TTE EU
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY AT CLAREMONT.— |

SCHOOL OF
THEOLOGY
|... NoT
CLAREMONT

2»

BOLLINGEN SERIES LXXVII

-
(x
4
pee A
U
Em( C AA( p R O
R
A
A DOCUMENT ATTRIBUTED TO THOMAS AQUINAS
ON THE PROBLEM OF OPPOSITES IN ALCHEMY
EDITED, WITH A COMMENTARY, BY
MARIE-LOUISE VON FRANZ
A COMPANION WORK TO
CAG. JUNCS
MYSTERIUM CONIUNCTIONIS
TRANSLATED BY
R. F. C. HULL AND A. S. B. GLOVER
B Osho IiN/G EAN 338 RAPS DP MOMMYD I
PANTHEON BOOKS

COPYRIGHT (C) 1966 BY BOLLINGEN FOUNDATION
PUBLISHED BY BOLLINGEN FOUNDATION, NEW YORK, N. Y.
DISTRIBUTED BY PANTHEON BOOKS, A DIVISION OF
RANDOM HOUSE, INC., NEW YORK, N. Y.
THIS IS THE SEVENTY-SEVENTH IN A
SERIES OF WORKS SPONSORED AND
PUBLISHED BY BOLLINGEN FOUNDATION
Originally published in German as
Aurora Consurgens: Ein dem Thomas von Aquin zuge-
schriebenes Dokument der alchemistischen Gegensatz-
problematik (Part III of Mysterium Coniunctionis, by
C. G. Jung), by Rascher Verlag, Zurich and Stuttgart, 1957
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGUE CARD NO.: 65—-10405
MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA BY H. WOLFF
NEW YORK, N. Y.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
FOREWORD vii
EDITORIAL NOTE viii
FOREWORD TO THE ENGLISH EDITION 1X
ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS XV
I. Introduction
. Preliminary
. The Transmission of the Text
. Ihe Sources
. The Problem of Dating
no wO0M-t9T
. The Manuscripts
oCM=o ». gTthUeH e Establishment of the Text of the Present
Edition : 28
II. Aurora Consurgens: Text and Translation
and III. Commentary
I. The Aurora or Aurea Hora of Blessed
Thomas Aquinas. Here Beginneth the Trea-
tise Entitled Aurora Consurgens 32 / 33
COMMENTARY, 155
II. What Wisdom Is 42 / 43
COMMENTARY, 195
II. Of Them Who Know Not and Deny This
Science 46 / 47
COMMENTARY, 200
IV. Of the Name and Title of This Book 50/51
COMMENTARY, 203
. Of the Provocation of the Foolish 52/53
COMMENTARY, 209CONTENTS
VI . The First Parable: Of the Black Earth,
Wherein the Seven Planets Took Root 56/57
COMMENTARY, 217
VII. The Second Parable: Of the Flood of Waters
and of Death, Which the Woman Both
Brought in and Put to Flight 66 / 67
COMMENTARY, 244
VIII. The Third Parable: Of the Gate of Brass and
Bar of Iron of the Babylonish Captivity 72/73
COMMENTARY, 261
IX. The Fourth Parable: Of the Philosophic
Faith, Which Consisteth in the Number
80/81
Three
COMMENTARY, 277
. The Fifth Parable: Of the Treasure-House
Which Wisdom Built upon a Rock 100/ 101
COMMENTARY, 314
XI. The Sixth Parable: Of Heaven and Earth
and the Arrangement of the Elements 12/0 12 1
COMMENTARY, 339
XII. The Seventh Parable: Of the Confabulation
of the Lover with the Beloved 132 / 133
COMMENTARY, 362
IV. Was St. Thomas Aquinas the Author of Aurora
Consurgens? 405
APPENDIX 1: LATIN AND GREEK TEXTS 435
APPEND IX 2: SUPPLEMENT TO THE APPARATUS 470
BIBLIOGRAPHY 477
INDEX OF BIBLICAL REFERENCES AND PARALLELS 525
GENERAL INDEX 531
viFOREWORD
It was Professor C. G. Jung who discovered the alchemical treatise
herewith presented, Aurora Consurgens, and brought it to light
again. It was at his request that I undertook to prepare the present
edition, for which purpose he supplied me with photocopies of
the manuscripts and placed at my disposal his copious material
on alchemy, which is very difficult to come by even in libraries.
For this and for his great help and encouragement during the
work I would here like to express my warmest thanks. As to the
hypothesis that the text might represent the last words of St.
Thomas Aquinas, I must emphasize that my primary concern
was with the position of the text in the history of alchemy and
with its psychological interpretation. I am fully aware that I lack
the knowledge necessary for any kind of excursion into hagio-
graphy—but unfortunately the text itself compels one to cut
across realms of thought which by their very nature are divided.
My concluding chapter, therefore, is nothing but a discussion of
an hypothesis, which I put forward in the hope that this question
will be clarified by the results of further research.
To me it seemed of greater importance that this valuable text
should be made accessible to a wider public, whoever the author
might be.
March 1957 © ManiE-LouisE VON FRANZ
vii

EDITORIAL NOTE
The second editions of C. G. Jung’s Psychology and Alchemy
and The Practice of Psychotherapy (Vols. 12 and 16 in the Col-
lected Works) and the forthcoming edition of Alchemical Studies
(Vol. 13) are cited in the present work by paragraph numbers.
The translations from Latin and Greek in the Commentary
are by A. S. B. Glover unless otherwise indicated. For quotations
from the Summa Theologica of St. ‘Thomas Aquinas, the trans-
lation by the English Dominican Fathers has been used with the
permission of the publishers, Benziger Brothers (New York) and
Burns, Oates and Washbourne (London).
viiiFOREWORD TO THE ENGLISH EDITION
Although this English edition of Aurora Consurgens appears al-
most ten years after the completion of the German text, the
"secret" of alchemy, unlike certain other fields to which Jungian
psychology can be applied, has never really lost its fascination for
me. The secret has to do with the relation of the unconscious
psyche to inorganic matter and to the unitary reality which may
be surmised as being their common substrate—that unus mundus
which Jung describes in the last chapter of Mysterium Coniunc-
tionis. It seems to me that with every year the progress of the
physical sciences is catching up with the bold results of Jung's
pioneer work, and that the time draws nearer when this psy-
chophysical unitary reality will assume a form that may be ap-
prehended by the intellect, even though it cannot be visualized
concretely. Here I will mention only two representative ex-
amples: the relativists among modern physicists have come up
against an "uncertainty relation" of time to events that have not
yet entered the field of observation, while for their opponents
in quantum physics the principle of causality has been put in
question. These difficulties suggest that serious consideration
should be given to Jung's proposed introduction of another prin-
ciple into the explanation of nature, namely synchronicity.
In this controversy between the relativists and the quantum
physicists over the determinism or indeterminism of events, the
German physicist Aloys Wenzl has attempted the role of medi-
ator by proposing that the four-dimensional mathematical con-
tinuum which constitutes the Einsteinian model of the universe
be regarded as an only potentially existent model of reality,
whereas the phenomena observed in quantum physics would rep-
resent the discontinuous actualizations of these mathematical
possibilities.! The Einsteinian model would thus become a con-
ceptual parallel of Jung's unus mundus, which in Jung's view
can be conceived in the form of mathematical structures.
Further, a French physicist, Olivier Costa de Beauregard, has
1 Die philosophischen Grenzfragen der modernen Naturwissenschaft, pp. 127f.
ixFOREWORD TO THE ENGLISH EDITION
made the proposal, based on the most recent developments in
cybernetic studies, that the physical universe must possess a
psychic "underside" as the sphere par excellence of “negen-
tropy," ? and that the unconscious should be conceived as pos-
sibly coextensive with the Minkowski-Einsteinian four-dimen-
sional world or "block universe." This would explain the time-
lessness of the unconscious and certain ESP phenomena.?
Indeed, Costa de Beauregard goes a step further, arriving in-
dependently at a parallel conception of Jung’s hypothesis of an
"absolute knowledge" (underlying synchronistic phenomena, for
instance). The psychic or infrapsychic underside of the universe
would have, in Costa de Beauregard's view, to be conceived as a
"source of information" which embraces all possible knowledge,
a kind of "supraconsciousness" of which the conscious phe-
nomena in animals and men are little crystallizations. The in-
formation it contains consists of images that correspond to
external situations.*
I mention this theory because it seems to me that the concept
of a unus mundus and the hypothesis of an absolute knowledge
are no longer so strange today as they were some years ago, see-
ing that certain branches of modern physics and of information
theory have arrived at parallel conceptions. The time may not
be too far off when physics and depth psychology will really be
able to join hands,* and only then will the full significance of
Jung’s rediscovery of alchemy be appreciated. Perhaps, too, the
hypothesis I have put forward, that the Awrora text may go
back to St. Thomas Aquinas, will then appear less absurd than
the reader might think at first sight. Even though I was not able
to convince my anonymous critic in the Bulletin Thomiste,®
he nevertheless admits that the idea is "seductive," and Father
Victor White recently assured me in a letter that he “likes the
2Since entropy is the ceaseless running down of the universe by loss of heat,
negentropy would be a contrary principle by which "improbable states of order"
with higher energy potential are built up.
3 Le Second Principe de la science du temps.
* The discovery of a "species memory” in lower organisms (e.g., flatworms), which
may be chemically transmitted by the RNA and DNA molecules, also throws a
new light on Jung's concept of the collective unconscious. Cf. the studies by James
McConnell in The Worm Runner's Digest, published at the University of Michigan.
5 Cf. Ernst Anrich, Moderne Physik und Tiefenpsychologie.
$ Vol. X (1957), L pp. 33ff.
xFOREWORD TO THE ENGLISH EDITION
idea, though there still seem to be a great many difficulties." 7
The fact that the style and content of Aurora differ so widely
from St. Thomas’s usual manner of writing seems to present, as
before, the chief difficulty; but I think two things have to be
considered which I would like to repeat here. Firstly, the experi-
ence of a breakthrough of the unconscious must necessarily as-
sume a form quite different from that of a text consciously com-
posed by its author, and it will therefore not contain the same
clearly defined concepts.’ Jung himself once said to me jokingly:
“When the philologists dig me up again a thousand years hence,
they will be a hundred percent certain that the essay on syn-
chronicity and Answer to Job cannot have been written by the
same author, let alone by the same author in the same year."
Often philological criticism, when applied to a creative genius,
is too rigid, and St. Thomas was undoubtedly a personality who
burst asunder the framework of the conventional scholastic. His
sudden breaking off of the Summa, together with the reports of
his mental disturbance or of some shattering inner experience,
seem to me as before to indicate that the approach of death
had brought the unconscious uncommonly close.? 7 Father White thinks it odd that St. Thomas did not quote the Moerbeke trans-
lation of De anima which he himself had put in hand. Against this it must be
said that the older Greco-Latin translation differs but slightly from Moerbeke's,
so that it is not possible to verify for sure the source of a short passage freely
quoted. (Cf. my introduction, infra, pp. 8f) More to the point, however, is the
fact that St. Thomas still used the older translation in his commentary on the
first book of Aristotle's Physics, and therefore went over to the Moerbeke version
only after 1267. (Cf. Pelster, "Die Übersetzungen der Aristotelischen Metaphysik
in den Werken des hl. Thomas von Aquin," pp.FOREWORD TO THE ENGLISH EDITION
made the proposal, based on the most recent developments in
cybernetic studies, that the physical universe must possess a
psychic "underside" as the sphere par excellence of “negen-
tropy," ? and that the unconscious should be conceived as pos-
sibly coextensive with the Minkowski-Einsteinian four-dimen-
sional world or "block universe." This would explain the time-
lessness of the unconscious and certain ESP phenomena.?
Indeed, Costa de Beauregard goes a step further, arriving in-
dependently at a parallel conception of Jung’s hypothesis of an
"absolute knowledge" (underlying synchronistic phenomena, for
instance). The psychic or infrapsychic underside of the universe
would have, in Costa de Beauregard's view, to be conceived as a
"source of information" which embraces all possible knowledge,
a kind of "supraconsciousness" of which the conscious phe-
nomena in animals and men are little crystallizations. The in-
formation it contains consists of images that correspond to
external situations.*
I mention this theory because it seems to me that the concept
of a unus mundus and the hypothesis of an absolute knowledge
are no longer so strange today as they were some years ago, see-
ing that certain branches of modern physics and of information
theory have arrived at parallel conceptions. The time may not
be too far off when physics and depth psychology will really be
able to join hands,* and only then will the full significance of
Jung’s rediscovery of alchemy be appreciated. Perhaps, too, the
hypothesis I have put forward, that the Awrora text may go
back to St. Thomas Aquinas, will then appear less absurd than
the reader might think at first sight. Even though I was not able
to convince my anonymous critic in the Bulletin Thomiste,®
he nevertheless admits that the idea is "seductive," and Father
Victor White recently assured me in a letter that he “likes the
2Since entropy is the ceaseless running down of the universe by loss of heat,
negentropy would be a contrary principle by which "improbable states of order"
with higher energy potential are built up.
3 Le Second Principe de la science du temps.
* The discovery of a "species memory” in lower organisms (e.g., flatworms), which
may be chemically transmitted by the RNA and DNA molecules, also throws a
new light on Jung's concept of the collective unconscious. Cf. the studies by James
McConnell in The Worm Runner's Digest, published at the University of Michigan.
5 Cf. Ernst Anrich, Moderne Physik und Tiefenpsychologie.
$ Vol. X (1957), L pp. 33ff.
x

Pelster, "Die Übersetzungen der Aristotelischen Metaphysik
in den Werken des hl. Thomas von Aquin," pp. 377f.; also Grabmann, “Guglielmo
di Moerbeke,” pp. 41ff., and Forschungen über die lateinischen Aristoteles-
übersetzungen des r3. Jahrh., pp. 190ff.; and Verbeke, Thémistius: Commentaire
sur le traité de l'áme d'Aristote, trad. de G. de Moerbeke.) When, on his death-
bed, the unconscious broke through in St. Thomas, it would surely have brought
back into his mind the older text which he knew in his youth, together with the
alchemical memories from the time of his studies under Albertus Magnus. 8'The only genuine Aristotle quotation in Aurora (infra, p. 37) occurs, how-
ever, in a context that fully agrees with St. Thomas's other ideas. Cf. A. C. Pegis
("St. Thomas and the Nicomachaean Ethics,” p. 73): "Ihe nature of man is
naturally endless since in fact no created good can terminate his intellectual desire
short of the vision of the divine essence."
9 Father White observes in his letter: *Have you noticed that St. Thomas stopped
writing the Summa just when he had come to deal with the partes poenitentiae
beginning with the confessio? I have often noticed that this presents difficulties
xiFOREWORD TO THE ENGLISH EDITION
So I can still stand today by my proposition—and it is no more
than that. On the other hand, in this English edition of the book
various errors, incomplete quotations, wrong references, etc. are
corrected. And here I would like to express my deepest thanks
to Mr. A. S. B. Glover, whose verification of quotations and
references when checking the bibliographical data has enabled
many improvements to be made in this edition. For his patience
and support and for his scholarly translation of the Aurora text,
I would like to express my lasting gratitude, as well as to Mr.
R. F. C. Hull for his careful translation of Parts I, III, and IV.
For the present edition I have tried to orient myself with re-
spect to the literature that has appeared in the interim, but
working in Switzerland and not having the time to travel abroad
I have encountered considerable difficulties in this respect.
Thanks to the helpfulness of the public library in Fribourg, I
was able to find some of the books I needed, but the collection
is limited and some works that I wanted to consult were not ob-
tainable. What particularly surprised me in this connection,
however, was the paucity of theological works that concern them-
selves with comparisons between modern theories of the uncon-
scious and St. ‘Thomas’s theory of the soul.!?^ I am convinced that
a study, by one more qualified than I, of such concepts as the
vous roujrós, Sapientia Dei, and the rationes aeternae would bring
to light many stimulating points of agreement with Jung's con-
cept of the self, the collective unconscious, and the archetypes.
The archetypes, because of their irrepresentable potentiality,
seem to correspond by and large to the :nfíellectus possibilis.
Jung’s idea of a potential unus mundus seems to me a modern
to those who—with or without analysis—have had a ‘drop-through’ into the un-
conscious and so come to realize the inadequacy of conscious confessio."
10 Klingseis ("Moderne Theorien über das Unterbewusstsein und die Thomistische
Psychologie") does not once mention either Freud or Jung, and Nolan (St. Thomas
and the Unconscious Mind), though he mentions Jung, gives an inadequate and
partly erroneous account of his views and moreover seems to possess no empirical
knowledge of the unconscious. Kelly (Die neuscholastische und die empirische
Psychologie) does not mention Jung at all. Exceptions must be made of Father
Meseguer's very broadminded and intelligent book The Secret of Dreams, Father
White’s God and the Unconscious, Father Goldbrunner's Individuation, and
Joseph Rudin's Psychotherapie und Religion. Cf. also the articles in the volume
Neurose und Religion. a
xiiFOREWORD TO THE ENGLISH EDITION
scientific formulation of the archetypal image of Sapientia Dei,
with, however, the incalculable difference that the unus mundus
is a concept derived from pure empiricism, whereas that of Sap-
ientia Dei is purely metaphysical. Nevertheless, the gulf between
the two might, in my opinion, actually have been bridged
when, at the end of his life, St. Thomas experienced how the
Sapientia Dei, which till then had existed for him only as a
metaphysical concept in his mind, suddenly revealed its over-
whelming psychic reality.
*
At the time when Jung had finished the first draft of Mysterium
Coniunctionis,“ in 1944, he had a serious accident followed by
the grave illness he describes in his memoirs.? During this ill-
ness he experienced, on the threshold of death, the great visions
of the coniunctio reported there. When I saw him again after
his illness, he said: "What I wrote in the Mysterium is true, I
don't need to alter the text. But I only know now how real
these things are."
Might it not be that St. Thomas Aquinas too, only experi-
enced on his deathbed, when the Song of Songs flooded back into
his memory, how real Wisdom and a union with her can be?
Küsnacht-Zurich, June 1964 M.-L. v. F.
11 The first draft included “The Psychology of the Transference,” published sepa-
rately in 1946.
12 Memories, Dreams, Reflections, pp. 270ff., esp. p. 274 (Amer. edn.; in the U.K.
edn., pp. 289ff., p. 294).
xiiipo tefl wor ee a) a? aea ob saienltenvia )
Mu a. sl
mf x11 , ' 4 ‘ ZI uli sap dm" ——
EET TET «i pubes axle du ul ^iniaegts ti bt ..—
G les tum. nut wm far? Has) qol vm 4 ibis: wixjo —
Vlbowm su e 7) Dilute 2 eer. sb A 4 otc - A:
T na nm. dx ‘Yaw Vue ut ott vash I tdem à me
" m
j mJ Sid mM E ep MAS mae« bo
lg i ‘Wal apis ig agel rowed ae
33 o's
ob dodi taining M hagotler endsias
* Seed 4 1 n s Pete the t vr buon.
* P j m. d »
oM- 2i x *- 1 D^u p aenm oe- P
bi vf 3 Li M" M Ec Abe i
uit ! A hs iind ee | i
ae . 2 & Rd iara, ae "its
: AE dod: oe eoe aeu ee eM aqi" Ww beste "m yà;
n & 4 - i” a as ] ibd: Je,
p, oe E —
hs » 2 , 2 Ead x meii DT be
hc *h. an rom | dmg U Aktion
$ "s * ,&« "Pus E
4 LR E y
, - E > by E b — -m d
TN Kore
i é L ine pug s dm
| LI s vid tarn diet
. : y sth M " j d, P
Za
pee eue
n

ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS
The MSS denoted by the sigla P, V, etc., are described on pp. 25ff.
Codex Parisinus, Bibl. Nat. Latin. No. 14006
Corrections in P by a second hand
Codex Vindobonensis, Osterr. Nationalbibliothek No.
5230 :
Corrections in.V by a second hand
Codex Marcianus Venetiarum (Valentinelli, V, 155)
Corrections in M by a second hand
Codex Rhenoviensis 172, Zentralbibliothek, Zurich
Corrections in Rh by a second hand
Codex in Biblioteca Universitaria, Bologna, No. 747
Codex Vossianus Chemicus 520, Leiden, University
Library, No. 29
Corrections in L by a second hand
Printed version in Rhenanus, Harmoniae inperscruta-
bilis etc., Frankfort, 1625
deleted by editor
added by editor
variants found in single Codices, too good to be consigned
only to mid-page apparatus
passage of some length omitted
conjecture
omitted
added
found in all MSS
XV

$4
? wwréHon. 1
‘ a ix
H ; "i
f i ’ L| thei
= *
e! it} i? 15
2
| tortoN alsebeild th
,
i
al tes
TA 4 --
ry I i 1 A re. i i
*.
in eG SOL vta Loi
-. * €
; 4 Yun YS ps Oe
. sibs ed ABI d
" " * MET zd qu -
: Jj hongold ea) beastso onm ambo) tysitai best un ^
-» ; : E ' Oa um sti uta . re
| - i denim dine— x "à
K : : " pv "INTRODUCTION

1. PRELIMINARY
As C. G. Jung has shown in Psychology and Alchemy, the early -
Latin texts of Western alchemy, like the earlier Greek and
Arabic ones, were written in a frame of mind which caused the
alchemist, seeking the divine secret of matter, to project his own
unconscious into the unknown nature of chemical substances.
<
These early texts have therefore become, for us, documents of
the greatest value in regard to the formation of symbols in gen-
eral and the individuation process in particular? whereas their
» chemical content is of significance only from the historical
point of view. Although they were written before the time when
alchemy split into chemistry on the one hand and hermeneutics
on the other, some of the texts lay more stress on rà $vewd, the
“physical” or “chemical” aspect of the opus, while others give
prominence to rà uvorud, its "mystical" side, and therefore have
a more "psychological" significance.? Among those texts whose
significance is almost exclusively psychological we must reckon
the treatise entitled Aurora Consurgens, which, both in content
and style, occupies a unique place in the alchemical literature
of its time. Jung was the first to discover the importance of this
treatise, and he discussed it briefly in Psychology and Alchemy.‘
Whereas other texts only occasionally cite conventional passages
from the Holy Scriptures, this treatise is composed almost en-
tirely of Biblical quotations, whose "alchemical" meaning is
hinted at by the interpolation of quotations from classical al-
chemy. We must therefore suppose that whatever the author
may have understood by "alchemy," he was trying to describe,
or give shape to, a religious experience or—in psychological
terms—an immediate experience of the unconscious. The treatise
was considered “blasphemous” by a later, “enlightened” age,®
1 Psychology and Alchemy, pars. $46fF., 357ff. 2 Ibid.
3 Par. 342. 4 Pars. 464ff. 5 Par. 464.
7AURORA CONSURGENS: INTRODUCTION
but to me it seems beyond doubt that the author was passionately
serious and was attempting to express a mysterium ineffabile.
It is perhaps no accident that the most frequently quoted
passages from the Old Testament are those in which the mys-
terious figure of Sapientia Dei—-Wisdopmla-y s a central role.
This Gnostic figure is the chief protagonist, and she is identified
with Mary and with the "soul in matter." The anima functions
as the mediator in any experience of the unconscious; she is the
first content to cross the threshold, and she transmits to con-
sciousness those images from the unconscious which compen-
sate the orthodox Christian ideas that dominate our conscious
view of the world.? In view of the recent solemn declaration of
the dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin, one cannot but re-
./gard the glorification of a divine female figure in Aurora as a
/ ^ prophetic presentiment of coming events. But behind this figure
we catch glimpses of the abyss of the nigredo, of the psycho-
et shadow and chthonic man, whose integration has begun
to present ethics with some troublesome questions. At all events
the problem of darkness, as the text and commentary will show,
is touched upon in the Aurora though it is not solved.
The treatise is traditionally attributed to Thomas Aquinas—
an attribution so surprising and, at first sight, so unlikely * that
hitherto it has never been taken seriously. This is due, among
other things, to the fact that the importance of the treatise was
not recognized before. 'T'he pros and cons of the attribution will
not be discussed at this point, but only after we have given the
commentary on the text. Whoever the author may have been, he
was a man who was vouchsafed an overpowering revelation of
2 the unconscious, which hweas -unable-to-descrrbe-in-the usual
ecclesiastical style but only with the help of alchemical symbols.
'The-treatishea s abouitt a n air of strangeness and loneliness—
which, it may be, touched and isolated the author himself.
6 Psychology and Alchemy, Part I. 7 Cf. Jung’s view, ibid., par. 465.2. THE TRANSMISSION OF THE TEXT
A new edition of the treatise variously entitled Aurora Con-
surgens, “De alchimia," and "Liber Trinitatis" is justified if only
because this important work is scarcely known at all, the main
reason being that till now it has been available only in a single
rare printing in the collection of Johannes Rhenanus, Har-
moniae inperscrutabilis chymico-philosophicae sive Philoso-
phorum antiquorum consentientium Decades duae (Frankfurt,
1625), and in a few scattered manuscripts.
More accessible to posterity was the so-called Part II of
Aurora, which enjoyed a wide circulation in the compilation
entitled Artis auriferae, quam Chemiam vocant, Volumina duo
(Basel, 1593 and 1610), and in other editions. This second part
is, in my view, a commentary on the first part by another hand.
Evidence for this, aside from its completely different style, is
the repetition of quotations from Part I,! the naming of Albertus
Magnus,” who in Part I is never cited by name, and the intro-
ductory words typical of a commentary: "In the foregoing it
was shown . . ."? Also, only Part I is cited in the "Rosarium
philosophorum." * In contrast to the entirely original, poetico-
rhetorical, confessional style of Part I, Part II has a prosaically
didactic character which follows the usual style of the contem-
porary alchemical treatises. The fact that a personified “Mater AI-
chimia” appears in Part II, that Geber is frequently cited, and
that medical considerations occupy a prominent place, seems to
me an indication that it was written in the fourteenth or fifteenth
1 For instance the saying: ““The mockery of science is the cause of ignorance.” *
Also quotations from Avicenna (Artis auriferae, 1610, I, p. 147) and Alphidius (p.
140). [For the Latin or Greek of the quotations marked with an asterisk, see Ap-
pendix 1, pp. 435ff.]
2 Ibid., p. 153. 8 "In praelibatis ostensum est . . .'
4 Art. aurif. (1610), II, pp. 133-252. Ruska assigns the Rosarium philosophorum"
first to the 14th, then to the 15th cent.
5AURORA CONSURGENS: INTRODUCTION
century. Though this commentary was appended to Part I even
in the manuscripts of the fifteenth century, it was published on
its own by Conrad Waldkirch in his edition of Artis auriferae
because, he says,? Part I profaned the Christian mysteries by
applying them to alchemy. For similar reasons our text may have
given offence even earlier and been thrust to one side,? although
itis without doubt an important document of medieval alchemy.
5 Art. aurif., 1, p. 118.
6 It is sometimes cited in later works, though the source is not given.3. THE SOURCES
Most of the alchemical quotations in Aurora, for which the
author almost always gives the source, could be identified. One
very general saying ascribed to a certain "Alphonsus," and one
source cited in the printed edition as "Liber quintae essentiae,"
could not be traced, together with a few quotations from Mori-
enus and Calid. The traceable sources are all early works in
Latin, the great majority being Latin translations of Arabic
treatises. The most important of these is "Lumen luminum,"
which in Aurora is ascribed to the Arabian alchemist Rhazis and
later also circulated under the title "Aristotelis de perfecto magis-
terio." ! It is cited by Thomas of Cantimpré as a work of Aris-
totle's, and Thomas of Cantimpré is mentioned in the Speculum
maius of Vincent of Beauvais,? so that it must have been current
1A "De perfecto magisterio" is attributed to Aristotle in Bibliotheca chemica
curiosa, I, pp. 638-59, and Theatrum chemicum (1659), III, pp. 76-127. The latter
volume also contains a "Liber perfecti magisterii" of Arnaldus of Villanova, "qui
Lumen luminum nuncupatur" (pp. 128-43). As Arnaldus refers to this treatise as
his "Lumen luminum," it cannot be identical with the “Lumen luminum" men-
tioned in Aurora. Rather, both he and the author of "De perfecto magisterio"
seem to have used "Lumen luminum" as a common source, which in “Consilium
coniugii" (Ars chemica, p. 50), as in Aurora, is ascribed to Rhazis (infra, pp. 48f.,
n. 9). Cf. Berthelot, La Chimie au moyen áge, I, pp. 145, 234, 269, 273, 311ff.;
Lippmann, Entstehung und Ausbreitung der Alchemie, Y, p. 489; Steinschneider,
Die europdischen Übersetzungen aus dem Arabischen bis Mitte des 17. Jahr-
hunderts, A, pp. 40f. Ruska (Tabula Smaragdina, p. 192, n. 5) doubts, probably
wrongly, whether "Lumen luminum" goes back to an Arabic original: “This book,
known also by various other names, is supposed to have been translated by
Gerhard of Cremona. F. Wuestenfeld [Die Übersetzungen arabischer Werke in
das Lateinische seit dem 11. Jahrhundert, p. 75] likewise conjectures that it is
not based on an Arabic original." But the matter is not as simple as that: Arabic
sources do exist. See Thorndike, History of Magic and Experimental Science, II,
pp. 252ff.
2 Ferckel, "Thomas von Chantimpré über die Metalle," Studien zur Geschichte
der Chemie (ed. Ruska), p. 76.
7AURORA CONSURGENS: INTRODUCTION
in Latin form before the middle of the thirteenth century? In
Aurora only a few general sayings are quoted from it.* Likewise,
the few sayings from the Tabula Smaragdina probably do not
come from an original but from this "Lumen luminum"; one of
them is introduced with exactly the same formula as used there.*
For our purpose, therefore, the whole problem of the transmis-
sion and dating of the Tabula Smaragdina loses its importance.®
Again, the sentence at the end of the third chapter, although
cited as a saying of Morienus, presumably comes from "Lumen
luminum." *
The Turba philosophorum,;5 which is cited a few times, was
likewise widely known at the beginning of the twelfth century
and was held as a high authority.? For the history of this inter-
esting treatise I must refer the reader to Ruska's works. Of the
various quotations from Aristotle, one comes from a genuine
treatise, De anima, II, lectio 8. A partial translation of this from
Greek into Latin existed before 1215 and was used by Alfred of
Sareshel.!? A translation from the Arabic into Latin was made
(after 1217) by Michael Scotus. The Aurora quotation (ch. 1)
runs: “To the size and growth of all things in nature a limit is
appointed, but fire by the addition of combustible matter waxes
without end." This formulates the passage in much the same
way as the older translations—actually it is closer to the version
that was current before William of Moerbeke's !2—so that it is
3 Thorndike, II, pp. 458ff. According to Pelster (Kritische Studien zum Leben und
zu den Schriften Alberts des Grossen, pp. g8ff.), the Speculum maius originated
between 1241 and 1244, and was continuously augmented. The first version was
completed in 1241. Vincent of Beauvais died in 1264. The first part, the "Speculum
naturale," was written before 1241 (ibid., p. 99).
4 Infra, pp. 94-97, nn. 53, 65. Cf. "De perfecto magisterio," Theatr. chem., III
(1659), p. 79.
5 “And Hermes says this in his Secret" (infra, pp. 94f. and n. 54). Cf. ibid., III, p. 80.
6 Ruska, Tabula Smaragdina, pp. 186ff. 7 Cf. infra, pp. 48£., n. 9.
8 Lippmann, I, p. 484. 9 Ruska, Turba Philosophorum, pp. 13 and 46.
10 Haskins, “A List of Textbooks from the Close of the Twelfth Century," p. 86.
11 Querfeld, Michael Scotus und seine Schrift De Secretis Naturae, p. 7; Sarton,
Introduction to the History of Science, II, pp. 561, 579ff., and the literature there
cited. Cf. also Haskins, ‘The Sicilian Translators of the Twelfth Century . . . ,"
p. 85.
12 Aurora: “Omnium natura constantium positus est terminus magnitudinis et
augmenti ignis vero appositione combustibilium crescit in infinitum."
Vetus translatio (Bibl. Mazarinea 3462, Paris, 13th cent, fol. givff.): “Ignis
autem augmentum in infinitum est, quousque est combustibile, natura autem
83. THE SOURCES
very like the one known to Thomas Aquinas, who, in his com-
mentary on De anima,? used an older translation, as also did
Albertus Magnus.!* This fact argues definitely in favour of an
early dating of Aurora, since these older translations fell into
disuse soon after 1280.!5
The saying at the end of the eleventh chapter comes from
the pseudo-Aristotelian "Secreta secretorum," 1° an early Latin
constantium omnium terminus est ratio magnitudinis et augmenti. Haec autem
animae sunt et non ignis et rationis magis quam materiae sunt."
William of Moerbeke (Bibl. Nat. 6296, Paris, 13th cent., fol. 247v): "Ignis vero
augmentum in infinitum est quousque fuit combustibile. Natura autem con-
stantium omnium terminus ratio est et ratio et magnitudinis et augmenti. Haec
autem animae sunt, non ignis et id rationis magis quam materiae."
English of the last two: “For the increase of fire is infinite so long as there is
anything combustible. But there are limitations to all things that subsist naturally,
and some definite principle governs their dimensions and growth. And this belongs
to the soul, not to fire, and to a specific principle rather than to matter." (De
anima, trans. by Foster and Humphries, pp. 218f.) Cf. also Lacombe, Corpus
Philosophorum Medii Aevi: Aristoteles Latinus, Y, pp. 5off. Later translations
(e.g., Sophianus) replace “augmenti” by "actionis" or “accretionis.”
18 “There is a limit both to (men’s) largeness and their littleness, and whatever
determines this limit is the true principal cause of growth. But this cannot be
fire, because the growth of fire has no naturally fixed limits; it would spread to
infinity if an infinite amount of fuel were supplied to it. Clearly, then, fire is not
the chief cause of growth and nutrition, but rather the soul. And this is reasonable
enough, for the quantitative limits of material things are fixed by form—the spe-
cific principle—rather than matter.AURORA CONSURGENS: INTRODUCTION
in Latin form before the middle of the thirteenth century? In
Aurora only a few general sayings are quoted from it.* Likewise,
the few sayings from the Tabula Smaragdina probably do not
come from an original but from this "Lumen luminum"; one of
them is introduced with exactly the same formula as used there.*
For our purpose, therefore, the whole problem of the transmis-
sion and dating of the Tabula Smaragdina loses its importance.®
Again, the sentence at the end of the third chapter, although
cited as a saying of Morienus, presumably comes from "Lumen
luminum." *
The Turba philosophorum,;5 which is cited a few times, was
likewise widely known at the beginning of the twelfth century
and was held as a high authority.? For the history of this inter-
esting treatise I must refer the reader to Ruska's works. Of the
various quotations from Aristotle, one comes from a genuine
treatise, De anima, II, lectio 8. A partial translation of this from
Greek into Latin existed before 1215 and was used by Alfred of
Sareshel.!? A translation from the Arabic into Latin was made
(after 1217) by Michael Scotus. The Aurora quotation (ch. 1)
runs: “To the size and growth of all things in nature a limit is
appointed, but fire by the addition of combustible matter waxes
without end." This formulates the passage in much the same
way as the older translations—actually it is closer to the version
that was current before William of Moerbeke's !2—so that it is
3 Thorndike, II, pp. 458ff. According to Pelster (Kritische Studien zum Leben und
zu den Schriften Alberts des Grossen, pp. g8ff.), the Speculum maius originated
between 1241 and 1244, and was continuously augmented. The first version was
completed in 1241. Vincent of Beauvais died in 1264. The first part, the "Speculum
naturale," was written before 1241 (ibid., p. 99).
4 Infra, pp. 94-97, nn. 53, 65. Cf. "De perfecto magisterio," Theatr. chem., III
(1659), p. 79.
5 “And Hermes says this in his Secret" (infra, pp. 94f. and n. 54). Cf. ibid., III, p. 80.
6 Ruska, Tabula Smaragdina, pp. 186ff. 7 Cf. infra, pp. 48£., n. 9.
8 Lippmann, I, p. 484. 9 Ruska, Turba Philosophorum, pp. 13 and 46.
10 Haskins, “A List of Textbooks from the Close of the Twelfth Century," p. 86.
11 Querfeld, Michael Scotus und seine Schrift De Secretis Naturae, p. 7; Sarton,
Introduction to the History of Science, II, pp. 561, 579ff., and the literature there
cited. Cf. also Haskins, ‘The Sicilian Translators of the Twelfth Century . . . ,"
p. 85.
12 Aurora: “Omnium natura constantium positus est terminus magnitudinis et
augmenti ignis vero appositione combustibilium crescit in infinitum."
Vetus translatio (Bibl. Mazarinea 3462, Paris, 13th cent, fol. givff.): “Ignis
autem augmentum in infinitum est, quousque est combustibile, natura autem
8

Clearly, then, fire is not
the chief cause of growth and nutrition, but rather the soul. And this is reasonable
enough, for the quantitative limits of material things are fixed by form—the spe-
cific principle—rather than matter. Now the soul of a living being is to the ele-
ments it contains as form is to matter; the soul, then, rather than fire, sets the
term and natural limit to size and growth." * (De anima, p. 223.)
14 Pelster, pp. 87, 133ff., 150; Sarton, II, pp. 829ff. 15 Pelster, p. 106. 16] used the edition of 1528, De proprietatibus originalium et lapidum, which
does not give the place of publication (Paris or Lyons). Cf. Thorndike, II, p. 267,
and Fórster, De Aristotelis quae feruntur Secreta secretorum commentatio. For
MSS and editions of Pseudo-Aristotelian writings see Baeumker, Der Platonismus
im Mittelalter, p. 42; Forster, "Handschriften und Ausgaben des pseudo-Aris-
totelischen Secretum Secretorum”; Steinschneider, Die hebraischen Übersetzungen
des Mittelalters und die Juden als Dolmetscher, pp. 245f. and 248ff.; also his Die
europdischen Übersetzungen, Part A, pp. 41f., and Zur pseudepigraphischen Lit-
eratur . .. des Mittelalters, pp. 83f.; Ruska, Tabula Smaragdina, p. 186; and
Wuestenfeld, Die Übersetzungen arabischer Werke in das Lateinische seit dem 11. Jahrh., p. 81. C£. further Grabmann, Forschungen über die lateinischen Aris-
totelesiibersetzungen, pp. 143f., 175f., 186f., 246£; Ueberweg and Baumgartner,
Grundriss der Geschichte der Philosophie, Part II: “Die mittlere oder die
patristische und scholastische Zeit," p. 369. The treatise was also called “The
9AURORA CONSURGENS: INTRODUCTION
translation of an Arabic treatise of the same name (Sirr al-asrár).
The medical part of it was translated by John of Seville during
the first half of the twelfth century.!* Then at the end of the
twelfth or beginning of the thirteenth century followed a trans-
lation by one Philip (of Tripoli or Salerno); whose exact
identity is still disputed. At any rate, the dating of the Latin
version must be placed between 1150 and 1220. Roger Bacon
regarded the treatise as genuine and wrote a commentary on it.!?
Albertus Magnus, too, cites it as a work of Aristotle.
Another Aristotle quotation, "With this stone it is not good
to fight" (ch. 10), could not be traced verbatim, but it may be
a free rendering of the saying in the “Secreta” about the stone
Alchahat: "And no man can fight with one who has this (stone)
in his hand." The text of the "Secreta" shows wide variations
both in the manuscripts and in the printings. The saying “the
(glorified) earth is called the coagulant" (ch. 11), likewise at-
tributed to Aristotle, is probably cited from Senior's De chemia,
and appears there as a quotation from Maria Prophetissa.?? It
is a saying that frequently occurs in the Arabic literature. Again,
the concluding sentence of Aurora is attributed not directly to
Calid (who elsewhere is cited by name) but to “the author of the
Three Words." It is evident that not much reliance could be
placed on the names of authors, since often the manuscripts seem
to have circulated anonymously or under different names.
The Hermes quotation "Sow the gold in the white foliate
earth" is another widespread saying that also occurs in Senior
(Muhammad ibn Umail at-Tamimi).? In two other cases I was
able to find the Hermes quotations under a different author.
This may be due to errors in transmission or to imprecise ascrip-
tion of these early Latin texts. There is a Hermes quotation in
chapter 1 which I could not trace directly, concerning the lapis
as an eternal food that could nourish mankind for many thou-
Theology of Aristotle" or “De secretiori Aegyptiorum philosophia." Cf. Jourdain,
Recherches critiques sur l'áge et l'origine des traductions latines d'Aristote, and
Rose, De Aristotelis librorum ordine et auctoritate, pp. 183ff.
17 Thorndike, II, p. 269. 18 Ibid., p. 270.
19 Lydgate and Burgh, Secrees of Old Philosoffres, ed. Steele, cited in Thorndike,
II, p. 268.
20 De chemia, pp. 34f. Cf. infra, pp. 122f., n. 6.
21 Ibid.
103. THE SOURCES
sands of years.?? The same saying occurs in "Consilium con-
iugii" ?? and in "Rosarium," ** but in the latter it is probably
taken from Aurora. A similar thought is expressed in the Buch
der Alaune und Salze?* namely that Mercurius is sufficient to
grant a man an infinitely long life.
The alchemical treatises of Avicenna (ibn Sina, 980-1037),
"De re recta ad Hasen regem epistola," “Declaratio lapidis
physici filio suo Aboali," and "De conglutinatione lapidis," ?9
though not generally regarded as genuine works," were known
in Latin about the middle of the thirteenth century, and are
cited in the Speculum of Vincent of Beauvais 28 and in Albertus
Magnus's “De mineralibus."
From Calid (reputedly the renowned Omayyad prince,
Calid ibn Yazid, 8th cent.),?® who according to legend trans-
lated Greek treatises on alchemy into Arabic,®° and who is named
as a source in Senior (10th cent.), Aurora cites one work which
is generally regarded as a Latin forgery,? "Liber trium ver-
borum," from which the concluding sentence is taken.?? The
Calid quotations in ch. 9, "Make warm the cold of the one by
the heat of the other" and "Extinguish the fire of the one by the
coolness of the other," can also be traced back, though not ver-
batim, to “Liber trium verborum" in Artis auriferae and the
deviant version in Manget.?? They are, however, sayings of such
22 Infra, pp. 36f.
28 Ars chemica, p. 116: "As Hermes saith, it shall suffice a man for a million years,
and if you shall feed two thousand men daily, you shall not want; for it tingeth
for ever." *
24 Art. aurif. (1610), IL, p. 149. 25 Ed. Ruska, p. 92.
26 The treatises are printed in Art. aurif., I (1610), pp. 240-45, and Theatr. chem.,
IV (1659), pp. 863-86. Cf. Berthelot, I, p. 293. "Epistola ad Hasen" is cited by
Albertus (?) in "De rebus metallicis," Lib. III, cap. 4 (Borgnet, V, p. 63).
27 Lippmann, I, pp. 405f., II, pp. 15 and 28, III, "Avicenna." Cf. also Ruska, “Die
Alchemie des Avicenna,” pp. 14 and 45.
28 Supra, p. 8, n. 3.
29 Lippmann, I, pp. 357ff., II, p. 122; Ruska, "Arabische Alchemisten," I, pp. 11f.,
and Tabula Smaragdina, p. 49.
30 Ruska ("Arabische Alchemisten,” II) has shown that this is probably only a
legend.
31 Lippmann, I, p. 357, n. 6.
32 Art. aurif. (1610), I, p. 228ff. Cf. Lippmann, II, pp. 148f., and Holmyard, “A
Romance of Chemistry," pp. 75f.
33 Art. aurif. (1610), I, pp. 226f. (cf. infra, pp. 88f., n. 50), and Bibliotheca chemica
(1702) , II, p. 189.
11AURORA CONSURGENS: INTRODUCTION
general import that they might have come from anywhere.** The
idea that the embryo is nourished in the womb by the ele-
ments, also in ch. 9, derives ultimately from Calid and is cited
in Senior, so it undoubtedly belongs to the stock of Arabic
thought. Another Calid quotation, “Three things are necessary,
namely: patience, deliberation, and skill with the instruments"
(ch. 10), cannot be traced in the two printed treatises of Calid
that have been preserved. It is, however, cited in “Secreta al-
chimiae," a treatise wrongly ascribed to Thomas Aquinas, as a
quotation from Avicenna: “But that at last there may come into
being the one substance, as Avicenna says, you must have pa-
tience, deliberation, and the instrument.” ** In Aurora “instru-
ment" is replaced by "skill with the instruments," and this ex-
pression recurs in “Liber sextus naturalium," a genuine treatise
of Avicenna.?' Aurora seems to have been known to the author
of "Secreta alchimiae." ?5
Ruska may be right in thinking that the extant printed
treatises of Calid are late compilations. What the author of
Aurora used were probably scattered treatises circulating under
various other names.
A similar situation prevails in regard to the quotation “He
who hath not patience, let him hold back his hand from the
work" (ch. 10), which Aurora puts into the mouth of Morienus.
It is to be found in the Morienus treatise, De transmutatione
metallorum," *? but as a saying of Calid, so that the misattribu-
tion in Aurora is due to the fact that at this point in the dialogue
34'They may derive from the treatise "Khalid Rex et Morienus Romanus," gnd
version, which D. W. Singer cites in her Catalogue of Latin and Vernacular Al-
chemical MSS in Great Britain and Ireland dating from before the 16th Century,
I, p. 64, no. 67. Unfortunately I had no access to this version.
35 Calid, "Liber trium verborum," Art. aurif., I, pp. 228f. (cf. infra, pp. 86f., n. 27),
and Senior, De chemia, p. 88.
36 Theatr. chem., III (1659), p. 278 [see biblio.]. Concerning the authenticity of
this treatise, cf. infra, p. 408, n. 3.
97 Avicennae perhypatetici philosophi ac medicorum, etc., I, ch. 1, fol. 3: “That
power of the soul has other powers . . . which all work for this end, that the
skill with the instruments may attain to the second perfections of the soul
Ico ut
38 He cites a passage from the last chapter of Aurora in Theatr. chem., III (1659),
p. 279: “Also in the first days you must rise early, and see if the vineyard flour-
ish . . ." But in that context it makes no sense.
89 Art. aurif. (1610), II, p. 21.
12$. THE SOURCES
Calid is speaking. There is a similar saying in "Liber de compo-
sitione alchimiae, "^? but there again the speaker is Calid. This is
perhaps confirmation of Ruska'ss view that the treatises mostly
circulated under the name of Calid and became associated with
Morienus only during the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.*!
The saying is attributed to Geber in the continuation of the
above-mentioned passage from "Secreta alchimiae": "Patience,
for according to Geber all haste is of the devil. Therefore he who
hath not patience let him hold back his hand from the work."
In agreement with "Secreta alchimiae," the saying is to be found
in Geber's "Summa perfectionis," *? a treatise which Darm-
staedter 5? conjectures was written in the twelfth or thirteenth
century, in southern Italy or Spain. But it does not seem to have
been known under Geber's name to Vincent of Beauvais, Al-
bertus Magnus, or Roger Bacon.* I think parts of this treatise
must previously have circulated anonymously, or were variously
attributed to Avicenna, Calid, and Morienus, and were given
Geber's name only later. As Darmstaedter supposes, the author
may have been someone who had to be on his guard with the
Church, and who therefore remained anonymous.
The saying at the end of the third chapter, also attributed in
Aurora to Morienus, does not occur in his "De transmutatione
metallorum," but is preserved in Petrus Bonus * and in various
other treatises (among them "Consilium coniugii") as a quota-
tion from Rhazis in "Lumen luminum." 4$
I was unable to trace in Morienus the sayings (in ch. 10)
"Hope and hope, and so shalt thou attain (the goal)," and (in
40 Bibl. chem., I, p. 512: “And especially the wise man must fear nothing. For if he
fear, he will soon despair. And if he despair, his purpose will be unsteady. . . . At
this the king [Calid] smiled, and said: Now I know of a truth that unless God give
a man patience he shall be cruelly confounded. For haste is of the devil." *
41 For the literature on this question see Singer, Catalogue, I, pp. 62-63.
42 De alchemia, ch. 12, p. 17, and "Testamentum," Bibl. chem., I, p. 562: "He who
hath not patience, let him hold back his hand from the work, for credulity will
ensnare him if he hasten. . . . For this three things are necessary, patience, delib-
eration, and skill with the instruments." *
48 Die Alchemie des Geber, p. 5.
44 Ibid., pp. 6—7 and p. 134, n. 8.
45 Pretiosa margarita novella, ed. Lacinius, p. 42. Perhaps it is in a Morienus trea-
tise to which I had no access, “Secretum maximum ad Flodium," mentioned in
Steinschneider, Die europdischen Übersetzungen, Part A, pp. 4of.
46 Not given in the “De perfecto magisterio" version.
13AURORA CONSURGENS: INTRODUCTION
ch. 9) "He who shall raise up his soul, shall see its colours.” **
On the other hand, "Already we have taken away the black
and made the white" (ch. 9) is to be found in the third section
of the Morienus treatise, the part that is based on Arabic
sources.*® Ruska regards the whole treatise as a Latin forgery,*®
but he still thinks this section is of Arabic origin. Certain quo-
tations are found also in Abu’l Qasim, who evidently had simi-
lar sources at his disposal in the thirteenth century.9? That the
third section is of different provenance from the first two seems
proved by the further fact that it occurs separately in the manu-
scripts and agrees only partially with the printed text.9!
Ruska conjectures that the printed version was the work of
a monk of the thirteenth or fourteenth century.®? Accordingly,
it is very significant that what was available to the author of
Aurora as the writings of Morienus cannot be the version known
today, but that they were still in the preliminary stages of com-
pilation. Therefore Aurora must be dated earlier than the time
of compilation conjectured by Ruska (13th to 14th cent.). In
these writings, which had not yet been put together to form the
text as we know it, may perhaps be found the Morienus sayings
I was unable to trace.
47 But in the “Liber Alphidii,” Codex Ashmole 1420, fol. 26 (Bodleian), and in
“Cons. coniug.” there is the following Alphidius or Assiduus quotation (Ars
chemica, p. 121): “Unless this vapour riseth up, thou wilt obtain nothing, for it is
itself the work, and without it there is nothing.” * The soul is described as a vapour
also in Senior and in the Turba. Cf. “Clangor buccinae,” Art. aurif. (1610), I, p.
317. It must be emphasized that the printed Morienus treatise differs widely from
some of the handwritten versions, e.g., Codex Ashmole 1450, fol. 49, "Questiones
Calid Regis ad Morienum Romanum."
48 "De transmutatione metallorum," Art. aurif. (1610), II, p. 22. Cf. Lippmann, II,
pp. 148f. Cf. also Holmyard, “A Romance of Chemistry," and Reitzenstein, "Al-
chemistische Lehrschriften und Marchen bei den Arabern,” pp. 63ff.
49 "Arabische Alchemisten,” I, pp. 35ff.
50 Lippmann, II, p. 149.
51 As does Codex Ashmole 1450, fol. 49, for instance. (I had a photostat of this
MS.) Cf. also Singer, Catalogue, I, pp. 61f.
52 He also thinks that the preface of 1144, by Robert of Chester, is a forgery. In
any case it does not belong to this compilation.
53 "He who shall raise up his soul" etc. recalls the saying in the third section of
Morienus: "He who shall whiten his soul, and shall make it ascend again, and
shall guard his body well, and shall take away from it all obscurity, shall be able
to pour it into his body. And in the hour of conjunction great wonders shall
appear." * (Art. aurif., 1610, II, p. 24.) Cf. the version in Cod. Ashmole 1450, fol. 53:
143. THE SOURCES
We must certainly be dealing with an Arabic source in the
case of Alphidius, whose sayings were widely acclaimed in early
medieval literature. His unprinted treatise was available to me
in a version contained in Codex Ashmole 1420 (Bodleian Li-
brary, fol. 1ff.). It is the same treatise as the one which Thorn-
dike states is available in Codex Riccardianus 1165 (fol. 163a—
166b), in Florence.** In the latter version four passages are miss-
ing which are contained in Codex Ashmole 1420. This Codex
also contains all the passages cited in Aurora. Unfortunately,
to my knowledge no Arabic originals of this interesting treatise
have yet been published.55
Ferguson 56 assigns Alphidius to the twelfth century, but this
dating may be true only of the Latin translation of his works. At all events he was known to Albertus Magnus. It is probable
that Alphidius is identical with the Alkides or Assiduus cited
by Senior.5' Elsewhere he appears as Asphidus, whom Berthelot
"He who shall whiten his soul, and shall make it ascend upwards, and shall
guard his body well from combustion . . . shall be able to extract his soul from
his body, and that body will be left obscure and in the hour of conjunction a great
wonder will appear." *
54 Thorndike, “Alchemical Writings in Vatican Palatine Manuscripts," p. 378. The Florence codex has the same Incipit: "Scito fili . . ." (I would like to express
my thanks to Fr. A. [now Cardinal] Albareda, prefect of the Vatican Library,
for his information on this point.) Cf. Thorndike, A History of Magic, III, p. 43. 55 Cf. Singer, Catalogue, I, p. 127, and Ruska, Turba, p. 339. 56 Bibliotheca Chemica (1906), I, p. 27. 57 De chemia, p. 111. The passage from "Liber Alphidii" (infra, pp. 314f.) on the
treasure-house of alchemy that can be opened with four keys (to which the con-
cluding sentence in chapter 10 of Aurora probably refers) is cited under the name
of Assiduus in “Cons. coniug.," Ars chemica, pp. 108f. (Concerning “Cons.AURORA CONSURGENS: INTRODUCTION
ch. 9) "He who shall raise up his soul, shall see its colours.” **
On the other hand, "Already we have taken away the black
and made the white" (ch. 9) is to be found in the third section
of the Morienus treatise, the part that is based on Arabic
sources.*® Ruska regards the whole treatise as a Latin forgery,*®
but he still thinks this section is of Arabic origin. Certain quo-
tations are found also in Abu’l Qasim, who evidently had simi-
lar sources at his disposal in the thirteenth century.9? That the
third section is of different provenance from the first two seems
proved by the further fact that it occurs separately in the manu-
scripts and agrees only partially with the printed text.9!
Ruska conjectures that the printed version was the work of
a monk of the thirteenth or fourteenth century.®? Accordingly,
it is very significant that what was available to the author of
Aurora as the writings of Morienus cannot be the version known
today, but that they were still in the preliminary stages of com-
pilation. Therefore Aurora must be dated earlier than the time
of compilation conjectured by Ruska (13th to 14th cent.). In
these writings, which had not yet been put together to form the
text as we know it, may perhaps be found the Morienus sayings
I was unable to trace.
47 But in the “Liber Alphidii,” Codex Ashmole 1420, fol. 26 (Bodleian), and in
“Cons. coniug.” there is the following Alphidius or Assiduus quotation (Ars
chemica, p. 121): “Unless this vapour riseth up, thou wilt obtain nothing, for it is
itself the work, and without it there is nothing.” * The soul is described as a vapour
also in Senior and in the Turba. Cf. “Clangor buccinae,” Art. aurif. (1610), I, p.
317. It must be emphasized that the printed Morienus treatise differs widely from
some of the handwritten versions, e.g., Codex Ashmole 1450, fol. 49, "Questiones
Calid Regis ad Morienum Romanum."
48 "De transmutatione metallorum," Art. aurif. (1610), II, p. 22. Cf. Lippmann, II,
pp. 148f. Cf. also Holmyard, “A Romance of Chemistry," and Reitzenstein, "Al-
chemistische Lehrschriften und Marchen bei den Arabern,” pp. 63ff.
49 "Arabische Alchemisten,” I, pp. 35ff.
50 Lippmann, II, p. 149.
51 As does Codex Ashmole 1450, fol. 49, for instance. (I had a photostat of this
MS.) Cf. also Singer, Catalogue, I, pp. 61f.
52 He also thinks that the preface of 1144, by Robert of Chester, is a forgery. In
any case it does not belong to this compilation.
53 "He who shall raise up his soul" etc. recalls the saying in the third section of
Morienus: "He who shall whiten his soul, and shall make it ascend again, and
shall guard his body well, and shall take away from it all obscurity, shall be able
to pour it into his body. And in the hour of conjunction great wonders shall
appear." * (Art. aurif., 1610, II, p. 24.) Cf. the version in Cod. Ashmole 1450, fol. 53:
14

108f. (Concerning “Cons. coniug."
see Berthelot, La Chimie au moyen áge, I, p. 249, and Ruska, Turba, p. 343.) An-
other treatise ascribed to Alphidius is cited in Hoghelande, "De alchimiae difficul-
tatibus" (Bibl. chem., I, p. 340): “Whence Alphidius in Clavis Philosophorum:
Thou canst not have this science until thou purifiest thy mind before God and
God knoweth thee to have a contrite mind. . . . If thou art humble, its wisdom
and knowledge shall be perfected." * Since this version agrees with neither the
“Cons. coniug," nor the "Ros. phil." version (infra, pp. 106f., n. 32; see also n. 29),
and the source Hoghelande gives is "Clav. Phil." he may have had before him the
treatise on which the Aurora passages are based. In Hoghelande may also be found
part of the Alphidius quotation in chapter I of Aurora (infra, pp. 32f., n. 8): "And
Alphidius in Clavis Philosophorum, when he says that our stone is a vile thing in
the eyes of men and is loathed as without value, which men trample underfoot in
the streets." * It is possible that Ashmole 1420 ("Liber Alphidii") is identical in
part with the treatise cited as "Clavis Philosophorum."
15AURORA CONSURGENS: INTRODUCTION
interprets as, originally, Asklepios.** The idea that the lapis is
a house with four walls (ch. 10) occurs as early as Senior and
probably goes back to the vision of Zosimos of a temple built of
one white stone.??
We have a clearer picture of the author cited as Senior. He
was an Arab by the name of Muhammad ibn Umail at-Tamimi
(ca. 900-960), whose “Book of the Silvery Water and Starry
Earth" (known in Latin as De chemia 9?) was edited by E. Staple-
ton and M. Hidayat Husain in Vol. XII of the Memoirs of the
Asiatic Society of Bengal.*! Stapleton affirms the existence of
other works by the same author.® In the West he is known by
one work only,** De chemia, printings of which all go back to
one version, as, presumably, do the manuscripts.** Accordingly,
the Senior quotations in Aurora must be close to the original
version. Since the Latin translation mentions Averroes (ibn
Roshd, d. 1098), it may be assigned to the twelfth or beginning
of the thirteenth century.® Senior also annotated the Turba,
and seems to have had connections with the Shiite sect: one of
his friends, Abul Hasan Ali ibn Abdullah,99 was (according to
the Fihrist) burned in Baghdad for the sake of his faith.5** Senior
58 La Chimie au moyen dge, III, p. 16. A “Liber Metheaurorum” or “De lapide
philosophico,” attributed to Alphidius, is preserved in a MS. at the Bodleian,
Digby 16413. Cf. Steinschneider, Die ewropdischen Ubersetzungen, Part B, p. 4,
and Carini, "Sulle scienze occulte nel medio evo,” p. 176, line 4.
59 Berthelot, Alchimistes grecs, III, i, 3.
60 I used an undated edition of De chemia, which Ruska conjectures was printed
by Perna in Basel between 1560 and 1570 (cf. Ruska, “Studien zu Muhammad ibn
Umail," pp. 320ff.), but which is generally thought to have been printed in Stras-
bourg in 1566. The treatise is reprinted in Bibl. chem., II, and Theatr. chem., V
(1622).
61 Cf. also Ruska's “Studien” and Singer, Catalogue, Y, p. 122, No. 136.
62 He mentions (Memoirs, XII, pp. 126f.) a "Combination of the Spirits," *Expla-
nation of the Protected Secret and the Hidden Knowledge," “Book of the Lamp,”
“Book of the Key of the Greater Wisdom,” '"The Hidden Book," "Clearing Up of
Enigmas,” “The Choice Pearl,” “Book of Chapters,” etc, and various poems
rhyming with the letters Dàl, Rà, Mim, Nün, Làm, etc.
93 A second work of Senior’s may have been translated under the title "Clavis
maioris sapientiae" (Bibl. chem., I, pp. 503-08), if this treatise is identical with
the Arabic "Book of the Key of the Greater Wisdom" (Kitab Mafatih al-
Hikmat al-'Uzma), which unfortunately has not yet been investigated (Stapleton,
p. 126, n. 1). Otherwise it is cited as a work of Artefius.
64 Cf. Singer, Catalogue, I, p. 122. 65 Stapleton, Memoirs, p. 126.
66 Ibid., p. 123. 87 Ibid., p. 124.
163. THE SOURCES
himself lived a very secluded life and was a decided mystic. He
had a considerable influence on the author of Aurora, who often
quotes him.
I was unable to trace the Alphonsus quotation "This is a true
friend, who deserteth thee not when all the world faileth thee"
(ch. 10). At any rate in the writings of Alphonsus, King of
Castile,$5 I was unable to find anything like this; also, the trea-
tises attributed to him are spurious ® and late.
Equally untraceable were the quotations which, in the
printed version of Aurora, are supposed to come from a "Liber
quintae essentiae." 7 In the manuscripts the same work is desig-
nated as "Liber sextus ox**" and “‘ocx",” in the Vienna manuscript
as "Liber sexagesimae," ™ and in the second part of Aurora as
"liber sextarius." 7
The quotation that appears in the manuscripts as a saying of
"Speculator" (ch. 3) raises some difficult problems. With the ex-
ception of the opening sentence, “Mockery of science is the cause
of ignorance," the passage occurs in three works of Roger Bacon
(1214-ca. 1292): Opus maius, Part I, ch. IV; "Compendium
studii," ch. 3; and "Epistola de secretis artis et naturae et de
nullitate magiae," ch. VIII, a work whose genuineness is dis-
puted but which 'Thorndike regards as a compilation of genuine
writings.'?. A. G. Little lists it among the genuine writings, too.”
68 On this question see Lippmann, I, p. 498, and Ferguson, Bibliotheca Chemica,
I, p. 24.
69 According to Lippmann, ibid., Alphonsus of Castile was hostile to alchemy.
70 Infra, pp. 86f., gof. (possibly based on Albertus Magnus, “De mineralibus,”
Lib. I, Tract. 2; Borgnet, V, p. 16: *. . . which is truly called a carbuncle, and
therefore he who attaineth to its real appearance shineth in the darkness like a
lamp" *), 110f.
71 Once designated in Codex Rhenoviensis as o fih/co.2 A “Liber sacerdotum"
is mentioned in Aurora II. Cf. Berthelot, Moyen áge, I, pp. 179ff. Or is it the
“Liber de septuaginta" cited by Vincent of Beauvais (Speculum, Lib. VII, cap. 96)?
72 Art. aurif. (1610), I, pp. 156£.: “Of the third it is written, that it changes stones
into precious gems, as is set forth above in the sixth book, where it is said that the
stones jacinth, red and white coral, emerald, chrysolite, and sapphire can be
formed from that material. And in the charter of the priests it is written, that
from crystal can be made by its means carbuncle, or ruby, or topaz, which in
colour and substance excel the natural.” *
73 A History of Magic, Il, p. 630.
74 Roger Bacon Essays, p. 395: “The work consists of ten or eleven chapters, the
last five of which Charles considered doubtful (Footnote: “Apparently merely
because they are ‘enigmatic.’ But see the ingenious explanation by Lieut.-Col,
17AURORA CONSURGENS: INTRODUCTION
Bacon cites the proverb about “not giving an ass lettuce when
thistles are good enough for him" as a saying of Aulus Gellius in
Noctes Atticae, where, however, it cannot be found.” Nor has
anyone succeeded in tracing it so far. The proverb appears,
among other places, in an inquisitor's report on the Walden-
sians,"* and it seems to have been a popular adage.
Among the alchemical writings of Roger Bacon there is one
that has been preserved under the title "De alchemia," which in
Manget’s Bibliotheca chemica curiosa, Vol. I, is called “Spec-
ulum alchimiae." Although the Aurora quotation does not occur
there, "Speculator" might nevertheless mean "Speculi autor"
and thus be a veiled reference to Bacon. The minor treatises of
Bacon were nearly all written in his early years,? but unfortu-
nately they have not yet been examined for their genuineness
and probable date of composition.?? If the dedication in ""Epis-
tola de secretis artis et naturae" is genuine, this treatise would
have been written before 1249. It is further to be noted that,
when citing the whole passage, the sources Bacon gives are:
"Aristotelis secreta secretorum" (which he regarded as genu-
ine),?? and Aulus Gellius, though this reference, as already men-
tioned, is not correct. He must therefore have written this quo-
Hime, Gunpowder and Ammunition, pp. 141-62”), addressed perhaps to William
of Auvergne (d. 1248) or to John of London whom Charles identifies with John
of Basingstoke (d. 1252)." In Sanioris medicinae magistri D. Rogeri Baconis Angli
de arte chymiae scripta (Frankfurt, 1603), I could find nothing that referred to
Aurora. But it is worth noting, on p. 17: "Excerpta de libro Avicennae de anima
I,” and on p. 86: “Explicit exempla cum laude Dei et eius auxilio, exempla dico
Abhuali Principis cognomine Avicennae ad Hasen Regem patrem suum de re
recta."
75 Cf. Martin Hertz's edition of Gellius, Introduction to vol. II, pp. xxxviii
and xxxix.
76 C. E. Georges (cited by Hertz, p. xxxviii, footnote) refers to Lucilius (St.
Jerome, Selected Letters, p. 25): "It bears out the proverb which, as Lucilius tells
us, made Crassus laugh for the only time in his life: ‘When an ass eats thistles, his
lips have the lettuce to match them.' " *
77 Hahn, Geschichte der Ketzer im Mittelalter, Il, p. 257, a report by the inquisitor
Walter Map, De nugis curialium, I, xxi, who says: '"Therefore I have set forth light
matters, which no one may ignore knowing that when an ass eats thistles, his lips
have the lettuce that suits them." *
78 Thorndike, II, pp. 630ff.
79 Cf. article on Roger Bacon in Encyc. Brit., 11th edn., III, pp. 153-56, by R.
Adamson.
80 Thorndike, II, p. 633.
183. THE SOURCES
tation down without having the original Gellius text in front
of him—he was, as a matter of fact, known for his inexact refer-
ences, fond as he was of criticizing others in this respect, includ-
ing Albertus Magnus and Thomas Aquinas! ** The author of
Aurora avoided this mistake either inadvertently or from better
knowledge. Furthermore the Bacon passages are mixed in the
Aurora version, for in the original they run as follows: Opus
maius, I, IV: “Where also he [Gellius] says it's silly to offer an
ass lettuce when thistles are good enough for him." *? "Epistola
de secretis," ch. VIII: "And Aristotle himself says in the 'Book
of Secrets' that he would be a breaker of the heavenly seal who
should disclose the secrets of nature and of the art. . . . Also
in this regard Aulus Gellius says in his book ‘Attic Nights’ con-
cerning the conversation of the sages that it would be foolish to
offer an ass lettuce when thistles suffice for him." *?* And finally,
"Compendium studii," ch. 3: “. . . since the pearls of wisdom
are not to be cast before swine, according to Matthew 7 : 6, and
it 1s foolish to give lettuce to an ass, when thistles suffice for him,
as Aulus Gellius says in his book ‘Attic Nights,’ " 8* etc. All these
quotations are combined in the Aurora version: the Aristotle
quotation with the ass proverb and with the passage from Mat-
thew. A possible explanation is that Bacon and the author of
Aurora worked from a common source (named "'Speculi
autor"?), from which Bacon arbitrarily quoted now one and
now another combination. A further possibility is that the au-
thor of Aurora knew and combined all the passages in Bacon’s
writings, or that he had the "Epistola de secretis" passage in his
head, corrected the attribution to Gellius, and supplemented
it with Matthew 7:6 in conformity with his style, which is a mix-
ture of Biblical quotations and alchemical sayings.
Another knotty problem is raised by a passage which, un-
fortunately, is based on the uncertain transmission of the manu-
scripts. It concerns a quotation from Senior in chapter 1, where
it is said of Wisdom that "the wise man . . . understandeth her,
when his spirits have been enlightened by the Liber aggrega-
tionis." * In the Rhenanus printing and the Leiden manuscript
81 Pelster, Kritische Studien, p. 5o; Thorndike, II, pp. 642f.
82 Opus majus, ed. Bridges, I, p. 10.*
83 Opera inedita, ed. Brewer, p. 543. * Cf. variant in Theatr. chem., V (1622),
P- 956. 84 Brewer, p. 416. 85 Infra, pp. 38f.
T9AURORA CONSURGENS: INTRODUCTION
this is replaced by "ex libris agnitionum" (by the Books of
Knowledge). The original passage in Senior runs: “by the trans-
mitted books, which the philosophers have hidden." Presumably
the later version in the printing and in the Leiden manuscript is
a correction which endeavoured to bring the text closer to the
Senior quotation, and which was made because the expression
"Liber aggregationis" could no longer be understood. But there
is in fact a "Liber aggregationis seu secretorum" among the writ-
ings of Albertus Magnus, in which the magic of plants, talis-
mans, etc., and also of alchemy, is discussed. This is one of a
group of three treatises, "Experimenta Alberti" (also named
"Secreta Alberti" or "Liber aggregationis"), "De mirabilibus
mundi," and “De secretis mulierum," which were all declared
spurious because of their occult or "obscene" content, although
they are among his most widely disseminated writings. Manu-
scripts of the "Liber ageregationis" date from the thirteenth
century, and of “De mirabilibus mundi" from the fourteenth
century, but both works were brought together even in the
earliest printings.5' The resistance against regarding them as
genuine is due mainly to the fact that their content was con-
sidered “frivolous” and bad, though Lynn Thorndike rightly
stresses that the views they contain in no way contradict those
found in the indisputably genuine works of Albertus Magnus.5?
He also emphasizes that we have no valid grounds, either of style
or of textual criticism, for cavilling at these works,*? though in
the end he leaves the question open.9?? He remarks only that "De
86 Thorndike, II, p. 720.
87 Cf. the Gesamtkatalog der Wieger.drucke (ed. Crous), I, no. 617ff. Even in the
earliest printings (Ferrara, 1471; Strasbourg, 1478; Bologna, 1478; Reutlingen,
1483; Speyer, 1483; Cologne, 1485), these writings are brought together under the
title "Liber Aggregationis." A 15th-cent. biographer of Albertus, Rudolf of
Nymwegen (Legenda litteralis Beati Alberti, Part III, cap. 7) notes: "Brother
Hermann of Mynda, by birth a Saxon, . . . in his book of stories which is en-
titled De mirabilibus mundi, in the fourth book concerning the life of Master
Albert, comprehends many things in a few words, which are inserted in their
proper place in our own work." * Pelster (p. 33) thinks this treatise of Hermann's
is lost, i.e., not identical with the existing one. He conjectures that the author of
this lost "De mirabilibus" was Hermann von Lerbecke. But it is not clear to me
how this could be connected with the "Secreta Alberti."
88 ‘Thorndike, II, pp. 724ff. 89 Ibid., pp. 725ff .
90 On this question and the literature for and against the authorship of Albertus
see Partington, "Albertus Magnus on Alchemy.”
203. THE SOURCES
mirabilibus mundi” > 66 “approaches even more closely to the cus-
tomary style of Albertus’s writings.” This treatise contains a theo-
retical discussion on the nature of magic which is of such out-
standing importance that we shall have to go into it more closely
in our commentary.
The main point to bear in mind is the oldest known manu-
scripts of Aurora really do have “Liber aggregationis" where
Senior has “books which the philosophers hare hidden," 3o that
the author obviously means that the "Liber aggregationis" was
an essential book of this kind which had to be kept secret. The
views it propounds on the real nature of alchemy seem to me to
fall completely into line with the thinking of Aurora, so that I
am inclined to retain the reading "aggregationis" or "aggrega-
tionum." ?* According to Aurora, the purpose of the book was
to bring about a preparatory clarification of the mind and to
enable one to make subtle distinctions. Now, as we have said,
"De mirabilibus mundi," which was always combined with
"Liber aggregationis" in the incunabula,? contains a funda-
mental discussion of the nature of all magic including alchemy,
and thus does in fact fulfil the role postulated by Aurora.
To sum up, the sources for Aurora yield the following pic-
ture: All traceable quotations (including the Biblical ones),
such as those from Senior, Alphidius, the T'urba, Pseudo-Aris-
totle's "De perfecto magisterio" and "Secreta secretorum," and
Gregory the Great, are scrupulously correct. That the Morienus
and Calid quotations do not accord with the texts as we have
them today mayb e due to the fact that these works were put into
their present form only after Aurora was written. I hope other
investigators will succeed in locating the passages I was unable
to trace, and so complete the picture of the sources which the
author of Aurora used.
91 Cf. infra, p. 179, n. 102.
92]It remains difficult to reconcile this with the fact that "Secreta Alberti" and
“De mirabilibus" appear together as "Liber aggregationis" only in late MSS and
printed incunabula, whereas in the earlier MSS known to us they appear sepa-
rately. Yet they must have been brought together earlier under this one title,
since the earliest incunabula from a great many different places of printing
consistently combine them under the title “Liber aggregationis" (Thorndike, II, p.
721). Thorndike mentions (pp. 569f), as related "current works," a “Semita recta,”
“Practica,” and a “Speculum secretorum Alberti," MS 138, from the 15th cent., in
Bologna.
214. THE PROBLEM OF DATING
As I was unable to trace all the sources (especially “Liber quintae
essentiae"), no conclusive opinion can be passed on the date of
Aurora's composition. All the traceable sources are early Latin
treatises or translations of Arabic writings, none of which can be
dated later than the middle of the thirteenth century. This argues
for a comparatively early date, more particularly as authors like
Arnaldus de Villanova (1235-1313) and Raymond Lully (1235-
1315), who figure in practically all the later treatises, are not
mentioned in Aurora.
Lynn Thorndike, in his History of Magic and Experimental
Science, assigns Aurora to the fifteenth century.! In my view this
dating holds only for Part II. Here mention is made of Albertus
Magnus (1193-1280) and Geber, who are not named in Part I.?
The fact that the quotation from Aristotle’s De anima (II, 8)
is based on the old translations argues for an early date. Fur-
ther conclusions can be drawn from the relation of the Specu-
lator-Gellius quotation to similar passages in Roger Bacon only
when the problem of the genuineness and dating of Bacon’s
minor writings has been cleared up. At all events this relation-
ship points back to Bacon’s time, that is, to the thirteenth cen-
tury.
LIV, p. 335: “Some anonymous works, distinguishable by their titles, may also
probably be assigned to the fifteenth century, such as the ‘Soliloquy of Philosophy’
or "The Burst of Dawn.’ 25 . . . The latter treatise gives four reasons for its title
and then seven parables of which the last is a confabulation of the lover with his
beloved. Its second part is in three chapters on astronomy, arithmetic, and the
natural process of first doctrine." Note 25: “Vienna 5230, A.D. 1505, fols. 2397-2497.
‘Incipit Aurora consurgens: Venerunt mihi . . . sanguine menstruali per cursum
eius.’ S. Marco VI, 215 Valentinelli, XVI, 4, A.D. 1475, fols. 657-1017 [Valentinelli,
V, pp. 155ff.]. With same title and incipit. The latter part of the work was printed
in Art. aurif. [1593], I, 185[ff]."
2?F or these and other authors see Ruska, Tabula Smaragdina, pp. 186ff.
224. THE PROBLEM OF DATING
An upper limit for the dating might be provided by "Ro-
sarium philosophorum," since it quotes from Aurora, and more-
over only from Part I.? Unfortunately the dating of "Rosarium"
is much disputed: Berthelot assigns it to the middle of the four-
teenth century, and Ruska first agrees with this, but later
thinks it should be assigned to the middle of the fifteenth cen-
tury,? though he does not adduce any decisive arguments."
An allusion to Chapter II of Aurora is to be found in a trea-
tise which was printed as "Compositum de compositis" under
the name of Albertus Magnus.5 As it is consistent with the whole
style of Aurora to employ Biblical quotations, and this is true
only of the preface to the treatise? which afterwards adopts a
prosaic "scientific" tone, we must assume that the first part of
it is based on Aurora and not the other way round.
Further, Aurora is cited in the "Aureum vellus sive sacra
vatum philosophia" (Antwerp, 1604) of Gulielmus Mennens,!'?
whereas Johannes Grasseus, in his "Arca arcani," !! had only
an indirect knowledge of the title?? but was not acquainted
with the text,!? though it must have been known to his source,
8 Art. aurif. (1610), II, pp. 133ff. Though it is no proof, this is further evidence
that Part I is by another hand and earlier than Part II. [In sections I and III of
the present volume, the “Ros. phil." references are always from Art. aurif., II; but
in section II they are from Bibl. chem., 1I.]
4 Moyen áge, I, p. 234.
5 Tabula Smaragdina, p. 193.
6 T'urba, p. 342; Thorndike, III, p. 56.
7 The citation from Aurora in Michael Maier's Symbola aureae mensae, p. 65,
agrees with "Ros. phil." and probably comes from there.
8 Theatr. chem., IV (1659), pp. 825ff.
9 Ibid. “Therefore the knowledge which I have learned without deceit, I com-
municate without envy, and if this envy is hidden it is lacking, for such a man
shall not be a sharer in God's friendship. All wisdom and knowledge is from the
Lord God, but this however it be said is always from the Holy Spirit. . . . There-
fore he that hath ears to hear such deifying grace, let him hear a secret bestowed
upon me by the grace of God, and let him in no wise reveal it to the unworthy." *
10 Also in Theatr. chem., V (1622), pp. 267ff.
11 Ibid., VI, p. 314.
12 Bibl. chem., Il, p. 594: "19: Aurora consurgens in Turba [!] Ecce," etc. There
is no citation from Aurora.
13 Echoes of it may have been transmitted by “Clangor buccinae," the author of
which was acquainted with Aurora. Cf. Art. aurif. (1610), I, p. 348, the same
Sextarius quotation; also pp. 309, 311, 325.
23AURORA CONSURGENS: INTRODUCTION
the Augustinian monk Degenhardus.'4 The treatise ascribed to
Salomon Trismosin, Splendor solis (ca. 1490), is full of passages
taken from Aurora, though the title is not mentioned.
I think there can be no doubt that Sir George Ripley (1415-
90) knew Aurora. Though he does not name it by title, his “Liber
duodecim portarum” contains too many of the same combina-
tions of Bible and Senior quotations to be an independent pro-
duction.!6
The situation is less clear with regard to the "Aquarium
sapientum," !* yet I think it possible that its author was ac-
quainted with Aurora. Nor does Boehme's Aurora seem to me
independent of Aurora Consurgens, even though Boehme, as
always, remodelled what he had read in a very freehanded way
nd used it only to amplify his own inner experiences.
All in all, Aurora, so far as I can see, was little known in the
later literature, because it obviously departed too much from
the popular alchemical style and was not understood. In con-
clusion it may be said that the lower limit for Aurora must be
around 1230, and the upper limit the middle of the fifteenth
century ("Rosarium," Ripley). I myself incline to date it to the
middle or second half of the thirteenth century.
14 Bibl. chem., IL, p. 593: "Master Degenhardus, a monk of the Augustinian
Order, a true possessor of the stone, says in his book of the Universal Way:
... It is a gift of the Holy Spirit. In it lies hid the mystery of approach to the
treasure of the sages. And it is the lead of the philosophers, also called the lead
of the air, in which there is a resplendent white dove, called the salt of the metals,
wherein consists the magistery of the work. This is that chaste, wise and rich
queen of Sheba, clothed in a white veil, who would submit to none but to King
Solomon. The heart of no man is able to search deeply enough into these
things." *
15 Ed. J. K., London, 1920. Aurora is missing in the anonymous editor's list of
sources,
16 Bibl. chem., Il, p. 280, col. 2, or Ripleys Opera omnia, Prologus Secundus to
"Liber XII Portarum," verse 3: "Make wisdom thy sister and prudence thy
friend"; also verses 3, 6, 8 (triune stone), and 9, p. 59: “. . . until it is dried up in
the streams (for by this operation the streams have passed into dry land, as the
Psalmist saith . . .)"; p. 259, the same Senior quotation; and on p. 300, “For it is
written: Thou hast set them bounds which they shall not pass” is referred to the
length of human life, as in Aurora.
17 Musaeum hermeticum (1683) , pp. 73ff.
245. THE MANUSCRIPTS
A complete manuscript of the treatise is to be found in the Biblio-
théque Nationale, Paris, Lat. 14006, fol. 1'—12": "Incipit tractatus
Aurora consurgens Intitulatus"; fol. 12" is followed by Part II.!
The manuscript, which I had at my disposal in photocopy form,
dates from the fifteenth century and came from the Bibliotheca
Manuscriptorum Coisliniana (earlier Seguenona), which Henri
du Campout, Duc de Coislin, Pair de France, bequeathed to the
monastery of St. Germain des Prés in 1732.? The manuscript is
very clean and legible, and a recapitulation of proper names and
a short summary of contents are given in the margin of the first
two folios. It is cited in the critical apparatus as P, its corrections
YD VN
Closest to the P readings is a manuscript in Vienna, at the
Osterreichische Nationalbibliothek, Codex 5230. Our treatise be-
gins on fol. 239" with "Incipit aurora consurgens" and continues
to fol. 248", where Part II begins, given only in abbreviated form
and ending on fol. 249’. After that come recipes. The preceding
treatise ends: "Explicit lapidarius raymundi magici 1467, 16.
Junii." The manuscript is mentioned in Thorndike’s History
(IV, p. 335)? In the apparatus it is cited as V (Vindobonensis),
marginal corrections as V».
1 Further alchemical treatises follow, the most important of which are the “Liber
secretorum" of Calid, "Correctio fatuorum" of Bernardus Magnus, "Rotatio ele-
mentorum" of Alanus, "Collectio ex nobili libro Margaritae pretiosae Novellae"
of Petrus Bonus, "Flos Regis," "Propositiones maximae in arte alchimiae" of
Albertus Magnus, "Epistola Avicennae ad Hazen philosophum," “Liber intitulatus
Lilium evulsum e spinis" "Problema" of Johannes Thonensis, “Colloquium
magistri cum discipulo," Herba incognita ortolana" of Joh. Thonensis, as well as
recipes and minor treatises,
2 Cf. the description and examination of the MS in Delisle, Inventaire des MSS
de St. Germain des Prés, pp. 124ff., and in Corbett, Catalogue des MSS alchimis-
tiques latins, L, pp. 178f.
3 Codex 5230 is a collection of MSS on paper, 222 x 159 mm., in brown calf over
wooden boards. Besides numerous chemical treatises, our MS contains many illus-
25AURORA CONSURGENS: INTRODUCTION
M To the same group as P and V belongs the manuscript in the
Biblioteca Marciana, Venice,’ cited in the apparatus as M, cor-
rections as M». This Codex is mentioned (under Class XVI) in
J. Valentinelli’s Bibliotheca Manuscripta ad S. Marci Venetia-
rum (vol. V, 1872, p. 155), dating from the year 1475. The treatise
runs from fol. 65" to 1617: "Incipit tractatus Aurora consurgens
tract. duo”; it is extraordinarily legible and carefully written.
Rh Likewise of good quality, but unfortunately incomplete, is
the manuscript in the Zentralbibliothek, Zurich, Codex Rheno-
viensis > 172, from the monastery at Rheinau, and assigned by
Father C. Mohlberg to the fifteenth century.? It is cited in the
apparatus as Rh, corrections as Rhy. It begins towards the end
of chapter 9 of Aurora with the words: "sitates tollit de cor-
pore . . ." The manuscript contains other alchemical treatises.’
The Aurora fragment is the work of a single hand, has the titles
in red and the initial letters in blue and gold, and is illustrated
with very beautiful symbolic pictures. The relation of the pic-
tures to the text is, however, somewhat tenuous.
The same pictures, poorly reproduced, are to be found in
the Codex Vossianus Chemicus 520, No. 29 in the University
Library at Leiden, dating from the sixteenth century and rather
carelessly written. In the apparatus it is cited as L, its corrections
trations to the text (chemical symbols, pictures of chemical experiments). The
various parts of the MS date from different periods of the 15th and 16th cents.
The dates 1465, 1467, 1481, 1516 are mentioned. Cf. Tabulae Codicum Manuscrip-
torum . . . in Bibl. Palat. Vindobonensi asservatorum, ed. Acad. Caes. Vindob.,
IV, p. 67; also Thorndike and Pearl Kibre, Catalogue of Incipits of Mediaeval
Scientific Writings in Latin, col. 767, under "Venerunt mihi . . ." Continuations
of this publication in Speculum, XIV, No. 1: Thorndike, “Additional Incipits of
Mediaeval Scientific Writings," and XVII, No. 3: "More Incipits" etc. Thorndike
dates the MS 1505 (IV, p. 335, n. 25).
4 Mentioned in Thorndike, IV, p. 335, n. 25. I am indebted to Fr. A. (now Cardi-
nal) Albareda, prefect of the Vatican Library, for first drawing my attention to
this MS. No Aurora MS is mentioned in Little, Initia operum Lat. quae saeculis
XIII, XIV, XV attribuuntur.
5 Cited earlier in C. G. Jung’s publications as Codex Rhenovacensis. The form
"Rhenoviensis" was subsequently adopted.
6 Mohlberg, Katalog der Handschriften der Zentralbibliothek in Zurich, I, p. 246.
7 Albertus Magnus: "Kalistenus unus de antiquioribus . . . dicit," "Questio
curiosa de natura solis et lunae"; Petrus de Zolento: "Secreta Hermetis"; Jo. de
Garlandia: "Clavis sap. maioris"; excerpts from Geber's writings; "Aurea massa,"
"Visio Arislei" and other treatises. Further details in Mohlberg.
26b. THE MANUSCRIPTS
as L5. The title reads: "Tractatus qui dicitur Thomae Aquin-
atis de Alchimia modus extrahendi quintam essentiam Liber
Alchimiae, qui a nonnullis dicitur Aurora consurgens latine
scriptus cum figuris." It is followed by other alchemical trea-
tises. The Codex comes closest to the Rhenanus printing in its
readings and is only of occasional importance for establishing
the text.
Dr. G. Goldschmidt kindly drew my attention to the manu-
script in the University Library at Bologna, No. 747, dated 1492,
and cited in the apparatus as B. It is unreliable and full of large
lacunae. I used a photocopy. The treatise runs from fol. 97* to
120°, with the title: "Incipit aurea [h]ora quae dicitur Aurora
consurgens vel liber trinitatis compositus a Sancto Thoma de
aquino." Particularly towards the end, this carelessly written
version of the treatise contains so many omissions that I ceased
to cite them in the apparatus. For the sake of completeness they
are given in Appendix II.
Finally, cited in the apparatus as D, is the British Museum
copy of Johannes Rhenanus, Harmoniae inperscrutabilis chym-
ico-philosophicae sive Philosophorum antiquorum consentien-
tium decades duae, apud Conr. Eifridum, Francofurti, 1625,
Decas II, pp. 175ff., of which I used a photocopy. Incipit: "Beati
"Thomae de Aquino Aurora sive Aurea Hora." Chapter headings
are missing. This version shows traces of revision by humanist
scholars who, shortly before the printing, corrected the Latin
and brought the text closer to the Vulgate, which is quoted much
more freely in the manuscripts.? The text contains repetitions
which are probably marginal glosses that have found their way
into it.!? The same is true of M and occasionally of P and Rh.
8 Including a treatise by Albertus Magnus in German, the “Schemata” of Gratus,
a treatise "De lapide," recipes, Lully’s "Elucidarium testamenti," etc.
9 Examples are p. 32, l. 11, “ut intelligat" instead of the barely intelligible "et in-
telligit"; p. 42, l. 5, "vacabit" corrupted into "vocabit" with "te" added; p. 42, 1. 9,
where the description of alchemy as a "sacramentum," offensive to religious sensi-
bilities, was altered into "sanctuarium"; p. 52, l. 12, "volens" added to the infini-
tive "videre"; p. 82, 1. 14£, the gloss "quod philosophus vult esse," because the
equation of the alchemical triad with the Trinity obviously caused offence, and
so on.
10 E.g., p. 76, 1. 33, "salvabitur et salvus vocabitur."
276. THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE TEXT
OF THE PRESENT EDITION
As P, M, and V were more or less of equal value, now one and
now the other containing the better reading,’ I could not rely
consistently on any one of them but had to take them all into
account. For the later chapters, Rh was as important as the
others. In the Vulgate quotations the Biblical text could not
always be taken as definitive, since the author quotes freely or
in deliberately modified form. Certain passages come also from
the liturgy of the Mass, for often the same Biblical quotations
appear combined in the same way as in the Roman Missal, or
less frequently in the Roman Breviary.? Because the author is
1M, for instance, is better on p. 48, l. 21, p. 50, 1. 16, and p. 52, 1. 2; P is better on
p. 76, 1. 33, and p.100, l. 5.
2 In the preparation of the English edition, Mr. A. S. B. Glover has kindly drawn
my attention to a number of other quotations from the Roman Breviary (as well
as to some passages which, while not forming part of the Roman Breviary as
standardized. by Pope Pius V, still appear in the Dominican Breviary), which are
included in the footnotes to the Aurora text in the next section. These and the
quotations I have given may be a sufficient indication of the use of the Breviary
in Aurora.
Mr. Glover has supplied the following note:
“The text of quotations from the Vulgate given in the footnotes follows Biblia
Sacra juxta Vulgatam Clementinam . . . , Rome, Tournai, Paris (Typis Societatis
S. Joannis Evang.), 1927; and chapter and verse numbers accord with this edition,
so that (especially in the case of the Psalms) they will not always agree exactly
with references in editions or translations of the Bible not based on the Vulgate.
The corresponding English translations are taken from The Holy Bible, translated
from the Latin Vulgate . . . , London (Burns Oates and Washbourne, Ltd.). 1914,
and subsequent (not specifically dated) reprints. In view of the almost numberless
slightly differing editions of the Missale and Brevarium Romanum, particularly
of those which give a vernacular text as well as the Latin, references here are
given not to the pages of any specific edition, but to the Mass or the Breviary
Office in which the passage cited is to be found. The extensive changes and omis-
sions called for in the Masses and other offices by the liturgical reforms of 1955
286. THE TEXT OF THE PRESENT EDITION
consciously playing with the meaning of the Biblical quotations,
it may be of interest to the reader to compare his wording with
the original passages cited in the footnotes to the Aurora text
and translation. Other, later versions, such as the long quotation
from Aurora in "Rosarium philosophorum," were consulted
only when a conjecture seemed necessary.?
The apparatus does not indicate the major omissions in B,
variations in the spelling of proper names, or single unimpor-
tant errors in copying, though these are given in Appendix II for
the sake of completeness.*
and later years, may mean that some of these passages will not be found in edi-
tions of the Missal and Breviary published after 1960.
"In the Swiss edition of the book, references to the Roman Missal were given
for all those quotations from the Scriptures in the text of Aurora which occur in
the Missale Romanum. In the present edition, such references are given only
when the text of the quotation as used in the Missal shows some significant
verbal difference from the Vulgate text, and for quotations from the Missal or
Breviary of texts which are not borrowed from the Bible."
3 For instance on p. 34, l. 24, "operationes" for "comparatione."
4In the Swiss edition, here followed an account of the editorial principles fol-
lowed in choosing the Biblical text in German. It is replaced by Mr. Glover's
explanation in n. 2, supra. For observations on the literature that has appeared
since the Swiss edition went to press (Oct. 1955), see the Foreword to the English
Edition, pp. ixff.
29

a J P MYOn
P"
H3 HL mr
. ety it
1 !] | ? 8[E4S^ 1.51 9
-
Lou 94H eSsoJ Af te
»
ee Oran

II
AURORA CONSURGENS
Text and Translationa J P MYOn
P"
H3 HL mr
. ety it
1 !] | ? 8[E4S^ 1.51 9
-
Lou 94H eSsoJ Af te
»
ee Oran

II
AURORA CONSURGENS
Text and Translation

I
BEATI THOMAE DE AQUINO
AURORA SIVE AUREA HORA. INCIPIT TRACTATUS
AURORA CONSURGENS
INTILULATUS
Venerunt mihi omnia bona pariter cum illa! sapientia austri?
5
quae foris praedicat, in plateis dat vocem suam, in capite turba-
rum clamitat, in foribus portarum urbis profert verba sua
dicens: ? Accedite ad me et illuminamini et operationes vestrae
non confundentur; * omnes qui concupiscitis me divitiis meis
adimplemini.* Venite (ergo) filii, audite me, scientiam Dei docebo
10
vos. Quis sapiens et intelligit hanc," quam Alphidius dicit hom-
ines et pueros in viis et plateis praeterire et cottidie a iumentis et
pecoribus in sterquilinio conculcari.? Et Senior: Nihil ea aspectu
7. orbis PVM / 10. ergo add. D / 11. ut intelligat D, et intelligens B, intelli-
get V /
1 Sap. 7 : 11: "Venerunt autem mihi omnia bona pariter cum illa et innumerabilis
honestas per manus illius."
2 Cf. Matth. 12: 42: "Regina austri surget in iudicio . . ." and Zach. 9 : 14: “Deus
in tuba canet et vadet in turbine austri . . ."
3 Prov. 1: 20-22: "Sapientia foris praedicat; in plateis dat vocem suam; in capite
turbarum clamitat; in foribus portarum urbis profert verba sua, dicens: Usque quo,
parvuli, diligitis infantiam?"
4 Ps. 33:6: "Accedite ad eum (sc, Dominum), et illuminamini; et facies vestrae
non confundentur."
5 Ecclus. 24: 26-80: "Transite ad me, omnes qui concupiscitis me, et a genera-
tionibus meis implemini. . . . Qui audit me non confundetur."
6 Ps. 33 : 12: "Venite, filii, audite me, timorem Domini docebo vos."
7 Osee 14 : 10: "Quis sapiens, et intelliget ista? intelligens et sciet haec? Quia rectae
viae Domini. . ."
8 "Liber Alphidii," Codex Ashmole 1420, fol. 18: homines pedibus conculcant in
viis . . ." fol. 21: ""Thesaurizatum est in viam ejectus vileque et carum . . . quae
homines ac pueri in viis praetereunt." Cf. also "Consilium coniugii," Ars chem.,
p. 88: Assiduus: "Et scito fili quod hunc lapidem de quo hoc archanum extrahitur
Deus non emendum praecio posuit quoniam in viis ejectus invenitur ut a paupere
et divite haberi possit." Also pp. 62-63: "Quidam (dixerunt lapidem) vile et carum
et stercore tectum ad quod vix poterit perveniri quod homines ac pueri in plateis
et viis praetereunt.” Cf. also "Rosarium philosophorum," Bibl. chem., II, pp.
32I
THE AURORA OR AUREA HORA
OF BLESSED THOMAS AQUINAS
HERE BEGINNETH THE TREATISE
ENTITLED AURORA CONSURGENS
All good things came to me together with her,! that Wisdom of
the south,? who preacheth abroad, who uttereth her voice in the
streets, crieth out at the head of the multitudes, and in the en-
trance of the gates of the city uttereth her words, saying: ? Come
ye to me and be enlightened, and your operations shall not be
confounded; * all ye that desire me shall be filled with my riches.5
Come (therefore), children, hearken to me; I will teach you the
science of God.* Who is wise, and understandeth this,” of which
Alphidius saith, that men and children pass her by daily in the
streets and public places, and she is trodden into the mire by
beasts of burden and by cattle?* And Senior saith: Nought is
1 Wisd. 5 : 11: “Now all good things came to me together with her, and innumera-
ble riches through her hands."
2 Cf. Matt. 12:42: "The queen of the south shall rise in judgment . . ." and
Zach. 9:14: "God will sound the trumpet and go in the whirlwind of the
south... 3
3 Prov. 1 : 20-22: “Wisdom preacheth abroad: she uttereth her voice in the streets:
At the head of multitudes she crieth out, in the entrance of the gates of the city
she uttereth her words, saying: O children, how long will ye love childishness?”
4 Ps. 33: 6: "Come ye to him [the Lord] and be enlightened, and your faces shall
not be confounded.”
5 Ecclus. 24 : 26-30: "Come over to me, all ye that desire me: and be filled with my
fruits. . . . He that hearkeneth to me shall not be confounded.”
6 Ps. 33: 12: "Come, children, hearken to me: I will teach you the fear of the
Lord."
* Hos. (Osee) 14 : 10: "Who is wise, and he shall understand these things? prudent,
and he shall know these things? For the ways of the Lord are right . . ."
8 "Liber Alphidii," Codex Ashmole 1420, fol. 18: “men trample it underfoot in the
streets . . ." fol. 21: "It is treasured and cast forth in the streets and cheap
and dear . . . which men and children pass by in the streets." Cf. also "Consilium
coniugii," Ars chemica, p. 88: Assiduus: "And know, my son, that this stone,
from which this secret thing is extracted, God appointed not to be bought for a
price, for it is found cast forth in the streets that it may be possessed by both
rich and poor." Also pp. 62-63: Some (called the stone) vile and dear and covered
with filth, to which one could hardly attain, which men and children pass by in
33AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
vilius et nihil ea in natura pretiosius, et Deus etiam eam pretio
15 emendam non posuit.? Hanc Salomon pro luce habere proposuit
et super omnem pulchritudinem et salutem; in comparatione
illius lapidis pretiosi virtutem illi non comparavit.1? Quoniam
omne aurum tamquam arena exigua et velut lutum aestimabitur
argentum in conspectu illius, et sine causa non est. Melior est
enim acquisitio eius negociatione argenti et auri purissimi. Et
20
fructus illius est pretiosior cunctis opibus huius mundi et omnia,
quae desiderantur, huic non valent comparari. Longitudo die-
rum et sanitas in dextera illius, in sinistra vero eius gloria et
divitiae infinitae. Viae eius operationes pulchrae et laudabiles
non despectae neque deformes et semitae illius moderatae et non
festinae, sed cum laboris diuturni instantia.! Lignum vitae est
his, qui apprehenderint eam et lumen indeficiens, si tenuerint
14. nihil om. BDLV / nihil om. MP / 15. composuit B / 16. operatione B, com-
positione M, operationibus L / 17. virtutem om. MPBL / 18. arenam et exiguum
VPM, arena etiam exigua D / 19.-20. causa non melior est enim DB, sine causa
non est melior. Est M /20. Et om. VMP./21. operibus DLM/P 2 2. valeant
MP / 23. illius: eius DL om. B | 24. operationes conj. from Rosarium, compara-
tione codd. om. B, comparatione eius V / 26. diurni VMP/ 2 7. apprehendunt
MPYV, apprehenderunt L /
88b-89a: "Scito quod hunc lapidem, de quo hoc arcanum agitur, Deus non posuit
magno pretio emendum, quoniam in via eiectus invenitur, quatenus tam a
paupere quam a divite haberi possit . . .” Braceschius, “De alchemia dialogus,"
ibid., I, p. 594b: "Nam Alphidius dicit hoc secretum pretio non comparari sed
inveniri proiectum in media via...” Cf. also “Rosinus ad Sarratantam," Art. aurif. (1610), I, p. 188; Morienus Romanus, "De transmutatione metallorum,"
ibid., IL p. 25; Avicenna, "Declaratio lapidis physici filio suo Aboali," Theatrum
chem. (1659), IV, p. 875. 9 Cf.I
THE AURORA OR AUREA HORA
OF BLESSED THOMAS AQUINAS
HERE BEGINNETH THE TREATISE
ENTITLED AURORA CONSURGENS
All good things came to me together with her,! that Wisdom of
the south,? who preacheth abroad, who uttereth her voice in the
streets, crieth out at the head of the multitudes, and in the en-
trance of the gates of the city uttereth her words, saying: ? Come
ye to me and be enlightened, and your operations shall not be
confounded; * all ye that desire me shall be filled with my riches.5
Come (therefore), children, hearken to me; I will teach you the
science of God.* Who is wise, and understandeth this,” of which
Alphidius saith, that men and children pass her by daily in the
streets and public places, and she is trodden into the mire by
beasts of burden and by cattle?* And Senior saith: Nought is
1 Wisd. 5 : 11: “Now all good things came to me together with her, and innumera-
ble riches through her hands."
2 Cf. Matt. 12:42: "The queen of the south shall rise in judgment . . ." and
Zach. 9:14: "God will sound the trumpet and go in the whirlwind of the
south... 3
3 Prov. 1 : 20-22: “Wisdom preacheth abroad: she uttereth her voice in the streets:
At the head of multitudes she crieth out, in the entrance of the gates of the city
she uttereth her words, saying: O children, how long will ye love childishness?”
4 Ps. 33: 6: "Come ye to him [the Lord] and be enlightened, and your faces shall
not be confounded.”
5 Ecclus. 24 : 26-30: "Come over to me, all ye that desire me: and be filled with my
fruits. . . . He that hearkeneth to me shall not be confounded.”
6 Ps. 33: 12: "Come, children, hearken to me: I will teach you the fear of the
Lord."
* Hos. (Osee) 14 : 10: "Who is wise, and he shall understand these things? prudent,
and he shall know these things? For the ways of the Lord are right . . ."
8 "Liber Alphidii," Codex Ashmole 1420, fol. 18: “men trample it underfoot in the
streets . . ." fol. 21: "It is treasured and cast forth in the streets and cheap
and dear . . . which men and children pass by in the streets." Cf. also "Consilium
coniugii," Ars chemica, p. 88: Assiduus: "And know, my son, that this stone,
from which this secret thing is extracted, God appointed not to be bought for a
price, for it is found cast forth in the streets that it may be possessed by both
rich and poor." Also pp. 62-63: Some (called the stone) vile and dear and covered
with filth, to which one could hardly attain, which men and children pass by in
33

875. 9 Cf. Senior, De chemia (1566), p. 117: “. . . Philosophus filius Hamuel Zadith
. extraxit a fundo eorum margaritas praeciosas, et ostendit tibi manifeste et
aperte hoc secretum celatum quod appropriavit dominus gloriosus, huic lapidi
vili, et inpraeciabili, et est praeciosius in mundo, et vilius." Cf. "Ros. phil," p. 102. Cf. ibid., p. 106: ". . . de quo dixit Viemon: Proiicitur in sterquiliniis hoc
est, est vile in oculis omnis ignorantis."
10 Cf. "Ros. phil.” p. 100. Cf. Sap. 7: 7: ". . . venit in me spiritus sapientiae; et
praeposui illam regnis et sedibus, et divitias nihil esse duxi in comparatione illius,
nec comparavi illi lapidem pretiosum, quoniam omne aurum in comparatione
illius arena est exigua, et tanquam lutum aestimabitur argentum in conspectu
illius. Super salutem et speciem dilexi illam, et proposui pro luce habere illam."
11 Cf. Petrus Bonus, Pret. marg. nov. (1546), p. 45: ". . . et tu quidem exerciteris
ad illud cum laboris instantia maxima et cum diuturnitate meditationis immensae,
cum illa enim invenies et sine illa non."
34I. HERE BEGINNETH THE TREATISE . . .
more base in appearance than she, and nought is more precious
in nature than she, and God also hath not appointed her to be
bought for a price.? She it is that Solomon chose to have instead
of light, and above all beauty and health; in comparison of her
he compared not unto her the virtue of any precious stone.!? For
all gold in her sight shall be esteemed as a little sand, and silver
shall be counted as clay; and this not without cause, for to gain
her is better than the merchandise of silver and the most pure
gold. And her fruit is more precious than all the riches of this
world, and all the things that are desired are not to be compared
with her. Length of days and health are in her right hand, and in
her left hand glory and infinite riches. Her ways are beautiful
operations and praiseworthy, not unsightly nor ill-favoured, and
her paths are measured and not hasty, but are bound up with
stubborn and day-long toil." She is a tree of life to them that
lay hold on her, and an unfailing light. Blessed shall they be who
the streets and ways." Cf. also "Rosarium philosophorum," in Manget, Bibliotheca
chemica, IY, pp. 88b-8ga: “Know that this stone, by which this secret is wrought,
God appointed not to be bought for a great price, for it is found cast forth in the
streets, so that it may be had both by rich and poor... .” Braceschius, “De al-
chemia dialogus," ibid., I, p. 594b: "For Alphidius saith that this secret thing can-
not be bought for a price, but is found cast forth in the midst of the street... ."
Cf. also “Rosinus ad Sarratantam," Artis auriferae ( 1610), I, p. 188; Morienus Ro-
manus, "De transmutatione metallorum," ibid., II, p. 25; Avicenna, "Declaratio
lapidis physici filio suo Aboali," Theatrum chemicum (1659), IV, p. 875.
9 Cf. Senior, De chemia (1566), p. 117: “. . . The philosopher Zadith, the son of
Hamuel, hath extracted from its fundament precious pearls, and showeth thee
openly and covertly thís concealed secret which the Lord of glory hath bestowed
on this worthless and priceless stone, and it is the most precious thing in the
world, and the most despicable.” Cf. "Ros. phil," p. 102. Cf. ibid., p. 106:
“. . . whereof Viemon saith: This is cast out upon the dunghills, and in the eyes
of everyone that knoweth it not it is of no worth."
10 Cf. “Ros. phíL," p. 100. Cf. Wisd. 7:7: ". . . and the spirit of wisdom came
upon me; And I preferred her before kingdoms and thrones, and esteemed riches
nothing in comparison of her. Neither did I compare unto her any precious stone;
for aM gold in comparison of her is as a little sand, and silver in respect to her
shall be counted as clay. I loved her above health and beauty, and chose to have
her instead of light.”
11 Cf. Petrus Bonus, Pretiosa margarita novella (1546), p. 45: ". . . and do thou
labour therein with the most urgent instancy, and with long and boundless medi-
tation, for therewith shalt thou find it, but without this not so.”
35AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
beati,!? quia scientia Dei numquam peribit, ut Alphidius testa-
tur, ait enim: Qui hanc scientiam invenerit, cibus erit eius legi-
timus et sempiternus.? Et Hermes atque ceteri (philosophi)
30
inquiunt, quod si viveret homo habens hanc scientiam milibus
annis, omnique die deberet septem milia hominum pascere,
numquam egeret. ^ Hoc affirmat Senior dicens; quia esset ita
dives, sicut ille, qui habet lapidem,!5 de quo elicitur ignis, qui
potest dare ignem cui vult et inquantum vult et quando vult
sine suo defectu.!? Hoc idem vult Aristoteles in libro secundo
de anima, cum dicit: Omnium natura constantium positus est ter-
minus magnitudinis et augmenti !* ignis vero appositione com-
bustibilium crescit in infinitum.!? Beatus homo, qui invenerit
28.-29. testatur: dicit BD, om. L / 29.-30. legitimus: longaevus VP, longus M /
30.-31. ceteri: alii B Geber, Ros. / philosophi add. DL / 31. inquiunt om. B /
32. deberet pascere: pasceret BDL / 33. numquam: non BDL / confirmat BDL /
Quia esset: Est enim hic BDL / 35. sui BDL / 38. appositionem D, compositione P /
12 Prov. 3: 13-18: "Beatus homo qui invenit sapientiam, et qui affluit prudentia.
Melior est acquisitio eius negotiatione argenti et auri primi et purissimi fructus
eius. Pretiosior est cunctis opibus, et omnia quae desiderantur huic non valent
comparari. Longitudo dierum in dextera eius, et in sinistra illius divitiae et gloria.
Viae eius viae pulchrae, et omnes semitae illius pacificae. Lignum vitae est his qui
apprehenderint eam, et qui tenuerit eam beatus." Cf. also Bishop Cyrillus, Specu-
lum sapientiae (ed. Graesse), pp. 5-7.
13 "Liber Alphidii," loc. cit.: "Scito fili quod qui hanc invenit scientiam et victum
inde habuerit cibus eius legitimus erit." And: “quod thesaurus Dei numquam
perit nec deficit." Quoted also in "Ros. phil," pp. 100b-101a: “Qui hanc scientiam
invenerit cibus eius legitimus erit et sempiternus" (also Maier, Symbola aureae
mensae, p. 65).
14 Cf. "Cons. coniug.,” p. 116: ". . . nec est necesse ut reiteretur, prout dicit
Hermes: Sufficiet homini per mille millia annorum, et si quotidie duo milia
hominum pasceres non egeres, tingit enim in infinitum." Cf. also De aluminibus
et salibus (ed. Ruska), p. 59: (Mercurius): “Et si quis junxerit me fratri meo vel
sorori meae, vivet et gaudebit, et ero sufficiens ei usque in aeternum et si viveret
annos millies millenos."
15"Ros. phil," p. 92a, Hermes et Geber: “Qui hanc artem semel perfecerit,
si deberet vivere mille millibus annis et singulis diebus nutrire quatuor milia
hominum non egeret. Hoc confirmat Senior dicens: Est ita dives habens lapidem,
de quo Elixir fit, sicut qui habet ignem potest dare ignem cui vult et quando vult
et quantum vult sine suo defectu et periculo."
16 Ibid., p. 92a.
17 Anonymous, in ibid., p. 102a: "positus est certus terminus . . .”
18 De anima, B. 4.416a: 4 wer ToU mupos aUEgsus els dmewpov, éws àv 7 TO kavocTÓv,
36I. HERE BEGINNETH THE TREATISE . . . retain her,?? for the science of God shall never perish, as Alphid-
ius beareth witness, for he saith: He who hath found this science,
it shall be his rightful food for ever.? And Hermes and other
(philosophers) say, that if a man who hath this science should
live for a thousand years, and every day must feed seven thou-
sand men, yet should he never lack.!^ This doth Senior confirm,
saying: That such a one is as rich as he that hath a stone from
which fire is struck, who can give fire to whom he will and as
much as he will and when he will without loss to himself.!9 The
same is the intent of Aristotle in his second book Of the Soul,
when he saith: To the size and the growth of all things in nature
a limit is appointed," but fire by the addition of combustible
matter waxes without end.!? Blessed is the man that shall find
12 Prov. 3: 13-18: "Blessed is the man that findeth wisdom, and is rich in pru-
dence. The purchasing thereof is better than the merchandise of silver; and her
fruit than the chiefest and purest gold. She is more precious than all riches; and
all the things that are desired are not to be compared with her. Length of days is
in her right hand: and in her left hand riches and glory. Her ways are beautiful
ways; and all her paths are peaceable. She is a tree of life to them that lay hold
on her; and he that shall retain her is blessed." Cf. also Bishop Cyrillus, Speculum
sapientiae (ed. Graesse), pp. 5-7. 18 "Liber Alphidii," loc. cit.: "Know, O son, that he who findeth out this science
and hath his nourishment therefrom, it shall be his lawful food." And: "for the
treasure of God never perisheth nor faileth." Quoted also in “Ros. phil," pp. 100b-1012: “He who findeth out this science, it shall be his lawful and everlasting
food" (also Maier, $ymbola aureae mensae, p. 65). 14 Cf. “Cons. coniug.," p. 116: “. . .AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
beati,!? quia scientia Dei numquam peribit, ut Alphidius testa-
tur, ait enim: Qui hanc scientiam invenerit, cibus erit eius legi-
timus et sempiternus.? Et Hermes atque ceteri (philosophi)
30
inquiunt, quod si viveret homo habens hanc scientiam milibus
annis, omnique die deberet septem milia hominum pascere,
numquam egeret. ^ Hoc affirmat Senior dicens; quia esset ita
dives, sicut ille, qui habet lapidem,!5 de quo elicitur ignis, qui
potest dare ignem cui vult et inquantum vult et quando vult
sine suo defectu.!? Hoc idem vult Aristoteles in libro secundo
de anima, cum dicit: Omnium natura constantium positus est ter-
minus magnitudinis et augmenti !* ignis vero appositione com-
bustibilium crescit in infinitum.!? Beatus homo, qui invenerit
28.-29. testatur: dicit BD, om. L / 29.-30. legitimus: longaevus VP, longus M /
30.-31. ceteri: alii B Geber, Ros. / philosophi add. DL / 31. inquiunt om. B /
32. deberet pascere: pasceret BDL / 33. numquam: non BDL / confirmat BDL /
Quia esset: Est enim hic BDL / 35. sui BDL / 38. appositionem D, compositione P /
12 Prov. 3: 13-18: "Beatus homo qui invenit sapientiam, et qui affluit prudentia.
Melior est acquisitio eius negotiatione argenti et auri primi et purissimi fructus
eius. Pretiosior est cunctis opibus, et omnia quae desiderantur huic non valent
comparari. Longitudo dierum in dextera eius, et in sinistra illius divitiae et gloria.
Viae eius viae pulchrae, et omnes semitae illius pacificae. Lignum vitae est his qui
apprehenderint eam, et qui tenuerit eam beatus." Cf. also Bishop Cyrillus, Specu-
lum sapientiae (ed. Graesse), pp. 5-7.
13 "Liber Alphidii," loc. cit.: "Scito fili quod qui hanc invenit scientiam et victum
inde habuerit cibus eius legitimus erit." And: “quod thesaurus Dei numquam
perit nec deficit." Quoted also in "Ros. phil," pp. 100b-101a: “Qui hanc scientiam
invenerit cibus eius legitimus erit et sempiternus" (also Maier, Symbola aureae
mensae, p. 65).
14 Cf. "Cons. coniug.,” p. 116: ". . . nec est necesse ut reiteretur, prout dicit
Hermes: Sufficiet homini per mille millia annorum, et si quotidie duo milia
hominum pasceres non egeres, tingit enim in infinitum." Cf. also De aluminibus
et salibus (ed. Ruska), p. 59: (Mercurius): “Et si quis junxerit me fratri meo vel
sorori meae, vivet et gaudebit, et ero sufficiens ei usque in aeternum et si viveret
annos millies millenos."
15"Ros. phil," p. 92a, Hermes et Geber: “Qui hanc artem semel perfecerit,
si deberet vivere mille millibus annis et singulis diebus nutrire quatuor milia
hominum non egeret. Hoc confirmat Senior dicens: Est ita dives habens lapidem,
de quo Elixir fit, sicut qui habet ignem potest dare ignem cui vult et quando vult
et quantum vult sine suo defectu et periculo."
16 Ibid., p. 92a.
17 Anonymous, in ibid., p. 102a: "positus est certus terminus . . .”
18 De anima, B. 4.416a: 4 wer ToU mupos aUEgsus els dmewpov, éws àv 7 TO kavocTÓv,
36

. . nor need it be repeated, as Hermes saith: It shall
suffice a man for a million years, and if every day thou shalt feed two thousand
men, thou shalt not lack, for it tingeth unto infinity." Cf. also De aluminibus et
salibus (ed. Ruska), p. 59: (Mercurius): "And if one shall join me to my brother
or my sister, he shall live and shall rejoice, and I will be sufficient for him for ever,
though he should live for a million years."
15 “Ros. phil," p. 92a, Hermes and Geber: "He who shall once have brought this
art to perfection, though he were to live a million years, and every day feed four
thousand men, yet should he not lack. And this doth Senior confirm, saying: He
who hath the stone from which the Elixir is made, is as rich as a man who hath
fire and can give fire to whom he will and when he will and as much as he will,
without loss or danger to himself."
16 Ibid., p. 92a. 17 Anonymous author, in ibid., p. 102a: “. . . a certain bound is fixed."
18 De anima, B.4.416a (Foster and Humphries trans., pp. 218-19): "For the increase
of fire is infinite so long as there is anything combustible. But there are limita-
tions to all things that subsist naturally, and some definite principle governs their
37AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
49 hanc scientiam et cui affluit prudentia haec [Saturni]; ?? in
omnibus viis tuis cogita illam et ipsa ducet gressus tuos.?? Ut
Senior dicit: Intelligit eam autem sapiens et subtilis et ingenio-
sus arbitrando, quando clarificati fuerint animi ex libro aggrega-
tionis. Tunc omnis fluens animus sequitur concupiscentiam
suam,? beatus qui cogitat in eloquio meo.?* Et Salomon: Fili,
45
circumda eam gutturi tuo ?* et scribe in tabulis cordis tui et in-
venies; dic Sapientiae: soror mea es et prudentiam voca amicam
tuam; ?* cogitare namque de illa sensus est valde naturalis et
subtilis eam perficiens.?9 Et qui vigilaverint constanter propter
eam, cito erunt securi.?' Clara est illis intellectum habentibus et
50
numquam marcescet nec deficiet; facilis videtur his, qui eam
40. cui om. MP / prudentia haec MPVB, haec om. L, providentia Saturni
D | 41. ducit MPV / 42. Intelliget BDL / 43. animum P, cum M, om B | aggre-
gationis conj., aggregationum MP, congregationum JV, ex libris agnitionum BDL /
45. Et: etc. D, om. BL / 46. tuo om. MPV | 51. marcescit MPVBD |
TOV b& pice cvvuorauévov mavTwy éotl mépas kal Adyos meyébous Te kal avéjoews*
TraUTa 06 THs YuxHs add’ oU mvpós, Kal Aóryov waddov 1) HAns-
19 Prov. 3:18: "Beatus homo qui invenit sapientiam, et cui affluit prudentia."
20 Prov. 3: 5-6: "Habe fiduciam in Dominum. . .. In omnibus viis tuis cogita
illum, et ipse diriget gressus tuos."
21Cf. Senior, De chemia, p. 11: ".. . intelligit ipsam ingeniosus, subtiliter
arbitrando, quando fuerint clarificati animi ex libris relictis, quos occultaverunt
Philosophi . . ." Cf. also Pseudo-Aristoteles, Secreta secretorum (1528): *Quoniam
illi qui fuerunt velocis apprehensionis et intellectus eorum fuerunt clarificati ad
suscipiendam scientiam investigaverunt." Cf. Liber aggregationis seu secretorum
Alberti Magni, H. Quentell, Cologne, ca. 1485 (incunabulum).
22 Senior, De chemia, p. 12: "Facta ignota (scil. praeparatio), propter hoc ne
cognoscat omnis animus concupiscenüam suam: fluit quod videntes dicant."
23 Ibid., p. 9: "Beatus qui cogitat in eloquio meo, nec dignitas mea ipsi negabitur,
nec vilescet per ca[r]nem infirmatus Leo."
24 Prov. 3 : 3-4: "Misericordia et veritas te non deserant; circumda eas gutturi tuo,
et describe in tabulis cordis tui; et invenies gratiam, et disciplinam bonam coram
Deomm s
25 Prov. 7:9-4: “ ".. . scribe illam (scil. sapientiam) in tabulis cordis tui. Dic
sapientiae: soror mea es, et prudentiam voca amicam tuam; ut custodiat te a
muliere extranea . . ."
26 Cf. Petrus Bonus, Pret. marg. nov., p. 53: "Et quoniam veritas nihil aliud est,
quam adaequatio intellectus ad rem," and p. 100: "Et ars eodem modo ut natura
operatur."
27 Sap. 6:16: "Cogitare ergo de illa sensus est consummatus, et qui vigilaverit
propter illam (scil. sapientiam) cito securus erit."
38I. HERE BEGINNETH THE TREATISE . . .
this science and into whom this prudence [of Saturn] floweth; !?
in all thy ways think on her and she shall direct thy steps.?? As
Senior saith: But the wise man and the discerning and ingenious
in judgment understandeth her, when his spirits have been en-
lightened by the Liber aggregationis.2 For then every spirit
bursteth into flood and followeth its desire; ?? blessed is he who
meditateth upon my words.? And Solomon: My son, put her
about thy neck ?* and write in the tables of thy heart and thou
shalt find. Say to Wisdom: Thou art my sister, and call Prudence
thy friend:?5 for to meditate upon her is a most natural and
subtle understanding, which bringeth her to perfection.?* And
they that constantly watch for her shall quickly be secure.?? For
she is clear to them that have understanding, and shall never
dimensions and growth. And this belongs to the soul, not to fire, and to a specific
principle rather than to matter."
19 Prov. 3 : 13: “Blessed is the man that findeth wisdom, and is rich in prudence."
20 Prov. 3 : 5-6: "Have confidence in the Lord. . . . In all thy ways think on him:
and he will direct thy steps."
21 Cf. Senior, De chemia, p. 11: «c ". . . the ingenious man understandeth it, by
subtle reflection, when his spirits have been rendered clear by the books that
are left, which the philosophers have hidden. .. ." Cf. also Pseudo-Aristotle,
Secreta secretorum (1528), cap. "De hora eligendi . . .": "For they who were of
quick understanding and whose intellect was enlightened to receive the science
have investigated it." Cf. Albert the Great, Liber aggregationis seu secretorum
(ed. Quentell, ca. 1485; incunabulum).
22 Senior, De chemia, p. 12: “It [the tincture] was hidden, lest every spirit should
recognize its desire: [for then] it flows, as the seers would say." (My translation. Cf.
infra, p. 179, n. 104.—M.L.v.F.)
23 Ibid., p. 9: “Blessed is he who thinketh upon my word, and my dignity shall
not be denied to him, and the Lion shall not lose its worth, weakened through
the [flesh] (dog)."
24 Prov. 3: 3-4: "Let not mercy and truth leave thee. Put them about thy neck,
and write them in the tables of thy heart: and thou shalt find grace and good
understanding before God and man."
25 Prov. 7: 3-4: “. . . write it (wisdom) upon the tables of thy heart. Say to wis-
dom: 'Thou art my sister. And call prudence thy friend: that she may keep thee
from the woman that is not thine . . ."
26 Cf. Petrus Bonus, Pret. marg. nov., p. 53: "And because truth is nothing else
than the assimilation of the understanding to things as they are," and p. 100:
* And the Art worketh in the same way as doth nature."
27 Wisd. 6:16: “To think therefore upon her is perfect understanding: and he
that watcheth for her (wisdom) shall quickly be secure."
39AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
52 sapiunt,?? quoniam dignos se ipsa circuit et in viis ostendit se
hilariter et in omni providentia occurrit; initium namque
ipsius verissima est natura,?? cui non fit fraus.
58. prudentia MP, scientia L / occurret MPV / 54. verissima est cui natura
PVB [sitB |
28 Sap. 6 : 13: "Clara est, et quae numquam marcescit, sapientia; et facile videtur
ab his, qui diligunt eam, et invenitur ab his, qui quaerunt illam."
29 Sap. 6 : 17-18. "Quoniam dignos se ipsa circuit quaerens, et in viis ostendit se
illis hilariter, et in omni providentia occurrit illis. Initium enim illius verissima
est disciplinae concupiscentia."
40

I. HERE BEGINNETH THE TREATISE . ..
LL s og Re AUEEMV EIE Ro Cuomo ee I MEM
fade away nor fail; she seemeth easy to them that have knowl-
edge of her,?* for she goeth about seeking such as are worthy of
her and showeth herself cheerfully to them in the ways and
meeteth them with all providence; for her beginning is the
most true nature,?? whereof cometh no deceit.
28 Wisd. 6 : 13: "Wisdom is glorious, and never fadeth away, and 1s easily seen by
them that love her, and is found by them that seek her."
29 Wisd. 6: 17-18: "For she goeth about seeking such as are worthy of her: and
she sheweth herself cheerfully to them in the ways and meeteth them with all
providence. For the beginning of her is the most true desire of discipline."
41II
QUID SIT SAPIENTIA
Si ergo nunc delectamini sedibus et sceptris regalibus, ut in per-
petuum regnetis, diligite lumen scientiae omnes et perquirite,
qui literis naturae estis insigniti, vobis enim sapientiam omnium
antiquorum exquir(e)t sapiens et in prophetis vacabit et in versu-
tias parabolarum si(mul) introibit occulta proverbiorum exquiret
et in absconditis parabolarum conversabitur.? Quid scientia sit
et quemadmodum facta sit referam et non abscondam a vobis.
Est namque donum et sacramentum Dei atque res divina, quae
maxime et diversimode a sapientum sermonibus typicis est oc-
10
cultata. Quare pono in lucem scientiam eius et non praeteribo
(veritatem) neque cum invidia tabescente? iter habebo, quo-
niam ab initio nativitatis hanc investigavi et ignoravi quoniam
mater omnium scientiarum esset illa, quae me antecedebat. Et
15 innumerabiles honestates mihi condonavit, quam sine fictione
5. exquiret conj., exquirit D, exquerit L, requiris P, requirit MV / vocabit MPL,
vocabit te D, versutiis vocabit L / 6. simul conj. sinum MP, suarum DLVB | 8.
reseram DL / 9.-10. sanctuarium Deitatis res divina est maxime D, sanctuarium
Dei atque res divina quia maxime L/11. semitam MPB / 12. veritatem add.
editor |
1Sap. 6: 22-23: "Si ergo delectamini sedibus et sceptris, o reges populi, diligite
sapientiam, ut in perpetuum regnetis. Diligite lumen sapientiae, omnes qui
praeestis populis."
2Ecclus. 39:1-3: "Sapientiam omnium antiquorum exquiret sapiens, et in
prophetis vacabit . . . et in versutias parabolarum simul introibit. Occulta pro-
verbiorum exquiret, et in absconditis parabolarum conversabitur."
3 Sap. 6: 24-25: “Quid est autem sapientia, et quemadmodum facta sit referam,
et non abscondam a vobis sacramenta Dei, sed ab initio nativitatis investigabo, et
ponam in lucem scientiam illius, et non praeteribo veritatem, neque cum invidia
tabescente iter habebo."
42II
WHAT WISDOM IS
If therefore now your delight be in thrones and the sceptres of
kings, that you may reign for ever, love the light of the science!
all of you and enquire, ye who are signed with the learning of
nature, for the wise man (will) seek out for you the wisdom of
all the ancients and will be occupied in the prophets and will
enter (withal) into the subtleties of parables and will search out
the hidden meaning of proverbs and will be conversant in the^
secrets of parables.? What the science is and how she cometh into
being I will lay bare, and will not hide from you. For she is a
gift and sacrament of God and a divine matter, which deeply
and in divers manners was veiled in images by the wise. Where-
fore I bring the knowledge of her to light and will not pass over
(the truth), neither will I have to do with consuming envy; ? for
from the beginning of my birth have I sought her out and knew
not that she was the mother of all sciences that went before me.
And she bestowed on me innumerable riches, which I have
1 Wisd. 6 : 22-23: "If then your delight be in thrones and sceptres, O ye kings of
the people, love wisdom, that you may reign for ever. Love the light of wisdom,
all ye that bear rule over peoples."
2 Ecclus. 39 : 1-3: “The wise man will seek out the wisdom of all the ancients
and will be occupied in the prophets. He will keep the sayings of renowned men
and will enter withal into the subtilties of parables. He will search out the hidden
meaning of proverbs and will be conversant in the secrets of parables."
3 Wisd. 6: 24-25: "Now what wisdom is, and what was her origin, I will declare.
And I will not hide from you the mysteries of God, but will seek her out from the
beginning of her birth, and bring the knowledge of her to light, and will not pass
over the truth. Neither will I go with consuming envy: for such a man shall not
be partaker of wisdom."
43AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
didici et absque invidia communicabo et non abscondendo
honestatem illius.* Est enim thesaurus infinitus omnibus,’ quem,
qui homo invenit, abscondit et prae gaudio illius dicit: * Laetare
Jerusalem et conventum facite omnes qui diligitis me, gaudete
20 cum laetitia, quia Dominus [Deus] pauperum suorum miseritus
est' Etiam Senior dicit: Est enim lapis, quem qui cognoscit
ponit super oculos suos qui vero non, in sterquilinium projicit
illum, et est medicina, quae fugat inopiam, et post Deum homo
non habet meliorem.?
16.17. invidia non abscondendo honestatem illius communicabo L / 16. com-
munico 7, communicando BMV / abscondo V / 17. (illius) praeservando add. VP,
praesumendo add. M / 20. Deus add. DL / 21. Etiam: Et MBDL / 23. et mediam
quam (V: quae) fugat inopia MPV, illum mediamque fugat B /
4 Albertus Magnus, “Compositum de compositis," Theatr. chem. (1659), IV,
p. 825: "Et ideo scientiam quam sine fictione didici, sine invidia communico,
qua invidia labescente deficit, quoniam talis homo non erit particeps amicitiae
Dei. Omnis sapientia et scientia a Domino Deo est, sed hoc quocumque modo
dicitur semper a Spiritu Sancto est. . . . Itaque qui habet aures audiendi tantam
gratiam Deificam, audiat secretum mihi desponsatum gratia Dei et indignis
nullatenus revelat."
5Sap. 7:12-14: "(Venerunt autem mihi omnia bona pariter cum illa) . . . et
laetatus sum in omnibus, quoniam antecedebat me ista sapientia, et ignorabam
quoniam horum omnium mater est. Quam sine fictione didici, et sine invidia
communico, et honestatem illius non abscondo. Infinitus enim thesaurus est
hominibus; quo qui usi sunt, participes facti sunt amicitiae Dei."
6 Matth. 13 : 44: "Simile est regnum caelorum thesauro abscondito in agro; quem
qui invenit homo, abscondit, et prae gaudio illius vadit, et vendit universa quae
habet, et emit agrum illum."
7 Roman Missal, Introit for Fourth Sunday in Lent: "Laetare Jerusalem, et con-
ventum facite, omnes qui diligitis eam: gaudete cum laetitia, qui in tristitia
fuistis . . .” Cf. Isa. 66: 10: "Laetamini cum Jerusalem, et exsultate in ea omnes,
qui diligitis eam; gaudete cum ea gaudio, universi qui lugetis super eam."
8 Cf. Senior, De chemia, p. 63: “. . . lapidem, quem qui cognoscit ponit illum
super oculos suos et qui non cognoscit proiicit illum."
9 Cf. "Cons. coniug.," p. 119: "Et alibi dicit (Senior): et post Deum non habes aliam
medicinam. Ipsa est enim aurum sapientum, quod fugat paupertatem." Cf. also
Avicenna, "Declaratio lapidis physici," Theatr. chem. (1659), IV, p. 879: "Et haec
est vera hominum et metallorum medicina, laetificans, ac transformans, nec post
Deum est alia quae fugat paupertatem."
44II. WHAT WISDOM IS
learned without guile and will communicate without envy, and
without hiding her worth.* For she is an infinite treasure to all
men,* which a man having found, hideth it and for joy thereof
saith: * Rejoice O Jerusalem and gather together all ye that love
me; rejoice with gladness, for the Lord [God] hath been merciful
unto his poor.” Senior likewise saith: For there is a stone, which
he that knoweth layeth it upon his eyes, but he that doth not,
casteth it upon the dunghill,5 and it is a medicine which putteth
poverty to flight, and after God hath man no better thing?
* Cf. Albert the Great, "Compositum de compositis," Theatr. chem. (1659), IV,
p. 825: "And therefore the science which I learnt without guile, do I communi-
cate without envy, for when envy weakens it faileth, for such a man shall not
be a sharer in the friendship of God. All wisdom and science is from the Lord
God, but this, in what manner soever it is spoken of, is always of the Holy
Ghost. . . . He therefore that hath ears to hear such great and deifying grace,
let him hear the secret thing espoused to me by the grace of God, and by no
means reveal it unto them that are unworthy."
5 Wisd. 7: 12-14: "(Now all good things came to me together with her) . . . And
I rejoiced in all these; for this wisdom went before me, and I knew not that she
was the mother of them all. Which I have learned without guile, and communi-
cate without envy, and her riches I hide not. For she is an infinite treasure to
men: which they that use, become the friends of God."
6 Matt. 13: 44: “The kingdom of heaven is like unto a treasure hidden in a field.
Which a man having found, hid it: and for joy thereof goeth and selleth all that
he hath and buyeth that field."
7 Roman Missal, Introit for Fourth Sunday in Lent: “Rejoice, O Jerusalem, and
come together all you that love her; rejoice with joy, you that have been in sor-
row . . ." Cf. Isa. 66: 10: “Rejoice with Jerusalem and be glad with her, all you
that love her: rejoice with joy for her, all you that mourn for her."
8 Cf. Senior, De chemia, p. 63: “. . . the stone, which he that knoweth layeth it
upon his eyes, and he that knoweth it not, casteth it away."
9 Cf. “Cons. coniug.,” p. 119: "And elsewhere (Senior) saith: and after God
thou hast no other medicine. For it is the gold of the wise, which putteth poverty
to flight." Cf. also Avicenna, "Declaratio lapidis physici," T'heatr. chem. (1659),
IV, p. 879: "And this is the true medicine of men and of metals, which maketh
glad and transformeth: and after God there is none other that putteth poverty to
flight."
45III
DE IGNORANTIBUS ET NEGANTIBUS
HANC SCIENTIAM
Hanc gloriosam scientiam Dei et doctrinam sanctorum et secre-
tum philosophorum ac medicinam medicorum despiciunt
stulti cum ignorent quid sit. Hi nolunt benedictionem et
elongabitur ab eis? nec decet imperitum scientia talis quia
omnis, qui est eam ignorans, est eius inimicus et non sine causa.
Ait enim Speculator: ? Derisio scientiae est causa ignorantiae,
nec sunt asinis dandae lactucae, cum eis sufficiant (cardui),*
neque panis filiorum mittendus est canibus * ad manducandum
10
neque margaritae inter porcos sunt seminandae,® nec tales de-
risores sunt participes (inclytae) huius scientiae: hic enim fractor
esset sigilli coelestis qui arcana huius scientiae revelaret indig-
6. scientiam talem MP, sapientia talis BD / 8. Et non sine causa ait VD / 9. suffi-
ciunt MP / cardui conj., carabe MVP, caribe B, caules DL / 12. inclytae add. DL /
1 Prov. 1: 7: "Sapientiam et doctrinam stulti despiciunt."
2 Ps. 108 : 18: "Et dilexit maledictionem, et veniet ei; et noluit benedictionem, et
elongabitur ab eo."
3 An author otherwise unknown. See Introduction, pp. 17ff.
* Cf. Roger Bacon, "De mirabili potestate artis et naturae libellus," Art. aurif.
(1610), II, pp. 327f. and 340. Also "Epistola Rogerii Bachonis,” Theatr. chem.
(1622), V, p. 956: "Ipsemet enim dicit in secretis secretorum, quod esset fractor
sigilli coelestis qui communicaret secreta naturae et artis; adjungens quod multa
mala sequuntur eum, qui occulta detegit et arcana revelat. Caeterum in hoc casu
dicit Aulus Gellius in libro Noctium Atticarum de collatione sapientum, quod
stultum est asino praebere lactucas, cum ei sufficiant cardui.”
5 Cf. Roman Missal, Sequence (Lauda Sion) for Corpus Christi, stanza 21, verse 2
(this Sequence was written by St. Thomas Aquinas): "Vere panis filiorum, non
mittendus canibus." Matth. 15:26: "Non est bonum sumere panem filiorum, et
mittere canibus."
$ Matth. 7:6: "Nolite dare sanctum canibus, neque mittatis margaritas vestras
ante porcos . , .”
46III
OF THEM WHO KNOW NOT AND
DENY THIS SCIENCE
This glorious science of God and doctrine of the saints and secret
of the philosophers and medicine of the physicians fools despise,!
for what it is they know not. These will not have the blessing and
it shall be far from them,? nor doth such science befit the un-
skilled, for everyone who is ignorant of it is its enemy, and that
not without cause. For Speculator? saith: The mockery of science
is the cause of ignorance, and lettuces are not to be given to asses,
for (thistles) suffice them,* nor is the children's bread to be set be-
fore the dogs to eat,® nor are pearls to be cast before swine, and
such mockers are not partakers in this (noble) science; for he
would be a breaker of the heavenly seal who should make the
1 Prov. 1: 7: “Fools despise wisdom and instruction."
2 Ps. 108 : 18: "And he loved cursing, and it shall come unto him; and he would
not have blessing, and it shall be far from him."
3 An author otherwise unknown. See Introduction, pp. 17ff.
1 Cf. Roger Bacon, “De mirabili potestate artis et naturae," Art. aurif. (1610), II,
pp. 327f. and 340. Also "Epistola Rogerii Bachonis," Theatr. chem. (1622), V,
p- 956: "For he himself says in the ‘Secreta secretorum' that he would be a breaker
of the heavenly seal who should communicate the secrets of nature and of the
Art, and he adds that many evils follow after him who uncovers hidden things
and reveals secrets. Also in this regard Aulus Gellius says in his book Attic Nights
concerning the conversation of the sages that it would be foolish to offer lettuces
to an ass when thistles suffice for him."
5 Roman Missal, Sequence (Lauda Sion) for Corpus Christi, stanza 21, verse 2
(this sequence was written by St. Thomas Aquinas): "In truth the bread of the
children, not to be set before dogs." Matt. 15 : 26: “It is not good to take the bread
of the children and to cast it to the dogs."
6 Matt. 7:6: “Give not that which is holy to dogs: neither cast ye your pearls
before swine."
47AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
nis; 7 neque in grossum corpus introibit spiritus sapientiae huius
nec insipiens potest cam percipere propter rationis suae perver-
15
sitatem; quia non sunt sapientes locuti insipientibus, qui enim
cum insipiente loquitur cum dormiente loquitur. Morienus
(enim) ait: Si omnia vellem enodare prout se habent, nullus
umquam ultra prudentiae locus esset, cum insipiens sapienti
20 aequaretur; neque sub globo lunari aliquis mortalium pauper-
tate noverca (inediarum) angustias defleret, quia stultorum
numerus est infinitus in hac scientia.!?
15.716. parvitatem BDL / 18. enim add. L / enudare MPV / 21. inediarum conj.,
medias et angustias B, medias PVMBD, modicis L /
7 Pseudo-Aristotle, "Secreta secretorum" (1538), fol. v, 2: “Ego sane transgressor
essem divinae gratiae et fractor coelestis secreti occultae revelationis, quapropter
tibi sub attestatione divine judicii illud detego sacramentum eo modo quo mihi
revelatum . . ,"
8 Ecclus, 22 : 9: “Cum dormiente loquitur, qui enarrat stulto sapientiam . . .”
9 Cf. Petrus Bonus, Pret. marg. nov., p. 42: "Idem (scil. Rasis) in lumine luminum:
Si enim omnia prout se habent, vellem enodare, nullus ultro prudentiae esset
locus, cum insipiens sapienti aequaretur, Neque sub lunari circulo quisquam
mortalium paupertate noverca inediarum ulterius defleret angustias." Also as
Rhazis quotation in “Cons, coniug.,” Ars chemica, p. 50; and "De arte chemica,”
Art. aurif. (1610), I, p. 374. The latter is identical with the treatise attributed to
Marsilio Ficino in Bibl. chem., II, pp. 1721L., cap. VII. Cf. Theobaldus de Hoghe-
lande, “De alchimiae difficultatibus," Bibl. chem. I, p. 347.
10 Eccles. 1 : 15: "Et stultorum infinitus est numerus." cf. Bishop Cyrillus, Speculum
sapientiae (ed. Graesse), p. 27.
48IIl. OF THEM WHO KNOW NOT AND DENY THIS SCIENCE
secrets of this science known to the unworthy;? nor shall the
spirit of this wisdom enter into a gross body, nor can the fool
perceive it on account of the perversity of his reason. For the
wise have not spoken to the foolish, seeing that he that speaketh
with a fool speaketh with one that is asleep.§ (For) Morienus
saith: If I were to unriddle all things as they are, there would
nowhere be any further place for prudence, for the fool would
be made equal to the wise; nor would any mortal under the
sphere of the moon bewail in stepmotherly poverty the pangs (of
hunger), for in this science the number of fools is infinite.!9
7 Pseudo-Aristotle, “Secreta secretorum" (1528), fol. v, 2: “But I would surely be a
sinner against divine grace and a breaker of the heavenly seal of the hidden
revelation, wherefore I uncover this mystery to thee under the sanction of the
divine judgment in that wise wherein it was revealed unto me . . ."
8 Ecclus. 22:9: "He speaketh with one that is asleep, who uttereth wisdom to
4100L 27 7"
9 Cf. Petrus Bonus, Pret. marg. nov., p. 42: "And the same (i.e., Rhazis) in the
‘Lumen luminum": For were I to unravel all things as they are, there would be
no place found any more for prudence, for the fool would be made equal to the
wise. Nor would any mortal under the circle of the moon bewail any more in
stepmotherly poverty the bitterness of abstinence." Also as Rhazis quotation in
"Cons. coniug," Ars chemica, p. 5o; and "De arte chemica," Art. aurif. (1610), I,
p- 374- The latter is identical with the treatise attributed to Marsilio Ficino in
Bibl. chem., I1, pp. 172ff., cap. VII. Cf. Hoghelande, "De alchimiae difficultatibus,"
Bibl. chem., I, p. 347.
10 Eccles. 1 : 15: "And the number of fools is infinite." Cf. Bishop Cyrillus, Specu-
lum sapientiae (ed. Graesse), p. 27.
49IV
DE NOMINE ET TITULO HUIUS LIBRI
[1
Huius autem voluminis titulus Aurora consurgens baptizatur,
et hoc quatuor de causis: Primo aurora dicitur quasi aurea hora,
sic haec scientia habet horam in finem aureum recte operantibus.
Secundo aurora est medium inter noctem et diem rutilans in
colore duplici, scil. rubeo et citrino, sic haec scientia dat colores
citrinos et rubeos, qui sunt medii inter nigrum et album. Tertio
quia in aurora ab omnibus infirmitatibus nocturnalibus pa-
tientes allevantur et quiescunt, sic in aurora huius scientiae
omnes odores et vapores mali mentem laborantis inficientes de-
10
ficiunt et senescunt, ut Psalmus ait: Ad vesperum demorabitur
fletus et ad matutinum laetitia.! Quarto et ultimo aurora dicitur
finis noctis et principium diei vel mater solis, sic nostra aurora
in rubedine summa est finis totius tenebrositatis et fugatio noc-
tis, longiturnitatis hiemalis illius, qui in ea ambulat, si non
25
caverit, offendetur.? De illa namque scriptum est: Et nox nocti
indicat scientiam, dies diei eructat verbum ? et nox sicut dies
illuminabitur in deliciis suis.*
4. et scientia haec V / horas et finem MPV, horam finem L / 8-9. omnes in-
firmitates nocturnales (M naturales) patientis (M parientes) BVPM / 11. vesperam
DL | 16. cavet P, caveat M, cavit V / 18. in deliciis suis om. MPV, etc. B /
1 Ps. 29: 6: "Ad vesperum demorabitur fletus, et ad matutinum laetitia."
? Joh. 11:9-10: "Respondit Jesus: Nonne duodecim sunt horae diei? Si quis
ambulaverit in die, non offendit, quia lucem huius mundi videt; si autem
ambulaverit in nocte, offendit, quia lux non est in eo."
8 Ps. 18: 3: "Dies diei eructat verbum, et nox nocti indicat scientiam."
4 Ps. 138 : 11-12: “. . . et nox illuminatio mea in deliciis meis . . . et nox sicut
dies illuminabitur." Cf. Roman Missal, Exultet of Easter Even: “O vere beata
nox, quae sola meruit scire tempus et horam, in qua Christus ab inferis resurrexit!
Haec nox est, de qua scriptum est: Et nox sicut dies illuminabitur: ex nox
illuminatio mea in deliciis meis."
50IV
OF THE NAME AND TITLE OF THIS BOOK
Now the title of this book is baptized Aurora Consurgens—The
Rising Dawn—and that for four reasons: Firstly, it is called
Dawn as one should say the Golden Hour, for so hath this science
an hour with a golden end for them that rightly perform the
Work. Secondly, the dawn is midway between night and day,
shining with twofold hues, namely, red and yellow; so likewise
doth this science beget the colours yellow and red, which are
midway between white and black. Thirdly, because at dawn they
that labour under all the infirmities of the night are relieved
and have rest; and so at the dawn of this science all evil odours
and vapours that infect the mind of the laborant fade away and
weaken, as the Psalm saith: In the evening weeping shall have
place, and in the morning gladness.1 Fourthly and lastly, the
dawn is called the end of the night and the beginning of the day,
or the mother of the sun, and so our dawn at its greatest redness
is the end of all darkness and the putting to flight of night, of
that long-drawn-out winter wherein he who walketh, if he take
not heed, shall stumble.? For of this indeed it is written: And
night to night showeth knowledge, day to day uttereth speech,’
and night shall be light as the day in its pleasures.*
1Ps. 29:6: "In the evening weeping shall have place: and in the morning
gladness."
2 John 11:9-10: “Jesus answered: Are there not twelve hours of the day? If a
man walk in the day, he stumbleth not, because he seeth the light of this world:
but if he walk in the night he stumbleth, because the light is not in him."
3 Ps. 18: 3: "Day to day uttereth speech: and night to night sheweth knowledge.”
4 Ps. 138 : 11-12: “. . . and night shall be my light in my pleasures . . . and night
shall be light as the day." Cf. Roman Missal, Exultet of Easter Even: "O truly
blessed night, which alone didst merit to know the time and the hour wherein
Christ rose from the dead! This is that night, whereof it is written: And the night
shall be light as the day: and night shall be my light in my pleasures."
51V
DE IRRITATIONE INSIPIENTUM
Numquid sapientia non clamitat in plateis et prudentia dat
vocem in libris sapientum dicens: O viri, ad vos clamito et vox
mea ad filios intelligentiae: ! Intelligite insipientes et animad-
vertite parabolam et interpretationem verba sapientum et aenig-
mata eorum; ? sapientes enim usi sunt diversis locutionibus in
assimilatione de omni re, quae est supra terram, et sub globo
lunari multiplicaverunt parabolas in hac scientia? Audiens
autem sapiens [sapientes] sapientior erit et intelliget, intelligens
sapientiam hanc possidebit illam. Haec est sapientia, regina
10
scilicet austri, quae ab Oriente dicitur venisse, ut aurora con-
surgens,* audire intelligere nec non videre [volens] sapientiam
Salomonis? et data est in manu eius potestas honor virtus et
2. non om. PVBLD | 5. verborum MPBY | 9. sapientes add. D, sapientem add. L,
sapientum M / 10.-11. quae regina austri . . . dicitur venisse MPV, scilicet quae
- .. B [ 12. volens add. DL |
1 Prov. 8: 1-6: "Numquid non sapientia clamitat, et prudentia dat vocem suam?
. in mediis semitis stans, iuxta portas civitatis . . . dicens: O viri, ad vos
clamito, et vox mea ad filios hominum. Intelligite, parvuli, astutiam, et, in-
sipientes, animadvertite. Audite, quoniam de rebus magnis locutura sum . . .”
2 Prov. 1: 5-7: "Audiens sapiens, sapientior erit; et intelligens gubernacula pos-
sidebit. Animadvertet parabolam et interpretationem, verba sapientum et aenig-
mata eorum."
3 Cf. Petrus Bonus, Pret. marg. nov. p. 54: "Lilium: Nostri lapidis tot sunt
nomina, quot sunt res vel rerum vocabula. Et Alphidius: In hoc opere est
parabolarum diversitas et nominum . . . ut ab imperitis celent . . .”
4 Cant. 6 : g: "Quae est ista, quae progreditur quasi aurora consurgens, pulchra ut
lupagelecta ut sol Pn
5 Matth. 12:42: "Regina austri surget in iudicio cum generatione ista, et con-
demnabit eam: quia venit a finibus terrae audire sapientiam Salomonis, et ecce
plus quam Salomon hic." Cf. Luc. 11 : g1.
52V
,OF THE PROVOCATION OF THE FOOLISH
Doth not Wisdom cry aloud in the public places and Prudence
put forth her voice in the books of the wise, saying: O ye men,
to you I call, and my voice is to the sons of understanding?!
Understand, ye foolish ones, and mark the parable and the in-
terpretation, the words of the wise and their mysterious sayings; ?
for the wise have used divers manners of speech in making com-
parison with everything that is upon the earth, and beneath the
sphere of the moon they have multiplied parables in this science.?
For the wise man who heareth [the wise] will grow wiser and
understand, and understanding this Wisdom he will lay hold
upon her. This is Wisdom, namely the Queen of the South, who
is said to have come from the east, like unto the MORNING
RISING,* [desiring] to hear, to understand, yea and to see the
wisdom of Solomon,’ and there was given into her hand power,
1Prov. 8: 1-6: “Doth not wisdom cry aloud, and prudence put forth her voice?
standing . . . in the midst of the paths, beside the gates of the city . . . saying:
O ye men, to you I call, and my voice is to the sons of men. O little ones, under-
stand subtilty, and ye unwise, take notice. Hear, for I will speak of great
things . . ."
2 Prov. 1: 5-7: "A wise man shall hear and shall be wiser: and he that under-
standeth shall possess governments. He shall understand a parable, and the
interpretation: the words of the wise, and their mysterious sayings."
3 Cf. Petrus Bonus, Pret. marg. nov., p. 54: "Lilium: 'There are as many names
for our stone as there are things or designations of things. And Alphidius: In this
work there is a diversity of parables and significations . . . that they may conceal it
from the unskilled . . ."
4 Cant. 6:9: "Who is she that cometh forth as the morning rising (aurora con-
surgens), fair as the moon, bright as the sun? . . ."
5 Matt. 12: 42: “The queen of the south shall rise in judgment with this genera-
tion and shall condemn it: because she came from the ends of the earth to hear
the wisdom of Solomon, and behold a greater than Solomon here." Cf. Luke
11591.
53AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
imperium, ferens regni coronam in capite suo radiis duodecim
15 stellarum rutilantem,* tamquam sponsa ornata viro suo? ha-
bensque in vestimentis suis scriptum ? litteris aureis graecis, bar-
baris et latinis: Regnans regnabo et regnum meum non habebit
finem !? omnibus invenientibus me et perquirentibus subtiliter
ingeniose et constanter.!!
15. sponsam ornatam MPVD / 17.18. regni mei non est finis BDL / 18. et per
alios perquirentibus facientibus D, percipientibus MPVD / salubriter MPV /
$ Roman Missal, Introit for Epiphany: “Ecce advenit Dominator Dominus: et
regnum in manu eius et potestas et imperium." Cf. Mal. 3 : 1.
7 Apoc. 12 : 1: "(Et signum magnum apparuit in caelo): mulier amicta sole, et luna
sub pedibus eius, et in capite eius corona stellarum duodecim."
8 Apoc. 21: 2: “Vidi sanctam civitatem, Jerusalem novam, descendentem de coelo,
. Sicut sponsam ornatam viro suo.”
9 Apoc. 19:16: "Et habet in vestimento suo... scriptum: Rex regum et
Dominus dominantium."
10 Luc. 1: 32-33: ". . . et regnabit in domo Jacob in aeternum, et regni eius non
erit finis."
11 Cf. "Ros. phil," p. 103b: “Salomon Rex: Haec [Sapientia] est filia, ob quam
Regina austri ab Oriente dicitur venisse, ut aurora consurgens audire et intelligere
et videre sapientiam Salomonis posset, et data est in manu eius potestas, honor,
virtus et imperium, et florens regni corona in capite suo radiis septem stellarum
rutilantium, tamquam sponsa ornata viro suo, habens in vestimentis suis scriptum
literis aureis Graecis et Barbaris et Latinis: Ego sum unica filia sapientum, stultis
penitus ignota." On the variations of this text see Jung, Psychology and Alchemy,
pars. 467f.
54V. OF THE PROVOCATION OF THE FOOLISH
honour, strength, and dominion,® bearing upon her head the
crown of the kingdom shining with the rays of twelve stars,” pre-
pared as a bride adorned for her husband, and having on her
garments written® in golden letters in Greek, in barbarian
(Arabic) script, and in Latin: Reigning I will reign, and my
kingdom shall have no end ?? for all them that find me and subtly
and ingeniously and constantly seek me out.14
6 Roman Missal, Introit for Epiphany: “Behold the Lord the Ruler is come: and a
kingdom in his hand, and power and dominion.” Cf. Mal. 3: 1.
7 Apoc. 12:1: “(And a great sign appeared in heaven;) a woman clothed with
the sun, and the moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve stars.”
8 Apoc. 21:2: “I saw the holy city, the new Jerusalem, coming down out of
heaven . . . prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.”
9 Apoc. 19: 16: “And he hath on his garment . . . written: King of kings and
Lord of lords."
10 Luke 1 : 32-33: ". . . and he shall reign in the house of Jacob for ever. And of
his kingdom there shall be no end."
11 Cf. "Ros. phil," p. 103b: "King Solomon: This [Sapientia] is my daughter, for
whose sake men say that the queen of the south came out of the east, like the
rising dawn, in order to hear, understand, and behold the wisdom of Solomon;
power, honour, strength and dominion are given into her hand; and on her head
the resplendent crown of the kingdom with seven gleaming stars for its rays, like
a bride adorned for her husband, and on her garment is written in golden letters,
in Greek, barbarian (Arabic), and Latin, ‘I am the only daughter of the wise,
utterly unknown to the foolish.’” On the variations of this text see Jung, Psy-
chology and Alchemy, pars. 467f.
55VI
PARABOLA PRIMA DE TERRA NIGRA,
IN QUAM SEPTEM PLANETAE RADICAVERUNT
Aspiciens a longe vidi nebulam magnam totam terram deni-
grantem,! quae hanc exhauserat meam animam tegentem et
(quia) aquae intraverant usque ad eam, quare putruerunt et
corruptae sunt a facie inferni inferioris et umbra mortis, quon-
iam tempestas dimersit me;? tunc coram me procident Aethi-
opes et inimici mei terram meam lingent.? Ideo non est sanitas
in carne mea et a facie iniquitatis meae conturbata sunt omnia
10 ossa mea.* Ergo laboravi per singulas noctes clamans, raucae
factae sunt fauces meae: ? quis est homo, qui vivit sciens et intelli-
gens, eruens animam meam de manu inferi? > Qui me elucidant
habebunt vitam (aeternam) * daboque ei edere de ligno vitae,
4. quae: qui PV BL, q M | exhausit B, exhauserit MPLV / anima M / regentem
MPY, tingentem L / 5. quia conj., qd M, d B, et quae aquae intraverint P, intra-
verunt MVB, aquae quae intraverant D, aquae quae intraverunt L / quare: quae
D, quia VL / 13. aeternam add. DL |
1Cf. Roman Breviary, First Responsory at Mattins for First Sunday in Advent:
"Aspiciens a longe, ecce video Dei potentiam venientem, et nubem totam terram
tegentem.”
2Ps. 68: 2-4: "Salvum me fac, Deus: quoniam intraverunt aquae usque ad
animam meam. Infixus sum in limo profundi, et non est substantia. Veni in alti-
tudinem maris, et tempestas dimersit me. Laboravi clamans, raucae factae sunt
falices mene esr.
3 Ps. 71 : 9: "Coram illo procident Aethiopes, et inimici eius terram lingent.”
4 Ps. 37 : 4-6: "Non est sanitas in carne mea, a facie irae tuae; non est pax ossibus
meis, a facie peccatorum meorum. . .. Putruerunt et corruptae sunt cicatrices
meae, a facie insipientiae meae . . .” Ps. 6:3-4: "Sana me, Domine, quoniam
conturbata sunt ossa mea, et anima mea turbata est valde."
5 Ps. 88:49: “Quis est homo qui vivet et non videbit mortem: eruet animam
suam de manu inferi?"
9 Ecclus. 24: 80731: ". . . qui operantur in me non peccabunt; qui elucidant me
vitam aeternam habebunt."
56VI
IHE FIRST PARABLE: OF THE BLACK EARTH,
WHEREIN THE SEVEN PLANETS TOOK ROOT
Beholding from afar off I saw a great cloud looming black over
the whole earth,! which had absorbed the earth and covered my
soul, (because) the waters had come in even unto her, wherefore
they were putrefied and corrupted before the face of the lower
hell and the shadow of death, for a tempest hath overwhelmed
me;? then before me shall the Ethiopians fall down and my ene-
mies shall lick my earth.? Therefore there is no health in my flesh
and all my bones are troubled before the face of my iniquity.*
For this cause have I laboured night by night with crying, my
jaws are become hoarse;? who is the man that liveth, knowing and
understanding, delivering my soul from the hand of hell? 5 They
that explain me shall have (eternal) life,* and to him I will give
1Cf. Roman Breviary, First Responsory at Mattins for First Sunday in Advent:
“Beholding from afar off, lo, I see the power of God approaching, and a cloud
covering the whole earth."
2 Ps. 68 : 2-4: "Save me, O God, for the waters are come in even unto my soul. I
stick fast in the mire of the deep: and there is no sure standing. I am come into
the depth of the sea; and a tempest hath overwhelmed me. I have laboured with
crying; my jaws are become hoarse . . ."
3Ps. 71:9: "Before him the Ethiopians shall fall down: and his enemies shall
lick the ground."
4 Ps. 37 : 4-6: "There is no health in my flesh, because of thy wrath: there is no
peace for my bones, because of my sins. . . . My sores are putrified and corrupted,
because of my foolishness.” Ps. 6: 3-4: "Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I am
weak; heal me, O Lord, for my bones are troubled. And my soul is troubled
exceedingly."
5 Ps. 88: 49: "Who is the man that shall live, and shall not see death: that shall
deliver his soul from the hand of hell?"
6 Ecclus. 24 : 30-31: "He that hearkeneth to me shall not be confounded, and they
that work by me shall not sin. They that explain me shall have life everlasting.”
57AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
quod est in paradiso et sedere mecum in solio regni mei.’ Qui
me effoderit sicut pecuniam et acquisierit sicut thesaurum ? et
I5
lacrimas oculorum meorum non turbaverit vestimentumque
meum non arriserit,? cibum et potum meum non intoxicaverit,
atque cubiculum requiei meae stupro non foedaverit, necnon
totum corpus meum, quod est valde delicatum non violaverit
atque supra omnia animam meam [sive columbam|, quae est
20
sine felle tota pulchra (et) decora, in qua macula non est,!? qui
mihi sedes et thronos non laeserit, cuius amore langueo, ardore
liquesco, odore vivo, sapore convalesco, cuius lacte nutrimentum
suscipio, amplexu iuvenesco, osculo spiraculum vitae recipio,
25 cuius condormitione totum corpus meum exinanitur, illi vero
ero in patrem et ipse mihi in filium," sapiens, qui laetificat pat-
rem,?? hunc quem primum pono et excelsum prae regibus terrae
20. sive columbam add. MPV | 24. amplexo MPDL, amplexus et oscula investigio
spiraculum L, investigo D / osculum MPVDL / spiritum MPB, spiritui V / 25. ex-
inanitur conj., exinanito DL, exitafiito MP, excitamento V /
7 Apoc. 2 : 7: "Vincenti dabo edere de ligno vitae, quod est in paradiso Dei mei."
Ibid., 3 : 21: "Qui vicerit, dabo ei sedere mecum in throno meo."
8 Prov. 2: 3-5: "Si enim sapientiam invocaveris, et inclinaveris cor tuum pru-
dentiae; si quaesieris eam quasi pecuniam, et sicnt thesauros effoderis illam;
tunc intelliges timorem Domini, et scientiam Dei invenies."
9 Cf. Turba Philosophorum (ed. Ruska), p. 132: "Omnes huius scientiae inves-
tigatores, operis nummi et auri arcanum est tenebrosa vestis, et nemo novit, quae
philosophi in libris suis narraverunt absque lectionum et tentationum frequenta-
tione ac sapientum inquisitione." '
10 Cant. 4: 7: "Tota pulchra es, amica mea, et macula non est in te." Cf. Roman
Missal, Gradual for the Immaculate Conception: "Tota pulchra es, Maria: et
macula originalis non est in te."
11 Hebr. 1 : 5: "Ego ero illi in patrem, et ipse erit mihi in filium," also I Chron.
17 : 13. Cf. also Apoc. 21 : 7: “Qui vicerit, possidebit haec, et ero illi Deus, et erit
mihi filius." Cf. Alphidius in Petrus Bonus, Pret. marg. nov., p. 40: "Adhuc etiam
noverunt quod Deus fieri debebat homo, quia in die novissima huius artis in qua
est operis complementum generans et generatum fiunt omnino unum: et senex
et puer et pater et filius fiunt omnino unum.” Cf. also Turba, p. 161: "Dico
quod ille senex de fructibus arboris comedere non cessat . . . quousque senex
ille iuvenis fiat . . . ac pater filius factus est.”
12 Prov. 29 : 3: "Vir qui amat sapientiam laetificat patrem suum."
58VI. THE FIRST PARABLE: OF THE BLACK EARTH ..
to eat of the tree of life which is in paradise, and to sit with me
on the throne of my kingdom." He that shall dig for me as money
and obtain me as a treasure? and shall not disturb the tears of
my eyes and shall not deride my garment,’ shall not poison my
meat and my drink and shall not defile with fornication the
couch of my rest, and shall not violate my whole body which is
exceeding delicate and above all my soul [or dove] which with-
out gall is wholly beauteous (and) comely, in which there is no
spot,'? who shall do no hurt to my seats and thrones, he for whose
love I languish, in whose ardour I melt, in whose odour I
live, by whose sweetness I regain my health, from whose milk
I take nourishment, in whose embrace I am made young, from
whose kiss I receive the breath of life, in whose loving embrace
my whole body is lost, to him indeed I will be a father and he
shall be to me a son; ™ wise is he who rejoiceth his father,!? him
whom I place first and highest among the kings of the earth, and
" Apoc. 2 : 7: “To him that overcometh I will give to eat of the tree of life, which
is in the paradise of my God." Ibid. 3:21: "To him that shall overcome, I will
give to sit with me in my throne."
8 Prov. 2: 3-5: "For if thou shalt call for wisdom and incline thy heart to pru-
dence: If thou shalt seck her as money, and dig for her as for a treasure; then
shalt thou understand the fear of the Lord, and shalt find the knowledge of God."
9 Cf. Turba Philosophorum (ed. Ruska), p. 132: “All ye seekers out of this
science, the secret of the silver and the gold is a dark garment, and no man
cometh to know what the philosophers have written in their books, without
abundant reading and experiment and enquiry of the wise."
10 Cant. 4 : 7: “Thou art all fair, O my love, and there is not a spot in thee." Cf.
Roman Missal, Gradual for the Immaculate Conception: “Thou art all fair, O
Mary, and there is in thee no stain of original sin.”
11 Hebr. 1:5: “I will be to him a father, and he shall be to me a son.” Also,
I Chron. 17: 13. Cf. also Apoc. 21: 7: "He that shall overcome shall possess these
things, and I will be hís God: and he shall be my son." Cf. Alphidius in Petrus
Bonus, Pret. marg. nov., p. 40: “They (of old) knew also that God was to be made
man, because on the last day of this Art, on which is the completion of the work,
the begetter and the begotten become altogether one; and old man and child,
father and son, become altogether one." Cf. also Turba, p. 161: "I say, that
that old man ceaseth not to eat of the fruits of the tree . . . until that old man
become a youth . . . and the father hath become the son."
12 Prov. 29 : 3: “A man that loveth wisdom rejoiceth his father.”
59AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
et in aeternum servabo illi testamentum meum fidele.?? Si autem
dereliquerit legem meam !* et in viis meis non ambulaverit et
mandata praedicta non custodiverit. [nil] proficiet inimicus in
30
eo et filius iniquitatis [non] apponet nocere illi, si autem in
viis meis ambulaverit, tunc non timebit a frigoribus nivis. Omni-
bus enim domesticis suis erit indumentum, byssus et purpura !9
et ridebit in die illa dum satiabor et apparuerit gloria mea,!*
quia consideravit semitas meas et panem otiosum non comedit.!*
85
Ideo aperti sunt coeli super eum et vox intonuit ?? illius, qui
habet septem stellas in manu sua, qui sunt septem spiritus ?? missi in omnem terram praedicare et testificari. Qui crediderit
et bene baptizatus fuerit salvus erit, qui vero non crediderit,
condemnabitur. Signa autem eorum, qui crediderint et bene
40
baptizati fuerint sunt haec: ?! dum discernit coelestis rex super
27.-28. terrae in aeternum. Servabo MP, terrae et om. V / 29. dereliquerit legem
meam et om. MPV, dereliquerunt L / 29-30. et mandata . .. in viis meis am-
bulaverit om. MPV / ambulaverint L / 32. nivis: o nobis MP, o vobis V, nimis L,
om. B. | 35. quia: qui PV / 38. testificare MPL, om. B | 40. eos PL | 41. sunt om. L | discurit MP, cernit L /
18 Ps. 88: 27-28: "Ipse invocabit me: Pater meus es tu: Deus meus, et susceptor
salutis meae. Et ego primogenitum ponam illum, excelsum prae regibus terrae. In aeternum servabo illi misericordiam meam; et testamentum meum fidele ipsi."
14 Ps. 88 : 31-38: "Si autem dereliquerint filii eius legem meam, et in iudiciis meis
non ambulaverint; si iustitias meas’ profanaverint, et mandata mea non cus-
todierint; visitabo in virga iniquitates eorum . . ."
15 Ps. 88:22-23: "Manus enim mea auxiliabitur ei, et bracchium meum con-
fortabit eum. Nihil proficiet inimicus in eo, et fiiius iniquitatis non apponet
nocere ei."
16 Prov.VI. THE FIRST PARABLE: OF THE BLACK EARTH ..
to eat of the tree of life which is in paradise, and to sit with me
on the throne of my kingdom." He that shall dig for me as money
and obtain me as a treasure? and shall not disturb the tears of
my eyes and shall not deride my garment,’ shall not poison my
meat and my drink and shall not defile with fornication the
couch of my rest, and shall not violate my whole body which is
exceeding delicate and above all my soul [or dove] which with-
out gall is wholly beauteous (and) comely, in which there is no
spot,'? who shall do no hurt to my seats and thrones, he for whose
love I languish, in whose ardour I melt, in whose odour I
live, by whose sweetness I regain my health, from whose milk
I take nourishment, in whose embrace I am made young, from
whose kiss I receive the breath of life, in whose loving embrace
my whole body is lost, to him indeed I will be a father and he
shall be to me a son; ™ wise is he who rejoiceth his father,!? him
whom I place first and highest among the kings of the earth, and
" Apoc. 2 : 7: “To him that overcometh I will give to eat of the tree of life, which
is in the paradise of my God." Ibid. 3:21: "To him that shall overcome, I will
give to sit with me in my throne."
8 Prov. 2: 3-5: "For if thou shalt call for wisdom and incline thy heart to pru-
dence: If thou shalt seck her as money, and dig for her as for a treasure; then
shalt thou understand the fear of the Lord, and shalt find the knowledge of God."
9 Cf. Turba Philosophorum (ed. Ruska), p. 132: “All ye seekers out of this
science, the secret of the silver and the gold is a dark garment, and no man
cometh to know what the philosophers have written in their books, without
abundant reading and experiment and enquiry of the wise."
10 Cant. 4 : 7: “Thou art all fair, O my love, and there is not a spot in thee." Cf.
Roman Missal, Gradual for the Immaculate Conception: “Thou art all fair, O
Mary, and there is in thee no stain of original sin.”
11 Hebr. 1:5: “I will be to him a father, and he shall be to me a son.” Also,
I Chron. 17: 13. Cf. also Apoc. 21: 7: "He that shall overcome shall possess these
things, and I will be hís God: and he shall be my son." Cf. Alphidius in Petrus
Bonus, Pret. marg. nov., p. 40: “They (of old) knew also that God was to be made
man, because on the last day of this Art, on which is the completion of the work,
the begetter and the begotten become altogether one; and old man and child,
father and son, become altogether one." Cf. also Turba, p. 161: "I say, that
that old man ceaseth not to eat of the fruits of the tree . . . until that old man
become a youth . . . and the father hath become the son."
12 Prov. 29 : 3: “A man that loveth wisdom rejoiceth his father.”
59

88:22-23: "Manus enim mea auxiliabitur ei, et bracchium meum con-
fortabit eum. Nihil proficiet inimicus in eo, et fiiius iniquitatis non apponet
nocere ei."
16 Prov. 31:21-22: "Non timebit domui suae a frigoribus nivis; omnes enim
domestici eius vestiti sunt duplicibus. Stragulatam vestem fecit sibi; byssus et
purpura indumentum eius."
17 Cf. Ps. 16 : 15: "Satiabor cum apparuerit gloria tua."
18 Prov. 31:25-27: ". . . et ridebit in die novissimo. Os suum aperiet sapientiae,
et lex clementiae in lingua eius. Consideravit semitas domus suae, et panem
otiosa non comedit." ‘
19 Apoc. 4:1: ". . . ecce ostium apertum in caelo, et vox prima, quam audivi,
tamquam tubae loquentis mecum, dicens . . ." Cf. Ps. 17 : 14: "Intonuit de coelo
Dominus, et Altissimus dedit vocem suam, . . . et apparuerunt fontes aquarum."
20 Apoc. 1:4: ". . . et a septem spiritibus, qui in conspectu throni eius sunt."
1:16: ". . . et habebat in dextera sua stellas septem . . ." 2: 1: "Haec dicit, qui
tenet septem stellas in dextera sua...” 3:1: "Haec dicit, qui habet septem
Spiritus Dei et septem stellas . . ."
21 Marc. 16: 16-17: “Qui crediderit, et baptizatus fuerit, salvus erit; qui vero non
crediderit, condemnabitur. Signa autem eos, qui crediderint, haec sequentur: In
nomine meo daemonia eiicient . . ."
60VI. THE FIRST PARABLE: OF THE BLACK EARTH ... I will keep my covenant faithful to him for ever.? But if he shall
forsake my law !* and walk not in my ways and keep not my com-
mandments aforesaid, the enemy shall have [no] advantage over
him and the son of iniquity shall [not] have power to hurt him; !5
but if he shall walk in my ways, then shall he not fear in the cold
of snow. And for all his household there shall be covering, fine
linen and purple; and he shall laugh in that day when I shall be
satisfied and my glory shall appear,!? for he hath looked well to
my paths and hath not eaten his bread idle.18 Therefore were
the heavens opened above him and there thundered the voice !? of him who holdeth the seven stars in his hand, which are the
seven spirits ? sent forth into all the earth to preach and to bear
witness. He that believeth and is well baptized shall be saved,
but he that believeth not shall be condemned. And the signs of
those who believe and are well baptized are these: 24 When the
13 Ps. 88 : 27-28: "He shall cry out to me: Thou art my father, my God, and the
support of my salvation. And I will make him my firstborn, high above the kings
of the earth. I will keep my mercy for him for ever: and my covenant faithful
to him."
14 Ps. 88 : 31-33: "And if his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judg-
ments: if they profane my justices, and keep not my commandments, I will visit
their iniquities with a rod . . ."
15 Ps. 88:22-23: "For my hand shall help him: and my arm shall strengthen
him. The enemy shall have no advantage over him: nor the son of iniquity have
power to hurt him."
16 Prov. 31 : 21-22: "She shall not fear for her house in the cold of snow: for all
her domestics are clothed with double garments. She hath made for herself cloth-
ing of tapestry: fine linen, and purple is her covering."
17 Ps. 16 : 15: "I shall be satisfied when thy glory shall appear."
18 Prov.88:22-23: "Manus enim mea auxiliabitur ei, et bracchium meum con-
fortabit eum. Nihil proficiet inimicus in eo, et fiiius iniquitatis non apponet
nocere ei."
16 Prov. 31:21-22: "Non timebit domui suae a frigoribus nivis; omnes enim
domestici eius vestiti sunt duplicibus. Stragulatam vestem fecit sibi; byssus et
purpura indumentum eius."
17 Cf. Ps. 16 : 15: "Satiabor cum apparuerit gloria tua."
18 Prov. 31:25-27: ". . . et ridebit in die novissimo. Os suum aperiet sapientiae,
et lex clementiae in lingua eius. Consideravit semitas domus suae, et panem
otiosa non comedit." ‘
19 Apoc. 4:1: ". . . ecce ostium apertum in caelo, et vox prima, quam audivi,
tamquam tubae loquentis mecum, dicens . . ." Cf. Ps. 17 : 14: "Intonuit de coelo
Dominus, et Altissimus dedit vocem suam, . . . et apparuerunt fontes aquarum."
20 Apoc. 1:4: ". . . et a septem spiritibus, qui in conspectu throni eius sunt."
1:16: ". . . et habebat in dextera sua stellas septem . . ." 2: 1: "Haec dicit, qui
tenet septem stellas in dextera sua...” 3:1: "Haec dicit, qui habet septem
Spiritus Dei et septem stellas . . ."
21 Marc. 16: 16-17: “Qui crediderit, et baptizatus fuerit, salvus erit; qui vero non
crediderit, condemnabitur. Signa autem eos, qui crediderint, haec sequentur: In
nomine meo daemonia eiicient . . ."
60

She hath made for herself cloth-
ing of tapestry: fine linen, and purple is her covering."
17 Ps. 16 : 15: "I shall be satisfied when thy glory shall appear."
18 Prov. 31: 25-27: "(Strength and beauty are her clothing;) and she shall laugh
in the latter day. She hath opened her mouth to wisdom: and the law of clemency
is on her tongue. She hath looked well to the paths of her house, and hath not
eaten her bread idle."
19 Apoc. 4: 1: "(After these things, I looked: and) behold, a door was opened in
heaven. And the first voice which I heard, as it were, of a trumpet speaking with
me, said: . . ." Cf. Ps. 17: 14: “And the Lord thundered from heaven, and the
Highest gave his voice: . . . and the fountains of waters appeared."
20 Apoc. 1:4: ". .. and from the seven spirits, which are before his throne."
1:16: “. . . and he had in his right hand seven stars.” 2 : 1: “These things saith
he, who holdeth the seven stars in his right hand . . .” 3: 1: “These things saith
he who hath the seven spirits of God and the seven stars . . .”
21 Mark 16: 16-17: “He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved: but he that
believeth not shall be condemned. And these signs shall follow them that believe:
In my name they shall cast out devils . . ."
61AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
eos,? nive dealbabuntur in Selmon et pennae columbae dear-
gentatae et posteriora dorsi eius in pallore auri.?? Talis erit mihi
filius dilectus ?* ipsum videte, speciosum forma prae filiis homi-
ako) num,”> cuius pulchritudinem Sol et Luna mirantur.?? Ipse vero
est privilegium amoris et heres in quem confidunt homines 77
et sine quo nihil possunt facere.?* Qui autem aures habet audi-
endi audiat, quid dicat spiritus doctrinae filiis disciplinae ??
de septem stellis, quibus opus divinum peragitur. Quas Senior
tradit in libro suo, capitulo Solis et Lunae, dicens: Postquam
50
42. eos conj., eam DL, eum MPV | dealbuntur L, dealbantur M / Salomon D,
Selomen M / 43. mihi: noster D / 44. spectaculum fore M. om. B / pro D | 45.
admiratur D / 46. amoris: amborum P, amborum amorum M / 47. sine quo nihil
potest fieri sine quo nihil possunt (V: potes) facere MPV / 49. percipitur L, tradidit
BV,om. MP |
22 Eos" (plural) is necessary here, since a plural is presupposed in both the pre-
ceding and succeeding clauses. The idea is probably that of a post-mortal, trans-
figured state, in which those who are saved follow the Lamb, as virgins (dove).
(Cf. Apoc. 7:14: “. . . et laverunt stolas suas, et dealbaverunt eas in sanguine
Agni,"—and 14: 4: "Virgines enim sunt. Hi sequuntur Agnum . . .”)
23 Ps, 67 : 14-15: "Si dormiatis inter medios cleros, pennae columbae deargentatae,
et posteriora dorsi eius in pallore auri. Dum discernit coelestis reges super eam,
nive dealbabuntur in Selmon: Mons Dei mons pinguis . . ." Perhaps an allusion
to the "columba deargentata" of Hugh of St. Victor, Migne, P.L., vol. 177, cols.
15ff: "De Bestiis. Incipit de tribus columbis: Si dormiatis inter medios
clerosr o. 37
24 Cant. 5 : 16: ". . . talis est dilectus meus, et ipse est amicus meus, filiae Jeru-
salem." d
25 Ps. 44: 3 (considered as a Christian epithalamium, with Christ as the bride-
groom): "Speciosus forma prae filiis hominum."
26 Cf. Honorius of Autun, Expos. in Cant., P.L., vol. 172, col. 38o: "mirantur."
Cf. Roman Breviary, Feast of St. Agnes, Ninth Antiphon at Mattins: "Ipsi sum
desponsata . . . cujus pulchritudinem sol et luna mirantur."
?! Baruch 3 : 18: . . . "et aurum, in quo confidunt homines."
28 Cf. Joh. 15 : 5: "Quia sine me nihil potestis facere."
29 Apoc. 2:7: "Qui habet aurem, audiat quid Spiritus dicat Ecclesiis: . . ." Cf.
Matth. 11 : 15: "Qui habet aures audiendi, audiat . . ."
62VI. THE FIRST PARABLE: OF THE BLACK EARTH...
king that is in heaven judgeth over them,”? they shall be whited
with snow in Selmon and shall be as the wings of a dove covered
with silver, and the hinder parts of her back with the paleness
of gold.?? Such shall be to me a beloved son,?* behold ye him,
beautiful above the sons of men,** at whose beauty the sun and
moon wonder.?56 For he is the privilege of love and the heir, in
whom men trust?’ and without whom they can do nothing.?8
But he that hath ears to hear, let him hear what the spirit of the
doctrine saith to the sons of the discipline ?? concerning the seven
stars, by which the divine work is wrought. And of these Senior
treateth in his book in the chapter of the Sun and Moon, saying:
22 “Eos” (plural) is necessary here, since a plural is presupposed in both the pre-
ceding and succeeding clauses. The idea is probably that of a post-mortal, trans-
figured state, in which those who are saved follow the Lamb, as virgins (dove).
(C£. Apoc. 7 : 14: “. . . and (they) have washed their robes and made them white
in the blood of the Lamb." And 14:4: “. . . for they are virgins. These follow
the Lamb whithersoever he goeth.")
23 Ps. 67 : 14-15: “If you sleep among the midst of lots, you shall be as the wings
of a dove covered with silver, and the hinder parts of her back with the paleness
of gold. When he that is in heaven appointeth kings over her, they shall be
whited with snow in Selmon. The mountain of God is a fat mountain . . .” [Cf.
RSV, Ps. 68:12-15: "The women at home divide the spoil, though they stay
among the sheepfolds—the wings of a dove covered with silver, its pinions with
green gold. When the Almighty scattered kings there, snow fell on Zalmon. O
mighty mountain, mountain of Bashan . . .”] Perhaps an allusion to the “dove
covered with silver" of Hugh of St. Victor, Migne, P.L., vol. 177, cols. 15ff.: "De
Bestiis. Incipit, Of the three doves: if you sleep among the midst of lots . . ."
24 Cant. 5 : 16: “. . . Such is my beloved, and he is my friend, O ye daughters of
Jerusalem."
25 Ps. 44: 3 (considered as a Christian epithalamium, with Christ as the bride-
groom). “Thou art beautiful above the sons of men.”
26 Cf. Honorius of Autun, Expos. in Cant., P.L. vol. 172, col. 380: “admire.” Cf.
Roman Breviary, Feast of St. Agnes, Ninth Antiphon at Mattins: "To him am
I espoused . . . whose beauty the sun and the moon admire."
27 Baruch 3:18: “. . . and gold, wherein men trust."
28 Cf. John 15:5: “For without me you can do nothing."
29 Apoc. 2:7: “He that hath an ear let him hear what the Spirit saith to the
churches." Cf. Matt. 11 : 15: "He that hath ears to hear, let him hear . . .”
63AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
5! feceris illa septem quae divisisti per septem stellas (et dedisti
septem stellis) (et) novies purgasti donec videantur margaritae
(in similitudine) haec est dealbatio.*°
51. feras illas P, feras illa M / divisisti conj., dividisti D, dimisisti MPVBL / et
dedisti opem stellis M, et septem dedisti septem stellis D, om. B / 52. novem D
(arab. Text: novem in place of septem) / purgati M, compurgasti L, purgasti eas
B / 53. in similitudinem D, om. MPV / dealbo M, dealbationem D /
80 Cf. Senior, De chemia, pp. 10-11: "Posteaquam feceris illa septem, quae divisisti
per septem stellas, purgasti, et hoc tritum minute; donec videantur sicut mar-
garitae in similitudine, haec est dealbatio," Cf. Stapleton, "Muhammad bin
Umail," pp. 149-50.
64

VI. THE FIRST PARABLE: OF THE BLACK EARTH .
After thou hast made those seven (metals) which thou hast dis-
tributed through the seven stars (and hast appointed to the seven
stars) (and) hast purged them nine times until they appear as
pearls (in likeness)—this is the Whitening.9?
30 Cf. Senior, De chemia, pp. 10-11: “After thou hast made those seven (metals),
which thou hast divided among the seven stars, and hast purged them, and hast
ground them up carefully, until they appear like to pearls in appearance, that is
the whitening.” Cf. Stapleton, “Muhammad bin Umail," pp. 149-50.
65VII
PARABOLA SECUNDA DE DILUVIO
m-€
AQUARUM ET MORTE,
QUAM FEMINA INTULIT ET FUGAVIT
Quando conversa fuerit ad me multitudo maris ! et torrentes in-
5 undaverunt? super faciem meam et sagittae pharetrae meae
sanguine inebriatae fuerint ? et torcularia mea optimo vino frag-
raverint et horrea mea frumento tritici repleta fuerint * et spon-
sus cum decem virginibus sapientibus in thalamum meum
introierit ? et postea venter meus a tactu dilecti mei intumuerit
et pessulum ostii mei dilecto apertum fuerit,? et postquam iratus
10
Herodes multos pueros in Bethlehem Judaeae occiderit et
Rachel omnes filios suos ploraverit * et lumen in tenebris exor-
5. et pharetrae MP, om. L/6 . sanguineae MPV | inebriati D / fuerint om.
MPY | fragraverunt MPL / 7. frumenti MPV, frumentis B / repletum fuerit L,
repleta fuerit M / sponsum MP / 8. in om. BDL | 9. introiverit DL / tacta MP /
intimuerit P / 10. iratus fuerit add. L / 11. Judaeae: iude MPV | occidit P /
1]Isa. 60: 5: “Tunc videbis, et afflues, mirabitur et dilatabitur cor tuum, quando
conversa fuerit ad te multitudo maris, fortitudo Gentium venerit tibi . . .”
2Ps. 77:20: "Quoniam percussit petram, et fluxerunt aquae, et torrentes in-
undaverunt." Cf. Jonas 2 : 3-6: ". . . de ventre inferi clamavi, et exaudisti vocem
meam. Et proiecisti me in profundum, in corde maris, et flumen circumdedit
me; ... Omnes . . . fluctus tui super me transierunt . . . circumdederunt me
aquae usque ad animam; abyssus vallavit me, pelagus cperuit caput meum . . .”
3 Deut. 32 : 42: "Inebriabo sagittas meas sanguine . . .”
4 Prov. 3: 10: ". . . et implebuntur horrea tua saturitate, et vino torcularia tua
redundabunt." Cf. Joel 2 : 24.
5 Cf. Matth. 25 : 1ff.
6 Cant. 5:6: '"Pessulum ostii mei aperui dilecto meo, at ille declinaverat, atque
transierat
? Cf. Matth. 2 : 16-18 and Roman Missal, Communion Antiphon for Holy Inno-
cents (Dec. 28).
66VII
THE SECOND PARABLE: OF THE FLOOD OF WATERS
AND OF DEATH, WHICH THE WOMAN BOTH
BROUGHT IN AND PUT TO FLIGHT
When the multitude of the sea shall be converted to me! and the
streams have flowed ? over my face and the arrows of my quiver
are drunk with blood? and my presses are fragrant with the best
wine and my barns are filled with the corn of wheat * and the
bridegroom with the ten wise virgins hath entered into my
chamber ? and thereafter my belly hath swelled from the touch
of my beloved and the bolt of my door hath been opened to my
beloved, and after Herod being angry hath slain many children
in Bethlehem of Juda and Rachel hath bewailed all her children *
1Isa. 60: 5: “Then thou shalt see and abound, and thy heart shall wonder and
be enlarged, when the multitude of the sea shall be converted to thee, the strength
of the Gentiles shall come to thee . . ."
2Ps. 77:20: "Because he struck the rock, and the waters gushed out, and the
streams overflowed.” Cf. Jonah 2 : 3-6: “I cried out of the belly of hell: and thou
hast heard my voice. And thou hast cast me forth into the deep in the heart of
the sea, and a flood hath compassed me: all thy billows and thy waves have passed
over me. . . . The waters compassed me about even to the soul: the deep hath
closed me round about: the sea hath covered my head."
3 Deut. 32 : 42: “I will make my arrows drunk with blood . . .'»
4 Prov. 3: 10: “. . . and thy barns shall be filled with abundance, and thy presses
shall run over with wine." Cf. Joel 2 : 24.
5 Cf. Matt. 25 : 1ff.
6 Cant. 5:6: "I opened the bolt of my door to my beloved, but he had turned
aside, and was gone."
7 Cf. Matt. 2: 16-18 and Roman Missal, Communion Antiphon for Holy Inno-
cents (Dec. 28).
67AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
tum fuerit? et Sol justitiae de coelo apparuerit? tunc veniet
plenitudo temporis, in qua Deus mittet filium suum,!^ sicut
15 locutus est, quem constituit heredem universorum, per quem
fecit et saecula, cui dixit olim: Filius meus es tu, ego hodie
genui te: !?? cui magi ab oriente tria munera pretiosa obtu-
lerunt ?? in die illa, quam fecit Dominus, exultemus et laetemur
in ea, quia hodie afflictionem meam Dominus” respexit et
redemptionem misit,^ quia regnaturus est in Israel. Hodie -
20
mortem quam foemina intulit foemina fugavit et claustra in-
ferni fracta sunt; mors enim ultra non dominabitur !* nec portae
inferi amplius praevalebunt adversus eam, quia drachma
decima, quae perdita fuerat est inventa et ovis decima ultra
25 nonaginta in deserto est restaurata et numerus fratrum nostro-
13. tunc: dunc MP / venierit M / 14. quo DL / quem om. L / 16. cui: qui PDLV |
20. Hodie: Homini D / 22. confracta BD / dominabitur illi add. L / 23. inferni vel
inferi VP, vel inferni M,, inferni D / 24. ultra: atque MPV / 25. nonaginta: nona
MPYV, de qua L /
8Ps. 111:4: "Exortum est in tenebris lumen rectis . . ." Cf. Roman Missal,
Gradual for the Visitation of Mary (July 2): "Felix es sacra Virgo Maria .
quia ex te ortus est sol iustitiae Christus Deus."
9 Mal.4:2: ". . . et orietur vobis timentibus nomen meum Sol iustitiae."
10 Gal. 4 : 4: "At ubi venit plenitudo temporis, misit Deus Filium suum."
11 Hebr. 1:2: "Novissime diebus istis locutus est nobis in Filio, quem constituit
heredem universorum, per quem fecit et saecula . . ."
12 Hebr. 1 : 5: "Cui enim dixit aliquando Angelorum: Filius meus es tu, ego hodie
genui te."
13 Cf. Matth. 2: 11, and Roman Breviary, First Responsory at Mattins on days
after (formerly within the Octave of) the Epiphany: "Tria sunt munera pretiosa,
quae obtulerunt Magi Domino in die ista."
14 Ps, 117: 24: "Haec est dies, quam fecit Dominus; exultemus et laetemur in
Cahors
15 Cf. Gen. 31 : 42: "afflictionem meam . . . respexit Deus.”
16 Ps. 110: 9: "Redemptionem misit populo suo . . .”
17 Rom. 6:9: "Scientes quod Christus resurgens ex mortuis iam non moritur,
mors illi ultra non dominabitur."
18 Matth. 16 : 18: "(Tu es Petrus,) et super hanc petram aedificabo ecclesiam meam,
et portae inferi non praevalebunt adversus eam . . .”
68VII. THE SECOND PARABLE: OF THE FLOOD OF WATERS .
and a light hath risen up in darkness * and the Sun of Justice hath
appeared from heaven,? then the fulness of the time shall come
when God shall send his Son,!° as he hath said, whom he hath
appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the world,
to whom he said of old time: Thou art my Son, today have I be-
gotten thee: ?? to whom the wise men from the East brought three
precious gifts; i? in that day, which the Lord hath made, let us
be glad and rejoice therein, for this day hath the Lord beheld
my affliction !? and sent redemption," for he shall reign in Israel.
That death which a woman brought into the world, this day
hath a woman put to flight, and the barriers of hell are broken
down; for death shall no more have dominion,’ nor shall the
gates of hell prevail against her,!? for the tenth groat, which was
lost, is found, and the hundredth sheep is restored in the wilder-
8Ps. 111:4: “To the righteous a light is risen up in darkness . . ." Cf. Roman
Missal, Gradual for the Visitation of Mary (July 2): "Happy art thou, O sacred
Virgin Mary . . . for out of thee hath risen the Sun of justice, Christ our God.”
9 Mal. 4: 2: “But unto you that fear my name the Sun of justice shall arise . . ."
10 Gal. 4:4: “But when the fulness of the time was come, God sent his Son .. . ”
11 Hebr. 1: 2: "Last of all in these days (God) hath spoken to us by his Son, whom
he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the world . . .”
12 Hebr. 1: 5: “For to which of the angels hath he said at any time: Thou art my
son, today have I begotten thee?"
18 Cf. Matt. 2:11, and Roman Breviary, First Responsory at Mattins on days
after (formerly within the Octave of) the Epiphany: “Three are the precious gifts,
which the Magi offered to the Lord on this day."
14 Ps. 117: 24: “This is the day which the Lord hath made: let us be glad and
rejoice therein."
15 Cf. Gen. 31 : 42: “God beheld my affliction . . ."
18 Ps. 110: 9: "He hath sent redemption to his people . .
17 Rom. 6:9: "Knowing that Christ, rising again from the dead, dieth now no
more. Death shall no more have dominion over him."
18 Matt. 16:18: “(Thou art Peter) and upon this rock I will build my church,
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it . . ."
69AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
rum de lapsu angelorum est plenarie integratus.? Oportet te
ergo hodie fili gaudere,*° quia amplius non erit clamor neque
ullus dolor, quoniam priora transierunt.?' Qui habet aures audi-
endi audiat quid dicat spiritus doctrinae filiis disciplinae de
foemina quae mortem intulit et fugavit, quod philosophi in-
30
nuunt his verbis: Aufer ei animam et redde ei animam, quia
corruptio unius est generatio alterius?? hoc est: priva ipsum
humore corrumpente et augmenta humore connaturali, per
quod erit ipsius perfectio et vita.
31. Infer L / 32. hoc est priva ipsum: hoc primo cum L, corr. L, / 33. humorem
corrumpentem MPV / cum (humore) add. L / cum naturali MP /
19 Cf. Apoc. 6: 11: "Et dictum est illis ut requiescerent adhuc tempus modicum,
donec compleantur conservi eorum et fratres corum." Also cf. Luc. 15 : 1-10.
20 Cf. Luc. 15 : 32: "Fili, . . . epulari autem et gaudere oportebat."
21 Apoc. 21:4: ". . . et mors ultra non erit, neque luctus, neque clamor, neque
dolor erit ultra, quia prima abierunt."
22 Cf. "Cons. coniug.,” p. 259: "Quia corruptio unius est generatio alterius
secundum Philosophos." This passage comes from the Arabic treatise "Le Livre
de la terre et de la pierre" (Berthelot, Chimie au moyen dge, III, p. 223). It is also
cited by Thomas Aquinas, Summa, I, q. 118, art. II ad 2, and Albertus Magnus,
"De lapide philos." Theatr. chem. (1659), IV, p. 855. Cf. Avicenna, "Declaratio
lapidis physici," ibid., p. 876.
70VII. THE SECOND PARABLE: OF THE FLOOD OF WATERS ...
ness, and the number of our brethren from the fall of the angels
is fully made up.!? It is meet therefore, my son, to make merry
this day,?? for there shall be no more crying nor any sorrow, for
the former things are passed away.”! He that hath ears to hear,
let him hear what the spirit of the doctrine saith to the sons of
the discipline concerning the woman who brought in death and
put it to flight, which the philosophers declare in these words:
Take away his soul and give him back his soul, for the corrup-
tion of one is the generation of another,? that is: Take from
him the corrupting humour and add to him the connatural
humour, through which shall come to pass his perfecting and life.
19 Cf. Apoc. 6 : 11: "And it was said to them that they should rest for a little time,
till their fellow servants and their brethren . . . should be filled up." Also cf.
Luke 15 : 1-10.
20 Cf. Luke 15 : 32: "Son . . . it was fit that we should make merry.”
21 Apoc. 21:4: ". . . and death shall be no more, nor mourning, nor crying, nor
sorrow shall be any more, for the former things are passed away."
22 Cf. “Cons. coniug.,” p. 259: “For the corruption of one thing is the gen-
eration of another, according to the philosophers." This passage comes from the
Arabic treatise “The Book of Earth and Stone" (Berthelot, Chimie au moyen áge,
III, p. 223). It is also cited by Thomas Aquinas, Summa, I, q. 118, art. II ad 2, and
Albert the Great, “De lapide philos.,” Theatr. chem. (1659), IV, p. 855. Cf. Avicenna,
* Declaratio lapidis physici," ibid., p. 876.
71VIII
1 PARABOLA TERTIA
DE PORTA AEREA ET VECTE FERREO
CAPTIVITATIS BABYLONICAE
Qui portas aereas et vectes meos ferreos confregit ! candelabrum
5 quoque meum de loco suo moverit? nec non vincula carceris
tenebrositatis dirupuerit atque animam meam esurientem, quae
cucurrit in siti oris sui adipe frumenti et (de) petra melle
cibaverit ? ac peregrinationi meae grande coenaculum praepara-
verit^ ut in pace dormiam et requiescant? super me septem
19 dona spiritus sancti [miseritus]. Quia congregabunt me de uni-
versis terris, ut effundant super me aquam mundam, et munda-
bor a delicto maximo * et a daemonio meridiano,? quia a planta
pedis usque ad verticem [capitis] non est (inventa) sanitas.?
2. ferrae L / 4. meas ferreas DL / 6. disrumpit MPB / 7. in siti: in sit M / de
conj. / 8. cibavit MPV / atque DL / 8-9. praeparavit MPV / 9. quiescam MVD,
quiescunt L, requiescam P / super me septem om. DL / 10. miseritus add. D / 11.
ut: et MPV / 11-12. emundabor MV BDL | 12. a (daemonio) om. BDL /
lIsa. 45: 2-3: "Ego ante te ibo, et gloriosos terrae humiliabo; portas aereas con-
teram, et vectes ferreos confringam; et dabo tibi thesauros absconditos, et arcana
secretorum . . ."
2 Apoc. 2 : 5: "Venio tibi, et movebo candelabrum tuum de loco suo, nisi poeniten-
tiam egeris." à
3 Ps. 80 : 17: "Et cibavit eos ex adipe frumenti, et de petra melle saturavit eos."
4 Luc. 22 : 12 (Last Supper): "Et ipse ostendet vobis coenaculum magnum stratum,
et ibisparateun an
5 Cf. Ps. 4: 9: "In pace in idipsum dormiam et requiescam."
9 Ezech. 36 : 24-25: “Congregabo vos de universis terris, et adducam vos in terram
vestram. Et effundam super vos aquam mundam, et mundabimini ab omnibus
iniquamentis vestris . . ."
* Cf. Ps. 18: 14: ". . . et emundabor a delicto maximo.”
8 Ps. go: 5-6: ". . . non timebis . . . ab incursu, et daemonio meridiano . . ."
9 Isa. 1 : 6: "A planta pedis usque ad verticem non est in eo sanitas . . ."
72VIII
THE THIRD PARABLE: OF THE GATE OF BRASS
AND BAR OF IRON OF THE BABYLONISH
CAPTIVITY
He who brake in pieces my gates of brass and my bars of iron!
shall also move my candlestick out of its place? and shall break
asunder the chains of the prison of darkness and feed my hungry
soul, which hasted in thirst for his face, with the fat of wheat and
with honey (out of) the rock,’ and shall prepare a large dining
room for my pilgrimage,* that I may sleep in peace,® and the
seven gifts of the Holy Spirit may rest upon me, [who hath had
mercy upon me]. For they shall gather me together out of all the
countries, that they may pour upon me clean water, and I shall
be cleansed from the greatest sin,’ and from the noonday devil?
for from the sole of my foot unto the crown [of my head] there
is no soundness (found) in me.? Therefore they shall cleanse me
1]sa. 45 : 2-3: "I will go before thee and will humble the great ones of the earth.
I will break in pieces the gates of brass and will burst the bars of iron. And I
will give thee hidden treasures and the concealed riches of secret places . . .”
2 Apoc. 2:5: "Or else I come to thee and will move thy candlestick out of its
place, except thou do penance.”
3 Ps. 80 : 17: "And he fed them with the fat of wheat and filled them with honey
out of the rock."
4 Luke 22:12 (Last Supper): "And he will show you a large dining room fur-
nished. And there prepare."
5 Cf. Ps. 4: 9: "In peace in the selfsame I will sleep and I will rest."
6 Ezek. 36: 24-25: "I... will gather you together out of all the countries and
will bring you into your own land. And I will pour upon you clean water and
you shall be cleansed from all your filthiness . . ."
7 Ps. 18: 14: 7. . . and I shall be cleansed from the greatest sin.”
8 Ps. go: 5-6: “. . . thou shalt not be afraid . . . of invasion, or of the noonday
devil."
9 Isa. 1: 6: "From the sole of the foot unto the top of the head there is no sound-
ness therein . . ."
78AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
Ideo ab occultis et ab alienis sordibus meis me mundabunt,!?
postea omnium iniquitatum mearum non recordabor, quia
yy
unxit me Deus oleo laetitiae ! ut inhabitet in me virtus pene-
trationis et liquefactionis in die resurrectionis meae,!? quando
(a) Deo gloriabor.? Quia generatio haec advenit et praeterit !*
donec veniat qui mittendus est!5 qui et aufert iugum capti-
vitatis nostrae, in qua sedebamus septuaginta annis super flumina
20
Babylonis; 1° ibi flevimus et suspendimus organa nostra, pro eo,
quod elevatae sunt filiae Sion et ambulaverunt extento collo et
nutibus oculorum ibant et plaudebant et pedibus suis composito
gradu incedebant. Decalvabit ergo Dominus verticem filiarum
13. capitis add. B / inventa om. MPVB | 17. refectionis MPV / quando: quantum
MPDL, cum B / 18. a add. D, cum V / Domino Di / 23. nutibus: mittibus P, miti-
bus M / oculis V /
10 Ps. 18: 13-14: "Ab occultis meis munda me et ab alienis parce servo tuo."
11 Ps. 44: 8: "Propterea unxit te Deus, Deus tuus, oleo laetitiae, prae consortibus
PUIS eats <a
12 Cf. Roman Missal, Alleluia-verse for First Sunday after Easter (Low Sunday):
"Alleluia, Alleluia. [Cf. Matth. 28:] In die resurrectionis meae, dicit Dominus,
praecedam vos in Galileam. [Cf. Joh. 20:] Post dies octo, ianuis clausis, stetit
Jesus in medio discipulorum suorum et dixit: Pax vobis. Alleluia."
18 Cf. Pret. marg. nov., p. 39: "Unde dicit Rasis in quadam epistola: Cum hoc
autem, scilicet lapide rubeo, magnificaverunt se philosophi super omnes alios et
vaticinati sunt futura. . . . Ita quod cognoverunt diem iudicii et consumma-
tionis saeculi debere venire et mortuorum resurrectionem in ipsa, in qua
unaquaeque anima suo primo corpori coniungetur, et de caetero ab invicem non
separabuntur in perpetuum. Et erit tunc, omne corpus glorificatum ad incor-
ruptibilitatem translatum et ad luciditatem et subtilitatem fere incredibilem, et
penetrabit omne solidum, quia eius natura tunc erit natura spiritus sicut et
corporis."
14 Eccles. 1 : 4: "Generatio praeterit et generatio advenit; terra autem in aeternum
stat."
15 Gen. 49: 10: "Non auferetur sceptrum de Juda, et dux de femore eius, donec
veniat qui mittendus est; et ipse erit expectatio gentium . . .”
16 Ps. 186 : 1-2: "Super flumina Babylonis, illic sedimus et flevimus, cum recorda-
remur Sion. In salicibus in medio eius suspendimus organa nostra . . ." Cf. "Liber
quartorum Platonis," Theatr. chem. (1622), V, p. 144: "Sedentes super flumina
Eufrates sunt Caldaei . . . priores, qui adinvenerunt extrahere cogitationem."
74Vill. THE THIRD PARABLE: OF THE GATE OF BRASS...
from my secret faults and from those of others,!? and thereafter
I shall not remember all my iniquities, for God hath anointed
me with the oil of gladness'''that there may dwell in me the
virtue of penetration and of liquefaction in the day of my resur-
rection,” when I shall be glorified (by) God.!? For this generation
cometh and passeth away,!* until he come that is to be sent,!5
who also taketh away the yoke of our captivity, wherein we sate
seventy years by the rivers of Babylon; !* there we wept and
hung up our instruments, because the daughters of Sion were
haughty and walked with stretched-out necks and winkings of
their eyes and made a noise and went at a measured pace. There-
fore the Lord will make bald the crown of the head of the daugh-
10 Ps. 18: 13-14: "From my secret [sins] cleanse me, O Lord, and from those of
others spare thy servant."
11 Ps. 44: 8: “Therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of glad-
ness above thy fellows."
12 Cf. Roman Missal, Alleluia-verse for First Sunday after Easter (Low Sunday):
"Alleluia, alleluia. [Cf. Matt. 28:] On the day of my resurrection, saith the Lord,
I will go before you into Galilee. Alleluia. [Cf. John 20:] After eight days, the
doors being shut, Jesus stood in the midst of his disciples, and said: Peace be
with you. Alleluia."
13 Cf. Pret. marg. nov., p. 39: "Wherefore Rasis saith in a certain epistle: With
this red stone have the philosophers magnified themselves above others and have
prophesied of future things . . . so that they knew that the day of judgment
and of the consummation of the world must come, and the resurrection of the
dead therewith, wherein every soul will be united with its original body, and
thenceforth they shall not be separated for ever. And then shall every body be
glorified and translated into incorruptibility, and to an incredible brightness and
subtlety, and shall penetrate every solid thing, for its nature shall then be the
nature of spirit as well as of body."
14 Eccles. 1: 4: “One generation passeth away, and another generation cometh:
but the earth standeth for ever."
15 Gen. 49 : 10: “The sceptre shall not be taken away from Juda, nor a ruler from
his thigh, till he come that is to be sent: and he shall be the expectation of
nations. . . ”
16 Ps. 136: 1-2: “Upon the rivers of Babylon, there we sat and wept: when we
remembered Sion. On the willows in the midst thereof we hung up our instru-
ments." Cf. "Liber quartorum Platonis," Theatr. chem. (1622), V, p. 144: “Those
who sit by the river Euphrates are the Chaldees . . . the first who discovered how
man draws forth thought."
75AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
25 Sion et crines earum nudabit,!” quia de Sion exibit lex et ver-
bum Domini de Jerusalem.!5 In die illa quando apprehenderunt
septem mulieres virum unum dicentes: Panem nostrum comedi-
mus et vestimentis nostris cooperimur,? quare non defendis
sanguinem nostrum,” qui effusus est tamquam aqua in circuitu
Jerusalem? ?! et divinum receperunt responsum: Adhuc sustinete
30
modicum tempus, donec numerus fratrum nostrorum impletus
sit,?? qui scriptus est in libro hoc; tunc omnis, qui relictus fuerit
in Sionsalvus vocabitur,?? cum abluerit Dominus sordem filiarum
suarum Sion spiritu sapientiae et intellectus; ?* tunc decem iugera
85 vinearum faciunt lagunculam et triginta modii sementis faciunt
25. rex L / 26. apprehendent D / 27.-28. comedemus MP / 31. temporis L /
83. abluit MD / 34. suarum om. VDL | spiritus MPV | et om. P | 35. et: sed P /
tres triginta MP / faciunt (at end of line) om. MP /
1T]Isa. 3: 16-17: "Et dixit Dominus: Pro eo quod elevatae sunt filiae Sion, et
ambulaverunt extento collo, et nutibus oculorum ibant, et plaudebant, am-
bulabant pedibus suis, et composito gradu incedebant; decalvabit Dominus ver-
ticem filiarum Sion, et Dominus crinem earum nudabit."
18 Isa. 2 : 3: "Quia de Sion exibit lex, et verbum Domini de Jerusalem."
19Jsa. 4:1-2: "Et apprehendent septem mulieres virum unum in die illa,
dicentes: Panem nostrum comedemus, et vestimentis nostris operiemur; ...
aufer opprobrium nostrum."
20 Cf. Roman Breviary, Second Responsory at Mattins for the Feast of the Holy
Innocents: "Sub altare Dei audivi voces occisorum dicentium, Quare non defendis
sanguinem nostrum? Et acceperunt divinum responsum: Adhuc sustinete modicum
tempus, donec impleatur numerus fratrum vestrorum."
21 Ps, 78: 3: "Effuderunt sanguinem eorum tamquam aquam in circuitu Jerusa-
lem."
22 Cf. Apoc. 6: 9-11: "Vidi . . . animas interfectorum propter verbum Dei ...
dicentes: Usquequo, Domine, sanctus et verus, non iudicas, et non vindicas san-
guinem nostrum de iis qui habitant in terra? Et datae sunt illis singulae stolae
albae; et dictum est illis ut requiescerent adhuc tempus modicum, donec com-
pleantur conservi eorum et fratres eorum, qui interficiendi sunt sicut et illi."
23 Isa. 4: 3-4: "Et erit: Omnis qui relictus fuerit in Sion, et residuus in Jerusa-
lem, sanctus vocabitur, omnis qui scriptus est in vita in Jerusalem. Si abluerit
Dominus sordes filiarum Sion, et sanguinem Jerusalem laverit de medio eius, in
spiritu iudicii, et spiritu ardoris . . .”
#4 Ecclus. 15:5: ". , , et adimplebit illum spiritu sapientiae et intellectus."
76VII. THE THIRD PARABLE: OF THE GATE OF BRASS ..
ters of Sion, and will discover their hair,17 for the law shall come
forth from Sion and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.!5 In
that day when seven women took hold of one man, saying: We
eat our own bread and wear our own apparel,!® why dost thou
not defend our blood,”° which is poured out as water round about
Jerusalem? *1 And they received the divine reply: Rest ye still
for a little time, until the number of our brethren is filled up,”2
which is written in this book: then every one that shall be left
in Sion shall be called saved, when the Lord shall have washed
away the filth of his daughters of Sion ?? with the spirit of wisdom
and understanding;? * then will ten acres of vineyard yield one
17 Isa. 3 : 16-17: "And the Lord said: Because the daughters of Sion are haughty,
and have walked with stretched-out necks and wanton glances of their eyes, and
made a noise as they walked with their feet, and moved at a set pace: the Lord
will make bald the crown of the head of the daughters of Sion, and the Lord will
discover their hair."
18 Isa. 2: 3: "For the law shall come forth from Sion: and the word of the Lord
from Jerusalem."
19 Isa. 4 : 1-2: "And in that day seven women shall take hold of one man, saying:
We will eat our own bread, and wear our own apparel: only let us be called by thy
name. Take away our reproach.” |
20 Cf. Roman Breviary, Second Responsory at Mattins for the Feast of the Holy
Innocents: "Under the altar of God I heard the voices of them that were slain,
saying: Why dost thou not defend our blood? And they received the divine reply:
Be patient still for a little time, until the number of your brethren be filled up."
21 Ps. 78: 3: “They have poured out their blood as water round about Jerusalem.”
22 Cf. Apoc. 6: 9-11: "I saw under the altar the souls of them that were slain for
the word of God and for the testimony which they held. And they cried with a
loud voice, saying: How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and
revenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth? And white robes were given,
to every one of them one. And it was said to them that they should rest for a
little time, till their fellow servants and their brethren, who are to be slain even
as they, should be filled up."
23 Isa. 4 : 3-4: "And it shall come to pass, that every one that shall be left in Sion,
and that shall remain in Jerusalem, shall be called Holy: every one that is written
among the living in Jerusalem. If the Lord shall wash away the filth of the
daughters of Sion, and shall wash away the blood of Jerusalem out of the midst
thereof, by the spirit of judgment and by the spirit of burning."
24 Ecclus. 15:5: “. .. and (she) shall fill him with the spirit of wisdom and
understanding . ..
ThAURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
modios tres.? Qui intelligit hoc, non commovebitur in aeter-
num.?° Qui habet aures audiendi audiat, quid dicat spiritus doc-
trinae filiis disciplinae de captivitate Babylonica, quae septua-
ginta durabat annos, quam philosophi insinuant his verbis:
40 Multiplices sunt septuaginta praeceptorum alternationes.?"
39. durabit M / 40. sunt om. MPV | altercationes P, operationes V, om. M /
25 Isa. 5: 10-11: "Decem enim iugera vinearum facient lagunculam unam, et
triginta modii sementis facient modios tres."
26 Prov. 10: 30: Justus in aeternum non commovebitur,' and Ps. 194:3: 5 0u1
confidunt in Domino, sicut mons Sion: non commovebitur in aeternum . . ."
?1 Cf. Pret. marg. nov., p. 45: "Rasis in libro septuaginta praeceptorum. . . ." In
the Middle Ages there existed a work attributed to Rhazis, the Liber divinitatis or
Septuaginta, also known under the title Liber alternationum praeceptorum Rasis
philosophi in Alchimiam etc. It had as its source a work of Geber. Cf. M. Stein-
schneider, Die europáischen Übersetzungen aus dem Arabischen bis Mitte des
17. Jahrhunderts, B, p. 28, and Berthelot, Moyen áge, III, p. 34.
78VII. THE THIRD PARABLE: OF THE GATE OF BRASS...
little measure and thirty bushels of seed yield three bushels.?5
He that understandeth this shall not be moved for ever.?? He
that hath ears to hear, let him hear what the spirit of the doctrine
saith to the sons of the dicipline concerning the Babylonish
captivity, which endured seventy years, of which the philosophers
tell in these words: Manifold are the alternations of the seventy
precepts.?7
25 Isa. 5: 10-11: "For ten acres of vineyard shall yield one little measure: and
thirty bushels of seed shall yield three bushels.”
26 Prov. 10: 30: “The just shall never be moved,” and Ps. 124: 1: They that trust
in the Lord shall be as Mount Sion: he shall not be moved for ever that dwelleth
in Jerusalem.”
27 Cf. Pret. marg. nov., p. 45: “Rasis in the Book of the Seventy Precepts . . .” In
the Middle Ages there existed a work attributed to Rhazis, the Liber divinitatis or
Septuaginta, also known under the title Liber alternationum praeceptorum Rasis
philosophi in Alchimiam etc. It had as its source a work of Geber. Cf. M. Stein-
schneider, Die europdischen Ubersetzungen aus dem Arabischen bis Mitte des
17. Jahrhunderts, B, p. 28, and Berthelot, Moyen áge, IU, p. 34.
79IX
PARABOLA QUARTA DE FIDE PHILOSOPHICA,
QUAE NUMERO TERNARIO
CONSISTIT
Qui fecerit voluntatem patris mei et eiecerit hunc mundum in
b mundum, dabo illi sedem mecum in throno regni mei ! super
solium David et super sedes tribus Israel.? Haec est voluntas patris
mei,? ut cognoscant ipsum esse verum (Deum) * et non alium, qui
dat affluenter et non improperat ? in omnibus gentibus in veri-
tate, et filium eius unigenitum, Deum de Deo, lumen de lumine,
et Spiritum Sanctum ab utroque procedentem,$ qui aequalis est
10
patri et filio in Deitate, nam in patre manet aeternitas, in filio
4-5. in hunc modum D, om. L | 5. mecum om. MP / 7. Deum add. D | 8. dat:
ditat DL / effluenter PL, affiréntur M / 9. in veritate: unitate P, om. B |
1 Matth. 12 : 5o: "Quicumque enim fecerit voluntatem Patris mei . . . ipse meus
frater, et soror, et mater est." Apoc. 3:21: "Qui vicerit, dabo ei sedere mecum in
throno meo . . .”
2]sa. 9:7: "Super solium David, et super regnum eius sedebit . . ." Matth.
19:28: "Vos qui secuti estis me . . . sedebitis . . . super sedes duodecim, iudi-
cantes duodecim tribus Israel."
3 Cf. Joh. 6 : 39: "Haec est autem voluntas ejus qui misit me, Patris."
4 Cf. Joh. 17 : 3: "Ut cognoscant te solum verum Deum."
5 Jac. 1:5: "Si quis autem vestrum indiget sapientia, postulet a Deo, qui dat
omnibus affluenter, et non improperat."
6 Nicene Creed: "Credo in unum Deum, Patrem omnipotentem, factorem coeli
et terrae, visibilium omnium et invisibilium. Et in unum Dominum Jesum
Christum, Filium Dei unigenitum. Et ex Patre natum ante omnia saecula. Deum
de Deo, lumen de lumine, Deum verum de Deo vero. Genitum, non factum, con-
substantialem Patri: per quem omnia facta sunt. Qui propter nos homines et
propter nostram salutem descendit de coelis. Et incarnatus est de Spiritu Sancto
ex Maria Virgine: et homo factus est. Crucifixus etiam pro nobis ... Et in
Spiritum Sanctum Dominum, et vivificantem, qui ex Patre Filioque procedit. Qui
cum Patre et Filio simul adoratur et conglorificatur . . ."
8oIX
THE FOURTH PARABLE: OF THE PHILOSOPHIC
FAITH, WHICH CONSISTETH IN THE
NUMBER THREE
Whosoever shall do the will of my Father and shall cast out this
world into the world, I will give him to sit with me upon the
throne of my kingdom ! and upon the throne of David and upon
the seats of the tribes of Israel.? This is the will of my Father; that
they may know him to be the true (God)* and no other, who
giveth abundantly and upbraideth not, unto all peoples in truth,
and his only begotten Son, God of God, light of light, and the
Holy Spirit who proceedeth from both,* who is equal in God-
head to the Father and the Son, for in the Father inhereth eter-
1 Matt. 12 : 5o: “For whosoever shall do the will of my Father in heaven, he is my
brother, and sister, and mother." Apoc. 3:21: “To him that shall overcome I
will give to sit with me in my throne . . ."
2 [sa. 9 : 7: "He shall sit upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom . . . ”
Matt. 19: 28: "You who have followed me ... . shall sit on twelve seats judging
the twelve tribes of Israel."
3 Cf. John 6 : 39: “This is the will of my Father who hath sent me.”
4 Cf. John 17: 8: "That they may know Thee the only true God."
5 James 1:5: “If any of you want wisdom, let him ask of God, who giveth to all
men abundantly and upbraideth not.”
6 Nicene Creed: “I believe in one God, the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and
earth, and of all things visible and invisible. And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the
only-begotten Son of God, and born of the Father before all ages. God of God,
light of light, true God of true God. Begotten, not made, consubstantial with the
Father, by whom all things were made. Who for us men and for our salvation
descended from heaven. And was incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary:
and was made man. He was crucified also for us: . . . and in the Holy Ghost, the
Lord and life-giver, who proceedeth from the Father and the Son, who together
with the Father and the Son is adored and glorified . . .”
81AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
aequalitas, in Spiritu sancto (est) aeternitatis aequalitatisque
connexio; quia sicut dicitur qualis pater, talis filius, talis et
Spiritus Sanctus * et hi tres unum sunt § [quod philosophus vult
15 esse] corpus spiritus et anima,® quia omnis perfectio in numero
ternario consistit, hoc est mensura, numero et pondere.’? Nam
pater a nullo est, filius a patre est, Spiritus Sanctus ab utroque est
procedens, quoniam patri attribuitur sapientia, qua omnia regit
et disponsit suaviter, cuius viae investigabiles sunt et incompre-
hensibilia iudicia. Filio attribuitur veritas, ipse enim apparens
20
id quod non erat assumpsit,'? perfectus Deus et homo existens ex
humana carne et anima rationali,? qui praecepto patris cooper-
ante Spiritu Sancto ' mundum peccato [parentum] perditum
12. est add. M / 14-15. quod philosophus vult esse add. BDL / 15. spiritum et
animam BDL / 16. trinario VP / 19. quae D / 20. ipso DLV / apparens conj., enim
apparente DL, om. B, omnia operante illud MPV / 21. non om. PB | absumpsit M /
22. humana natura rationae subsistens B / quae VP / 23. parentum add. DL /
7 Athanasian Creed (see Roman Breviary, Trinity Sunday at Prime): “Qualis
Pater, talis Filius, talis Spiritus Sanctus."
8 Roman Missal, Preface of the Trinity: "Domine sancte, Pater omnipotens,
aeterne Deus. Qui cum unigenito Filio tuo, et Spiritu Sancto, unus es Deus, unus
es Dominus: non in unius singularitate personae, sed in unius Trinitate sub-
stantiae. Quod enim de tua gloria, revelante te, credimus, hoc de Filio tuo, hoc de
Spiritu Sancto, sine differentia discretionis sentimus. Ut in confessione verae
sempiternaeque Deitatis, et in personis proprietas, et in essentia unitas, et in
maiestate adoretur aequalitas." Cf. I Joh. 5: 7-8: “Tres sunt qui testimonium
dant in coelo: Pater, Verbum, et Spiritus Sanctus; et hi tres unum sunt. Et tres
sunt qui testimonium dant in terra: Spiritus, et aqva, et sanguis; et hi tres unum
sunt."
9 Senior, De chemia, p. 45: "Aes nostrum est sicut homo habens spiritum, animam
et corpus. Propterea dicunt sapientes: Tria et tria sunt unum. Deinde dixerunt in
uno sunt tria, et spiritus, anima, et corpus sunt unum, et omnia sunt ex uno."
10 Sap. 11: 21. "Omnia in mensura, et numero, et pondere disposuisti.”
11 Rom. 11: 33: "O altitudo divitiarum sapientiae et scientiae Dei: quam incom-
prehensibilia sunt iudicia eius, et investigabiles viae eius." Cf. Isa. 45 : 15.
12 Cf. Roman Missal, Preface for Christmas: ". . . quo Unigenitus tuus in tua
tecum gloria coaeternus in veritate carnis nostrae visibiliter corporalis ap-
paruit s.
13 Athanasian Creed: "Perfectus Deus, perfectus homo, ex anima rationali et
humana carne subsistens."
14 Cf. Roman Missal, Ordinary of the Mass, Prayer after the Kiss of Peace:
"Domine Jesus .. . qui ex voluntate Patris, cooperante Spiritu Sancto, per
mortem tuam mundum vivificasti . . ."
82IX. THE FOURTH PARABLE: OF THE PHILOSOPHIC FAITH...
nity, in the Son equality, in the Holy Spirit (is) the bond of
eternity and equality; for as it is said, Like as the Father is, so is
the Son, and so also is the Holy Spirit,” and these three are One,’
[which the Philosopher would have to be] body, spirit, and soul,®
for all perfection consisteth in the number three, that is, in meas-
ure, number, and weight.!? For the Father is of none, the Son is
of the Father, the Holy Spirit proceedeth from both; for to the
Father is attributed wisdom, by which he ruleth and sweetly
disposeth all things, whose ways are unsearchable and his judg-
ments incomprehensible." To the Son is attributed Truth, for
he in his appearing took upon him that which he was not,?? sub-
sisting perfect God and man of human flesh and reasonable
soul? who at the behest of the Father with the co-operation of
the Holy Spirit restored to the world !* lost by the sin [of the first
7 Athanasian Creed (see Roman Breviary, Trinity Sunday at Prime): “As is the
Father, so is the Son, so is the Holy Ghost."
8 Roman Missal, Preface of the Trinity: “O Lord, holy Father, almighty, everlast-
ing God. Who together with thine only-begotten Son and the Holy Ghost art one
God, one Lord, not in the singleness of one person but in the Trinity of one sub-
stance. For what, revealed by Thee, we believe of thy glory, the same we believe
of the Son, the same of the Holy Ghost, without difference or distinction; so
that in the confession of one true and eternal Godhead there is adored distinction
in Persons, oneness in Essence, and equality in Majesty." Cf. I John 5: 7-8:
“There are Three who give testimony in heaven: the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Ghost; and these three are one. And there are three that give testimony on
earth: the spirit, the water, and the blood; and these three are one."
9 Cf. Senior, De chemia, p. 45. “Our ore is like to a man, having spirit, soul, and
body. Wherefore do the wise say: Three and three are one. They say also: In one
are three, and: Spirit, soul and body are one and all things are of one.”
10 Wisd. 11:21: “(God hath) ordered all things in measure, and number, and
weight.”
11 Rom. 11: 33: “O the depth of the riches of the wisdom and of the knowledge
of God! How incomprehensible are his judgments, and how unsearchable his
ways!” Cf. Isa. 45 : 15.
12 Cf. Roman Missal, Preface for Christmas: "“ec . . . on which thine only-begotten
Son, coeternal with thee in thy glory, in very truth visibly appeared in our bodily
flesh m
13 Cf. Athanasian Creed: “Perfect God, perfect man, subsisting of rational soul
and human flesh."
14 Cf. Roman Missal, Ordinary of the Mass, Prayer after the Kiss of Peace: "O
Lord Jesus . . . who, fulfilling the Father's will, by the cooperation of the Holy
Ghost, by thy death hast given life to the world . . ."
83AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
restauravit. Spiritui Sancto datur bonitas, quo terrena fiunt
25 coelestia et hoc tripliciter: baptizando flumine sanguine et
flammis: flumine vegetando et abluendo, quando squalores
omnes abluit expellendo fumositates de animabus, sicut dicitur:
Tu animabus vivificandis aquas foecundas." Nam omnium
vegetabilium nutrimentum est aqua,'® unde cum aqua de coelo
descendit inebriat terram 17 et terra per eam vim suscipit omni
30
metallo imminentem, ob hoc postulat eam dicens: Emitte spiri-
tum tuum, hoc est aquam et creabuntur et renovabis faciem
terrae, quoniam inspirat terram quando facit eam tremere et
tangit montes et fumigant.!? Cum autem sanguine baptizat, tunc
35 nutrit, ut dicitur: Aqua sapientiae salutaris potavit me,?" et
iterum: Sanguis eius vere est potus,?! quia sedes animae est in
sanguine, ut Senior dicit: Mansit autem ipsa anima in aqua,”
(quae [hodie] sibi similis est in caliditate et humiditate),? in
24. qua DL / 25. haec MD / flumine flaminee et sanguine MPVB / 26-27. et
flammis add. MV, flamen L / 27. expellit P / atque (fum.) MP / de: ab MPB |
81. ob: ab PV, ad M / 33. Et (quoniam) PV / 34. fumigabunt DL / 36. verus D,
om. P | 38. (quae hodie ~ humiditate) add. DL /
15 Cf. Notkerus Balbulus, Hymnus in die Pentecostes (Migne, P.L., vol. 131, col.
1013.) “Tu animabus Vivificandis Aquas foecundas, Tu aspirando Da spiritales Esse
homines." Cf. also Roman Missal, Blessing of the Font on Easter Even.
16 Cf. Senior, De chemia, p. 70: ". . . et dixit Hermes: . . . vita cuiuslibet rei est
aqua, et aqua suscipit nutrimentum hominum et aliorum . . ."
17 Isa. 55: 10: "Et quomodo . . . imber . . . non revertitur, sed inebriat terram,
et infundit eam . . ." Ps. 64: 10: “Visitasti terram et inebriasti eam."
18 Cf. Turba, p. 140: “. . . quousque lapis fiat, quem tunc invidi nuncupant
lapidem omni metallo imminentem."
19 Ps. 10: 330-3 2: "Emittes spiritum tuum, et creabuntur; et renovabis faciem
terrae. Sit gloria Domini in saeculum; laetabitur Dominus in operibus suis. Qui
respicit terram, et facit eam tremere; qui tangit montes, et fumigant."
20 Ecclus. 15:3: “Cibabit illum pane vitae et intellectus, et aqua sapientiae
salutaris potabit illum."
21 Joh. 6 : 56: “Caro enim mea vere est cibus, et sanguis meus vere est potus."
22 Senior, De chemia, p. 44: ". . . mansit ipsa (scil. anima) in aqua sibi simili
quem est pater eius in praeparatione . . . tunc nominaverunt animam, et san-
guinem aeris . . ."
23]bid. p. 58: “Anima... facta calida et humida in natura sanguinis et
ACTIS UA
84IX. THE FOURTH PARABLE: OF THE PHILOSOPHIC FAITH . .
parents]. To the Holy Spirit is attributed Goodness, through
whom earthly things become heavenly, and this in threefold wise:
by baptizing in water, in blood, and in fire; in water by quick-
ening and cleansing, when he washeth away all defilements and
driveth out murkiness from souls, as it is said: Thou dost fecun-
date the waters to give life to souls.!® For water is the nourish-
ment of all living things, whence when water cometh down
from heaven it plentifully watereth the earth,!7and the earth by it
receiveth strength which can dissolve every metal,1* wherefore it
beseecheth him saying: Send forth thy Spirit, that is water, and
they shall be created, and thou shalt renew the face of the earth,
for he breatheth upon the earth when he maketh it to tremble,
and he toucheth the mountains and they smoke.!? And when he
baptizeth with blood, then he nourisheth, as it is said: He gave
me to drink of the saving water of wisdom,? and again: His
blood is drink indeed,?! for the seat of the soul is in the blood,
as Senior saith: But the soul itself remained in water,?? (which
[today] is like to it in warmth and humidity.) ?? and therein con-
15 Cf. Notker Balbulus, Hymn for Pentecost (Migne, P.L., vol. 131, col. 1013;
trans. Neale, p. 20): "Thou givest to the waters virtue to quicken souls: thou, by
thine inspiration, grantest to men to be living spirits." Cf. also Roman Missal,
Blessing of the Font on Easter Even.
16 Cf. Senior, De chemia, p. 70: “. . . and Hermes hath said: . . . the life of all
things is in water, and water receiveth the nourishment of men and other beings."
17 Isa. 55 : 10: "And as the rain . . . return(s) no more (to heaven) but soak(s) the
earth and waters it . . . so shall my word be . . ." Ps. 64: 10: "Thou hast visited
the earth and hast plentifully watered it."
18 Cf. Turba, p. 140: ^. .. until it becometh a stone, which then the envious
call the stone which dissolveth every metal." (I translate imminere, ‘threaten,’ here
as 'dissolve.'—M.L.v.F.)
19 Ps. 103 : 30-32: “Thou shalt send forth thy spirit and they. shall be created:
and thou shalt renew the face of the earth. May the glory of the Lord endure
for ever: the Lord shall rejoice in his works. He looketh upon the earth, and
maketh it tremble: he toucheth the mountains, and they smoke."
20 Ecclus. 15:3: "With the bread of life and understanding did she feed him:
and gave him the water of wholesome wisdom to drink."
21 John 6 : 56: “For my flesh is meat indeed: and my blood is drink indeed.”
22 Senior, De chemia, p. 44: “For it (the soul) remaineth in the water, which is
like unto it and is its father in the preparation . . . wherefore they call the soul
also ‘Blood of the air.' "
23 Ibid., p. 58: “The soul becometh warm and damp, after the nature of blood and
Clim c cer
85AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
eS,
qua consistit omnis vita.2* Cum autem flammis baptizat, tunc
40 infundit animam et dat perfectionem vitae,”° quia ignis dat for-
mam et complet totum, ut dicitur: Inspiravit in faciem eius
spiraculum vitae et factus est homo, qui prius erat mortuus in
animam viventem.?* De primo, secundo et tertio testantur phi-
losophi dicentes: ? aqua tribus mensibus foetum in matrice
45 [conservat] fovet, aer tribus secundis nutrit, ignis tribus tertiis
[et] custodit. Infanti numquam patebit ortus, donec hi menses
consumantur, tunc nascitur et a sole vivificatur, quoniam ipse
vivificator est omnium mortuorum. Unde praedictus spiritus
propter excellentiam sui septiformis muneris ?* dicitur habere
septem virtutes operando in terram: Primo calefacit terram (ut
5o
patet in calce) frigiditate mortuam et aridam. Unde propheta:
Concaluit cor meum intra me et operatione mea exardescit
ignis? Et in libro Quintae essentiae: Ignis suo calore pene-
trando et subtiliando omnes pares terrestres multum materiales
et minime formales consumit; quamdiu enim ignis materiam
55
habet, non cessat agere volens rei passivae imprimere suam for-
mam. Et Calet Minor: Calefacite frigiditatem unius caliditate
39. Cum: Quando MPD / flumine P, flamine MV, flumen L / 43. et secundum D /
45. conservat add. DL | 46. et add. DL | Infans MPV | exitus vel ortus L / 47. con-
sumentur BDL / 48. mortuorum om. DL / 51. ut in calce V, ut patet in tale M,
om. DL | 55.-56. ignis in materiam non cessat agere DL / 56. volens om. LV,
vultus P / passae MPV, posse L / 57. Et (Cal) om. MPVB | Ut (Sen) D /
24 Ibid., p. 31: "Et sicut aer est vita uniuscuiusque rei, similiter aqua eorum est
caput operis. . . . Et sicut aer est calidus et humidus, similiter aqua eorum est
calida et humida, et est ignis lapidis . . .” Ibid., p. 33: "Aer vero ex aqua est . . .
et ex ambobus consistit vita uniuscuisque rei." Cf. also “Cons. coniug.,” p. 60.
25 Senior, p. 44: ". .. cum spiritu humido . . . Et ipse est reductor ad corpus
suum, quod vivificabit post mortem suam, per hanc vitam. Postea nulla erit mors.
Propterea quod vita infunditur, sicut spiritus corpori."
26 Gen. 2:7: "(Formavit igitur Dominus Deus hominem de limo terrae,) et in-
spiravit in faciem eius spiraculum vitae, et factus est homo in animam viventem."
21 "Scala philosophorum," Bibl. chem., II, p. 135b: "Igitur sciendum quod tribus
mensibus aqua foetum in matrice conservat. Aer quoque tribus mensibus fovet:
ignis vero totidem custodit. . . . Igitur infanti numquam patebit egressus,
quousque aeris flatus exhauriat." Cf. also Calid, "Liber trium verborum," Art.
aurif. (1610), I, pp. 228-29. Cf. also “Cons. coniug.," pp. 203, 233.
28 Roman Breviary, Hymn at Vespers for Pentecost (Veni Creator Spiritus): “Tu
septiformis munere . . .”
29 Ps. 38:4: “Concaluit cor meum intra me; et in meditatione mea exardescet
ignis."
86IX. THE FOURTH PARABLE: OF THE PHILOSOPHIC FAITH . ..
sisteth all life.24 But when he baptizeth in flame, then he infuseth
the soul and giveth perfection of life,?^ for fire giveth form and
completeth the whole, as it is said: He breathed into his face the
breath of life, and man, who was aforetime dead, became a living
soul.?9 Of the first, second, and third the philosophers bear wit-
ness, saying: ?* For three months water [preserveth] nourisheth
the foetus in the womb, air nourisheth it for the second three,
fire [also] guardeth it for the third three. The infant will never
come to birth until these months are expired, then it is born and
quickened by the sun, for that is the quickener of all things that
are dead. Wherefore the aforesaid Spirit by reason of the excel-
lence of his sevenfold gift?5 is said to have seven virtues in his
operation on earth: Firstly, he warmeth the earth (as is to be
seen in lime), which by coldness is dead and dry. Wherefore the
prophet saith: My heart grew hot within me and in mine opera-
tion a fire flames out.? And in the Book of the Quintessence:
Fire, penetrating and subtilizing by its warmth, consumeth all
earthly parts which are wholly material and not formal; for as
long as fire hath matter, it ceaseth not to act, seeking to imprint
its form on the passive substance. And Calet the Less: Make
24 Ibid., p. 31: “And as air is the life of every single thing, so their (the philos-
ophers’) water is the head of the work . . . and as air is warm and damp, so is
their water warm and damp, and it is the fire of the stone. . . ." Ibid., p. 33: "But
the air is from the water . . . and of these two consisteth the life of every living
thing." Cf. “Cons. coniug.," p. 60.
25 Senior, p. 44: “. . . with the damp spirit . . . And this it is, which bringeth it
(the soul) back to its body, which it shall quicken after death through this life.
Thereafter death shall be no more, for life is infused into it, as the spirit into
the body."
26 Gen. 2:7: "(And the Lord God formed man of the slime of the earth,) and
breathed into his face the breath of life; and man became a living soul."
27 "Scala philosophorum," Bibl. chem., II, p. 135b: "Know therefore that water
preserveth the foetus for three months in the womb. Air also nourisheth it for three
months; and fire guardeth it for as many. . . . Therefore there shall be no issue
for the child, until it shall draw in currents of air." Cf. also Calid, "Liber trium
verborum," Art. aurif. (1610), I, pp. 228-29. Cf. also “Cons. coniug.," pp. 203, 233.
28 Roman Breviary, Hymn at Vespers for Pentecost (Veni Creator Spiritus): “Thou
who art sevenfold in thy gifts. . . ."
29 Ps. 38: 4: "My heart grew hot within me: and in my meditation a fire shall
flame out."
87AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
alterius.®° Et Senior: Facite masculum super foeminam, hoc est
calidum super frigidum.*! Secundo extinguit intensum ignem
60 impressum in adustione,? de qua Propheta: Exarsit ignis in
synagoga eorum et flamma combussit peccatores in terra,?? hunc
ignem extinguit suo temperamento unde subditur: In aestu
temperies.* Et Calet Minor: Extinguite ignem unius frigidi-
tate alterius.?? Et Avicenna: Res, in qua est adustio, primum quod
65 resolvitur, ex ea est virtus ignea, quae lenior et dignior est,
quam virtutes aliorum elementorum.?* Tertio mollificat, id est
liquefacit duritiem terrae et resolvit partes eius condensas et
58. et (hoc) DL / 59. in tersum M, intensivum D, extensum V, extensivum L /
impressum: in ipsum P / 65. ex: in D / 66. alterum MPV / liquescit MPV /
30 Cf. Calid, "Liber trium verborum," in Art. aurif. (1610), I, pp. 226-27: “Op-
portet ergo quod frigidum et humidum recipiant caliditatem et siccitatem quod
erat in occulto et fiant una substantia." “Hic est liber Trium verborum,
liber lapidis pretiosum, qui est corpus aereum, et volatile, frigidum et humidum
... et in eo est caliditas, siccitas, frigiditas, et humiditas: alia virtus est in
occulto, et alia in manifesto. Quod ut illud quod est in occulto fiat manifestum:
et illud quod est manifestum fiat occultum per virtutem Dei, et caliditatem, ut
siccitas . . . caliditas et siccitas destruit frigidum et humidum aquosum et
adustivum virtute divina . . ." pp. 227-28: “. . . sed virtute Dei fieri potest cum
molli temperamento et moderativo termino ignis." Cf. also Turba, p. 110.
81 Senior, De chemia, p. 38: "Proiicite foeminam super masculum, et ascendet mas-
culus super foeminam," and p. 96: “Commisce humidum cum sicco . . . Masculus
est calidus et siccus, foemina autem, est frigida et humida." Cf. also Pret. marg.
nov., p. 123, and "Cons. coniug," p. 86: "Facite foeminam super masculum et
ascendet masculus super foeminam."
32 Cf. "Aurora consurgens IL," Art. aurif. (1610), I, p. 148: "Dicitur etiam occisio
sive mortificatio, ratione vitae vegetabilis, et ordinatae, et accidentis, hoc est,
caloris impressi."
33 Ps. 105 : 17-19: "Aperta est terra, et deglutivit Dathan, et operuit super con-
gregationem Abiron. Et exarsit ignis in synagoga corum, damma combussit pec-
catores. Et fecerunt vitulum in Horeb . . .”
34 Roman Missal, Sequence for Pentecost (Veni sancte Spiritus): "In labore
requies, in aestu temperies, in fletu solacium."
35 Avicenna, “De re recta ad Hasen regem epistola," Theatr. chem. (1659), IV,
p. 866: "Et scivimus quod res in qua est adustio, cum decoquitur, primum quod
de ea resolvitur, est virtus ignea, quae est in ipsa, quoniam est levior et dignior
vaporatione et separatione, quam virtus reliquorum elementorum."
88IX. THE FOURTH PARABLE: OF THE PHILOSOPHIC FAITH . ..
warm the cold of the one by the heat of the other.?? And Senior:
Set the male upon the female, that is, the warm upon the cold.?!
In the second place he extinguisheth the intense imprinted fire
by ignition,?? of which saith the Prophet: A fire was kindled in
their congregation, and a flame burned the wicked upon earth; #8
he extinguisheth this fire by its own temperament, whence it is
added: Thou art coolness in the heat.?* And Calet the Less: Ex-
tinguish the fire of the one by the coolness of the other.?? And
Avicenna: A thing in which there is burning, the first thing that
is released from it is a fiery virtue, which is milder and more
worthy than the virtues of the other elements.?? In the third place
he maketh soft, that is, he liquefieth the hardness of the earth and
30 Cf. Calid, "Liber trium verborum," Art. aurif. (1610), I, pp. 226-27: "Needs
must the cold and damp therefore receive the warmth and dryness, which was in
the secret thing, and become one substance." “This is the book of the Three
Words, the book of the precious stone, which is a body aerial and volatile,
cold and damp . . . and in it is heat, dryness, coldness and dampness; it hath one
virtue in secret, and one virtue openly. And that which is in secret must be made
manifest, and that which is manifest be hidden by the power of God, and the heat
(become) as dryness . . . the heat and dryness hath destroyed the cold and damp,
the watery and the burnt, by the power of God. . . ." Pp. 227-28: “but by the
power of God it can be done with a gentle temperament and a moderate quantity
of fire.” Cf. also Turba, p. 110.
31 Senior, De chemia, p. 38: “Cast the female upon the male, and the male will
ascend upon the female,” and p. 96: “Mix the warm with the cold, the damp with
the dry; the male is warm and dry, but the female is cold and damp." Cf. also
Pret. marg. nov., p. 123, and "Cons. coniug.,” p. 86: "Place the female upon the
male and the male will ascend upon the female."
32 Cf. "Aurora consurgens IL," Art. aurif. (1610), I, p. 148: "It is also called slaying
or mortification by reason of the vegetable life both ordained and accidental, that
is, of the impressed heat."
33 Ps. 105 : 17-19: “The earth opened and swallowed up Dathan: and covered the
congregation of Abiram. And a fire was kindled in their congregation: the flame
burned the wicked. They made also a calf in Horeb . . ."
34 Roman Missal, Sequence for Pentecost (Veni sancte Spiritus): "Thou in labour
rest most sweet, thou art coolness in the heat, solace in the midst of woe."
35 Avicenna, “De re recta ad Hasen regem epistola," Theatr. chem. (1659), IV,
p. 866: “And we know that the matter in which there is burning, when it is
cooked, the first thing to be released from it is the fiery virtue which is in it:
for it is lighter and more worthy, by vaporization and separation, than the virtue
of the other elements."
89AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
multum compactas, de quo scribitur: Imber sancti spiritus lique-
facit.5 Et Propheta: Emittet verbum suum et liquefaciet eam,
flabit spiritus eius et fluent aquae.?* Et in libro Quintae
470
essentiae scribitur, quia aer poros partium terrae adaperiet ad
suscipiendam virtutem ignis et aquae. Et alibi scribitur: Mulier
solvit virum et ipse figit eam, hoc est spiritus solvit corpus (et
mollificat) et corpus spiritum indurat. Quarto illuminat, quando
omnes tenebrositates tollit de corpore, de quo canitur: Horridas
75
nostrae mentis purga tenebras,?? accende lumen sensibus,*® et
Propheta: fuit eis dux tota nocte in illuminatione ignis *° et
tunc nox sicut dies illuminabitur.4 Et Senior: Et facit omne
nigrum album et omne album rubeum, quia aqua dealbat et
80 ignis illuminat.? Nam lucet in colore ut rubinus per animam
tingentem, quam acquisivit ex virtute ignis; propter hoc ignis
dicitur tinctor.?? Et in libro Quintae essentiae: Vides mirabile
lumen in tenebris.** Et in libro Turbae philosophorum scribi-
68. Imber: Geber P, in libro B / liquefecit me MP / 69. Emittit DL, emitte M /
ea DBLV | 5o. flavit BDLV / 73. solvit: mollificat MBV / 73.—74. (et mollificat)
add. DL | *75.-sitates: Incipit Rh / 74.—75. quod omnis tenebrositas tollitur MP /
76. ei MPV | lux D / 81. quas MPV, aquam B / 82. (essentiae) dicit add. MP /
Videns PV /
36 Cf. Ecclus. 39 : 9: ". . . et ipse tamquam imbres mittet eloquia sapientiae suae."
37 Ps. 147: 18: "Emittet verbum suum, et liquefaciet ea; flabit spiritus eius, et
fluent aquae."
38 Cf. Notkerus Balbulus, Hymnus in die Pentecostes (Migne, P.L., vol. 131, cols.
1012-13): "Spiritus alme, Illustrator hominum, Horridas nostrae mentis Purga
tenebras."
39 Roman Breviary, Hymn at Vespers for Pentecost (Veni Creator Spiritus):
*" Accende lumen sensibus, Infunde amorem cordibus . . .”
40 Ps. 77 : 14: "Et deduxit eos in nube diei, et tota nocte in illuminatione ignis."
Cf. Sap. 10:17: ". . . et fuit illis in velamento diei, et in luce stellarum per
noctem."
41 Ps. 198: 11: "Et nox sicut dies illuminabitur."
42 Senior, De chemia, p. 68: “et tingit omne nigrum, et facit album, et tingit omne
album, et facit rubeum. Et ideo res magnificatur . . ."
43 Ibid., p. 66: “Et quod dixit Rubinus, per hoc vult Animam tingentem propter
quod acquisivit virtutem ex igne . . ." C£. p. 35: "Anima tingens latet in aqua
. alba."
44 Cf. (not verbatim). Albertus Magnus, “De rebus metall.” (ed. Borgnet, V, p. 16):
“Carbunculus . . . lucet in tenebris sicut noctiluca," also p. 32: “Carbunculus
lucet in tenebris sicut carbo, et talem vidi ego."
90IX. THE FOURTH PARABLE: OF THE PHILOSOPHIC FAITH . .
dissolveth its condensed and exceedingly compact parts, of which
it is written: The rain of the Holy Spirit melteth.?^ And the
Prophet: He shall send out his word and shall melt it, his wind
shall blow and the waters shall run.?* And in the Book of the
Quintessence it is written, that the air shall open the pores of the
earthly parts to receive the virtue of fire and water. And elsewhere
it is written: Woman dissolveth man and he fixeth her, that is,
the Spirit dissolveth the body (and softeneth it) and the body
hardeneth the spirit. In the fourth place he enlighteneth, when
he taketh away all darknesses from the body, of which the hymn
singeth: Purge the horrible darknesses of our mind,?* enkindle a
light in our senses,?? and the Prophet: He conducted them all the
night with a light of fire,*? and night shall be light as the day.*!
And Senior: And he maketh all that is black white and all that is
white red, for water whiteneth and fire enlighteneth.*2 For he
shineth through the tincturing soul like a ruby in colour, which
it hath acquired by virtue of the fire, wherefore fire is called the
Dyer.* And in the Book of the Quintessence: Thou seest a won-
drous light in the darkness.* And in the Turba philosophorum
36 Cf. Ecclus. 39 : 9: "And he will pour forth the words of his wisdom as showers."
87 Ps. 147 : 18: "He shall send out his word, and shall melt them; his wind shall
blow, and the waters shall run."
38 Cf. Notker Balbulus, Hymn for Pentecost (Migne, P.L., vol. 131, cols. 1012-13;
trans. Neale, p. 19): "Merciful Spirit, enlightener of men, purge the fearful
shadows of our mind."
39 Roman Breviary, Hymn at Vespers for Pentecost (Veni Creator Spiritus): “Our
minds enkindle with thy light; within our hearts thy love excite.”
40 Ps. 77: 14: "And he conducted them with a cloud by day: and all the night
with a light of fire.” Cf. Wisd. 10: 17: “. . . and she was to them for a covert by
day and for the light of stars by night.”
41 Ps. 138: 11: “And night shall be light as the day.”
42 Senior, De chemia, p. 68: "And it tingeth every black thing, and maketh it
white, and tingeth every white thing, and maketh it red, and so is the matter
glorified.”
43 Ibid., p. 66: And when he saith “ruby,” he meaneth it of the tincturing soul,
because it hath received virtue from the fire. Cf. p. 35: "The tincturing soul lieth
hidden in the white . . . water."
44 Cf. (not verbatim) Albert the Great, "De rebus metall." (ed. Borgnet, V, p. 16):
“The carbuncle . . . shineth in the darkness like the moon,” also p. 32: “The
carbuncle shineth in the darkness like a coal, and so have I myself seen."
91AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
tur, quod si nubes superficiem dealbaverint, procul dubio eorum
intima dealbabuntur. Et Morienus ait: Jam abstulimus ni-
85
grum et fecimus album, cum sale [et] [a]natron,** id est cum
spiritu. Quinto separat purum ab impuro, quando omnia acci-
dentia animae removet, quae sunt vapores scil. odores mali
sicut dicitur: quod ignis separat heterogenea et cumulat homo-
genea.*7 Ob hoc Propheta: Igne me examinasti, et non est in-
9o
venta in me iniquitas,f et idem: Transivimus per ignem et
aquam, eduxisti nos in requiem et refrigerium.*? Et Hermes:
Separabis spissum a subtili, terram ab igne.9? Alphidius: Terra
liquefit et in aquam vertitur, aqua liquefit et in aerem vertitur,
95 aer liquefit et in ignem vertitur (ignis liquescit et in terram
vertitur glorificatam).54 Super hoc dicit Rasis, quod perfectae
84. superfaciem ML / dealbaverit MD / 85. Et om. MPVB / 86. et (an.) add.
MPVRRLB / 88. malos MPVBD | go. exanimasti L / 92. in requiem et om. MPB |
94. liquescit MPVB | aer liq. etc. om. P / 95. liquefit et in ignem vertitur om. P,
ignis liq. ~ glorificatam om. DLRRB |
45 Turba, p. 120: Parmenides: Ir . et scitote quod si superficies dealbetur,
intima eius dealbabuntur. Et si (Ruska: aeris) superficiem nubes dealbaverunt,
procul dubio intima dealbabuntur."
16 Morienus Romanus, “De transmutatione metallorum," Ari. aurif. IL (1610),
p. 221: (Datin dicit ad Euthicen ...): "Jam abstulimus nigredinem et cum
sale [a]natron, id est sale nitri, et almizadir, cuius complexio est frigida et sicca,
fiximus albedinem."
47 Cf. Pret. marg. nov. p. 86: "quia calor homogenea congregat et segregat
heterogenea," and "Cons. coniug," p. 252: "Ignis enim heterogenea separat et
homogenea congregat." Cf. Albertus Magnus, “De rebus metall.” (ed. Borgnet, V,
p. 25) ". . . calorem ignis, et quod congregat homogenia et disgregat heterogenia,
sicut dictum est in II. meteorum."
48 Ps. 16: 3: "Igne me examinasti, et non est inventa in me iniquitas."
49 Ps. 65 : 12: “Transivimus per ignem et aquam, et eduxisti nos in refrigerium."
50 Tabula Smaragdina (ed. Ruska), p. 2: "Separabis terram ab igne, subtile a
spisso, suaviter cum magno ingenio."
51 The version in brackets is found in P in place of the preceding clause. Cf.
"Clangor buccinae," Art. aurif. (1610), I, p. 317: "Dicit Assiduus philosophus:
Ignis coagulatur et fit aer, aer vero coagulatur et fit aqua, aqua vero coagulatur et fit
terra. Ecce in unam naturam inimici convenerunt." Cf. also “Cons. coniug.," pp.
28 and 29, and Flamel, “Excerpta ex Democrito," Theatr. chem. (1602), I, p. 891:
".. . elementa . . . transmutantur . . . ignis fit terra, et terra fit aqua, et aqua
aer, et rursus."
023IX. THE FOURTH PARABLE: OF THE PHILOSOPHIC FAITH . . .
it is written, that if the clouds have whitened the surface, with-
out a doubt their inner parts shall be whitened also. And
Morienus saith: Already we have taken away the black and have
made the white, with the salt [and] [a]natron,** that is with the
spirit. Fifthly, he separateth the pure from the impure when he
removeth all accidents from the soul, which are vapours, that is,
evil odours, as it is written: That fire separateth those things that
are unlike and bringeth together those things that are like.**
Wherefore the Prophet: Thou hast tried me by fire, and iniquity
shall not be found in me.** And again: We have passed through
fire and water, and thou hast brought us forth into rest and re-
freshment.? And Hermes: Thou shalt separate the dense from
the subtle, the earth from the fire." Alphidius: Earth is lique-
fied and turned into water, water is liquefied and turned into air,
air is liquefied and turned into fire, fire is liquefied and turned
into glorified earth.*' On this saith Rasis, that a certain purifi-
45 Turba, p. 120: Parmenides: “. . . and know that if the surface is whitened, its
innermost parts are whitened. And if clouds have whitened the surface [Ruska:
of the bronze], without doubt the innermost parts shall be whitened.”
46 Morienus Romanus, “De transmutatione metallorum," Art. aurif., II (1610), p.
221: (Datin to Euthice): “. . . Now we have taken away the blackness (nigredo),
and with the salt [a]natron, that is the salt of nitre, and almizadir, whose nature
is cold and dry, we have fixed the whiteness (albedo).” Anatron = An-natron =
Arab. “the natron."
41 C£. Pret. marg. nov., p. 86: "For heat gathereth like things together, and
setteth unlike things apart," and “Cons. coniug.,” p. 252: “For fire separateth
unlike things and gathereth together like things." Cf. Albert the Great, "De rebus
metall." (ed. Borgnet, V, p. 25): ". . . heat of fire, and that which gathereth to-
gether like things and separateth unlike things, as it is written in II. Meteorum."
48 Ps. 16: 3: "Thou hast tried me by fire, and iniquity hath not been found in
me."
49 Ps. 65 : 12: "We have passed through fire and water, and thou hast brought us
forth into a refreshment."
50 Tabula Smaragdina (ed. Ruska), p. 2: "Thou shalt separate the earth from the
fire, the subtle from the dense, gently and with great skill."
51'The version in brackets is found in P in place of the preceding clause. Cf.
*Clangor buccinae," Art. aurif. (1610), I, p. 317: “Assiduus the philosopher saith:
Fire is coagulated and becometh air, air is coagulated and becometh water, water
is coagulated and becometh earth. Lo, the enemies come together in one nature."
Cf. also “Cons. coniug.,” pp. 28 and 29, and Flamel, “Excerpta ex Democrito,"
Theatr. chem. (1602), I, p. 891: “. . . the elements are transmuted . . . fire be-
cometh earth, and earth water, and water air, and the reverse."
93AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
praeparationis operationem praecedit quaedam rerum purifi-
catio, quae a quibusdam administratio vel mundificatio nun-
cupatur, a quibusdam rectificatio et a quibusdam ablutio vel
separatio nuncupatur. Ipse enim spiritus, qui est septiformis
100
munere 9? puriores partes separat ab impuris, ut abiectis impuris
partibus opus cum puris compleatur. Et hanc quintam virtu-
tem innuit Hermes in suo secreto, cum dicit: Separabis terram
ab igne, subtile a spisso suaviter (etc.).°* Sexto infima exaltat,
105 quando profundam animam et occultam in visceribus terrae ad
faciem ducit, de quo Propheta: Qui educit vinctos in fortitu-
dine sua.5 Iterum: Eduxisti animam meam ex inferno in-
feriori.59 Et Jesaias: Spiritus Domini levavit me.5* Et philosophi:
Quicumque occultum fecerit manifestum 55 totum opus novit
et qui novit nostrum cambar (i.e. ignem) hic (noster) philoso-
110
phus est.5® Morienus: Qui animam (suam) sursum levaverit, eius
colores videbit. Et Alphidius: Nisi (hic) vapor ascenderit, nil
102. quartam v. MP, virtutem om. M / 103. cum: et MP / 104. a grosso a spisso
V | etc. add. DRh | 110. i.e., ignem add. MP / noster add. DRRhLV | philosophus:
filius DRA, / 111. suam add. D |
52 Roman Breviary, Hymn at Vespers for Pentecost (Veni Creator Spiritus): "Tu
septiformis munere, Digitus paternae dexterae . . ."
53 Cf. Pseudo-Aristotle, “De perfecto magisterio," Theatr. chem. (1659), III, p. 79:
"Praecedit autem operationem perfectae operationis quaedam rerum purificatio
quae a quibusdam mundificatio, et a quibusdam administratio, a quibusdam
rectificatio, et a quibusdam ablutio, et a quibusdam separatio nuncupatur. Ipsa
enim puriores rerum partes disgregat ab impuris ut gravioribus abiectis partibus
cum levioribus opus compleatur." Cf. also "Scala philosophorum," Bibl. chem.,
II, p. 134a, also in part "Aristotelis Tractatulus," Art. aurif., I (1610), p. 232, and
" Rosarium Arnaldi," ibid., II, p. 271, and Albertus Magnus, “De lapide philos."
Theatr, chem. (1659), IV, p. 847.
54 Tabula Smaragdina (ed. Ruska), p. 2.
55 Ps. 67 : 7: "Qui educit vinctos in fortitudine."
56 Ps, 85 :1 9: ". . . eruisti animam meam ex inferno inferiori."
57 Isa. 61 : 1 and Luc. 4 : 18: "Spiritus Domini super me . . .” Cf. Ezechiel 3 : 14:
"Spiritus quoque levavit me . . .”
58 Cf. Avicenna, "Declaratio lapidis physici," Theatr. chem. (1659), IV, p. 878.
59 Turba, p. 130: "Qui ergo scit cambar philosophorum occultum, iam ei est
notum arcanum." Cambar is frequently mentioned in the Turba, and is the
Arabic transcription of the Greek kinnabaris, ‘cinnabar.’ Cf. Ruska, Turba, p. 28.
Cf. “Cons, coniug.,” p. 198.
94IX. THE FOURTH PARABLE: OF THE PHILOSOPHIC FAITH...
cation of things precedeth the work of perfect preparation, which
by some is called administration or cleansing, by others rectifica-
tion, and by some it is called washing or separation. For the
spirit himself, who is sevenfold in his operation,” separateth the
purer parts from the impure, that the impure parts being cast
away, the work may be fulfilled with the pure. And this fifth
virtue doth Hermes refer to in his Secret, when he saith: Thou
shalt separate the earth from the fire, the subtle from the dense
gently (etc.). In the sixth place he exalteth the lowly, when he
bringeth to the surface the soul deep and hidden in the bowels
of the earth, of which saith the Prophet: Who bringeth out them
that were bound in his strength. Again: Thou hast delivered
my soul out of the lower hell.” And Isaias: The Spirit of the
Lord lifted me up. And the philosophers: Whosoever shall
make the hidden manifest knoweth the whole work, and he
who knoweth our cambar (i.e., fire), he is (our) philosopher.”
Morienus: He who shall raise up (his) soul, shall see its colours.
And Alphidius: If this vapour shall not ascend, thou shalt have
52 Roman Breviary, Hymn at Vespers for Pentecost (Veni Creator Spiritus): “Thou
who art sevenfold ín thy gifts, finger of the Father's right hand.”
52 Cf. Pseudo-Arístotle, "De perfecto magisterio,” Theatr. chem. (1659), YII, p. 79:
“But a certain purification of things precedeth the work of perfect preparation,
which by some is called deansing, by some administration, by some rectification,
by some ablution, and by some separation. For it separateth the purer parts of the
materials from the impure, that the heavier parts may be cast away and the work
fulfilled with the lighter.” Cf. also “Scala philosophorum," BibL chem., XY, p. 124a,
also in part “Aristotelis Tractatulus,” Art. aurif. (1610), L, p. 232, and "Rosarium
Arnaldi," ibíd., IL, p. 271, and Albert the Great, "De lapide philos," Theatr. chem.
(1659), 1V, p. 847.
54 Tabula Smaragdina (ed, Ruska), p. 2.
55 Ps, 67 : 7: “Who bringeth out them that were bound in strength.”
56 Ps, 85: 13: ". . . thou hast delivered my soul out of the lower hell.”
51 Isa, 61: 1 and Luk4:e 1 8: “The spirit of the Lord is upon me . . ." Cf. Ezek.
5 : 14: “The spirit also lifted me and took me up.”
55 Cf. Avicenna, "Declaratío lapidis physici," Theatr. chem. (1659), IV, p. 878.
59 Turba, p. 130; "He therefore who knoweth the hidden cambar of the philos-
ophers, to him is the secret already known." Cambar is frequently mentioned in
the Turba, and is the Arabic transcription of the Greek kínnabaris, ‘cinnabar.’
CL Ruska, Turba, p. 28; “Cons. coniug,,” p. 198.
95AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
habebis eo,9" quod per ipsum et cum ipso et in ipso totum *!
opus fit. Septimo et ultimo inspirat, quando suo flatu corpus
115 terrenum spirituale facit, de quo canitur: Tu aspirando das
spiritales esse homines.*? Salomon: Spiritus Domini replevit
orbem terrarum.9? Et Propheta: Et spiritu oris eius omnis virtus
eorum.® Et Rasis in lumine luminum: Non possunt gravia nisi
levium consortio levigari (nec levia nisi combinatione gravium
ad ima detrudi).® Et [in] Turba: Facite corpora incorporea 95
120
et fixum volatile; haec autem omnia nostro spiritu peraguntur
et adimplentur, quia ipse solus est, qui potest facere mundum
de immundo conceptum semine.5* Nonne dicit scriptura: Lava-
mini in eo et mundi estote. Et ad Naaman (Syrum) dictum
125 est: Vade et lavare septies in Jordane et mundaberis.*® Nam ipse
115. dicitur vel (canitur) add. MPV, dicitur B / 118. Rasis in om. MPVB, et Rasis
om. B | 119.120. (nec levia ~ detrudi) add. RhLD | 120. in add. RhLB | 124.
Syrum add. Rh, |
60 Cf. "Ros. phil.,” p. 118a: Albertus: "Nisi anima corpus suum exierit et in coelum
sursum ascenderit, nihil proficies in hac arte."
61 Alphidius, Codex Ashmole 1420, fol. 26: "Nisi hic vapor ascendat, nihil habetis
eo, quod ipse est opus et per ipsum et in ipso absque quo nihil fit." cf. Roman
Missal, Canon of the Mass: "Nobis quoque peccatoribus . . . Per ipsum et cum
ipso et in ipso est tibi Deo Patri omnipotenti in unitate Spiritus Sancti omnis
honor et gloria." Cf. Rom. 11:36: "Quoniam ex ipso et per ipsum et in ipso
sunt omnia. Ipsi gloria in saecula. Amen."
62 Notkerus Balbulus, Hymnus in die Pentecostes (supra, p. 84, n. 15).
63 Sap. 1:7: "Quoniam spiritus Domini replevit orbem terrarum . . . ”
64 Ps. 32:06: "Verbo Domini caeli firmati sunt et spiritu oris eius omnis virtus
eorum."
65 Pseudo-Aristotle, "De perfecto magisterio," Theatr. chem. (1659), III, p. 79: “Et
hoc dedit Hermes intelligere in suo secreto . . . dicens: Separabis terram ab igne,
et subtile a spisso. Quia non possunt gravia nisi cum levium superius, nec gravia
[7levia] nisi cum gravium inferius consortio detrudi." Cf. also Avicenna, "Declaratio
lapidis physici," Theatr. chem. (1659), IV, p. 880, and “Ros. phil," pp. 129a and
199b.
66 Cf. Turba, pp. 141, 155, 151.
67 Job 14:4: “Quis potest facere mundum de immundo conceptum semine?
Nonne tu, qui solus es?" Cf. Roman Missal, Prayers to be said before Mass: “Sed
scio veraciter et credo ex toto corde . . . quia potes me facere dignum, qui solus
potes mundum facere de immundo conceptum semine et de peccatoribus iustos
facis et sanctos."
68 Isa. 1 : 16: "Lavamini, mundi estote . . .
69 IV Reg. 5: 10: "Vade, et lavare septies in Jordane, et recipiet sanitatem caro
tua, atque mundaberis."
96IX. THE FOURTH PARABLE: OF THE PHILOSOPHIC FAITH . nothing from it,9? because through it and with it and in it all ©
the work is done. In the seventh and last place he inspireth,
when by his breathing he maketh the earthly body spiritual, of
which it is sung: Thou by thy breathing makest men to be spir-
itual.?? Solomon: The Spirit of the Lord hath filled the whole
world.8? And the Prophet: And all the power of them by the
spirit of his mouth.** And Rasis in the Light of Lights: Heavy
things cannot be made to ascend save by alliance with light things
(nor can light things be brought down to the depths save by
combination with the heavy).® And [in] the Turba: Make bodies
incorporeal ® and the fixed volatile; but all these things are
brought about and fulfilled by our spirit, for he alone it is
who can make clean that which is conceived of unclean seed.®*
Doth not the Scripture say: Wash yourselves in it and be clean.*
And to Naaman (the Syrian) was it said: Go and wash seven
times in the Jordan and thou shalt be clean.9? For there is one
60 Cf. “Ros. phil," p. 118a: Albertus: "Unless the soul go forth from its body, and
rise up into heaven, thou makest no progress in this art."
61 Alphidius, Codex Ashmole 1420, fol. 26: “Unless this smoke ariseth, thou shalt
have nothing, for it is itself the work and through it and in it, without which
there is nothing." Cf. Roman Missal, Canon of the Mass: “On ourselves too who
are sinners . . . through him and with him and in him is to thee, God the Father
Almighty, in the unity of the Holy Ghost, all honour and glory." Cf. Rom. 11:36: "For of him, and in him, and by him, are all things; to him be glory
for ever. Amen."
62 Notker Balbulus, Hymn for Pentecost (supra, p. 85, n. 15). 63 Wisd. 1: 7: "For the spirit of the Lord hath filled the whole world."
64 Ps. 32:6: "By the word of the Lord the heavens were established, and all the
power of them by the spirit of his mouth."
65 Pseudo-Aristotle, ''De perfecto magisterio," Theatr.AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
habebis eo,9" quod per ipsum et cum ipso et in ipso totum *!
opus fit. Septimo et ultimo inspirat, quando suo flatu corpus
115 terrenum spirituale facit, de quo canitur: Tu aspirando das
spiritales esse homines.*? Salomon: Spiritus Domini replevit
orbem terrarum.9? Et Propheta: Et spiritu oris eius omnis virtus
eorum.® Et Rasis in lumine luminum: Non possunt gravia nisi
levium consortio levigari (nec levia nisi combinatione gravium
ad ima detrudi).® Et [in] Turba: Facite corpora incorporea 95
120
et fixum volatile; haec autem omnia nostro spiritu peraguntur
et adimplentur, quia ipse solus est, qui potest facere mundum
de immundo conceptum semine.5* Nonne dicit scriptura: Lava-
mini in eo et mundi estote. Et ad Naaman (Syrum) dictum
125 est: Vade et lavare septies in Jordane et mundaberis.*® Nam ipse
115. dicitur vel (canitur) add. MPV, dicitur B / 118. Rasis in om. MPVB, et Rasis
om. B | 119.120. (nec levia ~ detrudi) add. RhLD | 120. in add. RhLB | 124.
Syrum add. Rh, |
60 Cf. "Ros. phil.,” p. 118a: Albertus: "Nisi anima corpus suum exierit et in coelum
sursum ascenderit, nihil proficies in hac arte."
61 Alphidius, Codex Ashmole 1420, fol. 26: "Nisi hic vapor ascendat, nihil habetis
eo, quod ipse est opus et per ipsum et in ipso absque quo nihil fit." cf. Roman
Missal, Canon of the Mass: "Nobis quoque peccatoribus . . . Per ipsum et cum
ipso et in ipso est tibi Deo Patri omnipotenti in unitate Spiritus Sancti omnis
honor et gloria." Cf. Rom. 11:36: "Quoniam ex ipso et per ipsum et in ipso
sunt omnia. Ipsi gloria in saecula. Amen."
62 Notkerus Balbulus, Hymnus in die Pentecostes (supra, p. 84, n. 15).
63 Sap. 1:7: "Quoniam spiritus Domini replevit orbem terrarum . . . ”
64 Ps. 32:06: "Verbo Domini caeli firmati sunt et spiritu oris eius omnis virtus
eorum."
65 Pseudo-Aristotle, "De perfecto magisterio," Theatr. chem. (1659), III, p. 79: “Et
hoc dedit Hermes intelligere in suo secreto . . . dicens: Separabis terram ab igne,
et subtile a spisso. Quia non possunt gravia nisi cum levium superius, nec gravia
[7levia] nisi cum gravium inferius consortio detrudi." Cf. also Avicenna, "Declaratio
lapidis physici," Theatr. chem. (1659), IV, p. 880, and “Ros. phil," pp. 129a and
199b.
66 Cf. Turba, pp. 141, 155, 151.
67 Job 14:4: “Quis potest facere mundum de immundo conceptum semine?
Nonne tu, qui solus es?" Cf. Roman Missal, Prayers to be said before Mass: “Sed
scio veraciter et credo ex toto corde . . . quia potes me facere dignum, qui solus
potes mundum facere de immundo conceptum semine et de peccatoribus iustos
facis et sanctos."
68 Isa. 1 : 16: "Lavamini, mundi estote . . .
69 IV Reg. 5: 10: "Vade, et lavare septies in Jordane, et recipiet sanitatem caro
tua, atque mundaberis."
96

1: 7: "For the spirit of the Lord hath filled the whole world."
64 Ps. 32:6: "By the word of the Lord the heavens were established, and all the
power of them by the spirit of his mouth."
65 Pseudo-Aristotle, ''De perfecto magisterio," Theatr. chem. (1659), III, p. 79: “And
this did Hermes give to be understood in his Secret . . . saying: Thou shalt sepa-
rate the earth from the fire, and the subtle from the gross. For heavy things cannot
be lightened save by the consort of light things from above, nor light things
brought down save by the consort of heavy things from below." Cf. also Avicenna,
"Declaratio lapidis physici," Theatr. chem. (1659), IV, p. 880, and "Ros. phil.,”
pp. 129a and 133b. 66 Cf. Turba, pp. 141, 155, 151. 67 Job 14:4: "Who can make him clean that is conceived of unclean seed? Is it not thou who only art?" Cf. Roman Missal, Prayers to be said before Mass:
*[But] I also know, and with all my heart firmly believe . . . that thou art able
to make me worthy, thou who alone canst make that clean which was born un-
clean, thou who alone canst out of sinners make just and holy men."
68 Isa. 1 : 16: "Wash yourselves, be clean. . . ."
69 IV (II) Kings 5 : 10: “Go, and wash seven times in the Jordan, and thy flesh
shall recover health; and thou shalt be clean."
97AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
est unum baptisma in ablutionem peccatorum, ut fides et
Propheta testantur." Qui habet aures audiendi audiat, quid
dicat spiritus (sanctus) doctrinae filiis disciplinae de spiritus
septiformis virtute, quo omnis impletur scriptura, quod phi-
1g0 losophi insinuant his verbis: Distilla septies et separasti ab
humiditate corrumpente.
ve6, absolutionem DY / 128. sanctus add. D / spiritu MRAL / virtutis D / 130.
septies: semel RH, /
T6C redo: 7, , , unum baptisma in remissionem peccatorum . . .” Cf. Marc. 1:4
Luc, 3: &; Acta Ap. 2 : 88; Eph. 4 : 5.
98

IX. THE FOURTH PARABLE: OF THE PHILOSOPHIC FAITH . . .
baptism for the remission of sins, as the Creed and the Prophet
bear witness."? He that hath ears to hear, let him hear what the
(holy) spirit of the doctrine saith to the sons of the discipline
concerning the virtues of the sevenfold spirit, whereby all the
scripture is fulfilled, which the philosophers'set forth in these
words: Distil seven times and thou hast set it apart from the
corrupting humidity.
70 Apostles’ Creed: “And I believe . . . in one baptism for the remission of sins.”
Cf. Mark 1 : 4; Luke 3: 3; Acts 2 : 38; Eph. 4: 5.
99X
PARABOLA QUINTA DE DOMO THESAURARIA,
QUAM SAPIENTIA FUNDAVIT SUPRA PETRAM
Sapientia aedificavit sibi domum,! quam quis introierit salva-
bitur et pascua inveniet? teste propheta: Inebriabuntur ab
ubertate domus tuae,? quia melior est dies una in atriis tuis
super millia. O quam beati, qui habitant in domo hac: * in ea
namque qui petit, accipit et qui quaerit invenit et pulsanti
aperietur. Nam Sapientia stat ad ostium dicens: Ecce sto ad
ostium et pulso, si quis audierit vocem meam et aperuerit
1. thesaurizaria MP / 2. firmam (petr.) add. L, supra petram om. MPV | 4. tes-
tante MPV / 5. tuis: eius RRDML, tuis corr. eius V / 8. Ecce: Ego VP /
1 Prov. 9: 1-5: "Sapientia aedificavit sibi domum, excidit columnas septem. Im-
molavit victimas suas, miscuit vinum, et proposuit mensam suam. Misit ancillas
suas, ut vocarent ad arcem et ad moenia civitatis: Si quis est parvulus, veniat ad
me. Et insipientibus locuta est: Venite, comedite panem meum, et bibite vinum
quod miscui vobis . . .” Cf. Senior, De chemia, p. 21: "Dixit filius Hamuel, author
huius operis: Feci inimicos in carmine figurarum . . . quas praedixi fuisse . . .
in gremio sapientis . . . sedentis iuxta hostium thalami, in domo quam sibi
aedificaverat . . ." p. 107: "Lapis . . . est sicut domus cum suis 4 parietibus et
tecto e
2 Joh. 10: 9: "Ego sum ostium. Per me si quis introierit, salvabitur, et ingredietur
et egredietur, et pascua inveniet."
3 Ps. 35:9: "Inebriabuntur ab ubertate domus tuae, et torrente voluptatis tuae
potabis eos."
* Ps. 83:11: ". . . quia melior est dies una in atriis tuis super millia . . ."
5 Ps. 88:5: "Beati qui habitant in domo tua, Domine, in saecula saeculorum
laudabunt te."
6 Matth. 7:7-8: "Petite, et dabitur vobis; quaerite, et invenietis; pulsate, et
aperietur vobis. Omnis enim qui petit, accipit; et qui quaerit, invenit; et pulsanti
apenietur >.
100X
THE FIFTH PARABLE: OF THE TREASURE-HOUSE
WHICH WISDOM BUILT UPON A ROCK
Wisdom hath built herself a house,! which if any man enter in
he shall be saved and find pastures,? as the prophet beareth wit-
ness: ‘They shall be inebriated with the plenty of thy house;? for
better is one day in thy courts above thousands.* O how blessed
are they that dwell in this house;* for therein everyone that
asketh receiveth and he that seeketh findeth and to him that
knocketh it shall be opened.* For Wisdom standeth at the door
and saith: Behold, I stand at the gate and knock: if any man shall
1 Prov. 9 : 1-5: "Wisdom hath built herself a house: she hath hewn her out seven
pillars. She hath slain her victims, mingled her wine, and set forth her table. She
hath sent her maids to invite to the tower, and to the walls of the city: whosoever
is a little one, let him come to me. And to the unwise she said: Come, eat my
bread, and drink the wine which I have mingled for you. . . ." Cf. Senior, De
chemia, p. 21: “The son of Hamuel, the author of this book, saith: I have made
enemies in the song of the figures, of which I said that they were in the bosom
of the wise man . . . who sat by the door of the room, in the house which he had
built for himself. . . ." P. 107: “The stone . . . is like unto a house with its four
walls and its roof . . ."
2 John 10: 9: "I am the door. By me, if any man enter in, he shall be saved: and
he shall go in and go out, and shall find pasture."
3 Ps. 35:9: “They shall be inebriated with the plenty of thy house: and thou
shalt make them drink of the torrent of thy pleasures."
4 Ps. 83 : 11: "For better is one day in thy courts above thousands."
5 Ps. 83: 5: “Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, O Lord; they shall praise
thee for ever and ever."
6 Matt. 7: 7-8: "Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and you shall find; knock,
and it shall be opened to you. For every one that asketh, receiveth; and he that
seeketh, findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened."
101AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
ianuam, introibo ad illum et ipse ad me et satiabor cum illo et
10
ipse mecum.* O quam magna multitudo dulcedinis tuae, quam
abscondisti introeuntibus domum hanc,® quam oculus non vidit
nec auris audivit nec in cor hominis ascendit? Domum hanc
reserantibus erit ea quae decet sanctitudo et utique longitudo
15 dierum,!? quia fundata est supra firmam petram, quae non
potest scindi nisi ungatur optimo sanguine hircino !? vel per-
cutiatur virga mosaica ter, ut aquae effluant largissimae, ita ut
omnis populus virorum ac mulierum bibat; !? et amplius non
sitient neque esurient.^ Quicumque domum hanc aperuerit
20 sua scientia, in ea inveniet fontem vivum indeficientem et
iuvenescentem,!? in quo quis baptizatus fuerit, [hic] salvus erit !9
nec amodo senescere potest. Prochdolor pauci [tamen eam]
12. ab (introeunt.) add. L / quae VP, quem M / 14. erit ea om. MPVB / 17. fluant
MPVD | 21. hic add. MPV | 22. tamen eam add. D / 22.-23. eis reseratur D /
" Apoc. 3:20: (Angelus Laodiceae ecclesiae:) "Ecce sto ad ostium, et pulso: si
quis audierit vocem meam, et aperuerit mihi ianuam, intrabo ad illum, et coenabo
cum illo, et ipse mecum . . .”
8 Ps. 30 : 20: "Quam magna multitudo dulcedinis tuae, Domine, quam abscondisti
timentibus te."
9I Cor. 2:9: “. . . quod oculus non vidit, nec auris audivit, nec in cor hominis
ascendit, quae praeparavit Dominus iis, qui diligunt illum."
10 Ps. 92: 5: "Domum tuam decet sanctitudo, Domine, in longitudinem dierum."
Cf. Ps. 22:6: ". . . ut inhabitem in domo Domini in longitudinem dierum."
11 Matth. 7 : 24: "Assimilabitur viro sapienti, qui aedificavit domum suam supra
petram . . ." Cf. Roman Breviary, Fourth Antiphon at Lauds for Dedication of a
Church: “Bene fundata est domus Domini supra firmam petram."
12 Levit. 16: 18: "Cum autem exierit ad altare quod coram Domino est...
sumptum sanguinem vituli atque hirci fundat super cornua eius per gyrum . . .”
Cf. Senior, De chemia, p. 9: "Igitur desinet lux mea, . . . quoniam capient . . . a
pinguedine . . . absque sanguine hircorum et discernit verum a falso." Cf. also
pp: 78-79.
13 Num. 20: 11: "Cumque elevasset Moyses manum, percutiens virga bis silicem,
egressae sunt aquae largissimae . . .” Exod. 17:6: "Percuties petram, et exibit
ex ea aqua, ut bibat populus."
14 Apoc. 7: 16: ". . . non esurient, neque sitient amplius, nec cadet super illos
sol." Cf. also Isa. 49: 10 and Joh. 4: 13-14: "Omnis qui bibit ex aqua hac, sitiet
iterum; qui autem biberit ex aqua quam ego dabo ei, non sitiet in aeternum.
Sed aqua quam ego dabo ei fiet in eo fons aquae salientis in vitam aeternam."
15 Cf. Zach. 18: 1: "In die illa erit fons patens domui David . . . in ablutionem
peccatoris . . ."
16 Marc. 16 : 16: "Qui crediderit et baptizatus fuerit salvus erit,"
102X. THE FIFTH PARABLE: OF THE TREASURE-HOUSE ... hear my voice and open the door, I will come in to him and he
to me, and I will be satisfied with him and he with me.* O how
great is the multitude of thy sweetness which thou hast hidden
for them that enter this house; 5 which eye hath not seen nor ear
heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of man.? To them
that unlock this house shall be befitting holiness and also length
of days,!? for it is founded upon a sure rock, which cannot be
split unless it be anointed with the blood of a most fine buck-
goat!? or be smitten three times with the rod of Moses, that
waters may flow forth in great abundance, that all the people
both men and women drink thereof,?? and they shall neither hun-
ger nor thirst any more. Whosoever by his science shall open
this house shall find therein an unfailing living fount that maketh
young, wherein whoever is baptized, [he] shall be saved !$ and
can no more grow old. [Yet], alas, but few open [it] who are chil-
7 Apoc. 3:20: (Angel of the church of Laodicea:) “Behold, I stand at the gate
and knock. If any man shall hear my voice and open to me the door, I will come
in to him and will sup with him: and he with me."
8 Ps. 30: 20: “O how great is the multitude of thy sweetness, O Lord, which thou
hast hidden for them that fear thee!"
91 Cor. 2:9: ". . . That eye hath not seen, nor ear heard: neither hath it entered
into the heart of man, what things God hath prepared for them that love him."
10 Ps. 92: 5: “Holiness becometh thy house, O Lord, unto length of days.” Cf. Ps. 22: 6: "And that I may dwell in the house of the Lord unto length of days."
11 Matt. 7 : 24: “(He) shall be likened to a wise man that built his house upon a
rock." Cf. Roman Breviary, Fourth Antiphon at Lauds for Dedication of a Church:
“The house of the Lord is well founded, upon a sure rock."
12 Levit. 16: 18: "And when he is come out to the altar that is before the Lord
. . .AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
ianuam, introibo ad illum et ipse ad me et satiabor cum illo et
10
ipse mecum.* O quam magna multitudo dulcedinis tuae, quam
abscondisti introeuntibus domum hanc,® quam oculus non vidit
nec auris audivit nec in cor hominis ascendit? Domum hanc
reserantibus erit ea quae decet sanctitudo et utique longitudo
15 dierum,!? quia fundata est supra firmam petram, quae non
potest scindi nisi ungatur optimo sanguine hircino !? vel per-
cutiatur virga mosaica ter, ut aquae effluant largissimae, ita ut
omnis populus virorum ac mulierum bibat; !? et amplius non
sitient neque esurient.^ Quicumque domum hanc aperuerit
20 sua scientia, in ea inveniet fontem vivum indeficientem et
iuvenescentem,!? in quo quis baptizatus fuerit, [hic] salvus erit !9
nec amodo senescere potest. Prochdolor pauci [tamen eam]
12. ab (introeunt.) add. L / quae VP, quem M / 14. erit ea om. MPVB / 17. fluant
MPVD | 21. hic add. MPV | 22. tamen eam add. D / 22.-23. eis reseratur D /
" Apoc. 3:20: (Angelus Laodiceae ecclesiae:) "Ecce sto ad ostium, et pulso: si
quis audierit vocem meam, et aperuerit mihi ianuam, intrabo ad illum, et coenabo
cum illo, et ipse mecum . . .”
8 Ps. 30 : 20: "Quam magna multitudo dulcedinis tuae, Domine, quam abscondisti
timentibus te."
9I Cor. 2:9: “. . . quod oculus non vidit, nec auris audivit, nec in cor hominis
ascendit, quae praeparavit Dominus iis, qui diligunt illum."
10 Ps. 92: 5: "Domum tuam decet sanctitudo, Domine, in longitudinem dierum."
Cf. Ps. 22:6: ". . . ut inhabitem in domo Domini in longitudinem dierum."
11 Matth. 7 : 24: "Assimilabitur viro sapienti, qui aedificavit domum suam supra
petram . . ." Cf. Roman Breviary, Fourth Antiphon at Lauds for Dedication of a
Church: “Bene fundata est domus Domini supra firmam petram."
12 Levit. 16: 18: "Cum autem exierit ad altare quod coram Domino est...
sumptum sanguinem vituli atque hirci fundat super cornua eius per gyrum . . .”
Cf. Senior, De chemia, p. 9: "Igitur desinet lux mea, . . . quoniam capient . . . a
pinguedine . . . absque sanguine hircorum et discernit verum a falso." Cf. also
pp: 78-79.
13 Num. 20: 11: "Cumque elevasset Moyses manum, percutiens virga bis silicem,
egressae sunt aquae largissimae . . .” Exod. 17:6: "Percuties petram, et exibit
ex ea aqua, ut bibat populus."
14 Apoc. 7: 16: ". . . non esurient, neque sitient amplius, nec cadet super illos
sol." Cf. also Isa. 49: 10 and Joh. 4: 13-14: "Omnis qui bibit ex aqua hac, sitiet
iterum; qui autem biberit ex aqua quam ego dabo ei, non sitiet in aeternum.
Sed aqua quam ego dabo ei fiet in eo fons aquae salientis in vitam aeternam."
15 Cf. Zach. 18: 1: "In die illa erit fons patens domui David . . . in ablutionem
peccatoris . . ."
16 Marc. 16 : 16: "Qui crediderit et baptizatus fuerit salvus erit,"
102

. . taking the blood of the calf, and of the buck-goat, let him pour it upon the
horns thereof round about." Cf. Senior, De chemia, p. 9: “Therefore let my light
fail, for they take . . . of the fatness . . . without the blood of a goat, and it
discerneth the true from the false."
18 Num. 20: 11: “And when Moses had lifted up his hand, and struck the rock
twice with the rod, there came forth water in great abundance, so that the people
and their cattle drank.” Exod. 17 : 6: “Thou shalt strike the rock, and water shall
come out of it that the people may drink."
14 Apoc. 7 : 16: “. . . they shall no more hunger nor thirst: neither shall the sun
fall on them. . . .” Cf. also Isa. 49: 10 and John 4: 13-14: “Whosoever drinketh
of this water shall thirst again; but he that shall drink of the water that I shall
give him shall not thirst for ever. But the water that I will give him shall become
in him a fountain of water, springing up into life everlasting."
15 Cf. Zech. 13:1: “In that day there shall be a fountain open to the house of
David . . . for the washing of the sinner . . .”
16 Mark 16 :16: “He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved.”
103AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
reserant, qui parvuli sunt et ut parvuli sapiunt; 1” si autem en-
arraverint illa qui parvuli sunt et sedilia viginti quatuor senio-
25 rum ipsis usurpaverint, procul dubio dignitate eorum et gradu
domum aperient ! ita ut facie ad faciem !?* oculo ad oculum
omnem claritatem solis et lunae speculabuntur, absque autem
ipsis minime valebunt. Qui enim habent claves regni coelorum
quodcumque ligaverint et solverint;? fiet ita. Nam ipsi sequ-
untur agnum quocumque ierit.?! Huius autem domus decor est
30
inenarrabilis, plateae et muri eius ex auro purissimo, portae
vero eius nitent margaritis ? atque gemmis pretiosis ?* lapides
23. quae MPVL | 23.24. si autem ipsis qui parvuli sunt enarraverint illa . . . D /
sedecim MPV, seniorem M / 25.-26. gradus ipsius domus MPV / 26. aperirent P,
aperuerunt M / 27.-28. absque hoc autem ipsi RhL / 29. quaecumque P, quem-
cumque M, quidcumque RA /
17Ps. 118: 130: "Declaratio sermonum tuorum illuminat, et intellectum dat
parvulis." I Cor. 13: 11: "Cum essem parvulus, loquebar ut parvulus, sapiebam
ut parvulus . . ."
18 Cf. Ps. 106: 32: “Exaltent eum . . . et in cathedra seniorum laudent eum.”
Cf. Apoc. 4: 4ff.: "Et in circuitu sedis sedilia vigintiquattuor: et super thronos
vigintiquattuor seniores sedentes, circumamicti vestimentis albis, et in capitibus
eorum coronae aureae. .. .[v. 10:] ... procidebant vigintiquattuor seniores
ante sedentem in throno, et adorabant viventem. . . . [5: 6:] Et vidi, et ecce in
medio . . . seniorum agnum stantem tamquam occisum, habentem cornua septem
et oculos septem, qui sunt septem spiritus Dei missi in omnem terram . . . [5: 8:]
. seniores . . . habentes . . . phialas aureas plenas odoramentorum . . ." Cf.
Senior, De chemia ("Epistola Solis ad Lunam crescentem"), p. 8: (Luna dicit:)
". . . exaltabimur, . . . quando ascend(er)imus ordinem seniorum. Lucerna lucis
infundetur lucernae meae et (ex) te et (ex) me (fit) sicut commixtio vini et aquae
dulcis . . . Cum intraverimus domum amoris, coagulabitur corpus meum . . ."
19 I Cor. 13 : 12: "Videmus nunc per speculum in aenigmate: tunc autem facie ad
faciem es
20 Matth. 16: 19: "Et tibi dabo claves regni coelorum. Et quodcumque ligaveris
super terram, erit ligatum et in coelis, et quodcumque solveris super terram, erit
solutum et in coelis."
21 Apoc. 14 : 4: "Hi sunt qui cum mulieribus non sunt coinquinati, virgines enim
sunt. Hi sequuntur Agnum quocumque ierit."
22 Cf. Dominican Breviary, Hymn for Vespers on the Dedication of a Church: (of
the celestial city) "Plateae et muri ejus ex auro purissimo. Portae nitent mar-
garitis ...”
28 Apoc. 21: 10ff.: . et ostendit mihi civitatem sanctam Jerusalem...
habentem portas duodecim . . . Et murus civitatis habens fundamenta duodecim
. . . [18:] Et erat structura muri eius ex lapide iaspide; ipsa vero civitas, aurum
mundum simile vitro mundo . .. Et duodecim portae duodecim margaritae
sunt . . . et platea civitatis aurum mundum . . .
104X. THE FIFTH PARABLE: OF THE TREASURE-HOUSE . .. —————————Á——ee— —e—e—e
dren and are as wise as children; 17 but if they who are children
shall tell of these things and shall usurp to themselves the seats of
the four and twenty elders, doubtless they shall by their dignity
and rank open the house,18 so that face to face !? and eye to eye
they shall look upon all the brightness of the sun and moon; but
without these (elders) they shall not prevail. For they who have
the keys of the kingdom of heaven, whatsoever they shall bind or
loose,?? so shall it be. For these follow the Lamb whithersoever he
goeth.?! But the beauty of this house cannot be told; its walls and
streets are of the purest gold, and its gates gleam with pearls ?? and
precious stones,?? and its cornerstones are fourteen, containing
17 Ps. 118: 130: “The declaration of thy words giveth light: and giveth under-
standing to little ones.” I Cor. 13 : 11: "When I was a child I spoke as a child, I
understood as a child . . ."
18 Cf. Ps. 106 : 32: "Let them exalt him . . . and praise him in the chair of the
ancients.” Cf. Apoc. 4: 4ff.: "And round about the throne were four and twenty
seats: and upon the seats, four and twenty ancients sitting, clothed in white gar-
ments. And on their heads were crowns of gold . . . [v. 10:| The four and twenty
ancients fell down before him that sitteth on the throne and adored him that
liveth for ever . . . [5: 6:] And I saw, and behold in the midst . . . of the an-
cients, a Lamb standing, as it were slain, having seven horns and seven eyes; which
are the seven Spirits of God, sent forth into all the earth . . . [5:8] . . . the
four and twenty ancients... having... golden vials of odours...” Cf. Senior, De chemia ("Epistola Solis ad Lunam crescentem"), p. 8: (The Moon
saith:) “we shall be exalted . . . when we shall ascend unto the order of the
elders. The lamp of light will be poured into my lamp, and of thee and of me
there will be a mixture, as of wine and sweet water .AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
reserant, qui parvuli sunt et ut parvuli sapiunt; 1” si autem en-
arraverint illa qui parvuli sunt et sedilia viginti quatuor senio-
25 rum ipsis usurpaverint, procul dubio dignitate eorum et gradu
domum aperient ! ita ut facie ad faciem !?* oculo ad oculum
omnem claritatem solis et lunae speculabuntur, absque autem
ipsis minime valebunt. Qui enim habent claves regni coelorum
quodcumque ligaverint et solverint;? fiet ita. Nam ipsi sequ-
untur agnum quocumque ierit.?! Huius autem domus decor est
30
inenarrabilis, plateae et muri eius ex auro purissimo, portae
vero eius nitent margaritis ? atque gemmis pretiosis ?* lapides
23. quae MPVL | 23.24. si autem ipsis qui parvuli sunt enarraverint illa . . . D /
sedecim MPV, seniorem M / 25.-26. gradus ipsius domus MPV / 26. aperirent P,
aperuerunt M / 27.-28. absque hoc autem ipsi RhL / 29. quaecumque P, quem-
cumque M, quidcumque RA /
17Ps. 118: 130: "Declaratio sermonum tuorum illuminat, et intellectum dat
parvulis." I Cor. 13: 11: "Cum essem parvulus, loquebar ut parvulus, sapiebam
ut parvulus . . ."
18 Cf. Ps. 106: 32: “Exaltent eum . . . et in cathedra seniorum laudent eum.”
Cf. Apoc. 4: 4ff.: "Et in circuitu sedis sedilia vigintiquattuor: et super thronos
vigintiquattuor seniores sedentes, circumamicti vestimentis albis, et in capitibus
eorum coronae aureae. .. .[v. 10:] ... procidebant vigintiquattuor seniores
ante sedentem in throno, et adorabant viventem. . . . [5: 6:] Et vidi, et ecce in
medio . . . seniorum agnum stantem tamquam occisum, habentem cornua septem
et oculos septem, qui sunt septem spiritus Dei missi in omnem terram . . . [5: 8:]
. seniores . . . habentes . . . phialas aureas plenas odoramentorum . . ." Cf.
Senior, De chemia ("Epistola Solis ad Lunam crescentem"), p. 8: (Luna dicit:)
". . . exaltabimur, . . . quando ascend(er)imus ordinem seniorum. Lucerna lucis
infundetur lucernae meae et (ex) te et (ex) me (fit) sicut commixtio vini et aquae
dulcis . . . Cum intraverimus domum amoris, coagulabitur corpus meum . . ."
19 I Cor. 13 : 12: "Videmus nunc per speculum in aenigmate: tunc autem facie ad
faciem es
20 Matth. 16: 19: "Et tibi dabo claves regni coelorum. Et quodcumque ligaveris
super terram, erit ligatum et in coelis, et quodcumque solveris super terram, erit
solutum et in coelis."
21 Apoc. 14 : 4: "Hi sunt qui cum mulieribus non sunt coinquinati, virgines enim
sunt. Hi sequuntur Agnum quocumque ierit."
22 Cf. Dominican Breviary, Hymn for Vespers on the Dedication of a Church: (of
the celestial city) "Plateae et muri ejus ex auro purissimo. Portae nitent mar-
garitis ...”
28 Apoc. 21: 10ff.: . et ostendit mihi civitatem sanctam Jerusalem...
habentem portas duodecim . . . Et murus civitatis habens fundamenta duodecim
. . . [18:] Et erat structura muri eius ex lapide iaspide; ipsa vero civitas, aurum
mundum simile vitro mundo . .. Et duodecim portae duodecim margaritae
sunt . . . et platea civitatis aurum mundum . . .
104

when we shall ascend unto the order of the
elders. The lamp of light will be poured into my lamp, and of thee and of me
there will be a mixture, as of wine and sweet water . . . When we shall enter
the house of love, my body will be coagulated. . . ."
19 I Cor. 13: 12: “We see now through a glass in a dark manner: but then face
to face."
20 Matt. 16 : 19: “And I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and
whatosever thou shalt bind on earth, it shall be bound also in heaven: and what-
soever thou shalt loose on earth, it shall be loosed also in heaven."
21 Apoc. 14: 4: “These are they who were not defiled with women: for they are
virgins. These follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth."
22 Cf. Dominican Breviary, Hymn for Vespers on the Dedication of a Church:
(of the celestial city) "Its streets and its walls are of the purest gold. Its gates
gleam with pearls . . ."
23 Apoc. 21 : 10ff.: “. . . and he shewed me the holy city Jerusalem. . . . having
twelve gates, . . . and the wall of the city had twelve foundations . . . and the
building of the wall thereof was of jasper stone; but the city itself pure gold, like
to clear glass. . . . and the twelve gates were twelve pearls . . . And the street of
the city was pure gold . . ."
105AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
vero eius angulares sunt quatuordecim tenentes virtutes princi-
pales totius fundamenti. Primus est sanitas, de qua Propheta:
35 Qui sanat contritos corde et alligat contritiones eorum,?^* et
philosophi: Qui utitur eo hominem vigoroso corpore con-
servat.*> Secundus est humilitas de qua scribitur: Quia respexit
humilitatem ancillae suae,?? ecce enim ex hoc beatam me dicent
omnes generationes. Et Propheta: Dominus erigit elisos.?? Et
Aristoteles ad Alexandrum: Cum isto lapide non est bonum
40
pugnare.?* Alphidius dicit: Si humilis fuerit, eius sapientia per-
ficietur.?? Tertius est sanctitas, de qua Propheta: Cum sancto
sanctus eris.?? Et iterum: sanctitas et magnificentia in sanctifi-
catione eius.?! Et Alphidius: Scito, quod hanc scientiam habere
45 non poteris, nisi mentem tuam Deo purifices, hoc est in corde
omnem corruptionem deleas.?? Et Turba: Voluptates reliqui
36. hominem om. RALD / 36-37. conservatur RhLD / 41. purgare RALDB /
42.-43. Cum sanctis MP / 45. sanctificesD /
24 Ps. 146: s: “Qui sanat contritos corde et alligat contritiones eorum."
25 Cf. “Aurora consurgens IL," Art. aurif. (1610), I, p. 141: "Illa (tinctura) hominem
laetificat et cor hominis sanat, ut Senior dicit, et reddit hominem hilarem, et
juvenilem facit et vigorose corpus conservat."
26 Luc. 1 : 48: "Quia respexit humilitatem ancillae suae; ecce enim ex hoc beatam
me dicent omnes generationes."
27 Ps. 144 : 14: "Allevat Dominus omnes qui corruunt, et erigit omnes elisos.”
28 Cf. Pseudo-Aristotle, "Secreta secretorum," fol. xxix: De lapide alchahat: "Et
non potest homo proeliari cum habente ipsum in manu.” And fol, xxx: ". . . est
alia arbor, qui istam secum portaverit, erit laetus probus et audax, cum isto non est
bonum luctari vel litigare vel pugnare . . ."
29 Cf. Hoghelande, "De alchimiae difficultatibus," Bibl. chem., I, p. sqo: “Et
Alphidius (in "Clav. phil"): Si humilis fueris eius Sophia et Sapientia perficietur,
sin autem, eius dispositio penitus te latebit.”
30 Ps, 17 : 26: "Cum sancto sanctus eris, et cum viro innocente innocens eris."
31 Ps. 95 : 6: "Confessio et pulchritudo in conspectu eius; sanctimonia et magnifi-
centia in sanctificatione eius,"
32 Alphidius, Codex Ashmole 1420, fol. 15: "Inspice Fili in libro meo et mandatum
meum respice atque monitionem meam. Et scito quod sapientiam istam habere
non potes quousque mentem tuam Deo purifices, et sciat te Deus habere certum
animum et creatori tuo fidelitatem, quod thesaurus Dei numquam perit nec
deficit." "Cons. coniug," p. 56: "Hanc etenim scientiam inquirentibus necessarium
est habere mentes purificatos a Deo, cum sit donum et secretum secretorum Dei.”
Cf. also "Ros. phil.," Bibl. chem., II, p. gib: "Scito fili quod istam scientiam habere
non potes, quousque mentem tuam Deo purifices, et sciat Deus te habere certum
animum ac rectum et tunc mundo dominari te faciet." Cf. Hoghelande, "De alch,
106X. THE FIFTH PARABLE: OF THE TREASURE-HOUSE .. . the principal virtues of the whole foundation. The first is health,
of which the Prophet: Who healeth the broken in heart and bind-
eth up their bruises, and the philosophers: He who useth it (the
stone) preserveth manhood in full vigour of body.” The second
is humility, whereof it is written: Because he hath regarded the
humility of his handmaid,”* for behold from henceforth all gen-
erations shall call me blessed. And the Prophet: The Lord set-
teth up them that are cast down.”7 And Aristotle to Alexander:
With this stone it is not good to fight.”* Alphidius saith: If he
shall be humble, his wisdom shall be perfected.?? The third is
holiness, of which the Prophet: With the holy thou shalt be
holy. And again: Holiness and magnificence are in his sanctu-
ary. And Alphidius: Know, that thou canst not have this sci-
ence, unless thou shalt purify thy mind before God, that is, wipe
away all corruption from thy heart.?? And the Turba: I have put
24 Ps, 146 : 3: "Who healeth the broken in heart: and bindeth up their bruises.”
25 Cf. "Aurora consurgens JI,” Art. aurif. (1610), I, p. 141: “This (the tincture)
maketh man glad and healeth his heart, as Senior saith, and maketh man gladsome
and young, and preserveth his body in vigour."
26 Luke 1:48: "Because he hath regarded the humility of his handmaid: for
behold from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed."
27 Ps. 144: 14: “The Lord lifteth up all that fall: and setteth up all that are
cast down."
25 Cf. Pseudo-Aristotle, "Secreta secretorum," fol. xxix: Of the stone Alchahat:
“And a man cannot fight with one who hath this stone in his hand." Also fol. xxx:
“There is another tree, which shall bear this with it; it shall be joyful and honest
and bold, it is not good to struggle or to argue or to fight therewith."
29 Cf. Hoghelande,. "De alchimiae difficultatibus," Bibl. chem., I, p. 340: “And
Alphidius (in “Clay.AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
vero eius angulares sunt quatuordecim tenentes virtutes princi-
pales totius fundamenti. Primus est sanitas, de qua Propheta:
35 Qui sanat contritos corde et alligat contritiones eorum,?^* et
philosophi: Qui utitur eo hominem vigoroso corpore con-
servat.*> Secundus est humilitas de qua scribitur: Quia respexit
humilitatem ancillae suae,?? ecce enim ex hoc beatam me dicent
omnes generationes. Et Propheta: Dominus erigit elisos.?? Et
Aristoteles ad Alexandrum: Cum isto lapide non est bonum
40
pugnare.?* Alphidius dicit: Si humilis fuerit, eius sapientia per-
ficietur.?? Tertius est sanctitas, de qua Propheta: Cum sancto
sanctus eris.?? Et iterum: sanctitas et magnificentia in sanctifi-
catione eius.?! Et Alphidius: Scito, quod hanc scientiam habere
45 non poteris, nisi mentem tuam Deo purifices, hoc est in corde
omnem corruptionem deleas.?? Et Turba: Voluptates reliqui
36. hominem om. RALD / 36-37. conservatur RhLD / 41. purgare RALDB /
42.-43. Cum sanctis MP / 45. sanctificesD /
24 Ps. 146: s: “Qui sanat contritos corde et alligat contritiones eorum."
25 Cf. “Aurora consurgens IL," Art. aurif. (1610), I, p. 141: "Illa (tinctura) hominem
laetificat et cor hominis sanat, ut Senior dicit, et reddit hominem hilarem, et
juvenilem facit et vigorose corpus conservat."
26 Luc. 1 : 48: "Quia respexit humilitatem ancillae suae; ecce enim ex hoc beatam
me dicent omnes generationes."
27 Ps. 144 : 14: "Allevat Dominus omnes qui corruunt, et erigit omnes elisos.”
28 Cf. Pseudo-Aristotle, "Secreta secretorum," fol. xxix: De lapide alchahat: "Et
non potest homo proeliari cum habente ipsum in manu.” And fol, xxx: ". . . est
alia arbor, qui istam secum portaverit, erit laetus probus et audax, cum isto non est
bonum luctari vel litigare vel pugnare . . ."
29 Cf. Hoghelande, "De alchimiae difficultatibus," Bibl. chem., I, p. sqo: “Et
Alphidius (in "Clav. phil"): Si humilis fueris eius Sophia et Sapientia perficietur,
sin autem, eius dispositio penitus te latebit.”
30 Ps, 17 : 26: "Cum sancto sanctus eris, et cum viro innocente innocens eris."
31 Ps. 95 : 6: "Confessio et pulchritudo in conspectu eius; sanctimonia et magnifi-
centia in sanctificatione eius,"
32 Alphidius, Codex Ashmole 1420, fol. 15: "Inspice Fili in libro meo et mandatum
meum respice atque monitionem meam. Et scito quod sapientiam istam habere
non potes quousque mentem tuam Deo purifices, et sciat te Deus habere certum
animum et creatori tuo fidelitatem, quod thesaurus Dei numquam perit nec
deficit." "Cons. coniug," p. 56: "Hanc etenim scientiam inquirentibus necessarium
est habere mentes purificatos a Deo, cum sit donum et secretum secretorum Dei.”
Cf. also "Ros. phil.," Bibl. chem., II, p. gib: "Scito fili quod istam scientiam habere
non potes, quousque mentem tuam Deo purifices, et sciat Deus te habere certum
animum ac rectum et tunc mundo dominari te faciet." Cf. Hoghelande, "De alch,
106

chem., I, p. 340: “And
Alphidius (in “Clay. phil.”): If thou art humble, its wisdom and knowledge shall
be perfected, but if not, its disposition will be wholly hidden from thee."
20 Ps, 17 : 26: “With the holy thou wilt be holy: and with the innocent man thou
wilt be innocent."
21 Ps. 95 : 6: “Praise and beauty are before him: holiness and majesty in his sanc-
tuary."
22 Alphidius, Codex Ashmole 1420, fol. 15: “Look, son, in my book, and have regard
to my command and my admonition. And know that thou canst not have this
wisdom until thou dost purify thy mind before God, and God knoweth thee to
have a steadfast spirit, and faithfulness to thy creator, because the treasure of
God perisheth never nor faileth." "Cons. coniug." p. 56: "For it is needful
that those who seek this knowledge have their minds purified by God, for it is
God's gift and his secret of secrets.” "Ros. phil," p. gib: “Know, my son,
that thou canst not have this science until thou purifiest thy mind before God,
and God knoweth thee to have a steadfast and right spirit, and then will he
make thee to rule over the world." Cf. Hoghelande, "De alch. diff," in Bibl. 107AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
et Deum exoravi, ut aquam mihi mundam ostenderet, quam
novi esse merum acetum.?? Quartus est castitas, de qua legitur:
Quem cum amavero munda sum, (cum tetigero casta sum).?*
5o Cuius mater virgo est et pater non concubuit,?? quia lacte vir-
gineo pastus est °° etc.?" Unde Avicenna in mineralibus dicit:
Quidam ingeniosi utuntur aqua, quae lac virginis dicitur.?* Quin-
tus est virtus, de qua dicitur: Virtus ornat animam. Et Hermes: Et
recipit virtutem superiorum et inferiorum planetarum et sua
55 virtute penetrat omnem rem solidam.?? Et in libro Quintae
49. (cum tetigero casta sum) add. MPV / 50. Cuius mater ~ pater non om. MPV |
concumbit MPB / 54. recepit D, recipiet RAL /
diff.," in Bibl. chem., Y, p. 340: "Unde Alphidius (in "Clav. phil.”): Hanc scientiam
habere non potes, quousque mentem tuam Deo purifices et sciat te Deus mentem
habere contritam."
33 Turba, p. 125, Floritis: "Acetum est acerrimum, quod facit aurum esse merum
spiritum . .. Et iuro vobis per Deum, quod multo tempore in libris investigavi
. et Deum oravi ut, quid est, me doceret. Exaudita autem oratione mundam
aquam mihi demonstravit, quam novi merum esse acetum."
34 Cf. Matth. 9, 21-22. Roman Breviary, Feast of St. Agnes, Second (before 1961,
Third) Responsory at Mattins: "Quem cum amavero, casta sum; cum tetigero,
munda sum."
35 Cf. Roman Breviary, ibid.: "cujus mater virgo est, cujus pater feminam nescit."
36 Cf. Dominican Breviary, Sunday within Octave of Christmas, Hymn at Lauds:
"Parvoque lacte pastus est, per quem nec ales esurit."
37 Alphidius, Codex Ashmole 1420, fol. 26: "Cuius mater virgo est et pater non
concubuit." Cf. the Alphidius quotation in Petrus Bonus, Pret. marg. nov., p. 40:
"Hic lapis in viis projectus, est in nubibus exaltatus, in aere habitat, in flumine
pascitur et in cacumine montium quiescit, cuius mater virgo est, cuius pater
foeminam nescit." Ibid.: “. . .chem., I, p. 340: “And
Alphidius (in “Clay. phil.”): If thou art humble, its wisdom and knowledge shall
be perfected, but if not, its disposition will be wholly hidden from thee."
20 Ps, 17 : 26: “With the holy thou wilt be holy: and with the innocent man thou
wilt be innocent."
21 Ps. 95 : 6: “Praise and beauty are before him: holiness and majesty in his sanc-
tuary."
22 Alphidius, Codex Ashmole 1420, fol. 15: “Look, son, in my book, and have regard
to my command and my admonition. And know that thou canst not have this
wisdom until thou dost purify thy mind before God, and God knoweth thee to
have a steadfast spirit, and faithfulness to thy creator, because the treasure of
God perisheth never nor faileth." "Cons. coniug." p. 56: "For it is needful
that those who seek this knowledge have their minds purified by God, for it is
God's gift and his secret of secrets.” "Ros. phil," p. gib: “Know, my son,
that thou canst not have this science until thou purifiest thy mind before God,
and God knoweth thee to have a steadfast and right spirit, and then will he
make thee to rule over the world." Cf. Hoghelande, "De alch. diff," in Bibl. 107

. . iudicaverunt Deum cum homine fieri debere unum,
et hoc factum fuit in Christo Jesu et virgine, matre eius. . . . Et ostendit Deus hoc
exemplum miraculosum philosophis in hoc lapide." Also as a quotation from As-
siduus in "Cons. coniug.,” pp. 205, 64, 150. 38 Avicenna, “De congelatione . . ." in Art. aurif. (1610), I, p. 240: “Est autem res
quaedam, qua utuntur quidam ingeniosi cum volunt rem siccam coagulare, quae
componitur ex duabus aquis, et dicitur lac virginis." Also in "De congelatione et
conglutinatione lapidis," Theatr. chem. (1659), IV, p. 883, and Pseudo-Aristotle,
"Secreta secretorum," cap. "De mineralibus." Also as Alphidius quotation in “Liber
de magni lapidis compositione et operatione," Theatr. chem. (1659), II, pp. 37
and 44. 389 Cf. Tabula Smaragdina, ed. Ruska, p. 2: "Ascendit a terra in coelum, iterumque
descendit in terram, et recipit vim superiorum ct inferiorum. Sic habebis gloriam
totius mundi. Ideo fugiat [fugiet] a te omnis obscuritas. Hic est totius fortitudinis
fortitudo fortis: quia vincet omnem rem subtilem, omnemque solidam penetrabit.”
108X. THE FIFTH PARABLE: OF THE TREASURE-HOUSE . .. pleasures aside and prayed to God, that he would show me the
pure water, which I know to be pure vinegar.?? The fourth is
chastity, of which it is written: Whom when I love I am pure,
(when I touch I am chaste); ** whose mother is a virgin and whose
father hath not cohabited with her,?5 for he is fed upon virgin's
milk,?* etc.87 Wherefore Avicenna saith in the Mineralia: Certain
learned ones use a water, which is called virgin's milk.2* The fifth
is virtue, of which it is said: Virtue adorneth the soul. And
Hermes: And it receiveth the virtue of the upper and lower
planets and by its virtue penetrateth every solid thing.?? And in
chem., I, p. 340: “Wherefore Alphidius (in "Clav. phil.”): Thou canst not have this
science, until thou purifiest thy mind before God and God knoweth thee to have
a contrite mind.”
33 Turba, p. 125, Floritis (Socrates): "The vinegar is very sharp, which maketh
gold to be pure spirit. . . . And I swear to you by God, that I have sought for
long in the books, to arrive at the knowledge of this single thing, and I have
besought God in prayer to teach me what it is. And when he had heard my prayer,
he showed me the pure water, which I know to be pure vinegar."
34 Cf. Matt. 9: 21-22. Roman Breviary, Feast of St. Agnes, Second (before 1961,
Third) Responsory at Mattins: *Whom when I love, I am chaste; when I touch, I
am clean."
35 Cf. Roman Breviary, ibid.: “whose mother is a maiden, whose father hath not
known woman."
36 Cf. Dominican Breviary, Sunday within Octave of Christmas, Hymn at Lauds:
"And He is fed with a little milk, through whom not even a bird goes hungry."
37 Alphidius, Codex Ashmole 1420, fol. 26: "Whose mother is a virgin and whose
father hath not cohabited with her." Cf. the Alphidius quotation in Petrus Bonus,
Pret. marg. nov., p.. . iudicaverunt Deum cum homine fieri debere unum,
et hoc factum fuit in Christo Jesu et virgine, matre eius. . . . Et ostendit Deus hoc
exemplum miraculosum philosophis in hoc lapide." Also as a quotation from As-
siduus in "Cons. coniug.,” pp. 205, 64, 150. 38 Avicenna, “De congelatione . . ." in Art. aurif. (1610), I, p. 240: “Est autem res
quaedam, qua utuntur quidam ingeniosi cum volunt rem siccam coagulare, quae
componitur ex duabus aquis, et dicitur lac virginis." Also in "De congelatione et
conglutinatione lapidis," Theatr. chem. (1659), IV, p. 883, and Pseudo-Aristotle,
"Secreta secretorum," cap. "De mineralibus." Also as Alphidius quotation in “Liber
de magni lapidis compositione et operatione," Theatr. chem. (1659), II, pp. 37
and 44. 389 Cf. Tabula Smaragdina, ed. Ruska, p. 2: "Ascendit a terra in coelum, iterumque
descendit in terram, et recipit vim superiorum ct inferiorum. Sic habebis gloriam
totius mundi. Ideo fugiat [fugiet] a te omnis obscuritas. Hic est totius fortitudinis
fortitudo fortis: quia vincet omnem rem subtilem, omnemque solidam penetrabit.”
108

marg. nov., p. 40: “This stone, cast forth into the streets, is exalted to the
clouds, dwelleth in the air, and is nourished in the rivers and resteth on the sum-
mits of the mountains, whose mother is a maid, whose father knoweth not
woman." Ibid.: .. . “it was their judgment, that God must become one with
man and that this came to pass in Christ Jesus and his maiden mother. . . . And
God made this plain as a wonderful example to the philosophers in this stone."
Also as a quotation from Assiduus in “Cons. coniug.,” pp. 205, 64, 150. 38 Avicenna, "De congelatione . . . ," in Art. aurif. (1610), I, p. 240: “For there is a
certain thing, which some men of skill use when they wish to coagulate something
which is dry: and it is composed of two waters, and is called virgin’s milk." The
same in “De congelatione et conglutinatione lapidis," Theatr. chem. (1659), IV, p. 883, and Pseudo-Aristotle, "Secreta secretorum," cap. "De mineralibus." Also as
Alphidius quotation in "Liber de magni lapidis compositione et operatione,"
Theatr. chem. (1659), III, pp. 37 and 44. 39 Cf. Tabula Smaragdina (ed. Ruska), p. 2: “It goeth up from earth to heaven,
and cometh down again to earth, and receiveth the virtue of the things above and
of the things below. So shalt thou have the glory of the whole world. Let all dark-
ness therefore flee from thee. This is the strong strength of all strength; for it shall
overcome every subtle thing, and penetrate every solid thing."
109AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
essentiae dicitur: Cum non suffecissem mirari de tanta rei vir-
tute sibi coelitus indita et infusa.*? Sextus est victoria, de qua
Hermes: Et vincet omnem rem solidam et lapidem pretiosum.??
Et Johannes in Apocalypsi: Vincenti subtile dabo manna ab-
60 sconditum et nomen novum quod os Domini nominavit.*'* ?
Et in libro Quintae essentiae: Cum autem operatus fuerit lapis
victoriae, smaragdos jaspides et veros chrysolithos cum lapide
ex ea materia facere informabo, qui in colore, substantia et
virtute naturales praecellunt et excedunt etc. Septimus est
65 fides, de qua legitur: Fides salvat hominem,** quam nisi quisque
habuerit, salvus esse non poterit.*^ Fides est intelligere, quod
non vides.*6 Et Turba: Est invisibilis quemadmodum anima in
humano corpore.*' Et in eodem dicitur: Duo videntur, terra
56. mirari: amanti PV, om. M [ 57. sibi: soli MP / induta MP / 58. vincit MPLRh /
solidam om. MPB / (pretiosum) et subtilem add. V / 59. subtilem M, om. PVB |
62. veros: achites MPV / Crisoliton MPV / 63. materia conj., manante DRh, manente
MPLY, om. B / informabo: Rubinos MPV / 64. etc. om. MPL | 66. intelligentia
DV |intra P, intus M / 67. Et om. MPV |
40 Cf. "Aurora consurgens IL" Art. aurif. (1610), I, p. 151: “Quod non sit [n]atus,
neque nascitur in futurum, qui hanc scientiam posset complere sine natura,
natura quidem quae coelitus est indita rebus et infusa." Cf. Pseudo-Aristotle,
"Secreta secretorum," fol. xxvi, 2.
41 Apoc. 2:17: "Vincenti dabo manna absconditum, et dabo illi calculum can-
didum, et in calculo nomen novum scriptum, quod nemo scit, nisi qui accipit."
42 Cf. Isa. 62 : 2: "Et vocabitur tibi nomen novum, quod os Domini nominabit."
43 Cf. "Aurora consurgens II," cap. 22, Art. aurif. (1610), I, pp. 156-57: “ut superius
allegatum est in libro Sextario, ubi dicitur: quod lapides Jacincti, Coralli rubei et
albi, Smaragdi, Chrysoliti, Saphyri, ex ipsa materia formari possunt: Et in charta
Sacerdotum traditur, quod ex chrystallo, carbunculus, sive rubinus, aut topazius
per eam fieri potest, qui in colore et substantia excellunt naturales."
44 Cf. inter alia Matth. 9 : 22: “Fides tua te salvam fecit."
45 Athanasian Creed: "Haec est fides catholica, quam nisi quisque fideliter
firmiterque crediderit, salvus esse non poterit."
46 Joh. 20: 29: "Beati qui non viderunt et crediderunt." Cf. Thomas Aquinas,
Summa theol., I-II, q. 62, art. 3 ad 2: “quia fides est de his, quae non videntur."
47 Turba, p. 141: "Hic enim spiritus, quem quaeritis, ut eo quodlibet tingatis,
in corpore occultus est et absconditus, invisibilis quemadmodum anima in humano
corpore." (This does not accord with the Vadiana MS.)
110X. THE FIFTH PARABLE: OF THE TREASURE-HOUSE . ..
the Book of the Quintessence it is said: For I could not wonder
enough at the great virtue of the thing, which is bestowed upon
and infused into it from heaven.*? The sixth is victory, whereof
Hermes: And it (the stone) shall be victorious over every solid
thing and precious stone.?? And John in the Apocalypse: To him
that overcometh I will give the subtle hidden manna and a new
name which the mouth of the Lord hath named.*1: *? And in the
Book of the Quintessence: But when the stone of victory shall
have been wrought, I shall teach how to make with the stone of
that material emeralds, jaspers, and true chrysolites, which in
colour, substance, and virtue excel and surpass the natural, etc.*?
'The seventh is faith, of which we read: Faith saveth a man,** and
he who hath it not, cannot be saved.** Faith is to understand what
thou seest not.*$ And the T'urba: It is invisible like unto the soul
in man’s body.*' And in the same it is said: Two things are seen,
40 Cf. "Aurora consurgens IL" Art. aurif. (1610), I, p. 151: “For there is not nor
shall there be in the future any man born who can fulfil this science without
nature—the nature, that is to say, which is bestowed upon things and infused into
them from heaven." Cf. Pseudo-Aristotle, "Secreta secretorum," fol. xxvi, 2.
41 Apoc. 2 : 17: "To him that overcometh I will give the hidden manna and will
give him a white counter (stone), and in the counter a new name written, which
no man knoweth but he that receiveth it."
42 Cf. Isa. 62:2: "And thou shalt be called by a new name which the mouth
of the Lord shall name."
43 Cf. "Aurora consurgens II,” cap. 22, Art. aurif. (1610), I, pp. 156-67: “. . . as is
set forth above in the sixth book, where it is said that the stones jacinth, red and
white coral, emerald, chrysolite, and sapphire, can be formed from that material.
And in the charter of the priests it is written, that from crystal can be made by its
means carbuncle, or ruby, or topaz, which in colour and substance excel the
natural."
44 Cf. inter alia Matt. 9 : 22: (Jesus says) “Thy faith hath made thee whole."
45 Athanasian Creed: “This is the catholic faith, which except a man believe
faithfully and firmly, he cannot be saved.”
46 John 20:29: “Blessed are they that have not seen and have believed.” Cf.
Thomas Aquinas, Summa theol., I-II, q. 62, art. 3 ad 2: "For faith concerns those
things that are not seen."
47 Turba, p. 141: "For this spirit, which you seek, that you may tinge somewhat
therewith, is hidden and concealed in the body, like unto the soul in a man's
body." (This does not accord with the Vadiana MS.)
111AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
scilicet et aqua, alia vero non, scilicet aer et ignis.** Et Paulus:
Qui crediderit in eum, non confundetur, nam non credentibus
70
est lapis offensio et petra scandali. Et Evangelium: Qui non
crediderit, iam iudicatus est." Octavus est spes, de qua dicitur:
Firma spes laetificat res, spes promittit semper finem bonum.
Et Morienes: Spera et spera et sic consequeris. Et Propheta:
75 Sperate in eum omnis congregatio populi, in eum speraverunt
patres nostri et liberati sunt.?? Nonus est caritas, de qua Apos-
tolus: Caritas omnia suffert. Caritas non agit perperam.? Et
Evangelista: Ego diligentes me diligo.* Qui omni tempore
diligit, hic amicus est.5> Et Alphonsus (rex): Hic est vere amicus,
80 qui te non deserit, cum omne saeculum tibi deficit. Et Gre-
gorius: 55 Probatio dilectionis est exhibitio operis. Et Job:
Omnia, quae homo habet dabit pro anima sua,?' hoc est pro
70. in eum om. PV, omnino M / non (both) om. MP / 71. ostensio P, offensionis
DV | 73. Firma fides Rh DL / 79. (amicus est) meus add. D | rex add. M |
48 Turba, p. 117: "In his (scil. elementis) est arcanum absconditum, quorum duo
tactum habent (et) aspectum apud visum largiuntur, quorum opus et vi[rtu]s
sciuntur, quae sunt terra et aqua, alia autem duo elementa nec videntur nec
tanguntur . . ."
49 Rom. 9:33: "Ecce pono in Sion lapidem offensionis, et petram scandali, et
omnis qui credit in eum non confundetur."
50 Joh. 3:18: "Qui credit in eum, non iudicatur; qui autem non credit, iam
iudicatus est."
51 Ps. 61 : 9g: "Sperate in eo, omnis congregatio populi; effundite coram illo corda
vestra."
52 Ps. 21: 5: “In te speraverunt patres nostri; speraverunt, et liberasti eos."
531 Cor. 13:7: "Charitas . . . omnia suffert, omnia credit, omnia sperat . . ."
I Cor. 13 : 4: "Charitas . . . non aemulatur, non agit perperam . . .”
54 Joh. 14 : 21: “Qui autem diligit me, diligetur a Patre meo; et ego diligam eum,
et manifestabo ei meipsum." Prov. 8: 17: "Ego diligentes me diligo."
55 Prov. 17: 17: "Omni tempore diligit, qui amicus est.”
56 Gregorius Magnus. Hom. XXX in DIOE: (Migne, P.L., vol. 76, col. 1220): “Pro-
batio dilectionis est exhibitio operis."
57 Job 2 : 4: Satan ait: “Pellem pro pelle, et cuncta quae habet homo dabit pro
anima sua." Cf. Matth. 16:26: "Aut quam dabit homo commutationem pro
anima sua?"
112X. THE FIFTH PARABLE: OF THE TREASURE-HOUSE .
namely water and earth, but two are not seen, namely air and
fire.*5 And Paul: Whosoever believeth therein shall not be con-
founded, for to them that believe not the stone is a stumbling
stone and a rock of scandal.*? And the Gospel: He that believeth
not is already judged.5" The eighth is hope, whereof it is said:
Firm hope maketh the work glad, hope always promiseth a good
end. And Morienus: Hope and hope, and so shalt thou attain
(the goal. And the Prophet: Hope in him all ye congregation
of people,*' in him have our fathers hoped and they were deliv-
ered.?? The ninth is charity, of which the Apostle: Charity bear-
eth all things, Charity dealeth not perversely.** And the Evange-
list: I love them that love me.** He is a friend that loveth at all
times.^* And (king) Alphonsus: This is a true friend, who desert-
eth thee not when all the world faileth thee. And Gregory: 59
The proof of love is the display of the work. And Job: All that a
man hath will he give for his soul," that is for this stone. For he
48 Turba, p. 117: "In these (elements) is a secret concealed, in that two of them
are tangible and display an appearance to the eye, of which the operation
and virtue are known, namely earth and water, but the other two elements are
neither to be seen nor touched."
49 Rom. 9:33: “Behold I lay in Sion a stumbling-stone and a rock of scandal,
and whosoever believeth in him shall not be confounded."
50 John 3: 18: “He that believeth in him is not judged: but he that doth not
believe is already judged . . .”
51 Ps. 61:9: “Trust in him, all ye congregation of people: pour out your hearts
before him."
52 Ps. 21: 5: “In thee have our fathers hoped: they have hoped, and thou hast
delivered them."
53] Cor. 13: 7: "Charity . . . beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all
things . . ." I Cor. 13:4: “Charity envieth not, dealeth not perversely, is not
puffed up."
54 John 14: 21: “He that loveth me shall be loved of my Father: and I will love
him and will manifest myself to him." Prov. 8:17: "I love them that love me."
55 Prov. 17 : 17: “He that is a friend loveth at all times . . ."
56 Gregory the Great, Hom. XXX in Evang. (Migne, P.L., vol. 76, col. 1220):
“The proof of love is the showing forth of the work.”
57 Job 2:4: "And Satan answered, and said: Skin for skin, and all that a man
hath will he give for his life." Cf. Matt. 16: 26: "Or what exchange shall a man
give for his soul?"
113AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
lapide isto. Nam qui parce seminat parce et metet; 5^ et qui
non fuerit socius passionis non erit consolationis. Decimus est
85 benignitas, de qua dicitur: Nescis, quod benignitas (Dei) te ad
poenitentiam ducit. Benignus est iudex, reddere unicuique
iuxta opera sua.9? Nam benignitas reddit bonum pro malo maxi-
mum pro pauco, sed bonitas pro bono reddit bonum, parvum
pro parvo. Undecimus est patientia, de qua dicitur: Si vis vin-
cere, disce pati. Et Apostolus: Per patientiam et consolationem
9o
scripturarum spem habeamus.*! Et Morienes: Qui patientiam
non habet manum ab opere suspendat.® Et Calet Minor: Tria
sunt necessaria, videlicet patientia, mora et aptitudo instru-
mentorum.® Et Apostolus: Patientes estote, quia adventus
95 Domini appropinquabit etc.5* Duodecimus est temperantia, de
qua scribitur, quod omnia nutrit et fovet et in sanitate conservat.
Quamdiu enim elementa sunt in temperantia, anima in corpore
delectatur, cum autem discordant, anima in eo abhorret habi-
tare. Nam temperantia est elementorum mixtio adinvicem, ut
84. compassionis D / (cons.) socius add. D / est om. PL | 85. Dei add. L, Divini-
tatis MP / te om. M, Dei est quae te L / 86, poenitentiam: praemium MPV, / 91.
Et: etc. DRh, om. L | 92. suspendit MPVL | 93. videlicet om. BPVD | 95 etc.
om. MPVL | 98. discordant in eo abhorret anima DBP /
58 II Cor. 9: 6: “Hoc autem dico: qui parce seminat, parce et metet." Cf. Albertus
Magnus, "De lapide philos." Theatr. chem. (1659), IV, p. 845: "Nam quaecunque
seminaverit homo, haec et metet."
59 II Cor. 1:7: "Ut spes nostra firma sit pro vobis: scientes quod sicut socii
passionum estis, sic eritis et consolationis."
60 Rom. 2:4-6: ". . . ignoras, quoniam benignitas Dei ad poenitentiam te ad-
ducit? . . . Dei, qui reddet unicuique secundum opera eius." Cf. Ps. 61 : 18.
61 Rom. 15 : 4: "Quaecumque scripta sunt, ad nostram doctrinam scripta sunt, ut
per patientiam et consolationem Scripturarum spem habeamus."
62 Morienus, "De transmut. metall.,” Art. aurif. (1610), II, p. 21. Cf. "Ros. phil.,”
Bibl. chem., YI, p. 114a. Cf. also Pseudo-Thomas, “Secreta alchimiae," Theatr.
chem. (1659), III, p. 278: ". . . quia secundum Gebrum festinantia a Diabolo est.
Ideo qui patientiam non habet, ab operatione manum suspendat."
63 "Ros. phil," Bibl. chem., II, p. 114a: "Ad hanc tria necessaria sunt, scilicet
patientia, mora, et instrumentorum aptatio." Cf. Pseudo-Thomas, "Secreta al-
chimiae," p. 278: "Quomodo tandem fit substantia una, ut dicit Avicenna: habere
oportet patientiam, moram, et instrumentum." See also Geber, "Summa perfec-
tionis," cap. 12, in De alchemia (1541), p. 17. Supra, p. 18, n. 42.
64 Jac. 5: 8: "Patientes igitur estote et vos, et confirmate corda vestra, quoniam
adventus Domini appropinquavit."
114X. THE FIFTH PARABLE: OF THE TREASURE-HOUSE . ..
who soweth sparingly shall also reap sparingly; 55 and he who is
not a partaker of the sufferings shall not be of the consolation.®®
The tenth is goodness, of which it is said: Knowest thou not that
the goodness (of God) leadeth thee to penance? Good is the judge,
to render to every man according to his works.®° For goodness
returneth good for evil, much for little, but good nature return-
eth good for good, little for little. The eleventh is patience, of
which it is said: If thou wilt conquer, learn to suffer (be patient).
And the Apostle: Through patience and comfort of the Scrip-
tures we may have hope.* And Morienus: He who hath not
patience, let him hold back his hand from the work.9? And Calet
the Less: Three things are necessary, namely patience, delibera-
tion, and skill with the instruments.9? And the Apostle: Be you
patient, for the coming of the Lord is at hand, etc.** The twelfth
is temperance, of which it is written that it nourisheth and cher-
isheth all things and keepeth them in health. For as long as the
elements are in temperance, the soul delighteth in the body, but
when they are in discord, the soul abhorreth to dwell in it. For
temperance is a mixture of the elements one with another, such
58 II Cor. 9: 6: "Now this I say: He who soweth sparingly shall also reap spar-
ingly." Cf. Albert the Great, "De lapide philos.," Theatr. chem. (1659), IV, p. 845:
"For what things soever a man sow, these also shall he reap."
59 II Cor. 1: 7: “That our hope for you may be steadfast: knowing that as you
are partakers of the sufferings, so shall you be also of the consolation."
60 Rom. 2: 4-6: “Knowest thou not, that the benignity of God leadeth thee to
penance? ... the just judgment of God, who will render to every man according
to his works." Cf. Ps. 61 : 13.
61 Rom. 15 : 4: "For what things soever were written were written for our learning,
that through patience and the comfort of the scriptures we might have hope."
62 Morienus, “De transmut. metall.,” Art. aurif. (1610), II, p. 21. Cf. "Ros. phil.,”
in Bibl. chem., II, p. 114a. Cf. also Pseudo-Thomas, “Secreta alchimiae," Theatr.
chem. (1659), III, p. 278: “. . . for according to Geber, all haste is of the devil.
"Therefore he who hath not patience, let him hold back his hand from the work."
63 “Ros. phiL," p. 114a: "For this three things are necessary, namely: patience,
deliberation, and skill with the instruments." Cf. Pseudo-Thomas, "Secreta al-
chimiae," p. 278: "But that at last there may come into being the one substance,
as Avicenna says, you must have patience, deliberation, and the instrument."
See also Geber, "Summa perfectionis," cap. 12, in De alchemia (1541), p. 17.
Supra, p. 18, n. 42.
64 James 5:8: "Be you therefore patient and strengthen your hearts; for the
coming of the Lord is at hand."
115AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
100 calidum cum frigido, siccum cum humido temperetur; et ne
unum excedat aliud philosophi summo studio prohibuerunt
dicentes: Cavete, ne arcanum fugiat,55 cavete, ne acetum in
fumum vertatur,® cavete, ne regem et uxorem suam fugetis
nimio igne,?' cavete omne, quod est extra modum, sed super
105 ignem putredinis hoc est temperantiae ponite quousque sponte
iungantur.955 Tredecimus est spiritualis disciplina sive intel-
lectus, de quo Apostolus: Littera occidit, spiritus autem vivifi-
cat? Renovamini spiritu mentis vestrae et induite (novum)
hominem,” hoc est intellectum subtilem."! Si spiritualiter intel-
lexeritis, spiritum utique cognoscetis. Unusquisque vestrum
110
opus suum probet, utrum sit perficiens an deficiens. Quae
enim homo seminat eadem et metet.'? O quam multi non in-
telligunt dicta sapientum, hi perierunt propter eorum insipien-
tiam, quia caruerunt intellectu spirituali et nihil invenerunt
102. Cavete om. MP | fugiet BLRh, fuget P, fumiget M / 103. cavete om. PM /
fugietis MPVLRh | 108. spiritu: spiritus MPD / novum add. BV / 112. O om.
MPVD | 114. quia: qui PV / caruerunt: non curaverunt V / intellectum spirit-
ualem LV /
65 Turba (ed. Ruska), p. 126: “. . . et cavete, ne arcanum fumiget . . ." (Codex
N. Vadiana 3go: fugiet). Cf. ibid., p. 128: “Observate ergo vas, ne compositum
fugiates es
66 Ibid., p. 126: ". . . et cavete ne acetum in fumum vertatur et pereat."
9 Ibid., p. 138: “. . . requiem eis constituite et cavete ne fugetis eos comburendo
nimio igne. Veneramini regem et suam uxorem et nolite eos comburere."
68"Liber Alphidii," Codex Ashmole 1420, fol. 10: "Deinde super ignem pone
putredinis quousque sponte iungantur et omne corruptum emendatur."
$9 II Cor. 3:6: "Littera enim occidit, Spiritus autem vivificat."—'This is cited by
Olympiodorus (Berthelot, Alch. grecs, II, iv, 41; Textes, p. 94).
70 Ephes. 4 : 23-24: "Renovamini autem spiritu mentis vestrae, et induite novum
hominem .. .”
T1 Cf. Pret. marg. nov., p. 38: “. .. et hoc (fixio et permanentia animae et
spiritus) fit per adiectionem lapidis occulti, qui sensu non comprehenditur, sed
intellectu solum per inspirationem vel revelationem divinam aut per doctrinam
scientis . . . et dixit Alexander: duo sunt in hac arte ordines, scilicet aspectus
oculo intellectusque corde, et hic lapis occultus est qui proprie dicitur donum
Dei, et hic est lapis divinus occultus sine cuius commixtione lapidi annihilatur
alchemia, cum ipse sit ipsa alchemia . . . Et hic lapis divinus est cor et tinctura
auri quaesita a philosophis."
72 Gal. 6: 4: "Opus autem suum probet unusquisque, et sic in semetipso tantum
gloriam habebit . . ."
78 Gal. 6:8: "Quae enim seminaverit homo, haec et metet." Cf. also “Ros. phil,"
P- 107b, Pseudo-Aristotle. Also Pret. marg. nov., pp. 116-17.
116X. THE FIFTH PARABLE: OF THE TREASURE-HOUSE . .. D TG MEE Mo ee eee eee
that the warm is tempered with the cold, the dry with the humid;
and the philosophers have been most careful to insist that one
may not exceed another, saying: Beware lest the secret escape,5
beware lest the vinegar be changed into smoke,99 beware lest ye
put to flight the king and his consort with too-much fire,9" be-
ware of all that is beyond the mean, but place it on the fire of
corruption, that is of temperance, until they are joined of their
own accord.5? The thirteenth is spiritual discipline or under-
standing, of which the Apostle: The letter killeth, but the spirit
quickeneth.*? Be renewed in the spirit of your mind and put on
the new man,” that is, a subtle understanding. If ye understand
in the spirit, ye shall also know the spirit." Let every one of you
prove his own work, whether it be perfect or defective. For
what things a man shall sow, those also shall he reap.'? O how
many understand not the sayings of the wise; these have perished
because of their foolishness, for they lacked spiritual under-
65 Turba (ed. Ruska), p. 126: “. . . and beware, lest the secret thing give forth
smoke." (Codex N. Vadiana 390: "fugiet": escape.) Cf. ibid., p. 128: “Watch there-
fore over the vessel, lest the compound escape . . ."
66 Ibid., p. 126: “. . . and beware lest the vinegar be changed into smoke, and
perish."
67 Ibid., p. 138: “. . . provide rest for them and take care that ye put them not
to flight by burning them with excess of fire. Venerate the king and his consort
and burn them not."
68 "Liber Alphidii," Codex Ashmole 1420, fol. 10: “Then place it upon the fire of
corruption until the spouses are conjoined and everything that is corrupt is
purified."
69 II Cor. 3 : 6: “For the letter killeth, but the spirit quickeneth.” This is cited by
Olympiodorus (Berthelot, Alch. grecs, II, iv, 41; Textes, p. 94). 70 Ephes.AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
100 calidum cum frigido, siccum cum humido temperetur; et ne
unum excedat aliud philosophi summo studio prohibuerunt
dicentes: Cavete, ne arcanum fugiat,55 cavete, ne acetum in
fumum vertatur,® cavete, ne regem et uxorem suam fugetis
nimio igne,?' cavete omne, quod est extra modum, sed super
105 ignem putredinis hoc est temperantiae ponite quousque sponte
iungantur.955 Tredecimus est spiritualis disciplina sive intel-
lectus, de quo Apostolus: Littera occidit, spiritus autem vivifi-
cat? Renovamini spiritu mentis vestrae et induite (novum)
hominem,” hoc est intellectum subtilem."! Si spiritualiter intel-
lexeritis, spiritum utique cognoscetis. Unusquisque vestrum
110
opus suum probet, utrum sit perficiens an deficiens. Quae
enim homo seminat eadem et metet.'? O quam multi non in-
telligunt dicta sapientum, hi perierunt propter eorum insipien-
tiam, quia caruerunt intellectu spirituali et nihil invenerunt
102. Cavete om. MP | fugiet BLRh, fuget P, fumiget M / 103. cavete om. PM /
fugietis MPVLRh | 108. spiritu: spiritus MPD / novum add. BV / 112. O om.
MPVD | 114. quia: qui PV / caruerunt: non curaverunt V / intellectum spirit-
ualem LV /
65 Turba (ed. Ruska), p. 126: “. . . et cavete, ne arcanum fumiget . . ." (Codex
N. Vadiana 3go: fugiet). Cf. ibid., p. 128: “Observate ergo vas, ne compositum
fugiates es
66 Ibid., p. 126: ". . . et cavete ne acetum in fumum vertatur et pereat."
9 Ibid., p. 138: “. . . requiem eis constituite et cavete ne fugetis eos comburendo
nimio igne. Veneramini regem et suam uxorem et nolite eos comburere."
68"Liber Alphidii," Codex Ashmole 1420, fol. 10: "Deinde super ignem pone
putredinis quousque sponte iungantur et omne corruptum emendatur."
$9 II Cor. 3:6: "Littera enim occidit, Spiritus autem vivificat."—'This is cited by
Olympiodorus (Berthelot, Alch. grecs, II, iv, 41; Textes, p. 94).
70 Ephes. 4 : 23-24: "Renovamini autem spiritu mentis vestrae, et induite novum
hominem .. .”
T1 Cf. Pret. marg. nov., p. 38: “. .. et hoc (fixio et permanentia animae et
spiritus) fit per adiectionem lapidis occulti, qui sensu non comprehenditur, sed
intellectu solum per inspirationem vel revelationem divinam aut per doctrinam
scientis . . . et dixit Alexander: duo sunt in hac arte ordines, scilicet aspectus
oculo intellectusque corde, et hic lapis occultus est qui proprie dicitur donum
Dei, et hic est lapis divinus occultus sine cuius commixtione lapidi annihilatur
alchemia, cum ipse sit ipsa alchemia . . . Et hic lapis divinus est cor et tinctura
auri quaesita a philosophis."
72 Gal. 6: 4: "Opus autem suum probet unusquisque, et sic in semetipso tantum
gloriam habebit . . ."
78 Gal. 6:8: "Quae enim seminaverit homo, haec et metet." Cf. also “Ros. phil,"
P- 107b, Pseudo-Aristotle. Also Pret. marg. nov., pp. 116-17.
116

94). 70 Ephes. 4 : 23-24: “And be renewed in the spirit of your mind; and put on the
newman...”
71 Cf. Pret. marg. nov., p. 38: “. . . and this (the fixing and permanence of soul
and spirit) cometh to pass through the addition of the secret stone, which is not
to be comprehended by the senses, but solely through understanding by divine
inspiration or revelation or by the teaching of one that knoweth . . . and Alex-
ander saith: There are two orders in this art, that is, beholding by the eye and
understanding by the heart, and this is the secret stone which is rightly called a
gift of God, and is the divine, secret stone which unless it be commingled with
the stone alchemy is annihilated, since it is itself alchemy . . . and this divine
stone is the heart and the tincture of the gold, which is sought by the philos-
ophers."
72 Gal. 6 : 4: “But let everyone prove his own work: and so shall he have glory in
himself only . . ."
18 Gal. 6: 8: *For what things a man shall sow, those also shall he reap." Cf. also
"Ros. phil," p. 107b, Pseudo-Aristotle. Also Pret. marg. nov., pp. 116-17. iv;AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
praeter laborem. Quartusdecimus lapis est oboedientia, de qua
115
scribitur: Oboedientes estote vestris superioribus ?* sicut
Christus factus fuit oboediens patri usque ad mortem.” Sic
oboedite praeceptis et dictis sapientum, tunc omnia promissa
eorum vobis oboediunt et proveniunt Deo Domino annuente.
Qui habet aures audiendi audiat, quid dicat spiritus doctrinae
120
filiis disciplinae de domo, quam fundavit sapientia super quat-
tuordecim lapides angulares,? quam vigintiquattuor seniores
clavibus regni coelorum reserant et quam Senior in prologo
libri sui declaravit: Ubi ponit quod (est) aquila in tecto et
125 diversarum in lateribus imagines proprietatum."* Et Alphidius
in libro suo dicit de domo thesaurizaria, quam docet quattuor
clavibus posse reserari, quae sunt quattuor elementa."*
123. reservant MP / 124. dicit seu ponit L / est conj. / 125. et etc. Alph. MPB, Et
om. V / 126. thesaurorum M, thesaurariorum PBV, thesaurisariaram L, thesaur-
archaD / dicit BDLRh |
74 Hebr. 13 : 17: "Oboedite praepositis vestris et subiacete eis . . ."
75 Phil. 2: 8: "Humiliavit semetipsum, factus oboediens usque ad mortem, mortem
autem crucis . . ."
76 Roman Missal, Epistle for 14th Sunday after Pentecost: "Duodecim fructus
Spiritus." (Gal. 5 : 16-24.)
77 Cf. Senior, De chemia, pp. 3-4: "Intravi . . . in domum quandam subter-
raneam . . . et vidi in tecto imagines novem aquilarum pictas . . . Et in pariete
domus, a dextris et a sinistris intrantis, imagines hominum, stantium, pro ut pos-
sent esse perfectiores, et pulchriores, induti diversis vestimentis et coloribus . . ."
Cf. p. 109: "Est enim lapis Aquilae . . ."
78 Codex Ashmole 1420, fol. 22-24. Larger fragments of the teachings of Alphidius
concerning the treasure-house are also to be found in “Cons. coniug.," Ars. chem.,
pp. 108ff.
118X. THE FIFTH PARABLE: OF THE TREASURE-HOUSE ..
standing and found nothing but toil. The fourteenth stone is
obedience, of which it is written: Obey your superiors,” as Christ
was made obedient to the Father even unto death.” So obey the
precepts and sayings of the wise, then all things promised by them
will obey you and come to fruition, God the Lord willing. He
that hath ears to hear, let him hear what the spirit of the doctrine
saith to the sons of the discipline concerning the house which
wisdom hath founded on fourteen cornerstones,”® which the four
and twenty elders open with the keys of the kingdom of heaven,
and of which Senior in the prologue of his book declared: Where
he placed what (is) the eagle on the roof and the images of the
various properties on the sides. And Alphidius in his book
speaketh of the treasure house, which he teacheth can be opened
by four keys, which are the four elements.78
74 Hebr. 13 : 17: "Obey your prelates and be subject to them."
*5 Phil. 2:8: "He humbled himself, becoming obedient unto death, even to the
death of the cross."
76 Cf. Roman Missal, Epistle for 14th Sunday after Pentecost: “The twelve fruits
of the spirit: (charity, joy, peace, patience, benignity, goodness, longanimity, mild-
ness, faith, modesty, continency, chastity)” (Gal. 5 : 16-24).
77 Cf. Senior, De chemia, pp. 3-4: "I entered . . . into a certain house under the
earth . . . and I saw on its roof pictures of nine eagles . . . and on the wall of the
house, both on the right and on the left of the entrance, images of men, stand-
ing, that they might be more perfect and more beautiful, clothed in garments of
divers colours . . .” Cf. p. 109: "For it is the stone of the eagle . . ."
78 Codex Ashmole 1420, fol. 22-24. Larger fragments of the teaching of Alphidius
concerning the treasure-house are also to be found in "Cons. coniug.," Ars chem.,
pp. 108ff.
119XI
PARABOLA SEXTA DE COELO ET MUNDO
ET SITIBUS ELEMENTORUM
Qui de terra est, de terra loquitur, qui de coelo venit super
omnes est.! Hic iam etiam locatur terra pro principio elemen-
torum, coeli vero pro tribus superioribus denotantur (princi-
piis), quare libet pauca de terra et de coelo perorare, cum ipsum
sit principium et mater aliorum elementorum testante Propheta:
Initio tu Domine terram fundasti et opera manuum tuarum
sunt coeli? id est aqua, aer et ignis. Nam a terra elementa mori-
10 endo separantur et ad eam vivificando revertuntur, quia a quo res
habet componi, in illud habet resolvi? testante sacro eloquio:
Homo cinis est et in cinerem revertetur.* Talem cinerem prae-
ceperunt philosophi commisceri aqua permanente, quae est fer-
mentum auri, et aurum eorum est corpus scilicet terra, quod
w5 vocavit Aristoteles coagulum, cum sit coagulans aquam, quae est
terra sanctae promissionis, in quam iussit Hermes filium suum
4. pro primum P, corr. P, / 5. principiis add. D / 6. libent P, libentur V |
procreare PV, parare M / 7. principium: primum, L, om. B / 9. et om. LBRR [ 11.
compositionem P, composi M /
1 Joh. 3 : 31: "Qui desursum venit, super omnes est. Qui est de terra, de terra est,
et de terra loquitur. Qui de caelo venit, super omnes est."
2 Ps. 101 : 26-27: "Initio tu, Domine, terram fundasti, et opera manuum tuarum
sunt coeli; ipsi peribunt, tu autem permanes.”
3 Cf. Morienus Romanus: “De transmut. metall.,” Art. aurif. (1610), Il, p. 19:
"Hermes quoque ait: Terra est mater elementorum: de terra procedunt et ad ter-
ram revertuntur." Cf. also Pret. marg. nov., p. 107: "Hermes: terra est elementum
et de terra omnia facta sunt et ad terram convertuntur. Moyses: terra est mater
elementorum, omnia de terra procedunt et ad terram convertuntur. Sic recitat
Morienus: Haec autem terra est, corpus et fermentum . . .”
4Gen. 3:19: ". . . quia pulvis es, et in pulverem reverteris . . .” Ecclus. 17 : 31:
". . . et omnes homines terra et cinis . . ." Job 34, 15: "Deficiet omnis caro
simul, et homo in cinerem revertetur."
5 Cf. Exod. 13 : 5. Cf. Roman Missal, Offertory for Thursday in Easter Week,
120XI
THE SIXTH PARABLE: OF HEAVEN AND EARTH
AND THE ARRANGEMENT OF THE ELEMENTS
He that is of the earth, of the earth he speaketh, he that cometh
from heaven is above all.! Now here also is the earth represented
as the principle of the elements, but the heavens stand for the
three higher (principles), wherefore a little ought to be said of
earth and heaven, for earth is the principle and mother of the
other elements, as the Prophet beareth witness: In the beginning,
O Lord, thou didst found the earth, and the heavens are the
works of thy hands,? that is, water, air, and fire. For from the earth
are the elements separated by dying, and to it do they return by
quickening, for what a thing is composed of, into that must it
be resolved,? as the holy word testifieth: Man is ashes and to
their ashes shall he return.* Such ashes did the philosophers or-
dain to be mixed with the permanent water, which is the ferment
of gold, and their gold is the body, that is the earth, which Aris-
totle called the coagulant, since it coagulateth water. It is the earth
of the Promised Land,5 wherein Hermes commanded his son to
1John g: 31: "He that cometh from above is above all. He that is of the earth,
of the earth he is, and of the earth he speaketh. He that cometh from heaven is
above all."
2 Ps. 101 : 26-27: "In the beginning, O Lord, thou foundedst the earth, and the
heavens are the works of thy hands. They shall perish but thou remainest.”
3 Cf. Morienus Romanus, “De transmut. metall," Art. aurif. (1610), IL, p. 19:
“Hermes also saith: Earth is the mother of the elements; from earth they come and
to earth they return." Cf. also Pret. marg. nov., p. 107: "Hermes: The earth is an
element, and of the earth are all things made, and into earth are they converted.
Moses: The earth is the mother of the elements, all things came forth from earth
and are turned again to earth. So doth Morienus say: But this earth is a body and a
ferment e ”
4Gen. 3:19: "Dust thou art, and into dust shalt thou return.” Ecclus. 17 : 31:
* ..and all men are earth and ashes.” Job 34:15: "All flesh shall perish to-
gether; and man shall return into ashes."
6 Cf. Exod. 13:5. Cf. Roman Missal, Offertory for Thursday in Faster Week.
121AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
seminare aurum, ut pluvia viva ascenderet de eo 7 et aqua ipsum
calefaciens, ut Senior dicit: Cumque voluerint extrahere hanc
aquam divinam, quae est ignis, calefaciunt igne suo, qui est
aqua, quem mensurati sunt usque in finem et occultaverunt
20
propter insipientiam fatuorum.? Et super hoc iuraverunt omnes
philosophi, ne in aliquo loco scriptotenus ponerent lucide, sed
attribuerunt glorioso Deo, ut revelaret cui vult et prohiberet a
quo vult? quia in ipso est magnum sophisma et obscuritas
25 sapientum. Cumque calor illius ignis ipsi terrae advenerit, solvi-
tur et fit aqua torrens id est vaporans, deinde revertitur ad for-
mam suam priorem terrestrem.!^ Ideo per aquam terra mota est
14. est: in M /17. ut: et VD / de eo et aqua: de ipsa aqua MPY / ut: et etc. MP,
om. V [ 19. quam DML, quem M, / 21. propter insipientes MPV / 22. in aliquo
loco om. MPV | 23. tribuunt BDLRh | revelet DLRh | voluerit . . . velit DLRh /
prohibeat MB / 25. solvetur LRh /
€ Cf. Senior, De chemia, pp. 34-35: "Secundo quod vocat terram benedictam,
sitientem, et cinerem, qui est fermentum. Auri aqua est fermentum, et corpora
sunt terra eorum, et fermentum huius aquae divinae, est cinis, qui est fermentum
fermenti. Quod vocavit Maria sapiens, in quodam loco librorum suorum,
Coagulum, cum sit coagulans aquam illorum, in terra eorum, quae est corpus
secundum . .. Et de hoc cinere, et de hoc corpore . . . dixit Hermes filio suo:
Semina aurum in terra alba foliata." P. 40: “Nominaverunt . . . cinerem .. . et
aquam mundam, quia mundata est a tenebris animae." Cf. Pseudo-Aristotle,
""Tractatulus," Art. aurif. (1610), I, p. 238: '"Terram dealbate, et igne cito sublimate,
quousque exeat ex ipsa spiritus quem in ea invenies, qui dicitur avis Hermetis. Hunc cinerem ne vilipendas, quoniam ipse est diadema cordis tui, et permanentium
cinis, corona victoriae et coagulum lactis. . . .XI
THE SIXTH PARABLE: OF HEAVEN AND EARTH
AND THE ARRANGEMENT OF THE ELEMENTS
He that is of the earth, of the earth he speaketh, he that cometh
from heaven is above all.! Now here also is the earth represented
as the principle of the elements, but the heavens stand for the
three higher (principles), wherefore a little ought to be said of
earth and heaven, for earth is the principle and mother of the
other elements, as the Prophet beareth witness: In the beginning,
O Lord, thou didst found the earth, and the heavens are the
works of thy hands,? that is, water, air, and fire. For from the earth
are the elements separated by dying, and to it do they return by
quickening, for what a thing is composed of, into that must it
be resolved,? as the holy word testifieth: Man is ashes and to
their ashes shall he return.* Such ashes did the philosophers or-
dain to be mixed with the permanent water, which is the ferment
of gold, and their gold is the body, that is the earth, which Aris-
totle called the coagulant, since it coagulateth water. It is the earth
of the Promised Land,5 wherein Hermes commanded his son to
1John g: 31: "He that cometh from above is above all. He that is of the earth,
of the earth he is, and of the earth he speaketh. He that cometh from heaven is
above all."
2 Ps. 101 : 26-27: "In the beginning, O Lord, thou foundedst the earth, and the
heavens are the works of thy hands. They shall perish but thou remainest.”
3 Cf. Morienus Romanus, “De transmut. metall," Art. aurif. (1610), IL, p. 19:
“Hermes also saith: Earth is the mother of the elements; from earth they come and
to earth they return." Cf. also Pret. marg. nov., p. 107: "Hermes: The earth is an
element, and of the earth are all things made, and into earth are they converted.
Moses: The earth is the mother of the elements, all things came forth from earth
and are turned again to earth. So doth Morienus say: But this earth is a body and a
ferment e ”
4Gen. 3:19: "Dust thou art, and into dust shalt thou return.” Ecclus. 17 : 31:
* ..and all men are earth and ashes.” Job 34:15: "All flesh shall perish to-
gether; and man shall return into ashes."
6 Cf. Exod. 13:5. Cf. Roman Missal, Offertory for Thursday in Faster Week.
121

. . Hic est ergo cinis extractus a cinere
et genitum philosophorum, terra alba foliata in qua seminandum est aurum. Unde
dicit Hermes: Extrahe a radio suam umbram et faecem, quae ipsum interficit, et
seminate aurum in terra alba foliata . . ." See infra, p. 344, n. 13. T Cf. Senior, De chemia, p. 108: "Et de illo cinere ascendit pluvia viva, et
vivificans, quae descendit de coelo . . ." Cf. also pp. 65-66 and p. 38. 8Senior, De chemia, pp. 67-68: "Cumque volunt illa(m) extrahere, calefaciunt
cum igne suo, quem mensurati sunt illi, et occultaverunt . . ."
9 Ibid., p. 92: “. . . et hoc est secretum super quo iuraverunt, quod non indicarent
in aliquo libro. Nec aliquis eorum declaravit hoc, et attribuerunt illud deo
glorioso, ut inspiraret illud cui vellet, et prohibeatur a quo vellet . . ." Cf. also
“Cons. coniug.," Ars chem., p. 49 and “De arte chem.,” Art. aurif. (1610), I, p. 374. 10 Cf. "Cons. coniug.,” p. 68: ". . . cum invenit illam (scil. aquam congelatam)
calor illius ignis, solvitur, et fit aqua currens. Cum autem praeparata fuerit
revertitur ad formam suam priorem, et congelatur . . .”
122XI. THE SIXTH PARABLE: OF HEAVEN AND EARTH ... sow gold,® that living rains might ascend from it, and water
which warmeth it, as Senior saith: And when they desire to ex-
tract this divine water, which is fire, they warm it with their fire,
which is water, which they have measured unto the end and have
hidden on account of the unwisdom of fools.’ And of this have all
the philosophers sworn, that they would nowhere set it forth
clearly in writing, but they have left it to the glorious God, to re-
veal it to whom he will and withhold it from whom he will? for in
him is great cunning and the secrecy of the wise. And when the
heat of that fire reacheth the earth itself, the earth is dissolved and
becometh a boiling, that is an evaporated water, and afterwards
returneth to its own former earthly form.!? 'T'herefore by water is
6 Cf. Senior, De chemia, pp. 34-35: "Secondly, because he calls the blessed and
thirsty earth the ash, which is the ferment. The water of gold is the ferment, and
the bodies [minerals] are their earth, and the ferment of this divine water is the
ash, which is the ferment of the ferment. And Maria the Wise, in a certain place
in her books, calls this the Coagulant, since it coagulates the water of those
[bodies], in their earth, which is the second body. And of this ash and of this
body . . . said Hermes to his son: Sow the gold in the white foliated earth." P. 40:
“They named . . . the ash . . . also clear water, for it is purified from the dark-
nesses of the soul." Cf. Pseudo-Aristotle, '"Tractatulus," Art. aurif. (1610), I, p. 238:
“Whiten the earth, and sublime it forthwith with fire, until a spirit go forth
from it which thou shalt find in it, which is called Hermes' bird. Despise not this
ash, for it is the diadem of thy heart, and the ash of things that endure, the crown
of victory and the coagulant of milk. . . .. . Hic est ergo cinis extractus a cinere
et genitum philosophorum, terra alba foliata in qua seminandum est aurum. Unde
dicit Hermes: Extrahe a radio suam umbram et faecem, quae ipsum interficit, et
seminate aurum in terra alba foliata . . ." See infra, p. 344, n. 13. T Cf. Senior, De chemia, p. 108: "Et de illo cinere ascendit pluvia viva, et
vivificans, quae descendit de coelo . . ." Cf. also pp. 65-66 and p. 38. 8Senior, De chemia, pp. 67-68: "Cumque volunt illa(m) extrahere, calefaciunt
cum igne suo, quem mensurati sunt illi, et occultaverunt . . ."
9 Ibid., p. 92: “. . . et hoc est secretum super quo iuraverunt, quod non indicarent
in aliquo libro. Nec aliquis eorum declaravit hoc, et attribuerunt illud deo
glorioso, ut inspiraret illud cui vellet, et prohibeatur a quo vellet . . ." Cf. also
“Cons. coniug.," Ars chem., p. 49 and “De arte chem.,” Art. aurif. (1610), I, p. 374. 10 Cf. "Cons. coniug.,” p. 68: ". . . cum invenit illam (scil. aquam congelatam)
calor illius ignis, solvitur, et fit aqua currens. Cum autem praeparata fuerit
revertitur ad formam suam priorem, et congelatur . . .”
122

. . This therefore is the ash extracted
from ashes and the thing begotten of the philosophers, the white foliated earth
in which the gold is to be sown. Wherefore saith Hermes: Extract from the ray
its shadow and the sediment which slayeth it, and sow the gold in the white
foliated earth . . .” See infra, p. 344, n. 13. 7 Senior, De chemia, p. 108: “And from the ash there goeth up a living and quick-
ening rain, which cometh down from heaven . . ." See also pp. 65-66 and p. 38. 8Senior, De chemia, pp. 67-68: "When they desire to extract that [congealed
water] they warm it with their [or its] fire, which they have measured out and
have hidden . . .”
9 Ibid., p. 92: “. . . and this is the secret concerning which they swore that they
would not reveal it in any book, and none of them has made it known, and they
left it to the glorious God to inspire it into whom he would and to withhold it
from whom he would . . ." See also “Cons. coniug.,” Ars chem., p. 49, and “De
arte chem.,” Art. aurif. (1610), I, p. 374. 10 Cf. “Cons. coniug.,” p. 68: “. . . when the heat of that fire reacheth it [the
congealed water], it is loosened and becometh running water. But when it hath
been prepared, it returneth to its previous form, and is congealed. . . .”
123AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
et coeli distillaverunt super eam™ et melliflui facti sunt per
totum mundum ?? et enarrant gloriam eius.1? Haec enim gloria
30 soli intelligenti est cognita, quomodo de terra facti sunt coeli,™
pro eo terra in aeternum permanet et coeli fundantur supra
eam, testante Propheta: Qui fundasti terram super stabilitatem
suam, non inclinabitur in saeculum saeculi. Abyssus vestimen-
tum eius, super ipsam stabunt aqua, aer, ignis,!? nec non volucres
35 coeli habitabunt in ea, rigantes ipsam de superioribus elementis,
ut de fructu operum ipsorum satiaretur, ut quia in centrum
terrae septem planetae radicaverunt et virtutes ibi reliquerunt,
unde in terra est aqua germinans diversa genera colorum et
fructuum et educens panem et vinum laetificans cor hominis
nec non producens foenum iumentis et herbam servituti homi-
40
num.!$ Haec inquam terra fecit lunam in tempore suo," deinde
ortus est sol !? valde mane una sabbatorum ?? post tenebras, quas
29. et: ut BDLRh | 30. quomodo Ofio MP, quoniam DL / 33. declinabitur MPV /
34. ipsum RAL / et (ignis) add. DL / 36. ut: et BV / ipsorum: suorum DLRh /
satiaretur conj., satiabitur Codd. / ut quia: utique B / 41. In quam terram MPV /
facit MPVL / 42. uno RAD |
11 Ps.65 : g: “Terra mota est, etenim caeli distillaverunt a facie Dei Sinai,a facie Dei
Israel." Ps. 96: 4-5: . . . vidit et commota est terra. Montes sicut cera fluxerunt
a facie Domini . . ." Cf. Isa. 64 : 1.
12 Roman Breviary, Christmas Day, Second Responsory at Mattins: “. . . hodie
per totum mundum melliflui facti sunt caeli."
13 Ps. 18: 2: "Caeli enarrant gloriam Dei . . ."
14 Cf. Prov. 8 : 22-35.
15 Ps. 103 : 5-6: "Qui fundasti terram super stabilitatem suam, non inclinabitur
in saeculum saeculi. Abyssus sicut vestimentum amictus eius, super montes stabunt
aquae."
16 Ps. 103: 12-14: "Super ea volucres coeli habitabunt; de medio petrarum
dabunt voces. Rigans montes de superioribus suis: de fructu operum tuorum
satiabitur terra, producens foenum iumentis, et herbam servituti hominum. Ut
educas panem de terra, et vinum laetificet cor hominis."
17 Ps. 103 : 19: "Fecit lunam in tempora, sol cognovit occasum suum."
18 Ps. 103 : 22: "Ortus est sol, et congregati sunt (scil. bestiae), et in cubilibus suis
collocabuntur." Cf. Pret. marg. nov., p. 112: "Ex quibus omnibus liquide patet
quomodo sol et luna sunt eiusdem naturae et quod luna praecedit solem et
ordinatur ad ipsum et quomodo sol est occultus in luna et quomodo de ventre
lunae sol extrahitur. Ideo dixit Senior quod sol est oriens in luna crescente."
19 Marc. 16: 1-2: "Maria Magdalene et Maria Jacobi et Salome emerunt aromata.
. . Et valde mane una sabbatorum veniunt ad monumentum, orto iam sole."
124XI. THE SIXTH PARABLE: OF HEAVEN AND EARTH . ..
the earth moved and the heavens are poured out upon it,!! and
they flow as if with honey throughout all the world !? and tell its
glory. For this glory is known only to him who hath under-
standing, how of the earth the heavens were made,'4 and there-
fore the earth remaineth for ever and the heavens are founded
upon it, as the Prophet beareth witness: For thou hast founded
the earth upon its own bases, it shall not be moved for ever and
ever. The deep is its clothing, above it shall stand water, air, fire,!5
and the birds of the air shall dwell therein, watering it from the
upper elements, that it may be filled with the fruit of their works,
because in the centre of the earth the seven planets took root,
and left their virtues there, wherefore in the earth is water ger-
minating divers kinds of colours and fruits and producing bread
and wine that cheereth the heart of man, and also bringing forth
grass for cattle and herb for the service of men.!* This earth, I
say, made the moon in its season," then the sun arose,? very
early in the morning the first day of the week,!? after the dark-
11 Ps. 67 : 9: “The earth was moved, and the heavens dropped at the presence of
the God of Sina, at the presence of the God of Israel." Ps. 96 : 4-5: “. . . the earth
saw and trembled. The mountains melted like wax, at the presence of the
Lord... GE I52-617: 3.
1?Roman Breviary, Christmas Day, Second Responsory at Mattins: “Today
throughout the whole world the heavens shed down honey."
13 Ps. 18:2: "The heavens show forth the glory of God . . ."
14 Cf. Prov. 8 : 22-95.
15 Ps. 108 : 5-6: "Who hast founded the earth upon its own bases, it shall not be
moved for ever and ever. The deep like a garment is its clothing; above the moun-
tains shall the waters stand."
16 Ps. 103 : 12-14: "Over them [the waters] the birds of the air shall dwell: from
the midst of the rocks they shall give forth their voice. Thou waterest the hills
from thy upper rooms: the earth shall be filled with the fruit of thy works,
bringing forth grass for cattle, and herb for the service of men. That thou mayst
bring bread out of the earth and that wine may cheer the heart of man."
17 Ps. 103 : 19: "He made the moon for seasons: the sun knoweth his going down."
18 Ps. 103 : 22: "The sun ariseth, and they (the beasts) are gathered together: and
they shall lie down in their dens." Cf. Pret. marg. nov., p. 112: "From all this it
appeareth clearly how the sun and the moon are of the same nature and that the
moon goeth before the sun and is ordered towards it, and how the sun is hidden
in the moon and how the sun is extracted from the body of the moon. Therefore
saith Senior, that the sun riseth in the waxing moon."
219 Mark 16: 1-2: “Mary Magdalen and Mary the mother of James and Salome
brought sweet spices. . . . And very early in the morning the first day of the
week they came to the sepulchre, the sun being now risen."
125AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
posuisti ante ortum solis in ipsa et facta est (nox). In ipsa enim
pertransibunt omnes bestiae silvae,? quia terminum posuisti
45 eis, quem non transgredientur ?! usque ad album, sed ordina-
tione sua perseverant [dies] usque ad rubeum, quia omnia servi-
unt terrae ?? et dies annorum eius sunt septuaginta anni ?* in-
gredientes super ipsam, quia est portans omnia verbo divinitatis
suae ?* ut in libro Turbae philosophorum scribitur: Terra, cum
50 sit ponderosa, omnia suffert,?*5 quoniam est fundamentum totius
coeli, pro eo quod ipsa apparuit arida in elementorum separa-
tione. Deinde via est in mari rubro sine impedimento,?* quo-
niam hoc mare magnum et spatiosum ?" percussit petram et
effluxerunt aquae (metallinae), deinde abierunt in sicco flu-
55 mina,?* quae laetificant civitatem Dei,? cum hoc mortale in-
duerit immortalitatem et corruptio vivorum incorruptelam.
Tunc fiet sermo utique qui scriptus est: Absorpta est mors in
victoria, ubi est o mors victoria tua? 2° Ubi abundavit delictum
498. nox conj. | 44. quia: qua MPB /4 6. dies add. BDLRh | rubrum P, album
B | 48. verba MP | 51-52. praeparatione PV / 54. fluxerunt BPV / metallinae add.
RRhDL / 57. Abscondita MPV / in om. MPVRhDL | 58. mortis victoria D, haec
mors victoria L / o om. MPVD | tua om. MP |
20 Ps. 103 : 20: "Posuisti tenebras, et facta est nox; in ipsa pertransibunt omnes
bestiae silvae . . ."
21Ps. 103:9: "... terminum posuisti, quem non transgredientur . .
22 Ps. 118: g1: "Ordinatione tua perseverat dies, quoniam omnia serviunt tibi."
23 Ps. 89 : 10: "Dies annorum nostrorum in ipsis septuaginta anni."
24 Hebr. 1: 8: "Filio . . . qui cum sit splendor gloriae, et figura substantiae eius,
portansque omnia verbo virtutis suae . . .”
25 Turba (ed. Ruska), p. 112: “. . . terra autem cum sit ponderosa et spissa, fert
omnia, quae regit ignis."
26 Sap. 19: 7: "Nam nubes castra eorum obumbrabat, et ex aqua, quae ante erat,
terra arida apparuit, et in mari rubro via sine impedimento, et campus germinans
de profundo nimio."
27 Ps. 103 : 25: "Hoc mare magnum et spatiosum manibus."
28 Ps. 104 : 41: "Dirupit petram, et fluxerunt aquae, abierunt in sicco flumina . . ."
Isa. 48 : 21: "et scidit petram, et fluxerunt aquae."
29 Ps. 45: 5: "Fluminis impetus laetificat civitatem Dei.”
30I Cor. 15:53-55: "Oportet enim corruptibile hoc induere incorruptionem, et
mortale hoc induere immortalitatem. Cum autem mortale hoc induerit immor-
talitatem, tunc fiet sermo, qui scriptus est: Absorpta est mors in victoria. Ubi
est, mors, victoria tua?"
126XI. THE SIXTH PARABLE: OF HEAVEN AND EARTH ...
ness, which thou hast appointed therein before sunrise, and it
is (night). For in it shall all the beasts of the wood go about,”° for
thou hast set them a bound which they shall not pass 74 until the
whitening, but in their order [the days] go on even until the red-
dening, for all things serve the earth,?? and the days of its years
are threescore and ten years?? passing over it, because it up-
holdeth all things by the word of its godhead,?* as in the T'urba
philosophorum it is written: The earth, since it is heavy, beareth
all things,?? for it is the foundation of the whole heaven, because
it appeared dry at the separation of the elements. Therefore in
the Red Sea there was a way without hindrance,” since this great
and wide sea ?* smote the rock and the (metallic) waters flowed
forth. Then the rivers disappeared in dry land,?* which make the
city of God joyful; ?? when this mortal shall put on immortality,
and the corruption of the living shall put on incorruption, then
indeed shall that word come to pass which is written, Death is
swallowed up in victory. O death, where is thy victory? ?*? Where
20 Ps. 103 : 20: "Thou hast appointed darkness, and it is night: in it shall all the
beasts of the woods go about . . ."
21 Ps. 103: 9: “. . . thou hast set a bound which they shall not pass over . . .
22 Ps. 118: g1: “By thy ordinance the day goeth on: for all things serve thee."
23 Ps. 89 : 10: ““The days of our years in them are three score and ten years.”
24 Hebr. 1:3: “By his Son . . . who being the brightness of his glory and the
figure of his substance and upholding all things by the word of his power . . ."
25 Turba (ed. Ruska), p. 112: “. . . but the earth, since it is heavy and dense,
beareth all things which the fire ruleth."
26 Wisd. 19: 7: “For a cloud overshadowed their camp, and where water was
before, dry land appeared, and in the Red Sea a way without hindrance, and out
of the great deep a springing field."
27 Ps. 103 : 25: "This great sea which stretcheth wide its arms.”
28 Ps. 104 : 41: "He opened the rock, and waters flowed; rivers ran down in the
dry land." Isa. 48: 21: “. . . and he clove a rock, and the waters gushed out.”
29 Ps. 45 : 5: “The stream of the river maketh the city of God joyful.”
301 Cor. 15:53-55: "For this corruptible must put on incorruption: and this
mortal must put on immortality. And when this mortal hath put on immortality,
then shall come to pass the saying that is written: Death is swallowed up in vic-
tory. O death, where is thy victory? O death, where is thy sting?"
127AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
tuum, ibi (nunc) superabundat et gratia.?! Nam sicut in Adam
60 omnes moriuntur, ita et in Christo omnes [homines] vivifica-
buntur,? quoniam quidem per hominem mors et per [Jesum]
ipsum resurrectio mortuorum advenit. Nam primus Adam et
filii eius de elementis corruptibilibus exordium sumpserunt,
ideo necesse fuit compositum corrumpi, secundus vero Adam,
65 qui dicitur homo philosophicus de puris elementis in aeterni-
tatem transmeavit. Ideo quod ex simplici et pura essentia con- *
stat, in aeternum manet.?* Ut Senior dicit: Est unum, quod
numquam moritur, quoniam augmentatione perpetua perseve-
rat,?> cum corpus glorificatum fuerit in resurrectione novissima
70 mortuorum, unde fides testatur carnis resurrectionem et vitam
aeternam post mortem.?* ‘Tunc Adam secundus dicit priori et
filiis suis: Venite benedicti patris mei, percipite regnum aeter-
num, quod vobis paratum est ab origine operationis,?? et come-
59. nunc add. MP / abundat RhL / et om. MPV | 60. et om. PL / et in: de M /
homines add. MP/ 61. ipsum: Jesum MPVRh / 66. quod: quia D, om. M / 67.
unum: vivum RAL / 68. augmentatio MPV / 7o. unde: ut RhLD | 73. reparationis
VPD, temperationis M, mundi scil. operationis B /
31 Rom. 5:20: ". . . Ubi autem abundavit delictum, superabundavit gratia.”
32] Cor. 15:22: "Et sicut in Adam omnes moriuntur, ita et in Christo omnes
vivificabuntur."
331 Cor. 15:21: "Quoniam quidem per hominem mors, et per hominem resur-
rectio mortuorum."
34 Cf. I Cor. 15:45-47: "Factus est primus homo Adam in animam viventem,
novissimus Adam in spiritum vivificantem. . . . Primus homo de terra, terrenus:
secundus homo de coelo, coelestis." Cf. Turba, pp. 115-16: "Ex quatuor autem
elementis pater noster Adam et filii eius, (scil.) ex igne, aere, aqua simul et terra
creati sunt. Intelligite, omnes sapientes, quod omne, quod ex una creavit Deus
essentia, non moritur usque in diem iudicii. Mortis enim definitio est compositi
disiunctio . . . ex duobus autem, tribus vel quatuor unumquodque compositum
separari necesse est, quod est mors."
35 Senior, De chemia, pp. 71—72: "Item unum quod non moritur, quam diu fuerit
mundus, et vivificat quodlibet mortuum." Cf. also “Cons. coniug.,” p. 66.
36 Apost. Creed: "Et exspecto resurrectionem mortuorum. Et vitam venturi
saeculi. Amen."
31 Matth. 25: 34: “Tune dicet rex his, qui a dextris eius erunt: Venite benedicti
Patris mei, possidete paratum vobis regnum a constitutione mundi." Cited as
concluding sentence in Pseudo-Aristotle, “De perfecto magisterio," Theatr. chem.
(1659), III, p. 127.
128XI. THE SIXTH PARABLE: OF HEAVEN AND EARTH .
thy sin abounded, there (now) grace doth more abound.?* For
as in Adam all die, so also in Christ all [men] shall be made alive.??
For by a man indeed came death, and by [Jesus] himself the
resurrection of the dead. For the first Adam and his sons
took their beginning from the corruptible elements, and there-
fore it was needful that the composed should be corrupted, but
the second Adam, who is called the philosophic man, from pure
elements entered into eternity. Therefore what is composed of
simple and pure essence, remaineth for ever.?* As Senior saith:
There is One thing, that never dieth, for it continueth by per-
petual increase, when the body shall be glorified in the final
resurrection of the dead, wherefore the Creed beareth witness to
the resurrection of the flesh and eternal life after death.?9 Then
saith the second Adam to the first and to his sons: Come, ye
blessed of my Father, possess you the eternal kingdom prepared
for you from the beginning of the Work,*7 and eat my bread and
81 Rom. 5 : 20: "And where sin abounded, grace did more abound."
$2I Cor. 15:22: "And as in Adam all die, so also in Christ shall all be made
alive."
93] Cor. 15:21: "For by a man came death, and by a man the resurrection of
the dead."
841 Cor. 15: 45-47: “The first man Adam was made into a living soul: the last
Adam into a quickening spirit . . . The first man was of the earth, earthly; the
second man from heaven, heavenly." Cf. Turba, pp. 115-16: "But out of the
four elements was our father Adam and his sons created, that is, out of fire, air,
water, and earth. Understand, all ye who are wise, that all which God created
from one essence dieth not until doomsday. For death is defined as the disjunction
of the composite . . . each thing that is composed out of two, three, or four must
needs be separated, and that is death."
35 Senior, De chemia, pp. 71-72: "Moreover there is one thing which dieth not,
so long as the world endureth, and it bringeth to life all that is dead." Cf. also
“Cons. coniug.,” p. 66.
26 Apostles’ Creed: "And 1 expect the resurrection of the dead, and the life of the
world to come. Amen."
37 Matt. 25:34: “Then shall the king say to them that be on his right hand:
Come, ye blessed of my Father, possess you the kingdom prepared for you from
the foundation of the world." Cited as concluding sentence in Pseudo-Aristotle,
“De perfecto magisterio," Theatr. chem. (1659), Ill, p. 127.
129AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
dite panem meum et bibite vinum, quod miscui vobis,?? quia
parata sunt vobis omnia. Qui habet aures audiendi audiat, quid
75
dicat spiritus doctrinae filiis disciplinae de Adam terreno et
Adam coelesti, quod philosophi insinuant his verbis: Quando
habueris aquam de terra, aerem de aqua, ignem de aere, terram
de igne, tunc plene habes artem (nostram) et perfecte (etc.).??
74. Vobis om. RhL | 76. de om. MPV | 77. innuunt MP / 79. nostram add. DLRh |
et perfecte om. MPVDB | etc. add. Rh. |
88 Prov. 9 : 4-5: "Et insipientibus locuta est (Sapientia): Venite, comedite panem
meum, et bibite vinum, quod miscui vobis."
89 Cf. Pseudo-Aristotle, Secreta secretorum (1528), fol. xxvii, "De proprietatibus ori-
ginalium lapidum": "Quum igitur habueris aquam de aere ct aerem ex igne et
ignem ex terra, tunc habebis plene artem." Cf. "Ros. phil," p. 101b: “De istis
quatuor elementis dicit Aristoteles in libro de regimine principiorum: Cum
habueris aquam ex aere, et aerem ex igne, et ignem ex terra, tunc plenam
habebis artem Philosophiae: et hic est finis primae compositionis."
190XI. THE SIXTH PARABLE: OF HEAVEN AND EARTH ...
drink the wine which I have mingled for you,?5 for all things are
made ready for you. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear what
the spirit of the doctrine saith to the sons of the discipline con-
cerning the earthly and the heavenly Adam, which the philoso-
phers treat of in these words: When thou hast water from earth,
air from water, fire from air, earth from fire, then shalt thou fully
and perfectly possess (our) art (etc.).5?
88 Prov. 9: 4-5: “And to the unwise she (Wisdom) saith: Come, eat of my bread,
and drink the wine which I have mingled for you."
39 Cf. Pseudo-Aristotle, Secreta secretorum (1528): fol. xxvii: "De proprietatibus
originalium lapidum": “Thus when you have water from air and air from fire and
fire from earth, then you have the fulness of the art." Cf. “Ros. phil.,” p. 101b: “Of
these four elements saith Aristotle in his book of the Regimen of the Principles:
When you have water from air, and air from fire, and fire from earth, then you
have the whole art of philosophy; and this is the end of the first composition."
131XII
PARABOLA SEPTIMA DE CONFABULATIONE
DILECTI CUM DILECTA
“Convertimini ad me in toto corde vestro! et nolite abiicere me,
eo quod nigra sum et fusca, quia decoloravit me sol? et abyssi
operuerunt faciem meam ? et terra infecta et contaminata est in
operibus meis; * quia tenebrae factae sunt super eam 5 pro eo,
quod infixa sum in limo profundi et substantia mea non est
aperta. Propterea de profundis clamavi? et de abysso terrae
voce mea ad vos omnes, qui transitis per viam. Attendite et
10 videte me, si quis similem mihi invenerit? dabo in manu sua
stellam matutinam.? Ecce enim in lectulo meo per noctem
5. in om. MP | 6. operationibus D / 9. vos: eos MP /
1 Joel 2 : 12: “Nunc ergo, dicit Dominus: Convertimini ad me in toto corde vestro,
in ieiunio et in fletu et in planctu."
2Cant. 1:4-5: "Nigra sum, sed formosa, filiae Jerusalem, sicut tabernacula
Cedar, sicut pelles Salomonis. Nolite me considerare, quod fusca sim, quia
decoloravit me sol; filii matris meae pugnaverunt contra me . . ."
3 Cf. Jona 2:6: "Circumdederunt me aquae usque ad animam; abyssus vallavit
me, pelagus operuit caput meum . . .”
4 Ps. 105 : 38: "Et infecta est terra in sanguinibus; et contaminata est in operibus
CONUM ean
5 Luc. 23: 44: ". . . et tenebrae factae sunt in universam terram . . .” Cf. Marc.
15 : 99.
6 Ps. 68: 3: "Infixus sum in limo profundi et non est substantia. Veni in alti-
tudinem maris, et tempestas demersit me."
7 Ps. 129: 1: "De profundis clamavi ad te, Domine; Domine, exaudi vocem meam."
8'Thren. 1:12: "O vos omnes qui transitis per viam, attendite, et videte si est
dolor sicut dolor meus . . ."
9 Apoc. 2: 28: ". . . dabo illi stellam matutinam . . ."
132XII
THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION
OF THE LOVER WITH THE BELOVED
“Be turned to me with all your heart! and do not cast me aside
because I am black and swarthy, because the sun hath changed
my colour? and the waters have covered my face? and the earth
hath been polluted and defiled in my works; * for there was dark-
ness over it,? because I stick fast in the mire of the deep and my
substance is not disclosed.* Wherefore out of the depths have I
cried,’ and from the abyss of the earth with my voice to all you
that pass by the way. Attend and see me, if any shall find one like
unto me,? I will give into his hand the morning star.? For behold
1 Joel 2: 12: "Now therefore saith the Lord: Be converted to me with all your
heart, in fasting and in weeping and in mourning."
2 Cant. 1:4—-5: "I am black but beautiful, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, as the
tents of Cedar, as the curtains of Solomon. Do not consider me that I am brown,
because the sun hath altered my colour; the sons of my mother have fought
against me."
8 Cf. Jonah 2: 6: “The waters compassed me about even to the soul; the deep hath
closed me round about, the sea hath covered my head."
4 Ps. 105 : 38: "And the land was polluted with blood, and was defiled with their
works."
5 Luke 23:44: “. . . and there was darkness over all the earth.” Cf. Mark 15: 33.
6 Ps. 68: 3: "I stick fast in the mire of the deep: and there is no sure standing. I
am come into the depth of the sea, and the tempest hath overwhelmed me."
7 Ps. 129: 1: "Out of the depths have I cried to thee, O Lord: Lord, hear my
voice.”
8 Lam. 1: 12: “O all ye that pass by the way, attend, and see if there is any sorrow
like to my sorrow.”
9 Apoc. 2: 28: “. . . and I will give him the morning star."
133AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
quaesivi consolantem et non inveni,!? vocavi et nemo respondit
mihi."—''Surgam ergo et introibo civitatem; per vicos et plateas
quaerens ! mihi unam desponsare virginem castam,’* pulchram
facie, pulchriorem corpore, pulcherrimam veste,!? ut revolvat
15
lapidem ab ostio monumenti mei !* et dabit mihi pennas sicut
columbae et volabo cum ea in coelo !5 et dicam tunc: Vivo ego
in aeternum !5 et requiescam in ea, quia astitit [regina] a dextris
meis in vestitu deaurato circumdata varietate. Audi ergo filia
et vide et inclina aurem tuam ad preces meas, quia concupivi
20
toto cordis desiderio speciem tuam.!* O locutus sum in lingua
mea, notum fac mihi finem meum et numerum dierum meorum
quis est, ut sciam quid desit mihi, quoniam mensurabiles pos-
uisti omnes dies meos et substantia mea tamquam nihilum ante
25 te.18 Tu es enim ipsa, quae introibit per aurem, per regionem
12. non: neminem MP / 15. facie pulchriorem corpore pulcherrimam om.
MP | revoivet PVRAhL | 16. dabo MPV / 18. regina add. BD / 24. meos: tuos
RhBDL | 25. aurem: auream portam D /
10 Ps. 68:21: "Et sustinui, qui simul contristaretur, et non fuit, et qui con-
solaretur, et non inveni . . .”
11Cant. $:1-2: "In lectulo meo per noctes quaesivi quem diligit anima mea;
quaesivi illum et non inveni. Surgam, et circuibo civitatem, per vicos et plateas
quaeram quem diligit anima mea; quaesivi illum, et non inveni."
12 II Cor. 11 : 2: "Despondi enim vos uni viro virginem castam exhibere Christo."
18 Cf. Dominican Breviary (pre-1961), Feast of St. Agnes, Eighth Responsory at
Mattins: "Pulchra facie, sed pulchrior fide, beata es, virgo."
14 Marc. 16:3: "Et dicebant ad invicem: Quis revolvet nobis lapidem ab ostio
monumenti? . . ."
15 Ps. 54:7: "Et dixi: Quis dabit mihi pennas sicut columbae, et volabo et
requiescam?" Cf. Pret. marg. nov., p. 123: “Et quia foemina est alba fugiens . . .
masculus vero est rubeus persequens foeminam fugientem et ipsam rapiens et
retinens . . . dixerunt: Foemina habet alas, masculus vero non." Cf. also Senior,
De chemia, p. 33.
16 Deut. 32:40: "Levabo ad coelum manum meam, et dicam: Vivo ego in
aeternum . . .”
17 Ps. 44:10-11: "Astitit regina a dextris tuis in vestitu deaurato, circumdata
varietate. Audi, filia, et vide, et inclina aurem tuam . . . et concupiscet rex
decorem tuum, (quia concupivit Rex speciem tuam)." Cf. Roman Missal, Tract
for First Mass (Dilexisti) of a Virgin not a Martyr.
18 Ps. 38: 5-6: "Locutus sum in lingua mea: Notum fac mihi, Domine, finem
meum, et numerum dierum meorum quis est, ut sciam quid desit mihi. Ecce
mensurabiles posuisti dies meos, et substantia mea tamquam nihiium est ante te."
134XII. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION ...
in my bed by night I sought one to comfort me and I found
none,!? I called and there was none to answer me."—'"Therefore
will I arise and go into the city, seeking in the streets and broad
ways !! a chaste virgin to espouse,!? comely in face, more comely
in body, most comely in her garments,!? that she may roll back
the stone from the door of my sepulchre !* and give me wings like
a dove, and I will fly with her into heaven !5 and then say: I live
for ever,!? and will rest in her, for she [the queen] stood on my
right hand in gilded clothing, surrounded with variety. Hearken
therefore O daughter and see and incline thine ear to my prayers,
for I have desired thy beauty with all the desire of my heart.17 O I
spoke with my tongue: Make known to me my end and what is
the number of my days, that I may know what is wanting to me,
for thou hast made all my days measurable and my substance is
as nothing before thee.!5 For thou art she who shall enter through
the ear, through my domain, and I shall be clothed with a purple
10 Ps. 68:21: "And I looked for one that would grieve together with me, and
there was none: and for one that would comfort me, and I found none."
11 Cant. 3: 1-2: "In my bed by night I sought him whom my soul loveth: I
sought him, and found him not. I will rise and go about the city. In the streets
and the broad ways I will seek him whom my soul loveth. I sought him, and I
found him not."
12 TI Cor. 11 : 2: “I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as
a chaste virgin to Christ."
18 Cf. Dominican Breviary (pre-1961), Feast of St. Agnes, Eighth Responsory at
Mattins: “Comely in face, yet more comely in faith, blessed art thou, O maiden.”
14 Mark 16: 3: "And they said one to another: Who shall roll us back the stone
from the door of the sepulchre?"
15 Ps. 54 : 7: "And I said: Who will give me wings like a dove, and I will fly and
be at rest?" Cf. Pret. marg. nov., p. 123: "And because the white woman escapeth
. . . but the red male followeth after the woman and holdeth her . . . they (the
philosophers) said: The woman hath wings, but the man not." Cf. also Senior,
De chemia, p. 33.
16 Deut. 32: 40: “I will lift up my hand to heaven: and I will say: I live for
CVeIe . |
17 Ps. 44: 10-11: “The queen stood on thy right hand, in gilded clothing: sur-
rounded with variety. Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thy ear... .
And the king shall greatly desire thy beauty" (Lit: “for the king hath greatly
desired thy appearance"). Cf. Roman Missal, Tract for First Mass (Dilexisti) of a
Virgin not a Martyr.
18 Ps. 38: 5-6: "I spoke with my tongue: O Lord, make me know my end, and
what is the number of my days, that I may know what is wanting to me. Behold,
thou hast made my days measurable: and my substance is as nothing before thee."
135AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
meam, et ero indutus stola purpurea !? ex te et ex me procedam
tamquam sponsus de thalamo suo,? quia circumdabis me ver-
nantibus atque coruscantibus gemmis et indues me vestimentis
salutis et laetitiae 2! ad expugnandas gentes et omnes inimicos,
nec non corona aurea expressa signo sanctitatis me ornabis et
30
stola iustitiae circumdabis me ? atque annulo tuo subarrabis
me ? nec non calceamentis aureis calceabis me. Haec omnia
faciet amica mea perfecta, pulchra nimis et decora in deliciis
suis,*4 quia viderunt eam filiae Sion et reginae atque concu-
35 binae eam laudaverunt? O regina supernorum, surge propera
(amica mea) sponsa mea,”¢ dic [dilecta] dilecto tuo, quae qualis
vel quanta es, propter Sion non tacebis nec propter Jerusalem
quiescas ?* Joquere mihi, audit (te) enim dilectus tuus."—" Audite
27. quae circumdabit MPV, circumdas L / 28. induens B, indueris V / vesti-
mento RAD /29. ex purgandas RAD, pugnandas L / gentes et omnium gentium
et nationum (D: hoc loco) inimicos nec non corona RAhLD, om. P | et (inimicos)
add. M | 31. iustitiae om. MPV / 31.-32. atque annulo ~ calceabis me om. MPV |
concubinae V, columbinae MPV, columbae RADL, om. B | 36. amica mea add.
D | dilecta add. RhL | 38. te add. D / loquere quae audit dilecto tuo MPV, cetera
om. MP | (Audite) haec add. VL |
19 Cf. infra, p. 371, nn. 45 and 47.
20 Ps. 18: 6: "In sole posuit tabernaculum suum; et ipse tamquam sponsus proce-
dens de thalamo suo."
21 Cf. Roman Breviary (pre-1961), Feast of St. Agnes, Fourth Responsory at Mat-
tins: "Induit me Dominus vestimento salutis, et indumento laetitiae circumdedit
me ... circumdedit me vernantibus atque coruscantibus gemmis." Isa. 61: 10:
"Gaudens gaudebo in Domino . . . quia induit me vestimentis salutis, et indu-
mento iustitiae circumdedit me, quasi sponsum decoratum corona, et quasi sponsam
ornatam monilibus suis."
22 Ecclus. 45 : 14: "Corona aurea super mitram eius expressa signo sanctitatis, et
gloria honoris . . .”
23 Cf. Roman Breviary, Feast of St. Agnes, Third Antiphon at Lauds: “Anulo
suo subarrhavit me Dominus meus Jesus Christus."
24 Cant. 7:6: "Quam pulchra es et quam decora, charissima, in deliciis!"
25 Cant. 6:8: ", . . Viderunt eam filiae et beatissimam praedicaverunt, reginae
et concubinae, et laudaverunt eam."
26 Cant. 2:10: "En dilectus meus loquitur mihi: Surge, propera, amica mea,
columba mea . . .”
?1 Isa. 62 : 1: "Propter Sion non tacebo, et propter Jerusalem non quiescam, donec
egrediatur ut splendor iustus eius . . ."
136XII. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION . . .
garment 1° from thee and from me, I will come forth as a bride-
groom out of his bride-chamber,?? for thou shalt adorn me round
about with shining and glittering gems and shalt clothe me with
the garments of salvation and joy?! to overthrow the nations
and all mine enemies, and shalt adorn me with a crown of gold
engraved with the sign of holiness and shalt clothe me with a robe
of righteousness ?? and shalt betroth me to thee with thy ring ??
and clothe my feet in sandals of gold. All this shall my perfect
beloved do, exceeding beautiful and comely in her delights,”* for
the daughters of Sion saw her and the queens and concubines
praised her. O queen of the heights, arise, make haste, (my
love), my spouse,?? speak [beloved] to thy lover, who and of what
kind and how great thou art, for Sion's sake thou shalt not hold
thy peace and for the sake of Jerusalem thou shalt not rest ?' from
speaking to me, for thy beloved heareth (thee)."—''Hear all ye
19 Cf. infra, p. 371, nn. 45 and 47.
20 Ps. 18:6: “He hath set his tabernacle in the sun: and he, as a bridegroom
coming out of his bridechamber. . . .”
21Cf. Roman Breviary (pre-1961), Feast of St. Agnes, Fourth Responsory at
Mattins: “The Lord hath clothed me with the garment of salvation, and hath
vested me with the robe of gladness; . . . he hath surrounded me with shining
and glittering gems." Isa. 61 : 10: “I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, and my soul
shall be joyful in my God. For he hath clothed me with the garments of salvation
and with the robe of justice he hath covered me: as a bridegroom decked with a
crown and as a bride adorned with her jewels."
22 Ecclus. 45 : 14: "And a crown of gold upon his mitre, wherein was engraved
Holiness, an ornament of honour . . ."
23 Roman Breviary, Feast of St. Agnes, Third Antiphon at Lauds: "With the ring
of his faith hath he betrothed me."
24 Cant. 7 : 6: "How beautiful art thou, and how comely, my dearest, in delights!"
25 Cant. 6: 8: “. . . The daughters of Sion saw her and declared her most blessed;
the queens and concubines, and they praised her."
26 Cant. 2 : 10: “Behold, my beloved speaketh to me: Arise, make haste, my love,
my dove...
27Isa. 62:1: “For Sion's sake I will not hold my peace, and for the sake of
Jerusalem I will not rest till her just one come forth as brightness."
137AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
omnes gentes, auribus percipite, qui habitatis orbem: ?$ dilectus
meus rubicundus locutus est ?? mihi, petiit et impetravit. Ego
40
sum flos campi et lilium convallium,?? ego mater pulchrae dilec-
tionis et [timoris et] agnitionis et sanctae spei.*! Ego vitis fructi-
ficans suavitatem odoris, et flores mei fructus honoris et hones-
tatis.22 Ego lectulus dilecti mei, quem sexaginta fortissimi am-
45 bierunt, omnes tenentes gladios suos super femur suum propter
timores nocturnales.?? Ego tota pulchra et absque macula ?* respi-
ciens per fenestras prospiciens per cancellos dilecti mei,*5 vulner-
ans cor suum in uno oculorum meorum et uno crine colli mei.?8
Ego odor unguentorum super omnia aromata ?? aromatizans et si-
cut cinnamomum et balsamum et myrrha electa.** Ego virgo pru-
50
dentissima *? progrediens quasi aurora valde rutilans electa ut sol
et pulchra ut Luna *? absque quod intrinsecus latet.** Ego cedrus
42. timoris add. V / 44. Sexaginta: se MP, om. B / 48. uno: ictu RADL | meo MP /
28 Ps. 48: 2: "Audite haec, omnes Gentes; auribus percipite, omnes qui habitatis
orbem s
29 Cant. 5 : 10: "Dilectus meus candidus et rubicundus, electus ex millibus."
30 Cant. 2 : 1: "Ego flos campi et lilium convallium, sicut lilium inter spinas . .
31 Ecclus. 24 : 24: (Sapientia loquitur): ''Ego mater pulchrae dilectionis, et timoris,
et agnitionis, et sanctae spei . . .”
32 Ecclus. 24:23: "Ego quasi vitis fructificavi suavitatem odoris, et flores mei
fructus honoris et honestatis." Cf. Joh. 15 : 1: "Ego sum vitis vera . . .”
33 Cant. 3: 7-8: "En lectulum Salomonis sexaginta fortes ambiunt ex fortissimis
Israel, omnes tenentes gladios, uniuscuiusque ensis super femur suum propter
timores nocturnos . . .”
34 Cant. 4: 7: “Tota pulchra es, amica mea, et macula non est in te.” Cf. Roman
Missal, Gradual for the Immaculate Conception: “Tota pulchra es, Maria, et
macula originalis non est in te.”
35 Cant. 2:9: ". . . en ipse stat post parietem nostrum, respiciens per fenestras,
prospiciens per cancellos."
36 Cant. 4:9: Vulnerasti cor meum, soror mea, sponsa .. . in uno oculorum
tuorum et in uno crine colli tui."
87 Cf. Cant. 4: 10: "Odor unguentorum tuorum super omnia aromata."
88 Ecclus. 24:20: "Sicut cinnamomum et balsamum aromatizans odorem dedi,
quasi myrrha electa dedi suavitatem odoris."
39 Cf. Matth. 25 : 1-18.
40 Cant. 6: g: "Quae est ista quae progreditur quasi aurora consurgens, pulchra
ut luna, electa ut sol . . .”
41 Cant. 4 : 1: “. . . Oculi tui columbarum, absque eo quod intrinsecus latet."
138XII. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION .. .
nations, give ear all ye inhabitants of the world; 28 my beloved,
who is ruddy, hath spoken to me;?? he hath sought and besought.
I am the flower of the field and the lily of the valleys I am the
mother of fair love and [of fear and] of knowledge and of holy
hope.?! As the fruitful vine I have brought forth a pleasant odour,
and my flowers are the fruit of honour and riches.?? I am the bed
of my beloved, which threescore of the most valiant ones sur-
rounded, all holding swords upon their thigh because of fears in
the night.?? I am all fair and there is no spot in me; ** looking
through the windows, looking through the lattices of my be-
loved,?55 wounding his heart with one of my eyes and with one
hair of my neck.?6 I am the sweet smell of ointments giving an
odour above all aromatical spices ?* and like unto cinnamon and
balsam and chosen myrrh.?? I am the most prudent virgin ?? com-
ing forth as the Dawn, shining exceedingly, elect as the sun, fair
as the moon,*? besides what is hid within.*! I am exalted as a cedar
28 Ps. 48: 2: "Hear these things, all ye nations: give ear, all ye inhabitants of the
world."
29 Cant. 5 : 10: "My beloved is white and ruddy, chosen out of thousands."
30 Cant. 2 : 1: "I am the flower of the field, and the lily of the valleys. As the lily
among thorns . . ."
31 Ecclus. 24 : 24: (Wisdom speaks): “I am the mother of fair love, and of fear, and
of knowledge, and of holy hope."
32 Ecclus. 24: 23: "As the vine I have brought forth a pleasant odour: and my
flowers are the fruit of honour and riches." Cf. John 15:1: "I am the true
vines cee
33 Cant. 3: 7-8: “Behold three score valiant ones of the most valiant of Israel
surrounded the bed of Solomon: all holding swords, and most expert in war:
every man's sword upon his thigh, because of fears in the night. . . ."
34 Cant. 4: 7: “Thou art all fair, O my love, and there is not a spot in thee." Cf.
Roman Missal, Gradual for the Immaculate Conception: “Thou art all fair, O
Mary, and there is in thee no stain of original sin."
35 Cant. 2:9: “Behold he standeth behind our wall, looking through the win-
dows, looking through the lattices."
36 Cant. 4: 9: "Thou hast wounded my heart, my sister, my spouse . . . with one
of thine eyes and with one hair of thy neck."
37 Cant. 4: 10: "The sweet smell of thy ointments (is) above all aromatical spices.”
38 Ecclus. 24:20: “I gave a sweet smell like cinnamon and aromatical balm; I
yielded a sweet odour like the best myrrh.”
39 Cf. Matt. 25 : 1-13.
40 Cant. 6:9: ^Who is she that cometh forth as the morning rising, fair as the
moon, bright as the sun?"
41 Cant. 4 : 1: “Thy eyes are doves’ eyes, besides what is hid within."
139AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
exaltata et cypressus in monte Sion,*” ego corona, qua coronatur
dilectus meus in die desponsationis ipsius et laetitiae,*? quia
55 unguentum effusum est nomen meum.** Ego funda David, cuius
lapis Goliae magnum oculum (eruit) et caput eius demum ab-
stulit.*^ Ego sceptrum domus Israel * et clavis Jesse,** qui aperit
et nemo claudit, claudit et nemo aperit. Ego sum illa vinea
electa, in quam pater familias misit hora prima, secunda, tertia,
60 sexta et nona operarios suos dicens: Ite et vos in vineam meam
et quod iustum fuerit dabo vobis hora duodecima.*® Ego sum
illa terra sanctae promissionis, quae fluit lacte et melle *?? et
faciens fructus suavissimos temporibus suis; quare omnes phi-
losophi me commendaverunt et seminaverunt in me aurum
65 eorum et argentum et granum ipsorum incombustibile. Et nisi
granum illud cadens in me mortuum fuerit, ipsum solum mane-
54. meus om. MP / quia sicut add. BD / 55.-56. cuius lapis Goliae: quare MP,
quia V / 56. eruit add. D / demum: denique P, demumque M, om. V / de domo
MPV | 59. qua PRALM | 61. duodecima conj., secunda DRhL, nona MPV, om. B |
62. sancta RhDL / 63. (fructus) suos add. MP / quare: quia RADL | 64. in me om.
LV [66.—67. ipsum solum ~ fuerit om. VLBM, corr. M, |
42 Ecclus. 24:17: "Quasi cedrus exaltata sum in Libano, et quasi cypressus in
monte Sion."
43 Cant. 3: 11: “Egredimini et videte, filiae Sion, regem Salomonem in diademate
quo coronavit illum mater sua . . . in die desponsationis illius, et in die laetitiae
cordis eius." ("Parans crucem Salvatori suo.”) Appendix (pre-1961) to Roman Mis-
sal, Mass of the Crown of Thorns.
44 Cant. 1: 2: "Oleum effusum nomen tuum . . . a”
45 Cf. I Samuel 17 : 49-51.
46 Cf. Roman Breviary, Antiphon at Magnificat for December 20: “O clavis David,
et sceptrum domus Isracl, qui aperis et nemo claudit, claudis et nemo aperit."
47 Cf. Isa. 11 : 1: “Et egredietur virga de radice Jesse, et flos de radice eius . . .”
Cf. Rom. 15: 4-13. Cf. Senior, De chemia, p. 10: "Sol est clavis cuiuslibet
ianuae . . ." Cf. also p. 17.
48 Apoc. 5: 7: ". . . Qui habet clavem David, qui aperit et nemo claudit, claudit
et nemo aperit."
49 Cf. Matth. 20 : 1ff.
50 Exod. 13 : 5: "Cumque introduxerit te Dominus in terram . . . fluentem lacte et
melle." Cf. Exod. 5:8: “. . . et educam in terram, quae fluit lacte et melle . . ."
Cf. Deut. 26 : 1-11.
140XII. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION ...
and a cypress tree on Mount Sion,*? I am the crown wherewith
my beloved is crowned in the day of his espousals and of his joy,*?
for my name is as ointment poured forth.** I am the sling of
David, the stone wherefrom (tore out) the great eye of Goliath
and finally took off his head.** I am the sceptre of the house of
Israel *6 and the key of Jesse,** which openeth and no man shut-
teth, shutteth and no man openeth.** I am that chosen vineyard,
into which the householder sent his labourers at the first, second,
third, sixth, and ninth hours, saying: Go you also into my vine-
yard, and at the twelfth hour I will give you what shall be just.*?
I am that land of the holy promise, which floweth with milk and
honey *? and bringeth forth sweetest fruit in due season; where-
fore have all the philosophers commended me and sowed in me
their gold and silver and incombustible grain. And unless that
grain falling into me die, itself shall remain alone, but if it die,
42 Ecclus. 24 : 17: “I was exalted like a cedar in Libanus, and as a cypress tree on
mount Sion."
43 Cant. 3:11: "Go forth, ye daughters of Sion, and see King Solomon in the
diadem wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his espousals, and in the
day of the joy of his heart." ("Preparing a cross for her Saviour.") Appendix (pre-
1961) to Roman Missal, Mass of the Crown of Thorns.
44 Cant. 1 : 2: "Thy name is as oil poured forth . . ."
45 Cf. I Samuel 17 : 49-51.
46 Roman Breviary, Antiphon at Magnificat for December 20: “O key of David
and sceptre of the house of Israel, who openest and no man shutteth, shuttest and
no man openeth."
47 Cf. Isa. 11 : 1: “And there shall come forth a rod out of the root of Jesse: and
a flower shall rise up out of his root . . ." Cf. Rom. 15: 4-13. Cf. Senior, De
chemia, p. 10: “The Sun is the key to every door. . . .” Cf. also p. 17.
48 Apoc. 3: 7: ". . . he that hath the key of David, he that openeth and no man
shutteth, shutteth and no man openeth . . .’
49 Cf. Matt. 20 : 1ff.
50 Exod. 13 : 5: "And when the Lord shall have brought thee into . . . a land that
floweth with milk and honey." Cf. Exod. 3:8: “to bring them . . . into a land
that floweth with milk and honey . . .” Cf. Deut. 26 : 1-11.
141AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
bit, si autem mortuum fuerit affert fructum triplicem: 5! pri-
mum quidem faciet bonum in terram bonam, scilicet margari-
tarum, secundum bonum quia in meliorem scilicet foliorum,
tertium in millecuplum quia in terram optimam scilicet auri.9?
70
Ex his enim fructibus grani (huius) cibus vitae conficitur, qui de
coelo descendit. Si quis ex eo manducaverit, vivet sine fame.??
De illo namque pane edent pauperes et saturabuntur et lauda-
bunt Dominum, qui requirunt eum et vivent corda eorum in
75 saeculum.** Ergo do et non resumo, ego pasco et non deficio, ego
securo et non paveo, quid plus referam dilecto meo? Ego sum
mediatrix elementorum, concordans unum alteri: illud, quod
calidum est frigesco et viceversa, et illud, quod siccum est
humecto et viceversa, et illud, quod est durum mollifico et
80 viceversa. Ego finis et dilectus meus principium,5* ego totum
opus et tota scientia in me occultatur,?* ego lex in sacerdote et
sermo in propheta et consilium in sapiente." Ego occidam et
vivere faciam et non est, qui de manu mea possit eruere.55 Ego
71. huius add. RhB | 72. et (sine) add. MP | 73. illa PL / 74. requirent RAL/
74-75. in saeculum om. MPV / 56. saturo MP / 79. durum mollifico: asperum len-
ifico MPV / 81. ego: et MP /
51 Joh. 12 : 24-25: “Amen, amen, dico vobis: nisi granum frumenti cadens in ter-
ram mortuum fuerit, ipsum solum manet; si autem mortuum fuerit, multum
fructum affert."
52 Cf. Senior, De chemia, p. 51: "Quidam vero eorum nomina variant, ut hoc, Ex
tribus terris, Quarum prima est margaritarum, secunda terra foliorum, tertia terra
est terra auri." Cf. also p. 106
53 Joh. 6: 33: "Panis enim Dei est, qui de coelo descendit et dat vitam mundo."
Joh. 6: 51-52: "Ego sum panis vivus, qui de caelo descendi. Si quis manducaverit
ex hoc pane, vivet in aeternum." Cf. Ps. 77 : 24-25.
54 Ps. 21:27: "Edent pauperes, et saturabuntur, et laudabunt Dominum qui
requirunt eum; vivent corda eorum in saeculum saeculi."
58 Apoc. 1:8: "Ego sum Alpha et Omega, principium et finis, dicit Dominus
Deusimse s
56 Cf. Mercurius in Rhazis, De alum. et salibus (ed. Ruska), p. 59: "Et ego sum
totum ipsum absconditum et in me sapientia latet abscondita."
57 Jer. 18: 18: ". . . non enim peribit lex a sacerdote, neque consilium a sapiente,
neque sermo a propheta."
58 Deut. 32: 39: "Videte quod ego sim solus, et non sit alius Deus praeter me;
Ego occidam, et ego vivere faciam; percutiam, et ego sanabo; et non est qui de
manu mea possit eruere."
142XI. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION ...
it bringeth forth threefold fruit: *! for the first it shall bring forth
shall be good because it was sown in good earth, namely of pearls;
the second likewise good because it was sown in better earth,
namely of leaves (silver); the third shall bring forth a thousand-
fold because it was sown in the best earth, namely of gold.*? For
from the fruits of (this) grain is made the food of life, which
cometh down from heaven. If any man shall eat of it, he shall
live without hunger.?? For of that bread the poor shall eat and
shall be filled, and they shall praise the Lord that seek him, and
their hearts shall live for ever.® I give and take not back, I feed
and fail not, I make secure and fear not; what more shall I say
to my beloved? I am the mediatrix of the elements, making one
to agree with another; that which is warm I make cold, and the
reverse; that which is dry I make moist, and the reverse; that
which is hard I soften, and the reverse. I am the end and my
beloved is the beginning, I am the whole work and all sci-
ence is hidden in me,°** I am the law in the priest and the word
in the prophet and counsel in the wise.5* I will kill and I will
make to live and there is none that can deliver out of my hand.*®
51John 12:24-25: “Amen, amen, I say unto you: unless the grain of wheat
falling into the ground die, itself remaineth alone. But if it die, it bringeth forth
much fruit."
52 Cf. Senior, De chemia, p. 51. "But some of them use different names, as for ex-
ample, of the three earths, of which the first is of pearls, the second is the earth
of leaves [silver], the third earth is the earth of gold." Cf. also p. 106.
53 John 6: 33: "For the bread of God is that which cometh down from heaven
and giveth life to the world." John 6: 51-52: “I am the living bread which came
down from heaven. If any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever." C£. Ps.
47 : 24-25.
64 Ps. 21:27: "The poor shall eat and shall be filled: and they shall praise the
Lord that seek him: their hearts shall live for ever and ever."
55 Apoc. 1:8: "I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, saith the
Lord God . . ."
56 Cf. Mercurius in Rhazis, De alum. et salibus (ed. Ruska), p. 59: "And I am the
whole of that hidden thing and in me lieth hid the hidden wisdom."
57 Jer. 18: 18: “. . . for the Law shall not perish from the priest, nor counsel from
the wise, nor the word from the prophet."
58 Deut. 32 : 39: “See ye that I alone am, and there is no other God besides me; I
will kill and I will make to live, I will strike and I will heal, and there is none
that can deliver out of my hand . . .”
143AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
porrigo os dilecto meo et compressit ipsius ad me,°® ego et ipse
85 unum sumus,*? quis nos separabit a caritate? * Nullus et nemo,
quia fortis est ut mors dilectio nostra." ?—'"O dilecta, immo
perdilecta, vox tua sonuit in auribus meis, quae dulcis est? et
odor tuus super cuncta unguenta preciosa. O quam pulchra
es facie,55 pulchriora ubera tua vino, soror sponsa,®* oculi tui
piscinae in Esebon,® capilli tui aurei, genae tuae eburneae,
90
venter tuus sicut crater tornatilis non indigens poculis,5* vestes
tuae candidiores nive, nitidiores lacte, rubicundiores ebore an-
tiquo,® totumque corpus tuum cunctis est delectabile atque de-
siderabile. Filiae Jerusalem, venite et videte et ea, quae vidistis
95 narrate, dicite, quid faciemus sorori nostrae, quae parvula est
et ubera non habet in die allocutionis?*? Ponam super eam
fortitudinem meam et apprehendam fructus illius et erunt eius
ubera sicut botri vineae." Veni mi dilecta et egrediamur in
84. porrigo os om. MPV/ 8 6. immo om. MPDB | 87. insonuit MP/ in om.
RADL [89. a facie P, in facie V / pulchriora: pulchra PVD / vino: unica PV/
91. crater tornatilis: tractus cortelis MP, tornalis D/ 96. In die allocutionis~
ponam MP, ablactationis V, allocutionis V, /
59 Cf. Cant. 1 : 1: "Osculetur me osculo oris sui . . ."
60 Joh. 10 : 30: “Ego et pater unum sumus."
61 Rom. 8: 35-39: "Quis ergo nos separabit a charitate Christi? . . . Certus sum
quia neque mors neque vita . . . poterit nos separare a charitate Dei, quae est
in Christo Jesu Domino nostro."
62 Cant. 8:6: “. . . quia fortis est ut mors dilectio, dura sicut infernus aemulatio."
63 Cant. 2 : 14: "Ostende mihi faciem tuam, sonet vox tua in auribus meis; vox
enim tua dulcis, et facies tua decora. '
64 Cant. 4: 10: ". . . odor unguentorum tuorum super omnia aromata . . .”
65 Cant. 4 : 1: "Quam pulchra es, amica mea, quam pulchra es!"
96 Cant. 4 : 10: "Quam pulchrae sunt mammae tuae, soror mea sponsa, pulchriora
sunt ubera tua vino."
67 Cant. 7 : 4: "Oculi tui sicut piscinae in Hesebon . . .”
$8 Cant. 7:2: "Umbilicus tuus crater tornatilis, numquam indigens poculis.
Venter tuus sicut acervus tritici, vallatus liliis."
69 Thren. 4:7: "Candidiores Nazaraei eius nive, nitidiores lacte, rubicundiores
ebore antiquo, sapphiro pulchriores . . ."
70 Cant. 8: 8-9: "Soror nostra parva, et ubera non habet: quid faciemus sorori
nostrae in die quando alloquenda est? ... Si murus est, aedificemus super
eum sis) 6
71 Cant. 7 : 8: Dixi: ascendam in palmam, et apprehendam fructus eius; et erunt
ubera tua sicut botri vineae . . ."
144XII. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION .
I stretch forth my mouth to my beloved and he presseth his to
me; 5? he and I are one; * who shall separate us from love? 9:
None and no man, for our love is strong as death." *°—“‘O beloved,
yea supremely beloved, thy voice hath sounded in my ears, for
it is sweet,? and thine odour is above all aromatical spices.** O
how comely is thy face,9 thy breasts more beautiful than wine, my
sister, my spouse,® thy eyes are like the fishpools in Heshbon,**
thy hairs are golden, thy cheeks are ivory, thy belly is as a round
bowl never wanting cups,9? thy garments are whiter than snow,
purer than milk, more ruddy than old ivory,*? and all thy body is
delightful and desirable unto all. Come forth, daughters of Jeru-
salem, and see, and tell and declare what ye have seen; say, what
shall we do for our sister, who is little and hath no breasts, in the
day when she shall be wooed?” I will set my strength upon her
and will take hold of her fruits, and her breasts shall be as the
clusters of the vine." Come, my beloved, and let us go into thy
59 Cf. Cant. 1 : 1: "Let him kiss me with the kiss of his mouth . . .”
60 John 10: go: “I and the Father are one."
61 Rom. 8: 35-39: "Who then shall separate us from the love of Christ? . . . Iam
sure that neither death, nor life, . . . shall be able to separate us from the love
of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord."
62 Cant. 8:6: “. . . for love is strong as death, jealousy is hard as hell."
63 Cant. 2:14: “. . . shew me thy face. Let thy voice sound in my ears; for thy
voice is sweet, and thy face comely."
64 Cant. 4:10: “. . . the sweet smell of thy ointments (is) above all aromatical
spices."
65 Cant. 4 : 1: “How beautiful art thou, my love, how beautiful art thou!”
66 Cant. 4 : 10: “How beautiful are thy breasts, my sister, my spouse! thy breasts
are more beautiful than wine . . .”
67 Cant. 7 : 4: “Thy eyes like the fishpools in Hesebon . . .
68 Cant. 7 : 2: “Thy navel is like a round bowl never wanting cups. Thy belly is
like a heap of wheat, set about with lilies."
69 Lam. 4: 7: "Her Nazarites [princes] were whiter than snow, purer than milk,
more ruddy than the old ivory, fairer than the sapphire."
70 Cant. 8: 8-9: “Our sister is little and hath no breasts. What shall we do to our
sister in the day when she is to be spoken to? . . . If she be a wall, let us build
upondt ne
71 Cant. 7 : 8: “I said: I will go up into the palm tree and will take hold of the
fruit thereof, and thy breasts shall be as the clusters of the vine . . ."
145AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
agrum tuum, moremur in villis, mane surgamus ad vineam,
quia nox praecessit et dies appropinquabit; ?? videamus si floruit
100
vinea tua,” si flores tui fructus parturierunt. Ibi dabis ori meo
ubera tua et ego omnia poma nova et vetera tibi servavi, frua-
mur ergo ipsis et utamur bonis tamquam in iuventute celeriter,
vino pretioso et unguentis nos impleamus et non praetereat flos,
105 quin ipsis nos coronemus, primo liliis, deinde rosis, antequam
marcescant. Nullum pratum sit, quod non pertranseat luxuria
nostra. Nemo nostrum exsors sit luxuriae nostrae, ubique relin-
quamus signa laetitiae, quia haec est pars nostra,” ut vivamus
in coitus nostri amore cum gaudio et tripudio dicentes: Ecce,
quam bonum et quam iucundum est habitare duobus in unum."
110
Faciamus ergo nobis tria tabernacula, tibi unum, mihi secun-
dum, filiis nostris tertium," quia funiculus triplex difficile
99. surgemus MP/ 101. flores fructus tui MPD / 102. servam MP, servabo D /
104.105. praetereat nos floribus ipsis convenimus nos MP / 105. deinde: demum
DRAL | 106. marcescunt ML / Nullum: non MPV / pctum MPL, peccum Rh /
107. expers RhDL, exosus MP, exsors Rh,V | 109. coitus: interitus MP, terris
interitus V / nostri om. DRRhL | 110. est om. MRRD | 111. nobis om. DL | 112. nostris: meis D. om. MPV |
72 Rom. 13:12: "Nox praecessit, dies autem appropinquavit. Abiiciamus ergo
opera tenebrarum, et induamur arma lucis."
73 Cf. Pseudo-Thomas, "Secreta alchimiae," Theatr. chem. (1659), III, p. 279:
“In primis etiam diebus oportet mane surgere, et videre si vinea floruit . . .”
74 Cant. 7 : 11-13: "Veni, dilecte mi, egrediamur in agrum, commoremur in villis;
mane surgamus ad vineas, videamus si floruerit vinea, si flores fructus parturiunt,
si floruerunt mala punica. . . . Ibi dabo tibi ubera mea. . . . In portis nostris
omnia poma, nova et vetera, dilecte mi, servavi tibi . . ." Cf. Pret. marg. nov.,
P. 101: ". . . et terra quae dicitur mater elementorum ...XII. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION .
I stretch forth my mouth to my beloved and he presseth his to
me; 5? he and I are one; * who shall separate us from love? 9:
None and no man, for our love is strong as death." *°—“‘O beloved,
yea supremely beloved, thy voice hath sounded in my ears, for
it is sweet,? and thine odour is above all aromatical spices.** O
how comely is thy face,9 thy breasts more beautiful than wine, my
sister, my spouse,® thy eyes are like the fishpools in Heshbon,**
thy hairs are golden, thy cheeks are ivory, thy belly is as a round
bowl never wanting cups,9? thy garments are whiter than snow,
purer than milk, more ruddy than old ivory,*? and all thy body is
delightful and desirable unto all. Come forth, daughters of Jeru-
salem, and see, and tell and declare what ye have seen; say, what
shall we do for our sister, who is little and hath no breasts, in the
day when she shall be wooed?” I will set my strength upon her
and will take hold of her fruits, and her breasts shall be as the
clusters of the vine." Come, my beloved, and let us go into thy
59 Cf. Cant. 1 : 1: "Let him kiss me with the kiss of his mouth . . .”
60 John 10: go: “I and the Father are one."
61 Rom. 8: 35-39: "Who then shall separate us from the love of Christ? . . . Iam
sure that neither death, nor life, . . . shall be able to separate us from the love
of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord."
62 Cant. 8:6: “. . . for love is strong as death, jealousy is hard as hell."
63 Cant. 2:14: “. . . shew me thy face. Let thy voice sound in my ears; for thy
voice is sweet, and thy face comely."
64 Cant. 4:10: “. . . the sweet smell of thy ointments (is) above all aromatical
spices."
65 Cant. 4 : 1: “How beautiful art thou, my love, how beautiful art thou!”
66 Cant. 4 : 10: “How beautiful are thy breasts, my sister, my spouse! thy breasts
are more beautiful than wine . . .”
67 Cant. 7 : 4: “Thy eyes like the fishpools in Hesebon . . .
68 Cant. 7 : 2: “Thy navel is like a round bowl never wanting cups. Thy belly is
like a heap of wheat, set about with lilies."
69 Lam. 4: 7: "Her Nazarites [princes] were whiter than snow, purer than milk,
more ruddy than the old ivory, fairer than the sapphire."
70 Cant. 8: 8-9: “Our sister is little and hath no breasts. What shall we do to our
sister in the day when she is to be spoken to? . . . If she be a wall, let us build
upondt ne
71 Cant. 7 : 8: “I said: I will go up into the palm tree and will take hold of the
fruit thereof, and thy breasts shall be as the clusters of the vine . . ."
145

. et terra quae dicitur mater elementorum ... et haec est arbor
aurea, de cuius fructu, qui comederit, non esuriet umquam."
7 Sap. 2:5 ff: (Dixerunt luxuriantes): “Umbrae enim transitus est tempus
nostrum, et non est reversio finis nostri; quoniam consignata est, et nemo re-
vertitur. Venite ergo, et fruamur bonis quae sunt, et utamur creatura tamquam
in iuventute, celeriter: Vino pretioso et unguentis nos impleamus, et non
praetereat nos flos temporis. Coronemus nos rosis antequam marcescant; nullum
pratum sit, quod non pertranseat luxuria nostra. Nemo nostrum exsors sit
luxuriae nostrae, ubique relinquamus signa laetitiae, quoniam haec est pars
nostra, et haec est sors."
76 Ps. 132: 1: "Ecce quam bonum et quam iucundum habitare fratres in unum.”
7 Matth. 17:4: ". .. Si vis, faciamus hic tria tabernacula, tibi unum, Moysi
unum, et Eliae unum." Cf. also Apoc. 21: 2-3: "Et ego Johannes vidi sanctam
civitatem Jerusalem novam descendentem de coelo . . . et audivi vocem magnam
de throno dicentem: Ecce tabernaculum Dei cum hominibus, et habitabit cum eis,"
146XII. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION ... field, let us abide in the villages, let us go up early to the vine-
yard, for the night is past and the day is at hand; ?? let us see if
thy vineyard flourisheth,? if thy flowers have brought forth
fruits. There shalt thou give thy breasts to my mouth, and I have
kept for thee all fruits new and old; ** let us therefore enjoy them
and use the good things speedily as in youth, let us fill ourselves
with costly wine and ointments, and let no flower pass by us save
we crown ourselves therewith, first with lilies, then with roses,
before they be withered. Let no meadow escape our riot. Let
none of us go without his part in our luxury, let us leave every-
where tokens of joy, for this is our portion,” that we should live
in the union of love with joy and merriment, saying: Behold how
good and pleasant it is for two to dwell together in unity.'* Let
us make therefore three tabernacles, one for thee, a second for
me, and a third for our sons,” for a threefold cord is not easily
72 Rom. 13 : 12: “The night is passed and the day is at hand. Let us therefore cast
off the works of darkness and put on the armour of light."
73 Cf. Pseudo-Thomas, "Secreta alchimiae," Theatr. chem. (1659), III, p. 279:
"Also in the first days one must rise up early, and see if the vineyard hath
Hourished <>
74 Cant. 7 : 11-13: "Come, my beloved, let us go forth into the field, let us abide in
the villages. Let us get up early to the vineyards, let us see if the vineyard flourish,
if the flowers be ready to bring forth fruits, if the pomegranates flourish; . . . there will I give thee my breasts. . . . In our gates are all fruits; the new and the
old, my beloved, I have kept for thee." Cf. Pret. marg. nov., p. 101: “. . . and the
earth which is called the mother of the elements . . . and this is the golden tree,
of whose fruit he who eateth shall never hunger."
75 Wisd. 2: 5ff.: (The wicked said): '". . .. et terra quae dicitur mater elementorum ... et haec est arbor
aurea, de cuius fructu, qui comederit, non esuriet umquam."
7 Sap. 2:5 ff: (Dixerunt luxuriantes): “Umbrae enim transitus est tempus
nostrum, et non est reversio finis nostri; quoniam consignata est, et nemo re-
vertitur. Venite ergo, et fruamur bonis quae sunt, et utamur creatura tamquam
in iuventute, celeriter: Vino pretioso et unguentis nos impleamus, et non
praetereat nos flos temporis. Coronemus nos rosis antequam marcescant; nullum
pratum sit, quod non pertranseat luxuria nostra. Nemo nostrum exsors sit
luxuriae nostrae, ubique relinquamus signa laetitiae, quoniam haec est pars
nostra, et haec est sors."
76 Ps. 132: 1: "Ecce quam bonum et quam iucundum habitare fratres in unum.”
7 Matth. 17:4: ". .. Si vis, faciamus hic tria tabernacula, tibi unum, Moysi
unum, et Eliae unum." Cf. also Apoc. 21: 2-3: "Et ego Johannes vidi sanctam
civitatem Jerusalem novam descendentem de coelo . . . et audivi vocem magnam
de throno dicentem: Ecce tabernaculum Dei cum hominibus, et habitabit cum eis,"
146

. . For our time is as the passing of a
shadow, and there is no going back of our end; for it is fast sealed, and no man
returneth. Come therefore, and let us enjoy the good things that are present; and
let us speedily use the creatures as in youth. Let us fill ourselves with costly wine
and ointments; and let not the flower of the time pass by us. Let us crown our-
selves with roses, before they be withered; let no meadow escape our riot. Let
none of us go without his part in luxury; let us everywhere leave tokens of joy;
for this is our portion, and this our lot."
76 Ps. 132: 1: “Behold how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell
together in unity."
77 Matt. 17: 4: "Lord, it is good for us to be here: if thou wilt, let us make here
three tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias." Cf. Apoc. 21: 2-3: “And I John saw the holy city, the new Jerusalem, coming down out of
heaven from God . . . and I heard a great voice from the throne, saying: Behold,
the tabernacle of God with men, and he will dwell with them."
147AURORA CONSURGENS: TEXT AND TRANSLATION
rumpitur.’§ Qui habet aures audiendi audiat, quid dicat spiritus
doctrinae filiis disciplinae de desponsatione dilecti ad dilectam.
115 Nam semen suum seminaverat, quod maturescat per eum triplex
fructus, quod auctor trium verborum dicit esse tria verba preti-
osa, in quibus tota occultatur scientia, quae danda est piis vide-
licet pauperibus a primo homine usque ad ultimum." 7?
114. cum dilecta MP / 115. seminat qui MPV / 116. esse: ecce MP / 117. est: sunt
DRh | piis om. MPV | videlicet om. M / 118. (ultimum) hominem add. RhDL |
78 Eccles. 4 : 10-12: “Vae soli, quia cum ceciderit, non habet sublevantem se. Et
si dormierint duo, fovebuntur mutuo: unus quomodo calefiet? Et si quispiam
praevaluerit contra unum, duo resistunt ei: funiculus triplex difficile rumpitur."
79 Calid, "Liber trium verborum," Art. aurif. (1610), I, p. 228: "Et haec sunt tria
verba preciosa occulta, et aperta, data non pravis, non impiis, non infidelibus, sed
fidelibus et pauperibus a primo homine usque ad ultimum."
148XII. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION ...
broken.*? He that hath ears to hear, let him hear what the spirit
of the doctrine saith to the sons of the discipline concerning the
espousal of the lover to the beloved. For he had sowed his seed,
that there might ripen thereof threefold fruit, which the author
of the Three Words saith to be three precious words, wherein is
hidden all the science, which is to be given to the pious, that is
to the poor, from the first man even unto the last." 7?
78 Eccles. 4 : 10-12: “Woe to him that is alone: for when he falleth he hath none
to lift him up. And if two lie together, they shall warm one another: How shall
one alone be warmed? And if a man prevail against one, two shall withstand
him: a threefold cord is not easily broken."
79 Calid, “Liber trium verborum," Art. aurif. (1610), I, p. 228: “And these are the
three precious words, concealed and open, to be imparted not to the wicked nor
to the impious nor to the unbelievers, but to the faithful and to the poor from
the first man even unto the last."
149

4%
B
ve,
(ies 100154 Tul oy, Ui ah nh ater d" T P
R Se 1 TueT4 Ses
Ü e ' A MT . MORI "its: DL "xl ML mdsd
^ 10 tudin «uu ahead ^
na "m eH vL Mond 181 d ^. LS Is RFT 4
^pa : E 5i ! LC i MAI* Ma a e L. degd t ! O[m , a HMq RI d - d
9 4 E E B E “ un , wh, i H ;
- 5 egt vi) eui my wi md cyst WO) 3401 08
p anon d ress iot distal a oed ido PAM
a Wa r t v e a n W a ri , t i e o s f u ox ape ebay "- Vi s « i o '4 n , i M | t
els jMA" ad a [ LAN j
Ob bt . " fie en t à EL Por 1 "
' T UE Um n m j " Un."
L- Peas ha iine

III
COMMENTARY

Y4354TW3MMOS
LIII
COMMENTARY

Y4354TW3MMOS
L

INTRODUCTORY
If the reader allows this text to work directly upon his feelings,
he will be struck first of all by the high-sounding poetic lan-
guage, which is completely different from the usual style of
medieval alchemical treatises. A flood of loosely connected Bib-
lical and alchemical quotations pours forth in an uninterrupted
spate of rhetoric. What the author is getting at, what his "theoria"
might be, cannot be discerned at first, although one senses that
he is struggling to express a meaningful experience. Is he an
alchemist usurping the language of the Bible, or a cleric using
the symbolic language of alchemy in order to formulate some-
thing extraordinary? What, indeed, can impel a man to pen such
a production? If Aurora is not to sink back, as being totally un-
intelligible, into the oblivion in which it has lain hitherto, there
is only one path to follow: to assume that the author did not
express himself in clearly understandable concepts for the simple
reason that he did not possess them, and that he was giving a
stammering description of an unconscious content which had
irrupted into his consciousness.
If this is so, the question as to whether he was an alchemist
or a cleric is incorrectly posed, for, as Jung has shown in Psy-
chology and Alchemy, the alchemist was a man who was seek-
ing to discover the "divine secret"—the secret of the unconscious
which he projected into matter. In this sense everyone is an
alchemist who struggles to give individual, immediate form to
an experience of the unconscious. The complete lack of any
"technical" passages in the text leads me to believe that the
author was not a practising alchemist and that he had no prac-
tical intentions in writing this treatise. He did not "see" the
symbols as projected into matter, he experienced their content
in himself, as inner intuitions, but their nature was such that
only the existing alchemical symbolism was of any avail in
153AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
formulating the inexpressible. The figurative language of the
mystics and of ecclesiastical symbolism obviously did not suffice,
for reasons which will become apparent. The exalted, poetico-
rhetorical style and the logical discontinuities indicate a strong
excitement that accompanies an unmistakably numinous experi-
ence. Quotations and thoughts tumble over one another, giving
one the impression of a flight of ideas. It does not, however, get
out of hand, but always returns to its theme. Also, there are no
signs of schizophrenic breaks in the meaning. On the other hand,
the existence of a hypomanic state cannot be ruled out. Unfor-
tunately, nothing certain is known about the author, and so we
cannot tell whether this hypomanic state was a phase of manic-
depressive psychosis or whether the excitement was of a psycho-
genic nature and could be traced back to some unconscious
religious problem.
Faced with such a document, we have no other course than
to approach the whole thing as a product of the unconscious, to
examine it as methodically as though it were a dream, and to
find out the meaning of the context by amplifying the images.
It might then prove that the seemingly loose chain of symbolic
allusions has, like a dream, a logical continuity of meaning, and
that it even reflects a psychic drama of the utmost consistency.
154I. HERE BEGINNETH THE TREATISE...
The first chapter introduces a mystical female figure who ap-
pears at first as the personified Sapientia Dei or Scientia Dei.!
This feminine divine hypostasis is painted on a broad canvas,
and is amplified by numerous Biblical sayings and comparisons.
At first the figure of Sapientia appears in the same personifica-
tion which we see in Proverbs, Ecclesiasticus, and the Wisdom
of Solomon. In patristic literature she was mostly interpreted as
Christ, the pre-existent Logos,? or as the sum of the rationes
aeternae (eternal forms), of the “self-knowing primordial causes,”
exemplars, ideas, and prototypes in the mind of God.? She was
also considered the archetypus mundus, "that archetypal world
after whose likeness this sensible world was made," * and through
which God becomes conscious of himself.5 Sapientia Dei is thus
1 Concerning this concept see Jung, Psychology and Alchemy, pars. 464ff. Parallels
are Mater Alchimia in Aurora II (Artis auriferae, I, pp. 126ff.) and Mater Naturae
in “Novum lumen," Musaeum Hermeticum, pp. 598ff.
2 E.g., Honorius of Autun, Quaest. et respons. in Prov. et Eccles. (Migne, P.L., vol.
172, col. 313): "Wisdom uttereth her voice in the streets . . . Christ Jesus who is
the power of God and the wisdom of God . . . in the openings of the gates of the
city of Holy Church," etc.* Cf. Thery, “Le Commentaire de Maitre Eckhart sur le
livre de la Sagesse," Archives d'histoire doctrinale, IV, p. 364.
3Scotus Erigena, De divis. nat., II, 18 (Migne, P.L., vol. 122, col. 553): “The
primordial causes know themselves, since they were created in wisdom and subsist
therein eternally.” * II, 20 (col. 557): “For the Father simultaneously begat his
Wisdom and created all things therein." *
4 Hugh of St. Victor, Annot. elucid. in Evang. Joannis (Migne, P.L., vol. 175, col.
834): “Whence also all things have their life and being from the wisdom of God
. . . for according to the wisdom of God, which is the life of all things, was made
all that was made. For this was God's exemplar, after the likeness whereof all the
world was made, and this is that archetypal world, after whose likeness this
sensible world was made." * Similar views are expressed by Alan of Lille.
5 Scotus Erigena, De divis. nat., II, 31 (Migne, P.L., vol. 122, col. 603): ". . . after
the likeness of God and the Father, who begat of himself his Son, who is his
Wisdom, whereby he knows himself." *
155AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
the sum of archetypal images in the mind of God.* Other pa-
tristic interpretations equate her with the soul of Christ or, more
frequently, with Mary."
In modern psychology she would be interpreted as a feminine
personification of the collective unconscious. The beginning of
the text would accordingly describe a numinous encounter with
the anima, whose irruption into the sphere of consciousness the
author endeavours to control. From the sublime, almost divine
significance here attributed to the anima we must conclude that
previously she had been devalued in the author's consciousness,
and that this devaluation is here compensated by the sublimity
of the image. The beginning of this chapter reminds us almost word for
word of the introduction to a youthful work of Albertus Magnus,
“Mariale, sive CCXXX quaestiones super Evangelium Missus
Est," * in which he puts together in praise of Mary the same Bib-
lical passages cited in Aurora.® It seems to me that in this respect
Aurora cannot be independent of this supposedly genuine work
of Albertus Magnus,!? though the difference is that our author
6 Thomas Aquinas, Summa, I, q. 44, art. 3 (Eng. edn., I, p. 231); also I, q. 56, art. 2
resp. (I, p. 281): "Now in the Word of God from eternity there existed not only
the forms of corporeal things, but likewise the forms of all spiritual creatures." *
(These "forms"—rationes—are also impressed upon the mind of the angels.)
Summa, I-II, q. 62, art. 2, ad 2 (I, p. 852): “The wisdom which the philosopher
reckons as an intellectual virtue, considers divine things so far as they are open
to the research of human reason." * Q. 62, art. 3 resp. (I, pp. 852£): “First, as
regards the intellect, man receives certain supernatural principles, which are held
by means of a divine light; these are the articles of faith, about which is faith." *
" Hugh of St. Victor, De sapientia animae Christi (Migne, P.L., vol. 176, col. 848). 8 Opera, ed. Borgnet, XXXVII, p. 3ff.I. HERE BEGINNETH THE TREATISE...
The first chapter introduces a mystical female figure who ap-
pears at first as the personified Sapientia Dei or Scientia Dei.!
This feminine divine hypostasis is painted on a broad canvas,
and is amplified by numerous Biblical sayings and comparisons.
At first the figure of Sapientia appears in the same personifica-
tion which we see in Proverbs, Ecclesiasticus, and the Wisdom
of Solomon. In patristic literature she was mostly interpreted as
Christ, the pre-existent Logos,? or as the sum of the rationes
aeternae (eternal forms), of the “self-knowing primordial causes,”
exemplars, ideas, and prototypes in the mind of God.? She was
also considered the archetypus mundus, "that archetypal world
after whose likeness this sensible world was made," * and through
which God becomes conscious of himself.5 Sapientia Dei is thus
1 Concerning this concept see Jung, Psychology and Alchemy, pars. 464ff. Parallels
are Mater Alchimia in Aurora II (Artis auriferae, I, pp. 126ff.) and Mater Naturae
in “Novum lumen," Musaeum Hermeticum, pp. 598ff.
2 E.g., Honorius of Autun, Quaest. et respons. in Prov. et Eccles. (Migne, P.L., vol.
172, col. 313): "Wisdom uttereth her voice in the streets . . . Christ Jesus who is
the power of God and the wisdom of God . . . in the openings of the gates of the
city of Holy Church," etc.* Cf. Thery, “Le Commentaire de Maitre Eckhart sur le
livre de la Sagesse," Archives d'histoire doctrinale, IV, p. 364.
3Scotus Erigena, De divis. nat., II, 18 (Migne, P.L., vol. 122, col. 553): “The
primordial causes know themselves, since they were created in wisdom and subsist
therein eternally.” * II, 20 (col. 557): “For the Father simultaneously begat his
Wisdom and created all things therein." *
4 Hugh of St. Victor, Annot. elucid. in Evang. Joannis (Migne, P.L., vol. 175, col.
834): “Whence also all things have their life and being from the wisdom of God
. . . for according to the wisdom of God, which is the life of all things, was made
all that was made. For this was God's exemplar, after the likeness whereof all the
world was made, and this is that archetypal world, after whose likeness this
sensible world was made." * Similar views are expressed by Alan of Lille.
5 Scotus Erigena, De divis. nat., II, 31 (Migne, P.L., vol. 122, col. 603): ". . . after
the likeness of God and the Father, who begat of himself his Son, who is his
Wisdom, whereby he knows himself." *
155

Borgnet, XXXVII, p. 3ff. Concerning the authenticity of this work see
Pelster, Kritische Studien, pp. 108ff. Others attribute it to Richard of St. Laurent. Cf. Dachnert, Die Erkenntnislehre des Albertus Magnus, p. 233. 9 Mariale, q. CLXIV, p. 244: "In the house of Wisdom there is medicine against
the wounds of sin, and this medicine is the Virgin Mary, who made herself into
a house for Solomon." Mary is the mother who crowned Solomon with the crown,
the Woman of the Apocalypse crowned with twelve stars, the City of God, and
the "woman who will encompass the man" (Jeremiah 31:22) (p. 246). She is
also the "dawn of illumination" (p. 369). 10 In Parable IV of Aurora, “Of the Philosophic Faith,” there are also quotations
similar to those in Albertus's "Libellus de Alchemia." The latter says: “ ‘All wisdom
is from the Lord God, and has been always with Him, and is before all time' (Ecclus. 1: 1). Let whoever loves wisdom seek it in Him and ask it of Him, ‘who gives
abundantly to all men, and does not reproach' (James 1 : 5). For He is the height
156I. HERE BEGINNETH THE TREATISE . ..
goes on to equate his feminine figure with the "soul in matter"
and with the "filius philosophorum" or lapis, thus lifting her
out of her purely ecclesiastical framework into the empirical
sphere of scientifically based alchemy and bringing her closer to
individual human experience.
It is important to remember that the thirteenth century, to
which Aurora presumably belongs, was a time when the worship
of Mary was on the increase. Psychologically, this would point
to a need, rising from the collective unconscious, for a feminine
figure to be given a place in the purely masculine, patriarchal
‘Trinity, as the representative of the anima of a man and the self
of a woman. But in contrast to the dogmatic development we
have before our eyes in this alchemical treatise a direct, indi-
vidual manifestation of this archetypal image of a divine femi-
nine figure.
All good things came to me together with her, that Wisdom of the
south, who preacheth abroad, who uttereth her voice in the streets,
crieth out at the head of the multitudes, and in the entrance of
the gates of the city uttereth her words, saying: Come ye to me and
be enlightened, and your operations shall not be confounded; all ye
that desire me shall be filled with my riches. Come therefore, chil-
dren, hearken to me; I will teach you the science of God.
Wisdom calls men to her with seductive words, promising
and the depth of all knowledge and the treasure house of all wisdom, 'since from
Him and through Him and unto Him are all things’ (Rom. 11 : 36); without Him
nothing can be done; to Him be honour and glory forever. Amen. Therefore, at
the beginning of my discourse I shall invoke the aid of Him Who is the Fount
and Source of all good to deign, in His goodness and love, to fill up by the grace
of His Holy Spirit my small knowledge so that I may be able by my teaching to
show forth the light which lies hidden in the darkness and to lead those who are
in error to the pathway of truth. . . . Though I have laboriously travelled to
many regions and numerous provinces, likewise to cities and castles, in the interest
of the science called Alchemy, though I have diligently consulted learned men
and sages concerning this art in order to investigate it more fully, and though I
took down their writings and toiled again and again over their works, I have not
found in them what their books assert. . . . Yet I have not despaired . . . until
finally I found what I was seeking, not by my own knowledge, but by the grace
of the Holy Spirit. Therefore, since I knew and understood what conquered
nature, I began to watch more diligently in decoctions . . ." * (Libellus de Al-
chemia, trans. Heines, pp. 1f.)
11 Cf. Meister Eckhart's commentary on this passage (Thery, III, p. 425): “Wisdom
is the one perfection, in which all other good is included."
157AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
them health and great riches, the Biblical background of her
words indicating that her treasures are of a spiritual nature.’
Hence it is emphasized a little later that she is more precious
han "merchandise of silver and the most pure gold."
She is called, further, the "Wisdom of the south" or of the
"south wind" (austri), and is thus equated with the Biblical
“Queen of the south," the Queen of Sheba,!? who in alchemical
radition was, like Solomon," the author of alchemical works,
and was identified with Maria the Jewess, "sister of Moses.” 16
In patristic literature the Queen of Sheba was a prefiguration of
Mary. On the other hand, in the hermeneutics of the Church
Fathers the Queen of the south was also an image for the Church
as the “queen” and "concubine" of Christ," who was called the
"King of the south." !5 Indeed, this feminine figure was even
identified with God himself, who "shall go with the whirlwinds
of the south." !? The south wind is also a symbol of the Holy
Spirit, causing the minds of the elect to seethe, “that they may
bring about whatsoever good things they desire." ?? 'The equa-
12 This agrees with the oft-cited saying, “Our gold is not the common gold." Cf.
Senior, De chemia, p. 39. Origen (In Cant. Cant., Lib. II: Migne, P.G., vol. 13, col.
135) likewise distinguishes between common gold and a gold that represents "the
invisible and incorporeal nature."
13 Cf. Matt. 12 : 42.
14 Cf. the sayings of Suleiman in the Sefer ha-Tamar ("Book of the Palm") by Abu
Aflah (ed. Scholem), and Lippmann, I, pp. 12, 111, 156, 265, 309.
15 Ruska, Turba, p. 272. She is mentioned as “Bilqis,” Queen of Egypt, and is said
to have written, among others, a book beginning: "After I had ascended the
mountain . . .” Cf. Holmyard, “Abu’l Qasim al-'Iraqi,” p. 407.
16 Berthelot, Chimie au moyen áge, I, p. 242, III, pp. 28 and 125; Lippmann, I, p. 46.
17 Honorius, Expositio in Cant. Cant. (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, cols. 352-54).
18 Cf. the final struggle between the good "King of the south" and the wicked
"King of the north" in the Concordia of Joachim of Flora, V, cap. 93 (Hahn,
Geschichte der Ketzer, III, pp. 311f.). In what follows, my quotations from
Joachim are nearly always taken from Hahn, as I was unable to obtain a reliable
edition of Joachim's works.
19 Zech. 9 : 14.
20 St. Gregory the Great, Moralia, Lib. 27 in cap. 37 Job, sec. 63 (Migne, P.L., vol.
76, col. 436; Eng. edn., III, pt. 1, p. 247), and Super Cant. Cant. expositio, cap. 4,
v. 16 (Migne, P.L., vol. 79, col. 516): "By the south is signified a hot wind, namely,
the wind of the Holy Spirit, who toucheth the minds of the elect, relieving them
of all sloth and making them fervent, that they may bring about whatsoever good
things they desire." *
158I. HERE BEGINNETH THE TREATISE . tion of the Holy Spirit with the south wind is presumably due,
as Jung points out,?! to the hot and dry quality of this wind. The
Holy Spirit is fiery and causes exaltation. He warms all things
with the fire of love.? According to Gregory the Great, the
"south" signifies "those unfathomed depths of the heavenly coun-
try, which are filled with the heat of the Holy Spirit." 7? In
Arabian alchemy the sublimation process is called “the great
south wind," by which is meant the heating of the retort and
its contents.?* These amplifications make it clear that in our text
Wisdom is a feminine pneuma who enkindles and inspires the
author at his work. She is a "spirit of truth,” bringing him en-
lightenment. Thus the anima appears here not as a personal con-
tent but in her transpersonal collective significance as a feminine
complement of the God-image itself.?* Her fiery nature accounts
for the agitated state of the author. 21 Psychology and Alchemy, par. 473. 22 Joachim of Flora, Concordia, V, cap. 93 (Hahn, III, p. 312): “The daughter of
the King of the south (who reigns in heaven and in spirits warmed by love)." *
Hahn, p. 321: “Cease [not] to enkindle us with the fire of charity to love... [that] we may be able to work in the warmth of the Holy Spirit." *
23 Moralia, Lib. 9 in cap. 9 Job, sec. 17 (Migne, P.L., vol. 75, col. 868; Eng. edn.,
I, p. 507): "And thus ‘the South’ are those unseen orders of the Angels, and those
unfathomed depths of the heavenly country, which are filled with the heat of the
Holy Spirit. . . . There all the day, as at midday, the fire of the sun burns with a
brighter lustre, in that the brightness of our Creator, which is now overlaid with
the mists of our mortal state, is rendered more clearly visible; and the beam of
the orb seems to raise itself to higher regions, in that "Iruth' from Its own Self
enlightens us more completely through and through.AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
them health and great riches, the Biblical background of her
words indicating that her treasures are of a spiritual nature.’
Hence it is emphasized a little later that she is more precious
han "merchandise of silver and the most pure gold."
She is called, further, the "Wisdom of the south" or of the
"south wind" (austri), and is thus equated with the Biblical
“Queen of the south," the Queen of Sheba,!? who in alchemical
radition was, like Solomon," the author of alchemical works,
and was identified with Maria the Jewess, "sister of Moses.” 16
In patristic literature the Queen of Sheba was a prefiguration of
Mary. On the other hand, in the hermeneutics of the Church
Fathers the Queen of the south was also an image for the Church
as the “queen” and "concubine" of Christ," who was called the
"King of the south." !5 Indeed, this feminine figure was even
identified with God himself, who "shall go with the whirlwinds
of the south." !? The south wind is also a symbol of the Holy
Spirit, causing the minds of the elect to seethe, “that they may
bring about whatsoever good things they desire." ?? 'The equa-
12 This agrees with the oft-cited saying, “Our gold is not the common gold." Cf.
Senior, De chemia, p. 39. Origen (In Cant. Cant., Lib. II: Migne, P.G., vol. 13, col.
135) likewise distinguishes between common gold and a gold that represents "the
invisible and incorporeal nature."
13 Cf. Matt. 12 : 42.
14 Cf. the sayings of Suleiman in the Sefer ha-Tamar ("Book of the Palm") by Abu
Aflah (ed. Scholem), and Lippmann, I, pp. 12, 111, 156, 265, 309.
15 Ruska, Turba, p. 272. She is mentioned as “Bilqis,” Queen of Egypt, and is said
to have written, among others, a book beginning: "After I had ascended the
mountain . . .” Cf. Holmyard, “Abu’l Qasim al-'Iraqi,” p. 407.
16 Berthelot, Chimie au moyen áge, I, p. 242, III, pp. 28 and 125; Lippmann, I, p. 46.
17 Honorius, Expositio in Cant. Cant. (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, cols. 352-54).
18 Cf. the final struggle between the good "King of the south" and the wicked
"King of the north" in the Concordia of Joachim of Flora, V, cap. 93 (Hahn,
Geschichte der Ketzer, III, pp. 311f.). In what follows, my quotations from
Joachim are nearly always taken from Hahn, as I was unable to obtain a reliable
edition of Joachim's works.
19 Zech. 9 : 14.
20 St. Gregory the Great, Moralia, Lib. 27 in cap. 37 Job, sec. 63 (Migne, P.L., vol.
76, col. 436; Eng. edn., III, pt. 1, p. 247), and Super Cant. Cant. expositio, cap. 4,
v. 16 (Migne, P.L., vol. 79, col. 516): "By the south is signified a hot wind, namely,
the wind of the Holy Spirit, who toucheth the minds of the elect, relieving them
of all sloth and making them fervent, that they may bring about whatsoever good
things they desire." *
158

. There all the day, as at midday, the fire of the sun burns with a
brighter lustre, in that the brightness of our Creator, which is now overlaid with
the mists of our mortal state, is rendered more clearly visible; and the beam of
the orb seems to raise itself to higher regions, in that "Iruth' from Its own Self
enlightens us more completely through and through. There the light of interior
contemplation is seen without the intervening shadow of mutability.” * Cf. Knorr
von Rosenroth, Kabbala denudata, I, p. 260: “The south is Chesed, wherefore
our elders said: Whoso would be wise, let him turn himself to the south.” *
24 Holmyard, Kitab al-’ilm al-muktasab, p. 43: “. . . but what of the speech of
Hermes in which he says: ‘The great South wind when it acts makes the clouds to
rise and raises the cloud of the sea’? He said, if the powdering is not successful the
compound will not ascend into the top of the retort, and even if it do ascend it
will not pour into the receiver. It is necessary to mix with it the first and second
waters before it will ascend to the top of the retort. ‘That,’ he said, ‘is the Great
South Wind?’ He said: ‘Yea, O King,’” etc. Cf. also Holmyard, “Abu’l Qasim
al-'Iraqi," pp. 403ff. 25 According to Wisd. 7: 25f., Wisdom is a “vapour of the power of God and a
certain pure emanation of the glory of almighty God ... the brightness of
eternal light, and the unspotted mirror of God's majesty, and the image of his
goodness."
159AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
Who is wise, and understandeth this, of which Alphidius saith, that
men and children pass her by daily in the streets and public places,
and she is trodden into the mire by beasts of burden and by cattle?
'The Alphidius quotation says of this figure that she is trodden
into the mire by the ignorant, which means psychologically that
the feminine personification of the unconscious is rejected by the
prevailing collective views, with the result that the lapis, the
germ of the individuation process, is stifled.?9 The saying is
quoted with extraordinary frequency by the alchemists, and
almost always it refers to the stone of the wise,’ so that our
author obviously identifies Wisdom with the lapis. The same
identification can be found in a quotation from Alexander in
Petrus Bonus, who says in his Pretiosa margarita novella ?*
that the work comes about "by the addition of the secret stone,
which is not to be apprehended by the senses, but by the intellect
alone, through inspiration or divine revelation, or the teaching
ofasage. . . . And Alexander saith, There are two categories in
this art, namely, seeing with the eye and understanding with the
heart, and this is the hidden stone, which is fitly called a gift of
God . . . and this is the divine hidden stone, and unless it be
admixed with this stone alchemy would be brought to nought,
for it is itself very alchemy. . . . And this divine stone is the
heart and tincture of gold which the philosophers seek." Here
the stone is described as something invisible, as the God-given
gift of understanding, and alchemy is nothing other than this.
It is “gnosis.” Hence we can understand why the author of
Aurora makes Wisdom not only the guide but also the goal of
the alchemical opus.
And Senior saith: Nought is more base in appearance than she, and
nought is more precious in nature than she, and God also hath not
appointed her to be bought for a price. She it is that Solomon chose
to have instead of light, and above all beauty and health; in com-
26'The (Latin) translation, by Rufinus and Jerome, of Origen's In Cant. Cant.,
III (Migne, P.G., vol. 18, col. 180) runs: ‘For the Word of God and the Word of
Knowledge appears not openly and in public, nor is to be trampled underfoot, but
when it is sought, it is found." * Possibly this passage was known to the author
of Aurora.
27 Bibliotheca chemica, Il, p. 88b. Cf. Ruska, Turba, pp. 122, 142, 165, and Das
Buch der Alaune und Salze (ed. Ruska), p. 56.
28 Theatrum chemicum, V, p. 580.*
160I. HERE BEGINNETH THE TREATISE ..
parison of her he compared not unto her the virtue of any precious
stone. For all gold in her sight shall be esteemed as a little sand, and
silver shall be counted as clay; and this not without cause, for to
gain her is better than the merchandise of silver and the most pure
gold.
This passage gives expression to the well-known paradox that
the science or the lapis is utterly worthless and yet at the same
time a value that exceeds all earthly goods, though it is stressed
anew that the stone is an aurum non vulgi. The paradoxical
formulation that the stone is cheap and precious at once occurs
already in the oldest Greek texts. Zosimos says that the stone is
"contemned and much esteemed, not given yet given by God." ??
Similar paradoxes were made by the Church Fathers in their
sayings about Christ; for instance, Ephraem Syrus says that Christ
slept on a dunghill, and that dunghill then became the Church
pouring out men's prayers to God,?? and the allegories (figurae
et typi) of Christ are his "treasury hidden and of no worth, but
when it is opened it is wonderful to behold." ?! Psychologically,
this means nothing less than that the symbolical images in the
Church's teachings about Christ, by which he was assimilated
into the psychic matrix,?? are the despised though extremely valu-
able "prima materia" of our faith.?? It is also significant that
29 Berthelot, Alch. grecs, III, ii, 1 and III, vi, 6. Cf. Turba, p. 122: "A thing...
which is found everywhere, which is a stone and no stone, contemptible and
precious, hidden, concealed, and yet known to everyone." * P. 165: "How mar-
vellous is the diversity of the philosophers . . . and their agreement about this
most worthless little thing, by which the precious is governed. And if the multi-
tude . . . knew that most worthless little thing, they would hold it for a deceit;
but if they knew its power, they would not hold it as of no account.” * Cf. p. 142
and Das Buch der Alaune und Salze, p. 56. “And others have said that arsenic
itself is the stone of the nations, of little worth, and rejected and cast out of doors
and into the dunghills and sewers.” * The same sentences occur in “Le Livre
d'Ostanes": Berthelot, Moyen áge, III, p. 116.
30 Hymni et sermones (ed. Lamy), II, col. 508: “If thou [Christ] restest thy head
upon a stone, they divide it and snatch it away; if thou sleepest upon a dunghill,
it becometh the Church for the pouring out of prayers." *
31 Ibid., col. 770. * 32 Jung, Aion, pp. 181f.
33 Cf. Honorius of Autun's comment on Ps. 112:7 ("He lifts up the poor
man out of the dunghill”): "That which is rejected by men, is pleasant to our
Lord. .. . Behold, thus is the precious stone that lies hidden in the dunghill
lifted out of the cloaca of the stench of the world and set in the kingly diadem,
which sparkles with fiery gems, in a shining place." Speculum Ecclesiae (Migne,
P.L., vol. 172, col. 1062).
161AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
'Thomas Aquinas, in his commentary (I. 1. 9) to the Epistle to
the Hebrews, points out that the "corpora vilia" are particularly
apt as a representation of the deity.?*
These *materiae viles" are, psychologically speaking, the
images and symbols that rise up directly from the unconscious
and have not been judged, interpreted, or changed into anything
else by the discriminative activity of the collective consciousness.
They are the real prima materia of every religious experience,
but the tragedy is that they are always “trodden into the mire"
by the prevailing collective opinions.
Length of days and health are in her right hand, and in her left hand
glory and infinite riches. Her ways are beautiful operation and praise-
worthy, not unsightly nor ill-favoured, and her paths are measured
and not hasty, but are bound up with stubborn and day-long toil.
She is a tree of life to them that lay hold on her, and an unfailing
light. Blessed shall they be who retain her, for the science of God
shall never perish, as Alphidius beareth witness, for he saith: He who
hath found this science, it shall be his rightful food for ever. And
Hermes . . . saith, that if a man who hath this science should live
for a thousand years, and every day must feed seven thousand men,
yet should he never lack.
Wisdom is described further in terms of her Biblical personi-
fication: she is praised as the source of long life and health, as a
tree of life, as the everlasting and inexhaustible food of mankind,
and as an unfailing light. All these images are archetypal and
play a great role in alchemical and patristic literature.?5
34 Cf. White, “St. Thomas’ Conception of Revelation,” p. 11. Also St. Bonaventure,
In I Sent., Dist. III, art. 1, q. 3, ad 2 (I, p. 75): “Creatures may be considered as
things or as symbols." * Thomas’s teacher, Albertus Magnus, was also fond of
illustrating his Biblical exegesis with alchemical images: “They believed that
[Christ] was not God, and he who was the purest gold they believed to be cop-
per." * Mariale (Borgnet, XX XVII, p. 242; cf. also p. 243).
35 The quotations in this part of the text show a striking affinity with the intro-
duction to Mariale, attributed to Albertus. We must bear this in mind when con-
sidering whether Thomas was the author of Aurore. Mariale, Prooemium
(Borgnet, XXXVII, p. 1) runs: "Wisdom is glorious and never fadeth away, as it is
written (Wisd. 6 : 13-17) and is easily seen by them that love her, and is found by
them that seek her. She preventeth them that covet her, so that she first sheweth
herself unto them. He that waketh early to seek her shall not labour; for he shall
find her sitting at his door. To think therefore upon her is perfect understanding;
and he that watcheth for her shall quickly be secure. For she goeth about seeking
such as are worthy of her; and she sheweth herself to them cheerfully in the
162I. HERE BEGINNETH THE TREATISE . .. In alchemy the tree ?* is primarily an image for the prima
materia which gradually unfolds during the transformation
process and is "sufficient unto itself." For its interpretation the
reader is referred to Jung’s essay "The Philosophical Tree.” 37
The tree symbolizes the individuation process in the sense of liv-
ing one's own life and thereby becoming conscious of the self,
He.) Pmosis.*8
The images which liken Wisdom to “unfailing light" and
"rightful food" require no further explanation.?? They symbolize
the stream of contents that flows like a spiritual substance from
the unconscious or, as the alchemists would say, from the “lumen
naturae," *? which the adept felt as divine illumination. Being
ways and meeteth them with all providence. Also it is written Ecclus. 24: 29ff.:
“They that eat me shall yet hunger; and they that drink me shall yet thirst. He
that hearkeneth to me shall not be confounded: and they that work by me shall
not sin. They that explain me shall have life everlasting.’ " *
36 In the Greek “Oracles of Apollo" (Berthelot, Alch. grecs, IV, vii, 2) it is said
that the divine water "rises like a virginal laurel to the cover of the vessel," and
Zosimos describes how the water in the bowl-shaped altar of the cosmos unfolds
like a tree and bears flowers and fruit (IV, i). The tree also plays a large role in
Arabic literature. Thus the Kitab al-'ilm al-muktasab (Holmyard, p. 23) says:
“This prime matter . . . is taken from a single tree which grows in the lands of
the West . . . and this tree grows on the surface of the ocean as plants grow on
the surface of the earth. This is the tree of which whosoever eats, man and jinn
obey him; it is also the tree of which Adam (peace be upon him!) was forbidden
to eat, and when he ate he was transformed from his angelic form to human
form.AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
'Thomas Aquinas, in his commentary (I. 1. 9) to the Epistle to
the Hebrews, points out that the "corpora vilia" are particularly
apt as a representation of the deity.?*
These *materiae viles" are, psychologically speaking, the
images and symbols that rise up directly from the unconscious
and have not been judged, interpreted, or changed into anything
else by the discriminative activity of the collective consciousness.
They are the real prima materia of every religious experience,
but the tragedy is that they are always “trodden into the mire"
by the prevailing collective opinions.
Length of days and health are in her right hand, and in her left hand
glory and infinite riches. Her ways are beautiful operation and praise-
worthy, not unsightly nor ill-favoured, and her paths are measured
and not hasty, but are bound up with stubborn and day-long toil.
She is a tree of life to them that lay hold on her, and an unfailing
light. Blessed shall they be who retain her, for the science of God
shall never perish, as Alphidius beareth witness, for he saith: He who
hath found this science, it shall be his rightful food for ever. And
Hermes . . . saith, that if a man who hath this science should live
for a thousand years, and every day must feed seven thousand men,
yet should he never lack.
Wisdom is described further in terms of her Biblical personi-
fication: she is praised as the source of long life and health, as a
tree of life, as the everlasting and inexhaustible food of mankind,
and as an unfailing light. All these images are archetypal and
play a great role in alchemical and patristic literature.?5
34 Cf. White, “St. Thomas’ Conception of Revelation,” p. 11. Also St. Bonaventure,
In I Sent., Dist. III, art. 1, q. 3, ad 2 (I, p. 75): “Creatures may be considered as
things or as symbols." * Thomas’s teacher, Albertus Magnus, was also fond of
illustrating his Biblical exegesis with alchemical images: “They believed that
[Christ] was not God, and he who was the purest gold they believed to be cop-
per." * Mariale (Borgnet, XX XVII, p. 242; cf. also p. 243).
35 The quotations in this part of the text show a striking affinity with the intro-
duction to Mariale, attributed to Albertus. We must bear this in mind when con-
sidering whether Thomas was the author of Aurore. Mariale, Prooemium
(Borgnet, XXXVII, p. 1) runs: "Wisdom is glorious and never fadeth away, as it is
written (Wisd. 6 : 13-17) and is easily seen by them that love her, and is found by
them that seek her. She preventeth them that covet her, so that she first sheweth
herself unto them. He that waketh early to seek her shall not labour; for he shall
find her sitting at his door. To think therefore upon her is perfect understanding;
and he that watcheth for her shall quickly be secure. For she goeth about seeking
such as are worthy of her; and she sheweth herself to them cheerfully in the
162

and this tree grows on the surface of the ocean as plants grow on
the surface of the earth. This is the tree of which whosoever eats, man and jinn
obey him; it is also the tree of which Adam (peace be upon him!) was forbidden
to eat, and when he ate he was transformed from his angelic form to human
form. And this tree may be changed into every animal shape." Among the Arabs
is also to be found the Platonic and Orphic idea of man as an inverted tree
growing down from heaven. Cf. Kern, Orphicorum fragmenta, p. 244, no. 2282:
“The soul takes root in men from heaven" (or: "the soul in men is rooted in
heaven").* Also Senior, De chemia, pp. 75f.: “The stone of the wise is produced
in itself and from it come the roots, branches, leaves, flowers, and fruits; for it is
like a tree whose branches, leaves, flowers, and fruits spring from itself, that
exist through it and belong to it, and it is the whole and the whole springs from
it." Cf. also Ephraem Syrus, Hymni et sermones, II, col. 538: "Mary and the tree
are one. The Lamb hung on its branches . . ." * The cross is the tree of life (col. 612). 37 Also Psychology and Alchemy, index, s.v. “Arbor philosophica."
38 For a similar conception of the word "gnosis" see Quispel, Gnosis als Welt-
religion, p. 17: “Gnosis is a mythical projection of experience of the self,” i.e., of
the individuation process. 39 Cf. Ruska, Das Buch der Alaune und Salze, p. 92, where Mercurius says: “If
anyone should unite me with my brother and my sister, he will live and rejoice,
and I shall suffice for him for ever, even though he live for a million years.”
40 For the history of this concept see Jung, “On the Nature of the Psyche,” pp. 190ff. 163AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
inexhaustible, Wisdom also acts like a fire which burns without
end.
This doth Senior confirm, saying: That such a one is as rich as he
that hath a stone from which fire is struck, who can give fire to whom
he will and as much as he will and when he will without loss to him-
self. The same is the intent of Aristotle in his second book Of the
Soul, when he saith: To the size and growth of all things in nature
a limit is appointed, but fire by the addition of combustible matter
waxes without end.
The quotation is from a genuine work of Aristotle's, De
anima. Aristotle emphasizes there, in refutation of other theories,
that the soul or reason is the cause of all limitation of growth,
and not fire. The soul sets limits, and thereby gives the body its
form.*! This conception was further elaborated during the Mid-
dle Ages. Thomas Aquinas, for instance, regarded the soul not
only as the “form” *? of the body, but as a form which possesses
its own substantiality and also imparts it.*? It can act creatively
on its own account and is thus an “ens in actu" (actual being).
Matter, in itself formless, becomes invested with its actual prop-
erties only in so far as it receives form from the soul.**
41 Supra, p. 9, n. 13.
42 “Form” is used here in the Aristotelian or Thomist sense. Cf. Sertillanges, Der
HI. Thomas von Aquin, pp. 124ff.
43 For a full discussion of this question see Gilson, The Spirit of Medieval Philos-
ophy, p. 183 and notes. It is the soul or "intellect," an incorporeal substance, that
organizes and forms its own material body by co-operating with the elements. Cf.
St. Thomas, De anima, II, lect. 8 (Eng. edn., p. 223): “The soul of a living being
is to the elements it contains as form is to matter." * Summa, I, q. 75, art. 2 resp.
(Eng. edn., I, p. 364): "Now only that which subsists can have an operation per se.
For nothing can operate but what is actual; . . . we must conclude, therefore,
that the human soul, which is called the intellect or the mind, is something in-
corporeal and subsistent." * Summa, I, q. 76, art. 1 resp. (Eng. edn., I, p. 372):
"Thus from the very operation of the intellect it is made clear that the intel-
lectual principle is united to the body as its form." *
44“And hence [the soul] is united to the body in order that it may have an
existence and an operation suitable to its nature." * (Summa, I, q. 89, art. 1 resp.;
Eng. edn., I, p. 452.) In all these definitions Thomas, like Albertus, is to a large
extent dependent on Avicenna. Cf. the latter's De anima, cap. I: "Now we will say
then, that the soul can be called a power or potentiality in relation to the affec-
tions which issue from it. ... It can also be called a perfection inasmuch as
the genus is perfected by it and the species has its being through it," etc.* The
soul is the "end and perfection" of everything: “Therefore it is a power of the
soul which hath other powers, of which this is one, which all strive to this end,
164I. HERE BEGINNETH THE TREATISE... In the light of these conceptions it is clear that Wisdom is not
a personification of the individual soul, for the author likens her
to a firestone from which inexhaustible fire can be struck,*® and
emphasizes that though all natural things have a limit to their
extension, and thus have form, fire does not. 'The firestone is
therefore an image for Wisdom in respect of her difference from
all forms and formed things, the difference being that she can
bestow unending life without ever exhausting herself.$ Her
action, unlike that of the soul, does not aim at individual form
but is capable of infinite extension. She gives the prime impulse
towards all being and all knowing in their endlessly diverse
forms, and as an inexhaustible vitalizing principle her range of
action is unlimited. She therefore acts transpersonally, beyond
and outside the individual, as an ordering principle showing
him the way, "directing the steps" of the alchemist, as the next
sentence says. This only confirms that psychologically she is not
the personal aspect of the man's anima (in medieval language,
not the anima humana as the "form of the body"),* but is a
that the skill with the instruments may attain to the second perfection of the soul
itself.” * Incidentally, the same De anima passage as the one in Aurora (pp. 36f.)
is cited in the commentary on the Wisdom of Solomon by Meister Eckhart, who
took over a good deal from St. Thomas. (Cf. Thery, "Le Commentaire de Maitre
Eckhart," pp. 237f.) Meister Eckhart comments on this passage as follows: ““There-
fore the ideas of motion and magnitude or dimension, considered as a prior form
in matter, as the Commentator [Averroes] so well says in De substantia Orbis, axe
infinite, and for this reason there can be something that is more mobile than any
mobile thing. God, therefore, since he is infinite, and not restricted by any other
motion or operation, can operate or move more swiftly.AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
inexhaustible, Wisdom also acts like a fire which burns without
end.
This doth Senior confirm, saying: That such a one is as rich as he
that hath a stone from which fire is struck, who can give fire to whom
he will and as much as he will and when he will without loss to him-
self. The same is the intent of Aristotle in his second book Of the
Soul, when he saith: To the size and growth of all things in nature
a limit is appointed, but fire by the addition of combustible matter
waxes without end.
The quotation is from a genuine work of Aristotle's, De
anima. Aristotle emphasizes there, in refutation of other theories,
that the soul or reason is the cause of all limitation of growth,
and not fire. The soul sets limits, and thereby gives the body its
form.*! This conception was further elaborated during the Mid-
dle Ages. Thomas Aquinas, for instance, regarded the soul not
only as the “form” *? of the body, but as a form which possesses
its own substantiality and also imparts it.*? It can act creatively
on its own account and is thus an “ens in actu" (actual being).
Matter, in itself formless, becomes invested with its actual prop-
erties only in so far as it receives form from the soul.**
41 Supra, p. 9, n. 13.
42 “Form” is used here in the Aristotelian or Thomist sense. Cf. Sertillanges, Der
HI. Thomas von Aquin, pp. 124ff.
43 For a full discussion of this question see Gilson, The Spirit of Medieval Philos-
ophy, p. 183 and notes. It is the soul or "intellect," an incorporeal substance, that
organizes and forms its own material body by co-operating with the elements. Cf.
St. Thomas, De anima, II, lect. 8 (Eng. edn., p. 223): “The soul of a living being
is to the elements it contains as form is to matter." * Summa, I, q. 75, art. 2 resp.
(Eng. edn., I, p. 364): "Now only that which subsists can have an operation per se.
For nothing can operate but what is actual; . . . we must conclude, therefore,
that the human soul, which is called the intellect or the mind, is something in-
corporeal and subsistent." * Summa, I, q. 76, art. 1 resp. (Eng. edn., I, p. 372):
"Thus from the very operation of the intellect it is made clear that the intel-
lectual principle is united to the body as its form." *
44“And hence [the soul] is united to the body in order that it may have an
existence and an operation suitable to its nature." * (Summa, I, q. 89, art. 1 resp.;
Eng. edn., I, p. 452.) In all these definitions Thomas, like Albertus, is to a large
extent dependent on Avicenna. Cf. the latter's De anima, cap. I: "Now we will say
then, that the soul can be called a power or potentiality in relation to the affec-
tions which issue from it. ... It can also be called a perfection inasmuch as
the genus is perfected by it and the species has its being through it," etc.* The
soul is the "end and perfection" of everything: “Therefore it is a power of the
soul which hath other powers, of which this is one, which all strive to this end,
164

237f.) Meister Eckhart comments on this passage as follows: ““There-
fore the ideas of motion and magnitude or dimension, considered as a prior form
in matter, as the Commentator [Averroes] so well says in De substantia Orbis, axe
infinite, and for this reason there can be something that is more mobile than any
mobile thing. God, therefore, since he is infinite, and not restricted by any other
motion or operation, can operate or move more swiftly. Therefore the Wise Man,
wishing to point out in a hidden and subtle manner the infinity of God and of
his wisdom, well says: Wisdom is more mobile [D.V. active] than all mobile [D.V. active] things. Again the imagination in dealing with magnitude is able to imagine
something greater than any great thing, even heaven. Thus Augustine in his
work De quantitate animae proves that the soul is greater than the whole
world." *
45 This is also an allegory of Christ. Cf. Psychology and Alchemy, par. 451. 46 St. Thomas, Summa, I, q. 25, art. 3 resp. (Eng. edn., I, p. 138): “The divine
existence, however, upon which the nature of power in God is founded, is in-
finite, and is not limited to any genus of being, but possesses within itself the
perfection of all being.” *
47 Albertus, De anima, II, ii, 4, refutes the view of certain contemporaries that
the soul is a “virtue of fire": “because fire alone of all bodies is nourished and
increased by its own virtue . . . by the addition of combustible things." * Cf. supra, p. 9, n. 13. 165AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
purely archetypal anima figure, the feminine aspect of the God-
image.‘® As an archetype, she is in fact form without limitation,
eternal and yet manifest and repeatable in an infinite number of
individuals.
The comparison of Wisdom with fire is in this context no
accident, as it is an allusion to the ignis occultus or ignis noster
of the alchemists.f? This is a a symbolic fire, whose meaning
could best be rendered by the modern conception of psychic
energy.5? Flame or fire is a widespread symbol for the soul,®* and
as an image for psychic energy it seems to have been venerated
in many primitive religions as something divine. It plays as cen-
tral a role in the religious life of those communities as the God-
image does in ours. (God showed himself to Moses in the burn-
ing bush, and Christ is named eternal fire.) 5? Later in the text
we shall come upon the fire symbolism of the Holy Ghost.
The archetypal idea of a cosmic, divine energy capable of
consciousness was not confined in the Middle Ages to certain
symbols of the Holy Ghost, but was resuscitated, sometimes in
modified form, in the concept of the intellectus agens or vos
moutixds (active intellect) . This concept and the discussions that
grew up around it seem to me psychologically so important that
I would like to go into this question more closely.
The main source for the medieval conception of the intel-
lectus agens is Ibn Sina (Avicenna).® In his view, cognition arises
because man is open to the influence of the intelligentia agens
(active intelligence), which is a cosmic 5* reality whose rays can
48 According to Albertus (ibid.) fire is “the most incorporeal and spiritual of all
the elements." Honorius in his Elucidarium (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, col. 1113) says
that the nature of the angels is a "spiritual fire" (Hebr. 1 : 7). “Eternal fire" is a
symbol of Christ (Ephraem Syrus, I, col. 350).
49 Psychology and Alchemy, pars. 157, 336f.
50 Jung, “On Psychic Energy," pp. 28ff.
51 Psychology and Alchemy, par. 370, n. 57.
52“He that is near to me is near to the fire. He that is far from me is far from
the kingdom.” Uncanonical saying from Origen, In Jer. hom., XX, 3 (Migne,
P.G., vol. 13, col. 532), cited in James, Apocryphal New Testament, p. 35. For
the dark aspect of this fire see Psychology and Alchemy, par. 215. The Holy Ghost
likewise is a fire (miracle of Pentecost).
53 I shall not go deeper here into the Aristotelian yois rounrixés, because Avicenna
was the chief transmitter at the time Aurora was written. Cf. Gilson, "Pourquoi
St. Thomas a critiqué St. Augustin," pp. 5ff., esp. p. 7.
54 That is, present in nature.
166I. HERE BEGINNETH THE TREATISE... be likened to rays of light.55 This intelligence dwells in the plane-
tary spheres and is an extra-psychic force present in nature, and
the root of all human cognition ** (for which reason Avicenna’s
theory of knowledge, according to peripatetic tradition, pertains
to physics). When the soul comes into contact with the intellectus
agens she becomes "reflective"; and when she soars up to it “in
inspired surmise," a holy power streams into her which causes
prophecy. Albertus Magnus and Maimonides took over this con-
ception practically unaltered,5* whereas William of Auvergne 5$
and others rejected it completely. From a psychological point of
view it seems to me a very significant one. For Avicenna, the
cosmic intellectus agens corresponded to the idea of a quasi-
conscious meaning inherent in the objective physical processes
of nature,*?? and thus it corresponds to Jung's concept of an ‘‘abso-
lute knowledge.” 9? According to Avicenna, man's ego is receptive to the intel-
55 Haneberg, "Zur Erkenntnislehre von Ibn Sina und Albertus Magnus," p. 197. 56 According to Avicenna there are many such intelligences ruling the individual
planetary spheres; the one that influences man is the sublunar intelligence. (Gilson, “Pourquoi St. Thomas," pp. 38-49). Cf. also Grabmann, “Mittelalterliche
Deutung und Umbildung der aristot. Lehre vom pois roinrixés-”
57 Haneberg, p. 247. Cf. the Avicenna quotation in Petrus Hispanus, afterwards
Pope John XXI, cited in Gilson, “Les Sources gréco-arabes de l'augustinisme
avicennisant," p. 106: "The fifth mode [of knowing] is to know a thing by the
uplifting and withdrawal of the mind itself. And of this kind of uplifting the
Philosopher [sc., of course, Aristotle] never speaks, but Avicenna speaks thus of it
in his book De anima, where he says that there are two aspects of the intellect.AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
purely archetypal anima figure, the feminine aspect of the God-
image.‘® As an archetype, she is in fact form without limitation,
eternal and yet manifest and repeatable in an infinite number of
individuals.
The comparison of Wisdom with fire is in this context no
accident, as it is an allusion to the ignis occultus or ignis noster
of the alchemists.f? This is a a symbolic fire, whose meaning
could best be rendered by the modern conception of psychic
energy.5? Flame or fire is a widespread symbol for the soul,®* and
as an image for psychic energy it seems to have been venerated
in many primitive religions as something divine. It plays as cen-
tral a role in the religious life of those communities as the God-
image does in ours. (God showed himself to Moses in the burn-
ing bush, and Christ is named eternal fire.) 5? Later in the text
we shall come upon the fire symbolism of the Holy Ghost.
The archetypal idea of a cosmic, divine energy capable of
consciousness was not confined in the Middle Ages to certain
symbols of the Holy Ghost, but was resuscitated, sometimes in
modified form, in the concept of the intellectus agens or vos
moutixds (active intellect) . This concept and the discussions that
grew up around it seem to me psychologically so important that
I would like to go into this question more closely.
The main source for the medieval conception of the intel-
lectus agens is Ibn Sina (Avicenna).® In his view, cognition arises
because man is open to the influence of the intelligentia agens
(active intelligence), which is a cosmic 5* reality whose rays can
48 According to Albertus (ibid.) fire is “the most incorporeal and spiritual of all
the elements." Honorius in his Elucidarium (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, col. 1113) says
that the nature of the angels is a "spiritual fire" (Hebr. 1 : 7). “Eternal fire" is a
symbol of Christ (Ephraem Syrus, I, col. 350).
49 Psychology and Alchemy, pars. 157, 336f.
50 Jung, “On Psychic Energy," pp. 28ff.
51 Psychology and Alchemy, par. 370, n. 57.
52“He that is near to me is near to the fire. He that is far from me is far from
the kingdom.” Uncanonical saying from Origen, In Jer. hom., XX, 3 (Migne,
P.G., vol. 13, col. 532), cited in James, Apocryphal New Testament, p. 35. For
the dark aspect of this fire see Psychology and Alchemy, par. 215. The Holy Ghost
likewise is a fire (miracle of Pentecost).
53 I shall not go deeper here into the Aristotelian yois rounrixés, because Avicenna
was the chief transmitter at the time Aurora was written. Cf. Gilson, "Pourquoi
St. Thomas a critiqué St. Augustin," pp. 5ff., esp. p. 7.
54 That is, present in nature.
166

106: "The fifth mode [of knowing] is to know a thing by the
uplifting and withdrawal of the mind itself. And of this kind of uplifting the
Philosopher [sc., of course, Aristotle] never speaks, but Avicenna speaks thus of it
in his book De anima, where he says that there are two aspects of the intellect. One is that which the intellect has towards the lower powers, according as the
active intellect receives from the possible intellect. The other is that which the
intellect has by withdrawal and uplifting from all material conditions, and this
it has through relation to the inflowing Intelligence. And when the soul is thus
uplifted, the Intelligence uncovers to it many things. Thus Avicenna says that it
remembers past things and foretells future things, and can command rain to
fall and thunder to sound, and can do harm through the evil eye. Hence Avicenna
says that the bewitching eye causes the dog [or possibly the old woman] to fall
into the ditch, and thus are those upraised who are in ecstasy, such as religious,
contemplatives, and maniacs and phrenetics, and in this way the soul knows the
First Being and itself in its essence by its own reflection upon itself." *
58 Gilson, "Pourquoi St. Thomas," p. 58. 59 Intellectus agens might be translated "creative meaning."
60 “Synchronicity: An Acausal Connecting Principle," pp. 481, 493, 506. Nous
poietikos seems to me the Occidental concept that comes closest to the Chinese
tao. (A classical parallel would be the Heraclitan fire.)
167AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
lectus agens.*! We know today that all thinking which takes place
in our ego-consciousness obscures that "absolute knowledge,"
and that an abaissement du niveau mental is required before
one can approach it. 'Thomas Aquinas modified the idea of the intellectus agens
as a cosmic principle outside the psyche by attributing the ca-
pacity for abstract thought to an intellectus agens within the
human soul (as we would say, in the unconscious), calling it a
“natural light." Its other aspect, that of a source of illumination
external to man, he identified with God or with Sapientia Dei.”
For the subtler details I must refer the reader to the work of
Gilson. He writes: 8? "God enlightens our souls in so far as he
has bestowed upon them the natural light thanks to which they
know, and which is that of the active intellect. . . . This active
intellect is indeed always in actu, but the soul possesses also a
possible intellect, and actually knows itself only through the co-
operation of its possible intellect 8* with its active intellect.” 95
In the act of contemplation the intellectus agens brings about
contact with Sapientia Dei, whereby an assimilation of the
human mind to God can take place.®* In this theory of St. 61 In his view, the ego would be the "intelligentia in potentia" and "consideratio
vel cogitatio." Gilson, “Pourquoi St. Thomas,” pp. 41f. 62 Ibid., pp. 61ff. Cf. Grabmann, “Die Aristotelesübersetzungen," pp. 112f., and Gil-
son, “Les Sources gréco-arabes," p. 107. Subsequently, Albertus sided with St. Thomas (Haneberg, p. 219). Roger Bacon also distinguished between an intellect
that worked actively upon the soul and a passive-receptive intellect within the soul. "Opus tertium," cap. XXIII (Brewer, p.106: "The fifth mode [of knowing] is to know a thing by the
uplifting and withdrawal of the mind itself. And of this kind of uplifting the
Philosopher [sc., of course, Aristotle] never speaks, but Avicenna speaks thus of it
in his book De anima, where he says that there are two aspects of the intellect. One is that which the intellect has towards the lower powers, according as the
active intellect receives from the possible intellect. The other is that which the
intellect has by withdrawal and uplifting from all material conditions, and this
it has through relation to the inflowing Intelligence. And when the soul is thus
uplifted, the Intelligence uncovers to it many things. Thus Avicenna says that it
remembers past things and foretells future things, and can command rain to
fall and thunder to sound, and can do harm through the evil eye. Hence Avicenna
says that the bewitching eye causes the dog [or possibly the old woman] to fall
into the ditch, and thus are those upraised who are in ecstasy, such as religious,
contemplatives, and maniacs and phrenetics, and in this way the soul knows the
First Being and itself in its essence by its own reflection upon itself." *
58 Gilson, "Pourquoi St. Thomas," p. 58. 59 Intellectus agens might be translated "creative meaning."
60 “Synchronicity: An Acausal Connecting Principle," pp. 481, 493, 506. Nous
poietikos seems to me the Occidental concept that comes closest to the Chinese
tao. (A classical parallel would be the Heraclitan fire.)
167

"Opus tertium," cap. XXIII (Brewer, p. 74): "For all the moderns say that the
active intellect in our souls, enlightening them, is part of the soul, so that in the
soul there are two parts: that is to say, the active and the possible; and that is
called the possible intellect which is in a state of potentiality to knowledge, and
has it not of itself; but when it receives the forms of things, and the agent influences
and illuminates it, then knowledge comes to birth in it. . . . And all the ancient
sages, and those who have remained unto our own times, have said that this was
God." * Cf. Grabmann, “Die mittelalterliche Lehre,” p. 10. 63 “Pourquoi St. Thomas,” pp. 6ef. 64'The intellectus possibilis would correspond with our modern concept of con-
sciousness. 65 Cf. Siewerth, "Die Aprioritit der menschlichen Erkenntnis nach Thomas von
Aquin," pp. 105f. 66 Summa, I-II, q. 93, art. 5 resp. (Eng. edn., I, p. 599): “Thirdly it should again
be evident from this that in the contemplative life man has something in
common with the things above him, viz., with God and the angels, to whom he is
made like by happiness. . . . The likeness of the speculative intellect to God is
one of union and information." * According to Thomas, the intrapsychic intel-
lectus agens is a gift of God. 168I. HERE BEGINNETH THE TREATISE...
Thomas’s the vois zouyrixds, or "absolute knowledge," is partially
integrated in man. The Thomist splitting-up of the nous-concept
signifies, from the psychological standpoint, an advance of con-
sciousness. Generally when an unconscious content becomes con-
scious it is first split up, one part entering into association with
the field of consciousness centred by the ego, the other remain-
ing in the unconscious or being projected into the extrapsychic
realm. Our Western intellect, as it developed at the time of
Scholasticism, seems to have arisen in this way: one portion of
our "pre-conscious thinking" was asserted to be the operation of
the subject, the rest remained pre-conscious and was projected
into the non-human realm, in other words, it was personified in
the “metaphysical” figure of Sapientia Dei. The important thing
is that the part which remained in the non-human realm no
longer continued to be, as in Avicenna, a purely masculine con-
cept ("intellectus") but was identified with Sapientia Dei: in
psychological language, it entered the sphere of the archetypal
anima-image.
The intrapsychic part of the intellectus agens is, according
to Thomas, capable of producing, in conjunction with sense-
experience, those first principles upon which man is able to erect
a scientific system. He can then formulate his truths because he
is in active participation with the original truth of God.* '"The
human soul knows all things in the eternal types, since by partici-
pation of these types we know all things. For the intellectual light
which is in us is nothing else than a participated likeness of the
uncreated light, in which are contained the eternal types." 9
Illumination, therefore, does not come down only “from above"
to man, who in himself is blind; according to St. Thomas there
is an intellectual light innate in man, which by "participated
likeness" is capable of knowing the first principles. Prophecy, for
instance, is due to this. In Thomas's view there are two kinds of
prophecy,” one that refers to “things which are to be believed by
all and are matters of faith, and another that is given only to
the perfect and concerns the higher mysteries." The latter kind
67 Gilson, The Spirit of Medieval Philosophy, p. 140: "From the time of St.
Thomas, we are henceforth in possession of a natural light, that of the active
intellect. . . . Like [Aristotle's active intellect] it is capable, on contact with
sensible experience, of generating first principles, and with these and of these, it
will gradually build up the system of the sciences."
€ Summa, L, q. 84, art. 5 resp. (Eng. edn., I, p. 427).*
$9 Summa, II-1I, q. 171 prolog. (Eng. edn., II, p. 1889).*
169AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
belongs to Wisdom.*" Equally, there are two ways of knowing
the truth: "one which comes of nature, and one which comes of
grace. The knowledge which comes of grace is likewise twofold:
the first is purely speculative, as when divine secrets are revealed
to someone, the second is affective knowledge, which produces
love for God and properly belongs to the gift of Wisdom." ™
Wisdom therefore contains higher mysteries than faith.
These amplifications may suffice to shed light on the nature
of Wisdom in Aurora as an entirely trans-personal power.??
The concept of the intellectus agens also coincides psycho-
logically with Jung’s conception of the “luminosity” (or twi-
light consciousness) of archetypal contents in the unconscious.
Jung comes to the conclusion that the archetypes, in conformity
with the cosmic function of the nous, must possess a non-psychic,
or "psychoid," aspect which even causes them to appear as order-
ing factors in the physical space-time continuum.*? We may re-
call that what St. Thomas calls the intellectus divinus or
wisdom of God has in Avicenna the character of a power ob-
jectively present in created nature as an intellectus agens or in-
telligentia influens. If we try to translate this concept into mod- -
ern psychological terms, it would mean that there exists in nature
and in the collective unconscious, at least potentially, a kind of
70 Elsewhere Thomas also distinguishes a "perfect prophecy": “When a man
knows that he is being moved by the Holy Ghost . . . this belongs properly to
prophecy: whereas when he is moved without his knowing it, this is not perfect
prophecy, but a prophetic instinct.” * Summa, H-II, q. 173, art. 4 resp. (Eng. edn.,
II, p. 1905). The latter kind is caused by *a most mysterious instinct to which the
human mind is subjected without knowing it." * Q. 172, art. 5 resp. (Eng. edn,
II, p. 1894).
T1 Summa, I, q. 64, art. 1 resp. (Eng. edn,, I, p. 330).* Cf. White, “St. Thomas’
Conception of Revelation," p. 5.
72 Cf. further the interesting definition of intellectus in Gundissalinus, De immor-
talitate animae, p. 35: “The power of the intellect does not have its end in its oper-
ation, nor does it have its end in time." * (This agrees with the definition of fire
in Aurora.) And on p. 31: “But if anyone should say that. the intellect is in no
wise a form nor has a form, and that therefore it is impossible for it to act: we
reply, that the intellect is itself, in its being and in its species, a form. As the
crystalline humour or visible spirit is in its being a form, and yet in regard to light
and colours is after a certain manner material: so likewise is the intellect to all
intelligibles which are outside it. Nor does it act, inasmuch as it is material, in
this way, that is of its essence, but through its form . . .” *
73 Jung, "On the Nature of the Psyche,” pp. 229IE, and “Synchronicity,” pp. 481,
493t.
170I. HERE BEGINNETH THE TREATISE . .. E— ——€ —rer —— e—e
objective consciousness or mind from which the individual ego-
consciousness is derived only secondarily and through which it is
expanded by “illumination.” This agrees remarkably well with
the facts known to us from depth-psychology and presented in
Jung’s essay “On the Nature of the Psyche." On closer investi-
gation, the contents of the unconscious do not seem to be plunged
in complete darkness—nor, indeed, could anything be predicated
of such an aspect of the unconscious—but to be only relatively
unconscious, just as, conversely, the contents of consciousness are
hardly ever perceived in all their aspects but are also partially
unconscious.** The unconscious state of a psychic content must
therefore be conceived as a relative one, and we should not
imagine that the light of ego-consciousness is set against the total
darkness of the unconscious. Even the light of consciousness
has, as Jung points out,’* many degrees of luminosity, and the
74 Accordingly, one might be tempted to regard the unconscious as a psychic state
that does not differ in principle from consciousness. Experience does show, how-
ever, that the state of unconscious contents is not quite the same as that of con-
scious ones. As Jung explains, feeling-toned complexes, for example, are conserved
in their original form; they even acquire the “uninfluenceable and compulsive
character of an automatism,” and finally they assume, “by self-amplification, an
archaic and mythological character and hence a certain numinosity. . . . These
peculiarities of the unconscious state contrast very strongly with the way com-
plexes behave in the conscious mind. Here they can be corrected: they lose their
automatic character and can be substantially transformed.AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
belongs to Wisdom.*" Equally, there are two ways of knowing
the truth: "one which comes of nature, and one which comes of
grace. The knowledge which comes of grace is likewise twofold:
the first is purely speculative, as when divine secrets are revealed
to someone, the second is affective knowledge, which produces
love for God and properly belongs to the gift of Wisdom." ™
Wisdom therefore contains higher mysteries than faith.
These amplifications may suffice to shed light on the nature
of Wisdom in Aurora as an entirely trans-personal power.??
The concept of the intellectus agens also coincides psycho-
logically with Jung’s conception of the “luminosity” (or twi-
light consciousness) of archetypal contents in the unconscious.
Jung comes to the conclusion that the archetypes, in conformity
with the cosmic function of the nous, must possess a non-psychic,
or "psychoid," aspect which even causes them to appear as order-
ing factors in the physical space-time continuum.*? We may re-
call that what St. Thomas calls the intellectus divinus or
wisdom of God has in Avicenna the character of a power ob-
jectively present in created nature as an intellectus agens or in-
telligentia influens. If we try to translate this concept into mod- -
ern psychological terms, it would mean that there exists in nature
and in the collective unconscious, at least potentially, a kind of
70 Elsewhere Thomas also distinguishes a "perfect prophecy": “When a man
knows that he is being moved by the Holy Ghost . . . this belongs properly to
prophecy: whereas when he is moved without his knowing it, this is not perfect
prophecy, but a prophetic instinct.” * Summa, H-II, q. 173, art. 4 resp. (Eng. edn.,
II, p. 1905). The latter kind is caused by *a most mysterious instinct to which the
human mind is subjected without knowing it." * Q. 172, art. 5 resp. (Eng. edn,
II, p. 1894).
T1 Summa, I, q. 64, art. 1 resp. (Eng. edn,, I, p. 330).* Cf. White, “St. Thomas’
Conception of Revelation," p. 5.
72 Cf. further the interesting definition of intellectus in Gundissalinus, De immor-
talitate animae, p. 35: “The power of the intellect does not have its end in its oper-
ation, nor does it have its end in time." * (This agrees with the definition of fire
in Aurora.) And on p. 31: “But if anyone should say that. the intellect is in no
wise a form nor has a form, and that therefore it is impossible for it to act: we
reply, that the intellect is itself, in its being and in its species, a form. As the
crystalline humour or visible spirit is in its being a form, and yet in regard to light
and colours is after a certain manner material: so likewise is the intellect to all
intelligibles which are outside it. Nor does it act, inasmuch as it is material, in
this way, that is of its essence, but through its form . . .” *
73 Jung, "On the Nature of the Psyche,” pp. 229IE, and “Synchronicity,” pp. 481,
493t.
170

These
peculiarities of the unconscious state contrast very strongly with the way com-
plexes behave in the conscious mind. Here they can be corrected: they lose their
automatic character and can be substantially transformed. They slough off their
mythological envelope, and, by entering into the adaptive process going forward
in consciousness, they personalize and rationalize themselves to the point where a
dialectical discussion becomes possible. Evidently the unconscious state is different
after all from the conscious." ("On the Nature of the Psyche,” pp. 186f.)
75 “The unconscious is accordingly a different medium from the conscious. In the
near-conscious areas there is not much change, because here the alternation of
light and shadow is too rapid. But it is just this no man's land which is of the
greatest value in supplying the answer to the burning question of whether
psy— cconshciouesnes s. It shows us how relative the unconscious state is, so
relative, indeed, that one feels tempted to make use of a concept like 'the sub-
conscious' in order to define the darker part of the psyche. But consciousness is
equally relative, for it embraces not only consciousness as such, but a whole scale
of intensities of consciousness. Between ‘I do this’ and ‘I am conscious of doing
this' there is a world of difference, amounting sometimes to outright contradic-
tion. Consequently there is a consciousness in which unconsciousness predomi-
nates, as well as a consciousness in which self-consciousness predominates. . . . So
we come to the paradoxical conclusion that there is no conscious content which
is not in some other respect unconscious . . .” (ibid., pp. 187£.). 76 Ibid., p. 189. 171AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
ego-complex many gradations of emphasis. On the animal and
primitive level a mere luminosity reigns, just as on the infantile
level consciousness is not a unity, since it is not yet centred by
a firmly knit ego-complex, but only flickers up here and there
when inner and outer events, instincts, and affects call it awake.
Even on the higher levels, consciousness is not a fully integrated
totality but is still capable of indefinite expansion.”
For this reason the psychic background of our consciousness
is often symbolized, in dreams and visions, by a starry sky, a sea
of lights, innumerable eyes shining out of darkness, and suchlike
motifs. The motif of multiple luminosities plays an important
role in alchemy, too, as the scintillae (sparks) and oculi piscium
(fish-eyes), or—in Paracelsus and Dorn—as the “inner firma-
ment.” 78 In Aurora this motif appears later in the image of
“pearls” or “planets in the earth."
The luminosity of the archetypes means, in practice, not only
that they represent the forms and the meaning of our instincts
but that they develop at the same time a quasi-conscious intelli-
gence of their own, which does not coincide with that of ego-
consciousness. Consequently, a constellated archetype conveys to
the individual ideas, intuitions, insights, inspired thoughts, and
a foreknowledge of things which he "really" could not know.”
In so far as Wisdom was defined by the scholastics as the sum
of the “eternal forms,” she is a feminine personification of the
collective unconscious; and in so far as all these eternal ideas
coalesce in her into one, she is a feminine form of the God-image
(i.e., of the self) in the human psyche.*? This psychic reality is
not expounded theoretically in Aurora but is immediately ex-
perienced. ‘The appearance of Wisdom denotes, psychologically,
an overpowering invasion of the unconscious, and the inspiring
and illuminating aspect of this event is praised enthusiastically
by the author.
77 “Therefore we would do well to think of ego-consciousness as being surrounded
by a multitude of little luminosities" (p. 190).
78 Pp. 195f.
79 In dreams and other unconscious material there is often found a centre of the
“inner firmament,” for instance a luminary larger than the others, a central sun
or star, which represents the archetype of the self, the regulatory centre of all the
psychic processes (p. 199).
80 Cf. what Jung says about Sapientia Dei in "Answer to Job," s.v. index.
172I. HERE BEGINNETH THE TREATISE . ..
Blessed is the man that shall find this science and into whom this
prudence (of Saturn) floweth; in all thy ways think on her and she
shall direct thy steps.
The word “Saturni” is presumably a gloss by a late alchem-
ical author which was taken into the printed text. This Prudentia
Saturni has the same meaning as the Sapientia or Scientia that is
bestowed on the alchemist. “Saturn” is an indication that wis-
dom flows into the author from the chemical material itself
(Saturn — lead = prima materia).5!
As Senior saith: But the wise man and the discerning and ingenious
in judgment understandeth her, when his spirits have been enlight-
ened by the Liber aggregationis. For then every spirit bursteth into
flood and followeth its desire; blessed is he who meditateth upon
my words.
Senior calls the same secret that appears personified in Aurora
as Wisdom, the “tincture,” and this he defines as that which can
change things from potentality into actuality.? According to
the philosophical thinking of the Arabs, this would be the crea-
tive essence of God and the soul, which, Senior says, becomes
"free"—active—only when the alchemist has cleared" his thought
by subtle meditation.
For the medieval Christian this typical idea of Islamic mys-
ticism could not be assimilated without difficulty, for in his view
God alone was endowed with creative power: only God could
change the potential into the actual. Nevertheless St. Thomas
holds that a real continuation of God's creative power runs
through the human soul.*? The soul does not of course create
things directly, like God, but as a "second cause," ** with the
81 Saturn is correlated with lead, in which arcane substance the alchemical secret
lies hidden. In lead, according to Olympiodorus (Berthelot, Alch. grecs, I, iv,
38-39), there dwells a demon, or a soul that wants to be set free. In Zosimos this
soul is represented as a virgin (ibid., III, xxxiv, 1, and xlii). In Khunrath (Von
hylealischen Chaos, pp. 194£) the mid point of the world is "ancient Saturn .
the lead of the wise, rich in mystery." Mylius (Philosophia reformata, p. 142)
calls lead the “water of wisdom." Cf. also the quotation from Grasseus (supra,
p. 24, n. 14). As Jung has shown (Psychology and Alchemy, par. 443, n. 59),
Grasseus may have known the Aurora text.
82 De chemia, pp. 11f. Cf. Stapleton, p. 150.
83 The soul is “the first act with a . . . relation to the second act." * Summa, I,
q. 77, art. 1 resp. (Eng. edn., I, p. 383).
84 Gilson, “Pourquoi St. Thomas," p. 11.
173AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
interposition of special functions (facultates) which “flow from
the essence of the soul as from their principle" (fluunt ab es-
sentia animae sicut a principio).*5 They flow from the soul "by
a certain resultance . . . as colour from light." ** In modern
language, this means that the human psyche, like God, can inter-
vene creatively in the physical and chemical processes of nature. So if the author of Aurora interprets Senior's "fluens" intra-
psychically, as a flowing of the spirit resulting in an alchemical
transmutation of metals, it is tempting to assume that he too was
thinking of a function flowing from the essence of the soul,
which can impart actual being and bring about material changes. According to St. Thomas it is one of the special properties of
the soul of one who has been enlightened ** by Wisdom that,
by the virtue of God, even matter outside his body will obey
him.5? His soul can intervene effectively in the physical order. 85 Summa, I, q. 77, art. 5 and art. 6 resp. (Eng. edn., I, pp. 387£). William of
Auvergne's view is in this respect extreme: the soul operates directly through its
simple, godlike essence ("De anima," Opera omnia, III, pars 6). Cf. Gilson,
Med. Phil., p. 246f. 86 Summa, I, q. 77, art. 6 and 7 (Eng. edn., I, pp. 387ff.). 87 Le., the prophet. 88 St. Thomas, "De veritate," q. 12, art 3, 7ff. (trans. Mulligan, II, p. 115): “From
natural causes we cannot perceive the meaning of those things which do not take
place naturally. But astrologers perceive the meanings of prophecies from the
movements of the heavenly bodies; therefore, prophecy is natural. In natural
science the philosophers discuss only those things which can happen naturally. But Avicenna discusses prophecy. Therefore prophecy is natural. For prophecy,
as Avicenna says, only three things are needed: clearness of intelligence, perfection
of the imaginative power, and power of soul so that external matter obeys it.I. HERE BEGINNETH THE TREATISE . ..
Blessed is the man that shall find this science and into whom this
prudence (of Saturn) floweth; in all thy ways think on her and she
shall direct thy steps.
The word “Saturni” is presumably a gloss by a late alchem-
ical author which was taken into the printed text. This Prudentia
Saturni has the same meaning as the Sapientia or Scientia that is
bestowed on the alchemist. “Saturn” is an indication that wis-
dom flows into the author from the chemical material itself
(Saturn — lead = prima materia).5!
As Senior saith: But the wise man and the discerning and ingenious
in judgment understandeth her, when his spirits have been enlight-
ened by the Liber aggregationis. For then every spirit bursteth into
flood and followeth its desire; blessed is he who meditateth upon
my words.
Senior calls the same secret that appears personified in Aurora
as Wisdom, the “tincture,” and this he defines as that which can
change things from potentality into actuality.? According to
the philosophical thinking of the Arabs, this would be the crea-
tive essence of God and the soul, which, Senior says, becomes
"free"—active—only when the alchemist has cleared" his thought
by subtle meditation.
For the medieval Christian this typical idea of Islamic mys-
ticism could not be assimilated without difficulty, for in his view
God alone was endowed with creative power: only God could
change the potential into the actual. Nevertheless St. Thomas
holds that a real continuation of God's creative power runs
through the human soul.*? The soul does not of course create
things directly, like God, but as a "second cause," ** with the
81 Saturn is correlated with lead, in which arcane substance the alchemical secret
lies hidden. In lead, according to Olympiodorus (Berthelot, Alch. grecs, I, iv,
38-39), there dwells a demon, or a soul that wants to be set free. In Zosimos this
soul is represented as a virgin (ibid., III, xxxiv, 1, and xlii). In Khunrath (Von
hylealischen Chaos, pp. 194£) the mid point of the world is "ancient Saturn .
the lead of the wise, rich in mystery." Mylius (Philosophia reformata, p. 142)
calls lead the “water of wisdom." Cf. also the quotation from Grasseus (supra,
p. 24, n. 14). As Jung has shown (Psychology and Alchemy, par. 443, n. 59),
Grasseus may have known the Aurora text.
82 De chemia, pp. 11f. Cf. Stapleton, p. 150.
83 The soul is “the first act with a . . . relation to the second act." * Summa, I,
q. 77, art. 1 resp. (Eng. edn., I, p. 383).
84 Gilson, “Pourquoi St. Thomas," p. 11.
173

Therefore prophecy is natural. For prophecy,
as Avicenna says, only three things are needed: clearness of intelligence, perfection
of the imaginative power, and power of soul so that external matter obeys it. But these three things can be had naturally. Therefore, one can naturally be a
prophet.” * According to the Thomist view, God is the only being who cannot
be divided into "actual" and “potential” being, but is only actual being and the
source of all being. N. del Prado (De veritate fundamentali philosophiae chris-
tianae, p. xxx): “The fundamental truth of St. Thomas's Christian philosophy,
formulated in De ente et essentia, can be summed up thus: ‘The First Being is
pure act, but all other beings are made up of potentiality and act. . . . God alone
is His own Being; in all else the essence of the thing is distinct from its being' " *
(cited in Gilson, L'Esprit de la philosophie médiévale, Y, p. 315, n. 34). God is
“maximum truth" and “maximum being" (cf. Compendium of Theology, ch. 69,
p. 64), and hence also the cause of the prima materia, which has its "potential
being" from him. "Nothing gives existence except in so far as it is a being in act,
Now God preserves all things in existence by his providence." * Summa contra
Gentiles, III, 66 (Eng. edn., III, part 1, p. 158). “Nor is it superfluous, if God can
produce all natural effects by Himself, that they should be produced by certain
174I. HERE BEGINNETH THE TREATISE . ..
An interesting account of this remarkable notion is to be
found in a treatise ascribed to Albertus Magnus, entitled “De
mirabilibus mundi," whose genuineness has, as Thorndike em-
phasizes,*? been wrongly disputed. Albertus says there: 9? “I found
an instructive account [of magic] in Avicenna's Liber sextus
naturalium, which says that a certain power (virtus) to alter
things dwells in the human soul and subordinates the other
things to her, particularly when she is swept into a great excess
of love or hate or the like. When therefore the soul of a man
falls into a great excess of any passion, it can be proved by ex-
periment that the excess binds things magically and alters them
in the way it wants. And for a long time I did not believe this,
but after I had read the nigromantic books and others of the
kind on signs and magic, I found that the affectivity (affectio)
of the human soul is the chief cause of all these things, whether
because, on account of her great emotion, she alters her bodily
substance and the other things towards which she strives, or
because, on account of her dignity, the other, lower things are
subject to her, or because the appropriate hour or astrological
situation or another power coincides with so inordinate an
emotion, and we [in consequence] believe that what this power
other causes; because this is not owing to the insufficiency of His power, but to
the immensity of His goodness, wherefore it was His will to consummate His
likeness to things not only in the point of their being, but also in the point of
their being the causes of other things." * Ibid., III, 7o (Eng. edn., III, part 1,
P- 174)- "Nothing is a cause of being except in so far as it acts by God's power." *
III, 67 (III, part 1, p. 160). "In all things that operate God is the cause of their
operating." * Ibid. Among the intermediary causes in nature, of which God makes
instrumental use, are the heavenly bodies. (Cf. Thorndike, II, p. 607.) According
to St. Thomas, the human soul also possesses that gift of acting as a "secondary
cause" after God; it endows matter with "esse actuale" and thus creates the indi-
vidual body-soul phenomenon; as form, it gives the only potentially existent
bodily material the "actum essendi," and for that reason is superior to it, because
“esse in actu" is higher than “esse in potentia." This "esse in actu" arises only
by contact with God and by his grace and illuminative effect. The soul can even
produce material effects in the outside world. Cf. Forest, La Structure méta-
physique du concret selon Saint Thomas d'Aquin, pp. 267-80; and, for Thomas’
conception of physics, Stanghetti, “Da S. Tommaso a Max Planck,” pp. 53ff.
89 History of Magic, II, p. 723.
90 * I cite here from an undated incunabulum in the Zentralbibliothek, Zurich,
Gal. II, App. 429,: "Liber aggregationis seu secretorum Alberti," etc. The library
also contains the printing of Lyons, 1582, and Cologne, ca. 1485.
175AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
does is then done by the soul. . . . Whoso, therefore, would
learn the secret of doing and undoing these things must know
that everyone can influence everything magically if he falls into
a great excess . . . and he must do it in that hour when the
excess befalls him, and with the things which the soul then dic-
tates to him. For the soul herself is then so desirous of the matter
she would accomplish that of her own accord she will seize on
the greater and better astrological hour which rules over the
things suited to that matter. . . . And thus it is the soul who
desires the thing more intensely, who makes things more active
and more like what comes forth. For science is the production of
signs (characteres). . . . Such is the manner of operation in all
things which the soul strongly desires. For everything she does
to that end has motive power and efficacy for what the soul
desires."
Thus Albertus, following Avicenna, comes to the conclusion
that all magic and occult techniques, including alchemical
transmutation, are ultimately and in principle explicable in
terms of the human psyche, and are produced by the psyche
when a man falls into a kind of ecstasy or trance (we would say,
into a completely unconscious state), and that in such states
concomitant material phenomena can be observed, as is known
today chiefly through the findings of parapsychological re-
search.?!
As Jung—who cites this Albertus passage—has shown,” we
are concerned here with a phenomenon which he calls "syn-
chronicity," that is, with the remarkable fact that, particularly
when archetypal unconscious contents are constellated, a non-
psychic event can coincide meaningfully with an intrapsychic
event, though no causal connection can be established between
them. The “magical” thinking of primitives seems to be based
partly on the observation of such occurrences. It is worth noting
that a man like Albertus Magnus, the teacher of Thomas
Aquinas, took an experimental interest in these phenomena and,
like Avicenna before him, brought them into connection with
the human psyche, or as we should say, with the unconscious.
The “production of signs" would correspond to the creation of
suitable symbols through which the unconscious is both con-
91 Rhine, The Reach of the Mind and other works.
92 “Synchronicity,” pp. 448f.
176I. HERE BEGINNETH THE TREATISE . . .
stellated and expressed. What distinguishes Jung's interpreta-
tion from the medieval one is that the medieval philosophers
still interpreted these connections as "magical causality,” as
primitives do today, whereas Jung considers the same class of
events to be acausal and synchronistic. In that way he avoids
a regressive amalgamation of the scientific concept of causality
with the old, pre-scientific "magical causality," setting up in-
stead, in the concept of synchronicity, a new and fundamental
category for the explanation of nature.
Unfortunately, Albertus's source, Avicenna's treatise "De
anima," which in those days was usually cited as "Liber sextus
naturalium," was available to me only in the Venice edition of
1508,°? in which the sections on magic, alchemy, and the occult
sciences had been partially deleted by the Augustinian monks
of the monastery of St. John of Viridario. Nevertheless, it was
clear from the portions that have been preserved that Avicenna
saw in the human soul not only that factor which, "as form,
aggregates and builds up the fundamental forces and matter
into a body of their own,” ** but also one which produces ma-
terial effects outside that body, thus explaining many so-called
miracles—the healing of the sick, etc.® And thus it is not to be
wondered at, that a strong and noble soul in her workings should
go even beyond her own body, so that (if she be not sunk in the
body’s passions) she can heal the sick and make evil men weak,
and that it is even possible for her to render the natures of
things compliant, and to change the elements in her interests,
so that what is not fire becomes for her fire, and what is not
earth becomes for her earth, and that rain and fruitfulness
93 Avicennae perhypatetici philosophi . . . opera, etc. Concerning this treatise
see Haneberg, "Zur Erkenntnislehre von Ibn Sina."
94 Fol. 3: “For it gathers together the principles and matter of its body...
preserving the body," etc.* Cf. the passage in the Prooemium, fol. 1r: "For the
knowledge of the soul is a very great help to knowing the dispositions of the
body," etc. * “Now we will say then, that the soul can be called a power or poten-
tiality in relation to the affections which issue from it. Likewise it can be called
a power on another ground: namely in relation to the sensible and intelligible
forms which it receives: it can likewise be called a form in relation to the matter
in which it exists: from both of which it is constituted a vegetable or animal
substance," etc. *
95 He also emphasizes that the idea of sickness and health in the soul affects the
state of the body. As the soul is not imprisoned [impressa] in the body's matter,
it can alter it at will.
177AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
appear at her behest . . ."?9 "And all these things come to pass
according to the intelligible virtue, for it is altogether possible
that even living beings will follow her wishes, since matter is
wont to change into opposites. For matter by nature obeys her
and becomes the matter she wills, for it obeys the soul utterly,
and obeys her still more than when [only] the opposites work
upon it." According to Avicenna, this is one of the basic factors
underlying prophecy, for there is in the soul a property that
depends on imagination and can act upon matter.?* This prop-
erty is conditioned by the virtus sensibilis motiva desiderativa
in the soul of the prophet.?* Further, the stars too are an opera-
tive factor since they affect the soul in this lower world.9?
In psychological terms the constellations in the sky are
where the archetypes of the collective unconscious appear in
projection, in such a way that, in contrast to myths, fairytales,
and other elaborations of the archetype, its time-quality is also
taken into account. The individual psyche also (Avicenna is
right in this) is instrumentally the place of realization for the
archetype, which in itself is transpersonal and, in its lower
reaches, even non-psychic.'? An archetype is constellated, i.e.,
becomes a realizable power having real effects, only when a
specific attitude of consciousness prevails. Avicenna formulates
this by saying that the constellation is brought about by "sci-
ence," that is, by the "right" understanding. Science is the pro-
duction of the right "imagination," the right symbols. As is
clear from the account in "De mirabilibus mundi," Albertus
took over in principle Avicenna's hypotheses.!?!
96 Cap. IV.
97 Cap. IV, fol. 20v. *
98 In Tract. 10, cap. 1 of his "De philosophia prima" or "Metaphysica" (1508,
fol. 107%) Avicenna says that the prophet is one “whose soul becomes the intelli-
gence in effect," i.e., is identical with the intellectus agens.
99 Ibid., cap. V, Tract. 9 (fol. 105¥): “. . . et a corporibus celestibus fiunt impres-
siones in corpore huius mundi propter qualitates, quae sunt ei propriae: et ab
illis fluit in hunc mundum et ab animabus etiam illorum fiunt impressiones in
animas huius mundi et ex his intentionibus scimus quod natura, quae est
gubernatrix istorum corporum, est quasi perfectio; et formae fiunt ab anima
diffusa vel adjutorio eius."
100 Jung, “On the Nature of the Psyche," p. 230.
101 They enabled him to explain and justify "good" magic, which could operate
without the influence of demons and was really a kind of higher science. It was
178I. HERE BEGINNETH THE TREATISE . . These amplifications seemed to me necessary in order to
elucidate the obscure passage in Aurora about the flowing
of the spirit. They also seem to justify my conjecture "Liber
aggregationis," 1°? for Albertus's “De mirabilibus mundi" was
circulated under this title. The flowing of the spirit means
that it was seized by Wisdom, so that the soul of the alchemist
not only attained to gnosis but could exert magical effects in
the material realm. By a reading of the "Liber aggregationis,"
the text says, the spirit bursts into flood and follows its desire. The word "desire" seems strange at first, because concupiscentia
in ecclesiastical language generally meant sinful desire, “the
flesh, which lusteth against the spirit" (Gal. 5 : 17).19? The sentence in Aurora is based on a mistranslation of
Senior’s Arabic text. In the original,1°* Senior says that by the
based—as we should say—on correct knowledge of unconscious phenomena and
their constellation, thanks to a conscious attitude that enabled the unconscious to
co-operate. In this sense the magician does what "the soul dictates to him," and
in the hour which "the soul appoints." Observance of the "virtus desiderativa"
amounts to following the gradient of psychic energy. 102'The Latin text shows the following variants: M and P, the best MSS, have
“ex libro aggregationum"; V has "congregationem"; B, D, and L have “ex libris
agnitionum." I take it that M and P come closest to the original text, and I con-
jecture the singular ending aggregationis instead of aggregationum only because
I assume that the Aurora text is referring to the treatise of this title, especially
as the author is here concerned with a thorough clarification of the problem of
alchemy. 103 Cf. St. Thomas, De malo, q. 4, art. 2, where concupiscentia is defined as “evil
desires, which a man feels without the consent of his will." Cf. also St. Augustine,
Sermo CLII, 4 (Migne, P.L., vol. 38, col. 821), and Rom.AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
appear at her behest . . ."?9 "And all these things come to pass
according to the intelligible virtue, for it is altogether possible
that even living beings will follow her wishes, since matter is
wont to change into opposites. For matter by nature obeys her
and becomes the matter she wills, for it obeys the soul utterly,
and obeys her still more than when [only] the opposites work
upon it." According to Avicenna, this is one of the basic factors
underlying prophecy, for there is in the soul a property that
depends on imagination and can act upon matter.?* This prop-
erty is conditioned by the virtus sensibilis motiva desiderativa
in the soul of the prophet.?* Further, the stars too are an opera-
tive factor since they affect the soul in this lower world.9?
In psychological terms the constellations in the sky are
where the archetypes of the collective unconscious appear in
projection, in such a way that, in contrast to myths, fairytales,
and other elaborations of the archetype, its time-quality is also
taken into account. The individual psyche also (Avicenna is
right in this) is instrumentally the place of realization for the
archetype, which in itself is transpersonal and, in its lower
reaches, even non-psychic.'? An archetype is constellated, i.e.,
becomes a realizable power having real effects, only when a
specific attitude of consciousness prevails. Avicenna formulates
this by saying that the constellation is brought about by "sci-
ence," that is, by the "right" understanding. Science is the pro-
duction of the right "imagination," the right symbols. As is
clear from the account in "De mirabilibus mundi," Albertus
took over in principle Avicenna's hypotheses.!?!
96 Cap. IV.
97 Cap. IV, fol. 20v. *
98 In Tract. 10, cap. 1 of his "De philosophia prima" or "Metaphysica" (1508,
fol. 107%) Avicenna says that the prophet is one “whose soul becomes the intelli-
gence in effect," i.e., is identical with the intellectus agens.
99 Ibid., cap. V, Tract. 9 (fol. 105¥): “. . . et a corporibus celestibus fiunt impres-
siones in corpore huius mundi propter qualitates, quae sunt ei propriae: et ab
illis fluit in hunc mundum et ab animabus etiam illorum fiunt impressiones in
animas huius mundi et ex his intentionibus scimus quod natura, quae est
gubernatrix istorum corporum, est quasi perfectio; et formae fiunt ab anima
diffusa vel adjutorio eius."
100 Jung, “On the Nature of the Psyche," p. 230.
101 They enabled him to explain and justify "good" magic, which could operate
without the influence of demons and was really a kind of higher science. It was
178

38, col. 821), and Rom. 7: 14; Irenaeus, Adv. haer., 1, 2, cap. 2 (Migne, P.G., vol. 7, col. 454; Eng. edn., I, p. 7), and St. John
Chrysostom, Gen. homil., XV, 4 (Migne, P.G., vol. 53, col. 123). Concupiscentia is
"something material.” See article on “Concupiscence” by Chollet in Dictionnaire
de théologie catholique, III, cols. 803-14. 104 Cf. Stapleton's discussion of the Arabic original in Memoirs, p. 150. The Latin
translation of Senior (De chemia, p. 12) reads: "But since [the preparation] is
difficult, delicate, light, moderate, and without force, the ingenious man under-
stands it by subtle reflection, when his spirits have been rendered clear by the
books that are left, which the philosophers have hidden on account of the prepara-
tion, which is a matter of difficulty. But it [the preparation or tincture] was hidden
lest every spirit should recognize its desire: [for then] it flows, as the seers would
say." (Latin: . . . Facta ignota, propter hoc ne cognoscat. Omnis animus con-
cupiscentiam suam fluit: quod videntes dicant.) The punctuation in the Latin is
quite arbitrary. I therefore read "cognoscat omnis" and put the colon before "fluit."
179AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
inspiration of Allah he discovered the secret of the preparation
and thereby the tincture which changes things from potentiality
into actuality. In this process the spirit is freed from its desire.!09
But the Latin translation says that the tincture was hidden lest
the spirit should recognize its desire and flow.'°* And in Aurora
this is again reinterpreted to mean that the spirit, when lique-
fied, follows its desire.
The author of Aurora evidently took this obscure sentence
of Senior's to mean that spirit can accomplish the difficult and
hidden preparation when it recognizes the root of its own striv-
ing, namely concupiscentia, and begins to follow it. T'his would
mean, psychologically, that the spirit begins to follow the nat-
ural gradient of psychic energy.
The preceding sentence in Aurora, "and she shall direct thy
steps," shows that during this process Wisdom is at work, exer-
cising a seductive fascination. This does not depart too far from
the contemporary scholastic views, since many philosophers sup-
posed that every act of cognition was preceded by a kind of
“love” or “natural appetition" of the knower for the object.!?*
According to Bernard of Clairvaux, all higher love and even our
love of God begins first with concupiscentia, for this is the
natural impulse of every creature for its own perfection. St.
Thomas, too, holds that the innermost instinct of every creature
105 Cf. Dorn, "Speculativae philosophiae," Theatr. chem. (1602), I, p. 298, cited in
Psychology and Alchemy, par. 377: "In this [truth] lies the whole art of freeing the
spirit from its fetters, in the same way that, as we have said, the mind can be
freed from the body."
106A later Latin treatise, the "Consilium coniugii" (Ars chemica, p. 153), gives a
negative interpretation of this Senior passage: "Every spirit that follows its yearn-
ing, that is, its own vain opinion, is in a state of flux [fluit], that is, it wanders
and strays by divers wrong paths." *
107 Witelo, Liber de intelligentiis, XVIII, 2 (ed. Baeumker, Beitrüáge zur Gesch. d.
Philosophie des Mittelalters, III, part 2, p. 23): "Love or delight naturally . . .
goes before knowledge. For unless some appetite of the knowing substance were
directed towards the thing that is to be known, there would never be any ordering
of the one towards the other, nor would the one be perfected by the other." * St.
Thomas also took some such inclination, love or natural appetite, to be the cause
of all knowing. (Summa, I, q. 60, art. 1; Eng. edn., I, p. 297.) Cf. St. Bernard, De
diligendo Deo ad Haimericum (Migne, P.L., vol. 182, col. 973): "Since we are
carnal, and are born of fleshly concupiscence, needs must that our desire or love
begin from the flesh; and if it be governed by right order, going forward by
degrees under the guidance of grace, it will at last be consummated in the
spirit." *
180I. HERE BEGINNETH THE TREATISE . .. strives for "perfection" and thus for a “divine likeness.” 19$ He
calls his amor boni the "root" of all the other motions of the
soul. Concupiscentia or desiderium is for him a movement
towards goodness.!? It is a movement that arises from knowl-
edge of the desired, or from contemplation of the good and
beautiful.*! The movement of loving is thus circular, and love
is the real unitive force.!? The striving for perfection is even
inherent in matter.!? All this would explain the allusion in
108 Summa Contra Gentiles, III, 21 (Eng. edn., III, part 1, p. 43).* Cf. “De veritate,"
XIV, 10 resp.: “The ultimate perfection towards which man is directed consists in
the perfect knowledge of God." *
109 In II Sent., Dist. 1, q. 2, art. 2 resp., and Contra Gent., III, 19 and 20 (Eng. edn., III, part 1, pp. 37ff.). Summa, I, q. 20, art. 1 resp. (I, p. 114): “Hence love is
naturally the first act.” Cf. Steinbuechel, Der Zweckgedanke in der Philosophie
des Thomas von Aquino. 110 Summa, 1-1I, q. 25, art. 2 (Eng. edn., I, p. 701): “Love is . . . the first of the
concupiscible passions. . . . This very aptitude or proportion of the appetite to
good is love. . . . Movement towards good is desire or concupiscence, and rest
in good is joy or pleasure." * OQ. 27, art. 1 (Eng. edn., I, pp. 7o6f.) and q. 36 art. 2 resp. (L p. 748): "But since concupiscence or desire is the first effect of love,
which gives rise to the greatest pleasure, as stated above: hence it is that Augustine
often speaks of desire or concupiscence in the sense of love." * Art. 3: "Love
strives towards unity in the sense of perfection of nature." A psychologist might
object that the soul also seems to be endowed with a natural “love of evil."
111 Q. 27, art. 2 ad 2 (Eng. edn., I, p. 707): “The contemplation of spiritual
beauty or goodness is the beginning of spiritual love.AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
inspiration of Allah he discovered the secret of the preparation
and thereby the tincture which changes things from potentiality
into actuality. In this process the spirit is freed from its desire.!09
But the Latin translation says that the tincture was hidden lest
the spirit should recognize its desire and flow.'°* And in Aurora
this is again reinterpreted to mean that the spirit, when lique-
fied, follows its desire.
The author of Aurora evidently took this obscure sentence
of Senior's to mean that spirit can accomplish the difficult and
hidden preparation when it recognizes the root of its own striv-
ing, namely concupiscentia, and begins to follow it. T'his would
mean, psychologically, that the spirit begins to follow the nat-
ural gradient of psychic energy.
The preceding sentence in Aurora, "and she shall direct thy
steps," shows that during this process Wisdom is at work, exer-
cising a seductive fascination. This does not depart too far from
the contemporary scholastic views, since many philosophers sup-
posed that every act of cognition was preceded by a kind of
“love” or “natural appetition" of the knower for the object.!?*
According to Bernard of Clairvaux, all higher love and even our
love of God begins first with concupiscentia, for this is the
natural impulse of every creature for its own perfection. St.
Thomas, too, holds that the innermost instinct of every creature
105 Cf. Dorn, "Speculativae philosophiae," Theatr. chem. (1602), I, p. 298, cited in
Psychology and Alchemy, par. 377: "In this [truth] lies the whole art of freeing the
spirit from its fetters, in the same way that, as we have said, the mind can be
freed from the body."
106A later Latin treatise, the "Consilium coniugii" (Ars chemica, p. 153), gives a
negative interpretation of this Senior passage: "Every spirit that follows its yearn-
ing, that is, its own vain opinion, is in a state of flux [fluit], that is, it wanders
and strays by divers wrong paths." *
107 Witelo, Liber de intelligentiis, XVIII, 2 (ed. Baeumker, Beitrüáge zur Gesch. d.
Philosophie des Mittelalters, III, part 2, p. 23): "Love or delight naturally . . .
goes before knowledge. For unless some appetite of the knowing substance were
directed towards the thing that is to be known, there would never be any ordering
of the one towards the other, nor would the one be perfected by the other." * St.
Thomas also took some such inclination, love or natural appetite, to be the cause
of all knowing. (Summa, I, q. 60, art. 1; Eng. edn., I, p. 297.) Cf. St. Bernard, De
diligendo Deo ad Haimericum (Migne, P.L., vol. 182, col. 973): "Since we are
carnal, and are born of fleshly concupiscence, needs must that our desire or love
begin from the flesh; and if it be governed by right order, going forward by
degrees under the guidance of grace, it will at last be consummated in the
spirit." *
180

edn., I, p. 707): “The contemplation of spiritual
beauty or goodness is the beginning of spiritual love. Accordingly knowledge is
the cause of love for the same reason as good is, which can be loved only if
known." *
112 Q. 26, art. 2 resp. (Eng. edn., I, p. 704): "For the appetitive movement is cir-
cular, as stated in De anima iii, 10 . . . hence, too, Dionysius says that love is a
unitive force (Div. nom. iv) and the Philosopher says (Polit. ii, 1) that union is
the work of love." *
118 Quaest. disp., De malo, q. I., art. 2, resp. (pp. 326ff.): “And this matter is not
to be called evil." Summa, I, q. 44, art. 4 resp. (Eng. edn., I, p. 232): "While
every creature intends to acquire its own perfection, which is the likeness of the
divine perfection and goodness. Therefore the divine goodness is the end of all
things." * (Cf. Gilson, Med. Phil. pp. 279f) Cf. the Avicenna quotation in
Meister Eckhart's commentary on the Book of Wisdom (Thery, part II, p. 348):
“But that which every thing desires is being, and the perfection of being in so far
as it is being. But privation, inasmuch as it is privation, is not desired." *
(Avicenna, Metaphysica, Lib. VIIL) Evil is only a privation of good and only by
accident real. (Summa, I, q. 63, art. 4; Eng. edn., I, pp. 314f.) There is no natural
inclination to evil, even among the demons. Cf. Summa, I, q. 48, art. 1 ad 1 (I,
pp. 248ff.) and De malo (q. I, art. 1, resp.; p. 322): Even an evil act, in so far as it
is an act, is of God. That is to say, what first sets the will and intellect in motion
is something higher than the will and intellect, i.e., God. Cf. Jung's criticism of the
privatio boni in Aion, pp. 41ff. 181AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
Aurora that at the touch of Wisdom the human spirit "flows" *™
and begins to follow its most natural desire, namely, for its own
perfection and the knowledge of God.
And Solomon: My son, put her about thy neck and write in the
tables of thy heart and thou shalt find. Say to Wisdom: Thou art
my sister, and call Prudence thy friend.
The description of Wisdom as sister and friend is probably
an allusion to the classic alchemical motif of brother /sister in-
cest.!!5 The brother and sister here would be the alchemist and
Wisdom. Usually the Biblical quotation was referred to Mary.
For to meditate upon her is a most natural and subtle understand-
ing, which bringeth her to perfection. And they that constantly watch
for her shall quickly be secure. For she is clear to them that have
understanding, and shall never fade away nor fail; she is easily seen
by them that have knowledge of her, for she goeth about seeking
such as are worthy of her and showeth herself cheerfully to them in
the ways and meeteth them with all providence; for her beginning
1s the most true nature, whereof cometh no deceit.
Not only is the alchemist enlightened by Wisdom, but his
meditation simultaneously brings her to perfection, by "a most
natural and subtle understanding." This idea may go back to
the sensus naturae of William of Auvergne (who took it over
from Avicenna).!* Albertus Magnus may have had a similar
114 In Thomist terms, becomes effective as “actus.”
115 Concerning this motif see Mysterium, pp. 91f., 149f., 299. The allusion to the
incest motif gives the Biblical quotations used by Wisdom as she cries out and
walks the streets a peculiar colouring: she appears in the role of a meretrix
(whore). This is not a fanciful formulation since, as we have seen, she is also the
prima materia, which the alchemists called, among other things, meretrix.
116 According to William of Auvergne ("De legibus," Opera omnia, I, pp. 86ff.; cf.
Thorndike, II, p. 348), the sensus naturae is something higher than any human
cognitive capacity and comes close to the gift of prophecy. (Cf. Avicennae perhypa-
tetici philosophi, "De anima," I, fol. 4.) Its functioning is similar to that of a
dog finding a thief, or a vulture anticipating a battle, or a sheep sensing the pres-
ence of a wolf, in all of which cases there is an assimilation of sense to object.
(William of Auvergne, “De universo," I, pp. 821ff.) The sensus naturae thus coin-
cides partly with what we today call "instinct" and partly with "unconscious
perception." Cf. Jung, "On the Nature of the Psyche,” pp. 195f.: “Paracelsus was
directly influenced by Agrippa von Nettesheim, who supposes a ‘luminositas
182I. HERE BEGINNETH THE TREATISE ... idea with regard to alchemy, for in his Libellus de alchemia" 117
(regarded by Thorndike as genuine) he calls upon Wisdom for
enlightenment and help and beseeches God "through the grace
of the Holy Spirit to increase his little knowledge," that, by his
teachings, he may show forth "the light that is hidden in the
darkness" "8 and lead the wayward into the path of truth."? The
spirit of God thereupon helps him to find itself (the spirit of
God); in other words, man's enlightenment is brought about by
the Holy Spirit leading him to the discovery of the light hidden
in the darkness. This idea of the circular workings of truth
occurs also in St. Thomas. According to him we know nature
through the "speculative intellect," which is passive and recep-
tive towards things and receives from them the first impulse and
sensus naturae. From this 'gleams of prophecy came down to the four-footed
beasts, the birds, and other living creatures, and enabled them to foretell future
things. He bases the sensus naturae on the authority of Gulielmus Parisiensis, who
is none other than William of Auvergne (G. Alvernus; d. 1249), bishop of Paris
from about 1228, author of many works, which influenced Albertus Magnus
among others. Alvernus says that the sensus naturae is superior to the perceptive
faculty in man, and he insists that animals also possess it. The doctrine of the
sensus naturae is developed from the idea of the all-pervading world-soul with
which another Gulielmus Parisiensis was much concerned, a predecessor of
Alvernus by name of Guillaume de Conches (1080-1154), a Platonist scholastic
who taught in Paris. He identified the anima mundi, this same sensus naturae,
with the Holy Ghost, just as Abelard did. The world-soul is a natural force
which is responsible for all the phenomena of life and the psyche."
117 Opera, ed. Borgnet, XXXVII, pp. 545ff. It was cited as a work of Albertus as
far back as 1320. (Cf. Thorndike, II p.AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
Aurora that at the touch of Wisdom the human spirit "flows" *™
and begins to follow its most natural desire, namely, for its own
perfection and the knowledge of God.
And Solomon: My son, put her about thy neck and write in the
tables of thy heart and thou shalt find. Say to Wisdom: Thou art
my sister, and call Prudence thy friend.
The description of Wisdom as sister and friend is probably
an allusion to the classic alchemical motif of brother /sister in-
cest.!!5 The brother and sister here would be the alchemist and
Wisdom. Usually the Biblical quotation was referred to Mary.
For to meditate upon her is a most natural and subtle understand-
ing, which bringeth her to perfection. And they that constantly watch
for her shall quickly be secure. For she is clear to them that have
understanding, and shall never fade away nor fail; she is easily seen
by them that have knowledge of her, for she goeth about seeking
such as are worthy of her and showeth herself cheerfully to them in
the ways and meeteth them with all providence; for her beginning
1s the most true nature, whereof cometh no deceit.
Not only is the alchemist enlightened by Wisdom, but his
meditation simultaneously brings her to perfection, by "a most
natural and subtle understanding." This idea may go back to
the sensus naturae of William of Auvergne (who took it over
from Avicenna).!* Albertus Magnus may have had a similar
114 In Thomist terms, becomes effective as “actus.”
115 Concerning this motif see Mysterium, pp. 91f., 149f., 299. The allusion to the
incest motif gives the Biblical quotations used by Wisdom as she cries out and
walks the streets a peculiar colouring: she appears in the role of a meretrix
(whore). This is not a fanciful formulation since, as we have seen, she is also the
prima materia, which the alchemists called, among other things, meretrix.
116 According to William of Auvergne ("De legibus," Opera omnia, I, pp. 86ff.; cf.
Thorndike, II, p. 348), the sensus naturae is something higher than any human
cognitive capacity and comes close to the gift of prophecy. (Cf. Avicennae perhypa-
tetici philosophi, "De anima," I, fol. 4.) Its functioning is similar to that of a
dog finding a thief, or a vulture anticipating a battle, or a sheep sensing the pres-
ence of a wolf, in all of which cases there is an assimilation of sense to object.
(William of Auvergne, “De universo," I, pp. 821ff.) The sensus naturae thus coin-
cides partly with what we today call "instinct" and partly with "unconscious
perception." Cf. Jung, "On the Nature of the Psyche,” pp. 195f.: “Paracelsus was
directly influenced by Agrippa von Nettesheim, who supposes a ‘luminositas
182

(Cf. Thorndike, II p. 571.) Paneth ("Über die Schrift Alberts
des Grossen ‘De Alchemia,’” pp. 408ff) has misgivings about its authenticity,
but, on the basis of De mineralibus and the “Tractatus de metallis et alchemia"
(which he holds to be genuine), he admits that Albertus was an alchemist. Ruska
(Tabula Smaragdina, p. 186) declares it spurious without substantiating this charge,
and so does Sarton, Introduction to the History of Science, II, pp. 937ff. Cf. also
Daehnert, Die Erkenninislehre des Albertus Magnus, pp. 228f. 118 John 1:5. 119 Cf. Albertus, De mineralibus et rebus metallicis, Lib. II (Cologne, 1569), p. 119,
where the same story occurs as in Aurora (infra, pp. 323f.), that the rock Adamas
is softened by goat's blood, and pp. 99, 201, 241, 253, 257, 274—76, 351, on the
influence of astrology. Later in the same treatise he emphasizes that after long
wanderings and researches he found what he was seeking, "not by my own
knowledge, but by the grace of the Holy Spirit," so that when he "knew and
understood what conquered nature,” he began to ‘‘watch more diligently in
decoctions.”
183AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
order, but the things themselves are ordered by the divine in-
tellectb»
This approximates closely to the view in Aurora, according
to which Wisdom enlightens man so that with the help of
"subtle understanding" he can then find the truth in nature, the
innermost essence ("most true nature") of which is Wisdom
herself.12 According to the medieval view the divine likeness
(similitudo) reaches down even into the physical structure of
natural things.!?? That is why Aurora says that to meditate on
Wisdom is a “most natural understanding.” !?? Nevertheless,
the entire cognitive process is not simply a circular one in which
man is included passively: the intervention of human conscious-
ness has a perfecting influence on Wisdom herself, making her
whole, even though her capacities far surpass man's.'?*
The idea that the process of cognition is circular plays a cen-
tral role in alchemy. Petrus Bonus says: “. . . truth is nothing
other than the correspondence of the intellect to the thing." 9
Again: “And the art works in the same way as nature." ?9 And
in one of the sources for Aurora, the "Declaratio lapidis physici
120 Quaestiones disputatae, “De veritate," I, 2, resp. (Eng. edn., I, p. 77). Cf. "De
potentia," VII, 10, ad 5: "But things themselves are the cause and measure of
our knowledge, wherefore, as our knowledge refers to things really and not the
reverse, so things are referred really to the knowledge of God and not the re-
verse." * Summa, I, q. 16, art. 6 ad 2 (Eng. edn., I, p. 93): "Things are said to
be true by comparison with the divine intellect." * Cf. Forest, La Structure
métaphysique, p. 21.
121] follow Gilson's formulation, Med. Phil. p. 141. Cf. Bacon, Opera inedita,
“Opus tertium," p. 82: “That I may show that philosophy is useless and point-
less, except in so far as it is raised to the wisdom of God." *
122 Robert de Grosseteste, "De unica forma omnium" (Baur, Beitrüge, p. 110):
"In that manner therefore in which the form of this thing in the mind of such
an architect is the form of a house, the art, or wisdom, or Word of almighty God
is the form of all creatures. For it is at the same time both the exemplar and
the efficient and formal cause preserving things in the form given them, until
created things are directed and recalled to it." *
123 This idea occurs among other scholastic philosophers. Thus Alcuin says
(Migne, P.L., vol. 100, col. 271) that the truth was implanted by God in nature,
where the wiser among men might find it. William of Auvergne identifies the
truth of a thing with its being: “For the truth of any thing is nothing else than
its substance, or being, or essence." * ("De universo," II, Opera, I, p. 836.)
124 Cf. the interpretation of wisdom in Gundissalinus, De divisione philosophiae
(Baur, Beitrüge, p. 8): “Wisdom is the truth of the knowledge of primary eternal
things." *
125 Theatr. chem. (1622), V, p. 667.* 126 Ibid., p. 745.*
184I. HERE BEGINNETH THE TREATISE . .
filio suo Aboali" of pseudo-Avicenna, it is said: “It is nature
that brings about the work with the help of the artifex." 127
This "natural" knowledge is attained through intensive medita-
tion on the substances and has a reactive effect on the alchemist,
perfecting his insight. The intellect is a “generative power," 23
so that already in Greek alchemy Petesis, a pupil of Ostanes,
could say: “The work is perfected by reflection.” !?? "Make the
nature come out, and you will find what is sought," !?? the
"hidden nature" being the mysterium of the philosophers.!?!
This produces the "golden point" in matter.!??
Here we have an allusion to that psychological form of inner
experience which Jung calls "active imagination," whereby the
conscious mind perceives the contents of the unconscious, and
transforms and integrates them by coming to terms with them.!3?
In alchemical language, this would be the extraction of the
"truth" from matter by means of the right "theoria"—that cen-
tral preoccupation of the alchemists which Jung has discussed
at length in Aion 4 and Mysterium Coniunctionis. From the
passages cited, particularly those from the works of Dorn, it is
clear that the arcane substance is nothing other than the un-
conscious, which in meditation is "attracted" by the "right
121 T'heatr. chem. (1659), IV, p. 879.* During the process sulphur acts as a lumen
luminum: "And it illuminates all bodies, for it is a light and a tincture, en-
lightening and perfecting every substance. And if the artifex of this magistery
knows not this light, he strays by many devious ways, as if walking in darkness,
because he is far from the truth and unity of this science." * Sulphur, as Jung
has shown (Mysterium, pp. 126f.), is in late alchemical literature a widespread
image for the "natural light" hidden in matter, the source of natural knowledge
as opposed to revelation.
128 William of Auvergne, “De trinitate," cap. 15; II, Suppl., p. 27: “Our intellect,
that is, the intellective power, is a generative power, and as it were the womb
of science or wisdom." *
129 Lippmann, Alchemie, I, p. 68, and Berthelot, Moyen dge, I, p. 246.
130 Zosimos, Berthelot, Alch. grecs, III, xxi, 22.* Cf. ibid., xlvi, 2. The hidden
nature corresponds to the "most true nature” in Aurora.
131 Ibid., V, ii, 8. C£. IV, iii, 2 and II, iv.
132 Ibid., IIT, vi. This nature hidden in matter is really the “divine soul bound
in the elements, or the divine pneuma mingled with the flesh." (Cf. the Book of
Sophe, Berthelot, III, xlii.) The Neoplatonist Celsus (Bousset, Hauptprobleme der
Gnosis, p. 11) calls the world soul a fluid force (8ívajus péovea), and Zosimos
(Berthelot, III, ii, 2) a feminine power.
133 Mysterium, pp. 494ff. Also Jung's commentary on The Secret of the Golden
Flower, pars. 20ff. 184 Pp. 155ff.
185AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
magnet” !*—the effective symbol—so that a synthesis is prepared
between the conscious and unconscious components of the per-
sonality. The essence to be extracted is personified in our text
by Wisdom, who, as is expressly emphasized, is at the same the
“most true nature, whereof cometh no deceit.” Dorn speaks in
much the same way of a "truth" which is hidden in natural
things.?9 This "truth" is a "metaphysical substance," hidden
not only in things but in the human body. "In the human body
is concealed a certain metaphysical substance known to very
few, which . . . needeth no medicament, being itself the in-
corrupt medicament.” 187 Jung interprets as follows: !?* “Thus
the doctrine, which may be consciously acquired ‘through a
kind of divine inspiration,’ is at the same time the instrument
whereby the object of the doctrine or theory can be freed from
its imprisonment in the ‘body,’ 18° because the symbol for the
doctrine—the ‘magnet’—is at the same time the mysterious
‘truth’ of which the doctrine speaks. The doctrine enters the
consciousness of the adept as a gift of the Holy Ghost. It is a
thesaurus of knowledge about the secret of the art, of the
treasure hidden in the prima materia, which was thought to be
outside man. The treasure of the doctrine and the precious
secret concealed in the darkness of matter are one and the same
thing 42
To my knowledge, Aurora is one of the earliest medieval
treatises in which we find the nascent idea that the alchemical
opus involves an inner experience, and that a numinous content,
Wisdom (the anima), is the secret which the adept was looking
for in the chemical substances.
Jung has discussed the great significance which attaches to
this projection of the unconscious into matter !*' in Psychology
135 Ibid., p. 159ff.
136 It is the "medicine, improving and transforming that which is no longer into
that which it was before its corruption, and that which is not into that which it
ought to be." Aion, p. 161. 137 Ibid. Cf. Mysterium, pp. 478f.
138 Aion, p. 162. Cf. Mysterium, pp. 48off. 139 Cf. Mysterium, pp. 482ff., 489ff.
140 For a more detailed psychological explanation of these extremely significant
ideas of Dorn, see Mysterium, pp. 494f.
141 Similar ideas to those of the alchemists are found in the Corpus Hermeticum
(ed. Scott, I, p. 158). God created all visible things through imagination (óavrac(a)
and manifests himself in everything. He is present in everything and is the
visible and the invisible, in that which is and that which is not. Thus the cre-
186I. HERE BEGINNETH THE TREATISE... and Alchemy. The tendency of the alchemists, as he says,
was "not only to locate the mystery of psychic transformation in
matter, but at the same time to use it as a theoria for effecting
chemical changes.” 148 That is why Wisdom appears in Aurora
as a guide ("she shall direct thy steps") during the opus: the
psychic content projected into matter has the effect of inspiring
the adept. In the pagan texts the same content was personified
as the “anima mundi" or as Physis/^* while in Aurora it is
equated with Wisdom and the Holy Spirit. It is probably no
accident that the author cites just those Biblical passages which
come from the latest portions of the Old and New Testaments,
and which derived from Hellenized Jewish sources 14° and may
safely be regarded as ''"Gnostic."
ative fantasy of God is contained in the visible world and can reveal itself to
the elect. God is the dynamic energy (Sivayis évepryrjs) in all things (p. 210), and
everything is full of psyche and moves in perfect order (p. 212). Similarly in the
treatise "Asclepius" (pp. 310f.): "In the beginning were God and matter [which
in Greek is the cosmos. And a breath hovered over the matter, and was within
it. But as yet the elements were not]. Later in the same treatise, matter is
identified with the spiritus mundi ox natura mundi, and possesses a self-subsistent
vis procreandi. In "Kore Kosmou" (p. 462; cf. IV, pp. 450f.), Physis is a beautiful
feminine being who arose from the word of the First Father. Her daughter is
Heuresis ("finding" or "discovering"), who has power over the cosmic mysteries. 'Thus here too the "spirit of finding the truth" resides as it were in Nature
herself, in the form of a divine feminine being who must reveal herself if Nature
is to be known. In another Hermetic fragment (I, p. 382) it is said that although
human imagination is a prey to illusion, it can nevertheless attain to a reflection
of the truth through an "influence" from above.AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
magnet” !*—the effective symbol—so that a synthesis is prepared
between the conscious and unconscious components of the per-
sonality. The essence to be extracted is personified in our text
by Wisdom, who, as is expressly emphasized, is at the same the
“most true nature, whereof cometh no deceit.” Dorn speaks in
much the same way of a "truth" which is hidden in natural
things.?9 This "truth" is a "metaphysical substance," hidden
not only in things but in the human body. "In the human body
is concealed a certain metaphysical substance known to very
few, which . . . needeth no medicament, being itself the in-
corrupt medicament.” 187 Jung interprets as follows: !?* “Thus
the doctrine, which may be consciously acquired ‘through a
kind of divine inspiration,’ is at the same time the instrument
whereby the object of the doctrine or theory can be freed from
its imprisonment in the ‘body,’ 18° because the symbol for the
doctrine—the ‘magnet’—is at the same time the mysterious
‘truth’ of which the doctrine speaks. The doctrine enters the
consciousness of the adept as a gift of the Holy Ghost. It is a
thesaurus of knowledge about the secret of the art, of the
treasure hidden in the prima materia, which was thought to be
outside man. The treasure of the doctrine and the precious
secret concealed in the darkness of matter are one and the same
thing 42
To my knowledge, Aurora is one of the earliest medieval
treatises in which we find the nascent idea that the alchemical
opus involves an inner experience, and that a numinous content,
Wisdom (the anima), is the secret which the adept was looking
for in the chemical substances.
Jung has discussed the great significance which attaches to
this projection of the unconscious into matter !*' in Psychology
135 Ibid., p. 159ff.
136 It is the "medicine, improving and transforming that which is no longer into
that which it was before its corruption, and that which is not into that which it
ought to be." Aion, p. 161. 137 Ibid. Cf. Mysterium, pp. 478f.
138 Aion, p. 162. Cf. Mysterium, pp. 48off. 139 Cf. Mysterium, pp. 482ff., 489ff.
140 For a more detailed psychological explanation of these extremely significant
ideas of Dorn, see Mysterium, pp. 494f.
141 Similar ideas to those of the alchemists are found in the Corpus Hermeticum
(ed. Scott, I, p. 158). God created all visible things through imagination (óavrac(a)
and manifests himself in everything. He is present in everything and is the
visible and the invisible, in that which is and that which is not. Thus the cre-
186

In another Hermetic fragment (I, p. 382) it is said that although
human imagination is a prey to illusion, it can nevertheless attain to a reflection
of the truth through an "influence" from above. 142 Pars. 4onff. . 143 Par. 406. 144 Par. 413. 145 According to Sellin (Introduction to the Old Testament), Ecclesiastes cannot
be dated prior to 300 B.c. because of the Graecisms it contains (p. 228), the
Canticles (Song of Songs) in its present version belongs to the 4th or 5th cent. B.c. (p. 224), Proverbs are post-exilic and belong to the 4th cent. (p. 208), Jesus Sirach
(Ecclesiasticus) to about 200 B.C. (p. 294), and the Wisdom of Solomon to the
1st cent. B.c. with demonstrable Greek influences. In this connection it is es-
pecially interesting to consider the conception of Sapientia Dei in Philo of Alex-
andria, since towards the end of the ist cent. s.c. this Hellenistic philosopher
undertook, as a Jew, the attempt to connect the Greck, pre-Christian idea of a
world-ordering pneuma with the Old Testament teachings, making special use
of the Wisdom of Solomon. (Cf. Leisegang, Der heilige Geist, pp. 69ff) In
his interpretation of the Bible there is a mixture of Stoic elements and Greek
ideas and mystery wisdom, from which sphere the alchemical philosophers de-
rived their basic concepts and which in turn was applied by our author to the
Bible. As Leisegang points out (p. 69), alike in Philo and in the Wisdom of
187AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
'The projection of the anima-image into Physis is in fact an
event that left its mark on practically all the Gnostic systems,
where it can be found in the motif of the "fallen Sophia." The
latter is a feminine hypostasis of the deity, sunk in matter. Thus
the followers of Simon Magus revered Helen, his companion,
as the "Ennoia" of the Primordial Father, as the "virgin
Pneuma” and the "All-Mother" (Prunikos, Holy Spirit, etc.),
and taught that she had descended into the lower world and
there produced the angels and archons by whom she was after-
wards devoured. After many incarnations and much suffering
she even sank so low as to become a whore in a brothel in ‘Tyre,
from which she was rescued by Simon.!*$ In Barbelo-Gnosis a
similar goddess sunk in the world and in matter was worshipped
as the “Mother of All Living," and was also named the “Holy
Spirit." 47 The Sophia of the Ophites was not only a “virgin
Pneuma" but had even sunk down into the intermediate realm
Solomon Sophia either is or possesses a pneuma, and in the latter case this is
a spiritual or psychic faculty which penetrated like a "breath" into man and
filled him with “wisdom, reverence, any virtue or any passion” (pp. 71f.). (The
same distinction as between Sophia and Pneuma is made in Aurora between
Scientia and Sapientia. Sapientia either is or had Scientia and passes it on to
man.) Sophia is "not only an hypostasis of a quality of God, she is a spiritual
being who co-exists independently with God" (p. 73). It is expressly mentioned
that she was there when God created the world, and that she knows his works. In the Corpus Hermeticum, too (I, p. 145), Sophia is an independent arche (un-
created principle) co-existing with God, Nous, Physis, and Hyle. Thus in Philo
(“That the Worse is Wont to Attack the Better," Loeb edn., II, p. 239) Sophia
becomes the “Mother, by whose agency the universe was brought to completion."
(C£. Scott, III, p.In another Hermetic fragment (I, p. 382) it is said that although
human imagination is a prey to illusion, it can nevertheless attain to a reflection
of the truth through an "influence" from above. 142 Pars. 4onff. . 143 Par. 406. 144 Par. 413. 145 According to Sellin (Introduction to the Old Testament), Ecclesiastes cannot
be dated prior to 300 B.c. because of the Graecisms it contains (p. 228), the
Canticles (Song of Songs) in its present version belongs to the 4th or 5th cent. B.c. (p. 224), Proverbs are post-exilic and belong to the 4th cent. (p. 208), Jesus Sirach
(Ecclesiasticus) to about 200 B.C. (p. 294), and the Wisdom of Solomon to the
1st cent. B.c. with demonstrable Greek influences. In this connection it is es-
pecially interesting to consider the conception of Sapientia Dei in Philo of Alex-
andria, since towards the end of the ist cent. s.c. this Hellenistic philosopher
undertook, as a Jew, the attempt to connect the Greck, pre-Christian idea of a
world-ordering pneuma with the Old Testament teachings, making special use
of the Wisdom of Solomon. (Cf. Leisegang, Der heilige Geist, pp. 69ff) In
his interpretation of the Bible there is a mixture of Stoic elements and Greek
ideas and mystery wisdom, from which sphere the alchemical philosophers de-
rived their basic concepts and which in turn was applied by our author to the
Bible. As Leisegang points out (p. 69), alike in Philo and in the Wisdom of
187

239) Sophia
becomes the “Mother, by whose agency the universe was brought to completion."
(C£. Scott, III, p. 137.) She is also identical with the spirit of God which brooded
over the waters (and which in Hebrew is feminine) because she represents God's
érvorhun (knowledge). (Cf. Scott, I, p. 296, where the body of every living thing
is nourished on water and earth, whereas the soul has its roots up above and
receives eternal nourishment from the movement of the heavens, "but the spirit
with which everything is filled mingles with everything and animates everything.")
She is also the nurse and nourisher of those who "demand eternal food" (Leise-
gang, p. 73). Indeed, in Philo as in Aurora the teaching of Wisdom is a mystery. She is initiated into God's knowledge and contains in herself the gnosis of the
saints (p. 75). In the Acts of Thomas (James, Apocryphal New Testament, pp. 376,
388) the "Mother" is praised as the "revealer of hidden mysteries." Similarly,
in Aurora, Scientia or Sapientia is called a sacrament and gift of God. 146 Leisegang, Die Gnosis, pp. 65ff. 147 Bousset, Hauptprobleme, pp. 1, 5, 18, 59-65, and 326, n. 1. (Irenaeus, Adv. haer., Y, 29, 4). She is God's “Ennoia,” a virginal pneuma, eternal and inde-
structible. Cf. Eisler, "Angelos," concerning Pistis Sophia and Barbelo. 188I. HERE BEGINNETH THE TREATISE . ..
between God and the world. She signified "Life," or, in Leise-
gang's interpretation, the "soul embodied in earthly things."
She was also considered to be the mother of the seven planets,!48
and hence of Heimarmene (‘‘compulsion of the stars") and the
earthly world. ‘The Syrian Gnostic Bardesanes knew this same
goddess in a similar double form, as a heavenly mother-goddess
and as the fallen Sophia, and among the Valentinians the
heavenly Aletheia ("Truth"), the “Mother of All Things," was
contrasted with the lower Achamoth.' Similarly, in the so-
called Books of Jeá and in Pistis Sophia, Barbelo as the Ennoia
of God is contrasted with the fallen Sophia. Among the Man-
daeans she appears as Ruhá d’Qudsa (Holy Spirit),° though in
demonic form, and was also called Namrus, which means mid-
day, the south. Thus she is a demon of the south and the noon-
day heat (cf. the Queen of the south in Aurora).*1 Namrus was
also considered the mother of the planets.!5?? The Church Fathers
interpreted the “midday” negatively, as the heat of worldly
ambition (fervor mundanae gloriae), from which the Queen of
the south was supposed to have turned away.15?
On a psychological view the Gnostic fall of Sophia, the Wis-
dom of God, into matter is the self-representation of an un-
conscious process, of that moment when the "pleromatic" anima
—the anima as an archetype of the collective unconscious—is pro-
jected into matter with the result that, although not yet recog-
nized as a psychic content, she is nevertheless brought con-
siderably nearer to the sphere of human understanding.'** An
148 Bousset, Hauptprobleme, p. 11 and 66; Leisegang, Gnosis, pp. 169ff. (Origen,
Contra Celsum, VI, 38; Eng. edn., p. 353.) C£. the prayer to the Mother, who was
thought of as the Holy Ghost, in the Acts of Thomas: “Come, mother of the
seven houses, that thy rest may be in the eighth house" (James, p. 376).
149 Bousset, pp. 58, 63, n. 2. 150 Ibid., pp. 28, 29, 33.
151 The Ruha d'Qudsà combines the qualities of the “noonday devil" (Psalm
go : 6, D.V.) with those of the Holy Spirit.
152 Brandt, Die manddische Religion, pp. 131 and 182.
153 Honorius, Expositio in Cant. Cant. (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, col. 352).
154 Cf. Psychology and Alchemy, par. 410: “The idea of the Pneuma as the Son
of God, who descends into matter and then frees himself from it in order to
bring healing and salvation to all souls, bears the traits of a projected uncon-
scious content. Such a content is an autonomous complex divorced from con-
sciousness, leading a life of its own in the psychic non-ego and instantly project-
ing itself whenever it is constellated in any way—that is, whenever attracted by
something analogous to it in the outside world." "In such visionary images .
189AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
account of this process can be found, for instance, in the late
classical tale of Amor and Psyche, related in the Metamorphoses
of Apuleius. ‘There the anima appears first as Venus, as a purely
divine, i.e., archetypal figure with a strong admixture of the
mother-imago. The king's daughter Psyche, who is persecuted
by Venus, is on the other hand an anima figure who is already
humanized, yet in so far as she is a fairytale princess she is to a
large extent still a collective content. Nor is she the bride of
a human being, but of Eros, a "daemon." Only her daughter
Voluptas (Pleasure), to whom Psyche gives birth at the end of
the tale, can be regarded as the individual anima of the hero
Lucius.155
Likewise the tragic love-story of Aeneas and Dido in Virgil's
Aeneid is a phase in the process of humanizing the anima (mak-
ing her more accessible to the consciousness of man) that goes
on in the unconscious. The mother-goddesses Juno and Venus
are the instigators of the love-affair between Aeneas and Dido,
but in the end they destroy her, just as Venus persecutes Psyche.
This process of realizing the anima, beginning in late antiquity
and probably traceable in other texts as well, was then broken
off or superseded by the humanization of the Logos in Christ.
Only in alchemy was the classical tradition preserved, and not
there is expressed the whole phenomenon of the unconscious projection of au-
tonomous contents. These myth-pictures are like dreams, telling us that a pro-
jection has taken place and also what has been projected" (p. 290). What Jung
says here about the projection of the Anthropos-image is naturally true also of
his feminine counterpart, Sophia.
155 This interpretation is borne out when one places the Amor and Psyche
story in the context of the Metamorphoses as a whole. In his fine psychological
commentary on the tale (4mor and Psyche, esp. p. 141), Neumann takes Psyche
more as the exponent of feminine psychology in general, and this is justified in
so far as the anima of a man does in fact reflect the psychology of a woman.
Seen in the total context of the novel, however, Psyche should be taken as an
anima-figure. Her sufferings lead to the birth of "Voluptas," for it is in this
childish form that the humanized anima first impinges on a man's consciousness.
'The novel itself presents the anima as she is experienced by the consciousness of
a man: it is through the pursuit of pleasure that Lucius finally comes to a
realization of the goddess Isis. The interpolated story, on the other hand, pre-
sents the same process "from behind the scenes," as seen from the unconscious,
and it is an apt touch that the story is told by an old woman, a personification of
the unconscious. It tells how the Queen (anima) strays down into the sufferings
of human existence, spurred on by her love for Eros, the mediator between the
world of the gods and of men.
190I. HERE BEGINNETH THE TREATISE . . .
until the Renaissance did the problem of humanizing the anima
emerge again, as in Francesco Colonna’s tale of Poliphilo.!59
In Aurora the anima appears as she does in the Gnostic
texts, on the one hand as the Biblical Wisdom, on the other
hand as the anima mundi sunk in matter and calling for help.
The need for redemption is sounded already in the first chapter,
where she goes about seeking the artifex and exposing herself
to the scorn of the multitude, and needs human thought for
her perfection. Also, the fact that she arouses "concupiscentia"
may be an indication that a natural imperfection clings to her.
In most of the Gnostic myths I have mentioned, Sophia be-
fore her fall or because of it was a suffering creature like man,
searching for God. Though in the doctrine of Simon Magus she
incarnates as a whore in Tyre, in other systems she does not
sink down to such human misery but is imprisoned in matter,
whence she cries out for deliverance. In the myth of Simon she
takes on human and personal features too soon, as it were,
because he identified himself with the “power of God" and his
beloved with "Ennoia" (God's self-knowledge). He thus over-
stepped the boundary between the limited, personal ego-con-
sciousness and the archetype, which amounts to inflation."
This may well have been responsible for the legend of Simon's
tragic end.!55 The inflation presumably occurred because, al-
though the need for the projection of the God-image to be
taken back into the psyche was present, the contemporary con-
sciousness lacked any concepts which would have enabled Simon
to understand the anima as an intrapsychic factor not coinci-
dent with the ego. T'he modern concept of the unconscious alone
makes such an integration possible. In the classical alchemical
writings the danger of inflation (as distinct from gnosis) was
avoided because the anima was largely conceived as a supra-
personal entity, but then everything got projected into matter
and stuck there. Sophia remained something mystical and quasi-
psychic which apparently showed itself in the behaviour of
chemical substances.
If we bear this fact in mind we shall perhaps understand
more easily how shattered the author of Aurora must have been
156 The Dream of Poliphilo, ed. Fierz-David.
157 Leisegang, Die Gnosis, pp. 82ff. He appeared as God and world-redeemer.
Cf. p. 65. 158 Ibid., pp. 65f.
191AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
when Wisdom suddenly appeared to him in personal form.
Doubtless he did not know before how real an archetypal figure
like Wisdom is, and he had taken her merely as an abstract idea.
For an intellectual it is a shattering experience when he dis-
covers that what he was seeking "from the beginning of his
birth" is not just an idea, but is psychically real in a far deeper
sense and can come upon him like a thunderclap. What I mean
by "psychically real" is expressed by the author when he says
that Wisdom is ‘‘most true nature." He is saying that she is not
merely an intellectual concept but is devastatingly real, actual,
and palpably present in matter. We see here how the symbolic
language of alchemy fulfils a saving function: it enabled the
author to describe the numinosum in all its individual actuality.
In this way he could relate to it directly and establish personal
contact with it. T'his personal contact consists in extracting the
"most true nature" in the encounter with the anima. In the
Turba '*? the extraction of the spiritus occultus, anima occulta,
natura abscondita, tinctura veritatis, etc. is of fundamental im-
portance. This Arabic treatise was probably—apart from Senior
—the main source for the author's views concerning a divine
truth, itself like a substance, hidden in matter. We read that
the “truth of the philosophers" is “nature fused with her
bodies," 19? i.e., the metals, which proves that the philosophers
sought the "spirit of truth" in matter itself. The same treatise
says: 18! "I maintain that the beginning of all things which God
hath created is faith and reason. For faith ruleth all things, and
in reason also faith appeareth, and the denseness of the earth.1
But faith is perceived only in a body. And know, all ye assembly,
that the denseness of the four elements resteth upon the
earth, aan
159 Ruska, p..131: “The hidden thing in which is the tincture of the truth.” *
P. 119: “Therefore order it by cooking it in liquid until its hidden nature ap-
pear." * Cf. pp. 134, 141, 149, 309, also Das Buch der Alaune und Salze (Ruska,
p. 59), where Mercurius says: “I am the whole arcanum, and in me the secret
wisdom is hidden." Wisdom is therefore given to man by God in order to ac-
celerate by art the work of nature (p. 62).
160 T'urba, p. 190.
161Sermo of Anaxagoras, ibid. p. 176 (German), p. 111 (Latin). I have made
the (German) translation rather more literal, and have restored one of Ruska's
deletions.
162 "and the denseness of the earth" is deleted by Ruska.
192I. HERE BEGINNETH THE TREATISE .
Faith (din), according to Ruska, was held to be the source
of all religious, supernatural, revealed knowledge, while reason
(aq!) was the source of natural knowledge. In natural knowl-
edge faith (the 'Transcendental) assumes a real, manifest form
("apparuit"), and so likewise does the denseness of the earth,
for it is only in a concrete manifestation that faith can be per-
ceived. Just as the four elements, sinking down, condense into
earth, so (and this process is thought of not as running parallel
with the first, but as coinciding with it) revealed knowledge re-
ceives form in natural knowledge. "Truth" was, in fact, con-
ceived as a substance.!9? This T'urba text is actually (like all
creation myths) describing the coming of consciousness: dql,
the source of natural knowledge, symbolizes the unconscious
archetypal background of the psyche. It is here that transcen-
dental knowledge of God attains empirically graspable form; 1%
for example, we can observe the effects which the archetype of
the self, the God-image, has upon the individual. From ádl,
so the text says, is produced the "denseness of the earth," com-
posed of the four elements, or, in psychological language, the
individual field of consciousness centered in the ego-complex
with its four-function structure, which corresponds to the qua-
ternary structure of the self.195
Such a psychological interpretation was naturally never
163 Cf. "truth" as a "substance of celestial nature" in Dorn, discussed in Mys-
terium, p. 487.
164 Din, being “the Transcendental,” is in itself empirically and psychologically
inapprehensible.
165 The distinction between a natural and a supernatural source of knowledge
is the subject of a subtle discussion in the Sermo of Locustor in the Turba
(Ruska, pp. 113-79). According to him there are two “creations,” one of which
is seen only by faith and cannot be described. This faith is called “piety,” and
is the equivalent of the above-mentioned revelatory knowledge. The invisible
creation is heaven. What lies below is a second creation, and this can be known
only by reason and with the help of the five senses. This lower creation receives
its light from the sun. (Among the Stoics and in the Corpus Hermeticum the
sun, according to a view widely held in antiquity, is an image of the mind
[mens], the source of human intelligence.) The light of the sun is of a particularly
“subtle” nature. The upper creation does not need the light of the sun, because
it is itself of a still subtler nature and receives its light from God. Thus the
capacity to cognize sensible things is dependent on the light of the sun, while
suprasensible things can be known only by the light of God. Cf. Mysterium, pp.
533ff., concerning the "potential world" in Dorn, to which the invisible creation
corresponds. It is ruled by the diffuse luminosity of “absolute knowledge."
195AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
formulated in alchemy because the psychic processes were pro-
jected into matter. Hence the “‘denseness of the earth" remained
the mystical end-result of the process, whereas actually it was a
projection of the pre-conscious growth of a new level of con-
sciousness.
I have cited the T'urba passage only to show that an inter-
pretation of Wisdom as the lumen naturale and at the same
time as a concrete substance is not out of place, since the
author must have known this passage. It sheds light on the
nature of Wisdom, who appears on the one hand as the divine
truth inspiring the alchemist, and on the other as a datum of
physical nature which needs to be processed and perfected by
the opus.!69 She contains all the attributes of divinity and is
the highest and lowest at once; a bringer of enlightenment, the
psychopomp to God, and a secret hidden in matter (the un-
conscious), which can be freed only by extraction (conscious
realization).
The effect which the invasion of this archetypal image had
upon the author seems at first to have been one bordering on
exaltation. Placing himself in the background, he utters a
beautiful paean of praise to this experience. Only towards the
end of the chapter does he hint that man's own attitude is im-
portant in such a situation and demands subtle thought.
166 Cf. Avicenna (Theatr. chem., 1659, IV, p. 879): "Its intrinsic virtue is the
light of lights, the enlightening tincture.” * Also Holmyard, “Abu’l Qasim al-
'Iràgi," pp. 421f., concerning the synonyms for the lapis: dog, eagle, poison of
the metals, light, mercury of the east, son of the fire, venom of the lion, son of
the philosophers, Satan.
194II. WHAT WISDOM IS
The second chapter also is devoted to a description of Wisdom,
but a slight alteration of tone is perceptible:
If therefore now your delight be in thrones and the sceptres of kings,
that you may reign for ever, love the light of the science all of you
and enquire, ye who are signed with the learning of nature, for the
wise man will seek out for you the wisdom of all the ancients and
will be occupied in the prophets and will enter into the subtleties
of parables and will search out the hidden meaning of proverbs and
will be conversant in the secrets of parables.
As we shall see later, the author identifies himself with that
"wise man" who reveals the secrets of symbols to the elect. An
ego-toned trait even appears: J will reveal the truth, and he
addresses himself only to kings and learned men. Obviously the
invasion of consciousness has been followed by a volte face, an
attempt of the ego to reassert itself—unfortunately by partially
identifying with Wisdom.
This chapter, too, is given over to an amplification of Sa-
pientia. But whereas the first, particularly towards the end, lays
stress on her quality as a natural source of knowledge, the main
accent here is on her divine and mysterious nature, which can
be grasped only by meditation and inspiration. Hers is the
secret of “reigning for ever," that is, of eternal life, and for this
reason she can be expressed only in symbolic language. This al-
chemical text therefore requires as much detailed study and
elucidation as the "typi" of Holy Writ.
It was a widespread idea among the scholastics, accepted for
instance by Joannes Scotus Erigena,! Albertus Magnus; and St.
1 Expositiones super ierarchiam caelestem Sancti Dionysii (Migne, P.L., vol. 122,
col. 146): "As the art of poetry sets forth moral or physical teaching by invented
fables and allegorical comparisons .. . so theology like a kind of poetry by
fictive imaginations brings Holy Scripture into conformity with the capacities of
195AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
'Thomas,? that Holy Writ had a symbolic content that needed
interpreting. This idea permitted the author of Aurora, too, to
bring the Biblical symbolism into connection with the al-
chemical.
Psychologically, the underlying thought is that the nature of
Wisdom can be sketched only by symbolic amplification, that it
is something "ineffable"—in other words, akin to an archetype,
whose ultimate essence can never be formulated intellectually.
The alchemists themselves frequently spoke of the symbolic
expressions and "thousand names" for the lapis,* justifying them
by the need for secrecy. Senior in particular emphasized that
he wrote typice (symbolically) * because the whole matter could
be grasped only by divine inspiration. Knowledge came only
through the "interior senses," and after lengthy labours God
himself had finally revealed that hidden matter to him,’ "for the
perfected science is of the greatest worth and a secret of the
glorious God . . . inspired by God himself into his philoso-
our mind and with apprehension by the outward bodily senses, as from a kind
of imperfect childhood, to the perfect knowledge of intelligible things. For the
sake of man's mind Holy Scripture is woven into various symbols and teachings." *
2“Mariale” (Borgnet, XXXVII, p. 260): "(Naphtali) received the name of ‘con-
version' because whatever he found written he turned to spiritual understand-
ing."* Mary alone has perfect understanding of Holy Scripture (p. 61). Cf. also
Albertus, "Enarrationes in Apocalypsim" (Borgnet, XXXVIII, p. 497), where he
says the Apocalypse should be interpreted allegorically lest the book become too
clear, be disseminated among the people and thereby become obsolete.
3 According to him, the truth is contained in the Holy Scriptures only “diffusely”
(Summa, II-II, q. 1, art. 9, ad 1; Eng. edn., II, p. 1177). Revelation is "a kind of
shadowy knowledge mingled with obscurity" * ("De veritate," 12, 12). He there-
fore believes in the "spiritual meaning" of the Scriptures (Quaestiones quod-
libetales, VII, 16, p. 279). Cf. White, "St. T'homas' Conception of Revelation,"
PP- 7; 27-
4 Jung, Psychology and Alchemy, par. 336. Cf. Zosimos in Berthelot, Alch. grecs,
II, xxv, 1 and III, xxix, 10, and Democritus, ibid., II, i, 15. “The stone and
No-Stone which is called by many names, lest any who is unwise should know
it"* (Turba, p. 129). The "Aquarium sapientum," which was influenced by
Aurora, says: "And as the earthly philosophical stone and its substance have a
thousand names, so an infinite variety of titles is even more justly predicated of
the Chief Good of the Universe." * Mus. Herm., p. 111 (Waite, I, p. 97).
5 De chemia, p. 53.
6 Ibid., p. 6; cf. pp. 61 and 82.
7 Pp. 91, 93, 98 and 101f.
196Il. WHAT WISDOM IS
phers* and into the elect . . . She is sister to Philosophy and
hath her being of God by inspiration." ?
What the science is and how she cometh into being I will lay bare,
and will not hide from you. For she is a gift and sacrament of God
and a divine matter, which deeply and in divers manners was veiled
in images by the wise.
In this passage the designation of alchemy as a "sacrament"
is particularly striking. It comes from the pseudo-Aristotelian
treatise “Secreta secretorum," which says: “I therefore reveal to
thee, calling divine justice to witness, that sacrament, as it was
revealed to me." !? But on the lips of a Christian writer this
word has a far deeper significance, and it cannot be doubted that
the author of Aurora was thinking of the sacraments of the
Church.!! The paralleling of alchemical symbolism and the Mass
is described by Jung in Psychology and Alchemy?
Wherefore I bring the knowledge of her to light and will not pass
over the truth, neither will I have to do with consuming envy; for
from the beginning of my birth have I sought her out and knew not
that she was the mother of all sciences that went before me. And she
bestowed on me innumerable riches, which I have learned without
guile and will communicate without envy, and without hiding her
worth.
8 P. 113.
9 Pp. 120f: "But thou, O reader, be desirous of learning the fear of God and
thou wilt come to see the secret and the visible working of this stone and wilt
find it, instructed by the spirit of the All-Highest, that thou mayest know that
all wisdom is of God and was always with him, whose name 'Lord' be blessed
for ever, who hid this thing from the wise and clever, and revealed it to the
poor in spirit (parvulis).”
10 I use the edition of 1528, fol. V.
11 This becomes obvious when one recalls the words of a later contemporary,
Petrus Bonus: "And in this wise Alchemy is supernatural, and is divine. And
in this stone is all the difficulty of the Art, nor can any sufficient natural reason
be adduced why this should be so. And thus it is when the intellect cannot com-
prehend this nor satisfy itself, but must yet believe it, as in miraculous divine
matters; even as the foundation of the Christian faith, being supernatural, must
first be taken as true by unbelievers, because its end is attained miraculously and
supernaturally. Therefore God alone is the operator, nature taking no part in
the work." (*Pretiosa margarita novella," Theatr. chem., 1622, V, p. 648.) The
designation of alchemy as a “sacrament” must be taken in this sense.
12 Pars. 480ff. See also “Transformation Symbolism in the Mass.”
197AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
Like many other alchemists, the author promises at last to
reveal the secret and to do so without “consuming envy" —an
allusion to the "invidi" !? among the philosophers, who grudg-
ingly withheld their knowledge from the world. He then
emphasizes that he has sought Wisdom “from the beginning of
my birth," !* a remarkable personal confession which almost
makes one think he consciously knew his preoccupation with
alchemy meant integrating the innermost essence of his soul,
presumably because only in that way could he express his inner
processes symbolically. At any rate he suggests that alchemy was
a personal concern of his which had interested him from his
youth.!5
For she is an infinite treasure to all men, which a man having found,
hideth it and for joy thereof saith: Rejoice O Jerusalem and gather
together all ye that love me; rejoice with gladness, for the Lord hath
been merciful unto his poor.
Alchemy is here represented, through the Biblical context,
as the Kingdom of Heaven and the treasure hidden in the field,!$
and is thus credited with having the same power of redemption
as the work of Christ.” It, too, has a healing significance, as is
shown by the reference to the liberated Jerusalem and the
Lord's mercy. Once again it becomes clear that alchemy is a
redeeming or liberating insight, dependent on man's labours on
the one hand and God's grace on the other.!5
18 Turba, pp. 122f., 133.
14 Note that St. Thomas begins his commentary on Boethius with the same
quotation from the Bible: "Ab initio nativitatis," etc. (Wisd. 6 : 24f.).
15 He emphasizes that alchemy is the "mother of all sciences." This is made clearer
by a saying of Hermes quoted in “De lapidis physici secreto" (Theatr. chem.,
1659, IV, p. 649): "Know, my son, that all the wisdoms which are in the world
are subordinate to my wisdom." Such an assertion is valid in so far as alchemy
was really concerned with the "divine" mystery of physical creation, so that all
other sciences are naturally subordinate to it. Since the alchemists regarded the
mystery of creation as divine, they accorded their art a status equal to that of
theology, and the author of Aurora is no doubt consciously alluding to this
when he calls alchemy the mother of all sciences—an epithet which in the Mid-
dle Ages was otherwise used only of theology. Cf. St. Bonaventure, "De reductione
artium ad theologiam," Opera, V, p. 325: "For it is evident how all thinking
is the handmaid of theology." *
16 Matt. 13 : 44.
17 Psychology and Alchemy, pars. 414ff.
18 'Text: "For the Lord hath been merciful unto his poor."
198II. WHAT WISDOM IS
Senior likewise saith: For there is a stone, which he that knoweth
layeth it upon his eyes, but he that doth not, casteth it upon the
dunghill, and it is a medicine which putteth poverty to flight, and
after God hath man no better thing.
The insight is also the medicine !? or the stone which, ac-
cording to Senior, "he that knoweth layeth it upon his eyes."
This recalls the "collyrium philosophorum" (eyewash of the
philosophers), one of the innumerable synonyms for the “divine
water." With the aid of this eyewash one can see the secrets of
the philosophers without difficulty.? In Aurora this eye-open-
ing solution is called the "medicine," just as in general the
divine water was often conceived as the ¢dppaxov àffovacías OY £oijs.?!
The fact that the water appears here in the form of the medicine
is directly connected with the "meditation" in the first chapter,
which, as it were, produced it.?? Application of attention to the
unconscious produces not only insight ("collyrium"), but also
a living afflux of creative contents as well as the feeling of hav-
ing come into contact with something eternal and supraper-
sonal. The egocentric tone disappears, and the text once more
voices the author's enthusiasm and emotion. The medicine
"putteth poverty to flight, and after God hath man no better
thing." "Poverty" should be understood here in a general and
not merely material sense, and the comparison with God em-
phasizes afresh the religious value of the eye-opening stone and
the healing insight.
Thus, on closer analysis, the apparently incoherent and con-
fused text proves to have a consistent meaning and, in its subtle
images, sketches a strange but thoroughly comprehensible pic-
ture of Wisdom as the primary impulse towards knowledge of
the alchemical secret, namely, the unconscious.
19 For the '*medicine" see Psychology and Alchemy, par. 418.
20 “Allegoriae super librum Turbae,” Art. aurif. (1610), I, p. 90; cf. Aion, p. 127.
This idea is found in Greek alchemy (Berthelot, Alch. grecs, IV, xix, 10). There
mention is also made of the "Italic cloud for the eyes." In the Ostanes text the
priest promises to make the blind see (IV, ii, 1). Cf. Lippmann, I, p. 68.
21 Psychology and Alchemy, pars. 418, 498.
22 “Therefore study, meditate, sweat, work, cook . . . so will a healthful flood be
opened to you which comes from the heart of the Son of the Great World, a
water which the Son of the Great World pours forth from his body and heart,
to be for us a true and natural Aqua Vitae.” Khunrath, Von hyleal. Chaos, p. 274.
199II. OF THEM WHO KNOW NOT
AND DENY THIS SCIENCE
The third chapter needs little explanation, since in the main
it is only a polemic against the fools who know not the art. Its
violence and abusiveness are understandable enough if we con-
sider the isolated and sometimes perilous situation of a medieval
alchemist, but they must also be regarded as betraying a peculiar
uncertainty on the part of the author. The reason for this will
be disclosed only too soon—in the sixth chapter, where there
follows an abrupt plunge into the realm of the shadow and of
darkness. 'T'he aggressive tone points even more clearly to a trace
of inflation in the author.
This glorious science of God and doctrine of the saints and secret of
the philosophers and medicine of the physicians fools despise, for
what it is they know not. These will not have the blessing and it shall
be far from them, nor doth such science befit the unskilled, for every-
one who is ignorant of it is its enemy, and that not without cause.
For Speculator saith: The mockery of science is the cause of igno-
rance, and lettuces are not to be given to asses, for thistles suffice them,
nor is the children's bread to be set before the dogs to eat, nor are
pearls to be cast before swine, and such mockers are not partakers in
this noble science; for he would be a breaker of the heavenly seal
who should make the secrets of this science known to the unworthy;
nor sha!l the spirit of this wisdom enter into a gross body, nor can
the fool perceive it on account of the perversity of his reason.
Particular emphasis should be laid on the remark that fools
scorn the "blessing," which is another reference to knowledge
as an act of God's grace. The quotation of the parable of the
pearls that are not to be cast before swine is a pointer in the
same direction, for Matt. 7 : 6 says "Give not that which is holy
unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine." Any-
one who does so, says Aurora, "would be a breaker of the heav-
enly seal." This is a clear indication of the divine nature of the
200ill. OF THEM WHO KNOW NOT AND DENY THIS SCIENCE
secret. In antiquity the alchemical secret was in fact represented
as having been stolen from God.! The views expressed by the
author are fully in keeping with those of the contemporary in-
vestigators of nature, for Roger Bacon, Scotus Erigena,? and
Averroes? repeatedly emphasized that the science was not
for the "simple," but only for those who were capable of wise
and subtle thought.
For the wise have not spoken to the foolish, seeing that he that
speaketh with a fool speaketh with one that is asleep. Morienus
saith: If I were to unriddle all things as they are, there would be
nowhere any further place for prudence, for the fool would be made
equal to the wise; nor would any mortal under the sphere of the
moon bewail in stepmotherly poverty the pangs of hunger, for in this
science the number of fools is infinite.
The quotation from Ecclesiasticus 22 : 8 compares those who
are ignorant of the art with sleepers, an apt formulation for
their unconsciousness. The motif of the "sleepers in Hades,”
who are awakened to resurrection by the divine water and are
reborn, is to be found in the late classical text ‘‘Komarios to
Cleopatra." *
'The concluding sentence is remarkable in that the author
apparently considers the equality of all men and the complete
abolition of poverty to be undesirable. We should not take this
simply as a ''dog-in-the-manger'" attitude of wanting to keep for
oneself the freedom of consciousness acquired through the
secret; it may refer to the knowledge that anything you have
not acquired for yourself is injurious.5 "Bewailing the pangs
1 Cf. how Isis beguiled the secret out of the angel Amnaél (Berthelot, Alch. grecs,
I, xiii, 1f£), and the widespread view, derived from the Book of Enoch, that
women inveigled God's angels into revealing the secrets of magic, alchemy, and
all occult sciences (Charles, Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha, Ul, p. 192).
2 Exposit. super ierarchiam caelestem (Migne, P.L., vol. 121, col. 146).
8“Destructio destructionis," in Aristotle, Opera latina (Venice, 1560), tom. X,
1a, 1b; cf. n. 5, 407b: “It is not fitting that this should be so both for fools and for
the wise, and both for the multitude and the elect." * Ibid., 344b: "It is for God's
honour to keep the thing hidden." * For evidence that St. Thomas recognized
the value of symbolic interpretation, see his own interpretations in Summa, I,
q. 66, art. 1 (Eng. edn., I, pp. 328f.) and q. 68, art. 2 (I, pp. 339f.).
4 Berthelot, Alch. grecs, IV, xx, 15.
5 Concerning the danger of covetous princes forcibly appropriating the secret,
see "Liber Alze," Mus. Herm., p. 331 (Waite, I, p. 266).
201AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
of hunger" also seems to be an indispensable condition for
undertaking the opus, as elsewhere Morienus emphasizes that
one can attain the goal only through the "affliction of the
soul." 9
Summing up the psychic events that are expressed in these
first three chapters, we are struck most of all by the fact that
the author seems to have succumbed to a certain presumptuous-
ness which alienates him from the ordinary man. One would
have expected that the encounter with Wisdom would bring
about a profound religious upheaval or else a "depression" that
drove him back upon himself. This depression does in fact
appear in chapter VI. 'T'o begin with, however, he tries to over-
ride the experience with a kind of intellectual superficiality, to
preserve his conscious standpoint by pretending that he knows
what it is all about. He even unconsciously identifies with
Wisdom in so far as he claims to enlighten the blind by his
teachings. ‘This reaction suggests an intellectual inflation in the
author. But this attitude does not last long, for he genuinely
tries to come to grips with the experience. There is still a trace
of the inflationary superficiality in chapters IV and V, as the play
on words in the next chapter will show.
6 Psychology and Alchemy, par. 386. Knorr von Rosenroth (Kabbala denudata,
II, Part 1, p. 251) says that two of God's tears, falling into the sea of wisdom,
change its bitterness into sweetness.
202IV. OF THE NAME AND TITLE OF THIS BOOK
Now the title of this book is baptized "The Rising Dawn,” and that
for four reasons: Firstly, it is called Dawn as one should say the
Golden Hour, for so hath this science an hour with a golden end for
them that rightly perform the Work. Secondly, the dawn is midway
between night and day, shining with twofold hues, namely, red and
yellow; so likewise doth this science beget the colours yellow and red,
which are midway between white and black.
The chapter is devoted to an explanation of the title,
Aurora Consurgens, which is explained as a play on the words
aurora and aurea hora (golden hour), and on the other hand by.
the colour symbolism of the four alchemical stages, for the
golden hour of dawn shines yellow and red (citrinitas and
rubedo) midway between night (nigredo) and day (albedo).
Thirdly, because at dawn they that labour under all the infirmities
of the night are relieved and have rest; and so at the dawn of this
science all evil odours and vapours that infect the mind of the labor-
ant fade away and weaken, as the Psalm saith: In the evening weep-
ing shall have place, and in the morning gladness. Fourthly and
lastly, the dawn is called the end of the night and the beginning of
the day, or the mother of the sun,
The dawn is the “mother of the sun" (sun — gold); it drives
away the wintry night and all evil odours that infect the mind
of the laborant, “the horrible darknesses of our mind," as is said
later in the quotation from the Whitsuntide hymn of Notker
Balbulus.! In much the same way the Church was praised by
the Fathers as the "moon, which hath put all wintry clouds to
1 Cf. Ephraem Syrus, Hymni et sermones, I, p. 94: “The union of the two lights
comes about through baptism and understanding. These lights shed forth re-
splendent rays and darkness is lifted from the mind. Then the radiant soul con-
templates the hidden Christ of glory." *
203AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
flight.” ? And Anastasius the Sinaite says: "Life hitherto was
passed in the deep darkness of the night and mists of godlessness,
until Christ, the Sun of Justice, rose with his spouse Luna, the
Church." * According to Honorius of Autun, Satan in his fall
swept some of the stars down with his tail and covered them
with the mists of sin, until the sun—Christ—rescued them.*
Senior, too, speaks of the "darkness of the mind” as the materia
nigredinis and interprets it as terrestreitas mala, 'evil earthi-
ness. 5 ‘These comparisons clearly indicate the "moral" aspect
of the "evil odours and vapours" mentioned in the text.
No mention is made in this chapter of the passage in the
Song of Songs which is the direct source for the designation of
Wisdom as "Aurora." There it is said of the Queen of Sheba: ?
“Who is she that looketh forth as the morning, fair as the moon,
clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners?" But it
is alluded to in the next chapter, which says: “This is Wisdom,
namely the Queen of the south, who is said to have come from
the east, like unto the morning rising." 'The famous verse from
the Song of Songs was interpreted by the Fathers as the earthly
Church, *which shall show forth the coming of the divine sun
and dispel the darkness of ignorance." * St. Gregory says: "For
what is the place of dawn but the perfect brightness of the in-
ternal vision?" ? The variant title, Aurea Hora," as an ex-
planation of "Aurora," is significant inasmuch as the saying
? Methodius of Philippi, Symposion, VIII, 12.
3 Anagogicae contemplationum in Hexaemeron, 4.
4 Speculum Ecclesiae (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, col. 937).
5 De chemia, p. 40. Cf. Scott, Hermetica, I, p. 370: “The Father . . . illuminates
man with that knowledge alone which is the property of mind; whereby the
darkness of error is dispelled from the soul, and truth is seen in all its brightness,
and so man's consciousness is wholly absorbed in the knowledge of God."
6 Cant. 6 : of.
7 Theodoret of Cyrus, Explanatio in Cant. Cant., IV, 9 (Migne, P.G., vol. 81,
cols. 52-53). Cf. St. Gregory, Moralia, Lib. 4 in cap. 3 Job, sec. 10 (Migne, P.L.,
vol. 75, col. 648): "For the dawn is the title of the Church, which is changed
from the darkness of its sins into the light of righteousness. . . . Who is she,
etc., for like the Dawn does the Church of the Elect arise, in that she quits the
darkness of her former iniquity, and converts herself into the radiance of new
light" * (Eng. edn., I, p. 197). Sec. 46: "But the rising of the dawn is that new
birth of the Resurrection, whereby Holy Church, with the flesh too raised up,
rises to contemplate the sight of Eternity" * (p. 214). Cf. Honorius, In Cant.
Cant. (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, col. 454).
8 Moralia, Lib. 29 in cap. 38 Job, sec. 4 (Migne, P.L., vol. 76, col. 479).*
204IV. OF THE NAME AND TITLE OF THIS BOOK
from St. Bernard's commentary on the Song of Songs: "Rara
hora et parva mora" ? was constantly cited by the early medieval
mystics as a reference to that “rare and fleeting moment" when
human knowledge makes direct contact with the wisdom of God
and "tastes" it in ecstasy.° Thus the “rising dawn" is really the
moment of mystical union with God. St. Augustine’s doctrine
of a "dawn knowledge" and a “twilight knowledge" in man is
of interest in this connection. It is a characteristic of creaturely
knowledge to grow dim at evening (because it is sunk in the
world and turns to worldly things) and to become morning
again when it recognizes itself in the wisdom of God and returns
to the love of God. The east from which the dawn comes should also be under-
stood in its alchemical context, for in alchemy the east signified
"blood and life.” 12 Among the Byzantine-Greek alchemists the
9In Cant. Cant., Sermo XXIII, cap. 15 (Eng. edn., I, p. 253): “But all too rare
that privilege, and all too short-lived."
10 Gundissalinus, De anima: "For sapientia is derived from sapor (savour), but
the savour of a thing is not experienced until that thing is tasted. But it is
tasted when for a moment it is touched by taste: wisdom truly is perfected by
intelligence alone, for by that alone indeed is God experienced rarely and for a
fleeting moment. . . . Thus God is said to be tasted by the intelligence alone, for
by that alone of all the powers of the soul he is touched as if with no intermediary
both in the present and in the time to come. Here indeed we are properly said
to taste when for a moment and fleetingly we experience through our intelli-
gence something of God. There shall we be satisfied, where we shall enjoy him
without end." * Cf. Loewenthal, Pseudo-Aristoteles über die Seele, pp. 124f. 11 The City of God, Book XI, ch.AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
flight.” ? And Anastasius the Sinaite says: "Life hitherto was
passed in the deep darkness of the night and mists of godlessness,
until Christ, the Sun of Justice, rose with his spouse Luna, the
Church." * According to Honorius of Autun, Satan in his fall
swept some of the stars down with his tail and covered them
with the mists of sin, until the sun—Christ—rescued them.*
Senior, too, speaks of the "darkness of the mind” as the materia
nigredinis and interprets it as terrestreitas mala, 'evil earthi-
ness. 5 ‘These comparisons clearly indicate the "moral" aspect
of the "evil odours and vapours" mentioned in the text.
No mention is made in this chapter of the passage in the
Song of Songs which is the direct source for the designation of
Wisdom as "Aurora." There it is said of the Queen of Sheba: ?
“Who is she that looketh forth as the morning, fair as the moon,
clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners?" But it
is alluded to in the next chapter, which says: “This is Wisdom,
namely the Queen of the south, who is said to have come from
the east, like unto the morning rising." 'The famous verse from
the Song of Songs was interpreted by the Fathers as the earthly
Church, *which shall show forth the coming of the divine sun
and dispel the darkness of ignorance." * St. Gregory says: "For
what is the place of dawn but the perfect brightness of the in-
ternal vision?" ? The variant title, Aurea Hora," as an ex-
planation of "Aurora," is significant inasmuch as the saying
? Methodius of Philippi, Symposion, VIII, 12.
3 Anagogicae contemplationum in Hexaemeron, 4.
4 Speculum Ecclesiae (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, col. 937).
5 De chemia, p. 40. Cf. Scott, Hermetica, I, p. 370: “The Father . . . illuminates
man with that knowledge alone which is the property of mind; whereby the
darkness of error is dispelled from the soul, and truth is seen in all its brightness,
and so man's consciousness is wholly absorbed in the knowledge of God."
6 Cant. 6 : of.
7 Theodoret of Cyrus, Explanatio in Cant. Cant., IV, 9 (Migne, P.G., vol. 81,
cols. 52-53). Cf. St. Gregory, Moralia, Lib. 4 in cap. 3 Job, sec. 10 (Migne, P.L.,
vol. 75, col. 648): "For the dawn is the title of the Church, which is changed
from the darkness of its sins into the light of righteousness. . . . Who is she,
etc., for like the Dawn does the Church of the Elect arise, in that she quits the
darkness of her former iniquity, and converts herself into the radiance of new
light" * (Eng. edn., I, p. 197). Sec. 46: "But the rising of the dawn is that new
birth of the Resurrection, whereby Holy Church, with the flesh too raised up,
rises to contemplate the sight of Eternity" * (p. 214). Cf. Honorius, In Cant.
Cant. (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, col. 454).
8 Moralia, Lib. 29 in cap. 38 Job, sec. 4 (Migne, P.L., vol. 76, col. 479).*
204

124f. 11 The City of God, Book XI, ch. 7: "For the creature’s knowledge, compared
with the Creator's, may be said to be a twilight knowledge; and it grows light,
and is morning, when it is applied to the praise and love of the Creator, and it
does not turn into night, where the Creator is not abandoned by the creature's
Jove. . .. But the creature's knowledge, considered in itself, is, so to speak,
more colourless than when it is known in the wisdom of God, as if in the art
whereby it was made. And so it may be called evening rather than night, and,
as I said, when it is used for the praise and love of the Creator, it becomes
morning again. And when it does this in the knowledge of itself, it is one day;
when in the knowledge of the firmament, the second day; when in the knowledge
of the land and sea and all things that come into being in them, and continue to
have roots in the earth, the third day; . . . and in the knowledge of man him-
self, the sixth day." * Cf. Jung, “The Spirit Mercurius," pars. 299-301. 12“Take the stone that floats on the sea... and kill with it the quick and
quicken with it the dead, and it has within it death and life. . . . In it are two
opposites: water and fire, and the one quickens this, and the other kills that. . And afterward will the Oriental redness appear, and the redness of blood."
("Opusculum autoris ignoti," Art. aurif. [1610], I, p. 250.)
205AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
correlation of the substances and colours with the four direc-
tions played a considerable role. The technical treatises of the
Greeks and Arabs often speak of an "oriental quicksilver"
($8pápyvpos àvaroAucx),'? and Olympiodorus (end of the 6th cent.) ?*
says: 15 '"T'o the North they assigned the nigredo, to the East
the albedo, the white substance, which is called silver . . .
for Hermes says . . . the white substance is assigned to the East,
inasmuch as they [the philosophers] made the beginning of
the work equal to the beginning of the day, when the sun rises
over the earth.!5 Mark also Apollo, who says, ‘Behold, [earth]
is taken for the procedure at dawn.' 'At dawn' clearly means
‘before sunrise’ and is the first beginning of the whole work
before the albedo." This means, he says later, that the earth
should be taken ‘while it still contains dew," for the sun
robs it of its dew in order to nourish itself, and then the earth
is "a widow and without husband.” 17 From these amplifications
it is evident that the east or dawn was correlated not only with
the rubedo (blood and life) but also with the feminine, white,
"dewy" substance fertilized by the spirit.
Psychologically this "aurora" symbol denotes a state in which
there is a growing awareness of the luminosity of the uncon-
scious.!? It is not a concentrated light like the sun, but rather a
diffused glow on the horizon, i.e., on the threshold of conscious-
ness.!? ‘The anima is this "feminine" light of the unconscious,
bringing illumination, gnosis, or the realization of the self,
whose emissary she is.
In ecclesiastical symbolism the east is accordingly a symbol
for Mary. Ephraem Syrus says: "The east with its stars was a
figure of Mary, from whose womb the Lord of the stars was born
for us. He by his birth put to flight darkness from the world.” 2°
A liturgical commentary says: “The dawn shining in the heaven
13 Berthelot, Alch. grecs, V, ii, 7, and La Chimie au moyen áge, III, pp. 207, 209:
"Le livre du Mercure Oriental."
14 Lippmann, II, p. 10.
15 “On the Sacred Art," Berthelot, Alch. grecs, II, iv, 31.
16 In the "Kore Kosmou," too, Isis (or Hermes?) received the gnosis of the higher
mysteries, later set forth in the "Mysteries of Osiris,” at sunrise. (Scott, Her-
metica, Y, p. 460.) (I retain the reading of Patricius: ras dvarodjs yerouérns-)
17 Alch. grecs, Il, iv, 35. 18 Mysterium, pp. 148ff., 181ff.
19 For the significance of dawn see Hurwitz, "Archetypische Motive in der chas-
sidischen Mystik," pp. 209f. 20 Hymni et sermones, II, col. 584.*
206IV. OF THE NAME AND TITLE OF THIS BOOK
of redemption and grace, from whose womb the sun rises outshin-
ing her a thousandfold, is Mary.” ?! Among the Fathers "aurora"
also signified the Church,”? and according to Alan of Lille all
reason begins in the east?? But whereas in these passages the
dawn-symbol is merely an allegorical image, in our text it has
a far deeper meaning that goes right down into concrete reality.
Deliverance from "all the infirmities of the night" ?* is meant
in the physical as well as the psychic sense and alludes yet again
to the medicinal properties of the lapis. The evil odours and
vapours which infect the mind of the laborant are also physical
and psychic. Taken psychically, they symbolize soul-destroying
collective opinions * and the poison of repressed contents.
and so our dawn at its greatest redness is the end of all darkness and
the putting to flight of night, of that long-drawn-out winter wherein
he who walketh, if he take not heed, shall stumble. For of this in-
deed it is written: And night to night showeth knowledge, day to
day uttereth speech, and night shall be light as the day in its
pleasures.
The allusion to John 11:9-10 points once more to the
moral background of the opus: the long, dark winter's night in
which the laborant “stumbles” is a reference to the “affliction
of the soul” which prevails over the beginning of the work. ‘This
hint prepares the way for chapter 6, the parable “Of the Black
Earth." In the present chapter, which is devoted to the Aurora
image, the author subtly foreshadows the coming peripeteia and
at its end refers for the first time to the coming birth of the
21 Messbuch (Schott edn.), p. 1041.
22 Rahner, "Mysterium Lunae," pp. 342ff., and St. Gregory, Moralia, Lib. 4 in
cap. 3 Job, sec. 19 (Eng. edn., I, p. 203).
23 Distinctiones dictionum theologicialium (Migne, P.L., vol. 210, col. 866): “As
in the macrocosm the firmament is moved from east to west and back to the
east again, so in man his reason is moved from the contemplation of eastern,
that is, heavenly things, first considering God and divine things, then it descends
to western things, that is, to consider earthly matters, that through visible things
it may contemplate things invisible; then it returns to the east to consider heav-
enly things again." *
24'* Night" in patristic literature is also an image for Antichrist. Cf. Honorius,
In Cant. Cant. (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, col. 472). Cf. col. 451: “For as the rising dawn
drives away the darkness of night and brings the sun to the world, so the new-
born Church drives away the darkness of ignorance and by her teachings and
examples brings the sun to the world." *
25 Mysterium, pp. 162f.
207AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
new sun. The passage from Psalm 138 : 11—12 is also cited in the
Missal, where it is sung in the Exultet at the consecration of
the Easter candle: ?* *O truly blessed night, which alone didst
merit to know the time and the hour wherein Christ rose from
the dead! This is that night, whereof it is written: And the night
shall be light as the day: and night shall be my light in my
pleasures." This is Easter night, the night of Christ's resurrec-
tion.??
By this reference to the Exultet the author gives an almost
imperceptible hint that the opus is a real rebirth mystery, and
that the new birth is a figure whom he even puts on a par with
Christ. The suggested parallelism will become even clearer
later. Here, for the first time, the symbolism goes beyond the
encounter with the anima (Wisdom) to delineate a masculine
figure in a resurrection mystery.
26 Exultet, in Easter Eve Mass, Roman Missal.
27 Ibid.: "Let the earth also be filled with joy, illuminated with such resplendent
rays; and let men know that the darkness which overspread the whole world is
chased away by the splendour of our eternal King. Let our mother the Church
also be glad, finding herself adorned with the rays of so great a light."
208V. OF THE PROVOCATION OF THE FOOLISH
By identifying Aurora at the end of the last chapter with the
first light of Easter morning, the author fitted his experience
into the framework of ecclesiastical ideas that were familiar to
him, thereby weakening its individual value; but by so doing
he escaped the danger of inflation. In consequence, the tone of
this chapter is no longer so egocentric: the author retires into
the background and lets Wisdom herself speak.
Doth not Wisdom cry aloud in the public places and Prudence put
forth her voice in the books of the wise, saying: O ye men, to you I
call, and my voice is to the sons of understanding? Understand, ye
foolish ones, and mark the parable and the interpretation, the words
of the wise and their mysterious sayings; for the wise have used divers
manners of speech in making comparison with everything that is
upon the earth, and beneath the sphere of the moon they have multi-
plied parables in this science.
This chapter is a real "Protreptikos" ! to the study of al-
chemy. Wisdom again cries publicly in the streets to the "sons
of understanding," as in Proverbs. Then follows a new reference
to the enigmatic expressions used by the alchemists, and to the
thousand names for the stone: they have named it "in making
comparison with everything that is upon the earth.” ? Every-
thing "beneath the sphere of the moon," in the world of genera-
tion and corruption where conflict, action and passion reign?
1 "Exhortation."
2 Cf. the Lilium quotation in Petrus Bonus: “The philosophers of old saw that
this stone . . . could be compared in parables . . . with all the things that are
in the world" (Theatr. chem., V [1622], p. 660).
3 Gundissalinus, De immortalitate animae, p. 23: “For every place under the
sphere of the moon is a place of generation and corruption, for it is a place of
conflict and action and passion, from which generation and corruption invariably
come." *
209AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
can become an image for the lapis, since it is itself the light of
nature hidden in all things. Psychologically this means that the
projection of the psychic content symbolized by the lapis, namely
the self, can be found everywhere at any time.*
This is Wisdom, namely the Queen of the south, who is said to have
come from the east, like unto the morning rising, to hear, to under-
stand, yea and to see the wisdom of Solomon, and there was given
into her hand power, honour, strength, and dominion, bearing upon
her head the crown of the kingdom shining with the rays of twelve
stars, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband, and having on
her garments written in golden letters in Greek, in barbarian script,
and in Latin: Reigning I will reign, and my kingdom shall have no
end for all them that find me and subtly and ingeniously and con-
stantly seek me out.
Here some kind of goal seems to have been reached. A rela-
tively detached objectivation of the anima has been achieved:
the author portrays her with the help of Biblical images and
alchemical symbols as a divine figure, very vividly seen. She
comes forth "as a bride adorned for her husband." Only one
burning question remains: Who is the bridegroom? He cannot
be the eschatological Christ of the Apocalypse, for the world is
not yet dissolved away, Satan is still unvanquished, the final
struggle has still to be fought. According to the text she desires
to hear the wisdom of Solomon—human wisdom, so presumably
she is also seeking her bridegroom on eaith among living men.
Certainly the author is seeking Aer in order to be illuminated
by her, but is he not also the one whom she loves and seeks as
a bridegroom? This question does not seem to be answered un-
equivocally at present, but it is a conjecture that will be con-
firmed later.
This concluding passage sketches a magnificent picture of
Wisdom as the personified anima mundi, a picture that contains
a bewildering assortment of features from figures in the Bible.
First she is again equated with the Queen of the south, who
desires to "hear, to understand, and to see" the wisdom of
Solomon. This is no doubt an allusion to the concrete results of
the opus, for other alchemists assure us that the lapis can be
4 Psychology and Alchemy, par. 433.
210V. OF THE PROVOCATION OF THE FOOLISH
"seen and handled.” * They emphasize this in order to avoid
the misunderstanding that it is a mere allegory.
From the Queen of Sheba the author's mind switches to the
image of the woman in the Apocalypse who was crowned with
twelve stars and pursued by the dragon, and then to the heav-
enly Jerusalem, which comes down from heaven “as a bride
adorned for her husband." * The "great woman" (yivy peyddn)
of the Apocalypse is in patristic allegory an image for the
Church; she stands for a “self-subsistent power” (8óvajus Kal?
éavtnv), an idealized hypostasis of a "power of illumination per-
vading nature" (7 rapwpynuévn doríteofa. Sóvajus).5 She is also, be-
cause she stands on the moon, a symbol of transcendence over
all change, over earthly decay and the "realm of the spirits of
the air." An especially important interpretation that comes close
to our text by likewise contaminating the bride in the Song of
Songs with the woman in the Apocalypse can be found in Lib. V
of the Concordia of Joachim of Flora (d. 1202).? He says that by
the radiance of the sun (of the woman in the Apocalypse) is
meant the contemplative life of the anchorites, by the radiance
of the moon is meant the active life of the cenobites, and by the
stars are meant the individual virtues which caused the old
monks to live each alone in his own cell. Yet since all heavenly
phenomena refer also to the contemplative life, sun, moon and
stars signify the "ecclesia contemplativa," that same Church
which is represented by the woman, and of whom it is written
in the Song of Songs: "Who is she that cometh forth as the morn-
ing rising, fair as the moon, clear as the sun?" etc. This Church
is formed of the monastic orders, and the closer she stands to
God, the more she shuns the darkness of the world and its do-
ings. According to Joachim the stars signify the gifts of the
Holy Spirit, and this idea may have led to seven !? instead of
twelve stars being mentioned in the passage from Aurora as
quoted in the Rosarium philosophorum. This interpretation of
5 "Rosarium philosophorum" (Art. aurif., II, p. 133): “. . . which I have seen with
mine own eyes, and touched with my hands."
6 Rev. 12 : 1.
i Reve20h: 12:
8 Methodius of Philippi, Symposion, VIII, 4 and 5 (Migne, P.G., vol. 18, col. 145).
9 As I could not obtain a copy of Concordia, I cite from the text given in Hahn,
Geschichte der Ketzer im Mittelalter, II, p. 297.
10In Parable 4, the Holy Spirit has seven gifts (munera) or functions.
211AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
Joachim’s is particularly important because—as we shall see in
the course of the commentary—a certain affinity with his ideas
is apparent in the author's thought and in the contamination of
symbols.
In an alchemical context, the astrological significance of the
woman should also be considered. Originally she was identical
with Virgo (an earth sign), at whose feet stands the constellation
of Hydra, and thus far she corresponds to Isis as the Queen of
Heaven or “Kore kosmou." Equally, she has a far-reaching
correspondence with the numerous Gnostic feminine personifi-
cations of the Holy Ghost, such as Barbelo, Achamoth, Sophia,
etc. In these figures the pagan background of the image stands
out more strongly. But the ecclesiastical interpretation of the
woman as a "power of illumination pervading nature" would
equally well explain her identification with Wisdom, who in
Aurora is conceived not only as illumination “from above" but
also as a lumen naturale.? Pope Pius XII gave expression to
this collective, unconscious need for a "divine mother" who is
closer to nature in his Encyclical Ad Caeli Reginam, where he
extols the mother of God as "Ruler of the Cosmos," citing those
Church Fathers who praised her as the "domina creaturae" and
"domina rerum." He goes so far as to say that she is her Son's
"partner in the work of Redemption" and attributes to her “a
unique part in the work of our eternal salvation." !?
The author of Aurora goes beyond the usual medieval sym-
bolism in that his goddess represents not only Mary or Wisdom
or the Church, but also a Physis who will bear a child in the
future, and whose offspring and son-lover, as will be shown, will
be not the historical Christ but the homo totus or lapis phi-
losophorum.!*
But now, in contrast to the Apocalypse, something unex-
pected and momentous happens in Aurora: the woman crowned
11 Boll, Aus der Offenbarung Johannis, pp. 100ff.
12 Alanus de Insulis (Alan of Lille) invokes nature as follows:
"Peace, love and virtue, principle and power,
Law, order, way, beginning, end, and leader,
Life, form and figure, fount of light and splendour,
Rule of creation." *
De planctu naturae (Migne, P.L., vol. 210, col. 447).
13 Ad Caeli Reginam, 1 Nov. 1954 (Mary, Queen of All Creation, pp. 15ff.).
14 For the significance of this motif see Jung, "Answer to Job," pp. 438ff.
212V. OF THE PROVOCATION OF THE FOOLISH
with stars, who in the Apocalypse was hidden in the desert, de-
scends to the human world, presumably to the author himself,
"prepared as a bride adorned for her husband." This is formu-
lated even more clearly later in the text, and means nothing less
than that the archetypal motif of the coniunctio, which had
always been projected upon divine or royal figures,!® bursts
through into the realm of mortal man and elevates him to the
Rex Gloriae. For anyone who had not learned to discriminate the
domain of ego-consciousness from that of the collective uncon-
scious !? this was bound to have a shattering effect," as the be-
ginning of Aurora shows. He would be lifted out of his ordinary
human context and would himself acquire symbolic signifi-
cance; 18 for the coniunctio, as Jung points out, involves a
"transsubjective union of archetypal figures," and its goal is
complete individuation.!? Although these considerations would
suggest that the identification of the alchemist with the divine
son-lover of Wisdom is a dangerous situation,? for medieval
man it was probably a necessary stage on the way to individua-
tion, because otherwise the mysterium coniunctionis would
have remained for ever projected upon Christ and the Church
or Christ and Mary, outside the realm of the individual. The
new, inner birth that is obviously intended by this union, that
is, the birth of the lapis, a new symbol of the self over and above
Christ, would then never have taken place. As Jung has shown
in Aion,”! from a psychological standpoint Christ represents only
the positive, "light" aspect of wholeness, or of the self; he lacks
the shadow, the dark counter-pole, the existence of which had
been anticipated in the prediction of the coming Antichrist.
Consequently, the Christian symbol of the self remains alienated
from the concrete earthly reality of the individual man. The
alchemical symbol of the self, on the other hand, the lapis, para-
doxically includes both the light and the dark aspect of man's
wholeness. That is why alchemy forms a compensatory (though
not contradictory) undercurrent to Christian ideas.??
15 “The Psychology of the Transference,” pars. 419ff., 438ff.
16 Ibid., par. 469.
17 See especially par. 440, concerning the projection of the divine numen into
matter as an approximation to the human level.
18 Par. 462. 19 Par. 469. 20 Pars. 471f. 21 Pp. 41ff.
22 Psychology and Alchemy, Introduction.
213AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
It was perhaps for this reason that the author felt impelled
to describe his experience not only in a Biblical paraphrase but
also by means of alchemical quotations and images. Here we
have the first hint that it was not a matter of an ever-repeated
"inner" birth of Christ, but of producing the filius philoso-
phorum—a more comprehensive self-symbol that unites the op-
posites Christ and Antichrist.
With the image of the heavenly Jerusalem the author again
takes up a Biblical motif which contains a wealth of classical
and Hellenistic ideas. The twelve gates of the city, like the
twelve stars, are a reference to the signs of the zodiac,”* and this
is also an allusion to the symbolic significance of the twelve
chapters of Aurora. Further, the heavenly Jerusalem anticipates
a motif that becomes of central importance in chapter 10, con-
cerning the treasure-house of Wisdom. The woman in the
Apocalypse had "two wings of a great eagle"; ?* this too is not
without significance for our text, for later the eagle is men-
tioned as an emblem of the lapis,?> and in the final chapter the
heavenly bride appears with wings. Thus, in these veiled refer-
ences to the woman and the city, we already have hints of sym-
bolic representations of the anima that are developed in the
23 Boll, p. 39. The text of this Aurora passage is somewhat different in the
"Rosarium" (Ari. aurif., 1610, II, p. 193). Cf. the translation in Psychology and
Alchemy, par. 467: "This [Sapientia] is my daughter, for whose sake men say that
the Queen of the South came out of the east, like the rising dawn, in order to
hear, understand, and behold the wisdom of Solomon; power, honour, strength,
and dominion are given into her hand; she wears the royal crown of seven glit-
tering stars, like a bride adorned for her husband, and on her robe is written
in golden lettering, in Greek, Arabic, and Latin: ‘I am the only daughter of the
wise, utterly unknown to the foolish.’ " Jung continues (pars. 468f.): ““The original
text has twelve instead of seven stars, the latter evidently referring to the seven
stars in the hand of the apocalyptic 'one like unto the Son of Man' (Rev. 1 : 19).
These represent the seven angels of the seven Churches and the seven spirits of
God. The historical sous-entendu of the seven is the antique company of seven
gods who later took up their abode in the seven metals of alchemy. . . . The
twelve stars of the original text refer to the twelve disciples and the twelve signs
of the zodiac. . . . In Clement's second Homily it is observed that the number of
the apostles corresponds to the twelve months. In the Manichaean system the
saviour constructs a cosmic wheel with twelve buckets—the zodiac—for the raising
of souls. 'This wheel has a significant connection with the rota or opus circula-
torium of alchemy, which serves the same purpose of sublimation."
24 Rev. 12 : 14.
25 See end of Parable 5, infra, p. 337.
214V. OF THE PROVOCATION OF THE FOOLISH
later chapters. In the image of the bride coming down from
heaven the ultimate goal of the opus, the coniunctio as described
in the final chapter, is mentioned for the first time.
At this point the first part of Aurora comes to an end, and a
series of parables begins, with new contents. The division into
twelve chapters has, as we have said, a symbolic significance. In
alchemy the number twelve plays a role as the number of the
months, the hours of the day and of the night, and the signs of
the zodiac, with which the phases of the work were often corre-
lated.?? In medieval symbolism it was important as denoting the
number of cornerstones of the heavenly Jerusalem, the twelve
tribes of Israel, and the twelve privileges of Mary. Whereas the
first five chapters revolve round a central concept, Wisdom as
the spirit or soul of alchemy, in the attempt to enrich it with
more and more new images, the seven parables that follow por-
tray in dynamic images a progressive process that is intended to
illustrate the course of the alchemical opus. This course is repre-
sented as a spiral procedure, since each of the seven parables de-
scribes the whole opus in miniature, at any rate by allusion,
always beginning with a nigredo and ending with the goal. At
the same time the seven parables—one has only to look at their
titles!—arrange themselves in a chain that exemplifies the opus
as a whole.
The seven parables may be understood as alluding to the
seven planets and the corresponding metals or spirits of the
metals, which are the arcana or pillars ?' of the opus.?? In ec-
clesiastical symbolism, seven is significant as the number of days
of Creation (indeed, the opus imitates the Creation). They were
interpreted by Joachim of Flora and others as the seven ages of
the world; in the seventh and last age, according to Joachim,
26 Senior, "De chemia,” in Theatr. chem. (1660), V, p. 212: p. 53: "And this
[the Philosophers] meant when they set forth symbolically the seven planets and
the twelve signs, and their natures and colours, and all that is in them." * Cf.
Ruska, Tabula Smaragdina, p. 110.
27 Lippmann, II, p. 44.
28 “Aquarium sapientum," Mus. Herm., p. 94 (Waite, I, p. 85): ““There are seven
cities, seven metals, seven days, and the number seven; seven letters, seven words
in order meet, seven times, and as many places; seven herbs, seven arts, and
seven stones . . . in brief, all will proceed favourably in this number." * For the
role of the number seven in alchemy see Lippmann, I, p. 187, and II, pp. 192£
and 219.
, 215AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
the "ecclesia contemplativa" of the Holy Spirit will appear, and
the “Great Sabbath" come upon mankind.??
29 Concordia, V (Hahn, III, pp. 291, 305f. 315). It seems to me possible that
Aurora was directly influenced by the teachings of Joachim. Cf. the following
parallels in Hahn, III, p. 141: "The spirit of wisdom will speak all truth to
both peoples and will show itself to be one of the seven angels. . . . [Removing]
the filth of the letter from the eyes of the mind . . ." * P. 127: “. . . the justice
of the religious which is greater and more precious will fail of its worth in those
days, in comparison with the spiritual justice which is signified by gold." * P. 127:
"The number seven relates to the Holy Spirit, because of the seven gifts of
grace." P. 129: "There shall be one day, which is known to the Lord: it shall
be neither day nor night, and at eventide there shall be light. And it shall be
in that day that living waters shall go forth from Jerusalem, half of them to
the east and half of them to the west sea." * P. 309: “The new Jerusalem which
is founded at Rome, with apostles, martyrs, confessors, and virgins for its precious
stones." *
216VI. THE FIRST PARABLE: OF THE
BLACK -EARTH —...
The sixth chapter is the parable "Of the Black Earth, wherein
the Seven Planets took Root.”
Beholding from afar off I saw a great cloud looming black over the
whole earth, which had absorbed the earth and covered my soul,
Here the author himself seems to be speaking, as though he
were watching what was going on in the retort. The cloud
(nubes or nebula) is a well-known alchemical image for whose
interpretation I would refer the reader to Jung.1 The direct
source for this image in Aurora is probably the Turba.? As
Ruska points out,’ "cloud" signifies pneuma, or a sublimate,*
more specifically of evaporated mercury. Perhaps the appearance
of the cloud is not without reference to the Queen of the south
alluded to in the previous chapter, for the Turba says: "Know
that most of the wind of noonday, when it is roused up, drives
the clouds high and lifts up the vapours of the sea." 5 T'he cloud
(vepéAn) played a large role in Greek alchemy: it was called "the
darkness of the water," the “vapour,” the "runner," * and in a
treatise ascribed to Zosimos" it was interpreted as "a black,
damp, unmixed pneuma," and of this cloud Maria Prophetissa
had said: '"The ore doth not tincture, but is tinctured, and only
when it hath been tinctured doth it tincture, and when it hath
been nourished it nourisheth, and when it hath been perfected
1 Mysterium, pp. 17of.
2 Ruska, pp. 190f.
3 Ibid., p. 190, n. 7.
4 Cf. Lippmann, I, p. 37.
5P. 240. This remark occurs also in Holmyard, Kitab al-ilm al-muktasab. Cf.
Ruska, p. 240, n. 6.
6 Alch. grecs, I, iii, 11; II, i, 27; II, iv, 8; III, vi, 6.
7 Ibid., III, xix, 4 and III, xx, 4.
217AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
it perfecteth.” § From this it is clear that the cloud, like the ore,
is the arcane substance which is transformed and works transfor-
mation, being both active and passive.
In our text the cloud, as in Zosimos, is black, because it is
mixed with earth. In alchemical terms, the state of nigredo has
appeared. This reminds us of a similar description in the second
poem of the Carmina Heliodori? which says that the dragon
(arcane substance) should be divided in two in the midst of the
sea, until a cloud rises up from it. From this the water pours
down again and bathes everything "like a black darkness"
(as uéAav oxdros). According to the T'urba,!? the substances must
be tormented with an "ancient black spirit" until they change.
In most of the alchemical texts the nigredo is the result of a
preliminary union of opposites and of a first operation, and
since there is no mention of this in our parable we must assume
that the nigredo is the result of what was described in the pre-
ceding chapters—in other words, the result of the author's en-
counter with Wisdom. Psychologically it was the collision of his
consciousness with the unconscious, personified as a woman.
What distinguishes the present account of the nigredo from
other alchemical parallels is the fact that the author seems to
have been affected by it in a much more personal way: it gave
rise to unexpectedly intense suffering and a perception of his
own darkness. In the mystical texts of the same period this per-
sonal aspect is much less pronounced. The state was described
by several other authors, including Hugh of St. Victor, who de-
scribed his “overshadowing” by the unconscious very beautifully
as the "imagination" gaining power over the light of reason. He
says H that this ?maginatio is nothing other than an image of
the body, perceived from outside by the senses and then con-
SCE ibid. V; xxv; THE, xxvi; 45 IIb x33; 16: TWO; iis HE II ur ee
cloud is whitened by pure sulphur. Cf. III, xx, 1. Zosimos says (IV, vii, 2): "The
quicksilver is fixed in the cloud that is of the same essence." And Hermes (III,
xxi, 3): "Triturate the cloud in the sun." Agathodaimon (III, xx, 3): "The poten-
tial cloud works upon the potential ore, and they dwell in amity." Cf. ibid., the
sayings of Maria about the cloud.
9? Compiled in the 7th-8th cent. (Lippmann, II, pp. gof.) or in the 4th? (I, p. 95).
Edited by Goldschmidt, Heliodori carmina IV ad Fidem Codicis Casselani. Ac-
cording to him, they were compiled 716-17.
10 P, 152.
11 De unione corporis et spiritus (Migne, P.L., vol. 177, cols. 285f.).
218VI. THE FIRST PARABLE: OF THE BLACK EARTH...
ducted inside to the purer part of the corporeal spirit (vital
spirit) and impressed upon it. The anima rationalis, he says, is
an incorporeal light, but the imagination, being an image of the
body, is a shadow (umbra). When therefore the imagination
ascends to reason like a shadow which approaches the light and
overwhelms the light, it-the imagination—becomes manifest
and is more sharply outlined, but only if it approaches the light:
if it overwhelms the light, it overshadows it and covers it up.
This is the result of an "affectio imaginaria," by which the soul
is affected through its contact with the body. When God influ-
ences reason from above, wisdom arises; when the imagination
influences it from below, it produces "scientia."
In the process described in Aurora, however, the influences
from above and below coincide, so that wisdom and science are
equated with one another. The descent of Wisdom to the adept
is followed by an extinction of consciousness, a "darkening of
the light," a state of complete disorientation and depression.”
The text describes the process as it is directly experienced, as
an invasion of the unconscious in which spirit and instinct, good
and evil, wisdom and knowledge, are indissolubly mixed.
In the passages that follow it is not always clear who is actu-
ally speaking. Sometimes it seems to be the author or artifex,
sometimes the arcane substance or its indwelling spirit; and
often it cannot be made out whether this is its masculine or its
feminine personification (sponsus or sponsa). One gets the im-
pression that the author, giving free rein to his "true imagina-
12 The mystical treatise attributed to Albertus, "De adhaerendo Deo” (Borgnet,
XXXVII, p. 533), describes how the caligo (darkness) forms the first stage of con-
templation. There is much in this treatise that reminds us of Aurora—for in-
stance, that “as a result of contemplation the soul is enkindled to long after
heavenly and divine and eternal good things, and to behold all temporal things
from a distance as if they were naught.” The soul detaches itself stage by stage
from the things perceived by the senses, from the imagined images, and from
the "intelligibles" until it contemplates Ultimate Being itself, which dwells in
creatures. "And this is the dark cloud (caligo) wherein God is said to dwell, into
which Moses entered, and therethrough into the inaccessible light." "Howbeit
that was not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural, and afterward that
which is spiritual" (I Cor. 15 : 46), and therefore one must pass through the usual
stages from active effort to rest in contemplation, he adds. The treatise is not
by Albertus, but was probably written by a monk at the end of the 14th or
beginning of the 15th cent. Cf. Pelster, Kritische Studien, p. 172, n. 1, and
Daehnert, Die Erkenntnislehre des Albertus Magnus, pp. 292f.
219AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
tion," !5 has sometimes let the voices of the unconscious speak
directly, and that he himself is only occasionally taking part in
the conversation with his ego-consciousness.
. . . because the waters had come in even unto her, wherefore they
were putrefied and corrupted before the face of the lower hell and
the shadow of death, for a tempest hath overwhelmed me;
Here the text speaks of the waters that had penetrated even
to the soul in the lower hell and were putrefied at the sight of
the abyss. The preceding passage spoke of the "cloud covering
my soul," but suddenly it is not altogether clear whether it is
still the author speaking or the prima materia which the
"tempest hath overwhelmed." At any rate it is evident that a
mixture has taken place and that the author has become one
with the material in the retort. The passages from the Psalms
make it clear that the nigredo corresponds both to the psychic
distress of the alchemist and to the distress of the soul im-
prisoned in matter, which consists in a profound, remorseful
feeling of sin. This moral aspect of the nigredo occurs also in
Senior, who calls the "material of the nigredo" the "darkness
of the soul" or, still more emphatically, "malitia" (wickedness).!*
In patristic literature caligo tenebrarum (mist of darkness),
nebula, etc. are almost always images for sin, the devil, and
death; © on the other hand St. Gregory says that the hidden
decrees of God are like ''a certain kind of darkness." !5 Later in
Aurora the elements of the nigredo are called the "horrible
darknesses of our mind" and “accidents of the soul.” 17 Already
in antiquity the flood had become an image for &yvocía (ignorance
of God and of one's self, or unconsciousness). Thus the seventh
treatise of the Corpus Hermeticum says: !5 “This evil of igno-
13 Psychology and Alchemy, pars. 360, 390ff.
14 De chemia, p. 40. Cf. the ecclesiastical interpretation of sin in Honorius (Migne,
P.L., vol. 172, col. 929): "And to the night of death and misery, which beginning
with Adam's sin has involved all men in its darkness, this holy night [of the
resurrection] puts an end." *
15 Cf. Boehmer, Der Neoplatonismus, pp. 51ff., for a varied collection of passages
referring to the words caligo, nubilum ignorantiae, etc.
16 Moralia, Lib. 4 in cap. 3 Job, sec. 29 (Eng. edn., I, p. 203).* Cf. also the view
of St. Augustine (De Genesi, III, 10): “The darksome atmosphere is as a prison
to the demons until the judgment day," * cited by St. Thomas in Summa, I, q.
64, art. 4 (Eng. edn., I, p. 323).
17 Infra, pp. 303, 307. — 18 Scott, I, pp. 170ff. Cf. Reitzenstein, Poimandres, pp. oft.
220VI. THE FIRST PARABLE: OF THE BLACK EARTH...
rance floods all the land; its current sweeps along the soul which
is penned up in the body. . . . Suffer not yourselves then to be
borne along downstream by the strong current, but avail your-
selves of a backflow, those of you who are able to reach the
haven, and cast anchor there, and seek a guide to lead you to
the door of the House of Knowledge. There you will find the
bright light which is pure from darkness; . . . all . . . look up
and see with the heart of him whose will it is that with the
heart alone He should be seen." Here the flood has the addi-
tional moral meaning of unconsciousness, guilt, and alienation
from God. In it dwells the devil, the "father of darkness" and
prince of this world, who rouses up the "'tempests of the fierce
and bitter sea." !?
The encounter with the sublime figure of the anima, which
sent the author into an ecstasy but also gave him an inflation,
was followed by an enantiodromia, and now the shadow has
been constellated.? With reference to a similar situation Jung
says that it is "a kind of descensus ad inferos—a descent into
Hades, and a journey to the land of ghosts somewhere beyond
this world, beyond consciousness, hence an immersion in the
unconscious." It is brought about by the "rising up of the fiery,
chthonic Mercurius, presumably the sexual libido which engulfs
the pair." ? In this sense Mercurius would be the chthonic
equivalent of Wisdom. It is perhaps not unimportant to re-
member that the woman in the Apocalypse was pursued by a
dragon, who was unable to catch her (wherefore her child was
"caught up unto God"). The dragon there symbolized the lower
world, matter, reality, etc. The role of the dragon in alchemical
imagery, as a symbol of Mercurius, is sufficiently well-known.
In the passage from the Carmina Heliodori cited earlier, the
black cloud rises up from the slain dragon, whereas in our
19 Cf. the impressive collection of illustrative passages from classical and patristic
sources in Rahner, "Antenna Crucis IL" For the significance of the "sea" see
Jung, “The Psychology of the Transference,” ch. 4.
20 Cf. ibid., par. 470.
21 Par. 455. The "pair" refers to the royal pair sitting in the bath, on whom the
Holy Ghost had previously descended. (Ibid., fig. 4.)
22 Cf. Turba, pp. 162, 247: "Therefore a tomb is dug for that dragon, and the
woman is buried with him, and he being securely bound with the woman...
is with the woman's weapons . .. cut into pieces . . . and turned entirely into
blood." * Cf. Mysterium, p. 21.
221AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
text it seems to be produced by the descent of Wisdom into the
human world, or by her encounter with the author. We may
perhaps compare this descent with the “fall of Sophia" described
in various Gnostic texts. From the standpoint of the Pleroma,
of the unconscious world of archetypes, the coming to conscious-
ness of an archetypal content in man would be a kind of fall
from the realm of spirit into the darkness of psychophysical life.
In other words, the divine Sapientia precipitates herself into the
dark confines of human comprehension, while for its part man's
ego feels caught in the nebulous vagueness of the archetypal
world of spirits, which is why one no longer knows in the text
who is the observer and who is calling for help.
then before me shall the Ethiopians fall down and my enemies shall
lick my earth. Therefore there is no health in my flesh and all my
bones are troubled before the face of my iniquity.
In the Biblical context the “Ethiopians” falling down and
licking the earth are performing homage or obeisance. But here
it looks more like an enemy invasion, especially as the ‘‘Ethio-
pian" occurs elsewhere as an image for the nigredo and in most
texts has a negative significance.? Thus the "Scriptum Alberti
super arborem Aristotelis" ?* says that the prima materia should
be purified and distilled until the “black head," ?» which is like
an Ethiopian, is well washed and begins to turn white. In the
Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosencreutz a Moor appears
as a symbol of the nigredo.?* In patristic literature Ethiopians
"black with sin" 27 are the embodiment of the “Gentiles,” i.e.,
they symbolize the pagan spirit. Since we may suppose that the
author was quite familiar with these interpretations, it seems
possible that he had an inkling of the non-Christian character
of the contents now appearing in the work, and this would ex-
plain the feeling of guilt manifested in the quotations from the
Psalms, which immediately follow. The shadow has come up,
23 Melchior Cibinensis, Addam et processum sub forma missae," Theatr. chem.,
III, p. 853. Cf. Psychology and Alchemy, par. 484.
24 Theatr. chem., Yl, p. 526; Psychology and Alchemy, par. 484, n. 171.
25 Like the caput corvi (raven's head), a symbol for the nigredo.
26 Mysterium, p. 519.
27 "Denigrati peccato." Epiphanius, Panarium 26, 16 (ed. Holl, I, p. 296). Further
material in von Franz, "Passio Perpetuae," pp. 467ff. Cf. Rahner, “Antenna Crucis
II," pp. 110ff.
222VI. THE FIRST PARABLE: OF THE BLACK EARTH...
bringing with it all those fantasies and impulses which seem
so sinful and shocking to the Christian consciousness.?5
The waters, which according to the text penetrate even to
the lower hell, symbolize a loosening of the personality struc-
ture or a dissociation.?? The feeling of guilt, however, is due
not only to the author's having been overwhelmed ?? by the
shadow and by pagan fantasies of the unconscious but also to
the previous inflation. The contamination of the psyche with
the suprapersonal contents of the collective unconscious,
brought about by the encounter with Wisdom, had damaged the
personality by producing an "impure" mixture of earth (reality
or consciousness of reality) and sea (collective unconscious).?!
For this cause I have laboured night by night with crying, my jaws
are become hoarse; who is the man that liveth, knowing and under-
standing, delivering my soul from the hand of hell? They that ex-
plain me shall have eternal life, and to him I will give to eat of the
tree of life which is in paradise, and to sit with me on the throne
of my kingdom.
The nigredo is, at the same time, clear evidence of the im-
perfection of the prima materia, which needs to be worked on
in order to become the gold. Hence it cries out for the help of
a man who, "knowing and understanding," will save its soul
from hell. The rescuer is promised, in the words of God in the
Apocalypse, the fruit of the tree of life in paradise, and even
28 Cf. Avicenna, De anima, Part 4, cap. 4, fol. 20r: "Likewise the man of good
disposition imagines evil desires, though he does not will them, but another wills
them; and these twofold dispositions belong not to man alone, but to all ani-
mated beings." *
29 Corresponding to the dissolution of Gabricus into atoms in the body of Beya,
described in the “Visio Arislei." Cf. Psychology and Alchemy, par. 439, and “The
Psychology of the Transference,” par. 455.
30It was more than just a confrontation with the shadow: the author was reg-
ularly overwhelmed by it.
31 “The Psychology of the Transference,” pars. 472f.: "With the integration of pro-
jections—which the merely natural man in his unbounded naiveté can never recog-
nize as such—the personality becomes so vastly enlarged that the normal ego-person-
ality is almost extinguished. In other words, if the individual identifies himself
with the contents awaiting integration, a positive or negative inflation results.
. . . At all events the integration of contents that were always unconscious and
projected involves a serious lesion of the ego. Alchemy expresses this through the
symbols of death, mutilation, or poisoning. . . . The alchemists assert that death
is at once the conception of the filius philosophorum . . .”
229AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
the throne of the kingdom.?? It becomes clear that the prima
materia crying out in distress, or its hidden spirit or soul, is
none other than Wisdom herself, for the words that immediately
follow (“He that shall dig for me as money," etc.) refer to her
(Prov. 2: 3-5). Wisdom, therefore, according to our text, has
not only come down to man, as in the Bible, but has become
sunk in matter and finds herself in distress and darkness. A
parallel or coincident event has taken place: the alchemist and
Wisdom have become mutually entangled. He has sunk down
into the darkness of the unconscious; but for the luminosity of
the archetype the approach to human reality also denotes a
darkening, and thus divine Wisdom loses her way in the depths
of materiality.
He that shall dig for me as money and obtain me as a treasure and
shall not disturb the tears of my eyes and shall not deride my gar-
ment, shall not poison my meat and my drink . . .
Wisdom now begs the alchemist not to poison her meat and
drink and, later, not to defile her couch and violate her body.
He is also not to deride her garment; all this clearly emphasizes
her imperfection and weakness. The anima's fear of defilement
and violation refers in all probability to the danger, often men-
tioned by the alchemists, of applying too much fire ("nimio
igne") or too violent purifying procedures, and thus destroying
the prima materia instead of cleansing it.? This could be in-
terpreted psychologically as too strong a desire to drag the un-
conscious contents to light. They have to be handled with a
certain amount of tact, and all "either/or" interpretations
should be avoided. 'T'here are positive values in both the shadow
and the anima, undeveloped germs that have to be treated with
delicacy and respect.
The garment that must not be derided is, in alchemical
32 Apoc. 2 : 7, and 3 : 21.
33 Aurora, Part II (Art. aurif., I, p. 151). Cf. Turba, p. 121: "And beware of
increasing the fire, for if you increase the fire before the red ending comes about,
that is of no profit to you, for in the beginning of the operation you want the
albedo." * P. 188: "Beware lest you drive them [bride and bridegroom] to flight
by burning them in too hot a fire. Honour the King and his spouse, and do not
burn them away, for you know not when you will need those things which en-
noble the King and his spouse." Olympiodorus (Berthelot, Alch. grecs, II, iv, 8)
also warns against excessive écripwos (firing).
224VI. THE FIRST PARABLE: OF THE BLACK EARTH...
terms, the "body of the ore," the darkness whose removal as
preparation for the work already played a role in Greek al-
chemy.** In the "Carmen Archelai" from Carmina Heliodori 95
the nigredo is described as “a wall like the blackness of dark-
ness," as a mist (dxAvs) that has to be dispersed by the alchemist.
And in the fourth poem from the same work ?9 it is said: "The
body shall come forth from the darkness, from Hades . . . and
cast off the mist of darkness," and put off the "garment of cor-
ruption" (xeóva $0opás).?* This goes back to the originally Orphic
view, widespread in antiquity, that the body (cépa) was the grave
(czpa) of the soul?5 In the above-mentioned treatise from the
Corpus Hermeticum, where the soul is admonished to save her-
self from the flood of agnosia (unconsciousness), the text goes
on to say: *° "But first you must tear off this garment which you
wear,—this cloak of darkness, this web of unconsciousness, this
[prop] of evil, this bond of corruption, this living death, this
visible corpse, this tomb you carry about with you, this inner
robber.” #° Later in Aurora there is similar talk of a prison
and of the "barriers of hell" that must be broken.*! The image
of the garment or couch must therefore be taken as the "body"
of the ore, from which the liquid "metallic soul" or "water" is
melted out or distilled.*? Psychologically, this could be seen as
34 Ibid., IV, i and III, xxiv. The Arabian Buch der Alaune und Salze (p. 71)
requires as prima materia an “ore without shadow." The same idea occurs in the
Turba (pp. 154, 156, 160), evidently taken over from the Book of Krates (p. 36).
35 Goldschmidt, p. 55, Carmen IV, verses 170-71.
36 Verses 214ff.
37 This expression derives from the mysteries of late antiquity and occurs also
in St. Paul. Cf. Reitzenstein, Hellenistische Mysterienreligionen, pp. 204ff.
' 38 Porphyry, "De antro nympharum,” ch. 14, Opuscula Selecta, p. 66 (opa= xvràv).
Cf. Alfarabi, Das Buch der Ringsteine, p. 19: “Thou hast on account of thyself
a veil besides the covering of thy body, therefore make haste to put it off, that
thou mayest reach the goal [God]." Also St. Ambrose, Hexaemeron, VI, 6 (Migne,
P.L., vol. 14, col. 256) and St. Gregory, Moralia (Eng. edn., I, pp. 295 and 538ff.).
39 Scott, I, pp. 172f.
40 The latter corresponds to the 'Ethiopians and enemies" in Aurora.
41 Infra, p. 251; supra, p. 69.
42 A perfect parallel to this is to be found in St. Bernard, In Cant. Cant., XX, 7
(Eng. edn., I, p. 243): The shadow of Christ, I take it, is that Flesh of His which
overshadowed even His Mother, and by its opacity, as by a veil interposed, tem-
pered for her the burning heat and dazzling splendour of the Spirit." * Also
Honorius, Speculum (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, col. 937). C£. Daniel, Thesaurus
Hymnologicus, Il, p. 205: "In this place did the Eternal / Human flesh and
225AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
a "breakthrough" to one’s innermost essence (the self). 'There-
fore a logion of Jesus promises salvation "when ye have trampled
on the garment of shame, and when the two shall be one, and
the outside as the inside, and the male with the female is neither
male nor female." *
The putting off of garments and of the “garment of darkness,”
referring to the obnoxious qualities of the prima materia, played
an important role in the later alchemical parables, particularly
with reference to Song of Songs 5:3: “I have put off my coat,
how shall I put it on?" In the parable of Henricus Madathanus
cited by Jung;** "Aureum saeculum redivivum,” the filthy, evil-
smelling clothes of the "bride" are a symbol for the prima
materia.*5 The artifex has a dream of an old woman who warns
him not to despise these clothes, and so, although he is unable
to understand their significance, he keeps them with him until
he finally discovers the lixivium with which he is to cleanse
them, whereupon he wins the bride, the most beautiful of the
“doves” from Solomon's harem. Probably this parable is not un-
connected with our text.*? In the Zohar, too, the old attitude to
be cast off is often symbolized as a dirty garment.*?
This "dirty garment" may also signify exposure to autoerotic
affects and fantasies which threaten to gain the upper hand
when consciousness is in the nigredo state of dissociation.*? But
these dark components veil like a garment something supra-
personal which should not be rejected along with them because
of their unpleasant aspect. As the anima figure begs so anxiously
for indulgence, we may conjecture that the author was an in-
nature don: / Hidden here the sacred Bridegroom / Put his wedding garment
on." * Hugh of St. Victor called the "imagination" (supra, pp. 218£) a garment or
pelt that veils reason. De unione corporis et spiritus (Migne, P.L., vol. 177, cols.
285ff.).
43 Clement of Alexandria, Stromata, III, 13, 92 (trans. James, p. 11). Further
parallels in Franz, "Passio Perpetuae," p. 473.
44 Mysterium, p. 50, n. 72.
45"Filthy and defiled and worn out are her garments, but I will cleanse them
and love her with all my heart. And let her be my sister, my spouse, with one
of mine eyes." * (Mus. Herm., p. 61.)
46 Cf. the numerous quotations from the Song of Songs in the "Aureum saeculum
redivivum," and especially the allusion to Aurora (Mus. Herm., p. 69) and the
epilogue (p. 72), where Madathanus declares himself a "frater Aureae crucis."
47 Sohar, ed. Muller, pp. 151f.: the garment is also Kether, the Crown,
48 “The Psychology of the Transference,” ch. 7.
226VI. THE FIRST PARABLE: OF THE BLACK EARTH ...
tellectual with a puritanical cast of mind, and that he stood in
danger of rejecting the emergent unconscious contents on ac-
count of their dubious outer aspect without grasping their
underlying meaning.
. and shall not defile with fornication the couch of my rest, and
shall not violate my whole body which is exceeding delicate and
above all my soul (or dove) which without gall is wholly beauteous
and comely, in which there is no spot, who shall not do hurt to my
seats and thrones,
The couch that is not to be defiled has much the same mean-
ing as the garment that is not to be derided. The "bed" (lectu-
lus) is the place where the coniunctio is consummated, a
synonym for the distilling vessel. Rosinus,*® commenting on the
text, says "they wedded themselves in their bed, that is, mingled
in their vessel." In alchemy, the vessel had to be sealed with the
lutum Sapientiae (clay of wisdom) °° and not cracked by over-
heating; like the "house" or "temple" it represented the
"body." 9 The “seats and thrones” in our text have a similar
meaning. In explanation of a figure of Hermes sitting on a
cathedra (throne or teacher's chair), Senior says expressly that
the cathedra is the vessel, the place of transformation.” In the
Turba, on the other hand, “thrones” signify angelic powers.5?
As such they represent spirits—ministering spirits, companions
of the anima or sponsa, and they too should not be destroyed by
overheating. ‘They are presumably identical with the twenty-
49 Art. aurif., I, p. 191.
50 Cf. Albertus, De mineralibus, 4, 1, 7 (Borgnet, V, p. 93).
51 Mysterium, pp. 152f.
52 De chemia, p. 122: "The cathedra signifies the place of the operation, and
the shape of the vessels, [and] what is in them." *
53 Ruska, p. 32: "For of these four elements are all things created, heaven, the
throne, angels, sun, moon, stars, earth," etc. * In the Koran God is the "Lord
of the sublime throne." After Allah had created heaven and earth, he seated
himself on the throne in order to rule the world. “His throne is as vast as the
heavens and the earth, and the preservation of both does not weary him." Sura
2, 255 (Dawood trans., p. 349). In versions B and C of the T'urba passage, thronus
is changed into throni, because the translators did not understand this Islamic
concept and referred it to a group of angels who in Christian angelology are called
“thrones.” The “thrones” were originally a Jewish concept. Cf. Daniel 7 : 9, Matt.
19 : 28, Col. 1 : 16, Rev. 20 : 4. They belong to the same category as the “principali-
ties and powers." Cf. Scott, Hermetica, III, p. 512.
227AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
four elders of the Apocalypse mentioned later in the text.5* The
"stone" must circulate through them, so that they are, as it were,
necessary ingredients in the work. Psychologically they embody
autonomous contents of the collective unconscious which are
constellated round and by the anima.5* She appears as if sur-
rounded by a cluster of creative contents pushing into the light
of consciousness, and these contents are in danger of being de-
stroyed by the alchemist, presumably because they are incom-
patible with his conscious attitude or difficult to reconcile
with it.
It is not only the "body of the ore,” the inferior side of man,
which should not be destroyed by too drastic a process of purifi-
cation, but also his "spirits" and above all, as the text says, his
“soul: 9?
An interpolation (presumably a marginal gloss that got into
the text) designates the speaker as the "dove," a typical attribute
of Mary, and praises her purity (“without gall," “in which there
is no spot").5* We have already encountered the white dove in
the passage quoted from Johannes Grasseus, as an image for the
soul hidden in matter, so that in the present context it is quite
clear that the soul in matter is speaking. "Without gall" means
"without bitterness," a reference to the symbolism of amaritudo,
fully discussed in Jung.®® The amaritudo is in the nature of an
"accident," not pertaining to the innermost soul of matter but
54 Infra, pp. 327ff.; supra, p. 105.
55 Cf. the fairytale motif of the anima-figure surrounded by dwarfs in "Snow
White."
56 Interestingly enough Meister Eckhart likewise warns against an incorrect, i.e.,
violent, love for Wisdom. Cf. Thery, "Le Commentaire de Maitre Eckhart,” III,
p. 268. "Note that every action is wearisome and burdensome to the agent, unless
the patient also contributes and imparts some force to it, and so cooperates with
the agent or effector. ‘An act is violent when the agent is external, the patient con-
tributing nothing, as the Philosopher says in Ethics III . . . and that is why a
violent movement falls short of its end, but a natural movement is directed to its
end. For nature is a force innate in things." * Cf. St. ‘Thomas, "De coelo et mundo,”
I lect. 17 and II lect. 8 (Opera omnia, HI, pp. 67—70 and 149-51).
57 Wolbero, Commentaria super Cant. Cant. (Migne, P.L., 195, col. 1086): “It is
without gall, which likewise spiritually Christ's spouse should be without, as
the apostle bath it: Let all bitterness and anger and indignation and clamour
and blasphemy be put away from you, with all malice (Eph. 4: 31)." * The dove
is also the Church (Honorius, Speculum, Migne, P.L., 172, col. 379). Christ will
return as a dove in a flock of doves (Bousset, T'he Antichrist Legend, p. 9o).
58 Mysterium, pp. 192ff.
298VL THE FIRST PARABLE: OF THE BLACK EARTH...
only to the impurity of the prima materia. According to Meister
Eckhart, the bitterness is produced merely by the misunderstand-
ing with which men approach Wisdom; if they surrendered to
her, the bitterness of the struggle would no longer prevail, but
only the “sweetness” of pure love.5?
he for whose love I languish, in whose ardour I melt, in whose odour
I live, by whose sweetness I regain my health, from whose milk I
take nourishment, in whose embrace I am made young, from whose
kiss I receive the breath of life, in whose loving embrace my whole
body is lost,
After dwelling on the difficulties of the "praeparatio deli-
cata," as Senior calls it, Wisdom’s discourse gradually passes
over into a passionate declaration of love. Significantly enough,
it remains unclear whether this declaration is addressed to the
sponsus, conceived as the arcane substance, or to the alchemist.
In other words, here again the indissoluble mingling of alchem-
ical processes with the psyche of the alchemist is the only ex-
planation of the discourse as it glides from figure to figure. The
anima yearns for the inner unity or wholeness of the personality
through a coniunctio of opposites.
The words "in whose embrace I am made young" deserve
emphasis, as this is probably a reference to the motif of the
king's renewal, so often mentioned in alchemy. It must have
been known to the author if only from the passage in the
Turba where the old man rejuvenates himself by feeding on
a white tree.? The interpretation of this motif can be found
in Jung.** The renewal has as its object a complete alteration of
the conscious attitude. The one who is usually renewed and
rejuvenated is the king, that is, an archetypal figure who can
be interpreted as the symbolic dominant of a collective attitude
59 Cf. Thery, "Le Commentaire de Maitre Eckhart,” HL pp. 275f.: “Good as
good is always sweet. . . . Dregs are bitterness.” * P. 278: "Everything that acts
seeks to make itself something else, and is in toil until it attains it; and all the
unlikeness and imperfection which it displays is hard and bitter. If it gave itself
that other thing in the first place, all action would be gentle on both sides, that
of the agent and that of the patient: nor would there be the bitterness of struggle
between them, but gentleness and sweetness." *
€9 De chemia, p. 11. 61 Ruska, pp. 161f.
62 Cf. “Rosinus ad Sarratantam," Art. aurif., 1, p. 192, and Carmina Heliodori, I,
pp- 29£, verses 110ff. (father-murder motif). :
62 Mysterium, pp. 72.
229AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
of consciousness.A Here it is Wisdom who wants to be reju-
venated, and from this we must conclude that the interpretation
of this archetype hitherto—i.e., the Church's conception of Wis-
dom—was in need of renewal. She became, as we mentioned
earlier, something completely abstract, the “sum of ideas in the
mind of God," or was interpreted as the "art" by which God
created the world, or was simply identified with Christ as the
Logos that existed before the world. The feminine element in
this personification was, however, overlooked. Too little atten-
tion was paid to her anima quality, to her specific nature as a
connecting, mediating factor, and to the feeling-values she con-
tains. Now, by being rediscovered through a primordial arche-
typal experience, she is as it were rejuvenated and comes alive
again.
It is no accident that about this time Meister Eckhart wrote
his commentary to 'Sapientia." Sapientia Dei, as a feminine
personification of God, is a figure in whose nature the antinomy
of Yahweh is abolished, since she stands for his “absolute knowl-
edge" and wisdom.® She seems to have been the goal towards
which the unconscious of that time was striving; hence the in-
creasing worship of Mary, the rediscovery of Aristotle and his
universalist thinking, and the efflorescence of Western alchemy,
whose chief concern was the production of the One: "one is the
stone, one the vessel, one the procedure, and one the medi-
cine."
The words "in whose loving embrace my whole body is
lost" allude to an equally far-reaching symbolic context. It
seems to me not without reference to the verse of St. Ambrose
in which he speaks of the "emptying" of Ecclesia-Luna.9* The
latter embodies the sufferings of unredeemed humanity and of
creation in general," and her sufferings assist the "emptying"
(kenosis) of the Logos made flesh. For the psychological inter-
pretation of this ecclesiastical allegory I must refer the reader
64 Just as in many fairytales there is an old king who seeks the fountain of life,
or the rejuvenating apple, or the water that cures blindness. Cf. the Grimms'
fairytale “The Golden Bird.”
65 Jung, “Answer to Job," pp. 386ff.
66 Hexaemeron, IV, 8, 31 (Migne, P.L., vol, 14, col. 203): “[Christ] emptied her
[Ecclesia] that he might fill her, as he also emptied himself that he might fill
all things. . . . Thus has the moon proclaimed the mystery of Christ.” *
67 Rahner, "Mysterium Lunae."
230VI. THE FIRST PARABLE: OF THE BLACK EARTH ...
to Jung.®* The dissolution and "melting" are also connected
with the "flowing of the spirit," mentioned earlier, which then
follows its desire. The author of the treatise ^De adhaerendo
Deo” 9? says: "For love has a unifying and transforming effect,
it changes the lover into the beloved, and the reverse. Love
draws the lover . . . out of himself and transports him into
the beloved. . . . For the soul is more when it loves than when
it only animates. . . . Love is the life of the soul itself, her
wedding garment *? and her perfection, upon which depend the
whole law and the prophets, and the commandment of the
Lord."
to him indeed I will be a father and he shall be to me a son; wise is
he who rejoiceth his father, him whom I place first and highest among
the kings of the earth, and I will keep my covenant faithful to him
for ever.
The whole ensuing part of the text tells of Wisdom's promise
to her lover, but it is no longer described as the experience of
the artifex. Psychologically this means that the text which now
follows, speaking of salvation, redemption, and the consumma-
tion of the work, is the intuitive anticipation of a solution not
yet realized. It is as though the author had suddenly leapt out
of the nigredo and into the ecstatic bliss of. the coniunctio.
Human reality, in which the ego is caught, plays no role any
more, and the divine bride celebrates her marriage with the
bridegroom, the "knowing" saviour, with whom the author no
doubt felt somehow identical.
The dark side of the classical alchemical coniunctiwoa s only
fleetingly hinted at in the motif of melting in the lover's em-
brace, for the discourse now passes on to the saying from
Hebrews 1:5: "I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to
me a Son" "!—which, in view of the fact that a female figure,
the anima or Wisdom, is speaking, sounds somewhat remark-
able. But in the Church's eyes Wisdom and the Logos do form
a unity, since both are creative aspects of God. Also, Jung's
view that the unconscious and the conscious stand in a father-
68 Mysterium, pp. 35ff.
69 Albertus, Opera (Borgnet, XXXVII, p. 536). 70 Supra, pp. 224ff.
71 The words ‘““Whoso loveth wisdom rejoiceth his father" (Prov. 29: 3) were re-
ferred to the mystery of baptism. Honorius, Quaest. et. Resp. in Proverbia, cap.
10 (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, col. 317).
291AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
son relationship 7 makes it easier to understand how Wisdom,
or the anima, can describe herself as the father of the alchemist.
'These words, therefore, indicate the nature of the relation-
ship between Wisdom and the adept. Later the figure of Wis-
dom appears in passing as the masculine God-image or as the
Holy Spirit—for ultimately she represents psychic wholeness in
its male-female aspect, more or less paralleling the Gnostic
father-mother—and, accordingly, sometimes the feminine side
predominates and sometimes the masculine side. Here she sud-
denly presents the aspect of a protecting father—with the pro-
viso, as we shall see, that man shall ‘“‘walk in my ways.” It seems
as if "religio," understood as the “careful consideration" of the
unconscious by consciousness, were a conditioning factor for
the manifestation of her "fatherly" aspect. That the adept is the
son seems proved by the text, for the bridegroom for whom
the speaker yearns was defined earlier as he who, "knowing and
understanding," shall deliver her from the abyss of the nzgredo
without mocking or injuring her, and that can only be the
alchemist, i.e., a human being. Were it not for that cautionary
remark about possible defilement, the passage could be inter-
preted as the soul yearning for her soul-mate Christ; but then
there would be no need of this anxious request that he should
not injure her. The anima is not calling Christ to her aid, but
a human ego. It is important to remember that all this took
place in a man who, so far as his conscious attitude was con-
cerned, was probably quite familiar with the conception of
Christ as the bridegroom of the soul, and who was inclined to
neglect the significance of his own ego. This was a characteristic
of the medieval mind which later was amply compensated by
the egoism of the Renaissance man.
But what does the anima really want, with her extraordinary,
urgent courtship? She wants—as the text says—to establish a re-
lationship which is parallel with that of God the Father to his
Son. In the text itself it looks as if not just a parallel but an
identity were meant, yet this is not possible when we consider
the Biblical context. It can only be a parallel: anima-Wisdom
relates to the alchemist as God to Christ.
The unconscious symbolism thus expresses that progressive
Christification of the individual the importance of which is dis-
72 Mysterium, pp. 100f., and "Transformation Symbolism in the Mass," pp. 262ff.
232VI. THE FIRST PARABLE: OF THE BLACK EARTH .
cussed by Jung in Answer to Job, together with its religious
background. The ordinary man is chosen to be the place of
God's birth, and in him is incarnated not only (as in Christ) the
“light” side of Yahweh: in him God regenerates himself as a
totality, in both his light and dark aspects. ‘Thereby the indi-
vidual man, as Aurora says, becomes a son of God and is placed
"first and highest among the kings of the earth.” 7 Not only does
Wisdom promise to exalt the alchemist to the status of a God-
man, she also promises to keep her "covenant faithful to him for
ever." Accordingly, since she is "friendly to man," ** she offers
him protection against the dangerous and incalculable side of
herself? or of God, and causes God to adopt the kindly-father
attitude.” It is clear from the text that the author fully identi-
fies his mysterious female figure, the anima in matter, with God.
She is his feminine aspect, but at the same time, paradoxically,
God himself.
But if he shall forsake my law and walk not in my ways and keep
not my commandments aforesaid, the enemy shall have advantage
over him and the son of iniquity shall have power to hurt him; but
if he shall walk in my ways, then shall he not fear in the cold of
snow. And for all his household there shall be covering, fine linen
and purple,
The very dangerousness of the alchemical undertaking,
whereby the artifex is exalted to the son of God, makes the
author speak at this point of the devil: if the alchemist does not
heed the ways of Wisdom, he exposes himself to the assaults
of the "enemy" and the "son of iniquity.” ™ The alchemists
often speak of the assaults of the devil,? which include haste,
arrogance, avarice, etc. The danger in our text is “the cold of
snow." This might be a chemical reference to the premature
cooling of the substances.” As we have said, the danger in the
73 Cf. Psalm 88 : 28. 74 “Answer to Job,” pp. 389, 397.
75 See beginning of second parable: “the arrows of my quiver are drunk with
blood.”
76 Concerning the changes manifested in the unconscious during the individua-
tion process see Mysterium, p. 172.
77 The text is corrupt here, and has been reconstructed to the best of my ability.
78 Cf. the “machinations of the thief" in Mysterium, pp. 165ff.; also “Liber Alze,"
Mus. Herm., p. 331 (Waite, I, p. 266).
79 Silberer, Problems of Mysticism and Its Symbolism, p. 340.
233AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
corresponding psychological situation is that of inflation. In
such cases feeling, relatedness to one's fellow-men, perishes and
is replaced by an intellectual form of relationship. This is one
of the dangers of exalting the alchemist to a state of Godlike-
ness. Since "fine linen and purple" 5? are mentioned as protec-
tion against the cold, this cold is thought of as coming from
outside, whereas the texts usually emphasize that no “extraneous
things" should be added to the work.*!
The reference to the “enemy” therefore has a background
of deep meaning. For if Wisdom elevates the alchemist to the
position of her "son," he then becomes an incarnation of God.
But this son of God is not, like Christ, the benevolent father-god
made flesh in a pure human vessel: this time God the Father
incarnates in an ordinary human being begotten in sin, because
man’s own nature, vacillating between brightness and darkness,
better corresponds to God’s antinomy and therefore makes a
more complete incarnation possible. ‘The chosen one must unite
the opposites in himself; that is to say his anima must serve
as the birthplace for God’s wholeness. Lest this task, or rather
God’s antinomy, should burst him asunder, he is warned to
walk in the ways of divine Wisdom, for the anima is the media-
trix between the irreconcilable opposites in the Godhead, just
as the connecting and unifying element pertains more to the
nature of woman than of man.
In patristic literature snow is a symbol of eternal damna-
tion,? and in Dante's Inferno Satan stands up to his middle in
ice. This is an allusion to the “‘frigidity of sinners"—Satan reigns
in the north, the north wind is one of his symbols.5? The motif
probably refers also to the psychological danger of getting stuck
in a conflict. The experience of the dark side of God could
freeze all love, and the icy "fear of God" extinguish every vital
impulse. Only Wisdom can protect man from this by giving him
80 St. Gregory, Epistolae, Book I, indict. ix, Ep. 25 (Migne, P.L., vol. 77, col.
471): "And what is signified by fine linen, if it be not bodily chastity shining
with the comeliness of purity?" *
81 Ripley, "Liber de Mercurio philosophorum," Opera omnia, p. 104: “Take
heed therefore of all things foreign and strange."
82 Also in Berthelot, Alch. grecs, III, viii, 1-2, Hoghelande, Theatr. chem., IV,
P. 150, and Rhabanus Maurus, Allegoriae in sacr. script. (Migne, P.L., vol. 112,
col. 1006),
83 Further documentation in Aion, pp. 99f.
234VI. THE FIRST PARABLE: OF THE BLACK EARTH...
"fine linen and purple," i.e., by implanting the right attitude.
I need not go into the red-white symbolism of the clothing
here, as I can refer the reader to Jung’s statements.** From these
it is clear that red and white are the colours of the filius philoso-
phorum and his bride. It is evident from what follows that the
author is fleetingly identified with these figures, for he is un-
doubtedly the one who is warned to “walk in my ways," and
yet it is not his glorification that ensues, but the appearance of
a suprapersonal King of Glory who is distinct from the alche-
mist. The admonition to conscientiousness and diligence (he
hath not eaten his bread idle") may also be regarded as a com-
pensation against the danger of inflation, for by heeding it the
adept suddenly becomes the servant of the work.
The mention of other servants or domestici (“all his house-
hold") may be explained by the fact that the metals, with re-
spect to gold, were often called the servants of the king.® It is
all the more probable that the metals are meant here, as a few
lines later the seven stars or seven spirits of the Apocalypse are
mentioned, and these were interpreted alchemically as the seven
planetary spirits or metals.59 They appear here as the servants
of Wisdom. There are seven of them, and Wisdom adds herself
to them as the eighth, whereby they all attain perfection. Psy-
chologically, this probably expresses the idea of the unification
of all the autonomous, collective components of the personality
into an inner whole. The servants of the work are protected
from the "cold" when the adept heeds the ways of Wisdom:
the devil, the destructive principle of evil *' that threatens the
individuation process, would get into the work if the servant is
not protected by Wisdom, and she can protect him only if the
adept (the human ego) pays heed to her ways (the guiding,
symbolic products of the unconscious) and comports himself as
a servant. Then he and his unconscious psyche are protected
against the disintegrative effect of evil.
84 Mysterium, pp. 4, 49.
85 In the parable of Bernardus Trevisanus (Bibl. chem., II, pp. 388ff.) the planets
are the servants of the king. Cf. Psychology and Alchemy, fig. 173, where the
king is killed by his servants.
86'The planets were identified with metals since the earliest times.
87 This probably refers not to the "inferior" shadow, the "Ethiopian," who rep-
resents the evil in man that can be integrated, but to that ultimate evil which
no man can integrate.
235AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
. . . and he shall laugh in that day when I shall be satisfied and my
glory shall appear, for he hath looked well to my paths and hath not
eaten his bread idle.
Wisdom says that she will then be "satisfied" and that her
"glory shall appear." The same quotation from the Bible
(Psalm 16 : 15) is used by the author of "De adhaerendo Deo":
he sees in it the moment when the soul fully knows God.** In
the alchemical texts the prima materia is often described as
terra sitiens, the thirsting earth, which in the coniunctio is
saturated by the rain, "the king descending from heaven." *?
The same image occurs in Ephraem Syrus with reference to
Mary: she is the thirsting earth who, "bedewed by the dew of
God, bore Christ, the bread of life." 9° Another ecclesiastical
interpretation identifies the thirsting earth with the human
body: "Rightly is the Church compared to the moon, because
she sprinkles us with the dew of the font and quickens the earth
of our body with the dew of baptism." ®t (The symbolism of
baptism is mentioned in the next passages of our text.) After
the “woman,” the thirsting earth, is "satisfied" by the king de-
scending from heaven, or by the labours of the alchemist (ac-
cording to “De adhaerendo Deo" knowledge of God occurs when
the soul "reflects on itself" *—proof of the significance of the
king as consciousness! **) her "glory shall appear"—indeed, she
becomes God himself! ?* Psychologically this means that the
divine, numinous aspect of the anima, which brings healing, be-
comes visible only when consciousness actively participates and
gives her due attention and the right understanding. Then the
dry emptiness of the thirsting earth within reveals itself as the
place where God himself appears.
88 Albertus Magnus, Opera, XXXVII, p. 533.
89 Cf. the quotation from Maria Prophetissa in Senior, De chemia, p. 8o: “And
that it is which they have called the King coming forth from the earth and
coming down from heaven. And it is the like of this that is said to be in this
water." * 90 Hymni et sermones, II, col. 744.
91 Maximus of Turin, Homil. ror (Migne, P.L., vol. 57, col. 488).* Cf. Isidore of
Seville, De natura rerum, p. 38.
92 Borgnet, XXXVII, p. 533: "reflectitur in se ipsam."
93 Concerning the king see Mysterium, ch. IV.
94 The anima could well have this exalted significance, because as a result of the
inflation there is an undervaluation of the unconscious, Hence the alchemist is
degraded to a servant and the anima acquires a divine status.
236VI. THE FIRST PARABLE: OF THE BLACK EARTH ...
'Therefore were the heavens opened above him and there thundered
the voice of him who holdeth the seven stars in his hand, which are
the seven spirits sent forth into all the earth to preach and to bear
witness. He that believeth and is well baptized shall be saved, but
he that believeth not shall be condemned.
In these words we recognize the epiphany of God in the
Apocalypse,?5 where it is also said that his hair was like white
wool, as white as snow, his eyes were as a flame of fire and his
voice as the sound of many waters, and his countenance was as
the sun—a description that must have involuntarily suggested
to an alchemist any number of associations with his filius phi-
losophorum. With this apparition, those that believe shall be
saved, "when the king that is in heaven judgeth over them," con-
tinues the text. They shall be “whited with snow": they are
like neophytes or as though transfigured.%
Behind Wisdom there emerges the face of the "Ancient of
Days," *' the judge who separates the believers from the un-
believers. After a fleeting mention of the "son of iniquity" the
text abruptly passes on to optimistic promises for the future.
‘The problem of evil has been touched on, but has obviously not
become fully conscious. In its place, the image of the Last Judg-
ment rises up with its final separation of the opposites instead
of their union. Although wholeness is there in the God-image—
the Ancient of Days holding the seven stars in his hand—man is
saved only through the participation of faith. What happens to
the condemned ones who have not believed is not mentioned in
the text. '
The heavenly judge who now appears is an alchemical paral-
lel to the filius philosophorum. He is, as it were, the glorified,
ultimate manifestation of the prima materia and is thus in a
mysterious manner identical with Wisdom. Similarly, in Rip-
ley’s "Cantilena," Luna changes into the “splendour of the
sun." 95
This transformation of the feminine substance into the
95 Rev. 1 : 14-16.
96 Ephraem Syrus, Hymni et sermones, 1, col. 110 (Hymn of the Baptized): “Your
garments, brethren, are white as snow, and your brightness shines like the bright-
ness of the angels." * The alchemical symbolism of baptism is discussed in the
following chapters.
97 Daniel 7 : 9. 98 Mysterium, pp. 313ff.
237AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
masculine recalls the view of Theodoret of Cyrus that Ecclesia-
Luna, who represents a "composition of souls fully initiated
into the mysteries," in her final glorification becomes the sun,
the image of Christ, whose light calls forth the wonder of men.??
Throughout this whole passage, therefore, Aurora does not
really depart from the Christian doctrine of redemption. The
author has reverted to his earlier views.
The identity of Wisdom with the filius !'? comes out in the
following passage:
And the signs of those who believe and are well baptized are these:
When the king that is in heaven judgeth over them, they shall be
whited with snow in Selmon and shall be as the wings of a dove
covered with silver, and the hinder parts of her back with the pale-
ness of gold.
The last words refer to Psalm 67:14-15: "If you sleep
among the midst of lots, you shall be as the wings of a dove
covered with silver," etc. Hugh of St. Victor interprets "among
the midst of lots" as a place between fear and desire, between
left and right. ‘The dove was generally interpreted as the
“multitude of the righteous." 1°? She thus appears as an image
of plurality in a place midway between the opposites. Joachim
of Flora interprets the passage as referring to the two orders of
monasteries and monks who shall be united “at the great Sab-
bath. s
The relation between the author and Wisdom described in
the opening chapters has undergone a remarkable change. At
first they confronted one another alone in a shattering en-
counter, after which they both sank into the darkness of the
abyss. hen Wisdom promised to make the alchemist her son-
lover if he rescued her, "knowing and understanding." After-
wards followed the warning about the "son of iniquity" and
the admonition to careful and diligent work. She then appeared
99 Explanatio in Cant. Cant., IV, 9 (Migne, P.G., vol. 81, col. 177). C£. the trans-
formation of the moon, symbolizing the soul, into the sun (Christ) in St. Gregory,
Expos. in Cant. Cant., 6, v. 9 (Migne, P.L,, vol. 79, cols. 530f.).
100 “Psychology and Religion," p. 74. Christ is the “man encompassed by a
woman” (ibid., p. 92).
101 Cf. his commentary in De bestiis (Migne, P.L., vol. 177, cols. 17f.).
102 Ephraem Syrus, II, col. 176.
103 Concordia, II (Hahn, III, p. 271).
238VI. THE FIRST PARABLE: OF THE BLACK EARTH ...
surrounded by ministering spirits, and finally in masculine form
as the divine judge in the midst of the righteous who have been
saved, the whole throng having the appearance of a dove cov-
ered with silver and gold. The central symbol has become a
plurality, and the alchemist is only one among many, secretly
included in the image of the dove (a compound of Wisdom and
filius). This pluralization may have something to do with the
previous reference to evil—that is to say, with the fact that there
has been no conscious and individual confrontation with the
shadow. 'The moral problem thus remains a collective one: the
"righteous" are saved, the “unbelievers” damned. The reconcili-
ation of the light with the dark can take place only in the in-
dividual, so that the avoidance of the encounter with the
shadow brings about a pluralization and regression to the domi-
nant collective views: the new "son" is identified with Christ,
whose "body" by tradition consists of the multitude of the
righteous, and it is only the belief in Christ that brings re-
demption.
Such shall be to me a beloved son, behold ye him, beautiful above
the sons of men, at whose beauty the sun and moon wonder. For he
is the privilege of love and the heir, in whom men trust and without
whom they can do nothing.
The filius is of one nature with the silver and gold dove.’
But the dove, as already mentioned, is a symbol for the Holy
Spirit, the Church, Mary, and also for Christ.1%
In the Missal, the words from Psalm 44:3, ““Thou art
beautiful above the sons of men," are referred to Christ.!^9 In
Aurora, on the other hand, the "son" is understood alchemically
as a product of the union of sun and moon, whose heir he is,
and who gaze at him in wonder, like parents. The coniunctio is
no longer between Wisdom and the author but between sun
and moon, and has thus become an “extra-personal” event pro-
jected into the cosmos. Moreover the "son" is the earthly gold,
for it is this to which the words from the Book of Baruch ("in
104 Cf. Honorius, Expos. in Cant. Cant. (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, col. 380).
105 Bousset, Hauptprobleme der Gnosis, p. 266.
106 Roman Missal, Gradual for Sunday within Octave of Christmas. Of Christ's
beauty Ephraem Syrus says (II, col. 562): “Thy lips distil the drug of life, balm
flows from thy fingers, beauteous are thine eyes .. . all the children of the
Church seek eagerly after thee." *
299AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
whom men trust") refer,!?? so that once again it is evident that
the "son" has changed into a non-Biblical, alchemical figure.
Nevertheless, it is difficult to see what the author had in mind.
The silver-gold dove would be an alchemical image for the
albedo, the whitened prima materia, or the gold. In ecclesiastical
symbolism it represents Wisdom or the Apocalyptic Christ, or
his body (“multitude of the righteous"). Did the author under-
stand the albedo in a religious sense, or did he interpret the
religious symbolism in an alchemical sense? Presumably both.
It is possible that he saw the image in a dream or vision and
then tried to interpret it in terms of the imagery familiar to him.
The striking thing in this passage is that the individual element
takes a back place. The style is once more that of an "annuncia-
tion" or hymn of praise, and the end is decidedly didactic. With
the disappearance of the dark elements everything personal has
vanished from the scene.
But he that hath ears to hear, let him hear what the spirit of the doc-
trine saith to the sons of the discipline concerning the seven stars,
by which the divine work is wrought. And of these Senior treateth
in his book in the chapter of the Sun and Moon, saying: After thou
hast made those seven which thou hast distributed through the seven
stars (and hast appointed to the seven stars), and hast purged them
nine times until they appear as pearls—this is the Whitening.
'The concluding sentence has a strong alchemical coloration
and shows that the first parable really is concerned with the ap-
pearance of the classical albedo. The quotation from Senior
speaks of the seven powers which are correlated with the seven
stars and have to be purified until they look like pearls. The
seven stars are the same as those which are mentioned in the
Apocalypse as attributes of God. It is evident that the seven
metals are meant, for these in their totality are often said to
constitute the stone, and are fused in it to form the "crown." 105
The concluding words of the parable allude once more to the
title: "Of the Black Earth wherein the Seven Planets took
Root." For in the medieval view the seven metals are not only
107 Also in Das Buch der Alaune und Salze (p. 64) gold is "Lord of the Stones . . .
and king . . . and thus gold is among bodies like to the sun among the stars,
for the sun is king and light of the stars, and by it are brought to fruition things
of the earth and growing things." *
108 Mysterium, p. 9.
240VI. THE FIRST PARABLE: OF THE BLACK EARTH . correlated with the seven planets but, through their instillatio
or "influence," are in the most literal sense formed in the
earth.’ Evidently in the black cloud mentioned at the begin-
ning of the parable, and in the inundation it produced, heaven
and the stars came down to earth and impressed themselves
upon it. The bride, who at the end of the previous chapter
came down from heaven, was likewise crowned with stars. She
is, in a sense, consubstantial with the cloud, in so far as both
bring heaven down with them. The union of heaven and earth is a favourite alchemical
image for the coniunctio. A Hermes quotation says: "It is need-
ful that heaven and earth be conjoined, which is a philosophic
word." !!! Or again: ““The male is the heaven of the female and
the female is the earth of the male." 2 An anonymous Greek
author says: ? "Heaven above, earth below, through the male
and the female is the work accomplished." 14
109 Mennens, "Aureum vellus" Theatr. chem., V, p. 307: “Someone will say,
How shall the aforesaid influences of the metals . . . make their way into the
parent mountains? The royal prophet replies, The mountains like wax have
flowed before the face of the Lord." *
110 Cf. the negative description of this motif in Honorius, Speculum (Migne, P.L.,
vol. 172, col. 937): "The seven-headed dragon, the prince of darkness, drew down
from heaven with his tail a part of the stars, and the cloud of sin overshadowed
them, and covered them with the darkness of death. Wherefore the eternal sun
hid the ray of his brightness beneath the cloud of the flesh. In the sunset of
his death he died in place of the stars; bringing them forth from the darkness
he the dayspring restored them from the night of death to the calm sky.” *
111 Petrus Bonus, Theatr. chem. (1622), V, p. 647. Cf. Psychology and Alchemy,
par. 192, n. 67. 112 “Tractatus aureus," Ars chemica, p. 12. * 113 Alch. grecs, IIT, x.AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
whom men trust") refer,!?? so that once again it is evident that
the "son" has changed into a non-Biblical, alchemical figure.
Nevertheless, it is difficult to see what the author had in mind.
The silver-gold dove would be an alchemical image for the
albedo, the whitened prima materia, or the gold. In ecclesiastical
symbolism it represents Wisdom or the Apocalyptic Christ, or
his body (“multitude of the righteous"). Did the author under-
stand the albedo in a religious sense, or did he interpret the
religious symbolism in an alchemical sense? Presumably both.
It is possible that he saw the image in a dream or vision and
then tried to interpret it in terms of the imagery familiar to him.
The striking thing in this passage is that the individual element
takes a back place. The style is once more that of an "annuncia-
tion" or hymn of praise, and the end is decidedly didactic. With
the disappearance of the dark elements everything personal has
vanished from the scene.
But he that hath ears to hear, let him hear what the spirit of the doc-
trine saith to the sons of the discipline concerning the seven stars,
by which the divine work is wrought. And of these Senior treateth
in his book in the chapter of the Sun and Moon, saying: After thou
hast made those seven which thou hast distributed through the seven
stars (and hast appointed to the seven stars), and hast purged them
nine times until they appear as pearls—this is the Whitening.
'The concluding sentence has a strong alchemical coloration
and shows that the first parable really is concerned with the ap-
pearance of the classical albedo. The quotation from Senior
speaks of the seven powers which are correlated with the seven
stars and have to be purified until they look like pearls. The
seven stars are the same as those which are mentioned in the
Apocalypse as attributes of God. It is evident that the seven
metals are meant, for these in their totality are often said to
constitute the stone, and are fused in it to form the "crown." 105
The concluding words of the parable allude once more to the
title: "Of the Black Earth wherein the Seven Planets took
Root." For in the medieval view the seven metals are not only
107 Also in Das Buch der Alaune und Salze (p. 64) gold is "Lord of the Stones . . .
and king . . . and thus gold is among bodies like to the sun among the stars,
for the sun is king and light of the stars, and by it are brought to fruition things
of the earth and growing things." *
108 Mysterium, p. 9.
240

* 113 Alch. grecs, IIT, x. 114'The primordial image of the union of heaven and earth probably entered
alchemy via the mystery religions. Aeschylus describes this union in the fragment
from his Danaids: “The holy heaven yearns to wound the earth, and yearning
lays hold on the earth to join in wedlock; the rain, falling from the amorous
heaven, impregnates the earth, and it brings forth for mankind the food of
flocks and herds and Demeter’s gifts; and from the moist marriage-rite the woods
put on their bloom." (Works, trans. Smyth, II, pp. 394f.) Proclus (In Timaeum
Commentaria, 40E; Diehl, III, p. 176) interpreted the cry üe-kíe at the Eleusinian
mysteries in the same sense: "The sacred ordinances of the Athenians . . . pro-
vided for the celebration of the marriage of heaven and earth, as a preparation
for initiation into the mysteries. Looking up to heaven they cried ‘Let it rain,’
and looking down to earth, ‘Make fruitful, thus recognizing that all things are
born of these as of a father and mother." In Gnosticism this cosmic process was
already interpreted psychologically. For instance, in Justin’s Book of Baruch
241AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
The black earth in the title is obviously the receptive ele-
ment which absorbs the planetary forces. This not only agrees
with the general views of "Mother Earth" in antiquity !? but
is borne out by the alchemical texts. For instance, to
Euthicia’s question "Quis foemina?" Rosinus answers ““Terra
nigra." 49 All this suggests very strongly that the earth is iden-
tical with the sublime figure of Wisdom at the end of the pre-
ceding chapter.!*
On closer examination this is really a tremendous thought.
The "Wisdom of God" in the Bible was the playmate of
Yahweh, who was with him before the beginning of the world.
In patristic literature she was, as we have mentioned, defined as
the "archetypal world" (mundus archetypus) or as the sum of
eternal ideas in the mind of God, the prototypes from which
he created all things. She may also be compared with the Indian
Shakti or Maya and with the Gnostic Sophia. And yet in our
text this figure is equated with the soul of the dark earth, the
impure prima materia! Alchemy, accordingly, lays upon man
the task, and confers upon him the dignity, of rescuing the
hidden, feminine aspect of God from imprisonment in matter
by his opus, and of reuniting her with the manifest, masculine
deity.
Through the ablution described at the end of the parable
the earth, or the seven stars or metals within it, become “as
pearls." In Senior the pearl is a synonym for the lapis,5 which,
as the "subtle pearl," is formed from the divine water. "De ad-
haerendo Deo” calls Wisdom a “precious pearl." ? In our text
heaven is equated with pneuma, and earth with psyche. Hippolytus, Elenchos,
V, 26, 36 (Legge, I, p. 179); cf. also Reitzenstein, Das iranische Erlósungsmys-
terium, p. 104. The same interpretation occurs in Philo, "Allegorical Interpreta-
tion of Genesis" (Works, I, p. 159), where heaven and earth are vois and ale630:s
(sense-perception), and are also interpreted as the heavenly and the earthly man.
These significations are taken up in Parable VI of Aurora.
115 Documentation in Dieterich, Mutter Erde.
116 Art. aurif., I, p. 169.
117In Philo, too, the paradisal earth is a “symbol of wisdom." (“Questions and
Answers on Genesis,” I, p. 5.) The identity of the earth with Wisdom is clearly
expressed in Parable VI.
118 De chemia, p. 11.
119 “For this is that hidden heavenly treasure and precious pearl" (Borgnet,
XXXVII, p. 524).
242VI. THE FIRST PARABLE: OF THE BLACK EARTH ...
the pearl is split into seven, which points to a dissociation, i.e.,
the pluralization mentioned earlier. This is probably the reason
why the alchemical procedures are repeated in the second
parable.
In Greek alchemy the pearl is a synonym for the divine
water, or its spirits (pneumata, vapours). An anonymous author
says: "Ihe philosophers named the waters or spirits ‘pearls’ and
‘precious stones,’ as they are full of great power.?? When thou
makest the hidden nature to come out, thou hast the mystery
of the philosophers.” !?
In our text the pearls are a symbol of the albedo and prob-
ably also of the female power of the anima or Wisdom. In Chris-
tian symbolism the pearl signifies purity and virginity,?? and
this emphasizes the moral aspect of the whitening. The theme
of chemical and psychic ablution and the symbolism of baptism
are discussed more closely in the following parables.
Summing up, we may say that the first parable describes an
essentially new psychic event, the sudden emergence of Wisdom
from below, from matter, and her demand for succour through
man's work and efforts. Not only would she thereby regain her
former sublime status, but the final redemption of humanity
would also be made possible. Wisdom appears, further, in the
form of a male judge, who is, psychologically, the embodiment
of a tendency in the unconscious to force the conscious mind
to make sharper distinctions. Discrimination (presumably be-
tween ego and self, personal and impersonal) has become
urgently necessary because of the previous contamination of the
author's personality with the archetypal anima image. There-
fore the parable ends with a didactic admonition for a ninefold
purification of the "pearls." Whereas anima-Wisdom speaks in
the middle section of the parable, the author himself speaks
again at the end. Evidently the differentiation has been tem-
porarily successful—but it is not definitive, for it is again the
anima speaking at the beginning of the next parable.
120'The Arabian mystic Alfarabi uses the term “precious stone" for “all that
truly is." Cf. Horten, Das Buch der Ringsteine, p. 2.
121 Alch. grecs, V, ii, 8. Zosimos says (III, ii, 2): “I will also explain to you the
power of the pearl: cooked in oil, it has within it the feminine power . . . the
perfection of the material is wrought by the pearl."
122 Cf. Ephraem Syrus, I, col. 7o, and col. 314n.
243VII. THE SECOND PARABLE: OF THE
FLOOD OF WATERS...
The significance of the second parable is already apparent in its
title: *Of the Flood of Waters and of Death, which the Woman
both brought into the World and put to Flight." As will be
seen, the woman is again Wisdom. In commenting on the pre-
vious chapter we had deduced only indirectly that Wisdom, or
her descent to the adept, was the cause of the nigredo, but it was
not stated directly in the text. The situation of distress in which
both found themselves was simply there, all of a sudden. The
author's attempts at discrimination in the last chapter seem,
however, to have given him an inkling that it was Wisdom her-
self who brought about this “death.”
The parable again begins with the description of a flood. As
I have said, it is as though each parable were an abbreviated re-
capitulation of the whole opus. This time the anima alone
speaks, describing the nigredo as though it were already in the
past.
When the multitude of the sea shall be converted to me and the
streams have flowed over my face . . .
Here the nigredo state is amplified in a new direction. The
flood is not caused only by the cloud penetrating into the earth,
but is described as an invasion of the sea. ““The multitude of the
sea" in Isaiah (60 : 5) means really the pagans dwelling by the
sea (AV: "the forces of the Gentiles"), and this is again an allu-
sion to the motif of the Ethiopians, symbolizing an inrush of
pagan psychic contents. Significantly, a similar conception is to
be found in a Byzantine commentator of alchemical treatises,
Christianos. He says in explanation of the "sea-water" that the
old philosophers meant the fixing and generative water of the
art, "for the sea breaks in not only by reason of the multitude
244VII. THE SECOND PARABLE: OF THE FLOOD OF WATERS ...
of fishes, but because it is also the dwelling-place of barbarians."
Hugo Rahner, in his compilation of patristic sources for the
symbolical significance of the sea,! says that the ‘diabolical sea"
is a metaphor for the pagan nations which have given them-
selves to the devil. He cites St. Hilary, who says: ? "We under-
stand the waters as rightly signifying the peoples. . . . For the
waters of the earth are unquiet, earthly, darksome, seeking to
^ overwhelm us, their spirits excited with wrath, and moved with
the violence of diabolical rage." Over the sea are the mists and
whirlwinds of the demons.? This view probably underlies the
passage from Christianos, which explains why the inrush of bar-
barians—or, in our text, the multitude of the sea—could destroy
the adept, an allusion to a possible outbreak of insanity. Chris-
tianos goes on to say that the ore is a "red thing" which destroys
those who handle it without experience.* The ancient authors
pointed out that in lead (a prima materia) there dwelt a daemon
who could induce “mania.” 5 In our text this is expressed in
figurative language as an invasion of the sea. The image is un-
derstandable psychologically since the sea represents the collec-
tive unconscious, which was quite capable of destroying the
senses of the adept not only because of its pagan contents but
because of its overwhelming power. The anonymous author of
the work often cited as “Rhazis Epistula" speaks of the water as
"our sea full of giants." 9
Simultaneously with the flood of waters, a bloody struggle
has broken out.
. and the arrows of my quiver are drunk with blood . . .
Without warning, the same figure, the anima projected into
matter, declares that she had made herself drunk with butchery
and bloodshed. The quotation (Deut. 32 : 42) is evidently an
allusion to that treacherous murder in the Turba," when the
1 “Antenna Crucis II."
2 Tractatus super Psalmos, 123, 5 (Migne, P.L., vol, 9, col. 677).*
3 Peter Chrysologus, Sermo 20 (Migne, P.L., vol. 52, col. 254), and Augustine (?),
Sermo 366, 5 (Migne, P.L., vol. 39, col. 1649).
4 Berthelot, Alch. grecs, VI, xii, 4.
5 Petasios in Olympiodorus (Berthelot, Alch. grecs, IT, iv, 43 and 44). Cf. Mys-
terium, p. 351.
6 Art. aurif. (1610), I, p. 251. The treatise is a Latin translation of an Arabic text.
7Pp. 229 and 247. Cf. Alch. grecs, UI, vi, 8, and Art. aurif., I, p. 189.
245AURORA CONSURGENS : COMMENTARY
“woman” slays her lover during the coniunctio with the
"weapons hidden in her body." In other texts it is described as
the pdxn Onrctn, “female combat." 5 The symbolism and its eccle-
siastical parallels are discussed in Jung.? In ecclesiastical lan-
guage, love is something that both kills and makes to live; thus
St. Augustine says: !? “love kills that which we were, in order
that we may be that which we were not; love makes as it were a
death for us." According to St. Thomas, excess of love causes a
"Iiquefactio" !! and a "languor." !?
In the Biblical context (Deut. 32 : 42) the arrows drunk with
blood signify God's victory over his enemies, and his vengeance.'?
So once again the anima is equated with God. Further, the
“woman” does not murder only her lover, as in most of the al-
chemical texts, but wallows in an indiscriminate blood-bath.!*
Just as the murder of the innocents was a concomitant of Christ's
birth, so here this “‘new birth" is accompanied by mass murder
on an Apocalyptic scale.
8 Carmina Heliodori, p. 56, Carmen IV, verse 225.
9 Mysterium, pp. 21ff., 145, 159f.
10 Enarr. in Psalm. 121 (Migne, P.L., vol. 37, col. 1628).*
11 Summa, I-II, q. 28, art. 5 resp. (Eng. edn., I, p. 713): “Consequently love of
a suitable good perfects and betters the lover; but love of a good which is un-
suitable to the lover wounds and worsens him. Wherefore man is perfected and
bettered chiefly by the love of God; but is wounded and worsened by the love
of sin. . . . Melting denotes a softening of the heart, whereby the heart shows
itself to be ready for the entrance of the beloved." * In Sent. III, Dist. xxvii,
q. 1a, 1 ad 4: "For the lover is separated from himself, and tends towards the
beloved, and on this account love is said to cause ecstasy and to glow, because
that which glows outside itself bubbles up and sends forth vapour." *
12 Meier, Die Lehre des Thomas von Aquino “De passionibus animae" in quel-
lenanalytischer Darstellung, p. 55. Cf. Gilbert of Hoyland, Sermones in Cantica
XLVI, 3 (Migne, P.L., vol. 184, col. 244); William of Thierry, Expositio altera
super Cant. Cant., cap. ? (Migne, P.L., vol. 180, col. 515); Baldwin of Canterbury,
Tractatus XIV (Migne, P.L., vol. 204, col. 539); William of Auvergne, “De trini-
tate," cap. XXI, Opera omnia, II (Suppl), p. 26: “and love is commonly called a
wound."
13 Cf. also Joel 3 : 12ff.
14 An older mythological parallel would be the Egyptian legend of the goddess
Hathor: when the sun-god Ra grew old, men conspired against him, so he sent
his eye, the goddess Hathor, down to earth. Hathor created such havoc among
mankind that, in order to save the human race from total destruction, Ra caused
quantities of red beer to be prepared which she mistook for blood, "and she
returned home drunken and knew not men." Cf. Neumann, Origins and History
of Consciousness, pp. 55f. and 74, and Vandier, La Religion égyptienne, p. 38.
246VII. THE SECOND PARABLE: OF THE FLOOD OF WATERS .
. .. and my presses are fragrant with the best wine and my barns
are filled with the corn of wheat and the bridegroom with the ten
wise virgins hath entered into my chamber and thereafter my belly
hath swelled from the touch of my beloved and the bolt of my door
hath been opened to my beloved,
The triumph of the victor, the positive aspect of the slaughter,
is celebrated in the passage about the presses and barns.’ For
the nigredo, as a saying from Avicenna !5 makes clear, signifies
the victory or domination of the female.!*
The blood-bath is evidently an allusion to the "death" which
the woman brought about, and this, to judge by parallel ideas in
other texts, seems to have been a consequence of the first con-
iunctio; therefore the text goes on to speak of the ten virgins to
whom the bridegroom came, and of the impregnation of the
woman. It is as though the blood-bath had had the reactive effect
of making the woman pregnant by the heavenly bridegroom.
Psychologically this would mean that the hostile, emotional out-
break of the "divine" element, utterly destroying the world of
consciousness, has a deeper significance in that it makes the
anima pregnant and initiates a new birth, that is, a further and
more comprehensive incarnation of God. The parable of the ten
virgins hints at a hierosgamos with the deity. It is worth while
refreshing our memories with the actual text (Matt. 25: 1-13,
AV): “Then shall the kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten
virgins, which took their lamps, and went forth to meet the
bridegroom. And five of them were wise, and five were foolish.
They that were foolish took their lamps, and took no oil with
them; but the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps.
While the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept.
And at midnight there was a cry made, Behold, the bridegroom
cometh; go ye out to meet him. Then all those. virgins arose,
and trimmed their lamps. And the foolish said unto the wise,
Give us of your oil, for our lamps are gone out. But the wise
answered, saying, Not so, lest there be not enough for us and
you; but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for yourselves.
And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came; and they
15 Cf. Joel 2 : 24.
16 Theatr. chem., IV (1613), p. 991: ‘“. . . for until the albedo the corruption of
humidity and the rule of the female is in force.” *
17 In the Biblical context the raging female is, as we have said, identical with God.
247AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
that were ready went in with him to the marriage: and the door
was shut. Afterward came also the other virgins, saying, Lord,
Lord, open to us. But he answered and said, Verily I say unto
you, I know you not. Watch therefore, for ye know neither the
day nor the hour wherein the Son of man cometh.” !5
This motif of a group of women, all waiting for one bride-
groom who appears in the middle of the night, is strange enough
in itself, and probably echoes some pre-Christian tradition. In
the cult of Adonis and also in the popular festivities celebrating
the death and refinding of Osiris, the death of the god and his
hierosgamos with the mother goddess were accompanied by
choruses of women, who shared the sufferings of the Great
Mother and her feast of joy.!? The bier and the marriage-bed
were one.? The festival was celebrated mainly by women.?!
After the finding of the dead Osiris there followed in Busiris
the "festival of burning lamps," at which the celebrants con-
ducted the dead god to the island of the dead.?? If the parable
in the Bible should have connections with such ideas, then it
would contain echoes of the archetypal motif of the death-mar-
riage, which is the central theme of the final chapter of Aurora.
The striking thing in our text is the fact that all ten virgins
enter the bridal chamber with the bridegroom, so that the fool-
ish virgins are included in the work of redemption as described
here, whereas in the Bible version the door to the kingdom of
Heaven remained shut. This intimation of a more comprehensive
redemption, in which even the inadequate human being shares,
is presumably due to the irruption of God’s shadow into the
human psyche. The significance of the number 10 will be gone
into later,?? when the text returns to it in another form. What
deserves special emphasis here is the fact that those human
beings who in the Christian view were excluded from the heav-
enly marriage are, in our text, admitted as having equal rights.
The inundation and the blood-bath simultaneously brought
about an impregnation which will result in the birth of the
18 Honorius interprets this passage as Christ’s entry into the soul. Expos. in
Cant. Cant. (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, col. 534).
19 Gressmann, Tod und Auferstehung des Osiris, ch. “Adonis und Osiris.”
20 Ibid., p. 16.
21 P. 25. Cf. the maenads in the Dionysus cult.
22 P, 38.
23 Infra, pp. 253ff.
248VII. THE SECOND PARABLE: OF THE FLOOD OF WATERS .. .
filius philosophorum.?* Looking back, we can see that the flood
and the cloud in the preceding parable have acquired a new
aspect: they are not only destructive but fertilizing factors. In
Greek alchemy the cloud bestowed life. The treatise of Ko-
marios says: “See and understand how the clouds rise up from the
sea, carrying the blessed waters with them, and they saturate
the earth, and there spring up seeds and blossoms.” ?* In Senior
the divine water is the "cloud which quickens the lower
world." ?5 In ecclesiastical symbolism Mary is the “freshening
cloud.” ?* Just as in the last parable the flood had the double
aspect of a deadly inundation and a purifying ablution (indi-
cated at the end by the albedo), so here have the flood and the
nigredo: they kill and quicken at once.?
and after Herod being angry hath slain many children in Bethlehem
of Juda and Rachel hath bewailed all her children and a light hath
risen up in darkness and the Sun of justice hath appeared from
heaven,
The interweaving of destruction and new life is further
elaborated by the reference to the massacre of the innocents and
to Rachel robbed of her children. The threatening of the child-
hero is a widespread archetypal motif for the psychological
interpretation of which I would refer the reader to Jung’s essay
“The Psychology of the Child Archetype.” In the hermeneutics
24 For the psychological significance of the "soul's pregnancy" see “The Psychology
of the Transference," pars. 461ff.
25 Berthelot, Alch. grecs, IV, xx, 12.
26 De chemia, pp. 24f.: “Likewise they call this water the Cloud which quickens
the lower world, and by all these they mean the foliate Water, which is the
gold of the Philosophers.” * A parallel image occurs in Ephraem Syrus, according
to whom the Gospel "spreads over the earth beneficent as a cloud” (Hymni et
sermones, II, col. 766).
27 Albertus, “Biblia Mariana" (Borgnet, XX XVII, p. 384): "[Mary] is the cloud that
cooleth, raineth, and bestoweth." She is also (p. 373) the "cloud of overshadowing
and guidance." *
28 Cf. the passage from Komarios in Alch. grecs, IV, xx, 10: “The floods and
roling waves wound the substance in Hades, that is, in the grave, wherein it
lies; but when the grave is opened, it will rise up therefrom like a child from
the womb." The “Aquarium sapientum," Mus. Herm., p. 86 (Waite, I, p. 79),
says: "Everything contributes to the formation of this stone. It is conceived in
hell, born in the earth, quickened in heaven, dies in time, and at length attains
eternal glory." * Origen similarly interpreted the Flood as the xdé@apors (purifica-
tion) and 8ióp6weis (correction) of the world. Contra Celsum, IV, 69 (Chadwick,
pp. 238f.).
249AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
of the Church Fathers, Rachel was an image for the "dying
Church." Cyril of Alexandria says that just as Rachel died at
the birth of her last-born, “‘so the Church in her earthliness dies
into the birth of eternal life." ?? It is to be assumed that this
symbolical background plays a part in our text: just as in the
nigredo the woman dominated at first, so she is now robbed of
her dominion at the birth of the filius philosophorum; she dies,
and her life passes into the new being.
The new birth is called "the Sun of justice," an image from
Malachi 4:2 which the Church has always referred to Christ.*°
Thus the Gradual for September 8, Nativity of the Blessed Virgin
Mary, says: "Happy art thou, O Virgin Mary . . . for of thee
is born the Sun of Justice, Christ our God.” ?' Ephraem Syrus
says: ? "Mary . . . bears in her womb the sun; her mystery
affrights all who wish to speak of it." ** And the "Biblia Mari-
ana" of pseudo-Albertus says of Mary: "She it is whom Solomon
compared with the dawn at her birth, with the full moon at
the mysterious conception of the son of God, with the sun at her
ascension, with the terrible hosts of the Lord for the affrighting
of demons." *4 The complex psychological significance of Sol as
a primordial image of consciousness and of its source, the self, is
fully discussed in Jung.®®
As in the first parable, the initial situation of distress passes
over without a break into a hymn of praise, this time in honour
of the birth of a saviour; and, as in the first parable, the change
goes hand in hand with the Christian interpretation of the
29 Glaphyra in Genesin (Migne, P.G., vol. 69, cols. 223-26).
30 Doelger, Die Sonne der Gerechtigkeit und der Schwarze, pp. 49ff.
31 Concerning the identification of Christ with the sun see St. Augustine, Enarr.
in Psalm. 10 (11) 3 (Eng. edn. I, p. 94) “[Christ] in many places of Holy
Scripture is allegorically called the Sun." *
32 Hymni et sermones, II, col. 530, also 174.
33 Cf. ibid. col. 540: “Risen from her [Mary] is the Sun of Justice, who in his
rising lit the whole world." Col. 792: "All things become distinct in the light, and
all things axe declared in Christ." Vol. I, col. 10: “Conquered is the darkness, that
the victory over Satan may be known, and the sun was victorious that it might
announce the First-Born, Conquered is the darkness and the spirit of darkness,
and our Light was victorious with the author of light.” (Cf. also I, cols. 8, 16, 130;
II, cols. 478, 526, 550, 630, 794, 812.) Elsewhere (II, col. 496) Ephraem Syrus calls
Christ a pillar of light, and this recalls the conception of the Redeemer as a pillar
of light among the Manichaeans.
34 Borgnet, XXXVII, p. 399. 35 Mysterium, pp. 106ff.
250VII. THE SECOND PARABLE: OF THE FLOOD OF WATERS ...
event: the newborn saviour is identified in nearly all the quota-
tions with Christ. It is as though the author has got himself
again and again into the unconscious darkness of pagan and
alchemical contents, but as soon as an image of the self is mani-
fest in the chaos, he equates it with Christ and feels safe again,
rehabilitated, and delivered from the hand of the "enemy." He
pushes the problem of the shadow too far away from him, so
that the darkness always comes back.
then the fulness of the time shall come when God shall send his Son,
as he hath said, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom
also he made the world, to whom he said of old time: Thou art my
Son, today have I begotten thee: to whom the wise men from the
East brought three precious gifts; in that day, which the Lord hath
made, let us be glad and rejoice therein, for this day hath the Lord
beheld my affliction and sent redemption, for he shall reign in Israel.
These sentences all refer to the birth of a figure who each
time is paralleled with Christ: "when the fulness of the time
shall come," ** “heir of all things," ?* "thou art my son, today
have I begotten thee,” 3° “wise men from the East." °° It is partic-
ularly significant that it was this son "by whom God made the
world," #° for the filius philosophorum, like Christ, is here
interpreted as the world-creating Logos. The words "in that
day, which the Lord hath made, let us be glad," etc.*! form the
Gradual for Easter Sunday and throughout Easter Week, thus
indicating that the birth of the filius philosophorum is also a
resurrection or rebirth. This is the more significant in that,
psychologically considered, it concerns not merely the birth of
the ‘inner man," the self, but at the same time the rebirth of
man's ego-consciousness. The birth of the alchemical filius could
be interpreted as a resurrection of Christ in compensatory,
changed form; for the archetype of the self, as such, is presumably
"eternal"—only the archetypal image which represents it in the
psyche "dies" and changes in accordance with the changes in
individual consciousness.
That death which a woman brought into the world, this day hath
a woman put to flight, and the barriers of hell are broken down; for
36 Gal. 4 : 4. 87 Hebr. 1 : 2. 38 Hebr. 1 : 5.
39 Matt. 2 : 11. 40 Hebr. 1 : 2. 41 Ps. 117 : 24.
251AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
death shall no more have dominion, nor shall the gates of hell pre-
vail against her,
The statement that on the day when the son appears “death
shall have no more dominion” €? shows that this son is identical
with the risen Christ: he is an image of the immortal man.*? At
the same time the author experiences the banishment of his
"affliction"; he feels saved, and death is driven out of the world.
For since he is inseparably bound up with the wretchedness and
despair of the prima materia, its purification and deliverance
from all darkness and corruptibility denote his own redemp-
tion and give him a feeling of immortality.
Thus a typically Christian solution has been found: the al-
chemist is saved not so much by his own work as by his particip-
ation in the birth of the saviour. In the unconscious something
becomes complete and whole again, and through it the ego feels
pacified. It is as though the vacillations between the extremes
of hell and bliss in these parables had gradually brought about
an equalization of opposites, without the author's fully realizing
what sort of alterations in his conscious view of the world this
would entail. Therefore the process remains partially unrecog-
nized, and the author thinks he can equate his experience of
the filius—the self—with the Church's conception of Christ, al-
though, as Jung has pointed out,** the filius philosophorum is
really a compensatory mirror-image of the dogmatic figure of
Christ arising out of the unconscious. In comparison with Christ
the alchemical image is much the more complete as it contains
a light and a dark side—the inferior part of human nature is
included in it. As the next passage will show, this is true also of
the saviour figure in Aurora; yet the author identifies this more
complete figure with Christ, because he has not really become
conscious of the problem of including the dark side.
42 Rom. 6: 9.
43 Similarly, the author of "De adhaerendo Deo" says: "When our heart and
mind .. . is gradually concentrated upon an immutable sufficient Good and has
learned to abide with itself . . . and has fully habituated itself to that supreme
Good until it is itself made immutable and immutably attains that true life which
is God the Lord . . . [then] it inwardly abides in that peaceful and secret place
of the Godhead, fully established in itself in Jesus Christ, who is the way, the
truth, and the life." (Borgnet, XXXVII, p. 530.)
44 Psychology and Alchemy, pars. 29ff.
252VII. THE SECOND PARABLE: OF THE FLOOD OF WATERS ...
for the tenth groat, which was lost, is found, and the hundredth
sheep is restored in the wilderness, and the number of our brethren
from the fall of the angels is fully made up.
This passage indicates what is the nature of the “redemp-
tion" or wholeness in the unconscious, by reference to the para-
bles of the lost piece of silver and lost sheep (Luke 15 : 1-10),
which in their turn are connected with the "number of our
brethren from the fall of the angels." This frame of reference
derives from Church hermeneutics, for according to St. Gregory
the ten groats signify the nine choirs of angels together with
mankind, which are the property of the divine Sophia (1),
that is, of God's son, who is diligently seeking for the one that
is lost. Elsewhere, the woman is interpreted as the Church, and
sinners are represented as unreasoning animals (sheep) and as
groats of little worth. A similar interpretation of the parable
as the fallen angels or the fallen Sophia occurs in the Gnostic
sect of the Marcosians, whose teachings are reported by Irenae-
us. It runs as follows: *9 “The creation of the Aeons and
the story of the sheep that was lost and found again are for them
[the Marcosians] one and the same, and they endeavour to
interpret these things mystically . . . maintaining that the uni-
verse was formed out of the numbers 1 and 2, and then, count-
ing from 1 to 4, they generate the Decad [the number 10]. For
when 1, 2, 3, and 4 are added together, they give rise to the
number of the ten Aeons. And again, the number 2 advancing
from itself up to six—two, four, and six—produces the Dodecad
[the number .12]. . . . They therefore call the Dodecad—
because it contains Episemon [ — the number 6], and because
Episemon waits upon it—the Passion. And for this reason, be-
cause an error occurred in connection with the twelfth number,
the sheep ran off and went astray: for they assert that a fall took
place from the Dodecad. In the same way they oracularly declare
that, a power having departed from the Dodecad and perished,
this was represented by the woman who lost the drachma and,
lighting a lamp, found it again. But of the pieces of money there
now remain nine, and of the sheep eleven. These numbers,
when multiplied together, produce the number 99....
45 Cf. Writings, I, pp. 54ff.
46 Leisegang, Die Gnosis, p. 340.
253AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
Wherefore they also maintain that the word AMEN contains
this number."
According to Marcos, the sum of all the numbers or letters
produce the Virgin of Light, Aletheia (Truth).** She is a femi-
nine emanation of God, the creative thought by which he
"thinks" the world. Marcos, according to Irenaeus,*® also as-
sumed a decad of ten heavenly circles and a dodecad of twelve
zodiacal signs.*? The dodecad represents evil, earthly fate, but
the decad is "soul-producing," and, according to the Pythag-
oreans,°! life and light are united in it; it is therefore an image
of the world-creating Nous.? The monad is descended from
the original pneuma and includes the decad, and the decad in
its turn includes the monad. This Pythagorean idea, widespread
in late antiquity, lived on in alchemy thanks in particular to
the T'urba. A sermon of Pythagoras, the Arabic text of which
is still preserved, runs: "Know, therefore, that the root of count-
ing and its beginning is One, male and single, and that from
that One the whole of creation proceeded. And as to Two, it
comes after One and is female. . . . And Three is male. .
But when Four came, it was female. . . . The perfection of all
counting is therefore Four, for Ten is perfected by Four. . . .
Thus did God create all creatures from the four different na-
tures; after they had come to ten in number, they were joined
to one another . . . and God brought forth everything from
them. . . . Therefore there is no distinction and no separation
between Ten and Four... Ten cannot be separated from
Four, and Ten is perfected only by Four. But beyond this there
is no counting and no knowledge." 5?
47 Ibid., pp. 929f. 48 Bousset, Hauptprobleme, p. 341.
49 There are ten heavens also in Mani's system. Bousset, n. 1.
50 Similarly, in the 18th treatise of the Corpus Hermeticum a dodecad of evil
punitive spirits (the signs of the Zodiac) is contrasted with the ten good powers of
God. Cf. Scott, Hermetica, I, pp. 238ff., especially pp. 247-48. Also Reitzenstein,
Poimandres, p. 336, Bousset, p. 364, and Reitzenstein, Mysterienreligionen, pp. 49f.
51 Scott, Hermetica, II, p. 393.
52 Proclus, In Timaeum, I, 87, line 28 (cited in Scott, IV, p. 388). Lydus, De
mensibus, 3, 4: “The world-creating Decad, the Nous shining in souls." * (Cf.
Proclus, II, 236, line 12.) The decad is also the "head of Kronos" (Iamblichus,
De vita Pythagorae, 298, Kern, Orphicorum fragmenta, 315, 316, Hippolytus,
Elenchos, 4, 43). Cf. also “The Psychology of the Transference,” pars. 525ff., and
Hurwitz, "Archetypische Motive,” pp. 194ff.
53 Turba, pp. 3ooff.
254VII. THE SECOND PARABLE: OF THE FLOOD OF WATERS ...
This passage from the Turba seems to have influenced
Senior,** whose work contains a good deal of number symbolism.
Thus in his “poem” he describes ten figures," five to the left
of the Table and five to the right. During the opus the water
is divided into nine parts and placed over the: “white foliate
earth" 59 until one earth and one water arise. Then the earth is
saturated with six parts (called "daughters"),5" and these have
ten colours which appear, corresponding to the nine "eagles,"
but the tenth is the dirty sediment (faex) from which they were
extracted. From this we can see the alchemical meaning here
of nine and ten: nine parts of the substance can be sublimated,
and are therefore represented as birds,5? but the tenth part is
the unsublimable residue. This would correspond to the lost
groat or sheep in Aurora and to the choir of fallen angels. ‘The
entire work of the alchemists is an endeavour to reintegrate that
unsublimable residue, the sinners on earth and the fallen angels,
into a whole. The two parables in Luke 15 come immediately
before the parable of the prodigal son, another sinner over
whose repentance “there is joy in the presence of the angels of
God." 5? The filius—to put it in Senior's language—is the vola-
tile (spiritual) substance and the earthy (bodily) substance
which have become one, and, as the end of our parable says,
have attained “perfecting and life."
Looking back, we can see from such amplifications why the
five foolish virgins could enter the bridal chamber with the five
wise ones: they were an integral part of the decad, in which that
54 Ibid., p. 304, n. 1. These sermons of Pythagoras are the source for Senior’s re-
marks in Theatr. chem., V, p. 203: “Then the second new salting enters into it,
which is the second female, and the whole become four, that is, two males and two
females, out of which went forth four colours, and these are its number. Under-
stand this principle of number, first and second, and you say two, and they are
three in number, and you say three, which are six in number, and then you say
four, and they become in number ten manifest numbers, but four of them are
hidden, But with these numbers you perfect the Magnesia, which is Abarnahas,
existing out of the four. But ten are four, and are extracted from them, and four
of them are ten. These are the four of nature, that is, earth, water, air, and fire,
of which every created thing consists. But understand this." *
55 De chemia, p. 23. 96 Ibid., p. 27. 51 P. 28.
58 P. 122: “By eagles you may understand the volatile substance." *
59 Luke 15 : 10. According to Pistis Sophia the evil in the world consists in the mix-
ture of light and darkness, and their final separation will occur only when the
perfect number (of just souls) is completed. Bousset, Hauptprobleme, p. 102.
255AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
unsublimable, rejected residue, dark and earthy, is to be in-
cluded and redeemed.
It is meet therefore, my son, to make merry this day, for there shall
be no more crying nor any sorrow, for the former things are passed
away.
In the view of the author, darkness and evil have been finally
put to flight, and he even hints at a complete apocatastasis. All |
separation is over, the lost groat and the lost sheep have been
found, and the fallen angels are, as the text says literally, “plen-
arie integratus"—fully integrated.9?
He that hath ears to hear, let him hear what the spirit of the doc-
trine saith to the sons of the discipline concerning the woman who
brought in death and put it to flight, which the philosophers declare
in these words: Take away his soul and give him back his soul, for
the corruption of one is the generation of another,
Here the text returns to the motif of “the woman who
brought in death and put it to flight," but this time it is ex-
plained as a taking away of the soul from matter, and its restora-
tion. Although the author did in reality have an experience of
death and the overcoming of death, his knowledge of alchemical
texts evidently caused him to understand it in alchemical terms,
thereby putting a distance between himself and his emotion.
In Biblical language the *woman who brought death into
the world" would be Eve. Ephraem Syrus,*t with his love of
antithetical formulations, says: "Eve, the mother of all living,
became the fount of death to all living." *? In alchemy we often
come across Eve as a name for the feminine arcane substance,9?
probably because of the interpretation of her name as the
60 Cf. Mysterium, pp. 533ff. It is an apocatastasis of everything that exists, when
man also will re-experience his original oneness with nature and God. The intui-
tion of this goal momentarily frees the author from his involvement in the uncon-
scious drama; he even sees it as an alchemical process which can be initiated by
man, and this accounts for his sudden access of didacticism in the following
passages.
61 Hymni et sermones, I, col. 154.*
62In his Encyclical Letter, Mary, Queen of All Creation, Pius XII calls Mary a
"new Eve" (p. 19), citing Albertus, "Sermones de Sanctis," XV. Cf. Cyril of Jerusa-
lem, Catecheses, I, xii, 29 (ed. Reischl and Rupp, II, p. 41).
63 E.g., in Senior, De chemia, pp. 95f., the part which is also printed in Art. aurif.,
I, pp. 158ff. as "Rosinus ad Euthiciam."
256VH. THE SECOND PARABLE: OF THE FLOOD OF WATERS...
“mother of all living" (Gen. 3 : 20).** For the Gnostic sect of the
Peratics Eve was the embodiment of the anima mundi, under-
stood as the “common nature" of gods and angels, mortals and
immortals. Even more pointed is the dualistic view of the
Mandaeans, who recognized two female principles, a "mother
of the living" and a "death" which they thought of as a woman.
Death was bound up with the life of the body, which was also
the seat of sin.99 Because of her significance as the mother of all
living, Eve became a prefiguration of the Church.*' If Eve is,
paradoxically, the fount of both life and death, “the woman who
put death to flight" can be found in another dogmatic figure,
that of Mary. Ephraem Syrus says: "From Mary arose the light
which scattered the darkness that Eve brought." ® And: "Mary
hath felled the tree that brought death, and hath bestowed the
fruit which maketh all to live." ® From these formulations it is
clear that the author of Aurora experienced the woman as a
unified embodiment of the figure that was otherwise personified
separately in Eve and Mary.” Once again the unconscious tries
to bring together the too widely separated light and dark aspects
of the same archetypal figure.
This figure is then clearly characterized as the "anima" of the
alchemical substance, and hence as the same feminine personifi-
cation who appeared previously now as Wisdom and now as the
soul of matter calling for help.
that is: Take from him the corrupting humour and add to him the
connatural humour, through which shall come to pass his perfecting
and life.
64 Philo, “On Husbandry,” sec. 21, Works, III, pp. 118f.
65 Leisegang, Die Gnosis, p. 184, and Bousset, Hauptprobleme, p. 59.
66 Reitzenstein, Das iranische Erlósungsmysterium, pp. 137f.
97 Anastasius the Sinaite, Anagogicae contemplationes, 4 (Migne, P.G., vol. 89, cols.
gonf.): “Eve is interpreted as Life. But Life is also the Church, showing forth the
perpetual regeneration of baptism and the life which is through water and
spirit." * The Church arose from the water and blood that flowed from Christ's
side, just as Eve arose from Adam's rib (col. 906).
68 Hymni et sermones, II, col. 526.
69 Ibid., col. 530. Cf. Bruno of Asti, Sententiae, Lib. V, cap. 2 (Migne, P.L., vol. 165,
col. 1023): “Death came through Eve, life was restored through Mary. The former
was overcome by the devil, the latter bound and conquered him." *
70 C£. Mysterium, pp. 56ff., concerning the paradoxes occasioned by the Aelia Laelia
Crispis inscription.
257AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
It is apparent that this anima is a corrupting and at the same
time “connatural” (i.e., vivifying) humour, and, as such, em-
bodies the divine water of the art.
As in alchemy, the water has the dual meaning of life and
death in many Gnostic systems.7! As the heavenly ocean it is an
image for Sophia. Among the Peratics, on the other hand,
Edem or Eve as the world-soul in the Book of Baruch ?? cor-
responds to the “power of the Abyssal mud” (8évays àfvoowov .
6éAov), also named the "sea." 7 Zosimos mentions “the round ele-
ment of Kronos” as a profane designation for the mystery of
the divine water.” Elsewhere 7 he says this water has in itself
“life and spirit and the destructive element" (dvaiperixdv).77 In
explanation of a saying of Maria Prophetissa: ““Touch it not
with the hands, for it is a fiery medicine,” he says: "Quick-
silver is death-dealing, and gold decomposes in it.” * But this
water is also the "seed-bed" (ravemépjuov), the round element 9,
the sea-water and the egg,*? and it has roughly the same mean-
71 Cf. the Naassene idea that when it flowed downwards the Ocean brought forth
Creation, and the gods when it flowed upwards (Leisegang, Gnosis, pp. 140f.); it is
the uroboros, the ring of "genesis and decay." It is the "moist substance, without
which nothing in the world can exist, whether mortal or immortal, living or life-
less; the river that flows from Eden and divides into the four streams." Among the
Peratics this serpent was Eve, the "mother of all living" (p. 148); opposed to her
is the corrupting moisture of Kronos, the "cause of decay in all creatures" (p.
149).
72 Bousset, Hauptprobleme, p. 69, and Irenaeus, I, 30, 3. Concerning the “supra-
celestial waters" see “Psychology and Religion,” pp. 98ff.
73 Leisegang, Die Gnosis, pp. 163ff., 175£., and Hippolytus, Elenchos, V, 14.
74 Bousset, p. 73, n. 1. The “power of the abyssal mud” is said to “receive and
carry the dirt of the imperishable, mute, wet element; it is the whole power of the
watery state of convulsion, eternally in motion, which supports that which rests,
contains that which trembles, liberates that which is to come . . . destroys grow-
ing things. . . . This power the ignorant call Kronos, who was flung into chains."
(Leisegang, Die Gnosis, pp. 149f; cf. Hippolytus, Elenchos, V, 14.) This cor-
responds to the "shuddersome water of the beginning" (#5wp $ogepóv) among the
Sethians, from which came a wind that caused everything to be. (Leisegang, pp.
153f.; Bousset, p. 104.)
7 “On Equipment and Furnaces,” in Berthelot, Alch. grecs, III, xlix, 1.
76 III, ix, 2,
77 Concerning the "deadly" (6avaró0es) quality of the water see also the anony-
mous treatise in Alch. grecs, IV, vii, 2.
78 III, xxix, 13.
79 J, iii, 4 and 8.
258VII. THE SECOND PARABLE: OF THE FLOOD OF WATERS ..
ing as the "bright water of Kronos" among the Peratics.9?
Ostanes says of the divine water: "This water makes the dead
to rise and slays the living, it lightens the darkness and darkens
the light." ** Many of these late classical ideas can be found in
Senior * and in the T'urba, and were certainly known to the
author of Aurora. In the T'urba the water is a water of life and
also a poison.*? “The philosophers spoke the truth when they
called the water living, because that which is mixed with the
water first dies, then lives again and is made young. And it is
the sharpest vinegar, which decomposes everything, or a poison.
But this poison is, as it were, birth and life, because it is a soul
extracted from many things. . . . Its colour is therefore life for
those bodies from which it takes away a defect, and death for
those bodies from which it is extracted." ** This fully accords
with the passages in Aurora about taking away and giving back
the soul, and removing the corrupting humour and adding the
connatural humour.55 Psychologically considered, this water is
an aspect of Mercurius, whose paradoxical qualities are dis-
cussed in Jung.*® According to St. Thomas Aquinas, the old
and oft-quoted saying ““The corruption of one is the generation
of another" is a fundamental law of all change aiming at per-
fection; "through many generations and corruptions we arrive
at the ultimate substantial form." 57 These, therefore, were
50 Hippolytus, Elenchos, V, 16. This water stands for entanglement in the cor.
ruptible world.
81 Berthelot, IV, ii, 3.
82 De chemia, pp. 85, 106f., and for the mysterium of the water in general pp. 17,
21, 34f., 70ff., 87.
83 P. 130.
84 Turba, p. 162. Cf. pp. 125, 213.
85 The Buch der Alaune und Salze (p. 63) says that the process consists essentially
in "extracting the corrupting humour and infusing the fiery humour." Of Mer-
curius it is said (pp. 58f.) that he copulates with himself and makes himself preg-
nant and gives birth in a single day. Cf. Zosimos in Alch. grecs, II, ix, 1: There
are two natures and one substance, one nature attracts the other, and one con-
quers the other, and that is mercury, the male-female, ever-elusive divine water,
which not all know and whose nature is difficult to see.
86 “The Spirit Mercurius."
87 Summa, I, q. 118, art. 2 ad 2 (Eng. edn., I, p. 575): "We must therefore say that
since the generation of one thing is the corruption of another, it follows of neces-
sity that both in men and in other animals, when a more perfect form supervenes
the previous form is corrupted; yet so that the supervening form contains the
perfection of the previous form, and something in addition. It is in this way that
259AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
widely known ideas, but in alluding to them the author intro-
duces a bold innovation when he tries—for the first time with
such clarity—to relate these paradoxical conceptions of the
divine water as the anima in matter to the figures of Eve and
Mary, and to fuse their dual nature in a single figure.** Here in
particular we see the role which the alchemical symbols play in
the text: they have the function of uniting the opposites.
through many generations and corruptions we arrive at the ultimate substantial,
form, both in man and other animals. . . . We conclude therefore that the intel-
lectual soul is created by God at the end of human generation, and this soul is at
the same time sensitive and nutritive, the pre-existing forms being corrupted." *
88It is true not only of this passage, but of alchemy in general, that the same
archetypes which were seen and experienced in their dual aspect as a totality, in
Christian allegory appear split up in a dualism of bright and dark images.
260VIII. THE THIRD PARABLE: OF THE
GATE OF BRASS...
In the course of the preceding parable it became increasingly
clear that Wisdom and the “corrupting humour,” or the death-
dealing woman, represented one and the same thing. But, as
in most alchemical texts, the author was not aware that he was
projecting his anima into matter. For this reason she remains
“unredeemed,” i.e., caught in the projected state and not recog-
nized as a psychic factor. Hence, as the title of the present par-
able states, she still languishes in “Babylonish captivity” and
speaks as follows:
He who brake in pieces my gates of brass and my bars of iron . . .
The quotation from Isaiah (45:2-3), "I will go before
thee. . . . I will break in pieces the gates of brass and will burst
the bars of iron," goes on to say: "And I will give thee hidden
treasures and the concealed riches of secret places, that thou
mayest know that I am the Lord who called thee by thy
name. . . ." Alchemically interpreted, this would be an allu-
sion to the gradual extraction of the "fluid soul" from the
mineral body (ore or iron).! The simultaneous "moral" or psy-
chological aspect of this process can be seen very clearly in the
seventeenth Ode of Solomon;? where the ““Redeemed,” identify-
ing himself with Christ, says: "And from thence he [God] gave
1'Thus Lucas says in the Turba (Sermo 67, pp. 166 and 252): “The definition of
the art is the liquefaction of bodies and the separation of the soul from the body,
for copper, like man, has a soul as well as a body. You must therefore . . . destroy
the body and extract the soul from it; wherefore the philosophers have said that
it is not the body that penetrates the body, but the fine nature, namely the soul,
which penetrates and tinges the body."
20des of Solomon (trans. Bernard), pp. 81f. Cf. Reitzenstein, Das iranische
Erlósungsmysterium, p. 87.
261AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
me the way of His footsteps and I opened the doors that were
closed and brake in pieces the bars of iron; but my iron melted
and dissolved before me; nothing appeared closed to me, be-
cause I was the door of everything." ?
Psychologically, the alchemical € "unlocking of the iron"
would mean the emotional release of the ego caught in its
prejudices and caprices. Contact with the unconscious opens the
prison which we have made for ourselves with our conscious
views and ego-bound aims, and at the same time an analogous '
process takes place in the unconscious psyche: through the ap-
plication of conscious insight the unconscious is freed from its
irreducible, unchanging quality, and is altered by contact with
the understanding consciousness. In this phase of the opus the
situation of the alchemist coincides with that of the anima in
the prison of hell.
shall also move my candlestick out of its place, and shall break
asunder the chains of the prison of darkness.
The "Bar of Iron of the Babylonish Captivity” in the title
refers to the doors of hell,* hence the anima is imprisoned in
the centre of the earth and, from the Christian point of view, is
actually in hell. This is confirmed by her words in the first
parable, where she calls for help from the “lower hell." Such an
interpretation would shed light on the somewhat obscure pas-
sage that now follows, namely, the anima's request for her
"candlestick to be moved out of its place." This is an allusion
to Rev. 2:5: “Or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will
remove thy candlestick out of his place, except thou repent”
(AV). It is to be assumed that this had happened before the
parable began, and that, as a punishment, her candlestick was
removed to hell, for which reason the anima now asks for it to
be restored.* According to a commentary of Albertus Magnus
8 Cf. the prayer of Gizeh (4th cent.), ibid., p. 265.
4 Cf. Daniel, Thesaurus hymnologicus, IV, p. 117: "Christ the king, the world's
Creator, / Thou who ope'st the prison hard, / Thou who break'st the bars of
iron, / And releasest those inbarred.” *
5 Cf. the laments of the fallen Sophia in Pistis Sophia (Leisegang, Die Gnosis,
pp. 378ff., and Reitzenstein, Erlósungsmysterium, pp. 174ff.). In some respects the
anima of our text might also be compared to the “virgin of light" in the Coptic-
Gnostic writings. Cf. Bousset, Hauptprobleme, p. 61.
262VII. THE THIRD PARABLE: OF THE GATE OF BRASS...
on the Apocalypse, the candlestick is an image for the Church,®
and, in other of his writings, for Mary." Similarly, the golden can-
delabrum was interpreted as an allegory of Christ, whereas in
the Cabala it signifies the Shekinah or Metatron.® The soul’s
sojourn in the interior of the earth and in hell is the conse-
quence of a previous "fall" when she was caught in matter 1°—a
portrayal of that age-old projection of the unconscious into na-
ture upon which alchemy is based.!!
The idea of the fallen soul also occurs in scholastic philos-
ophy. Thus William of Auvergne says that through Adam’s sin
the soul was "cast down from the height of its natural luminosity
and nobility.” 1”
A similar formulation to the one in Aurora—and perhaps its
source—occurs in a passage from "Rosinus ad Sarratantam,” 1%
where the personified “lunar moisture" (a parallel to our figure)
says: "And whoso shall remove me, who have the Lunar and
Mercurial matter, from my place, i.e., from the body of the
metal, by force, i.e., by the force of putrefaction and dissolution,
and shall join my beloved, i.e., the solar fatness, with me, i.e.,
with the humidity of the moon . . . they shall regenerate us
unto life, by which death shall be no more." !*
That the soul in the hellish abyss of matter is represented
in Aurora as a candlestick or a light accords with her interpre-
tation as the lumen naturale or scintilla, the wider context of
which is discussed in Jung.!5 Even in the first chapter Wisdom
6 *Enarr. in Apocalypsim" (Borgnet, XXXVIII, p. 491): "And the Church is called
the golden candlestick, because it is illuminated with knowledge, precious in
grace, confirmed in patience, ready in obedience, resounding in preaching, endur-
ing in perseverance, firm in the faith of the Trinity, which is filled with the seven-
fold grace of the Holy Spirit." * The genuineness of this work is disputed.
* "Biblia Mariana" (Borgnet, XXXVII, p. 371): “Mary is the candlestick of enlight-
enment." *
8 St. Gregory, Homil. I in Ezech. (Migne, P.L., vol. 76, col. 831).
9? Knorr von Rosenroth, Kabbala denudata, I, Part 1, p. 543.
10 In the Cabala this is the imprisonment of the light in the dark vessel. Ibid., IT,
Part 1, pp. 261f. 11 Cf. Psychology and Alchemy, pars. 405ff.
12 "De anima," V, 19, Opera omnia, II, p. 144.* 13 Art. aurif., I, p. 188.*
14 This is from a commentary on a text part of which is also contained in “Cons.
coniug." (Ars chemica, pp. 120-29), describing the coniunctio as in Senior's
"Epistola Solis ad Lunam crescentem" (De chemia, pp. 7-10). Cf. the Christian
image of the body as a prison.
15 *On the Nature of the Psyche,” pp. 190ff., and Mysterium, pp. 48ff.
263AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
calls herself "an unfailing light" which blesses those who find
her. But in order to illuminate men she must obviously first be
delivered from the depths of hell5 Without the understanding
participation of consciousness the unconscious cannot exert its
illuminating and helpful function.
and feed my hungry soul, which hasted in thirst for his face, with
the fat of wheat and with honey out of the rock, and shall prepare a
large dining-room for my pilgrimage, that I may sleep in peace, and
the seven gifts of the Holy Spirit may rest upon me, who hath had
mercy upon me.
The feeding of the thirsting soul had been hinted at in the
"adding of the connatural humour" at the end of the last par-
able. Joachim of Flora interprets the “honey out of the rock”
(Psalm 80 : 17), which was usually considered an image for God,
as "spiritual understanding" and the "spiritual joy" bestowed
by the Holy Spirit.17 The alchemical reference here is to the
“nourishment of the stone," a definite phase of the work. Thus
the "Exercitationes in Turbam XV” !5 says that the material is
first embodied in milk, then in blood and in water; then the
limbs are formed, “‘and at last God gives to matter soul, that is,
the power by which our medicine is increased and nourished.”
The second part of Aurora (which, as I have said, is probably a
commentary on the first!?) combines the phase of ablution
with that of nutrition, and says after describing the former: ??
“The philosophers desire to nourish their grain of seed with
the connatural humour until it lives and brings forth fruit,
and they desire to quicken that which is dead.” ** In our text
the ablution is similarly described as a rebirth, and mention is
16 Cf. Senior, De chemia, pp. 5, 6, 26, where a ray of sunlight descended to the
lower world, splitting it and at the same time surrounding it.
17 Concordia, V (Hahn, Geschichte der Ketzer, III, p. 332): "And yet he who
believes and fears yet understands not is brought as it were to the knowledge of
the Father alone . . . but they who believe and understand are brought to the
knowledge of the Father and the Son, for the Son is the wisdom of the Father . . .
but they who believe, understand, and enjoy, having knowledge of the Father
and the Son, have reached even to the understanding of the Holy Spirit, for he is
the delight and love of God, he is honey from the rock and oil from the flinty
rock. Verily he is honey from the rock, he is spiritual joy . . ."*
18 Art. aurif., I, p. 117. 19 Supra, p. 5.
20 Art. aurif., I, pp. 148f. Cf. also pp. 130f.
21 Cf. the "Flos florum" of Arnaldus, Art. aurif., II, p. 322.
264VIII. THE THIRD PARABLE: OF THE GATE OF BRASS .
made of the "seven gifts of the Holy Spirit." This may be an
allusion to the words of the priest who, plunging the candle
into the water, says at the benediction of the font: “May the
virtue of the Holy Spirit descend into all the water of this
font, and make the whole substance of this water fruitful, and
capable of regenerating.” ?? This signifies an “inner quicken-
ing," an increase in vitality and psychic strength.?? According
to Paracelsus, honey signifies the "sweetness of the earth"—the
anima is joyless and needs the loving attention of the conscious
mind.
For they shall gather me together out of all the countries, that they
may pour upon me clean water, and I shall be cleansed from the
greatest sin, and from the noonday devil, for from the sole of my
foot unto the crown of my head there is no soundness in me. There-
. fore they shall cleanse me from my secret faults and from those of
others, and thereafter I shall not remember all my iniquities, for
God hath anointed me with the oil of gladness,
The first thing to be noted here is the motif of "gathering
together out of all the countries," an allusion to the gathering
of the "light particles" or "soul particles" of God which are
scattered throughout matter.?* The aim is to produce the uni-
tary man (vir unus) who is without stain. This stain, according
to the text, is not only the chemical impurity of the metal, but
is called "the greatest sin" (maximum delictum) and the “noon-
day devil." ‘The noonday, as has been mentioned, is the “heat of
worldly ambition," and Artefius says that "since the devil's in-
terior is of the nature of fire, it is manifest that it is contrary
and hostile to the nature of the soul, which is a nature of
equality.” ?5 Therefore the anima in our text is cleansed with
water and anointed with the oil of gladness in the day of her
resurrection. All this is an allusion to the symbolism of Chris-
22 Roman Missal, Blessing of the Font on Easter Eve.
23 Cf, Ephraem Syrus, Hymni et sermones, I, col. 54, 58, 80, and Anastasius the
Sinaite, Hexaem. 4: *. . . that through her [the Church] we may be born and
reborn until . . . the night of this world pass away and Christ the sun of justice
shall have risen again." * *But the moon has the government and administration
of the authority of water and the Holy Spirit . . . that through it we may be
born and regenerated.” * These symbolisms are elaborated in the following
chapters.
24 Mysterium, pp. 48ff.
25 “Clavis maioris sapientiae," Theatr. chem. (1659), IV, p. 211.*
265AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
tian baptism, which was interpreted as a burial and resurrec-
tion. The alchemical parallels are discussed in Jung.?* The oil
of gladness is the chrism, the oil used at confirmation and at
the consecration of bishops in imitation of the oil with which
Christ was anointed at his baptism.?* In addition, fat or “shining
oil" played an important part in alchemy as a symbol of the soul
or of the aqua divina or aqua sapientiae?* Accordingly, the
anointing in Aurora is, in a sense, another designation for “‘add-
ing the connatural humour." In Church symbolism fat was an
image for the manna that fell from heaven,?? so that again allu-
sion is made to the motif of supernatural nourishment.
that there may dwell in me the virtue of penetration and of lique-
faction in the day of my resurrection, when I shall be glorified
by God.
With these words the author subtly reverts to the theme of
the “unitary man" or Anthropos which was sounded shortly
before, and as in the preceding chapters equates the purified
material with the risen Christ: once more it assumes a masculine
form. The words “in the day of my resurrection" refer to the
Alleluia verse for Low Sunday, where, in a variant of the words
spoken by the angel at the sepulchre,?? the Lord says: “On the
day of my resurrection . . . I will go before you into Galilee."
The "virtue of penetration" is a reference to the Tabula
Smaragdina: ". . . it conquers every subtle thing and pene-
trates all solids." *! The author compares this virtue with the
apparition of the risen Christ in his glorified body.?? All these
statements ultimately refer to the filius philosophorum, risen
from the transformed feminine substance. That the filius really
26 Mysterium, pp. 235ff.
27 Pontificale Romanum, Blessing of the Oils on Maundy Thursday.
28 Senior, De chemia, pp. 49, 55, and 57: “By oil he means the Soul.” Pp. 75 and
82: "And this that is born is the fatness which they call the soul and the egg."*
C£. "Collectanea ex Rhasi" in the Lacinius edition of Pret. marg. nov., p. 169.
29 Ephraem Syrus, II, col. 676.
30 Matt. 28: 5ff.
31 P. 2. Cf. Pseudo-Aristotle, "De perfecto magisterio," Theatr. chem. (1659), III,
p- 79, and Senior, De chemia, p. 116: “For Hermes saith: Every subtle thing enters
into every gross thing." *
32 Similarly, Petrus Bonus compares the penetrative power of the lapis with man's
glorified body. In the same way, the Mercurial spirit was compared with the
ubiquitous presence of the Paraclete (Mysterium, pp. 16, 30).
266VIII. THE THIRD PARABLE: OF THE GATE OF BRASS...
is meant is confirmed by the passage that now follows: "For this
generation cometh and passeth away, until he come that is to be
sent, who also taketh away the yoke of our captivity,” etc. The
first part is from Ecclesiastes 1:4: "One generation passeth
away, and another generation cometh: but the earth abideth
for ever" (AV). For anyone who knew the Bible, therefore, the
author was here giving a plain hint that an "everlasting earth"
had been produced, a body endowed with immortality.?? This
theme is taken up again later on. The second part of the pas-
sage is from Gen. 49: 10 (DV): “The sceptre shall not be taken
away ... till he come that is to be sent: and he shall be the
expectation of nations." Of this figure it is said: "His eyes shall
be red with wine, and his teeth white with milk" (Gen. 49: 12,
AV). For an alchemical reader this is a clear allusion to the
rubedo-albedo symbolism, and to the fact that the filius is a
"unio oppositorum."
The text, then, says in sum: if the anima is "gathered to-
gether" (withdrawn from projection in matter) and "washed
with the spirit of wisdom and understanding" ?* (made conscious
by insight), there will arise a spiritual entity which, like the
risen Christ, can penetrate and pervade all material things. This
new form of the anima is represented as masculine: it is that
completer image of the self which is symbolized by the filius phi-
losophorum. At the same time this masculine figure can deliver
the anima from the “Babylonish captivity,” i.e., from the state
of unconsciousness. T'he psyche, therefore, redeems itself. Previ-
ously the anima-image and the self were so contaminated that
they could hardly be distinguished from one another. Now for
the first time the self crystallizes out as an independent content
and manifests itself as that more comprehensive centre of the
psyche which, as we shall see, guides the anima-impulse towards
a definite goal—the individuation process.
For this generation cometh and passeth away, until he come that is
to be sent, who also taketh away the yoke of our captivity, wherein
we sate seventy years by the rivers of Babylon; there we wept and
hung up our instruments,
33 For evidence that the opus was concerned with the production of the immortal
inner man, see Mysterium, pp. 453f., and Parable 7 of Aurora.
34 See infra, p. 273.
267AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
The unredeemed state of the anima in matter is here ex-
pressed figuratively as a captivity.?5 In ecclesiastical allegory the
Babylonian exile was interpreted as the “supremacy of the
heathen and of sin" and thus forms a parallel to the domination
of the “Ethiopians” and the “multitude of the sea" mentioned
earlier. In patristic literature Babylon was called lacus inferior
(the lake below).?* This interpretation occurs also in the Acts
of Cyriac, where Babylon is called a “marshy sea," full of “hippo-
centaurs," dragons, and the great Uroboros (which for the al-
chemist symbolized the divine water). It was also called the
"centre of hell."?" It signified confusion ?* (ecyxvew) and the
“evil thoughts which confound the heart." The "rivers of Baby-
lon" mentioned in the text were interpreted by the Church
Fathers as the "streams of lust" and the "stream of this world.” *°
Here we have another allusion to the theme of concupiscentia
which was mentioned in the first chapter as a concomitant of
Wisdom.*? These amplifications show that the author's anima is
still overpowered or at least oppressed by shadow elements, from
which she can be cleansed only by becoming conscious.
With the words "there we wept,” etc. the discourse suddenly
changes from the first person singular into the plural, as
though the anima had become a plurality during the Babylo-
nian exile. The captivity was at the same time a dispersion, or,
in psychological terms, it involved a dissolution into separate
autonomous complexes or a dissociation of the personality.*!
That is why the text spoke of the need for a "gathering together
out of all countries."
35 Cf. the ieiunium (fast) and the 40-day imprisonment of the gold in the Cabala
(Knorr von Rosenroth, I, Part 1, p. 302).
36 Ephraem Syrus, II, col. 226: And do vengeance upon them, who have led the
people into the lake below, i.e., into Babylon." *
37 Reitzenstein, Erlósungsmysterium, pp. 77ff.
38 St. Gregory, Moralia, Lib. 6 in cap. 5 Job, sec. 25 (Eng. edn., I, p. 330): “For-
asmuch as Babylon is rendered ‘confusion.’ ”
39 Honorius, Speculum (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, cols. 937ff.): “By the sea is meant
this world, which is continually disturbed by the swirling of adversities. The devil
swimmeth about in it like Leviathan, and devoureth a multitude of souls." * Con-
cerning this symbolism, see Rahner, "Antenna Crucis."
40 Cf. the Gnostic equation of Babel and Aphrodite, who is the cause of all
adultery. Leisegang, Die Gnosis, p. 161.
41 One-sided accentuation whether of brightness or of darkness always seems to
produce a dissociation,
268VIII. THE THIRD PARABLE: OF THE GATE OF BRASS...
Among the Gnostic sect of the Naassenes the river that flowed
through Babylon was interpreted (in contrast to the symbolism
cited above) as the living water by which the pneumatikoi were
made elect? Mesopotamia was the “great stream of Ocean
which flows from the midst of the perfect man." Its water con-
tained the "spirit of God.” *? This positive aspect of the water
will be mentioned later.
because the daughters of Sion were haughty and walked with
stretched-out necks and winkings of their eyes and made a noise and
went at a measured pace. Therefore the Lord will make bald the
crown of the head of the daughters of Sion, and will discover their
hair, for the law shall come forth from Sion and the word of the
Lord from Jerusalem.
After the self has crystallized out as a separate, central con-
tent from the chaos of the initial state, the author recognizes,
as a further aspect of the figure he had previously identified with
Eve, Mary, and Wisdom, yet another plurality—the haughty
daughters of Sion whom God has punished but who, the text goes
on to say, all yearn for one husband. Evidently sufficient sta-
bility of consciousness had been attained for the author to per-
ceive, in retrospect, this ambiguous aspect of the anima. Con-
sciously he no doubt related these female figures whom God
had humbled to the spirits of the metals or planets imprisoned
in the earth.** The captivity is an important concept in the
Turba and there it symbolizes the intentional "fixing" (solidify-
ing) of a volatile spirit or soul for the purpose of transforma-
tion. '"The soul is held fast like a slave, so that she cannot flee,
and she falleth into sickness and rust and perisheth. But be-
cause she fleeth not, she is made free and gaineth her spouse." *5
The fixing is called «aroy; (imprisonment) in Greek alchemy.*®
In one of the oldest texts, "Komarios to Cleopatra," the metals
are called "corpses" which lie around in Hades, harassed and
chained up in mist and darkness. Then the elixir, the “blessed
waters," come down to them and rouse them from sleep.*? ‘The
term xaroyj played an important role in the contemporary
42 Bousset, Hauptprobleme, pp. 280-81, n. 2.
43 Ibid., p. 81, Cf. The Clementine Homilies, II, 24, p. 185.
44 Cf. "Demonstratio naturae," Mus. Herm., p. 167 (Waite, I, p. 138), and Psy-
chology and Alchemy, fig. 21. 45 P. 222.
46 Olympiodorus in Alch. grecs, II, iv, 9. 47 Ibid., IV, xx, 8.
269AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
religious literature, where it meant "seizure by a divinity" (and
even frenzy) or the “voluntary seclusion” of a novice.*
In Aurora it is seven women who suffer the imprisonment
—they are the planetary powers in the earth.*? These seven
captives recall the seven female spirits chained together, who ap-
pear in the Testament of Solomon 9? as elements of the Lord of
Darkness, and to each of whom seven stars were assigned. ‘The
idea that the planetary spirits were imprisoned because they
were apostate angels is very old and is widely distributed. In
the Ethiopic Book of Enoch *' the spirits of the stars had to
atone for their rebellion against God by being locked up in
seven burning mountains, and in the late classical treatise "Kore
Kosmou" ?? the spirits of the stars, who were once "pure souls,"
were locked up in human bodies because of their disobedi-
ence. In Aurora, too, the seven women were punished for their
sins and were incarcerated in Babylon, that is, in the centre of
hell. These seven souls of the stars thus form another parallel
to the Gnostic motif of the fallen Sophia.
In that day when seven women took hold of one man, saying: We
eat our own bread and wear our own apparel, why dost thou not
48 Reitzenstein, Mysterienreligionen, pp. 200ff.; Erlósungsmysterium, p. 198.
49 Cf. Bousset, pp. 25ff.; Lippmann, I, pp. 215ff. Also the influence of the planets
on the earth in Philo, "De opificio mundi," 113-14 (Loeb edn., I, pp. goff.), and
Scott, Hermetica, IV, p. 447.
50 Pp. 31 and 51. Cf. Bousset, p. 21, n. 2. According to Theodor bar Konai, the
sect of the Kukaeans had a myth in which seven daughters of the "Great Mother
of Life" were abducted by the powers of darkness and await their heavenly bride-
grooms in the cities of Matra, Mabug, and Harran. (Bousset, p. 263, n. 2.)
51 Charles, Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha, YI, p. 200. Cf. Bousset, p. 53, and
Lippmann, I, p. 221. 52 Scott, I, p. 464.
53 Similar conceptions in Pistis Sophia, Book 4 (cf. Bousset, p. 51) and among the
Mandaeans (pp. 31, 35). There Ruhá, the feminine Holy Spirit, is the "mother of
the seven," who incites them to revolt so that, for punishment, they must burn in
their own fire. (Bousset, p. 36; Reitzenstein, Erlósungsmysterium, pp. 59ff.) The
same motif occurs among the Parsis (Bousset, p. 41) and in the Book of Jed (ibid.,
pp. 51£). Ruhá, therefore, was regarded as a seven-headed dragon (Reitzenstein,
Erlósungsmysterium, p. 85). Cf. the serpent of the Ophites (Leisegang, Gnosis,
p- 179). The Seven were regarded as hermaphroditic demons and as the cause of
propagation, and consequently of death and the seven deadly sins. (Lippmann, I,
p. 242; Boll, Sphaera, p. 13; Scott. Hermetica, IV, p. 419.) According to Honorius
the heptad is the number of the Old Testament, the octad that of the New,
because Christ rose on the eighth day. Quaest. et resp. (Migne, P.L., vol. 172,
col. 345).
270VII. THE THIRD PARABLE: OF THE GATE OF BRASS...
defend our blood, which is poured out as water round about Jeru-
salem? And they received the divine reply: Rest ye still for a little
time, until the number of our brethren is filled up, which is written
in this book:
According to the passage in Isaiah (4:1) the proud daugh-
ters of Sion were seven women who were condemned to remain
unmarried and unfruitful. At the same time, by an allusion in
the text (“why dost thou not defend our blood?’’), they are com-
pared to “the souls of them that were slain for the word of God”
(Rev. 6 : of.), the saints and martyrs, whose blood is "poured out
as water round about Jerusalem" (Psalm 78:3). They are thus
sinners and martyrs at once! The reply they received from the
Lord on begging to be freed was that they should wait a little
time until the number of their brethren was made up (Rev.
6:11). This refers to those martyred for the Church. Accord-
ingly, the incarceration of the planetary spirits is represented as
the consequence of a sin,®* but the torment they undergo in
the opus is a martyrdom for the sake of redemption.®
The identification of the proud daughters of Sion with the
souls of the martyrs was no doubt suggested to the author by
ecclesiastical allegory, which interpreted Sion as the Church
oppressed by the devil but later freed, and the daughters of
Sion as the souls reborn in Christ.°® They also signified the
souls lost in this world.5* The unmarried and unfruitful woman
was equally a symbol for the Church,** for the Church is that
once rejected earth (terra repudiata) which, chosen by God,
54 Cf. the removal of the candlestick earlier.
55 Origen once named the Christian martyrs “rubbish and muck.” Commentaria
in Joannis Ev. IV (Migne, P.G., vol. 14, col. 295).
56 Thus Ephraem Syrus says (II, col. 172): "A Saviour shall come out of Sion. The
spiritual . . . Sion and the hill of visions or revelations is the Church." * Of Zeph.
3:14, "Give praise, O Daughter of Sion," he says (cols. 296f.): “This signifies also
the mystery of the Church, which is delivered through the Cross from the hand
of the devil." * Cf. Honorius: “And the daughters of Sion, that is the souls reborn
in Christ, this day rejoice in their King." * Speculum (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, cols.
1041 and 930), 57 Ephraem Syrus, II, col. 346.
58 Ibid., II, col. 134: “I am barren and solitary. These things concern the Church,
for whether they revere or persecute her they greatly magnify and multiply her." *
Honorius: But the Church, long barren, gave birth to a faithful son, that is, the
Christian people, for special observances." * Speculum (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, col.
1041). Cf. the widow as an image for the soul in St. Gregory, Moralia, Lib. XVI
in cap. 22 Job, sec. 10 (Eng. edn., II, p. 230).
271AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
received the name voluntas mea (my pleasure) or terra maritata
(wedded earth), and her spouse is the clergy and the right-
eous.9 (This accords with the symbolism of the “thirsting
earth" mentioned earlier as an image for Mary.)*! We can sum
up this part of the text by saying that it refers to the redemp-
tion of an anima figure who, as the "body" or "earth," is of
seeming material nature, and who, tainted with the stain of sin
and ungodliness, languishes in the depths of the earth and in .
hell. At the same time she is clearly connected with the Church
and Mary, and is ultimately identical with Wisdom. Her suffer-
ings are a punishment and at the same time a martyrdom for
God's sake.
We meet here with the well-known alchemical idea of re-
demption which occurs in almost all texts. The alchemist, as
Jung says, was primarily interested in the "fate and manifest re-
demption of substances, for in them the divine soul lies captive
and awaits . . . release. The captive soul then appears in the
form of the ‘Son of God.’ For the alchemist, the one primarily
in need of redemption is not man, but the deity who is lost
and sleeping in matter. . . . His attention is not directed to
his own salvation through God's grace, but to the liberation of
God from the darkness of matter. . . . Since it is not man but
matter that must be redeemed, the spirit that manifests itself
in the transformation is not the 'Son of Man' but . . . the
filius macrocosmi.” 9?
As with the Gnostic figure of Sophia, so in our text the
anima in her unconscious state has been unfaithful to the God
of Israel and yielded to pride and worldly pleasure. Therefore
she sank into wretchedness and loneliness, and now God answers
her cries with the promise of his help. But the Biblical passages
which are quoted as God's answers continue in a strain quite
different from what we would expect: the martyrs are to wait
until more of their fellow servants and brethren are slain even as
they were (Rev. 6 : 11), and "the Lord shall wash away the filth
of the daughters of Sion, and shall wash away the blood of
Jerusalem out of the midst thereof, by the spirit of judgment
59 Isa. 62 : 4 (AV). 60 Ephraem Syrus, II, col. 186.
61 Ibid., col. 146: "Christ ascended . . . like a root out of the thirsty ground from
Mary the Virgin." * Cf. also col. 744.
62 Psychology and Alchemy, par. 420.
272VIII. THE THIRD PARABLE: OF THE GATE OF BRASS ..
and by the spirit of burning" (Isa. 4 : 4). Something decisive
must have taken place in the author: he twists the motif of
the Apocalyptic blood-bath and fiery judgment into a promise
of redemption. In the ensuing text it is not the fiery wrath of
God's judgment that shall cleanse the daughters of Sion, but
"the spirit of wisdom and understanding." God's wrath and
vengeance are not mentioned at all, and the author evidently
believes that the spirit of understanding will enable him to en-
dure the suffering caused him by the dark aspect of God. Exactly
who put the anima in the dark prison and who demands her
martyrdom remain obscure. Previously we interpreted imprison-
ment as the state of being projected; but this state cannot be
put down to any human sin, for it is not man's conscious mind
that makes the projection, but rather an unconscious process.
That is why the Gnostics say that Sophia got entangled in
matter through the blandishments of the demon Ialdabaoth;
the cause of the tragedy is a dark aspect of God himself. This
dark aspect remains unmentioned in Aurora, so that the guilt
seems to devolve on man.
then every one that shall be left in Sion shall be called saved, when
the Lord shall have washed away the filth of his daughters of Sion
with the spirit of wisdom and understanding; then will ten acres of
vineyard yield one little measure and thirty bushels of seed yield
three bushels. He that understandeth this shall not be moved for ever.
The motif of "gathering together out of all countries" is
again taken up here, and, as in the earlier passage, the ablution
brings about a unification of the scattered elements. The clos-
ing words of the parable show that what is unified is a plurality
characterized by the number 5 (like the seven daughters of
Sion), which alchemically interpreted refers to the seven metals.
These, as we have said, are identical with the planets, the lords
of Heimarmene. Psychologically they symbolize the collective
constituents of the personality. The uniqueness of the individ-
ual is expressed in the specific pattern of their constellation.
The regulating factor of the constellation is, however, that
supraordinate centre which Jung calls the self. The self is some-
thing unique and individual, and is therefore the psychic factor
which gathers the collective personality components together
in a functional unity. A symbolical illustration of this is the
273AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
saying of St. Gregory that "our Redeemer coming in the flesh
joined together the [seven] Pleiades.” 9? As a symbol of the self,
Christ is the "one man" for whom the seven women longed
(Isaiah 4 : 1). The seven had been mentioned earlier, at the end
of the first parable, as the seven stars that are to be purified
until they appear as "pearls"; this image, too, referred to the
souls of the metals. It is as though the intrapsychic process por-
trayed in the parables had taken a purely circular course, so that
nothing essentially new has been reached in this later phase.
This is reflected in the fact that only seven stars or pearls are
purifed and united—the eighth, which here would be the
longed-for spouse of the seven women, is missing. For the far-
reaching significance of this problem of seven and eight, and
of three and four, I must refer the reader to Jung.**
But who—psychologically considered—would be the missing
spouse of the seven women? Comparison with other alchemical
texts allows of two possibilities: the anima often has an illegiti-
mate lover who personifies the shadow. Thus in The Chymical
Wedding of Christian Rosencreutz the princess is abducted by
a Moor before she wins the king, and in a parable cited by
Jung ® “Sulphur” is the thief who comes between the true
lovers. Whereas the illegitimate lover represents the shadow,
the "true" spouse is the self, with whom the anima is finally
united. In ecclesiastical symbolism this would be the "bride-
groom of the soul," Christ.
In this part of the text it is not clear who the husband of
the seven women will be—moreover the author as speaker has
vanished at this point, and it often looks as though he were
identical with the seven women. This would mean that he had
been overpowered by the unconscious, for when the ego, as
Jung says,9* “proves too weak to offer the necessary resistance
to the influx of unconscious contents" it is "assimilated by the
unconscious, which produces a blurring or darkening of ego-
consciousness and its identification with a preconscious whole-
ness." This seems to me to have happened at times to the author
of Aurora, so that the text often becomes very obscure. In order
63 Moralia, Lib. XXIX in cap. 38 Job, sec. 74 (Eng. edn., III, Part 1, p. 355). *
64 Psychology and Alchemy, index, s.v. “numbers.”
65 Mysterium, pp. 115ft.
66 "On the Nature of the Psyche,” pp. 224f.
274VIII. THE THIRD PARABLE: OF THE GATE OF BRASS...
to get out of the dissociation, as the text says, “the spirit of
understanding” is needed. Then “the filth of the daughters of
Sion” will be washed away. Psychologically this would mean an
integration of the unconscious contents by a suitable view or
interpretation (aqua doctrinae). In a certain sense Aurora is
just such an attempt to understand the influx of archetypal con-
tents by alchemical amplification and to reconcile them with
the ruling Christian ideas. The “spirit of understanding" is
itself an aspect of Wisdom, which helps the author to grasp her
chthonic side. The dissociated components of the personality
are thus "gathered together," and a new conscious standpoint
is won. That is why the text says that "thirty bushels of seed
yield three bushels,” and "he that understandeth this shall not
be moved for ever." The reduction from thirty to three is a
reduction of the plurality to the essential: the chaotic contents
of the unconscious are reduced to their essential expression.
From a concretistic point of view it would certainly be a disap-
pointing harvest if ten acres of vineyard yielded but one little
measure and thirty bushels of seed only three bushels. But just
as wine is the essence of the whole process of viniculture and is
something won by human effort," and as seed contains, in po-
tentia, the essence of a whole field of grain, so this reduction
must be understood as a concentration upon what is essential.
Three and one, moreover, are well-known alchemical formulae
for the wholeness of the central symbol.
The washing of the daughters of Sion with the spirit of
understanding represents not only an attempt to make the
anima conscious and to eliminate her dissociative effect, but
also to work out the hidden meaning of the initial invasion.
The "immovability" thereby gained is the acquisition of a
higher standpoint which includes both conscious and uncon-
scious.? The aim of the unification is to produce the unus
mundus (one world) or res simplex, a theme to which we shall
return later on. The ternary symbolism of thirty and three
67 “The Psychology of the Transference,” par. 478.
68 “Transformation Symbolism in the Mass," p. 221: “The combination of offering
and offerer in the single figure of Christ is implicit in the doctrine that just as
bread is composed of many grains of wheat, and wine of many grapes, so the
mystical body of the Church is made up of a multitude of believers." For bread
and wine as cultural achievements of man, cf. ibid., pp. 252ff.
89 “The Psychology of the Transference,” par. 479.
275AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
forms the theme of the next parable, where the author tries to
regain his conscious, Christian standpoint."?
He that hath ears to hear, let him hear what the spirit of the doctrine
saith to the sons of the discipline concerning the Babylonish cap-
tivity, which endured seventy years, of which the philosophers tell in
these words: Manifold are the alternations of the seventy precepts.
The seventy years of captivity and the seventy precepts are
presumably connected with the seven women (souls of the'
metals) who, psychologically, are the collective constituents of
the personality. At the same time, seventy years represent the
Biblical length of human life. Consequently it is possible that
the process here described corresponds to the living develop-
ment of the human individual. The "manifold alternations” of
the seventy precepts suggest that the working out of the mean-
ing requires a multitude of individual data, and that the sym-
bolic account of the process in alchemical terms stresses only
the essential aspects, whereas actually it follows a devious course
with many ups and downs.
Three and seven (and their multiples by ten) were con-
sidered "masculine" numbers, and their appearance in the text
may be a hint that the work has now entered a phase in which
the masculine consciousness of the author has to reassert itself,
as it clearly does in the next parable.
70 The number 30, as 3 x 10, is assigned by Joachim of Flora to the monastic
orders which build the Ecclesia spiritualis: "For this reason the number ten would
seem to pertain to the married, the number twenty to the clergy: to monks the
number thirty, that is, three tens."* Psalterium decem chordarum (Hahn, III,
P- 331).
276IX. THE FOURTH PARABLE: OF THE
PHILOSOPHIC FAITH...
The fourth parable treats “Of the Philosophic Faith, which con-
sisteth in the number Three," and the opening passage leads,
as we shall see, into a direct paraphrase of the Creed.!
Whosoever shall do the will of my Father and shall cast out this
world into the world, I will give him to sit with me upon the throne
of my kingdom and upon the throne of David and upon the seats of
the tribes of Israel. This is the will of my Father, that they may know
him to be the true God and no other, who giveth abundantly and
upbraideth not, unto all peoples in truth,
"Casting out this world into the world" presumably means
the alchemical processes of purification by which all "super-
fluities" and "accidents" are removed? Only after these unclean
elements have been eliminated can the alchemist be elevated to
the filius Dei who sits upon the throne.
Whereas the alchemist, by implication, is here secretly iden-
tified with the filius philosophorum as in the earlier chapters,
the text now proceeds to give an objective description of the
filius as a trinitarian being.
But even then it is not altogether clear who is actually speak-
ing. In the opening sentences it appears to be Wisdom, who is
identical with Christ; but in the next passage the style becomes
didactic and impersonal. It is rather as if the author were speak-
ing, but in that preaching tone which people drop into who
1 Unfortunately it is not cited literally enough to offer any sure evidence as regards
dating. The idea that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son
(filioque) might be taken as a reference to the Creed of the Lateran Council, 1215,
though it was already implicit in the Athanasian, 381.
2 Mennens, "Aureum vellus," Theatr. chem., V, p. 316: ". . . in that place under
the name of David, speaking of Christ, who saith: I have overcome the world, and
elsewhere: The prince of this world is cast out." *
277AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
think they are announcing a higher metaphysical truth. Obvi-
ously the author has identified himself with the Christian inter-
pretation of the process which he is now putting forward, and
hopes in this way to gain the upper hand of his emotionality.
So I must beg the reader to be patient if the interpretation
of the following passage turns out to be somewhat long-winded.
He is, nevertheless, taking part in that same wearisome process
of elaboration which the author himself attempted in this
parable. :
and his only begotten Son, God of God, light of light, and the Holy
Spirit who proceedeth from both, who is equal in Godhead to the
Father and the Son, for in the Father inhereth eternity, in the Son
equality, in the Holy Spirit the bond of eternity and equality; for as
it is said, Like as the Father is, so is the Son, and so also is the Holy
Spirit, and these three are One, (which the Philosopher would have
to be) body, spirit, and soul, for all perfection consisteth in the num-
ber three, that is, in measure, number and weight.
The most likely source for the last part of this passage is
Senior, who says: ? “Our metal hath, like man, spirit, soul and
body.* ‘Therefore the sages say: three and three are one. Further
they say: in one are three, and: spirit, soul, and body are one,
and all is of One." 5 The divine water, he says, is "one, in which
are three, namely, water, air and fire." 5 Similarly Rosinus
(Zosimos): * "Our stone hath its name in common with the
Creator, for it is triune and one" (triunus et unus). The Car-
mina Heliodori also call the stone triune;? it is a "thrice-
blessed fount,” 1° “one sprout with three faces" (uía $vrXj rpww
mpocómov), Or a “rampart” formed of soul, body and pneuma, this
3 De chemia, pp. 45 and 58.
4 This triad could be compared with the "Comma Johanneum,” infra, p. 289.
5 Senior calls his upper triad an "image of divine spirituality."
6 De chemia, p. 25; cf. p. 58.
7 Art. aurif., I, p. 192 (quotation from Rhazis).
8 This saying probably does go back to Zosimos, who taught (Alch. grecs, III, vi, 18)
that the demiurge created two triads, for which reason he was called Hermes
Trismegistos. The upper triad was indivisible and a monad, active, creative, and
caused the stone to live; the lower was cosmic, divisible, material, consisting of
ore, lead, and the Etesian stone. (Cf. the threefold sonship of Basilides in Mys-
terium, p. 346, and Aion, pp. 64f.)
9 P. 29, and Carmen II, verse 134, p. 38.
10 Carmen II, 85, p. 45.
278IX. THE FOURTH PARABLE: OF THE PHILOSOPHIC FAITH . ..
last being the “third wreath.” '! Christian influences are notice-
able here, and later Petrus Bonus carried the parallel between
this alchemical triad and the Christian trinity still further, ex-
pressly emphasizing the parallel between the lapis and the
“glorified body." !? The same equation is made in Aurora.
The author now cites a further triad: "measure, number,
and weight." In alchemy this would refer to a subtle ‘“‘ponder-
ing" of spiritual and earthly components during the production
of the lapis. Another view worth noting, which may have been
not without influence on the quotations in this parable, is put
forward in St. Augustine's City of God, where he says that a re-
flection of the Trinity is to be found in every creature, namely
essence (Father), knowledge (Son), and love (Holy Spirit).? And
Albertus Magnus says in his "Paradisus animae" (though its
genuineness is disputed): "God's omniscient direction of the
world should lead us to observe measure, since he ordered all
things in measure, number, and weight. In accordance with this
order each of our deeds, our attitude and our life also should
be measured, numbered, and weighed; that is, in the power of
the Father, to whom is attributed measure, in that of the Son,
to whom appertains number, and in that of the Holy Spirit, to
whom is ascribed weight." !* The passage refers to the Wisdom
of Solomon 11:20 (AV): “. . . thou hast ordered all things in
measure, and number, and weight." On this Augustine !5 com-
ments that God created all things in himself, who is number
without number, measure without measure, weight without
weight.$ A not uninteresting explanation is given by the
11 Carm. Archelai," IV, verses 16ff., p. 5o. Cf. “On the Names of the Egg" (Alch.
grecs, I, iii, 13): "If two do not become one, and three do not become one, and
the whole composition does not become one, the expectation [of the philosophers]
will come to nothing."
12 Pret. marg. nov., ed. Lacinius, pp. 171ff. Fuller citation infra, pp. 336, 397f.
For the correspondence between Mercurius and the triune God see "The Spirit
Mercurius," pars. 270ff.
13 The City of God, Book X, ch. 27, Part II, pp. 210ff.: “Of essence, knowledge of
essence, and love of both."
14 Borgnet, XXXVII, p. 466.
15 De Genesi ad litteram, Lib. IV, cap. 9, sec. 8 (Migne, P.L., vol. 34, col. 299).
16 *He created all things in weight, etc., that is, in himself, who is number with-
out number, measure without measure, weight without weight. Or it is otherwise
explained thus: God created all things in number, that is, every number is certain
in his sight, so likewise is the measure of all things certain, and of whatever has
279AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
alchemist William Mennens, who, like Augustine, interpreted
these three principles as instruments, existent and non-existent
at once, by means of which God or Wisdom created the world.!*
It is not yet apparent from this part of the text how the
author suddenly came to speak of the Christian symbol, and his
train of thought will become clearer only in what follows. It is,
however, psychologically meaningful that, after having been
overwhelmed by the flood of unconscious contents, he should
think back to the very foundations of his Christian standpoint,
especially as this would support a masculine-spiritual attitude !*
and bring about a reinforcement of consciousness.
In what follows the author dwells exclusively on one figure
in the Trinity, that is, on the Holy Spirit and his workings.
This is of great significance not only intrinsically, but also as
regards the historical context. Aurora belongs, in my view, to
the thirteenth century, and this was the century in which numer-
ous sects sprang up, all of them, despite their differences, show-
ing the same tendency to give the Holy Spirit a central place
in religious life. The teachings of Joachim of Flora, though
somewhat older in time, exerted a noticeable influence every-
where,!? so that in them we can most easily find traces of what
was obviously pushing up from the unconscious and coming to
light in that age. This, as we have said, showed itself in a sud-
den, intense preoccupation with the third hypostasis of the
Trinity, the Person of the Holy Spirit, and it is no exaggeration
to say that the hallmark of almost all heresies at that time was
an attempt to found a new religion cr church of the Holy
weight, that weight is most certain before him. Or again: In these three, number,
measure, and weight, Holy Writ secks to show that there is nought equal to God.
For number excludes simplicity, measure immensity, weight felicity and stability.
He created all things in number, that is, he created nothing of perfect simplicity;
in measure, that is, he created nothing that is immeasurable; in weight, that is,
he created nothing that can fail of itself or fall from its felicity.” *
17 Theatr. chem., V (1622), p. 319: “Therefore in unity, in a point, and a centre,
which are the three principles of number, measure, and weight (though this is none
of them), are all things created, and though they seem nothing to us, yet before
God and in God they are all things: and therefore is God said to have created all
things from nothing in the beginning, which is a great mystery, namely, the most
holy Trinity and Wisdom itself; for in the centre he sustains all, in the point
fulfils all, and in unity perfects all." *
18 “A Psychological Approach to the Dogma of the Trinity," pp. 193ff.
19 Hahn, Geschichte der Ketzer, II, pp. 450ff. Cf. Aion, pp. 82ff.
280IX. THE FOURTH PARABLE: OF THE PHILOSOPHIC FAITH . ..
Spirit, or a free community in which the main accent lay on the
Paraclete and on the individual who was inspired or guided by
him, and on that individual's interpretation of the Scriptures.
Abbot Joachim of Flora had propounded a doctrine of three
great ages or "estates" (status) as follows: The first was the age
of the Father, when the law of the Old Testament and fear of
God prevailed; this age lasted up to the birth of Christ. The
second was that of the Son or of Wisdom, when the Church and
her sacraments were considered to be the new dispensation; this
was to last until the year 1260.?? But the third age, which would
then dawn, is the age of the Holy Spirit, when the "Ecclesia
contemplativa" will arise, and the Scriptures will be read anew
with "spiritual understanding" and will be taken no longer
literally but symbolically. Then there will be no more fear of
God and no more servitude, nor any subjection to the letter;
but jubilation, love, and liberty shall reign.24 Then shall come
the "Great Sabbath," when the "spirit of truth" teaches men,??
and the "Third Estate" will hold dominion, the monastic orders
and "Poor Men" (Parvuli) who are chosen for the liberty of
contemplation.?? “Then the people of the Gentiles shall be
joined with the people of the Hebrews and there shall be one
flock and one shepherd, and this conjunction is rightly to be
attributed to spiritual men." ?*
20 Cf. Reuter, Geschichte der religiósen Aufkldrung im Mittelalter, YI, pp. 204ff.,
365ff. and notes, concerning the difficult question of authorship. This, however, is
of less interest to us because what is said above undoubtedly gives the substance of
Joachim's thoughts.
21 Expos. in Apocal. (Hahn, III, p. 111): "It seems however that any work pertains
to the Father, reading to the Son, rejoicing to the Holy Spirit: for the fear of
God calls for true servitude to him, and the mastery of Christ the subjection of
doctrine, and the joy of the Holy Spirit the rejoicing of jubilation. . . . Thus
there are three things by which God the Three in One is said to draw near to us:
fear, wisdom, and love, and three through which those three remain in us: work,
reading, and joy." * Cf. Haupt, “Zur Geschichte des Joachimismus,” pp. 372ff.,
and "Zur Geschichte der Sekte vom Freien Geiste und des Beghardentums,"
pp. 503ff.
22 Hahn, III, p. 128: "When that spirit of truth shall come he will teach us all
virtue," etc.
23 Concordia, II, tract. 2: "(The third order) which proceeds from both is chosen
for the liberty of contemplation, the Scripture bearing witness which says: Where
is the Spirit of the Lord, there is liberty." * Hahn, p. 272: “The Holy Spirit
manifests liberty, for he is love." *
24 Concordia, V, cap. 51.*
281AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
This doctrine of Abbot Joachim and others like it, for in-
stance that of Amalric of Bene, who took over much of Joa-
chim's teachings, further state that heaven and hell exist
primarily as realities within the soul. Similar views were held
by David of Dinant and the Poor Men of Lyons, the Tertiaries
or Fratres Minores, the Parvi, Fratres Spirituales, and also by
the Lollards, Beguines and Beghards, and the "Friends of God
in the Rhineland." Almost all of them turned against the visible
Roman Church, and these sects must therefore be regarded as
pre-Reformation reform movements. Joachim’s doctrine was
even taken over officially by a stricter sect of the Franciscan
Order, and in 1254 was officially proclaimed in Paris in the
form of the "Introductorius in Evangelium Aeternum.”? ? A
year later it was condemned by Pope Alexander IV.?' The teach-
ings of these Tertiaries were as follows: ?* the end of the world
was coming now, and only the Third Order among the Fran-
ciscans, called the Fratres Spirituales or Beguines of the Third
Order, would survive it.?? The secular Church would then be
repudiated and a new Church established which would be
humble and a true Ecclesia spiritualis.??
The strong emphasis on the Holy Spirit and on the revela-
tion wrought by him in the individual, and on the symbolic
interpretation of the Scriptures, led many other sects to repudi-
ate the existing Church in favour of an Ecclesia spiritualis,
which was to consist of individuals whom the Holy Spirit had
inspired.?! The Poor Men of Lyons or "Humiliati" even went
25 Caesarius of Heisterbach, Dialogus miraculorum, Distinctio V, 22.
26 Hahn, II, pp. 426ff.
21 Ibid., III, pp. 159ff.
28 II, pp. 437ff. 29 IT, p. 438. 80 II, p. 438, n.
31See Hahn, II, pp. 358f. on the “Friends of God,” and I, pp. 53f. on the
"Ortlibarii." Cf. also an earlier, typical document of a neo-Manichaean sect cited
by Hahn (I, p. 36) from D'Achery, Spicilegium, II (Mansi, Sacrorum Conciliorum
nova et amplissima collectio, XIX, cols. 376f.): “Thou shalt be sprinkled with the
waters of wisdom, until thou art instructed, and by the sword of God's word art
able to dispense with the thorns of vices, and after foolish doctrine hath been
driven out of thy breast, thou art able to receive in purity of mind our heavenly
teaching handed down from the Holy Spirit . . . indeed they surely open to thee
the dregs of their wickedness covered hitherto by the words of the divine books
. . . doubtless thou hast lain hitherto in the Charybdis of false opinion with the
unlearned; but now, raised up unto the summit of all truth, thou hast begun to
open the eyes of thy whole mind to the light of the true faith . . . and thou shalt
282IX. THE FOURTH PARABLE: OF THE PHILOSOPHIC FAITH ... so far as to say that the individual soul of every good man was
the Holy Spirit himself.?? "The Brethren of the Free Spirit like-
wise taught that the human soul was of the substance of God,*? and that man together with his body can become God—to the
point, indeed, where he does not need God any longer.*4
As Jung has shown in Zion; the spiritual assumptions of
the alchemists have a great affinity with the ideas current in
these movements, for they identified their lumen naturale with
the hypostasis of the Holy Spirit. The—possibly genuine—trea-
tise "De alchemia" of Albertus Magnus offers one of the earliest
examples of this. It is therefore not surprising if we find notable
alchemists of that time among the mendicant orders or sects
we have mentioned: for instance, Johannes de Rupescissa (Jean
de Roquetaillade) among the Poor Men of Lyons;?9 Roger
be filled with the gift of the Holy Spirit, who will teach thee without scruple
the depth and true dignity of all these scriptures." * Another sect at Montfort
taught, like the Ortlibarii (Hahn, I, pp. 39 and 53f.), a mystic interpretation of
the Scriptures, and interpreted the mysteries of faith as inner processes: "But
then the Son of God is crucified and scourged . . . then does the Son die when
any of them falls into mortal sin or returns from the sect: but he rises again
through penance." * Or the heretics of Montfort (Hahn, I, p. 42), who held that
the Father is God, the Son the human spirit beloved of God, and the Holy Ghost
the understanding of the Scriptures. 32 As transmitted by one Stephen of Borbone (Hahn, II, p. 266, n. 3, and pp. 267f.). 33 Preger, Geschichte der Mystik im Mittelalter, I, p. 462f. (also pp. 14, 37). Cf. Hahn, II, p.AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
This doctrine of Abbot Joachim and others like it, for in-
stance that of Amalric of Bene, who took over much of Joa-
chim's teachings, further state that heaven and hell exist
primarily as realities within the soul. Similar views were held
by David of Dinant and the Poor Men of Lyons, the Tertiaries
or Fratres Minores, the Parvi, Fratres Spirituales, and also by
the Lollards, Beguines and Beghards, and the "Friends of God
in the Rhineland." Almost all of them turned against the visible
Roman Church, and these sects must therefore be regarded as
pre-Reformation reform movements. Joachim’s doctrine was
even taken over officially by a stricter sect of the Franciscan
Order, and in 1254 was officially proclaimed in Paris in the
form of the "Introductorius in Evangelium Aeternum.”? ? A
year later it was condemned by Pope Alexander IV.?' The teach-
ings of these Tertiaries were as follows: ?* the end of the world
was coming now, and only the Third Order among the Fran-
ciscans, called the Fratres Spirituales or Beguines of the Third
Order, would survive it.?? The secular Church would then be
repudiated and a new Church established which would be
humble and a true Ecclesia spiritualis.??
The strong emphasis on the Holy Spirit and on the revela-
tion wrought by him in the individual, and on the symbolic
interpretation of the Scriptures, led many other sects to repudi-
ate the existing Church in favour of an Ecclesia spiritualis,
which was to consist of individuals whom the Holy Spirit had
inspired.?! The Poor Men of Lyons or "Humiliati" even went
25 Caesarius of Heisterbach, Dialogus miraculorum, Distinctio V, 22.
26 Hahn, II, pp. 426ff.
21 Ibid., III, pp. 159ff.
28 II, pp. 437ff. 29 IT, p. 438. 80 II, p. 438, n.
31See Hahn, II, pp. 358f. on the “Friends of God,” and I, pp. 53f. on the
"Ortlibarii." Cf. also an earlier, typical document of a neo-Manichaean sect cited
by Hahn (I, p. 36) from D'Achery, Spicilegium, II (Mansi, Sacrorum Conciliorum
nova et amplissima collectio, XIX, cols. 376f.): “Thou shalt be sprinkled with the
waters of wisdom, until thou art instructed, and by the sword of God's word art
able to dispense with the thorns of vices, and after foolish doctrine hath been
driven out of thy breast, thou art able to receive in purity of mind our heavenly
teaching handed down from the Holy Spirit . . . indeed they surely open to thee
the dregs of their wickedness covered hitherto by the words of the divine books
. . . doubtless thou hast lain hitherto in the Charybdis of false opinion with the
unlearned; but now, raised up unto the summit of all truth, thou hast begun to
open the eyes of thy whole mind to the light of the true faith . . . and thou shalt
282

Cf. Hahn, II, p. 267: "Likewise, the spirit of man, in so far as he is good, if he die, is
the same as the spirit of God, and is itself God." * “Also, this is the Trinity which
or in which they believe: that he is the Father who turns another to good; he
who is turned, the Son; that by which he is turned and into which he is turned,
the Holy Spirit." * They held that the Incarnation was not a proven historical
fact, but was an inner process in man (p. 268). 34'The ethical attitude among these sects varied from religious rigorism to com-
plete amorality in accordance with the dictum: "Where the spirit is, there is lib-
erty.” Thus the Amalricians said: “If anyone who is in the spirit commits
fornication, or is polluted with any other pollution, it is no sin in him, for that
spirit, which is God, altogether separated from the flesh, cannot sin." * (Hahn, II,
pp. 470ff.; cf. I, p. 403.) The Brethren of the Free Spirit said that a man who was
united with God could no longer sin, since he became God or the divine soul
itself. (Preger, I, p. 462, nos. 15 and 21.) On the other hand, the utmost moral
rigour prevailed among the Brethren of the Free Spirit (Hahn, II, pp. 450ff.). 35 Pp. 86, 150. 36 They, too, favoured a spiritual interpretation of the Bible (Hahn, II, pp. 256£). They had affinities with the Waldensians of Piedmont,
283AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
Bacon among the Franciscans,37 Raymund Lully ** among the
Franciscan Tertiaries, who at that time had not yet dropped
away from the Church, and Albertus Magnus among the
Dominicans.??
We may regard the followers of the Holy Ghost movements,
and also these alchemists, as forerunners of our modern psy-
chology of the unconscious in that they went beyond mere
belief in the contents of religion and sought to obtain indi-
vidual experience of them. What they called the "spirit in
matter" or the "Paraclete," we today call the guiding function
of the unconscious, which is experienced as "meaning." *? ‘The
psychological significance of this shift of accent to the third Per-
son of the Trinity presents such a deep and far-reaching prob-
lem that I must refer the reader to Jung’s discussion of it in
“A Psychological Approach to the Dogma of the Trinity.” If I
cite here some of his views, I do so in full awareness that I am
tearing them out of their context, so that what follows should
be taken as a mere sketch. Jung states that "Father," conceived
psychologically as a symbol, "denotes the earlier state of con-
sciousness when one was still a child, still dependent on a defi-
nite, ready-made pattern of existence which is habitual and has
the character of law. It is a passing, unreflecting condition, a
mere awareness of wbat is given, without intellectual or moral
judgment." But "the picture changes when the accent shifts to
the son.” The situation then calls for "conscious differentiation
from the father and from the habitus represented by him. This
requires a certain amount of knowledge of one's own indi-
viduality, which cannot be acquired without moral discrimina-
tion and cannot be held on to unless one has understood its
meaning. Habit can only be replaced by a mode of life con-
sciously chosen and acquired. The Christianity symbolized by
the ‘Son’ therefore forces the individual to discriminate and to
reflect.” “The third step, finally, points beyond the ‘Son’ into
37 For his allegorical interpretation of the Bible and his belief in alchemy see his
, Opus minus (ed. Brewer), p. 359.
38 The extant alchemical writings of Lully have not been examined for their
authenticity.
39 Thorndike, History of Magic, II, pp. 522ff. Cf. Aion, p. 87.
40 In his "Liber de spiritu et anima" Joachim of Flora attempted a psychological
interpretation of the Trinity symbol, thus clearly expressing the trend of the age.
Cf. Aion, p. 253.
284IX. THE FOURTH PARABLE: OF THE PHILOSOPHIC FAITH ..
the future, to a continuing realization of the ‘spirit,’ i.e., a liv-
ing activity proceeding from ‘Father’ and ‘Son.’” The “Son”
represents a transition stage and a state of conflict; not only is it
in opposition to the still-existing earlier state, but freedom from
the law brings a sharpening of the moral opposites. In the third
stage the patriarchal initial state is, in a sense, re-established,
but this is not just a repetition of the first stage, for the values
of the second must be held fast. “Though the new level of con-
sciousness acquired through the emancipation of the son con-
tinues in the third stage, it must recognize that it is not the
source of the ultimate decisions and flashes of insight which
rightly go by the name of 'gnosis, but that these are inspired
by a higher authority which, in projected form, is known as the
‘Holy Ghost.’ Psychologically speaking, ‘inspiration’ comes from
an unconscious function. . . . Accordingly, the advance to the
third stage means something like a recognition of the uncon-
scious, if not actual subordination to it." The transitions from
one stage to another are—as Jung emphasizes—'"very fateful
transformations indeed. Usually they have a numinous char-
acter, and can take the form of conversions, illuminations, emo-
tional shocks, blows of fate, religious or mystical experiences." €!
Just such an experience is described in Aurora; moreover,
it is a description of the transition from the second to the third
stage, which is why the recognition of the Holy Spirit occupies
a central place. The author has experienced something that
caused him, willy-nilly, to be seized by the Holy Spirit, just as
had happened to many other men of his time.
A later passage in Aurora, where the "parvuli" (little ones,
children) are mentioned as those who are chosen for the opus,*”
suggests that the author may have belonged to, or been con-
nected with, one of the mendicant orders. He does not seem to
have been hostile to the Church, but to have felt it possible
to reconcile his views with tradition. If Thomas Aquinas were
to be considered the author, it should be pointed out that
though he rejected in part the teachings of Joachim of Flora,*?
he expressly warned against a too rigorous and summary con-
demnation of his views.**
41 “Dogma of the Trinity,” pp. 181ff. 42 Infra, pp. 327f.; supra, p. 105.
43 4 Sent., dist. 49, p. 4, col. II ad 3 (Paris edn., vol. 11, p. 284).
44 Infra, p. 421, n. 6.
285AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
From this historical standpoint, therefore, it is well worth
while examining the conception of the Holy Spirit in Aurora
more closely.
For the Father is of none, the Son is of the Father, the Holy Spirit
proceedeth from both; for to the Father is attributed wisdom, by
which he ruleth and sweetly disposeth all things, whose ways are un-
searchable and his judgments incomprehensible. To the Son is at-
tributed Truth, for he in his appearing took upon him that which he
was not, subsisting perfect God and man of human flesh and reason-
able soul, who at the behest of the Father with the co-operation of the
Holy Spirit restored the world lost by the sin of the first parents.
The Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son be-
cause, according to the text, wisdom is an attribute of the
Father, and truth of the Son.*® The Holy Spirit is therefore a
combination of Wisdom with the incarnate Truth, so that once
again we can plainly discern his connection with Wisdom who
was defined in the beginning as “most true nature.” The Holy
Spirit, as conceived in dogma, has here acquired a feminine and
material character. It should be noted, however, that Scotus
Erigena regarded the “mind of God” as a sort of anima mundi,
and that, in consequence, even in the realm of ecclesiastical
ideas the Holy Spirit, though not actually identified with the
anima mundi, was nevertheless compared with it. Thus Hono-
rius of Autun says: ** “In the view of certain persons, the anima
mundi is the Holy Spirit, for through God's goodness and will
(which is the Holy Spirit) lives everything that exists in the
world. Others name the anima mundi a natural vigour 47 which
was implanted in things by God, and by which the many crea-
tures live, feel, and think. . . . Yet others name the anima
mundi an incorporeal substance which is entire in all bodies,
albeit that, on account of the inertia of many bodies, it does
45 Honorius identifies the Father with the potentia divina, the Son with Sapientia
Dei, and the Holy Spirit with God's will. De philosophia mundi (Migne, P.L.,
vol. 172, col. 45). Cf. Joachim of Flora, Psalterium decem chordarum (Hahn, III,
p. 338): "Some . . . attributed power to the Father . . . and wisdom to the Son
. will or love to the Holy Spirit." * P. 327: “The Holy Ghost enkindles us
with the fire of love . . .” * P. 321: "He is that light which enlightens every man
coming into this world and proceeds as that warmth which quickens all things." *
46 Migne, P.L., vol. 172, col. 46.
41 'This view goes back to the Stoics.
286IX. THE FOURTH PARABLE: OF THE PHILOSOPHIC FAITH .
not work and create equally in all." ** The conception of the
Holy Spirit in Aurora comes close to these ideas of an anima
mundi immanent in matter.
To the Holy Spirit is attributed Goodness, through whom earthly
things become heavenly, and this in threefold wise: by baptizing in
water, in blood, and in fire;
As in Honorius of Autun, so here the Holy Spirit possesses
"goodness," and through him “earthly things become heavenly."
In the previous passage there was an allusion to the incarnation.
In the incarnation something heavenly and spiritual became
earthly, and now the text emphasizes that at the same time a bit
of earthly humanity became heavenly, i.e., was spiritualized. For
an alchemist this was a clear allusion to the oft-repeated saying
of Maria Prophetissa that one should make the corporeal in-
corporeal, the incorporeal corporeal, whereby the two become
one.*? The alchemical background of this part of the text, with
its seemingly dogmatic statements, is clearly revealed in the
continuation of the parable, where the three workings of the
Holy Spirit are described.
in water by quickening and cleansing, when he washeth away all
defilements and driveth out murkiness from souls, as it is said: ‘Thou
dost fecundate the waters to give life to souls. For water is the nour-
ishment of all living things,
'The whole water symbolism of the preceding parables is
recapitulated in this reference to baptism: water quickens and
cleanses souls. Even if by "souls" are meant the souls of the
metals, the allusion to Notker Balbulus (Hymn for Pente-
cost) * and to the Missal immediately puts the chemical
ablutio in a religious setting. Once more the artifex has got
inextricably involved in the chemical process. The water of the
Holy Spirit washes away the “squalores et fumositates,” the
superfluous dross which in other treatises is called sulphur,
48 These pantheistic tendencies may be compared with the teachings of David of
Dinant. (Preger, Geschichte der Mystik, IL, pp. 76 and 462.)
49 Cited in Olympiodorus (Alch. grecs, II, iv, 40): "Unless you make the corporeal
incorporeal, the incorporeal corporeal, and the two one, your expectation will
come to nothing." *
50 “Thou givest to the waters virtue to quicken souls: thou, by thine inspiration,
grantest to men to be living spirits." Neale, Collected Hymns, p. 20.
287AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
the thief, etc, and whose psychological significance as the
shadow Jung discusses.*! The water has a purifying effect because,
the text says, it contains the spirit of God, which moved over the
waters at the Creation and fecundated them. As the ensuing
quotation from Psalm 103: 30-32 shows, the water is nothing
less than the spirit of God itself, which renews the face of the
earth and makes it to tremble. From this it is clear that the
author completely identifies the Holy Spirit, personified Wis-
dom, and the spirit of God indwelling in the baptismal water
with the divine water of the alchemical opus. 'T'his water is also
the nourishing ground-substance of all concrete organic phe-
nomena. At the same time it is the aqua fortis which dissolves
the metals.®?
whence when water cometh down from heaven it plentifully watereth
the earth, and the earth by it receiveth strength which can dissolve
every metal, wherefore it beseecheth him saying: Send forth thy
Spirit, that is water, and they shall be created, and thou shalt renew
the face of the earth, for he breatheth upon the earth when he maketh
it to tremble, and he toucheth the mountains and they smoke.
These ablutions, dissolutions, and upheavals have, as it were,
answered the prayer of the anima when she was imprisoned in
the centre of the earth: the breaking of the barriers of hell. In
psychological terms, what had solidified into fixed, unshakable
convictions—more, the whole personality—is loosened up and
opens itself to new realities: the ego makes ready to receive the
influences of the self.
The ablutio and solutio are followed by the nutritio, which,
like them, is described as the action of the Holy Spirit or divine
water.
And when he baptizeth with blood, then he nourisheth, as it is said:
He gave me to drink of the saving water of wisdom, and again: His
blood is drink indeed, for the seat of the soul is in the blood, as
Senior saith: But the soul itself remained in water, which is like to
it in warmth and humidity, and therein consisteth all life.
The quotation from Ecclus. 15: 3, "She gave him the water
of wholesome wisdom to drink," shows that blood and water
51 Mysterium, pp. 192ff., 235ff.
52 Turba (p. 218) says that just as man has air in him as a life-principle (breath),
so the ore possesses a "humour" which, when it solidifies into the lapis, can dis-
solve every metal.
288IX. THE FOURTH PARABLE: OF THE PHILOSOPHIC FAITH . .
are synonyms for the aqua Sapientiae. 'This passage refers to
the so-called “comma Johanneum": "For there are three that
bear witness in heaven: the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Spirit; and these three are one. And there are three that bear
witness on earth: the Spirit, and the water, and the blood; and
these three are one." 5 Whereas in the Bible a heavenly and
an earthly triunity are contrasted with one another, in Aurora
they are identified—which means that the metaphysical entities
have been drawn into the human sphere, into the unconscious
psyche (in so far as blood is the seat of the anima vegetativa).
‘Thus man himself becomes the psychic carrier of the trinitarian
symbol; in other words, the ordinary man, the artifex, is assimi-
lated to God. The author even dares to identify the alchemical
blood-water with the blood of Christ, as the quotation from
John 6 : 55 shows.5* The nourishment of the stone therefore has
the “human” aspect of a communion with the Godhead, thanks
to the mediation of the soul-containing blood,55 or as we should
say, the unconscious psyche. Just as Christ the exemplar gave
his blood for mankind, so also the alchemist gives his blood,
not to man but to the stone; and the fact that he can do this
he feels is a gift or working of the Holy Spirit. Psychologically
it would mean that the "spirit" of the unconscious, that is, its
inspiring and guiding function, has led him to give himself
with his whole being to the "production" of the self (i.e., its
conscious realization), during which process the self is "nour-
ished" by him like a child.*®
The nourishment of the lapis by water (or milk) and blood
is then followed by its quickening.
531 John 5: 7-8. This is probably a late interpolation. Cf. “A Psychological Ap-
proach to the Dogma of the Trinity," p. 138n.
54 "For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed.”
55 In the T'urba (p. 129) the divine water is interpreted as "spiritual blood," also
in the Book Al-Habib (ibid., pp. 42£), which says: "You must learn the power of
the permanent water ... because its power is a spiritual blood .. . and it
changes the body into spirit . . . so that the body which then comes into being is
spiritual and coloured like blood, for everything that the soul possesses, the blood
possesses also." For the Greek alchemists, too, blood was a synonym for the divine
water. Cf. Olympiodorus in Alch. grecs, II, iv, 38 and 44, and Zosimos, ibid., III,
xliii, 5.
56 Cf. Jung's commentary on Dorn's text in Mysterium, pp. 485f. where the union
of mind with body is produced by the admixture, among other things, of human
blood.
289AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
But when he baptizeth in flame, then he infuseth the soul and giveth
perfection of life, for fire giveth form and completeth the whole, as
it is said: He breathed into his face the breath of life, and man, who
was aforetime dead, became a living soul.
The same is said in "Exercitationes in Turbam XV”: “And
in the end of those days God poured out the blessing of the
human seed, that is, the soul or life." 5* The three stages are
also said to correspond to an addition of milk (= water), blood .
(= “our salt"), and flesh (= anima or rex), the latter being added
over a "moderate fire." The last stage, as we have seen,?? is an
incarnation and a quickening at once. Our text therefore men-
tions, as the third working of the Holy Spirit, the quickening
of Adam in Genesis 2:7, and this is followed by the famous
saying from Calid about the nourishing of the foetus by water,
air, and fire, each time for three months.5??
Of the first, second, and third the philosophers bear witness, saying:
For three months water nourisheth the foetus in the womb, air
nourisheth it for the second three, fire also guardeth it for the third
three. The infant will never come to birth until these months are
expired, then it is born and quickened by the sun, for that is the
quickener of all things that are dead.
In Greek alchemy this third stage would be that of the
avalwripwors, “quickening by fire," and of the resurrection of
the dead (rà vexpa oeópara éjujvxosrra)).9? The quickening in our
text is effected by the sun, "the quickener of all things." In some
authors the quickening by fire is a parallel process to the whiten-
ing.®! Zosimos, for instance, says: "The whitening is a burn-
ing, and this is a quickening by fire; for it (the substance) con-
sumes itself in itself and quickens itself by fire and fertilizes
57 Art. aurif., I, p. 117.* Cf. on the other hand the Christian equation of blood,
water, and spirit, documented by Rahner in "Flumina de ventre Christi," p. 277
and especially pp. 370-71, 373, 381. Honorius, Speculum (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, col.
910) says that the Church was formed from the water and blood that flowed from
the wound in Christ's side: "She is redeemed with blood, she is washed with
water." 58 Supra, p. 264.
59 See supra, pp. 85-87, quotations from Senior in nn, 22-25. Cf. further Senior,
De chemia, pp. 87f., Berthelot, La Chimie au moyen áge, III, pp. 92, 97, 109, Lipp-
mann, Alchemie, I, p. 47, and Tabula Smaragdina, pp. 3ff., where the lapis is
called a “cosmic” child.
60 Alch. grecs, III, lvi, 2 and 3, and III, viii, 2: “Deny not resurrection to the dead."
61 Ibid., III, xl, 2.
290IX. THE FOURTH PARABLE: OF THE PHILOSOPHIC FAITH ...
itself and impregnates itself and gives birth to the living being
(Gov) desired by the philosophers." In the fire of the matrix
the organism receives "colour, shape and extension," and is
then visibly born.® Similarly, Komarios says that the fire brings
about a ripening and transfiguration of the elements and
"changes the material into a divine being, for it is nourished in
the fire as the embryo little by little grows in the womb." ®
The material rises up "with natural life like a child from the
womb. . . . For the art imitates the growth of a child, and
when it is perfected in all—behold, that is the sealed mystery." 9*
In Aurora the quickening is effected not by the fire alone but,
as in Genesis 2 : 7, by the breath of God, by his pneuma, with
which the human soul was held to be consubstantial. The soul
was also conceived as a vapour or steam.® ‘This agrees with the
Stoic conception of the soul as an áva6vpíaess, bubbling up or
exhalation of the blood,® or as air ** or warm pneuma,® which
was the very fine substance of God and caused in man “en-
thusiasm" (lit. inspiration by the god) and the "airy phantoms
of dreams." In Simon Magus air is the intermediary between
spirit and earth; "in it is the father who sustains, nourishes, and
safeguards all things." *? Similar views are reflected in a Her-
metic fragment: the heated material turns to fire and water,
62 III, xliii, 5. Cf. III, vi, 17, Moyen dge, III, p. 98, and Reitzenstein, “Alche-
mistische Lehrschriften," pp. 75 and 83.
63 Alch. grecs, IV, xx, 10. Cf. Carmina Heliodori, pp. 28ff.
64 Alch. grecs, Textes, p. 338, and V, iii. Cf. Senior, De chemia, pp. 16, 19, 30, 44,
58£., 77; Turba, pp. 137f., 163. 65 Turba, p. 142.
66 Aristotle, De anima, I, 2, 405 (Foster and Humphries trans, p. 77); Areios
Didymos, 39, 2 in Diels, Doxographi, p. 471; Chrysippus, cited in Galen, De
placitis Hippocratis et Platonis, Book III, pp. 249ff.; Diogenes Laertius, 7, 156
(Loeb edn.), II, pp. 260f.; Macrobius, Somn. Scip., I, 14, 19; Tertullian, De anima,
5 (Writings, II, p. 419); Plotinus, 4. 7. 4 (Enneads, p. 344); Alexander of Aphrodisias,
De anima, 26, 13 (ed. Bruns, p. 3, line 18); Nemesius, De natura hominis, cap. 2
(Scott, Hermetica, III, p. 612).
67 Lippmann, I, p. 133. 68 Leisegang, Der heilige Geist, pp. 26ff.
69 Leisegang, Gnosis, p. 81. Cf. Didymus of Alexandria, De trinitate, Lib. II, cap.
27 (Migne, P.G., vol. 39, col. 756). (Scott, I, p. 542.) The pneuma is the yévimor &v
("one thing that is fecund"). In the Latin Asclepius (Scott, ibid.), air is the uni-
versal instrument by which all things come into being and which holds every-
thing together, mortal and immortal, since the breath of the spirit moves the
whole world. Ephraem Syrus (I, col. 16) praises the air because it is pure enough
to penetrate everything and even saw the Lord formed in the womb. (Cf. Calid's
words!)
291AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
then the fire dries the water, and earth is formed. Steam from
fire, earth, and water produces air. All come together **accord-
ing to the Logos of harmony," and from the combined breath
of the opposed qualities arises a pneuma and sperma that cor-
responds to the divine pneuma. "From this creative pneuma the
child is formed in the matrix.’ A similar description of
the formation of a "child" from cosmic elements is found in the
Logos vision of the Gnostic Valentinus:
"I behold how all things in the
aether are mixed with pneuma.
Isee in spirit how all things
are sustained by pneuma:
Flesh hangs itself upon soul,
Soul is upborne by air,
Air hangs itself upon aether.
Fruits rise up from the depth,
A child is lifted from the womb." ™
A further parallel is the vision in II Esdras 13: 1-4: “And
it came to pass after seven days, I dreamed a dream by night.
And lo, there arose a wind from the sea, that it moved all the
waves thereof. And I beheld, and, lo, that man flew with the
clouds of heaven; 72 and when he turned his countenance to
look, all things trembled that were seen under him. And when-
soever the voice went out of his mouth, all they burned that
heard his voice, like as the earth when it feeleth the fire." 7 As
Reitzenstein observes, individual features of this description
can be found in Manichaeism.'* Thus, at the ascension of
Shitil, it was said that the winds had fetched him away, storms
had lifted him up in a cloud of light; and in a poem the Mani-
chaean Original Man says: *
70 Scott, I, p. 438; Stobaeus, Anthologium, I. 41. 7.
71 Cited from Leisegang, Gnosis, p. 283. Cf. Hippolytus’ interpretation of this
passage (ibid.). It is related of Simon Magus that he created a homunculus by
letting human pneuma congeal into water and then into blood and then into
"flesh." (Lippmann, I, p. 224.)
72 AV: “waxed strong with the thousands of heaven."
73 Charles, Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha, I, p. 616.
74 Erlósungsmysterium, pp. 121f.
75 Ibid., pp. 49f. Cf. the early Christian apocryphon in Solomon of Basra, The
Book of the Bee (ed. Budge), p. 81: “At the end of time, and at the final dissolu-
292IX. THE FOURTH PARABLE: OF THE PHILOSOPHIC FAITH . ..
"Iam a great Mana,
I who dwelt in the sea;
I dwelt in the sea
Until I was given wings,
Until I became a winged one
And lifted up my wings
to the place of light."
Again, in the Carmina Heliodori™ it is said that the lapis
remains "hidden in the womb for a long time and calls for
deliverance like a treasure in the depth. ... He is found
wherever men dwell, he rises up from the sea into the clouds
and strides over the sea in a garment of clouds . . . and he sits
in the cloud like a light smoke lifted up by an inward fire." **
The same thing is meant by the celebrated saying from the
Tabula Smaragdina: “The wind hath carried it in his belly."
Such was the alchemical background to which the author
of Aurora alludes when he makes the baptism by the Holy
Spirit in water, blood, and fire end with Calid's description of
the lapis as a foetus nourished by water, air, and fire. It appears,
however, that the three protecting elements are really one, that
they form a triunity in accordance with the “Philosophic Faith,
which consisteth in the number Three.” The triad of elements
is not always clearly established in the text, which speaks now
of water, blood, and fire and now of water, air, and fire. In both
cases earth is missing. This is psychologically significant. Look-
ing back over the inner development which has taken place in
the course of the parables, we can observe a gradual shifting of
the centre of gravity towards the conscious side. The image of
Wisdom in her light as well as her chthonic aspect ("the woman
tion, a child shall be conceived in the womb of a virgin. . . . And he shall be
like a tree . . . laden with fruit . . . then he will come with the armies of light
and be borne aloft upon white clouds; for he is a child conceived by the Word
which establishes the natures."
16 P. 28, verses 7off.
77 Cf. Senior, De chemia, pp. 16-19 and go: '"They mean therefore by the medi-
ating air . . . that the son of Wisdom is born in the air, when it is sublimed in
the alembic. Wherefore the water quickens their earth and the embryo, which is
earth, which is the soul from their bodies." * Cf. p. 44.
293AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
who brought in death") has receded, and the contamination of
conscious and unconscious which the irruption of her image
occasioned has been largely removed by the "gathering to-
gether” and ablution, and by the “spirit of understanding." The
same numinous factor that was previously designated by the
name of Wisdom" has been superseded by—or has coalesced
with—the hypostasis of the Holy Spirit, whose workings the
author now praises. Dirt and the world are cast out, and the
identity of the alchemist with the filius philosophorum, which
had often struck us before, seems no longer to exist. It is as
though, through the insight afforded by the traditional alchem-
ical symbolism, the author were able to stand off from his ex-
perience. After having been initially overwhelmed by the spate
of unconscious contents, he seems gradually to have arrived at
a conscious standpoint and found inner peace. In this he was
helped by the ternary structure of his philosophic credo; for, as
Jung has pointed out, a ternary pattern of order fosters an
emancipation of consciousness from mere nature. ““The Trinity
is an archetype whose dominating power not only fosters spiritual
development but may, on occasion, enforce it." ** But threeness
is not a natural expression for wholeness as compared with the
quaternity.”®
This is due to the structure of our consciousness, which
seems to be made up of four orienting functions, of which
on average three at most are at our conscious disposal. The
fourth or “inferior” function is usually in an undeveloped
state, is contaminated with the unconscious, and shows primi-
tive, archaic features. At the same time, it is the connecting-
link with the collective unconscious and with its immense net-
work of symbolic meanings and associations.*!
Thus, if we correlate the alchemical quaternity of elements
with the four psychological functions, the absence of the ele-
ment earth would lead us to conclude that one of the author’s
four functions has remained in the unconscious. The absence
of this particular element would mean specifically that the re-
78 “A Psychological Approach to the Dogma of the Trinity,” p. 193.
79 Ibid., p. 167.
80 Psychological Types (1923 edn.), pp. 428ff., and “Dogma of the Trinity,” pp.
165f.
81 "Dogma of the Trinity," p. 121.
294IX. THE FOURTH PARABLE: OF THE PHILOSOPHIC FAITH . ..
lationship to materiality and the concrete world is lacking.9??
We must therefore assume that the solution of the problem as
presented in this part of Aurora has more the character of a
spiritual intuition, but that complete individual realization is
not yet possible.
The difficulty of bringing the alchemical quaternity of ele-
ments into harmony with the Christian conception of the
Trinity is yet another example of that common vacillation be-
tween three and four, of which Jung says: *? "It must be stressed
that side by side with the distinctive leanings of alchemy (and
of the unconscious) towards quaternity there is always a vacilla-
tion between three and four which comes out over and over
again. . . . In alchemy there are three as well as four regimina
or procedures, three as well as four colours. There are always
four elements, but often three of them are grouped together,
with the fourth in a special position—sometimes earth, some-
times fire. . . . This uncertainty has a duplex character—in
other words, the central ideas are ternary as well as quaternary.
The psychologist cannot but mention that a similar puzzle exists
in the psychology of the unconscious: the least differentiated or
‘inferior’ function is so much contaminated with the collective
unconscious that, on becoming conscious, it brings up among
others the archetype of the self as well. . . . Four signifies the
feminine, motherly, physical; three the masculine, fatherly,
spiritual. Thus the uncertainty as to three or four amounts to
a wavering between the spiritual and the physical." 9*
82 Pp. 122f. Cf. Jung's argument that trinitarian thinking not only corresponded
to a patriarchal order of society but enabled the human mind to “think in oppo-
sition to nature, thus demonstrating its godlike freedom" (p. 176). The Pythag-
orean quaternity, on the other hand, was a "purely naturalistic, intuitive idea
born of the nature-bound mind” (ibid.). “The quaternity schema . . . [fetters]
trinitarian thinking to the reality of this world" (p. 178). The Fourth always
brings up the problem of "realization," i.e., worldly materiality (p. 171).
83 Psychology and Alchemy, par. 31.
84 As Jung has shown, trinitarian thinking entails a dissociation of the fourth,
“inferior” function: “This peculiar dissociation is, it seems, a product of civiliza-
tion, and it denotes a freeing of consciousness from any excessive attachment to
the 'spirit of gravity.' If that function, which is still bound indissolubly to the
past and whose roots reach back as far as the animal kingdom, can be left behind
and even forgotten, then consciousness has won for itself a new and not entirely
illusory freedom. It can leap over abysses on winged feet; it can free itself from
bondage to sense-impressions, emotions, fascinating thoughts and presentiments
by soaring into abstraction." ("Dogma of the Trinity," pp. 165f£.)
295AURORA CONSURGENS >: COMMENTARY
Turning back to our text, we see that the author's prefer-
ence for a ternary formulation of his credo coincides with the
disappearance of the feminine figure of Wisdom and her re-
placement by the masculine hypostasis of the Holy Spirit. The
identity of the two is evidenced, among other things, by the
fact that both—first Wisdom and now the Holy Spirit—are iden-
tified with the saving water of the art.
The hypostasis of the Holy Spirit has in the course of his-
tory often showed a tendency to become feminine. He was even
interpreted as the mother of Christ, but that, as Jung says,
"would merely have kept him within the archaic family-picture,
within the tritheism and polytheism of the patriarchal world." 55
On the other hand, in the official tradition of the Church he
represents the breath of life and of love between Father and
Son, and is thus "essentially . . . an hypostatized noumenon
tacked on to the natural family-picture of father and son." 59
In that form he is “psychologically heterogeneous in that he
cannot be logically derived from the father-son relationship and
can only be understood as an idea introduced by a process of
human reflection." 5* Not only is he the life common to Father
and Son, he is also the Paraclete whom the Son left behind
him, to procreate in man and bring forth works of divine
parentage.” 55 “Just as the Holy Ghost is a legacy left to man,
so, conversely, the concept of the Holy Ghost is something be-
gotten by man and bears the stamp of its human progenitor.
... The Trinity, therefore, discloses itself as a symbol that
comprehends the essence of the divine and the human." *?
Jung goes on to say that the “Gnostic interpretation of the
Holy Ghost as the Mother contains a core of truth in that
Mary was the instrument of God's birth and so became involved
in the trinitarian drama as a human being. The Mother of
God can, therefore, be regarded as a symbol of mankind's essen-
tial participation in the Trinity. The psychological justification
for this assumption lies in the fact that thinking, which orig-
inally had its source in the self-revelation of the unconscious,
was felt to be the manifestation of a power external to con-
sciousness. The primitive does not think; the thoughts come to
him. We ourselves still feel certain particularly enlightening
85 “Dogma of the Trinity," p. 159.
86 Ibid. 87 P. 160. 88 P. 159. 89 P. 161.
296IX. THE FOURTH PARABLE: OF THE PHILOSOPHIC FAITH .
ideas as ‘in-fluences,’ ‘in-spirations,’ etc. Where judgments and
flashes of insight are transmitted by unconscious activity, they
are often attributed to an archetypal feminine figure, the anima
or mother-beloved. It seems as if the inspiration came from the
mother or from the beloved, the ‘femme inspiratrice.’ In view
of this, the Holy Ghost would have a tendency to exchange his
neuter designation (76 svejpa) for a feminine one. .. . Holy
Ghost and Logos merge in the Gnostic idea of Sophia, and again
in the Sapientia of the medieval natural philosophers, who
said of her: 'In gremio matris sedet sapientia patris' (the wisdom
of the father lies in the lap of the mother)." *?
These remarks of Jung’s shed light on the psychological hap-
penings that found expression in Aurora. The fact that the
numinosum appeared first as Wisdom, a feminine figure, leads
us to suppose that overpowering new insights were approaching
the author's consciousness, and that the anima was constellated
as a mediatrix. If later she retires from the scene, we must infer
that a process of reflection had occurred in the interim, which
attempted to incorporate the experience in a spiritual order.
This inevitably entailed a retreat from the unconscious, which
found symbolical expression in the exclusion of the element
earth. But, as we have already seen, earth is an aspect of
Wisdom herself, her own chthonic side, as it were.
Wherefore the aforesaid Spirit by reason of the excellence of his
sevenfold gift is said to have seven virtues in his operation on earth.
The element earth is not entirely lacking, as this passage
shows; but it is excluded from the triad praised in the author's
philosophic credo and is put in parenthesis, so to speak, ap-
pearing as something opposed to it, a passive, imperfect element
that still has to be worked on.
Looking at this part of the text in the light of our earlier
remarks on the four-function schema of consciousness, we would
have to conclude from the exclusion of the fourth element that
the author's consciousness found difficulty in assimilating the
90 Pp. 161f.
91 Previously I interpreted the missing earth as an incomplete realization, but now
as a retreat from the unconscious. For anyone with a knowledge of the psycho-
logical facts this is not a contradiction, because a retreat from the unconscious is
the same as unconsciousness and hence an incomplete realization.
297AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
fourth, "inferior" function. This function, here represented by
earth, is in a man always contaminated with the anima and the
collective unconscious.??
Now if the step from three to four appears too difficult, we
often find in the unconscious material a doubling of these num-
bers, and the problematical step is then from seven to eight,
so that the inferior function appears to have been reduced by
half. The doubling, therefore, represents a process of psycho-
logical differentiation.
This accords with certain symbolical explanations of the
number seven which may be found in Allendy's book Le Sym-
bolisme des nombres.?? In his view, seven is produced by a
double division of three:
Oo oS
eee
o^ E
oO 1 ar riinniittyv o=O
Y cm
03
This derivation, he remarks, is the rule in progressive series
of numbers.?* Whereas four reflects the continuous, self-con-
92 Psychology and Alchemy, pars. 192f.: "In the psychology of the functions there
are two conscious and therefore masculine functions, the differentiated function
and its auxiliary. . . . Since the confiict between the two auxiliary functions is
not nearly so great as that between the differentiated and the inferior function, it
is possible for the third function—that is, the unconscious auxiliary one—to be
raised to consciousness and thus be made masculine. It will, however, bring with
it traces of its contamination with the inferior function, thus acting as a kind of
link with the darkness of the unconscious. It was in keeping with this psycho-
logical fact that the Holy Ghost should be interpreted as Sophia. . . . The fourth
function is contaminated with the unconscious and, on being made conscious,
drags the whole of the unconscious with it. . . . At first a violent conflict breaks
out, such as any reasonable man would experience when it became evident that
he had to swallow a lot of absurd superstitions.”
93 Pp. 17eff.
94 By a progressive series is meant a series of numbers so arranged that the ratio
of their relationship remains constant, whether they increase or decrease.
298IX. THE FOURTH PARABLE: OF THE PHILOSOPHIC FAITH . . .
tained cycle of natural processes, seven represents the evolving
circle of progress in spiral form. According to Jakob Boehme,?5
there are in the cosmos seven organizing spirits who actualize
the eternal wisdom. They consist of an upper triad (Desire,
Motion, Rest), a lower, natural triad (Love, Word, Body), and
a mediator, Lightning or Fire, who establishes the contact be-
tween nature and spirit. Also in other systems of number sym-
bolism seven, according to Allendy, stands for the clash between
an upper, spiritual triad and a lower, natural quaternity.?6
These amplifications seem to me relevant as throwing light
on the sevenfold gifts of the Spirit which are described in the
following passages. They also explain how it is that the author
suddenly switches from the three workings of the Holy Spirit
to his seven gifts or virtues. The seven virtues, we are told, refer
specifically to his operation on earth, which represents the ex-
cluded fourth (or eighth) element. But this earth, as we know
from the earlier parables, is the "black earth" and the woman
in the pit of sin and hell. Although the author would hardly
have had any conscious doubts about his own Christianity, the
inclusion of this element in his alchemical and Christian view
of the world nevertheless seems to have presented difficulties.
In the same way the alchemist William Mennens, borrowing
from Cabalistic ideas, called the prima materia "God's shadow"
and "God's back parts.” ?' In medieval number symbolism it
was co-ordinated with the quaternarius.?? It is no accident that
this difficulty should have cropped up in Aurora specifically in
connection with the Holy Spirit, for, as Jung has shown,?? this
is the very figure in the Trinity who forms the connecting-link
with the rejected "fourth," or with evil. Not only is he the
“breath common to man, the Son, and the Father," but, as the
95 The Signature of All Things, XIV, 10, p. 178.
96 Le Symbolisme des nombres, pp. 181ff.
97 Theatr. chem., V, p. 301: “Therefore the four-letter name of God is seen to
designate the most holy Trinity and matter, which is also threefold, as we have
set forth earlier, and is also called his shadow, and by Moses God’s back parts.” *
Cf. Knorr von Rosenroth, Kabbala denudata, I, Part 1, pp. 73 and 581, and II, p.
29, Supplement ("Adumbratio Kabbalae Christianae").
98 Meister Dietrich, De miscibilibus in mixto: "Because that which is the first
matter, is in itself many and plural and fourfold in number according to the four
elements." * (Krebs, Die Schriften Meister Dietrichs, p. 46 * [the asterisk here is a
part of the page number].)
99 “Dogma of the Trinity," p. 178.
299AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
Paraclete, the Comforter of man suffering evil, he is the “rec-
onciliation of opposites and hence the answer to the suffering
in the Godhead which Christ personifies.” °° The author, as we
have seen, was unexpectedly confronted with the problem of
evil, with the dark side of God, as a result of his encounter with
Wisdom, and so he was in quite particular need of the Holy
Spirit, who reconciles the opposites in God. Therefore he
equates this hypostasis of the Godhead specifically with the
aqua divina and makes him the real operator in the work of
bringing about the transformation of the black earth.
We could briefly interpret what has happened so far as
follows: the initial inrush of the collective unconscious—per-
sonified at first in the sublime anima-image of Wisdom—led to
an inundation of consciousness. In this “dark night of the soul”
all the repressed shadow elements, the heathen Ethiopians and
the sinful daughters of Sion, appeared, so that the author fell
into a profound depression. To save himself from complete
dissolution, he now calls to his aid his conscious Christian views
and implores the Holy Spirit to help him purify the black
earth (the unconscious that caused the depression). Only one
thing remains obscure and is stated in the text only indirectly:
the black earth is itself Wisdom! He thus, like Job, calls upon
God for help against God.’ A secret enantiodromia has taken
place: what first broke through was the bright image of Wis-
dom, but later this gradually changed into a darkness that had
to be "operated" on and worked with. We now see why the
author had recourse to the saving language of alchemy, for only
in that way could he formulate such a paradoxical experience
at all.
Firstly, he warmeth the earth (as is to be seen in lime), which by cold-
ness is dead and dry. Wherefore the prophet saith: My heart grew
hot within me and in mine operation a fire flames out. And in the
Book of the Quintessence: Fire, penetrating and subtilizing by its
warmth, consumeth all earthly parts which are wholly material and
not formal; for as long as fire hath matter, it ceaseth not to act, seek-
ing to imprint its form on the passive substance.
The discussion of the seven virtues of the Holy Spirit is
really an amplification of the three workings described in the
100 Ibid., pp. 158 and 176. 101 Answer to Job," p. 369.
300IX. THE FOURTH PARABLE: OF THE PHILOSOPHIC FAITH ..
first part of the parable. The Spirit is again described as a fire
which has a warming and purifying effect on the cold earth.
The moral aspect is not overlooked, for the author compares
him with the hidden fire of wrath which David sends out
against the wicked.! The passive and (as we shall see) ‘“com-
pact" earth which is cleansed, subtilized, and "imprinted" by
this fire is thus identical with wickedness and sin, and hence
with the Ethiopians and sinful daughters of Sion in the earlier
parables.
And Calet the Less: make warm the cold of the one by the heat of
the other. And Senior: Set the male upon the female, that is, the
warm upon the cold.
The quotations from Calid and Senior show the operation
of the Spirit as a balancing of opposites in the well-known
image of the coniunctio of man (— active, warm) and woman
(= passive, chthonic, cold). Through the warm participation
of consciousness the unconscious is changed and "imprinted"
—though it should not be overlooked that in the process the
upper, Spirit, comes down and enters the lower, Physis.
In the second place he extinguisheth the intense imprinted fire by
ignition, of which saith the Prophet: A fire was kindled in their con-
gregation, and a flame burned the wicked upon earth; he extin-
guisheth this fire by its own temperament, whence it is added: Thou
art coolness in the heat. And Calet the Less: Extinguish the fire of
the one by the coolness of the other.
The second operation of the Spirit is represented as the self-
consuming and self-quenching of the spiritual fire which at the
same time consumes the ungodly like the fire of hell.!?? The
underlying alchemical idea is probably that of “nature con-
quering nature,” and that there is in the arcane substance itself
(i.e., the unconscious) a "temperament," an inner equability,
which removes the destructive elements within it. The psychol-
ogy of the unconscious has rediscovered this fact in its own
field, as when Jung shows that psychic energy, though in itself
polaristic (for instance as instinct and spirit), balances out its
102 Ps. 38: 4.
103 Ps. 105 : 17-19: "The earth opened and swallowed up Dathan, and covered
the congregation of Abiram. And a fire was kindled in their congregation: the
flame burned the wicked."
301AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
own polarities.!?^* In the Christian view, on the other hand, the
two fires are usually distinct. Thus Ephraem Syrus says: ““Bap-
tism extinguishes with its fire the fire which the Evil One has
kindled. The pure fire of our Redeemer put out the fire which
flamed up in sinners.” 1° Once again alchemy unites the sepa-
rated aspects in one paradoxical idea. The author boldly illus-
trates the alchemical "fiery virtue" by a verse from the “Veni
sancte Spiritus” of Pentecost: “Thou art coolness in the heat,”
thus uniting the fire-water symbolism of the Holy Ghost in
ecclesiastical allegory !?* with the alchemical ignis noster.
And Avicenna: A thing in which there is burning, the first thing
that is released from it is a fiery virtue, which is milder and more
worthy than the virtues of the other elements.
With this quotation the author hints that this paradoxical
fire is really a "fiery virtue" immanent in elemental matter
itself, so that the fire of the Holy Spirit acquires a concrete,
material aspect. The psychic experience expressed in his state-
ments about the inner "temperament" of the fire seems to me
a very important one, for it looks as if it had begun to dawn on
the author that he had fallen into the hands of an overwhelm-
ing power which, however, contains within itself the capacity
to neutralize its own forces, and which thereafter heals as well
104 Symbols of Transformation, pp. 437ff.
105 Hymni et sermones, I, col. 80. Cf. Peter Damian’s hymn "In solemnitate S.P.
Benedicti" (Blume and Dreves, Analecta hymnica medii aevi, XLVIII, p. 42): "The
thorns and briers he plungeth in / With wounds make whole the wounds of
sin: / His mind aflame with heaven's breath / The fire with fire extinguish-
eth; / And, with for stone the Cross's sign, / Shatters the cup of poisoned wine." *
St. Gregory, Homiliae in Evangelia, XXX (Migne, P.L., vol. 76, col. 1223): "Fit-
tingly therefore did the Spirit appear in fire, for he driveth out the deadness of
cold from every heart that he filleth." *
106 Cf. Hippolytus' commentary on Song of Songs in Rahner, "Mysterium Lunae,"
p. 79: the Holy Spirit is fire and at the same time soul-cooling dew. Also Origen,
Comm. in Epist. ad Rom., V, 8 (Migne, P.G., vol. 14, col. 1038), Hugh of St. Victor,
De Unione corporis et spiritus (Migne, P.L., vol. 177, col. 286), and Eruditionis
Didascaliae (vol. 176, col. 746). Compare the Holy Spirit as fire with the baptism
by fire at the end of time in Anastasius the Sinaite, 4nagog. contempl. 4 (Migne,
P.G., vol. 89, col. goo). Also Ephraem Syrus, I, col. 62: “The Spirit anoints his
flock with a secret fire.” The baptismal water assimilates the opposites to one
another "that the hidden and the manifest may be brought together" (ibid., col.
72). Cf. Doelger's “aqua ignita" in Antike und Christentum, pp. 175-83.
302IX. THE FOURTH PARABLE: OF THE PHILOSOPHIC FAITH . .
as wounds. This dawning realization gives him a chance to re-
cover his lost balance at a deeper level of psychic reality.
In the third place he maketh soft, that is, he liquefieth the hardness
of the earth and dissolveth its condensed and exceedingly compact
parts, of which it is written: The rain of the Holy Spirit melteth.
And the Prophet: He shall send out his word and shall melt it, his
wind shall blow and the waters shall run.
The aqua Sapientiae is also a rain, and is indirectly equated
here with the Word of God, the Logos. Through an influence
from above (i.e., consciousness) the compact and impenetrable
darkness of the unconscious is gradually broken up, so that
the imprisonment of the personality in seemingly immutable
facts ceases, and, through "penetrating" understanding, psychic
life begins to flow again.!97
And in the Book of the Quintessence it is written, that the air shall
open the pores of the earthly parts to receive the virtue of fire and
water. And elsewhere it is written: Woman dissolveth man and he
fixeth her, that is, the Spirit dissolveth the body and softeneth it, and
the body hardeneth the spirit.
The author here interprets the earth's collision with the
spiritual triad (water, air, fire) as the opposition between body
and spirit, or woman and man. This is a reference to the con-
iunctio, which becomes of central importance in the concluding
parable. In this passage the author is no longer actively par-
ticipating; it is as though not he personally were having it out
with his shadow, but as though two archetypal spheres—an
upper, bright, spirit-triad (spiritual insight) and a dark "fourth"
(something not understood)—were clashing together. The au-
thor has, as it were, taken refuge in the light part.
In the fourth place he enlighteneth, when he taketh away all dark-
nesses from the body, of which the hymn singeth: Purge the horrible
darknesses of our mind, enkindle a light in our senses,
Now follows a reference to the personal aspect of the process,
in the quotation from Notker Balbulus’s Hymn for Pentecost
and from the ‘‘Veni Creator Spiritus." 1°° This is an indication
107 Cf. Mysterium, pp. 204ff.
108 “Our minds enkindle with thy light; within our hearts thy love excite.”
595AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
that the “operation” of the triune water-air-fire spirit upon the
earth was, after all, an encounter with the darkness of the
author's own mind, and that this (as the following quotation
from Psalm 77: 14 shows) can come to a good end only by the
grace of God and by his guidance.
and the Prophet: He conducted them all the night with a light of
fire, and night shall be light as the day.
The author likens this redemption to the exodus from'
Egypt, and since in patristic literature Egypt was generally
interpreted as sin and "this world," !?? we have here yet another
allusion to the captivity, nigredo, flood, etc. of the previous
parables.
The words “and night shall be light as the day" recapitulate
the end of Chapter IV, and, as there, are an allusion to the
mystic birth of the filius philosophorum, who is later described
as "a wondrous light in the darkness." !'^ This light is the
lumen luminum, called by Dorn the "invisible sun." Psycho-
logically it signifies the illumination of the unconscious, in
whose chaotic darkness a “meaning” and a regulating centre
independent of the ego—the self—gradually become percep-
tible.! An illuminating insight flashes out from a previously
incomprehensible content.
And Senior: And he maketh all that is black white and all that is
white red, for water whiteneth and fire enlighteneth. For he shineth
through the tincturing soul like a ruby in colour, which it hath ac-
quired by virtue of the fire, wherefore fire is called the Dyer.
The light is described as a ruby, a synonym for the lapis.'?
Senior interprets the ruby as the "tincturing soul" (anima tin-
109 Documentation in von Franz, "Passio Perpetuae," pp. 464ff.
110 In Alphidius also the lapis is described as a resplendent and transparent light
(Codex Ashmole 1420, fol. 11). In other texts it is a "secret light," and the
"Rosarium" says that it "comes with light and is born with light." Cf. Turba,
Sermo LXII: “This is the red sulphur that emits light in the darkness and it is the
red jacinth . . . and the conquering lion.” * In "Abu'l Qasim al-Tràaqi" (Holm-
yard, pp. 421f.) the lapis is called “dog, eagle, harmless lion, fiery poison, light,
son of the fire, Satan."
111 Cf. “On the Nature of the Psyche," pp. 192ff., and the parallels given there.
112 Jung, “A Study in the Process of Individuation," p. 331, n. 127: “The carbuncle
is a synonym for the lapis. "The king bright as a carbuncle’ (Lilius, an old source
in the "Ros. phil.,” Art. aurif., 1593, I, p. 329). ‘A ray . . . in the earth, shining in
804IX. THE FOURTH PARABLE: OF THE PHILOSOPHIC FAITH ... gens),!? which is hidden in the water."* From the soul come
the colours. Psychologically the red of the ruby denotes feeling,
emotion, passion. In alchemy red (and the rubedo) was in-
terpreted as masculine, white as feminine. The "king," or the
lapis as bridegroom of the white bride (anima), is red. It is as
though at this stage of the process active life and emotion had
returned after the rigidity and depression of the nigredo, and
after the phase of objective insight in the albedo is over. But
this "vita nuova" (of the rubedo) no longer proceeds from the
ego, but from the self. Senior's remark that the soul produces the colours is an allu-
sion to the motif of the "cauda pavonis," !5 of which Jung
says: 46 “The appearance of these colours in the opus repre-
sents an intermediate stage preceding the definitive end-result. the darkness after the manner of a carbuncle gathered into itself’ * (from Michael
Maier's exposition of the theory of Thomas Aquinas, in $ymbola aureae mensae,
p- 377). I found a certain stone, red, shining, transparent, and brilliant, and in it
I saw all the forms of the elements and also their contraries' * (quotation from
Thomas in Mylius, Philosophia reformata, p. 42). For heaven, gold, and carbuncle
as synonyms for the rubedo, see ibid., p. 104. The lapis is ‘shimmering carbuncle
light' (Khunrath, Von hyleal. Chaos, p. 237). Ruby or carbuncle is the name for the
corpus glorificatum (Glauber, Tractatus de natura salium, Part 1, p. 42). In Rosen-
creutz's Chemical Wedding the bed-chamber of Venus is lit by carbuncles (p. 97)."
113 De chemia, p. 66: "And when he saith ‘ruby,’ he meaneth it of the tincturing
soul, because it hath received its virtue from the fire." *
114 [bid., p. 35: “The tincturing soul lieth hidden in the white . . . water." * Cf. Knorr von Rosenroth, Kabbala denudata, II, Part 2, pp. 21f. for the hyacinthine
colour and rubedo in the sea; also II, Part 2, p.AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
that the “operation” of the triune water-air-fire spirit upon the
earth was, after all, an encounter with the darkness of the
author's own mind, and that this (as the following quotation
from Psalm 77: 14 shows) can come to a good end only by the
grace of God and by his guidance.
and the Prophet: He conducted them all the night with a light of
fire, and night shall be light as the day.
The author likens this redemption to the exodus from'
Egypt, and since in patristic literature Egypt was generally
interpreted as sin and "this world," !?? we have here yet another
allusion to the captivity, nigredo, flood, etc. of the previous
parables.
The words “and night shall be light as the day" recapitulate
the end of Chapter IV, and, as there, are an allusion to the
mystic birth of the filius philosophorum, who is later described
as "a wondrous light in the darkness." !'^ This light is the
lumen luminum, called by Dorn the "invisible sun." Psycho-
logically it signifies the illumination of the unconscious, in
whose chaotic darkness a “meaning” and a regulating centre
independent of the ego—the self—gradually become percep-
tible.! An illuminating insight flashes out from a previously
incomprehensible content.
And Senior: And he maketh all that is black white and all that is
white red, for water whiteneth and fire enlighteneth. For he shineth
through the tincturing soul like a ruby in colour, which it hath ac-
quired by virtue of the fire, wherefore fire is called the Dyer.
The light is described as a ruby, a synonym for the lapis.'?
Senior interprets the ruby as the "tincturing soul" (anima tin-
109 Documentation in von Franz, "Passio Perpetuae," pp. 464ff.
110 In Alphidius also the lapis is described as a resplendent and transparent light
(Codex Ashmole 1420, fol. 11). In other texts it is a "secret light," and the
"Rosarium" says that it "comes with light and is born with light." Cf. Turba,
Sermo LXII: “This is the red sulphur that emits light in the darkness and it is the
red jacinth . . . and the conquering lion.” * In "Abu'l Qasim al-Tràaqi" (Holm-
yard, pp. 421f.) the lapis is called “dog, eagle, harmless lion, fiery poison, light,
son of the fire, Satan."
111 Cf. “On the Nature of the Psyche," pp. 192ff., and the parallels given there.
112 Jung, “A Study in the Process of Individuation," p. 331, n. 127: “The carbuncle
is a synonym for the lapis. "The king bright as a carbuncle’ (Lilius, an old source
in the "Ros. phil.,” Art. aurif., 1593, I, p. 329). ‘A ray . . . in the earth, shining in
804

21f. for the hyacinthine
colour and rubedo in the sea; also II, Part 2, p. 12, and Part 1, pp. 461f. for the
albedo and rubedo in the crystal. 115 “A Study in the Process of Individuation," p. 330, n. 124 (mod.): “The cauda
pavonis is identified by Khunrath with Iris, the ‘nuncia Dei.’ Dorn (“De trans-
mutat. metallorum," Theatr. chem., I, 1602, p. 599) explains it as follows: “This is
the bird which flies by night without wings, which the first dew of heaven by
continual decoction, and by ascent and descent upwards and downwards, turns
into the raven's head, and then into the peacock's tail, and afterwards it acquires
very brilliant and swanlike feathers, and lastly an extreme redness, an indication
of its fiery nature.' * In Basilides (Hippolytus, Elenchos, X, 14, 1) the peacock's
egg is synonymous with the sperma mundi, the xókkos awárews. It contains the
‘fullness of colours, 365 of them. The golden colour should be produced from
peacock's eggs, we are told in the Cyranides (Delatte, Textes latins et vieux
francais relatifs aux Cyranides, p. 171). The light of Mohammed has the form of
a peacock, and the angels were made out of peacock's sweat (Aptowitzer,
“Arabisch-jiidische Schópfungstheorien," pp. 209, 233).”
116 “A Study in the Process of Individuation,” pp. 330f. 305AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
Boehme speaks of a ‘love-desire or a Beauty of Colours; and
here all Colours arise.’ ’’ !!7
In “The Earthly and Heavenly Mystery" Boehme says: '*
"And then we are able to recognize an eternal substantiality of
Nature, identical with water and fire, which are as it were
mixed together; where then this gives a light-blue colour, like
the flash of fire; where it hath a form as a ruby mixed with
crystal in one substance, or as yellow, white, red, and blue
mingled in a dark water; where it is as blue in green, yet each
has its lustre, and shines. And the water checks the fire, so that
there is no consuming there, but an eternal essence, or sub-
stance, in two mysteries united in one another, and yet the dis-
tinction of two principles as two kinds of life.” The phenome-
non of the colours owes its existence to the "Imagination of the
great Mystery, where a wondrous essential life is born.” 11°
Contact with the unconscious causes a world of fantasy and
feeling to blossom forth—the world of Eros lights up in the
darkness, as the passages that follow will show.
And in the Book of the Quintessence: 'Thou seest a wondrous light
in the darkness. And in the T'urba philosophorum it is written, that
if the clouds have whitened the surface, without a doubt their inner
parts shall be whitened also. And Morienus saith: Already we have
taken away the black and have made the white, with the salt
[a]natron, that is with the spirit.
The transformation of night, sin, and death into a world of
light and colour is explained as the dealbatio, the whitening.
This, says the text, is brought about by the “‘salt natron"' !?? or
the spirit. The manifold significance of this new analogue of
the Holy Spirit, salt, is discussed in Jung.'?' Even though the
author may not have known its significance as Eros,'? he equates
117 The Signature of All Things, p. 178.
118 “On the Earthly and Heavenly Mystery" (trans. Earle), pp. 147f.
119 "A Study in the Process of Individuation," p. 331.
120 "Anatron" is due to transcription of the Arabic al-natron. Natron is derived
from the Egyptian ntr, God. Cf. Steuer, Über das wohlriechende Natron bei den
alten Aegyptern. 121 Mysterium, ch. III, sec. 5.
122 Cf. Albertus, "Biblia Mariana" (Borgnet, XXXVII, p. 385), who identifies salt
with Christ: "For salt is the son of God. Because when he had put that salt into
the fountain of waters, which was done at the Annunciation, he said: Thus saith
the Lord, I have healed these waters, that is, inconstant and pestiferous human
nature, and death and barrenness shall be no more, but life and fruitfulness." *
306IX. THE FOURTH PARABLE: OF THE PHILOSOPHIC FAITH ...
salt with the Holy Spirit'?* who was also interpreted as the fire
of love;??* and for him both are an analogy expressing the para-
doxical nature of the arcane substance.
Fifthly, he separateth the pure from the impure when he removeth
all accidents from the soul, which are vapours, that is, evil odours, as
it is written: That fire separateth those things that are unlike and
bringeth together those things that are like. Wherefore the Prophet:
Thou hast tried me by fire, and iniquity shall not be found in me.
And again: We have passed through fire and water, and thou hast
brought us forth into rest and refreshment. And Hermes: Thou shalt
separate the dense from the subtle, the earth from the fire. Alphidius:
Earth is liquefied and turned into water, water is liquefied and turned
into air, air is liquefied and turned into fire (fire is liquefied and
turned into glorified earth).
After what we have said, this passage can be understood
without further explanation, but the Alphidius quotation needs
stressing, as it raises a problem of transmission. The manu-
scripts differ in regard to the third clause, for instead of "air
is liquefied and turned into fire" the Paris manuscript has "fire
is liquefied and turned into glorified earth." It is not mere
chance that a textual difficulty presents itself at this point—for
once again it is the problem of three and four! !?5 Considering
his “philosophic faith," the author ought really to enumerate
123 Cf. salt as the mediator and uniter of opposites in Mus. Herm., p. 11 (Waite,
I, p. 14): “. . . the true spirit of mercury, and the soul of sulphur, united to
spiritual salt.” *
124 Donahoe, Early Christian Hymns, p. 107: “Well art thou called the Para-
clete, / Thy mercies comfort and condole, / The fount of life, the love, the
heat, / The soothing unction of the soul.” * Richard of St. Victor, De tribus ap-
propriatis Personis in Trinitate (Migne, P.L., vol. 196, col. 993): “. . . in the
Holy Scriptures power is more especially attributed to the Father, wisdom to the
Son, love or goodness to the Holy Spirit.” *
125 A similar uncertainty occurs in the “Opusculum autoris ignoti,” usually cited
as “Rhazis Epistula" (Art. aurif., I, p. 251): “This stone is triangular in its being,
quadrangular in its quality.” * Also in the Carmina Heliodori, p. 57 (Carmen 4,
verse 260), where the stone is called a "triple bulwark" formed from spirit, soul
and body, and a “fortress joined by the four elements.” In Alch. grecs, I, vi, 3,
the lapis is likened to a dragon with four feet (elements) and three ears (vapours).
Vacillation between three and four is occasionally found in patristic literature,
e.g Ephraem Syrus, who compares the ecclesiastical oil to the river Eden and
says (IL, col. 790) that the river had four names and four prophets (the four evan-
gelists), whereas the oil had three names (— trumpets of baptism).
397AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
a triad, but the traditional "rota" or circulatory process in
alchemy, to which Alphidius is referring, was always performed
with the four elements, so that the author or a copyist slipped
up at this point, and the text is so corrupt that it is hardly pos-
sible to reconstruct the original version. Once again the cold,
black earth becomes a "stone of scandai" which the Paris version
tries to get round by wafting a "glorified earth" up to the realm
of the spirit.
On this saith Rasis, that a certain purification of things precedeth
the work of perfect preparation, which by some is called administra-
tion or cleansing, by others rectification, and by some it is called
washing or separation. For the Spirit himself, who is sevenfold in his
operation, separateth the purer parts from the impure, that the im-
pure parts being cast away, the work may be fulfilled with the pure.
And this fifth virtue doth Hermes refer to in his Secret, when he
saith: Thou shalt separate the earth from the fire, the subtle from
the dense gently.
The Rhazis quotation shows that the procedures described
in this parable, as also in the preceding ones, are still concerned
with washing and purification, but the text stresses that these
purifications are for the purpose of separating the dense from
the subtle. In psychological terms this would be the laborious
process of coming to terms with the unconscious and discrimi-
nating between its subjective and objective components, whose
significance in the individuation process Jung discusses in "The
Psychology of the Transference.” 1*° The wearisome shuttling to
and fro between the opposites at this point in the text, or in the
psychic process it describes, is not without meaning. If we
look back at the events in the previous three parables, we find
each time a description of an initial darkness and state of dis-
tress (flood, imprisonment, etc.), and then a sudden, momentary
swing-over to an ecstatic state of bliss. In this parable, on the
other hand, a shuttling movement begins in which the dark is
worked upon by the light; and not just one swing-over is de-
scribed, but a gradual illumination and sublimation of the
dark element by the repeated operations of the Spirit. It is no
accident that this sets in with the credo cited at the beginning
of the parable; the collective, conscious religious values and
126 Pars. 502ff.
308IX. THE FOURTH PARABLE: OF THE PHILOSOPHIC FAITH . . .
contents are included in the process and an attempt is made to
build up a firm standpoint within the theatre of warring oppo-
sites. Nor is the darkness merely "suffered" any more, it is being
worked through. The only odd thing is that the struggle is
really between two suprapersonal forces, the Holy Spirit and
the dark earth; while the author seems to have been banished
from the process and to be present only as a spectator.
In the sixth place he exalteth the lowly, when he bringeth to the sur-
face the soul deep and hidden in the bowels of the earth, of which
saith the Prophet: Who bringeth out them that were bound in his
strength. Again: Thou hast delivered my soul out of the lower hell.
And Isaias: The Spirit of the Lord lifted me up. And the philoso-
phers: Whosoever shall make the hidden manifest knoweth the whole
work, and he who knoweth our cambar !?' (i.e., fire), he is our phi-
losopher.
The process of discrimination initiated by the Holy Spirit
has the effect of liberating the soul from the bowels of the earth,
where she had been languishing—an event which the author
compares with the state of exaltation induced by the Spirit of
the Lord.?* The unconscious, hitherto projected into matter,
gradually becomes apprehensible to consciousness and is felt as
an inner reality that "inspires" new contents. The lifting up of
the soul signifies at the same time her deliverance from the
lower hell and is described as a display of colours.'?? The psy-
chological significance of this display as the transition stage
between the nigredo and the albedo is discussed in Jung.!??
Morienus: He who shall raise up his soul, shall see its colours. And
Alphidius: If this vapour shall not ascend, thou shalt have nothing
from it, because through it and with it and in it all the work is done.
The Alphidius quotation describes the soul as a vapour,?'
127 Cinnabar. 128 [sa. 61 : 1.
129 Cf. Synesios in Alch. grecs, II, iii, 13-14, and Turba, p. 123: “When this stone
is broken, various colours will appear before you." * Tincturing with the “invari-
able colour" is the goal of the opus (pp. 123, 141). "Moisten it, until God extract
the colours for you and they appear" (p. 136).* Senior, De chemia, p. 82: “And
when the colours or tinctures shall appear, it will be as when the . . . little chick
appears." * 130 Mysterium, pp. 285ff.
131 For the antiquity of this idea cf. the saying of Maria Prophetissa in Olym-
piodorus (Alch. grecs, II, iv, 40): "Unless everything is sublimed by the fire and
the spiritualized vapour is carried up, the process will not go forward." *
309AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
and the allusion to Romans 11 :3 6 (“of him, and in him, and
by him, are all things") equates this vapour with the Holy Spirit.
The Holy Spirit, therefore, is simultaneously the actor and the
acted-upon, the producer and the product, as Wisdom was
before; he is the equivalent of the alchemical uroboros. In
Morienus !3?? and in the Turba the vapour is the “soul of the
metals" or the soul herself; it is the “life-breath’’ of man and
all creatures,!?? and “thus our work . . . is nothing but vapour
and water.” 134 Psychologically it is still a question of "raising" -
the contents of the unconscious to consciousness and under-
standing them in a spiritual sense.
In the seventh and last place he inspireth, when by his breathing he
maketh the earthly body spiritual, of which it is sung: Thou by thy
breathing makest men to be spiritual. Solomon: The Spirit of the
Lord hath filled the whole world. And the Prophet: And all the
power of them by the spirit of his mouth.
The description of the seventh virtue makes it clear that
the Spirit represents the active and passive arcane substance
(the psyche itself as the substrate of consciousness and the un-
conscious): he spiritualizes the earthly body by breathing into
it ("inspirat"), and this breathing is none other than the Spirit
of the Lord which fills the whole world !5* and "inspired" en-
lightenment into men at Pentecost. What is described here is,
both psychologically and alchemically, a process of sublimation
which takes place in the psyche itself without the interference
of the ego. In a state of "inspired" understanding the author
experiences the dwindling importance of earthly things, and,
by his growing awareness of the self, even the spirit-body an-
tithesis drops away, for the psyche is the link between them.!?9
132 Cited in “Ros. phil.,” Art. aurif., YI, p. 247.
183 Ibid., p. 154: "Therefore saith the Philosopher, the wind hath carried it in
his belly. It is clear therefore that wind is air, and air is life, and life is soul: that
is, oil and water." *
134 Turba, pp. 142f.: “Then all things become vapour . . . but this and the spirit
and the soul the philosophers have called vapour ... thus our work... is
nothing but vapour and water." * Cf. pp. 43, 139, 152. Also Wisd. 7: 25, where
Wisdom is called a "vapour of the power of God" (DV; AV: “breath”).
135 Wisd. 1 : 7.
136 Cf. "Aquarium sapientum," Mus. Herm., pp. 84f. (Waite, I, p. 78): "It is the
Spirit of the Lord who fills the universe, and in the beginning moved upon the
face of the waters. They also call it the spirit of truth that is hid in the world,
310IX. THE FOURTH PARABLE: OF THE PHILOSOPHIC FAITH . ..
The author obviously understands this living psychic substrate
as the Holy Spirit, with whom his consciousness becomes more
and more indistinguishably coalescent.
And Rasis in the Light of Lights: Heavy things cannot be made to
ascend save by alliance with light things, nor can light things be
brought down.to the depths save by combination with the heavy.
And the T'urba: Make bodies incorporeal and the fixed volatile;
but all these things are brought about and fulfilled by our spirit,
The Spirit brings about an assimilation of man to God. But,
simultaneously and conversely, the higher, heavenly things are
made corporeal, that is, are actualized—a process that was hinted
at earlier by the reference to the incarnation of God in Christ
at the beginning of the parable. The realization of the spirit
should probably not be understood as a complete inclusion of
the common earth—it is, rather, a spiritual realization. Never-
theless it takes place in a particular individual and is no longer
just a collective idea. In this individual the self is realized and
is then interpreted as the filius philosophorum and Christ.
for he alone can make clean that which is conceived of unclean seed.
Doth not the Scripture say: Wash yourselves in it and be clean.
The earthy darkness is not included, for the spirit helps men
on the contrary to rid themselves of the dark stain of original
sin.
And to Naaman was it said: Go and wash seven times in the Jordan
and thou shalt be clean. For there is one baptism for the remission
of sins, as the Creed and the Prophet bear witness.
As the healing of Naaman shows, the purification is anal-
ogous to baptism, the symbolism of which has appeared several
times already in the text. T'he washing of Naaman seven times in
the Jordan once more stresses seven as the number of the planets,
metals, etc. In ecclesiastical symbolism, on the other hand, the
number seven pertains to the doctrine of the sevenfold gifts or
functions of the Holy Spirit, and the story of Naaman, as we
have said, was regarded as a prefiguration of baptism. Other
and cannot be understood without the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. . . . It is
found potentially everywhere and in everything, but in all its perfection and
fulness only in [this] one thing. In short, it is a spiritual essence which is neither
celestial nor infernal, but an aerial, pure, and precious body." *
311AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
prefigurations are: 187 the Creation (when the “dry land of faith
was divided from the heathen waters"), the Flood, the sacrifice
of Isaac, the crossing of the Red Sea, the Song of Isaiah
(Isa. 54 : 17-55), the praise of Wisdom (Baruch 3 : 9-37), the
valley of dry bones (Ezekiel 37 : 1-14), the paschal lamb (Exod.
12 : 1-19), the conversion of Nineveh (Jonah 3 : 1-10), the Song
of Moses (Deut. 31 : 22-30), the fiery furnace (Daniel 3 : 19ff.),
the washing of the daughters of Sion (Isa. 4 : 4), cited earlier in
Aurora, and finally the healing of Naaman (2 Kings 5: 1ff.),
when Naaman dipped himself seven times in the Jordan.!?? The
Jordan rises in Mount Lebanon, a name which the Church
Fathers interpreted as candidatio, "whitening," and so, they
said, the Jordan signified the “fount of baptism in which the
chosen are made white from the filth of sin." !*? Just as Naa-
man's leprosy was washed away in the water by the "hidden
power" of God, so sin is removed by baptism.!*? The leper was
considered an image for the heretic.!*! In alchemy and in the
Cabala the story of Naaman was applied to the leprositas of the
metals.142 The “Clangor buccinae" 14% says, probably not with-
out reference to Aurora: “Our mineral has a dropsical body
like Naaman the Syrian . . . wherefore he sought a bath of
renewal in the Jordan, that he might be cleansed from his in-
born sufferings [or passions: passionibus]."!** In the Arabic
137 Cf. Roman Missal, “Prophecies” read on Easter Eve previously to the simplifi-
cation of the rite in 1955.
138 Ephraem Syrus, I, col. 6: ““The seven purifications of Elisha are a figure of the
seven spirits that are cast out by baptism.” * Cf. col. 52.
139 Honorius, Speculum (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, col. 1099).
140 Ephraem Syrus, I, col. 60: “Elisha consecrated the natural waters, invoking
him that is hidden, [and] the leper immersed himself in them, but a hidden
power cleansed him. Leprosy is cleansed away in the waters and iniquity in
baptism.” *
141 Rhabanus Maurus, Allegoriae in sacram Scripturam (Migne, P.L., vol. 112, col.
985).
142 Knorr von Rosenroth, Kabbala denudata, Y, Part 1, p. 151: “[210], which is the
number of the word Naaman, that is, of Naeman the Syrian and chief of the
army of the king of Aram, 2 Kings 5: 1, by whom is allegorically understood the
matter of the metallic Medicine to be seven times purified in the Jordan, which
many students of the metallic art call Gur.” *
143 Art. aurif., I, p. 322.
144 For evidence of dependence of this treatise on Aurora cf. the Senior quota-
tion, ibid., p. 314. The same idea occurs in "Aquarium sapientum," which was
also influenced by Aurora. Mus. Herm., p. 122 (Waite, I, p. 106).
312IX. THE FOURTH PARABLE: OF THE PHILOSOPHIC FAITH...
Buch der Alaune und Salze 1° it is said that lead is really gold
into which a sickness has penetrated, “like as a sickness befalls
an unborn child in the womb." And in the Corpus Hermeticum
the evil in the world is compared with rust (i6s).!49 In other al-
chemical allegories the sickness of the material is said to be
epilepsy or hydrophobia,!*' or is an “original defect." 148
He that hath ears to hear, let him hear what the spirit of the doctrine
saith to the sons of the discipline concerning the virtues of the seven-
fold spirit, whereby all the scripture is fulfilled, which the philoso-
phers set forth in these words: Distil seven times and thou hast set
it apart from the corrupting humidity.
The material is cleansed of its impurity and of original
sin by a sevenfold distillation which casts out the “corrupting
humidity" or “lethal water." The symbolism of distillation
refers psychologically to the realization of unconscious, emo-
tionally charged impulses in the background. When a con-
glomeration of feeling-toned ideas rises up, it is to begin with
something "exceedingly compact" (p. 303)—as the word “com-
plex" itself suggests—a regular "packet" of disquieting contents.
But if you penetrate into it with "spiritual understanding," its
apparently irreducible qualities are dissolved, and the uncon-
scious, split-off components (the corrupting humidity) evapo-
rate. An understanding of the unconscious thus produces a
subtler understanding of psychic processes in general—greater
detachment and closer penetration at once. The separation of
the dense from the subtle points further to a discrimination be-
tween the physical and spiritual components, or between what
is visibly going on in the foreground and the subtle meaning
lying behind it. The length and intensity of the purifying pro-
cedures here described show, indirectly, how dangerous were
the inrush of the unconscious and the resulting contamination
with its numinous contents, and how hard it will be for the
author to recover his inner stability.
145 Pp. 68-76 and 113.
146 Tract. 14, Scott, Hermetica, I, p. 260.
147 Mysterium, p. 155.
148 Ripley’s Cantilena, ibid., p. 276.
313X. THE FIFTH PARABLE: OF THE
TIREASURE-HOUSE...
The fifth parable takes an important step beyond the liber-
ating, purifying, and distilling procedures described in the
first four parables, for it treats "Of the Treasure-House which
Wisdom built upon a Rock.”
Wisdom hath built herself a house, which if any man enter in he
shall be saved and find pastures, as the prophet beareth witness:
They shall be inebriated with the plenty of thy house, for better is
one day in thy courts above thousands.
The alchemical basis for this parable is to be found first of
all in Senior, who compares the lapis to a house with four
walls, and then more particularly in Alphidius. In the eighth
chapter of the "Liber Alphidii philosophi" ? it is said: “I will
show thee the place of this stone. . . . Know, my son, that this
knowledge is in a certain place and that this place is everywhere.
The place is the four elements, and they are four doors, which
if thou wouldst know I say firstly that they are four stations,
four corners, four ends, and four walls. . . . This is the treas-
ure-house in which are treasured up all the sublime things of
science or wisdom or the glorious things which cannot be pos-
sessed. . . . The house in which these treasures are is closed
with four doors and they are locked with four keys, each door
having one. And none can enter this house nor extract any-
thing from it nor find the secret hidden within it unless he
knows the key or has it with him or belongs to the servants
of the house. Know therefore, my son, that he who knows one
key and knows not the rest shall open the doors of the house
with his key, but he shall not see the things that are in the
1 De chemia, p. 107.
2 Codex Ashmole 1420, Bodleian, fols. 2gf.
314X. THE FIFTH PARABLE: OF THE TREASURE-HOUSE ...
house, for the house has a surface which stretches far out of
sight. Therefore each door must be opened with its own key,
until the whole house is filled with light, then anyone may
enter and take of the treasure." *
The Alphidius text goes on to interpret the four keys as the
extraction of the water, the softening of the “earthy body" (ore),
its saturation and fixation. Each of the four operations leads to
the lapis, but only the combination of all four can reveal its
irue essence.
‘These statements seem to point to a psychic process for
realizing the self by means of all four functions of conscious-
ness? Naturally this is only one aspect of the process, for the
idea of opening the house (self) with four keys can be further
related to that remarkable diagram of quaternions which Jung
put forward in Aion as a model for the inner structure of the
self.5 It refers to certain dynamic processes of transformation
within the self which lead to a conscious realization of its con-
tents. Jung first shows that these processes take place according
to the following formula:
bs d
PAN Aa’
C3 ag —A— a Cc
put i d
d; b
ll Il
D B
i |
d» bi
ag £5 OC ay ay
b; d
3*3d infinitum visum tendentem." Or: "leads to endless looking"? The text is
corrupt. I read "infinitum" for "infimum."
4 This passage also occurs in “Cons. coniug.,” Ars chemica, pp. 108ff.*
5 “The Psychology of the Transference,” pars. 488ff. The "superficiem ad infinitum
visum tendentem" if the house is opened with only one key may refer to the psy-
chological danger of using only one function to "unlock" the unconscious. Fasci-
nated by thinking, feeling, intuition, or sensation (fact-collecting), one sees only the
“surface” and not the whole house by an inner “fixation.”
6 P. 259; see also pp. 231ff., 247f.
315AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
He then continues: “The formula repeats the ancient alchem-
ical tetrameria which is implicit in the fourfold structure of
d
unity: 4 —a . c. What the formula can only hint at, however,
Jade
is the higher plane that is reached through the process of trans-
formation and integration. The 'sublimination' or progress or
qualitative change consists in an unfolding of totality into four
parts four times, which means nothing less than its becoming
conscious. When psychic contents are split up into four aspects,
it means that they have been subjected to discrimination by the
four orienting functions of consciousness. Only the production
of these four aspects makes a total description possible. The
process depicted by our formula changes the originally uncon-
scious totality into a conscious one. The Anthropos A descends
from above through his Shadow B into Physis C (— serpent),
and, through a kind of crystallization process D (— lapis) that
reduces chaos to order, rises again to the original state, which
in the meantime has been transformed from an unconscious
into a conscious one. Consciousness and understanding arise
from discrimination, that is, through analysis (dissolution) fol-
lowed by synthesis, as stated in symbolical terms by the alchem-
ical dictum: ‘Solve et coagula' (dissolve and coagulate)." "Ihe
formula presents a symbol of the self, for the self is not just a
static quantity or constant form, but is also a dynamic process.
. . . The four transformations represent a process of restora-
tion or rejuvenation taking place, as it were, inside the
selbe Sti
As applied to our text, the descent of the Anthropos corre-
sponds to Wisdom's descent to the alchemist. ‘Then follows the
phase of imprisonment in Physis through the influence of the
shadow (B), which in Aurora is represented by the fall into
the pit of hell. Phase C, the serpent, is symbolized in Aurora by
the “woman who brought in death" or by the “corrupting hu-
midity." ‘The fourth phase, D, begins in the present chapter:
the crystallization process symbolized by the building of the
treasure-house, which represents the coagulation of the lapis.
7 Pp. 259f.
316X. THE FIFTH PARABLE: OF THE TREASURE-HOUSE . ..
In Alphidius the fourth stage is also one of fixation, and this is
precisely what the parable of the house built on a rock signifies.
In our text Wisdom once more appears personified, in ac-
cordance with Proverbs 9: 1—5, on which the whole parable is
based, though there is also an allusion to Matthew 7 : 24, con-
cerning the wise man who built his house on a rock. This wise
man is the one who not only hears Christ's words but acts upon
them—i.e., does not regard Christ's act of redemption passively,
as something that has already happened and is sufficient for his
own salvation, but himself takes an active part by his own
endeavours.
The fact that Wisdom—the anima—should appear once
again is itself significant, for it is proof that the wearisome
operations described in the previous parables have been suc-
cessful. Through them the author has regained so much sta-
bility that he is no longer buffeted about by the opposites,
vacillating between despair and ecstasy, but can now confront
the anima in person, this time more consciously. Since this
state is played out in projection, it seems as if the anima were
building herself a house, an indestructible "setting" or temenos
in which the author can meet her without falling back into the
nigredo. In subsequent passages yet another fundamental ad-
vance becomes discernible: the anima is no longer the sole and
central experience—behind her or in her house something far
greater is revealed: the God-image itself.
O how blessed are they that dwell in this house; for therein everyone
that asketh receiveth and he that seeketh findeth and to him that
knocketh it shall be opened. For Wisdom standeth at the door and
saith: Behold, I stand at the gate and knock: if any man shall hear
my voice and open the door, I will come in to him and he to me,
and I will be satisfied with him and he with me.
The Biblical treasure-house of Wisdom forms a parallel to
the heavenly Jerusalem alluded to in the fifth chapter of Aurora,
which is a synonym for Wisdom and in patristic literature was
identified with the Church.’ Here it is described as the house
8 Ephraem Syrus, II, col. 156 (referring to Isa. 54 : 11£): “Behold, I will make thy
stones beryls and will lay thy foundations with sapphires. And I will make thy
bulwarks of jasper, and thy gates of stone of crystal. And all who have departed
out of my hands shall enter into thee. These things are spiritual and belong today
to the Church and heretofore were figured by the precious things of the earth." *
317AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
and courts of the Lord (Psalm 35:9, 83:5, 11), and is equated
with Christ as the "door" to salvation (John 10: 9).? Honorius
of Autun !? interpreted Wisdom building herself a house as a
prefiguration of Christ: "Wisdom, that is, the Lord Jesus Christ,
the Son of God, built himself a house, for he created a man in
the womb of the Virgin, and took him up into the unity of his
Person." 1 The seven pillars of the house of wisdom Honorius
interpreted as the seven gifts of the Holy Spirit. Seen from
this standpoint, the alchemical fixatio can be understood as an
incarnation of God, which had already been alluded to in the
previous parable. Also, in Aurora as in Honorius, Wisdom is
identified with the Holy Spirit. The fixation or incarnation of
the spiritual content can be conceived psychologically as an
actualization of the archetype of the self. For the self, the centre
and totality of the psyche, is only potentially existent so long
as it is not perceived by consciousness. But in this phase of
development the inner experience of the self becomes "con-
solidated." Nevertheless, it should be noted that the fixation
takes place somewhere in the "beyond," i.e., in the unconscious
(as Alphidius says: "in a certain place which is everywhere");
for the treasure-house of Wisdom, like the heavenly Jerusalem
and the courts of the Lord, is not of this world.
If we try to understand the text psychologically, we find
ourselves confronted with a strangely paradoxical situation. On
the one hand a realization of the self seems to have taken place,
on the other hand the human ego seems to have been in large
measure extinguished, so that a genuine, conscious realization
of the self is scarcely possible. We must therefore suppose that
there was an intuitive realization of the self in a delirious or
trance-like state, as is in fact suggested by the style of the text.
The ego would then have gone a long way towards the infinity
of the self, and the self a long way towards man ("I will come in
to him and he to me").
9 Matt. 7:7, "Ask, and it shall be given you,” etc. is cited also by Christianos
(Alch. grecs, VI, i, 4).
10 Quaest. et Resp. in Prov. et Eccl. (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, cols. 316ff.).
11*'Biblia Mariana" (Borgnet, XXXVII, p. 388): “[Mary] is the house and wardrobe
from which the Son of God was clothed with flesh." * She is also the “house of all
renovation and restoration" (p. 411), and the "ark of salvation" (p. 366).
12 Cf. also Alcuin, Grammatica (Migne, P.L., vol. 101, col. 853), and John the
Deacon, Life of St. Gregory, 2, 13 (Migne, P.L., vol. 75, col. 92).
318X. THE FIFTH PARABLE: OF THE TREASURE-HOUSE . ..
Wisdom prepares a love-feast for the man who enters her
house. Apocalypse 9:20, "If any man shall hear my voice and
open to me the door, I will come in to him and sup with him,
and he with me," was interpreted as an allusion to the Eucha-
rist, which was a pharmacum vitae and was called by Ephraem
Syrus a "ferment" or “cup of life." !? In Aurora this supper is
identical with the "living fount" mentioned later on.
O how great is the multitude of thy sweetness which thou hast hid-
den for them that enter this house; which eye hath not seen nor
ear heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of man. To them
that unlock this house shall be befitting holiness and also length
of days,
These images give expression to the hope for a life after
death. In consequence of the relative timelessness and non-
spatiality of the archetype, the experience of the self does in-
deed bring with it a sense of immortality.* This passage, too,
seems to me to confirm that the text was composed when the
author was in a semi-conscious, rapturous state—perhaps a state
near to death.
so that face to face and eye to eye they shall look upon all the bright-
ness of the sun and moon; 15
Here the figure of Wisdom appears as God himself. The
previous reference to I Corinthians 2:9, “Eye hath not seen
nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man,
what things God has prepared for those who love him,” and the
four-and-twenty elders mentioned later (p. 327), who in the
Apocalypse fell down before the Lamb, show that a symbol of
the highest numinosity is revealed in the midst of the treasure-
house.!9 In our text, significantly enough, it is not actually God
that is seen but "all the brightness of the sun and moon," by
which must be meant the mystery of their conjunction. It may
13 Ephraem Syrus, I, cols. 390 and 340: “Through his wine is union made.” *
14 “The Psychology of the Transference,” par. 531.
15In the Aurora text this passage comes later, at p. 327 (supra, p. 105). I have
moved it here only in the commentary.
16 Cf. the remarkable parallel in the Gnostic Book of Baruch (Bousset, Haupt-
probleme, p. 293): "After the neophyte has sworn the oath, he goes in to the
good [God] and sees what eye hath not seen nor ear heard . . . and drinks of the
living water, and that among them is baptism."
319AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
also be a veiled allusion to Apocalypse 21 : 23-24: "And the city
had no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine in it: for
the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light
thereof. And the nations of them which are saved shall walk
in the light of it, and the kings of the earth do bring their glory
and honour into it." In the Apocalypse, therefore, the place of
the sun and moon is taken by a supernatural light, the Lamb of
God.1" According to St. Thomas the highest heaven, the empy-
rean, "has light, not condensed so as to emit rays, as the sun
does, but of a more subtle nature. Or it may have the bright-
ness of glory which differs from mere natural brightness." 1%
Obviously some such supernatural light is meant in Aurora.
But whereas in the Apocalypse it takes the place of the sun
and moon, here it is begotten by the sun and moon in
accordance with the classical alchemical formula. That the lapis
arises between the sun and moon is mentioned in the ear-
liest Greek texts. Thus the treatise entitled "The Eight
Tombs” !? says that the lapis is a winged being consisting of
the four elements and lying between the sun and moon, and that
this is the alabaster egg.?? Zosimos calls the stone a “Mithraic”
mystery," perhaps because Mithras was held to be a mediator
who connected the sun with the moon.” In classical times it
was widely believed that the sun was a symbol of the demiurgic
power of God and of the "truth" by which he created the
world.” It was the cosmic Nous, spreading God's power and
goodness through the universe.?* Psychologically, the sun sym-
bolizes the archetypal foundation of consciousness and of its
expansion.
17 Cf. the ecclesiastical interpretation in Cyril of Alexandria, In Isaiam Com-
mentarium, cap. 60, v. 19 (Migne, P.G., vol. 7o, cols. 1346£) and Theodoret of
Cyrus, Interpretatio in Isaiam, 60, 19 (Migne, P.G., vol. 81, cols. 69, 469). Also
Honorius, Elucidarium (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, col. 1111): "In the fiery substance
[of the sun] therefore understand the Father, in the splendour the Son, in the
warmth the Holy Spirit." *
18 Summa, I, q. 66, art. 3 (Eng. edn., I, p. 333).* 19 Alch, grecs, IV, xxxiii, 1.
20 Cf. also Olympiodorus, ibid., II, iv, 49. 21 YII, ii; 1.
22 Bousset, p. 120. A similar idea occurs in the Gnostic Bardesanes: the sun and
moon are the "father and mother of life," and from them proceeds the “hidden
son of life." Mani, too, was the medius Solis et Lunae."
23 Scott, Hermetica, I, pp. 266, 348, 388, 454 (Stobaeus, 1. 41. 11), and III, p. 464.
Cf. Das Buch der Alaune und Salze, p. 64, Turba, p. 333, and Pret. marg. nov.,
p. 119. 24 Scott, I, pp. 187ff., Reitzenstein, Erlósungsmysterium, p. 200 n.
320X. THE FIFTH PARABLE: OF THE TREASURE-HOUSE ...
The coniunctio of sun and moon as the central mystery of
the treasure-house occurs also in Senior's "Epistola Solis ad
Lunam crescentem," > where it symbolizes a unio mystica of
two transcendent powers.
So far the parable seems to come closer to the generally ac-
cepted Christian views than does the earlier part of the text. The
reason for this must be that the author has separated himself
from the black earth and has passed into a vision of the world
beyond. But here, in this passage, he communicates something
portentously new: in the Holy of Holies, which the Christian
may hope to enter only after death, he beholds not the Godhead
but the mysterium coniunctionis of sun and moon. The
"woman" in the Apocalypse is “clothed with the sun, and the
moon under her feet" (Apoc. 12:1), so that this motif had
already been foreshadowed in the earlier appearance of the
anima.?5 An authentic parallel to the image in Aurora would
be the vision of the heavenly Jerusalem *'as a bride adorned for
her husband" in Apocalypse 21 : 2ff., where the city is described
as the "Lamb's wife." The light that emanates from the city
"was like unto a stone most precious, even like a jasper stone,
clear as crystal" (Apoc. 21 : 11).27 This recalls the Aidos ruuóraros,
"most costly stone" of the Greek alchemists. ‘The hierosgamos
of opposites in the self represents the climax of the alchemist's
endeavours, and has its parallel in the Apocalyptic hierosgamos:
"And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there
shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall
there. be, any more. pain..«« (Apoc. 21:4)7*. In thes same
place occur the words which must have been of great import
to an alchemist: "I will give unto him that is athirst of the
fountain of the water of life freely. He that overcometh shall
inherit all things; and I will be his God, and he shall be my
son (Apoc. .2 1.O £.),79
It is as though the author in his vision had anticipated the
union of the Mother of God with Christ in the "heavenly
bridal chambers," which is now promulgated in the Papal
25 De chemia, pp. 7-9.
26 Supra, pp. 213ff.
27 Cf. “Answer to Job," p. 447f., 461ff.
28 Cf. the union of God with the Shekinah in the Cabala (ibid., p. 447).
29 C£. supra, p. 59 and n. 11.
321AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
Encyclical.9? The significance of this symbol for the whole of
Christianity is discussed in Jung’s Answer to Job.?! The fact
that it appeared in the vision of a man living in the thirteenth
century shows that these compensatory and conciliatory tend-
encies had long been constellated in the collective unconscious.
Perhaps we may deduce from this vision that the author was
one who had penetrated especially deeply into the problem of
opposites in Christianity, so that the unconscious broke through
with this uniting symbol. Another important parallel to be -
mentioned is the coniunctio symbolism in the Cabala.? Ac-
cording to the Cabala the Original Man was created male-
female after the image of God. The Zohar says: "Therefore an
image (diokna) which does not contain male and female is not
a higher image. . . . Come and see, the Holy One, blessed be
He, will not set up His tabernacle in a place in which male
and female are not united." ?? A similar view is expressed in
the description of the union of Tifereth and Malchuth, where
Yesod, signifying the phallus, effects spiritual procreation.**
Malchuth is compared also to a “watered garden” (after Isa.
30 The Assumption of Our Blessed Lady: Munificentissimus Deus, quoting St.
John Damascene, Homilia II in Dormitionem BMV, 14 (Migne, P.G., vol. 96, col.
742): "The Bride whom the Father had espoused had to abide in the heavenly
bridal chambers.” '"T'he intimate union of Mary with her Son." “Similarly, in their
treatment of the subject, they describe the Queen triumphantly entering into the
royal court and sitting at the right hand of the Divine Redeemer. Again, they
adduce the Spouse of the Canticles 'that goeth up by the desert, as a pillar of
smoke of aromatical spices, of myrrh and frankincense, to be adorned with a
crown. And these are put forward by the same writers as figures of that heavenly
Queen and celestial Spouse who together with the Divine Bridegroom is elevated
to the court of heaven." *
31 Pp. 461ff.
32 Hurwitz, "Archetypische Motive in der chassidischen Mystik," pp. 175ff.
33 Zohar, I, 55b. Cf. Sperling and Simon, trans., I, p. 177.
34 Hurwitz, "Archetypische Motive," p. 177. The Idra Suta says: “But Tifereth
is JHWH, whence comes the name JHWH-Zebaoth. The male member is at the
extremity of the body and is named Yesod. It is the element [stage] which delights
woman." "If therefore only the high priest has permission to enter there [the
Holy of Holies] . . . only he may enter that upper place [the Holy of Holies of
the Matronita, the upper stage] who is named Love [Chesed, i.e., Tifereth in his
Chesed aspect]. When he enters the Holy of Holies the Matronita is delighted,
and this Holy of Holies is blest in the place that is named Zion. But Zion and
Jerusalem are likewise two stages, one corresponding to Love, the other to stern
judgment." Rosenroth, Kabbala denudata, II, part I, pp. 593 (sec. 743), 594 (secs.
153t).
322X. THE FIFTH PARABLE: OF THE TREASURE-HOUSE .
58:11), which is a striking reminder of the symbolism of the
bride in the last chapter of Aurora. Hurwitz interprets these
passages to mean that the “generative and creative principle of
the unconscious has entered consciousness." 55 In Aurora we
have the same primordial image of the hierosgamos. The im-
portant thing in our text, however, is that this symbol explicitly
represents the Godhead.
At the sight of the hierosgamos the visionary is seized with
a feeling of immortality: he is granted "befitting holiness and
also length of days"—obviously because something immutable
and eternal has revealed itself to him.
for it is founded upon a sure rock, which cannot be split unless it
be anointed with the blood of a most fine buck-goat or be smitten
three times with the rod of Moses, that waters may flow forth in
great abundance, that all the people both men and women drink
thereof, and they shall neither hunger nor thirst any more. Who-
soever by his science shall open this house shall find therein an un-
failing living fount that maketh young, wherein whoever is baptized
shall be saved and can no more grow old.
Although the unshakability of the rock is praised, the un-
expected demand is now made that it should be split by anoint-
ing it with the blood of a buck goat or by the rod of Moses, so
that the fountain of life shall flow forth. The rock is evidently
both the foundation of the house and something found in the
house, as well as the house itself. It is the lapis philosophorum.
The goat's blood with which it is opened is probably a borrow-
ing from the parable of Marchos in Senior, quoted by Jung; *°
there it signifies the "flowing soul" of the stone, a synonym for
the divine water. Picinellus says that the stone Adamas ("un-
conquerable," *adamant," hence "diamond" could neither be
broken by iron nor destroyed by fire. It was "ever the same
and ever constant and without flaw." Therefore, he says, it was
also an allegory of the soul of Mary. It could be softened only
by goat's blood, which signified benevolence, love, and also the
"heat of libido."?' In other texts Adamas symbolizes the
morally irreproachable man who could be undone only by “the
35 Hurwitz, p. 178.
36 Mysterium, pp. 72ff.; Senior, De chemia, pp. 78f. In Zosimos (Alch. grecs, III,
XXV, 3) goat's blood is a synonym for the water and the name of a stone.
37 Picinellus, Mundus Symbolicus, 1, p. 677.
959AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
goat's blood of lust" (luxuria)9* Goat's blood thus stands for
something very like the concupiscentia mentioned in the first
chapter of Aurora. In its dual significance as benevolence and
love on the one hand and lust and dissipation on the other it
represents an animal and emotional factor in man that has to be
included in the process, so that a living effect can stream forth
from the "sure rock" of the spiritually stable personality. The
unsplit rock and the goat's blood express the paradoxicality of
Wisdom (i.e., the unconscious), who confers immutability and .
vitality at once. There is a similar combination of rock, house,
and fountain in Zosimos,? who recommends the adept to build
a temple from one stone of Prokonnesos marble "without be-
ginning or end.” “And in it shall be a fount of purest water
and a sunlike light shall flash out. In the fount is the treasure
you seek, the metal priest," who is changed to silver and
finally to gold. Similarly, the Carmina Heliodori* say that
the lapis is a "light without shadow," a marvellous thing that
makes a great golden fountain to gush forth from itself.*! Again,
the Turba* says that a stone can be made which shines like
marble, and from which the "hidden nature" can be extracted,
and in the Buch der Alaune und Salze *Ó*. Mercurius says that
he brings light to substances because he is the living water, the
"fount of creatures" (fons animalium), and whoever drinks him
shall not die for ever.
The treasure-house and the fount are found also in the
Corpus Hermeticum, where in the seventeenth “Treatise to
King Ammon" Asclepius says: "You can see that in the earth
there gush forth many springs of water and of air in its mid-
most parts, and that these things, air, water, and earth, are
38 Milo, De sobrietate, II, 797-98 (Poetae Latini aevi Carolini, ed. Traube, III,
p. 668): "He who would be a diamond, let him beware of being tainted with the
goat's blood of lust, lest the hammer break him." *
39 Alch. grecs, III, i, 5. Cf. Jung, "The Visions of Zosimos,” par. 87, and, concern-
ing the "hieratic house" in Zosimos, Alch. grecs, III, xxix, 12.
40 P. 45.
41 Cf. Christianos (Alch. grecs, IV, i, 2) who says that his teaching is like the
. fountain of eternally procreative water in the midst of Paradise, and like the sun
shining at midday without casting a shadow, and like the moon that illumines
the night. Nothing could reach its desired end without the "moisture of the
philosophers." Alphidius likewise calls the stone a “light lacking shadow.”
42 P. 145. 43 Pp. 58f.; cf. p. 91.
324X. THE FIFTH PARABLE: OF THE TREASURE-HOUSE . ..
found in the same place, being attached to one single root.
Hence we believe that the earth is the storehouse of all mat-
ter." ** This source of power is fed by the sun, the universal
creative spirit. In the treatise "Asclepius" 55 the house is an
image of the hylic man, or body; in it the "divine mind” rests,
“fenced in by the body, as it were by a wall." Among the
Naassenes the body was the "enclosure" in which the first
Adam or Logos dwelt. ““This is Adamas, the cornerstone, which
is added to the citadel of Zion." *€ According to Simon Magus,
man as the microcosm is a "house" which contains the root of
the universe, and in this root is sealed and hidden the un-
bounded fiery power of God.*?
While the alchemical conceptions were drawn partly from
late classical images of this kind, it is probable that the author
also associated them with patristic symbolism. ‘Thus Honorius
of Autun 5$ comments on I Corinthians 3:17: “The temple of
God is holy, and it is within you. O how blessed is he in whom
God dwelleth, for as this house is built of four walls, so is the
temple of our body made from the four elements." He goes on
to say that the sanctuary of this temple *? is our mind, which
thinks spiritual things. The forecourts are the soul, which allows
what is necessary to the life of the body to reach it through the
senses. The altar of sacrifice is the heart, in which pure thoughts
and prayers are offered up to God. The tower is our head, the
windows are our eyes, and the images our good works. But
the light of the lamp is the lumen scientiae. 'The image of the
fount frequently occurs in patristic literature: Christ or his
44 Scott, Hermetica, I, pp. 264ff.
45 Ibid., p. 298.
46 Leisegang, Gnosis, p. 125.
41 Ibid., p. 68.
48 Speculum (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, col. 1105).
49 Cf. The Zohar (trans. Sperling and Simon, III, p. 293): "This is a secret en-
trusted to the keeping of the wise alone, and here is the substance thereof. In the
midst of a mighty rock, a most recondite firmament, there is set a Palace which
is called the Palace of Love. This is the region wherein the treasures of the King
are stored, and all His love-kisses are there. All souls beloved of the Holy One
enter into that Palace. And when the King Himself appears, ‘Jacob kisses Rachel’
(Gen. 29, 11), that is, the Lord discovers each holy soul, and takes each in turn
up unto Himself, fondling and caressing her." Cf. in the Cabala the "aedes
divitiarum" of the divine name Adonai, whose four letters form the four exits of
the rivers of Paradise (Knorr von Rosenroth, Kabbala denudata, I, Part 1, p. 32).
325AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
body the Church is a fount of life." According to Origen,
Christ lives as an "inner rock" in the "kingly inner man," and
from this rock the "spiritual senses flow out like living water." **
These are the “living stones" which Dorn says men must change
themselves into. The water from the rock was generally in-
terpreted by the Fathers as knowledge of God, or as the fons
scientiae? In the Church's view Christ is the rock smitten by
the rod of Moses, for just as that rock yielded living water, so
water and blood flowed from Christ's side; his body is a
“pneumatic rock" from which the water of spirituality flows.**
Peter, the natural man who accompanied him, became the rock
of the Church. Basil interprets the water as the vision of God,
which will one day perfectly satisfy our thirst.?? In Aurora, too,
it is suggested that nothing less than a vision of God is meant.
Gregory of Nyssa calls the mystic who experiences God and the
Logos in the depths of his soul a "treasure-house of living
water," 55 and St. Ambrose says that the mind of man is the
place where the water of the spirit given by Christ gushes up.9?
Ephraem Syrus** calls Christ's body a “thesaurarium” from
which he gives to the needy heathen. That the author really
did have such associations in mind is proved by the reference
in the text to Mark 16 : 16, "He that believeth and is baptized
shall be saved." Yet, in contrast to the ecclesiastical parallels,
there is as we have said an apparent contradiction in the text:
on the one hand the treasure-house is founded on a sure rock,
on the other the rock must be split so that the saving water can
flow out. If an unshakable foundation has been found within,
why should it be broken up again? The reason for this is prob-
ably—once more—that the "fixation" of the self occurred in an
50 Ephraem Syrus, Hymni et sermones, II, cols. 130, 790, and 558: "From thee
flows life on all sides," and I, col. 166: "Glory to thee, who didst put on the body
of mortal man, and made it a fountain of life to all mortals.” *
51 In Numeros hom., 12, 2 (Migne, P.G., vol. 12, col. 659).
52 Rahner, “Flumina de ventre Christi," p. 274.
53 Ibid., pp. 278, 385, 3goff. 54 Pp. 372, 377, 3779- 55 P. 285.
56 P. 286. Cf. Niklaus von der Flue’s vision of the reservoir of water in Lavaud,
La Vie profonde de Nicolas de Flue, pp. 71 and 73ff., and the image of the taber-
nacle as the ground of the soul in Meister Eckhart (Evans, I, p. 187), where God
eternally gives birth to the son. Cf. also Jundt, Essai sur le mysticisme spéculatif de
Maitre Eckhardt, p. 102.
57 Rahner, pp. 288f. This Nous is also Paradise, where the fourfold river of the
Logos rises and waters the whole earth. 58 I, col. 168.
326X. THE FIFTH PARABLE: OF THE TREASURE-HOUSE . ..
intuitive vision of the world beyond, that is, on a pneumatic
plane. Therefore the stone must be softened with goat’s blood,
because otherwise too much psychic life would be excluded from
the process. Certain parts of the personality are, as the next
passage shows, not yet integrated. This intuitive vision of the
self corresponds to the stage of the unio mentalis in Dorn,
which has still to be united with the body by means of the art
and with the aid of human blood.*? The goat's blood in our
text represents, as it were, the soul of the goat and symbolizes
the animal man. The mythological connection of the goat with
the Egyptian god Set and the devil, with black magic and the
chthonic world, is too well known to need further amplifica-
tion here. This animal world is the solvent by which the rock,
the self, is drawn into a new process of development.
Yet, alas, but few open it who are children (parvuli) and are as
wise as children; but if they who are children shall tell of these
things and shall usurp to themselves the seats of the four and twenty
elders, doubtless they shall by their dignity and rank open the
house, (so that face to face and eye to eye they shall look upon all
the brightness of the sun and moon) but without these (elders) they
shall not prevail.
This passage its textually corrupt, but at least it makes clear
that those who enter the treasure-house need the help of the
four and twenty elders in order to behold "all the brightness
of the sun and moon."
As regards the historical position of our text, it should par-
ticularly be noted that only the "parvuli" can open the treasure-
house with the help of the twenty-four elders. "Parvuli" was
the official title of members of the mendicant orders, that is,
the Dominicans and Franciscans.9 Already at the time of
Joachim of Flora the chosen ones from the contemplative
monastic orders who would build the Ecclesia spiritualis were
called "Parvuli." According to him! they were the "holy
people" of whom God had said: “I will be to him a Father and
he shall be to me a son," a saying which also occurs in Aurora.
The interpretation of "parvuli" as an allusion to the mendicant
orders is confirmed by the closing words of Aurora, where the
59 Mysterium, p. 485.
60 Concordia, V (Hahn, Geschichte der Ketzer, III, p. 301). 61 Ibid., p. 300.
327AURORA CONSURGENS? COMMENTARY
chosen are called "the poor," which was another accepted title
for these two orders. Since many other points of contact with
Joachim’s Concordia will be revealed in the course of the com-
mentary, it may be assumed on the one hand that the author of
Aurora was acquainted with his writings, and on the other that
he himself was probably a member of one of these orders or at
least had close connections with it.
For they who have the keys of the kingdom of heaven, whatsoever
they shall bind or loose, so shall it be. For these follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goeth.
The four and twenty elders are now said—like the zap6évo.
in the Apocalypse *?—to follow the Lamb of God and to have
the keys that bind and loose (i.e., the power of Peter and the
Church). Here this power refers at the same time to the al-
chemical solve et coagula. The image of the twenty-four elders
is taken from the Apocalypse, but it is very difficult to deter-
mine what they mean alchemically. Part II of Aurora, which I
regard as a commentary on Part I,* interprets them as the
“greater humours” (humores maiores),® and one thinks at once
of such pictures as the Ripley “Scrowle,” where the gods of the
planets and metals are shown pouring liquids into the basin of
the arcane substance.99 There may be an allusion to the "order
of the elders" in Senior's "Epistola Solis ad Lunam crescen-
tem," ** where the moon says to the sun: “We shall be exalted
by the spirit when we shall ascend the order of the elders. . . .
The lamp of the light will be poured into my lamp, and of
thee and of me there will be made a mixture, as of wine and
sweet water. . . ." These "elders" are thus assistants at the
coniunctio.95 The word "'ascend" (ascenderimus) may give a clue
to their meaning: they are probably connected with the twenty-
four hours of the day, or with the gradus (degrees or steps) of
the fire, or the mópyo. (divisions) of the sun.*® Many of the mys-
62 Apoc. 14 : 4: "These are they which were not defiled with women; for they are
virgins."
63 Matt. 16 : 19. 64 Supra, p. 5.
65 Art. aurif., I, p. 123. 66 Psychology and Alchemy, fig. 257.
67 De chemia, pp. 7-9. Cf. Stapleton, "Muhammad bin Umail," p. 149.
68 Cf. the advice of the "old philosophers" in the Xenodochium (hospital) of Dorn
("Spec. phil.," Theatr. chem., I, pp. 256f.).
69 Carmina Heliodori, p. 37.
328X. THE FIFTH PARABLE: OF THE TREASURE-HOUSE ...
tery initiations in antiquity were divided into twelve hours.
‘Thus a Mandaean text says that at the “semence de l'homme
nouveau" the twelve hours are "douze rois lumineux des trans-
formations successives." 7 These twelve kings are the "signs
which symbolize the sun round and complete." Elsewhere they
are twelve virgins.” In the Mithraic mysteries the celebrant
changed his garment (symbolizing his form) twelve times to
correspond with the twelve signs of the zodiac,” and the twelve
hours of day and night played an important role in the Egyptian
liturgy for the dead.** In some mysteries only the twelve night-
hours were considered, in others those of the day as well. In
Aurora they would be added together, as is obvious since the
lapis unites in itself the upper and lower powers. ‘The Cabalistic
sefiroth, which are shining lights, are called gradus in the Latin
translations. "And in that light, which is in each step (or de-
gree), is revealed whatever is revealed . . . And therefore all
ascend on to one step and all are crowned with one and the same
thing. . . . That light which is manifested is called the gar-
ment. For the king himself is the innermost Light of all. And
all lamps and all lights are lighted by the Most Holy Anointed
One." *5 This refers psychologically to the archetypal idea of the
personality as a “conglomerate soul.” Another such multiple
unity is hiranyagarbha (golden germ), one of the Indian sym-
bols of the self£.'* Roger Bacon says of Christ: “For Christ is the
cornerstone, as being the point in which are gathered together
the twelve apostles, and otherwise the twenty-four elders of the
Apocalypse; and whosoever would be united to Christ and
founded upon Christ must be spiritually of one number or the
other;
Considered purely arithmetically, 24 can be,viewed as
1 X 2 X 3 X 4, just as 10 represents 1 + 2 + 3 + 4, and this
70 Reitzenstein, Erlósungsmysterium, p. 153. 71 Ibid., p. 154.
72 Theodor bar Konai, ibid., p. 156. 13 P. 168.
74 Pp. 170f. Cf. pp. 95-98, 155-62, and Moret, Mystéres égyptiens, pp. 22ff. Also
Junker, Die Stundemwachen in den Osiris-Mysterien, and the twelve fatherly
and twelve motherly angels in the Book of Baruch (Leisegang, Gnosis, pp. 17of.).
Ephraem Syrus, I, col. 10: '"The sun hath overcome, and the number of steps by
which he ascended signified a mystery. Lo, it is twelve days since he ascended,
and today is the thirteenth, a perfect symbol of the Son and his twelve apostles." *
75 Knorr von Rosenroth, Kabbala denudata, II, Part 1, p. 555.*
76 Mysterium, p. 208. 71 Opus tertium (ed. Brewer), cap. xl, p. 138.*
B29AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
gives both numbers the significance of a totality. From ancient
times 24 was regarded as significant because it was a multiple
of 4. Anselm of Laon says of the twenty-four elders: “This
[number] is composed of twelve and twelve, and it is also com-
posed of three and four; for the holy preachers announce the
name of the holy Trinity through the four quarters of the
world." 78 According to the Marcosians, the sum of the letters
composing the highest Tetrad *? gives the number 24. This was
also true of the second Tetrad and of the name “Jesus.” *? The
Pistis Sophia says that Jesus came from the last mystery, the
twenty-fourth, and that there were twenty-four “Invisibles”
which were emanations of the highest God.*! We find 24 as a
multiple of 4 also in Zosimos. A rather obscure passage says:
"From the most general musical lines ABCD twenty-four dif-
ferent lines arise . . . and only with these twenty-four lines
can the numberless melodies of hymns be composed . . . in-
cluding those concerning the sacred knowledge, for instance
concerning the solution and dissolution. . . . Herein is found
that which has power over the one true material for the genesis
of the bird" (bird = lapis)? Evidently the twenty-four lines
constitute the active and formative principle in matter, and this
is in agreement with the contemporary Gnostic speculations
about the stoicheia (basic elements, letters), which were in-
terpreted as aeons and emanations of light. The twenty-four
stoicheia were called "symbola," and according to Philo of
Alexandria were derived, like the musical signs, from Egypt.5*
Hence, in alchemy, the stars were considered to be the twenty-
four letters of a golden alphabet in the heavens, the “heavenly
crown" which unites all things.5*
18 Enarr. in Apoc., cap. IV (Migne, P.L., vol. 162, col. 1517).*
79 Arrhetos, Sige, Pater, Aletheia.
80 Leisegang, Gnosis, p. 336.
81 Ibid., pp. 351 and 36off.
82 Alch. grecs, III, xliv, 1.
83" On the Life of Moses" (Loeb edn.), VI, pp. 286f. Cf. Scott, Hermetica, YII,
p: 490.
84 According to Mennens ("Aureum vellus," Theatr. chem., V, p. 329), the heavens
are a parchment, and the inscription on it is the stars. "And the said alphabet or
heavenly crown, although it includes various causes of things, yet are they closely
conjoined, and conspire together for one species of man and the production of
those things which are for his use." *
830X. THE FIFTH PARABLE: OF THE TREASURE-HOUSE . ..
These amplifications enable us to understand the twenty-
four elders as elements or powers which work together in the
coniunctio and are synthesized into a whole, a motif whose psy-
chological significance is discussed in Jung.%
But the beauty of this house cannot be told; its walls and streets
are of the purest gold, and its gates gleam with pearls and precious
stones, and its cornerstones are fourteen, containing the principal
virtues of the whole foundation.
In our text the treasure-house of Wisdom is built upon
fourteen pillars, whereas in Proverbs 9:1 it is "hewn out of
seven pillars"—no doubt as a reflection of the cosmos with its
seven planetary spheres.*® The heavenly Jerusalem, with which
the treasure-house is implicitly compared, stands upon twelve
foundations (Apoc. 21: 14ff.).87 The number 14 in our text
may be regarded as a doubling of 7 or as the sum of 4 and 10
(both, as we have seen, significant numbers). It signifies the
“helpers in need" *5 and is the number into which the forbears
of Jesus were grouped.*? This grouping may have been influ-
enced by the ancient Egyptian idea that the Pharaoh had four-
teen ancestors or ka's.? Remarkably enough, in some texts the
fourteen ka’s are described as the moral and physical attributes
of the Pharaoh, just as "virtues" are attributed to the fourteen
cornerstones in Aurora. In Arabic legend Adam had fourteen
children—seven pairs of twins who were the "parents of the
world."? ? According to Boehme, the number 14 symbolizes
85 Mysterium, '"The Journey through the Planetary Houses,” pp. 224ff.
86 Reitzenstein, Erlósungsmysterium, § 4: ““The Eternal City."
87 Boll (4us der Offenbarung Johannis, p. 23) interprets them as the twelve signs
of the zodiac. Cf. the twelve or fourteen privileges of Mary in Albertus, "Marziale"
(Borgnet, XXXVII, p. 239).
88 Type of saint in Catholic folklore.
89 Matt. 1: 17: “So all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen gen-
erations; and from David until the carrying away into Babylon are fourteen
generations; and from the carrying away into Babylon unto Christ are fourteen
generations." Cf. Joachim of Flora, Concordia, V (Hahn, III, p. 307).
90 Jacobsohn, Die dogmatische Stellung des Konigs in der Theologie der alten
Aegypter, pp. 32 and 67.
91 Moret, Mystéres égyptiens, p. 209. The ka’s are strength, light, intelligence, sight,
hearing, wealth, etc.
92*Le Livre d'Hermés, MS No. 2578 Paris, cited in Blochet, “Etudes sur le
gnosticisme musulman," p. 73.
331AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
the Holy Ghost as manifested in the "Liberty" and uncon-
sciously in nature.??
In the text, the fourteen cornerstones represent the virtues
required of the alchemist if Wisdom is to build her house. Her
house is accordingly the lapis in Senior’s sense of a microcosm; ?*
hence the lapis symbolizes the inner structure of the alchemist
himself. Moreover, in many places the cornerstones are de-
scribed as if each one stood for the whole lapis; they are in fact
only single aspects of one and the same thing.
The first is health, of which the Prophet: Who healeth the broken
in heart and bindeth up their bruises, and the philosophers: He
who useth it preserveth manhood in full vigour of body. The second
is humility, whereof it is written: Because he hath regarded the hu-
mility of his handmaid, for behold from henceforth all generations
shall call me blessed. And the Prophet: The Lord setteth up them
that are cast down. And Aristotle to Alexander: With this stone
it is not good to fight. Alphidius saith: If he shall be humble, his
wisdom shall be perfected. The third is holiness, of which the
Prophet: With the holy thou shalt be holy. And again: Holiness
and magnificence are in his sanctuary. And Alphidius: Know, that
thou canst not have this science, unless thou shalt purify thy mind
before God, that is, wipe away all corruption from thy heart. And
the T'urba: I have put pleasures aside and prayed to God, that he
would show me the pure water, which I know to be pure vinegar.
The fourth is chastity, of which it is written: Whom when I love
I am pure, when I touch I am chaste; whose mother is a virgin and
whose father hath not cohabited with her, for he is fed upon virgin's
milk. Wherefore Avicenna saith in the Mineralia: Certain learned
ones use a water, which is called virgin’s milk. The fifth is virtue, of
which it is said: Virtue adorneth the soul. And Hermes: And it
receiveth the virtue of the upper and lower planets and by its virtue
93 Allendy, Le Symbolisme des nombres, p. 361, who also gives the literature on
the number 14. Always the time element is of significance here. Cf. Agrippa von
Nettesheim’s view that Christ was sacrificed on the fourteenth day of the moon
(De philosophia occulta, YI, 15, fol. m iiv).
94 De chemia, pp. 25 and 83.
956 Cf. the ecclesiastical interpretation of the twelve cornerstones or precious
stones of the heavenly Jerusalem as virtues, e.g., steadfastness of faith, simplicity
of heart, unquestioning faith, humility, chastity, etc. Cf. Anselm of Laon, Enarr.
in Apoc., XXI (Migne, P.L., vol. 162, cols. 1579-82), who comments on a hymn
entitled "Cives coelestis patriae," by Marbod of Rennes (d. 1125), cited in Neale,
Collected Hymns, p. 28.
332X. THE FIFTH PARABLE: OF THE TREASURE-HOUSE ... penetrateth every solid thing. And in the Book of the Quintessence
it is said: For I could not wonder enough at the great virtue of the
thing, which is bestowed upon and infused into it from heaven. No detailed commentary is needed here. The first and second
cornerstones represent health and humility, two virtues which
are often demanded as prerequisites of the opus.®* The third is
holiness, defined by Alphidius as purity of mind before God,
and by the Turba as an ascetic way of life, for only so can one
find the “pure vinegar," ie. the divine water." The fourth,
the stone of chastity, is amplified by the well-known alchemical
saying, “Whose mother is a virgin,’ and by a reference to
virgin's milk,?* known already in Greek alchemy.?? The prima
materia was considered to be a virgin who bore the filius phi-
losophorum from her finest substance. Virgin's milk occurs also
in a hymn of Ephraem Syrus,!^? which says: "Let the earth praise
him [Christ], who with her waters nourishes the fruits and
adores the sun, and looks upon the pure child who sucks the
virgin's milk." It is probable that the author of Aurora was here
96 “Ros. phil," Art. aurif., IL, p. 147: “[The alchemist] should drive far from
himself the vice of arrogance and be pious. ... But the son of the doctrine
should be a man adorned with a most subtle mind . . . clear-headed, firm, and
constant in his purpose." *
97 Cf. the chapter on “The Bitterness” in Mysterium, pp. 192ff. 98 Senior, De chemia, p. 19; "Rosinus ad Sarrat," Art. aurif., I, p. 198; Ruska,
" Al-Razis Buch Geheimnis der Geheimnisse," p. 67. 99 Alch. grecs, V, ii, 4, and I, iii, 11. The prima materia was considered to be
virginal, and the distilling vessel had breastlike openings from which the distillate
was poured. (Cf. Synesios, the dialogue with Dioscurus on Democritus, ibid., II,
iii, 6.) C£. the Stephanos quotation in Carmina Heliodori, I, p. 32, verses 189-90:
"From the sea there rises . . .AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
the Holy Ghost as manifested in the "Liberty" and uncon-
sciously in nature.??
In the text, the fourteen cornerstones represent the virtues
required of the alchemist if Wisdom is to build her house. Her
house is accordingly the lapis in Senior’s sense of a microcosm; ?*
hence the lapis symbolizes the inner structure of the alchemist
himself. Moreover, in many places the cornerstones are de-
scribed as if each one stood for the whole lapis; they are in fact
only single aspects of one and the same thing.
The first is health, of which the Prophet: Who healeth the broken
in heart and bindeth up their bruises, and the philosophers: He
who useth it preserveth manhood in full vigour of body. The second
is humility, whereof it is written: Because he hath regarded the hu-
mility of his handmaid, for behold from henceforth all generations
shall call me blessed. And the Prophet: The Lord setteth up them
that are cast down. And Aristotle to Alexander: With this stone
it is not good to fight. Alphidius saith: If he shall be humble, his
wisdom shall be perfected. The third is holiness, of which the
Prophet: With the holy thou shalt be holy. And again: Holiness
and magnificence are in his sanctuary. And Alphidius: Know, that
thou canst not have this science, unless thou shalt purify thy mind
before God, that is, wipe away all corruption from thy heart. And
the T'urba: I have put pleasures aside and prayed to God, that he
would show me the pure water, which I know to be pure vinegar.
The fourth is chastity, of which it is written: Whom when I love
I am pure, when I touch I am chaste; whose mother is a virgin and
whose father hath not cohabited with her, for he is fed upon virgin's
milk. Wherefore Avicenna saith in the Mineralia: Certain learned
ones use a water, which is called virgin’s milk. The fifth is virtue, of
which it is said: Virtue adorneth the soul. And Hermes: And it
receiveth the virtue of the upper and lower planets and by its virtue
93 Allendy, Le Symbolisme des nombres, p. 361, who also gives the literature on
the number 14. Always the time element is of significance here. Cf. Agrippa von
Nettesheim’s view that Christ was sacrificed on the fourteenth day of the moon
(De philosophia occulta, YI, 15, fol. m iiv).
94 De chemia, pp. 25 and 83.
956 Cf. the ecclesiastical interpretation of the twelve cornerstones or precious
stones of the heavenly Jerusalem as virtues, e.g., steadfastness of faith, simplicity
of heart, unquestioning faith, humility, chastity, etc. Cf. Anselm of Laon, Enarr.
in Apoc., XXI (Migne, P.L., vol. 162, cols. 1579-82), who comments on a hymn
entitled "Cives coelestis patriae," by Marbod of Rennes (d. 1125), cited in Neale,
Collected Hymns, p. 28.
332

. . the shining milk of a bridal virgin, to feed the
newborn child." Zosimos (Alch. grecs, III, xliii, 6) says that others named the
divine water the “water of the amalgam” (uatwylov). "But the amalgam is the
ore ... others derive it from the vessel ($ávos), which has breasts." (Cf. also
Zosimos, “On Vapours," ibid., III, Ivi, 4; IV, vii, 1: “with breast-shaped apparatus,”
Lippmann, I, pp. 97f.) Since the prima materia was often praised as virginal
because it was untouched and unformed, a formless "arche" and hypostasis, the
divine water that issued from it was called the "untouched water" or "virgin's
milk." The idea that the filius philosophorum was the son of the “virginal
pneuma" was current in ancient alchemy. Thus the idea (derived from the
Eleusinian mysteries) lingered on among the Naassenes of a son of a virgin who
was not psychic and not somatic, but the “aeon of aeons” (Hippolytus, Elenchos,
V, 8, and Scott, III, p. 189). 100 *Hymnus in Festum Epiphaniae," II, 12, vol. I, col. 18. 333AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
making a conscious allusion to the virgin's son 1° in order to
emphasize the Christ-lapis parallel.1° The fifth stone is virtue,
which here has the double connotation of moral virtue and
power, more particularly the power of penetration. In Komarios
the end-result of the opus is described as a “murderous” medi-
cine which penetrates all bodies.'? Mercurius, as spiritus
mundus, pure spirit, penetrates, quickens, illuminates and trans-
forms all things.!*
The sixth is victory, whereof Hermes: And it [the stone] shall be
victorious over every solid thing and precious stone. And John in
the Apocalypse: To him that overcometh I will give the subtle hid-
den manna and a new name which the mouth of the Lord hath
named. And in the Book of the Quintessence: But when the stone
of victory shall have been wrought, I shall teach how to make with
the stone of that material emeralds, jaspers, and true chrysolites,
which in colour, substance, and virtue excel and surpass the natural.
The sixth stone is the “hidden manna," the “white pebble
upon which a new name is written" (Apoc. 2 : 17)—a statement
which makes it plainer than ever that this stone has to do with
the innermost nature of man. In his commentary on the Apoc-
alypse Albertus Magnus interpreted the hidden manna as the
Holy Spirit because of its sweetness, and as Christ because of its
fortifying power; but the white pebble (calculus) signified "eter-
nal contemplation” or the glorified body. "Because of its white-
ness it is called clarity; of its solidity, impassibility; of its mod-
eration, subtlety; of its roundness, agility." 1°° Elsewhere he
101 Bonus, Pret. marg. nov., p. 40: “They judged that God must become one with
man, and this came to pass in Jesus Christ and his virgin Mother, and God has
revealed it as a wondrous example to the philosophers in this stone."
102 Psychology and Alchemy, pars. 447ff.
103 Alch. grecs, IV, xx, 17. Cf. supra, p. 266, concerning the penetrative power of
the glorified body.
104 Ruska, Buch der Alaune und Salze, pp. 58f. This idea, which seems to have
influenced the Arabic alchemists, might be compared with the "perfect nature"
of the Manichaeans, who regarded the "perfect body" as the source of revelation
and as the “original nature" or “original self." (The Aramaic word quómàá means
person, matter, body and self at once.) It functions also as the "daemon" or
"familiar spirit" in man. (Reitzenstein, Erlósungsmysterium, pp. 75f., 112f. Cf.
the Arabic “Book of Hermes," ca. 8th cent., there mentioned, which contains the
same idea.)
106 Borgnet, XXXVIII, pp. 516f.*
334X. THE FIFTH PARABLE: OF THE TREASURE-HOUSE . ..
comments: "'I will give unto him a pebble,’ that is, Christ,
who is figured by the pebble, for the pebble is a precious stone,
which is called carbuncle, and it takes this name from charcoal,
taking a likeness therefrom: for it shines when placed in the
dark. So did Christ shine forth in the darkness of this world,
when ‘the Word was made flesh and dwelt among us.’ ” 196
The psychological significance of the lapis comes out even
more plainly in the description of the next four cornerstones:
faith, hope,!?* charity,!^* and goodness. These four are the prin-
cipal Christian virtues and they are also required for the al-
chemical opus. By his paraphrase of Job 2:4, “All that a man
hath will he give for his soul, that is, for this stone," the author
himself clearly states that the lapis is man's soul in the sense
that it is his life, his breath or life-principle.
The seventh is faith, of which we read: Faith saveth a man, and he
who hath it not, cannot be saved. Faith is to understand what thou
seest not. And the T'urba: It is invisible like unto the soul in man's
body. And in the same it is said: Two things are seen, namely water
and earth, but two are not seen, namely air and fire. And Paul:
Whosoever believeth therein shall not be confounded, for to them
that believe not the stone is a stumbling stone and a rock of scandal.
And the Gospel: He that believeth not is already judged. The
eighth is hope, whereof it is said: Firm hope maketh the work glad,
hope always promiseth a good end. And Morienus: Hope and hope,
and so shalt thou attain [the goal]. And the Prophet: Hope in him
all ye congregation of people, in him have our fathers hoped and
they were delivered. The ninth is charity, of which the Apostle:
Charity beareth all things, Charity dealeth not perversely. And the
Evangelist: I love them that love me. He is a friend that loveth at
all times. And King Alphonsus: This is a true friend, who deserteth
thee not when all the world faileth thee. And Gregory: The proof
of love is the display of the work. And Job: All that a man hath
will he give for his soul, that is for this stone. For he who soweth
sparingly shall also reap sparingly; and he who is not a partaker of
the sufferings shall not be of the consolation. The tenth is goodness,
of which it is said: Knowest thou not that the goodness (of God)
leadeth thee to penance? Good is the judge, to render to every man
106 Ibid. *
107 Summa, 1-1I, q. 62, art. 3 ad 2 (Eng. edn., I, p. 853): “Faith is of things unseen,
and hope, of things not possessed." *
108 Cf. Albertus, in Borgnet, XXXVIII, p. 498: "Charity, which is compared to gold
because of its worth, colour, and preciousness." *
3535AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
according to his works. For goodness returneth good for evil, much
for little, but good nature returneth good for good, little for little.
An allegorical style predominates throughout this part of
the text, as if the author were consciously trying to face up to
the moral aspect of the opus. Once again his conscious reflec-
tions come to the fore. The next stone is patience, a virtue re-
peatedly described by the alchemists. This is followed by tem-
perance, and it is interesting to see how its psychological aspects
gradually merge with the chemical processes in the retort. First
it is a question of preserving the health of the soul in the human
body, and then of combining the substances in the vessel. ‘This
part of the text demonstrates very clearly the peculiar way in
which intrapsychic and chemical processes run side by side and
coalesce in the opus.
The eleventh is patience, of which it is said: If thou wilt conquer,
learn to suffer [be patient]. And the Apostle: Through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures we may have hope. And Morienus: He
who hath not patience, let him hold back his hand from the work.
And Calet the Less: Three things are necessary, namely patience,
deliberation, and skill with the instruments. And the Apostle: Be
you patient, for the coming of the Lord is at hand. The twelfth
is temperance, of which it is written, that it nourisheth and cherish-
eth all things and keepeth them in health. For as long as the ele-
ments are in temperance, the soul delighteth in the body, but when
they are in discord, the soul abhorreth to dwell in it. For temperance
is a mixture of the elements one with another, such that the warm
is tempered with the cold, the dry with the humid; and the philoso-
phers have been most careful to insist that one may not exceed
another, saying: Beware lest the secret escape, beware lest the vin-
egar be changed into smoke, beware lest ye put to flight the king
and his consort with too much fire, beware of all that is beyond
the mean, but place it on the fire of corruption, that is of temper-
ance, until they are joined of their own accord.
The next stone, spiritual discipline or understanding, is
particularly significant as it brings about an intrapsychic con-
version or renewal. This is the "subtle" understanding so fre-
quently stipulated by the texts °° in order that the adept should
not come to grief through a concretistic misunderstanding of
the symbols. Similarly, in Joachim of Flora’s doctrine of the
109 Supra, p. 333, n. 96.
336X. THE FIFTH PARABLE: OF THE TREASURE-HOUSE . ..
three ages, it is stressed that in the third age, that of the Holy
Spirit, the "subtler mysteries" would be understood. He
speaks repeatedly in his Concordia of the spiritual and mystic
understanding of the Bible which the Holy Spirit will inspire,”
and he himself tried to interpret it symbolically. This spiritual
understanding is particularly the concern of monks."!?
The thirteenth is spiritual discipline or understanding, of which
the Apostle: The letter killeth, but the spirit quickeneth. Be re-
newed in the spirit of your mind and put on the new man, that is,
a subtle understanding. If ye understand in the spirit, ye shall also
know the spirit. Let every one of you prove his own work, whether
it be perfect or defective. For what things a man shall sow, those
also shall he reap. O how many understand not the sayings of the
wise; these have perished because of their foolishness, for they lacked
spiritual understanding and found nothing but toil. The fourteenth
stone is obedience, of which it is written: Obey your superiors, as
Christ was made obedient to the Father even unto death. So obey
the precepts and sayings of the wise, then all things promised by
them will obey you and come to fruition, God the Lord willing.
The last stone, obedience, signifies submission to the will of
God—or, psychologically, renunciation of the ego-attitude and
subordination to the self.
He that hath ears to hear, let him hear what the spirit of the doc-
trine saith to the sons of the discipline concerning the house which
Wisdom hath founded on fourteen cornerstones, which the four and
twenty elders open with the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and of
which Senior in the prologue of his book declared: Where he placed
the eagle on the roof and the images of the various properties on
the sides. And Alphidius in his book speaketh of the treasure-house,
which he teacheth can be opened by four keys, which are the four
elements.
The conclusion of the parable refers to Senior and Alphidius
as the two main sources used by the author. It also shows that
the fourteen cornerstones of the treasure-house all represent the
one lapis in its different aspects. The twenty-four elders, like
the eagle, symbolize the volatile substance. The author sees the
110 Hahn, Geschichte der Keizer, III, p. 303.
111 Ibid., p. 273.
112 P, 33g: “. . . knowing and revering the letter of the Old and New Testa-
ment in the patriarchs and apostles, whom they know to be elect, they [monks]
cleave to the spiritual understanding which proceeds from both works,” etc. *
337AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
whole edifice as comparable to the "kingdom of heaven"; in
other words, he beholds in an intuitive vision a crystallization
of the self in the world beyond.
In conclusion we can sum up as follows: in the opening
chapters there is manifest a tremendous tension of opposites
accompanied by an almost deliriously excited manner of speak-
ing. The mood alternates between ecstatic joy and profound
despair—now the ego seems caught in an inflation, now utterly
dissolved. The anima (Wisdom) appears contaminated with
shadow elements (black earth, Ethiopians, corrupting humidity,
etc.), and behind her looms up the dark, vindictive, destructive
side of God. Not until the fourth parable is reached does the
author succeed, with the help of the reconciling function of the
unconscious, in building up a spiritual standpoint and gaining
a spiritual understanding of what is going on within him. The
opposites no longer alternate, but begin to influence one an-
other reciprocally, and this assists their reconciliation or union
in the unconscious. The union of irreconcilables is experienced
in the present parable as a visionary reality and is revealed in
the form of an authentic God-image. The vision of the hier-
osgamos in the treasure-house of Wisdom seems, temporarily
at least, to have gripped the author's feelings; for whereas in
the preceding parable an attempt was made to integrate the
irruption of unconscious contents in a spiritual hierarchy, the
present parable goes on to describe the author's emotional and
moral confrontation with these inner events. The predomi-
nance of feeling is reflected in the reappearance of the anima in
the figure of Wisdom as contrasted with the Holy Spirit in the
preceding parable. The lapis as treasure-house is now repre-
sented primarily as the sum of man's moral qualities, the didac-
tic, allegorical style and the disappearance of the poetic element
being particularly striking—for one would hardly expect this
after so momentous a vision, Obviously the content of the
vision has been grasped only intuitively, and closer contact with
the experience is still lacking. Nevertheless, the vision seems to
have had a calming effect on the author, which caused him to
be mindful of his own attitude and of his situation as a human
being. This sense of calm and reassurance was no doubt due
very largely to the feeling of immortality which the vision
gave him.
338XI. THE SIXTH PARABLE: OF
HEAVEN AND EARTH ...
The sixth parable treats “Of Heaven and Earth and the Ar-
rangement of the Elements," and is concerned mainly with an
alchemical world-creating process. It revolves round the image
of the "earth," which seems to symbolize a feminine divinity.
From this earth a new cosmos blossoms forth.! The whole
1 As was evident from the amplifications, the treasure-house of Wisdom was also
a reflection of the cosmos, but there the main emphasis fell on the microcosm of
the inner man, who in the medieval view was an image of the macrocosm. Cf.
Honorius, Elucidarium,I, 11 (Migne, P.L.,vol. 172, col. 1116): “Thus the bodily man
consists of the four elements, for which reason he is named the microcosm, i.e.,
little world; for from the earth he has his flesh, from the water his blood, from
the air his breath, and from the fire his heat. His head is round after the manner
of the heavenly sphere, from which his two eyes shine like the two luminaries in
the skies. Seven openings adorn him like the seven harmonies of heaven," etc.
The same image occurs in the Hortus deliciarum of Herrad of Landsberg and in
Hildegard of Bingen (Reitzenstein, Erlósungsmysterium, pp. 137ff.). Reitzenstein
has there unearthed the classical and Persian sources of this idea. Blochet, who
particularly emphasizes the Persian influences on the Arabian Gnostics ("Études
sur le gnosticisme musulman," pp. 247ff.), cites a Persian MS, “Medjma
el-bahrein," by Shems ed-Din, according to which the human heart corresponds
to the sun. There is the “house of salvation,” a reflection of the heavenly Ka'aba,
in which the heavenly spirit dwells. The cosmos, like a uéyas &v6pwros, is formed
in the image of man. Among other things the author says that the human heart
is a coffin in which the soul is imprisoned; it is midway bétween the tangible
and the intangible world. In the beginning God built a city for his khalifs and
officers. This city was formed of man's body as well as of the earth and the real
world. The foundations of the city rested on the four elements. The heart was the
palace of the khalif, who, after the philosophers, was the spokesman of reason.
The place he retired to was the brain. But he was also the spirit that dwelt in
the heart. The senses were the gates and watchmen of this city. Similar views are
expressed by the author of the Mersad el-ibad: Man's body corresponds to the
earth, his heart to the sky. The heart has two aspects, called by the mystics dil
and kolb, each with seven parts corresponding to the seven heavenly spheres and
seven regions of the earth. The heart also corresponds to the throne of Allah, one
339AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
parable appears to depict a kind of apocatastasis. We can easily
recognize the "earth" as the anima-Wisdom figure of the earlier
chapters, but now she is purified and spiritualized. Psycho-
logically considered, the parable is a description of the stage
which Dorn calls the production of the unus mundus (unitary
world), and for further details I must refer the reader to Jung's
interpretation of Dorn’s text.? Here it is sufficient to say that
after the self has been experienced as a divine centre within
the psyche, this experience expands into a feeling of oneness
with the whole cosmos. An Indian parallel would be the disso-
lution of the individual atman in the universal atman. Such an
experience is so far removed from the ordinary sphere of ego-
consciousness that one wonders in what state the author must
have been to have found himself so lost to the world and reality.
We saw in the commentary to the fourth parable that the
earth was the fourth element, which was so difficult to fit into
the alchemical trinity. In the meantime, a further alchemical
operation has been performed, the fixatio, which was the theme
of the fifth parable. This was the production of an unshakable
inner core, the well-founded treasure-house of the self, the ego
appearing only as a "guest," i.e., a marginal phenomenon. The
description of this "interior stone" was bound up with a vision
of God, and it is psychologically possible that the vision—the
hierosgamos of sun and moon—was itself the "rock," that is, an
inalienable experience upon which the whole future man is
founded. But this rock or "new world" is not just an "inner"
reality which adds itself to the “old world"—it is total reality.
Therefore the author tries in the present chapter to describe
this totality and ultimate reality which is the substrate of his
experience.
He that is of the earth, of the earth he speaketh, he that cometh
from heaven is above all. Now here also is the earth represented as
the principle of the elements, but the heavens stand for the three
higher principles, wherefore a little ought to be said of earth and
heaven, for earth is the principle and mother of the other elements,
side of which can be touched, but the other side touches the world beyond. Thus
one side of the heart is turned towards the world of the body, the other to that
of the spirit. Alphidius' description of the mystic treasure-house has affinities with
these conceptions.
2 Mysterium, pp. 465ff.
340XI. THE SIXTH PARABLE: OF HEAVEN AND EARTH . .. By "he that cometh from heaven is above all" is probably
meant the filius philosophorum, who, according to the T'abula
Smaragdina, after ascending to heaven descends again to earth,
thereby uniting in himself the upper and lower powers. Simi-
larly, heaven and earth unite in our text. In heaven there are
the three elements, fire, air, and water; earth forms the fourth. The unsolved problem of the fourth parable—the integration of
the fourth element—is taken up again. On closer analysis it is
apparent that the earth described here is not simply the fourth
element which is added to the other three, but that it possesses
the character of a mystical totality. This earth is the arché
(first principle) in the sense intended by classical philosophy; ? indeed, in our text it is praised as the "principle and mother of
the other elements," a view borne out by the quotation from
Psalm 101:26 in the next passage, and also by Morienus,
Hermes, and Moses.*
This earth is really identical with Wisdom, who in Proverbs
8 : 22f. is, if not the "mother," then at least God's helper at the
work of Creation: > '"T'he Lord possessed me in the beginning
of his way, before his works of old. I was set up from everlast-
ing, from the beginning, or ever the earth was" (AV).* ‘Thomas
3 Cf. Olympiodorus (Alch. grecs, 1I, iv): “Understand, thou who hast all wisdom,
that the earth was not taken for an element by the philosophers because it was
not generative. And this hath a meaning in respect of our problem: for Hermes
saith somewhere, that the virgin earth is found in the tail of a virgin."
4 Morienus, “De transmut. metall," Art. aurif., Il, p. 19: "Hermes also saith:
Earth is the mother of the elements; from earth they come and to earth they
return.” * Bonus, Pret. marg. nov., p. 107: "Hermes: The earth is an element,
and of earth are all things made, and into earth are they converted.AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
parable appears to depict a kind of apocatastasis. We can easily
recognize the "earth" as the anima-Wisdom figure of the earlier
chapters, but now she is purified and spiritualized. Psycho-
logically considered, the parable is a description of the stage
which Dorn calls the production of the unus mundus (unitary
world), and for further details I must refer the reader to Jung's
interpretation of Dorn’s text.? Here it is sufficient to say that
after the self has been experienced as a divine centre within
the psyche, this experience expands into a feeling of oneness
with the whole cosmos. An Indian parallel would be the disso-
lution of the individual atman in the universal atman. Such an
experience is so far removed from the ordinary sphere of ego-
consciousness that one wonders in what state the author must
have been to have found himself so lost to the world and reality.
We saw in the commentary to the fourth parable that the
earth was the fourth element, which was so difficult to fit into
the alchemical trinity. In the meantime, a further alchemical
operation has been performed, the fixatio, which was the theme
of the fifth parable. This was the production of an unshakable
inner core, the well-founded treasure-house of the self, the ego
appearing only as a "guest," i.e., a marginal phenomenon. The
description of this "interior stone" was bound up with a vision
of God, and it is psychologically possible that the vision—the
hierosgamos of sun and moon—was itself the "rock," that is, an
inalienable experience upon which the whole future man is
founded. But this rock or "new world" is not just an "inner"
reality which adds itself to the “old world"—it is total reality.
Therefore the author tries in the present chapter to describe
this totality and ultimate reality which is the substrate of his
experience.
He that is of the earth, of the earth he speaketh, he that cometh
from heaven is above all. Now here also is the earth represented as
the principle of the elements, but the heavens stand for the three
higher principles, wherefore a little ought to be said of earth and
heaven, for earth is the principle and mother of the other elements,
side of which can be touched, but the other side touches the world beyond. Thus
one side of the heart is turned towards the world of the body, the other to that
of the spirit. Alphidius' description of the mystic treasure-house has affinities with
these conceptions.
2 Mysterium, pp. 465ff.
340

nov., p. 107: "Hermes: The earth is an element,
and of earth are all things made, and into earth are they converted. Moses: The
earth is the mother of the elements, all things come from earth and are turned
again to earth. So doth Morienus say: But this earth is a body and a ferment." *
5 She is, as it were, the positive counterpart to Tehom or Tiamat. 6 According to St. Augustine, she is the "art" by which God created the world. Philo interprets this passage as follows: "With His knowledge God had union. . . . And knowledge having received the divine seed . . . bore the only beloved
son who is apprehended by the senses, the world which we see." “De ebrietate,"
30 (Loeb edn.) III, pp. 334f. Cf. Leisegang, Gnosis, p. 95. The idea of two
“archai,’ God and a mother goddess, Hyle, is found in Asclepius Latinus (Scott,
Hermetica, I, pp. 310f£): "In the beginning was God and matter" (i45). Hyle is
also the cosmos, the natura mundi or spiritus mundi; she is the matrix of all
things and their receptacle, and at the same time the cause of evil. Cf. the teach-
ings of Hermogenes (Tertullian, Adv. Hermogenem, 12). Similar views in Nu-
menius (Comm. in Timaeum, 294); cf. Scott, III, pp. 68ff., 77, 84, 272, and the
related Gnostic ideas of Simon Magus in Leisegang, Gnosis, pp. 74, 81, 95. 341AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
Aquinas attempted a symbolical interpretation of the passage in
Genesis, "And the earth was without form, and void": it was
the invisible, only potentially existent prima materia." This
may shed light on the statement that earth is the first principle;
it is materia in potentia, which receives its form from God.
as the Prophet beareth witness: In the beginning, O Lord, thou
didst found the earth, and the heavens are the works of thy hands,
that is, water, air, and fire. For from the earth are the elements
separated by dying, and to it do they return by quickening, for
what a thing is composed of, into that must it be resolved,
Here the author, besides praising the earth as the mysterious
arche of the cosmos and the basis of all life, introduces a curious
new idea: that the founding of the heavens above the earth, or
the creation of the world by a sundering of the upper from the
lower, is a death, and that, in consequence, the dissolution of
the world and its return to the undifferentiated arche signifies
a renewal of life. Strangely inverting the Genesis story, he pre-
sents the Creation as a process of destruction, and the destruc-
tion of the world as a reunion—not a dissolution, but a fusion
with the original unity. At first this is described as a cosmic
process, but its intrapsychic, human aspect is revealed in the
continuation of the text.
The destruction of the world, when the elements return at
death to earth, is, psychologically, a symbol for the complete
extinction of consciousness, and accordingly it often appears in
dreams at the onset of a psychosis. We know from the earlier
parables that the author must have been in a state bordering on
complete dissociation, in which his conscious world at least was
totally disrupted. But, in contrast to a pathological dissolution,
the psychic hierarchy seems to have built itself up again out
of the chaos, so that the "destruction of the world," or return of
the three higher principles (“the heavens" — spiritual sphere of
consciousness) to earth (the unconscious) is an individuation
process signifying the birth of a new, transcendental cosmos.
as the holy word testifieth: Man is ashes and to ashes shall he return.
Such ashes did the philosophers ordain to be mixed with the per-
7 Summa, I, q. 66, art 1 ad 1 and g (Eng. edn., I, pp. 329£): "In this respect, then,
the earth is said to be void and empty, or invisible and shapeless, that matter is
known by means of form. Whereas matter, as such, is essentially being in poten-
tiality." *
342XI. THE SIXTH PARABLE: OF HEAVEN AND EARTH ...
manent water, which is the ferment of gold, and their gold is the
body, that is the earth, which Aristotle called the coagulant, since
it coagulateth water.
As the arché of all corporeal things, the earth (in the sym-
bolic sense of prima materia)? is the basic substance of the
human body, as the text indicates when it says, "Man is ashes."
"Such ashes," it continues significantly, "did the philosophers
ordain to be mixed with the permanent water": which amounts
to saying that the prima materia is, among other things, the
human body. This primary "body-matter" (which the text by
a series of equations again shows to be earth) is the “ferment of
gold," and is thus a means for "fermenting" and maturing the
inner man, but at the same time it is water? the aqua per-
manens of the alchemical opus. Psychologically, we have to do
once again with the unconscious in its somatic aspect—with its
"actualizing" function.^ The body can be understood as a
. symbol of the personality with its individual limits, so that
what the text is saying, in symbolic language, is that the indi-
vidual human being is the maturing-ground and birthplace of
a divine inner man, and that the specific qualities of the indi-
vidual are the sole basis for the whole process of inner develop-
ment. This is not a contradiction of ecclesiastical doctrine, but
it does show a tendency to shift the accent on to a recognition
and acknowledgment of the physical man. Jung says of this
shift: "What unconscious nature was ultimately aiming at when
she produced the image of the lapis can be seen most clearly in
the notion that it originated in matter and in man, that it was
to be found everywhere, and that its fabrication lay at least
potentially within man's reach. These qualities all reveal what
were felt to be the defects in the Christ-image at that time: an
air too rarefied for human needs, too great a remoteness, a place
left vacant in the human heart. Men felt the absence of the 'inner'
Christ who belonged to every man. Christ's spirituality was too
high and man's naturalness was too low. In the image of
8 Cf. the chapter on “The Increatum” in Psychology and Alchemy, pars. 4goff.
Certain statements in Paracelsus point to a principle coequal with God and cor-
responding to a dea mater (ibid.).
9In the Summa, I, q. 68, art. 2 (Eng. edn., I, p. 340), water is the "matter of
bodies.”
10 Mysterium, pp. 519ff.
343AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
Mercurius and the lapis the ‘flesh’ glorified itself in its own way;
it would not transform itself into spirit but, on the contrary,
‘fixed’ the spirit in stone. . . . This image of the ‘Son of the
Great World' tells us from what source it was derived: it came
not from the conscious mind of the individual man, but from
those border regions of the psyche that open out into the mystery
of cosmic matter." 4
The "earth" in our text stands for this mystery, and further
on the author calls it the “Promised Land," an image that re-
appears in the next parable and can be regarded as a symbol of
the self. At the same time it is fiery and airy, and it receives
the gold or the “honoured soul" into itself like seeds.!? It is
evident that this earth or "second body" is something that unites
in itself the qualities of all the other elements: !? it is an airy
earth, a fiery water, a fluid fire, etc., and as such it is a mystery
known to God alone. In the Cabala it is compared with Mal-
chuth.!* It could be said to correspond with the primitive con-
ception of the "subtle body."
In other alchemical treatises, too, earth or ash is the most
precious thing and a great mystery. The T'urba calls it a "spir-
itual dust" which turns into water,* and to which all bodies
must first be pulverized or burnt.! In Senior ash is the feminine
arcane substance, and in Greek alchemy it was known as the
11 “The Visions of Zosimos," par. 127.
12 Senior, De chemia, p. 25: ““The lower world is the body and the burnt ash to
which they reduce the honoured soul. And the burnt ash and the soul are the gold
of the wise, which they sow in their white earth." * Cf. supra, pp. 122-23.
13 Cf. “Ros. phil.,” in Art. aurif., II, p. 185: Hermes: “Sow your gold in white foli-
ated earth, which by calcination is made fiery, subtle, aerial." * And p. 200: "Sow
the soul therefore in white foliated earth, which retaineth it, for when it ascendeth
from earth to heaven and again descendeth to earth it shall receive the virtue of
the things below and also of the things above . . ."* For the four elements as
constituents of man see "Isis to Horus" (Stobaeus, I, 49, 69); IIepi éuvuydoews
(Scott, I, pp. 514ff.); Philo, "De sacrificiis Abelis et Caini," 33, 107 (Loeb edn.), II,
pp. 172f.
14 Knorr von Rosenroth, Kabbala denudata, I, p. 118: “And Malchuth will be the
metallic woman, and the Moon of the sages, and the field into which are cast the
seeds of the secret ores, namely Water of gold, as this name occurs in Gen. 36 : 39;
but know, my son, that in these things are hidden mysteries so great, that no
human tongue can tell them." *
15 P. 149.
16 P. 139. Cf. p. 159: "How precious is the ash . . . and how precious is that which
is made from it. So, mixing the ash with the water, cook it again . . .” *
344pee err XI. ETEH E SIXTH eaPA RABiLEe: OF aHlE uAsV EoeN a eANdD EiARTeH.e..e
“ash of Mary" (exopí&a Kal Téppau Mapias) ,17 which plays an im-
portant role in the literature. Zosimos cites a saying of Agatho-
daimon that "the ash is all.” 18 It symbolizes that irreducible
and indissoluble substrate of physical and psychic facts which
everyone has from birth and out of which individuation is ac-
complished. This absolute endowment is the raw material of
an "objective" ego, i.e., the self.19
It is the earth of the Promised Land, wherein Hermes commanded
his son to sow gold, that living rains might ascend from it, and water
which warmeth it, as Senior saith: And when they desire to extract
this divine water, which is fire, they warm it with their fire, which
is water, which they have measured unto the end and have hidden
on account of the unwisdom of fools. And of this have all the phi-
losophers sworn, that they would nowhere set it forth clearly in
writing, but they have left it to the glorious God, to reveal it to
whom he will and withhold it from whom he will, for in him is
great cunning and the secrecy of the wise.
The secret earth is thus formed by a union of opposites, by
a fiery water or watery fire, since in the self all opposites—con-
scious and unconscious, psyche and physis, and so on—unite.
And when the heat of that fire reacheth the earth itself, the earth
is dissolved and becometh a boiling, that is an evaporated water,
and afterwards returneth to its own former earthly form. Therefore
by water is the earth moved and the heavens are poured out upon
it, and they flow as if with honey throughout all the world and tell
17 Alch. grecs, Il, iv, 37; cf. II, iv, 48.
18 Ibid., III, Ivi, g. Especially famous in later times was the saying of Morienus
(“Rosinus ad Sarrat.,” Art. aurif., I, p. 183£): "Despise not the ash which is at the
bottom of the vessel: it is in the lower place, but it is the earth of thy body, and
the ash of things that endure." * “Ros. phil." variant: “Despise not the ashes, for
they are the diadem of thy heart." * Cf. "Psychology of the Transference," par. 495.
19 Ibid., p. 199: “[Analysis] must be a genuine process of purification where ‘all
superfluities are consumed in the fire' and the basic facts emerge. Is there any-
thing more fundamental than the realization, "This is what I am"? It reveals a
unity which nevertheless is—or was—a diversity. No longer the earlier ego with its
make-believes and artificial contrivances, but another, ‘objective’ ego, which for
this reason is better called the ‘self.. No longer a mere selection of suitable fic-
tions, but a string of hard facts, which together make up the cross we all have to
carry or the fate we ourselves are.” The "ash" is its prima materia, and it is pro-
duced by burning the initial material, i.e., by analysis of the conscious and uncon-
scious contents.
345AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
its glory. For this glory is known only to him who hath understand-
ing, how of the earth the heavens were made,
This passage shows that the secret earth is produced by a
circulatory process: ?? after being liquefied by fire and water,
it evaporates and "returns to its own former earthly form." The
art, as we know, proceeds like a wheel or vortex.?! Basing him-
self on the views of Heraclitus and other early Greek philoso-
phers,?? Zosimos says that the elements have to be transformed .
“into themselves" (eis éavrd), for, although they are different in
quality, they are not so in substance (oioía); and just as all things
arose from the dissolution of the elements, so the art must pro-
ceed likewise. Ever since the time of Aristotle the elements
had been divided into two upper ones, air and fire, which were
active and "psychic," and two lower ones, water and earth,
which were passive and "somatic." ?* A similar view is found
in the treatise "Asclepius" and in "Isis to Horus" in the
Corpus Hermeticum:?* "[Air] enters into earth and water, and
fire enters into air. That only which tends upward is life-giving;
and that which tends downward is subservient to it. Moreover,
all that descends from on high is generative; and that which
issues upward from below is nutritive. Earth, which alone
stands fast in its own place, receives all that is generative into
itself, and renders back all that it has received. . . . The ele-
20 As will become clear infra, pp. 348ff.
21 "Komarios to Cleopatra” in Alch. grecs, IV, xx, 17. Cf. Psychology and Alchemy,
pars. 468ff., also 212ff.
22 Freeman, Ancilla to the Pre-Socratic Philosophers, p. 29, fragm. 60: “The way
up and the way down is one and the same." Diogenes Laertius, 9, 8 (Loeb edn.,
II, pp. 416f.), explains that this is the way of "change" (uerafgoX$j) by which the
cosmos came into being; for when fire "condenses," it turns into water, and when
this solidifies, it turns into earth, and that is the way down; but when earth
liquefies, it turns back into water, and so to fire, and that is the way up. Cf.
Cleomedes, De motu circulari corporum caelestium, 1.11.61 (ed. Ziegler, pp.
110ff); Philo, “De aeternitate mundi," 21, 109 (Loeb edn., IX, pp. 26o0f.); Maximus
of Tyre, Dissertations, 41, 4 (trans. Taylor), II, pp. 219ff.; Iamblichus, Hep Vvx7js
in Stobaeus, 1.49.89. In Plato, rotation characterizes the motion of the Logos
(Timaeus, 39D). Cf. the circular movement of the life-pneuma in "Isis to Horus"
(Stobaeus, 1.49. 69), Scott, I, p. 522, III, p. 610, IV, p. xxiii.
23 Alch. grecs, III, xliii, 16. Cf. V, ii, 12.
24 Olympiodorus, ibid., II, iv, 28; Carmina Heliodori, pp. 23, 25, 52; Lippmann, I,
PP- 99> 147, 259.
25 Scott, I, pp. 28off. and 528ff.
346XI. THE SIXTH PARABLE: OF HEAVEN AND EARTH ... ments through which all matter has been indued with form are
four in number—fire, water, earth, and air; but matter is one,
soul is one, and God is one . . . Matter has been made ready
by God beforehand to be the recipient of individual forms of
every shape; and nature, fashioning matter in individual forms
by means of the four elements, brings into being, up to the
height of heaven, all things that will be pleasing in God's
sight." Note that the elements here are by their very nature
instruments for actualizing God's ideas in matter. This is also
the view of Zosimos; he calls them "limbs of the sacred science"
OD "DUIt"CeHtres. 4e
It is evident from these examples that the classical theory
of the four elements was largely symbolical and that it really
expressed a projected psychic content—the quaternary structure
of the self and its reflection in the four-function structure of
ego-consciousness. ‘The quaternary structure is inherent both
in the starting-point (the preconscious totality) and in the end-
product (the actualized totality). Hence the mystic “earth” in
the present parable is a product of the fixatio (treasure-house
of Wisdom) described in the preceding one, and, paradoxically,
it is also the prima materia; a cosmic arche which is the mother
of the other elements.?7
26 Alch. grecs, II, xliv, 1. Cf. VI, xv, 2-3, and Christianos, ibid., VI, x, 1. This
explains why in alchemy generally and also in Aurora the elements are described
in such a paradoxical way: water is "spiritual blood" and fire; air is pneuma,
fire, soul, and water; fire is water, and water is earth, ash, or the human body. In
Senior (De chemia, p. 25) the secret water is of threefold nature, containing in
itself water, fire, and air. Air, in its turn, is the "mediator" between fire and water
and thus contains both (p. 30); and water is really the fire of the stone or
“corporeal air" (p. 19) or "starry earth" (p.AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
its glory. For this glory is known only to him who hath understand-
ing, how of the earth the heavens were made,
This passage shows that the secret earth is produced by a
circulatory process: ?? after being liquefied by fire and water,
it evaporates and "returns to its own former earthly form." The
art, as we know, proceeds like a wheel or vortex.?! Basing him-
self on the views of Heraclitus and other early Greek philoso-
phers,?? Zosimos says that the elements have to be transformed .
“into themselves" (eis éavrd), for, although they are different in
quality, they are not so in substance (oioía); and just as all things
arose from the dissolution of the elements, so the art must pro-
ceed likewise. Ever since the time of Aristotle the elements
had been divided into two upper ones, air and fire, which were
active and "psychic," and two lower ones, water and earth,
which were passive and "somatic." ?* A similar view is found
in the treatise "Asclepius" and in "Isis to Horus" in the
Corpus Hermeticum:?* "[Air] enters into earth and water, and
fire enters into air. That only which tends upward is life-giving;
and that which tends downward is subservient to it. Moreover,
all that descends from on high is generative; and that which
issues upward from below is nutritive. Earth, which alone
stands fast in its own place, receives all that is generative into
itself, and renders back all that it has received. . . . The ele-
20 As will become clear infra, pp. 348ff.
21 "Komarios to Cleopatra” in Alch. grecs, IV, xx, 17. Cf. Psychology and Alchemy,
pars. 468ff., also 212ff.
22 Freeman, Ancilla to the Pre-Socratic Philosophers, p. 29, fragm. 60: “The way
up and the way down is one and the same." Diogenes Laertius, 9, 8 (Loeb edn.,
II, pp. 416f.), explains that this is the way of "change" (uerafgoX$j) by which the
cosmos came into being; for when fire "condenses," it turns into water, and when
this solidifies, it turns into earth, and that is the way down; but when earth
liquefies, it turns back into water, and so to fire, and that is the way up. Cf.
Cleomedes, De motu circulari corporum caelestium, 1.11.61 (ed. Ziegler, pp.
110ff); Philo, “De aeternitate mundi," 21, 109 (Loeb edn., IX, pp. 26o0f.); Maximus
of Tyre, Dissertations, 41, 4 (trans. Taylor), II, pp. 219ff.; Iamblichus, Hep Vvx7js
in Stobaeus, 1.49.89. In Plato, rotation characterizes the motion of the Logos
(Timaeus, 39D). Cf. the circular movement of the life-pneuma in "Isis to Horus"
(Stobaeus, 1.49. 69), Scott, I, p. 522, III, p. 610, IV, p. xxiii.
23 Alch. grecs, III, xliii, 16. Cf. V, ii, 12.
24 Olympiodorus, ibid., II, iv, 28; Carmina Heliodori, pp. 23, 25, 52; Lippmann, I,
PP- 99> 147, 259.
25 Scott, I, pp. 28off. and 528ff.
346

30); and water is really the fire of the stone or
“corporeal air" (p. 19) or "starry earth" (p. 23): terra stellata, yj dorepirns. Finally, Senior says that the secret is warm water, motionless air, liquefied earth
and circumambient fire (p. 33). And from these four elements everything is made
(pp. 30-31): “And even as air is warm and moist, so is their [the philosophers]
water warm and moist and is the fire of the stone and the circumambient fire, and
the moisture of their water is the water. And when air is cooked for a long time,
it turns to fire, since in the form of air it has the action of fire." Air is also the
soul or the blood (pp. 44 and 58). St. Thomas thought it possible the elements
could change into one another (Summa, I, q. 67, art. 3; Eng. edn., I, pp. 335f.). 27 The text stresses that one must know the secret of creation in order to under-
stand this—a reference to the classical view that the lapis must be produced after
the manner of the cosmos. Cf. Zosimos, Alch. grecs, III, vi, 22, and Pseudo-
Aristotle, “De perfecto magisterio," Theatr. chem., III (1659), p. 79: "As this
world was created, so is the Stone created."
347AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
and therefore the earth remaineth for ever and the heavens are
founded upon it, as the Prophet beareth witness: For thou hast
founded the earth upon its own bases, it shall not be moved for
ever and ever.
The preceding passages described a process of sublimation
which was compared to the ascent of a “living rain." Afterwards
the product—the distillate—drops down to earth again, “the
heavens are poured out upon the earth and tell its glory.” But
this glory is known only to him who knows “how of the earth
the heavens were made,” in other words, who knows the al-
chemical process of sublimation which imitates God’s cosmo-
gonic work of creation.?? During this process the earth, as the
text now says, forms the everlasting and immovable foundation
of the heavens. And just as the earth is dissolved and trans-
formed by the divine fiery water, so in the Bible "the mountains
melted like wax at the presence of the Lord" (Psalm 96 : 5).
Once again, therefore, a power equal to God's is attributed to
the water.
The deep is its clothing, above it shall stand water, air, fire, and
the birds of the air shall dwell therein, watering it from the upper
elements, that it may be filled with the fruit of their works,
“The deep is its clothing": it is surrounded by the abyss of
ocean, which in antiquity and the Middle Ages was depicted as
the uroboros. Above the earth the lighter elements arrange
themselves in layers, and, since these elements will return to it
again, the process is symbolized by birds watering the earth.?°
In alchemy birds or, in the singular, the swan, goose, dove,
raven, etc. symbolize vapours, sublimated volatile substances,
hence also spirits, and the birds watering the earth mean the
same thing as the previously mentioned distillation of the heav-
ens and the falling rain. In both cases it is the divine water,
"which they call the king rising from the earth and descending
28 Senior, De chemia, p. 106: "But when it is all coagulated, then it is called the
Sea of the sages. And this earth is the mother of wonders, and the mother of the
heavens . . . and it is all, and from it all is taken." *
29 According to Joachim of Flora, birds are the prophets, who “with their wings
fly up to heaven far in advance of all other mortals.” Concordia, V (Hahn, III,
P- 293).
348XI. THE SIXTH PARABLE: OF HEAVEN AND EARTH ...
from heaven." *? In the Summa, Thomas Aquinas cites Origen's
view that the "waters above the heavens" are "spiritual sub-
stances,” *! and this is borne out by our text.
The circulatory distillation continues: the waters are sub-
limated and rise like birds?? over the earth, which remains
below as if dead, then drop down again like living rain or
dew.?? ‘This stage represents the reunion with the body (follow-
ing the stage of the unio mentalis, which is discussed in Jung).*4
The birds watering the earth symbolize the fertilizing effect
which the archetypes in their spiritual aspect have upon the
reality-bound consciousness of the individual. The meaning of
the process comes out in the next passage: the earth receives
the powers of the upper elements.?5
because in the centre of the earth the seven planets took root, and
left their virtues there, wherefore in the earth is water germinating
divers kinds of colours and fruits and producing bread and wine
that cheereth the heart of man, and also bringing forth grass for
cattle and herb for the service of men.
The earth receives the virtues of heaven, and these are noth-
ing other than the planetary powers, discussed earlier, which
have now descended into the centre of the earth.2 The “moun-
tains that melted like wax at the presence of the Lord" are,
in the Book of Enoch,?7 mountains made of celestial metal, and
30 Senior, p. 17. Cf. the Tabula Smaragdina: “He ascends from earth to heaven
and again descends to earth, and receives the power of Above and Below. Thus
you have the glory of the whole world." *
31 I, q. 68, art. 2 (Eng. edn., I, p. 339).
32 Cf. Senior, p. 122, and the ecclesiastical interpretation of eagles in Ephraem
Syrus, I, col. 86: “In the beginning the spirit of fruitfulness brooded over the
waters: and they conceived and bore dragons, fishes, birds. The Holy Spirit
brooded over the waters of baptism, which bore mystical eagles, namely, virgins
and the directors of the Church." *
33 Cf. the return of the soul in “The Psychology of the Transference,” par. 497.
34 Mysterium, pp. 475ff., 519ff.
35 Cf. the imitation of the upper stars in the lower heaven in Dorn (ibid., p. 478f.).
36 Summa, I, q. 67, art. 3 (Eng. edn., I, pp. 335£): "The light of the heavenly
bodies is a cause of the substantial forms of earthly bodies, and also gives to col-
ours their immaterial being, by making them actually visible. Light, then, is not
a sensible quality, but rather a substantial or spiritual form . . . so does light
act instrumentally, by virtue of the heavenly bodies, towards producing substan-
tial forms." *
37 Charles, Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha, l1, p. 204.
349AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
in similar manner the precipitating heavens signify that the
planets become earthly in the form of metals? It was widely
believed in the Middle Ages that the metals were formed in the
earth by the “influences” of the planets. Thus, in our text, they
produce in the earth a "germinating water" (evidently identical
with the metals),?? and from this is produced the food of men
and animals and spiritual nourishment in the form of wine.*?
In Psalm 103: 12-14, which is quoted here, this germinating
water is identical with the power of God. Similarly, Senior says
that the lapis is born of pure seed and is endowed with the
power of grace.*! This generative cosmic principle is the water.*?
After all harmful admixtures coming from the unconscious
have been removed from the conscious personality by these
purificatory procedures, the unconscious is more and more able
to exert an inspiring and vivifying effect. The birds watering
the earth suggest mental and spiritual enrichment. It is worth
noting that Thomas Aquinas based his inaugural lecture as
Magister in Paris on this passage from Psalm 103:13: “Thou
waterest the hills from thy upper rooms, the earth is sated with
the fruit of thy works"—and moreover because of a dream. He
was reluctant to accept this new honour, but then an old man
appeared to him in a dream who comforted him and suggested
that passage as a text for his lecture.*? The dream was evidently
an admonition to St. Thomas to rely more on the creative in-
spiration of the unconscious and not to torment himself un-
necessarily with doubts and misgivings.
This earth, I say, made the moon in its season, then the sun arose,
very early in the morning the first day of the week, after the dark-
ness, which thou hast appointed therein before sunrise,
The germination of colours and the production of a gay,
fruitful world would be, in alchemy, comparable to the cauda
38 In Komarios the water is called the “water on the mountain tops" (Alch. grecs,
IV, xx, 4): “The earth has been solidified above the waters, and the waters are
raised above the mountain tops." * 39 Infra, p. 354.
40 Cf. the role of wine in Dorn (Mysterium, pp. 477). 41 Cf. Stapleton, p. 169.
42 De chemia, pp. 58, 59. P. 87: "Hermes saith that the secret of every thing is in
water alone . . . and the beginning of the generation of man is water." *
43 Grabmann, Die echten Schriften des heiligen Thomas von Aquin, p. 25. This
lecture has been preserved and is edited by Fr. Salvatore in Due sermone inediti
di San Tommaso d'Aquino.
350XI. THE SIXTH PARABLE: OF HEAVEN AND EARTH ...
pavonis which follows the nigredo, and whose psychological
significance is discussed in Jung.‘
This stage is usually followed by the albedo, here repre-
sented by the rising moon, and then by the rubedo—the rising
sun.5 With the sun and moon, however, time comes into
existence.19
Before the creation of the sun and moon, and hence of
"sidereal time," it is as if the world were outside time, in a
kind of dawn-state. In it there was light, but as yet there were
no "luminaries." We may recall here Dorn's conception of a
mundus potentialis, an image for the world of archetypes, in
which “luminosity” 47 is present but no discriminating ego-
consciousness, and therefore no categories of space and time.
Then first the moon rises—a diffuse state of consciousness which
is easily extinguished; and this is followed only later by a clear
and steady state of consciousness (sun). Seen in the context of
Aurora as a whole, this re-creation of the world signifies a re-
structuring of consciousness from the very depths, after it had
been annihilated by the invasion of the unconscious. The new,
nascent world of consciousness has, however, a different centre:
it is no longer the ego, but a figure which the text later calls
Christ and the Second Adam, that is, a symbol of the self.
In patristic literature, the words from Psalm 103: 19, "He
made the moon for seasons: the sun knoweth his going down,"
were generally interpreted as referring to the Church and
Christ. Ecclesia-Luna, symbolizing the mortality of this life, dies
as she draws nearer to the sun, i.e., is taken up in Christ.*? That
the author knew of such interpretations of this passage and con-
sciously had them in mind is proved by the words that follow
44 Mysterium, pp. 285ff.
45 Cf. the earth as mother of the sun and moon in the Phoenician cosmology of
Sanchuniathon (Eusebius, Praeparatio evangelica, i. 10. 2), according to which
the world was created in the form of an egg: “and from it came Mot [the mother
goddess], then the sun and moon, and then the stars."
46 According to St. Thomas, time came into existence only with the creation of
the sun and moon on the sixth day, but light, having been created earlier by itself,
“signified the formation of spiritual creatures." Summa, I, q. 67, art. 4 ad 4 (Eng.
edn T3p95597):
47 “On the Nature of the Psyche,” pp. 190ff.
48 Augustine, Enarr. in Psalm. 103. 19 (Eng. edn., 5, p. 121): “We understand
spiritually the Church increasing from the smallest size, and growing old as it were
from the mortality of this life, yet so, that she draweth nearer unto the sun.” *
351AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
("very early in the morning the first day of the week"), which
allude to Christ's resurrection.*? The equivalence of the filius
philosophorum and the risen Christ runs through the whole
treatise and shows that the author was fully conscious of what
he was doing. The mysterious earth or ash which forms the
basic stuff of the human body is, accordingly, the substance of
the resurrected body or of the Second Adam—a god-man or
Anthropos figure who in the text sometimes has a superhuman
aspect, but sometimes seems to be identical with the alchemist .
himself.
and it is night. For in it shall all the beasts of the wood go about,
for thou hast set them a bound which they shall not pass until the
whitening, but in their order go on even until the reddening,
This and the previous passage recapitulate the three main
stages of the procedure: the nigredo (the night that precedes
sunrise), albedo (moon), rubedo (sun)? In the night of the
nigredo the beasts of the wood go about. This is probably an
allusion to the wealth of animal symbolism in the opus, char-
acterizing the initial stages in particular; the arcane substance
is symbolized by the serpent, uroboros, lion,*' reptiles,5? eagle,5?
dog, wolf, and camel.5* It may be that the author also had in
mind the famous passage in Virgil's Georgics, II, 336ff., about
the springtime of the world: “Springtime it was; the great world
was keeping spring . . . when the first cattle drank in the light
and man’s iron race reared its head from the hard fields, and
the wild beasts were let loose into the forests and the stars into
heaven." 55 Servius ** remarks that this meant the spring equi-
nox, when there was a new "unloosing of the planets" in the
heavens, like wild beasts let loose in the wood or the stadium
49 Mark 16 : 2.
50 Of importance for the interpretation of this passage is a later amplification of
it in Mennens (Theatr. chem., V, p. 364), according to which the sun and moon
were created on the fourth day: "For the number four is perfect and contains
in itself all number or multitude, for one, two, three, and four added together
make the number ten, beyond which you cannot go save by returning to unity." *
51 Parable of Marchos in Senior, De chemia, p. 63.
52 Senior, pp. 78 and 108.
53 Zosimos, Alch. grecs, III, vi, 5 and III, xxix, 18. Cf. the “eagle-stone” (M8os
derirns), I, iv, 1. 54 "Opusculum autoris ignoti," Art. aurif., I, p. 251.
55 Virgil (Loeb edn.), I, p. 139.
56 Cf. Norden, Die Geburt des Kindes, p. 17 and n.
352XI. THE SIXTH PARABLE: OF HEAVEN AND EARTH ...
of a circus. In Aurora, too, the author depicts a springtime of
the world, a genitura mundi, so that the beasts of the wood
going about might conceivably be understood as the planets
entering their new orbits. This is suggested all the more strongly
by the words that follow: “for thou hast set them a bound
which they shall not pass over . . . but in their order go on
even until the reddening." The beasts going about were usu-
ally interpreted as a reference to the coming of Antichrist.
Thus Joachim of Flora says that when Antichrist appears, this
will be “a night of tribulation and anguish, a night in which all
the beasts of the wood shall go about.” 5? This, he says, will
happen in the sixth age. (The beasts are mentioned in the
sixth parable!) He adds: '"These beasts and reptiles, which God
created on the sixth day, signify the reigns of the heathen and
sects of pseudo-prophets." 55 It seems to me probable that the
author of Aurora knew of such interpretations.
for all things serve the earth, and the days of its years are threescore
and ten years passing over it, because it upholdeth all things by
the word of its godhead,
The author's idea is that before the final glorification of the
substances as described in the seventh parable there will be one
last outbreak of all the dark powers, and that this has something
to do with the human body. But he goes on to say that the
beasts shall not transgress the bound because "all things serve
the earth." Earth signifies the body, so the instincts (beasts)
are restrained by the body's very nature. Instinct is not bound-
less; somewhere it runs up against its own limitation. The
words "for all things serve the earth" are particularly signifi-
cant because the author here puts the earth in the place of God:
Psalm 118 : g1 says "for all things serve thee"! ‘This earth itself
is the risen Christ and the divine mystery—indeed, it is God
himself. But, the text goes on, the life of this earth is "three-
score and ten years," 5? so the earth is at the same time the
57 Concordia, V, cap. 92 (Hahn, III, pp. 120f.).*
58 Ibid., IV, cap. 6 (Hahn, III, pp. 114f.; cf. note on p. 112).
59 Ripley, who obviously knew Aurora, interpreted the "bounds" in this sense
(*Medulla philosophiae chemicae," Opera omnia, p. 300): "For it is written, Thou
hast set them bounds which they shall not pass over" (Ps. 103: 19). He says this
refers to the fact that even with the aid of the "medicine" human life could not
be prolonged beyond 7o years.
353AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
ordinary mortal man! Yet it also "upholds all things by the
word of its godhead" (cf. Hebrews 1 : 3): that is to say, it is the
world-creating Logos. For the explanation and interpretation
of this tremendous paradox I must refer the reader to Jung; 9?
evidently it concerns the production of a divine-human figure,
which like Christ is very God and very man and in Aurora is
at the same time the ordinary mortal individual.
as in the Turba philosophorum it is written: The earth, since it
is heavy, beareth all things, for it is the foundation of the whole '
heaven, because it appeared dry at the separation of the elements.
Here the mysterious end-product of the opus is again some-
thing non-human: it is the "earth" which bears all things and
is the "foundation of the whole heaven." And yet it is the same
primordial earth of Genesis, which appeared at the separation
of land from water—the prima materia of the cosmos.
Therefore in the Red Sea there was a way without hindrance, since
this great and wide sea smote the rock and the metallic waters flowed
forth.
The emergence of the first bit of dry land in the primordial
chaos is compared with the parting of the Red Sea, when “a way
without hindrance” appeared for the children of Israel, "and
out of the great deep a springing field" (Wisd. 19: 17). This
allusion refers back to the germination of a new world, but as it
is a motif that occupies a large place in the final parable, I am
deferring the commentary until then. On the other hand, the
"Red Sea” is an alchemical synonym for the divine water, and
amplifications on this theme will be found in Jung.®
It is remarkable that "this great and wide sea" is further
identified with the rod of Moses, with which he struck water
from the rock and with which he also divided the Red Sea.
Mercurius, representing the divine water, is often symbolized
60 Cf. the Christ-lapis parallel in Psychology and Alchemy, pars. 447ff., and Mys-
terium, pp. 452ff.
61 Ibid., ch. III, § 5c. Cf. the designation of the water as the “Egyptian sea" in
Komarios, Alch. grecs, IV, xx, 11. The Turba (p. 249) says that purple is a colour
which is "extracted from our red, most pure sea." Cf. also pp. 125, 248 and
Senior, De chemia, pp. 82, 83. The Gnostics, like the Church Fathers, interpreted
the Red Sea as the perishable world (Leisegang, Gnosis, pp. 139-40 and 143).
354XI. THE SIXTH PARABLE: OF HEAVEN AND EARTH ...
by the caduceus. So here again the water is both the producer
and the product. (The “rod of living water" is an idea found
among the Mandaeans.)9? The rod symbolizes an orienting
factor which is contained in the "water" of the unconscious and
which, like the magic staff of Hermes, causes sleep and waking,
rouses to life or leads the way into death. In ecclesiastical sym-
bolism ‘Mary is that golden rod, the symbol of eternal life." 9*
Then the rivers disappeared in dry land, which make the city of
God joyful; when this mortal shall put on immortality, and the
corruption of the living shall put on incorruption, then indeed
shall that word come to pass which is written, Death is swallowed
up in victory. O death, where is thy victory?
The rivers which make the city of God joyful (Psalm 45 : 5)
disappear (abierunt) in dry land (Psalm 104:41). These two
Biblical quotations seem to contradict one another, but they
are probably meant as follows: the corrupting humidity, the
divine water in its chaotic, corrosive aspect, disappears, and
from it the secret earth grows up as dry land in the fixatio or
coagulatio.® ‘This firm ground is not only "earth" but also the
treasure-house of Wisdom or the heavenly Jerusalem, the “city
of God," and in it the water is preserved, now gushing forth as
a fountain which grants rejuvenation and eternal life in the
spirit. The "rivers which make the city of God joyful" were
interpreted by Origen and St. Gregory as Christ and the Holy
Ghost,$$ and Joachim of Flora interpreted the dry land between
the rivers as the Ecclesia spiritualis. But in our text the "'city
of God" is the immortal body or immortal inner man, the
62'"Dlhe Spirit Mercurius," par. 255. In the Turba (p. 255) the raw material is
called the "rod of the metals." Cf. the ecclesiastical interpretation of the rod
in Ephraem Syrus, I, col. 54: “The rod of Moses opened the rock and the waters
gushed forth. . . . Behold, from the side of Christ gushed forth the fountain
o£ life:*
63 Bousset, Hauptprobleme, p. 31.
64 “Biblia Mariana" (Borgnet, XXXVII, p. 389).*
65 Cf. the interpretation of this passage in Ripley, "Medulla philosophiae
chemicae," p. 159, in connection with the appearance of the "'fish's eyes."
66 Rahner, "Flumina de ventre Christi," p. 277. Cf. St. Gregory, Expos. in Cant. 4,
verse 15 (Migne, P.L., vol. 79, col. 515): “. . . when through the gift of the Holy
Spirit mightily bedewing holy Church with the wisdom of Scripture, or the mind
of whosoever receives it, he makes them to rejoice with his outpouring." *
67 Concordia, V (Hahn, III, pp. 296f.).
355AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
second Adam (or, according to Gregory, "the mind of whoso-
ever receives" the gift of the Holy Spirit).
Where thy sin abounded, there now grace doth more abound. For
as in Adam all die, so also in Christ all shall be made alive. For by
a man indeed came death, and by him himself the resurrection of
the dead.
The text becomes a dithyrambic song of victory over death
and corruption, expressed with such passion that we can see at
once that for the author the alchemical process in which he was *
participating meant his own inner rebirth and transformation
from corruption into incorruption. Commenting on the words
of St. Paul, "Where sin abounded,” etc., Joachim of Flora says:
" As the Son is like the Father, so he must also act . . . in like
manner; but because He who is named the Spirit of truth pro-
ceeds from Him who is truth and from the Father also, mercy
in the New Testament must be doubled: hence ‘where sin
abounded, grace did more abound." " 55 I cite this because the
Holy Spirit is the Person of the Trinity on whom the greatest
stress is laid in Aurora.®
This part of the text is particularly important psycholog-
ically as the description of what seem to be cosmic processes
gradually slips into a description of a human figure, of an im-
mortal Adam “composed of simple and pure essence.” It is as if
the author had become conscious of the intrapsychic aspect of
the opus. More and more it is understood as the production
of a greater, inner man, the self; and in contrast to the begin-
ning of Aurora, where the author in his inflation repeatedly
identified himself with the filius philosophorum, this same
figure now crystallizes out within his psyche, pure and no
longer sullied by the “corruption” of unconsciousness. This
inner Anthropos is an immortal man who has nothing more to
do with the corruptible earthly world.
For the first Adam and his sons took their beginning from the cor-
ruptible elements, and therefore it was needful that the composed
68 Ibid., IV (III, p. 287).
69 St. Thomas cites the same passage from St. Paul in the Summa, III, q. 1, art. 3
ad 3 (Eng. edn., II, p. 2029): “God allows evil in order that something better may
come of it, wherefore it is said in Rom. 5:20: Where sin abounded, grace did
more abound. Hence, too, in the blessing of the Paschal candle, we say: O happy
fault, that merited such and so great a redeemer!” *
356XI. THE SIXTH PARABLE: OF HEAVEN AND EARTH .
should be corrupted, but the second Adam, who is called the phil-
osophic man, from pure elements entered into eternity. Therefore
what is composed of simple and pure essence, remaineth for ever.
For the interpretation of the first and second Adam I would
refer the reader to Jung’s work,” where the significance of these
allusions is made quite clear."!
As Senior saith: There is One thing, that never dieth, for it con-
tinueth by perpetual increase, when the body shall be glorified in
the final resurrection of the dead, wherefore the Creed beareth wit-
ness to the resurrection of the flesh and eternal life after death.
Then saith the second Adam to the first and to his sons: Come, ye
blessed of my Father, possess you the eternal kingdom prepared
for you from the beginning of the Work, and eat my bread and
drink the wine which I have mingled for you, for all things are
made ready for you.
What deserves special emphasis here is that the second Adam
proves himself identical with Wisdom, for the words "Come eat
my bread and drink the wine which I have mingled for you"
are a direct quotation from Proverbs 9 : 5, where Wisdom is the
speaker. In this respect the author is following the official view
of the Church.? The changing form of the Anthropos, appear-
70 Mysterium, ch. V, “Adam and Eve,” and Psychology and Alchemy, par. 476.
71 Cf. "Aquarium sapientum," Mus. Herm., pp. 111, 114f. (Waite, I, pp. 98, 100),
with reference to this part of the text: Christ has within him the "heavenly
Adam." Irenaeus, Contra haer., III, 21 (trans. Roberts and Rambaut, I, p. 358):
“And as the protoplast himself, Adam, has his substance from untilled land and as
yet virgin soil (for God had not yet sent rain, and man had not tilled the ground),
and was formed by the hand of God, that is, by the word of God . . . so did he
who is the Word, recapitulating Adam in himself, rightly receive a birth, enabling
him to gather up Adam [into himself] from Mary, who was as yet a virgin." *
72 Hugh of St. Victor, De Sapientia animae Christi (Migne, P.L., vol. 176,
col. 848): “What is the Word but Wisdom? For the same who by John is called
the Word of God, is by Paul called the wisdom of God. For Christ, saith the
Apostle Paul, is the power of God and the wisdom of God (I Cor. 1). Christ
therefore is himself the Word and himself wisdom. The Word is wisdom, and wis-
dom is the Word. The Word is wisdom, because 'My heart hath uttered a good
word' (Ps. 44). Wisdom is the Word, because 'I Wisdom out of the mouth of the
Most High . . .’ (Ecclus. 24). Wisdom therefore is the word of the heart... .
Therefore if the Word giveth light, wisdom giveth light.” * Joachim of Flora
(Hahn, III, p. 332): “For the son of the Father is wisdom.” Scotus Erigena, De
divis. nat., III, 9 (Migne, P.L., vol. 122, col. 646): “To be the wisdom of God
the Father . . . and the creative cause of all things and to be created and made
357AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
ing now as a man and now as a woman, is found also in the
teachings of the Mandaeans, where the Redeemer is sometimes
called Adakas, or Adam, or the “inner man” (6 éow ávporos), and
sometimes appears as a shining female figure, and also as the
"knowledge of God” embodied in Manda d’Hajje.7* These con-
ceptions are a survival of Manichaean ideas, one of which was
that the feminine Daena (the immortal self of every individual)
can take the form of a wise old man.** Again, the Manichaeans
interpreted the Original Man who was sunk in matter as the -
world-soul (yvy; érávrov), and, according to St. Augustine, as the
anima bona.” According to Clement of Alexandria, this world-
soul was "divine in the beginning, but being made effeminate
by sensual desire, came here below to generation and destruc-
tion." 7 This is significant inasmuch as Wisdom appeared as a
feminine spirit of desire at the beginning of the work and in the
end has finally become masculine (second Adam).
The second Adam, alias Wisdom, now invites the “sons”
(presumably the alchemists) to a banquet, using the words
spoken by Christ the King of Glory: “Come, ye blessed of my
Father, possess you the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world" (Matt. 25 : 34). The rest of the quota-
tion (Prov. 9:5) was interpreted by the Church Fathers as a
in all things that he creates and to contain all things in which he is created and
made." * II, 31 (col. 603): "God, who out of himself gives birth to his Son, who
is his wisdom." * II, 18 (col. 552): “The primordial causes know themselves, since
they are created in wisdom, and subsist eternally therein." * (Cf. Preger, Ge-
schichte der Mystik, I, p. 161.) II, cap. 2 (col. 529): ". .. as those primordial
causes of things are called by the Greeks prototypes, that is, primordial exemplars
or proorismata." *
73 Reitzenstein, Erlósungsmysterium, pp. 22f.
74 Ibid., p. 54. In the Gnostic systems we find more frequently a syzygy, eg.
Protanthropos and Barbelo, Logos and Ennoia, Autogenes and Aletheia, Adam
and his companion yrdois redela (perfect knowledge), or power of the “virginal
pneuma.” (Schmidt, “Ein voriraenisches gnostisches Originalwerk," p. 843; Bousset,
Hauptprobleme, pp. 160ff.)) According to the heresy of the Jewish Christian Sym-
machus, Adam is the world-soul. Cf. Reitzenstein, Eriósungsmysterium, p. 103,
and Marius Victorinus Afer, In Epistolam Pauli ad Galatas (Migne, P.L., vol. 8,
col. 1155).
76 De vera religione, 9 (Earlier Writings, p. 234). Cf. Titus of Bostra, Adv,
Manichaeos, I, 29 (Migne, P.G., vol. 18, col. 1109); Alexander of Lycopolis, *On
the Tenets of the Manichaeans" (trans. Clark and Hawkins), pp. 238f.
76 Stromata, III, 13, 92; Bousset, p. 178.*
358XI. THE SIXTH PARABLE: OF HEAVEN AND EARTH ...
reference to the Eucharist. This passage is particularly impor-
tant psychologically because, as we saw earlier, the alchemist,
as the chosen son of Wisdom, had himself been exalted to the
King of Glory, and even represented Wisdom's male partner
in the mysterium coniunctionis. Since then, and through the
exclusion of the fourth element (earth) and the return to a
trinitarian faith, the identification has ceased. The coniunctio
was glimpsed in the heavenly place, in “all the brightness of
the sun and moon," male and female are now united in the
second Adam, and the alchemist is only a guest at the banquet.
This shows plainly enough how the author has come to terms
with the irrupted contents and has found a way back to his
Christian faith.
The alchemist now partakes of the immortal essence of the
filius philosophorum by a true communion. The Eucharistic
meal had already been hinted at in the fifth parable, where
Wisdom invited the alchemists into her house, and "they shall
be inebriated with plenty." She stood at the door and invited
them in with the words of the angel of the Apocalypse: “Behold,
I stand at the gate and knock. If any man shall hear my voice
and open to me the door, I will come in to him and will sup
with him, and he with me" (Apoc. 3:20). This was the "ban-
quet of Christ" in the Apocalypse, which Ephraem Syrus inter-
preted as a hierosgamos with God.*5 And Mary was called the
"cellar-keeper of the whole Trinity, who giveth of the wine of
the Holy Spirit, pouring it out to whom she will and as much
as she will." *? :
The figure who appears now as the Rex coelestis or the
77 Supra, pp. 213ff.
78 Hymni et sermones, II, cols. 822ff.: “Let the banquet praise thee, for thou hast
multiplied its wine. . . . I will give thanks among the guests, for he hath re-
freshed me with drink. I have invited the heavenly bridegroom, who himself took
a lower place, that he might invite all. I will enter as a guest his most pure ban-
quet, I will give thanks among the young men, for he is the bridegroom and none
shall knock at his chamber in vain.” * The Marcosians celebrated communion
with a feminine deity, invoking the Holy Spirit as the "Mother." Cf. Acts of
Thomas (James, Apocryphal New Testament, p. 388): "Come, O perfect compas-
sion, Come, she that knoweth the mysteries of him that is chosen. . . . Come,
she that manifesteth the hidden things and maketh the unspeakable things plain,
the holy dove. . . . Come, hidden mother. . . . Come and communicate with us in
this eucharist which we celebrate in thy name."
79 “Biblia Mariana" (Borgnet, XXXVII, p. 398). *
359AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
"heavenly Adam" and now as Wisdom celebrating the commun-
ion with the alchemists is, according to the closing words of the
parable,*? the product of the circulatory distillation of the four
elements. 'The first or earthly Adam likewise consisted of four
elements, but he was a composite that might easily disintegrate
and was therefore corruptible; but the second Adam “is com-
posed of simple and pure essence, and remaineth for ever.” This
essence has been distilled as the fifth—the "quintessence"—
from the circulation of the four. In other texts it is life, and it
is beyond the opposites since it contains them within itself,
male, and female and all contraries.?! It is a spiritual earth,*? psychic reality itself. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear what the spirit of the doc-
trine saith to the sons of the discipline concerning the earthly and
the heavenly Adam, which the philosophers treat of in these words:
When thou hast water from earth, air from water, fire from air,
earth from fire, then shalt thou fully and perfectly possess our art. 80 This saying from Pseudo-Aristotle (cf. Art. aurif., II, pp. 185 and 163) does in
fact reflect the Aristotelian view that the elements could be transformed into one
another: “cyclically, upwards and downwards.” Cf. Lippmann, I, p. 141. 81"Expositio epistolae Alexandri regis," Art. aurif., I, p. 245: ““The feminine re-
tentive virtue is cold and dry, and is the earth. The digestive or alterative virtue
is male, warm, and damp, and is the air. . . . But the quintessence is life, which
is peculiar to itself, and is neither warm nor damp nor cold nor dry, neither male
nor female." * Cf. Senior, De chemia, p. 96. 82 The fact that the quintessence is spiritual recalls Philo's view that everything
corporeal consists of the four elements, but that the “fifth” is the intelligible soul
(Wuxh voepá), which is a “circulating substance" (otcla xuxdopopyrixy).XI. THE SIXTH PARABLE: OF HEAVEN AND EARTH ...
reference to the Eucharist. This passage is particularly impor-
tant psychologically because, as we saw earlier, the alchemist,
as the chosen son of Wisdom, had himself been exalted to the
King of Glory, and even represented Wisdom's male partner
in the mysterium coniunctionis. Since then, and through the
exclusion of the fourth element (earth) and the return to a
trinitarian faith, the identification has ceased. The coniunctio
was glimpsed in the heavenly place, in “all the brightness of
the sun and moon," male and female are now united in the
second Adam, and the alchemist is only a guest at the banquet.
This shows plainly enough how the author has come to terms
with the irrupted contents and has found a way back to his
Christian faith.
The alchemist now partakes of the immortal essence of the
filius philosophorum by a true communion. The Eucharistic
meal had already been hinted at in the fifth parable, where
Wisdom invited the alchemists into her house, and "they shall
be inebriated with plenty." She stood at the door and invited
them in with the words of the angel of the Apocalypse: “Behold,
I stand at the gate and knock. If any man shall hear my voice
and open to me the door, I will come in to him and will sup
with him, and he with me" (Apoc. 3:20). This was the "ban-
quet of Christ" in the Apocalypse, which Ephraem Syrus inter-
preted as a hierosgamos with God.*5 And Mary was called the
"cellar-keeper of the whole Trinity, who giveth of the wine of
the Holy Spirit, pouring it out to whom she will and as much
as she will." *? :
The figure who appears now as the Rex coelestis or the
77 Supra, pp. 213ff.
78 Hymni et sermones, II, cols. 822ff.: “Let the banquet praise thee, for thou hast
multiplied its wine. . . . I will give thanks among the guests, for he hath re-
freshed me with drink. I have invited the heavenly bridegroom, who himself took
a lower place, that he might invite all. I will enter as a guest his most pure ban-
quet, I will give thanks among the young men, for he is the bridegroom and none
shall knock at his chamber in vain.” * The Marcosians celebrated communion
with a feminine deity, invoking the Holy Spirit as the "Mother." Cf. Acts of
Thomas (James, Apocryphal New Testament, p. 388): "Come, O perfect compas-
sion, Come, she that knoweth the mysteries of him that is chosen. . . . Come,
she that manifesteth the hidden things and maketh the unspeakable things plain,
the holy dove. . . . Come, hidden mother. . . . Come and communicate with us in
this eucharist which we celebrate in thy name."
79 “Biblia Mariana" (Borgnet, XXXVII, p. 398). *
359

96. 82 The fact that the quintessence is spiritual recalls Philo's view that everything
corporeal consists of the four elements, but that the “fifth” is the intelligible soul
(Wuxh voepá), which is a “circulating substance" (otcla xuxdopopyrixy). This is
"stronger than the four"; from it are composed the heavens and the stars, and the
soul therefore returns to the heavenly aether as to its father. “Quis rerum
divinarum heres?" 57, 283 (Loeb edn., IV, pp. 310ff., 428f.); “De plantatione," V,
18 (Loeb edn., III, pp. 222f.); "Legum allegoriae,” III, 55 (Loeb edn., I, pp. 336f.). Cf. also Philostratus, Life of Apollonius of Tyana, 1, pp. 308f.; Iamblichus, De
anima (Stobaeus, 1. 49. 32); Scott, Hermetica, III, p. 4o; Bousset, Hauptprobleme,
p. 196. Epicurus described the soul as a mixture of four things: a fiery, an airy,
and a pneumatic quality, and a fourth thing, which was unknown. Plutarch,
" Adversus Coloten," 20, 1, 118D, in Moralia (ed. Bernardakis) VI, p. 453; Lucretius,
De rerum natura, 3, 231-45 (Loeb edn., pp. 186£); Aetius, De placitis reliquiae,
IV. 3.11 (Diels, Doxographi Graeci, p. 388); Scott, III, p. 506. Not only the earthly
man is composed of the four elements, but his immortal divine part also (Scott,
I, pp. 304f.; cf. the Latin Asclepius, ibid. p. 298, and “Isis to Horus" on
éuWtxwors, p. 522). In patristic literature the regenerated inner man, son of Luna-
Ecclesia and of Sol-Christus, is composed of the four elements of the sun and
moon (Rahner, “Mysterium Lunae,” p. 76). 360XI. THE SIXTH PARABLE: OF HEAVEN AND EARTH ...
The second Adam, composed of the sublimated and unified
elements, combines in himself their qualities—warm and cold,
dry and damp, active and passive, etc.—which were divided into
the opposites; he is also male and female, appearing now as the
heavenly King or risen Christ or alchemical filius philoso-
phorum, and now as Wisdom or the alchemical earth or world-
soul. Taken as a whole, the picture is an anticipation of the
complete fusion of these two aspects which forms the theme of
the seventh and last parable. What the parable of the ‘‘Philo-
sophic Faith" did not quite succeed in bringing off—the circula-
tion of the four elements without the exclusion of the fourth—
has now become possible: all four elements have become one
in the quinta essentia, the immortal essence of the second Adam.
But this apocatastasis is realized in the "Beyond," and in a
moment which for the ordinary mortal comes close to the mo-
ment of death. The former man, the "first Adam and his sons,"
is still standing on the threshold; but at the next step, the step
to which the whole process has been tending, he himself will be
received into immortality.
361XII. THE-SEVENTH PARABLE: OF
THE CONFABULATION-- . .
The last parable, "Of the Confabulation of the Lover with the
Beloved," leans heavily on the Canticles (Song of Songs) both
in its composition and in its wealth of quotations. The Church
traditionally interpreted the Biblical version (originally, per-
haps, a Babylonian love-song) ! as the conversation of Christ with
the soul or with the Church, or as the “delectation of the Holy
Spirit"; ? and in a sermon Origen says very aptly that one must
first have left Egypt and crossed the Red Sea before one could
interpret the Canticles. He himself had passed through the
"spiritual wilderness" until he came within sight of the Prom-
ised Land, where he sang the Song standing upon the banks of
the Jordan.? How many voices there were in it he did not know
precisely, but in answer to his prayer God had revealed that
there were four of them: the bridegroom and the bride, the
bridegroom's chorus of youths and the bride's chorus of virgins.*
The author of Aurora, who was no doubt familiar with the
Church's interpretation,? employs the Canticles for the greater
glorification of his coniunctio. As in the Biblical version, the
speakers alternate, and the transition from one to the other is
sometimes not at all clear. It is as if the two figures were speak-
ing directly out of a state of non-differentiation, out of that
mutual contamination which is characteristic of unconscious
contents. Psychologically, it is remarkable that after so many
purificatory procedures the parable still begins as before with a
nigredo. Evidently the appearance of the King of Glory at the
1 Wittekindt, Das Hohe Lied und seine Beziehungen zum Istarkult.
? Hippolytus, Commentarium in Cant. Cant. (ed. Bonwetsch), p. 21.
3 In Cant. Cant. homiliae, Y, 1-2 (Migne, P.G., vol. 13, col. 37).
4 Ibid., col. 38.
5 For instance, that of Honorius, Speculum (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, col. 1065).
362XII. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION ...
end of the preceding parable was so overpowering that the
author was flung back into the darkness. Hence the indistinct-
ness of the speaker, which had almost disappeared in the pre-
ceding chapters. This renewed darkening of consciousness may
have been induced by the communion with the divine “second
Adam” at the end of the last parable.
Be turned to me with all your heart and do not cast me aside be-
cause I am black and swarthy, because the sun hath changed my
colour and the waters have covered my face and the earth hath been
polluted and defiled in my works;
Here the bride, or the prima materia or its soul, is speak-
ing, and she begs for help and deliverance.9 But, as the quota-
tion from Joel* shows, she is at the same time identical with
God. This is one of the places where that equation, often dimly
hinted at before, is expressed most clearly; where God, or at
any rate his feminine aspect, appears as the spirit or soul in
matter and awaits redemption by the work of man.? Origen
identifies the black bride of the Song of Songs with Miriam, the
second wife of Moses,? and also with Mary in her “overshadow-
ing" by God.?? In alchemy the black woman is an embodiment
of the nigredo, or of the umbra Solis, or of the new moon dark-
ened by the sun: a motif the psychological significance of
which is discussed in Jung.??
6 “Aquarium sapientum," Mus. Herm., p. 117 (Waite, I, p. 102): “The sages have
called our compound . . . the Raven's Head, on account of its blackness (Cant. 1,
'I am black."
7 Joel 2:12: “Now therefore saith the Lord: Be converted to me with all your
heart yeaa
8 Psychology and Alchemy, pars. 414ff. 9 Cf. Aion, pp. 209f.
10 In Cant. Cant., Lib. II (Migne, P.G., vol. 13, col. 103).
11 The ecclesiastical interpretation is the blackness of sin over the Church (Hip-
polytus, Comm. in Cant., p. 35). The sun is the “light of the world” (Meister
Eckhart, trans. Evans, IL, p. 82) or Christ, who convicts the Church of her sins
(St. Gregory, Super Cant. Cant., cap. 1: Migne, P.L., vol. 79, col. 486): “The holy
soul perceives the foulness of her sins.” Cf. Honorius, Expos. in Cant. (Migne,
P.L., vol. 172, cols. 367-69). Origen, In Cant. Cant., I, 6 (Migne, P.G., vol. 13, col.
360) interprets this passage as meaning that the bride was about to turn white: “For
because she is not yet purged of the filth of all her sins . . . and not yet bathed
in salvation, she is called black, but she doth not remain black in colour. There-
fore she is white when she riseth up to greater things . . . and it is said of her,
Who is this that goeth up whitened?” *
12 Mysterium, pp. 24ff., 145ff., 173ff .
363AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
for there was darkness over it, because I stick fast in the mire of
the deep and my substance is not disclosed. Wherefore out of the
depths have I cried, and from the abyss of the earth with my voice
to all you that pass by the way.
'The words "there was darkness over it" (the earth) refer to
the Crucifixion, when the sun and moon were darkened. The
Crucifixion itself was interpreted as the novilunar conjunction
of the sun (Christ) with the moon (Church).
Attend and see me, if any shall find one like unto me, I will give
into his hand the morning star. For behold in my bed by night I
sought one to comfort me and I found none, I called and there was
none to answer me.— Therefore will I arise and go into the city,
In moving words the anima cries out for help—but in the
sentence that immediately follows, "Therefore will I arise," it
is the bridegroom speaking, and he is the buried one who seeks
a virgin to deliver him. The transition from one speaker to the
other is barely perceptible, so that one is inclined to think that
it is the same figure speaking now as a woman and now as a
man, just as so often before Wisdom coalesced with the Holy
Spirit, Christ, or God. One has the impression that the author,
having achieved direct contact with the unconscious, is letting
the voices speak just as he hears them, without bringing his ego
into it at all, as if he and the unconscious had again become
identical. Later in the text it sometimes seems as if he felt him-
self to be identical with the bridegroom calling for help from
the grave, although, as the next passage makes clear, this buried
bridegroom is an impersonal, objective figure.
seeking in the streets and broad ways a chaste virgin to espouse,
comely in face, more comely in body, most comely in her garments,
that she may roll back the stone from the door of my sepulchre . . .
The male partner, it now appears, is the alchemical “body”
or corpse that has to be reanimated. Thus in the Carmina Helio-
dori '? the corpse cries out: "Where is the living soul that has
separated from me? . . . O wash me that I may become a shin-
ing house . . . for the spirit and the purified soul."
and give me wings like a dove, and I will fly with her into heaven
and then say: I live for ever, and will rest in her, for the queen
stood on my right hand in gilded clothing, surrounded with variety.
18 Carmen IV, verse 240, p. 57.
364XII. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION . . .
We can now understand why the bride gives her lover
"wings like a dove": she endows the body with her own vola-
tility so that it can fly with her into heaven.!4 Senior says: “And
because the white woman escapeth . . . but the red man fol-
loweth after the woman and holdeth her, they (the philosophers)
said: the woman hath wings but the man not." !5
Hearken therefore O daughter and see and incline thine ear to my
prayers, for I have desired thy beauty with all the desire of my
heart. O I spoke with my tongue, Make known to me my end and
what is the number of my days, that I may know what is wanting
to me, for thou hast made all my days measurable and my substance
is as nothing before thee.
It is evident from these words that the man really does rep-
resent the body or corpus glorificatum: only through the soul
can he attain eternal life. In similar wise the Manichaean texts
speak of a post-mortal union of body and soul; the heavenly
half of the dead man rising to heaven comes down to him in
the form of a wise old man or a shining female figure (Daena),
and calls him the "body." 16 As Reitzenstein emphasizes," the
spirit is, as it were, a lower part of the soul, which serves the
true soul as a kind of body.!5
14 Mennens, Theatr. chem., V, p. 280: “Wherefore the prophet exclaims, Who
will give me wings like a dove, that is, pure and simple thoughts and contempla-
tions, and I will fly and be at rest? Who but the heavenly Father? Wherefore saith
Christ, No man cometh unto me except my Father draw him, and then indeed
when he hath completed a whole circle, and God shall be all in all, as he always
was." * 1
15 Pret. marg. nov., p. 123. Cf. De chemia, p. 33. Cf. Merculinus in “Ros. phil."
Art. aurif., II, p. 242: "The stone . . . bears wings and is the moon, who by herself
shines more than all others." In Senior the volatility is represented by eagles; cf.
the allusion in Aurora (p. 214) to the woman who has “wings of the great eagle"
(Rev. 12 : 14). Augustine likens the transfigured Church to a young eagle that “flies
aloft as before" (Enarr. in Ps. 102 [103] 9, trans. Tweed, V. p. 46). For the motif of
the fledged and unfledged see Zosimos, Alch. grecs, III, xxviii: "If two do not be-
come one, that is, if the fledged does not conquer the unfledged, your expectation
will come to nothing.”
16 Reitzenstein, Erlósungsmysterium, pp. 4f.; cf. pp. 28ff.
17 Ibid.
18 A similar view is found among the Mandaeans, ibid., p. 50 (Ginza, 1. 111. 24ff.):
“T am a great Mana, / I who dwelt in the sea; / I dwelt in the sea / Until I was
given wings . . . / Until I became a winged one / And lifted up my wings to the
place of light."
365AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
A Christian interpretation of the same alchemical process is
given in Petrus Bonus.!? “In the magistery and end of the work,
when the soul herself arises, it is to be seen that she seeks her
body, and is united therewith and receives life and activity; and
that union and composition comes about by the mediation of
the spirit; and when she is joined to the body she lives forever
with her body. But this conjunction takes place at the birth
and resurrection of the soul, for though she was created first,
the soul with her body could not show forth her own proper
and incorruptible activities because of the body's defilement
and corruptibility, nay more, she lay useless and as if dead, and
as if buried with her body, and when through the magistery
she is purified and made white, she rises again separated from
her body, and then her body is also purified, and she seeks her
body and desires to be joined therewith that she may live for
ever, and cannot be conjoined with another body. . . . For our
soul arose on the horizon of eternity ?? before she was united
with her body . . . and in this conjunction of resurrection the
body becomes wholly spiritual, like the soul herself, and they
are made one as water is mixed with water, and henceforth they
are not separated for ever, since there is no diversity in them,
but unity and identity of all three, that is, spirit, soul, and body,
without separation for ever."
Psychologically this process represents a further stage in the
integration of the self. Previously it was essentially concerned
with freeing the anima from matter, that is, withdrawing her
projection and transforming her into a function of relationship
with the unconscious. The self was then manifested as the King
of Glory and the "second Adam." But now a new problem is
constellated: the freeing of the body itself, in which the "fallen
Sophia" was imprisoned. This is the stage of the unio corporalis
discussed in Dorn.*! According to him, the “body” must be dis-
tilled until it turns into a blue liquid called “heaven” (caelum),
the parallel action in our text being the volatilization or sub-
limation of the body, which is accomplished by the bride giving
it wings and clothing it in royal garments. The opposition be-
19 Pret. marg. nov., pp. 119ff.*
20 This is from the so-called “Liber de causis"; cf. Bardenhewer, Die pseudo-aris-
totelische Schrift über das reine Gute: Liber de causis.
21 Mysterium, pp. 482ff., 4871f.
366XII. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION .. .
tween "body" and "spirit" is thus resolved. Joannes Scotus Eri-
gena's conception of resurrection ?? is of significance in this re-
spect. He says that just as iron in the fire becomes fire without
losing its essence, so will the substance of the body turn into the
substance of the soul—into a "better substance" which is purely
spiritual and sexless. After its transfiguration Christ's body was
bisexual. The body, after being dissolved into the four elements,
arises from them anew.?? Similar views were held by various
neo-Manichaean sects.?*
The “making one" (adunatio) of the two sexes is immedi-
ately followed (according to Erigena and the Amalricians) by
the unification of earth and paradise.?5
In the passage we quoted earlier?9 Jung, interpreting the
lapis as a compensatory figure to Christ, continues: "Correctly
recognizing the spiritual one-sidedness of the Christ-image, theo-
logical speculation had begun very early to concern itself with
Christ's body, that is, with his materiality, and had temporarily
solved the problem with the hypothesis of the resurrected body.
But because this was only a provisional and therefore not an
entirely satisfactory answer, the problem logically presented
itself again in the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin, leading first
to the dogma of the Immaculate Conception and finally to that
of the Assumption.” ?7
Not only does our text contain clear, unconscious anticipa-
tions of this development, but certain symbolic allusions even
go beyond it and carry the alchemical idea of the "God become
physical" ?5 still further to include the physical man, so that
each individual becomes the vessel for an incarnation of God.
Since the body is also a symbol for the individual limitations
of the conscious personality, its dissolution in our text could
be conceived as the extinction of the conscious individual in
22 De divis. nat., V, 8 (Migne, P.G., vol. 122, col. 879), and I, 10 (col. 451).
23 Preger, Geschichte der Mystik, I, p. 164.
24 Hahn, Geschichte der Ketzer, II, pp. 107ff. They believed in an adunatio
sexuum.
25 De divis. nat., YI, cap. 8 (Migne, col. 533): "And since after the unification of
man, that is, of the two sexes, into the pristine unity of nature, in which there
was neither male nor female, but there was simply a human being, forthwith shall
follow the unification of earth and paradise." *
26 Supra, pp. 343f.
27 “The Visions of Zosimos," par. 127. 28 Ibid., par. 138.
367AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
the unconscious, here described positively as a deliverance from
the "sepulchre" of conscious limitations, as the moment of
union with the inner totality in which there are no more oppo-
sites.?? In the Christian view this union occurs only after death
at the resurrection of the glorified body.
The motif of resurrection had been alluded to just before
in the text, when the lover begged the chaste virgin to roll the
stone from the door of his sepulchre. This allusion parallels the
earlier motif of the breaking of the barriers of hell and
the “gates of brass and bars of iron" (Isaiah 45 : 2 and Psalm
106 : 16), a passage generally interpreted by the Church Fathers
as referring to Christ's stay in limbo.?? According to Cyril of
Jerusalem, the buried Lord was like a "stone within the stone"
—a spiritual stone covered by the tomb. By his burial the tree
of life was planted in the earth, that the dead be set free.** Such
formulations could easily be understood alchemically. Not only
Christ but Wisdom, too, makes a descent to the centre of the
earth. In Ecclesiasticus 24 : 45 she says: ** “I will penetrate to
all the lower parts of the earth, and will behold all that sleep,
and will enlighten all that hope in the Lord." *? A similar image
occurs in the Odes of Solomon, where the "living, eternal water
of the Lord" descends to quicken the dead and carries them up
transfigured. They rise up "by the dew of the Lord” to the
"cloud of peace.” As Lippmann observes,** this is strikingly
like the alchemical idea of the dvaforipmos (quickening by fire)
as described by Komarios ?? in connection with the hierosgamos:
"Behold, in the midst of the mountain, there beneath the male
lies his companion, with whom he unites and upon whom he
29 Cf. Jung’s commentary to The Tibetan Book of the Great Liberation, pp. 490,
498.
30 The same motif occurs in Hippolytus, Comm. in Cant., pp. Goff.
31 Cf. Katechesis, 13, cap. 35 (ed. Reischl and Rupp, II, p. 96), where Christ says:
"I am the cornerstone, elect, precious, I am hidden within the stone for a short
time, a stone of stumbling to the Jews, but of salvation to them that believe.
Therefore was the tree of life sown in the earth, that what was accursed might
obtain blessing and that the dead might be set free.” *
32 Cf. Bousset, Hauptprobleme, pp. 256ff.
33 The prototype of this is Ishtar’s journey to the underworld.
84 I, p. 222.
35 Komar is the Syriac word for ‘priest.’ According to Jung the “Book of Ko-
marios" belongs to the ist cent. A.D. For contrary views see Lippmann, II, p. 33,
and Reitzenstein, Erlósungsmysterium, p. 167.
368XII. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION .. .
rejoices. And nature rejoices in nature and unites with nothing
outside herself. . . . See O ye sages and understand: see the
consummation of the art, when the bride and bridegroom unite
and are made one!" “And then when the soul and spirit unite
and are made one . . . you will have the gold which not even
the treasuries of kings contain. Behold, this is the mystery of the
philosophers." ?9 During this process the spirit becomes cor-
poreal, the dead body receives a soul and takes up again the
spirit that had been extracted from it, and now they all “rule
and let themselves be ruled by one another." “When the dark
pneuma * is driven away . . . the body will be illuminated,
and now soul and spirit rejoice, for the darkness has departed
from the body. Wake up from Hades, stand up from the grave
and come forth from the darkness. . . . The medicine of life 38
has entered into you. And the spirit rejoices again to dwell in
the body, and the soul, too, loves it . . . now that it is illumi-
nated; and they shall be no more divided for ever." *? In Zosi-
mos the coniunctio is at the same time a "palingenesis" #° and a
resurrection." The alchemist's idea of producing the resur-
rected body and the elixir of immortality by a chemical pro-
cedure is derived from the Egyptian embalming rites and the
ceremonies for the dead Osiris. From the very beginning, there-
fore, the alchemists were preoccupied with the problem of the
post-mortal state of the soul, and though the metaphysical
validity of their statements is not susceptible of scientific proof
they may well be intuitively correct anticipations of the psycho-
logical experience of death. At any rate these statements have
to do with a reality which is far removed from life as ordinarily
lived and from the sphere of ego-consciousness.
The conception of the coniunctio as a post-mortal event runs
36 Alch. grecs, IV, xx. 13. Cf. Reitzenstein, "Zur Geschichte der Alchemie und des
Mystizismus," p. 17, line 123, and Erlósungsmysterium, p. 6.
37 The “horrible darknesses" of our text.
38 Cf. also the animation of the dead by the ¢dpyaxov (wíjs in "Ostanes to Petesis"
(Lippmann, I, p. 67).
39 This unity is described as a statue of light, which comes out of the fire
(Berthelot, Alch. grecs, IV.xx.7). Cf. Bousset, Hauptprobleme, pp. 34f. on the
parallelism between this statue and the Naassene conception of Adam's body, also
the Mandaean parallels.
40 Alch. grecs, III, xxxiv, 2; cf. ITI, xl, 2.
41 Ibid., III, lvi, 3; cf. III, viii, 2: “Deny not resurrection to the dead.”
369AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
through the whole history of alchemical symbolism and is found
also among the Arabic alchemists who were the sources for
Aurora. Thus the Turba *? says that the res (thing, matter) is
buried like a man, and then God gives it its soul and spirit back
again, and after the decomposition it grows stronger and is
purified, just as after the resurrection a man becomes stronger
and younger than he was upon earth. And Calid says: "This
hidden thing is of the nature of sun and fire, and it is the most
precious oil of all hidden things, and the living tincture, and
the permanent water, which ever liveth and remaineth, and the
vinegar of the philosophers and the penetrative spirit: and it is
hidden, tincturing, aggregating, and reviving: it rectifieth and
enlighteneth all the dead and causeth them to rise again." *?
In Aurora the risen bridegroom stands at the left hand of
the Queen, who appears to him “in gilded clothing, surrounded
with variety." This figure, the Queen of alchemy, is again
Wisdom, the anima in her glorified form purged of all super-
fluities. She stands to the right of the bridegroom—that is to say,
he is more deeply buried in the unconscious than she, and is a
figure even stranger to consciousness than the anima. He is also
the body, which in Christianity is of lesser worth than the soul.
At the Last Judgment and the "coming of the Great Sab-
bath," Joachim of Flora says, the glory of the just will appear as
a queen in golden robes sitting at the right hand of God. The
text is similar to that of Aurora: ““Then the glory of the just
shall appear like unto the sun in the kingdom of their father
when the walls of Jerusalem are wholly complete and the whole
number of the elect is filled up, and she sball appear glorious
and happy, seated like a queen on the right hand of God in
gilded raiment, surrounded with variety. And the Lord God
will give her a part of his glory and will reign with her even
for ever and of his kingdom there shall be no end. Amen." **
For thou art she who shall enter through the ear, through my do-
main, and I shall be clothed with a purple garment from thee and
from me, I will come forth as a bridegroom out of his bride-chamber,
Here we find a curious detail: the soul enters the resurrected
body through the ear. This refers to the ecclesiastical idea of
42 P. 139. 43 "Liber trium verborum," Art. aurif., I, p. 227.*
44 Expositio in Apoc. (Hahn, III, p. 341).*
370XII. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION ...
"conception through the ear," according to which the Holy
Ghost entered Mary's ear as the "Word" and so begot Christ.
St. Isaac of Antioch says: "Unless [Christ] were God, how could
he enter through the ear? . . . For by the ear the spirit entered
and out of the womb issued the flesh." *5 And Ephraem Syrus:
"[Christ] entered through the ear and dwelt secretly in the
womb." 46 By alluding to these ideas the author of Aurora prob-
ably wished to indicate that the resurrection coniunctio was
simultaneously an incarnation of the Logos or of God,*' thereby
expressing the spiritual and supernatural nature of the con-
iunctio.
When the soul has entered the body and the bride has united
with the bridegroom, she adorns him with a purple garment and
jewels.
for thou shalt adorn me round about with shining and glittering
gems and shalt clothe me with the garments of salvation and joy
to overthrow the nations and all mine enemies, and shalt adorn me
with a crown of gold engraved with the sign of holiness . . .
For the significance of the crown I would refer the reader to
Jung. As the feminine arcane substance *® it represents the
anima or, in our text, the earth or body, so that here the roles
are interchanged—for in the end both opposites always signify
both.*? In the '"T'ractatus aureus Hermetis" *! the lapis likewise
appears as a crowned king “who cometh forth from the fire . . .
45 Opera omnia, I, p. 60.* John Damascene, De fide orthodoxa, IV, 14 (Migne,
P.G., vol. 94, col. 1162): “And the conception came about by hearing.” * Cf.
Euthymius Zigabenos, Panoplia dogmatica (Migne, P.G., vol. 130, col. 1302), and
Agobardus of Lyons, De correctione antiphonarii, 7 (Migne, P.L., vol. 104, col.
332): "The word entered through the Virgin's ear and came out by the golden
gate." *
46 II, col. 570. *
47 Hence also the motif of clothing with a purple garment. Cf. Daniel, Thesaurus
hymnologicus, II, p. 205: "In this place did the Eternal / Human flesh and nature
don: / Hidden here the sacred bridegroom / Put his wedding garment on." *
48 Mysterium, p. 378.
49 Turba, p. 336: “The body is called earth, ash, chalk, mother . . . Holy Virgin,
kingly crown . . . wood, sea, sputum of the moon." Senior, De chemia, p. 41:
“The white foliated earth is the crown of victory . . . and the second body." Cf.
ibid., pp. 16 and 35.
50 Cf. the interpretation of Honorius, Expos. in Cant. (Migne, P.L., vol. 172,
col. 440).
51 Ars chemica, pp. 21f. Cf. "Ros. phil.,” Art. aurif. (1610), II, p. 248.
371AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
then is death overcome, and the son reigneth in the red gar-
ment, and the purple is put on." ®? At the coronation scene in
our text the bride clothes her lover with a "purple garment
from thee and from me." In alchemy this would mean the
rubedo, already referred to in the Senior quotation in the fourth
parable: "He shineth in colour like a ruby through the tinctur-
ing soul, which it hath acquired by virtue of the fire." 5? This
is the much-prized color invariabilis (unchanging colour), whose
origin the T'urba attributes to the soul: "For out of sulphur
mixed with sulphur cometh the most precious colour, which
doth not vary nor flee from the fire, when the soul is introduced
to the innermost parts of the body, and containeth and giveth
colour to the body." ** *O wonderful nature, which coloureth
the other natures, O heavenly natures, which transform . .
the elements!" 55 This anima tingens is of a spiritual nature 59
and assimilates the body to itself so that it too becomes spirit-
ual.5* When the body is pulverized to a "spiritual powder" the
fire tinges it with the "unchanging colour"; and "this spirit
which you seek, that you may tinge somewhat therewith, is
hidden and concealed in the body, like unto the soul in a man's
body." 35 The soul or bride in our text is thus a fiery, tincturing
spirit who gives the bridegroom rising from the grave (i.e., the
spiritualized body) a "garment" (colour)? This motif recalls
the ancient idea of the soul as a coloured garment enveloping
the material world. According to the Gnostic Basilides the
52 Cf. the role of the crown in the Cabala (Bousset, pp. 201f.) and in Manichaeism
(p. 202, n. 1). There the crown of victory is borne ahead of the Primordial Man.
Also the Manichaean “wreath of light" (Reitzenstein, Erlósungsmysterium, p. 3).
53 ‘The same Senior quotation occurs in “Ros. phil." Art. aurif., II, p. 248.
54 Turba, p. 129.*
55 Ibid., p. 166. Cf. pp. 251f.: "For it is the soul that penetrates and tinctures the
body."
56 P. 135: “The soul... is a spiritual nature out of which the colours ap-
peared." *
57 P. 155; cf. pp. 136 and 140.
58 P. 141; cf. p. 160: “Then they become bodies having tincturing spirits and souls,
because they fertilize one another." *
59 T'urba, p. 147: "Saturate and cook, until that arises which he commanded to be
ruled by you, an intangible spirit, and until you see the elixir clothed with the
royal garment (that is, with the Tyrian hue).” P. 127: "When man and woman
are conjoined, the woman is no longer volatile and the compound is spiritualized,
and when this compound is changed into a red, spiritual breath, then arises the
beginning of the world."
372XII. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION ... world-soul is nothing but an '"enphasis" or "colour" of light
which has descended into matter.® As Philo puts it, it produces
the "many-coloured fabric of this world." *' The same arche-
typal image played a great role in the ancient mystery cults,
when the neophyte was given a new "heavenly garment" as a
symbol of his inner transformation and rebirth. The garment
represented his final solificatio,9? for which reason it was some-
times described as "light," “‘seal of light," etc.9? These ancient
ideas were preserved for a long time among the Manichaeans
and the Mandaeans,** and they penetrated very early on into
60 Hegemonius, Acta Archelai, p. 96, and Bousset, pp. 92, 94. 61 For the seven aetheric garments of Physis see Hippolytus, Elenchos, V, 8, and
Scott, Hermetica, IV, p. 409. 62 Apuleius, The Golden Ass, pp. 285ff., and Reitzenstein, Erlósungsmysterium,
p. 164: "The meaning is clear: the neophyte, reborn, becomes God, and the sun-
god at that." These ancient ideas are probably based on the primitive equation
garment — skin — soul. Cf. Ninck, Wodan und germanischer Schicksalsglaube,
pp. 43ff. 63 Bousset, pp. 3o03ff. Cf. the “Book of the Secrets of Enoch," 22: 8-9 (Charles,
Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha, Il, p. 443): "And the Lord said to Michael: ‘Go
and take Enoch from out of his earthly garments, and anoint him with my sweet
ointment, and put him in the garment of my glory.’ And Michael did thus, as the
Lord had told him: He anointed me, and dressed me, and the appearance of that
ointment is more than the great light, and his ointment is like sweet dew.” Acts
of Philip (James, Apocryphal New Testament, p. 450): “Clothe me in thy glorious
robe and thy seal of light that ever shineth." In the Ascension of Isaiah (Charles,
pp. 52ff.), Isaiah sees in the highest heaven the crowns and robes which are to be
given to the believers.AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
then is death overcome, and the son reigneth in the red gar-
ment, and the purple is put on." ®? At the coronation scene in
our text the bride clothes her lover with a "purple garment
from thee and from me." In alchemy this would mean the
rubedo, already referred to in the Senior quotation in the fourth
parable: "He shineth in colour like a ruby through the tinctur-
ing soul, which it hath acquired by virtue of the fire." 5? This
is the much-prized color invariabilis (unchanging colour), whose
origin the T'urba attributes to the soul: "For out of sulphur
mixed with sulphur cometh the most precious colour, which
doth not vary nor flee from the fire, when the soul is introduced
to the innermost parts of the body, and containeth and giveth
colour to the body." ** *O wonderful nature, which coloureth
the other natures, O heavenly natures, which transform . .
the elements!" 55 This anima tingens is of a spiritual nature 59
and assimilates the body to itself so that it too becomes spirit-
ual.5* When the body is pulverized to a "spiritual powder" the
fire tinges it with the "unchanging colour"; and "this spirit
which you seek, that you may tinge somewhat therewith, is
hidden and concealed in the body, like unto the soul in a man's
body." 35 The soul or bride in our text is thus a fiery, tincturing
spirit who gives the bridegroom rising from the grave (i.e., the
spiritualized body) a "garment" (colour)? This motif recalls
the ancient idea of the soul as a coloured garment enveloping
the material world. According to the Gnostic Basilides the
52 Cf. the role of the crown in the Cabala (Bousset, pp. 201f.) and in Manichaeism
(p. 202, n. 1). There the crown of victory is borne ahead of the Primordial Man.
Also the Manichaean “wreath of light" (Reitzenstein, Erlósungsmysterium, p. 3).
53 ‘The same Senior quotation occurs in “Ros. phil." Art. aurif., II, p. 248.
54 Turba, p. 129.*
55 Ibid., p. 166. Cf. pp. 251f.: "For it is the soul that penetrates and tinctures the
body."
56 P. 135: “The soul... is a spiritual nature out of which the colours ap-
peared." *
57 P. 155; cf. pp. 136 and 140.
58 P. 141; cf. p. 160: “Then they become bodies having tincturing spirits and souls,
because they fertilize one another." *
59 T'urba, p. 147: "Saturate and cook, until that arises which he commanded to be
ruled by you, an intangible spirit, and until you see the elixir clothed with the
royal garment (that is, with the Tyrian hue).” P. 127: "When man and woman
are conjoined, the woman is no longer volatile and the compound is spiritualized,
and when this compound is changed into a red, spiritual breath, then arises the
beginning of the world."
372

450): “Clothe me in thy glorious
robe and thy seal of light that ever shineth." In the Ascension of Isaiah (Charles,
pp. 52ff.), Isaiah sees in the highest heaven the crowns and robes which are to be
given to the believers. In Pistis Sophia, his heavenly garment of shining light was
sent down to Jesus after his resurrection, so that he might ascend in it. Likewise
in the Acts of Thomas (James, pp. 414f.) a shining robe "that was made like unto
me as it had been in a mirror" came down from heaven to the king's son. Similar
ideas existed among the Mandaeans, and for a long time induced them to wear
only white clothes (Bousset, p. 303, n. 2 and 364, n. 2). Cf. the rite of the Sethians,
in which the celebrants were given a drink of the living water, then stripped off
the likeness of slaves and put on the heavenly garment (Hippolytus, Elenchos, V,
19 and 27, and Bousset, p. 293). 64 Thus the Fihrist says of the teachings of Mani (Reitzenstein, Erlósungsmys-
terium, pp. 28£): "When a truthful man is about to die, the Primordial God sends
a god of light in the form of the leading sage, together with three gods, and with
them the water vessel, the robe, the head-band, the crown, and the wreath of
light. . . . Also the devil appears to him . . . As soon as the truthful man sees
them, he calls to his aid the goddess who has assumed the form of the sage... But they take him and clothe him with the crown, the wreath and the robe
. and rise with him . .. to the sphere of the moon.” (Cf. ibid., p. 177, and
I Cor. 15) It is worth noting that the helpful figures are four gods with four
objects! 378AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
alchemy. Thus, in his visions, Zosimos saw the transformed an-
throparion clad in a robe of royal purple. He is therefore
equated with the sun-god Mithras, who appeared to the neo-
phyte as a king in a scarlet robe.9?9 That just such a solificatio of
the bridegroom is meant here is proved by the reference to
Psalm 18:5-6, ". . . he hath set his tabernacle for the sun,
which is like to the bridegroom coming out from the bridal
chamber." ® In patristic literature Christ was the “new sun,"
so that once again the Sol-Christus-filius-lapis parallel is taken
up in our text. It should be borne in mind that throughout this
part of the parable the bride and bridegroom are winged beings,
i.€., spirits, and that everything that happens between them
takes place in heaven, i.e., in the world beyond, the uncon-
scious. The earth, the body, and earthly reality in general have
been left behind like an empty grave. Therefore the author no
longer intervenes in the dialogue with interpolated comments;
he has, as it were, vanished in the impassioned converse of Wis-
dom and the glorified king.
In general, clothes signify, psychologically, an inner attitude
that has become manifest, or one that either acts upon the en-
vironment or protects against it. The change of clothing in the
mysteries therefore signifies a change of psychic attitude; for
instance, the disrobing with which some of them begin means
casting off the previous unsuitable attitude or persona (mask),
and the solificatio robe means the new, religious attitude which
has been found on a higher level of consciousness. The robing
of the bridegroom by the queen thus indicates that he is not
only transformed and has attained illumination, but can mani-
fest it on a higher level of activity. Red or purple signifies heal-
ing power, mana, incorruptibility, enhanced power of irradia-
ton
and shalt clothe me with a robe of righteousness and shalt be-
troth me to thee with thy ring and clothe my feet in sandals of gold.
All this shall my perfect beloved do, exceeding beautiful and comely
65 “The Visions of Zosimos,” par. 86 (III, v, 1), and Lippmann, I, p. 81.
66 Dieterich, Eine Mithrasliturgie, p. 10.
67 Ephraem Syrus, I, col. 532: "Light shone out before them, Jesus the bridegroom
came forth from his chamber, the tomb remained with the angels in the midst." *
68 Concerning these significations of red, see Wunderlich, Die Bedeutung der
roten Farbe im Kultus der Griechen und Rómer.
374XII. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION ...
in her delights, for the daughters of Sion saw her and the queens
and concubines praised her. O queen of the heights, arise, make
haste, my love, my spouse, speak beloved to thy lover, who and of
what kind and how great thou art, for Sion's sake thou shalt not
hold thy peace and for the sake of Jerusalem thou shalt not rest
from speaking to me, for thy beloved heareth.
This passage continues the motif of the robing and adorn-
ment, and it should be noted that the bride is once more iden-
tified with God, for Isaiah 61 : 10 says: "I will greatly rejoice in
the Lord, and my soul shall be joyful in my God. For he hath
clothed me with the garments of salvation, and with the robe
of justice he hath covered me: as a bridegroom decked with a
crown and as a bride adorned with her jewels." Ephraem Syrus
interprets this as the hierosgamos of the neophyte with God or
the Church.® The author of Aurora must therefore have been
fully aware that he was describing a unio mystica with God, and
that the figure he variously calls Wisdom, the woman, the water,
and the bride is nothing less than God himself or at any rate
some aspect of him. The ring indicates the eternity of the lovers'
union in the self, the golden sandals signify an incorruptible
standpoint."? The bridegroom speaks throughout with such hu-
mility that one is inclined to see in him an ordinary mortal,
indeed the author himself; but later it becomes increasingly
clear that he is a personification of the self with whom the
author has become emotionally identified. In contrast to the
beginning of the treatise, however, there is no evidence of in-
flation. ‘This may be because the scene has changed: the material
world and the ego are abolished, everything is extinguished in
the unconscious, so there can be no more question of an impure
69 Commentarius in Jesaiam, cap. 61 (ed. Lamy, II, col. 184): "Let the Church
rejoice in her God, for he hath clothed me with the garment of salvation, that is
the stole of glory of baptism; for that is the true garment of salvation and white
robe of glory. And he hath made me as a glorious bridegroom by absolution. And
as a bride adorned. The bride is the Church, which is adorned with the beauty
of all peoples." * I, col. 44, "Hymnus in Festum Epiphaniae," No. 4, verses 2-3:
“For from heaven is his divine nature and from earth his garment of flesh. Every-
one who puts off his garments mixes them with the garment of Christ for ever.
Receive from him in the waters the garment which is not worn out or lost,
wherewith he covers for ever those who put it on." * Cf. the real spiritual mar-
riage which the Marcosians, for instance, celebrated in earthly imitation of the
marriage of Sophia with the Saviour (Bousset, pp. 267ff., and esp. p. 315).
70 von Franz, “Passio Perpetuae," p. 480.
375AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
mixture of this world and the world beyond, of conscious and
unconscious. I must confess that I cannot conceive how this
might be possible unless the author were in a state near to death.
If it were just a passing delirium, the ego-personality would still
be hovering in the background and, one would think, would
make itself felt in one way or another.
After the bridegroom has praised his glorification by the
queen in all humility, he beseeches her to tell him who she is,
and the bride now gives answer.
Hear all ye nations, give ear all ye inhabitants of the world; my
beloved, who is ruddy, hath spoken to me, he hath sought and be-
sought: I am the flower of the field and the lily of the valleys, I am
the mother of fair love and of knowledge and of holy hope.
All the aspects of the central figure of the opus, which were
elucidated separately in the earlier parables, are summed up in
this proclamation. She describes herself as the "flower of the
field" and the "lily of the valleys," following the bride in the
Canticles, in that well-known verse (2:1) which the Fathers
consistently interpreted as referring to Mary or the Church.”
Hugo Rahner ? has comprehensively shown the classical pre-
history of this symbol, as well as its patristic interpretations."
The flower, particularly the lily, also played an important role
in alchemy. It symbolized the arcane substance, and as such was
often called Lunatica (honesty), berissa, or moly. The lily was
specifically a synonym for the white, feminine substance (as con-
trasted with the red rose) and for silver (as contrasted with
gold).'* The succus lunariae (juice of the moon-plant) was a
synonym for the divine water; ** hence we can understand why
the bride, following Ecclesiasticus 24: 23, immediately after-
71 Honorius, Expos. in Cant. (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, col. 382), or "Sequence for the
Nativity of the BVM,” in The Liturgical Poetry of Adam of St. Victor, II, p. 220:
"Flower of the field, unique lily of the valleys, from thee did Christ come forth.
Thou, heavenly paradise, and unfelled Lebanon, breathing forth sweetness—thou
art the throne of Solomon, to which no other throne is like in material or work-
manship." * Cf. Hippolytus, Comm. in Cant., pp. 49£., where “the Queen stood” is
interpreted as the Church; and Honorius, Quaest. et Resp. in Prov. et Eccl., cap.
31 (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, col. 330). 72 “Die seelenheilende Blume."
73 Cf. also Jung, “The Philosophical Tree,” ch. 9.
74 A detailed account is to be found in the treatise Der kleine Baur (see Bibliog-
raphy s.v. Grasshoff). For the symbolism of the Lunaria see Mysterium, pp. 199f.
75 "Ros. phil.,” Art. aurif., II, p. 137.
376XII. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION ..
wards calls herself the "vine": she is the source or fundamental
substance of the red and white “water” (wine), symbolizing the
opposites. Lily and vine are also symbols for Mary.”
As the fruitful vine I have brought forth a pleasant odour, and my
flowers are the fruit of honour and riches.
Vine and grapes played a large role in classical alchemy.
Hermes is there called the "vintner" (Borpuyirns), who "reddens
the white brands of his vintage with fire." 7” In the Carmina
Heliodori the lapis is called the "white grape," which, crushed
in the hand, gives out a fiery, odorous wine like blood.78 Zosimos
interprets this motif as the "mystery of the washing," or as the
rust or poison (ios). In Ruland’s Lexicon the "grapes of
Hermes" are still defined as the philosophical water, distilla-
tion, solution, etc.8°
In our text the allusion is also to Christian symbolism, to
Christ as the "true vine" of whom Ephraem Syrus says that the
souls are his shoots.! Mary too was compared with the vine.
Ephraem Syrus says of her: "And Mary flourished, a new vine
in place of that old vine Eve, and the new life Christ dwelt in
her." 5? Or again: “Mary is the vine that grew from the blessed
root of David. Her shoots yielded a grape filled with life-giving
blood. Of that new wine did Adam drink, and returned resur-
rected to paradise." 5
Just as the vine in ecclesiastical symbolism can mean Christ
or Mary, so the bride in Aurora is obviously the producer of
76 “Biblia Mariana" (Borgnet, XXXVII, p. 397): "Mary is the lily of all chastity; as
a thorn to the rose, so Jewry gave birth unto Mary." *
77 Alch. grecs, V, iv.
78 Carmina Heliodori, p. 32, verses 180-85. Cf. the Eucharist of the Marcosians,
where a cult-transformation of white into red wine took place (Leisegang, Gnosis,
Pp. 347)-
79 Alch. grecs, III, vi. 80 Latin edn. (1612), under "uvae."
81 T, col. 22. Christ is also the grape that let itself be pressed to revivify souls with
its wine (II, col. 482). 82 T, col. 154. *
83 II, col. 618. Cf. Hymn XX, col. 640: “Simeon bore in his arms the cluster of life
gathered from the virginal vine." * Hymn I, col. 524: "The virginal vine gave
grapes whose sweet wine brought consolation to them that weep.” * Honorius,
Speculum (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, col. go2): "[Mary] was indeed the paradise of
apples, the fount of the gardens, for in her rose up the tree of life, and from her
flowed forth the fount of wisdom, and she was enriched with all delights, in
whom were hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge." *
377‘AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
the white (lily) and red (wine), a hermaphroditic being who
unites the opposites in herself. Not only are they contained in
her, she is actually the medium of their conjunction, as the
next passage shows.
I am the bed of my beloved, which threescore of the most valiant
ones surrounded, all holding swords upon their thigh because of
fears in the night.
The "fears" are comparable with the “horrible darknesses -
of our mind” mentioned earlier—a last echo of the nigredo,
now finally overcome. Honorius of Autun * interpreted the
sixty “valiant ones" as indicating the number of perfection; 55
they symbolize "those perfected in the law of the Church, who
wield the sword of the Logos and of discrimination (discretio)
against heresies.” Alchemically they probably refer (despite the
multiplication by ten) to the six luminaries—Venus, Mercury,
Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Earth—which are present as servants at the
coniunctio of sun and moon. The somewhat remarkable designa-
tion of the bride as the "bed" (lectulus) may be an allusion to
Solomon's “litter” (Song of Songs 3 : 7-8), whose pillars he made
of silver, the seat of gold, and the covering of purple—a passage
which would invite alchemical interpretations.** In patristic
literature Solomon’s bed was taken as an image of the eternal
bliss in which the Church reposes, or a symbol of the Church it-
self as Christ’s couch. It was further interpreted as the “house of
the banquet" (cf. supra, pp. 314, 358f.), or as an image for the
sanctified soul which has become the resting-place of the inner
Christ.87 Mary, too, was "Solomon's bed, in which God's son
84 Expos. in Cant. (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, cols. 404-6).
85 According to Augustine (The City of God, traus. Healey, Bk. X, ch. 30) the
number 6 signifies perfection, because it is composed of 1 + the first even num-
ber, 2, + the first odd number, 3.
86 Cf. the alchemical interpretation of the lectulus as the vas coniunctionis in
"Rosinus ad Sarrat.," Art. aurif., I, p. 192. In Origen (In Cant. hom., Migne, P.G.,
vol. 18, col. 51) the bed signifies the human body.
87 Honorius, Expos. in Cant. (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, cols. 406-8). Richard of St.
Victor, Explic. in Cant. (Migne, P.L., vol. 196, col. 410) says that “on my bed" etc.
means “the soul, which seeks God.” Cols. 410-11: "So peace and tranquillity of
mind is the couch on which the bride resteth." * Cf. the designation of the
Church as the "sun-throne of Christ" in Athanasius, Expos. in Ps. LXXXVIII
(Migne, P.G., vol. 27, cols. 391-92), and Mary as “Solomon’s throne" in Adam of
St. Victor (n. 71 supra). Cf. Hippolytus, Comm. in Cant., pp. 78f.
378XII. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION
rested for nine months." 3? In this sense the bride serves as a
vas coniunctionis for man with God.8?
I am all fair and there is no spot in me; looking through the win-
dows, looking through the lattices of my beloved, wounding his
heart with one of my eyes and with one hair of my neck.
For the phrase “wounding his heart with one of my eyes,”
etc., I would refer the reader to Jung.® In patristic literature the
hairs are interpreted as "subtle thoughts"; ?! hence this passage
indicates a spiritual union. “Looking through the lattices of my
beloved” refers to the soul penetrating the "prison of the body"
—another coniunctio image.?? The “window of escape" or “win-
dow of illumination" is an attribute of Mary,?? corresponding
to the "spiracle of eternity" in Dorn.?* The mysterium fenestrae
plays an important role in the Cabala, where the “window”
means the link of light connecting Kether (the Crown) with
Wisdom, and Wisdom with Intelligence.?5 Through these win-
dows the highest Sefiroth are connected with the divine Light.
I am the sweet smell of ointments giving an odour above all aro-
matical spices and like unto cinnamon and balsam and chosen
myrrh.
The bride is a sweet-smelling pneuma and is thus identified
with the Holy Spirit.?* The idea that the divine spirit is a per-
fume seems to be of Oriental origin; it is found again in late
Jewish literature and also in Gnosticism.?* ‘Thus the Marcosians
used an oil of balsam at baptism as a symbol of the "fragrance
above all," *? and the Sethians compared their light-pneuma to
88 “Biblia Mariana" (Borgnet, XXXVII, p. 399).
89 Cf. Isis as "throne." 90 Mysterium, pp. 31f.
91 Honorius (Expos. in Cant., Migne, P.L., vol. 172, col. 443): “The hairs are subtle
thoughts." He interprets “one hair of thy neck" as unity of faith (col. 419).
92 In Origen (In Cant. hom., Il, 12, Migne, P.G., vol. 13, col. 57) the window sig-
nifies the senses through which impressions go in and out.
93 “Biblia Mariana," p. 385.
94 Mysterium, p. 471.
95 Knorr von Rosenroth, Kabbala denudata, II, Part I, pp. 281f.
96 Leisegang, Der heilige Geist; Bousset, Hauptprobleme, p. 120, n. 1; Hippolytus,
Comm. in Cant., pp. 26, 32.
97 Lohmeyer, Vom góttlichen Wohlgeruch, and Steuer, Über das wohlriechende
Natron bei den alten Aegyptern.
98 Bousset, p. 301.
379AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
other things a maternal significance."? The significance of the
crown and the incest motif is discussed in Jung.!'* All this part
of the text reveals the anima more and more clearly in her help-
ful and favourable aspects. At the beginning Wisdom appeared
in the role of a sublime psychopomp, but now she becomes
more and more the lover. "Eros" and “Gnosis” are fused to-
gether in her.
In the words “my name is as ointment poured forth" she
again describes herself as the unguent, which in alchemy is one.
of the many synonyms for the divine water, more particularly
as connoting the soul of matter.!? The “oil of gladness" men-
tioned in the third parable (pp. 265f.) is here taken up again.
I am the sling of David, the stone wherefrom tore out the great eye
of Goliath and finally took off his head.
The dangerous side of the anima has not entirely disap-
peared, but it no longer troubles those who serve her, for in
their hands it works like a sling with which they can conquer
their enemies. Once it is controlled by conscious understand-
ing, the previously destructive emotionality of the anima be-
comes an instrument for overcoming blind unconsciousness and
one-sidedness. Goliath, like the dragon, is a symbol of the prima
materia in the state of sinfulness and nigredo;"? and—though
the lapis itself is the ultimate goal—it is at the same time the
mysterious means of reaching that goal."* The “great eye of
Goliath," referred to in the singular, reminds us of Polyphemus:
Goliath is blinded like the Cyclops. ‘The significance of the eye
(here considered primarily in its nefarious aspect) as the devour-
ing female darkness is discussed in Jung."5
110 “The Philosophical Tree,” ch. 13. Cf. “Answer to Job,” pp. 387f.
111 Mysterium, ch. IV, passim.
112 Senior, De chemia, pp. 49, 55, 57, and 69: “By oil he means the Soul...
which does not enter through the fire, but water extracts it." * Pp. 75 and 82:
"And this that is born is the fatness which they call the soul and the egg." * Cf.
Pret. marg. nov., p. 169.
113 Mennens, Theatr. chem., V, pp. 316f.: “. . . which overcame Goliath, that
is, sin.”
114 Honorius, Speculum (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, col. 1041): “For the sling [of David]
which was hurled is the humanity of Christ, whirled by his passions, [and] the
stone which entered the forehead of Goliath was his divinity which pierced the
jaw of Leviathan.” * 115 Mysterium, p. 31ff.
382XII. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION . ..
I am the sceptre of the house of Israel and the key of Jesse, which
openeth and no man shutteth, shutteth and no man openeth.
The motif of the sceptre of Israel and key of Jesse “which
openeth and no man shutteth" emphasizes the instrumental sig-
nificance of the lapis. T'he sceptre probably refers to the alchem-
ical "regimen," and the key in other texts (as also in Roger
Bacon) is an image for the arcane substance and the NDA Lhe
"Rosarium" 16 says: "For this stone is the key . . . for... it
is [endowed with] the most mighty spirit," and with it the
doors of the metals are opened.!!* The lapis functions as a key
inasmuch as the experience of the self (lapis) gives conscious-
ness a "method" for realizing the secrets of the unconscious,
namely its symbols. Hence the "Rosarium" says: “The phi-
losophers speak of the salt, and they call it the soap of the sages
and the little key which shutteth and openeth, and again
shutteth and no man openeth; for without this little key, they
say, no one in this world can attain perfection in this science,
that is, except he understand the calcining of the salt after its
preparation." 148 The manifold significance of salt is discussed
in Jung,U? and its connotations as a principle of Eros, under-
standing, wit, etc. help to explain why Wisdom refers to her-
self as the "key" in our text.
I am that chosen vineyard, into which the householder sent his
labourers at the first, second, third, sixth, and ninth hours, saying:
Go you also into my vineyard, and at the twelfth hour I will give
you what shall be just. I am that land of the holy promise, which
floweth with milk and honey and bringeth forth sweetest fruit in
due season; ,
Wisdom compares herself to the vineyard in the parable
(Matt. 20: 1ff.) #2° and to the Promised Land, thus emphasizing
her identity with the “spiritual earth” of the previous parable.
She is the reality of the psyche as such.
wherefore have all the philosophers commended me and sowed in
me their gold and silver and incombustible grain. And unless that
116 Art. aurif., IL, p. 162 (Rosinus quotation).
117 Ibid., p. 181. 118 P. 146. 119 Mysterium, ch. III, § 5.
120 Cf. the interpretation of Mennens (Theatr. chem., V, p. 338), who sees in the
sum of the 1st, 3rd, 6th, gth, and 11th hours an allusion to the number 30.
383AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
grain falling into me die, itself shall remain alone, but if it die, it
bringeth forth threefold fruit: for the first it shall bring forth shall
be good because it was sown in good earth, namely of pearls; the
second likewise good because it was sown in better earth, namely of
leaves; the third shall bring forth a thousandfold because it was
sown in the best earth, namely of gold.
'This motif, too, is taken over from the previous parable,
where Hermes commanded his son to sow gold in the earth of
the Promised Land. The “earth of leaves" (terra foliorum) is
the "white foliate earth" (terra alba foliata), or silver-earth.!?!
In Senior, granum (grain) is sometimes the tincture, sometimes
gold, and sometimes the soul.!?? The "Rosarium," commenting
on this passage, explains the grain as the "grain of the body"
and the earth as the prima materia, which absorbs the "fatty
vapour" (Mercurius).7? In Aenigma VII of “Allegoriae super
librum Turbae" the "single grain of burgeoning seed" must be
joined in mystic marriage to the "primordial vapour of the
earth." !?* The primordial earth-vapour, the fatty vapour, and
Mercurius are, accordingly, all synonyms for the Promised Land
and show that an airy, sublimated earth is meant.!?5 This con-
sists of three substances: pearls, silver, and gold; we find the
121 “Clangor buccinae,” Art. aurif., I, p. 330.
122 De chemia, p. 42: “For in the beginning they dissolve this tincture with the
moisture, which is from itself, and in the end with fire, as you see the grain
Hospho or Offoto in its stalk, naturally nourished or increased with water and fire,
and the tincture comes to birth in it. ... Turn the gold into leaves...” *
P. 115: “The tincture, which Hermes also called gold when he said, Sow the gold
in the white foliate earth, signified this tincture, and they called it crocus and
Effer.” * P. 70: ". . . the true tincture of Calid, that is, fixed and incombustible,
whereas its grain was formerly combustible." *
123 Art. aurif., II, p. 146.
124 Ruska, Turba, p. 329. Cf. the words of the filius regis or lapis in the
"Metaphora Belini" (Art. aurif., II, p. 249): "I am the grain sown in pure land,
which being born grows and multiplies and brings forth fruit to the sower; for
everything which is generated is generated in its own kind, and each individual
multiplies the form of its own species and not otherwise." *
125 This recalls the Orphic idea of the “heavenly Earth" (moon), from which souls
came. Plutarch, De facie in orbe lunae, 21 (Loeb edn., XII, p. 141); Macrobius,
Somn. Scip., I. 19. 8; Rahner, "Mysterium Lunae," pp. 68, 124. The “air-earth” or
"light-earth" of the Manichaeans is a similar concept (cf. Flügel, Mani, seine
Lehre und seine Schriften, p. 86: Bousset, p. 135). It corresponds to Sophia or
Sapientia.
384XII. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION . .
same classification in Senior, from whom it was taken over.!?6
This mystic earth is therefore a kind of lower Trinity." The
psychological significance of the “lower triad” is discussed in
Jung
The essential thing about this lower Trinity is that it is
described as an earth, i.e., as a psychic reality which has to do
with the nature of matter. Matter thus acquires an importance
of its own and is even raised to divine rank—in complete re-
versal of the medieval scholastic view, according to which
matter, unless it is given form, has only potential reality. The
text is, in effect, proclaiming a glorification of the feminine
principle, of the body and matter. From this we can see what a
shattering breakthrough of unconscious contents was needed
before a man of the Middle Ages could hazard such a statement,
and it is also clear that it could, as the text shows, be formulated
only indirectly, in the language of trance or delirium—for
these are the compensatory statements of the unconscious and
not the conscious views of a man of that age.
For from the fruits of this grain is made the food of life, which
cometh down from heaven. If any man shall eat of it, he shall live
without hunger. For of that bread the poor shall eat and shall be
filled, and they shall praise the Lord that seek him, and their hearts
shall live for ever.
In this threefold earth is sown the incombustible grain,
which dying brings forth a thousandfold and from which is
made the bread of life. Alchemically this would refer to the
phase of the multiplicatio, when, by “projection” of the tincture
or of the gold upon base metals, the latter are turned into gold.
The author parallels the alchemical multiplicatio by a Chris-
tian amplificatio, for the bread of life is the Host, Le., Christ’s
body signifying the multitudo fidelium (multitude of the faith-
126 De chemia, p. 51. Foliate gold is called "sand" or “washed earth" by Maria
Prophetissa (Olympiodorus in Alch. grecs, IL, iv). Senior's “starry earth" is the
i dorepirns of the Greeks (ibid., II, iii, and III, xxv).
127 Cf. this interpretation in Mennens, Theatr. chem., V, p. 301.
128 “Phenomenology of the Spirit in Fairytales,” pp. 294ff. Cf. “The Visions of
Zosimos," par. 127: “In the image of Mercurius and of the lapis the ‘flesh’ glori-
fied itself in its own way; it would not transform itself into spirit but, on the
contrary, ‘fixed’ the spirit in stone and endowed this with practically all the at-
tributes of the Trinity."
385AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
ful). In so far as the multiplicatio occurs here in a single indi-
vidual it would mean—in Indian terms—a dissolution of the
individual in the universal atman. In the self the one is also
the many, and the many are all comprised in the one. This
extraordinary insight seems to indicate a supreme, borderline
state in which the individual ego is extinguished and replaced
by an experience that includes all men. Such a state might well
be conceived as an illumination before death.
In alchemy the multiplicatio progresses by multiples of ten, -
and here I can refer the reader to Jung’s statements in
"Psychology of the Transference.” ?? According to Rhabanus
Maurus, ten is the number of perfection and of the everlasting
reward. In the teachings of Joachim of Flora the ecclesia
spiritualis will arise in the seventh age, the age of the monastic
orders when "Sacerdotium" and "Imperium" will finally be
united like sun and moon.1*! I mention this because clear traces
of the idea of an ecclesia spiritualis can be found in this seventh
parable (corresponding to the seventh age); but as this motif is
touched on again in the closing words of the parable and thus
seems to be the real goal of the opus, I shall come back to it
later on.
I give and take not back, I feed and fail not, 1 make secure and fear
not; what more shall I say to my beloved? I am the mediatrix of
the elements, making one to agree with another; that which is warm
I make cold, and the reverse; that which is dry I make moist, and
the reverse; that which is hard I soften, and the reverse. I am the
end and my beloved is the beginning, I am the whole work and all
science is hidden in me,
In Senior the "soul" is described as the power which makes
the opposites come together in one.!3? She works miracles and
also reverses them. She is, as our text shows, "the whole work,"
"all science," and—so far as the soul and her spouse are one
being—the beginning and the end, alpha and omega, another
token of her divine status. An interesting parallel is the collec-
129 Pars. 525ff.
130 Alleg. in sacr. script. (Migne, P.L., vol. 112, col. 907): “The denarius is Christ,
as in the Apocalypse (vi, 6), and they who hold to it in faith and works belong to
Christ." *
131 Hahn, Geschichte der Ketzer, II, pp. 289ff.
182 De chemia, p. 34.
386XII. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION . . .
tion of honorific titles which Albertus Magnus (?) put together
in praise of Mary in the “Biblia Mariana": !*? she is the empy-
rean, the light that scatters the darkness of ignorance, the fruit-
ful earth that bore the green grass, Christ; the fountain of life,
"hospitatrix" of wandering souls, bride, mother of grace, "our
sister," stairway to heaven, gate of the kingdom, dawn of illumi-
nation (Aurora illuminationis), dawn that affrights the demons;
treasure-house of sanctity which Christ opened, queen of the
world, door, year, time of grace, cloud of the overshadowing,
cooling mist, ark of the covenant, rock from which water of
grace or oil flows, star of enlightenment, shining lamp, "best
earth," sister of our poverty, sun, mount of benediction, bridal
chamber of God's delight, window of escape or illumination,
altar, fleece of the divine dew, "sole eagle." She clothes us with
the garment of divinity, she is the Queen of Sheba and the
throne of Solomon and of the Trinity, the tabernacle for God's
union with human nature. These symbols all describe a femi-
nine numen which closely resembles the bride in our text, save
that here the dark and dangerous side is also included.
I am the law in the priest and the word in the prophet and counsel
in the wise. I will kill and I will make to live and there is none that
can deliver out of my hand. I stretch forth my mouth to my beloved
and he presseth his to me; he and I are one; who shall separate us
from love? None and no man, for our love is strong as death.
The identity of the bride with God is beyond all doubt,
for the words she speaks are God's own (Deut. 32:39: "I kill,
and I make alive; I wound, and I heal; neither is there any that
can deliver out of my hand"). She is God, or his feminine
"correspondence" in matter. She is God—but as a loving woman
embracing the man in order to draw him into God's own anti-
thetical nature and at the same time into his allenveloping
wholeness. This experience, as the text says, transcends even
death.
This unio mystica is, compared with the usual medieval
texts, something new and completely different, because ordi-
narily it is the human soul as a feminine being that unites with
Christ or God. Man or his anima is the bride. Here, on the con-
trary, God is the bride, and man or the self the bridegroom.
133 Borgnet, XXXVII, pp. 367ff.
387AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
This singular exchange of roles must be understood in the first
place as a compensatory phenomenon: the masculine, spiritual
God-image has turned into its opposite, into a figure that unites
God's "self-reflection"—Sophia or Wisdom—with matter and
nature. What is manifest in this figure is an aspect of God which
is striving to become conscious of itself—as though the human
psyche and matter were the chosen place for God's self-realiza-
tion. The son-lover of this figure, however, is a human being in
a glorified end-state, who has passed through death. In contrast:
to Wisdom, he has cast off the darkness from himself. This situa-
tion explains the somewhat uncanny effect of unreality which
the concluding part of the text conveys. The "unreal," glori-
fied human being now addresses Wisdom.
O beloved, yea supremely beloved, thy voice hath sounded in my
ears, for it is sweet, and thine odour is above all aromatical spices.
O how comely is thy face, thy breasts are more beautiful than wine,
my sister, my spouse, thy eyes are like the fishpools in Heshbon, thy
hairs are golden, thy cheeks are ivory, thy belly is as a round bowl
never wanting cups, thy garments are whiter than snow, purer than
milk, more ruddy than old ivory, and all thy body is delightful and
desirable unto all.
The lover's response to his beloved is in passionate words
that are practically all taken from the Canticles. But an im-
portant psychological change is apparent at this point: for the
first time the anima figure is addressed directly. Till now either
she herself was speaking, or the author was speaking to a human
audience and telling them of Wisdom's "glory." He was quite
literally "seized" or "possessed" by her, but was unable to turn
that experience inwards and confront it actively. Now he has
passionately turned to the bride herself—which means, psycho-
logically, an emotional acceptance of the unconscious, a joyous
affirmation of the anima. The author turns away from his fellow
human beings, and though they will be invited to share the bliss
of the lovers, his earlier didactic intentions have largely disap-
peared. The archetypal image of a divine pair and of their
hierosgamos fills the text from now on, god and goddess con-
summate the mystic marriage, and a pagan joie de vivre breaks
through in words that border on the heretical. At the same
time the text conveys a feeling of inner liberation, as if the
388XII. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION . .
prison of conventional religious ideas and human narrow-
mindedness had finally burst open, and the author had left his
previous mental world behind him like an empty shell.
In his paean of praise the bridegroom describes the bride in
symbolic images that show her as the essence of wholeness. '"T'hy
navel is as a round bowl never wanting cups" (Cant. 7:2) was
interpreted by Honorius of Autun ??* as signifying "temper-
ance," 18° which has its seat in the middle of the body, and the
cups are the seven gifts of the Holy Spirit. l'emperance, he says,
is "round by reason of its circumspection, and fruitful by
reason of its wisdom." Rhabanus Maurus interprets the navel
as the contemplative Order.?9 In the text there is probably a
subsidiary allusion on the one hand to the ecclesiastical view
of Mary as the vas devotionis and of the Church as the vessel of
"true doctrine" and of the human body as the vessel of the
spirit,?? and on the other hand to the alchemical vas symbolism
with its complex meanings.1** The vessel had to be round be-
cause it was an image of the cosmos and of the heavenly
spheres,!?? as well as of the human head as the seat of the anima
rationalis.1*° In the Corpus Hermeticum the cosmos is described
as a vessel or sphere, and this sphere was also the Nous, which
moved like a head; everything connected with this head was
immortal.*! To this "cosmic reason" or "soul" the Harranites
erected hemispherical temples.'^? The krater (mixing bowl) also
has a hylic significance; in the Corpus Hermeticum, matter (and
134 Migne, P.L., vol. 172, cols. 457 and 465.
135 See “temperance” in Parable V, supra, p. 336.
136 Or as luxuria (Migne, P.L., vol. 112, col. 1085).
137 Lactantius, Divinae institutiones," 2. 12. 11 (Works, I, p. 122).
138 Psychology and Alchemy, Index, s.v. “vas.”
139 Senior, p. 122. Cf. the “spherical apparatus" of the Greeks (Alch. grecs, IV,
vii) and the Zosimos quotation in Olympiodorus (ibid., II, iv): “And he points to
the house of the souls of the philosophers, saying: The house was spherical or
egg-shaped, looking to the west . . . and it had the form of a snail's shell."
140 Cf. "The Visions of Zosimos,” par. 113, and “Transformation Symbolism in
the Mass,” pp. 239ff. Also Turba, p. 254, n. 3. According to the Fihrist, alchemists
are those who are "famed for the production of the head and of the perfect
elixir.” In "Cons. coniug.,” Ars chemica, p. 66, the water is called the “caput
mundi." Cf. Berthelot, Moyen áge, III, pp. 140f., and Lippmann, I, pp. 97f.
141 Scott, Hermetica, I, p. 194.
142 Chwolsohn, Die Ssabier und der Ssabismus, II, pp. 367, 376, 382. Cf. the round
*barba" (pyramid) in Senior, De chemia, p. 80.
389AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
in Plutarch, time) !*? is called the vessel of genesis and decay,
and in Neoplatonism the cosmos is a hollow or cave.!** Plato
and, later, certain Orphic sects held that the world-creator
mixed the cosmos in a huge krater,** and Zosimos in his
vision 146 saw the elements being transformed in a "'bowl-
shaped" altar which embraced the entire cosmos.!^* Such is the
context of the bride's designation as a crater tornalis.
Come forth, daughters of Jerusalem, and see, and tell and declare,
what ye have seen; say, what shall we do for our sister, who is little
and hath no breasts, in the day when she shall be wooed? I will
set my strength upon her and will take hold of her fruits, and her
breasts shall be as the clusters of the vine.
This passage, based on Canticles 8 : 8-9 and 7:8, shows that
the soror mystica is still too young for marriage and will only
be matured by the man's wooing. In patristic literature it was
interpreted as referring to the "young Church" which is ripened
by Christ,148 or to Mary, who lacked the “breasts of concupis-
cence." As applied to alchemy it suggests that the bride still
lacks something, namely the "strength" of the male. The Song
of Songs continues: "If she be a wall, let us build upon it bul-
warks of silver" (8: 9). A final fixatio through the "body" or
"spirit-body" is still missing. This implies that only an indi-
vidual realization of the anima gives her her specific form and
quality. Only when God—and the bride 7s God—is realized in
a human being does he become actual. Therefore, compared
with man, he quite logically appears as a "woman" lacking
strength, and even as an undeveloped girl. 'T'his image is almost
an overaccentuation of God's helplessness—to compensate the
dogmatic image of a father-deity alien to man and removed to
the realm of metaphysics.
A striking parallel is furnished by the Persian idea that
143 Scott, I, p. 422, and III, p. 396; Plutarch, De Ei, 392 (Loeb edn., V, p. 243).
144 Porphyry, De antro nympharum, 5 and 21 (ed. Nauck, pp. 59, 7of.).
145 Timaeus, 41D; Lucian, Bis accusatus, 34, 834 (The Double Indictment, IV, p.
58); Servius, Grammatici, II, p. 93; Macrobius, Somn. Scip., I. 12. 8. Cf. Scott, II,
pp. 141 and 151, and Leisegang, Gnosis, pp. 126, 336.
146 “The Visions of Zosimos," pars. 86f.
147 See Psychology and Alchemy, pars. 408ff., and Scott, I, p. 148, for the interpreta-
tion of the krater.
148 Honorius, Expos. in Cant. (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, col. 480).
390XII. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION . ..
when a man dies, he meets his soul in the form of a beautiful
young girl of about fifteen, who is also an old sage.!*? So this
motif of the “little sister" again has associations with ideas that
are linked with the experience of death.
Come, my beloved, and let us go into thy field, let us abide in the
villages, let us go up early to the vineyard, for the night is past
and the day is at hand; let us see if thy vineyard flourisheth, if thy
flowers have brought forth fruits. There shalt thou give thy breasts
to my mouth, and I have kept for thee all fruits new and old;
The bridegroom summons his beloved to go out into the
country and celebrate a feast of joy with men, "for the night is
past and the day is at hand.” 15° After the night of the moon and
the dawn, when the “woman” ruled, there now breaks the day
of the sun, when the lapis is perfected. "Going into thy field"
and "abiding in the villages" suggests expansion and liberation
from cramped humanity, and ecstatic union with nature. But it
might also mean relinquishing the sick body at death—death
breaks like a new morning, and in its light everything is trans-
formed: it brings an entirely new state of consciousness. In this
new light the lovers enjoy their bliss.
let us therefore enjoy them and use the good things speedily as in
youth, let us fill ourselves with costly wine and ointments, and let
no flower pass by us save we crown ourselves therewith, first with
lilies, then with roses, before they be withered. Let no meadow
escape our riot. Let none of us go without his part in our luxury,
This passage has no ecclesiastical parallel, for the words
which the author puts into the mouth of the bridegroom are
those spoken by the “ungodly” (luxuriantes) in Wisdom 2 : 5ff.
Either he suffered a lapse of memory or else he was consciously
alluding to a non-Christian mystery. At any rate it is a break-
through of the classical or pagan feeling for nature, or—to speak
with Heraclitus—a ‘‘phallic hymn" sung in honour of Dionysus
149 Reitzenstein, Erlósungsmysterium, p. 31.
150 Cf. St. Ambrose, Hexaemeron, IV. 8. 32 (Migne, P.L., vol. 14, col. 204), accord-
ing to whom these words are addressed to men by the Church (Luna), “who en-
lightens the darkness of our temporal world," the word "day" signifying the
appearance of Christ (Sol).
327AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
and Hades.!* Liberation from the prison of the body seems also
to be a liberation from the narrowness of spiritual prejudice;
the natural man is set free and celebrates his oneness with
nature.
The lovers invite all men to pick flowers (lilies and roses
= albedo and rubedo) and to crown themselves with them.!9?
The burgeoning of the earth has already been mentioned in
the sixth parable, where it was said that there was a “germi-
nating water" in the earth which produces "fruits and bread
and wine and herb for the service of men." This water is like
the quinta essentia, which the "Expositio epistulae Alexandri
Regis" !5? says is a "spirit, which quickeneth and changeth all
things, and maketh every seed to sprout, and kindleth every
light, and bringeth all fruits to bear.” According to the
Turbaj*5 flowers are the "virtue" which proceeds from the di-
vine water, and in Senior golden flowers are equated with the
tinctures.!56 Pseudo-Democritos says that the "house of the mys-
tery” is surrounded by “pools and gardens.” !5' In Greek al-
chemy flowers and blossoms are an image for spirits or souls; 15$
the lapis is a "terrestrial sun" or “blossom of metal," !?? or a
“well-formed flower sprouting from four branches." !9? Flowers
151 Heraclitus in Freeman, Ancilla, p. 25, No. 15: "If it were not in honour of
Dionysus that they conducted the procession and sang the phallic hymn, their
activity would be completely shameless. But Hades is the same as Dionysus, in
whose honour they rave and perform the Bacchic revels."
152 Flowers correspond to the stars, with which they are connected through the
medium of the air: ". . . as heaven is married to earth, having for a bridesman
Mercury, or the aforesaid aerial spirit" (Mennens, Theatr. chem., V, p. 379). Cf.
the herbs used in Dorn's alchemical procedure, Mysterium, pp. 479f.
153 Art. aurif., I, p. 247. *
154 The “germinating water" is the aqua divina which contains the spirit of God.
Cf. "Psychology and Religion," pp. 100f. For the alchemical significance of the
spring rain see Carmina Heliodori (p. 37, Carmen II, verses 93-97): "It rains, and
fruits are brought forth in all the earth . . . spring enters the warm and moist
ground, and the earth sprouts forth every kind of flowers."
155 P, 145. 156 De chemia, pp. 11, 57, and 108. 157 Alch. grecs, II, iv.
158 Synesios, ibid., II, iii: “By the word flower he (Democritus) means the subliming
of souls, i.e., pneumata."
159 ‘The Book of Sophe,” ibid., III, xlii, 1. Zosimos calls the sublimation (pots)
the "rising of the flowers" (ibid., III, ii, 3; III, xv). For Democritus the most im-
portant flowers are ''sea blossom" and the "Italic rose" (II, i); for Synesios they are
the Cilician crocus and "anagillis," which signifies the "ascent of souls" (II, iii).
160 Carmina Heliodori, pp. gof.
392XII. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION . . .
also play a role in the hierosgamos described in Komarios: 4
“The waters run along and waken the sleeping bodies and the
spirits languishing in prison . . . and they rise up and clothe
themselves with many beautiful colours, like the flowers in the
spring . . ." "Behold the fulfilment of the art: the union of
bride and bridegroom. . . . Behold the plants and their varia-
tions—behold, I tell you the whole truth! See and understand,
how the clouds rise up from the sea, bearing the blessed waters
with them, and they water the earth, and seeds and flowers
come forth. . . . Take care to water your earth and nourish
your seeds, that you may reap ripe fruit." 1° This sowing of
the seed in Komarios refers to the "vegetal resurrection" of
Osiris, that is, to the Egyptian ritual for the dead, at which
seeds and bulbs were placed on the mummy, their germination
signifying its resurrection. In the non-alchemical Hermetic text
"Isis to Horus" (named “Kore Kosmow’’),1® the demiurge by a
magic spell creates the world out of pneuma, fire, and other
ingredients, and when the mixture is stirred a volatile, trans-
parent substance, which only God can see, rises to the surface,
which he calls psychosis—soul-stuff. This is the "efflorescence"
(rà érav6ovv), and from it the souls are formed.
Flowers also play a role in ecclesiastical symbolism. Ephraem
Syrus says that, when Christ was united with his bride, the
Church, in the Easter month of Nisan,!9* the earth was filled
with flowers.1® St. Ambrose interprets the passage "the winter is
past . . . the flowers appear on the earth," etc. (Cant. 2 : 11f.),
to which allusion is made in the text, as referring to the Church
in her final glory.!9* Elsewhere in patristic literature flowers are
161 Alch. grecs, IV, xx.
162 Komarios goes on to say: “Fire has been subordinated to water, and earth to
air. Also air has been subordinated to fire, and earth to water, fire and water to
earth, and earth to air, and they have become one. From the plants and vapours
the One is formed." 163 Scott, I, pp. 464ff.
164 Nisan (March-April) is the month of the opus in the Syrian alchemical texts.
In Egypt it was Pharmouthi. Cf. Lippmann, I, pp. 48 and 58.
165 “De resurrectione Christi," XX, in Hymni et sermones, II, cols. 756£.: “Nisan,
the month of victory, brought forth the spouse of the King, disturbed the earth
with its outpourings and filled it with scattered flowers . . . the pure nuptials
being effected in the desert." * Hymn XXI: “Nisan also filled the earth with a gar-
ment woven of colours of all kinds, the earth put on a tunic and garment of
flowers." *
166 Hexaemeron, 4. 5. 22 (Migne, P.L., vol. 14, cols. 198f.).
393AURORA CONSURGENS : COMMENTARY
an image for the transience of human life,;!9* or they are blos-
soms of the mind bedewed by the Holy Spirit and warmed by
the sun of the Logos.!55 ‘They appear in the works of the martyrs
and also in the typi, the symbols of Christ? According to
Origen,!?? flowers symbolize the burgeoning of the “seed of spirit-
ual understanding" and a "living meaning" which the spirit
infuses into the Scriptures. In general, flowers symbolize feeling
and emotion, and it is noticeable how in the text of Aurora the
feeling of ecstasy breaks through more and more strongly and
sweeps away all didactic and rational aspects. Perhaps the nearest
thing to this part of the text is a curious fragment which Lacinius
ascribes to Albertus Magnus,"'! though I was unable to trace it
in the extant Albertus treatises (or in those of Pseudo-Albertus). It runs: "Pluck divers kinds of flowers filled with the odour of
all good things. In them is the odour of sweetness and the light
of beauty, the splendour and glory of the world. This is the
flower of flowers, the rose of roses, and the lily in the valley. Rejoice therefore in thy youth, O youth, and learn to pluck the
flowers; for I have led thee into the garden of paradise.!'? Weave
167 Ephraem Syrus, II, col. 318. The same view is found in Simon Magus
(Leisegang, Gnosis, p. 69). 168 Ibid., II, col. 752: "Who hath seen flowers bursting forth from books as from
the hills? Chaste maidens have filled with them the wide spaces of the mind. Lo,
a voice like the sun scattered flowers over the crowds." Col. 754: "Children have
scattered fair and reasonable flowers before the king. The little one is crowned
with them; . . . let each gather all flowers and mix them with the flowers which
have grown in his land. . . . Let them offer to our Lord a crown of flowers; the
bishop his sermons, the priests their praises, the deacons their readings . . . Let
us invite . . .XII. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION . . .
also play a role in the hierosgamos described in Komarios: 4
“The waters run along and waken the sleeping bodies and the
spirits languishing in prison . . . and they rise up and clothe
themselves with many beautiful colours, like the flowers in the
spring . . ." "Behold the fulfilment of the art: the union of
bride and bridegroom. . . . Behold the plants and their varia-
tions—behold, I tell you the whole truth! See and understand,
how the clouds rise up from the sea, bearing the blessed waters
with them, and they water the earth, and seeds and flowers
come forth. . . . Take care to water your earth and nourish
your seeds, that you may reap ripe fruit." 1° This sowing of
the seed in Komarios refers to the "vegetal resurrection" of
Osiris, that is, to the Egyptian ritual for the dead, at which
seeds and bulbs were placed on the mummy, their germination
signifying its resurrection. In the non-alchemical Hermetic text
"Isis to Horus" (named “Kore Kosmow’’),1® the demiurge by a
magic spell creates the world out of pneuma, fire, and other
ingredients, and when the mixture is stirred a volatile, trans-
parent substance, which only God can see, rises to the surface,
which he calls psychosis—soul-stuff. This is the "efflorescence"
(rà érav6ovv), and from it the souls are formed.
Flowers also play a role in ecclesiastical symbolism. Ephraem
Syrus says that, when Christ was united with his bride, the
Church, in the Easter month of Nisan,!9* the earth was filled
with flowers.1® St. Ambrose interprets the passage "the winter is
past . . . the flowers appear on the earth," etc. (Cant. 2 : 11f.),
to which allusion is made in the text, as referring to the Church
in her final glory.!9* Elsewhere in patristic literature flowers are
161 Alch. grecs, IV, xx.
162 Komarios goes on to say: “Fire has been subordinated to water, and earth to
air. Also air has been subordinated to fire, and earth to water, fire and water to
earth, and earth to air, and they have become one. From the plants and vapours
the One is formed." 163 Scott, I, pp. 464ff.
164 Nisan (March-April) is the month of the opus in the Syrian alchemical texts.
In Egypt it was Pharmouthi. Cf. Lippmann, I, pp. 48 and 58.
165 “De resurrectione Christi," XX, in Hymni et sermones, II, cols. 756£.: “Nisan,
the month of victory, brought forth the spouse of the King, disturbed the earth
with its outpourings and filled it with scattered flowers . . . the pure nuptials
being effected in the desert." * Hymn XXI: “Nisan also filled the earth with a gar-
ment woven of colours of all kinds, the earth put on a tunic and garment of
flowers." *
166 Hexaemeron, 4. 5. 22 (Migne, P.L., vol. 14, cols. 198f.).
393

. . the martyrs, apostles, and prophets, their flowers are like to him:
their roses are copious, their lilies have a sweet smell: from the garden of delights
they gather most beauteous flowers, and bring them to the crown of our most
beauteous feast. Glory to thee from the blessed. The crowns of kings are poor in
comparison to the riches of thy crown. Purity is woven into it; faith triumphs in
it; humility is resplendent in it; many-hued sanctity shines in it; great charity
gleams in it, the queen of all flowers. Lo, thy crown is perfect. Blessed be he who
granted us to weave it." * Honorius, Expos. in Cant. (Migne, col. 392): "Flowers
are men who flourish in faith" (the flower of the vine — the faith of Christ). 169 Ephraem Syrus, I, pp. 112 and 148-56; II, p. 756. 170 In Cant. hom., Lib. III. 171 Collectanea Lacinii ex Alberto Magno, in Pret. marg. nov., fol. 180r. 172 Cf. Albertus, “Mariale,” CLXIV (Borgnet, XXXVII, p. 245), with reference to
Mary: “. . . fulness of flowers, herbs, and fruits, signifying perfection of manners,
virtues, and divers operations," *
394XII. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION ...
thyself a wreath for thy head and enjoy the delights of this world,
praising God and succouring thy neighbour in distress. Now will
I reveal to thee the science and disclose the secret and give thee
understanding of the hidden things of the art, and that which
hath long been concealed shall be brought to light." A com-
mentator explains that this passage refers to the "purification of
the spirits."
The flower motif recalls the peculiar role which certain
flowers and herbs play in Paracelsus and Dorn, discussed at con-
siderable length in Jung.!*? Flowers are, so to speak, ingredients
of the "lower heaven," equivalents of the stars—in other words,
they represent components of our psychic totality, the self. Since
the soul "can live only in and from human relationships," !7*
these flowers in Aurora, which blossom during the coniunctio,
indicate a blossoming of psychic relationship. This relationship
means being filled with the spirit of Wisdom, who even cleanses
the joy of the “ungodly” of its sinfulness and herself shares it; 17
for, as we have said, it is the words of the sinners that are here
put into the mouth of the bridegroom. Whether the author was
conscious of this fact is impossible to say. Since the coniunctio
was presumably experienced in a transconscious state in the pre-
liminary stages of death, all equivocal interpretations of this
passage are beside the point—ub: spiritus, ibi libertas.
let us leave everywhere tokens of joy, for this is our portion, that
we should live in the union of love with joy and merriment, saying:
Behold how good and pleasant it is for two to dwell together in
unity. Let us make therefore three tabernacles, one for thee, a second
for me, and a third for our sons, for a threefold cord is not easily
broken.
The words of Psalm 132: 1, “Behold how good and how
pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity," are here
173 “Paracelsus as a Spiritual Phenomenon,” pars. 171, 190ff., and Mysterium,
pp. 479ff.
174 “The Psychology of the Transference,” par. 444.
175 Nevertheless, I have not ventured to read “pecum/pctum” of the MSS as
“peccatum” instead of the Biblical “pratum” (meadow) of the printed text. (The
meadows in the Song of Songs were interpreted as the heavenly mysteries and the
herbs as the words of the Gospel. Cf. Honorius, Quaest. et Resp., Migne, P.L., vol.
172, col. 327.) For all that, it might easily have been a psychologically significant
parapraxis on the part of an early copyist, unconsciously adapted to the meaning
of the context.
395AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
referred to the alchemical coniunctio, but out of the dwelling
of two-in-one is made a dwelling of three-in-one—the image of
the three tabernacles and the threefold cord which “‘is not easily
broken.” 17° From the Biblical original (Eccles. 4 : 11—12) it is
difficult to see how the saying about the threefold cord joins
up with the praise of marriage, of "two lying together." We
have to suppose a third, unifying power which acts as a link be-
tween the two.!77 Three, the ternarius, was a "sign of concord
and conjunction" in medieval number symbolism.!'? In alchemy
we often come across the image of a pair linked together by a
third, for instance by Mercurius senex, who clearly stands for
the Holy Spirit.17®
The motif of the cord is a widespread archetypal idea. Alike
in the initiations of the shamans and in the Tibetan religious
texts we find that the initiate has to climb up a rope into the
other world. In Tibet the dead ruler was given a certain rope
so that he could climb back to the place from which the first
ruler once came down on a similar rope.!*?? The rope thus rep-
resents a continuity of experience or meaning through which
consciousness is connected with its substrate, the collective un-
conscious. On the other hand, ropes, nooses, snares, etc. signify
magical "bonds," !*! generally with demons or gods—that is, alli-
ance with or subjection to an archetype. The point of many
shamanistic initiations is to establish contact with the other side,
the lost paradise.!*? In this case the rope is a variant of the fairy-
176 Honorius (Migne, col. 339) interprets the threefold cord as the Trinity.
177 Richard of St. Victor, Explic. in Cant. (Migne, P.L., vol. 196, col. 478): "For he
exhorts not merely with twofold, but with threefold voice, that she may come,
declaring the vastness of the love ana desire which he has for her, since a threefold
repetition is an attestation of greatness and strength, for a threefold cord is not
easily broken." *
178 Helinandus of Froidmont, De cognitione sui (Migne, P.L., vol. 212, col. 728):
“The binarius, which has no middle term, is without a link, and signifies division.
But the ternarius, which has a middle term, is the sign of concord and conjunc-
tion. For it is the first of the odd numbers, and the first wholly unequal, whence
as it were all is concord. . . . And when the singer of Mantua [Virgil] said, ‘God
rejoices in odd numbers,' it is as if he had said: God loves peace and love, for he
is himself peace and love." *
179 Cf. The Book of Lambspringk (Waite, Mus. Herm., I, fig. xi, p. 297), where the
pair is replaced by a father-son group.
180 Eliade, Shamanism, pp. 430ff.
181 Ibid., p. 419. 182 P, 484. Examples on pp. 490, 492, 311, 117.
396XII. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION ..
tale motif of the world-tree ("Jack and the Beanstalk,” etc.) or
world-axis. In an American Indian tale, a man follows his dead
wife by means of a magic string. Here the rope has the signifi-
cance of a fated union that lasts beyond death. It is indeed very
remarkable to see how, in this last parable, more and more
mythological motifs turn up which are connected with the idea
of life after death or with experiences during which the body
lies there in sickness or trance. It is a revelation of psychic con-
tents that border on the extreme limit of conscious experience.
The three tabernacles are an allusion to the transfiguration
of Christ (Matt. 17:4: "Let us make here three tabernacles,
one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias"). This again
stresses the death aspect and the parallel of the lapis with the
risen Christ, but we have also to think of Apocalypse 21: 3,
where it is said of the new Jerusalem coming down from heaven
that "the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with
them, and they shall be his people." This association is sug-
gested by the text because the third tabernacle is intended for
the "sons" of the pair. In the language of alchemy "sons" mean
the alchemists themselves. They, therefore, are mysteriously im-
plicated in the conjunction and resurrection of the pair, and
unexpectedly take the place of the mediator, the Holy Spirit,
or Mercurius senex.!*? Petrus Bonus, writing a little later than
the author of Aurora, described the resurrection mystery as
follows: "And in the reunion of the resurrection the body be-
comes wholly spiritual like to the soul herself, and they are
made one like water mixed with water, and they are not sepa-
rated any more for ever, since there is no diversity in them, but
rather unity and identity of all three, spirit, soul, and body,
without separation for ever. So likewise it is manifest of the
identity and unity of the most holy Trinity in God, that is, of
Father and Son and Holy Spirit, which in the same God are
one and the same with distinction of persons but without differ-
ence in substance. From which words we can see directly that
the old philosophers of this art were truly prophets through this
divine art, namely of the resurrection of the soul with her body
183 As a parallel we might mention that in Cabalistic interpretation Moses, sym-
bolizing the children of Israel, becomes one with the “higher queen," the Sefira
Binah, and is thus united with God. This is the "mysterium of the kisses." (Knorr
von Rosenroth, Kabbala denudata, II, part 3, p. 149.)
397AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
and its glorification, of the appearing of God in human flesh,
that is Christ, and of his identity with God by the mediating
infusion and emanation of the Holy Spirit, although they told
of these things very indistinctly and confusedly. . . . For in
this stone is truly assigned the Trinity in unity and the con-
verse, with distinction but without diversity, as is clear to him
who considers it subtly and with knowledge.” !5*
In alchemy the mediator who unites the pair in place of the
Holy Spirit is the spirit Mercurius, who like him manifests ~
himself in many individuals. This means that God becomes
manifest in the individual man, for the "sons" in the Aurora
text are individuals who, through the opus, have themselves
become "gods and sons of the Highest"—they even restore to
unity and wholeness the "oppositeness" in God's nature. Man
becomes God's redeemer, uniting in him his two aspects as
man and woman.
By his allusion to the transfiguration, the author plainly
tells us that he feels identical with the bridegroom. For in
Aurora it is the bridegroom who invites his bride to make three
tabernacles, whereas in the Bible it is Peter, “not knowing what
he said" (Luke 9: 33). Peter represents the ordinary man, who
beheld the transfiguration as in a vision, just after having been
"heavy with sleep" (9 : 32). Similarly, the author of Aurora must
have been in a state of rapture, in which he not only beheld
the mysterium coniunctionis but became one with the bride-
groom. Therefore his concern is not, like Peter's, for the divine
figures of Moses and Elias, but for the "sons," who, spiritually
begotten out of the coniunctio, will later accomplish the same
work.
The quotation shows, further, that the author was alluding
to something inconceivable, which Christ forbade his disciples
to speak of "until the Son of man be risen again from the
dead" (Matt. 17 : 9). This is another indication that it was an
experience which anticipated a post-mortal state.
He that hath ears to hear, let him hear what the spirit of the doc-
trine saith to the sons of the discipline concerning the espousal of
the lover to the beloved. For he had sowed his seed, that there might
ripen thereof threefold fruit, which the author of the Three Words
184 Pret. marg. nov., pp. 120ff. *
398XII. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION ...
saith to be three precious words, wherein is hidden all the science,
which is to be given to the pious, that is to the poor, from the first
man even unto the last.
These concluding words of the text return to the recurrent
motif of the seed and the ripening of threefold fruit. They
seem to me to contain an allusion to that “unitary world" (unus
mundus) whose significance is discussed in Jung's commentary
on Dorn's text.55 In that potential, unitary world, we are told,
all the “pious” will be united outside time, for the unus mundus
does not exist within the space-time continuum.
The image of the seed seems to go back to Gnostic sources.
Thus in the system of Basilides the “threefold sonship of God"
is likened to a grain of seed: [God] did not create the cosmos
as it later came to exist in its full extension and proportion,
rather he created a seed of the cosmos. The cosmic seed contains
everything within it, as the grain of mustard-seed contains every-
thing at once within the smallest space: the roots, the stem, the
branches, innumerable leaves, seeds of seeds which are produced
by the plant itself, and hence a multitude of ever other seeds
and other plants. ‘Thus did the non-existent God create a not-
yetexisting cosmos, by letting a single seed fall in its place,
which contained the whole germ of the cosmos. But I will make
what they mean even plainer: Just as the egg of a very variegated
and multi-coloured bird, say of a peacock, or of another bird
still more variegated and more multi-coloured, contains within
it many kinds of beings of many shapes, many colours, and
composed of many things, even though it be but a single egg—
so the non-existent seed which the non-existent God let fall
contained the whole germ of the cosmos, with all its many
shapes and many natures." !56 In this unformed creation the
third sonship lies as a germ, corresponding to the alchemical
filius macrocosm1.!5?
We find the same cosmogonic aspect of the seed in the
Corpus Hermeticum, Tract XIV, where Hermes explains the
creation of the world to Asclepius: 18°“. . . and how God makes
things, and how the things made come into being, you may see
an image of it. . . . Look at a husbandman sowing seed, here
185 Mysterium, pp. 533ff. 186 Leisegang, Gnosis, pp. 215f.
187 Aion, p. 66. 188 Scott, Hermetica, I, p. 260.
399AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
wheat, there barley, and elsewhere some other kind of seed.
Look at him planting now a vine, and now an apple-tree, and
trees of other kinds; the same man plants them all. And even
so God sows immortality in heaven, and change on earth, and
in all the universe life and movement." !*? In this connection
we might mention a prayer to the Agathodaimon in a Magic
Papyrus: 18° “Come to me, good countryman, Agathodaimon,
Knouphi . . . come to me, holy Orion,’*! that dwellest in the,
north and rollest along the floods of the Nile,1® uniting with
the sea and working change through the life process, even as a
man .. .1% the seed of the union of love, who sets the cosmos
on a firm foundation." !?* 'The conception of the alchemical
opus as the sowing and flowering of a grain of seed is an im-
portant one and is derived from the most ancient sources.
Zosimos quotes a treatise of Hermes: "Go to the peasant Achaab,
and you will learn that whoever sows wheat brings forth wheat.
. . . For the treatise says, the colours do not decompose into
anything but the corporeal and the incorporeal." !9*5 This prob-
ably means that the divine ideas (the incorporeal) entering into
a body produce the created world. A variant of this passage
occurs in "Isis to Horus": "Come and watch and question the
peasant Acharantos, and learn from him what is sown and har-
vested; learn that whoever sows barley harvests barley, and who-
ever sows wheat harvests the same. When you have heard this
as an introduction, my son, think afterwards upon the whole of
creation and the genesis of things, and know that a man can
189 In other treatises the cosmos is a receptacle of God's ideas, the d»y»yetov ^yevécews
(vessel of genesis), which receives the seed of becoming (ibid., p. 288). Cf. "Hermes
to Ammon” (p. 438) and the teachings of Hermes Trismegistus in Stobaeus, 1. 11. 2
(pp. 422-24). Or the cosmos is called the “second God" or demiurge, the “sower
of life," who by casting the seed grants renewal to creatures (pp. 179ff.).
190 Berlin Papyrus 5025 (Preisendanz, Papyri Graecae Magicae, I, p. 4).
191 In ancient Egypt Orion was considered to be the ba of Osiris.
192 The water of the Nile is the alchemical “spermatic water."
193 Lacuna in text.
194 Here we might mention the classical Janus-Aion conception of God as the
sator mundi, "planter of the world" (Martial, X, 28), and Philo's commentary on
Gen. 9 : 20 (De plantatione, Loeb edn., III, pp. 212ff.): “It is the Lord of all things
that is the greatest of planters and most perfect master of his art. It is this world
that is a plant." This idea goes back to Plato (Republic, 597D), who calls God
Qvrovp'yóv, ‘planter.’
195 Alch. grecs, Il, iv, 32.
400XII. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION ...
beget only a man, a lion a lion, and a dog a dog. . . . Foras I
have said that barley begets barley and man a man, so also only
gold can harvest gold, and like like. Thus is the mystery re-
vealed; 59$
These passages probably refer to the Egyptian rites of mum-
mification. Professor Helmut Jacobsohn informs me that the
name "Acharantos" may be derived from the Egyptian god
Aker, who played an important part in the cult of the dead. He
was represented as a double-headed lion or dog, and in his arms
the sun-god is renewed, and together with him the dead man.
‘The sowing of wheat in the earth is an alchemical motif that
dates back to the Osiris mysteries. It points to a post-mortal
process of resurrection or regeneration in which many are pro-
duced from one and there is a secret identity of things that are
“like.” The potential unity of the cosmos is indicated in the
seed motif, but it also has an intrapsychic meaning as the germ
of conscious realization of the self. T'hus the Marcosians cele-
brated a hierosgamos of which Irenaeus !?? reports that Marcos
said to the women with whom he had intercourse: “May that
Charis [grace] who is before all things, and who transcends all
knowledge and speech, fill thine inner man, and multiply in
thee her own knowledge, by sowing the grain of mustard seed
in thee as in good soil.” And again: 1% “Adorn thyself as a
bride. . . . Receive the seed of light into thy nuptial chamber.
. . . Behold Charis hath descended upon thee. . . ."!9?
Many of these images in their ancient connotations are pre-
served in the language of the Church Fathers. There the "corn,"
especially the *corn of wheat" in John 12:24, which dying
"bringeth forth much fruit," refers to Christ. Ephraem Syrus
in his hymns for the feast of the Epiphany? calls Christ a
196 Ibid., I, xiii, 6. This passage occurs as the saying of a “very ancient writer"
(dpxaéraros) in Pelagios, ibid., IV, i, 9.
197 Adv. haer., 1.13. 2 (Writings, I, p. 52).
198 Tbid., p. 53.
199 The Valentinians seem to have had a similar ceremony. Cf. Irenaeus, 1. 13.4 ,
and Tertullian, Adv. Valentinianos, cap. 1. The Corpus Hermeticum says, like-
wise, that God “sows” virtue, reason, and gnosis in the human mind, and the 13th
treatise describes the inner rebirth of man from the intelligible wisdom and seed
of goodness, which comes from God (Scott, Hermetica, I, pp. 179f. and 238).
200 I, cols. 21f.* Cf. John 15: 1: “I am the true vine, and my Father is the hus-
bandman.”
401AURORA CONSURGENS: COMMENTARY
"spiritual husbandman," , who "committed his body as seed to
the sterile field. That body was the grain, which breaking through
all things is now arisen and hath brought the new bread." °°
"Like a grain of wheat falling into the earth, Christ fell into
the underworld and rose up like a sheaf and as the new bread—
blessed be his sacrifice." ??? Christ was plunged into the depths
by his murderers, like a grain of wheat by the peasant, whence
he rose again and wakened many with him.” ?? Here the crop
is the multitude of believers, an image that occurs again among -
the Manichaeans and Mandaeans: the righteous are "pearls of
the invisible" which were sown by the "son of life" in the earth
torn open by the plough. They are the "living crop" which,
coming from the realm of life, light, and spirit, was sown in the
"land of fire and water." ?** Honorius of Autun says in his
Elucidarium:?'5 “And as bread is made up of many grains, so
is the body of Christ gathered together from many elect ones.
. . . And wine is composed of many grapes, and is trodden out
in the wine-press; so is the body of Christ put together out of
many just men, which is tormented on the scaffold of the cross;
and this wine is turned into the blood of Christ, that our soul,
which is in the blood, may through it be quickened." Here the
body of Christ is the Church 2% or, to be more accurate, the
ecclesia spiritualis.29
The archetypal idea underlying all these symbols is that of
the self as a multiple unity, a “conglomerate soul"—an image
that crops up again and again in the text and now reappears at
the end. Rapt in the otherworldliness of an inner archetypal
201 Mary is the “field which knew not the furrow of the husbandman” and yet
"brought forth fruit.” “The Lord poured out his living dew and rain upon Mary,
the thirsting earth." II, col. 526. Cf. cols. 546 and 554.
202 TI, col. 744. Cf. col. 360.
203 I, col. 166. In other parables Ephraem says that Wisdom scatters the "seed of
truth” (I, col. 574) and that Christ is the “planter of the vineyard of his Church"
(I, col. 388).
204 Reitzenstein, Erlósungsmysterium, p. x, and Usener, “Die Perle."
205 Migne, P.L., vol. 172, col. 1129.* Cf. cols. 457 and 463.
206 Cf. Anastasius the Sinaite, Hexaemeron, P.L., vol. 89, col. 1067.
207 For Joachim of Flora gold was a symbol of the perfect, spiritual monastic
orders in contrast to lead, which represented the corrupt clergy. Concordia, IV,
p. 25: "For that order which on account of the brightness of wisdom could be
called gold is now darkened and is again like to black lead" * (Hahn, Geschichte
der Ketzer im Mittelalter, III, p. 101).
402XII. THE SEVENTH PARABLE: OF THE CONFABULATION ...
event, the author experiences a mystic oneness with all those of
like mind, outside space and time.
The fact that he concludes with Calid's "three precious
words" shows that he understood the ecclesia spiritualis spe-
cifically as a community of all those who were enlightened by
the Holy Spirit and took part in the alchemical transformation
and union of opposites—the “sons of the discipline," with whom
the “tabernacle of God dwells.” 20$
His allusion to the transfiguration of Christ, and the hint
that the community of the pious and the poor lives on in secret,
emphasize that this final solution was essentially an inner and
spiritual realization. All earthly elements have dropped away,
extinguished in the overwhelming image of the unio mystica.
In many respects this ending reminds us of the final scene in
Faust, where man, become a child again, is rapt into the other
world and beholds the mysteries of Sophia. The Luciferian
aspect of the spirit Mercurius has, like Mephistopheles, no more
part in it; he has vanished into the depths from which he came:
the "corrupting humidity," the world and the black earth are
distilled away. Therefore the text ends with an avowal of a
trinitarian symbol of totality—the three precious words of Calid.
In conclusion, we may say that the final parable presents
the following picture: two transcendent, archetypal figures cele-
brate a hierosgamos, and the author is somehow included in
their mystic union. What had been hinted in the parable of the
treasure-house of Wisdom, that this union was the God-image
par excellence, is now revealed in all clarity: God is made mani-
fest in the two-in-oneness of lover and beloved. Unlike other
mystical texts, such as Hugh of St. Victor's colloquy with his
soul, where the soul, personified as a woman, turns to her bride-
groom Christ,?? the author's ego no longer exists as a separate
figure; as a man he is only one of the "poor" or one of the
"sons" of the divine lovers—an anonymous particle of humanity
—and elsewhere in the text he seems to feel himself identical
with the bridegroom. Such a state amounts to an extinction of
individual consciousness and its dissolution in the collective
unconscious. It might very well be an abnormal psychic state,
208 A close parallel would be Joachim of Flora's doctrine of the "three ages of the
world." Concordia, II, Tract. 1 (Hahn, III, pp. 108ff.).
209 Cf. Hannah, “Hugh de St. Victor's Conversation with His Anima,” pp. 23ff.
403AURORA CONSURGENS : COMMENTARY
but the accumulation of motifs which in other realms of thought
are connected with death suggests rather that it was an ecstatic
"or delirious state experienced in conspectu mortis. Indeed, the
individuation process, which is here reflected in the alchemical
symbolism, is in a sense a preparation for death as the natural
end of a process whose goal is the fullest possible development
of all the potentialities inherent in the personality.
404

IV
WAS ST. THOMAS AQUINAS
THE AUTHOR OF
AURORA CONSURGENS?

^
us
ie
m
, M 147
ra] Lj
r-
— a —
1 É 4 >
Vy ;-
zy ^" d
>p u
e
» LU | [ £ ^ p e" Fg "2
c ^ ry OF. " 4 ; iv urilH t . - 4 ! 1 " hn ^ W Mee e ee
O f0Wv11 !Ti T" - IU
. PLT AXE IS IT NES^
us
ie
m
, M 147
ra] Lj
r-
— a —
1 É 4 >
Vy ;-
zy ^" d
>p u
e
» LU | [ £ ^ p e" Fg "2
c ^ ry OF. " 4 ; iv urilH t . - 4 ! 1 " hn ^ W Mee e ee
O f0Wv11 !Ti T" - IU
. PLT AXE IS IT NES

Before I discuss the authorship of Aurora, it seems to me neces-
sary to recapitulate some of the conclusions which have resulted
from the foregoing commentary.
Although Aurora consists of a mosaic of quotations drawn
on the one hand from the Bible and other ecclesiastical texts
and from the "classical," or early medieval, alchemical texts on
the other, it nevertheless has the effect of a homogeneous work
cast in a single mould. From the very first chapters in praise of
Wisdom and of the mystic science unknown to the ignorant,
and all through the seven parables describing the transforma-
tion process, the impassioned elation of the author strikes one
with a force one has seldom encountered before. In the last
parable, which is largely a paraphrase of the Canticles, it rises
to the point of ecstasy. It is difficult to withstand the impression
that the whole treatise was composed in an abnormal psychic
state. Moreover, minor inaccuracies in the quotations make it
evident that these were reproduced on the spot and written
down quickly. We can therefore conclude that the treatise must
have been composed under unusual circumstances. The ab-
normal state of mind seems to consist mainly in the steady flow
of imagery, which guided the author's pen in a way that is
ordinarily observed only during periods of intense excitement
bordering on rapture or possession, when unconscious contents
overwhelm the conscious mind. The loss of conscious control
would explain the extraordinary manner of speech and expres-
l'The nearest comparison might be some of the quotations in Hippolytus from
Gnostic writings, where there is a similar associative chain of archetypal images
whose meaning can be elicited only by psychological interpretation. The chain of
associations in Aurora is not unlike the chain of Biblical quotations found, for
instance, in the Sermons of St. Bernard (as my critics have pointed out). There
the associations follow in a known, i.e., conscious pattern, while in our case the
context can be reconstructed only if one considers the unconscious background.
407AURORA CONSURGENS
sion to which the author had involuntarily to submit. Aurora
is unique, not only with respect to the mystical literature of the
time, but also among the authentic alchemical treatises of what-
ever period. One is forced to the conclusion that it cannot have
been written by an alchemist who lived entirely in the world
of "chemical" ideas. Evidence for this is the fact that only about
a dozen of the "classics" of alchemy are quoted, and only the
most general sayings at that, while all evidence of any detailed
knowledge of the material, as well as chemical recipes and tech-
nical instructions, together with the word "alchemia" itself,
are lacking. In the case of a man who was only an alchemist
mention of these things would be almost obligatory. On the
other hand, we have to postulate for our author a fairly good
knowledge of the alchemical literature and an intimate ac-
quaintance with the Bible and the liturgy. These facts combine
to suggest that he was, above all, a cleric. His praise of the
"parvuli" and "pauperes" might be an indication that he was a
member of the Dominican or Franciscan Order.
In the Paris, Vienna, and Venice versions, and also in the
"Rosarium," Aurora has no attribution (the incipit is missing
in the Zurich codex), but in the Bologna and Leiden manu-
scripts and in the printing of Rhenanus it is stated to be a
work of St. Thomas Aquinas.?
At first this attribution seems rather shocking,’ since in
2 Bologna: "Aurora . . . vel Liber trinitatis compositus a S. Thoma de Aquino."
Leiden: "Tractatus, qui dicitur Thomae Aquinatis De Alchemia modus extrahendi
quintam essentiam. Liber Alchemiae qui a non nullis dicitur Aurora consurgens
latine cum figuris." Printed edition of Rhenanus: "Beati Thomae de Aquino
Aurora sive Aurea hora."
3 In Quetif and Echard, Scriptores Ordinis Praedicatorum, Y, p. 345 and II, p. 818,
Aurora is listed as a forgery, as are also the "opera chemica falso illi tributa" in
Theatrum chemicum. These are: "Tractatus . . . de lapide philosophico” or “Se-
creta alchimiae" (Theatr. chem., III, 1659, pp. 267ff.), "Tractatus . . . datus fratri
Reinaldo in arte Alchemiae" (ibid., pp. 278ff.), and ‘““Tractatus sextus de esse et
essentia mineralium" (ibid., V, 1660, pp. 806ff.). The last is undoubtedly a false
attribution, as it was written by the Dominican Thomas of Bologna, who dedi-
cated the treatise to Robert of Naples, born 1275 (!). (Cf. Grabmann, “Die echten
Schriften des heiligen Thomas von Aquin," p. 104.) Meyrink, on the other
hand, endeavours to prove the genuineness of "De lapide philosophico," and
states that a MS with the Incipit: "Sicut lilium inter spinas" is equally genuine
(Thomas von Aquino: Abhandlung über den Stein der Weisen, p. xxiii). The MS
"Sicut lilium" was printed as "Liber lilii benedicti" in Theatr. chem., IV (1659),
pp. 959ff. Schmieder (Geschichte der Alchemie, p. 139) also thinks these alchemical
408WAS THOMAS AQUINAS THE AUTHOR? style and content Aurora offers the strongest possible contrast
to the known writings of St. Thomas. We have, however, to
consider that Aurora, as we have said, was written under the
impact of an encounter with the unconscious, so that, in content
and form, such a composition would compensate or comple-
ment a totally different level of consciousness and mode of ex-
pression. It could, for instance, compensate a hyper-intellectual
attitude caught in the limitations of logic—an attitude that
afforded but little outlet to feeling, emotion, and mystic para-
doxes. In that case Aurora would represent the discharge of
energies that had been dammed up behind the narrowness and
rigidity of the conscious attitude of the author.*
It may be worth while, therefore, to scrutinize the life and
career of St. Thomas from a psychological point of view. He
was born about 1225 in Rocca Secca, near Naples, the son of
Count Landulfo of Aquino, of Lombard origin, and of 'Teo-
dora, Countess of 'Teano,* and the youngest of four brothers
treatises of Thomas are genuine. Waite (Lives of Alchemystical Philosophers,
pp- 61£) considers the “Secreta alchimiae" genuine, but all the other treatises not. Ruska (Turba, pp. 93, 339) mentions a "Commentum Beati Thomae de Aquino
super codicem veritatis qui et Turba dicitur phylosoforum,” and a second com-
mentary, "In Turbam breviorem." The former begins like Aurora with a quo-
tation from Wisdom. Unfortunately I could not get hold of a copy of these writings. One of them may perhaps be identical with the “Compendium” of St. Thomas
cited in “Clangor buccinae" (Artis auriferae, I, p. 329). (Cf. Lippmann, II,
p. 28.) In none of these writings, whose genuineness cannot be discussed here, can
any positive connections with Aurora be inferred. Both in style and content
Aurora is entirely unique. Only in the “Secreta alchimiae" (Theatr. chem., III,
1659, pp.AURORA CONSURGENS
sion to which the author had involuntarily to submit. Aurora
is unique, not only with respect to the mystical literature of the
time, but also among the authentic alchemical treatises of what-
ever period. One is forced to the conclusion that it cannot have
been written by an alchemist who lived entirely in the world
of "chemical" ideas. Evidence for this is the fact that only about
a dozen of the "classics" of alchemy are quoted, and only the
most general sayings at that, while all evidence of any detailed
knowledge of the material, as well as chemical recipes and tech-
nical instructions, together with the word "alchemia" itself,
are lacking. In the case of a man who was only an alchemist
mention of these things would be almost obligatory. On the
other hand, we have to postulate for our author a fairly good
knowledge of the alchemical literature and an intimate ac-
quaintance with the Bible and the liturgy. These facts combine
to suggest that he was, above all, a cleric. His praise of the
"parvuli" and "pauperes" might be an indication that he was a
member of the Dominican or Franciscan Order.
In the Paris, Vienna, and Venice versions, and also in the
"Rosarium," Aurora has no attribution (the incipit is missing
in the Zurich codex), but in the Bologna and Leiden manu-
scripts and in the printing of Rhenanus it is stated to be a
work of St. Thomas Aquinas.?
At first this attribution seems rather shocking,’ since in
2 Bologna: "Aurora . . . vel Liber trinitatis compositus a S. Thoma de Aquino."
Leiden: "Tractatus, qui dicitur Thomae Aquinatis De Alchemia modus extrahendi
quintam essentiam. Liber Alchemiae qui a non nullis dicitur Aurora consurgens
latine cum figuris." Printed edition of Rhenanus: "Beati Thomae de Aquino
Aurora sive Aurea hora."
3 In Quetif and Echard, Scriptores Ordinis Praedicatorum, Y, p. 345 and II, p. 818,
Aurora is listed as a forgery, as are also the "opera chemica falso illi tributa" in
Theatrum chemicum. These are: "Tractatus . . . de lapide philosophico” or “Se-
creta alchimiae" (Theatr. chem., III, 1659, pp. 267ff.), "Tractatus . . . datus fratri
Reinaldo in arte Alchemiae" (ibid., pp. 278ff.), and ‘““Tractatus sextus de esse et
essentia mineralium" (ibid., V, 1660, pp. 806ff.). The last is undoubtedly a false
attribution, as it was written by the Dominican Thomas of Bologna, who dedi-
cated the treatise to Robert of Naples, born 1275 (!). (Cf. Grabmann, “Die echten
Schriften des heiligen Thomas von Aquin," p. 104.) Meyrink, on the other
hand, endeavours to prove the genuineness of "De lapide philosophico," and
states that a MS with the Incipit: "Sicut lilium inter spinas" is equally genuine
(Thomas von Aquino: Abhandlung über den Stein der Weisen, p. xxiii). The MS
"Sicut lilium" was printed as "Liber lilii benedicti" in Theatr. chem., IV (1659),
pp. 959ff. Schmieder (Geschichte der Alchemie, p. 139) also thinks these alchemical
408

Only in the “Secreta alchimiae" (Theatr. chem., III,
1659, pp. 278ff.) which is dedicated to Frater Reinaldus do we find the same quota-
tions as in Aurora concerning the need for patience and deliberation, but as
quotations from Avicenna and Geber, whereas in Aurora they are attributed to
Morienus and Calid. Further, the author of "Secreta alchimiae" speaks of his
"teacher Albertus," contrary to Thomas’s usual habit of not mentioning him. On
p- 279 the passage about rising early to see if the vineyard flourishes (Cant. 7 : 11£)
is meaningless in that context, whereas in Aurora it fits as an organic part of the
text. I do not know whether it is meant as an allusion to Aurora, but think it likely. 4 Scholastic thinking in general and the Summa in particular, with its rigid divi-
sion into questions and answers in accordance with the laws of medieval logic,
are perfect examples of such an attitude of consciousness. 5 Cf. Walz, St. Thomas Aquinas (trans. Bullough) and the literature there men-
tioned (especially the writings of Grabmann); Bourke, Thomistic Bibliography
1920-1940; Wyser, “Thomas von Aquin"; Pruemmer, Fontes Vitae S. Thomae,
Parts I-III. 6 Or Teate (Chieti) of the Neapolitan nobility, originally Norman. 409AURORA CONSURGENS
and four or five sisters.’ He was the grandchild of Franziska of
Swabia,? a sister of Barbarossa.
When still a small boy of about five he was sent to a monas-
tery and placed under the care of his uncle Sinibaldo, who was
then (1227-36) the abbot of Monte Cassino.® From the begin-
ning everyone was struck by the boy's quiet and taciturn man-
ner.? About 1235-37, around the age of twelve, he had to
leave Monte Cassino because of political unrest, and a year or
two later went to Naples to continue his studies. There the '
teaching of the natural sciences was particularly well advanced,
thanks to the protection of the emperor Frederick II; ?? in 1231,
Michael Scotus had begun his translations of Aristotle.!? His
most important teacher there was Peter of Spain (Petrus His-
panus), and it was probably he who induced Thomas to enter
the Dominican Order.^ He was invested about 1240-41 or
more probably 1244-45. His mother did not want him lost
to the family's political ambitions, and desired him to take up a
worldly career; ! at her instigation, and probably with the con-
nivance of Frederick II, the young man's brothers abducted
him and held him prisoner in the castle of Acquapendente,!*
7 Cf. also Sertillanges, Der heilige Thomas von Aquin, p. 23, and Chénu, Intro-
duction à l'étude de S. Thomas d'Aquin, passim, esp. pp. 11ff. Unfortunately I
was unable to obtain Petitot's more recent La Vie intégrale de Saint Thomas
d'Aquin, so I had to use instead his Saint Thomas d'Aquin: La vocation, l'euvre,
la vie spirituelle. Grabmann's The Interior Life of St. Thomas (trans. Ashen-
brener) was less useful, as it contains few facts and is more a panegyric. But cf.
the literature there mentioned.
8 Petitot, p. 17. His grandfather, the Count of Sommacle, was one of Barbarossa's
generals.
9 Walz, p. 8; Sertillanges, p. 25; Chénu, p. 11; Petitot, p. 16; Tocco, Vita S.
Thomae (in Pruemmer, Fontes Vitae), II, p. 69.
10 Walz, p. 16. 11 Petitot, p. 19. 12 Walz, p. 21.
13 Haskins, "Michael Scot and Frederick II"; Walz, p. 21. Cf. Grabmann,
"Methoden und Hilfsmittel des Aristotelesstudiums im Mittelalter," pp. 64f.
14As Monte Cassino belongs to the Benedictines, one might have expected
Thomas to join that Order.
15 Walz, p. 33. His novitiate lasted from 6 to 12 months. Cf. Petitot, p. 24.
16 According to certain sources (e.g., Petitot), she wanted him to be a Benedictine,
so that later he would become abbot of Monte Cassino.
17 His superiors, in expectation of what was to come, had sent Thomas to Rome,
with the intention of bringing him to Paris from there. He was ambushed near
Acquapendente (Walz, pp. 34f.). Cf. Thomas of Cantimpré, Bonum universale de
apibus, I, 20, pp. 81ff.
410WAS THOMAS AQUINAS THE AUTHOR?
on his father's domains.!? The family sent beautiful courtesans
to visit him in his prison, in the hope of luring him back to
the world, but he chased them away with a burning brand from
his fire,!? and the following night had a vision in which two
angels gave him a chastity belt, so that he awoke with a shout of
pain.? Thereafter he abhorred the sight of women.?! Mean-
while his superior had gone to Bologna to intervene with the
Chapter General. On July 25, 1243, a new pope, Innocent IV,
had been elected, and in July 1245 he deposed Frederick II.
About the same time the family relented, and Thomas was set
free? whereupon he returned to Naples. His mother, who
seems to have been a hard woman, never forgave him for his
intransigeance.??
Soon afterwards (ca. 1245) he went to Paris, and later (ca.
1248) to Cologne to study under Albertus Magnus.?* His meet-
ing with this formidable personage seems to have been an in-
cisive experience for young Thomas. It is related that during
his time in Cologne he was so tongue-tied and abstracted that
his fellow students called him the "dumb ox" (bos mutus). Only
Albertus recognized his gifts, and prophesied that this “dumb
ox” would one day fill the whole earth with his doctrinal bellow-
ings.?5 Albertus inducted him into all the burning intellectual
and spiritual problems of that age, and made him more closely
18 Petitot, p. 27. 19 Ibid., p. 31; Tocco (Fontes), p. 75.
20 Walz, pp. 34, 37f.; Petitot, p. 32; Petrus Calo (in Pruemmer, Fontes Vitae), I,
pp. 23f. Cf. Pelster, Kritische Studien, pp. 63f. and 71.
21 Tocco (Fontes), p. 75.* This was probably because he, like Aristotle, regarded
woman as a mistake on the part of nature, who really wanted to produce males:
“Woman is a misbegotten male, produced as it were unintentionally by nature." *
(Gabriel of Barletta, Sermones I, fol. 165v.) Cf. Summa, I, q. 99, art. 2, obj. 2 and
ad 1; q. 92, art. 1 obj. 1 and ad 1 (Eng. edn., I, pp. 495£); q. 92, art. 1 obj. 1 and ad 1
(Eng., p. 466); also 2 Sent. 20, 2, 1, obj. 1, and 3 Sent. 11, 1, 1c. (Opera, ed. Fretté
and Maré, XXX, pp. 345, 455-)
22 Walz, pp. 38f. In other versions he escaped. Petitot, p. 34; Tocco (Fontes), p. 77.
23 Petitot, p. 28.
24 Walz, pp. 44f. For the dates, see pp. 45f. Possibly he was in Cologne in 1245, in
Paris in 1245-48, and then again in Cologne; or (according to Pelster) he studied
under Albertus in 1245 and again from 1248 to 1252. Cf. Sertillanges, p. 23;
Chénu, p. 12.
25 Tocco (Fontes), pp. 77£.: "He began to be marvellously silent and taciturn. . . .
The brethren began to call him the Dumb Ox." * (Cf. Pelster, Kritische Studien,
p. 14) Henry of Herford (Chronicon, p. 201): "There will come a time when all
the world will marvel at the lowing of this ox." * C£. Petrus Calo (Fontes), pp. 26f.
411AURORA CONSURGENS
acquainted with the writings of Aristotle, the scientific litera-
ture of the Arabic peripatetics, and—not least—the writings of
Avicenna and Arabic alchemical philosophy.
It was during the years 1245-50, the time of his first meeting
with Thomas, that Albertus was making an intensive study of
alchemy and occult problems.?^ One can imagine what an im-
pression the personality and ideas of this temperamental, free-
thinking scholar must have made on Thomas. Albertus seems
to have belonged psychologically to the extraverted type, his '
interest being directed to the outer object and to experimental
science.?* For instance, he even took the trouble to travel about
visiting alchemists in their laboratories.?5 ‘Theologically, he
justified his interest in nature by arguing that God works
through the natural processes, and that, as one could not search
out God's will directly, it was valuable to investigate the natural
processes which were God's instrument. Again and again he
states in his writings that he had observed this or that for him-
self, or had tested it by experiment.?? In his “Mineralia” (III. i.
1, and IV. i. 6; Borgnet, V, pp. 59f., go) he admits that he had
personally attended alchemical experiments in Paris, Cologne,
and other cities.?? He also conducted experiments in the occult
and magic arts?! as we know not only from "Liber aggrega-
26 Practically all the important writings of Albertus on this theme are cited in
Vincent of Beauvais, and hence were written between 1240 and 1245, except for
"Mineralia," though this is relatively early too. (Thorndike, History of Magic,
IL, pp. 524ff.) Even Mandonnet ("Albert le Grand," in Dictionnaire de théologie
catholique), who gives the lifetime of Albertus a later date (b. 1206 instead of
1193), thinks these writings must belong to those years. Albert wanted to popu-
larize Aristotle: "to make all these parts intelligible to Latin readers," as he puts it.
27 As Thorndike points out (II, pp. 53o0f.), Albertus was at his most original in
his scientific writings.
28 In "De causis et proprietatibus elementorum," I. 2. 9 (Borgnet, IX, p. 619), he
says: "It is not enough to know in general, but we seek to know everything accord-
ing to its own proper nature, for this is the best and most perfect kind of
knowledge." *
29 Thorndike, II, pp. 538ff.
30 "Mineralia," IV. i. 6 (Borgnet, V, p. go): ". . . but those who work much in
copper in our parts, that is at Paris and Cologne and other places where I have
been and seen and experimented . . .” *
31 In "De somno et vigilia," IIT. ii. 6 (Borgnet, IX, p. 203) he explains—following
Avicenna and Algazel—that man's power to fascinate and exert magical influence
(what we would call hypnosis and suggestion) comes from the soul. “Mineralia,”
II. i. 1 (Borgnet, V, p. 24): ". . . and in this wise, they say, the soul of one man or
412.WAS THOMAS AQUINAS THE AUTHOR? tionis" (whose authenticity is doubted), but from “De vegeta-
bilibus et plantis" (VI. ii. 1),?? where he says he had proved by
experiment and found it true that a toad could make an emer-
ald explode or, again, would die at the sight of it! #3 He de-
clares that many of these occult things could. not be proved
"along physical principles" ?* and emphasizes, on the authority
of Avicenna, that alchemy properly appertains to magic,** since
it depends on the occult powers of the human soul,?* which in
turn are moved by the "heavenly powers." ?* The stars are the
instruments of God par excellence, by which he governs the
sublunar world. He held with Avicenna that it was possible
animal will enter into and go out of another, and bewitch it and interfere with
its workings." * This is in striking agreement with the views in the Liber aggre-
gationis, and reinforces the assumption that it is genuine. 32 Borgnet, X, pp. 218f. 33 He believed in the magical effects of stones, plants, etc., in love potions, and the
making of seals (ibid., pp. 555£). De veg. et plant., VI. i. 30-34, ii passim; Borgnet,
X, pp. 190ff., 223ff. 34 “Mineralia,” II. iii. 5 (Borgnet, V, p. 55); Thorndike, p. 557. 35 Cf. ibid., II. i. 9 (Borgnet, V, p. 24). 36 Thorndike, pp. 558-62. 37 “Mineralia,” IL i. 1 (Borgnet, V, pp. 30ff.); cf. “De causis elementorum," I. ii. 7
(Borgnet, IX, p. 615), Thorndike, II, pp. 557ff. Also “Mineralia,” II. i. 2 (Borgnet,
V, pp. 23ff.): “And the art brings this about with great labour and many errors,
but nature does so without difficulty or trouble: the reason for which is that the
powers existing in the matter of stones and metals are moved by sure and effi-
cacious heavenly powers when the matter works: and those powers are the opera-
tions of intelligences which do not err unless it be by accident or through the
inequality of the material." * Quoted in part in Ruska, Tabula Smaragdina, p. 187. Cf. also p. 188: "In Lib.AURORA CONSURGENS
acquainted with the writings of Aristotle, the scientific litera-
ture of the Arabic peripatetics, and—not least—the writings of
Avicenna and Arabic alchemical philosophy.
It was during the years 1245-50, the time of his first meeting
with Thomas, that Albertus was making an intensive study of
alchemy and occult problems.?^ One can imagine what an im-
pression the personality and ideas of this temperamental, free-
thinking scholar must have made on Thomas. Albertus seems
to have belonged psychologically to the extraverted type, his '
interest being directed to the outer object and to experimental
science.?* For instance, he even took the trouble to travel about
visiting alchemists in their laboratories.?5 ‘Theologically, he
justified his interest in nature by arguing that God works
through the natural processes, and that, as one could not search
out God's will directly, it was valuable to investigate the natural
processes which were God's instrument. Again and again he
states in his writings that he had observed this or that for him-
self, or had tested it by experiment.?? In his “Mineralia” (III. i.
1, and IV. i. 6; Borgnet, V, pp. 59f., go) he admits that he had
personally attended alchemical experiments in Paris, Cologne,
and other cities.?? He also conducted experiments in the occult
and magic arts?! as we know not only from "Liber aggrega-
26 Practically all the important writings of Albertus on this theme are cited in
Vincent of Beauvais, and hence were written between 1240 and 1245, except for
"Mineralia," though this is relatively early too. (Thorndike, History of Magic,
IL, pp. 524ff.) Even Mandonnet ("Albert le Grand," in Dictionnaire de théologie
catholique), who gives the lifetime of Albertus a later date (b. 1206 instead of
1193), thinks these writings must belong to those years. Albert wanted to popu-
larize Aristotle: "to make all these parts intelligible to Latin readers," as he puts it.
27 As Thorndike points out (II, pp. 53o0f.), Albertus was at his most original in
his scientific writings.
28 In "De causis et proprietatibus elementorum," I. 2. 9 (Borgnet, IX, p. 619), he
says: "It is not enough to know in general, but we seek to know everything accord-
ing to its own proper nature, for this is the best and most perfect kind of
knowledge." *
29 Thorndike, II, pp. 538ff.
30 "Mineralia," IV. i. 6 (Borgnet, V, p. go): ". . . but those who work much in
copper in our parts, that is at Paris and Cologne and other places where I have
been and seen and experimented . . .” *
31 In "De somno et vigilia," IIT. ii. 6 (Borgnet, IX, p. 203) he explains—following
Avicenna and Algazel—that man's power to fascinate and exert magical influence
(what we would call hypnosis and suggestion) comes from the soul. “Mineralia,”
II. i. 1 (Borgnet, V, p. 24): ". . . and in this wise, they say, the soul of one man or
412.

also p. 188: "In Lib. III, which treats of metals in general, Albertus again
enters the sphere of alchemical ideas: ‘Concerning the transmutation of these
bodies and the changing of them one into another it is not for the physicist to
determine, but rather for the art that is called Alchemy.' " * Ibid: “According to
the teachings of Hermes and his pupils, the powers of all earthly things are
dependent above all on the stars and constellations. Through the circle 'alaur'
they are transferred to the lower world." Ruska rightly emphasizes that Albertus
was greatly influenced by the Arabian astrologers and alchemists, particularly
Avicenna. Certain quotations from Albertus show that he was interested in the
details of alchemical recipes (examples in Ruska, passim). 38 Thorndike, II, p. 583 and Albertus, “Mineralia,” II. i. 2 (Borgnet, V, p. 26):
“But all powers are infused into the lower things by the first circle of celestial
images." * That is the reason “why precious stones have wonderful powers ex-
ceeding those of others, namely because they are more like in substance to the
higher things . .. , wherefore precious stones are called by some, elemental
stars." * According to “Mineralia,” II. i. 4 (Borgnet, V, p. 28f.), the heavenly
powers are infused "according to the merits of the material."
418AURORA CONSURGENS
to purify metals in a natural way and reduce them to their
prima materia—sulphur or mercury—but afterwards they could
be turned into the desired metal only "magically," by taking
account of the elemental or heavenly powers.?? In other words,
the chemical analysis was physical, but the synthesis could be
achieved only psychologically. Most alchemists, Albertus con-
tinues, proceed in the wrong way and get only superficial colora-
tions of the metal. We find the same attitude towards alchemy in .
his (possibly genuine) work “De alchemia," where he relates
that he had long travelled around "exul" (banished? in a
foreign country?) and attended numerous experiments which
were all fruitless; but finally, through the grace of the Holy
Spirit, he found the thing that conquers nature. What this is he
does not say, true to tradition, but only hints at it in symbol.
Albertus was an impressive and vital personality, with a
highly receptive mind. Probably he was an intuitive, setting
less store by systematic clarity of thought *? but having an innate
sense for anything new and of value for the future.*! It may
well have been his intuition that enabled him to spot so quickly
the importance of young Thomas.*?
The biographical data suggest that Thomas Aquinas, on the
other hand, belonged to the introverted type. We have seen
39 TII. i. 4 (Borgnet, V, pp. 63f.).
40 Thorndike, II, pp. 530f. Cf. the rather sharp judgment of Sertillanges, p. 39,
who accuses him of superficiality. Chénu, p. 97, speaks of his "faconde presque
désordonnée."
41 Jung describes this type as follows: "The intuitive never finds himself where
generally accepted reality values are found, but always where there are possibili-
ties. He has a fine nose for future developments. . . . He grasps new objects and
new ways with great intensity. . . . The intuitive's morality is neither intellectual
nor emotional; he has a morality of his own, consisting in fidelity to his own
views." (Psychological Types, 1923 edn., p. 464.) His unconscious, inferior sensa-
tion function expresses itself in compulsive ties to people or objects, imaginary
illnesses, a neurotic proneness to hypochondriac obsessional ideas, phobias, and
absurd body sensations (ibid., p. 467). This might explain Albertus's melancholia
in old age and his almost exaggerated grief at the death of Thomas.
42 Mandonnet ("Albert le Grand," Dictionnaire de théologie catholique, I, col.
671) says of Albertus: "il joua un véritable róle de révélateur intellectuel." Walz
("De Alberti Magni et S. Thomae Personali Relatione," p. 311): "As formerly by
divination he commended the wonderfully increasing intellect of Brother Thomas,
so afterwards he was a prophet of the everlasting victory of Master Thomas’s
teaching." * (My italics.)
414WAS THOMAS AQUINAS THE AUTHOR?
that even as a boy he was reserved and taciturn.$? So we know
very little of what was going on in him. His biographers extol
his quiet gravity, his equable and humble acceptance of the
religious rule, and his precocious knowledge. At thirteen he
knew the greater part of the Psalms, gospels, and epistles of
Paul by heart, and had translated among other things the
Moralia of Gregory the Great.** His resistance to the attempts
of his family to lure him back into the world has something
almost timorous about it; it betrays his sensitivity,*? perhaps also
a certain weakness in regard to the sphere of sexuality, which
he shunned as menacing and diabolical. His reluctance to ap-
pear before the public is further evidence of an introverted dis-
position. For instance, he was overcome by nervousness when
he had to deliver his inaugural lecture (prolusio) as Magister in
Paris.*€ Then an old friar of the Order appeared to him in a
dream, saying: "Behold, thou art heard, accept the Master's
office, for God is with thee; but for thy beginning take this
text: “Thou waterest the hills from thy upper rooms, the earth
is sated with the fruit of thy works’ " (Psalm 103 : 13).47 ‘Thomas
obeyed the dream's command and gave an address on this pas-
sage (to which allusion is made in 4A4urora).*5 From a psycho-
logical point of view, the dream figure *? was admonishing him
to place more reliance on the inspiration of the unconscious.
Obviously in his conscious life he was inclined to lose himself
in reflection and intellectual speculation.
If the typology we have hazarded is correct, the friendship
uniting Albertus and Thomas would be readily understandable
since their attitude-types " complemented one another. As
function-types ** they cannot have been direct contrasts, for
both inclined to the side of thinking and intuition, though with
Albertus the irrational function (intuition) predominated, and
with Thomas the rational (thinking), so that they stimulated
43 Tocco (Fontes), p. 69: “For the aforesaid child was not talkative and garrulous,
but already beginning to be taciturn and given to inward meditation." *
44 Petitot, p. 18.
45 Ibid., p. 39: "We see that the Saint was extremely, even astonishingly sensi-
tive; his tougher companions and disciples found this surprising. This very Italian,
almost feminine delicacy . . ." 46 Ca. 1256. Cf. Sertillanges, p. 24.
41 'Tocco (Fontes), p. 85.* 48 Supra, pp. 348, 350.
49 A personification of the archetype of the wise old man.
50 Extravert, introvert. 51 Thinking, feeling, sensation, intuition.
415AURORA > CONSURGENS
and complemented one another that way too. The fact that
Albertus felt the death of his friend telepathically shows that
there was a participation mystique between them, as often hap-
pens in the case of an intense relationship with mutual pro-
jection.
Albertus is described as being small in stature, of delicate
build, nimble, vivacious, and extremely amiable; ®* Thomas,
on the other hand, as a large, lumbering, coarse-boned man,
with an elongated face, low forehead, and a great round head’
inclining to baldness.5? He is said to have suffered from stomach
trouble,5* which may perhaps have been of nervous origin. If
this was a psychogenic symptom, it would show that there was
something he found hard to "digest" or could not “stomach.”
Because of their bad psychological digestion, introversion in
the cases of such persons usually leads to one-sidedness.
Once, at a court dinner with Louis IX, the story goes,
Thomas so lost the use of his senses as to forget himself, and,
overcome by the force of his contemplation, he smote the table
with his fist, and exclaimed in a loud voice that he had found a
final and compelling argument against the Manichaeans.® By
this he probably meant the neo-Manichaean heresy, which was
very influential at that time."e
This story shows that his intense introvertedness was not the
result of lack of temperament or evidence of inner tranquillity.
Rather, behind his outward composure violent psychic con-
flicts were going on, and it is clear that he was personally af-
fected in the strongest way by the religious problems of that
restless age.
Further proof of passionate inner struggles and doubts is
afforded by various reports of dreams and visions in which the
Mother of God, Christ, or St. Paul appeared to him. Character-
istically, the first thing he asked these persons was whether
what he had written was right or not. With a man who was
52 Petitot, p. 51. 53 Tocco (Fontes), pp. 111f. Cf. Petitot, pp. 39 and 73f.
541t is reported that he was suddenly unable to eat and died of the resulting
weakness. Tocco (Fontes), pp. 129f.
55 Acta Bollandiana, p. 673: "He came to the king, and being by him at table, sud-
denly, inspired with the truth of the faith, he smote the table and said: "That
finishes with the heresy of the Manichaeans!' " * Cf. Calo (Fontes), p. 42.
56 Hahn, Geschichte der Ketzer, I, pp. 55ff.
57 Tocco, in Acta Sanctorum Martii, I, p. 670; Fontes, pp. 106f.
416WAS THOMAS AQUINAS THE AUTHOR?
not tormented by doubts about his own work (but rather about
the object of belief), one would expect a gesture of adoration
and reverence—anything rather than this anxious question.
Obviously it was not so much the metaphysical reality of these
persons which he doubted as the form in which he himself had
attempted to give intellectual definitions of their nature.
His writings, too, display a marked dichotomy in his crea-
tive powers, for his main works were written in the dry, logical,
scholastic style of the period (“he always spoke formally'),5* but
on the side he composed hymns and sermons of great poetic
beauty. Gulielmo de Tocco even declares that he wrote many
of them in a kind of ecstasy (“in raptu mentis").9? None of the
known poems, however, comes anywhere near Aurora in in-
tensity of feeling. In my view, Thomas must have been a man
in whom there was the greatest tension between feeling and in-
tellect. Presumably, as I have said, he was an introverted think-
ing type. His thinking was not related to the object but was
founded on ideas. He was more interested in the principles of
the Aristotelian system than in questions of detail. One can
imagine what a shock it must have been for him to find himself
caught up in the whirlwind of an extraverted intuitive like AI-
bertus, who actually carried out practical experiments in min-
eralogy, zoology, and botany, and was specially interested in
alchemical and parapsychological questions.®
58 Said of him by Cajetan, cited in Chénu, p. 93.
59 Petitot (p. 143) says of the sermon he preached before the Consistory for the
institution of the feast of Corpus Christi: “It was wholly lyrical, exclamatory, and
formless, without heads or divisions.”
60 Vita di S. Thomaso, Acta Bollandiana, p. 665: He even speaks of a “continuous
mental rapture” (Fontes, p. 122). Cf. Walz, “De Alberti Magni et S. Thomae Per-
sonali Relatione," p. 316, n. 44.
61 Gilson, “Pourquoi Saint Thomas a critiqué Saint Augustin," pp. 124f.: “St.
Thomas has left to us neither a ‘Discourse on Method’ nor a ‘Confessions,’ and we
have no evidence to show the course of the evolution of his philosophical prin-
ciples. . . . This Minerva sprang fully armed from the head of Jupiter.”
62 For which reason his contemporary Engelbert of Strassburg named him an
“expert in magic.” Cf. Peter of Prussia, Vita B. Alberti Magni, p. 126. Albertus
thought magic was due to demonic influences (ibid., p. 551), the demons having
the support of the stars. There was a “right” or positive magic. Its "magistri"
were people who philosophized about the stars and nature. Cf. In Evang. Matth.,
II. 1 (Borgnet, XX, p. 61), where he calls the wise men from the East such
"magistri," and In Daniel, I. 20 (Borgnet, XVIII, p. 465): “They are called Magi
... from being magisters who philosophize about all things.” *
417AURORA CONSURGENS
From that time on, under the influence of Albertus, Thomas
accepted in principle the possible existence of occult phenom-
ena. He says in the Summa that in the physical order things
have certain occult powers, the reason for which cannot be
assigned by man.9? Like Albertus, he believed in the occult
powers of precious stones,?* and that alchemy was a “true art,
but difficult on account of the occult influences of the celestial
powers." *5 In his In quatuor libros Sententiarum Petri Lom-.
bardi, an early work, he emphasizes that in principle he be-
lieved in the transmutation of metals, but that "the alchemists
make something that is similar to gold so far as its outward acci-
dents are concerned: yet they do not make real gold, for the
substantial form of gold does not come into being through the
heat of the fire which the alchemists use, but through the heat
of the sun in a definite place where the mineral virtue operates,
and therefore their gold has not a power in accordance with its
appearance, and so likewise with the other things that come
into being through their work." ®* For him, therefore, the most
important thing in alchemy seems to have been these astro-
logical and magical powers.®* His convictions in this matter
seem to have grown even stronger with age.9? Such assevera-
63 TI-II, q. 96, art. 2 (Eng. edn., II, p. 1609).*
64 He thought they could have astrological and demonic effects. Cf. Thorndike,
II, p. 603.
65 Meteorol., III. 9. “Whence also the Alchemists themselves by the true art of
alchemy, difficult though it be because of the hidden operations of celestial
power. . . ."* Cf. Thorndike, II, pp. 607ff., and the evidence for his belief in
astrology: There was an “imprinting of forms from above,” i.e., by the stars, which
acts “as the magnet attracts iron" (Codex Vat. Urb. 1491, fols. 76£.). Thomas also
had the same views as Albertus concerning fascination and hypnosis (Contra
Gentiles, MI, 103, and Summa theol., I, 117, 3). The stars were moved by the
angels (Thorndike, II, pp. 608f.). God used them to guide the lower world (Boll,
Sternglaube und Sterndeutung, pp. 39 and 102). Man's “humours” were also
influenced by the stars (De veritate, XII.10, and Summa, II-II, q. 95, art. 5 ad 1).
66 *
87 Similar views are found in the doubtfully authentic “De lapide philosophico"
(cf. Meyrink, Thomas von Aquino: Abhandlung über den Stein der Weisen, p. 3)
and in Bacon, De speculis comburentibus (cited by Little, Roger Bacon Essays),
p- 394. A common source in all these cases may have been Witelo.
68 The treatise "De occultis operibus naturae ad quendam militem" (Opera,
1871-80, XXVII, pp. 504-07) is relatively late, and the still later Summa is more
favourably disposed towards alchemy than the earlier Commentary on the Sen-
tences (Thorndike, II, 607ff.).
418WAS THOMAS AQUINAS THE AUTHOR?
tions, coming from authenticated works of his, demand to be
taken seriously.
What we miss, however, is the emotional factor: to what
extent did these alleged facts impress themselves on his feel-
ings? The "dumb ox" anecdote seems to indicate that impres-
sions went much deeper than one would have supposed, but
that he kept them locked away in himself. His later thinking,
cramped by formal logic, could well be a defence-reaction
against these and similar impressions, for the attempt to gain
control over the menacing world of objects by conceptual
means is characteristic of introverted thinking, and "occult"
objects must have exerted a particularly numinous effect on a
scholastic. Thomas’s own uncertainty, when in his dreams and
visions he tormented himself with doubts as to whether he had
formulated everything correctly, betrays the typical dependence
of the introvert on the "subjective factor," ® and on the other
hand shows that formal thinking was extraordinarily important
to him, perhaps because it served as a defence against impulses
and interpretations of quite another kind.”
If Thomas was an introvert, it must have been all the more
exasperating for him that his success as a university teacher in-
volved him more and more in external duties and activities
which he could not escape because of his vow of obedience.
After he had functioned as Bachelor and then as Master in
Paris from about 1254 to 1260," the Chapter General in Naples
nominated him “Preacher General." Even before that he had
had to attend many congresses in different cities, where occa-
sionally he met Albertus.” In the autumn of 1265 he stayed for
a while in Rome, and in 1267 at the Chapter General in
Bologna. At that time he was active in some capacity (perhaps
as lector?) at the Papal Court.? Besides that, all through this
period he was engaged on a monumental literary task: in
69 Psychological Types (1923 edn.), pp. 473ff.
70 Thomas’s brother Raynaldus was a well-known writer of love poems and
piquant romances. His own handwriting seems to have been very “‘pateuse”
(thick) (Petitot, pp. 31 and 42). It is conceivable that he had a sensuous tempera-
ment which was held well in check.
71 Walz, p. 89.
72 For instance, at Anagni in 1256 (Walz, pp. 81ff) and Valenciennes in 1259
(p. 85).
73 Walz, pp. 89f.
419AURORA CONSURGENS
1266 he had begun the Swmma™ and the De anima com-
mentary.” In 1268—72 he stayed for a second time in Paris. He
was in contact with numerous distinguished personalities con-
nected with the Church: Vincent of Beauvais, St. Bonaventure,
Witelo, William of Moerbeke, to name but a few. 'T'he famous
Averroist controversy occurred during his second stay in Paris,
and on December 10, 1270, certain of Thomas's theses were
officially condemned. It is possible that the incident at the
Court dinner with Louis IX took place about this time,?? for
it is then that he became more and more the official defender
of the Catholic faith against the contemporary heresies.
The Dominican Order to which Thomas belonged, as well
as the Franciscan Order, which together are usually known as
the mendicant orders, had been called into being by a profound
crisis within the Church. Externally it was caused by the pres-
sure of Islam and the Tartars,** but internally by the decay of the
nobility and the growth of towns. The mendicant orders con-
sidered it their task to reform the Church and to bring back
into the fold the masses of the people, who were slipping into
sectarianism and paganism. The Franciscans took over the prac-
tical cure of souls, while the Dominicans considered it their
main task to combat heresies scientifically, styling themselves
"Domini canes"—God's watchdogs. Since no serious encounter
with an opponent is possible without partial approximation to
his point of view, it is understandable that a party of Fran-
ciscans found themselves slipping into an heretical popular re-
ligious movement. They called themselves the ‘““Tertiaries,”
and they later merged almost indistinguishably with the
Beguines and Beghards, Fratres pauperes, Brethren of the Free
Spirit, and other sects.? ‘The Dominicans too, including
Thomas and his teacher Albertus, came into conflict with
bigoted representatives of the Church such as William of Saint-
Amour, because they were alleged to have taken over too much
Arabic Aristotelianism into their theological views *" and to
have given too much protection to the Left Wing of the mendi-
74 Ibid., p. 100. 75 Pp. 104f. 76 Pp. 128f.
77 Chénu, p. 34. 78 Ibid., pp. 11 and 35ff.
79 Cf. Tocco, in Acta SS. Martii, I, p. 666, concerning the “Poor Men of Lyons,”
and Kroenlein, Amalrich von Bena und David von Dinant, pp. 279ff .
80 Mandonnet, Siger de Brabant et l’Averroisme latin au XIIe siécle.
420WAS THOMAS AQUINAS THE AUTHOR?
cant orders. Thomas alone composed three treatises in their
defence, and he and Albertus went on several occasions to Rome
to defend them.*' There is even an important document from
Albertus in existence concerning the Beguines and Beghards,
which he had obviously written to protect this movement,
whose centre was in Cologne, against the Inquisition.? Both he
and Thomas display an astonishing knowledge of the contem-
porary philosophical sects, such as those of Amalric of Bene,
David of Dinant, etc.5? Thomas refers to them as "certain mod-
ern philosophers.” 5* It is also important to note that he pro-
tested when William of Saint-Amour wanted to brand the teach-
ing of Joachim of Flora as the teaching of Antichrist55 He
knew the so-called "Liber Introductorius,’ a summary of
Joachim's teaching, and said that though some things in it
were to be "held in reprobation," to call it the teaching of
Antichrist was false. Thomas, therefore, not only was ac-
quainted with this movement but took a fair and not entirely
negative view of it.5"
In 1272 he left Paris and travelled to Naples, where a
"studium generale" was to be instituted, and there became chief
81 Thorndike, II, p. 525.
82 Preger, Geschichte der Mystik, I, p. 466, and Haupt, "Zwei Tractate gegen
Beginen und Begharden," p. 85. Cf. Hahn, II, p. 472, and Doellinger, Beitráge
zur Sektengeschichte des Mittelalters, II, pp. 403 and 702.
83 Summa, I, q. 3, art. 8 (Eng. edn., I, pp. 19£). Cf. Kroenlein, p. 282. David of
Dinant seems to have been influenced by Scotus Erigena and his pantheistic doc-
trine (ibid., pp. 284 and 303). Cf. also Thery, Autour du décret de 1210.
84 In Sent., II, 17, q. 1, a. 1, solutio. For Amalric of Bene see Kroenlein, pp. 282
and 284. David of Dinant was probably known to Albertus through Baldwin of
Canterbury (Albertus's Summa, I, Tr. 4, q. 20, memb. 2, and II, 12, 72, 4, 2, in
Borgnet, XXXI). Cf. Kroenlein, pp. 302f., 311ff.
85 Petitot, pp. 71f.
86'Thomas Aquinas, Contra impugnantes Dei cultum et religionem, p. 110:
“Wherefore when certain men try to change the gospel of Christ into a certain
Gospel which they call eternal, it is clear that they are declaring the times of
Antichrist to be at hand. But this gospel of which they speak is an introduction
to the books of Joachim, which is condemned by the Church, or rather the teach-
ing itself by Joachim, by which as they say the Gospel is changed. Hence when
the said teaching, which they call the law of Antichrist, is set forth at Paris, it is
a sign that the time of Antichrist is at hand. But that the teaching of Joachim or
of that Introduction, although it contains certain things that are to be held in
reprobation, is the teaching which Antichrist will preach, is false." *
87 Chénu (pp. 39ff.) calls Joachim “un écho sonore des aspirations de son temps."
421AURORA ~CONSURGENS
lecturer. Gulielmo de Tocco reports that he did not work only
in the academic world, but "with closed eyes" preached ecstatic
sermons which were attended by great throngs of people.55 Fits
of absent-mindedness, like the one recorded in the story of his
clinching argument against the Manichaeans, became more and
more frequent, and on one occasion he even had a raptus
mentis in the presence of a Roman cardinal, and repeatedly
during the celebration of the Mass. At Mass he would often
burst into tears over the sufferings of Christ. There are even'
reports of levitations.?? The following report from Gulielmo de
Tocco points to an inner conflict with the shadow:
Once when a Neapolitan judge was visiting Thomas, and
the two were pacing up and down a terrace by the sea, the
judge saw the figure of a black-clad Ethiopian approaching the
saint. But Thomas shook his fist at him and cried out: “Do you
dare to tempt me again?" Whereupon the “noonday devil"
fled.* (One thinks of the Ethiopian as a symbol of the nigredo
in Aurora!)
Reports of this kind, partly historical, partly legendary, may
be taken as the psychological ambiance of a formidable and
highly strung personality whose depths were unsuspected and
still less understood by the ordinary man. The superb one-
sidedness of his conscious thinking alone is enough to guarantee
the existence of a totally different inner world, whose task it
was to maintain the balance of the personality as a whole.
Reports of ecstasies and other unusual biographical data are
indicative of this invisible background. They belong to the
phenomenology of an imposing personality, filling out the pic-
ture on the unconscious side, which generally expresses itself
only indirectly. The predominance of rationality in St. Thomas
would evoke an equally powerful counterposition in the un-
conscious psyche, which, to compensate his “universalist” think-
ing, would reach down to the depths of the psychic past and
activate the corresponding archetypal contents. Since every-
thing that is activated in the unconscious strives for conscious
realization, manifest signs of the conflict will not be lacking.
At all events, the conscious mind cannot shake off the feeling of
88 Walz, p. 150. 89 Ibid., p. 151.
90 Petitot, p. 133; Petrus Calo (Fontes), pp. 36f.; Tocco (Fontes), pp. 107f.
91 Petitot, pp. 146f.; Tocco (Fontes), p. 128.
422WAS THOMAS AQUINAS THE AUTHOR?
inner foreboding but will feel obliged to parry the counter-
thrust of the unconscious by rational means—in the case of
Thomas, with scholastic-theological formulations. This attempt
is doomed to failure, in view of the necessary presence of the
counterthrust and its balancing function. At any rate, the oppo-
sition between the two halves of the psyche was not equalized in
the life of St. Thomas, but became if possible even stronger.
Petitot goes so far as to speak of his capacity for “dédouble-
ment." ?? For instance, through mental concentration he could
render himself insensitive to pain, and in his trancelike states
he could still talk to the people around him, and even dictate
to them, “as if in a hypnotic state." An English witness declares
that he took down Thomas’s dictation while the saint slept.9?
After middle life, this tension led to a severe crisis which
was reported by his friend Reginald of Piperno. It is even pos-
sible that his early death was the direct or indirect consequence
of psychic overstrain.?* Since Thomas was probably one of
those people whose highly differentiated thinking and intel-
lectual concentration had suppressed the natural man and the
demands of feeling, his feeling would come more and more into
conflict with his spiritual attitude and build up a powerful
counterposition. His conscious convictions would then be under
continual attack and would eventually be undermined. This
would produce a "sentiment d'insuffisance," of which clear
traces can be found in Thomas. But the counterposition is
always personified by the anima, and this would explain his
horror of women.
Such, we may suppose, are the psychological facts which—
perhaps in conjunction with a physical illness of some kind 95
92 Petitot, p. 130; Tocco (Fontes), pp. 107f., 121.
93 Tocco (Fontes), p. 89.
94'This is a point of dispute between Walz, “De S. Thomae Aquinatis e Vita
discessu," pp. 41—55, and Petitot, "La Mort de Saint Thomas d'Aquin," pp. 312-36.
(Cf. also the discussion in the Bulletin Thomiste, Nov. 1925, p. [17].) Walz and
others see no causal connection between the vision of December 6, 1273, and the
death of the saint, whereas Petitot supposes that the vision ushered in a state of
physical and mental exhaustion which was causally connected with the death. On
a psychological view and also in the light of the lesser visions mentioned below, a
psychological connection seems to me plausible.
95 According to Calo (Fontes, p. 47£), he lost appetite, could not eat, and died of
the resulting weakness. After his death the rumour arose that he had been
poisoned (Petitot, p. 152).
423AURORA CONSURGENS
—caused those fits of absent-mindedness or trancelike states and,
later, the depression of which we shall speak below. Gradually,
premonitions of death appeared. A short while before the de-
pression set in his dead sister Marotta appeared to him in a
vision and told him that she would soon see him again in the
other world.?* When, in 1273, he received an invitation to the
Chapter General at Lyons for the following year, the premoni-
tion of approaching death grew stronger, although he had not
yet reached his fiftieth year. The dead Pater Romano da Roma
appeared to him in a vision and informed him that he had ob-
tained the "true knowledge of divine things" after a journey
through purgatory. ‘Thomas thereupon asked him whether the
knowledge which a man acquires in this life is preserved in the
other world. Romano did not answer directly (“in forma"), but
referred him to the fact of the “Visio Dei." ‘Thomas then asked:
"How can a man see God without a medium or intermediate
species?" ?** And Romano answered him in the words of Psalm
47:9: "As we have heard, so we have seen, in the city of the
Lord of hosts. . . ."95 This vision brought ‘Thomas joy and
consolation. But then, in the middle of his Summa, while work-
ing on the section on penance, that celebrated experience befell
him which put an end to his literary activity and, a month later,
to his life. The report of it is contained in the Acta Bollandiana
and rests on the testimony of Bartholomew of Capua,?? who in
turn had it direct from Reginald of Piperno, ‘Thomas’s best
friend and confidant.’
"Moreover the same witness [Bartholomew of Capua] said
that, when the said Brother Thomas was saying Mass in the said
chapel of St. Nicholas at Naples, he was smitten with a wonder-
ful change, and after that Mass he neither wrote nor dictated
anything more, but suspended his writing in the third part of
the Summa, in the treatise on Penance. And when the same
Br. Reginald saw that Br. Thomas had ceased to write, he said
to him: Father, why have you put aside so great a work, which
you began for the praise of God and the enlightenment of the
96 Walz, p. 108, Tocco (Fontes), p. 118.
97 “Sine media vel mediante similitudine.”
98 Walz, p. 155, Tocco (Fontes), pp. 118f.
99 Mandonnet, Des Écrits authentiques de St. Thomas d'Aquin, p. 32.
100 Acta Bollandiana, pp. 712£.*
424WAS THOMAS AQUINAS THE AUTHOR?
world? And the said Br. Thomas replied: I cannot go on. But
the said Br. Reginald, fearing that he had fallen into madness
as a result of too much study, kept on pressing the said Br.
‘Thomas to go on with his writing, and likewise Br. Thomas re-
plied: I cannot do it, Reginald, everything I have written seems
as worthless as straw.!?! ‘Then Br. Reginald, overcome with sur-
prise, so arranged matters that the said Br. Thomas went to
visit his sister, the Countess of San Severino, of whom he was
very fond; he hastened to her with great difficulty, and when he
arrived, and the Countess came to meet him, he hardly spoke
to her. Then the Countess, in a state of great fear, said to Br.
Reginald: What is all this? Why is Br. ‘Thomas all struck with
a stupor, and hardly speaks to me? And Br. Reginald answered:
He has been like this since about St. Nicholas's day, and since
then he has not written anything.'? And the said Br. Reginald
began to press the said Br. Thomas to tell him for what reason
he refused to write and why he was stupefied like this. And
after a great many pressing questions from Br. Reginald, Br.
Thomas replied to the said Br. Reginald: I adjure you by the
living God Almighty and by your duty to our Order and by
the love you have for me, that so long as I am alive you will
never tell anyone what I am going to tell you. And he went on:
Everything that I have written seems to me worthless in com-
parison with the things I have seen and which have been re-
vealed to me. And as the aforesaid Countess continued to be
very taken aback, Br. T'homas departed and returned to Naples,
and then resumed his journey to the Council according to the
invitation he had received, writing nothing whatever. And on
the road, in the village of Magentia in Campania, he was at-
tacked by the illness from which he afterwards died.” 1°
This was in January 1274, on the journey to Rome, from
where he wanted to go and attend the council of Lyons at the re-
quest of Gregory X. Riding along absent-mindedly on a mule,
101 Cf. “Processus Canonizationis S. Thomae Aquinatis Neapoli," in Pruemmer,
Fontes, p. 377; Tocco (Fontes), p. 120; Walz, p. 157. He also said a little later:
“This is the end of my literary activity, so I hope I shall soon reach the end of
this life." Sertillanges, p. 27, and Petitot, "La Mort de St. Thomas," p. 329f.
102 Cf. Walz, p. 158. Reginald said to the Countess (Tocco [Fontes], p. 120): "He
is often rapt in spirit when in contemplation, but I have never seen him so taken
out of his senses as he is now." * Cf. Bulletin Thomiste, p. [18].
103 Cf. Walz, pp. 155, 160.
425AURORA CONSURGENS
he struck his head on a branch and fell unconscious. In
Maenza,'^* where he stayed for a while with his niece Francisca
of Aquino, he asked to be taken to the Cistercian monastery of
St. Mary at Fossanova.!^5 There he spent his last month. The
report continues: 1%
“And the said witness said moreover, that when the said Br.
Thomas began to be overcome with sickness in the said village
of Magentia, he besought with great devotion that he might be
borne to the monastery of St. Mary at Fossanova: and so it was
done. And when the said Br. Thomas entered the monastery,
weak and ill, he held on to a door-post with his hand and said:
This is my rest for ever and ever. . . .!* And he remained for
several days in that monastery in his ill state with great patience
and humility, and desired to receive the Body of our Saviour.1%
And when that Body was brought to him, he genuflected, and
with words of wondrous and long-drawn-out adoration and glori-
fication he saluted and worshipped it, and before receiving the
Body he said: I receive thee, price of my soul's redemption, I
receive thee, viaticum of my pilgrimage, for love of whom I
have studied and watched and laboured and preached and
taught; never have I said aught against thee unless it were in
ignorance: nor am I obstinate in my opinion, but if I have said
aught ill, I leave it all to the correction of the Roman Church.
And then he died, and was buried near the high altar of the
church of that monastery, in a marshy place close to the garden
of the said monastery, where there is a stream, from which a
water-wheel takes up water, by which all that place is watered,
as the witness himself has often and carefully observed." 1°
As there are no authenticated reports to inform us of the
content of that last, evidently overwhelming vision, we cannot
explain why he broke off his work (he was at most forty-eight
104 Or Faenza (Petitot).
105 Though he had lost all appetite, he still read the Mass amid many tears. At
the urgent request of Br. Reginald he ate some herrings, of which he was very
fond. (Petitot, p. 323.)
106 Acta Bollandiana, p. 719.*
107 Cf. Walz, p. 165; Tocco (Fontes), p. 130.
108 This was on the 4th or 5th of March, 1274 (Walz, p. 164).
109 Cf. "Thou waterest the hills from thy upper rooms, the earth is sated with
the fruit of thy works"! (Psalm 103 : 13.)
426WAS THOMAS AQUINAS THE AUTHOR?
or forty-nine at the time of his death).!? But his reaction in
regard to the Summa, that it seemed to him "worthless as
straw," suggests that this last vision (an immediate experience
of the unconscious) struck a layer of his being in comparison
with which his scholastic thinking seemed totally inadequate.
Also, his words on receiving the viaticum are rather strange, for
he tells Christ that he has never said anything against him—
which suggests that the psychological possibility did exist of his
saying something unorthodox.
The very fact that the biographers state that he interpreted
the Canticles to the monks of the monastery on his deathbed 14?
may give us a clue to the inner events of those last days: it is
possible that the Canticles came closest to the vision, or lent it
adequate expression. The Canticles have always fascinated the
mystics of the Church (Honorius of Autun, Gregory the Great,
Teresa, John of the Cross, the Victorines, to name but a few),!!?
and it is no accident, either, that medieval alchemy, beginning
with Aurora, made particular use of their symbolism. Through
it, the archetype of the hierosgamos found the easiest means of
access to the formalized conceptual world of Christianity and
also enabled the alchemists to amalgamate Christian ideas with
their conceptions of the alchemical coniunctio. Nor can one
help being struck by the fact that the witnesses are remarkably
silent about the content of this interpretation of the Canticles.U*
Petitot observes: "He agreed to make a last mental effort, and
to expound to the religious the most mystical of Old Testa-
ment writings. Is there not good reason to think that the last
moments of a Saint who dies fully conscious are always sug-
gestive? On his deathbed St. Thomas, even though he had left
his $umma unfinished, undertook to commentate the Canticles.
. . . It has not been sufficiently appreciated that St. ‘Thomas
110 Sertillanges, p. 27. Later, in the presence of Reginald of Piperno, the head
and a thumb were severed from the corpse, boiled in wine more Teutonico
(“after the German fashion"), and handed over to the Countess of San Severino
(Bulletin Thomiste, p. [20]).
111 Sertillanges (p. 27) speaks of "profound discouragement."
112 Grabmann, “Die echten Schriften,” pp. 189ff.
113 Honorius, Migne, P.L., vol. 172, cols. 347-518; Richard of St. Victor, P.L., vol.
196, cols. 405-524; Gregory the Great, P.L., vol. 79, cols. 471-548.
114 Petitot ("La Mort de St. Thomas," p. 325) is understandably astonished at this
silence of the witnesses.
427AURORA CONSURGENS
Aquinas died from having contemplated God in an ecstatic
vision." 45 I agree with Petitot that this last interpretation is
connected in some way with the vision of December 6, 1273 and
also with the death of the saint.
Itis the more probable that T'homas's preoccupation with the
Canticles on his deathbed was connected with this vision in that
the latter was a prodromal symptom of death, while on the
other hand the coniunctio symbolism mirrored suprapersonal,
archetypal processes transcending space and time, such as are
experienced more particularly in the presence of death. In the
Cabala, for instance, death is described as a mystic marriage.
At the burial of Rabbi Simeon ben Yochai his disciples heard
a voice saying: "Up and come to the marriage of Rabbi Simeon!
Let there be peace, let them rest upon their couches." 146
Christ's death on the cross was interpreted as a "marriage" by
St. Augustine: "Like a bridegroom Christ went forth from his
chamber, he went out with a presage of his nuptials into the
field of the world. He ran like a giant exulting on his way and
came to the marriage-bed of the cross, and there in mounting
it he consummated his marriage. And when he perceived the
sighs of the creature, he lovingly gave himself up to the torment
in place of his bride, and he joined himself to the woman for
ever." 17 Honorius of Autun says the crucifixion was a deadly
wound of love which Christ received for the Church in order
to make her his bride at death.!! Interpretations like these
were undoubtedly known to Thomas, yet underlying them is a
primordial experience which may be repeated at any time, and
this, in my view, is what caused him to return to the Canticles
on his deathbed. The motif of the death-marriage is found in
many variations in folklore: the unconscious psyche often rep-
resents death as a union of opposites, as the achievement of an
inner wholeness.!!? It therefore seems to me possible that the
long-repressed anima appeared to Thomas, in that vision shortly
before his death, in the guise of Wisdom and the bride. A report
115 Petitot, Saint Thomas d'Aquin, p. 154.
116 Der Sohar (ed. Mueller), p. 390; cf. p. 113.
117 Sermo suppositus, 120, 8 (In Natali Domini, IV). I am indebted to Professor
jung for this reference.
118 Expos. in Cant. (Migne, P.L., vol. 172, col. 419).
119In the ancient Persian religion, his soul appears to the pious man at the
moment of death in the form of a beautiful girl.
428WAS THOMAS AQUINAS THE AUTHOR?
of Sixtus of Siena '?? says that Thomas died in a state of ecstasy
at the words: "Venite, dilecti filii, egredimini in hortum
. . ." ?! He passed away as dawn was breaking.!??
Albertus, who outlived his pupil, is supposed to have felt
the moment of his death telepathically.?? When the death was
later confirmed, he wept with great emotion, and whenever
afterwards ''homas's name was mentioned he burst into tears
so violently that people thought he had succumbed to senile
decay ("senilis hebetudo").1?*
These biographical data lead me to believe that in the
treatise "Beati Thomae de Aquino Aurora sive Aurea hora"
we have before us a document that really does stem from St.
Thomas and reveals to us the "other side" of the great Doctor
Angelicus, since it was composed during an invasion from the
unconscious.?5 In that case it would naturally not agree styl-
istically with his other works.?9 Nevertheless, one point of
120 Bibliotheca sancta (1575), p. 331. Cf. Grabmann, “Die echten Schriften," p. 189.
Cf. also Walz, St. Thomas Aquinas: A Biographical Study.
121 According to Touron (La Vie de St. T'homas, p. 686), what he said was taken
down by the monks. Grabmann states that the commentaries on the Canticles
hitherto circulated under the name of St. Thomas are not genuine ("Die echten
Schriften," pp. 178ff). Unfortunately I was unable to examine the only unpub-
lished MS mentioned by him (p. 191) in the library at Salins (France), with the
Incipit: "Donum sapiens poscens. . . . Explicit postilla super Cantica ed. a S.
Thoma de Aquina quadruplici sensu exposita Scripta per manum fratris J.
Berlueti Turoniae 1393." Cf. Vrede, Die beiden dem Hl. Thomas zugeschriebenen
Commentare zum Hohenlied. Cf. also Schumpp, “Hat der hl. Thomas einen Kom-
mentar zu dem Hohenlied geschrieben?," pp. 47ff. Schumpp asserts that Thomas
never wrote such a commentary.
122 Tocco, Acta SS. Martii 7, p. 679: “. . . that at the hour when morning dawns the
saint should attain the climax of his vision and enter upon the day of the full
light of glory." *
123 Pelster, Kritische Studien, pp. 18, 39.
124 Walz, “De Alberti et Thomae Personali Relatione,” pp. 299ff. Cf. Ptolemy of
Lucca, Historia ecclesiastica, XXII, 19 (Muratori, Rerum Italicarum Scriptores,
XI, col. 1151), and Thorndike, II, p. 523. Albertus died at about the age of 8o.
125 Grabmann has shown in his thorough investigation of the writings of the saint
(Thomas Aquinas: His Personality and Thought, pp. 18ff.; “Die echten Schriften"
[1920], p. 13) that the lists of writings considered definitive by Mandonnet are
not complete, and, moreover, that they do not cite all his scientific writings, such
as the undoubtedly genuine “De natura materiae" and “De dimensionibus in-
terminatis."
126 Grabmann emphasizes that no definitive stylistic criteria exist for distinguish-
ing between genuine and spurious writings and that contradictions sometimes
429AURORA CONSURGENS
textual criticism needs stressing: with regard to the fourth para-
ble, Of the Philosophic Faith," I came to the conclusion (for
psychological reasons implicit in the text) that in this one chap-
ter the author was struggling to regain his conscious standpoint,
and that he partially succeeded with the help of the concept of
the Holy Spirit. His exposition of the "workings" of the Holy
Spirit is, both in style and content, in complete agreement with
St. Thomas’s discussion of the Holy Spirit in the Expositio in
symbolum Apostolorum;?" where he even uses the recurrent
formula in Aurora from Apocalypse 2:7: "He that hath ears -
to hear, let him hear what the spirit . . ." When the author
expresses himself more or less consciously, he does in fact write
in the style of St. Thomas. But when, swallowed up in the un-
conscious, he speaks of his inner experiences, he employs a com-
pensatory, excited language which is not in agreement with St.
Thomas’s usual style. Since we know that St. Thomas died talk-
ing in an ecstasy, Aurora might very well be a transcript of his
last words (perhaps elaborated later by another hand). Or was
it written in a similar ecstasy at an earlier phase of his life? If,
as I believe, Aurora is his last "seminar," he himself could
hardly have written it down—he was far too weak for that. As
far back as 1737 Antoine Touron ?? thought that this last
interpretation of the Canticles on the deathbed could only
have been preserved in a text taken down by another hand.'??
My personal conjecture is that Aurora is indeed this last
seminar, and that the last precious words of St. Thomas were
occur in the work of the saint ("Die echten Schriften” [1920], pp. 6f., 18). The
fact that we have no canon for his writings is also emphasized by Pelster (“Zur
Forschung nach den echten Schriften des hl. Thomas,” pp. 36ff.). Thus we have
to rely in the end on documentary and psychological criteria in attributing or
disallowing a work to St. Thomas. Transcripts and notes of his lectures also exist.
For instance, the first book of the De anima commentary is a lecture taken down
by Reginald of Piperno (Sertillanges, p. 26).
127 Sanctorum Patrum Opuscula Selecta (ed. Hurter), VI, pp. 227ff. Concerning the
genuineness of this treatise see Grabmann, Die Werke des hl. Thomas, p. 288.
According to Bartholomew of Capua, it is part of the "Reportata," and would
therefore reproduce the spoken style of St. Thomas's lectures. The stylistic agree-
ment is all the more illuminating since I maintain that Aurora might also be an
“opus reportatum."
128 La Vie de St. Thomas d'Aquin, p. 686.
129 Sertillanges (p. 27) also refers to the fact that St. Thomas dictated on his
deathbed.
430WAS THOMAS AQUINAS THE AUTHOR?
not preserved officially,!?? as one would certainly have expected,
but were transmitted as an "apocryphon" for the very good
reason that they reveal the other, unconscious personality of
the saint! which had overpowered him on several occasions
before in his trancelike states and now manifested itself again
in the mystic marriage at the moment of death. I would not
venture to advance this as a conclusive result, but the facts
nevertheless seem to me significant enough to warrant my sub-
mitting them to the judgment of my reader.
130 It may make the reader sceptical that the MSS of Aurora that have so far been
found are few and all relatively late. But it must be borne in mind that this is a
document which was probably composed under very unusual conditions and that
its content was opposed to the spirit of the age and of the secular and ecclesias-
tical authorities. It is therefore to be regretted that persons with scientific interests
are not permitted to examine the written material at the Vatican.
131 There are on the one hand reliable reports that St. Thomas wrote a com-
mentary on the Canticles (Grabmann, “Die echten Schriften" [1920], p. 190),
while on the other hand it seems proved that the two commentaries that have
been preserved, with the Incipits "Salomon inspiratus" and "Sonet vox tua," are
not by St. Thomas. Grabmann says (p. 191): "The genuine commentary of St.
Thomas is therefore not known to us, and there is little prospect of our being
able to establish it." The Bull for the canonization of the saint does not mention
this episode of the dictation, although all the other details of the death scene are
recorded. (Cf. "Die Kanonisationsbulle des hl. Thomas von Aquin," pp. 210ff)
This affords a cogent argument from silence. Petitot, too (“La Mort de St. Thomas,”
P- 325), rightly emphasizes the peculiarity of the fact that on the one hand the
commentary on the Canticles is an established tradition, but that on the other
hand the precious last words of the saint have not been preserved. He explains
this by saying (following Tocco) that St. Thomas on his deathbed spoke only
"breviter" and to only a few persons. If, as I conjecture, these last words were
uttered in a delirious state and were interspersed with alchemical sayings, as in
Aurora, this conspiracy of silence is hardly surprising.
431AURORA CONSURGENS
textual criticism needs stressing: with regard to the fourth para-
ble, *Of the Philosophic Faith," I came to the conclusion (for
psychological reasons implicit in the text) that in this one chap-
ter the author was struggling to regain his conscious standpoint,
and that he partially succeeded with the help of the concept of
the Holy Spirit. His exposition of the "workings" of the Holy
Spirit is, both in style and content, in complete agreement with
St. Thomas’s discussion of the Holy Spirit in the Expositio in
symbolum Apostolorum;?"* where he even uses the recurrent
formula in Aurora from Apocalypse 2:7: "He that hath ears
to hear, let him hear what the spirit . . ." When the author
expresses himself more or less consciously, he does in fact write
in the style of St. Thomas. But when, swallowed up in the un-
conscious, he speaks of his inner experiences, he employs a com-
pensatory, excited language which is not in agreement with St.
Thomas’s usual style. Since we know that St. Thomas died talk-
ing in an ecstasy, Aurora might very well be a transcript of his
last words (perhaps elaborated later by another hand). Or was
it written in a similar ecstasy at an earlier phase of his life? If,
as I believe, Aurora is his last "seminar," he himself could
hardly have written it down—he was far too weak for that. As
far back as 1737 Antoine Touron ?* thought that this last
interpretation of the Canticles on the deathbed could only
have been preserved in a text taken down by another hand.’
My personal conjecture is that Aurora is indeed this last
seminar, and that the last precious words of St. Thomas were
occur in the work of the saint ("Die echten Schriften" [1920], pp. 6f., 18). The
fact that we have no canon for his writings is also emphasized by Pelster ("Zur
Forschung nach den echten Schriften des hl. Thomas,” pp. 36ff.). Thus we have
to rely in the end on documentary and psychological criteria in attributing or
disallowing a work to St. Thomas. Transcripts and notes of his lectures also exist.
For instance, the first book of the De anima commentary is a lecture taken down
by Reginald of Piperno (Sertillanges, p. 26).
121 Sanctorum Patrum Opuscula Selecta (ed. Hurter), VI, pp. 227ff. Concerning the
genuineness of this treatise see Grabmann, Die Werke des hl. Thomas, p. 288.
According to Bartholomew of Capua, it is part of the "Reportata," and would
therefore reproduce the spoken style of St. 'Thomas's lectures. The stylistic agree-
ment is all the more illuminating since I maintain that Aurora might also be an
"opus reportatum."
128 La Vie de St. Thomas d'Aquin, p. 686.
129 Sertillanges (p. 27) also refers to the fact that St. Thomas dictated on his
deathbed.
430WAS THOMAS AQUINAS THE AUTHOR?
not preserved officially;!?? as one would certainly have expected,
but were transmitted as an "apocryphon" for the very good
reason that they reveal the other, unconscious personality of
the saint,’ which had overpowered him on several occasions
before in his trancelike states and now manifested itself again
in the mystic marriage at the moment of death. I would not
venture to advance this as a conclusive result, but the facts
nevertheless seem to me significant enough to warrant my sub-
mitting them to the judgment of my reader.
130 It may make the reader sceptical that the MSS of Aurora that have so far been
found are few and all relatively late. But it must be borne in mind that this is a
document which was probably composed under very unusual conditions and that
its content was opposed to the spirit of the age and of the secular and ecclesias-
tical authorities. It is therefore to be regretted that persons with scientific interests
are not permitted to examine the written material at the Vatican.
131 There are on the one hand reliable reports that St. Thomas wrote a com-
mentary on the Canticles (Grabmann, “Die echten Schriften" [1920], p. 190),
while on the other hand it seems proved that the two commentaries that have
been preserved, with the Incipits "Salomon inspiratus" and "Sonet vox tua," are
not by St. Thomas. Grabmann says (p. 191): "The genuine commentary of St.
Thomas is therefore not known to us, and there is little prospect of our being
able to establish it." The Bull for the canonization of the saint does not mention
this episode of the dictation, although all the other details of the death scene are
recorded. (Cf. “Die Kanonisationsbulle des hl. Thomas von Aquin," pp. 210ff.)
This affords a cogent argument from silence. Petitot, too ("La Mort de St. Thomas,”
P- 325), rightly emphasizes the peculiarity of the fact that on the one hand the
commentary on the Canticles is an established tradition, but that on the other
hand the precious last words of the saint have not been preserved. He explains
this by saying (following Tocco) that St. Thomas on his deathbed spoke only
"breviter" and to only a few persons. If, as I conjecture, these last words were
uttered in a delirious state and were interspersed with alchemical sayings, as in
Aurora, this conspiracy of silence is hardly surprising.
431— SS — MÀ
haeo rwr V- ibte" ds r w* bed , etuw ae
qtrioog £7 Haee berifareome Cove. find
rho: iets ^ tstave oig
31 qot eys "remm n£1a na» 7 fe.
" 2 34 * ] 7 ME"
1 : :
Se SERCUFu 71.901
[ amu eiiia:às -
4 4M «i TEMPE th pv
d , H spr" e rre "e. f r Asi4es ! — i
ty 1 etyk Mun f* gm (1 erento
‘
» e 3 n=i s Whe , dict VIDyW i bw
" "ll > vl. é 4329 N09
, : L Pi aed ‘ war a Oe hs) á
~ dese ' ip Wr hs ye ful IY NI (yr) ét
da na "dod ay Bd e To
nui Gat 94 nibswomr 3 04
Fo TEMPOS isc « í Ft 39005
- 2 ! t d rrhcar! 29 +l (s a’ mo ALS gar
E "Y.
te AE , ‘ n " DG TET MTM IT ' 4 ates huie ?
' T p Les aot" bug aol) a fede Pap o oh 1
~ + @ be inte #7. trn "e.
d , ‘ " d ,Bi non on nie tz ul í supo 17
Ma 1 " P9 9 954 hodp APT S01 LIEUT M ifei diE A. T
— *
TS: | Fy Él. dicen Ie Ast) 3 p aide ns
, "UA T Á pA 7d; wh aunt s eh-st" eb. ait*n i>i ns T! oti 22) hw ae
epi) 7i ; a r4 "m yal ern Norm - ii o snb» s
end " p fo 1 er 2,4: hi I ucc we Td] amt da sta Marais, dm
eal E 11 dat! sam Loa ‘dete mp t eabt M dy diu m. "oam 1
lays 4H " a i y+ oru Tita Tes id ow aM ij n il? "ü
. A eit M is xs m id J Sr ] ati atio arena i
1b sh wet) wele pre i ee Mh angor tw n tine otb ine eee ’ !
nani (a Wailers Ir dijwoha "ied ips’ Beg m inde eostv ^ui de^ di ]
hy » , 2$ T" qum rie a;f ias y T udv ite monse ke
iw tte rfi ; b^" Sh Ter) = Che o»e yiat
T T El ic? !'e n, lh
: a VoLE
' i > bo ELEM [4 ^ Wade ad i
(9 he * rn A ds gne ies e 2 : D "^

AsPBPENUISINXESAsPBPENUISINXES

I. LATIN AND GREEK TEXTS
The asterisks (*) in the footnotes refer to the following passages
quoted by the author in Latin or Greek. In general, only translations
are given in the body of the book. Unless otherwise stated, the trans-
lations are by A. S. B. Glover. The entries below carry the pertinent
footnote numbers. Errors in the Swiss edition have been corrected.
I, 2. The Transmission of the Text
Derisio scientiae est causa ignorantiae.
I, 3. The Sources
19. Illud igitur quod est causa determinationis magnitudinis et
augmenti est principalis causa augmenti. Hoc autem non est
ignis. Manifestum est enim quod ignis augmentum non est
usque ad determinatam quantitatem sed in infinitum ex-
tenditur si in infinitum materia combustibilis inveniatur.
Manifestum est igitur quod ignis non est principale agens in
augmento et alimento sed magis anima. Et hoc rationabiliter
accidit quia determinatio quantitatis in rebus naturalibus est
ex forma quae est principium speciei, magis quam ex materia.
Anima autem cooperatur ad elementa quae sunt in corpore
vivente sicut forma ad materiam. Magis igitur terminus et
ratio magnitudinis et augmenti est ab anima quam ab igne.
23. . . . prout dicit Hermes: sufficiet homini per mille millia an-
norum et si quotidie duo millia hominum pasceres non egeres;
tingit enim in infinitum.
37- . ergo ipsa vis animae habet alias vires . . . quae omnes
operantur ad hoc ut perveniat aptitudo instrumentorum ad
perfectiones secundas ipsius animae . . .
40. Et maxime sapientem timere aliquod non decet. Nam si timu-
erit cito desperabit. Quod si desperaverit eius animus vacillabit.
. . . Ad haec subrisit rex [Calid] et ait: Nunc vere scio quod
nisi homini praestat Deus patientiam crudeliter confunditur.
Festinatio enim ex parte Diaboli est.
435APP. I. LATIN AND GREEK TEXTS
42. Qui patientiam non habet manus ab opere suspendat, quia
impediet eum festinantem credulitas . . . Ad hanc tria neces-
saria sunt, patientia, mora, et instrumentorum aptatio.
53: Quicumque animam dealbaverit, et eam rursum ascendere fec-
erit, et corpus bene custodierit, et ab eo omnem obscuritatem
abstulerit, etc., ipsam in corpus infundere poterit. Et in hora
coniunctionis maxima miracula apparebunt. / Quicumque ani-
mam dealbaverit et eam rursum ascendere fecerit et corpus a
combustione bene custodierit . . . animam poterit a corpore
extrahere et ipsum corpus obscurum relinquitur et in hora con-
iunctionis maximum apparebit miraculum.
57- Unde Alphidius in Clav. Phil: Hanc scientiam habere non
potes quousque mentem tuam Deo purifices et Deus sciat te
mentem habere contritam. . . . Si humilis fueris eius Sophia
et Sapientia perficietur. / Et Alphidius in Clav. Phil. cum dicit
lapis noster ex vilis re est in oculis hominum pretio carente fasti-
dita quam homines pedibus conculcant in viis.
70. . . . qui vere dicitur carbunculus: et ideo ille qui vere speciem
suam attingit, lucet in tenebris sicut noctiluca.
72. De tertio scribitur, quod lapides in gemmas pretiosas trans-
mutat, ut superius allegatum est in libro sextario, ubi dicitur,
quod lapides Jacincti, Coralli rubei et albi, Smaragdi, Chryso-
liti, Saphyri, ex ipsa materia formari possunt. Et in charta sacer-
dotum traditur, quod ex christallo, carbunculus, sive rubinus,
aut topazius per eam fieri potest, qui in colore et substantia ex-
cellunt naturales.
Secundum illud quoque de quo semel in vita Crassum ait risisse
Lucilius "similem habent labra lactucam asino carduos come-
dente."
7T: .. .igitur proposui levissima, quae nemini licet ignorare,
sciens quod asino, cardones edenti, dignam habent labra lactu-
cam.
82. . . in quo etiam dicit [Gellius] stultum est asino praebere
lactucas cum ei sufficiant cardui.
83. Atque ipsemet Aristoteles enim dicit in libro secretorum quod
esset fractor sigilli coelestis qui communicaret secreta naturae
et artis. . . . Caeterum in hoc casu dicit A. Gellius in libro
Noctium Atticarum de collatione Sapientium quod stultum est
asino praebere lactucas cum ei sufficiant cardui.
87. Frater Hermannus de Mynda Saxo genere . . . in libro histori-
arum, qui De mirabilibus mundi inscribitur, libro quarto de
vita domini Alberti sub brevi, verborum compendio multa com-
prehendit, quae suis in locis nostro opusculo inserta sunt.
436FOR PAGES 13-156
I, 4. The Problem of Dating
9. Et ideo scientiam quam sine fictione didici, sine invidia com-
munico, qua invidia labescente deficit, quoniam talis homo non
erit particeps amicitiae Dei. Omnis sapientia et scientia a
Domino Deo est, sed hoc quocumque modo dicitur semper a
Spiritu Sancto est. . . . Itaque qui habet aures audiendi tan-
tam gratiam deificam, audiat secretum, quod mihi desponsatum
gratia Dei et indignis nullatenus revelat . .
14. Magister Degenhardus Augustini Ordinis monachus, verus lapi-
dis possessor, in suo libro de Via Universaliait . . . Est Spiritus
Sancti donum. In ipso latet mysterium perveniendi ad thesau-
rum sapientum. Et hoc est plumbum Philosophorum, quod
plumbum aeris appellant, in quo splendida columba alba
inest, quae sal metallorum vocatur, in quo magisterium operis
consistit. Haec est casta sapiens et dives illa regina ex Saba velo
albo induta, quae nulli nisi Regi Salomoni se subicere volebat.
Nullius hominis cor haec omnia satis scrutari potest.
III, 1. Here Beginneth the Treatise...
Sapientia foris praedicat—Christus Jesus qui est Dei virtus et
Dei sapientia . . . in foribus portarum urbis sanctae Ecclesiae,
etc.
primordiales causae se ipsas sapiunt, quoniam in sapientia
creatae sunt aeternaliterque in ea subsistunt. / Simul enim Pater
et sapientiam suam genuit et in ipsa omnia fecit.
Unde et a Sapientia Dei omnis et vitam et esse habent . . . quia
juxta sapientiam Dei, quae vita omnium est, factum est omne
quod factum est. Hoc enim exemplar Dei fuit, ad cuius exem-
plaris similitudinem totus mundus factus est, et est hic ille
archetypus mundus, ad cuius similitudinem mundus iste sensi-
bilis factus est.
. ad similitudinem Dei et Patris, qui de se ipso Filium suum,
qui est sapientia sua, gignit, qui se ipsum sapit.
In verbo autem Dei ab aeterno exstiterunt non solum rationes
rerum corporalium, sed etiam rationes omnium spiritualium
creaturarum. / Sapientia quae a philosopho ponitur virtus intel-
lectualis, considerat divina secundum quod sunt investigabilia
ratione humana. / Et primo quidem, quantum ad intellectum,
437APP. I. LATIN AND GREEK TEXTS
adduntur homini principia supernaturalia, quae divino lumine
capiuntur: et haec sunt credibilia, de quibus est fides.
Omnis sapientia a Domino Deo est: et cum illo fuit semper et est
10.
ante aevum (Ecclus. 1 : 1). Quicumque ergo diligit Sapientiam
apud ipsum quaerat et ab ipso petat, quia ipse dat omnibus
affluenter et non improperat (Jac. 1 : 6). Ipse enim est altitudo
et profunditas omnis scientiae et thesaurus totius sapientiae:
quoniam ex ipso et in ipso et per ipsum sunt omnia (Rom.
11 :36). Et sine eius voluntate nihil potest fieri. Ipsi honor et
gloria in saecula saeculorum. Amen. Unde in principio mei
sermonis invoco eius auxilium, qui est fons et origo omnium
bonorum, ut ipse per suam bonitatem et pietatem dignetur
parvitatem scientiae meae supplere per gratiam sui Spiritus
sancti, ut per meam doctrinam lumen quod in tenebris latet
manifestare valeam et errantes ad semitam veritatis perducere.
. . . Cum in multas regiones et plurimas provincias nec non
civitates et castella causa scientiae, quae vocatur Alchimia,
maximo labore perlustraverim et a litteratis viris et sapienti-
bus de ipsa arte ab ipsis diligenter inquisierim, ut ipsam plenius
investigarem; et cum scripta omnia perscriberem, et in operi-
bus ipsorum saepissime persudarem, non inveni tamen verum
in his, quae libri eorum affirmabant. . . . Ego vero non des-
peravi . . . quousque, quod quaerebam, inveni, non ex mea
scientia, sed ex Spiritus sancti gratia. Unde cum saperem et
intelligerem quod naturam superaret, diligentius vigilare coepi
in decoctionibus . . .
Per Austrum vero calidum scil. ventum Spiritus sanctus figura-
20.
tur, qui dum mentes electorum tangit ab omni torpore relaxat
et ferventes facit, ut bona, quaeque desiderant, operentur.
Filia namque regis austri (qui in coelis regnat et in calidis amore
22.
spiritibus). / [non] desinit nos igne charitatis accendere ad
amandum et... [ut] ia calore Spiritus sancti operari va-
leamus.
29. Interiora ergo austri sunt occulti illi angelorum ordines et sec-
retissimi patriae coelestis sinus, quos implet calor Spiritüs sancti.
Ibi per diem quasi in meridiano tempore ardentius solis ignis
accenditur, quia conditoris claritas mortalitatis nostrae iam
pressa caligine manifestius videtur et velui sphaerae radius ad
spatia altiora se elevat: quia de semetipsa veritas subtilius illus-
trat. Ibi lumen intimae contemplationis sine interveniente
cernitur umbra mutabilitatis. / Meridies est Chesed, unde
Maiores nostri: Quicumque vult sapiens fieri convertat se ad
meridiem.
438FOR PAGES 156—164
26. Verbum enim Dei et sermo scientiae non in publico et palam
positus neque conculcandus pedibus apparet, sed cum quaesitus
fuerit invenitur .
28. . . et hoc fit, per adiectionem lapidis occulti, qui sensu non
comprehenditur, sed intellectu solum per inspirationem, vel
revelationem divinam, aut per doctrinam scientis . . . et dixit
Alexander: duo sunt in hac arte ordines, scilicet aspectus oculo,
intellectusque corde. Et hic lapis occultus est, qui proprie dici-
tur donum Dei, . . . et hicest lapis divinus occultus, sine cuius
commixtione lapis parenti annihilatur alchemia, cum ipse sit
ipsa alchemia. . . . Et hic lapis divinus est cor et tinctura auri,
quaesita a philosophis.
29.
res . . . quae ubique invenitur, quae lapis est et non lapis, vilis
et pretiosa, obscura celata et a quolibet nota. / Quam mira
est philosophorum diversitas . . . et eorum conventus in hac
paula re vilissima, qua regitur pretiosum. Et si vulgus . .
istud paulum et vilissimum scirent, mendacium putarent; cuius
vim si scirent, non vilipenderent. / Et dixerunt alii quod ipsum
arsenicum est lapis gentium, vilis pretii, et repudiatus et deiec-
tus per fora et per stercora et balnea.
30. Si recumbis capite super petram, dividunt et rapiunt eam; si
dormis in sterquilinio, illud fit Ecclesia ad fundendas preces.
Figuris vestitur, typos portat . . . thesaurus eius absconditus et
31.
vilis est, ubi autem aperitur mirum visu . . .
34: Creaturae possunt considerari ut res vel ut signa. / Crediderunt
[Christum] non Deum esse, et qui fuit aurum mundissimum
crediderunt esse cuprum.
35- Clara est et quae nunquam marcescit sapientia, sicut scriptum
est (Sap. 6 : 13-17) et facile videtur ab his qui diligunt eam et
invenitur ab his qui quaerunt illam. Praeoccupat qui se con-
cupiscunt, ut illis se prior ostendat. Qui de luce vigilaverit ad
illam non laborabit, assidentem enim illam foribus suis in-
veniet. Cogitare ergo de illa sensus est consummatus, et qui
vigilaverit propter illam cito securus erit. Quoniam dignos se
ipsa circuit quaerens, et in viis se ostendit illis hilariter, et in
omni providentia occurrit illis. Item scriptum est (Ecclus. 24 : 29
et seq.): Qui edunt me adhuc esurient et qui bibunt me adhuc
sitient. Qui audit me non confundetur, et qui operantur in me
non peccabunt. Qui elucidant me vitam aeternam habebunt.
Vvyi] S'avSpdémroww dm’ aiSépos éppiLwra. | Maria et arbor unum
sunt. Agnus in ramis pendebat . . .
Anima autem cooperatur ad elementa, quae sunt in corpore
45°
vivente, sicut forma ad materiam. / Nihil autem potest per se
439APP. I. LATIN AND GREEK TEXTS
operari nisi quod per se subsistit. Non enim est operari nisi entis
inactu . . . Relinquitur enim animam humanam, quae dicitur
intellectus vel mens, esse aliquid incorporeum et subsistens.
/ Sic ergo ex ipsa operatione intellectus apparet quod intellecti-
vum principium unitur corpori et forma.
44- Et ideo ad hoc unitur [anima] corpori ut sit et operetur secun-
dum naturam suam. / Dicemus igitur nunc: quod anima potest
dici vis vel potentia comparatione affectionum quae emanant
ab ea... potest etiam dici perfectio hac comparatione scl.
quod perficitur genus per illam et habet esse species per illam,
etc. / ergo ipsa est vis animae habentis alias vires, quarum una
haec est, quae omnes operantur ad hoc ut perveniat aptitudo in-
strumentorum ad perfectiones secundas ipsius animae. / Motus
igitur ratione qua motus est, et magnitudo sive dimensio, utpote
prior forma in materia, ut optime ait Commentator De sub-
stantia orbis [Averroes], infinita sunt, et ob hoc omni mobili
potest esse mobilius. Deus igitur cum sit infinitus, non receptus
in aliquo, omni motu et operacione potest operari seu movere
velocius. Volens igitur Sapiens ostendere occulte et subtiliter
Dei infinitatem et ipsius Sapientiae, ait optime: “Omnibus
mobilibus mobilior est Sapientia." . . . Rursus etiam imagina-
tio quae circa magnitudinem versatur potest imaginari quolibet
magno maius, etiam coelo. Unde per hoc Augustinus, libro De
quantitate animae, probat animam esse maiorem toto mundo.
Esse autem divinum, super quod ratio divinae potentiae funda-
tur, est esse infinitum non limitatum ad aliquod genus entis, sed
praehabens in se totius esse perfectionem.
47 ... quia ignis solus inter omnia corpora et alitur virtute
propria et augmentatur . . . per appositionem cremabilium.
57- Quintus modus [cognoscendi] est cognoscere rem per eleva-
tionem et abstractionem ipsius animae. Et de hoc modo eleva-
tionis nusquam loquitur Philosophus, sed Avicenna de hoc
modo loquitur in suo libro de anima, ubi dicit, quod intellectus
duae sunt facies. Una est, quam habet intellectus ad virtutes
inferiores, secundum quod intellectus agens recipit a possibili.
Alia est, quam habet intellectus per abstractionem et eleva-
tionem ab omnibus condicionibus materialibus, et hanc habet
per relationem ad Intelligentiam influentem. Et quando anima
sic est elevata, intelligentia ei multa detegit. Unde dicit Avi-
cenna, quod recolit praeterita et praedicit futura et potest preci-
pere pluviis et tonitruo, ut cadant, et potest nocere per malum
oculum suum. Unde dicit Avicenna quod oculus fascinatus facit
cadere caniculam in foveam, et sic elevantur illi, qui sunt in
440FOR PAGES 164-170
ecstasi, ut religiosi contemplativi et maniatici et phrenetici, et
hoc modo anima cognoscit Primum et se ipsam per essentiam
per reflexionem sui ipsius supra se.
62. Nam omnes moderni dicunt quod intellectus agens in animas
nostras, et illuminans eas, est pars animae, ita quod in anima
sunt duae partes, agens scilicet et possibilis; et intellectus possi-
bilis vocatur qui est in potentia ad scientiam, et non habet eam
de se, sed quando recipit species rerum, et agens influit et
illuminat ipsum, tunc nascitur scientia in eo; . . . Et omnes
sapientes antiqui, et qui adhuc remanserunt usque ad tempora
nostra, dixerunt quod fuit Deus.
66. Tertio idem apparet ex hoc quod in vita contemplativa homo
communicat cum superioribus scilicet cum Deo et angelis,
quibus per beatitudinem assimilatur. . . . Assimilatio intel-
lectus speculativi ad Deum est secundum unionem vel informa-
tionem.
68. Anima humana cognoscit in rationibus aeternis, per quarum
participationem omnia cognoscimus. Ipsum enim lumen intel-
lectuale, quod est in nobis, nihil est aliud quam quaedam par-
ticipata similitudo luminis increati, in quo continentur rationes
aeternae.
69. Prophetica revelatio se extendit . . . et ad quantum ad ea,
quae proponuntur omnibus credenda, quae pertinent ad fidem
et quantum ad altiora mysteria, quae sunt perfectorum, quae
pertinent ad Sapientiam.
70. Cum ergo aliquis cognoscit se moveri Spiritu Sancto—hoc
proprie ad prophetiam pertinet, cum autem movetur sed non
cognoscit, non est perfecta prophetia sed quidam instinctus
propheticus. / . . . per quendam instinctum occultissimum
quem nescientes humanae mentes patiuntur.
71. Duplex est cognitio veritatis, una quidem quae habetur per
gratiam, alia vero quae habetur per naturam. Et ista quae
habetur per gratiam est duplex: una quae est speculativa tan-
tum, sicut cum alicui aliqua secreta divinorum revelantur, alia
vero, quae est affectiva, producens amorem Dei, et haec proprie
pertinet ad donum Sapientiae.
42. Virtus intellectiva non habet finem in operatione, non habet
finem in tempore. / Quod si dixerit quis, quia intellectus
omnino non est forma nec habens formam, et ideo impossibile
est ipsum agere: respondemus, quia intellectus in se ipso, in esse
suo et in specie sua, forma est. Quemadmodum humor crystal-
linus aut spiritus visibilis in esse suo formatum est, et tamen
ad lucem et colores quodammodo materiale: sic et intellectus
441APP. I. LATIN AND GREEK TEXTS
ad omnia intelligibilia, quae sunt extra se. Neque agit, in
quantum est materiale, hoc modo, scilicet ex essentia sua, sed
per formam...
83. . . actus primus ordinatus ad actum secundum.
Praeterea ex causis naturalibus non potest accipi significatio
super ea, quae naturaliter non fiunt, sed astrologi accipiunt
significationes super prophetiam ex motibus corporum coeles-
tium, ergo prophetia est naturalis. Praeterea philosophi in
scientia naturali non determinaverunt nisi de his quae natural-
iter possunt accidere. Determinavit autem Avicenna in libro
sexto de Naturalibus de prophetia etc. Praeterea ad prophetiam
non requiruntur nisi tria, scilicet claritas intelligentiae et per-
fectio virtutis imaginativae et potestas animae, ut ei materia
exterior oboediat, ut Avicenna ponit in sexto de Naturalibus,
sed haec tria possunt accidere naturaliter. / Primum Ens est
actus purus, omnia vero alia entia constant ex potentia et actu.
. . . Solus Deus est suum esse, in omnibus autem aliis differt
essentia rei et esse eius. / Nihil enim dat esse nisi inquantum est
ens in actu. Deus autem conservat res in esse per suam provi-
dentiam. / Neque est superfluum, si Deus per se ipsum potest
omnes effectus naturales producere quod per quasdam alias
causas producantur. Non enim hoc est ex insufficientia divinae
virtutis sed ex immensitate bonitatis ipsius, per quam suam
similitudinem rebus communicare voluit, non solum quantum
ad hoc quod essent sed etiam quantum ad hoc quod aliorum
causae essent. / Nihil autem est causa essendi nisi inquantum
agit in virtute divina. / Deus est causa operandi omnibus
operantibus.
go. quando ipsa fertur in magnum amoris excessum aut odii aut
alicuius talium. . . . fertur in grandem excessum alicuius pas-
sionis invenitur experimento manifesto quod ipse ligat res et
alterat ad idem quod desiderat et diu non credidi illud. . . .
inveni quod affectio animae hominis est radix maxima omnium
harum rerum seu propter grandem affectionem alteret corpus
suum et altera, quae intendit sive propter dignitatem eius
oboediant ei res aliae viliores seu cum tali affectione exter-
minata concurrat hora conveniens aut ordo caelestis aut alia
virtus, quae quodvis faciat, illud reputavimus tunc animam
facere. . . . Qui ergo vult scire huius rei secretum ut operetur
illud et dissolvat, sciat quod ligare potest omnis omnia quando
venit in grandem excessum . . . et debet facere hoc in illa hora,
in qua invadit eum ille excessus et cum illis rebus quas sibi
dictat tunc anima. . . . Ipsa enim anima cum sic est avida rei
442FOR PAGES 170—178
quam ipsa vult operari, arripit ex se horam maiorem et meli-
orem quae est et super res magis convenientes ad illud. . . . Et
sic anima, quae est magis desiderans rem, ipsa facit eas magis
efficaces et magis habentes similitudinem eius quod venit; nam
scientia est factio caracterum . . . Similiter enim est operatio
in omnibus quae desiderat anima forti desiderio. Omnia enim
quae tunc agit illud intendens, movent et efficaciam habent ad
id, quod anima desiderat.
94- Ipsa est congregans principia et materias sui corporis . . . serv-
ans corpus etc. / Scientia enim de anima maius adminiculum est
ad cognoscendas dispositiones corporales, etc. / Dicemus igitur
nunc: quod anima potest dici vis vel potentia comparatione
affectionum quae emanant ab ea. Similiter potest dici vis ex alio
intellectu: comparatione scilicet formarum sensibilium et in-
telligibilium, quas recipit: potest dici etiam forma compara-
tione materiae in qua existit: ex quibus utriusque constituitur
substantia vegetabilis aut animalis etc.
97- Non autem dicimus ad summam, quod ex anima solet con-
tingere in materia corporali permutatio complexionis quae
acquiritur sine actione et passione corporali ita quod calor acci-
dat non ex calore et frigiditas non ex frigido. Cum enim imagi-
natur anima aliquam imaginationem et corroboratur in ea,
statim materia corporalis recipit formam habentem compara-
tionem ad illam aut qualitatem . . . plerumque autem non
permutantur (scil. principia) nisi per contraria quae subsistunt
in eis. . . . Attende dispositionem infirmi cum credit se con-
valescere aut sani cum credit se aegrotare, multoties contingit ex
hoc, ut cum corroboratur forma in anima eius, patiatur ex ea
ipsius materia et proveniant ex hac sanitas aut infirmitas et est
actio haec efficacior et quam id, quod agit medicus instrumentis
suis et mediis. . . . Ergo cum esse formarum impressum fuerit
in anima et constat animae quod habent esse, continget saepe
materiam pati, ex eis quae solent pati, ex eis, et ut habeant esse
. . . Multoties autem anima operatur in corpore alieno sicut in
proprio quemadmodum est opus oculi fascinantis et aestima-
tionis operantis. Immo cum anima fuerit constans, nobilis, simi-
lis principiis, oboediet ei materia, quae est in mundo et patitur
ex ea et invenitur in materia quidquid formabitur in illa, quod
fit propter hoc, quod anima humana, sicut postea ostendemus,
non est impressa in materia sua, sed est providens ei, et quoniam
quidem propter hunc modum colligationis potest ipsa permu-
tare materiam corporalem, ab eo quod expetebat materia eius.
Tunc non est mirum, si anima nobilis et fortissima transcendat
443APP. I. LATIN AND GREEK TEXTS
operationem suam in corpore proprio ut cum non fuerit de-
mersa in affectum illius corporis vehementer et propter hoc
fuerit naturae praevalentis constantis in habitu suo, sanet in-
firmos et debilitet pravos et contingat pronari naturas et per-
mutari sibi elementa ita ut, quod non est ignis fiat ei ignis, et
quod non est terra, fiat ei terra, et pro voluntate eius contingant
pluviae et fertilitas sicut contingit absorbitio a terra et mor-
talitas, et hoc totum perveniat secundum virtutem intelli-
gibilem, omnino enim possibile est ut comitetur eius velle esse
id, quod pendet ex permutatione materiae in contraria. Nam
materia oboedit ei naturaliter etc.
106. omnis animus sequens concupiscentiam, i.e. opinionem suam
vanam, fluit, i.e. fluctuat et divagatur per diversas vias erroneas.
107. Amor vel delectatio naturaliter . . . antecedit cognitionem.
Nisi enim esset aliquis appetitus substantiae cognoscentis ad
ipsum cognoscibile, nunquam esset ordinatio huius ad hoc
neque perficeretur unum ad alio. / Quia carnales sumus et de
carnis concupiscentia nascimur, necesse est ut cupiditas vel
amor noster a carne incipiat; quae si recto ordine dirigitur,
quibusdam suis gradibus duce gratia proficiens, spiritu tandem
consummabitur.
108. Unumquodque tendens in suam perfectionem tendit in di-
vinam similitudinem. Ultima autem perfectio ad quam homo
ordinatur consistit in perfecta Dei cognitione.
Amor . . . est prima passionum concupiscibilis. . . . Amor est
appetitus ad bonum . . . Motus autem ad bonum est desi-
derium vel concupiscentia, quies autem in bono est gaudium
et delectatio. / Sed quia concupiscentia vel cupiditas est primus
effectus amoris quo maximo delectamur ut supra dictum est.
Ideo frequenter Augustinus cupiditatem vel concupiscentiam
pro amore ponit . . .
Contemplatio spiritualis pulchritudinis vel bonitatis princi-
pium amoris spiritualis. Sic igitur cognitio est causa amoris ea
ratione qua est bonum, quod non potest amari nisi cognitum.
Appetitivus motus circulo agitur ut dicitur in tertio de anima.
. . . Unde et Dionysius dicit (De div. nom. cap. 4) quod amor
est virtus unitiva, et Philosophus dicit in II. Polit. quod unio
est opus amoris.
113. Nec ista hyle malum dicenda est. / Et unaquaeque creatura in-
tendit consequi suam perfectionem, quae est similitudo perfec-
tionis et bonitatis divinae. Sic ergo divina bonitas est finis
omnium rerum. / Id vero quod desiderat omnis res, est esse et
444FOR PAGES 178—195
perfectio esse, inquantum est esse. Privacio vero inquantum
est privacio non desideratur.
120. Ipsae autem res sunt causa et mensura scientiae nostrae, unde
sicut et scientia nostra refertur ad res realiter et non e con-
trario, ita res referuntur realiter ad scientiam Dei et non e con-
trario. / Res dicuntur verae per comparationem ad intellectum
divinum.
121. Ut ostendam quod philosophia inutilis sit et vana, nisi prout ad
sapientiam Dei elevatur.
122. Eo itaque modo quo forma huius in mente huiusmodi archi-
tectoris esset forma domus, est ars, sive sapientia, sive Verbum
omnipotentis Dei forma omnium creaturarum. Ipsa enim simul
et exemplar est et efficiens et formans est in forma data con-
servans est, dum ad ipsam applicantur et revocantur creaturae.
123. Veritas enim uniuscuiusque rei non est, nisi substantia, vel
essentia, sive esse ipsius.
124. Sapientia est veritas scientiae rerum primarum sempiternarum.
125. Et quia veritas nihil aliud est quam adaequatio intellectus ad
rem.
126. Et ars eodem modo ut natura operatur.
eve Et natura ipso artifice ministrante operatur. / Et illuminat
omnia corpora, quoniam est lumen et tinctura illuminans et per-
ficiens omne corpus. Et si artifex huius magisterii hoc lumen
non cognoscit, tamquam in tenebris ambulans multipliciter per
devia errat, propter elongationem eius a veritate, et unitate
huius scientiae.
128. Intellectus noster, id est vis intellectiva, vis est generativa et
velut matrix quaedam scientiae vel sapientiae.
130. ékapeyov Tijv $ow kal ebpijoes TO Entodvpevov. | ékóépes é£o Tiv évüov
KeKpuppevny-
159. Arcanum in quo est veritatis tinctura. / Regite igitur ipsum
coquendo humore, donec natura abscondita appareat.
166. Virtus intrinseca est lumen ]uminum, tinctura illustrans . . .
Ill, u. What Wisdom Is
Quemadmodum ars poetica per fictas fabulas allegoricasque
similitudines moralem doctrinam seu physicam componit . . .
ita theologica veluti quaedam poetria sanctam scripturam fictis
imaginationibus ad consultum nostri animi et reductionem cor-
poralibus sensibus exterioribus, veluti ex quandam imperfecta
pueritia, in rerum intelligibilium perfectam cognitionem . . .
445APP. I. LATIN AND GREEK TEXTS
conformat etc. Propter humanum animum sancta Scriptura in
diversis symbolis atque doctrinis contexta [est] etc.
[Naphtali] quia ergo quidquid scriptum reperit, ad spiritualem
intelligentiam convertit.
quaedam cognitio obumbrata et obscuratis admixta.
Lapis et non lapis quod multis nuncupatur nominibus, ne quis
ipsum agnoscat insipiens. / Quemadmodum inquam terrenus
philosophicusque hicce lapis una cum sua materia multa di-
versimodaque immo mille paene, uti dictum est, nomina habet,
inde quoque mirabilis appellatur, ita etiam hi et id genus alii
supra commemorati tituli atque nomina multo potius immo in
summo gradu a Deo omnipotente et Summo Bono praedicari
possunt.
15. Patet etiam quomodo omnes cogitationes famulantur theo-
logiae.
IIL nur Of Them Who Know Not and Deny This Science
$. Non est [in]conveniens ut eveniat hoc stultis cum sapientibus
et vulgo cum electis. / Honor Dei est abscondere rem.
III, 1v. Of the Name and Title of This Book
1. Baptismo et intellectu unio fit duorum luminum. Ista lumina
ditissimos emittunt radios et caligo a mente removetur. Tunc
anima nitida contemplatur absconditum gloriae Christum . . .
Pater . . . hominem sola intellegentia mentis inluminans; qui,
discussis ab animo errorum tenebris, et veritatis claritate per-
cepta, toto se sensu intellegentiae divinae commiscet.
Aurora quippe ecclesia dicitur quae a peccatorum suorum tene-
bris ad lucem iustitiae permutatur. . . . Quae est ista etc. quasi
aurora electorum surgit Ecclesia quae pravitatis pristinae tene-
bras deserit et sese in novi luminis fulgorem convertit. / Ortus
vero aurorae est illa nova nativitas resurrectionis, qua sancta
Ecclesia etiam carne suscitata oritur ad contemplandum lumen
aeternitatis.
Quid est enim locus aurorae nisi perfecta claritas visionis in-
ternae?
10. Si enim sapientia a sapore dicta est, sapor autem rei non senti-
tur, nisi cum ipsa res gustatur, gustatur autem cum ad horam
gustu tangitur, profecto sola intelligentia sapientia perficitur,
446FOR PAGES 195—212
quia ea sola et rara hora et parva mora Deus utique sentitur.
- . . Ita sola intelligentia Deus gustari dicitur, quia ex omnibus
viribus animae ea sola in praesenti et in futuro quasi nullo
mediante tangitur. Hic tamen proprie gustamus ubi ad horam
intelligendo raptim de Deo aliquid sentimus. Ibi vero satia-
bimur ubi eo sine fine perfruemur.
11. Quoniam scientia creaturae in comparatione scientiae Creatoris
quodammodo vesperascit: itemque lucescit et mane fit, cum et
ipsa refertur ad laudem dilectionemque Creatoris nec in noctem
vergitur, ubi non Creator creaturae dilectione relinquatur. T. .
Cognitio quippe creaturae in se ipsa decoloratior est, ut ita
dicam, quam cum in Dei sapientia cognoscitur, velut in arte in
qua facta est. Ideo vespera congruentius quam nox dici potest,
quae tamen, ut dixi, cum ad laudandum et amandum refertur
Creatorem, recurrit in mane. Et hoc cum facit in cognitione sui
ipsius, dies unus est: cum in cognitione firmamenti . . . dies
secundus . . . terrae ac maris omniumque gignentium, quae
radicibus continuata sunt terrae, tertius . . . atque ipsius
hominis dies sextus.
Oriens cum suis astris figura fuit Mariae, e cuius sinu ortus est
20.
nobis Dominus astrorum. Ille sua nativitate tenebras a mundo
fugavit.
29. Sicut in mundo maiori firmamentum movetur ab oriente in
occidentem et revertitur in orientem, sic ratio in homine
movetur a contemplatione orientalium, id est coelestium, primo
considerando Deum et divina, consequenter descendit ad occi-
dentalia, id est ad considerationem terrenorum, ut per visibilia
contemplatur invisibilia, deinde revertitur ad orientem iterum
considerando coelestia.
24. Sicut enim aurora surgens tenebras noctis depellit, solem mundo
inducit, sic Ecclesia nascens tenebras ignorantiae reppulit, et
solem mundo dictis et exemplis induxit.
III, v. Of the Provocation of the Foolish
Omnis enim locus sub coelo lunari locus est generationis et cor-
ruptionis, quoniam locus est conflictus et actionis et passionis,
ex quibus sunt generatio et corruptio universaliter.
Pax, amor, virtus, regimen, potestas,
12.
Ordo, lex, finis, via, dux, origo,
Vita, lux, splendor, species, figura,
Regula mundi.
447APP. I. LATIN AND GREEK TEXTS
26. Et hoc voluerunt (philosophi) quod typice protulerunt, memo-
rando Planetas septem, et signa duodecim, et naturas eorum,
et colores, et quidquid in eis est.
28. Septem sunt Urbes, septem pro more metalla,
suntque dies septem, septimus est numerus. . . .
septem litterulae, septem sunt ordine verba.
Tempora sunt septem, sunt totidemque loca.
Herbae septem, artes septem, septemque lapilli. . . .
hoc in numero cuncta quiete valent.
29. Loquetur Spiritus sapientiae utrique populo omnem veritatem
et ostendet se esse unum de septem angelis . . . albugo litterae
ab oculis mentis suae. / justitia religiosorum quae major est et
pretiosior illa est vilescet in diebus illis respectu spiritualis iusti-
tiae quae signatur in auro. / Septenarius numerus pertinet ad
Spiritum sanctum, propter septem munera gratiarum. / Erit
dies una, quae nota est Domino. Non dies neque nox et in
tempore vesperae erit lux. Et erit in die illa exibunt aquae vivae
de Hierusalem medium earum ad mare orientale et medium
earum ad mare novissimum. / Novam Hierusalem quae fundata
est Romae, lapides autem pretiosos apostolos, martyres, confes-
sores et virgines.
III, vi. The First Parable: Of the Black Earth...
14. Nocte quippe mortis et miseriae, quae a peccato Adae in-
choans cunctos suae caligine involvit, haec sacra nox (scil.
resurrectionis) finem imposuit.
16. Occulta Dei iudicia quaedam tenebrae sunt. / Aer caliginosus
est quasi carcer daemonibus usque ad tempus iudicii.
22. Effodiatur igitur sepulchrum illi Draconi, et sepeliatur illa
mulier cum eo, qui cum illa fortiter vinctus muliere, . . .
muliebribus armis . . . in partes secatur . . . et totus vertitur
in sanguinem.
28. itemque est bonorum morum imaginari concupiscentias turpes,
non tum vult illas, alius autem vult; et hae duae dispositiones
non sunt solius hominis sed etiam omnium animalium.
33- Et cavete ignis intensionem, quoniam si intendatis ignem ante
terminum rubeum fit, quod nihil vobis prodest, eo quod in
initio regendi vultis albedinem.
42. Umbram siquidem Christi, carnem reor esse ipsius, de qua
obumbratum est et Maria, ut eius obiectu fervor splendorque
spiritus illi temperaretur. /
448FOR PAGES 215—240
Hac in domo Deus homo
fieri disposuit.
Hic absconsus pius Sponsus
Vestem suam induit.
45. Obscoenae inquinatae obsoletaeque quidem vestes illius sunt,
purgabo tamen illos et ex corde illam amabo. Sitque mea soror,
sponsa mea cum uno oculorum meorum.
52. Cathedra significat locum operationis, et formam vasorum,
quod est intus.
53- Ex his igitur quatuor elementis omnia creata sunt, coelum,
thronus, angeli, sol, luna, stellae, terra.
Notandum est quod omnis actio efficientis gravis est et molesta,
nisi ipsi passo conferatur vis aliqua et imprimatur, qua vi
cooperetur, formaliter inhaerente, ipsi suo agenti sive efficienti.
“Violentum enim est, cuius agens est extra, non conferente vim
passo." Sic ait Philosophus III Ethic. . . . et haecest ratio prop-
ter quam motus violentus in fine remittitur, naturalis vero in
fine intenditur. Natura enim vis est insita rebus.
57- Felle caret, quo spiritualiter quoque sponsa Christi carere debet
ut secundum Apostolum: Omnis amaritudo et ira et clamor et
blasphemia tollatur . . . cum omni malitia (Eph. 4).
B9: Bonum ut bonum semper dulce est. . . . Fex amaritudo est. /
Omne agens intendit se alterum; et quousque ad hoc attingat,
labor est; et gravis et amara omnis dissimilitudo et imperfectio,
quam dat. Si daret se ipsum alterum primo, omnium actio esset
suavis hinc inde, agenti scilicet et patienti, nec esset inter ipsos
pugnae amaritudo, sed dulcedo et suavitas.
66. [Christus] exinanivit eam ut repleat, qui etiam se exinanivit,
ut omnia impleret, exinanivit se ut descenderet nobis . . . ergo
annuntiavit Luna mysterium Christi.
80. Et quid per byssum nisi candens decore munditiae corporalis
castitas designatur?
89. Et illud est quod nominaverunt Regem de terra prodeuntem,
et de coelo descendentem. Et simile est huic quod dicit quidam
in ista aqua.
91. Recte [plane] lunae comparatur Ecclesia et ipsa nos lavacri rore
perfundit et terram corporis nostri baptismatis rore vivificat.
Vestes vestrae, fratres, candidae sunt ut nix, et nitor vester
refulget ut nitor Angelorum.
106. Labia tua stillant pharmacum vitae, balsamum fluit e digitis
tuis, pulchri sunt oculi tui . . . Omnes filii Ecclesiae te arden-
tissime appetunt.
107. Dominus Lapidum . . . et rex . . . et sic est aurum inter cor-
449APP. I. LATIN AND GREEK TEXTS
pora sicut sol inter sidera, quia sol est rex siderum et lumen et
cum eo complentur res terrarum et vegetabilium . . .
109. Dicet aliquis: quomodo influentiae praedictae metallorum . . .
parentes montes penetrabunt? Respondet Propheta regius:
Montes sicut cera fluxerunt a facie Domini.
110. Eptacephalus draco, princeps tenebrarum, traxit de coelo cauda
sua partem stellarum et nebula peccatorum eas obtexit atque
mortis tenebris obduxit. Unde sol aeternus iubar suae claritatis
nube carnis operuit. In occasu mortis pro stellis occubuit; de
caligine productas ipse de nocte mortis oriens sereno coelo
restituit.
verum masculus est coelum feminae et foemina terra masculi.
1123.
Ill, vu. The Second Parable: Of the Flood of Waters...
recte significari aquas populos intelligimus. . . . Aquae ter-
restres sunt trepidae, terrenae, tenebrosae, absorbere nos vol-
entes, animis in ira concitatis, et toto diabolici furoris impetu
commotis.
10. Ipsa caritas occidit quod fuimus, ut simus quod non eramus;
facit nobis quandam mortem dilectio.
Amor ergo boni convenientis est perfectivus et meliorativus
11.
amantis: Amor autem boni, quod non est conveniens amanti,
est laesivus et deteriorativus amantis: unde maxime homo per-
ficitur et melioratur per amorem Dei, laeditur autem et deteri-
oratur per amorem peccati . . . liquefactio importat quandam
mollificationem cordis qua exhibet se cor habile ut amatum in
ipsum subintret. / Quia amans a se ipso separatur in amatum
tendens et secundum hoc dicitur amor extasin facere et fervere,
quia quod fervet extra se bullit et exhalat. . . .
16. Quia usque ad albedinem humiditatis corruptio et foeminae
viget dominium.
26. Similiter nominant hanc aquam Nubem vivificantem, mundum
inferiorem, et per haec omnia intelligunt Aquam foliatam, quae
est aurum philosophorum.
271 [Maria] est nebula refrigerans, pluens, et donans. / nubes um-
brationis et ductionis.
28. Lapis huius generis undique est: conceptio eius sit in inferno,
partus in terra, vita in coelo, moritur in tempore et demum
beatitudinem aeternam impetrat.
8 Christus multis locis in sanctis Scripturis allegorice Sol est ap-
pellatus.
450FOR PAGES 240-263
52. 7) SnpovpyiKy Sexas voids éAAdjurovaa, rais yvxais.
54- Deinde ingreditur salsatura secundo in eo recens, quae est
femina secunda, et facta sunt universa quatuor, scilicet duo
masculi et duae feminae, ex quibus exierunt quatuor colores,
et hi sunt numerus eius. Intellige hoc principium numeri,
primum et secundum, et dicis duo, et illa sunt tria in numero,
deinde dicis tria, quae sunt in numero sex, deinde dicis quatuor,
et fiunt in numero decem numeri manifesti, occulti autem
ipsorum quatuor. His autem numeris perficis Magnesia, quae est
Abarnahas, existens ex quatuor. Decem vero sunt quatuor, et
ex eis extrahuntur, et quatuor ex eis sunt decem. Haec sunt
quatuor naturae, scilicet terra, aqua, aer et ignis, ex quibus
consistit omnis creatura, Intellige autem hoc.
58. Per Aquilas substantiam volatilem intelligas.
61. Eva mater omnium viventium fons mortis effecta est omnibus
viventibus.
67. Eva interpretatur vita. Vita autem est etiam Ecclesia, exhibens
perpetuam baptismatis regenerationem et vitam, quae est per
aquam et Spiritum.
Mors per Evam facta est, vita per Mariam reddita est. Illa a
diabolo victa est, haec diabolum ligavit et vicit.
87. Et ideo dicendum quod cum generatio unius semper sit cor-
ruptio alterius, necesse est dicere quod tam in homine quam in
animalibus aliis, quando perfectior forma advenit, fit corruptio
prioris, ita tamen quod sequens forma habet quidquid habebat
prima et adhuc amplius; et sic per multas generationes et cor-
ruptiones pervenitur ad ultimam formam substantialem tam
in homine quam in aliis animalibus. Sic igitur dicendum est,
quod anima intellectiva creatur a Deo in fine generationis
humanae, quae simul est et sensitiva et nutritiva, corruptis
formis praeexistentibus.
III, vix. The Third Parable: Of the Gate of Brass...
4- Christe, Rex mundi, Creator, . . .
Dira claustra diruens,
Ferrea vincla resolvens
Es, retrusos eximens.
6. Et dicitur Ecclesia candelabrum aureum, quia lucens scientia,
gratia pretiosa, patientia solida, oboedientia ductilis, praedi-
catione sonora, perseverantia longa, fide Trinitatis fundata,
quae est repleta septemplici Spiritus sancti gratia.
451APP. I. LATIN AND GREEK TEXTS
Maria est candelabrum illuminationis . . .
Ex his igitur apparet tibi quam deiecta et depressa sit ab alti-
tudine luminositatis, et nobilitatis suae naturalis, virtus intel-
lectiva, sive anima humana quantum ad illam.
19. . .. et qui me habentem Lunarem et Mercurialem materiam
de loco meo, id est de corpore aeris, abstulerit, id est sublimare
fecerit, vi, id est per vim putrefactionis et solutionis, ac dilec-
tum meum, id est pinguedinem solarem mecum, id est cum hu-
miditate Lunari vinculaverit . . . regenerabunt nos in vitam, |
per quam non erit ultra mors.
17. Et tamen qui credit et timet sed non intellegit quasi ad solius
patris notitiam perductus est . . . qui autem credunt et intel-
legunt quasi ad Patris et Filii notitiam perducuntur, quia Filius
Patris sapientia est . .. sed et qui credunt, intellegunt et
delectantur, habentes notitiam Patris et Filii usque ad Spiritus
sancti intelligentiam pervenisse noscuntur, quia ipse est delec-
tatio et amor Dei, ipse mel de petra oleumque de saxo durissimo.
Ipse est, inquam, mel de petra, ipse laetitia spiritualis etc.
23. ut nos per ipsam [Ecclesiam] generemur et regeneremur donec
praeterierit nox huius saeculi et rursus exortus fuerit Christus
sol justitiae. / Luna vero habente gubernationem et adminis-
trationem auctoritatis aquae et Spiritus sancti . . . ut nos per
ipsum generemur et regeneremur.
25. Cum ergo interius diaboli sit de natura ignis, manifestum est,
ipsum contrariari et inimicari ipsius animae naturae, quae est
natura aequalitatis.
28. Vult per oleum animam . .. Et hoc genitum est pinguedo
quam vocant animam et ovum.
Dixit autem Hermes: Omne subtile ingreditur in omne
grossum.
Retribue etiam iis, qui adduxerunt populum in lacum inferi-
orem, i.e. in Babylonem.
Per mare saeculum insinuatur, quod voluminibus adversitatum
iugiter elevatur. In hoc diabolus circumnatat ut Leviathan,
multitudinem animarum devorat.
De Sion veniet Salvator. . . . Sion . . . spiritualis et collis
visionum seu revelationum Ecclesia est. / Significat etiam mys-
terium ecclesiae, quae liberata est per crucem a manu diaboli. /
Filiae quoque Syon, id est animae in Christo renatae, in Rege
suo hodie exultent.
Sterilis sum et solitaria. . . . Haec Ecclesiam respiciunt sive
enim eam revereantur sive persequantur valde magnificant et
multiplicant eam. / Ecclesia autem, diu sterilis, fidelem filium
452FOR PAGES 263-281
scilicet Christianum populum ad speciales observantias gener-
avit.
61. Christus ascendit . . . sicut radix de terra sitienti de Maria
virgine.
Christus Redemptor autem noster in carne veniens [septem]
pleiadas iunxit.
70. Hac de causa videntur ad coniugatos pertinere . . . denarius
numerus, ad clericos vigenarius . . . ad monachos trigenarius
hoc est denarii simul tres.
IIL rx. The Fourth Parable: Of the Philosophic Faith...
. sub nomine Davidis ibidem Christum celebrando, qui
dicit: Ego vici mundum, et alibi: Iam Princeps huius mundi
eiectus est foras.
16. Creavit omnia in pondere etc., id est in se ipso, qui est numerus
sine numero, mensura sine mensura, pondus sine pondere. Vel
aliter exponitur: Creavit Deus omnia in numero, id est numerus
omnis apud eum certus, similiter omnium mensura certa est et
quicquid ponderis habet aliquid apud eum est certissimum. Vel
aliter: His tribus, numero mensura pondere voluit ostendere
scriptura nil Deo esse aequale. Numerus enim simplicitatem,
mensura immensitatem, pondus felicitatem et stabilitatem ex-
cludit. Creavit omnia in numero, id est nihil creavit summae
simplicitatis. In mensura, id est nihil creavit immensum. In
pondere quia nihil creavit quod ex se deficere vel sua felicitate
cadere possit.
17. In unitate itaque puncto atque centro, quae tria sunt principia
numeri, mensurae, atque ponderis (quam etiam nihil eorum
sint), cuncta creata sunt, et cum nihil videantur nobis, sunt
tamen apud Deum vel in Deum omnia; et idcirco dicitur Deus
ex nihilo creasse cuncta in principio, quod est mysterium mag-
num, videlicet sacrosancta Trinitas, ipsaque Sapientia; centro
enim cuncta sustinet, puncto adimplet, unitate denique per-
ficit.
. . videtur tamen aliquod opus pertinere ad Patrem, lectio ad
21.
Filium, iubilatio ad Spiritum sanctum, quia et timor Dei veram
sibi exigit servitutem et Christi magisterium subiectionem doc-
trinae et gaudium Spiritus sancti iubilationis tripudium. .. .
Tria igitur sunt quibus nobis Deus trinus et unus appropin-
quare dicitur: timor sapientia caritas, et tria per quae manent in
nobis tria ista: labor lectio et iubilatio.
450APP. I. LATIN AND GREEK TEXTS
23. [Tertius ordo] qui procedit ex utroque electus est ad libertatem
contemplationis, scriptura attestante, quae ait: Ubi Spiritus
Domini, ubi libertas. / Sanctus Spiritus exhibet libertatem, quia
amor est.
24. Coniungetur gentilis populus cum Hebraeo et fiet unum ovile
et unus pastor, quae coniunctio recte viris spiritualibus attri-
buenda est.
1. . Aquis perfunderis sapientiae, donec informeris, et gladio
Verbi Dei vitiorum spinis carere valeas, ac insulsa doctrina tui
pectoris ab antro exclusa, nostram doctrinam a Spiritu sancto
traditam, mentis puritate possis excipere . . . iamiam suae
nequitiae sentinam verbis divinorum librorum antea coopertam
securi aperiunt . . . procul dubio in charybdi falsae opinionis
hactenus cum indoctis iacuisti: nunc vero erectus in culmine
totius veritatis, integrae mentis oculos ad lumen verae fidei
aperire coepisti . . . atque sancti Spiritus dono repleberis, qui
scripturarum omnium profunditatem, ac veram dignitatem,
absque scrupulo te docebit. / Tunc autem crucifigitur Filius
Dei et flagellatur . . . tunc moritur Filius quatenus aliquis
ipsorum cadit in mortale peccatum vel redit a secta; resurgit
autem per poenitentiam.
35: Item, spiritus hominis, ex quo bonus est, si moritur, est idem
quod spiritus Dei, et ipse Deus. / Item, haec est Trinitas, quam
vel in qua credunt, ut sit Pater, qui alium in bonum convertit,
qui convertitur, Filius; id per quod convertit, et in quo con-
vertitur, Spiritus sanctus.
34- Si aliquis in spiritu est aiebant et faciat fornicationem, vel
aliqua alia pollutione polluatur, non est ei peccatum, quia ille
Spiritus qui est Deus omnino separatus a carne non potest pec-
care.
45: Nonnulli . . . Patri attribuerunt potentiam, . . . sapientiam
Filio, . . . voluntatem vel amorem Spiritui sancto. / Spiritus
sanctus accendit nos igne caritatis. / Est illa lux quae illuminat
omnem hominem venientem in hunc mundum et procedit ille
calor qui vivificat omnia.
49- éay py TH THpaTa ücopaTócys Kal TA àcÓpara coparócys Kal moujays
Ta Ovo Ev, OvdeV TOV TpoddoKOUpPEVWY éoTat.
57: Et in fine illorum dierum Deus infundit benedictionem generis
humani, animam scilicet seu vitam.
77 Significant ergo per mediatorem aerem . . . quod natus sapien-
tiae in aere nascitur, quando sublimatur ad alembicum. Prop-
ter quod fit aqua vivificans terram illorum, et embrionem, qui
est terra, qui est anima ex corpore eorum.
454FOR PAGES 281—307
97s Nomen itaque Dei quadriliterum, sanctissimam "Trinitatem
designare videtur, et materiam, quae etiam triplex existit, ut
ante tradidimus, quae et umbra eius dicitur et a Moyse Dei
posteriora.
Quod illud, quod est materia prima, est in se multa et plures
et secundum numerum quaternarium in ordine ad quatuor
elementa.
105. Urticae iunctae vepribus,
Vulnus curant vulneribus,
Flammata mens divinitus
Ignem extinguit ignibus. /
Bene ergo in igne apparuit Spiritus, quia ab omni corde quod
replet torporem frigoris excutit.
110. Hoc est sulphur rubeum luminosum in tenebris et est hya-
cinthus rubeus . . . et leo victor.
112. Rex clarus ut carbunculus. / Radius . . . in terris, qui lucet in
tenebris instar carbunculi in se collectus. / Inveni quendam
lapidem rubeum, clarisimum, diaphanum et lucidum, et in
eo conspexi omnes formas elementorum et etiam eorum con-
trarietates.
113. Et quod dixit Rubinus, per hoc vult Animam tingentem,
propter quod acquisivit virtutem ex igne.
114. Anima tingens latet in aqua . . . alba.
115. Haec est avis noctu volans absque alis, quam coeli ros primus
continuata decoctione, sursum atque deorsum ascensione de-
scensioneque in caput corvi convertit, ac tandem in caudam
pavonis, et postea candidissimas et olorinas plumas, ac postremo
summam rubedinem acquirit indicium igneae suae naturae.
Sal enim filius Dei est. Quod cum misisset illud sal fontem
122.
aquarum, quod factum est in annunciatione, ait: Haec dicit
Dominus: Sanavi has aquas, id est, humanam naturam fluidam
et pestiferam, et non erit in eis ultra mors neque sterilitas, sed
vita et foecunditas.
123. Verus mercurii spiritus et sulphuris anima una cum sale spirit-
uali simul unita.
124. Qui Paraclitus diceris,
Donum Dei altissimi,
Fons vivus, ignis, caritas,
Et spiritalis unctio. /
[Addis adhuc ut quaeras, quid mihi causae videtur cur] potentia
Patri in scripturis sanctis specialius attribuitur, sapientia Filio,
caritas vel bonitas Spiritui sancto.
125. Hic lapis triangulus est in esse, quadrangulus in qualitate.
455APP. I. LATIN AND GREEK TEXTS
129. Ex hoc . . . lapide cum confringitur, varii vobis colores ap-
parebunt. / Imbuite ipsum, quousque extrahat vobis Deus
colores et appareant. / Cumque apparuerint colores, vel tinc-
turae, erit hoc sicut cum apparet . . . pullus.
131. '"Eày py rà mávra TO mTvpi ékAerrwvS; kai 5j aiSdAy mvevparoSeica
BaaraxS1j, ovdev eis répas áxSvjoerat.
133. Ideo dicit Philosophus, portavit eum ventus in ventre suo.
Planum est ergo quod ventus est aer, et aer est vita, et vita est
anima; id est oleum et aqua.
134. Tunc omnia vapor facta sunt . . . hoc autem et spiritum et
animam philosophi vaporem appellaverunt . . . sic opus nos-
trum . . . nihil aliud est quam vapor et aqua.
Esse illum Spiritum Domini, qui terrarum orbem impleat et ab
initio aquis supernatavit. Spiritum veritatis quoque illum ap-
pellant qui mundo absconditus absque inspiratione Spiritus Dei
. . comprehendi nequeat. Qui quidem in quovis loco, ex re
quavis potentialiter, in unico vero hoc subiecto perfecte ac
plenarie tantum reperiatur. In Summa esse spiritualem sub-
stantiam quae neque coelestis neque infernalis sit sed aereum
purum ...
Septem Elisaei purificationes figura sunt septem spirituum per
baptismum expellendorum.
140. Aquas naturales consecravit Elisaeus, invocato Abscondito, in
illas immersit se leprosus notus, sed vis occulta purificavit eum.
Dissipata est lepra in aquis et iniquitas in baptismo.
142. [210], qui est numerus vocis Naaman, id est Naemani Syri
principis militiae Regis Aram 2. Reg. 5:1 per quem allegorice
intelligitur materia medicinae metallicae septies per Jordanum
purificanda, quam multi metallicae rei studiosi Gur vocant.
Ill, x. The Fifth Parable: Of the Treasure-House ...
Nota de domo thesaurorum de qua dixit author in primo.
Assiduus loquitur de ea sic: Ergo fili locum huius lapidis tibi
ostendam. . . . Hanc [scientia] autem quodam est in loco qui
est ubique [I read est ubique for in utique]; locus est 4 elementa
et sunt 4 januae, quas si nosse vis dico primo 4 esse stationes,
4 angulos, 4 terminos et 4 parietes . . . Haec autem domus est
thesauraria in qua omnia thesaurizantur sublimia de scientiis
sive sapientiis vel rebus gloriosissimis quae haberi non possunt
(et) in hac domo thesaurizantur. Domus in qua hi thesauri sunt
4 januis clauduntur quae 4 clavibus reserantur. . . . Scito ergo
456FOR PAGES 309-329
fili . . . quod qui scit clavem unam et ignorat residuas, domus
ianuas sua clave aperiet, sed ea quae sunt in domo non aspiciet
quoniam domus superficiem habet ad infinitum [/ read in-
finitum for infimum] visum tendentem. Ergo oportet ut sin-
gulae ianuae singulis clavibus aperiantur quousque domus tota
adimpleatur lumine, tunc ingrediatur quivis de thesauro acci-
piens...
Ecce facturus sum lapides tuos beryllos et fundamenta tua
firmaturus sum lapidibus saphyri. Et parietes tuos constructurus
sum lapidibus iaspidis, et portas tuas lapidibus crystalli. Et
omnes qui recesserunt e manibus meis ingredientur ad te. . . .
Haec spiritualia sunt et ad Ecclesiam hodie pertinent et antea
per res terrae pretiosas figurata sunt.
[Maria] est domus et vestiaria ex qua indutus fuit Filius Dei
11.
carne.
19. Per eius vinum unio fit.
In ignea igitur substantia intellige Patrem, in splendore Filium,
in calore Spiritum sanctum.
18. . . . potest aliter dici quod habet lucem caelum empyraeum
non condensatam ut radios emittat sicut corpus solis sed magis
subtilem vel habet claritatem gloriae, quae non est conformis
claritati naturali.
90. Oportebat sponsam quam Pater desponsaverat in thalamis
caelestibus habitare. — intima Mariae cum Filio coniunctio. —
Pari modo, hac de re agentes Reginam describunt in regiam
coelorum aulam per triumphum ingredientem ac dextero Di-
vini Redemptoris assidentem lateris: itemque Canticorum Spon-
sam inducunt "quae ascendit per desertum sicut virgula fumi
ex aromatibus myrrhae et thuris" ut corona redimiatur. Quae
quidem ab iisdem veluti imagines proponuntur caelestis illius
Reginae, caelestisque Sponsae, quae una cum Divino Sponso ad
caelorum aulam evehitur.
38. Qui vult esse adamas, hircino sanguine tingui luxuriae caveat,
ne frangat malleus illum.
50. Ex te undique vita fluit. — Tibi gloria, qui induisti corpus
hominis mortalis, illudque fontem vitae effecisti omnibus
mortalibus.
74: Vicit sol et quibus ascendit gradibus signavit mysterium. Duo-
decim ecce dies ex quo ascendit . . . symbolum . . . duodecim
eius apostoli.
Et in illo lumine, quod in singulis gradibus est, revelatur
quidquid revelatur . . . Et propterea omnia in unum gradum
ascendunt et omnia una eademque re coronantur . . . Lumen
457APP. I. LATIN AND GREEK TEXTS
illud quod manifestatur vocatur vestimentum. Nam ipse rex est
Lumen omnium intimum . . . Et omnes lucernae et omnia
lumina lucent a Sene Sanctissimo.
(Wh Nam Christus est lapis angularis, tamquam punctus in quo
componuntur duodecim apostoli; et alias 24 seniores in Apoc-
alypsi; et oportet quod de uno numero vel alio spiritualiter sit,
quilibet qui Christo Domino debeat uniri et super Christum
fundari.
24 Seniores: hic [numerus] constat ex duodecim et duodecim,.
qui item constat ex tribus et quattuor; sancti vero praedicatores
nomen sanctae Trinitatis per quattuor mundi partes annun-
tiant.
84. et praedictum Alphabetum sive corona illa caelestis licet causas
possideat rerum varias verum tamen coniunctissimas et quae in
unam hominis speciem productionemque eorum, quae in usum
eiusdem veniunt, conspirent.
96. Oportet [Alchemistam] . . . arrogantiae vitium a se repellere
et pium esse . . . Sed doctrinae filius (sit) vir subtilissimo in-
genio decoratus, . . . sanus, firmus in proposito et constans etc.
105. ratione candoris signatur claritas, ratione soliditatis impassi-
bilitas, ratione modicitatis subtilitas, ratione rotunditatis
agilitas.
106. Vel sic: Dabo illi calculum. Id est Christum, qui per calculum
signatur; quia calculus lapis pretiosus, qui et carbunculus
dicitur, et dicitur sic a carbone, quia ab eo similitudinem ducit;
lucet enim positus in tenebris. Sic Christus in mundi tenebris
refulsit, quando Verbum caro factum est et habitavit in nobis.
quia fides est de his quae non videntur et spes de his, quae non
107.
habentur.
108. Charitas, quae comparatur auro propter valorem, colorem,
pretiositatem.
Pertinet ad monachos quasi trigenarius numerus in eo quod
scientes et venerantes literam veteris testamenti et novi in patri-
archis et apostolis, quos electos esse sciunt, intellectui spirituali
qui ex utraque litera procedit, adhaerent etc.
III, xi. The Sixth Parable: Of Heaven and Earth...
Hermes quoque ait: Terra est mater elementorum: de terra
procedunt et ad terram revertuntur. / Hermes: terra est ele-
mentum et de terra omnia facta sunt et ad terram convertuntur.
Moyses: terra est mater elementorum, omnia de terra procedunt
458FOR PAGES 329—350
et ad terram convertuntur. Sic recitat Morienus: Haec autem
terra est corpus et fermentum...
Secundum hoc ergo dicitur terra inanis et vacua vel invisibilis
et incomposita, quia materia per formam cognoscitur . . . Ma-
teria autem secundum id quod est, est ens in potentia.
12. Mundus inferior est corpus et cinis combustus ad quem re-
ducunt Animam honoratam. Et cinis combustus et anima, sunt
aurum sapientum, quod seminant in terra sua alba... .
13. Seminate aurum vestrum in terram albam foliatam, quae per
calcinationem facta est ignea, subtilis, aerea. / Seminate ergo
animam in terram albam foliatam, quoniam ipsa retinet eam
quoniam cum ascenderit a terra in coelum iterumque de-
scenderit in terram recipiet vim inferiorum et superiorum . .
14. Et Malchuth erit Foemina Metallica et Luna sapientum,
agerque in quem conicienda sunt semina minerarum secre-
tarum, nempe Aqua auri, prout hoc nomen occurrit Gen.
36 : 39; sed scito fili mi in his talia latere mysteria, quae nulla
hominum lingua effari poterit.
16. Quam pretiosus est cinis . . . et quam pretiosum est, quod ex
eo fit. Miscentes igitur cinerem aquae, iterum coquite . . .
18. Cinerem, qui est in fundo vasis, ne vilipendatis; est quidem in
inferiori loco, sed est terra corporis tui, quae est permanentium
cinis. / Cinerem ne vilipendas; nam ipse est diadema cordis tui.
28. Cum autem coagulatum fuerit totum, tunc nominatur mare
sapientum. Et haec terra est mater mirabilium, et mater coelo-
rum. . . . et est totum et ex ipsa trahitur totum.
90. Ascendit a terra in coelum, iterumque descendit in terram, et
recipit vim superiorum et inferiorum. Sic habebis gloriam
totius mundi.
32. In principio spiritus foecunditatis incubavit aquis; et illae con-
ceperunt pepereruntque dracones, pisces et aves. Spiritus sanc-
tus incubavit aquis baptismi, quae pepererunt mysticas aquilas,
nempe virgines et Ecclesiae rectores.
36. Lux caelestium corporum causat formas substantiales in istis
inferioribus. Dat etiam esse spirituale coloribus quia facit eos
visibiles actu. Ergo lux non est aliqua qualitas sensibilis sed
magis substantialis forma aut spiritualis . . . : lumen agit
quasi instrumentaliter in virtute corporum caelestium ad pro-
ducendas formas substantiales etc.
‘Ho pev ys) éorepéora, érávo tov Vüdrov, rà 0€ VdaTa év rais Kopupais TOV
ópéov KTA.
42. Dixit Hermes quod secretum uniuscuiusque rei in una est aqua
. . . et principium generationis hominis est aqua.
459APP. I. LATIN AND GREEK TEXTS
48. Fecit lunam in tempora . . . Intelligimus spiritualiter Eccle-
siam crescentem de minimo et ista mortalitate vitae quodam-
modo senescentem: sed ut propinquet ad Solem!
50. Quartus enim numerus perfectus est atque omnem numerum
sive multitudinem in se complectitur, unum enim duo tria
quatuor simul iuncta denarium constituunt ultra quem pro-
gredi non datur absque regressu ad unitatem.
57- Erit autem nox illa nox tribulationis et angustiae, nox in qua
pertransibunt omnes bestiae silvae.
62. Virga Moysi petram aperuit et fluxerunt aquae . . . Ecce a
latere Christi fluxit fons vitae.
64. Maria est virga aurea, signum vitae aeternae.
66. cum per donum Spiritus sancti fortiter inundans scripturae
Sapientia sanctam ecclesiam, vel cuiuslibet capientis mentem,
infusione sua exhilarat.
Deus enim permittit mala fieri ut inde melius eliciat aliquid.
Unde dicitur Rom. 5:20: Ubi abundavit iniquitas, super-
abundavit gratia. Unde in benedictione cerei paschalis dicitur:
O felix culpa, quae talem ac tantum meruit habere Redemp-
torem!
71. Et quemadmodum protoplastus ille Adam de rudi terra et de
adhuc virgine (nondum enim pluerat Deus et homo non erat
operatus in terram) habuit substantiam et plasmatus est manu
Dei id est Verbo Dei. . . ita recapitulans in se Adam ipse
Verbum existens a Maria, quae adhuc erat virgo recte accipiebat
generationem Adae recapitulationis.
72. Quid est Verbum nisi sapientia? Idem enim qui Verbum Dei a
Joanne dicitur ipse sapientia Dei a Paulo nominatur. Christum
enim, inquit Paulus apostolus, Dei virtutem et Dei sapientiam
(I Cor. 1). Christus igitur ipse et Verbum et iste est Sapientia.
Verbum Sapientia, et Sapientia Verbum. Verbum Sapientis,
quia “Etructavit cor meum verbum bonum" (Ps. 44). Sapientia
Verbum, quia “Ego Sapientia ex ore Altissimi . . .” (Ecclus. 24).
Sapientia igitur Verbum cordis etc. . . . Itaquesi Verbum illu-
minat Sapientia illuminat. / quia Filius Patris Sapientia est. /
Sapientiam Dei Patris . . . et causam creatricem omnium esse
et in omnibus, quae creat, creari et fieri et omnia in quibus
creatur et fit, continere. / [Deus] qui de se ipso Filium suum,
qui est sapientia sua, gignit. / ut ipsae primordiales rerum
causae a Graecis prototypa, hoc est primordialia exemplaria
vel proorismata vocantur.
Seíav oócav Tv Wrynv dveOev, émiSvuíg SqAvvSeicav Sedpo wkew eis
yéveow kai $Sopáv.
460FOR PAGES 351—966
78. Convivium laudet te, quia multiplicasti vina eius . . . Inter in-
vitatos gratias agam, quod potu me refecit. Invitavi sponsum
coelestem, qui se demisit, ut omnes invitaret. Ad convivium
eius purissimum conviva ingrediar, inter iuvenes gratias agam,
quia ipse sponsus est et non est qui ad thalamum eius frustra
pulset.
79- Ipsa [scilicet Maria] est cellaria totius Trinitatis, quae de vino
Spiritus sancti dat, et propinat, cui vult et quantum vult.
81. Virtus retentiva foeminina est frigida et sicca, et est terra. Virtus
digestiva seu alterativa est masculina, calida et humida, et est
aer. . . . Quinta essentia vero est vita, quae est propria, nec
est calida, nec humida; nec frigida nec sicca; nec masculina nec
foeminina.
III, xu. The Seventh Parable: Of the Confabulation . ..
Quia vero necdum omnium peccatorum sorde purgata, necdum
11.
lota est in salute, nigra dicitur, sed in atro colore non permanet.
Itaque candida quando ad maiora consurgit . . . diciturque
de ea: Quae est ista quae ascendit dealbata?
14. Unde Propheta exclamat: Quis dabit mihi pennas ut columbae,
videlicet cogitationes contemplationesque immaculatas ac sim-
plices, et volabo et requiescam? Quis nisi Pater caelestis? Quare
inquit Christus: Nemo venit ad me nisi Pater meus traxerit eum,
et tum videlicet cum perfecerit integrum circulum, et erit Deus
omnia in omnibus ut semper fuit.
19. Videndum est quod in magisterio et termino operationis, cum
oritur anima ipsa, quaerit corpus suum, ut uniatur cum eo et
recipiat vitam et operationem; et unio ista et compositio fit
mediante spiritu; et cum coniuncta fuerit corpori vivit in aeter-
num cum suo corpore; haec autem coniunctio fit in ortu et
resurrectione animae, quia quamvis prius creata esset, cum suo
corpore tamen propter inquinationem corporis et corruptibili-
tatem, non poterat anima suas proprias et incorruptibiles osten-
dere operationes, immo tamquam mortua et inutilis iacebat et
quasi cum corpore tumulata et quando per magisterium ipsa
purificatur et candidatur, resurgit a suo corpore separata et tunc
suum corpus est etiam purificatum et ipsa quaerit suum corpus
et desiderat coniungi sibi ut in aeternum vivat nec potest
coniungi cum corpore alieno . . . quod anima nostra orta est
in Orizonte aeternitatis antequam suo corpori uniatur . . . et
in hac coniunctione resurrectionis fit corpus totum spirituale
ut ipsa anima, et fiunt sic unum sicut aqua mixta aquae et non
461APP. I. LATIN AND GREEK TEXTS
separantur de caetero in aeternum cum in eis nulla sit diversitas,
immo unitas et identitas omnium trium, scilicet spiritus, animae
et corporis absque separatione in aeternum.
25. et quoniam post adunationem hominis, hoc est, duplicis sexus
in pristinam naturae unitatem, in qua neque masculus neque
foemina, sed simpliciter homo erat, confestim orbis terrarum
adunatio ad paradisum sequetur.
31. 6 AiSos 6 dxpoywuatos, 6 ékAekrós, 6 Evtipos, évOorépo AiSov Keipar pos
6ALyov xpóvov, AiSos mpooKoppaTos "IovOatow, Kal GwTHpLos ois Tio TeU-
ovaty. evepuTevSyn Toivey TO Etrov THs Cwns ev TH yi» (va Grodavon Tis
evAoylas 1) karapaSeica yi Kal iva AVSwow ot vekpot.
43- Et istud occultum est de natura Solis et ignis, et est pretiosissi-
mum oleum omnium occultorum, et tinctura viva, et aqua
permanens, quae semper vivit et permanet, et acetum Philo-
sophorum et spiritus penetrativus; et est occultum tingitivum,
aggregativum et revivificativum: quod rectificat et illuminat
omnes mortuos et surgere eos facit.
44- Tunc apparebit justorum gloria quasi sol in regno patris eorum
consummatisque ad integrum muris Hierusalem et universo
numero electorum Dei apparebit gloriosa et felix sedens quasi
regina a dextris Dei in vestitu deaurato circumamicta varietate.
Dabit autem illi Dominus Deus partem gloriae suae et regnabit
cum illa usque in aeternum et regni eius non erit finis. Amen.
45- Nisi [Christus] Deus erat, quomodo per aurem intrare potuit?
Per aurem enim spiritus intravit et ex ventre caro egressa est. /
Ac conceptio quidem per auditum facta est. /V erbum intravit
per aurem Virginis et exivit per auream portam.
Ingressus est per aurem et secretum uterum inhabitavit.
Hac in domo Deus homo
fieri disposuit.
Hic absconsus pius Sponsus
vestem suam induit.
Quod ex sulphure sulphuri mixto pretiosissimus fit color, qui
non variatur nec ab igne fugit, quando anima in corporis intima
infertur ac corpus continet et colorat.
Anima ... quae est spiritualis natura ex qua colores ap-
paruerunt.
Deinde fiunt corpora spiritus et animas habentes tingentes eo,
quod invicem germinant.
Lux coram eis effulsit, Jesus ut sponsus e thalamo suo exsiliit,
remansit sepulcrum cum angelis in medio.
Exultat Ecclesia in Deo suo, quia induit me vestimento salutis,
id est stola gloriae baptismi; illa quippe est verum salutis vesti-
462FOR PAGES 366—382
—————————————————————————————————
mentum et candida gloriae stola. Et fecit me tamquam sponsum
gloriosum per absolutionem. Et tamquam sponsam ornatam.
Sponsa ecclesia est, quae exornata est pulchritudine omnium
populorum. / E coelo divina eius natura et e terra eius vesti-
mentum carnis. Omnis qui sua exuit vestimenta ea commiscet
cum vestimento Christi in aeternum. Ab eo in aquis acquirite
vestimentum quod non teritur nec amittitur, vestimentum quod
ipso indutos semper obtegit.
1.
Flos campi convallium,
Singulare lilium,
Christus ex te prodiit.
Tu caelestis paradisus . . .
Tu thronus es Salomonis,
Cui nullus par in thronis
Arte vel materia.
46. Maria est lilium totius castitatis. Sicus spina rosam genuit
Judaea Mariam.
82. Floruit autem Maria, nova vitis prae vite antiqua Heva, habi-
tavitque in ea vita nova Christus.
Simeon botrum vitae e vite virginali decerptum portavit in ulnis
suis... / Vitis virginalis uvam dedit cuius dulce vinum flen-
tibus solamen attulit. / Ipsa [Maria] quippe erat paradysus
malorum, fons hortorum, quia in ea surrexit lignum vitae,
atque de ea profluxit fons sapientiae, omnibusque deliciis
affluebat, in qua omnes thesauri sapientiae et scientiae abscon-
diti erant.
8: Ita mentis pax et tranquillitas lectulus est in quo sponsa
quiescit.
101. Absque eo quod intrinsecus latet, hoc nobis beatus Job intimat
cum Austri interiora commendat.
106. Stat Maria mater tua, soror tua, sponsa tua, ancilla tua... .
Magister matris, Deus matris, Domine matris, matre iunior et
senior.
107. Rex qui nuptias filio fecit, est Deus Pater, qui Iesu Christo,
Filio suo, sponsam Ecclesiam coniunxit. Huius nuptialis thala-
mus erat sacrae Virginis uterus. / De his nuptiis texuit rex
Salomon dulce epithalamium dum in laude Sponsi et Sponsae
per Spiritum concinuit Cantica Canticorum.
109. Mater me genuit et per me gignitur ipsa.
Vult per oleum animam, . . . quae non ingreditur per ignem,
112.
sed aqua extrahit eam. / Et hoc genitum est pinguedo quam
vocant animam et ovum.
114. Funda [David] quippe erat circumdata Christi humanitas, pas-
463APP. I. LATI.NAN D GREEK TEXTS
sionibus circumrotata; Lapis qui frontem Goliae penetravit
erat divinitas quae maxillam Leviathan perforavit.
122. Solvunt enim hanc tincturam cum humiditate, quae est ex ipso
in principio et in fine cum igne, sicut vides granum Hospho seu
Offoto in gramine suo, cum aqua et igne naturaliter augmentari
et nutriri et generatur in eo tinctura. . . . Vertite aurum in
folia. / Tinctura, . . . quam etiam vocavit Hermes aurum,
cum dixit Seminare aurum in terram albam foliatam, signifi-
cavit hanc tincturam . .. et nominaverunt eam crocum et
Effer. / Tinctura vera, Kalid, id est fixa incombustibilis, cum”
granum eius prius fuerat combustibile.
124. Ego sum frumentum seminatum in terram puram, quod nascens
crescit et multiplicatur et adfert fructum seminanti: quia omne
quod generatur genere suo [generatur] et quodlibet individuum
multiplicat formam suae speciei, et non alterius. .
130. Denarius est Christus, ut in Apocalypsi (6:6) "quod qui...
in fidem et operationem tenent, ad Christum pertinent."
153. Quinta essentia spiritus est, qui omnia vivificat et alterat, et
omne germen germinat, et omne lumen accendit, et omnes
fructus floret.
Nisan, mensis victoriae eduxit Sponsam Regis, suis effusionibus
turbavit terram eamque sparsis suis floribus implevit . . .
factae nuptiae purae in deserto./ Nisan etiam terram induit
vestimento coloribus omnis generis texto, induitur tellus tunica
pallioque florum.
168. Quis vidit flores e libris veluti e montibus erumpentes? Castae
puellae iis impleverunt spatiosos mentis sinus. Ecce vox ut sol
super turbas flores sparsit. . . . Flores pulchros et rationales
sparserunt pueri coram rege. Pullus illis coronatus est. . . .
Unusquisque colligat cunctos flores et hos misceat floribus qui
creverunt in terra sua. . . . Offerunt Domino nostro in coro-
nam florum; pontifex suas homilias, presbiteri sua encomia,
diaconisuaslectiones. . . . Invitemus . . . martyres, apostolos
et prophetas. Ipsi similes sunt eorum flores . . . ditissimae sunt
eorum rosae, suave olent eorum lilia; ex horto deliciarum col-
ligunt pulcherrimos flores, eosque adducunt ad coronam festi
nostri pulcherrimi. Gloria tibi a beatis. Coronae regum pau-
peres sunt in conspectu divitiarum tuae coronae. Inserta est in
ea puritas; triumphat in ea fides; splendet in ea humilitas;
fulget in ea multicolor sanctitas; nitet in ea charitas magna,
omnium florum regina. Ecce corona tua perfecta est. Bene-
dictus qui dedit nobis ut plecteremus eam. / Flores sunt
homines fide florentes etc.
464FOR PAGES 382—402
172. Quam plenitudinem florum, herbarum, et fructuum, signifi-
cantem perfectionem morum, virtutum, et operationum di-
versarum.
177. Quod autem non solum duplicata voce, sed etiam triplicata
hortatur, ut veniat, immensitatem desiderii et amoris, quem
habet ad eam, insinuat, et ut trina repetitio immensitatis et
firmitatis est attestatio, funiculus triplex difficile rumpitur.
Binarius, qui sine medio est, sine vinculo est, et ipse divisionem
significat. Ternarius autem, qui medium habet, concordiae et
coniunctionis est signum. Est enim primus imparium numer-
orum, et primus totus impar, unde quasi totus concordia est.
. vatem Mantuanam, cum dixit: Numero Deus impare
gaudet, quod idem est ac si diceret: Deus pacem diligit ac dilec-
tionem, quia ipse pax et dilectio est.
. et in... coniunctione resurrectionis fit corpus totum
spirituale ut ipsa anima, et fiunt sic unum sicut aqua mixta
aquae et non separantur de caetero in aeternum, cum in eis
nulla sit diversitas, immo unitas et identitas omnium trium
scilicet spiritus, animae et corporis absque separatione in aeter-
num. Sicut vere patet de identitate et unitate sanctissimae
Trinitatis in Deo scilicet Patris et Filii et Spiritus sancti, quae
sunt in ipso Deo unum et idem cum distinctione personarum
absque diversitate in substantia. Ex quibus verbis coniicere pos-
sumus directe quod philosophi antiqui huius artis fuerunt vates
vere per hanc divinam artem, scilicet de resurrectione animae
cum suo corpore et eius glorificatione, de apparitione Dei in
humana carne scilicet Christi et identitate ipsius cum Deo medi-
ante influxu et manatione Spiritus sancti, quamvis indistincte
valde haec noverunt et confuse. . . . Nam in hoc lapide vere
assignatur trinitas in unitate et e converso, cum distinctione et
absque diversitate, ut patet subtiliter intuenti et scienti.
Ad annum decimum sextum laudet granum frumenti spirit-
200.
ualem agricolam, qui corpus suum agro sterili ut semen com-
misit. Corpus illud granum fuit, quod omnia praerumpens mox
ortum est et panem novum praebuit.
205. Et sicut panis ex multis granis conficitur, ita Christi corpus ex
multis electis colligitur. . . . Vinum etiam ex multis acinis
eliquatur, et in torculari exprimitur; ita corpus Christi ex
multis iustis compaginatur, quod in praelo crucis torquetur;
quod vinum in sanguinem Christi vertitur, ut anima nostra
quae in sanguine est, per hoc vivificetur.
207. Etenim ordo ille qui pro claritate sapientiae dici poterat aurum
modo obscuratum est et rursum velut in nigrum plumbum.
465APP. I. LATIN AND GREEK TEXTS
IV. Was St. Thomas the Author of
“Aurora Consurgens?"
21. Mulierum aspectum semper abhorruit. / Femina est mas occa-
sionatus, quasi praeter intentionem naturae proveniens.
25. Coepit miro modo taciturnus esse silentio. . . . coeperunt eum
fratres vocare bovem mutum. / Tempus erit in quo mugitum
bovis istius totus mundus admirabitur. :
28. Non autem sufficit scire in universali sed quaerimus scire un-
umquodque secundum quod in propria natura se habet, hoc
enim optimum et perfectum est genus sciendi.
Hi autem qui in cupro multum operantur in nostris partibus,
30.
Parisiis videlicet ac Coloniae et in aliis locis in quibus fui et
vidi experiri ...
31. et hoc modo dicunt animam unius hominis vel alterius ani-
malis egredi et ingredi in alterum et fascinare ipsum et impedire
operationes ipsius.
37: Et hoc quidem operatur ars cum labore et erroribus multis,
natura vero sine difficultate et labore; cuius causa est, quia
virtutibus caelestibus certis et efficacibus moventur virtutes
in materia lapidum et metallorum existentes, quando materia
operatur; et illae virtutes sunt intelligentiarum operationes,
quae non errant nisi per accidens et inaequalitate scilicet ma-
teriae. / De transmutatione autem horum corporum et muta-
tione unius in aliud non est physici determinare, sed artis quae
vocatur Alchemia.
Omnes autem virtutes infundi in inferioribus omnibus per cir-
culum imaginum caelestium. / quoniam lapides pretiosi prae
aliis habent mirabiles virtutes quia videlicet in substantia magis
simulantur superioribus propter quod a quibusdam eorum
stellae elementales esse dicuntur.
42. Sicut divinans quondam ingenium splendide increscens fratris
Thomae commendavit, ita postea propheta fuit de magistri
Thomae doctrinae victoria perenni.
43. Erat autem praedictus puer non verbis garrulus sed meditari
intra se iam incipiens taciturnus.
4T- Ecce exauditus es, suscipe onus magisterii, quia Deus tecum est,
et pro tuo autem principio nihil aliud proponas nisi hoc:
Rigans montes, etc.
55- . . . accessit ad regem, juxta quem existens in mensa subito
veritate fidei inspirata mensam percussit et dixit; Modo con-
clusum est contra haeresim Manichaeil
466FOR PAGES 411—424
62. Magi dicuntur . . . quasi magistri qui de universis philosoph-
antur.
63. Res autem naturales habent quasdam virtutes occultas quarum
ratio ab homine assignari non potest.
65. Unde etiam ipsi Alchemistae per veram artem alchimiae sed
tamen difficilem, propter occultas operationes virtutis coeles-
ts ess
66. Alchimistae faciunt aliquid simile auro quantum ad accidentias
exteriores; sed tamen non faciunt verum aurum, quia forma
substantialis auri non est per calorem ignis quo utuntur al-
chimistae, sed per calorem solis in loco determinato ubi viget
virtus mineralis, et ideo tale aurum non habet operationem
consequentem speciem, et similiter in aliis quae per eorum
operationem fiunt.
86. Unde cum quidam iam Christi evangelium mutari conentur,
in quoddam aliud evangelium, quod dicunt aeternum, mani-
feste dicunt instare tempora Antichristi. Hoc autem evangelium
de quo loquuntur est quoddam introductorium in libro
Joachim compositum, quod est ab Ecclesia reprobatum, vel
etiam ipsa doctrina Joachim, per quam ut dicunt Evangelium
Christi mutatur . . . Unde cum doctrina praedicta, quam
legem Antichristi dicunt, sit Parisius exposita, signum est
tempus Antichristi instare. Sed doctrinam Joachim vel illius
Introductorii quamvis alia reprobanda contineat, esse doc-
trinam, quam praedicabit Antichristus, falsum est.
100. Item dixit idem testis quod, cum dictus Frater Thomas cele-
braret Missam in dicta capella S. Nicolai Neapoli, fuit mira
mutatione commotus, et post ipsam Missam non scripsit, neque
dictavit aliquid, imo suspendit organa scriptionis in tertia parte
Summae in tractatu de Poenitentia. Et dum idem Fr. Raynaldus
videret, quod ipse Fr. Thomas cessaverat scribere, dixit ei:
Pater, quomodo dimisistis opus tam grande, quod ad laudem
Dei et illuminationem mundi coepistis? Cui respondit dictus
Fr. Thomas: Non possum. Idem vero Fr. Raynaldus timens ne
propter multum studium aliquam incurrisset amentiam, in-
stabat semper, quod idem Fr. Thomas continuaret scripta, et
similiter ipse Fr. Thomas respondit: Raynalde, non possum,
quia omnia quae scripsi videntur mihi paleae. Tunc Fr. Ray-
naldus stupefactus . . . [effecit] quod dictus Fr. Thomas iret
ad Comitissam S. Severini sororem suam, quam caritative dili-
gebat: quo properavit magna cum difficultate, et cum illuc
accederet, ipsi Comitissae sibi occurrenti vix locutus est. Tunc
Comitissa dixit dicto Fr. Raynaldo cum magno timore: Quid
467APP. I. LATIN AND GREEK TEXTS
est hoc, quod Fr. Thomas totus est stupefactus et vix mihi
locutus est? Respondens idem Fr. Raynaldus ait: A festo B.
Nicolai circa fuit in isto statu et ex tunc nihil scripsit. Et idem
Fr. Raynaldus coepit instare apud dictum Fr. Thomam, ut
diceret illi, qua de causa scribere recusaverat, et quare ita stupe-
factus erat. Et post multas interrogationes omni importunitate
factas per ipsum Fr. Raynaldum, respondit Fr. Thomas eidem
Fr. Raynaldo: Ego adiuro te per Deum vivum omnipotentem
et per fidem quam tenetis ordini nostro et per caritatem qua
modo stringeris, quod ea, quae tibi dixero, nulli reveles in vita
mea. Et subiunxit illi: Omnia quae scripsi videntur mihi paleae
respectu eorum quae vidi et revelata sunt mihi. Praedicta vero
Comitissa remanente multum desolata, recessit Fr. Thomas et
rediit Neapolim et deinde assumpsit iter eundi ad Concilium
iuxta vocationem sibi factam penitus nihil scribens. Et in
itinere invasit eum infirmitas in castro Magentiae de Cam-
pania, de qua post modum decessit.
102. Frequenter in spiritu rapitur, cum aliqua contemplatur, sed ex
toto tempore, sicut nunc, nunquam vidi ipsum sic a sensibus
alienum.
106. Item dixit dictus testis, quod, quando idem Fr. Thomas incepit
gravari infirmitate in eodem castro Magentiae, petiit cum
multa devotione quod portaretur ad monasterium S. Mariae
de Fossanova, sicque factum est. Et cum dictus Fr. Thomas
intrasset monasterium infirmus et debilis, adhaesit per manum
posti et dixit: Haec est requies mea in saeculum saeculi etc.
... Et stetit in eodem monasterio pluribus diebus infirmus cum
patientia et humilitate multa, et voluit sumere Corpus Salva-
toris nostri. Et cum Corpus ipsum fuit illi portatum genuflexit
et cum verbis mirae et longae adorationis et glorificationis
salutavit et adoravit ipsum et ante sumptionem Corporis dixit:
Sumo te pretium redemptionis animae meae, sumo te viaticum
peregrinationis meae, pro cuius amore studui, vigilavi et labor-
avi et praedicavi et docui, nihil unquam contra te dixi, sed si
quid dixi ignorans; nec sum pertinax in sensu meo, sed si quid
male dixi, totum reliquo correctioni Ecclesiae Romanae. Et sub-
sequenter mortuus est et sepultus prope altare magnum ec-
clesiae ipsius monasterii in loco palustri prope quoddam viri-
darium ipsius monasterii, ubi est fluvius, ex quo perducitur
aqua per rotam, per quam totus locus ille humectatur, sicut
ipse testis frequenter et diligenter inspexit.
117. Procedit Christus quasi sponsus de thalamo suo, praesagio nup-
tiarum exiit ad campum saeculi, cucurrit sicut gigas exultando
468FOR PAGES 424—420
per viam usque venit ad crucis torum et ibi firmavit ascendendo
coniugium . .. commercio pietatis se pro coniuge dedit . . .
et copulavit sibi perpetuo iure matronam.
122. ... ut... hora matutinali diluculum aenigmatice visionis
finem acciperet et plenae lucis sanctus diem gloriae inchoaret.
469IL' SUPPLEMENT TO THE APPARALUS
The following variants and omissions were not mentioned:
1. The chapter headings, which in D are missing throughout.
2. Allomissions in the MSS at the stereotyped concluding sentence
of the parables: Qu: habet aures audiendi, etc. Mostly either doc-
trinae or disciplinae is missing, or both; the Vienna MS (V) has
throughout: quid dicat spiritus filiis doctrinae.
g. One source is given in D as Liber quintae essentiae, in the other
MSS as oxto or o€e (sexto? secreto? secretorum?) and in V as lo*, with
sexagesimae written alongside. These variants will be explained only
when the sources come to light.
4. In D and V Morienus always occurs as Morigenes; in BLRh, as
Morienes; in MP, as Morienus.
5. Occasionally, obvious mistakes, such as absturimus for abstuli-
mus L (IX.85) or igno P (IX.90), and variants such as aministratio for
administratio P (IX.98), were not mentioned.
6. Thelarge lacunae in B, which can hardly be considered a usable
MS. These omissions are: I.10. me / 12-13. a iumentis ~ Et / 18.
exigua / 24. operationes pulchrae et / 25. neque deformes / 27. quia
scientia — peribit / 29. ait enim / 36. Hoc idem vult / 37. cum
dicit / II.4—7. vobis enim ~ conversabitur / 8-9. et non abscondam.
Et namque / 10. a sapientum / 12. neque cum invidia — habebo / 18.
homo, et, illius / III.10. mittendus est ~ manducandum / 18. ait /
IV.1. De nomine / 4. aureum / 14. summa / 16. De illa — est: ut dicit
ng / V.10. sapientiam hanc / 19. ingeniose et constanter, etc. / VI.8.
mei / 9. a facie iniquitatis meae / 14. mecum / 19. quod est valde,
non / 20. supra omnia ~ quae est / 21-22. tota pulchra ~ laeserit /
23. sapore convalesco / 25. cuius ~ exinanitur / 26-28. sapiens qui
~ aeternum / 31. non apponet illi / 32-33. nivis. Omnibus ~ erit /
$5. quia ~ comedit / 40-43. condemnabitur — Talis / 44. filius /
44-45. speciosum ~ mirantur / 47. autem / VII.g. meus a tactu
470APP. II. SUPPLEMENT TO THE APPARATUS
dilecti mei / 9-10. mei, postquam / 12. omnes, et / 13. et sol ~ ap-
paruerit / 14-15. sicut ~ est / 16. olim / 17. ab oriente — pretiosa /
19. quia / 20. Hodie / 23. amplius / 24-26. inventa — integratus /
28. ullus dolor: luctus, cetera om. / 30-31. philosophi innuunt, cetera
om. | VIIL4. meos / 14. meis / 22-25. extento — filiarum Syon /
29-30. est ~ Jerusalem / 31. nostrorum / 32-34. qui scriptus ~ intel-
lectus / 39. innuunt / IX.6. et super — Israel / 8-9. in veritate / 13-14.
talis ~ sunt / 19-20. sunt — iudicia / 20-21. attribuitur ipse ~ id /
22—24. qui — restauravit / 26. vegetando / 27-28. sicut ~ Nam / 29.
cum / go. descendit / 33. quoniam ~ terram / 90-91. Igne — idem /
124-27. Et — testantur / X.10-11. illum — mecum / 12. domum
hanc / 20-21. et iuvenescentem / 23. si autem / 30. ierit, est / 35.
(corde) et / 37. de / 38-39. ecce — generationes / 42-44. et iterum ~
eius. Et / 60. quod — nominavit / 61. autem / 67. anima / 74. sic, Et
(Propheta) / 96. et fovet / 98. autem / 108. vestrae / 111. utrum —
deficiens / 112-15. O quam ~ laborem / 116. scribitur: dicitur /
118. et dictis / 119. et proveniunt, Domino / 126. quam / XI.4. terra /
6. cum / 21. fatuorum /28-29. per ~ mundum / 32. testante / 33.
non ~ saeculi / 58-59. Ubi ~ victoria, ibi — gratia / 60-62. vivifi-
cabuntur — advenit / 67. Ut / 72—73. aeternum est / 76. Adam /
XII.12. vocavi — nemo / 15. pulcherrimam veste / 17. tunc / 21. toto
~ desiderio / 22-24. quid ~ mihi, omnes / 29. et laetitiae / 32. me
(nec) / 38. quia audit — tuus / 42. et agnitionis — spei / 43-44. et flores
~ honestatis / 46—47. respiciens — mei / 49. aromatizans / 50. et
myrrha electa / 51-52. progrediens — latet / 54. et laetitiae quia /
56-57. et — abstulit / 62. et (faciens) / 73. namque / 73-75. et lauda-
bunt — saeculum / 78—79. quod siccum ~ illud / 81. tota / 81-82. lex
~ propheta et, Ego / 82-83. Ego ~ eruere / 85. et nemo / 87-9o. quae
dulcis ~ Esebon / 91. venter — poculis / 97-98. et erunt — vineae /
98. mi / 102. tua, servavi / 103. et utamur ~ celeriter / 104-9. et nos
impleamus — amore / 112. quia / 117. danda /
7. Further isolated and unimportant omissions in the other MSS
are as follows: I.12. in viis V, corr. Vz / 14. et (Deus) L / 14. eam L /
19. et sine causa non est L / 21. illius V / 26. vitae L / 29. eius V /
31. milia L / 38. et augmenti P / 41. in D / IL17. infinitus omnibus
L / YIL.11. sunt L / 12-13. hic enim ~ scientia V / 13. esset L / 17.
cum dormiente loquitur V / 19. ultra L / IV.5. in P / 8. in P / 12. et
ultimo D / V.3. et V / 4. Intelligite M / 5. parabolam et L / VI.1.
nigra L / 12. me L / 22. mihi V / 26. et ipse — laetificat patrem
hunc D / 29. meam L / VIL23. drachma L / 27. erit D / VIII.10.
me L / 14. meis B / 23. suis L / 29. est L / 35. et P / IX.4. et eiecerit
M | 10. et P, est M / 25. et (flammis) M / 36. est (in) P / 37. in aqua
471APP. II. SUPPLEMENT TO THE APPARATUS
P | 40-42. quia ignis ~ vitae P / 57. unius P / 58-59. alterius. Et ~
frigidum L / 78. Et L / 79. et (ignis) D / 8o. nam D / 83. scribitur P /
99. et Rh / 102. hanc L / 104-5. infima — visceribus, transposed V |
106. de quo — vinctos V / 113. et in ipso L / 118. Et D / 122. et D /
124-25. dictum est Rh / 126. in L / X.2. quam L / 6. hac M / 29. ipsi
L | 40-41. cum isto — Si M / 52. dicitur L / 53. est L / 54. sua P /
88. pro bono Rh / 88-89. sed bonitas ~ pro parvo P / 91. Et D / 96. et
L | 100. ne L / 111. an deficiens L / XI.3. est M / 4. etiam D / 7. sit
L / 11. sacro eloquio L / 14. auri V / 23-24. prohiberet — vult V /
25. terrae L / 40. producens L / 47. anni M / 52. in D / 58. ubi est ~
victoria L / 65. homo L / XII.4-5. decoloravit ~ operuerunt L / '
5. est D / 10. me D / 11. quaesivi L / 16. mihi L / 22. et P / 24. mea
L | 25.te L / 26. meam P, et P / 40. meus L, locutus V / 51. valde L /
65. et granum ipsorum L / 78. pane L / 76. non (paveo) M, meo L,
sum M / 78. est L / 79-80. et illud — viceversa M / 88-90. O quam ~
Esebon M / 91. non M / 92. nive, nitidiores L / 93. est L / 93-94.
atque desiderabile D / 97. eius P / 100. et D / 110. quam (iucundum)
D / 118. hominLe /
8. Variants which are of importance for textual criticism but
which were nevertheless discounted in our text: I.5. illa: prima D /
9. confundanturD / concupisciteD / 10. sapientiamB / Domini DL /
11. et om. MPVF, corr. V? | dixit P / homines: omnes L / 14. etiam
eam: ex causa M / 15. Salomonem M / composuit B / posuit et
omnem pulchritudinem L cetera om. / 17. illi: huic L, illo M / com-
peravit M / 18. existimabitur M / 20. negacione L / 21. huius om.
BL | modi M / 23. dextra DV | vero om. BL / 24. pulchra et lauda-
bilis P / 25. difformesL / moderataL / 27. iis D / illam B / 28. quia:
quare M / 31. quod: quia L / viveret homo: unus L / mille L /
35. cui quantum et quando vult.L / et om. BD / 36. libro om.
BL / 37. cum: tantum M / 38. terminus: unius VD / 39. cessit in
finitum M / invenit PB / 41. viis: vicis M / ipsam M / gressos L,
egressus B / 42. dicit: docet DL, ait B / autem: enim L, autem Lo,
om. B | 48. quando: quoniam D / fuerunt D, fuerit M / 44. anima
L / sequitur: servat D / 47. Sapientia M / providentiam D / 48.
namque: numquam L, enim inquam quod M / est: et L / naturale
et subtile M / 49. proficiens P / vigilaverit MD / 50. securi: secum
D, cum L / illum M, illa D / 51. nec: et BL / iis D / II.3. regnetur M
/ omnes: eius D / 4. qui: quae M / librorum natura est infinita M /
estis infiniti VP, imbuti B / scientiam D, sapientia M / 5. prophetiis
DL | 6. parabolorum MP / interibit D / exquirat MP / discutit DL /
7. abscondite M / parabolorum MP, enigmatum L / conversatur
MP | 9. res: vos P / 10. a: ad MPV | est: et P, est et D, om. L | trip-
472APP. II. SUPPLEMENT TO THE APPARATUS
licis M / occulta LV, obcultata M / 11. pone in luce P / eius om. DL |
12. iterum MPV / habeo ML / 14. est MP / Et om. MPV | 15. in
mirabiles D, in minerales M / mihi: me D / fixione P, ex fine fixione
M / 17. quam MP / 18. cum homo invenerit DL / dicit: debet D /
18-19. laetari velim et D / 21. didicit B / qui: quoniam L / 23. illud
D | post: praeterL / (homo) certissime (habet), add. L / III.1. negan-
tibus: refutantibus BL / 3. sanctorum: secretorum D / 5. ignorant
MPL | volunt D / 6. discet imperitus M / qui est om. LD / 8. enim:
omnium D / sapientiae et (scientiae) add. B / causa: eam V / 9. eis:
illis L / 10. neque: nam M / 11. margaritas P / 12. scientiae: sapien-
tiae L / 18. archanum D / huius: illius L / 14. intrabit D / huius:
illius L / 15. carpere D, capere BL / 16. insipientibus: nisi sapienti-
bus L / qui enim: quia qui B / 17. insipiente: eo B / 18. haberent L,
habet V / 19. ultra om. L / locutusM / 20. neque: et B / globulo M /
moraliumB / 21. noverciM / medias modicisL / augustas P / deflent
P, defloret L / IV.1. De titulo huius libri cap. quart. Aurora con-
surgens L / 2. volumine M / baptisatus L / 3. haec M / 5. diem ac
noctem D / 6. rubee et citrine MP / 7. album: rubeum L / 8. in:
ut V / 10. laborantes LV / inficientem MPV / 11. ut philosophus
ait D, propheta B, in Psalmo PMV / 12. (ultimo) modo add. L |
13. nostra: vero MP, om. B | 15. eam MP, cum mea V | 16. offenditur
P | 15. eructas P / V.1. fatuorum B, et stultorum add. L / 3. librum
MPV | clamat V / 5. interpretationis D / 6. enim: vero MP / usi:
visi MP / 7. super L / globolo luminari M / 9. autem: igitur D,
om. L | (autem) hanc add. B / intellegit L / intelligemus M / 12. nec
.non: et BV / videmus M / 13. manum D / et (virtus) add. P / 17.
regnans: regnanter D / 18. me om. BL / 19. et: ac L / VI.2. qua P /
3. magnam: nigram L / 5. putruerant D / 6. inferiorum L / 6—7. et
quia umbra (L: umbrae) mortis et tempestas dimiserunt me DL /
7. procedent MP / 8. Ideo om. DL | 9. et om. DL | 10. Ergo: ego
DL | 12. meam om. MP | inferni MP, de Inferno L / 15. offenderit
V | acquisiverit DL, om. B / 16. turbavit L / vestimentum quoque
L | 17. amiserit DL, arserit M / poculum B / 18. vitiaverit et (foeda-
verit) add. L / 20. superL / 21. et add. L / 22. mihi om. V / 25. cum
dormitione P, condormitatione M / 26. ipsi P / in patre M / in
filium: filius BL / 27. in excelsum P, in excelsis D / 30. custodiverint
L / 31. opponet D / illi: ei L / 32. ambulaverintL / 35. comedet D /
36. illius: illis M / 37. habent M / 38—39. crediderunt — bene fuerunt
baptizati D / 39. fuerint M / 39-41. salvus erit — sunt haec om. M /
47. habent L, audient L / 48. dicit D / 52. videntur P / VII.1. Par-
ticula M / 3. et (femina) add. L / 4. fuit / maris: avari M / 5. sagipte
M | 7. horreum meum L / 9. et postea venter meus a tactu dilecti
mei intumuerit om. LVB / 10. pessulio M / 16. olim om. B, aliquando
473APP. II. SUPPLEMENT TO THE APPARATUS
V | 17. tria: tanta D / 18. illo D / 19. aspexit L / 20. regnatio D, re-
generaturus L / 21. feminam intulit M / 22. mors enim: ores eius M /
nec: et B / 23. eam: vos (eos?) L / 27. Quia non ~ clamor P / 31.
anima M / 31.-32. quia corruptio: corruptio autem DL, om. B |
VIII.1. parabola: particula M / 2. et vecte: perfecte M / 5. quo-
cumque P / movit B / 10. congregabant PV / 11. terrae M / effun-
dant: efficiant M / me om. L / 14. Ideoque DL / 16. ut: ne D / habi-
tet V / 18. et praeterit — mittendus est qui om. LD / iugum: Migrum
L | 20. nostrae: meae D / sedabamus P / septem L / 22. quia elevati
L | ambularunt D / 23. suis om. L / composita M, incomposito D, in ,
composito L, recomposito V / 24. decalundabit M, et calvabit V, om.
L | ergo om. MLVP | ergo — Sion om. M. / 28. cooperimus BD, non
cooperimus L / defundimus M / go. recepit L / 31. impleatur L /
32. quo scriptum P / 33. (salvabitur) et salvus vocabitur add. DL /
sordum L / 34. tum D / 36. in aeternum om DL / 38. septem L / 39.
annis L / philosophus insinuat L / IX.1. Parabola: Particula M /
2. trinario V / 4. eieceritque L / et eiecerit om. M / 7. cognoscunt L /
10. Spiritum sanctum: in spiritum M / 12. aequalitatis L / 17-18. est
procedens: procedit B / 20. (iudicia) eius add. D / 21. ex: ab L /
23. et (peccato) add. M / deperditum D / 25. flumen L / 26. quando:
quoniam D / 27. alluit M / 31. imminenti V / ad haec M / 32. haec
est aqua M / 33. spirat M / 34. cum: quando D / 35. portavit L /
88-39. (in qua) sibi (consistit) add. MVP / 39. autem: vult V / 42.
prius: mihi M / qui prius om. L / erat om. DL | 44. fructum V /
46. praeteribit onusD / 47. et om. MP | ipse: is B, om. L / 49. suis M /
munere MP, numeris D / 50. operandi L, operandam M / terra L /
51. prophetam M / 52. calcavit P, conculcavit L / operationem meam
P / 60. adusionem M / quo DL / 61. terram L / 62. et (in aestu) add.
M / 63. Et: unde D, om. L / 64. Res est in qua D, rex in qua M /
adusio M / 65. quae: quo V / et dignior: est indignior et V / 66. virtus
V / id est: et M / 68. sancti: seu D, sanctus B / liquefaciat M / 71.
quia: quod D / 73. haec M / 74. (mollificat) id add. D / et: ac L /
spiritus L / 75. quo canitur: coquando M / horrendas L, arridas M /
76. purgat P / tenebrosas M / attende P / (sensibus) infunde add.
L | 77. nocte om. L / in om. LM / 78. omnem M / 79. rubeus L /
81. propter hoc: propterea D / 82. Et: Unde L / 88. in Turba RAL /
85. dealbuntur L / Et: unde D / 87. quinto: eruto D / quando:
quoniam D / 88. sic D / 89. erogenia P / 9o. ob hoc: quoniam B /
igno P / 92. et (eduxisti) add. V / et: in D / 93. subtilia B / liquescit
P | et om. M / 94-96. aqua liquescit ~ glorificatam om. BL / 96.
quod: tunc L / 96-97. postremae operationis operationem D /
97. praecedit: percipit MP / 97-98. purificabit L / 98. quae a: quo
L | vel mundificatio om. B / 99. (rectificatio) nuncupatur add. L /
474APP. II. SUPPLEMENT TO THE APPARATUS
99-100. a quibusdam — nuncupatur om. BD / 101. muneris D / 105.
quando: quoniam D / 106. (propheta) dicit add. L / ducit L / victos
M / 109. fecit DL / noverit Rh / 112. Nisi: ubi D / ascendit BD /
114. opus: corpus L / quando: quoniam D / qua PD / 116. esse:
omnes D / 117. Unde (et propheta) add. D / 118. nimime minimum
L | leviaL / nisi: cum D / 119. nisi: cumD / 120. detendi D / in non
corporea B / 122. adimplicatur M / quia: quare M / potest facere:
facit D / 124. ananiam P, naminam M / 125. lava te L / Jordano
LD | et om. MP / 127. prophetae L / testatur P / Qui: Quia L,
qui L» / 129. quo: quiaP / adimpleturL / 130. destilla D / X.1. Par-
ticula M / 8. introiverit L / 4. inebriabunt L / 5. atriis: domo L /
6. eam M / 8. Nam: ut B / g. audiverit M / 10. intrabo L / satiebor
L | 18. hominum D / 14. quae decet: quam docet B, quam decet
VP, om. D | 17. ut: et D / 18. ac: et D / 19. sitiant B / 20. inveniat
L | 22. procul dolore M / pauci: praerumper D / 23. reservant M /
qui: quia V / ut (parvuli): ita p. B / sapiunt: sentiunt D, et sapiunt
M | 24. Seniorem M / ipsius M / 27. lunae: lucem D / 28. enim
om. MP | habet D / 29. ligaverit et solverit D / fiat L / 31. inenar-
rabiles P / 33-34. potentiales D / 34. quo RhDL / 4o. (Alex.) dicit
add. M | isto: ipso P / 42. quo DL / prophetae V / 43. (eris) etc.
add. L [ 46. delés Rh / volutates MP / 47-48. qua noiam M, quam
veram B, vocavi V / 51. Unde om. RhL | dicit: ait L / 52. Quidam:
quid D / 53. Et: item L / 54. superiorem P / inferiorem P / 55. pene-
trativum M / 56. sufficissem D, suffecisset P / 57. quo D / 62. et om.
MVB / 65. loquitur L Et (fides) add. L / 68-69. terram et aquam
M | 69. scilicet om. MDV, videlicet L / scilicet aer: puta aer RAL /
70. confunditur M / credit D / 78. beatificat P / 74. consequere M /
75. eo D | 79. Aldephonsus BDRh, Adelphonsus L / verus D, vero
M / 80. desinit MPV / Gregorius: allegorico P, allegorice MV /
81. Et Job om. MPBD LRh | Et (omnia) add. MPB / 83. isto om.
MP | et: etiam D / 86. benignus: benignitas M / 87. reddat L /
88. parvum: maximum L / 91. scripturae L / habemus D / 93. neces-
saria: noia M / 95. temperantia vero bíi est temperantia M / 96.
quod: quia L / et (in): id est (in) D / conservet P / 97. anima:
nam M / 98. cum: quando D / 100. temperantur M / 101. excedit
L | 102. cave L / 108. convertatur L / cave P / 104. supra: per L /
105. temperanter D / posite M / 106. tredecima Rh / seu DRh |
107. quaL / dicitur (Apostolus) add. L / 109. spirituale D / 111. pro-
ficiens L / 112-13. intelligent M / 113. ii D / 115. propter D /
quo P / 117. factus om. BM / oboediens om. P / 118. oboediatis V /
119. perveniunt V / 123. regnum P / 127. reserare L / (elementa) etc.
add. Rh | XL.1. Particula M / 5. vero: ubi L / notantur L / 7. (alio-
rum) omnium add. B / et mater: terre materia M / 8. Initio ~ id
475APP. II. SUPPLEMENT TO THE APPARATUS
est om. MB | 9. a terra: cetera P / 10. separando L / 11. sancto D /
13. commiscere D / promanenteL / 14. aurum: animaB / 17. ascendet
D | 19. quae est (aqua) D / 21. Et: ut M / 22. ire in aliquo loco ne
D, (ne) hoc add. B / vel (scriptotenus) add. B / ponantur D, pro-
ponerentL / lucidae D / 23. gloriam M / 25. terrae: refie (?) P / ad-
venit P / 26. id est: et D / 28. destillaverunt D / 29. ut enarrat gloria
D / 30. solum L / 34. stabant M / 35. rigantis P / 36. de fructu: de-
fectu P / 37. (virtutes) terrae add. M / ibi: coeli L / 38. germina D /
coelorum D / 39. et fructum educens D / et: in P / 41. inquit B /
42. artum P / 45. egrediemur D / 46. serviant L / 47. eius: ipsius B / .
septem L / 49. Turba L / 5o. sustinet L / 51. quia L / 52. rubeo L /
53. et: est L, corr. Ly / sicca L / 57. fiat L / 58. dilectum M / 59.
ibi: ubi P / 68. sumpserat V / 64. conceptum D / 66. transivit D,
infundavit M, transiverunt L / 68. moritur: mortuum D / 69. fuit
L | 71. dicet D / 72. possidete B / 78. habuerit M / 79. tum D /
habemus D / XII.1. Particula M / 2. ad dilectam Rh, ad dilectum
L / 7. fimo P / 10. in manum suam D / 11. in: cum M / 12. nemo:
non L / 13. Surgam: Qis L / (ergo) ego add. L / 15. pulcherrima L /
17. eo M / coelum L / 18. quiescam L / 19. varietate: veritate L /
ergo: quaeso D / 21. toto: te L / et M / 25. in regionem V / 26. pur-
purata M / 30. signo: sum P / 33. faciat M / 36. sponsa: speciosa V /
tuo: meo L / 37. vel: et D / 38. quiesces D / 39. habitate Jerusalem
M / 40. Ego: et L / 41. floris M / 44-45. abierunt MB / 46. noc-
turnos vel (nocturnales) add. L / 47. perspiciens L / vulneratum D /
49. odorem M / 50. Ego: et L, ergo M / 51. electa: coruscans D /
52. Et (ego) add. L / 54. sponsationis V / 55. Ego: Et D / 57. quae
DL | 59. inmissit P / secunda om. RAL | (tertia) et (sexta) add. D /
64. seminat P / eorum D / 66. illud: id V / 67. aufert D, afferat L /
68. quidem: quod L / terra bona L / 69. quia: quare D / filiorum
D | 70. in decem millium D / 71. granis et fructibus D / 75. reficio
L / 78. illud: id D / 82. sermo: primus V / 82-88. occidam quod
vivere D / 84. ipsius: impius P / ipsa P / 85. separabat M / 86. quia:
quare P / dilectio nostra: dilecto meo L / nostra: mea M / 87. sonat
L | go. piscm ei neschebon P / aureae P / 91. poculo V / 92. tuas M /
93. dilectabile M / 94. Israel B / (dicite) add. M / faciam consorori
D | 98. electa D / 101. parrutuerunt D / ori meo: mods me P / 102.
ubera: verba M / pofia P, ponam M / 108. ergo: et B / 104. et (vino)
add. D | praeteriat Rh, praetereat nos flos temporis cetera om. V /
105. quin: quoniam L / 107-8. relinquimus L / 108. hac D /
109. coitu et amore D, amoris M / 110. duobus: fratres L / 111.
secundum: unum L / 113. dicat: loquitur L / 114. ad filios L / dis-
ponsatione M, dispositione D / desp. ubi dil. ad dil. semen suum V /
115. marcescat M, maturescit B / eam D /
476