Albert G. Mackey: The History of Freemasonry (7 volumes, 1906)
==============================================================
Albert Gallatin Mackey’s complete 1906 History of Freemasonry in seven volumes. The standard American Masonic history; source: Internet Archive.

# VOLUME I

NAWAB SALAR JUNG BAHADUR.

Dr. ALnRRT GALLAT/N" MACKEY

THE

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

BY

ALBERT GALLATIN MACKEY, M.D.. Hd.

WITH

THE HISTORY OF ITS INTRODUCTION AND PROGRESS
IN THE UNITED STATES

THE HISTORY OF THE

SYMBOLS OF FREEMASONRY

AND THE

HISTORY OF THE A.. A . SCOTTISH RITE

BY

WILLIAM R. SINGLETON, Hd.

Voli|^^^,^ne

pilBlrsmti-ihr '

THE MASONIC HISTORY COMPANY
NEW York

LONDON, Sydney and Calcutta

“ There seems no human thought so primitive
as to have lost its bearing on our own thought, nor
so ancient as to have broken its connexion with
our own life/’

Tylor, Primitive Culture.

PREFACE

O comprehensive a title as the one selected for
the present work would be a vain assuiniMion if
the authors object was not really to embrace in
a series of studies the whole cycle of Masonic
history and science. Anything short of this
would not entitle the work to be called Tiir:
History of Freemasonry.

Freemasonry as a society of long standing, has of course its his-
tory, and the age of the institution has necessarily led to the mixing
in this history of authentic facts and of mere traditions or legends.

We are thus led in the very beginning of our labors to divide
our historical studies into two classes. The one embraces the Leg-
endary History of Freemasonry, and the other its authentic annals.

The Legendary History of Freemasonry will constitute the sub-
ject of the first of the five parts into which this work is divided. Il
embraces all that narrative of the rise and progress of the institution,
which beginning with the connection with it of the antediluvian
patriarchs, ends in ascribing its modern condition to the patronage
of Prince Edwin and the assembly at York.

This narrative, which in the T5th and up to the end of the 17th
century, claimed and received the implicit faith of the Craft, which
in the 18th century was repeated and emendated by the leading
writers of the institution, and which even in the 19th century has had
its advocates among the learned and its credence among the un-
learned of the Craft, has only recently and by a new school been
placed in its true position of an apocryphal story.

And yet though apocryphal, this traditionary story of Freemasonry
which has been called the Legend of the Craft, or by some the
Legend of the Guild, is not to be rejected as an idle fable. On
the contrary, the object of the present work has been to show that
these Masonic legends contain the germs of an historical, mingled

vi

PREFACE

often with a symbolic, idea, and that divested of certain evanescences
in the shape of anachronisms, or of unauthenticated statements,
these Masonic legends often, nay almost always, present in their
simple form a true philosophic spirit.

To establish this principle in the literature of Freemasonry,
to divest the legends of the Craft of the false value given to them
as portions of authentic history by blind credulity, and to protect
them from the equally false estimate that has been bestowed upon
them by the excessive incredulity of unphilosophic sceptics, who
view them only as idle fables without more meaning than what they
attach to monkish legends — in one word, to place the Legendary
History of Freemasonry in the just position which it should occupy
but has never yet occupied, is the object of the labors expended in
the composition of the first part of this work.

The second part of the work will pass out of the field of myth
and legend and be devoted to the authentic or recorded history of
Freemasonry.

Rejecting as wholly untenable and unsupported by historical
evidence, the various hypotheses of the origin of the institution in
the Pagan mysteries, in the Temple of Solomon, or in the Crusades,
an attempt has been made to trace its birth to the Roman Colleges
of Artificers, which present us with an almost identical organization
of builders and architects. Following the progress of the Roman
Masons of the Colleges, through their visits to the different prov-
inces of the Empire, where they went, accompanying the legions in
their victorious excursions, we will find that the art of building was
communicated by them to the Italians, the Spaniards, the Gauls, and
the Britons.

In this way the knowledge of Operative Masonry and its prac-
tice in guilds, sodalities, and confraternities was preserved by these
peoples after the extinction of the Roman Empire.

We next find this sodality emerging in the loth century from
Lombardy, and under the name of “ Traveling Freemasons,” per-
ambulating all Europe and re-establishing confraternities of Stone-
masons in Germany, France, England, Scotland, and other coun-
tries.

The narrative of the progress of this fraternity of builders from
Como, which was evidently an outshoot from the ancient Roman
Colleges, is treated with great particularity, because without the aid

PREFACE

vii

of any mythical or legendary instrumentality we arc thus enabled
to connect it continuously with the modern system of ()i)erative
Masonry.

The merging of Operative into Speculative Masonry in the I)e-
ginning of the i8th century is an historical incident based on the
most authentic records. Its details, derived from records of whose
genuineness there never has beiMi a doul)t, will complete and {)erfect
the history of Freemasonry from its rise to its f)rescnt condition.

Thus we may imagine the growth of that magnificent tree, be-
neath whose wide-spreading branches the fraternity now recline. In
the far remote reign of Numa, the jdiilosophie and religious king of
Rome (or if his personality be doubled by the disciples of Niebuhr),
in the times represented by his name, we find the germ of the insti-
tution in those organized confratcTnities of craftsmen, whom history
records as flourishing with varying success and ])opularity through
the times of the Kingdom, the Republic, and the Empire of Rome.

The seeds of a co-operative association of builders, based on the
principles of fraternity, were carried with the legions of Rome into
the various provinces that had been conquered by the soldiers of
the Empire, and as colonies of Romans were there established, the
Latin language, the manners and customs of the Roman pcojile
and their skill in the arts were introduced among the natives.

Of these arts, the most important was that of architecture, and
by means of monuments still remaining, as well as other historical
evidences, we arc enabled to follow the gradual growth of the oper-
ative societies out of the Roman guilds and then that of the sjiecu-
lative institution out of the operative societies.

The hypothesis sought to be sustained in investigating the his-
tory of Freemasonry, in the present work, may be succinctly stated
as follows :

Operative Masonry is the basis on which S|)cculative I'reema-
sonry is founded — that is to say, the lodges of P'reemasons of the
present day are the successors of the lodges of Operative Masons
which c.xisted all over Europe during the Middle Ages and up to
the beginning of the i8th century.

But the Operative Masonry that gave birth to the modern specu-
lative order was not the mere craft or trade or art of building.
The men who practiced it were not mere cutters and layers of stone.
There were large numbers of workmen who belonged to a lower

viii

PREFACE

class of the trade or profession, who were never looked upon with
any respect, with whom companionship was denied, and who were
employed only in subordinate positions. These men were called
cowans, rough layers, foreigners or similar titles intimating degra-
dation of class and inferiority of skill.

No relation can be traced between the Operative Masons of this
class and the Speculative Masons, who have represented Freema-
sonry since the beginning of the i8th century. The Operative
Masons, between whom and the modem Freemasons there is a
relation of succession, were a higher class of artists. They were
possessed of secrets connected with peculiar skill in their craft.
But above all, they were distinguished for the adoption of what
might, in our modern phrase, be called the co-operative principle in
the practice of their Craft. Perhaps it may more properly be called,
a principle of sodality. It was shown in the formation of a com-
pany, a society, a guild, a corporation, or a confraternity, call it by
what name you please, in which there was an association of skill,
of labor, and of interests. This principle has been called the guild
spirit, and it is this spnrit which constitutes the essential characteris-
tic of the Masonic institution.

If we propo.se to establish a chain of historical continuity, which
shall extend from the first appearance of any association in which
the origin of modern Freemasonry is sought to be found, to the
present day, when the institution has assumed its well-recognized
form, there are two elements which must be well marked in every
link of the chain.

In the first place, there must be an operative element. Freema-
sonry can be traced only to an association of builders or architects.
Every ceremony in the ritual, every symbol in the philosophy of
Speculative Frcema.sonry, indicates — nay, positively proves — that it
has been derived from and is closely connected with the art of build-
ing. The first Freemasons were builders, they could have been
nothing else. To seek for them in a mystical, religious association
as the ancient pagan Mysteries, or in an institution of chivalry as
in the Knights of the Crusades would be a vain and unprofitable
task. As well might one look for the birthplace of the eagle in
the egg of the crow as to attempt to trace the origin of Freema-
sonry to anything other than an association of builders.

In the second place there must be a guild spirit The builders

PREFACE

IX

who have come together must not have associated temporarily for
the mere purpose of accomplishing a certain task, each man wholly
independent of the others, and arbitrarily exercising only his own
skill. There must be a permanent organization, a community of
interest, a division of labor, a spirit of fraternity, an organization
looking beyond the present moment. A certain number of Masons,
brought together to construct an edifice, who after its construction
would be ready to disperse, each Mason on his own footing to seek
fresh employment under new masters and with new companions,
could never, under such circumstances, be concentrated into such
organizations as would, in the lapse of time, give rise to the lodges
of modern Speculative Freemasons.

The hypothesis, then, which is advanced in the present work and
on which its authentic historical part is constructed, is that there
was from the earliest days of Rome an organization of workmen
under the name of the Collcs^inm Artificum, or Collrffiuvi
Fabrortiin, that is, the College of Artificers, or the College of Work-
men. That this college consisted of builders and architects, that it
was regularly organized into an association, which was marked with
all the peculiarities that afterward distinguisheil the guilds or incor-
porations of the Middle Ages. That this college, nourishing greatly
under the later empire, sent its members, imbued with the skill in
architecture and the spirit of confraternity which they had acquired
in the home organization, into the various provinces which the Roman
legions penetrated and conquered. And, finally, that in all these
provinces, but principally in Northern Italy, in (iaui, and in Britain,
they established similar colleges or associations, in which they im-
parted to the natives their knowledge of the art of building and
impressed them with their spirit of fraternal co-operation in labor.

From these colleges of workmen sprang in the course of time,
and after the fall of the empire and the transition of the provinct:s
into independent and sovereign states, organizations of builders, of
masons and architects, who in Italy assumed the name and title of
Traveling Freemasons, in Gaul that of the Mestrice des Ma9ons,
in Germany that of the Steinmetzen, in England that of the Guilds
and Companies, and in Scotland that of the Lodges and Incorpora-
tions. All these were associations of builders and architects, who
were bound together by regulations which were very similar to and
evidently derived from those by which the Roman Colleges had

X

PREFACE

been governed, with others suggested by change of conditions and
circumstances.

The associations, though mainly made up of professional work
men, sometimes admitted, as the Roman Colleges had done, non-
professionals, men of wealth, distinction, or learning into their ranks
as honorary members.

About the close of the 17th century the number of these non-
professional members was greatly increased, which fact must have
produced a gradual and growing influence on the organizations.

Finally, during the second decade of the i8th century, these
non-professional members completely changed the character of the
Masonic organizations known at that time under the name of
Lodges. The operative element was entirely eliminated from them,
and the Lodges became no longer companies of builders, but frater-
nities of speculative philosophers.

The new institution of Speculative Freemasonry retained no other
connection with or relation to the operative organization, than the
memory of its descent, and the preservation of the technical language
and the tools of the art, all of which were, however, subjected to new
and symbolic interpretations.

This transition of the operative into the speculative organizations
occurred in London in the year 1 71 7, at which time the Grand Lodge
of Free and Accepted Masons was established.

From England the change passed over into other countries and
Lodges were everywhere instituted under the authority of the Grand
Lodge of London. The history of Freemasonry from that time is
to be found in the recorded annals of the various Lodges and Grand
Lodges which sprung up in the course of time from the parent
stem, the common mother of all the speculative Lodges of the
world.

Scotland might .seem at first to be an exception to this cosmo-
politan maternity, but though the growth of the speculative out of
the operative element was there apparently an independent act of
transition, yet it cannot be denied that the influence of the English
society was deeply felt in the sister kingdom and exhibited especially
in the adoption of the three degrees, in the organization of the
Grand Lodge on a similar model, and in the establishment of the
office of Grand Master, a title of entirely modem and English
origin.

PREFACE

xi

Such is the plan of the history that has been pursued in the
present work, a plan which materially and essentially differs from
that of any preceding writer. Iconoclasts have composed mono-
graphs in which they have attacked particular fallacies and denounced
special forgeries, but the history of Masonry as a whole has not be-
fore been written with, the same spirit of candor that has been or
should always be exercised in the composition of history.

Doubtless the well-settled and carefully nourished prejudices of
some will be shocked by any attempt to expose the fallacies and
falsehoods which have too long tarnished the annals of Freemasonry.
But such an attempt cannot, if it be successfully pursued, but com-
mand the approval of all who believe with Cicero that history is
“the witness of time, the light of truth, and the life of memory.”

ALBERT G. MACKEY, M.D.

PART ONE

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

CHAPTER I

TRADITION AND HISTORY IN MASONRY

N the Study of Freemasonry there are two kinds
of statements which are presented to the mind
of the inquiring scholar, which arc sometimes
concurrent, but much oftencr conflicting, in
their character.

These are the historical and the traditional,
each of which appertains to Freemasonry as we
may consider it in a different aspect.

The historical statement relates to the Institution as we look at
it from an exoteric or public point of view ; the traditional refers
only to its esoteric or secret character.

So long as its traditional legends are confined to the ritual of
the Order, they are not appropriate subjects of historical inquiry.
They have been invented by the makers of the rituals for symbolic
purposes connected with the forms of initiation. Out of these
myths of Speculative Masonry its philosophy has been developed ;
and, as they are really to be considered as merely the expansion of
a philosophic or speculative idea, they can not properly be posited in
the category of historical narratives.

But in the published works of those who have written on the
origin and progress of Masonry, from its beginning to the present
time, the legendary or traditional has too much been mingled with
the historical element. The effect of this course has been, on ad-
versely prejudiced minds, to weaken all claims of the Institution to
an historical existence. The doctrine of “ false in one thing, false
in all,” has been rigidly applied, and those statements of the Ma-
sonic historian which are really authentic have been doubted or re-

2

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

jected, because in other portions of his narrative he has been too
credulous.

Borrowing the technical language of archajology, I should say
that the histoiy of Masonry* may be divided into two periods — the
prehi.storic and the historic. The former is traditional, the latter
documentary. Each of these divisions must, in any historical in-
quiry, be clearly defined. There is also another division, into esoteric
and exoteric history. The first is exclusively within the arcana of
the Order, and can not, as I have said, be the subject of hi.storical
investigation. The second properly comes within the sphere of his-
torical study, and is subjected to all the laws of hi.storical criticism.

When we are treating of Freemasonry as one of the social or-
ganizations of the world — as one of those institutions which are the
results of civilization, and which have sprung up in the progress of
society ; and, finally, when wc are considering what are the influ-
ences that the varying conditions of that society have produced
upon it, and what influences it has reciprocally produced upon these
varying conditions — we arc then engaged in the solution of a hi.s-
torical problem, and we mu.st pursue the inquiry in a historical
method and not otherwise. We must discard all speculation, be-
cause history deals only with facts.

If we were treating the history of a nation, we should assert
nothing of it as hi.storical that could not be traced to and be veri-
fied by its written records. All that is conjectured of the events
that may have occurred in the earlier period of such a nation, of
which there is no record in contemporaneous or immediately subse-
quent times, is properly thrown into the dim era of the prehistoric
age. It forms no part of the authentic history of the nation, and
can be dignified, at its highest value, with the title of historical
speculation only, which claims no other credence than that which
its plausibility or its probability commands.

Now, the possibility or the probability that a certain event may
have occurred in the early days of a nation’s existence, but of which
event there is no record, will be great or little, as dependent on cer-
tain other events which bear upon it, and which come within the
era of its records. The event may have been possible, but not
probable, and then but very little or no importance would be im-

^ In the progress of this work I shall use the terms Masonry and Freemasonry with-
out discrimination, except on special, and at the time specified, occasions.

TRADITION AND HISTORY IN MASONRY

3

puted to it, and it would at once be relegated to the category of
myths. Or it may have been both possible and highly probable,
and we may be then permitted to speculate upon it as something
that had exerted an influence upon the primitive character or the
subsequent progress of the nation. But, even then, it would not
altogether lose its mythical character. Whatever we might predi-
cate of it would only be a plausible speculation. It would not be
history, for that deals not in what may have been, but only in that
which actually has been.

The progress in these latter days of what are called the exact
sciences has led, by the force of example and analogy, to a more
critical examination of the facts, or, rather, the so-called facts, of
history.

Voltaire said, in his Life of Charles XII. of Sweden, that "in-
credulity is the foundation of history.” Years pa.ssed before the
axiom in all its force was accepted by the learned. But at length it
has been adopted as the rule of all historical criticism. To be cred-
ulous is now to be unphilosophical, and scholars accept nothing as
history that can not be demonstrated with almost mathematical cer-
tainty,

Niebuhr began by shattering all faith in the story of Rhea Syl-
via, of Romulus and Remus, and of the maternal wolf, which, with
many other incidents of the early Roman annals, were consigned by
him to the region of the mythical.

In later times, the patriotic heart of Switzerland has been made
to mourn by the discovery that the story of William Tell, and of
the apple which he shot from the head of his son, is nothing but a
mediaeval fable which was to be found in a great many other coun-
tries, and the circumstances of which, everywhere varying in details,
still point to a common origin in some early symbolic myth.

It is thus that many narratives, once accepted as veracious, have
been, by careful criticism, eliminated from the domain of history ;
and such works as Goldsmith’s Histories of Greece and Rome are
no longer deemed fitting text-books for schools, where nothing but
truth should be taught.

The same rules of critical analysis which are pursued in the sep-
aration of what is true from what is false in the history of a nation
should be applied to the determination of the character of all state-
ments in Masonic history. This course, however, has, unhappily.

4

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

not been generally pursued. Many of its legends are unquestion-
ably founded, as I shall endeavor hereafter to show, on a historical
basis : but quite as many, if not more, are made up out of a mixture
of truth and fiction, the distinctive boundaries of which it is difficult
to define ; while a still greater number are altogether mythical, with
no appreciable element of truth in their composition. And yet, for
nearly two centuries, all of these three classes of Masonic legendary
lore have been accepted by the great body of the Fraternity, with-
out any discrimination, as faithful narratives of undoubted truthful-
ness.

It is this liberal acceptation of the false for the true, and this
ready recognition of fables as authentic narratives whereby imagina-
tive writers have been encouraged to plunge into the realms of ab-
surdity instead of confining themselves to the domain of legitimate
history, that have cast an air of romance over all that has hitherto
been written about Freemasonry. Unju.stly, but very naturally,
scholars have been inclined to reject all our legends in every part as
fabulous, because they found in some the elements of fiction.

But, on the other hand, the absurdities of legend-makers, and the
credulity of legend-readens, have, by a healthy reaction, given rise to
a school of iconoclasts (to whom there will soon be occasion to re-
fer), which sprang up from a laudable desire to conform the prin-
ciples of criticism which arc to govern all investigations into Ma-
sonic history to the rules which control profane writers in the ex-
amination of the history of nations.

As examples of the legends of Masonry which have tempted the
credulity of many and excited the skepticism of others, those almost
universally accepted legends may be cited which attribute the organ-
ization of Freemasonry in its present .form to the era of King Solo-
mon’s temple — ^the story of Prince Edwin and the Grand Lodge
congregated by him at the city of York in the loth century — and
the theory that the three symbolic degrees were instituted as Ma-
sonic grades at a period very long anterior to the beginning of the
i8th century.

These statements, still believed in by all Masons who have not
made the history of the Order an especial .study, were, until recently,
received by prominent scholars as veracious narratives. Even Dr.
Oliver, one of the most learned as well as the most prolific of Ma-
sonic authors, has, in his numerous works, recognized them as his*

TRADITION AND HISTORY IN MASONRY

5

toric truths without a word of protest or a sign of doubt, except,
perhaps, with reference to the third legend above mentioned, of
which he says, with a cautious qualification, that he has “some
doubts whether the Master’s degree, as now given, can be traced
three centuries backwards.” *

But now comes a new school of Masonic students, to whom, bor-
rowing a word formerly used in the history of religious strifes, has
been given the name of “iconoclasts.” The word is a good one.
The old iconoclasts, or image-breakers of the 8th century, demol-
ished the images and defaced the pictures which they found in the
churches, induced by erroneous but conscientious views, because they
thought that the people were mistaking the shadow for the substance,
and were worshipping the image or the picture instead of the Divine
Being whom it represented.

And so these Masonic iconoclasts, with better views, are proceed-
ing to destroy, by hard, incisive criticism, the intellectual images which
the old, unlettered Masons had constructed for their veneration.
They are pulling to pieces the myths and legends, whose fallacies and
absurdities had so long cast a cloud upon what ought to be the clear
sky of Masonic history. But they have tempered their zeal with a
knowledge and a moderation that were unknown to the iconoclasts
of religion. These shattered the images and scattered the fragments
to the four winds of heaven, or they burnt the picture so that not
even a remnant of the eanvas was left. Whatever there was of
beauty in the work of the sculptor or painter was forever destroyed.
Every sentiment of aesthetic art was overcome by the virulence of
religious fanaticism. Had the destructive labors of these iconoclasts
been universal and long continued, no foundation would have been
left for building that science of Christian symbolism, which in this
day has been so interesting and so instructive to the archaeologist.®

Not so have the Masonic iconoclasts performed their task of
critical reformation. They have shattered nothing ; they have de-
stroyed nothing. When in the course of their investigations into
true Masonic history, they encounter a myth or a legend, replete, ap-

1 “ Dissertation on the State of Masonry in the Eighteenth Century.”

* Thus the Emperor Leo, the Isaurian, caused all images and pictures to be removed
from the churches and publicly burnt — an act of vandalism not surpassed by that Saracen
despot who (if the story be true) ruthlessly committed the books of the Alexandrian
library to the flames as fuel for the public baths.

6

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

parcntly, with absurdities or contradictions, they do not consign it to
oblivion as something unworthy of consideration, but they dissect it
into its various parts ; they analyze it with critical acumen ; they
separate the chaff from the wheat ; they accept the portion that is
confirmed by other and collateral testimony as a legitimate contribu-
tion to history ; what is undoubtedly fictitious they receive as a myth,
and either reject it altogether as an unmeaning addition to a legend,
or give it an interpretation as the expression of some symbolic idea
which is itself of value in a historical point of view.

That lamented archaeologist, Mr. George Smith, late of the Brit-
ish Museum, in speaking of the cuneiform inscriptions excavated in
Mesopotamia, and the legends which they have preserved of the old
Babylonian empire, said : ^ “ With regard to the supernatural element
introduced into the .story, it is similar in nature to many such addi-
tions to historical narratives, especially in the East ; but 1 would not
reject those events which may have happened, because, in order to
illustrate a current belief, or add to the romance of the story, the
writer has introduced the supernatural.”

It is on this very principle that the iconoclastic Masonic writers,
such as Ilughan and Woodford, are pursuing their researches into
the early history of Freemasonry. They do not reject those events
related in the old legends, which have certainly happened, because in
them they find also mythical narratives. They do not yield to the
tendency which George Smith says is now too general, “to repudiate
the earlier part of history, because of its evident inaccuracies and the
marvelous element generally combined with it.”® It is in this way,
and in this way only, that early Masonic history can be rightly writ-
ten. Made up, as it has been for centuries past, of a commingled
tissue of historical narrative and legendary invention, it has been
heretofore read without judicious discrimination. Either the tradi-
tional account has been wholly accepted as historical, or it has been
wholly rejected as fabulous, and thus, in either case, numerous errors
have been the consequence.

As an example of the error which inevitably results from pursu-
ing cither of these methods of interpretation, one of which may be
distinguished as the school of gross credulity, and the other as that
of great skepticism, let us take the legend of the Temple origin of

^ “ Chaldean Account of Genesis,” p. 302.

^ Ibidem.

TRADITION AND HISTORY IN MASONRY

7

Masonry — that is to say, the legend which places the organization of
the Institution at the time of the building of the temple at Jerusalem.

Now, the former of these schools implicitly receives the whole
legend as true in all its details, and recognizes King Solomon as the
first Grand Master, with Hiram of Tyre and Hiram as his Wardens,
who, with him, presided over the Craft, divided into three degrees,
the initiation into which was the same as that practiced in the lodges
of the present day, or at least not very unlike it.

Thus Dr. Anderson, who was the first to publicly promulgate this
legend and the theory founded on it, says, in the second edition of
his “Constitutions,” that Hiram Ahif, “in Solomon’s absence, filled
the chair as Deputy Grand Master, and, in his presence, was the
Senior Grand Warden” and, again, that “ Solomon partitioned the
Fellow Crafts into certain lodges, with a Master and Wardens in
each ” ;* and, lastly, that “Solomon was Grand Master of all Masons
at Jerusalem. King Hiram was Grand Master at Tyre, and Hiram
Abif had been Master of Work.”® The modern rituals have made
some change in these details, but we evidently sec here the original
source of the legend as it is now generally believed by the Fraternity.

Indeed, so firmly convinced of its truth are the believers in this
legend, that the brand of heterodoxy is placed by them on all who
deny or doubt it.

On the contrary, the disciples of the latter school, whose skepti-
cism is as excessive as is the credulity of the former, reject as fab-
ulous everything that tends to connect Freemasonry with the Solo-
monic temple. To the King of Israel they refuse all honor, and they
contemptuously repudiate the theory that he was a Masonic dignitary,
or even a Freemason at all. One of these Pyrrhonists has gone so
far as to defile the memory of the Jewish monarch with unnecessary
and unmerited abuse.

Between these tw^o parties, each of which is misdirected by an in-
temperate zeal, come the iconoclasts — impartial inquirers, who calmly
and dispassionately seek for truth only. These disavow, it is true,
the authenticity of the Temple legend in its present form. They
deny that there is any proof which a historian could, by applying the
just canons of criticism, admit as competent evidence, that Free-
masonry was organized at the building of the temple of Solomon,

' Anderson, “ Constitutions,” 2d ed., chap, iii., p. 12. * Ibid., p. 13. ■' Ibid., p. 1$.

8

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

and hence they look for its origin at some other period and under
different circumstances.

But they do not reject the myth connected with the temple as
being wholly unworthy of consideration. On the contrary, they re-
spect this legend as having a symbolic significance, whose value can
not be overestimated. They trace its rise in the Old Constitutions ;
they find it plainly alluded to in the Legend of the Craft ; and
they follow it in its full development in the modern rituals. They
thus recognize the influence that the story of the temple and its
builders has exerted on the internal construction of the Order, and
hence they feel no disposition to treat it, notwithstanding its his-
torical inaccuracy, with contumely.

Knowing what an important part the legends and symbols of
Freemasonry have performed in the progress of the Institution, and
how much its philosophic system is indebted to them for all that is
peculiar to itself, they devote their literary energies, not to the expur-
gation of this or any other myth or legend, but to the investigation
of the questions how and when it arose, and what is its real signifi-
cance as a symbol, or what foundation as a narrative it may have in
history. And thus they are enabled to add important items to the
mass of true Masonic history which they have been accumulating.

In short, the theory of the iconoclastic school is that truth and
authenticity must always, and in the first place, be sought ; that
nothing must be accepted as historical which has not the internal
and external evidences of historical verity, and that in treating the
legends of Masonry — of almost every one of which it may be said,
“ Se non vero, fc ben trovato ” — if it is not true, it is well invented
— we are not to reject them as altogether fabulous, but as having
some hidden and occult meaning, which, as in the case of all other
symbols, we must diligently seek to discover. But if it be found
that the legend has no symbolic significance, but is simply the dis-
tortion of a historical fact, we must carefully eliminate the fabulous
increment, and leave the body of truth to which it had been added,
to have its just value.

Such was the method pursued by the philosophers of antiquity ;
and Plato, Anaxagoras, and Cicero explained the absurdities of the
ancient mythologists by an allegorical mode of interpretation.

To this school I have for years been strongly attached, and in the
composition of this work I shall adopt its principles. I do not fear

TRADITION AND HISTORY IN MASONRY

9

that the claims of Freemasonry to a time-honored existence will be
injured by any historical criticism, although the era in which it had
its birth may not be admitted to be as remote as that assigned to it
by Anderson or Oliver.

Iconoclastic criticism can not depreciate, but will rather elevate,
the character of the Institution. It will relieve it of absurdities, will
often explain the cause of anachronisms, will purify the fabulous
element, and confine it within the strict domain of history.

It was a common reproach against the great Niebuhr that he had
overthrown the whole fabric of early Roman history, and yet Dr.
Arnold, the most competent of critics, has said of him that he had
built up much more than he had destroyed, and fixed much that
modern skepticism had rejected as fabulous on firmer historic
grounds.

Following such a method as that pursued by the most learned of
modern historians, it will be necessary, for a faithful and compre-
hensible investigation of the history of Masonry, to discriminate be-
tween the two periods into which it is naturally divided.

The Preiii.storic and

The Historic.

The Historic embraces the period within, which we have au-
thentic documents in reference to the e.xistcnce of the Order, and
will be considered in the second part of this book.

The Prehistoric embraces the period within which we have no
authentic memorials, and when we have to depend wholly on legends
and traditions.

The legendary history of Masonry will, therefore, be commenced
in the next chapter.

CHAPTER II

THE LECENDAKY HISTORY OK FREEMASONRY

N the history of every ancient nation there is a
prehistoric and a historic period.

The prehistoric period is that which has no
records to prove the truth of the events that
have been attributed to it. It is made up of
myths and legends, founded — some of them, in
all probability — on a distortion of historical

facts, and some of them indebted entirely to imagination for their
invention.

The historic period is that which begins with the narration of
events which are supported by documents, either contemporary with
the events or so recently posterior to them as to have nearly all the
validity of contemporaiy evidence.

Just such a division of periods as this we find in the history of
Freemasonry.

The prehistoric period, more commonly styled the legendary his-
tory, embraces the supposed history of the rise and i)rogress of the
Institution in remote times, and details events said to have occurred,
but which hav'c no proof of their occurrence other than that of oral
tradition, unsupported by that sort of documentary evidence which
is essentially necessary to give a reliable character to an historical
statement.

The historic period of Freemasonry commences with the time
when written or printed records furnish the necessary testimony that
the events narrated did actually occur.

In treating of the history of nations, scholars have found great
difficulty in precisely defining the point of separation between the
prehistoric and the historic periods. As in natural history, it is
almost impossible to define the exact line of demarkation between
any two consecutive classes of the kingdoms of nature .so as to dis-
tinguish the highest species of a vegetable from the lowe.st of an

THE LEGENDARY HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY n

animal organization, so in political history it is difficult to tell when
the prehistoric period ends and the historic begins.

In Freemasonry we meet with the same embarrassment, and this
embarrassment is increased aecording to the different standpoints
from which we view the institution.

If we adopt the theory (as lias been done by a few writers too
iconoclastic in their views) that Speculative Masonry never was any-
thing but that which its present organization presents, with Grand
Lodges, Grand Masters, and a ritual of distinct degrees, then we are
compelled to place the commencement of the historic era at that
period which has been called the Revival in the second decade of
the 1 8th century.

If, with more liberal views, we entertain the opinion that Specu-
lative Masonry was founded on, and is the offspring of, the Opera-
tive system of the Stonemasons, then we must extend our researches
to at least the Middle Ages, where we shall find abundant docu-
mentary evidence of the existence and character of the Operative
parent to which the Freemasonry of the present day, by a well-
marked transition, has succeeded.

Connecting the written history of the Operative Masons with
that of its speculative offshoot, we have an authentic and continuous
history that will carry us back to a period many centuries anterior
to the time of the so-called Revival in the year 1717.

If I were writing a history of Speculative Masonry merely, I
should find myself restricted to an era, somewhere in the 17th cen-
tury, when there is documentary evidence to show that the tran-
sition period began, and when the speculative obtruded into the
Operative system.

But as I am really writing a history of Freemasonry, ol which
the Operative and the Speculative systems are divisions, intimate-
ly connected, I am .constrained to go farther, and to investigate the
ri.se and the progress of the Operative art as the precursor and the
founder of the Speculative science.

The authentic details of the condition of Operativ'e Masonry in
the Middle Ages, of its connection, if it had any, with other organi-
zations, and its transmutation at a later period into Speculative Ma-
sonry, will con.stitute the historic narrative of Freemasonry.

Its prehistoric narrative will be found in the myths and legends
which were, unfortunately, for a long time accepted by the great

12

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

body of the Craft as a true history, but which, though still credited
by many, are yet placed by most modern Masonic scholars in their
proper category.

These legends, some of which are preserved in the rituals, and
some are becoming almost obsolete, have a common foundation in
that traditional narrative which is known as the Legend of the
Crafty and which must first be understood before we can with sat-
isfaction attempt to study the legendary history of the Institution.

But this legend is of such length and of so much importance
that it demands for its consideration a separate and distinct chapter.

I, by no means, intend to advance the proposition that all the
myths and legends now taught in the Lodges, or preserved in the
works of Masonic writers, are to be found in the Legend of the
Craft, but only the most important — those that are still recognized
by the more credulous portion of the Fraternity as genuine and au-
thentic narratives — receive their first notice in the Legend of the
Craft, although they are indebted for their present, fuller form, to
a development or enlargement, subsequently made in the course of
the construction of the modern ritual.

^The Rev. Bro, Woodford calls it the Legend of the Guild.” But I prefer the title
here used, because it does not lead to embarrassing questions as to the relation of the
mediaeval Guilds to Freemasonry.

CHAPTER III

THE OLD MANUSCRIPTS

NDERSON tells us, in the second edition of
the Book of Constitutions, that in the year
1 7i9> “ some private Lodges several very val-
uable manuscripts concerning the Fraternity,
their Lodges, Regulations, Charges. Secrets, and
Usages, were too hastily burnt by some scrupu-
lous Brothers, that these papers might not fall
into strange hands.” ‘

Fortunately, this destruction was not universal. The manuscripts
to which Anderson alludes were undoubtedly those Old Constitutions
of the Operative Masons, several copies of which, that had escaped
the holocaust described by him, have since been discovered in the
British Museum, in old libraries, or in the archives of Lodges, and
have been published by those who have discovered them.*

These are the documents which have received the title of “ Old
Records,” “ Old Charges," or “ Old Constitutions.” Their general
character is the same. Indeed, there is so much similarity, and
almost identity, in their contents as to warrant the presumption that
they are copies of some earlier document not yet recovered.

The earliest of these documents is a manuscript poem, entitled
the Constitutiones artis gcometrits secundum Eucleydetn, which is
preserved in the British Museum, and which was published in 1840
by Mr. Halliwell, in his Early History of Freemasonry in England.
The date of this manuscript is supposed to be about the year 1 390.
A second and enlarged edition was published in 1844.

The next of the English manuscripts is that which was published

^ Anderson's ** Constitutions,” 1738, p. iii.

* Among these writers wc must not omit to mention Bro. William James Hughan,
J'acile princeps of all Masonic antiquarians, who made, in 1872, a valuable contribution to
this literature, under the title of ** The Old Charges of the Biitish Freemasons,” the value
of which is enhanced by the learned Preface of Bro. A. F. A. Woodford.

13

*4

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

in 1 86 1 by Bro. Matthew Cooke from the original in the British
Museum, and which was once the property of Mrs. Caroline Baker,
from whom it was purchased in 1859 hy the Curators of the Museum.
The date of this manuscript is supposed to be about 1490.

All the English Masonic antiquarians concur in the opinion that
this manuscript is next in antiquity to the Halliwell poem, though
there is a difference of about one hundred years in their respective
dates. It is, however, mere guesswork to say that there were not
other manuscripts in the intervening period. But as none have
been discovered, they must be considered as non-existent, and it is
impossible even to conjecture, from any groundwork on which we
can stand, whether, if such manuscripts did ever exist, they partook
more of the features of the Halliwell or of the Cooke document, or
whether they presented the form of a gradual transmission from
the one to the other.

The Cooke MS. is far more elaborate in its arrangement and its
details than the Halliwell, and contains the Legend of the Craft in
a more extended form.

In the absence of any other earlier document of the same kind,
it must be considered as the matrix, as it were, in which that Legend,
in the form in which it appears in all the later manuscripts, was
moulded.

In the year 1815, Mr. James Dowland published, in the Gentle-
mans Magazine^ the copy of an old manuscript which had lately
come into his possession, and which he described as being “ written
on a long roll of parchment, in a very clear hand, apparently early in
the 1 7th century, and very probably is copied from a manuscript of
an earlier date.” Although not as old as the Halliwell and Cooke
MSS., it is deemed of very great value, because it comes next to
them in date, and is apparently the first of that series of later manu-
scripts, so many of which have, within the past few years, been re-
covered. It is evidently based on the Cooke MS., though not an
exact copy of it. But the later manuscripts comprising that series,
at the head of which it stands, so much resemble it in details, and
even in phraseology, that they must either have been copies made
from it, or, what is far more probable, copies of some older and com-
mon original, of which it also is a copy.

^ GentlematCs Magazine ^ vol. 85, p. 489, May* 1815.

THE OLD MANUSCRIPTS

15

The original manuscript which was used by Dowland for the pub-
lication in the Gentlemans Magazine is lost, or can not now be found.
But Mr. Woodford and other competent authorities ascribe the year
1550 as being about its date.

Several other manuscript Constitutions, whose dates vary from
the middle of the 16th to the beginning of the i8th century, have
since been discovered and published, principally by the industrious
labors of Brothers Hughan and Woodford in England, and Brother
Lyon in Scotland.

The following list gives the titles and conjectural dates of the
most important of these manuscripts

Halliwell MS. ...

supposed, 1390.

Cooke MS.

“ 1490*

Dowland MS. . •

“ 1500.

Landsdowne MS. . . •

« 1560.

York MS., No. i . . •

1600.

Harleian MS., No. 2054 •

“ 1625.

Grand Lodge MS.

“ 1632.

Sloane MS., No. 3848 .

certain, 1646.

Sloane MS., No. 3323 ,

“ 1659.

Harleian MS., No. 1942

supposed, t 60 o.

Aitcheson-Haven MS. •

certain, 1666.

Edinburgh-Kilwinning MS. .

supposed, 1670,

York MS., No. 5 . . •

1670.

York MS., No. 6 .

‘‘ 1680.

Lodge of Antiquity MS*

certain, 1686.

York MS., No. 2 . . •

“ 1693.

Alnwick MS. • . •

“ 1701.

York MS., No. 4 , • •

“ 1704-

Papworth MS.

supposed, 1714.

All of these manuscripts begin, except the Halliwell poem, with
an invocation to the Trinity. Then follows a descant on the seven
liberal arts and sciences, of which the fifth, or Geometry, is said to be
Masonry. This is succeeded by a traditional history of Masonry,
from the days of Lamech to the reign of King Athelstan of Eng-
land. The manuscripts conclude with a series of “ charges, or
regulations, for the government of the Craft while they were of a
purely operative character.

U have relied on the excellent authority of Rev. A. F. A. Woodford for the dates.
See Hughan’s “ Old Charges of the British Freemasons,” p. xii.

i6 PREHISTORIC MASONRY

The traditional history which constitutes the first part of these
“Old Records” is replete with historical inaccuracies, with anachro-
nisms, and even with absurdities. And yet it is valuable, because it
forms the germ of that system of Masonic history which was after-
ward developed by such writers as Anderson, Preston, and Oliver,
and from whose errors the iconoclasts of the present day are suc-
cessfully striving to free the Institution, so as to give its history
a more rational and methodic form.

This traditional history is presented to us in all the manuscripts,
in an identity of form, or, at least, with very slight verbal differ-
ences. These differences are, indeed, so slight that they suggest the
strong probability of a common source for all these documents,
either in the oral teaching of the older Masons, or in some earlier
record that has not yet been recovered. The tradition seems always
to have secured the unhesitating belief of the Fraternity as a true
relation of the origin and the progress of Masonry, and hence it has
received the title of the Legend of the Craft.

From the zealous care with which many manuscripts containing
this legend were destroyed in 1719 by “ scrupulous brothers ” who
were opposed to its publication, we might believe that it formed a
part of the esoteric instructions of the Guild of Operative Masons.
If so, it lost this secret character by the publication of Roberts’s
edition of the “Constitutions” in 1722.

In the earlier German and French Masonic records, such as the
Ordenung der Steinmetzen at Strasburg in 1462, and the Regle-
tnents sur les Arts ct Metiers at Paris in the 12th century, there is
no appearance of this legend. But it does not follow from this that
no such legend existed among the French and German Masons.
Indeed, as it is well known that early English Operative Masonry
was derived from the continent, it is natural to suppose that the
continental Masons brought the legend into England.

There is, besides, internal evidence in the English manuscripts of
both French and German interpolations. The reference in the Le-
gend to Charles Martel connects it with the French Masonry of the
1 2th century, and the invocation to the “Four Crowned Martyrs”*
in the Halliwell MS. is undoubtedly of German origin.®

^Dic hcilij^cn Vicr gekronten, “ Ordenung dcr Steinmetz, zu Strasburg, 1459>” i**

all the other (jcrman Constitutions.

2 Findel thinks that this invocation to the Four Crowned Martyrs “ must be regarded

THE OLD MANUSCRIPTS

17

The importance of this Legend in the influence that it ex-
erted for a long period on the Craft as the accredited history of
the Institution makes it indispensably necessary that it should
form a part of any work that professes to treat of the history of
Masonry.

For this purpose I have selected the Dowland MS., because it
is admitted to be the oldest of those that assumed that general form
which was followed in all the subsequent manuscripts, between
which and it there is no substantial difference.

as a most decided proof of the identity of the German and English Stonemasons, and of
their having one common parentage.” (“Gcschichte der Frci Maurerci.” Lyon s trans-
lation. p. 31.) Woodford does not concur with this view, but I think without good
reason.

CHAPTER IV

THE LEGEND OF THE CRAFT

HE might of the Father of Kings,* with the wis-
dome of his glorious Son, through the grace of
the goodness of the Holy Ghost, there bene
three persons in one Godheade, be with us at
our beginninge, and give us grace so to governe
us here in this mortall life liveingc, that we
may come to his kingdome that never shall
have endinje. Amen.

“ Good Brectheren and Followes : Our purpose is to tell you
how and in what manner this worthy science of Masonrye was be-
gunne, and afterwards how it was favoured by worthy Kings and
Princes, and by many other worshippfull men. And also to those
that be willinge, wee will declare the charge that bclongeth to any
true Mason to keepe for in good faith. And yce have good heede
thereto ; it is well worthy to be well kept for a worthy craft and a
curious science.

“ For there be Seaven liberall Sciences, of the which seaven it is
one of them. And the names of the Seaven Seyenccs bene these :
I'irst is Grammere, and it tcachcth man to .speakc truly and write
truly. And the second is Rhethoricke ; and tcachcth a man to
speakc faire in subtill termes. And the third is Dialectyke ; and
tcachcth a man for to discern or know truth from false. And the
fourth is Arithmcticke ; and that tcachcth a man for to recken and
to accompte all manner of numbers. And the fifth is called Geom-
etric ; and that tcachcth mett and measure of earth and of all other
things; of the which science is called Masonrye. And the sixth
science is called Musicke ; and that teacheth a man of songe and
voice, of tongue and orgaine, harpe and trompe. And the seaventh
science is called Astronomye ; and that teacheth a man the cour.se of

^ In the Landsdowne, and most of the other MSS., the formula is “the Father of the
Heavens,” or “ of Heaven.”

THE LEGEND OF THE CRAFT

19

the sunn, moone and starrs. These be the Scaven liberall Sciences,
the which bene all founded by one Science, that is to say Geometrie.
And this may a man prove, that the science of the work is founded
by Geometrie, for Geometrie teacheth a man mett and measure, pon-
deration and weight, of all manner of things on earth, for there is no
man that worketh any science, but he worketh by some mett or
measure, nor no man that buyeth or selleth, but he buyeth or selleth
by some measure or by some weight, and all these is Geometrie.
And these use merchants and all craftsmen, and all other of the
Seaven Sciences, and in especiall the plowman and tillers of all man-
ner of grounds, graynes, vynes, flowers and setters of other fruits ;
for Grammere or Rctricke, neither Astronomie nor none of all the
other Seaven Sciences can no manner find mett nor measure without
Geometrie. Wherefore methinketh that the science of Geometric
is most worthy, and that findeth ' all other.

“ How that these worthy Sciences were first begunne, I shall you
tell. Before Noye’s flood, there was a man called Lameche, as it is
written in the Byble in the iiijth chapter of Genesis ; and this La-
meche had two wives, and the one height Ada, and that other height
Sella; by his first wife Ada he gott two sons, and that one Jabell
and thother Tuball, and by that other wife Sella he got a son and a
daughter. And these four children founden the beginning of all
sciences in the world. And this elder son Jabell found the science
of Geometrie, and he departed flocks of sheep and lambs in the field,
and first wrought house of stone and tree,* as is noted in the chapter
above said. And his brother Tuball found the science of niusickc,
songe of tonge, harp and orgainc. And the third brother, Tuball
Cain, found smithcraft of gold, silver, copper, iron and steclc; and
the daughter found the craft of Weavinge. And these children knew
well that God would take vengeance for synn, either by fire or by
water; wherefore they writt their science that they had found in two
pillars of stone, that they might be found after Noye’s flood. And
that one stone was marble, for that would not burn with fire ; and

1 Used in its primitive Anglo-Saxon meaning of ** to invent, to devise.” Geometry
invented or devised all the other sciences.

^ This is an instance of the inaccuracy of these old records in historical lore. So far
from Jabal being the first who ‘‘ wrought house of stone and tree,” he was the originator
of the nomadic life, in which such buildings are never used. He invented tents, made
most probably of skins, to be the temporary residence of a pastoral people, led by the
exigency of a want of food to remove their flocks from time to time to new pastures.

20

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

that other stone was clepped laterns,* and would not drown in noe
water.

“ Our intent is to tell you trulie how and in what manner these
stones were found that these sciences were written in. The great
Hermarynes, that was Cuby’s son, the which Cub was Sem’s son, that
was Noy’s son. This Hermarynes afterwards was called Harmes,
the father of wise men ; he found one of the two pillars of stone, and
found the science written there, and he taught it to other men. And
at the making of the Tower of Babylon there was Masonryc first
made much of. And the Kinge of Babylon that height Nemrothe,"*
was a mason himself ; and loved well the science, and it is said with
masters of histories. And when the City of Nyneve and other cities
of the East should be made, Nemrothe, the King of Babylon, sent
thither three score Masons at the rogation of the King of Nyneve,
his cosen. And when he sent them forth, he gave them a charge on
this manner. That they should be true each of them to other, and
that they should love truly together, and that they should serve their
lord truly for their pay ; soe that the master may have worshipp and
all that long to him. And other moe charges he gave them. And
this was the first time that ever Masons had any charge of his science.

“ Moreover when Abraham and Sara his wife went into Egipt,
there he taught the Scaven Sciences to the Egiptians ; and he had a
worthy scoller that height Ewelyde,* and he learned right well and
was a master of all the vij Sciences liberall. And in his days it befell
that the lord and the estates of the realme had soe many sonns that
they had gotten, some by their wives and some by other ladyes of
the realme ; for that land is a hott land and a plentious of generacion.
And they had not competent livelode to find with their children,
wherefor they made much care, and then the king of the land made
a great Counsell and a Parliament, to witt, how they might find their
children honestly as gentlemen ; and they could find no manner of
good way. And then they did crye through all the realme, if there
were any man that informe them, that he should come to them, and
he should be soe rewarded for his travail, that he should hold him
pleased.

' This word is a corruption of the Latin “ later,” brick. Nimrod.

* iJro. Matthew Cooke, in his Notes to the MS. whieh he was the first to publish,
and which thence bears his name, protests against being held responsible for the chro-
nology which makes Abraham and Euclid contemporaries. It will hereafter be seen that
this legend of Euclid is merely a symbol.

THE LEGEND OF THE CRAFT

21

“ After that this crye was made, then came tliis worthy clarkc
Ewelyde and said to the king and all his great lords, ‘ If yec will
take me your children to governe, and to teach them one of the
Seaven Scycnccs, wherewith they may live honestly as gentlemen
should, under a condition, that yee will grant me and them a com-
mission that I may have power to rule them after the manner that
the science ought to be ruled.’ And that the kinge and all his
Counsell granted to him anone and scaled their commission. And
then this worthy Doctor tooke to him these lord’s sonns, and taught
them the scyence of Geometrie in practice, for to work in stones all
manner of worthy worke that belongeth to buildinge churches, tem-
ples, castells, towres, and mannors, and all other manner of build-
ings : and he gave them a charge in this manner.

“ The first was that they should be true to the Kynge, and to the
Lord that they owe. And that they should love well together and
be true each one to other. And that they should call each other his
fellowe or else brother and not by servant nor his knave, nor none
other foul name. And that they should deserve their paie of the
lord or of the master that they serve. And that they should or-
daine the wisest of them to be master of the worke and nether for
love nor great lynneage, ne riches ne for no favour to lett another that
hath little conning for to be master of the lord’s worke, wherethrough
the lord should be evill served and they ashamed. And also that they
should call their governors of the worke. Master, in the time that
they worke with him. And other many moc charges that longc to
tell. And to all these charges he made them to swcarc a great oath
that men used in that time ; and ordayned them for reasonable wages,
that they might live honestly by. And also that they shf>uld come
and semble together every yeare once, how they might worke best to
serve the lord for his profitt and to their own worshipp ; and to cor-
rect within themselves him that had trespassed against the science.
And thus was the seyence grounded there ; and that worthy Mr.
Ewelyde gave it the name of Geometrie. And now it is called
through all this land, Masonrye.

“ Sythen longe after,’ when the children of Israeli were coming into
the land of Beheast,* that is now called amongst us, the country of

^ Since then long after — long after that time.

^ The Land of Promise, or the Promised Land. Beheste Promissio,” says the
Promptorium Parvulorum.

22

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Jhrlm. Kingc David began the Temple that they called Templum
D'ni, and it is named with us the Temple of Jerusalem. And the
same Kinge David loved Masons well and cherished them much, and
gave them good paie. And he gave the charges and the manners as
he had learned of Egipt given by Ewclyde, and other charges moe
that ye shall heare afterward. And after the decease of Kinge David,
Solomon, that was David’s sonn, performed out the Temple that his
father begonne ; and sent after Masons into divers countries and of
divers lands ; and gathered them together, so that he had fourscore
thousand workers of stone, and were all named Masons. And he
chose out of them three thousand that were ordayned to be masters
and governors of his worke. And furthermore there was a Kinge of
another region that men called Iram,^ and he loved well Kinge Solo-
mon and he gave him tymber to his worke. And he had a sonn that
height Aynon,* and he was a Master of Geometric, and was chief
Master of all his Masons, and was Master of all his gravings and car-
vinge, and of all manner of Masonry e that longed to the Temple ;
and this is witnessed by the Bible, in libro Regum, the third chapter.
And this Solomon confirmed both charges and the manners that his
father had given to Masons. And thus was that worthy Science of
Masonrye confirmed in the country of Jerusalem, and in many other
kingdoms.

“ Curious craftsmen walked about full wide into divers countryes,
some because of learning more craft and cunning, and some to teach
them that had but little cunnynge. And soe it befell that there was
one curious Mason that height Maymus Grecus,® that had been at the
making of Solomon’s Temple, and he came into France, and there
he taught the science of Masonrye to men of France. And there
was one of the Regal line of France that height Charles Martell ; ^
and he was a man that loved well such a science, and drew to this
Maymus Grecus that is above-said, and learned of him the science,
and tooke upon him the charges and manners ; and afterwards by the

Ml is scarcely necessary to explain that this is meant for Hiram.

^ The true origin and meaning of this name, for which some of the modern Specu-
lative Masons have substituted Hiram Abif, and others Adoniram, will be hereafter dis-
cussed.

This name has been a Sphinxian enigma which many a Masonic CEdipos has failed
to solve. 1 shall recur to it in a subsequent page.

^The introduction of this monarch into the Legend le^ds us to an inquiry into an in-
teresting period of French Masonic history that will be hereafter discussed.

THE LEGEND OF THE CRAFT -’3

grace of God, he was elect to be Kinge of Fraunce. And when he
was in his estate, he tooke Masons, and did helpe to make men
Masons that were none ; and set them to worke, and gave them both
the charge and the manners and good paie, as he had learned of other
Masons ; and confirmed them a charter from yeare to yeare, to hold
their semble when they would ; and cherished them right much ; and
thus came this science into Fraunce.

“England in all this season stood voyd, as for any charge of
Masonrye unto St. Albones* tyme. And in his days the King of
England that was a Pagan, he did wall the towne about, that is called
Sainct Albones. And Sainet Albones was a worthy Knight and
Stewart with the Kinge of his household, and had governance of the
real me, and also of the makingc of the town walls ; and loved well
Masons and cherished them much. And he made their paie right
good, standing as the realme did ; for he gave them ij.j. vyd. a wceke
and uyd. to their nonesynehes.* And before that time, through all
this land, a Mason tooke but a penny a day and his meate, till Sainct
Albones amended it, and gave them a chartour of the Kinge and his
Counsell for to hold a general councell, and gave it the name of As-
semble ; and thereat he was himselfe, and helped to make Masons
and gave them charges as you shall heare afterward.

“ Right soon after the dccea.se of Sainct Albone, there came divers
wars into the realme of England of divers Nations soethat the good
rule of Masonrye was destroyed unto the tyme of Kinge Athelstone’s
days that was a worthy Kinge of England and brought this land into
good rest and peace ; and builded many great works of Abbyes and
Toures, and other many divers buildings ; and loved well Ma.sons.
And he had a sonne that height Edwinne, and he loved Masons much
more than his father did. And he was a great practiser in Geometric* ;
and he drew him much to talke and to commune with Masons,
and to learn of them science ; and afterwards for love that he had to
Masons, and to the science, he was made Mason, and he gatt of the
Kinge his father, a Chartour and Commission to hold every yeare

1 St. Alban, the protomartyr of England. Of his connection with the Legend, more
hereafter.

corruption of the old English word noonshtm^ from which comes our modern
luncheon. It meant the refreshment taken at noon, when laborers desist from work to
shun the heat. It may here mean food or subsistence in general. St. Alban gave his
Masons two shillings a week and three pence for their daily food. (See Noncsynchcs in
Mackey’s “ Encyclopajdia of Krcem.tsonry.”)

24

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

once an Assemble, wher that ever they would, within the realme of
England ; and to correct within themselves defaults and trespasses
that were done within the science. And he held himselfe an As-
semble at Yorke,* and these he made Masons, and gave them charges,
and taught them the manners, and commanded that rule to be kept
ever after, and tooke then the chartour and commission to keepe,
and made ordinance that it should be renewed from kinge to kinge.

“ And when the Assemble was gathered he made a cry that all
old Masons and young that had any writeinge or understanding of
the charges and the manners that were made before in this land, or
in any other, that they should show them forth. And when it was
proved, there were founden some in French, and some in Greek, and
some in English and some in other languages ; and the intent of
them all was founden all one. And he did make a booke thereof,
and how the science was founded. And he himselfe bad and com-
manded that it should be readd or tould, when that any Mason
should be made for to give him his charge. And fro that day into
this tyme manners of Masons have been kept in that form as well as
men might governe it. And furthermore divers Assembles have
beene put and ordayned certain charges by the best advice of Mas-
ters and fellows.”

Then follow the charges that arc thus said to have been en-
acted at York and at other General Assemblies, but which properly
constitute no part of the Legend, at least no part connected with
the legendary details of the rise and progress of the Institution. The
Legend ends with the account of the holding of an Assembly at
York, and other subsequent ones, for the purpose of enacting laws
for the government of the Order.

^ This part of the Legend which refers to Prince Edwin and the Assembly at York is
so important that it demands and will receive a future comprehensive examination.

CHAPTER V

IIALLTWELL POKM AND THE LEGEND

HERE is one manuscript which differs so much
from all the others in its form and in its contents
as to afford the strongest internal evidence that it
is derived from a source entirely different from
that which gave origin to the other and later
documents.

I allude to what is known to Masonic anti-
quaries as the Halliwcll MS. As this is admitted to be the oldest
Masonic document extant, and as some very important conclusions
in respect to the early history of the Craft arc about to be deduced
from it, a detailed account of it will not be deemed unnecessary.

This work was first published in 1840 by Mr. James Orchard
Halliwcll, under the title of “A Poem on the Constitutions of Ma-
sonry,” ^ from the original manuscript in the King’s Library of the
British Museum. Mr. Halliwcll, who subsequently adopted the
name of Phillips, is not a member of the Brotherhood, and Wood-
ford appropriately remarks that “ it is somewhat curious that to
Grandidier and Halliwcll, both non-Masons, Freemasonry owes tlie
impetus given at separate epochs to the study of its archaeology and
history.” *

H alii well says that the manuscript formerly belonged to Charles
Theyer, a well-known collector of the 17th century. It is undoubt-
edly the oldest Masonic MS. extant. Messrs. Bond and Egerton
of the British Museum consider its date to be about the middle of
the 15th century. Kloss® thinks that it was written between the
years 1427 and 1445. Hr. Oliver maintains that it is a transcript
of the Book of Constitutions adopted by the General Assembly, held

Un a brochure entitled “ The Early History of Freemasonry in England.** A later
and improved edition was published in 1844.

*ln Kenning*s Encyclopaedia,** voc. HalliwelL

® ** Die Freimaur in ihrer wahren Bedentung.** S. 12.

* American Quart. Rev. of Freemasonry, \q\* i., p. 547.

25

20

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

in the year 926, at the City of York. Halliwell himself places the
date of the MS. at 1390. Woodford’ concurs in this opinion. 1
am inclined to think that this is the true date of its transcription.

The manuscript is in rhymed verse, and consists of 794 lines.
At the head of the poem is the inscription : Hie incipiunt consti-
tuciones artis (^cmetrice secundum Euclydem." The language is
more archaic than that of Wicliffe’s version of the Bible, which was
written toward the end of the 14th century, but approaches very
nearly to that of the Chronicles of Robert of Gloucester, the date
of which was at the beginning of the same century. Therefore, if
we admit that the date of 1390, attributed by Halliwell and Wood-
ford to the transcription in the British Museum, is correct, wc may,
I think, judging by the language, safely assign to the original the
date of about 1 300. Further back than this, philology will not per-
mit us to go.

Lines 1-86 of this MS. contain the history of the origin of
geometry, or Masonry, and the story of Euclid is given at length,
much like that which is in the Legend of the Craft, But no
other parts of that Legend arc referred to, except the portion which
records the introduction of Masonry into England. From the nar-
rative of the establishment of Masonry in Egypt by Euclid, the
poem passes immediately to the time when the “craft com ynto
Englond.” Here the legendary story of King Athclstan and the
Assembly called by him is given, with this variation from the com-
mon Legend, that there is no mention of the city of York, where
the Assembly is said to have been held, nor of Prince Edwin, who
summoned it.

Lines 87-470 contain the regulations which were adopted at that
Assembly, divided into fifteen articles and the same number of
points. There is a very great resemblance, substantially, between
these regulations and the charges contained in the subsequent or
second set of Manuscript Constitutions. But the regulations in the
Halliwell poem are given at greater length, with more particularity
and generally accompanied with an explanation or reason for the
law.

After an interpolation, to be referred to hereafter, the poem pro-
ceeds under the title of " Ars quatuor coronatorumP The Art of

U^reface to Hughan’s Old Charges,’* p. vii.

THE HALLIWELL POEM AND THE LEGEND

27

the Four Crowned Ones, a title never applied to Masonry in the
later and purely English manuscripts. We have first an invocation
to God and the Virgin, and then the Legend of the Four Crowned
Martyrs, which ends on line 534.

Now this Legend of the Four Crowned Martyrs’— rt'iV Vicr
Gckronten — is found in none of the purely English manuscripts, hut
is of German origin, and peculiar to the German Steinmetzen or
Stone Masons of the Middle Ages. Its introduction in this manu-
script is an evidence of the German origin of the document, and, as
Findel * says, “ must be regarded as a most decided proof of the
identity of the German and English Stone Masons, and of their hav-
ing one common parentage.”

The details of this Legend close at the 534th line, and the poem
then proceeds to give a small and imperfect portion of what is
known in our later manuscripts as the Legend of the Craft.

I am persuaded that all this part of the jioem has been dislocated
from its proper place, and that in the original the lines from 535 to
576 formed a portion of the Legend of the Craft, as it must have
been inserted in the introductory part of the second manuscript.
I think so, first, because in all other manuscripts the Legend forms
the exordium and precedes the charges ; secondly, because it has
no proper connection with or sequence to the Legend of the Four
Crowned Martyrs which precedes it, and which terminates on the
354th line ; and lastly, because it is evidently an interruption of the
religious in.structions which are taken up on line 577, and which
naturally follow line 534. The writer having extolled the Christian
steadfastness and piety of the four martyrs whose feast he tells us is
on the eighth day after Allhalloween, proceeds on line 576 to ad-
monish his readers to avoid pride and covetousness and to practice
virtue. There is here a regular and natural connection, which, how-
ever. would be interrupted by the insertion between the two clauses
of an imperfect portion of a legend which has reference to the very
beginning of the history of Masonry. Hence I conclude that all
that part of the Legend which described the events that were con-
nected with Noah’s flood and the Tower of Babel is an interpola-
tion, and belongs to another manuscript and to another place.

^Scc the full details of this Legend in Mackey’s “ Encyclopaedia of Freemasonry/'
art. Four Crowned Martyrs.

History of Freemasonry,” Lyon’s Trans., p, 31.

28

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

In fact, the copyist had two manuscripts before him, and he
transcribed sometimes from one and sometimes from the other, ap-
parently with but little judgment, or, rather, he copied the whole of
one and then interpolated it with extracts from the other without
respect to any congruity of subjects.

The rest of the poem is occupied with instructions as to be-
havior when in church, when in the company of one’s superiors,
and when present at the celebration of the mass. The whole ends
with what we find in no other manuscript, the now familiar Masonic
formula, “ Amen, so mote it be.”

Line 471 furnishes, I think, internal evidence that the poem was
originally composed of two distinct works, written, in all probability,
by two different persons, but in the copy which we now have, com-
bined in one by the compiler or copyist. Mr. Woodford also is of
the opinion that there are two distinct poems, although the fact had
not attracted the attention of Halliwell. The former gentleman
says that “ it seems to be in truth two legends, and not only one.”
This is evident, from the fact that this second part is prefaced by
the title, "A/ta ordinacio artis gemctrice," that is , Another Consti-
tution of the art of geometry.” This title would indicate that what
followed was a different Ordinacio or Constitution and taken
from a different manuscript. Besides, line 471, which is the begin-
ning of the other or second Constitution, does not fall into its proper
place in following line 470, but is appropriately a continuation of
line 74. To make this evident, I copy lines 70-74 from the poem,
and follow them by lines 471-474, whence it will be seen that the lat-
ter lines are an appropriate and natural continuation of the former.

Line 70. He sende about ynto the londe

71. After alle the masonus of the crafte,

72. To come to hym ful evene stragfte

73. For to amende these defaultys alle

74. By good counsel gef it hyt mytgh falle.

471. They ordent thcr a semble to be y-holde

472. Every yer, whersever they wolde

473. To amende the defautes, gef any where fonde

474. Amonge the craft withynne the londe.

The second manuscript seems to have been copied from line 471,
as far as line 496. There. I suppose, the charges or regulations to

THE HALLIWELL POEM AND THE LEGEND

29

have followed, which having been given from the first manuscript
the copyist omitted, as a needless repetition, but went on immedi-
ately with the “ ars quatuor coronalorum.” This ended at line 534.
It is now evident that he went back to a preceding part of the sec-
ond manuscript and copied the early account of Masonry from line
535 to 57b- The bare reading of these lines will convince the reader
that they are not in their proper place, and must have formed a part
of the beginning of the second poem.

Line 577 appropriately follows line 534, when the interpolation
is left out, and then the transcription is correctly made to the end
of the poem. The first manuscript was apparently copied correctly,
with the exception of the two interpolations from the second M S.
There is a doubt whether the Legend of the Crowned Martyrs be-
longed to the first or to the second poem. If to the first, then we
have the whole of the first poem, and of the second only the inter-
polations. This is, however, a mere conjecture without positive
proof. Yet it is very probable.

On the whole, the view 1 am inclined to take of this manuscript
is as follows :

1. There were two original manu.scripts, out of which the copy-
ist made a careless admixture.

2. The first MS. began with line i and went on to the end at
line 794. But this is only conjectural. It may have ended, or
rather the copying ceased, at line 470.

3. If the conjecture just advanced be correct, then from a second
MS. the copyist made interpolations, in the following way.

4. The beginning of the second MS. is lost. But from very
near the commencement, which probably described the antediluvian
tradition of Lamech, the copyist had selected a portion which begins
with line 535 and ends at line 576. He had previously interpolated
the lines from 471 to 496.

5. We have, then, the whole of the first manuscript, from the ist
line to the 794th, with the addition of two interpolations from the
second, consisting only of 68 lines, namely: from line 471 to 496,
and from line 535 to 576.

6. The first manuscript is deficient in any references to antedilu-
vian Masonry, but begins with the foundation of Masonry in Egypt,
as its title imports. This deficiency was, in part, supplied by the
second interpolation (535-596). This part begins with the building

30

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

of Babel. But it is evident from the words, “ many years after,” that
there was a preceding part to this manuscript that has not been
copied. The “ many years after ” refer to some details that had been
previously made. The account of the Seven Sciences, found in all
later manuscripts, is not given in the first poem. It is inserted in
this from the second.

7. So of the poem in the form we now have it, the parts copied
from the second MS. consist only of 68 lines, which have been
interpolated in two places into the first MS. — namely, lines 471-
496, and lines 535-576; and these have been dislocated from their
proper places. All the rest of the poem constitutes the original
first manuscript. If I hesitate at all in coming to the positive
conclusion that the first and la.st parts of the poem were composed
by the same author, it is because the latter is written in a slightly
different metre. This, therefore, leaves the question where the first
poem ends and where the second begins, still open to di.scussion.

The variations which exi.st between the Halliwcll poem, or,
rather, poems, and other Masonic manuscripts of later date, are
very important, because they indicate a difference of origin, and, by
the points of difference, suggest several questions as to the early
progress of Masonry in England.

1. The form of the Halliwcll MS. differs entirely from that of
the others. The latter are in prose, while the former is in verse.
The language, too, of the Halliwcll MS. is far more antiquated
than that of the other manuscripts, showing that it was written in
an earlier stage of the English tongue. It belongs to the Early
English which succeeded the Anglo-Saxon. The other manu.scripts
were written at a later period of the language.

2. The Halliwcll MS. is evidently a Roman Catholic production,
and was written when the religion of Rome prevailed in England.
The later manuscripts are all Protestant in their character, and
must have been written after the middle of the i6th century, at least,
when Protestantism was introduced into that country by Edward
VI. and by Queen Eirzabeth.’

The different religious character of the two sets of manuscripts

^Edward VI. reigned from i 547 '-i 553 ; Elizabeth reigned from 1558-1603; the in-
terval was occupied by the Roman Catholic reign of Mary. lUit the archaic style of
the Halliwcll MS.” forbids any theory of its having been written during that irucr-
mediate period.

THE HALLIWELL POEM AND THE LEGEND

31

is very patent. We see ecclesiastical influence very strongly mani-
fested in the Halliwell MS. So marked is this that Mr. Hallivvell
supposes that it was written by a priest, which, I think, is not impos-
sible, although not for the reason he a.ssigns, which is founded on his
incorrect translation of a single word.*

But the Roman Catholic character of the poem is proven by
lines 593-692, which are occupied in directions how the mass is to
be heard ; and, so ample are these directions as to the ritual observ-
ance of this part of the Roman Catholic worship, that it is very
probable that they were written by a priest.

In the subsequent manuscripts we find no such allusions. Free-
masonry, when these documents were written, was Christian in its
character, but it was Protestant Christianity. The invocation with
which each one begins is to the Trinity of Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost ; but no mention is made, as in the Halliwell MS. of the
Virgin and the saints. The only reference to the Church is in the
first charge, which is, “ that you shall be a true man to God and the
holy Church, and that you use no heresy nor error by your under-
standing or teaching of discreet men ” — a charge that would be emi-
nently fitting for a Protestant Christian brotherhood.

On referring to the first charge adopted after the revival in 1717
by the Grand Lodge of England, we find that then, for the first
time, the sectarian character was abandoned, and the toleration of a
universal religion adopted.

Thus it is said in that charge: “Though in ancient times Ma-

^ A philological note may, Iutc, be not uninteresting. Mr. Halliwell, in support of
his assertion that the writer of the poem was a priest, cjuotes line 629 : “ And, when tlie
Oospel mv rede schal”- where he evidently supposes that me was used instead of /, and
that the line was to be translated — ‘‘when I shall read the Gospel.” Hut in none of th(‘
old manuscripts is the flagrant blunder committed of using the accusative me in place of
the nominative Y or /. The fact is, that the Anglo-Saxon many signifying onvy or they^
like the French on in “ on dit,” as “ man dyde,” one or they didy or it was done^ gave
way in Early English to used in the same sense. Examples of this may be found in
the writers who lived about the time of the composition of the “ Halliwell MS.” A few
may suffice. In the Ayenbite of Jnwyt is the following line : “ Ine the ydcle wordes me
zeneyeth ine vif manercs,” that is, “ In the idle word one sinneth in five ways.” Again,
in Robert of (iloucester’s Chronicle are these phrases : “ Hy this tale me may yse,” i,e, :
“ By this talc may be scenf Story of l.ear, line 183. “ And best me may to hem truste,”

ia\ .* “ And they may he /rz/jAv/best,” ib.. 1 . 184. “ The stude that he was at yslawc me

cleputh yet Morgan,” i.c. : “ The place where he was slain is called Morgan still,” ib., 1 .
213. And the line in the Halliwell poem, which Mr. Halliwell supposed to mean, “And
when / shall read the Gospel,” properly translated, is, “And when the Gospel shall be
ready It furnishes, therefore, no proof that the writer was a priest.

32

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

sons were charged in every country to be of the religion of that
country or nation, whatever it was, yet ’tis now thought more ex-
pedient only to oblige them to that religion in which all men agree,
leaving their particular opinions to themselves.”'

Now, comparing the religious views expressed in the oldest Ma-
sonic Constitution of the 14th century, with those set forth in the
later ones of the i6th and 17th, and again with those laid down in
the charge of 1717, we find an exact record of the transitions which
from time to time took place in the religious aspect of Freemasonry
in England and in some other countries.

At first it was Roman Catholic in its character, and under eccle-
siastical domination.

Then, after the Reformation, rejecting the doctrines of Rome
and the influence of the priesthood, it retained its Christian char-
acter, but became Protestant in its peculiar views.

Lastly, at the time of the so-called Revival, in the beginning of
the 18th century, when Speculative Masonry assumed that form
which it has ever since retained, it abandoned its sectarian character,
and adopted a cosmopolitan and tolerant rule, which required of its
members, as a religious test, only a belief in God.

^ Anderson's Constitutions/' 1st cd., 1723, p. 50.

CHAPTER VI

THE ORIGIN OF THE HALLIWELL POEM

L these facts concerninfj the gradual changes in
the religious character of the Institution, which
by a collation of the old manuscripts we are en-
abled to derive from the Le/^cnd of the Craft,
are corroborated by contemporaneous historical
documents, as will be hereafter seen, and thus the
“ Legend,” notwithstanding the many absurdities
and anachronisms which deface it, becomes really valuable as an his-
torical document.

But this is not all. In comparing the Ilalliwell poem with the
later manuscripts, we not only find unmistakable internal evidence
that they have a different origin, but we learn what that origin is.

The Halliwell poem comes to us from the Stonemasons of Ger-
many. It is not, perhaps, an exact copy of any hitherto undiscov-
ered German document, but its author must have been greatly im-
bued with the peculiar thoughts and principles of the German
" Steinmetzen ” of the Middle Ages.

The proof of this is very palpable to any one who will carefully
read the Halliwell poem, and compare its idea of the rise and prog-
ress of Geometry with that exhibited in the later manuscript Consti-
tutions.

These latter trace the science, as it is always called, from Lamech
to Nimrod, who “found” or invented the Craft of Masonry at the
building of the Tower of Babel, and then to Euclid, who established
it in Egypt, whence it was brought by the Israelites into Judea, and
there again established by David and Solomon, at the building of
the Temple. Thence, by a wonderful anachronism it was brought
into France by one Namus Grecus, who had been a workman at the
Temple, and who organized the Science in France under the auspices
of Charles Martel. From France it was carried to England in the
time of St. Alban. After a long interruption in consequence of the

3 33

34

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Danish and Saxon wars, it finally took permanent root at York,
where Prince Edwin called an Assembly, and gave the Masons their
charges under the authority of a Charter granted by King Athelstan.

It will be observed that nowhere in this later Legend is there any
reference to Germany as a country in which Masonry existed. On
the contrary, the Masonry of England is supposed to have been de-
rived from France, and due honor is paid to Charles Martel as the
founder of the Order in that kingdom.

Hence we may rationally conclude that the Legend of the
Craft was modified by the influence of the French Mason.s, who,
as history informs us, were brought over into England at an early
period.

In this respect, authentic history and the Legend coincide, and
the one corroborates the other.

Different from all this is the Legend of the Halliwell poem, the
internal evidence clearly showing a Germanic origin, or at least a
Germanic influence. The Rev. Bro. Woodford objects to this view,
because, as he says, “ the Legend was then common to both coun-
tries.” But with all due respect, I can not but look upon this argu-
ment as a sort of petitio principii. The very question to be deter-
mined is, whether this community of belief, if it existed at that
time, did not owe its origin to an importation from Germany. It
is certain that in none of the later English manuscripts is there any
allusion to the Four Crowned Martyrs, who were the recognized
patrons of German Operative Masonry.

The variations of the Halliwell poem from the later manu-
scripts arc as follows : It omits all reference to Lamech and his
sons, but passing rapidly over the events at the Tower of Babel,
the building of which it ascribes to Nebuchadnezzar, it begins (if
we except a few lines interpolated in the middle of the poem)
with the Legend of Euclid and the establishment of Masonry by
him in Egypt.

There is no mention of King Solomon’s Temple, whereas the
history of the building of that edifice, as a Masonic labor, constitutes
an important part of all the later manuscripts.

The Legend of the Four Crowned Martyrs, concerning whom
all the later manuscripts are silent, is given at some length, and they
are described as “ gode masonus as on erthe schul go.” These were
the tutelar saints of the German Operative Masons of the Middle

THE ORIGIN OF THE HALLIWELL POEM 35

Ages, but there is no evidence that they were ever adopted as such
by the English brotherhood.

There is no allusion in the Halliwell poem to Charles Martel,
and to the account of the introduction of Masonry into England
from France, during his reign, which forms a prominent part of all
the later manuscripts.

Neither is there any notice of the Masonry in England during
the time of St. Alban, but the poem attributes its entrance into that
country to King Athelstan.

Lastly, while the later manuscripts record the calling of the As-
sembly at the city of York by Prince Edwin, the Halliwell makes
no mention of York as the place where the Assembly was called,
nor of Edwin as presiding over it. This fact demolishes the theory
of Dr. Oliver, that the Halliwell poem is a copy of the so-called Old
York Constitutions.

From all these considerations, I think that we are justified in
assigning to the Halliwell poem and to the other later manuscripts
two different sources. The former is of Germanic, and the latter of
French origin. They agree, however, in a general resemblance, di-
versified only in the details. This suggests the idea of a common
belief, upon which, as a foundation, two different structures have
been erected.

CHAPTER VII

THE LEGEND, THE GERM OF HISTORY

HE Legend of the Craft, as it has been given in
the fourth chapter of this work fropi the exem-
plar in the Dowland MS., appears to have been
accepted for centuries by the body of the Frater-
nity as a truthful history. Even at the present
day, this Legend is exerting an influence in the
formation of various parts of the ritual. This
influence has even been extended to the adoption of historical views
of the rise and progress of the Institution, which have, in reality,
no other foundation than the statements which are contained in the
Legend.

For these reasons, the Legend of the Craft is of great impor-
tance and value to the student of Masonic history, notwithstanding
the absurdities, anachronisms, and unsupported theories in which it
abound.s.

Accepting it simply as a document which for so long a period
claimed and received the implicit faith of the Fraternity whose his-
tory it professed to give — a faith not yet altogether dead — it is worthy
of our consideration whether we can not, by a careful examination
of its general spirit and tenor, irrespective of the bare narrative which
it contains, discover some key to the true origin and character of that
old and extensive brotherhood of which it is the earliest record.

I think that we shall find in it the germ of many truths, and the
interpretation of several historic facts concerning which it makes im-
portant suggestions.

In the first place, it must be remarked that we have no way of
determining the precise period when this Legend was first composed,
nor when it was first accepted by the Craft as a history of the Insti-
tution. The earliest written record that has been discovered among
English Masons bears a date which is certainly not later than about
the end of the 14th century. But this by no means proves that no

36

THE LEGEND, THE GERM OF HISTORY 37

earlier exemplar ever existed, of which the Constitutions, which
have so far been brought to light, may only be copies.

On the contrary, we have abundant reason to believe that all the
Old Records which have been published are, with the exception of
the Ilalhwell MS., in fact derived from some original text which
however, has hitherto escaped the indefatigable researches of the in-
vestigators.

If, for instance, we take the Sloane MS., No. 3,848, the assumed
date of which is a.0. 1646, and the Harleian MS., No. 2,054, the
date of which is supposed to be a.d. 1650, and if we carefully collate
the one with the other, we must come to the conclusion either that
the latter was copied from the former, or that both were copied from
some earlier record, for whose exhumation from the shelves of the
British Museum, or from the archives of some old Lodge, we may
still confidently hope.

The resemblances in language and ideas, and the similarity of
arrangement that are found in both documents, very clearly indicate
a common origin, while the occasional verbal discrepancies can be
safely attributed to the carelessness of an inexpert copyist. Brother
Hughan,’ who is high authority, styles the Harleian, from its close
resemblance," an indiflferent copy ” of the Sloane. The Rev. A. F. A.
Woodford,* who assigns the earlier date of 1625 to the original
Harleian, says it " is nearly a verbatim copy of Dowland’s form,
slightly later, and must have been transcribed either from an early,
and almost contemporary, copy of Dowland’s, or it is really a copy
of Dowland’s itself.” These opinions by experts strengthen the
view 1 have advanced, that there was a common origin for all of
these manuscripts.

If wc continue the collation of the manuscripts of later date, as
far, even, as the Papworth, which is supposed to have been tran-
scribed about the year 1714, the same family likeness will be found
in all. It is true, that in the transcription of the later manuscripts
— those, for example, that were copied toward the end of the 1 7th
and the beginning of the i8th centuries — the language has been im-
proved, some few archaisms have been avoided, and more recent
words substituted for them. Scriptural names have been sometimes
spelt with a greater respect for correct orthography, and a feeble

' “ Old Charges of the Brit. Freemasons,’* p. 8.
* Preface to Hughan’s “ Old Charges,” p. xi.

38

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

attempt has been made to give a modem complexion to the docu-
ment. But in all of them there is the same misspelling of words, the
same violations of the rules of grammar, the same arrangement of
the narrative, and a preservation and repetition of all the state-
ments, apocryphal and authentic, which arc to be found in the
earliest exemplars.

I have said that the Legend of the Crafty as set forth in the
later manuscripts, was for centuries accepted by the Operative Ma-
sons of England, with all its absurdities of anachronism, as a veri-
table history of the rise and progress of Masonry from the earliest
times, and that the influence of this belief is still felt among the
Speculative Masons of the present day, and that it has imbued the
modern rituals with its views.

This fact gives to this Legend an importance and a value irre-
spective of its character as a mere Legend. And its value will be
greatly enhanced if we are able to show that, notwithstanding the
myths with which it abounds, the Legend of the Craft really con-
tains the germ of historical truth. It is, indeed, an historical myth —
one of that species of myths so common in the mythology of antiq-
uity, which has a foundation in historical truth, with the admixture
of a certain amount of fiction in the introduction of personages and
circumstances, that are either not historical, or are not historically
treated. Indeed, it may be considered as almost rising into the
higher class of historical myths, in which the historical and truthful
greatly predominate over the fictitious.^

In the contemplation of the Legend of the Mediaeval Masons
from this point of view, it would be well if we should govern our-
selves by the profound thought of Max Miiller,* who says, in writ-
ing on a cognate subject, that “ everything is true, natural, signifi-
cant, if we enter with a reverent spirit into the meaning of ancient
art and ancient language. Everything becomes false, miraculous,
and unmeaning, if we interpret the deep and mighty words of the
seers of old in the shallow and feeble sense of modern chroniclers.”

Examined in the light of this sentiment, which teaches us to
look upon the language of the myth, or Legend, as containing a
deeper meaning than that which is expressed upon its face, we shall

^ For a classification of myths into the historical myth and the mythical history^ see
the author^s treatise on the “ Symbolism of Freemasonry,” p. 347.

^ Science of Language,” 2d series, p. 578.

THE LEGEND, THE GERM OF HISTORY

39

find in the Legend of the Craft many points of historical reference,
and, where not historical, then symbolical, which will divest it of
much of what has been called its absurdities.

It is to an examination of the Legend in this philosophic spirit
that I now invite the reader. Let it be understood that I direct my
attention to the Legend contained in the later manuscripts, such as
the Dowland, Harleian, Sloanc, etc., of which a copy has been given
in preceding pages of this work, and that reference is made only as
occasion may require to the Halliwell MS. for comparison or ex-
planation. This is done because the Legend of the later manuscripts
is undoubtedly the one which was adopted by the English Masons,
while that of the Halliwell MS. appears to have been of exotic
growth, which never took any extensive root in the soil of English
Masonry.

In the subsequent chapters devoted to this subject, which may
be viewed as Commentaries on the Legend of the Craft, I shall
investigate the signification of the various subordinate Legends into
which it is divided.

CHAPTER VIII

THE ORIGIN OF GEOMETRY

HE manuscript begins with an invocation to the
^ Trinity. This invocation is almost identical with
that which prefaces the Harleian, the Sloane, the
Landsdowne, and, indeed, all the other manu-
scripts, except the Halliwell and the Cooke.
^ j From this fact we may justly infer that there

was a common exemplar, an “editio princeps,”
whence each of these manuscripts was copied. The very slight ver-
bal variations, such as “ Father of Kings” in the Dowland, which is
“ Father of Heaven ” in the others, will not affect this conclusion,
for they may be fairly attributed to the carelessness of copyists. The
reference to the Trinity in all these invocations is also a conclusive
proof of the Christian character of the building corporations of the
Middle Ages — a proof that is corroborated by historical evidences.
As I have already shown, in the German Constitutions of the Stone-
masons, the invocation is “ In the name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, in the name of the blessed Virgin Mary, and also in honor
of the Four Crowned Martyrs” — an invocation that shows the Ro-
man Catholic spirit of the German Regulations; while the omission
of all reference to the Virgin and the Martyrs gives a Protestant
character to the English manuscripts.

Next follows a descant on the seven liberal arts and sciences, the
nature and intention of each of which is briefly described. In all
of the manuscripts, even in the earliest — the Halliwell — ^will wc find
the same reference to them, and, almost literally, the same description.
It is not surprising that these sciences should occupy so prominent
a place in the Old Constitutions, as making the very foundation of
Masonry, when wc reflect that an equal prominence was given to
them in the Middle Ages as comprehending the whole body of human
knowledge. Thus Mosheim’ tells us that in the iith century they

^ “ Ecclesiast. Hist. XI. Cent.,” part ii., chap. i.
40

THE ORIGIN OF GEOMETRY 41

were taught in the greatest part of the schools ; and Holinshed, who
wrote in the i6th century, says that they composed a part of the cur-
riculum that was taught in the universities. Speculative Masonry
continues to this day to pay an homage to these seven sciences, and
has adopted them among its important symbols in the second degree.
The connection sought to be established in the old manuscripts be-
tween them and Masonry, would seem to indicate the existence of a
laudable ambition among the Operative Masons of the Middle Ages
to elevate the character of their Craft above the ordinary standard
of workmen — an elevation that, history informs us, was actually
effected, the Freemasons of the Guild holding themselves and being
held by others as of higher rank and greater acejuirements than were
the rough Masons who did not belong to the corporation of builders.

The manuscript continues by a declaration that Geometry and
Masonry are identical. Thus, in enumerating and defining the seven
liberal arts and sciences. Geometry is placed as the fifth, “ the which
science,” says the Legend, “ is called Masonrye.” *

Now, this doctrine that Geometry and Masonry are identical
sciences, has been held from the time of the earliest records to the
present day by all the Operative Masons who preceded the i8th
century, as well as by the Speculative Masons after that period.

In the ritual of the Fellow Craft’s degree used ever since, at least
from the middle of the last century, the candidate is informed that
“Masonry and Geometry are synonymous terms." The Lodge-
room, wherever Speculative Masonry has extended, show.s, by the
presence of the hieroglyphic letter in the East, that the doctrine is
still maintained.

Gadicke, the author of a German Lexicon of Freemasonry,
says, that as Geometry is among the mathematical sciences the one
which has the most especial reference to architecture, we can, there-
fore, under the name of Geometry, understand the whole art of
Freemasonry.

Hutchinson, speaking of the letter G, says that it denotes Geom-
etry, and declares that as a symbol it has always been used by artif-
icers — that is, architects — and by Masons.®

1 Dowland MS. The Halliwell poem expresses the same idea in different words :

‘‘ At these lordys prayers they counterfetyd gemetry,

And gaf hyt the name of Masonry.” (Lines 23, 24.)

Spirit of Freemasonry,” led. viii., p. 92, 2d edit.

CHAPTER IX

THE LEGEND OF LAMECH’S SONS AND THE TILLARS

HE traditional history of Masonry now begins, in
the Legend of the Craft, with an account of
the three sons of Lamcch, to whom is attributed
the discovery of all sciences. But the most in-
teresting part of the Legend is that in which the
story is told of two pillars erected by them, and
on which they had inscribed the discoveries they
had made, so that after the impending destruction of the world the
knowledge which they had attained might be communicated to the
post-diluvian race.

This story is not mentioned in the Bible, but is first related by
J osephus in the following words :

“They also [the posterity of Seth] were the inventors of that
peculiar sort of wisdom which is concerned with the heavenly bodies
and their order. And that their inventions might not be lost before
they were sufficiently known, upon Adam’s prediction that the
world was to be destroyed at one time by the force of fire, and at
another time by the violence and quantity of water, they made two
pillars, the one of brick, the other of stone ; they inscribed their dis-
coveries on them both, that in case the pillar of brick should be de-
stroyed by the flood, the pillar of stone might remain and exhibit
those discoveries to mankind, and also inform them that there was
another pillar of brick erected by them. Now this remains in the
land of Siriad to this day.” ^

Although this traditional narrative has received scarcely any es-
timation from scholars, and Josephus has been accused either of
“ incredible audacity or frivolous credulity,” * still it has formed the

^Josephus, “Antiquities of the Jews,** B. I., ch. ii., Whiston’s trans.

Incredibili audacii aut futili credulitate usus est,” is the language of Hornius in
his “ Geo/rraphia Veius.** But Owen (“ Theologomena,” lib. iv., c. ii., 6), although
inclined to doubt the story, thinks it not impossible if we suppose hieroglyphics like
those of the Egyptians to have been used for the inscriptions, instead of letters.

44

OPRRAin'E MASONS OF THE jolh CRN JURY

LAMECH’S SONS AND THE PILLARS

45

foundation on which the Masonic Legend of the pillars has been
erected. But in passing from the Jewish historian to the Legend-
maker of the Craft, the form of the story has been materially altered.
In Josephus the construction of the pillars is attributed to the pos-
terity of Seth ; in the Legend, to the children of Lamech. Whence
was this important alteration derived ?

The Dowland and all subsequent manuscripts cite the fourth
chapter of Genesis as authority for the Legend. But in Genesis
no mention is made of these pillars. But in the Cooke MS.,
which is of an earlier date, we can trace the true sc'urce of the Le-
gend in its Masonic form, which could not be done until that manu-
script was published.

To the Cooke MS. has been accorded the date of 1490. It dif-
fers materially in form and substance from the Halliwell MS., which
preceded it by at least a century, and is the first of the Old Consti-
tutions in which anything like the present form of the Legend ap-
pears.

The way in which the Legend of Lamech is treated by it, enables
us to discover the true source whence this part of the Legend of (he
Craft was derived.

It must be remarked, in the first place, that the Halliwell poem,
the earliest of the old manuscripts, the date of which is not later
than the close of the 14th century, contains no allusion to this
Legend of Lamech and his children. The Cooke MS. is the first
one in which we find the details. The Cooke MS. is assigned, as
has been before said, to the end of the 15th century, about the
year 1490. In it the Legend of the pillars is given (from line 253
to 284) in the following words :

“And these iii brotheryn [the sons of Lamech] aforesayd, had
knowlyche that God wold take vengans for synne other by fyre or
watir, and they had greter care how they myght do to saue the
sciens that they founde, and they toke her [their] consell to gedyr
and by all her [their] wilts they scyde that were ij manner of stonn
of suchc virtu that the one wolde neuer brenne [burn] and that stonn
is called marbyll and that other stonn that woll not synke in watir,
and that stone is namyd laterus,^ and so they deuysyd to wryte all
the sciens that they had Found® in this ij stonys if that god wolde

^From the Latin ‘Mater,” a brick.

* It is to be regretted that in nearly all the recent printed copies of the old manu-

46

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

take ven^eans by fyre that the marbyll scholde not brenne. And yf
god sende vcngeans by watir that the other scholde not droune, and
so they prayed her elder brother jobell that wold make ij pillers of
these ij stones, that is to sey of marbill and of laterus, and that he
woldc write in the ij pylcrs alle the sciens and crafte that alle they
had founde, and so he did.”

C.kimparing this Legend with the passage that has been cited from
Josephus, it is evident that the Legend-maker had not derived his
story from the Jewish historian. The latter attributes the building
of the pillars to the children of Seth, while the former assigns it to
the children of Lamech. ITow are we to explain this change in the
form of the Legend ? We can only solve the problem by reference
to a work almost contemporary with the legendist.

Ranulph Higden, a Benedictine monk of St. Werburg’s Abbey,
in Chester, who died in the latter half of the T4th century, wrote a
Universal history, completed to his own times, under the title of
Pplychronicon.

The Polychronicon was written in the Latin language, but
was translated into English by Sir John Trevisa. This translation,
with several verbal alterations, was published in London by William
Caxton in 1482, about ten years before the date of the Cooke MS.
With this work, the compiler of the Legend in the Cooke MS. ap-
pears to have been familiar. He cites it repeatedly as authority for
his statements.

Thus he says : “Ye schal understonde that amonge all the craftys
of the world of mannes crafte Masonry hath the most notabilite and
moste parte of this sciens Gemctry as his nolid and seyd in storiall
as in the bybyll and in the master of stories. And in policronico a
cronycle prynted.”

Now the Legend of Lamcch’s children is thus given in Caxton’s
edition of the translation of Higden’s Polychronicon : ^

scripts, the editors have substituted the double ff for the capital F which is in the origi-
nal. The scribes or amanuenses of the Middle Ages were fond of employing capital let-
ters often when there was really no use for them, but they never indulged in the folly of
unnecessarily doubling initial letters. What the modern editors of the manuscripts
have mistaken for a double ff was really the ff or the capital F of the scribes. This is
not of much importance, but even in small things it is well to be accurate. Bro. Hughan,
in his edition of the Old Charges,” is, as wc might expect, generally correct in this
particular. But sometimes, perhaps inadvertently, he has printed the double instead of
the capital letter.

I., ch. V.

LAMECirS SONS AND THE I’lLLARS

47

“ Caym /vdams fvrste sone bcgate Enoch, he gate I rad, he gale
Manayell, he gate Matusale, he gate Lameth. This Lametlj tt)kc
twey wyves, Ada and Sella, and gale tweyne sons on Ada. lahell
that was fader of them that woned in tentes and in pauylons. And
Tuball that was fader of organystre and of harpers. And Lameth
gate on Sella Tubal cayn that was a smith worchyng with hamer,
and his sister Nocma, she found fyrsl weuynge craftc.

Josephus. Jabell ordayned fyrste lloekes of beestes and marks
to know one from another. And departed kyddesfroin lambesand
yonge from the olde. Petrus Tubaleayn founde fyrsl smythes
crafte. Tuball had grete lykynge to here the hamers sowne. And
soo he vsed them moehe in the accorde of melodye, but he was not
finder of the instruments of musyke. For they were founde longe
afterwarde.”

The reader will at once perceive whence the composer of the
Legend in the Cooke MS. derived his information about the family
of Lameeh. And it will be equally plain that the subse(iuent writers
of the Old Constitutions took the general tone of their Legend
from this manuscript.

The Polychronicfltt. after attributing the discovery f)f music to
Pythagoras, |»rocceds to descant upon ihe wickedness of mankind
immediately after the time of Seth, and rcj)eats the biblical story of
the intermarriage of the sons of God and the daughters of men,
which he explains as signifying the .sons (jf Seth and the daughters
of Cain. Then follows l he following passage :

''Josephus. That tyme men wysle as Adam and sayde, that they
sholde be destroyed by fyre or dies by water. Therefore bookes
that they hadde made by grete trauaille and sludye, be clo.sed them
in two grete pylers made of marbill and of brent tyle. In a j)yl(;r of
marbill for water and in a pyler of lyle for fyre. For it should be
sauved by that maner to hclpe of mankynde. Men sayth that the
pyler of stone escaped the (loode, and yet is in Syrya.”

Here we find the origin of the story of the two pillars as related
in the Legend of the Craft. But how can we account for the
change of the constructors of these pillars from the children of Seth,
as stated in Josephus, and from him in the Polychronicon, to the
children of Lameeh, as it is given in the Legend ?

By the phrase “ That tyme men wyste,” or “ at that time men

48

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

knew," with which Trevisa begins his translation of that part of
Higden’s work, he undoubtedly referred to the “tyme” contempo-
rary with the children of Seth, of whom he had immediately before
been speaking. But the writer of the Legend engaged in recount-
ing the narrative of the invention of the sciences by the children of
Lamcch, and thus having his attention closely directed to the doings
of that family, inadvertently, as I suppose, passed over or omitted to
notice the passage concerning the descendants of Seth, which had
been interposed by the author of the Polychronicon, and his eye,
catching the account of the pillars a little farther on, he ai)plied
the expression, “ that lyme,” not to the descendants of Seth, but to
the children of Lamcch, and thus gave the Masonic version of the
Legend.

1 have called this ascription of the pillars to the children of La-
mcch a “ Masonic version,” because it is now contained only in the
Legend of the Craft, those who do not reject the story altogether
as a myth, preferring the account given by Josephus.

But, in fact, the error of misinterpreting Josephus occurred long
before the Legend of the Craft was written, and was committed
by one of the most learned men of his age.

St. Isidore, Bishop of Seville, who died in the year 636, was the
author of many works in the Latin language, on theology, philos-
ophy, history, and philology. Among other books written by him
was a ChronicoH, or Chronicle, in which the following passage
occurs, where he is treating of Lamech :

“In the year of the world 1642, Lamech being 190 years old,
begat Noah, who, in the five hundredth year of his age, is commanded
by the Divine oracle to build the Ark. In these times, as Josephus
relates, those men knowing that they would be destroyed either by
fire or water, inscribed their knowledge upon two columns made of
brick and of stone, .so that the memory of those things which they
had wisely discovered might not be lost. Of these columns the stone
one is said to have escaped the Flood and to be still remaining in
Syria.” ’

It is very evident that in some way the learned Bishop of Seville
had misunderstood the passage of Josephus, and that to him the sons
of Lamcch are indebted for the honor of being considered the con-

Opera Isidori/’ cd. Matriti, 1778, tom. i., p. 125.

LAMECH’S SONS AND THE PILLARS

49

structors of the pillars. The phrase “ his tcmporibus,” //icsc fimt s,
clearly refers to the times of Lamcch.

It is doubtful whether the author of the Legend of the Craft was
acquainted with the works of Isidore, or had read this passage. His
Etymologies are repeatedly cited in the Cooke manuscript, but it is
through Higden, whose Polychronicon contains many quotations
from the Libri Etymologiartim of the Spanish Bishop and Saint.
But I prefer to assume that the Legend-maker got his ideas from
the Polychronicon in the method that I have described.

In the last century a new Legend was introduced into Masonry,
in which the building of these pillars was ascribed to Enoch. But
this Legend, which is supposed to have been the invention of the
Chevalier Ramsay, is altogether modern, and has no connection
with the Legend of the Craft.

In borrowing the story of the antediluvian pillars from Josephus,
through the Polychronicon, though they have made some confu-
sion in narrating the incidents, the Old Operative Masons were sim-
ply incorporating into their Legend of the Craft a myth which had
been universal among the nations of antiquity, for all of them had
their memorial columns. Sesostris, the great Egyptian king and
conqueror, sometimes called Sethos, or Seth, and who, VVhiston
thinks, has been confounded by Josephus with the Adamic Seth,
erected pillars in all the countries which he conquered as monu-
ments of his victories.

The Polychronicon, with which we see that the old Masons
were familiar, had told them that Zoroaslres, King of Bactria, had
inscribed the seven liberal arts and sciences on fourteen pillars, seven
of brass and seven of brick. Hercules was said to have jilaced at
the Straits of Gades two pillars, to show to posterity how lar he had
extended his conquests.

In conclusion, it should be observed that the story of the pillars
as inserted in the Legend of the Craft has exerted no influence
on the modern rituals of Freema.sonry, and is never referred to in
any of the ceremonies of Ancient Craft Masonry. The more recent
Legend of the pillars of Enoch belongs exclusively to the higher and
more modern degrees. The only pillars that are alluded to in the
primitive degrees are those ol Solomon’s temple. But these develop
so important a portion of the symbolism of the Institution as to de-
mand our future consideration in a subsequent part of this work.

4

CHAPTER X

THK LEGEND OF HERMES

HE next part of the Legend of the Craft
which claims our attention is that which relates
to Hermes, who is said to have discovered one
of the pillars erected by the sons of Lamech,
and to have communicated the sciences inscribed
on it to mankind. This may, for distinction, be
called ''The Legend of Hermes^

The name has suffered cruel distortion from the hands of the
copyists in the different manuscripts. In the Dowland MS. it is
Hcrmaryncs ; in the Landsdowne, Hermincrus / in the York, Her-
marines ; in the Sloane, 3,848, Ilermincs and Ilcrfnencs, who “was
afterwards called Hermes ” ; and worst and most intolerable of all,
it is in the Harleian, IIcrmax 7 nes, But they all evidently refer to
the celebrated Hermes Trismegistus, or the thrice great Hermes.
The Cooke MS., from which the story in the later manuscripts is
derived, spells the name correctly, and adds, on the authority of
the Polychro 7 iicony that while Hermes found one of the pillars,
Pythagoras discovered the other. Pythagoras is not mentioned in
any of the later manuscripts, and we first find him referred to as a
founder in Masonry in the questionable manuscript of Leland, which
fact will, perhaps, furnish another argument against the genuineness
of that document.

As to Hermes, the Legend is not altogether without some his-
torical support, although the story is in the Legend mythical, but of
that character which' pertains to the historical myth.

He was reputed to be the son of Taut or Thoth, whom the
Egyptians deified, and placed his image beside those of Osiris and
Isis. To him they attributed the invention of letters, as well as of
all the sciences, and they esteemed him as the founder of their relig-
ious rites.

50

THE LEGEND OF HERMES

51

Hodges says, in a note on a passage of Sanchoniathon,' that
“ Thoth was an Egyptian deity of the second order. The Gracco-
Roman mythology identified him with Hermes or Mercury. He
was reputed to be the inventor of writing, the patron deity of learn*
ing, the scribe of the gods, in which capacity he is represented sign-
ing the sentences on the souls of the dead.” Some recent writers
have supposed that Hermes was the symbol of Divine Intelligence
and the primitive type of Plato’s “ Logos.”

Manetho, the Egyptian priest, as quoted by Syncellus, distin-
guishes three beings who were called Hermes by the Egyptians.
The first, or Hermes Trismegistus, had, before the deluge, inscribed
the history of all the sciences on pillars ; the second, the son of Aga-
thodemon, translated the precepts of the first ; and the third, who is
supposed to be synonymous with Thoth, was the counsellor of Osiris
and Isis. But these three were in later ages confounded and fused
into one, known as Hermes Trismegistus. He was always under-
stood by the philosophers to symbolize the birth, the progress, ami
the perfection of human sciences. He was thus considered as a type
of the Supreme Being. Through him man was elevated and put
into communication with the gods.

The Egyptians attributed to him the composition of 36,525
books on all kinds of knowledge.* But this mythical fecundity (jf
authorship has been explained as referring to the whole scientific
and religious encyclopaedia collected by the Egyptian priests and
preserved in their temples.

Under the title of Hermetic books, several works falsely attrib-
uted to Hermes, but written, most probably, by the Neo-Platonists,
are still extant, and were deemed to be of great authority up to the
16th century.®

It was a tradition very generally accepted in former times that
this Hermes engraved his knowledgf? of the sciences on tables or
pillars of stone, which were afterward copied into books.

Manetho attributes to him the invention of styl(c, or pillars, on
which were inscribed the principles of the sciences. And Jamblichus

^Cory’s “Ancient Fragments,*’ edited by E. Richmond Hodges, Lond., 1876,
p. 3.

^Jamblichus, citing Selencos, “ de Mysteriis,” segm. viii., c. i.

^ Rousse, Dictionnaire in voc. The principal of these is the “ Poemander,” or of the
Divine Power and Wisdom.

52

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

says that when Plato and Pythagoras had read the inscriptions on
these columns they formed their philosophy.^

Hermes was, in fact, an Egyptian legislator and priest. Thirty-
six books on philosophy and theology, and six on medicine, are said
to have been written by him, but they are all lost, if they ever ex-
isted. The question, indeed, of his own existence has been regarded
by modern scholars as extremely mythical. The Alchemists, how-
ever, adopted him as their patron. Hence Alchemy is called the
Hermetic science, and hence we get Hermetic Masonry and Her-
metic Rites.

At the time of the composition of the Legend of the Craft,
the opinion that Hermes was the inventor of all the sciences, and
among them, of course. Geometry and Architecture, was universally
accepted as true, even by the learned. It is not, therefore, singular
that the old Masons, who must have been familiar with the Hermetic
myth, received it as something worthy to be incorporated into the
early history of the Craft, nor that they should have adopted him, as
they did Euclid, as one of the founders of the science of Masonry,

The idea must, however, have sprung up in the 1 5th century, as
it is first broached in the Cook MS. And it was, in all proba-
bility, of English origin, since there is no allusion to it in the Halli-
well poem.

The next important point that occurs in the Legend of the
Craft is its reference to the Tower of Babel, and this will, there-
fore, be the subject of the next chapter.

^ Juxta antiquas Mcrcurii columnas, quas Plato quondam, ct Pythagoras cumlectitas*
sent, philosophiam constitucrunt. Jamblichus, ** de Mysteriis,” segm. i., c. 3.

CHAPTER XI

THK TOVVKR OK HAHEL

NLIKE the legend of Hermes, the story of the
Tower of Babel appears in the Halliwell poem,
which shows, if my theory of the origin of that
poem be correct, that the Legend was not con-
fined at an early period to the English Masons.
In the second of the two poems, which 1 have
heretofore said arc united in one manuscript, the
legend of Babel, or Babylon, is thus given

**Ye mow here as y do rede,

'rhat many years after, for gret dredc.

That Noee’s flod was alle y-ronne,’*^

The tower of Bebyloinc was begoune,

Also playne werk of lyme and ston.

As any irion schulde toke uppon,

Seven mylc the hcyghle shadwclh the sonne.

King Nabugodonosor let hyt make
To gret strenthe for monus^ sake
Thaygh such a flod agayne schulde come.

Over the werke hyt schulde not nome,^

For they hadde so hye pride, with strange bost,

Alle that werke therfore was y-lost ;

An angele smol hem so with dyveres spccchc,

That never won wyste what other schuld reche." ®

Thc‘ slalemcnfsof this Halliwell T^egcncl are very meagre, nor is it
possible to say witii any certainty whence the writer derived his de-
tails. From neither the Book of Genesis, nor Berosus, nor Josephus
could he have derived the information which has given its peculiar
form to the legend. The anachronism of making Nebuchadnezzar,
who lived about sixteen centuries after the event, the builder of the

^ Lines 535-550-

^Rain — Ang.-Sax. rinatty to rain — That Noah’s flood would still rain.

® Men’s sake. Get — should not get over the work — cover it. ® Say.

53

54

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

tower is worthy of notice. It would appear that the writer of the
poem had a general acquaintance with the well-known tradition of
Babel, and that in loosely giving an account of it, he had confused
the time and place of the erection and the supposed name of the
builder. At all events, the subsequent Masonic legendists did not
accept the Halliwell writer as authority, or, more probably, were
wholly unacquainted with his poem. It did not exert any inlluence
over the subsequent manuscripts.

The next time that the Babel legend appears is in the Cooke MS.,
written at least a century after the Halliwell. The legend, as there
given, is in the following words :

“ Hit is writen in the bibull Genesis, Cap. 1“", wo [how] that
Cam, Noe’s sone, gate Nembrothe, and he wax a myghty man apon
the erthe, and he wax a stronge man, like a Gyant, and he was a
grete kyng, and the bygynyng of his kyngdom was [the] trew kyng-
dom of Babilon and Arach and Archad and Calan ’ and the lond of
Sennare. And this same Cam * he gan the towre of babilon, and he
taught to his werkemen the craft of mesurie,® and he had with him
mony masonys mo than xl. thousand, and he louyd and chereshed
them well, and hit is wryten in Policronicon and in the master of
stories and in other stories mo, and this a part wytnes [the] bybull
in the same x. chapter where he seyth that asure [Assur] was nye
kynne to Nembrothe^ gede [went] owt of the londe of Senare, and
he bylded the City Nunyve and Plateas and other mo. Thus he
seyeth, ‘ De terra ilia et de Sennare egressus est Asure et edifiiavit
Nunyven et Plateas civitates et Cale et lesu quoque inter Nunyven
et ha;c est Civitas Magna.’

“ Reson wolde [requires] that we schold telle opunly how and in
what manner that the charges of masoncraft was fyrst foundyd and
ho gaf [who gave] fyrste the name to hit of masonri. And ye
schyll knawwell that hit [is] told and writen in Policronicon and in
Methodus episcopus and Martyrus that Asur that was a worthy lord

’The names of cities.

^ The word Nembroth had been first written in the manuscript, then erased, and the
Cam” (for Ham) inserted. But this correction is itself incorrect and incongruous with
the rest of the legend.

Mesuri — measure. The author of the manuscript had previously maintained that
measure and geometry were identical. So here '' the craft of mesuri^* means the craft of
geometry, and geometry was always supposed to be the same as Masonry.

^ Cam originally written, then erased and Nembrothe inserted.

THE TOWER OF BABEL

55

of Sennare, sende to Nembroth the kyng to scnde hym masons and
workemen of crafte that myght hclpc hym to make his Cite that he
was in wyll to make. And Nembroth sende hym xxx C. (3,000) of
masons. And whan they scholde go and [he] sende hem forth he
callyd hem by for hym [before him] and seyd to hem, ye must go to
my cosyn Asure to helpe hym to bilde a cyte, but loke that ye be
well govemyd, and I shall give you a charge profitable for you and
me. . . .

“And they resceyved the charge of him that was here [their]
maistcr and here lorde, and went forth to Asure and bilde the cite
of Nunyve in the country of Plateas and other cites mo, that men
call Cale and lesen that is a gret cite bi twene Cale and Nunyve.
And in this manner the craft of masonry was fyrst preferryd
[brought forward] and chargyd for a sciens.”

We next meet with the Legend in the later manuscripts, in a
form differing but little from that of the Cooke MS. The Dow-
land, which is the earliest of these manuseript Constitutions, and the
date of which is supposed to be about the year 1550, has already
been printed in this work. But for the convenience of the reader,
in comparing the three forms of the Legend, so much of it as re-
fers to the Babel legend is again inserted. It is in these words,
which, it may be remarked, are very closely followed by all the sub-
sequent manuscripts up to the beginning of the i8th century :

“At the makinge of the Tower of Babylon, there was Masonrye
first made much of. And the Kinge of Babylon that height Nem-
rothe was a mason himselfc, and loved well the science as it is said
with masters of histories. And when the City of Ninyve and other
citties of the East should be made, Nemrothe the Kinge of Baby-
lon sent thither three score masons at the rogation of the Kinge of
Nyneve, his cosen. And when he sent them forth he gave them a
charge in this manner. . . . And this was the first tyme that

ever Masons had any charge of his science.”

In comparing the three forms of the Babylonish legend, which
have here been cited, namely, as given in the Halliwell, the Cooke,
and the Dowland MSS., we shall readily delect that there was a
gradual growth of the details until the legend eventually took the
shape which for a long time was accepted by the Craft.

In the Halliwell poem the legend is very brief, and by its abrupt
termination would impress the opinion upon the reader that Ma-

56

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

sonry had no part in the building of the Tower of Babel, the only
effect of which was to produce a confusion of languages and the
dispersion of mankind. It was only “ many years after ” that the
“craft of geometry,” or Masonry, was taught by Euclid. In fact,
the whole tendency of the Halliwell legend is to trace the origin of
Masonry to Euclid and the Egyptians. In his account of the
Tower of Babel, the writer of the Halliwell poem seems to have
been indebted only to the Scriptural narrative, although he has con-
founded Nebuchadnezzar, the repairer of Babylon, with Nimrod,
its original founder.

But the writer of the Cooke MS. took his details of the legend
from another source. Only a few years before the composition of
this manuscript, Ca.xton had published, and thus placed in the hands
■of the English Masons, Trevisa’s translation of Ranulph tiigden’s
Polychronicon, or Universal History. Of this book, rich in mate-
rials for legendary composition, the writer of the Cooke MS. read-
ily availed himself. This he honestly acknowledges in several places.
And although he quotes as other authorities Herodotus, Josephus,
and Methodius, it is very evident that he knows nothing of these
historians except from the citations from them made by the monk
Higden in the Polychronicon.

The English Masons were probably already acquainted with the
legend in the imperfect form in which it is given in the Halliwell
poem. But for the shape which it assumed from the time of the
composition of the Cooke MS., and which was adopted in the Dow-
land and all the later manuscripts, the Craft were, 1 think, undoubt-
edly indebted to the Polychronicon of the Monk of Chester,
through its translation by Trevisa and its publication by Caxton.

There arc two other forms of the Babylonian legend, of later
<late, which must be read before we can thoroughly understand the
growth of that legend.

In 1723 Anderson published, by authority of the Grand Lodge
of England, the Constitutions of the Free-Masons. Dr. Anderson
was, no doubt, in posse.ssion of, or had access to, many sources of
information in the way of old manuscripts which have since been
lost, and with these, assisted in some measure by his own inventive
genius, he has extended the brief Legend of the Craft to 34 quarto
pages. But as this work was of an official character, and was written
and published under the sanction of the Grand Lodge, and freely di.s-

THE TOWER OF BABEL

57

tributed among the Lodges and Masons of the time, the form of the
Legend adopted by him was accepted by the F'raternity for a very
lung period as authentic. The Andersonian legend of the Tower i)f
Bab^'l molded, therefore, the belief of the English Craft for at least
the whole of the j8th century.

Before giving any citations from the Andersonian version of the
legend, it will be necessary to refer to another copy of the Old
Constitutions.

Dr. Krause, the author of a learned Masonic work, entitled The
Three Oldest Documents of the Brotherhood of T'rccmasous, j)ub-
lislied in that work in i8io a German translation of a document
which he calls the York Constitutions}

Of this document Krause gives the following account. lie says
that Bro. Schneider, of Altenberg, had written communication from
Bro. Bdttger, who stated that in the year 1799 he had seen at London
a copy of the York (A)nstitutions in a very old manuscrijg, consist-
ing of 107 leaves in large; folio, almost one-third of which he had
been unable to read, because it was written in the early English lan-
guage, and hence he was forced to employ a learned Englishman as
an interpreter. Schneider made diligent inquiries after this manu-
script, and eventually received a certified Latin translation, made in
1806, from which, in 1808, he composed a German version.

This document Krause supposes to be a genuine e.xemplar of
the Constitutions enacted at York in 926. The original manuscript
has, however, never been found ; it is not referred to in any of the
records of the old Grand Lodge of V'ork, and seems to have re-
mained in mysterious obscurity until seen in 1799 by this Bro.
Bdttger while on a visit to London.

For these reasons, Findcl deems it a spurious document. Bro.
Woodford, than whom there is none more competent to judge of
questions of this kind, does not assent to this opinion, but, having
his doubts, thinkc the matter should remain in abeyance for the
present. Bro. Ilughan, another accomplished critic, believes that
it is probably a compilation of the early part of the last century.

When the reader .shall have collated the extracts about to be
given from Anderson’s Constitutions and the Krause MS., he will,
1 think, concur with me, that either Anderson had seen the latter

1 “ Die drei iiltcsten Kunsturkunden der Freimaurerbriiderschaft," vol. iii., p. 5.

58

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

manuscript, or that the author of it had been familiar with the work
of Anderson. The general similarity of ideas, the eollocation of cer-
tain words, and the use of particular phrases, must lead to the con-
clusion that one of the two writers was acquainted with the produc-
tion of the other. Which was the earlier one is not easily determined,
nor is it important, since they were almost contemporaneous docu-
ments, and, therefore, they both show what was the form assumed by
the legend in the early part of the i8th century.*

The Anderson version of the Babylon legend is as follows ; *

“About loi years after the Flood we find a vast number of ’em
[the offspring of the sons of Noah], if not the whole race of Noah,
in the vale of Shinar, employed in building a city and large tower, in
order to make themselves a name and to prevent their dispersion.
And tho’ they carried on the work to a monstrous height, and by
their vanity provoked God to confound their devices, by confounding
their speech, which occasioned their dispersion ; yet their skill in
Masonry is not the less to be celebrated, having spent above 53 years
in that prodigious work, and upon their dispersion carried the mighty
knowledge with them into distant parts, where they found the good
use of it in the settlement of their kingdoms, commonwealths, and
dynasties. And tho’ afterwards it was lost in most parts of the earth
it was especially preserved in Shinar and Assyria, where Nimrod, the
founder of that monarchy, after the dispersion built many splendid
cities, as Ereck, Accad^ and Calneh in Shinar, from whence after-
wards he went forth into Assyria and built Nineveh, Rehoboth,
Caleb, and Rhesin.

“In these parts, upon the Tigris and the Euphrates, afterwards
flourished many learned Priests and Mathematicians, known by the
names of Chaldees and Magi, who preserved the good science, Ge-
ometry, as the kings and great men encouraged the Royal Art.”

The Krause MS., or the reputed York Constitutions, gives the
Babylonian legend as follows : ®

^ The oftener I read thi.s document, and the more I reflect on its internal evidence,
the more I become convinced that it was written after the first edition of Anderson’s
“ Constitutions,” and, perhaps, after the second. Indeed, I am almost prepared to assign
any jmrt of the i8th century for the date of its composition.

^“Constitutions,” ist edition, p. 3.

^ See it in Ilughan’s Old Charges of the British Freemasons,” p. 80. It must be re-
membered that it is there an English version of the German which had been translated
from a Latin translation of the original old English — ut diciiur, I have corrected a few
errors in the translation in the Old Charges ” by a collation with the German of Krause.

THE TOWER OF BABEL

59

“Two generations after Noah, his descendants, proud of their
knowledge, built on a plain, in the land of Shinar, a great city and a
high tower of lime, stones, and wood, in order that they might dwell
together, under the laws which their ancestor, Noah, had made
known, and that the names of Noah’s descendants might be pre-
served for all time. This arrogance, however, did not please the
Lord in heaven, the lover of humility, therefore he caused a confu-
sion of their speech before the tower was finished, and scattered them
in many uninhabited lands, whither they brought with them their
laws and arts, and then founded kingdoms and principalities, as the
Holy Books often testify. Nimrod, in particular, built a town of
considerable size ; but Noah’s son, Shem, remained in Ur, in the
land of the Chaldeans, and propagated a knowledge of all the
arts and sciences abroad, and taught also Peleg, Serug, Nahor,
Terah, and Abraham, the last of whom knew all the sciences,
and had knowledge, and continued to instruct the sons of free-
born men, whence afterwards the numerous learned prie.sts and
mathematicians who have been known under the name of the wise
Chaldeans.”

We have now five different documents presenting three different
forms of the Legend of the Tower of Babel :

1. The Ilalliwcll poem. This Legend briefly recounts the facts
of the building of the tower and the subsequent interruption of the
work by the confusion of tongues and the dispersion of the l)uilders.
By an anachronism, Nebuchadnezzar is designated as the monarch
who directed the construction. Not a word is said about the Insti-
tution of Masonry at that time. In fact, the theory of the Halli-
well MS. seems rather to be that Masonry was, “many years after,”
taught for the first time in Egypt by Euclid.

The form of the Legend was never accepted by the Operative
Masons of the Guild, certainly not after the end of the 1 5th century.

2. The Cooke and later manuscripts. This form <if the Legend
ascribes the origin of Masonry to the era of the building of the tower.
Nimrod is made the Grand Master and makes the first charge — that
is, frames the first Constitution that the Masons ever had. Asshur,
the son of Shem, is also represented as a great Mason, the builder of
the city of Nineveh, and to whom Nimrod sent workmen to assist
him. From Babylon, Masonry was carried next into Egypt.

This form of the Legend, first presented in the Cooke MS., and

6o

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

followed almost literally in the Dowland and all the succeeding
manuscript Constitutions, seems to have embodied the prevailing
belief of the Fraternity until about the end of the 17th or the be-
ginning of the i8lh century.

The Andersonian and the York Constitutions. In these the
form of the Legend is greatly improved. The idea that Masonry
was first established with appropriate laws at the Tower of Babel
under the superintendence of Nimrod is still preserved. But Asshur
no longer appears as a builder of cities, assisted by “ his co.sen,” but is
transformed, and correctly too, into the kingdom of Assyria, where
Nimrod himself built Nineveh and other cities. And the next
apj)earance of Masoniy is said to be, not in Egypt, as in the preced-
ing manuscripts, but is said to have been })ropagated after the dis-
persion by the Magi in the land of the Chaldeans.

This form of the Legend prevailed during perhaps the whole of
the 1 8th century. It became the settled conviction of the Masons
of that period that Masonry \vas instituted at the Tower of Babel by
Nimrod and thence propagated to the Chaldeans.

Thus, in Smith’s Use and Abuse of Freemasonry^ published
in 1 783, it is .said that after the Flood the Masons were first called
Noachida;, and afterwards sages or wise men, Chaldeans, etc. And
Northouek, who, in J 784, by order of the Grand Lodge, published
an edition of the Constitutions far superior to that of Anderson,
says® that Nimrod founded the empire of Babylon, and that “under
him flourished those learned mathematicians who.se successors were
styled Magi, or wise men.”

But about the end of the last century, or, perhaps, still later,
about the beginning of the present, this legendary account of the
origin of Freemasonry began to be repudiated, and another one, in
contradiction of the old manuscripts, was substituted for it.

Masonry was no longer believed to have originated at the Tower
of Babel ; the Temple of Jerusalem was considered as the place of
its birth; and Solomon and not Nimrod was called the “first Grand
Master.”

Accepting this Legend, as we do the other Legends of Masonry,
which, in the language of Oliver,® “ are entitled to consideration,
though their authenticity may be denied and their aid rejected," we

^ Op. cit,y p. 29. 2 Op. cit*y p. II.

^ Historical Landmarks,” vol. i., lect. i., p. 53.

THE TOWER OF BABEL

6i

say that at the present day the Babylonish legend has assumed the
present form.

Before the Flood there was a system of religious instruelion
which, from the resemblance of its legendary and symbolic character
to that of Freemasonry, has been called by some authors “ antediluvian
Masonry.” This system was preserved by Noah, and after the deluge
was communicated by him to his immediate descendants. This sys-
tem was lost at the time of the dispersion of mankind, and corrupted
by the pagans in their Mysteries. But subsequently it was purified,
and Freemasonry, as we now have it, was organized by the King of
Israel at the time of the building of the temple.

This idea is well exemplified in the American ritual, which was,
we have every reason to believe, invented about the end of tlie last
century.

In this ritual, much of which is, however, being lost or becoming
obsolete, from the necessary imperfections of oral transmission, the
aspirant is supposed to represent one who is travelling from the
intellectual blindness of the profane world into the brightness of
Masonry, in whose arena he expects to find the light and truth, the
search for which is represented by his initiation. This symbolic
journey is supposed to begin at the Tower of Babel, where, in the
language of the ritual, “language was confounded and Masonry
lost,” and to terminate at the Temple of Solomon, where " language
was restored and Masonry found.”

Hence, according to this latest form of the Legend, the Tower
of Babel is degraded from the prominent place which was given to
it in the older forms as the birth-place of Masonry, and becomes
simply the symbol of the darkness and ignorance of the profane
world as contradistinguished from the light and knowh ilge lo be
derived from an initiation into the system of Speculative Masonry.

But the old Masons who framed the L(gcnd of the Craft
were conforming more than these modern ritualists to the truth of
history when they assigned to Babylon the glory of being the orig-
inal source of the sciences. So far from its being a place of intel-
lectual darkness, we learn from the cuneiform inscrij)tions that the
Ancient Babylonians and their copyists, the Assyrians, were in
possession of a wonderful literature. From the ruins of Babyfijn,
Nineveh, and other ancient cities of the plain of Shinar tablets of
terra cotta have been excavated, inscribed with legends in cuneiform

62

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

characters. The interpretation of this once unknown alphabet and
language has yielded to the genius and the labors of such scholars as
Grotefend, Botta, Layard, and Rawlinson.

From the fragments found at Kouyunjik, the modern Arabic
name for the site of Nineveh, the late Mr. George Smith conject-
ured that there were in the Royal Library at Nineveh over ten
thousand inscribed tablets, including almost every subject in ancient
literature, all of which literature was borrowed by the Assyrians
from Babylonian sources.^

Speaking of this literature, Smith says that “at an early period
in Babylonian history a great literary development took place, and
numerous works were produced which embodied the prevailing
myths, religion, and science of that day. Written, many of them, in
a noble style of poetry, and appealing to the strongest feelings of the
people on one side, or registering the highest efforts of their science
on the other, these texts became the standards for Babylonian liter-
ature, and later generations were content to copy these writings in-
stead of making new works for themselves.”®

We see, therefore, that the Masons of the present day are wrong
when they make Babel or Babylon the .symbol of intellectual dark-
ness, and suppose that there the light of Masonry was for a time ex-
tinguished, to be re-illumined only at the Temple of Solomon.

And, again, the Legend of the Craft vindicates its character,
and correctly clothes an historical fact in .symbolic language, when
it portrays Babylonia, which was undoubtedly the fountain of all
Semitic science and architecture, as also the birth-place of Operative
Masonry.

* “ Chaldean Account of Genesis,** p. 21, ^ Ibid., p. 22.

CHAPTER XII

THE LEGEND OF NIMROD

HE universal sentiment of the Masons of the
present day is to confer upon Solomon, Kinp of
Israel, the honor of hein^ their first Grand
Master/* But the Legend of the Craft had
long before, though there was a tradition of the
temple extant, bestowed, at least by implication,
that title upon Nimrod, the King of Babylonia
and Assyria. It had attributed the first organization of a fraternity
of craftsmen to him, in saying that he gave a charge to the workmen
whom he sent to assist the King of Nineveh in building his cities.
That is to say, he framed for them a Constitution, and, in the words
of the Legend, “ this was the first tyme that ever Masons had any
charge of his science.’* It was the first time that the Craft were
organized into a fraternity working under a Constitution or body of
laws; and as Nimrod was the autocratic maker of these laws, it
results as a necessary consequence, that their first legislator, legislat-
ing with dictatorial and unrestricted sovereign |)ower, was also their
first Grand Master.

This view of the early history of Masonry, presented to us by

Lcgc7id of the Craft, which differs so much from the modern
opinion, although it has almost become obsolete, is worthy of at
least a passing consideration.

Who was this Nimrod, who held so exalted a position in the
eyes of the old legendists, and why had they assigned to him a rank
and power which modern Craftsmen have thought to belong more
justly to the King of Israel ?

The answers to these questions will be an appropriate commen-
tary on that part of the Legend of the Craft which contains the
story of this old Assyrian monarch.

The estimation of the character of Nimrod which has been al-
most universally entertained by the ancients as well as the moderns.

64

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

obtains no support from the brief account of him contained in the
Book of Genesis.

Josephus portrays him as a tyrant in his government of his peo-
ple, vainglorious of his great power, a despiscr and hater of God, and
instigated by this feeling, the builder of a tower through which he
would avenge himself on God for having destroyed the world.

For this view of the character of Nimrod, Josephus was in all
probability indebted to the legends of the orientalists, which had
clustered around the name of Nimrod, just as in ancient times le-
gends always did cluster around great and mighty men.

Thus in the ancient chronicles he was represented as of gigantic
stature, ten or twelve cubits in height. To him was attributed the
invention of idolatry, and he is said to have returned to Chaldea
after the destruction of the Tower of Babel, and to have persuaded
the inhabitants to become fire-worshippers. He built a large furnace
and commanded that all who refused the idolatrous worship should
be cast into it. Among his victims were Abraham or Abram, the
patriarch, and his father Terah, The latter was consumed, but the
former by the interposition of a miracle came out unhurt. It is
hardly necessary to say that such legends are altogether mythical and
of no historical value.

The Scriptural account of Nimrod is a very brief and unsatisfac-
tory one. It is merely that :

“ Cush begat Nimrod ; he began to be a mighty one in the earth.
He was a mighty hunter before the Lord ; wherefore it is said, Even
as Nimrod the mighty hunter before the Lord. And the beginning
of his kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh, in
the land of Shinar. Out of that land went forth Ashur and builded
Nineveh, and the city Rehoboth, and Calah, and Resen between
Nineveh and Calah : the same is a great city.” '

The most learned commentators have differed as regards the
translation of the i ith verse. The Septuagint, the Vulgate, Luther’s
and our own recognized version say — “ Out of that land went forth
Ashur, and builded Nineveh.” Higden, in the Polychronicon,
which I have already said was the source of the Masonic Legend,
adopts the same version. And the Cooke and the later manuscripts
assign the building of Nineveh and the other cities of Assyria to
Ashur, the son of Shem, and the kinsman of Nimrod, who assisted

^ Genesis x. 8-12.

THE LEGEND OF NIMROD 65

him with workmen. Such was the legend until the beginning of the
1 8th century.

But the best modern Hebrew scholars, such as Borhart, Lc Clerc,
Gesenius, and a great many others, insist that Ashur is not the name
of a person, but of a country, and that the passage should be ren-
dered : “Out of that land he (Nimrod) went forth to Assyria and
builded Nineveh, and the city Rehoboth, and Calah, and Resen, be-
tween Nineveh and Calah.” This is the form of the legend that was
adopted by Dr. Anderson and by the author of the Krause document,
and after the publication of Anderson’s work it took the place of the
older form.

The Craft have in both forms of the legend recognized Nimrod
as a great Mason, nor have the vituperations of Josephus and the
scandalous legends of the orientalists had the slightest effect on their
apparent estimation of that mighty monarch, the founder of nations
and the builder of cities.

And now, in the latter part of the 19th century, comes a
learned scliolar,' well acquainted with the language of the ancient
Babylonians and Assyrians, and with the complicated cuneiform al-
phabet in which it is clothed, and visiting the remains of the ruined
cities which Nimrod had built, finds the fragments of twelve tablets
which contain the history of a Babylonian monarch to whom he gave
the provisional name of Izdubar and whom he identified with Nim-
rod. If this identification be correct, and there is certainly strong
internal evidence in favor of it, we have in these tablets a somewhat
connected narrative of the exploits of the proto-monarch of Babylon,
which places his character in a more favorable light than that which
had hitherto been received as the popular belief founded on the
statement of Josephus and the oriental traditions.

The Izdubar legends, as Mr. Smith has called the inscriptions on
these tablets, represent Nimrod as a mighty leader, a man of great
prowess in war ana in hunting, and who by his ability and A-alor had
united many of the j)etty kingdoms into which the whole of the
valley of the Euphrates was at that lime divided, and thus established
the first empire in Asia.® He was, in fact, the hero of the ancient

1 The late George Smith, of the British Museum, the author of ‘‘ Assyrian discover-
ies,” of the “Chaldean Account of Genesis,” and many other writings in which he has
given the learned result of his investigations of the cuneiform inscriptions.

Smith, “ Chaldean Account of Genesis,” p. 174.

5

66

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Babylonians, and therefore it was only natural that they should con-
secrate the memory of him who as a powerful and beneficent king had
first given them that unity which secured their prosperity as a nation.^
If we now refer to the Legend of the Craft, we shall find that
the old Masonic legendist, although of course he had never seen
nor heard of the discoveries contained in the cuneiform inscriptions,
had rejected the traditional estimate of Nimrod’s character, as well
as the supposed results of the destruction of the Tower of Babel,
and had wisely selected Babylon as the first seat and Nimrod (who-
ever may have been meant by that name) as the founder of the
sciences, and especially of architecture.

In this there is a conformity of the legendary account with the
facts of history, not usual with legendists.

“ We must give,” says Canon Rawlinson,* “ the Babylonians credit
for a genius and a grandeur of conception rarely surpassed, which led
them to employ the labor whereof they had the command, in works
of so imposing a character. With only ‘ brick for stone,’ and at
first only ‘ slime for mortar,’ they constructed edifices of so vast a
size that they still remain, at the present day, among the most enor-
mous ruins in the world, impressing the beholder at once with awe
and admiration.”

The Legend of the Craft continually confounds Masonry, Ge-
ometry, and Architecture, or rather uses them as synonymous and
convertible terms. It is not, therefore, surprising that it should
have selected Babylon as the birth-place, and Nimrod as the founder
of what they called “ the science.” The introduction of his name
into the Legend, may be attributed, says the Rev. Bro. Woodford,®
“to an old assumption that rulers were patrons of the building so-
dalities.” I rather imagine that the idea may be traced to the fact
that Nimrod was supposed to be a patron of architecture and the
builder of a great number of cities. The mediaeval Operative
Masons were always ready to accept any distinguished architect or
builder as a patron and member of the Craft. Thus the history of
Masonry compiled by Dr. Anderson, out of the Old Records, is
nothing but a history of architecture, and almost every king, prelate,
or nobleman who had erected a palace, a church, or a castle, is
called a distinguished Freemason and a patron of the Institution.

^ Smith, ib.^ p. 294. ^ In Smith’s “ Diet, of the Bible,” voce^ Babel.

^ Kenning’s Encyclopaedia,” in voce Nimrod.

CHAPTER XIII

THK LEGEND OF EUCLID

* AVING disposed of the establishment of Masonry

^ in Babylon, the Legend of the Craft next pro-

^ ceeds by a rapid transition to narrate the his-

tory of its introduction into Egypt. This Egyp-
^ tian episode, which in reference to the principal

^ action in it has been called the ** Legend of

Euclid/’ is found in all the old manuscripts.

It forms the opening feature of the Halliwell poem, being in
that document the beginning of the history of Masonry ; it is told
with circumstantial minuteness in the Cooke MS., and is apparently
copied from that into all the later manuscripts, where the important
details are essentially the same, although we find a few circumstances
related in some which are omitted in others.

Divesting the narrative of the archaic language of the manu-
scripts, the legend may be given as follows :

Once on a time, to use the story-teller’s style, Abraham and his
wife went to Egypt. Now Abraham was very learned in all the
seven arts and sciences, and was accomi)anied by Euclid, who was
his scholar, and to whom he had imparted his knowledge. At that
time the lords or rich men of Egypt were in sore distress, because
having a very numerous progeny of sons, for whom thvy could find
no occupation, they knew not how they could obtain for them a
livelihood.

In this strait they held a council and made proclamation that if
any one could suggest a remedy, he should lay his plans before them,
when he should be suitably rewarded.

Upon this Euclid presented himself and offered to supply these
sons with an honest means of living, by teaching them the science
of Geometry, provided they should be placed by their fathers under
his exclusive control, so that he might have the power of ruling them
according to the laws of the Craft.

67

68

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

To this proposition the Egyptian nobles gladly consented, and
granted Euclid all the power that he had asked, and secured the
grant to him by a sealed commission.

Euclid then instructed them in the practical part of Geometry,
and taught them how to erect churches, castles, towers, and all other
kinds of buildings in stone. He also gave them a code of laws for
their government.

Thus did Euclid found in the land of Egypt the science which
he named Geometry, but which has ever since been called Masonry.

I have said that while all the manuscripts agree in the prominent
circumstances of this legend, there are in some of them a few dis-
crepancies as to some of the minor details.

Thus the Halliwell poem makes no allusion to Abraham, but
imputes the founding of Masonry to Euclid alone, and it will be re-
membered that the title of that poem is, “The Constitutions of the
art of Geometry according to Euclid.”

The Cooke MS. is far more full in details than either the Halli-
well poem or the manuscripts that succeeded it. It says that Abra-
ham taught Geometry to the Eg)'^ptians, and that Euclid was his
scholar. But a few lines after, quoting St. Isidore as its authority,
it says that Euclid was one of the first founders of Geometry, and
that in his time there was an inundation of the Nile, and he taught
them to make dykes and walls to restrain the water, and measured
the land by means of Geometry, and divided it among the inhabi-
tants, so that every man could enclose his own property with ditches
and walls. In consequence of this the land became fertile, and the
population increased to such a degree, that there was found a diffi-
culty in finding for all employment that would enable them to live.
Whereupon the nobles gave the government of their children to
Euclid, who taught them the art of Geometry, so called because he
had with its aid measured the land,‘ when he built the walls and
ditches to separate each one’s possession.

The needless repetitions and confusion of details in the Cooke
M S. show that the author had derived the information on which he
constructed his legend from various sources — partly from the au-
thority of St. Isidore, as he is quoted in Higden’s Polychronicon,
and partly from the tradition of the Craft.

^ Geometry from the Greek yr; (ge) land and titrpov (metron) measure.

THE LEGEND OF EUCLID 69

The later manuscripts have copied the details of the Legend as
contained in the Cooke codex, but with many omissions, so as to
give it the form in which it was known to the Craft in the 16th and
1 7th centuries.

Thus the Dowland MS., whose date is supposed to be about
1550, gives the story almost exactly as it is in the Halliwell poem,
except that it adds Abraham and Sarah as dramatis persotur, mak-
ing it in this respect coincide with the Cooke MS., and probably
with the form of the original Legend.

In this it is followed by the York, No. 1 (1600), the Grand
Lodge (1632), the Sloane (1646), the Lodge of Hope (16S0), the
Alnwick (1701), and even the Papworth MS., as late as 1 714.

The Landsdowne MS. (1560), and the Antiquity (1686), have
the Legend in a very imperfect form, and either did not copy or
greatly curtailed the Dowland MS., as they but .slightly refer to
Egypt and to Euclid, and not at all to Abraham.

As to the reputation for great learning which the legendists have
given to Abraham, although the Bible dwells only on his piety, they
found their authority in Josephus, as well as in Isidore.

Josephus says that among the Egyptians he was esteemed as a
very wise man, and that besides reforming their customs, he taught
them arithmetic and astronomy.

It is evident, as has been already noticed, that the Lcoend of
the Craft has been indebted for much of its materials to the An-
tiquities of Josephus, and the Btymoloifcs of St. Isidore, and the
Polychronicon of Ranulph Higden — the first two at second hand,
in all probability through the citations of those works which are
made in the third.

The Krause MS., which is said to have been trans'ated from
the English into the Latin, and afterward into German, and pub-
lished by Dr. Krause,’ gives the Legend in an entirely different
form.

Notwithstanding that I have declared my belief that this docu-
ment is spurious with a date of not earlier than the second decade,
or more probably toward the middle of the iSth century, yet, as
an indication of the growth and the change of the Legend at that
period, it will be worth while to compare its form with that in the

^ “ Die drei altesten Kunsturkunden/* iii., 59-113.

70

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

older manuscripts, at least so far as relates to the Egyptian episode,
which is in the following words :

“ Abraham was skilled in all the sciences and continued to leach
them to the sons of the freeborn, whence afterwards came the many
learned priests and mathematicians who were known by the name of
the Chaldean Magi. Afterwards, Abraham continued to propagate
these sciences and arts when he came to Egypt, and found there, es-
pecially in Hermes, so apt a scholar, that the latter was at length
called the Trismegistus of the sciences, for he was at the same time
priest and natural philosopher in Egypt ; and through him and a
scholar of his the Egyptians received the first good laws and all the
sciences in which Abraham had instructed him. Afterwards Euclid
collected the principal sciences and called them Geometry. But the
Greeks and Romans called them altogether Architecture.

“ But in consequence of the confusion of languages, the laws
and arts and sciences could not formerly be propagated until the peo-
ple had learned to make comprehensible by signs that which they
could not understand by words. Wherefore, Mizraim, the son of
Cham, brought the custom of making himself understood by signs
with him into Egypt, when he colonized a valley of the Nile. This
art was afterwards extended into all distant lands, but only the signs
that are given by the hands have remained in architecture ; for the
signs by figures are as yet known to but few,

“In Egypt the overflowings of the Nile afforded an opportunity
to use the art of measurement, which had been introduced by Miz-
raim, and to build bridges and walls as a protection against the water.
They used burnt stone and wood and earth for these purposes.
Therefore when the heathen kings had become acquainted with this,
they were compelled to prepare stone and lime and bricks and there-
with to erect buildings, by which, through God’s will, however, they
became only the more experienced artists and were so celebrated
that their art spread as far as Persia,”

If the reader compares this legend of the Krause manuscript
with that which is given by Dr. Anderson in the first edition of his
Constitutions, he will be constrained to admit that both docu-
ments arc derived from the same source, or that one of them is an
abridged or an expository copy of the other. It is evident that
the statement in Anderson is merely a synopsis of that more de-
tailed narrative contained in the Krause Legend, or that it is an

THE LEGEND OF EUCLID

7

expansion of the statement in the first edition of the Consdlu-
tions.

If the Krause MS. was written before Anderson compiled his
history, it could not have been long anterior, and must have been
composed between 1714, the date of the Papworth MS., which con-
tains the Legend in its mediieval form, and 1723, when Anderson
published his work. Within this period the Masons sought to
modify the old Legend of the Craft, so as to deprive it of its ap-
parent absurdities, and to omit its anachronisms so as to give it the
appearance of an authentic historical narrative.

Instead, therefore, of having the date of 926, which has been
ascribed to it by Dr. Krause, his manuscript is, as Bro. Hughan
thinks it, “ a compilation of the early part of the last century.” It
is, however, important, as I have said, because it shows how the old
Legend was improved and divested of its anachronisms.

It is certainly a very absurd anachronism to make Euclid the
contemporary of Abraham, who lived more than two thousand years
before him. Nor is it less absurd to suppose that Euclid invented
Masonry in Egypt, whence it was carried to India, and practiced by-
King Solomon, since the great geometrician did not flourish until
six centuries and a half after the construction of the Temple.

Considered, then, as an historical narrative, the Legend of Euclid
is a failure. And yet it has its value as the symbolical development
of certain historical facts.

The prominent points in this Legend being, of course, those on
which the old believers of it most strenuously dwelt, are :

X. That Geometry is the groundwork of Masonry ;

2, That Euclid was the most distinguished of all geometricians ;
and,

3. That the esoteric method of leaching this as well as all the
other sciences which was pursued by the {)jiests of Egypt, was very
analogous to that which was adopted by the Oj)(;rativt Masons
of the Middle Ages, in imparting to their disciples the geometric
and architectural secrets, which constituted what they called the
Mystery of the Craft.

The Legend, in fact, symbolizes the well-recognized fact, that in
Egypt, in early times — of which there is no historical objection to
make Abraham the contemporary — there was a very intimate connec-
tion between the science of Geometry and the religious system of the

72

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Egyptians ; that this religious system embraced also all scientific in-
struction ; that this instruction was secret, and communicated only
after an initiation,’ and that in that way there was a striking analogy
between the Egyptian system and that of the mediaeval Masons,
And this fact of an analogy, the latter sought to embody in the ap-
parent form of an historical narrative, but really in the spirit of a
symbolic picture.

Thus considered, the Lcf^end of the Craft, in its episode of
Euclid and his marvelous doings in the land of Egypt, is divested
of its absurdity, and it is brought somewhat nearer to the limits of
historical verity than the too literal reader would be disposed to
admit.

^ Kendrick confirms this statement in his ** Ancient E^ypt/* where he says: ‘‘ When
wc read of foreigners (in Egypt) being obliged to submit to painful and tedious cere-
monies of initiation, it was not that they might learn the secret meaning of the rites of
Osiris, or Isis, but that they might partake of the knowledge of astronomy, physick,
geometry, and theology.”— (Vol. i., p. 383.)

CHAPTER XIV

THE LFXJENl) OF THE TEMPLE

ROM this account of the exploits of Abraham
and his scholar Euclid, and of the invention of
Geometry, or Masonry in E^ypt, the Lcoend of
the Craft proceeds, by a rapid stride, to the
narrative of the introduetion of the art into
Judea, or as it is called in all of them, “the land
of behest,’* or the land of promise.

Here it is said to have been principally used by Kinfr Solomon,
in the construction of the temple at Jerusalem. The general details
connected with the building of this edifice, and the assistance given
to the King of Israel, by Hiram, King of Tyre, are related with
sufficient historical accuracy, and were probably derived either
directly or at second hand, through the Polychronicon, from the
first Book of Kings, which, in fact, is referred to in all the manu-
scripts as a source of inforrhation.^

The assumption that Freemasonry, as it now exists, was organ-
ized at the Temple of Solomon, although almost universally accepted
by Masons who have not made Masonry a historical study, but who
derive their ideas of the Institution from the mythical teachings of
the ritual, has been utterly rejected by the greater part of the recent
school of iconoclasts, who investigate the history of Freemasonry by
the same methods which they would pursue in the examination of
any other historical subject.

The fact, however, remains, that in the Lcgcftd of the Craft the
Temple is prominently and definitely referred to as a place where
Masons congregated in great numbers, and where Masonry was con-
firmed or established, and whence it traveled into other countries.*

1 “ As it is said in the Bible, in the third book of Kinjjs,” are the words of the Cooke
M.S. In the canon of Scripture as then used, the two books of Samuel were called the
first and second of Kings. The third book of Kings was then the first according to the
present canon.

^ “ And thus was that worthy Science of M.'isonry confirmed in the country of Jeru-
salem, and in many other kingdoms . — Dowland MS,

73

74

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Considering; the Lcj^cnd of the Craft as merely a narrativ(; of
the rise and progress of architecture in its connection with a pecul-
iar architectural association, it was natural that in such a narrative
some reference should be made to one of the most splendid speci-
mens of ancient architectural art that the ancient world had ex-
hibited. And since this Temple was, by its prominence in the ritual
of Jewish worship, intimately connected with both the Jewish and
Christian religions, we shall be still less surprised that an associa-
tion not only so religious, but even ecclesiastical as mediaeval Ma-
sonry was, should have considered this sacred edifice as one of the
cradles of its Institution.

Hence we find the Temple of Jerusalem occupying a place in
the Legend of the Craft which it has retained, with many enlarge-
ments, to the present day.

But there is a difference in the aspect in which this subject of
the Temple is to be viewed, as we follow the progress of the Order
in its transition from an Operative to a Speculative Institution.

Originally referred to by the legendists as a purely historical fact,
whose details were derived from Scripture, and connected by a sort
of esprit du corps, with the progress of their own association, it was
retained during and after the development of the Order into a
Speculative character, because it seemed to be the very best foun-
dation on which the religious symbolism of that Order eould be
erected.

But notwithstanding that the masses of the Institution, learned
as well as unlearned, continue to accept the historical character of
this part of the Legend, the Temple is chiefly to be considered in a
symbolic point of view. It is in this aspect that we must regard it,
and in so doing we shall relieve the Legend of another charge of
absurdity. It is true that wc are unable now to determine how
much of true history and how much of symbolism were contem-
plated by the authors of the Legend, when they introduced the
I'emple of Jerusalem into that document as a part of their tradi-
tional narrative. But there is a doubt, and we can not now posi-
tively .assert that the mediawal Freemasons had not some impression
of a symbolic idea when they incorporated it into their history.

The Temple might, indeed, from its prominence in the ritual,
be almost called the characteristic symbol of Speculative Masonry.
The whole system of Masonic Symbolism is not only founded on

THE LEGEND OF THE TEMPLE

75

the Temple of Jerusalem, but the Temple idea so thoroughly per-
meates it that an inseparable connection is firmly established, so that
if the Temple symbol were obliterated and eliminated from the
system of Freemasonry — if that system were purged of all the le-
gends and myths that refer to the building of the Solomonic Temple,
and to the events that are supposed to have then and there occurred,
we should have nothing remaining by which to recognize and iden-
tify Speculative Masonry, as the successor of the Operative System
of the Middle Ages. The history of the Roman Empire with no
account of Julius Caesar, or of Pompey, or that of the French Revo-
lution, with no allusion to Louis XVI., or to Robespierre, would
present just as mutilated a narrative as Freemasonry would, were all
reference to the Temple of Solomon omitted.

Seeing, then, the importance of this symbol, it is proper and will
be interesting to trace it back through the various exemplars of the
Legend of the Craft contained in the Old Constitutions, because
it is to that Legend that modern Freemasonry owes the suggestion
at least, if not the present arrangement and formula; of this impor-
tant symbol.

In the oldest Constitution that we have, the one known as the
Halliwell MS., whose date is supposed not to be later than the end
of the 14th century, there is not the least allusion to the Temple of
Solomon, which is another reason why I ascribe to that document,
as I have before .said, an origin different from that of the other and
later manuscripts.

The word temple occurs but once in the entire poem, and then
it is used to designate a Christian church or place of worshij).’ But
in the Cooke MS., written, as it is estimated, about a century after-
ward, there are ample references to the Solomonic Temple, and the
statement made in the Legend of the Craft is fur the first time
enunciated.

After this, there is not a Constitution written in which the same
narrative is not repeated. There does not ai)pcar in any of them,
from the Landsdowne MS. in 1560 to the Papworth in 1701, any
enlargement of the narrative or any development of new occur-

^ He m.Tclc the bothe hallc and eke bowrc,

And hye tnnpuh of j^jret honoure,

'J'o .sport hym yn bothe day and nipjhth,

And to worschepe hys God with all hys inyj^ht.'*

(Lines 63-66).

76

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

rences. Each of them dilates, in almost the same words, upon the
Temple of Solomon as connected with Masonry in many words, and
g^ives elaborate details of the construction of the edifice, of the num-
ber of Masons employed, how they were occupied in performing
other works of Masonry, and, finally, how one of them left Jerusa-
lem and extended the art into other countries. We thus see that
up to the end of the 1 7th century the Legend of the Craft in all
its essential details continued to be accepted as traditionary history.

In the beginning of the i8th century the Legend began to assume
a nearer resemblance to its present form. The document already
referred to as the Krause MS., and which Dr. Krause too hastily
supposed was a copy of the original York Constittitions of 926, is
really, as I have heretofore shown, a production of the early part
of the 1 8th century. In this document the Legend is given in the
following words :

“ Although, by architecture great and excellent buildings had al-
ready been everywhere constructed, they all remained far behind the
holy Temple, which the wise King Solomon caused to be erected
in Jerusalem, to the honor of the true God, where he employed an
uncommonly large number of workmen, as we find in the Holy
Scriptures ; and King Hiram of Tyre also added a number to them.
Among these assistants who were .sent was King Hiram’s most skil-
ful architect, a widow’s son, whose name was Hiram Abif, and who
afterwards made the most exquisite arrangements and furnished the
most costly work.s, all of which arc described in the Holy Scriptures.
The whole of these workmen were, with King Solomon’s approval,
divided into certain classes, and thus at this great building was first
founded a worthy Society of Architects.”

Whether the author of the Krause MS. had copied from Ander-
son, or Anderson from him, or both from some other document which
is no longer e.xtant, is a que.stion that has already been discu.ssed.
But the description of the Temple and its connection with the his-
tory of Masonry, are given by Dr. Anderson with much of the feat-
ures of the Krause form of the Legend, except that the details are
more copious. Now, what was taught concerning the Temple by
Anderson in his History contained in the first edition of the Con~
sti tut tons, although afterward polished and perfected by Preston and
other ritual makers, is substantially the same as that which is taught
at the present day in all the Lodges.

THE LEGEND OF THE TEMPLE

77

Therefore, notwithstanding that Dr. Krause asserts,* that “ the
Temple of Solomon is no symbol, certainly not a prominent one of
the English system,” I am constrained to believe that it was one of
the prominent symbols alluded to in the Mediaeval Legend, and
that the symbol of the Temple upon which so much of the symbol-
ism of Modern Speculative Masonrj' depends, was, in fact, suggested
to the revivalists by the narrative contained in the Legend of the
Craft.

Whether the Operative Masons of the Middle Ages, who seem
to have accepted this Legend as authentic history, had also, under-
lying the narrative, a symbolic interpretation of the Temple and of
certain incidents that are said to have occurred in the course of its
erection, as referring to this life and the resurrection to a future one,
or whether that interpretation was in existence at the time wlien the
Legend of the Craft was invented, and was subsequently lost siglit
of, only to be recovered in the beginning of the i8th century, are
questions that will he more appropriately discussed in succeeding
pages of this work, when the subject of the myths and symbols of
Freemasonry is under consideration.

But it is evident that between the narrative in the Legend con-
cerning the Temple, with its three builders, the Kings of Israel and
Tyre, and Solomon’s Master of the Works, and the symbolism of
Modern Speculative Masonry in allusion to the same building and
the same personages, there has been a close, consecutive connection.

Hence, again, we find that the Legend of the Craft is of value
in reference to the light which it throws on the progress of Masonic
science and symbolism, which otherwise it would not possess, if
it were to be considered as a mere mythical narrative without any
influence on history.

Before concluding this subject, it will be necessary to refer to the
name of the chief builder of the Temple, and whose name has un-
dergone that corruption in all the manuscripts to which all proper
names have been subjected in those documents.

Of course, it is known, from the leslimony of Scripture, that the
real name and title of this person, as used in reference to King Solo-
mon and himself, was Iliram Abif, that is, “his father Hiram.”*

' “ Die drei altcslcn Kunslurkundcn ” vol. i., p. 155, note 41 .

-When the King of Tyre speaks of him, it is as Hiram Abi^ that is, “ My father
Hiram/* 2 Chron, ii. 13.

78

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

This Hebrew appellative is found for the first time in Masonie doe-
umcnts in Anderson’s Constitutions, and in the Krause MS., both
being of the date of the early part of the i8th century. Previous to
that period we find him variously called in all the Old Manuscripts,
from the Dowland in 1550 to the Alnwick in 1701, Aman, Amon,
Aynone, Aynon, Anon, and Ajuon. Now, of what word are these a
corruption ? ^

The Cooke MS. does not give any name, but only says, that
“the King’s son of Tyre was Solomon’s Master Mason.” All the
other and succeeding manuscripts, without exception, admit this
relation. Thus the Dowland, in which it is followed by all the others,
says that King Hiram “ had a son that was called Aynon, and he
was a Master of Geometry, and was chief Master of all Solomon’s
Masons.”

The idea was thus established that this man was of royal dignity,
the son of a King, and that he was also a ruler of the Craft.

Now, the Hebrew word A don denotes a lord, a prince, a ruler
or master. It is, in short, a title of dignity. In the Book of Kings
we meet with Adoniram, who was one of the principal officers of
King Solomon, and who, during the construction of the Temple,
performed an important part as the chief or superintendent of the
levy of thirty thousand laborers who worked on Mount Lebanon.

The old Masons may have confounded this person with Hiram
from the similarity of the terminational syllables. The modern Con-
tinental Masons committed the same error when they established the
Rite of Adonhiram or Adoniram, and gave to Hiram Abif the title
of Adon Hiram, or the Lord or Master Hiram. If the Old Masons
did this, then it is evident that they abbreviated the full name and
called him Adon.

But I am more inclined to believe that the author of the first or
original old manuscript, of which all the rest arc copies, called the
chief builder of Solomon Adon, Lord and Master, in allusion to his
supfiosed princely rank and his high position as the chief builder or
Master of the Works at the Temple.

’ Tlie I’apworth MS., whose supposed date is 1714, rejects all these words and calls
him ISenaim, which is a misspelling of Bonaini, builders, and that a grammatical error for
lioneh. the Builder. The writer had evidently got an inkling of the new form which the
Legend was beginning to assume. Anderson, it will be recollected, speaks of the “ Bonai,
or builders in stone.”

THE LEGEND OF THE TEMFLE

79

The corruption from A don to Aynon, or Amon, or even Ajtton,
is not greater than what occurs in other names in these manuscripts,
as where Hermes is transmuted into Hcrmarincs, and Euclid into
Englet. Indeed the copyists of these mediaeval documents appear to
have had a Gallic facility in corrupting the orthography of all foreign
names, very often almost totally destroying their identity.

As to the real meaning of Hiram Abif, either as a historic or
symbolic character, that topic will be thoroughly considered in an-
other part of this work, when the subject of Masonic Symbols
comes to be considered. The topic of the corruption of the name
in the old manu.scripts, and its true signification, will again be treated
when I come to investigate the “Legend of Hiram Abif.”

The Legend of Ihe Temple could not be appropriately completed
without a reference to Solomon, King of Israel, and some inquiry
as to how he became indebted for the important place he has held
in mediaeval Freemasonry.

The popularity of King Solomon among the Eastern nations is a
familiar fact, known not only to Oriental scholars, but even to those
whose knowledge on the subject is confined to what they have
learned from their youthful reading of the Arabian Nights Enter-
tainments. Among the Arabians and the Persians, the King of
Israel was esteemed as a great magician, whose power over the genii
and other supernatural beings was derived from his possession
of the Omnific Name, by the use of which he accomplished all
his wonderful works, the said name being inscribed on his signet-
ring.

It is not singular, seeing the communication which took j)lace
before and after the Crusades between the East and the West, that
the wise son of David should have enjoyed an equal i)opularity
among the poets and romancers of the Middle Ages.

But among them the character that he sustains is not that of a
great magician, so much as that of a learned philosopher. When-
ever a Norman romancer or a Proven<jal minstrel com])Osed a relig-
ious morality, a pious declamation, or a popular proverb, it was the
name of Solomon that was often selected to “ point the moral or
adorn the tale.”

Unlike the Orientalists, whose tendencies were always toward
the mystical, the mediaeval writers most probably derived their opin-
ion of the King of Israel, from the account of him and of his writ-

8o PREHISTORIC MASONRY

ings in the Bible. Now, there he is peculiarly distinguished as a
proverbialist.

Proverbs are the earliest out.spoken thought of the people, and
they precede, in every nation, all other forms of literature. It was
therefore to be expected, that at the awakening of learning in the
Middle Ages, the romancers would be fascinated by the proverbial
philosophy of King Solomon, rather than by his magical science, on
which the Eastern fabulists had more fondly dwelt.

Legrand D’Aussy, in his valuable work On the Fables and Ro-
mances of the 1 2th and 13th Centuries, gives two interesting speci-
mens from old manuscripts, of the use made by their writers of the
traditional reputation of King Solomon.

The first of these is a romance called “The Judgment of Solo-
mon.” It is something like the Jewish story of the two mothers.
But here the persons upon whom the judgment is to be passed are
two sons of the Prince of Soissons. The claim advanced was for a
partition of the property. To determine who was better entitled to
be the heir, by the reverence he might exhibit for the memory of his
father, Solomon required each to prove his knightly dexterity by
transfixing a mark with his lance, and that mark was to be the body
of his dead father. The elder readily complied with the odious con-
dition. The younger indignantly refused. To him Solomon decreed
the heritage.

We see here how ready these romancers of the Middle Ages
were to invent a narrative and fit it into the life of their favorite
Solomon. The makers of the Masonic Legend of the Craft,
who were their contemporarie.s, promptly followed their example.
There is in that Legend, as we have seen, some anachronism.s, but
none more absurd than that which makes a Prince of Soissons, who
could not have been earlier than the time of Clovi.s, in the 6th
century, the contemporary of a Jewish monarch who lived at least
sixteen centuries before Soissons was known as a kingdom.

But it shows us the spirit of the age and how Legends were
fabricated. We are thus prepared to form a judgment of the Ma-
sonic myths.

The Middle Ages also attributed to King Solomon a very famil-
iar acquaintance with the science of astrology. In so doing they
by no means borrowed the Oriental idea that he was a great magi-
cian ; for astrology formed no part of Eastern occult magic. The

THE LEGEND OF THE TEMPLE

Si

mediaeval astrologer was deemed a man of learning, just as at this
day is the astronomer. Astrology was, in fact, the astronomy of the
Middle Ages. Solomon’s astrological knowledge was therefore only
a part of that great learning for which he had the reputation.

In the collection of unpublished Fabliaux ct Contes, edited by
M. Meon, is a poem entitled, “ Le Lunaire que Salomon fist”;
that is, “ The Lunary which Solomon made.”

The lunary or lunarium was a table made by astrologers to indi-
cate the inlluence e.xerted by the moon on human affairs.

The poem, which consists of 910 lines, written in the (»ld French
or Norman language, contains directions for the conduct of life, tell-
ing what is to be done or what omitted on every day of the month.
The concluding lines assign, without hesitation, the authorship to
Solomon, while it pays the media-val tribute to his character :

“ Here is ended the lesson
Made by the good King Solomon,

To whom in his life (Jod gave
Riches and honor and learning.

More than to any other born
Or begotten of woman.”

The canonical book of Proverbs gave the writers of the Middle
Ages occasion to have an exalted opinion of Solomon as a maker of
those pithy sayings — a characteristic of his genius of which the Ori-
entals seem to have been unmindful.

One of the most remarkable works of mediaeval literature is a
poem by the Comte de Bretagne, entitled “ Proverbs of Marcol and
Solomon.”

This Marcol is represented as a commentator, or rather perhaps,
a rival of King Solomon. The work is a poem divided into stanzas
of six lines each. The first three lines contain a proverb of Solo-
mon : the next three another proverb on the same subject, and in
response, by Marcol.

There is another mediaeval poem in the collection of M. Meon,
entitled “ Of Marco and Solomon.” The responsive style is the
same as that of the Comte de Bretagne, but the one hundred and
thirty-seven proverbs which it contains are all new.

But still more apposite to the present inquiry is the fact that
among the mediaeval writers Solomon bore the reputation of an

82

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

artisan of consummate skill. He was like the Volund or Wicland
of the Scandinavian and Teutonic myths — the traditional smith who
fabricated the decorations of chambers, the caparison of war-horses,
and the swords and lances of cavaliers. In the poems of the Middle
Ages, whenever it becomes necessary to speak of any of these things
as having been made with exquisite and surpassing skill, it is said to
be “the work of Solomon” — I'ucvrc Salcmon.

But enough has been said to show that King Solomon was as
familiar to the romancers of the Middle Ages as he was to the Jews
of Palestine or to the Orientalists of Arabia and Persia. Philip de
Thuan, who, in the 12th century, wrote his Bestiary, a sort of
natural history spiritualized, says that by Solomon was signified any
wise man — Saces par Salemuon sage gent entendum.

Now, about the same time that these fable-makers and song-
writers of the 12th, 13th, and 14th centuries were composing these
stories about King Solomon, the makers of the Masonic Legend of
the Craft were inventing their myths about the same monarch and
the Temple which he erected.

This is a concurrence of time which suggests that possibly the
popularity of King Solomon with the romancers of the Middle Ages
made the incorporation of his name in the Masonic Legend less
difficult to those who framed that mythical story.

We might, indeed, be led to suspect that the use of Solomon in
their Legends and traditions was first suggested to the Stonemasons
and to the cognate associations, such as the “ Compagnons de la
Tour ” of France, from the frequent references to it by the contem-
porary romancers.

But the subsequent myths connected with Solomon as the head
of the association of Masons at the Temple were, at a much later
period, borrowed, in great part, from the Talmudists, and have no
place among the song-writers and fabulists of the Middle Ages.

CHAPTER XV

THE EXTENSION OF THE ART INTO OTHER COUNTRIES

HE Legend of the Craft next proceeds to nar-
rate how Masonry was extended “into di-
vers countryes/' some of the Masons traveling
to increase their knowledge of their art, and
others to extend that which they already pos-
sessed.

This subject is very briefly treated in the dif-
ferent manuscripts. The Halliwell poem says nothing of the pro-
gressive march of Masonry, except that it details almost as an
episode the persecution of the “Four Crowned Martyrs’" as Chris-
tian Masons, in the reign of the Roman Emperor Diocletian, and
we should almost be led to infer from the tenor of the poem that
Masonry was introduced directly into England from Egypt

The Cooke MS. simply says that from Egypt Masonry “went
from land to land and from kingdom to kingdom,” until it got to
England.

The later manuscripts are a little more definite, although still
brief. They merely tell us that skillful craftsmen largely traveled
into various countries, some that they might acquire more knowledge
and skill, and others to teach those who had but little skill.

There is certainly nothing that is mythical or fabulous in this
statement. Every authentic history of architecture concurs in the
statement that at ar early period the various countries of Europe
were perambulated by bodies of builders in search of employment
in the construction of religious and other edifices. The name, in-
deed, of “Traveling Freemasons” which was bestowed upon them,
is familiar in architectural historical works.^

Indeed, as Mr. George Godwin says, “ There are few points in
the Middle Ages more pleasing to look back upon than the existence

' See Hope’s “ Historical Essay on Architecture,’

83

84

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

of the associated Masons ; they arc the bright spot in the general
darkness of that period, the patch of verdure when all around is
barren.”* But this interesting subject will be more fully discussed
in another part of this work, when we come to treat of the authentic
history of Masonry. This portion of the Legend can not be said to
belong to the prehistoric period.

It is sufficient, for the present, to have shown that in this part,
as elsewhere, the Legend of the Craft is not a merely fictitious nar-
rative, but that the general statement of the extension of Free-
masonry throughout Europe at an early period is confirmed by
historical evidence.

On examining the Legend of the Craft, it will be found to
trace the extension of Masonry through its successive stages of prog-
ress from Babylon and Assyria to Egypt, from Egypt to Judea, from
Judea to France, and from France to England. Accepting Masonry
and the art of building as synonymous terms, this line of progress
will not be very adverse, with some necessary modifications, to that
assumed to be correct by writers on architecture. But, as I have
just said, the consideration of this subject belongs not to the pre-
historic, but to the historic period of the Society.

^ “ The Builder/* vol. ix., p. 463.

CHAPTER XVI

THE LEGEND OF CHARLES MARTEL AND NAMUS GRECUS

HE Legend, now approaching the domain of au-
thentic history, but still retaining its traditional
character, proceeds to narrate, but in a very few
words, the entrance of Masonry into France.

This account is given in the following Ian-
guage in the Dowland manuscript :

“ And soe it befell that there was one curious
Mason that height Maymus Grecus, that had been at the making
of Solomon’s temple, and he came into France, and there he taught
the science of Masonrye to men of France. And there was one of
the Regal lyne of Fraunce, that height Charles Martell; and he
was a man that loved well such a science, and drew to this Maymus
Grecus that is above said, and learned of him the science, and tooke
upon him the charges and manners ; and afterwards, by the grace
of God, he was elect to be Kinge of France. And whan he was in
his estate, he tooke Masons and did helpe to make men Masons
that were none ; and he set them to worke, and gave them both the
charge and the manners and good paie, as he had learned of oilier
Masons ; and confirmed them a Charter from yeare to yeare, to
holde their semble wher they would ; and cherished them right
much ; and thus came the science into France.”

This Legend is repeated, almost word for word, in all the later
manuscripts up to the year 1714.

It is not even alluded to in the earliest of all the manuscripts —
the Halliwell poem — which is another proof that that document is
of (jerman origin.

The Cooke MvS. has th(^ Legend in the following words :

“ Sumtyme ther was a worthye kyng in Frauns, that was clepyd
Carolus secundus that ys to sey Charlys the secunde. And this
Charlys was elyte [elected] kyng of Frauns by the grace of God
and by lynage [lineage] also. And sume men sey that he was elite

85

86

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

[elected] by fortune the whiche is fals as by cronycle he was of the
kynges blode Royal. And this same kyng Charlys was a mason
bifor that he was kyng. And after that he was kyng he lovyd
masons and cherschid them and gaf them chargys and mannerys at
his devise the whiche sum ben yet used in fraunce and he ordeynyd
that they scholde have a scmly [assembly] onys in the yere and
come and speke togedyr and for to be reuled by masters and felows
of thynges amysse.”^

The absence of all allusion to Namus Grecus (a personage who
will directly occupy our attention) in the Cooke document is worthy
of notice.

When Dr. Anderson was putting the Legend of the Craft into
a modern shape, he also omitted any reference to Namus Grecus
but he preserved the spirit of the Legend, so far as to say, that ac-
cording to the old records of Masons, Charles Martel “ sent over
several expert craftsmen and learned architects into England at the
desire of the Saxon kings.”*

I think it will be proved, when in the course of this work the
authentic history of Masonry comes to be treated, that the statement
in the Legend of the Craft in relation to the condition of the art
in France during the administration of Charles Martel is simply a
historical fact. In claiming for the “ Hammerer” the title of King
of France, while he assumed only the humble rank of Duke of the
Franks and Mayor of the Palace, the legendists have only com-
mitted a historical error of which more experienced writers might
be guilty.

The introduction of the name of Namus Grecus, an unknown
Mason, who is described as being the contemporary of both Solomon
and of Charles Martel, is certainly an apparent anachronism that re-
quires explanation.

This Namus Grecus has been a veritable sphinx to Masonic an-
tiquaries, and no CEdipus has yet appeared who could resolve the
riddle. Without assuming the sagacity of the ancient expounder of
enigmas, I can only offer a suggestion for what it may be considered
worth.

I suppose Grecus to be merely an appellative indicating the fact
that this personage was a Greek. Now, the knowledge of his exist-

^ Cooke MS., lines 576-601.

* “ Constitutions,** ed. 1723, p. 30.

THE LEGEND OF CHARLES MARTEL

87

cnce at the court of Charles Martel was most probably derived by
the English legendist from a German or French source, because the
Legend of the Craft is candid in admitting that the English Ma-
sons had collected the writings and charges from other countries.
Prince Edwin is said to have made a proclamation that any Masons
who “ had any writing or understanding of the charges and the man-
ners that were made before in this land [EnglandJ or in any other,
that they should shew them forth.” And there were found “ some
in French, some in Greek, some in English, and .some in other 'an-
guages.”

Now, if the account and the name of this Greek architect had
been taken from the German, the text would most probably have
been “ ein Maurer Namens Greens" ; or, if from the French, it would
have been “ un Ma^on nomnu' Greens” The English legendist
would, probably, mistake the words Namens Greens, or nomnn'
Greens, each of which means “he was named Grecus,” or, literally,
“a Mason by the name of Grecus,” for the full name, and write him
down as Namus Greens. The Mayntus in the Dowland MS. is
evidently a clerical error. In the other manuscripts it is Namns.
The corrected reading, then, would be — “there was a Mason named
(or called) a Greek.”

It can not be .said that it is not probable that any legendist would
have fallen into such an error when we remember how many others
as great, if not greater, have been perpetrated in these Oid Rceords.
See, for instance, in these manuscripts such orthographical mistakes
as Hermarincs for Hermes, and Englet for Euelid ; to say nothing
of the rather ridiculous blunder in the Lcland MS., where Pyt /tag-
ore, the French form of Pythagoras, has suffered transmutation into
Peter Gower. So it is not at all unlikely that Namens Grecus, or
nommd Grecus, should be changed into Namus Grcctis.

The original Legend, in all probability meant to say merely that
in the time of Chanes Martel, a Greek artist, who had been to Jerusa-
lem, introduced the principles of Byzantine architecture into France.

Now, history attests that in the 8th century there was an influx
of Grecian architects and artificers into Southern and Western Eu-
rope, in consequence of persecutions that were inflicted on them by
the Byzantine Emperors. The Legend, therefore, indulges in no
spirit of fiction in referring to the advent in France, at that period,
of one of these architects.

88

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

It is also a historical fact that Charles the Great of France was
a liberal encourager of the arts and sciences, and that he especially
promoted the cultivation of architecture on the Byzantine or Greek
model in his dominions.

Dr. Oliver, in the second edition of the Constitutions, repeats
the Legend with a slight variation. He says that “ Ethelbert, King
of Mercia, and general monarch, sent to Charles Martel, the Right
Worshipful Grand Master of France (father of King Pippin), who
had been educated by Brother Mimus Grcrcus ; he sent over from
France (about a.d. 710) some expert Masons to teach the Saxons
those laws and usages of the ancient fraternity, that had been hap-
pily preserved from the havock of the Goths.”

Pritchard, in his Masonry Dissected, gives, upon what author-
ity I know not, the Legend in the following form ;

Euclid “communicated the art and mystery of Masonry to
Hiram, the Master Mason concerned in the building of Solomon’s
Temple in Jerusalem, where was an excellent and curious Mason,
whose name was Mannon Grccus, who taught the art of Masonry to
one Carolus Marcil in France, who was afterwards elected King of
France.”

Upon this change of the name to Mannon Grecus, Krause sug-
gests a derivation as follows : In using this name he thinks that
Pritchard intended to refer to the celebrated .scholastic philosopher
Mannon, or Nannon, who was probably celebrated in his time for
his proficiency in the language and literature of Greece. Nannon
lived in the reign of Charles the Bold, and was the .successor of
Erigena in the direction of the schools of France.

I think the derivation of the name offered by Dr. Krause is
wholly untenable though ingenious, for it depends upon a name not
found in any of the old manu.scripts, and besides, the philosopher
did not live in the time of Charles Martel, but long afterward.

Between his derivation and mine, the reader may select, and
probably w'ill be inclined to reject both.

As far as the Legend regards Charles Martel as the patron of
architecture or Masonry in France, one observation remains to be
made.

If there has been an error of the legendists in attributing to
Charles Martel the honor that really belonged to his successor,
Charles the Great, it is not surprising when we consider how great

THE LEGEND OF CHARLES MARTEL

89

was the ignorance of the science of chronology that prevailed in
those days. However, it must be remarked, that at the present day
the French Masonic writers speak of Charles Martel as the founder
of Masonry in France.

The error of making the Greek architect a contemporary both of
Solomon and of Charles Martel, is one which may be explained,
either as the expression of a symbolic idea, alluding to the clo.se con-
nection that had existed between Oriental and Byzantine architect-
ure, or may be excused as an instance of blundering chronology for
which the spirit of the age, more than the writer of the Legend, is
to be blamed. This objection will not, however, lie if we assume
that Namus Grecus meant simply a Greek architect.

But this whole .subject is so closely connected with the authentic
history of Masonry, having really passed out of the prehistoric pe-
riod, that it claims a future and more elaborate consideration in its
proper place.

CHAPTER XVII

THE LEGEND OF ST. ALBAN

HE Legend of the Craft now proceeds to nar-
rate the history of the introduction of Masonry
into England, in the time of St. Alban, who
lived in the 3d century.

The Legend referring to the protomartyr of
England is not mentioned in the Halliwell poem,
but is first found in the Cooke MS., in the fol-
lowing words : And sone after that come seynt Adhabell into
Englond, and he convertyd seynt Albon to cristendome. And seynt
Albon lovyd well masons, and he gaf hem fyrst her charges and
maners fyrst in Englond. And he ordeyned convenyent ^ to pay
for their travayle.’’®

The later manuscripts say nothing of St. Adhabell, and it is not
until we get to the Krause MS. in the beginning of the i8th century,
that we find any mention of St. Amphibalus, who is described in
that document as having been the teacher of St. Alban. But St.
Amphibalus, of which the Adhabell of the Cooke MS. is undoubt-
edly a corruption, is so apocryphal a personage, that I am rejoiced
that the later legendists have not thought proper to follow the Cooke
document and give him a place in the Legend.

In fact, amphibalum was the ecclesiastical name of a cloak, worn
by priests of the Romish Church over their other vestments.® It
was a vestment ecclesiastically transmuted into a saint, as the hand-

^ Cooke translates this “ convenient times,’^ supplying the second word. But a more
correct word is suitable ox proper, which is an old meaning of convenient. ** He ordained
suitable pay for their labor,” and this agrees with the later manuscripts which impress the
fact that St. Alban ** made their pay right good.”

“Cooke MS., lines 602-611.

^It i.s significant that among the spurious relics sent, when fearing the Danish inva-
sion, in the reign of Edward the Confessor, by the Abbot of St. Albans, to the monks of
Ely, was a very rough, shagged old coat, which it was said had been usually worn by St.
Amphibalus.

90

THE LEGEND OF ST. ALBAN

9 ‘

kerchief on which Christ left the image of His face when, as it is said,
it was handed to Him on His way to Calvary, by a pious Jewess,
became from the Greco-Latin vera icon, “ the true image,” converted
into St. Veronica. The Masonic are not the only legendists who
draw deeply on our credulity.

Of St. Alban, ecclesiastical history furnishes only the following
meager details, and even of these some are apocryphal, or at least
lack the stamp of authenticity.

He was born (so runs the tradition) in the 3d century, in Hert-
fordshire, England, near the town of Verulanium. Going to Rome,
he served for seven years as a soldier under the Emperor Diocletian.
He then returned with a companion and preceptor Amphibalus, to
Britain, and betook himself to Verulanium. When the persecu-
tions of the Christians commenced in Britain, Amphibalus was
sought for, as one who had apostatized to the new religion ; but as
he could not be found, St. Alban voluntarily presented himself to
the judge, and after undergoing torture was imprisoned. Soon after
this, the retreat of Amphibalus having been discovered, both he and
St. Alban suffered death for being Christians. Four centuries after
his martyrdom, Offa, King of the Mercians, erected a monastery at
Holmehurst, the hill where he was buried, and soon after the town
of St. Albans arose in its vicinity.

When the Christian religion became predominant in England,
the Church paid great honors to the memory of the protomartyr.
A chapel was erected over his grave, which, according to the Vener-
able Bede, was of admirable workmanship.

The Masonic Legend contains details which arc not furnished by
the religious one. According to it, St. Alban was the steward of
the household of Carausius, he who had revolted from the Emperor
Maximilian, and usurped the sovereignty of England. Carausius
employed him in building the town walls. St. Alban, thus receiving
the superintendence of the Craft, treated them with great kindness,
increased their pay, and gave them a charter to hold a general as-
sembly. He assisted them in making Masons, and framed for them
a constitution — for such is the meaning of the phrase, “ gave them
charges.”

Now, there is sufficient historical evidence to show that archi-
tecture was introduced into England by the Roman artificers, who
followed, as was their usage, the Roman legions, habilitated them-

92

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

selves in the conquered colonies, and engaged in the construction
not only of camps and fortifications, but also when peace was restored
in the building of temples and even private edifices. Architectural
ruins and Latin inscriptions, which still remain in many parts of
Britain, attest the labors and the skill of these Roman artists, and
sustain the statement of the Legend, that Masonry, which, it must
be remembered, is, in the Old Records, only a synonym of archi-
tecture, was introduced into England during the period of its Roman
colonization.

As to the specific statement that St. Alban was the patron of
Masons, that he exercised the government of a chief over the Craft,
and improved their condition by augmenting their wages, we may
e.xplain this as the expression of a symbolical idea, in which history
is not altogether falsified, but only its dates and personages confused.

Carausius, the Legend does not mention by name. It simply
refers to some King of England, of whose household St. Alban was
the steward. Carausius assumed the imperial purple in the year in
which St. Alban suffered martyrdom. The error of making him the
patron of St. Alban is not, therefore, to be attributed to the legend-
ist, but to Dr. Anderson, who first perpetrated this chronological
blunder in the second edition of his Constitutions. And though
he states that “this is asserted by all the old copies of the Consti-
tutions,” ‘ we fail to find it in any that are now extant.

This “ Legend of St. Alban,” as it has been called, is worthy of
a farther consideration.

The foundation of this symbolical narrative was first laid by the
writer of the Cooke MS., or, rather, copied by him from the tradition
existing among the Craft at that time. Its form was subsequently
modified and the details extended in the Dowland MS., for tradition
always grows in the progress of time. This form and these details
were preserved in all the succeeding manuscript Constitutions, until
they were still further altered and enlarged by Anderson, Preston,
and other Masonic historians of the last century.

With the gratuitous accretions of these later writers we have no
concern in any attempted explanation of the actual signification of
the Legend. Its true form and spirit are to be found only in the
Dowland MS. of the middle of the i6th century, and in those which

^ Anderson, “ Constitutions,” 2d edit., p. 57.

THE LEGEND OF ST. ALBAN

93

were copied from it, up to the Papworth, at the beginning of the
i8th. To these, and not to anything written after the period of the
Revival, we must direct our attention.

Admitting that on the conquest of England by the Roman power,
the architects who had accomj)anied the victorious legions introduced
into the conquered colony their architectural skill, it is very likely
that some master workmen among them had been more celebrated
than others for their skill, and, indeed, it is naturally to be supposed
that to such skillful builders the control of the Craft must have been
confided. Whether there were one or more of these chief architects,
St. Alban, if not actually one of them, was, by the lapse of time and
the not unusual process by which legendary or oral accretions are
superimposed on a plain historical fact, adopted by the Icgcndists as
their representative. Who was the principal patron of i he Architects
or Masons during the time of the colonization of England by the
Romans, is not so material as is the fact that architecture, with other
branches of civilization, was introduced at that era into the island by
its conquerors.

This is an historical fact, and in this point the Legend of the
Craft agrees with authentic history.

But it is also an historical fact that when, by the pressure of the
Northern hordes of barbarians upon Rome, it was found necessary
to withdrawal! the legions from the various colonies which they j)ro-
tected from exterior enemies and restrained from interior insurrec-
tion, the arts and sciences, and among them architecture, began to
decline in England. The nativt;s, with the few Roman colonists who
had permanently settled among them, were left to defend lliernselves
from the incursions of the Piets on the north, and the Danish and
Saxon pirates in the east and south. The arts of civilizaiion suf-
fered a depression in the tumult of war. Science can not flourish
amid the clang and clash of arms. This dcj)rcssion and susf)cnsion
of all architectural progress in England, which continued for some
centuries, is thus expressed in the quaint language of the Legend :

“ Right soone after the decease of Saint Albone, there came
divers wars into the realmc of England of divers Nations, soe that
the good rule of Masonrye was destroyed unto the tyme of Kinge
Athelstone’s days.”

There is far more of history than of fiction in this part of the
Legend.

94

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

The next point of the Legend of the Craft to which our atten-
tion is to be directed, is that which relates to the organization of
Masonry at the city of York, in the loth century. This part of the
Legend is of far more importance than any of those which have
been considered. The prehistoric here verges so closely upon the
historic period, that the true narrative of the rise and progress of
Masonry can not be justly understood until each of these prehis-
toric and historic elements has been carefully relegated to its ap-
propriate period. This will constitute the subject matter of the
next chapter.

CHAPTER XVIII

THE YORK LEGEND

HE suppression of all architectural art and enter-
prise having lasted for so long a period in Britain,
the Legend of the Craft next proceeds to ac-
count for its revival in the loth century and
in the reign of Athelstan, whose son Edwin
called a meeting, or General Assembly, of the
Masons at York in the year 926, and there re-
vived the Institution, giving to the Craft a new code of laws.

Now, it is impossible to attach to this portion of the Legend, ab-
solutely and without any reservation, the taint of fiction. The con-
vocation of the Craft of England at the city of York, in the year 926,
has been accepted by both the Operative Masons who preceded the
Revival, and by the Speculatives who succeeded them, up to the
present day, as a historical fact that did not admit of dispute. The
two classes of Legends — the one represented by the Halliwell poem,
and the other by the later manuscripts — concur in giving the same
statement. The Cooke MS., which holds an intermediate place be-
tween the two, also contains it. But the Halliwell and the (^ooke
MSS., which are of older date, give more fully the details of what
may be called this revival of English Masonry. Thoroughly to
understand the subject, it will be necessary to collate the three ac-
counts given in the three different sets of manuscript.s.

The Halliwell poem, whose conjectural date is about 1390, con-
tains the account in the following words. I will first give it, re-
lieved of its archaisms, for the convenience of the reader inexpert
in early English, and then follow with a quotation of the original
language :

“ This craft came into England, as I tell you, in the time of good
King Athelstane’s reign. He made them both hall and also chamber,
and lofty churches of great honour, to recreate him in both day and
night and to worship his God with all his strength. This good lord

95

96

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

loved this craft full well, and purposed to strengthen it in every part,
on account of several defects which he discovered in the craft. He
sent about into the land after all the masons of the craft to come
straight to him, to amend all these defects by good counsel, if it could
be done. Then he permitted an assembly to be made of various
lords according to their rank, dukes, earls, and barons also, knights,
squires, and many more, and the great burgesses of that city, they
were all there in their degree ; these were there, each one in every
way to make laws for the society of these masons. There they
sought by their wisdom how they might govern it. There they in-
vented fifteen articles, and there they made fifteen points.” '

The original is as follows :

“ Thys craft com ynto England as y you say,

Yn tyme of good kynge Athelston’s day;

He made the both halle and eke boure,

And hye templus of gret honoure,

To sportyn hym yn bothe day and nyghth,

And to worschepe his (Jod with alle hys myghth.

Thys goodc lorde loved thys craft fill wel,

And purposud to strenthyn hyt ever del,

For dy vers defautys that yn the craft he fondc ;

He sende aboute ynto the londe
After alle the masonus of the crafte
To come to hym ful evene strayfte,

For to amende these defaultys alle
By good counsel gef hyt mygth falle.

A scmbl<^ thenne he cowthe let make
Of dyvers lordis in here state
Dukys, erlys and barnes also,

Knygthys, sqwycrs and mony mo,

And the grete burges of that syl6,

They were ther alle yn here degr6 ;

These were there uchon algate.

To ordeyne for these masonus estate,

Ther they sowgton ly here wytte
How they inygthyn governe hytte :

Fyftene artyculus they there sowgton.

And fyftene poyntys ther they wrogton.”

One hundred years afterward we find the Legend, in the Cooke
MS., as follows ;

“ And after that was a worthy kynge in Englond that was callyd

Hallivvcll MS., lines 61-87.

THE YORK LEGEND

97

Athclstone, and his yongest sone lovyd well the sciens of Gcmctrv,
and hewystwcll that handcraft had the practyke of Gemetryso well
as masons, wherefore he drew him to consell and lernyd [thej prac-
tyke of that sciens to his speculatyfe.’ For of speculatyfc he was a
master, and he lovyd well masonry and masons. .(Vnd he hieome a
mason hym.selfc. And he gaf hem [gave them] charges and names*
as it is now usyd in Englond and in other countries. And he
ordeyned that they schulde have resonabull pay. And purche.sed
[obtained | a fre patent of the kyng that they schulde make a semblv
when they saw rcsonably tyme a | to] cume togedir to hi.r [theii |
counsell of the whiche charges, manors & .scmblc as is write and
taught in the bokc of our charges wherefor 1 leve it at this tyme.” *

In a subsequent part of the manuscript, which appears to have
been taken from the aforesaid “ bokc of charges,” with some addi-
tional details, are the following words :

“After that, many ycris, in the tyme of Kyng Adhelstanc, wiche
was sum tyme kynge of Englonde, bi his counscll and other gret
lordys of the lond by eomyn [common] assent for grete defaul
y-fennde [found] among masons ihei ordeyend a certayne reule
amongys hem [them]. On [one] tyme of the yere or in iii ycrc as
nedc were to the kyng and gret lordys of the londe and all the
comente [community], fro provynce to provynce and fro countre to
countre congrcgacions schulde be made by maisters, of all maisicrs
masons and felaus in the forsayd art. And so at such congrega-
cions, they that be made masters schold be examined of the articuls
after written & be ransacked [examined] whether they be abull and
kunnyng to the profyte of the lordys hem to serve [to serve them]
and to the honour of the forsayd art.” ''

Sixty years afterward wc find this Legend repeated in the Dow-
land MS., but with some important variations. This Legend has
already been given in the Legend of the Cruft, but for the con-
venience of immediate comparison with the preceding documents it
will be well to repeat it here. It is in the following words :

“ Right soone after the decease of Saint Albone there came divers

calls particular attention to this word as of much significative import. I
think it simply means that the king added a practic.al knowledge of M.asonry or architect-
ure to his former merely speculative or theoretical acquaintance with the art.

“This is evidently an error of the pen for mamrs, i.e.,

» Cooke MS., lines 6i 1-O42. ■* Cooke MS., lines 693-719.

7

98

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

wart s into the rcalmc of England of divers Nations, see that the good
rule of Mason rye was dcstioyed unto the tyme of Kinge Athelstones
days (hat was a worthy Kinge of England, and brought this land
into good rest and peace and builded many great works of Abbyes
and Towres and other many divers buildings and loved well Masons.
And he had a Sonn that height Edwinue, and he loved Masons
much more than his father did. And he was a great practiscr in
Geoinctiy, and he drew him much to talke and to commune with
Masons and to learne of them science, and afterwards for love that
he had to Masons and to the science he was made Ma.son,’ and he
gatt of the Kinge his father a Chartour and Commission to hold
every yeare once an Assemble wher that ever they would within the
rcalmc of England, and to correct within themselves defaults and
tresi)asses that were done within the science. And he held himsclfe
an Assemble at Yorke, and there he made Masons and gave them
charges and taught them the manners, and commanded that rule to be
kept ever after. And tooke them the Chartour and Commission
to kcepe and made ordinance that it should be renewed from kinge
to kinge.

“ And when the Assemble was gathered he made a cry that all
old Masons and young, that had any writeings or understanding of
the charges and the manners that were made before in this land, or
iti any other, that they should shew them forth. And when it was
proved there was founden .some in Frcnche and some in Greek and
some in English and some in other languages ; and the intent of
them all was founden all one. And he did make a booke thereof,
and how the science was founded. And he himselfe bad and com-
manded that it should be readd ortould, when that any Mason should
be made, for to give him his Charge. And fro that day into this
tyme manners of Masons have beene kept in that forme as well as
men might governe it. And furthermore divers Assembles have
beene put and ordayned certain charges by the best advice of Masters
and Fellowes.”

It will be remarked that in neither of the two oldest manu.scripts,

' The next MS. in date, the Landsdownc, names the place where he was made as
Windsor. This statement is not found in any of the other manuscripts except the An*
tiquity MS. It may here be observed that nothing more clearly proves the great care-
lessness of the transcribers of these manuscripts than the fact that although they must
have all been familiar with the name of Edwin, one of them spells it Ladrian and another
Hoderine*

THE YORK LEGEND

99

the Halliwcll and the Cooke, is there any mention of Prince Edwin,
or of the city of York. For the omission 1 shall hereafter attempt
to account. As to that of the latter I agree with Bro. \Voodford, that
as the fact of the Assembly is stated in all the later traditions, and
as a city is mentioned whose burgesses were present, we mav fairly
understand both of the oldest manuscripts also to refer to York.’
At all events, their silence as to the place affords no .sufficient e\'i-
dence that it was not York, as opposed to the positive di'claration
of the later manuscripts that it was.

We see, then, that all the old Legends assert expressly, or by
implication, that York was the city where the first General Masonic
Assembly was held in England, and that it was summoned under
the authority of King Athclstan.

The next point in which all the later manuscripts, excejit the
Harleian,* agree is, that the Assembly was called by Prince Edwin,
the King’s son.

The Legend does not here most certainly agree with history, for
there is no record that Athelstan had any son. He had, however, a
brother of that name, who died two years before him.

Edward the Elder, the son of Alfred the Great, died in the year
925, leaving several legitimate sons and one natural one, Athelstan.
The latter, who was the eldest of the .sons of Edward, obtained the
throne, notwithstanding the stain on his birth, in consequence of his
age, which better fitted him to govern at a time when the kingdom
was engaged in foreign and domestic wars.

All historians concur in attributing to Athelstan the character of
a just and wise sovereign, and of a sagacious statesman. It has been
said of him that he was the most able and active of the ancient
princes of England. What his grandfather, the great Alfred, com-
menced in his efforts to consolidate the petty monarchies into which
the land was divided, into one powerful kingdom, Athelstan, by his
energy, his political wisdom, and his military prowess, was enabled
to perfect, so that he has been justly called the first monarch of all
England.

Although engaged during his whole reign in numerous wars, he

^ ** On the Connection of York with the History of F reemasonry in England.** By
A. F. Woodford, A.M., in Hughan’s “ Masonic Sketches and Reprints,** p. 168.

^Thc Harleian MS. makes no mention of Prince Edwin, but attributes the organiza*
tion of Masonry at York to King Alhelstai; himself.

100

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

did not neglect a cultivation of the employments of peace, and en-
couraged by a liberal patronage the arts and especially architecture.

The only stain upon his character is the charge that having sus-
pected his brother Edwin of being engaged in a conspiracy against
his throne, he caused that prince to be drowned. Notwithstanding
the efforts of Preston to disprove this charge, the concurrent testi-
mony of all the old chroniclers afford no room to doubt its truth.
But if anything could atone for this cruel act of state policy, it
would be the bitter anguish and remorse of con.science which led
the perpetrator to endure a severe penance of seven years.

Of Edwin, the Saxon historians make no mention, except when
they speak of his untimely death. If we may judge of his charac-
ter from this silence, we must believe that he was not endued with
any brilliant qualities of mind, nor distinguished by the performance
of any important act.

Of all the half-brothers of Athelstan, the legitimate children of
Edward the Elder, Edmund seems to have been his favorite. He
kept him by his side on battle-fields, lived single for his sake, and
when he died in 941, left to him the succession to the throne.

But there is another Edwin of prominent character in the an-
nals of Saxon England, to whom attention has been directed in
connection with this Legend, as having the best claim to be called
the founder or reviver of English Masonry.

Of Edwin, King of Northumbria, it may be said, that in his
narrow sphere, as the monarch of a kingdom of narrow dimensions,
he was but little inferior in abilities or virtues to Athelstan.

At the time of his birth, in 590, Northumbria was divided into
two kingdoms, that of Bcrnicia, north of the Humber, and that of
the Deira, on the south of the same river. Of the former, Ethel-
frith was King, and of the latter, Ella, the father of Edwin.

Ella died in 593, and was succeeded by Edwin, an infant of
three years of age.

Soon after, Ethelfrith invaded the possessions of Edwin, and
attached them by usurpation to his own domains.

Edwin was sent to Wales, whence when he grew older he was
obliged to flee, and passed many years in exile, principally at the
Court of Redwald, King of East Anglia. By the assistance of this
monarch he was enabled to make war upon his old enemy, Ethel-
frith, who, having been slain in battle, and his sons having fled into

THE YORK LEGEND

lOI

Scotland, Edwin not only regained his own throne, but that of the
usurper also, and in the year 617 became the King of Northumbria,
of which the city of York was made the capital.

Edwin was originally a pagan, but his mind was of a contem-
plative turn, and this made him, says Turner, more intellectual than
any of the Saxon Kings who had preceded him. He was thus led
to a rational consideration of the doctrines of Christianity, which
he finally accepted, and was publicly baptized at York, on Easter
day, in the year 627. The ceremony was publicly performed in ihe
Church of St. Peter the Apostle, which he had caused to be hastily
constructed of wood, for the purposes of divine .service, during the
time that he was undergoing the religious instructions preliminary
to his receiving the sacrament.

But as soon as he was baptized, he built, says Bede, under the
direction of Paulinas, his religious instructor and bishop, in the
same place, a much larger and nohler church of stone.

During the reign of Edwin, and of his successors in the same
century, ecclesiastical architecture greatly nourished, and many large
churches were built. Edwin was slain in battle in 633, having
reigned for seventeen years.

The Venerable Bede gives us the best te.slimony we could desire
as to the character of Edwin as ruler, when he tells us that in all of
his dominions there was such perfect peace (hat a woman with a m w-
born babe might walk from sea to sea without receiving any harm.
Another incident that he relates is significant of Edwin’s care and
consideration for the comforts of his jreople. Where there were
springs of water near the highways, he caused posts to be fixed with
drinking ve.ssels attached to them for the convenience of travtdi rs.
By such acts, and others of a higher character, by his encoungement
of the arts, and his strict administration of justice, he secured tlie
love of his subjects.

So much of hi.story was necessary that the reader might under-
stand the argument in reference to the true meaning of iJic 1 ork
Legend, now to be discussed.

In the versions of the Legend given by Anderson and Preston,
the honor of organizing Masonry and calling a General Assembly is
attributed to Edwin the brother, and not to Edwin the son of Athel-
stan. These versions are, however, of no value as historical documents,
because they are merely enlarged copies of the original Legend.

102

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

But in the Roberts Constitutions, printed in 1722, and which
was claimed to have been copied from a manuscript about five hun-
dred years old, but without any proof (as the original has never been
recovered), the name of Edwin is altogether omitted, and Alhelstan
himself is said to have been the reviver of the institution. The lan-
guage of this manuscript, as published by J. Roberts, is as follows:^

“ lie [Athclstan ] began to build many Abbies, Monasteries, and
other religious houses, as also Castles and divers Fortresses for de-
fence of his realm. He loved Masons more than his father ; he
greatly study’d Geometry, and sent into many lands for men expert
in the science. He gave them a very large charter to hold a yearly
assembly, and power to correct offenders in the said science ; and the
king himself caused a General Assembly of all Masons in his realm,
at York, and there were made many Masons, and gave them a deep
charge for observation of all such articles as belonged unto Masonry
and delivered them the said Charter to keep.”

In the omission of all reference to Prince Edwin, the Harleian
and Roberts manuscripts agree with that of Halliwell.

There is a passage in the Harleian and Roberts MSS. that is
worthy of notice. All the recent manuscripts which speak of Edwin
as the procurer of the Charter, say that “he loved Masons much
more than his father did” — meaning Athclstan. But the Harleian
and Roberts MSS., speaking of King Athclstan, use the same lan-
guage, but with a different reference, and say of King Athclstan,
that “ he loved Masons more than his father ” — meaning King Ed-
ward, whose son Athclstan was.

Now, of the two statements, that of the Harleian and Roberts
MSS. is much more conformable to history than the other. Athel-
stan was a lover of Masons, for he was a great patron of architecture,
and many public buildings were erected during his reign. But it is
not recorded in history that Prince Edwin exhibited any such attach-
ment to Masonry or Architecture as is attributed to him in the old
records, certainly not an attachment equal to that of Athclstan, On
the contrary, Edward, the son of Alfred and the father of Athclstan,
was not distinguished during his reign for any marked patronage of

' The book was republished by Spencer in 1870. The Roberts “ Constitutions” and
ihc IljirU-itin MS. No. 1942, are evidently copies from the same original, if not one from
the other. The story of Athclstan is, of course, identical in both, and the citation might
as well have been made from either.

THE YORK LEGEND 103

the arts, and especially of architecture ; and it is, therefore, certain
that his son Athelstan exhibited a greater love to Masons or Archi-
tects than he did.

Hence there arises a suspicion that the Legend was originally
framed in the form presented to us by the Halliwell poem, and
copied apparently by the writers of the Harleian and Roberts MSS.,
and that the insertion of the name of Prince Edwin was an after-
thought of the copiers of the more recent manuscripts, and that this
insertion of Edwin’s name, and the error of making him a son of
Athelstan, arose from a confusion of the mythical Edwin with a
different personage, the earlier Edwin, who was King of Northum-
bria.

It may also be added that the son of Athelstan is not called
Edwin in all of the recent manuscripts. In one Sloane MS. he is
called Ladrian, in another Ilcpnc, and in the Lodge of Hope MS.
Hodcrine. This fact might indicate that there was some confusion
and disagreement in putting the name of Prince Edwin into the
Legend. But I will not press this point, because 1 am rather in-
clined to attribute these discrei)ancics to the proverbial carelessness
of the transcribers of these manuscripts.

How, then, are we to account for this introduction of an appar-
ently mythical personage into the narrativ'e, by which the plausi-
bility of the Legend is seriously affected ?

Anderson, and after him Preston, attempts to get out of the difTi-
eulty by calling Edwin the brother, and not the son, of Athelstan.
It is true that Athelstan did have a younger brother named Edwin,
whom some historians have charged him with putting to death.
And in so far the Legend might not be considered as incompatible
with history. But as all the manuscripts which have to this day
been recovered which speak of Edwin call him the king’s son and
not his brother, notwithstanding the contrary statement of Ander-
son,' I prefer another explanation, although it involves the charge
of anachronism.

The annals of English history record a royal Edwin, whose de-

* Anderson says in the second edition of the ‘‘Book of Coivstitutions that in all
the Old Constitutions it is written Prince Edwin, the kind’s brother -a statement that is
at once refuted by a reference to all the manuscripts from the Dowland to the Papworth,
where the word is always son. So much for the authority of the old writers on Masonic
history.

104

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

votion to the arts and sciences, whose wise statesmanship, and whose
patronage of architecture, must have entitled him to the respect
and the affection of the early English Masons. Edwin, King of
Northumbria, one of the seven kingdoms into which England was
divided during the Anglo-Saxon heptarchy, died in 633, after a
reign of sixteen years, which was distinguished for the reforms which
he accomplished, for the wise laws which he enacted and enforced,
for the introduction of Christianity into his kingdom, and for the
improvement which he effected in the moral, social, and intellectual
condition of his subjects. When he ascended the throne the north
ern metropolis of the Anglican Church had been placed at York,
where it still remains. The king patronized Paulinus, the bishop,
and presented him with a residence and with other possessions in that
city. Much of this has already been said, but it will bear repetition.

To this Edwin, and not to the brother of Athelstan, modern Ma-
sonic archaiologists have supposed that the Legend of the Craft
refers.

Yet this opinion is not altogether a new one. More than a
century and a half ago it seems to have prevailed as a tradition
among the Masons of the northern part of England. For in 1 726,
in an addrc.ss delivered before the Grand Lodge of York by its Jun-
ior Grand Warden, Francis Drake, he speaks of it as being well
known and recognized, in the following words :

“You know we can boast that the first Grand Lodge ever held
in England was held in this city [York]; where Edwin, the first
('hristian King of the Northumbers, about the six hundredth year
after Christ, and who laid the foundation of our Cathedral,^ sat as
Grand Master.”

Bro. A. F. A. Woodford, a profound Masonic archaeologist, ac-
cepts this explanation, and finds a confirmation in the facts that the
town of Derventio, now Auldby, six miles from York, the supposed
seat of the pseudo-Edwin, was also the chief seat and residence
of Edwin, King of Northumbria, and that the buildings, said in
one of the manuscripts to have been erected by the false Edwin,
were really erected, as is known from history, by the Northumbrian
Edwin.

1 think that with these proofs, the inquirer will have little or no

^ Bctlc (I-. 2., c. T3) and Rapin (p. 246) both confirm this statement that the founda-
tions of the York Cathedral, or Minster, were laid in the reign of Edwin.

THE YORK LEGEND

los

hesitation in accepting this version of the Legend, and will recog-
nize the fact that the writers of the later manuscrijjts fell into an
error in substituting Edwin, the son (as they called him, but really
the brother) of Athelstan, for Edwin, the King of Northumbria.

It is true that the difference of dates presents a difficulty, there
being about three hundred years between the reigns of Edwin of
Northumbria, and Athelstan of England. But that difficulty, 1
think, may be overcome by the following theory which 1 advance
on the subject :

The earlier scries of manuscripts, of which the Ilalliwell poem is
an exemplar, and, perhaps, also the Harleian and the Roberts MSS.,*
make no mention of Edwin, but assign the revival of Masonry in
the TOth century to King Athelstan.

The more recent manuscripts, of which the Dowland is the ear-
liest, introduce Prince Edwin into the Legend and ascribe to him the
honor of having obtained from Athelstan a charter, and of having
held an Assembly at York.

There are, then, two forms of the Legend, which, for the sake of
distinction, may be designated as the older and the later. The older
Legend makes Athelstan the reviver of Masonry in England, and
.says nothing at all of Edwin. The later takes this honor from
Athelstan and gives it to Prince Edwin, who is called his son.

The part about Edwin is, then, an addition to the older legend,
and was interi)olatcd into it by the later legendist.s, as will be evi-
dently seen if the following extract from the Uowland MS. be read,
and all the words there printed in italics be omitted. So road, the
passage will conform very substantially with the corresponding one
in the Roberts MS., which was undoubtedly a copy from some older
manuscript which contained the legend in its primitive form, where-
in there is no mention of Prince Edwin. Here is the extract to be
amended by the omission of words in italics :

“ The good rule of Masonry was de.stroyed unto the tyme of
Kinge Athelstone dayes that was a worthy Kinge of England, and
brought this land into good rest and peace ; and builded many great
works of Abbyes and Towres, and other many divers buildings and
loved well Masons. And he had a sonn that height Edioinne, and

^ The fact that the Legend in the Roberts “ Constitutions ” agrees in this respect with
the older legend, and differs from that in all the recent manuscripts, gives some color to
the claim that it was copied from a manuscript five hundred years old.

io8

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

and, what is of great value to the present question, gave charters
to many guilds or operative companies as well as to several munici-
palities.

Especially is it known from historical records that in the reign of
Alhelstan the frith-gildan, free guilds or sodalities, were incorporated
by law. From these subsequently arose the craft-guilds or associa-
tions for the establishment of fraternal relations and mutual aid,
into which, at the present day, the trade companies of England are
divided.

There would be nothing improbable in any narrative which should
assert that he extended his protection to the operative Masons, of
whose art we know that he availed himself in the construction of the
numerous public and religious edifices which he was engaged in erect-
ing. It is even more than plausible to suppose that the Masons
were among the sodalities to whom he granted charters or acts of
incorporation.

Like the Rev. Bro. Woodford, whose opinion as a Masonic
archaeologist is of great value, I am disposed to accept a tradition
venerable for its antiquity and for so long a period believed in by the
craft as an historical record in so far as relates to the obtaining of a
charter from Athclstan and the holding of an assembly. “ I see no
reason, therefore.” he say.s, " to reject so old a tradition that under
Athelstan the operative Masons obtained his patronage and met in
General Assembly.” *

Admitting the fact of Athelstan’s patronage and of the Assembly
at some place, we next encounter the difficulty of e.xplaining the in-
terpolation of what may be called the episode of Prince Edwin.

1 have already shown that there can be no doubt that the framers
of the later legend had confounded the brother, whom they, by a
mistake, had called the son of Athelstan, with a preceding king of
the same name, that is, with Edwin, King of Northumbria, who, in
the 7th century, did what the pseudo-Edwin is supposed to have
done in the loth. That is to say, he patronized the Masons of his
time, introduced the art of building into his kingdom, and probably
held an Assembly at York, which was his capital city.

Now, I supi)ose that the earlier Masons of the south of England,
who framed the first Legend of the Craft, such as is presented to

^ “ The Connection of York with the History of Freemasonry in England,” inserted
in Hughan’s “ Unpublished Records of the Craft,” p. 168.

ANTHOyy SAVER

hirst Gnuul Master »il s,peciil:Mive Freemasons, 1717

THE YORK LEGEND

109

us in the old poem, first published by Mr. Halliwell in 1840, and
also in the Harleian manuscript and in the one printed by Roberts
in 1722, were unacquainted with the legend of Edwin of Northum-
bria, although, if we may believe Bro. Drake, it was a well-known
tradition in the north of England. The earlier legends of the south,
therefore, gave the honor of patronizing the Masons and holding an
Assembly at York in 926 to Athelstan alone. This was, therefore,
the primitive Legend of the Craft among the Masons of London
and the southern part of the kingdom.

But in time these southern Masons became, in consequence of
inereased intercourse, cognizant of the tradition that King Edwin of
Northumbria had also patronized the Masons of his kingdom, but
at an earlier period. The two traditions were, of course, at first
kept distinct. There was, perhaps, a reluctance among the Masons
of the south to diminish the claims of Athelstan as the first reviver,
after St. Alban, of Masonry in England, and to give the precedence
to a monarch who lived three hundred years before in the northern
part of the island.

This reluctance, added to the confusion to which all oral tradi-
tion is obnoxious, coupled with the fact that there was an Edwin,
who was a near relation of Athelstan, resulted in the substitution of
this later Edwin for the true one.

It took years to do this — the reluctance continuing, the con-
fusion of the traditions increasing, until at last the southern Masons,
altogether losing sight of the Northumbrian tradition as distinct
from that of Athelstan, combined the two traditions into one, and,
with the carelessness or ignorance of chronology so common in that
age, and especially among uncultured craftsmen, substituted Edwin,
the brother of Athelstan,’ for Edwin, the King of Northumbria, and
thus formed a new Legend of the Craft such as it was perpetuated
by Anderson, and after him by Pre.ston, and which has lasted to the
present day.

Therefore, eliminating from the narrative the story of Edwin,
as it is told in the recent Legend, and accepting it as referring to
Edwin of Northumbria, and as told in the tradition peculiar to the
Masons of the northern part of England, we reach the conclusion
that there were originally two traditions, one extant in the northern

1 To the same carelessness or ignorance are wc to attribute the legendary error of
making Edwin the son of Athelstan.

no

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

part of England and the other in the southern part. The former
Legend ascribed the revival of Masonry in England to Edwin, King
of Northumbria in the 7th century, and the latter to Athelstan,
King of England in the loth. There being little communica-
tion in those days between the two parts of the kingdom, the
traditions remained distinct. But at .some subsequent period, not
earlier than the middle of the i6th century, or the era of the
Reformation,’ the southern Masons became acquainted with the
true Legend of the York Masons, and incorporated it into their own
Legend, confounding, however, the two Edwins, either from igno-
rance, or more probably, from a reluctance to surrender the pre-
eminence they had hitherto given to Athelstan as the first reviver of
Masonry in England.

We arrive, then, at the conclusion, that if there was an Assem-
bly at York it was convened by Edwin, King of Northumbria,
who revived Masonry in the northern part of England in the 7th
century ; and that its decayed prosperity was restored by Athelstan
in the loth century, not by the holding of an Assembly at the city
of York, but by his general patronage of the arts, and especially
architecture, and by the charters of incorporation which he freely
granted to various guilds or sodalities of workmen.

With these explanations, we are now prepared to review and to
summarize the Legend of Ihc Craft, not in the light of a series
of absurd fictions, as too many have been inclined to consider it,
but as an historical narrative, related in quaint language, not always
grammatical, and containing several errors of chronology, misspell-
ing of names, and confusion of persons, such as were common and
might be expected in manuscripts written in that uncultured age,
and by the uneducated craftsmen to whom we owe these old manu-
scripts.

' I .issign this era because the Halliwcll poem, which is the excmpl.ar of the older
Lc^jend, is evidently Roman Catholic in character, while the Dowland, and all subsequent
manuscripts which contain the later Legend, are Protestant, all allusions to the Virgin,
ilic saints, and crowned martyrs being omitted.

CHAPTER XIX

SUMMARY OF THE EEGKND OF THE CRAFT

HE Lcgmd of the Craft, as it is presented to us
in what I have called the later manuscripts, that
is to say, the Dowland and those that follow it
up to the Papworth, be.c^ins with a descant on the
seven liberal arts and scienees.’ I have already
shown that among the schoolmen contemporary
with the legendists these seven arts and sciences
were considered, in the curriculum of education, not so mucli as the
foundation, but as the finished edifice of all human learning. The
Legend naturally partook of the spirit of the age in which it was in-
vented. But especially did the Masons refer to these sciences, and
make a description of them, the preface, as it were, to the story that
they were about to relate, because the principal of these sciences
was geometry, and this they held to be synonymous with Masonry.

Now, the intimate connection between geometry and architect-
ure, as practiced by the Operative PTeemasons of the Middle Ages,
is well known, since the secrets, of which these Freemasons were
supposed to be in possession, consisted almost solely in an application
of the principles of the science of geometry to the art of building.

The Legend next proceeds to narrate certain circumstances con-
nected with the children of Lamech. These details are said in the
Legend to have been derived from the Rook of Genesis but were
probably taken at second-hand from the Polychronicon, or uni-
versal history of the monk Higden, of Chester. This part of the
Legend, which is not otherwise connected with the Masonic nar-
rative, appears to have been introduced for the sake of an allusion
to the pillars on which the sons of Lamech arc said to have inscribed
an account of the sciences which they had discovered, so that the

1 The Halliwell poem, although it differs from the later manuscripts in so many par-
ticulars, agrees with them in giving a descant on the arts and sciences .

HI

II2

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

knowledge of them might not be lost in consequence of the destruc-
tion of the world which they apprehended.

The story of the inscribed pillars was a tradition of every peo-
ple, narrated, with variations, by every historian and implicitly be-
lieved by the multitude. The legendists of Masonry got the ac-
count from Josephus, perhaps through Iligden, but altered it to suit
the spirit of their own narrative.

We are next told that Hermes discovered one of these pillars
and was, from the information that it contained, enabled to restore
the knowledge of the science.s, and especially of Masonry, to the
post-diluvian world. This was a tribute of the legendists to the
universally acccf)ted opinion of the ancients, who venerated the
“thrice great Mennes” as the mythical founder of all science and
philosophy. We are next told that Nimrod, “the mighty hunter
before the Lord,” availed himself of the wisdom that had been re-
covered by Hermes. lie was distinguished for his architectural
works and first gave importance to the art of Masonry at the building
of the Tower of Babel. The Legend attributes to Nimrod the cre-
ation of the Masons into an organized body and he was the first who
gave them a constitution or laws for their government. Masonry,
according to the legendary account, was founded in Babylon, whence
it passed over to the rest of the world.

In all this we find simply a recognition of the historical opinion
that Chaldea was the birthplace of knowledge and that the Chal-
dean sages were the primitive teachers of Asia and Europe. The
modern discoveries of the cuneiform inscriptions show that the Ma-
sonic legendists had, at a venture, obtained a more correct idea of
the true character of Nimrod than that which had been hitherto en-
tertained, founded on the brief allusion to him in Genesis and the
disparaging account of him in the Antiquities of Josephus.

The monastic legends had made Abraham a contemporary of
Nimrod, and the Book of Genesis had described the visit of the
patriarch and his wife to the land of Egypt. Combining these two
statements, the idea was suggested to the legendists that Abraham
had carried into Egypt the knowledge which he had acquired from
the Chaldeans and taught it to the inhabitants.

Thus it is stated that Egypt was, after Babylonia, the place
where the arts and sciences were first cultivated and thence dis-
seminated to other countries. Among these arts and sciences,

SUMMARY OF THE LEGEND OF THE CRAFT 113

geometry, which vvc have seen was always connected in the Masonic
mind with architecture, held a prominent place. lie who taught it
to the Egyptians was typically represented by the name of Euclid,
because the old Masons were familiar with the fact that he was then
esteemed, as he still is, as the greatest of geometricians and almost
the inventor of the scienec.

Aceepting the allusion to Euclid, not as an historical anachronism,
but rather as the expression of a symbolic idea, we can scarcely
class the legendary statement of the condition of learning in Egypt
as a pure and unadulterated fiction. It is an undoubted fact that
Egypt was the primeval land whence science and learning (lowed
into Southern Europe and Western Asia. Neither can it be disputed
that civilization had there ripened into maturity long before Greece
or Rome were known. It is moreover conceded that the ancient
Mysteries whence Masonry has derived, not its organization, but a
portion of its science of symbolism, received its birth in the land of
the Nile, and that the Mysteries of Osiris and Isis were the proto-
types of all the mystical initiations which were celebrated in Asia
and in Southern Europe. They have even been claimed, though
I think incorrectly, as the origin of those in Gaul, in Britain, and in
Scandinavia. By a rapid transition, the Legend i)asscs from the
establishment of Masonry or architecture (for it must be remem-
bered that in legendary acceptation the two words are synonymous)
to its appearance in Judea, the “Land of Behest,” where, under the
patronage and direction of King Solomon the Temple of Jerusalem
was constructed. All that is said in this portion of the Legend i)ur-
ports to be taken from the scriptural account of the same transac-
tion and must have the same historical value.

As to the error committed in the name and designation of him
who is now familiarly known to Freemasons as Iliram Abif, a suffi-
cient explanation has been given in a preceding chapter.

We next have an account of the travels of these Masons or archi'
tects who built the Temple into various countries, to acquire addi-
tional knowledge and experience, and to disseminate the principles
of their art. The carelessness of chronology, to which I have already
adverted, so peculiar to the general illiteracy of the age, has led
the legendists to connect this diffusion of architecture among the
various civilized countries of the world with the Tyrian and Jewish
Masons ; but the wanderings of that body of builders known as

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

1 14

the “ Traveling Freemasons ” of the Middle Ages, through all
the kingdoms of Europe, and their labors in the construction of
cathedrals, monasteries, and other public edifices arc matters of his-
torical record. Thus the historical idea is well preserved in the
Legend of a body of artists who wandered over Europe, and were
employed in the construction of cathedrals, monasteries, and other
public edifices.

The Legend next recounts the introduction of architecture into
France, and the influence exerted upon it by Grecian architects, who
brought with them into that kingdom the principles of Byzantine
art. These are facts which are sustained by history. The promi-
nence given to France above Spain or Italy or Germany is, 1 think,
merely another proof that the Legend was of French origin or was
-constructed under French influence.

The account of the condition of Masonry or architecture among
the Britains in the time of St. Alban, or the 4th century, is simply
a legendar)'^ version of the history of the introduction of the art
of building into England during the Roman domination by the
“ Collegia Artificum ’’ or Roman Colleges of Artificers, who accom-
panied the victorious legions when they vanquished Hesperia, Gaul,
and Britain, and colonized as they vanquished them.

The decay of architecture in Britain after the Roman armies
had abandoned that country to protect the Empire from the incur-
sions of the northern hordes of barbarians, in consequence of which
Britain was left in an unprotected state, and was .speedily involved
in wars with the Piets, the Danes, and other cnemie.s, is next nar-
rated in the Legend, and is its version of an historical fact.

It is also historically true that in the 7th century peace was re-
stored to the northern parts of the island, and that Edwin, King of
Northumbria, of which the city of York was the capital, revived
the arts of civilization, gave his patronage to architecture, and caused
many public building.s, among others the Cathedral of York, to be
built. All of this is told in the Legend, although, by an error for
which I have already accounted, Edwin, the Northumbrian king,
was in the later Legend confounded with the brother of Athelstan.

The second decay of architecture in England, in consequence of
the invasions of the Danes, and the intestine as well as foreign wars
which desolated the kingdom until the reign of Athelstan, in the
early part of the loth century, when entire peace was restored, is

SUMMARY OF THE LEGEND OF THE CRAFT 115

briefly alluded to in the Legend, therein conforming to the history
of that troublous period.

As a consequence of the restoration of peace, the Legend records
the revival of Masonry or architecture in the loth century, under
the reign of Athelstan, who called the Craft together and gave them
a charter. 1 have already discussed this point and shown that the
narrative of the Legend presents nothing improbable or incredible
but that it is easily to be reconciled with the facts of contemporary
history. We have only to reconcile the two forms of the Legend
by asserting that Edwin of Northumbria revived Masonry in an
Assembly convened by him at York, and that Athelstan restored
its decayed prosperity by his general patronage, and by charters
which he gave to the Guilds or corporations of handicraftsmen.

Passing in this summary method over the principal occurrences
related in this Legend of the Craft, we relieve it from the charge
of gross puerility, which has been urged against it, even by some
Masonic writers who have viewed it in a spirit of immature criticism.
We find that its statements arc not the offspring of a fertile imagina-
tion or the crude inventions of sheer ignorance, but that, on the con-
trary, they really have a support in what was at the time accepted
as authentic history, and whose authenticity can not, even now, be
disproved or denied.

Dissected as it has here been by the canons of philosophical criti-
cism, the Legend of the Craft is no longer to be deemed a fable
or myth, but an historical narrative related in the quaint language
and in the quainter spirit of the age in which it was written.

But after the revival of Freemasonry in the beginning of the
1 8 th century, this Legend, for the most part misunderstood, served
as a fundamental basis on which were erected, first by Ander-
son and then by other writers who followed him, expanded narra-
tives of the ri.se and progress of Masonry, in which the symbolic
ideas or the mythical suggestions of the ancient “ Legend ” were
often developed and enlarged into statements for the most part en-
tirely fabulous.

In this way, these writers, who were educated and even learned
men, have introduced not so much any new legends, but rather
theories founded on a legend, by which they have traced the origin
and the progress of the institution in narratives without historic
authenticity and sometimes contradictory to historic truth.

ii6 PREHISTORIC MASONRY

The mode in which these theories have been attempted to be
supported by the citation of assumed facts have caused them to take,
to some extent, the form of legends. But to distinguish them from
the pure Legends which existed before the iSth century, I have pre-
ferred to call them theories.

Their chief tendency has been, by the use of unauthenticated
statements, to confuse the true history of the Order. And yet they
have secured so prominent a place in its literature and have ex-
erted so much influence on modern Masonic ideas, that they must
be reviewed and analyzed at length, in order that the reader may
have a complete understanding of the legendary history of the insti-
tution. For of that legendary history, these theories, founded as
they are on assumed traditions, constitute a part.

As having priority in date, the theory of Dr. Anderson will be
the first to claim our attention.

CHAPTER XX

THE ANDERSONIAN THEORY

HE Legend or theory of Dr. Anderson is de-
tailed first in the edition of the of Consii-

tuitions which was edited by him and published
in the year 1723, and was then more extensively
I developed in the subsequent edition of the same
^ ] work published in 1 738.

Anderson was acquainted with the more re-
cent Legend of the Craft, and very fully cites it from a manu-
script or Record of Rreemasons, 7 vr/tteu in the reign of Edioard
U^., that is, toward the end of the 15th century. If Anderson’s
quotations from this manuscript are correct, it must be one of
those that has been lost and not yet recovered. For among some
other events not mentioned in the manuscripts that are now extant,
he states that the charges and laws of the Freemasons had been
seen and perused by Henry VI. and his council, and had been ap-
proved by them.

He does not appear to have met with any of the earlier manu-
scripts, such as those of Halliwell and Roberts, which contain the
Legend in its older form, for he makes no use of the Legend
of Euclid, passing over the services of that geometrician lightly,
as the later manuscripts do,^ and not ascribing to him the origin
of the Order in Egypt, which theory is the peculiar characteristic
of the older Legend.

But out of the later Legend and from whatev^er manuscripts con-
taining it to which he had access, Anderson has formed a Legend of
his own. In this he has added many things of his own creation and
given a more detailed narrative, if not a more correct one, than that
contained in the Legend of the Craft.

Anderson’s Legend, or theory, of the rise and progress of Ma-

1 In the slight mention that he makes of Euclid, Anderson has observed the true
chronology and placed him in the era ot Ptolemy Lagus, 300 years B.c.

117

ii8 PREHISTORIC MASONRY

sonry, as it is contained in the first edition of the Book of ConstiBi-
tions, was for a long time accepted by the Craft as a true history of
the Order, and it has exercised a very remarkable influence in the
framing of other theories on this subject which from time to time
have been produced by subsequent writers.

To the student, therefore, who is engaged in the investigation of
the legendary history of Masonry, this Andersonian Legend is of
great importance. While the Legend of the Craft in its pure
form was very little known to the great body of Masonic writers
and students until the manuscripts containing this Legend in its
various forms were made common to the Masonic public by the
labors of Ilalliwell, Cooke, and, above all, by Ilughan and his ear-
nest collaborators in Masonic archx'ology, the Legend of Anderson
was accessible and familiar to all, and for a century and a half
was deemed an authentic history, and even at the present day is
accepted by some over-credulous and not well-informed Masons as
a real narrative of the rise and progress of Masonry.

Anderson, in his history of the origin of Masonry, mindful of the
French proverb, to eommencer far la begins by

attributing to Adam a knowledge of Geometry as the foundation of
Masonry and Architecture, words which throughout his Legend he
uses as synonymous terms.

These arts he taught to his sons, and Cain especially practiced
them by building a city. Seth also was equally acquainted with
them and taught them to his olfspring. Hence the antediluvian
world was well acquainted with Masonry,’ and erected many curious
works until the lime of Noah, who built the Ark by the principles
of Geometry and the rules of Masonry.

Noah and his three sons, who were all Masons, brought with
them to the new world the traditions and arts of the antediluvians.
Noah is therefore deemed the founder of Masonry in the post-dilu-
vian world, and hence Anderson called a Mason a “true Noachida”
or Noachite, a term used to the present day.

The descendants of Noah exercised their skill in Masonry in the
attempted erection of the Tower of Babel, but were confounded
in their speech and dispersed into various countries, whereby the

’ Oliver lias readily accepted this theory of an antediluvian Masonry and written sev-
eral very learned and indeed interesting works on the subject.

THE ANDERSONIAN THEORY

119

knowledge of Masonry was lost.’ It was, however, preserved in
Shinar and Assyria, where Nimrod built many cities.

In those parts afterward flourished many priests and mathema-
ticians under the name of Chaldees and Magi, who preserved the
science of Geometry or Masonry, and thence the science and the
art* were transmitted to later ages and distant climes. Mitzraim,
the second son of Ham, carried Masonry into Egypt, where the
overflowing of the banks of the Nile caused an improvement in
Geometry, and consequently brought Masonry much into request.

Masonry was introduced into the Land of Canaan by the de-
scendants of the younge.st son of Ham, and into Europe, as he sup-
poses, by the posterity of Japhet, although we know nothing of their
works.

The posterity of Shem also cultivated the art of Masonry, and
Abraham, the head of one branch of that family, having thus ob-
tained his knowledge of Geometry and the kindred sciences, com-
municated that knowledge to the Egyptians and transmitted it to
his descendants, the Israelites. When, therefore, they made their
exodus from Egypt the Israelites were “a whole kingdom of Ma-
sons,” and while in the wilderness were often assembled by their
Grand Master Moses into “ a regular and general Lodge.”

On taking posse.ssion of Canaan, the Israelites found the old in-
habitants were versed in Masonry, which, however, their conquerors
greatly improved, for the splendor of the finest structures in Tyre
and Sidon was greatly surpassed by the magnificence of the Temple
erected by King Solomon in Jerusalem. In the construction of this
edifice, Solomon was assisted by the Masons and carpenters of Hi-
ram, King of Tyre, and especially by the King of Tyre’s namesake
Hiram or Iluram, to whom, in a note, Andenson gives the name of
Hiram Abif, which name he has ever since retained among the
Craft.*

^ This part of the Lej^end has been preserved in the American rituals, wherein the
candidate is said to coine from the lofty Tower of iJabel, where language was confounded
and Masonry Jost,’^ and to be proceeding “ to tlie thre.shing-tloor of Orneu the Jebusitc
(the Temple of Solomon) where language was re stored and Masonry found.”

^By the science is meant geometry, and by the art architecture — a distinction pre-
served in the Middle Ages ; and the combination of them into (ieomctrical Masonry,”
constitute the Mystery of the Freemasons of that period.

^ In the first edition of this Legend, Anderson make.s no allusion to the death of Hiram
Abif during the building of the Temple. He mentions it, however, in the second edition of
the “ Constitutions ” published fifteen years afterward- But this does not absolutely prove

120

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Anderson p;ivcs in this Legend the first detailed account of the
Temple of Solomon that is to lie found in any Masonic work. It
is, however, only an appropriation of that contained in the Books of
Kings and Chronicles, with some statements for which he was prob-
ably indebted to his own invention. It has exerted a considerable
influence upon other Legends subsecjuently framed, and especially
upon all the rituals, and indeed upon all the modern ideas of specu-
lative Masons.’

After the construction of the Temple, the Masons who had been
engaged in it dispersed into S3Tia, Mesopotamia, Assyria, Chaldea,
Babylonia, Media, Persia, Arabia, Africa, Lesser Asia, Greece, and
other parts of Europe, where they taught the art to many eminent
persons, and kings, princes, and potentates became Grand Master-s,
each in his own territory.

The Legend then passes on to Nebuchadnezzar, whom it calls a
Grand Master, and a.s.serts that he received much improvement in
Masonry from the Jewish captives whom he brought to Babylon
after he had destroyed that city and its Temple.

Afterward Cyrus constituted Zerubbabel the leader of the Jews,
who, being released from their captivity, returned to Jeru.salem and
built the second Temple.

From Palestine, and after the erection of the Temple, Masonry
was carried into Greece, and arrived at its height during the Jewish
captivity, and in the time of Thales Milesius, the philosopher, and
his pupil, Pythagoras, who was the author of the 47th Proposition
of Euclid, which “ is the foundation of all Masonry,” Pythagoras
traveled into Egypt and Babylon, and acquired much knowledge
from the jmests and the Magi, which he dispensed in Greece and
Italy on his return.*

The Legend now speaks, parenthetically as it were, of the prog-

that lie was at the time unacquainted with the tradition, but he may have thought it too
esoteric for public record, for lie says, in the very place where he should have referred to
it, that he has left ‘‘ what must not and cannot be communicated in writing/*

^ The jicculiar details of the doctrine of Anderson have not been always respected.
For instance, it is a very prevalent opinion among the Craft at this day, that there was a
Master Mason’s Lodge at the Temple, over which Solomon presided as Master and the
two Ilirams as Wardens, a theory which is not supported by Anderson, who says that
King Solomon was Grand Master of the Lodge at Jerusalem, King Hiram Grand Master
of that at Tyre, and Hiram Abif Master of Work. Const., 1st ed., p. 14.

^ It was probably this part of the Andersonian Legend which gave rise to a similar
statement made in the spurious production known as the Leland MS.

THE ANDERSONIAN THEORY

I2I

ress of Masonry in Asia Minor, and of the labors of Euclid in
E&ypb the reign of Ptolemy Lagus, in the methodical digestion
of Geometry into a science.

It next dwells upon the great improvement of Masonry in
Greece, whose Masons arrived at the same degree of skill and mag-
nificence as their teachers the Asiatics and Egyptians.

From Sicily, from Greece, from Egypt and Asia, Masonry was
introduced into Rome, which soon became the center of learning,
and disseminated the knowledge of Masonry among the nations
which it conquered.

The Emperor Augustus became the Grand Master of the Lodge
at Rome, and established the Augustan style of architecture. Dur-
ing the prosperous condition of the Roman Empire, Masonry was
carefully propagated to the remotest regions of the world, and a
Lodge erected in almost every Roman garrison.

Hut upon the declension of the empire, when the Roman garri-
sons were drawn away from Britain, the Angles and lower Sax-
ons, who had been invited by the ancient Britons to come over and
help them against the Scots and Piets, at length subdued the southern
part of England, where Masonry had been introduced by the Ro-
mans, and the art then fell into decay.

When the Anglo-Saxons recovered their freedom in the 8th
century Masonry was revived, and at the desire of the Saxon kings,
Charles Martel, King of France, sent over several expert craftsmen,
so that Gothic architecture was again encouraged during the Hep-
tarchy.

The many invasions of the Danes caused the destruction of nu-
merous records, but did not, to any great extent, interrupt the work,
although the methods introduced by the I'ioman builders were lost.

But when war ceased and peace was proclaimed by the Norman
conquest. Gothic Masonry was restored and encouraged by William
the Conqueror and his son William Rufus, who built Westminster
Hall. And notvvithstanding the wars that subsequently occurred,
and the contentions of the Barons, Masonry never ceased to main-
tain its position in England. In the year 1362, Edward III. had an
officer called the King’s Freemason, or General Surveyor of his
buildings, whose name was Henry Yvele, and who erected many
public buildings.

Anderson now repeats the Legend of the Craft, with the story

1 22

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

of Athelstan and his son Edwin, taking it, with an evident modifica-
tion of the language, from a record of Freemasons, which he says
was written in the reign of Edward IV. This record adds, as he
says, that the charges and laws therein contained had been seen and
approved by Henry VI, and the lords of his council, who must
therefore, to enable them to make such a review, have been incor-
porated with the Freemasons. In consequence of this, the act passed
by Parliament when the King was in his infancy, forbidding the
yearly congregations of Masons in their General Assemblies, was
never enforced after the King had arrived at manhood, and had
perused the regulations contained in that old record.

The Kings of Scotland also encouraged Masonry from the ear-
liest times down to the union of the crowns, and granted to the Scot-
tish Masons the prerogative of having a fixed Grand Master and
Grand Warden.'

Queen Elizabeth discouraged Masonry, and neglected it during
her whole reign. She sent a commission to Y ork to break up the
Annual Assembly, but the members of the commission, having been
admitted into the Lodge, made so favorable a report to the Queen,
of the Fraternity, that she no longer opposed the Masons, but toler-
ated them, although she gave them no encouragement.

Her successor, James I., was, however, a patron of Masonry,
and greatly revived the art and restored the Roman architecture,
employing Inigo Jones as his architect, under whom was Nicholas
Stone as his Master Mason.

Charles I. was also a Mason, and patronized the art whose suc-
cessful progress was unhappily diverted by the civil wars and the
death of the king.

But after the restoration of the royal family. Masonry was again
revived by Charles II., who was a great encourager of the craftsmen,
and hence is supposed to have been a Freemason.

In the reign of James II., Masonry not being duly cultivated,
the London Lodges “ much dwindled into ignorance.”

But on the accession of William, that monarch “who by most is
reckoned as a Freemason,” greatly revived the art, and showed him-
self a patron of Masonry.

^ From this it appears that Anderson was acquainted with the claim of the St. Clairs
of Roslin to the hereditary Crand Mastership of Scotland, a point that has recently been
disputed.

THE ANDERSONIAN THEORY

His good example was followed by Queen Anne, who ordered
fifty new ehurches to be erected in London and its suburbs, and also
by George I., her successor.

With an allusion to the opinion that the religious and military
Orders of knighthood in the Middle Ages had borrowed many of
their solemn usages from the Freemasons,^ the Legend here ends.

Upon a perusal of this Legend, it will be found that it is in fact,
except in the latter portions, which are semi-historical, only a run-
ning commentary on the later Lcgcmd of the Craft, embracing all
that is said therein and adding other statements, partly derived from
history and partly, perhaps, from the author’s invention.

The second edition of the Co7istit2itions goes more fully over the
same ground, but is written in the form rather of a history than of
a legend, and a review of it is not, therefore, necessary or appropriate
in this part of the present work, which is solely devoted to the
Legends of the Order.

In this second edition of Anderson’s work, there arc undoubtedly
many things which will be repudiated by tbe skeptical student of
Masonic history, and many which, if not at once denied, require
proof to substantiate them. But with all its errors, this work of
Anderson is replete with facts that make it interesting and instruct-
ive, and it earns for the author a grateful tribute for his labors in
behalf of the literature of Masonry at so early a period after its re-
vival.

^ It will be sren hereafter that the Chevalier Ramsay greatly developed this brief
allusion of Anderson, and out of it worked his theory of the Templar origin of Frccma-
sonry.

CHAPTER XXI

THE PRESTONIAN THEORY

HE Legend given by Preston in his Illustrations
of jl/asonry, which details the origin and early
progress of the Institution, is more valuable and
more interesting than that of Anderson, because
it is more succinct, and although founded like
it on the Lcgimd of the Craft, it treats each
detail with an appearance of historical accuracy
that almost removes from the narrative the legendary character
which, after all, really attaches to it

In accepting the Legend of the Craft as the basis of his story,
Preston rejects, or at least omits to mention, all the earlier part of
it, and begins his story with the supposed introduction of Masonry
into England.

Commencing with a reference to the Druids, who, he says, it has
been suggcsl(Tl, derived their system of government from Pythago-
ras, he thinks that there is no doubt that the science of Masonry was
not unknovYn to them. Yet he does not say that there was an affin-
ity between their rites and those of the Freemasons, which, as an
open question, he leaves everyone to determine for himself.

Masonry, according to this theory, was certainly first introduced
into England at the time of its conejuest by Julius Caesar, who, with
several of the Roman generals that succeeded him, were patrons and
j)rotectors of the Craft.

The fraternity were engaged in the creation of walls, forts,
bridges, cities, temples, and other stately edifices, and their Lodges
or Conventions were regularly held.

Obstructed by the wars which broke out between the Romans
and the natives, Masonry was at length revived in the time of the
Emperor Carausius. He, having shaken off the Roman yoke, sought
to improve his country in the civil arts, and brought into his domin-
ions the best workmen and artificers from all parts. Among the

124

THE PRESTONIAN THEORY

125

first class of his fav'^orites he enrolled the Masons, for whose tenets he
professed the highest veneration, and appointed his steward, Alhanus,
the superintendent of their Assemblies. He gave them a charter,
and commanded Albanus to preside over them in person as Grand
Master. He assisted in the initiation of many persons into the
mysteries of the Order.

In 680 some expert brethren arrived from France and formed a
Lodge under the direction of Rennet, Abbot of VVirral, who was
soon afterward appointed by Kenred, King of Mercia, inspector
of the Lodges and general superintendent of the Masons.

Masonry was in a low state during (he 1 leptarchy, but in S56 it
was revived under St. Swithin, who was employed by Ethelwolf,
the Saxon king, to repair some pious houses ; and il gradually im-
proved until the reign of Alfred, who was its zealous protector and
who maintained a number of workmen in repairing the desolations
of the Danes.

In the reign of Edward, his successor, the Masons eontinued to
hold their Lodges under the sanetion of Ethred, his sister’s husband,
and Ethelward, his brother.

Athelstan succeeded his father in 924 and appointed his brother
Edwin, patron of Masons. The latter procured a eharter from
Athelstan for the Masons to meet annually in communieation at
York, where the first Grand Lodge of England was formed in
926, at which Edwin presided as Grand Master. The Les^end of
the Craft, in reference to the collection of old writings, is here
repeated.

On the death of Edwin, Athelstan undertook in person the
direction of the Lodges, and under his sanction the art of Masonry
was propagated in peace and security.

On the death of Athelstan, the Masons dispersed and eontinued
in a very unsettled state until the reign of Edgar, in 960, when they
were again collected by St. Dunstan, but did not meet with per-
manent encouragement.

For fifty years after Edgar’s death Masonry remained in a low
condition, but was revived in 1041 under the patronage of Edward
the Confessor, who appointed Leofric, Earl of Coventry, to superin-
tend the Craft.

William the Conqueror, who acquired the crown in 1066, aji-
pointed Gunduljih Bishop of Rochester, and Roger de Montgomery,

126

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Earl of Shrewsbury, joint patrons of the Masons. The labors of the
fraternity were employed, during the reign of William Rufus, in the
construction of various edifices.

The Lodges continued to assemble under Henry I. and Stephen.
In the reign of the latter, Gilbert de Clare, Marquis of Pembroke,
presided over the Lodges.

In the reign of Henry II., the Grand Master of the Knights
Templars employed the Craft in 1135 in building their Temple.
Masonry continued under the patronage of this Order until 1199,
when John succeeded to the throne and Peter de Colechurch was
appointed Grand Master. Peter de Rupibus succeeded him, and
Masonry continued to flourish during this and the following reign.

Preston’s traditionary narrative, or his theory founded on Le-
gends, may be considered as ending here.

The rest of his work assumes a purely historical form, although
many of his statements need for authenticity the support of other
authorities. These will be subjects of consideration when we come
to the next part of this work.

At present, before dismissing the theory of Preston, a few com-
ments are required which have been suggested by portions of the
narrative.

As to the Legend of Carausius, to whom Preston ascribes the
patronage of the British craft in the latter part of the 3d century,
it must be remarked that it was first made known to the fraternity
by Dr. Anderson in the 2d edition of his Constitutions. He says
that the tradition is contained in all the old Constitutions and was
firmly believed by the old English Masons. But the fact is that it
is to be found in none of the old records that have as yet been dis-
covered. They speak only of a king who patronized St. Alban
and who made him the steward of his household and his Master of
Works. Anderson designated this until then unnamed king as
Carausius, forgetting that the Saint was martyred in the same year
that the monarch assumed the throne. This was a strange error to
be committed by one who had made genealogy his special study and
had written a voluminous work on the subject of royal successions.

From Anderson, Preston appears to have borrowed the Legend,
developing it into a minuter narrative, by the insertion of several ad-
ditional circumstances, a prerogative which the compilers of Masonic
as well as monastic Legends have always thought proper to exercise.

THE PRESTONIAN THEORY

127

The advent of French Masons into England toward the end of
the 7th century, brought thither by the Abbot Bcnnet or Benedict,
which is recorded by Preston, is undoubtedly an historical fact.
Lacroix says that England from the 7th century had called to it
the best workmen among the Fren '*’ Masons, the Mattres de
pierre.

The Venerable Bede, who was contemporary with that period,
says that the famous Abbot Benedictus Biscopius (the Bcnnet of
Preston) went over to France in 675 to engage workmen to build
his church, and brought them over to England for that purpose.

Richard of Cirencester makes the same statement. He says
that “ Bennet collected Masons (coementarios) and all kinds of in-
dustrious artisans from Rome, Italy, France, and other countries
where he could find them, and, bringing them to England, employed
them in his works.”

Preston is, however, in error as to the reign in which this event
occurred. Kenrcd, or rather Coenred, did not succeed as King of
Mercia until 704, and the Abbot Benedict had died the year before.
Our Masonic writers of the last century, like their predecessors, the
Legendists, when giving the substance of a statement, were very
apt to get confu.sed in their dates.

Of the Legend of the “ weeping St. Swithin,” to whom Preston
ascribes the revival of Masonry in the middle of the 9th century, it
may be remarked that as to the character of the Saint as a cele-
brated architect, the Legend is supported by the testimony of the
Anglo-Saxon chroniclers.

Roger of Wendover, who is followed by Matthew of West-
minster, records his custom of personally superintending the work-
men when engaged in the construction of any building, “ that his
presence might stimulate them to diligence in their labors.”

But the consideration of the condition of Masonry at that period,
in England, belongs rather to the historical than to the legendary
portion of this work.

On the whole, it may be said of Preston that he has made a con-
siderable improvement on Anderson in his method of treating the
early progress of Masonry. Still his narrative contains so many as-
sumptions which are not proved to be facts, that his theory must,
like that of his predecessor, be still considered as founded on le-
gends rather than on authentic history.

CHAPTER XXI 1

THE IIUTCHINSONIAN THEORY

HE theory advanced by Bro. William Hutchin-
son as to the origin and the progress of Free-
masonry, in his treatise, first published in the
year 1775 and entitled The Spirit of Ma-
sonry, is so complicated and sometimes appar-
ently so contradictory in its statements, as to
require, for a due comprehension of his views,
not only a careful perusal, but even an exhaustive study of the work
alluded to. After such a study I think that 1 am able to present
to the reader a correct summary of the opinions on the rise and prog-
ress of the Order which were entertained by this learned scholar.

Let it be said, by way of preface to this review, that however we
may dissent from the conclusions of Hutchinson, he is entitled to
our utmost respect for his scholarly attainments. To the study of
the history and the philosophy of Masonry he brought a fund of
antiquarian research, in which he had previously been engaged in
the examination of the ecclesiastical antiejuities of the province of
Durham. Of all the Masonic writers of the 18th century, Hutchin-
son was undoubtedly the most learned. And yet the theory that he
has propounded as to the origin of the Masonic Institution is alto-
gether untenable and indeed, in many of its details, absurd.

Of all the opinions entertained by Hutchinson concerning the
origin of Freemasonry, the most heterodox is that which denies
its descent from and its connection, at any period, with an opera-
tive society. “ It is our opinion,” he says, “that Masons in the pres-
ent state of Masonry were never a body of architects. ... We
ground a judgment of the nature of our profession on our ceremo-
nials and Hatter ourselves every Mason will be convinced that they
have not relation to building and architecture, but are emblematical
and imply moral and spiritual and religious tenets.” ‘

^ “ Spirit of Masonry,” lect. xiii., p. 131.

THE HUTCHINSONIAN THEORY

I 20

In another place, while admitting that there were in former times
builders of cities, towers, temples, and fortifications, he doubts
“ that the artificers were formed into bodies ruled by their own proper
laws and knowing mysteries and secrets which were kept from the
world.” »

Since he admits, as we will see hereafter, that Masonry existed
at the Temple of Solomon, that it was there organized in what lie
calls the second stage of its progress, and that the builders of the
edifice were Masons, one would naturally imagine that Hutchinson
would here encounter an insuperable olijection to his theory, which
entirely disconnects Masonry and architecture. But he attemjits
to obviate this difficulty by supposing that the principles of Free-
masonry had, before the commencement of the undertaking, been
communicated by King Solomon to “ the sages and religious men
amongst his people,” * and that these “ chosen ones of Solomon, as
a pious and holy duty conducted the work.” Their labors as buildcTS
were simply ineidental and they were no more to be regarded by
reason of this duty as architects by profession, than were Abel,
Noah, Abraham, Jacob, Moses, and David by reason of the build-
ing of their altars, which were, like the Temple, works of piety and
devotion.*

This theory, in which all connection between operative and
speculative Masonry is completely dissevered, and in which, in fact,
the former is entirely ignored, is peculiar to Hutchinson. No other
writer, no matter to what source he may have attributed the original
rise of speculative Masonry, has denied that there was some period
in the history of its progress when it was more or less intimately
connected with the operative art. While, therefore, it is plain that
the opinion of Hutchinson is in opposition to that of all other
Masonic writers, it is equally evident that it contradicts all the well-
established facts of history.

But besides these opinions concerning the non-operative charac-
ter of the Institution, Hutchinson has been scarcely less peculiar in
his other views in respect to the rise and progress of Freemasonry
and its relations to other associations of antiquity.

' “ Spirit of Masonry,” lect. x., p. 107.

^ Hutchinson’s language is here somewhat confused, but it seems that this is the only
rational interpretation that can be given to it.

^ “ Spirit of Masonry,” Icct, x., p. 108.

9

130 PREHISTORIC MASONRY

The Hutchinsonian theory may indeed be regarded as especially
and exclusively his own. It is therefore worthy of consideration
and review, rather in reference to the novelty of his ideas than in
respect to anything of great value in the pseudo*historical statements
that he has advanced.

The prominent thought of Hutchinson in developing his theory
is that Masonry in its progress from the earliest times of antiquity
to the present day has been divided into three stages, respectively
represented by the three ancient Craft degrees.*

He docs not give a very lucid or satisfactory explanation of the
reasons which induced him to connect each of these “ stages of
progress ” with one of the symbolical degrees, and indeed the con.
ncction appears to be based upon a rather fanciful hypothe.sis.

The three stages into which he divides the progress of Masonry
from its birth onwards to modern times are distinguished from each
other, and distinctively marked by the code of religious ethics pro-
fessed and taught by each. The first stage, which is represented
by the Entered Apprentice degree, commences with Adam and the
Garden of Eden and extends to the lime of Moses.

The religious code taught in this first stage of Masonry was con-
fined to a “knowledge of the God of Nature and that acceptable
service wherewith He was well pleased.”®

To Adam, while in a state of innocence, this knowledge was im-
parted, as well as that of all the science and learning which existed
in the earliest ages of the world.

When our first parent fell, although he lost his innocence, he
still retained the memory of all that he had been taught while in the
Garden of Eden. This very retention was, indeed, a portion of the
punishment incurred for his disobedience.

It, however, enabled him to communicate to his children the
sciences which he had comprehended in Eden, and the knowledge
that he had acquired of Nature and the God of Nature. By them
these lessons were transmitted to their descendants as the corner-
•stone and foundation of Masonry, whose teachings at that early

^ " It is known to the world, bat more particularly to the brethren, that there are three
degrees of Masons — Apprentices, Craftsmen, and Masters ; their initiation, and the sev-
eral advancements from the order of Apprentices, will necessarily lead us to observations
in these distinct channels .” — ** Spirit of Masonry,” lect. i., p. i.

Spirit of Masonry,” lect. i., p. 6.

THE HUTCHINSONIAN THEORY

131

period consisted of a belief in the God of Nature and a knowlcdi^e
of the sciences as they had been transmitted by Adam to his pos-
terity. This system appears to have been very nearly the same as
that afterward called by Dr. Oliver the “ Pure Freemasonry of
Antiquity.”

All of the descendants of Adam did not, however, retain this
purity and simplicity of dogma. After the deluge, when mankind
became separated, the lessons which had been taught by the ante-
diluvians fell into confusion and oblivion and W('re corrupted bv^
many peoples, so that the service of the true God, which had been
taught in the pure Masonry of the first men, was defiled by idolatry.
These scceders from the pure Adamic Masonry formed institutions
of their own, and degenerated, as the fir.st deviation from the simple
worship of the God of Nature, into the errors of Sabaism, or the
adoration of the Sun, Moon, and Stars. They adopted syml>ols
and allegories with which to teach csoterically their false doctrines.
The earlie.st of these scceders were the Egyptians, whose priests
secreted the mysteries of their religion from the multitude by syt7i-
bols and hieroglyphics that were comprehensible to the members of
their own order only. A similar .system was adopted by the priests
of Greece and Rome when they established their peculiar Mysteries.
These examples of conveying truth by symbolic methods of teacli-
ing were wisely followed by the Masons for the purjiose of conceal-
ing their own mysteries.

From this we naturally make the deduction, although Hutchin-
son does not expressly say so, that, according to his theory, Masonry
was at that early period merely a religious profession “ whose prin-
ciples, maxims, language, learning, and religion were derived from
Eden, from the patriarchs, and from the sages of the East,” and that
the symbolism which now forms so essential an element of the sys-
tem was not an original characteristic of it, but was borrowed, at
a later period, from the mystical and religious associations of the
pagans.’

^ Long after, Mr. Grote, in his History of Greece,” spoke of an hypothesis of an
ancient and highly instructed body of priests having their origin cither in Egypt or the
East, who communicated to the rude and barbarous Greeks religious, physical, and his-
torical knowledge under the veil of symbols. The same current of thought appears to
have been suggested to the Masonic writer and to the historian of Greece, but each has
directed it in a different way — one to the history ot the Pagan nations, the other to that
of Masonry.

132

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Such, according to the theory of Hutchinson, was the “ first
stage ” in the progress of Masonry represented by the Entered Ap-
prentice degree, and which consisted simply of a belief in and a
worship of the true God as the doctrine was taught by Adam and
the patriarchs. It was a system of religious principles, with few
rites and ceremonies and fewer symbols. The second stage in the
progress of Masonry, which Hutchinson supposes to be represented
by the Fellow Craft degree, commences at the era of Moses and
extends through the whole period of the Jewish history to the ad-
vent of Christianity. According to the theory of Hutchinson, the
Jewish lawgiver was, of course, in possession of the pure Masonry of
the patriarchs which constituted the first stage of the institution, but
was enabled to extend its ethical and religious i)rinciples in conse-
quence of the instructions in relation to God and the duties of man
which he had himself received by an immediate revelation. In
other words. Masonry in its first stage was cosmopolitan in its relig-
ious teachings, rc(}uiring only a belief in the God of Nature as he
had been revealed to Adam and his immediate descendants, but in
the second stage, as inaugurated by Moses, that universal belief was
exchanged for one in the Deity as He had made himself known on
Mount Sinai. That is to say, the second or Mosaic stage of Ma-
sonry became J udaic in its profession.

But in another respect Masonry in its second stage assumed a
different form from that which had marked its primitive state.
Moses, from his peculiar education, was well acquainted with the
rites, the ceremonies, the hieroglyphs, and the .symbols used by the
Egyptian priesthood. Many of these he introduced into Masonry,
and thus began that system which, coming originally from the Egyj)-
tians and subsequently augmented by derivations from the Druids,
the Essenes, the Pythagoreans, and other mystical associations, at last
was developed into that science of symbolism which now constitutes
so important and essential a characteristic of modern Freemasonry.

A third change in the form of Masonry, which took place in its
Mosaic or Judaic stage, was the introduction of the operative art of
building among its disciples. Instances of this occurred in the days
of Moses, when Aholiab, Bezaleel, and other Masons were engaged
in the construction of the Tabernacle, and subsequently in the time
of Solomon, when that monarch occupied his Masons in the erec-
tion of the Temple.

THE HUTCHINSONIAN THEORY

»33

But, as has already been shown in a preceding part of this chap-
ter, Hutchinson does not conclude from these facts that Masonry
was ever connected in its origin with “builders, architects, or me-
chanics.” The occupation of these Masons as builders was entirely
accidental, and did not at all interfere with or supersede their char-
acter as members of a purely speculative association.

But it may be as well to give, at this point, in his own words, his
explanation of the manner in which the Masons became, on certain
occasions, builders, and whence arose in modern times the erroneous
idea that the Masonic profession consisted of architects.*

“ I presume,” he says, “ that the name of Mason in this society
doth not denote that the rise or origin of such society was solely
from builders, architects, or mechanics ; at the times in which
Moses ordained the setting up of the sanctuary, and when Solomon
was about to build the Temple at Jerusalem, they selected from out
of the people those men who were enlightened with the true faitli,
and, being full of wisdom and religious fervor, were found proper to
conduct these works of piety. It was on those occasions that our
predecessors appeared to the world as architects and were formed
into a body, under salutary rules, for the government of those who
were employed in these great works, since which period builders
have adopted the name of Masons, as an honorary distinction and
title to their profession. I am induced to believe the name of
Mason has its derivation from a language in which it implies some
indication or distinction of the nature of the society, and that it has
not its relation to architects.” “

Masonry was not organized at the Temple of Solomon, as is be-
lieved by those who adopt the Temple theory, but yet that building
occupies, according to the views of Hutchinson, an important place
in the history of the institution. It was erected during the second
stage of the progress of Masonry, not, as we must infer from the
language of our author, by the heathen operatives of Tyre, but solely
by Israelitish Masons ; or, if assisted by any, it was only by proselytes
who on or before their initiation had accepted the Jewish faith.

Un a subsequent lecture (xiii.) he attempts, in an historical argument, to show that
the guild of Masons incorporated in the reign of Henry V., and the laws concerning con-
gregations and confederacies of Masons,” passed in the succeeding reign, had no refer-
ence whatever to the speculative society.

Spirit of Masonry,” lect. i., p. 2. In another place in this work the etymological
ideas of Hutchinson and other writeis will be duly investigated.

134

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

The language of Hutchinson is on this point somewhat obscure,
yet I think that it admits only of the interpretation which has been
given. He says : “ As the sons of Aaron alone were admitted to the
holy office and to the sacrificial rites, so none but devotees were
admitted to this labour (on the temple). On this stage we see those
religious who had received the truth and the light of understanding
as possessed by the first men, embodied as artificers and engaged in
this holy work as architects.” '■

Still more explicit is the following statement, made in a subse*
quent part of the work : “ Solomon was truly the executor of that
plan which was revealed to him from above ; he called forth the
sages and religious men amongst his people to perform the work ;
he classed them according to their rank in their religious profession,
as the priests of the Terajde were stationed in the solemn rites and
ceremonies instituted there. . . . The chosen ones of Solo-

mon, as a pious and holy duty, conducted the work.”*

Solomon did not, therefore, organize, as has very commonly been
believed, a system of Masonry by the aid of his Tyrian workmen,
and especially Hiram Ahif, who has always been designated by the
Craft as his “ Chief Builder,” but he practiced and transmitted to his
descendants the primitive Masonry derived from Adam and modi-
fied into its sectarian Jewish form by Moses. The Masonry of
Solomon, like that of the great lawgiver of the Israelites, was ('ssen-
tially Judaic in its religious ethics. It was but a continuation of
that second stage of Masonry which, as I have already said, lasted,
according to the Hutchinsonian theory, until the era of Christianity.

But the wisdom and power of Solomon had attracted to him the
attention of the neighboring nations, and the splendor of the edifice
which he had erected extended his fame and won the admiration of
the most distant parts of the world, so that his name and his artif.
icers became the wonder of mankind, and the works of the latter
excited their emulation. Hence the Masons of Solomon were dis-
persed from Jerusalem into various lands, where they superintended
the architectural labors of other princes, converted infidels, initiated
foreign brethren into their mysteries, and thus extended the order
over the distant quarters of the known world.®

' “ Spirit of Masonry,” lect. vii., p. 86. ^ Ibid., Icct. x., p. io8.

have employed in thi.s paragraph the very language of Hutchinson. However
mythical the statements therein contained may be deemed by the iconoclasts, there

THE IIUTCHINSONIAN THEORY

135

Hence we see that, according to the theory of Hutchinson, King
Solomon, although not the founder of Masonry at the Temple and
not our first Grand Master, as he has been called, was the first to
propagate the association into foreign countries. Until his time, it
had been confined to the Jewish descendants of the patriarchs.

The next or third stage of the progress of Masonry, represented
by the Master’s degree, commenced at the advent of Christianity.
As Hutchinson in his description of the two preceding progressive
classes of Masons had assigned to the first, as represented by the
Apprentices, only the knowledge of the God of Nature as it pre-
vailed in the earliest ages of the world, and to the second, as repre-
sented by the Fellow Crafts, the further knowledge of God as re-
vealed in the Mosaic Legation, so to this third stage, as represenK'd
by Master Masons, he had assigned the complete and perfect knowl-
edge of God as revealed in the Christian dispensation.

Masonry is thus made by him to assume in this third stage of
its progressive growth a purely Christian character.

The introduction of rites and ceremonies under the Jewish law,
which had been derived from the neighboring heathen nations, had
clouded and obscured the service of God, and consequently eorrupu d
the second stage of Masonry as established by Most'sand followed by
Solomon. God, perceiving the ruin which was overwhelming man-
kind by this pollution of Ilis ordinanct.'S and laws, d^-vised a new
scheme for redeeming His creatures from the errors into which they
had fallen. And this scheme was typified in the Third or Master’s
stage in the progressive course of Masonry.

Hence the Master’s degree is, in this theory, exclusively a Chris-
tian invention ; the legend receives a purely Christian interi)retu-
tion, and the allegory of Hiram Abif is made to refer to tli<‘ death
or abolition of the Jewish law and the establishment of the new dis-
pensation under Jesus Christ.

A few citations from the language of Hutchinson will place this
theory very clearly before the readei.'

The death and burial of the Master Builder, and the consequent
loss of the true Word, are thus applied to the Christian dispensation.
“ Piety, which had planned the Temple at Jerusalem, was expunged.*

can be no doubt that they were accepted by the learned author as undeniably histor-
ical.

' are taken from “ Spirit of Masonry,” led, ix. ^The Master is slain.

136

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

The reverence and adoration due to the Divinity was buried in the
filth and rubbish of the world.’ Persecution had dispersed the few
who retained their obedience,® and the name of the true God was
almost lost and forgotten among men.®

“ In this situation it might well be .said ‘ That the guide to
Heaven was lost and the Master of the works of righteousness was
smitten.’

Again, “ True religion was fled. ‘ Those who sought her through
the wisdom of the ancients 7vcre not able to raise her ; she eluded
the grasp, and their polluted hands were stretched forth in vain for
her restoration.'"^

Finally he explains the allegory of the Third degree as directly
referring to Christ, in the following words : “The great Father of
All, commiserating the miseries of the world, .sent 1 1 is only Son,
who was innocence® itself, to teach the doctrine of salvation, by
whom man was raised from the death of sin unto the life of right-
eousness ; from the tomb of corruption unto the chambers of hope ;
from the darkness of despair to the celestial beams of faith.” And
finally, that there may be no doubt of his theory that the third
degree was altogether Christian in its origin and design, he explic-
itly says; “Thus the Master Mason represents a man under the
Christian doctrine saved from the grave of iniquity and raised to
the faith of salvation. As the great testimonial that we are risen
from the state of corruption, we bear the emblem of the Holy Trin-
ity as the insignia of our vows and of the origin of the Master’s
order.’”

The Christianization of the Third or Master’s degree, that is, the
interpretation of its symbols as referring to Christ and to Chri.stian

^ Burial and concealment in the rubbish of the Temple first, and then in an obscure
grave .

^The confusion and consternation of the Craft.

^The Master’s word is lost.

^In the 18th century it was supposed, by an incorrect translation of the Hebrew, that
the substitute word signified “ The Master is smitten.” Dr. Oliver adopted that interpre-
tation.

^By “ the wisdom of the ancients” is meant the two preceding stages of Masonry
represented, as we have seen, by the Apprentices and the Fellow Craft. In the allegory
of Hiram, the knowledge of each of these degrees is unsuccessfully applied to effect the
raising.

® Acacia. The Greek word akakia means innocence. Hence in the succeeding para*
graph he calls Masons true Acacians.”

Spirit of Masonry,” lect. ix., p. 100.

THE HUTCHINSONIAN THEORY

•37

dogmas, is not peculiar to nor original with Hutchinson. It was
the accepted doctrine of almost all his contemporaries, and several
of the rituals of the i8th century contain unmistakable traces
of it. It was not, indeed, until the rcvisal of the lectures by Dr.
Hemming, in 1813, that all references in them to Christianity were
expunged. Even as late as the middle of the 19th century.
Dr. Oliver had explicitly declared that if he had not been fully
convinced that Freemasonry is a system of Christian ethics — that it
contributes its aid to point the way to the Grand Lodge above,
through the Cross of Christ — he should never have been found
among the number of its advocates.^

Notwithstanding that the Grand Lodge of England had authori-
tatively declared, in the year 1723, that Masonry required a belief
onl}'^ in that religion in which all men agree,* the tendency among all
our early writers after the revival of 1717 was to Christianize the
institution.

The interpretation of the symbols of Freemasonry from a
Christian point of view was, therefore, at the period when Hutch-
inson advanced his theory, neither novel to the Craft nor peculiar
to him.

The peculiarity and novelty of his doctrine consisted not in its
Christian interpretation of the symbols, but in the view that he has
taken of the origin and historical value of the legend of the Third
degree.

At least from the time of Anderson and Desaguliers, the legend
of Hiram Abif had been accepted !>y the Craft as an historical state-
ment of an event that had actually occurred. Even the most skep-
tical writers of the present day receive it as a myth which possibly
has been founded upon events that have been distorted in their pas-
sage down the stream of tradition.

Now, neither of these views appears to have been entertained by
Hutchinson. We look in vain throughout his work for any refer-
ence to the legend as connected with Hiram Abif. In his lecture
on “The Temple at Jerusalem," in which he gives the details of the
labors of Solomon in the construction of that edifice, the name of
Hiram does not once occur, except in the extracts that he makes
from the Book of Kings and the Antiquities of Josephus. Indeed,

Antiquities of Masonry,” chap, vi-, p. i66, note.

2“ Book of Constitutions,” irt ed., Charges of a Freemason,” I.

138 PREHISTORIC MASONRY

we must infer that he did not recognize Hiram Abif as a Mason, for
he expressly says that all the Masons at the Temple were Israelites
and believers in the Jewish faith.

In a subsequent lecture, on “The Secrecy of Masons,” he, in fact,
undervalues Hiram Abif as an architect, and says that he does not
doubt that “ Hiram’s knowledge was in the business of a statuary
.and painter, and that he made graven images of stone and wood and
molten images in metals,” thus placing him in a subordinate position,
and completely ignoring the rank given to him in all the Masonic
rituals, as the equal and colleague of Solomon and the Master
Builder of the Temple.’

There is nowhere to he found in the work of Hutchinson any
reference, however remote, to the circumstances of the death and
raising of the “ Widow’s Son.” Me must have been acquainted with
the legend, since it was preserved and taught in the lodges that he
visited. But he speaks, in the most general terms, of the third de-
gree as symbolizing the corruption and death of religion, and the
moral resurrection of man in the new or Christian doctrine.

If he believed in the truth of his own theory — and we are bound
to .suppose that he did — then he could not but have looked upon the
details of the Master’s legend as absolutely false, for the legend
and the theory can in no way be reconciled.

If I rightly understand the language of Hutchinson, which, it
must be admitted, is sometimes confused and the ideas are not plainly
expre.s.sed, he denies the e.xislencc of the third degree at the Temple.

That edifice was built, according to his theory, within the period
of the second stage of the progress of Masonry. Now, that stage,
which was inaugurated by Moses, was represented by the Fellow
Craft’s degree. It was not until the coming of Christ that the Mas-
ter’s degree with its rites and ceremonies came into existence, in the
third stage of the progress of Masonry, which was represented by
that degree. Indeed, in the following passage he explicitly makes
that statement.

“ The eeremonies now known to Masons prove that the testimo-
nials and insignia of the Master’s order, in the present state of

' Hutchinson has here ventured on a truth which, however, none of his successors
have accepted. See hereafter the ch.ipter in this work on “ The Legend of ITiram Abif,”
in which 1 h.ave advanced and endeavored to sustain the same view of the character of this
celebrated artist.

THE HUTCHINSONIAN THEORY

139

Masonry, were devised within the ages of Christianity ; and we are
confident there are not any records in being, in any nation or in any
language, which can show them to be pertinent to any other system
or give them greater antiquity." *

We can not explain this language with any respect for consist-
ency and for the meaning of the words except by adopting tlie
following explanation of the TIutchinsonian theory. At the build-
ing of the Temple, the Masonry then prevailing, which was the sec-
ond or Fellow Crafts stage, was merely a system of religious ethics in
which the doctrines of the Jewish faith, as revealed to Moses, had
been superimposed upon the simple creed of the Patriarchs, which
had constituted the first or Apprentice’s stage of the institution,
There was at that time no knowledge of the legend of Hiram
Abif, which was a myth subsequently introduced in tlie Tliird or
Master’s stage of the progress of the Order. It was not until after
the advent of Jesus (Tirist, “within the ages of Christianity,’’ that
the death and raising of the Master Builder was devised as a myth-
ical symbol to constitute wlial Hutchinson calls “ the testimonials
and insignia of the Master’s order,”

The myth or legend thus fahricaU'd was to be used as a sym-
bol of the change which took place In the religious system of Ma-
sonry when the third stage of its progress was inaugurated hv the
invention of the Master’s degree.

Here again Hutchinson differs from all the writers who pre-
ceded or who have followi d him. 'I'he orthodox doctrliK' of all
those who have given a Christian interpretatitm to the legend of
the Third Degree is that it is the narrative of events which aciually
occurred at the building of the Temple of Solomon, and that it was
afterward, on the advent of Christianity, adopted as a symbol,
whereby the death and raising of Hiram Abif were eemsidered as a
type of the sufferings and death, the resurrection and ascension, of
Christ.

No words cf Hutchinson give expression to any such idea.
With him the legend of Hiram the Builder is simply an allegory,
invented at a much later period than that in which the events it de-
tails are supposed to have occurred, for the purpose of symbolizing

^‘‘Spirit of Masonry,” lect. x., p. 1,062. It i.s ** passinjr strange ” that a man ot
Hutchinson's learning should, in this passage, have appeared to be oblivious of the myth-
ical character of the ancient Mysteries.

140

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

the death and burial of the Jewish law with the Masonry which it
had corrupted, and the resurrection of this defunct Masonry in a
new and perfect form under the Christian dispensation.

Such is the Ilutchinsonian theory of the origin and progress of
Masonry. It is sui generis — peculiar to Hutchinson — and has been
advanced or maintained by no other Masonic writer before or since.
1 1 may be summarized in a very few words :

1. Masonry was first taught by Adam, after the fall, to his de-
scendants, and continued through the patriarchal age. It consisted
of a simple code of ethics, teaching only a belief in the God of
Nature. It was the Masonry of the Entered Apprentice.

2. It was enlarged by Moses and confirmed by Solomon, and
thus lasted until the era of Christ. To its expanded code of ethics
was added a number of symbols derived from the Egyptian priest-
hood. Its religion consisted in a belief in God as he had been
revealed to the Jewish nation. It was the Masonry of the Fellow
Craft.

3. The Masonry of this second stage becoming valueless in con-
sequence of the corruption of the Jewish law, it was therefore
abolished, and the third stage was established in its place. This
third stage was formed by the teachings of Christ, and the religion
it inculcates is that which was revealed by Him. It is the Masonry
of the Master Mason.

4. Hence the three stages of Masonry present three forms of
religion : first, the Patriarchal ; second, the Jewish ; third, the
Christian.

Masonry, having thus reached its ultimate stage of progress, has
continued in this last form to the present day. And now Hutchin-
son proceeds to advance his theory as to its introduction and growth
in England. He had already accounted for its extension into other
quarters of the world in consequence of the dispersion and travels
of King Solomon’s Masons, after the completion of the Temple.
He thinks that during the first stage of Masonry — the Patriarchal —
its principles were taught and practiced by the Druids. They re-
ceived them from the Phoenicians, who visited England for trading
purposes in very remote antiquity. The second stage — the Judaic
— was with its ceremonials introduced among them by the Masons
of Solomon, after the building of the Temple, but at what precise
period he can not determine. The third and perfect form, as devel-

THE E ASSES OE 7 HE JORDAN

THE HUTCHINSONIAN THEORY

141

oped in the third stage, must have been adopted upon the conversion
of the Druidical worshippers to Christianity, having been introduced
into England, as we should infer, by the Christian missionaries who
came from Rome into that country.

While Hutchinson denies that there was ever any connection
between the Operative and the Speculative Masons, he admits that
among the former there might have been a few of the latter. He
accounts for this fact in the following manner :

After Christianity had become the popular religion of England,
the ecclesiastics employed themselves in founding religious houses
and in building churches. From the duty of assisting in this pious
work, no man of whatever rank or profession was exempted. There
were also a set of men called “ holy werk folk,” to whom were as-
signed certain lands which they held by the tenure of repairing,
building, or defending churches and sepulchers, for which labors they
were released from all feudal and military services. These men
were stone-cutters and builders, and might, he thinks, have been
Speculative Masons, and were probably selected from that bod\.
“ These men,” he says, “ come the nearest to a similitude of Solo-
mon’s Masons, and the title of Free and Accepted Masons, of any
degree of architects we have gained any knowledge of.” But he
professes his ignorance whether their initiation was attended with
peculiar ceremonies or by what laws they were regulated. That they
had any connection with the Speculative Order whose origin from
Adam he had been tracing, is denied.

Finally, he attributes the moral precepts of the Masonry of the
present day to the school of Pythagoras and to the Basilideans, a
sect of Christians who flourished in the 2d century. For
this opinion, so far as relates to Pythagoras, he is indebted to the
celebrated Leland manuscript, of whose genuineness he had not the
slightest doubt. These precepts and the Egyptian symbols intro-
duced by Moses with Jewish additions constitute the system of
modern Masonry, which has, however, been perfected by a Christian
doctrine.

Such is the theory of Hutchinson as to the origin and progress
of Speculative Masonry. That it has been accepted as a whole by
no other writer, is not surprising, as it not only is not supported by
the facts of history, but is actually contradicted by every Masonic
document that is extant.

142

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

It is, indeed, a mere body of myths, which are not clad with the
slightest garment of probability.

And yet there are here and there some glimmerings of truth,
such as the appropriation of his real character to Hiram Abif, and
the allusions to the “holy work folk," as showing a connection be-
tween Operative and Speculative Masonry, which, though not pushed
far enough by Hutchinson, may afford valuable suggestions, if ex-
tended, to the searcher after historic truth in Freemasonry.

CHAPTER XXIII

THE OLIVEKIAN TUKUKY

N commendation of the Rev. Dr. Oliver as a
learned and prolific writer on r'reemasonry, too
much can not be said. His name must exer be
clarttm ct vcncrabilc amonj^ the Craft. To the
study of the history and the philosophy of the
Institution he brought a store of scholarly ac-
quirements, and a familiarity with ancient and
modern literature which had been pos.scssed by no Masonic author
who had preceded him. Even Hutchinson, who certainly occupied
the central and most elevated point in the circle of Masonic students
and investigators who nourished in the i8th century, must yield
the palm for erudition to him whose knowledge of books was en-
cyclopedical.

In his numerous works on Freemasonry, of which it is difficult
to spt?cify the most important, the most learned, or the most inter-
esting, Dr. Oliver has raised the Institution of Masonry to a point
of elevation which it had never before reached, and to which its
most ardent admirers had never aspired to promote it.

He loved it for its social tendencies, for he was genial in his in-
clination and in his habits, and he cherished its principles of brotherly
love, for his heart was as e.vpanded as his mind. But he taught that
within its chain of union there was a fund of ethics and philosophy,
and a beautiful science of symbolism by which its ethics was devel-
oped to the initiated, which awakened scholars to the contemi)lation
of the fact never before so completely demonstrated, that .Speculative
Masonry claimed and was entitled to a prominent place among the
systems of human philosophy.

No longer could men say that Freemasonry was merely a club
of good fellows. Oliver had proved that it was a school of inquirers
after truth. No longer could they charge that its only design was
the cultivation of kindly feelings and the enjoyment of good cheer.

144

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

He had shown that it was engaged in the communication to its
disciples of abstruse doctrines of religion and philosophy in a method
by which it surpassed every other human scheme for imparting such
knowledge.

But, notwithstanding this eulogium, every word of which is
merited by its subject, and not one word of which would I erase, it
must be confessed that there were two defects in his character that
materially affect the value of his authority as an historian.

One was, that as a clergyman of the Church of England he was
controlled by that clerical esprit du corps which sought to make
every opinion subservient to his peculiar sectarian views. Thus, he
gave to every symbol, every myth, and every allegory the interpreta-
tion of a theologian rather than of a philosopher.

The other defect, a far more important one, was the indulgence
in an excessive credulity, which led him to accept the errors of tradi-
tion as the truths of history. In reading one of his narratives, it is
often difficult to separate the two elements. He so glosses the sober
facts of history with the fanciful coloring of legendary lore, that the
reader finds himself involved in an inextricable web of authentic
history intermixed with unsupported tradition, where he finds it im-
possible to discern the true from the fabulous.

The canon of criticism laid by Voltaire, that all historic certainty
that does not amount to a mathematical demonstration is merely
extreme probability, is far too rigorous. There are many facts that
depend only on contemporaneous testimony to which no more pre-
cise demonstration is applied, and which yet leave the strong impres-
sion of certainty on the mind.

But here, as in all other things, there is a medium — a measure of
moderation — and it would have been well if Dr. Oliver had observed
it. But not having done so, his theory is founded not simply on
tlic Lcgcjtd of the Craft, of which he takes but little account, but
on obscure legends and traditions derived by him, in the course of
his multifarious reading, sometimes from rabbinical and sometimes
from unknown sources.*

^ He divides the legends of Masonry into two classes, neither of which embraces the
incredible. He says that many of them arc founded in fact, and capable of unquestion-
able proof, whilst others are based on Jewish traditions, and consequently invested with
probability, while they equally inculcate and enforce the most solemn and important
truths.” — Historical Landmarks,” vol. i., p. 399.

THE OLIVERIAN THEORY

»45

The theoretical views of Oliver as to the origin and progress of
Masonry from a legendary point of view are so scattered in his
various works that it is difficult to follow them in a chronological
order. This is especially the case with the legends that relate to the
periods subsequent to the building of the Temple at Jerusalem. Up
to that era, the theory is enunciated in his A niijuitics of Freema-
sonry, upon which I shall principally depend in this condensation.
It Was, it is true, written in the earlier part of his life, and was his
first contribution to the literature of Masonry, but he has not in any
of his subsequent writings modified the views he there entertained.
This work may therefore be considered, as far as it goes, as an au-
thoritative exposition of his theory. Ilis llistorieal Latidmarks,
the most learned and most interesting of his works, if we excej)t,
perhaps, his History of Initiation, will furnish many commentaries
on what he has advanced in his Antiquities, l)ut as it is principally
devoted to an inquiry into the origin and interpretation of the sym-
bols and allegories of Masonry, we can not obtain from its pages a
connected view of his theory.

Preston had introduced his history of Masoniy by the assertion
that its foundations might be traced “ from the commencement of
the world.” Dr. Oliver is not content with so remote an origin, but
claims, on the authority of Masonic traditions, that the science “ ex-
isted before the creation of this globe, and was diffused amidst the
numerous systems with which the grand empyreum of universal
space is furnished.”^

But as he supposes that the globes constituting the universe
were inhabited long before the earth was peopled, and that these
inhabitants must have possessed a system of ethics founded on the
belief in God, which he says is nothing else but Speculative Masonry,
we may regard this opinion as merely tantamount to the expression
that truth is eternal.

Passing by this empyreal notion as a mere metaphysical idea, let
us begin with Oliver’s theory of the mundane origin of the science
of Masonry.

While in the Garden of Eden, Adam was taught that science
which is now termed Masonry.* After his fall, he forfeited the gift
of inspiration, but certainly retained a recollection of those degrees

1 “ Antiquities,” Period 1., ck. ii., p. 26. ^ Oliver, ** Antiquities,” 1., ii., 37,

10

146

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

of knowledge which are within the compass of human capacity,
and among them that speculative science now known as Freema-
sonry.*

These, in the course of time, he communicated to his children.
Of these children, Seth and his descendants preserved and culti-
vated the principles of Masonry which had been received from
Adam, but Cain and his progeny perverted and finally abandoned
it. However, before his complete secession, the latter, with some
of his descendants, reduced the knowledge he had received from
Adam to practice, and built a city which he called Hanoch. The
children of Lamech, the sixth in descent from Cain, also retained
some faint remains of Masonry, which they exerted for the benefit
of mankind.

It is in this way that Dr. Oliver attempts to reconcile the story
of the children of Lamech, as detailed in the Legend of the Craft,
with his theory, which really ousts Cain and all his descendants from
the pale of Masonry. The sons of Lamech were Masons, but their
Masonry had been greatly corrupted.

Dr. Oliver makes the usual division of Masonry into Operative
and Speculative. The former continued to be used by the Cainites
after they had lost all pretensions to the latter, and the first practical
application of the art was by them in the building of the city of
Hanoch, or, as it is called in Genesis, Enoch.

Thus Masonry was divided, as to its history, into two distinct
streams, that of the Operative and that of the Speculative; the
former cultivated by the descendants of Cain, the latter by those of
Seth. It does not, however, appear that the Operative branch was
altogether neglected by the Sethites, but was only made subordinate
to their Speculative science, while the latter was entirely neglected
by the Cainites, who devoted themselves exclusively to the Opera-
tive art. Finally they abandoned it and were lost in the corruptions
of their race, which led to their destruction in the flood.

The Speculative stream, however, flowed on uninterruptedly to
the time of Noah. Oliver docs not hesitate to say that Seth, “as-
sociating himself with the most virtuous men of his age, they formed
lodges and discussed the great principles of Masonry,” and were
called by their contemporaries the “ Sons of Light.”

Seth continued to preside over the Craft until the time of

J Oliver, “ Antiquities,” I. , ii., 40.

THE OLIVERIAN THEORY

147

Enoch, when he appointed that patriarch as his successor and Grand
Superintendent*

Enoch, as Grand Master, practiced Masonry with such effect that
God vouchsafed to reveal to him some peculiar mysteries, among
which was the sacred word, which continues to this day to form
an important portion of Masonic speculation, and for the preserva-
tion of which from the impending destruction of the world he con-
structed a subterranean edifice in which he concealed the sacred
treasure. He also erected two pillars, one of brass and one of stone,
on which he engraved the elements of the liberal sciences, including
Masonry.® Enoch then resigned the government of (he Craft to
Lamech, who afterward surrendered it to Noah, in whose hands it
remained until the occurrence of the flood.

Such is Oliver’s legendary narrative of the progress of Masoniy
from the creation to the flood. The Craft were organized into
lodges and were governed during that long period by only five
Grand Masters — Adam, Seth, Enoch, Lamech, and Noah.

To the Institution existing at that time he gives the appropri-
ate title of “Antediluvian Masonry,” and also that of “Primitive
Masonry.”

Of its character he says that it had but few symbols or ceremo-
nies, and was indeed nothing else but a system of morals or pure re-
ligion. Its great object was to preserve and cherish the promise
of a Messiah.

On the renewal of the world by the subsidence of the waters of
the deluge, it was found that though Enoch’s pillar of brass had
given way before the torrent of destruction, the pillar of stone had
been preserved, and by this means the knowledge of the state of
Masonry before the flood was transmitted to posterity.

Of the sons of Noah, all of whom had been taught i.he pure
system of Masonry by their father, Shem and his descendants alone
preserved it. Ham and Japhet having dispersed into Africa and
Europe, their descendants became idolaters and lost the true principles

1 Anderson gives the direction of the Craft, .after Seth, successively to Enoch,
Kainan, Mahalalccl, and Jared, whom Enoch succeeded. Const. 2d edit., p. 3.

2 This legend of the vault of Enoch was not known to the medieval Masons. It
forms, therefore, no part of the ritual of Ancient Craft Masonry. It is an invention of a
later period, and is recognized only by the more modern “ high degrees.” The form of
the legend as known to Anderson in 1723 was tliat he erected pillars on which the science
of Masonry was inscribed.

148

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

of Masonry, which consisted in the worship of the one true God.
The descendants of Japhet not only fell from the worship of God
and embraced the adoration of idols, but they corrupted the form
of Masonry by the establishment on its basis of a system of secret
rites which are known in history as the “ Mysteries.”

This secession of the children of Japhet from the true system
which their ancestor had received from Noah, has been called by
Dr. Oliver “ Spurious Freemasonry,” while that practiced by the
descendants of Shorn he styles “ Pure Freemasonry.”

Of these two divisions the Spurious Freemasons were more dis-
tinguished for their cultivation of the Operative art, while the Pure
Freemasons, although not entirely neglectful of Operative Masonry,
particularly devoted themselves to the preservation of the truths of
the Speculative science.

Shorn communicated the secrets of Pure Freemasonry to Abra-
ham, through whose descendants they were transmitted to Moses,
who had, however, been previously initiated into the Spurious
Masonry of the Egyptians.

Masonry, which had suffered a decay during the captivity of the
Israelites in Egypt, was revived in the wilderness by Moses, who
held a General Assembly, and, as the first act of the reorganized In-
stitution, erected the Tabernacle.

From this time Masonry was almost exclusively confined to the
Jewish nation, and was propagated through its judges, priests, and
kings to the time of Solomon.

When Solomon was about to erect the Temple at Jerusalem, he
called to his assistance the artists of Tyre, who were disciples of the
Spurious Masonry and were skillful architects, as members of the
Dionysiac fraternity of artificers.

By this association of the Tyrian Masons of the spurious order
with the Jewish workmen who practiced the pure system, the two
classes were united, and King Solomon reorganized the system of
Freemasonry as it now exists.

For the subsequent extension of Masonry throughout the world
and its establishment in England, Dr. Oliver adopts the legendary
histories of both Anderson and Preston, accepting as genuine every
mythical narrative and every manuscript. From the Leland manu-
script he quotes as if he were citing an authority universally admitted
to be authentic. Receiving the narrative of the General Assembly

THE OLIVERIAN THEORY

149

which was called at York by Prince Edwin as an event of whose
occurrence there canbe no possible doubt, he claims that the Halli-
well poem is a veritable copy of the Constitutions enacted by that
Assembly.

On the subject of the religious character of Freemasonry, Dr,
Oliver in the main agrees with Hutchinson, that it is a Christian
Institution, and that all its myths and symbols have a Christian in-
terpretation. He differs from Hutchinson in this, that instead of
limiting the introduction of the Christian element to the time of
Christ, he supposes it to have existed in it, from the earliest f imes.
Even the Masonry of the patriarchs he believes to have been based
upon the doctrine of a promised Messiah.

But his views will be best expressed in his own language, in a
passage contained in the concluding pages of his Historical Land-
marks: “The conclusion is therefore obvious. If the lectures of
Freemasonry refer only to events which preceded the advent of
Christ, and if those events consist exclusively of admitted types of
the Great Deliverer, who was preordained to become a voluntary
sacrifice for the salvation of mankind, it will clearly follow that the
Order was originally instituted in accordance with the true principles
of the Christian religion ; and in all its consecutive steps bears an
unerring testimony to the truth of the facts and of their typical
reference to the founder of our faith.”

He has said, still more emphatically, in a preceding part of the
same work, that “ Freemasonry contains scarcely a single ceremony,
symbol, or historical narration which does not apply to this glorious
consummation of the divine economy of the Creator towards his
erring creatures ” ; by which economy he, of course, means the
Christian dispensation and the Christian scheme of redemption.

If in the multifarious essays in which he has treated the subject
Dr. Oliver meant to announce the proposition that in the very ear-
liest ages of the world there prevailed certain religious truths of
vast importance lo the welfare and happiness of mankind, which had
been communicated either by direct inspiration or in some other
mode, and which have been traditionally transmitted to the present
day, which truths principally consisted in an assertion of a belief in
God and in a future life, such a proposition will hardly meet with
a denial.

But if he also meant to contend that the transmission of these

prehistoric masonry

truths to posterity and to the present ag’e was comniitted to and
preserved hy 3n order of men, <in assut;iai.iL/iii va
form and features have been retained in the Freemasonry of the
present day, it will, I imagine, be admitted that such a proposition is
wholly untenable. And yet this appears to be the theoiy that was
entertained by this learned but too credulous scholar.

CHAPTER XXIV

TIIK TEMPLE LEGEND

E Temple Legend is a name that I give to
that legend or tradition which traces the origin
of Freemasonry as an organized institution to
the Temple of Solomon and to the builders,
Jewish and Tyrian, who were employed in the
construction of that edifice.

This is the legend that is now almost uni-
versally accepted by the great mass of the Masonic fraternity. Per-
haps nine out of ten of the Freemasons of the present day — that is
to say, all those who receive tradition with the undoubting faith
that should be given to history only — conscientiously believe that
Freemasonry, as we now see it, organized into lodges and degrees,
with Grand Masters, Masters, and Wardens, with the same ritual
observances, was first devi.sed by Solomon, King of Israel, and as-
sumed its position as a secret society during the period when that
monarch was engaged in the construction of the Temple on Mount
Moriah.*

This theory is not a new one. It was probably at first sug-
gested by the passage in the Legend of Ike Craft which briefly
describes the building of the Temple and the confirmation by Solo-
mon of the charges which his father David had given to the Masons.

There can be no doubt from this passage in the Legend that the
Temple of Solomon occupied a prominent place in the ideas of the
mediaeval Masons. How much use they made of it in their eso-
teric ceremonies we, of course, are unable to learn. It is, however, a

^ In a sermon by the Rev. A. N. Keij^win, at the dedication of the Masonic Temple
in Philadelphia (1873), we find the following passage : “ Historically, Masonry dates from
the building of the Temple of Solomon. No one at the present day disputes this claim.*’
I cite this out of hundreds of similar passages in other writers, to show how universal
among such educated Masons is the belief in the Temple theory. It is, in fact, very true
that only those scholars who have made the history of the Order an especial study have
any doubts upon the subject.

,50 PREHISTORIC MASONRY

truths to posterity and to the present age was committed to and
preserved by an order of men, an association, or a society whose
form and features have been retained in the Freemasonry of the
present day, it will, I imagine, be admitted that such a proposition is
wholly untenable. And yet this appears to be the theory that was
entertained by this learned but too credulous scholar.

CHAPTER XXIV

THE TEMI'I.E LEGEND

HE Temple Legend is a name that I give to
that legend or tradition which traces the origin
of Freemasonry as an organized institution to
the Temple of Solomon and to the builders,
Jewish and Tyrian, who were employed in the
construction of that edifice.

This is the legend that is now almost uni-
versally accepted by the great mass of the Masonic fraternity. Per-
haps nine out of ten of the Freemasons of the present day — that is
to say, all those who receive tradition with the undoubting faith
that should be given to history only — conscientiously believe that
Freemasonry, as we now see it, organized into lodges and degrees,
with Grand Masters, Masters, and Wardens, with the same ritual
observances, was first devised by Solomon, King of Israel, and as-
sumed its position as a .secret society during the period when that
monarch was engaged in the construction of the Temple on Mount
Moriah.'

This theory is not a new one. It was probably at first sug-
gested by the passage in the Legend of the Craft which briefly
describes the building of the Temple and the confirmation by Solo-
mon of the charges which his father David had given to the Masons.

There can be no doubt from this passage in the Legend that the
Temple of Solomon occupied a prominent place in the ideas of the
mediaeval Masons. How much use they made of it in their eso-
teric ceremonies we, of course, are unable to learn. It is, however, a

^ In a sermon by the Rev. A. N. Keigwin, at the dedication of the Masonic Temple
in Philadelphia (1873), we find the following passage : “ Historically, Masonry dates from
the building of the Temple of Solomon. No one at the present day disputes this claim.”
I cite this out of hundreds of similar passages in other writers, to show how universal
among such educated Masons is the belief in the Temple theory. It is, in fact, very true
that only those scholars who have made the history of the Order an especial study have
any doubts upon the subject.

151

154

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

as connected with the origin of Freemasonry is to be found in the
Cooke MS. and is in the following words :

“ What tyme that the children of isrl dwellid in Egypte they
Icrnyd the craft of masonry. And afterward they were driven
out of Egypte they come into the lond of bihest (promise) and is
now callyd Jcrl’m (Jerusalem) and it was ocupied and chsrgys
yholde. And the makyng of Salomonis tempull that kyng David
began. Kyng David lovyd well masons and he gaf hem rygt nye as
thay be nowe. And at the makyng of the temple in Salomonis
tyme as hit is seyd in the bibull in the iij boke of Regum in teicio
Regum capito quinto (i Kings, Cap. 5) That Salomon had iiij score
thowsand masons at his werke. And the kyngis sone of Tyry was
his master mason, And (in) other cronyclos hit is seyd and in olde
bokys of masonry that Salomon confirmed the chargys that David
his fadir had geve to masons. And Salomon hymself taught hem
here (their) manors (customs) but lityll diflferans fro the maners
that now ben usyd. And fro thens this worthy sciens was brought
into Fraunce and into many other regions.” ^

The Dowland MS., whose supposed date is some fifty or sixty
years later than the Cooke, gives substantially the same Legend, but
with the additional circumstances, that David learned the charges
that he gave, from Egypt, where they had been made by Euclid ;
that he added other charges to these ; that Solomon sent into vari-
ous countries for Masons, whom he gathered together ; that the
name of the King of Tyre was I ram, and that of his son, who was
Solomon’s chief Master, was Aynon ; and finally that he was a Mas-
ter of Geometry and of carving and graving.

In this brief narrative, the first edition of which dates back as
far as the close of the 15th century, we see the germs of the full-
er Legend which prevails among the Craft at the present day.
That there was an organization of Masons with “Charges and Man-
ners,” that is, laws and customs at the building of the Temple of
Jerusalem, and that King Solomon was assisted in the work by
the King of Tyre and by a skillful artist who had been sent to him
by Hiram, arc the two most important points in the theory of the
Temple origin of Masonry, and both arc explicitly stated in these
early legends. We next find the Legend repeated, but with more

^ Cooke MS., lines

THE TEMPLE LEGEND

155

elaborate details, most of which, however, are taken from the Book
of Kings as referred to in the Legend of the Craft by Anderson,
in the first edition of the Constitutions, and with a few additional
particulars in the second edition of the same work.

Preston, the next important Masonic writer after Anderson, docs
not indeed relate or refer to the Legend in any part of his Illustra-
tions of Masonry, but the theory that Masonry found its origin at
the Temple is to be deduced from the historical traditions contained
in the third lecture of the Prestonian system, from which Webb
derived it, and has perpetuated it among American Masons to the
present day.

Hutchinson, who followed Preston, although, as has been seen, he
inclined to a remoter origin of the Order, repeatedly refers in his
Spirit of Masonry, and especially in his Sixth Lecture, to the Tem-
ple of Solomon as the place where “ the true craftsmen were proved
in their work,” and where Solomon distinguished them into different
ranks, giving to each appropriate signs and secret tokens, and organ-
ized them for the first time into an association of builders, the pred-
ecessors of the Masons being previous to that time sages who,
though acquainted with the principles of geometry and architect-
ure, were engaged solely in philosophical speculations. In this way
Hutchinson gave the weight of his influence in favor of the Legend
which ascribed the origin of operative and speculative Masonry to
Solomon and to his Temple, although his views on this subject dif-
fer from those of other writers.

Dr. Oliver, one of the latest and the most prolific of the legend-
ary writers, although in his own theory he seeks to trace the origin
of Freemasonry to a much more remote antiquity, yet speaks so
much in detail in most of his works, but principally in his A ntiqui-
ties and in his Historical Landmarks, of the system which was for
the first time organized at the building of the Solomonic Temple,
that most readers who do not closely peruse his writings and carefully
scan his views are under the impression that he had fully adopted
the Legend of the Temple origin, and hence his authority has been
lent to the popular belief.

Existing, as may be supposed from the analogy of a similar
legend of the Compagnons de la Tour, among the craftsmen of the
Middle Ages ; transmitted to the Revival era of the beginning of
the 1 8th century, and since then taught in all the rituals and sus-

ISO PREHISTORIC MASONRY

tained by the best Masonic writers up to a recent period, this Legend
of the Temple origin of Freemasonry, or, in plainer words, the the-
ory that Freemasonry received at the time of the building of the
Temple of Jerusalem that form and organization which it holds at
the present day, has been and continues to be a dogma of faith im-
plicitly believed by the masses of the fraternity.

It is well, therefore, that we should now see what precisely is the
form and substance of this popular Legend. As received at the
present day by the body of the Craft, it may be stated as follows :

When Solomon was about to commence the building of his
Temple, his own people not being expert or experienced architects,
he applied to his friend Hiram, the monareh of the neighboring
kingdom of Tyre, for assistance. Hiram, in complying with his re-
quest, sent to him a numerous body of workmen, and at their head
a distinguished artist called, as a mark of distinction, Hiram Abif,^
equivalent to the title, “ Hiram his father,” who is described as “a
cunning man endued with understanding.”

King Solomon then proceeded to organize the institution into a
form, which has been adopted as the model of that whieh exists at
the present day in every country where Freemasonry exists. The
Legend that contains the classification of the workmen at the Tem-
ple, which has been adopted in the rituals of modern Masonry, is
derived partly from Scripture and partly from tradition. An ex-
amination of it will not be inappropriate.

There are two accounts, slightly conflicting, in the Scriptural
narrative. In the Second Book of Chronicles, chapter ii., verses 17
and 18, are the following words :

“And Solomon numbered all the strangers that were in the land
of Israel, after the number wherewith David his father had numbered
them, and there were found an hundred and fifty thousand and three
thousand and six hundred.

“ And he set three score and ten thousand of them to be bear-
ers of burdens and four score thousand to be hewers in the moun-
tains and three thousand six hundred overseers to set the people
at work.”

The same numerical details are given in the second verse of the

^ Of Hiram Abif a more detailed account will be given when we come to consider the
legend connected with him.

THE TEMPLE LEGEND

157

same chapter. Again in the First Book of Kings, chapter v., verses
13 and 14, it is said :

“ And King Solomon raised a levy out of all Israel ; and the
levy was thirty thousand men.

“And he sent them to Lebanon, ten thousand a month by
courses ; a month they were in Lebanon, and two months at home :
and Adoniram was over the levy.”

In the Legend of the Craft this enumeration was not strictly
adhered to. The Cooke MS. says that there were “ four seore thou-
sand masons at work,” out of whom three thousand were chosen as
Masters of the work. The Landsdowne MS. says that the number
of Masons was twenty-four thousand. But this number must have
been a clerical error of the copyist in which he is followed only by
the Antiquity MS. All the other manuscripts agree with the Dow-
land and make the number of Masons eighty thousand, including
the three thousand overseers or Masters of the Work.

This statement does not accord with that which is in the Book
of Kings nor with that in Chronicles, and yet it is all that the Le-
gend of the Craft furnishes.

Dr. Anderson, who was the first author after the Revival who
made an enumeration and classification of the workmen at the I'em-
ple, abandoned the Legend altogether and made up his account from
the Bible. This he published in the first edition of the Constitu-
tions and tempered it with some traditional information, whence de-
rived I do not know. But it is on this classification by Anderson
that all the rituals that have been in use since his time are framed.
Hence he may justly be considered as the author of the Legend of
the Workmen at the Temple ; for notwithstanding the historical
element which it contains, derived from Scripture, there are so many
traditional interpolations that it properly assumes a legendary char-
acter.

Anderson’s account is that there were employed on the building
three thousand six hundred Master Masons, to conduct the work
according to Solomon’s directions ; eighty thousand hewers of stone
in the mountains who he says were Fellow Craftsmen, and seventy
thousand laborers who were not Masons, besides the levy of thirty
thousand who worked under the superintendence of Adoniram,
making in all one hundred and eighty-three thousand six hundred.
For this great number, Anderson says Solomon was “ much obliged ”

158

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

to Hiram, King of Tyre, who sent his Masons and carpenters to
Jerusalem.

Over this immense number of builders and laborers, Anderson
says that King Solomon presided as Grand Master at Jerusalem,
King Hiram in the same capacity at Tyre, and Hiram Abif was the
Master of Work.

Fifteen years afterward, Anderson, in the second edition of his
Conslitiitions somewhat modified these views and added certain
other particulars. He promotes Hiram Abif from the position of
Magister Operis or Master of the Work, to that of Deputy Grand
Master in Solomon's absence and to that of Senior Grand Warden
in his presence. He also says :

“ Solomon partitioned the Fellow Crafts into certain Lodges with
a Master and Wardens in each ; that they might receive commands
in a regular manner, might take care of their tools and jewels,
might be paid every week, and be duly fed and clothed, etc., and the
Fellow Crafts took care of their succession by educating Entered
Apprentices.” ^

Anderson adds in a marginal note that his authority for this
statement is “the traditions of old Masons, who talk much of these
things.”

If such a tradition ever existed, it is now lost, for it can not be
found in any of the old manuscripts which arc the record of the
Masonic traditions. It is admitted that similar usages were prac-
ticed by the Operative Masons of the Middle Ages, but we have no
historical authority, nor even legendary, outside of Anderson’s work,
for tracing them to the Temple of Jerusalem.

Out of these materials the ritualists have manufactured a Legend ;
which exists in all the Masonic rituals and which must have been
constructed in London, at a very early period after the Revival, to
have secured such an universal acceptance among all the nations
who derived their Masonry from the Grand Lodge of England.
The Legend of the Temple origin of Masoniy, as generally accepted
l)y the Craft at the present day, is that there were one hundred and
fifty-three thousand, three hundred workmen employed in the con-
struction of the Temple. Three thousand three hundred of these
were overseers, who were among as well as over the Craft, but who at

^ “ Constitutions,’* 2d edit., p. 13.

THE TEMPLE LEGEND

*59

the completion of the Temple were promoted to the rank of Master
Masons. The remaining workmen were divided into eighty thou-
sand Fellow Crafts and seventy thousand Entered Apprentices,

Three Grand Masters presided over the large number of work,
men, namely, Solomon, King of Israel ; Hiram, King of Tyre, and
Fliram Abif. These were the only persons who at the building of
the Temple were Master Masons and in possession of the secrets of
the Third Degree.

The statement in the ritual is that the workmen were divided
into Lodges. The Lodge of Master Masons, for there could be only
one of that degree, consisted of three members ; the Lodges of Fellow
Crafts, of which there must have been si.xtecn thousand, was com-
posed of five members each ; and the Lodges of Entered Appren-
tices, of which there must have been ten thousand, was composed
of seven each.

But as this statement has neither historical authority nor logical
possibility to support it, it must be considered, as it undoubtedly
was originally intended to be considered, merely as a reference to
the symbolic character of those sacred numbers in Masonry — thii.-e,
five, and seven. In the same spirit of symbolic reference the steps of
the winding stairs leading to the middle chamber were divided into
a series of three, five, and seven, with the addition in the English
ritual of nine and eleven. All of this is, therefore, to be rejected
from the class of legends and referred to that of .symbols.

Viewing then this Legend or theory of the origin of Masonry at
the Temple, tracing it from the almost nude state in which it is pre-
sented in the Legend of the Crafl through the e.xtrancous cloth-
ing which was added by Anderson and I sui)pose by Desaguliers, to
the state of tinsel ornamentation in which it appears in the modern
ritual, we will come to the following conclusion :

In the Legend of the Craft we find only the following state-
ment : That King Solomon was assisted in the building of the Tem-
ple by the King of Tyre, who sent him materials for the edifice and
a skillful artist, on whose name scarcely any two of them agree, and
whom Solomon appointed as his Master of the Work ; that Solomon
invited Masons from all lands and having collected them together
at Jerusalem, organized them into a body by giving them a system
of laws and customs for their government. N ow, most of these facts
are sustained by the historical authority of the Books of Kings and

i6o PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Chronicles, and those that arc not have the support of extreme
probability.

That Solomon, King of Israel, built a Temple in Jerusalem is an
historical fact that can not be doubted or denied. Richard Carlilc,
it is true, says, “ My historical researches have taught me that that
which has been called Solomon’s Temple never existed upon earth ;
that a nation of people called Israelites never existed upon earth,
and that the supposed history of the Israelites and their Temple is
nothing more than an allegory.”*

But the measure of the moral and mental stature of Carlile has
long been taken, and even among the most skeptical critics he re-
mains alone in his irrational incredulity.

Doubtless there are Oriental exaggerations in respect to the
amount of money expended and the number of workmen employed
on the building, which have been overestimated. But the simple,
naked fact that King Solomon built a temple remains uncontra-
dicted, and is as historically true and undoubted as that of the con-
struction of any other public edifice in antiquity.

It is equally historical that the King of Tyre gave assistance to
Solomon in carrying out his design. However fiercely the skeptics
may have attacked certain portions of the Bible, the Books of Kings
and Chronicles have been placed upon the footing of other ancient
historical records and subjected to the same canons of criticism.

Now wc are distinctly told that Hiram, King of Tyre, “sent
masons and carpenters to David to build him a house ; ” * we learn
subsequently that the same Hiram (some say his .son) was equally
friendly with Solomon, and although there is no distinct mention
cither in Kings or Chronicles that he sent workmen to Jerusalem,*
except his namesake, the artificer, yet we may infer that he did .so,
from the friendship of the two kings, from the need of Solomon for
expert workmen, and from the fact which we learn from the First
Book of Kings, that the stones for the edifice were hewn by “ Sol-
omon’s builders and Hiram’s builders and the Giblim.” The author-
ized version, on what authority 1 know not, translates this word
“ Giblim ” as “stone-squarers.” They were, however, the inhabitants

^ “ Miinual of Freemasons/’ Part I., p. 4. l Chronicles, xiv., i.

•^Wc arc told in i Kings, v., and it is repeated in 2 Chron., ii., that Hiram sent his
workmen to Lebanon to cut down trees. The timber they were to carry to Joppa, where
Solomon was to receive it, and, presumably, the workmen were to return to the forest.

THE TEMPLE LEGEND

i6t

of the city of Gebal, called by the Greeks, Byblos, which was the
principal seat of the worship and the mysteries of Adonis. The
inhabitants were celebrated for their skill in stone-carving and in
shipbuilding.

Thus we see that there were, according to the Scriptural account,
three classes of Masons engaged at the building of the Temple.
First there were the workmen of Solomon : the.se were of the “ four
score thousand hewers in the mountains ” ' who were taken by Sol-
omon from ‘‘the strangers that were in the land of Israel”* — men
whom Dr. Adam Clarke supposes to have been not pure Israelites,
but proselytes to the Jewish religion so far as to renounee idolatry
and to keep the precepts of Noah. But we must believe that among
these four score thousand strangers were to be enumerated the work-
men who came from Tyre, or there will be no place allotted to them
in the distribution in the First Book of Kings. The three thousand
three hundred who were “ over the work,” are said to have been
chief ofiicers of Solomon and therefore Israelites, and the remaining
seventy thousand were mere laborers or bearers of burden — a class for
whom Solomon need not have been indebted to the King of Tyre.

Secondly, there were the workmen of Hiram, King of Tyre.
These I have already said were probably, and indeed necessarily,
included in the number of four score thousand strangers or foreign-
ers. The words in the original are anoshim gherim, men who are
foreigners, for Gesenius defines the word gherim, to be "sojourners,
strangers, foreigners, men living out of their country.”*

Thirdly, we have the Giblim, the inhabitants of the city of Gebal
in Phoenicia, who came to Jerusalem, invited there by Solomon, to
assist in the construction of the Temple, and who must also be reck-
oned among the four score thousand strangers.

Thus the Legend of the Craft is justified in saying that Solomon
“sent after Masons into divers countries and of divers landes,”
and that he had “ four score workers of stone and were all named
Masons.” For these were the foreigners or sojourners, whom he
found in Jerusalem, many of whom had probably come there on his
invitation, and the Tyrians who had been sent to him by King
Hiram, and the Phcenicians, whom he had called out of Gebal on
account of their well-known skill in stone-cutting. And all of these

1 1 Kings, V., 13.

II

^2 Chron. ii., 17.

^Lexicon, in

i 62

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

amounted to eighty thousand, the number stated in the Books of
Kings and Chronicles, and just the number mentioned in the
Legend of the Craft.

It will be seen that the Legend of the Craft takes no notice
of the levy of thirty thousand who worked under Adoniram on
Mount Lebanon, nor of the seventy thousand who were employed
as bearers of burdens. As the former were merely wood-cutters
and the latter common laborers, the legend does not class them
among the Masons, any more than it does the three thousand three
hundred who were, according to the Biblical account, officers of the
court of Solomon, who were appointed merely to overlook the
Masons and to see that they worked faithfully ; perhaps also to pay
them their wages, or to distribute their food, and to supervise gen-
erally their conduct.

In all this, the Legend of the Craft differs entirely from the
modern rituals, which have included all these classes, and therefore
reckon that at the building of the Temple there were one hundred
and fifty-three thousand three hundred Masons, instead of eighty
thousand. The Legend is certainly more in accord with the author-
ity of the Bible than are the rituals.

The Legend of the Craft is also justified in saying that Sol-
omon organized these Masons into what might be called a guild, that
is, a society or corporation,’ by giving them “ charges and manners ’’
— in other words, a code of laws and regulations. On this question
the Bible account is silent, but it amounts to an extreme probability,
the nearest approximation to historical evidence, that there must
have been some regulations enacted for the government of so large
a number of workmen. It is also equally probable that to avoid
confusion these workmen must have been divided into sections, or
what, in modern parlance, would be called “gangs,” engaged in
various parts of the building and in different employments. There
must have been a higher and more skillful class occupied in directing
the works of these several sections ; there must have been others less
skillful and yet competent to discharge the duties of stone-cutters
and layers, and there must have been another and still inferior class
who were only acquiring the rudiments of the profession.

Founded on these evident propositions, Anderson made his

^ The Latin original of the Krause MS. calls it “ Societas architedonica ” — an archi-

tcciuial society.

THE TEMPLE LEGEND

163

division of the workmen at the Temple into the three classes of
Master Masons, Fellow Crafts, and Entered Apprentices. But he
abandoned the Legend in calling the three thousand six hundred
officers of King Solomon Master Masons and making the whole
number, exclusive of the seventy thousand laborers and the thirty
thousand wood-cutters on Mount Lebanon, eighty-three thousand,
and afterward stating that there were one hundred and eighty-three
thousand Masons in all — a contradiction of his own previous state-
ment as well as of the Legend of the Ceaft which states the whole
number of Masons to have been eighty thousand.

The modem ritual may, however, be considered as having adopted
the Temple of Jerusalem as a type of that abstruse symbol of a
spiritual temple, which forms, as will be hereafter seen, one of t he
most important and most interesting symbolic lessons on which the
philosophy of Speculative Masonry depends. But viewing it as an
historical statement, it is devoid of all claims to credence. The facts
stated in the ritual are an outgrowth of those contained in the
Legend of the Craft which it has greatly altered by unauthorized
additions, and it is in entire contradiction to those given in the
Books of Kings and Chronicles,

The claim that Freemasonry took its origin at the building of
the Temple is without any historical authority. The Legend of
the Craft, upon which, to be consistent, all Masonic rituals should
be founded, assigns its origin equally to two other periods — to that
of the building of the Tower of Babel, when Nimrod was Grand
Master, and to Egypt under the geometrician Euclid. Why the
Temple of Solomon was exclusively selected by the modern Masons
as the incunabulum of their Order can be only conjccturally ac-
counted for.

I am not unwilling to believe, for reasons that have been already
assigned, that the Operative or Stone Masons of the Middle Ages
had some tradition or Legend of the origin of the Institution at the
Temple of Solomon. If so, I am inclined to attribute their selection
of this in preference to any other stately edifice of antiquity to these
reasons.

The mediaeval Masons were, as an association of builders, most
intimately connected with the ecclesiastics of that age. Their prin-
cipal home at one time was in the monasteries, they worked under
the immediate patronage and supervision of bishops and abbots, and

,6^ prehistoric masonry

were chiefly engaged in the construction of cathedrals and other
religious edifices. Private houses at that early period were mostly
built of wood, and the building of them was the business of carpen-
ters. The treow-wyr-hta, literally the tree-workman, in modern
phrase the carpenter, was one of the most important handicrafts of
the early Anglo-Saxons. He was the builder of their ships as well
as of their houses, and the trade is frequently spoken of in ancient
Saxon documents. He was constantly employed in the construction
of vessels for the carrying on of trade, or the erection of dwellings
for the residences of the people.

To the stone-masons was exclusively entrusted the nobler voca-
tion of building religious edifices.

Imbued, from their connection with the priests as well as from
their peculiar employment, with religious sentiments, they naturally
looked for the type of the great cathedrals which they were erecting,
not to Pagan temples, however splendid might be their architecture,
but rather to that Jewish cathedral which had been consecrated on
Mount Moriah to the worship of the true God. Hence the brief
notice of that building in the Legend of the Craft was either the
suggestion of that esoteric Legend of the Temple which has not, from
its necessarily oral character, been handed down to us, or if the writ-
ten Legend was posterior in time to the oral one, then it was a brief
record of it.

But I do not believe that this lost Legend of the stone-masons
was ever intended to be historical. It was simply a symbol to illus-
trate the idea that the Temple at Jerusalem was the type of all
Christian cathedrals.

This symbolic Legend, which I suppose to have existed among
the stone-masons of the Middle Ages, was probably lost before the
revival of Masonry in the year 1717. Anderson therefore framed
a new Legend out of the Legend of the Crafty the Scriptural ac-
count, and his own invention.

Upon this Andersonian Legend, simple in the first edition of the
Constitutions, but considerably expanded in the second, the modern
ritualists have framed another Legend, which in many important
details differs from Anderson’s, from the Legend of the Craft, and
from the account in the Bible.

This is the Legend now accepted and believed by the great body
of the Craft to be historically true. That it has no claim to histori-

THE TEMPLE LEGEND 1O5

cal credence is evident from the fact that it is, in its most important
details, unauthorized, and in fact contradicted by the Scriptural ac-
count, which is the only authentic memorial that we have of the
transactions that took place at the building of the Solomonic
Temple.

And moreover, the long period that elapsed between the build-
ing of the Temple, a thousand years before the Christian era, and the
time, not earlier than the 3d century after Christ, during which we
have no traces of the existence of such an architectural association
connected with Jewish Masons and transmitted from them to the
Christian architects, presents an extensive lacuna which must be
filled by authentic records, before we can be enabled, as scholars in-
vestigating truth, to consent to the theory that the Freemasons of
the present day arc, by uninterrupted successions, the representatives
of the Masons who wrought at King Solomon’s Temple.

The Legend of the ritual is, in fact, a symbol — but a very im-
portant and a very interesting one, and as such will be fully discussed
when the subject of Masonic symbols comes to be treated in a sub-
sequent part of this work.

CHAPTER XXV

LEGEND OF THE DIONYSIAC ARTIFICERS

E now approach a very interesting topic in the
legendary history of Masonry. The reader has
already seen in the last chapter that the Masons
of the kingdom of Tyre were invited to join
with the Jewish builders in the construction of
the Temple. Who these Tyrian Masons were,
what was their character, whence they came,
and what was the influence exerted by them on the Jewish work-
men with whom they were united in a common labor, are questions
which can only be solved by a reference to what may be called the
Le^i^cnd of the Dionysiac A rtificcrs.

This Legend was entirely unknown to the old Masons of the
Middle Ages. There is no reference to it in any of the manuscripts.
The brief allusion to the Dionysiacs of Asia Minor in Robison's
anti-Masonic work does not necessarily connect them with the Ma-
sons of King Solomon.^

The first writer who appears to have started the theory that the
Masons sent by King Hiram to the King of Israel were members
of the Dionysiac fraternity, is Sir David Brewster, who presented the
Legend under the guise of an historic statement in the History of
Freemasonry, published in the beginning of this century, and the
authorship of which, although it was actually written by him, has
been falsely attributed to Alexander Lawrie, the bookseller of Edin-
burgh and at the time the Grand Secretary of the Grand Lodge of
Scotland. Brewster may therefore, I think, be fairly considered as
the original framer of the Legend.

The origin of the mystical and architectural society which Brew-

** Proofs of a Conspiracy,” p. 20.
156

LEGEND OF THE DIONYSIAC ARTIFICERS 167

ster closely connects with the Masons of the Temple may be given
in almost his own words ; ‘

Between 1055 and 1044 years before Christ, or something more
than half a century anterior to the building of the Temple, the in-
habitants of Attica, complaining of the narrowness of their territory
and the unfruitfulncss of the soil, went in quest of more extensive
and fertile settlements. Being joined by a number of the inhabi-
tants of the surrounding provinces of Greece, they sailed to Asia
Minor and drove out the inhabitants of that portion of the western
coast from Phoccea in the north to Miletus in the st'uth. To this
narrow strip of land they gave the name of Ionia, because the great-
est number of the adventurers were natives of that Grecian state.
After partly subduing and partly expelling the original inhabitants,
they built several towns, of which one of the princlinil was Teos.

Prior to this emigration the Greeks had made considerable prog-
ress in the arts and sciences, which the adventurc'rs carried with
them into their new territory, and they introduced into Ionia the
Mysteries of Pallas and Dionysus, before they had become corrupted
by the licentiousness of the Athenians.

Especially popular, not only in Ionia but throughout Asia Mim)r,
were the Mysteries of Dionysus, the Roman Bacchus. In these,
as in all the religious Mysteries of antiquity, there was a funereal
legend.

In the Dionysiac Mysteries the legend of initiation recounted or
represented the death of the demi-god Dionysus, the search for and
discovery of his body, and his subsequent restoration to life.

In the initiations the candidate was made to represent in his
own person, the events connected with the slaying of the hero-god.
After a variety of preparatory ceremonies, intended to call forth all
his fortitude and courage, the aphanism or mystical death of Diony-
sus — torn to pieces by the Titans — was presented in a dramatic form
and followed by the confinement or burial of the candidate, as the
representative of Dionysus in the pastos, couch, or coffin, all of which
constituted the first part of the ceremony of initiation. Then began
the search for the remains of Dionysus, which was continued amid
scenes of the greatest confusion and tumult, until at last, the search
having been successful, the morning was turtied to joy, light sue-

' Lawric’s “ History of Freemasonry,” ist edit., p. 27.

l68

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

ceeded to darkness, and the candidate was invested with the knowl-
edge of the secret doctrine of the Mysteries — the belief in the exist-
ence of one God and a future and immortal state.'

Now these Mysteries of Dionysus were very intimately con-
nected with a society of architects. As this association, according
to the Legend which we are now considering, had much to do with
the organization of Masonry at the Solomonic Temple, it is neces-
sary to take a brief notice of its origin and character.

It is an hi.storical fact that at the time of the building of the
Temple at Jerusalem, there existed at Tyre as well as in other parts
of Asia Minor an association known as the Dionysian Architects,
because they joined to the practice of operative architecture the ob-
servance of the religious rites of the Dionysiac Mysteries.

It has been already stated that the priests of Dionysus had de-
voted themselves to the study and the practice of architecture,
and about one thousand years before the Christian era, or at the
time that King Solomon began the construction of the Temple at
Jerusalem, had emigrated from Greece and established themselves
as a society or fraternity of builders in Asia Minor, and devoted
themselves to the construction of temples and other public edifices.®

Hiram, who then reigned over the kingdom of Tyre, and who
from his cultivation of the sciences has been styled the Augustus of
his age, is said to have patronized these religious builders, and to
have employed them in the magnificent works by which he adorned
and strengthened his capital.

The internal government and the usages of this association were
very similar to those exhibited by the Masonic society in the present
day, and which the legendary theory supposes to have prevailed
among the builders of the Solomonic Temple.

The fraternity was divided into communities called synoeciac,**
having houses or dwellings in common, which might well be com-

^ Lc meurtre dc Bacchus mis mort et d^chir^ cn pieces par Ics Titans, ct son retour
h la vie, ont ^'t^ le sujet d^cxplications allegoriques tout-k-fait analogues A celles que Ton
ii donni^es de rcnl^vemcnt de Proserpine ct du meurtre d’Osiris. — Sylvestre de Tracy in
Sainte-Croix’s “ Recherches sur les Mysteres du Paganisme,*’ T. ii., p. 86.

Chandler says “ the Dionysiasts were artificers or contractors for the Asiatic thea-
ters, and were incorporated and settled at Teos, under the Kings of Pergamum.** — ** Travels
in Asia Minor,” vol. i., ch. xxviii., p. 123. [This was at a later period than the era of the
Temple.]

® “ Antiquitates Asiaticae Christianam Aeram Antccedentes,” p. 139.

LEGEND OF THE DIONYSIAC ARTIFICERS

169

pared to the Masonic Lodges of the present day. Their plans of meet-
ing were also called in Greek koina, which signifies communitic's,
and each received a distinctive name, just as our Lodges do. Thus
Chishull speaks in his account of the pre-Christian antiquities of
Asia of a koinon ton Attaliston, or a “ community of the Attalista ,”
so called, most probably in honor of King Attains, who was their
patron.'

There was an annual festival, like the General Assembly or
Grand Lodge of the Masons, which was held with great pomp and
ceremony. Chandler says (but he speaks of a later period, when
they were settled at Teo.s) that it was the custom of their sa nod to
hold yearly a General Assembly, at which they sacrificed to the gods
and poured out libations to their deceased benefactors. They like-
wise celebrated games in honor of Bacchus, when the crowns which
had been bestowed by any of the communities as rewards of merit
were announced by heralds, and the wearers of them were applauded
by the other members. These meetings, he adds, were solemnized
with great pomp and festivity.*

The same traveler mentions a long decree made by one of the
communities in honor of its magistrates, whicli he found inscribed
on a slab in a Turkish burying-ground. The thanks of the com-
munity with a crown of olives are given as a recompense to these
officers for their great liberality and troulde while in office ; and to
perpetuate their memory and to e.xcite an emulation of their merit,
it is besides enacted that the decrees be engraved, but at their ex-
pense, “so desirable,” says Chandler, “ was the testimony to the in-
dividuals and so frugal the usage in bestowing it.” ®

Of course as an architectural association the Dionysiacs used
many of the implements employed i)y Operative Masons, and as a
secret brotherhood they had a system of signs and tokens by which
any one of the members could make himself known to tlie otlu rs.
Professor Robison, who may be accepted on this point as authority,
admits that they were “ distinguished from the uninitiated or pro-
fane inhabitants by the science which they possessed and by many
private signs and tokens by which they recognized each other.” *

1 Rollings “Universal History ” places Attains in the rank of those princes who loved
and patronized letters and the arts.

Chandler, ** Travels in Asia Minor,** vol. i,, ch. xxx., p. 126.

8 Ibid., vol. i., ch. xxviii., p. 124. * “ Proofs of a Conspiracy,’* p. 20.

170 PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Each of the koina or separate communities into which they were
divided was under the direction of officers corresponding to a Mas-
ter and Wardens.’

The Masonic principle of charity was practiced among them
and the opulent members were bound to provide for the wants and
necessities of their poorer brethren.

The Legend which connects these architects with the building of
the Temple at Jerusalem, assumes that Hiram Abif was a member
of this secret association. Although the Scriptural narrative is ad-
verse to this theory, since it states that he was simply a worker in
metals and precious stones, yet we may reconcile it with possibility
by supposing that such craftsmen were admitted into the assoeia-
tion of the Dionysiacs because their decorative art was necessary for
the completion and perfection of the temples and public buildings
which they constructed. This is, however, merely conjectural.

The Legend, now connecting itself in part with history, proceeds
to state that when Solomon was about to build a temple to Jehovah,
he made his intention known to his friend and ally, Hiram, King of
Tyre, and because he was well aware of the arehiteetural skill of the
Tyrian Dionysiacs, he besought that monarch’s assistance to enable
him to carry his pious design into execution. Hiram complied with
his request and sent him the necessary workmen, who by their skill
and exj)ericnce might supply the mechanical deficiencies and igno-
rance of the Israelites.

With the body of builders he sent this Hiram Abif, who as “ a
curious and cunning workman,” highly recommended by his patron,
was entrusted by King Solomon with the superintendence of the
construction and placed at the head of both the Tyrian and Jewish
craftsmen as the chief builder and principal conductor of the work.

To this distinguished artist, on account of the large influence
which his position gave him and the exalted personal virtues which
are traditionally .supposed to have characterized him, is to be at-
tributed, according to the Legend, the intimate union of two peo-
ples so dissimilar in manners and so antagonized in religion as the
Jt;ws and the Tyrians, which resulted in the organization of the In-
stitution of Freemasonry.

Supposing Hiram Abif, as the Legend does, to have been con-

^ Brewster in Lawrie’s ‘‘ History,” p. 29.

LEGEND OF THE DIONYSIAC ARTIFICERS

171

nected with the Dionysiac fraternity, we may also suppose that he
could not have been a very humble or inconspicuous member, if we
may judge of his rank in the society, from the amount of talent
which he is said to have possessed, and from the elevated position
that he held in the affections and at the court of the King of Tyre.

He must therefore have been very familiar with all the cere-
monial usages of the Dionysiac artificers and must have enjoyed a
long experience of the advantages derived from the government and
discipline which they practiced in the erection of the many sacred
edifices which they had constructed. A portion of these ceremonial
usages and of this discipline he would naturally be inclined to intro-
duce among the workmen at Jerusalem. He therefore united them
in a society, similar in many respects to that of the Dionysiac artifi-
cers. He inculcated lessons of charity and brotherly love ; he es-
tablished a ceremony of initiation to test experimentally the vvorlli
and fortitude of the candidate ; adopted secret methods of recogni-
tion : and impressed the obligations of duty and the principles of
morality by means of symbols and allegories.

Just at this point a difficulty must have arisen in reconciling the
pagan symbolic instruction of the Tyrians with the religious notions
of the Jews, which, however, the Legend ingeniously overcomes.

The most prominent symbol of Speculative Masonry, that, in-
deed, on which the whole of the ethical instructions is founded, is
contained in the lesson of resurrection to a future life as developed
in the allegorical Legend of the Master’s Degree.

In the Pagan Mysteries, of which the Dionysia were a part, this
doctrine was also illustrated by an allegorical legend. In the Mys-
teries of Dionysus which were practiced by the Tyrian architects
the legend related to the death and subsequent resuscitation of
Bacchus or Dionysus.

But it would have been utterly impossible to have introduced
such a legend as the basis of any instructions to be communicated
to Jewish initiates. Any allusion to the mythological fables of their
Gentile neighbors would have been equally offensive to the taste
and repugnant to the religious prejudices of a nation educated from
generation to generation in the worship of a Divine Being, who, they
had been taught, was jealous of his i)rerogalivcs, and who had made
himself known to their ancestors as the Jkiiovaii, the only God of
time present, past, and future.

172

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

The clilTiculty of obtaining a legend on vvhieh the dogma of the
Third Degree might be founded was obviated by substituting Hiram
Abif, after his death (at which time only the system could have been
perfected), in the place of Dionysus. The lesson taught in the Mys-
teries practiced by the Dionysiac artificers was thus translated into
the Masonic initiation, the form of the symbolism remaining the
same, but the circumstances of the legend necessarily varying.

By this union of the Dionysiacs with the Jewish workmen and
the introduction of their mystical organization, the Masonic Order
assumed at the building of the Temple that purely speculative form
connected with the operative which it has ever since retained.

From its Jewish element it derived its religious character as a
pure theism.

From its Tyrian element it borrowed its peculiar mystical char-
acter and its system of symbolism, which so much assimilated it to
the ancient Pagan Mysteries, that a Legend has been framed (to be
hereafter considered) which traces its origin directly to those secret
associations of antiquity.

Upon the completion of the Temple, the workmen, invested with
all the secrets which had been promised in their initiation, and thus
becoming Master Masons, dispersed, that they might be enabled to
extend their knowledge and to renew their labors in other lands.

Such is the Legend which seeks to attribute the present form of
Freemasonry to the connection of the Dionysiac artisans of Tyre
with the Jewish workmen at the building of the Temple. So much
of the Legend as relates to the cxi.stcnce of a building sodality at
Tyre (leaving out the question whether they were or were not
Dionysiacs), some of whose members went to Jerusalem to assist
in the construction of the Solomonic Temple, may, I think, be ac-
cepted as indisputably historic. What were the real influences ex-
erted by them on the Jewish people, is a question whose answer finds
no place in the realm of history, but must be relegated to the doubt-
ful domain of conjecture. Brewster has described the Dionysiacs as
they existed in about the 3d century before Christ, and after their
incorporation by King Attains, as if they maintained the same con-
dition in the reign of Hiram of Tyre seven hundred years before.
For this statement there is no warrant in any historical record. The
supposition that the Dionysiacs of Tyre and those of Teos were
identical in organization, is simply a theory based on a mere assump-

ft

LEGEND OF THE DIONYSIAC ARTIFICERS

1 73

tion. It is, however, certain that they who adopt the legendary the-
ory that Freemasonry was first organized at the Temple of Solomon,
will find much to sustain their theory in the Legend of the Dionys.
iac Artificers.

It is equally certain that those who deny the Temple theory will
have to reject the Dionysiac, for the two are too closely connected
to be arbitrarily dissevered.

But laying the subject of Freemasonry altogether aside, and con-
sidering the connection of the Tyrians and the Jews at the Temple
as a mere historical question, it would present a very interesting
study of history to determine what were the results of that connec-
tion, if there were any way of solving it except by mere conjecture.

The subsequent history of the association of Dionysiac Archi-
tects forms no part of the Legend which has just been recited ; but
it may be interesting to trace their progress. About seven hundred
years after the building of the Temple at Jerusalem, they are said
to have been incorporated by the King of Pergamum, an ancient
province of Mysia, as a society exclusively engaged in the erection
of public buildings such as theaters and temples. They settled at
Teos, an Ionian city, on the coast of Asia Minor, where, notwith-
standing its intestine troubles, they remained for several centuries.
Among the works accomplished by them were a magnificent theater
and a splendid temple of Dionysus, some ruins of which still remain.

But proving turbulent and seditious they were at length expelled
from Teos and removed to the city of Ephesus. Thence they were
transferred by King Attains to the town of Myonessus. The Teians
having sent an embassy to Rome to request that the Myoncssians
should not be permitted to fortify their city, the Dionysiacs removed
to Lebedos, about fifteen miles from Teos, where they were joyfully
welcomed.

In the 5th century of the Christian era the Emperor Theodosius
abolished all mystical associations, but the Dionysiacs are said to
have continued their existence until the time of the Crusades, when
they passed over into Europe and were merged in the association of
builders known as the Traveling Freemasons of the Middle Ages.
This latter part of the narrative is, I think, merely legendary or tra-
ditional, and will find no support in authentic history. It is, how-
ever, an historical study to be examined hereafter.

CHAPTER XXVI

FREEMASONRY AND THE ANCIENT MYSTERIES

HE theory which ascribes the origin of Freema-
sonry as a secret society to the Pagan Mysteries
of the ancient world, and which derives the most
important part of its ritual and the legend of its
Third Degree from the initiation practiced in
these religious organizations, necessarily con-
nects itself with the Legend of the Temple ori-
gin of the Institution, because we can only link the initiation in the
Mysteries with that of Freemasonry by supposing that the one was
in some way engrafted on the other, at the lime of the building of
the Temple and the union of the Jewish and Tyrian workmen.

But before we can properly appreciate the theory which associ-
ates Freemasonry with the Pagan Mysteries, we must make our-
selves acquainted with the nature and the design as well as with
something of the history of those mystical societies.

Among all the nations of antiquity in which refinement and
culture had given an elevated tone to the religious sentiment, there
existed two systems of worship, a public and a private one. “ Each
of the pagan Gods,” says Warburton, ‘‘had (besides the public
and open) a secret worship paid unto him, to which none were ad-
mitted but those who had been selected by preparatory ceremo-
nies, called Initiation. This secret worship was called the Mys-
teries.”^

The public worship was founded on the superstitious polythe-
ism whose numerous gods and goddesses were debased in character
and vicious in conduct. Incentive to virtue could not be derived
from their example, which furnished rather excuses for vice. In
the Etintichiis of Terenic, when Chocrea is meditating the seduc-
tion of the virgin Pamphila, he refers to the similar act of Jupiter,

^ “ Divine Legation of Moses,” B. I., sect, iv., p. 193.
174

FREEMASONRY AND THE ANCIENT MYSTERIES 175

who in a shower of gold had corrupted Danae, and he exclaims, “If
a god, who by his thunders shakes the whole universe, could com-
mit this crime, shall not I, a mere mortal, do so also ? ’’ ’ Plautus,
Euripides, and other Greek and Roman dramatists and poets re-
peatedly used the same argument in defense of the views of their
heroes, so that it became a settled principle of the ancient religion.
The vicious example of the gods thus became an insuperable ob-
stacle to a life of purity and holiness.*

The assurance of a future life of compensation constituted no
part of the popular theology. The poets, it is true, indulged in
romantic descriptions of an Elysium and a Tartarus, but their views
were uncertain and unsatisfactory, as to any specific doctrine of im-
mortality, and were embodied in the saying of Ovid * that of the
four elements which constituted the human organization, “ the
earth covers the flesh ; the shade flits around the tomb ; the spirit
seeks the stars."

Thus did the poet express the prevalent idea that the composite
man returned after death to the various primordial elements of
which he had been originally composed. In such a dim and
shadowy hypothesis there was no incentive for life, no consolation
in death. And hence Alger, to whom the world has been in-
debted for a mo.st exhaustive treatise on the popular beliefs of all
nations, ancient and modern, on the subject of the future life, has
after a full and critical examination of the question, come to the
following conclusion :

“ To the ancient Greek in general, death was a sad doom.
When he lost a friend, he sighed a melancholy farewell after him to
the faded shore of ghosts. Summoned himself, he departed with a
lingering look at the sun and a tearful adieu to the bright day and
the green earth. To the Roman death was a grim reality. To
meet it himself he girded up his loins with artificial firmness. But
at its ravages among his friends, he wailed in anguished abandon-
ment. To his dying vision there was indeed a future, but shapes
of distrust and shadow stood upon its disconsolate borders ; and

1 At quern Deum, qui templa caeli summa sonitu concutit ;

Ego homuncio hoc non facerem ?

— Act iii., sc. 5.

2 Warburton, Divine Legation ” B. II.. sect. iv.

^ Terra tegit carnem ; tumulum circumvolat umbra ; orcus habet manes ; spiritus
astra petit.

176

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

when the prospect had no horror, he still shrank from the poppied
gloom.” *

Yet as each nation advanced in refinement and intellectual cult-
ure the priests, the poets, and the philosophers* aspired to a higher
thought and cherished the longing for and inculcated the consoling
doctrine of an immortality, not to be spent in shadowy and inert
forms of existence, but in perpetual enjoyment, as a compensation
for the ills of life.

The necessary result of the growth of such pure and elevated
notions must have been a contempt and condemnation of the ab-
surdities of polytheism. But as this was the popular religion it was
readily perceived that any open attempt to overthrow it and to ad-
vance, publicly, opinions so antagonistic to it would be highly impol-
itic and dangerous. Whenever any religion, whether true or false,
becomes the religion of a people, whoever opposes it, or ridicules it,
or seeks to subvert it, is sure to be denounced by popular fanaticism
and to be punished by popular intolerance.

Socrates was doomed to drink the poisoned bowl on the charge
that he taught the Athenian youth not to worship the gods who are
worshipped by the state, but new and unknown deities. Jesus was
suspended from the cross because he inculcated doctrines which,
however pure, were novel and obnoxious to the old religion of his
Jewish countrymen.

The new religious truths among the Pagan peoples were there-
fore concealed from common inspection and taught only in secret
societies, admission to which was obtained only through the ordeal
of a painful initiation, and the doctrines were further concealed un-
der the veil of symbols whose true meaning the initiated only could
understand. “The truth,” says Clemens of Alexandria, “was
taught involved in enigmas, symbols, allegories, metaphors, and
tropes and figures.” *

The secret associations in which the principles of a new and

^ “ Critical History of the Doctrine of a Future Life," p. 196.

"'Many of the philosophers were, however, skeptics. The Stoics, for instance,
anti they were the leading sect, denied the survival of the soul after the death of
the body ; or, if any of them conceded its survival, they attributed to it only a temporary
duration before it i.s dissolved and absorbed into the universe. Seneca (“Troades,” I.,
397) says “there is nothing after death, and death itself is nothing.** Post mortem nihiU
cst ipsaque mors nihil.

Stromat.,” lib. v., p. 658.

FREEMASONRY AND THE ANCIENT MYSTERIES 177

purer theology were taught have received in history the name of the
Mysteries.

Each country had its own Mysteries peculiar to itself. In
were those of Osiris and Isis ; in Samothrace those of the
Cabiri ; in Greece they celebrated at Eleu.sis, near Athens, the Mys-
teries of Demeter ; in Syria of Adonis ; in Phoenicia of Dionysus ;
and in Persia those of Mithras, which were the last to perish after
the advent of Christianity and the overthrow of polytheism.

These Mysteries, although they differed in name and in some of
the details of initiation, were essentially alike in general form and
design. “Their end as well as nature,” says Warburton, “was the
same in all : to teach the doctrine of a future state.”* Alger says :
“The implications of the indirect evidence, the leanings and guid-
ings of all the incidental clews now left us as to the real aim and
purport of the Mysteries, combine to assure us that their chief
teaching was a doctrine of a future life in which there should be
rewards and punishments.”*

Thomas Taylor, the Platonist, than whom no better modern
authority on this subject could be cited, says that “ the initiated were
instructed in the doctrine of a state of future rewards and punisli-
ments,” ® and that the greater Mysteries “ obscurely intimated, by
mystic and splendid visions, the felicity of the soul both here and
hereafter, when purified from the defilements of a material nature
and constantly elevated to the realities of intellectual vision.”®

All the ancient writers who were contemporary with these asso-
ciations, and must have been familiar with their character, concur in
the opinion that their design was to teach the doctrine of a future
life of compensation.

Pindar says, “ Happy the man who descends beneath the hollow
earth having beheld these Mysteries. He knows the end, he knows
the divine origin of life.”

Sophocles says that “ they are thrice happy who descend to the
shades below, after having beheld these rites ; for they alone have
life in Hades, while all others suffer there every kind ol evil.”

Divine Legation,” B. I., sect, iv., p. 194.

Hist, of the Doctrine of a Future Life,” p. 454.

Dissertation on the Eleusinian and Bacchic Mysteries” apud Pamphleteer^ voL
viiL, p. 40.

^ Ibid., p. 53.

12

178

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

And lastly, Isocrates declares that “those who have been initi-
ated in the Mysteries of Ceres entertain better hopes both as to the
end of life and the whole of futurity.”

It is then evident from all authorities that the great end and
design of the initiation into these Mysteries was to teach the aspir-
ant the doctrine of a future life — not that aimless, uncertain, and
shadowy one portrayed by the poets and doubtfully eonsented to by
the people, but that pure and rational state of immortal existence in
which the soul is purified from the dross of the body and elevated to
eternal life. It was, in short, much the same in its spirit as the
Christian and Masonic doctrine of the resurrection.

But this lesson was communicated in the Mysteries in a peculiar
form, which has in fact given rise to the theory we are now consid-
ering that they were the anletype and original source of Speculative
Masonry. They were all dramatic in their ceremonies ; each one
exhibited in a series of scenic representations the adventures of
some god or hero ; the attacks upon him by his enemies ; his death
at their hands; his descent into Hades or the grave, and his final
resurrection to renewed life as a mortal, or his apotheosis as a god.

The only important difference between these various Mysteries
was, that there was to each one a diflfcrcnl and peculiar god or hero,
whose death and resurrection or apotheosis constituted the subject
of the drama, and gave to its scenes the changes which were depend-
ent on the adventures of him who was its main subject. Thus,
in Samothracc, where the Mysteries of the Cabiri were celebrated,
it was Atys, the lover of Cybele, who was slain and restored ; in
Egypt it was Osiris whose death and resurrection were represented ;
in Oreece it was Dionysus, and in Persia Mithras.

But in all of these the material points of the plot and the relig-
ious design of the sacred drama were identical. The dramatic form
and the scenic representation of the allegory were everywhere pre-
served.

This dramatic form of the initiatory rites in the Mysteries — this
acted allegory in which the doctrine of the resurrection was shad-
owed forth by the visible representation of some fictitious event —
was, as the learned Dr. Dollinger* has justly observed, “eminently
calculated to take a powerful hold on the imagination and the heart.

“ Jew and Gentile ” I., p. 136, Darncirs Translation.

FREEMASONRY AND THE ANCIENT MYSTERIES i;y

and to excite in the spectators alternately conflicting sentiments of
terror and calmness, of sorrow and fear and ho])e.”

As the Mysteries were a secret society, whose members were
separated from the rest of the people by a ceremony of initiation,
there resulted from this form of organization, as a necessary means
of defense and of isolation, a solemn obligation of secrecy, with
severe penalties for its violation, and certain modes of recognition
known only to those who had been instructed in them.

There was what might be called a progressive order of degrees,
for the neophyte was not at once uj»on his initiation invested with
a knowledge of the deepest arcana of the religious system.

Thus the Mysteries were divided into two classes called the
Lesser and the Greater Mysteries, and in addition there was a pre-
liminary ceremony, which was only preparatory to the Mysteries
proper. So that there was in the process of reception a system of
three steps, which those who are fond of tracing analogies between
the ancient and the modern initiations are ])rone to call degrees.

A brief review of these three steps of progress in the Mysteries
will give the reader a very definite idea of the nature of this ancient
system in which so many writers have tliought that they had found
the incunabulum of modern I'reemasonry, and will enable him to
appreciate at their just value the analogies which these writers have
found, as they suppose, between the two systems. I'he first stt'p
was called the Lustration, or ])urification by water. When the mH>
phyte was ready to be received into any of the ancient Mysteries,
he was carried into the temple or other place appropriated to the
ceremony of initiation, and there underwent a thorough cleansing of
the body by water. This was the preparation for reception into the
Lesser Mysteries and was symbolic of that purification of the heart
that was absolutely necessary to prepare the aspirant for admission
to a knowledge of and participation in the .sacred lessons which were
to be subsequently communicated to him. It has been sought to
find in this preparatory ceremony an analogy to the first degree of
Masonry. Such an analogy certainly exists, as will hereafter be shown,
but the theory that the Apprentice’s degree was derived from and
suggested by the ceremony of Lustration in the Mysteries is wholly
untenable, because this ceremony was not peculiar to the Mysteries.

An ablution, lustration, or cleansing by water, as a religious rite
was practiced among all the ancient nations. More especially was

i8o PREHISTORIC MASONRY

it observed among the Hebrews, Greeks, and Romans. With the
Hebrews the lustration was a preliminary ceremony to every act of
expiation or sin-oflfering. Hence the Jewish prophets continually
refer to the ablution of the body with water as a symbol of the puri-
fication of the heart. Among the Greeks lustration was always con-
nected with their sacrifices. It consisted in the sprinkling of water
by means of an olive or a laurel branch. Among the Romans, the
ceremony was more common than among the Greeks. It was used
not only to expiate crime, but also to secure the blessing of the
Gods. Thus, fields were lustrated before the corn was put into the
ground ; colonies when they were first established, and armies before
they proceeded to battle. At the end of every fifth year, the whole
people were thus purified by a general lustration. Everywhere the
rite was connected with the performance of sacrifice and with the
idea of a moral purification.

The next step in the ceremonies of the ancient Mysteries was
called the Initiation, It was here that the dramatic allegory was
performed and the myth or fictitious history on which the peculiar
Mystery was founded was developed. The neophyte personated the
supposed events of the life, the sufferings, and the death of the god
or hero to whom the Mystery was dedicated, or he had them brought
in vivid representation before him. These ceremonies constituted
a .symbolic instruction in the initia — the beginnings — of the relig-
ious system which it was the object of the Mysteries to teach.

The ceremonies of initiation were performed partly in the Lesser,
but more especially and more fully in the Greater Mysteries, of which
they were the first part, and where only the allegory of death was
enacted. The Lesser Mysteries, which were introductory to the
Greater, have been supposed by the theorists who maintain the
connection between the Mysteries and Freemasonry to be analogous
to the Fellow Craft’s degree of the latter Institution.

There may be some ground for this comparison in a rather in-
exact way, for although the Lesser Mysteries were to some extent
public, yet as they were, as Clemens of Alexandria ‘ says, a certain
groundwork of instruction and preparation for the things that were
to follow, they might perhaps be considered as analogous to the
Fellow Craft’s degree.

^ Stromat.,” v., p. 424,

FREEMASONRY AND THE ANCIENT MYSTERIES i8i

The third and last of the progressive steps or grades in the Mys-
teries was Perfection. It was the ultimate object of the system. It
was also called the autopsy, from a Greek word which signifies see-
ing with one's own eyes. It was the complete and finished commu-
nication to the neophyte of the great .secret of the Mysteries ; the
secret for the preservation of which the system of initiation had been
invented, and which, during the whole course of that initiation, had
been symbolically shadowed forth.

The communication of this secret, which was in fact the expla-
nation of the secret doctrine, for the inculcation of which the Mys-
teries in every country had been instituted, was made in the most
sacred and private place of the temple or place of initiation.

As the autopsy or J^crfection of the Mysteries concluded the
whole .system, the maintainers of the doctrine that Freemasonry
finds its origin in the My.steries have compared this last stej) in the
ancient initiation to the Master’s degree. But the analofiy between
the two as a consummation of the secret doctrine is less patent in
the third degree, as it now exists, than it was before the disseverance
from it of the Royal Arch, accepting, however, the Master’s degree
as it was constituted in the earlier part of the iSth century, the anal-
ogies between that and the last stage of the Mysteries are certainly
very interesting, although not sufficient to prove the origin of the
modern from the ancient systems. But of this more hereafter.

This view of the organization of the Pagan Mysteries would not
be complete without some reference to the dramatized allegory
which constituted so important a part of the ceremony of initia-
tion, and in connection with which their relation to Freemasonry
has been most earnestly urged.

It has been already said that the Mysteries were originally in-
vented for the purpose of teaching two great religious truths, which
were unknown to, or at least not recognized, in the popular faith.
These were the unity of God and the immortality of the soul in
a future life. The former, although illustrated at every point by ex-
pressed symbols, such, for instance, as the all-seeing eye, the eye of
the universe, and the image of the Deity, was not allegorized, but
taught as an abstract doctrine at the time of the autopsy or the close
of the grade of Perfection. The other truth, the dogma of a future
life, and of a resurrection from death to immortality, was communi-
cated by an allegory which was dramatized in much the same way

l82

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

in each of the Mysteries, although, of course, in each nation the
person and the events which made up the allegory were different.
The interpretation was, however, always the same.

As Egypt was the first country of antiquity to receive the germs
of civilization, it is there that the first Mysteries are supposed to have
been invented.^ And although the Elcusinian Mysteries, which were
introduced into Greece long after the invention of the Osiriac in
Egypt, were more popular among the ancients, yet the Eg)'^ptian
initiation exhibits more purely and more expressively the symbolic
idea which was to be developed in the interpretation of its allegory.
I shall therefore select the Osiriac, which was the most important
of the Egyptian Mysteries, as the exemplar from which an idea may
be obtained of the character of all the other Mysteries of paganism.

All the writers of antiquity, such as Plutarch, Diodorus Siculus,
and Herodotus, state that the Egyptian Mysteries of Osiris, Isis,
and Horus were the model of all the other systems of initiation
which were subsequently established among the different peoples of
the (31d World. Indeed, the ancients held that the Demeter of the
Greeks was identical with the Isis of the Egyptians, and Dionysus
with Osiris. Their adventures were certainly very similar.

The place of Osiris in Egyptian history is unknown to us. The
fragments of Sanchoniathon speak of Isiris, the brother of Chna or
Canaan ; in the lists of Manctho, he is made the fifth king under
the dynasty of the demi-gods, being conjoined with Isis ; but as the
four preceding kings are named as Hepheestus, Helios, Agathodo-
mon and Kronos, the whole is evidently a mere mythological fable,
and we have as far to seek as ever. Herodotus is not more satis-
factory, for he says that Osiris and Isis were two great deities of
the Egyptians. Banier, however, in his Mythology thinks that he
was the same as Mizraim, the son of Cham, and grandson of Noah.
Bishop Cumberland concurs in this and adds that Cham was the
first king of Egypt, that Osiris was a title appropriated by him, sig-
nifying Prince, and that Isis was simply Ishah, his wife. Lastly,
Diodorus Siculus says that he was Menc.s, the first King of Egypt.
Some later writers have sought to identify Osiris and Isis with the

^ The first and original Mysteries of which we hjive any account were those of Isis and
Osiris in Egypt, from whence they were derived by the Greeks. — Warburton, ** Divine
Legation,” 1., p. 194. Diodorus says the same thing in the first book of his History/* L,
xxxvii.

FREEMASONRY AND THE ANCIENT MYSTERIES 183

Iswara and Isi of India. There is certainly a great deal of etymo-
logical plausibility in this last conjecture.

The ubiquitous character of Osiris as a personality among the
ancients is best shown in an epigram of Ausonius, wherein it is said
that in Greece, at Eleusis, he was called Bacchus ; the Egyptians
thought that he was Osiris, the Mysians of Asia Minor named him
Phanoeus or A{fbllo ; the Indians supposed that he was Dionysus ;
the sacred rites of the Romans called him Liber ; and the Arabians,
Adonis.^

But the only thing that is of any interest to us in this connection
is that Osiris was the hero of the earliest of the Mysteries, and that
his death and apotheosis — his change from a mortal king to an im-
mortal God — symbolized the doctrine of a future life.

His historical character was that of a mild and beneficent sov-
ereign, who had introduced the arts of civilization among his sub-
jects, and had then traveled for three years for the purpose of ex-
tending them into other nations, leaving the government of his
kingdom, during his absence, to his wife Isis. According to the
legend, his brother Typhon had been a rival claimant for the throne,
and his defeat had engendered a feeling of ill-will. During the ab-
sence of Osiris, he, therefore, formed a secret conspiracy with some
of his adherents to usurp the throne.

On the return of Osiris from his travels he was invited by Typhon
to a banquet, ostensibly given in his honor, at which all the con-
spirators were present. During the feast Typhon produced a chest,
inlaid with gold, and promised to present it to that person of the
company, whose body, upon trial, would be found most exactly to
fit it. Osiris tried the experiment, but as soon as he had laid him-
self in the chest, Typhon closed and nailed down the lid.

The chest was then thrown into the river Nile, whence it floated
into the sea, and, after being for some time tossed upon the waves,
it was finally cast ashore at the town of Byblos, in Phoenicia, and
left at the foot of a Tamarisk tree. Isis, the wife of Osiris, over-

L me Bacchum vacat ;

Osisin Egyptus putat ;

Mysi Phanaccm nominant ;

Dionuson Indi existimant ;

Romana sacra Liberum ;

Arabica gens Adoncun*.

— Ausonius, Ep. 30.

i84

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

whelmed with grief for the loss of her husband, commenced a search
for the body, being accompanied by her son, Anubis, and his nurse,
N epthc.

After many adventures Isis arrived on the shores of Phoenicia
and in the neighborhood of Byblos, where she at length discovered
the body at the foot of the Tamarisk tree. She returned with it to
Egj'pt. It was received by the people with great demonstrations
of joy, and it was proclaimed that Osiris had risen from the dead
and had become a god.

The sufferings of Osiris, his death, his resurrection, and his sub-
sequent office as judge of the dead in a future state, constituted the
fundamental principles of the Egyptian religion. They taught the
secret doctrine of a future life, and initiation into the mysteries of
Osiris was initiation into the rites of the religion of Egypt. These
rites were conducted by the priests, and into them many sages from
other countries, especially from Greece, such as Herodotus, Plutarch,
and Pythagoras, were initiated.

In this way it is suppo.sed that the principles and general form
of the Mysteries were conveyed into other countries, although they
everywhere varied in the details. The most important of the
Mysteries besides the Egyptian were those of Mithras in Persia, of
Atys or of the Cabiri in Thrace, of Adonis in Syria, and of Dionysus
in Greece. They extended even beyond the then more civilized
parts of the world into the northern regions of Europe, where were
practiced the Scandinavian rites of the Norsemen and the Druidical
Mysteries of Gaul and Britain, though these were probably de-
rived more directly from a primitive Aryan source.

But wherever they existed we find in them a remarkable unity
of design and a similarity of ceremonies from which we are com-
pelled to deduce a common origin, while the purity of the doctrines
which they taught evidently show that this common origin was not
to be sought in the popular theology.

In all of the Mysteries the ceremonies of initiation were of a
funereal character. They allegorized in a dramatic form the suffer-
ings, the death, and the resurrection of some god or hero. There
was a death, most generally by violence,' to symbolize, as certain

Clemens of Alexandria describes the legend or allegory of the Cabiri
Mysteries as the sacred mystery of a brother slain by his brethren, “ frater trucidatus a
fratribus."

FREEMASONRY AND THE ANCIENT MYSTERIES 185

Interpreters of the Mysteries have supposed, the strife of certain
antagonistic powers in nature, such as life and death, virtue and
vice, light and darkness, or summer and winter.

The person thus slain was represented in the allegorical drama
by the candidate. After the death followed the disappearance of
the body, called by the Greeks the aphanism, and the consequent
search for it. This search for the body, in which all the initiates
joined, constituted what Faber calls “ the doleful part,” and was
succeeded by its discovery, which was known as the henresis} This
was accompanied by the greate.st demonstrations of joy. The can-
didate was afterward instructed in the apporheta, or secret dogmas
of the Mysteries.

In all of the Pagan Mysteries this dramatic form of an allegory
was preserved, and wc may readily see in the groans and lamenla-
ti(jns on the death of the god or hero and the disappearance of thi-
body a symbol of the death of man, and in the subsequent rejoicings
at bis discovery and restoration, a symbol of the restoration of the
spirit to eternal life.

In view of the purity of the lessons taught in the Mysteries and
their inculcation of the elevated dogmas of the unity of God and
the immortality of the soul, it is not surprising to read the enco-
miums passed upon them by the philosophers of antiquity.

The reader, if he has carefully considered the allegorical drama
which was represented in the ancient Mysteries, and comj)ared it
with the drama which constitutes the principal portion of the initia-
tion in Freemasonry, will be at no loss to account for the reasons
which have led so many writers to attribute the origin of the Ma-
sonic system to these mystical associations of antiquity.

It has been a favorite theory with several German, French, and
British scholars to trace the origin of Freemasonry to the Mysteries
of Paganism, while others, repudiating the idea that the modern
association should have sprung from them, still find analogies so
remarkable between the two systems as to lead them to suppose
that the Mysteries were an offshoot from the pure Freemasonry of
the Patriarchs.

In my opinion there is not the slightest foundation in historical

‘ ‘ ‘ Concerning Adonis, whom some call Osiris, there are two things remarkable ;
aphanisntos, the death or loss of Adonis ; and heuresis, the finding of him again.’’— God-
evyn in “ Moses and Aaron,” lib. iv., c. 2.

i86

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

evidence to support either theory, although I admit the existence of
many analogies between the two systems, which can, however, be
easily explained without admitting any connection in the way of
origin and descent between them.

Of the theory that the Mysteries were an offshoot or imitation
of the pure patriarchal Freemasonry, Hutchinson and Oliver are the
most distinguished supporters.

While Hutchinson strongly contends for the direct derivation
of Freemasonry from Adam, through the line of the patriarchs to
Moses and Solomon, he does not deny that it borrowed much from
the initiations and symbols of the Pagans.

Thus he unhesitatingly says, that “ there is no doubt that our
ceremonies and Mysteries were derived from the rites, ceremonies,
and institutions of the ancients, and some of them from the re-
motest ages.”^

But lest the purity of the genuine patriarchal Masonry should
be polluted by borrowing its ceremonies from such an impure
source, he subsequently describes, in that indefinite manner which
was the peculiarity of his style, the separation of a purer class from
the debasement of the popular religion, wherein he evidently alludes
to the Mysteries. Thus he says :

“In the corruption and ignorance of after ages, those hallowed
places * were polluted with idolatry ; the unenlightened mind mis-
took the type for the original, and could not discern the light from
darkness ; the sacred groves and hills became the objects of enthu-
siastic bigotry and superstition ; the devotees bowed down to the
oaken log and the graven image as being divine. Some preserved
themselves from the corruptions of the times, and we find those
sages and select men to whom were committed, and who retained,
the light of understanding and truth, unpolluted with the sins of the
world, under the denomination of Magi among the Persians ; wise
men, soothsayers, and astrologers among the Chaldeans ; philoso-
phers among the Greeks and Romans ; Brahmins among the Ind-
ians ; Druids and bards among the Britons ; and with the people of
God, Solomon shone forth in the fullness of human wisdom.”*

Dr. Oliver expresses almost the same views, but more explicitly.

' “ Spirit of Masonry," lect. ii., p. 1 5. “ " The highest hills and lowest valleys.”

Spirit of Masonry.” lect. iv., p. 59.

FREEMASONRY AND THE ANCIENT MYSTERIES 1S7

Ile was, I think, the first to advance the theory that two systems of
Masonry had come down the course of time, both derived from a
common source, which he called the Pure and the Spurious Free-
masonry of antiquity — the former descending without interruption
from the Patriarchs, and especially from Noah, and which system
was the progenitor of that which is now practiced, and the latter,
being a schism, as it were, from the former, and impure and cor-
rupted in its principles, and preserved in the Pagan Mysteries. He
admits, however, that there were certain analogies between the two
in their symbols and allegories. Ilis own language on this subject,
which is as follows, leaves no doubt of the nature of his views. In
a note to his Histojy of Jniliation, an elaborate and learned work
on certain of these Mysteries, he says :

“ 1 have denominated the surreptitious initiations earth-born, in
contra-distinction to the purity of Freemasonry, which was certainly
derived from above ; and to those who contend that Masonry is
nothing more than a miserable relic of the idolatrous Mysteries
(vide Fab. Pag. Idol., vol. iii., p. 190), I would reply, in the words
of an inspired apostle, ‘Doth a fountain send forth at the same
place sweet water and bitter ? Can the fig tree bear olive berries or
a vine figs ? So can no fountain both yield salt water and fresh.
The wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, full of
mercy and good fruits’ (James iii. ii, 12, 17). I wish to be dis-
tinct and intelligible on this point, as some misapprehensions are
afloat respecting the immediate object of my former volume of
Signs and Symbols ; and I have been told that the arguments there
used afford an indirect sanction to the opinion that Masonry is de-
rived from the Mysteries. In answer to this charge, if it requires
one, I only need reply to the general tenor of that volume, and to
declare explicitly my firm opinion, founded on intense study and
abstruse research, that the science which we now denominate Specu-
lative Masonry, was coeval, at least, with the creation of our globe,
and the far-famed Mysteries of idolatry were a subsequent institu-
tion founded on similar principles, with the design of conveying
unity and permanence to the false worship, which it otherwise could
never have acquired.”*

I do not know of any other prominent Masonic writer who en-

' History of Initiation,” lect. i., p. 13. notes.

i88 PREHISTORIC MASONRY

tertains the theory of the common origin but diverse descent of the
Mysteries and Freemasonry, although there are many who, sub-
scribing with implicit faith to the teachings of Dr. Oliver as a
Masonic historian, necessarily give their assent to his opinion on
this subject.

There is another class of Masonic scholars who have advanced
the theory that the Speculative Freemasonry of the present day
is derived directly from and is a legitimate successor of the Myste-
ries of antiquity. They found this theory on the very many and
striking analogies that are to be found in the organization, the de-
sign, and the symbols of the two systems, and which they claim can
only be explained on the theory that the one is an offshoot from the
other.

The Abb <5 Robin was, perhaps, the first writer who advanced
this idea in a distinct form. In a work on the Ancient and Modern
Initiations,^ published in 1780, he traces the origin of the ancient
systems of initiation to that early period when wicked men, urged
by the terror of guilt, sought among the virtuous for intercessors
with the Deity. The latter, he says, retired into solitary places to
avoid the contagion of the growing corruption, and devoted them-
selv^es to a life of contemplation and to the cultivation of the arts
and sciences. In order to associate with them in their labors and
functions only such as had sufficient merit and capacity, they ap-
pointed strict courses of trial and examination. This, he thinks,
must hav’^e been the .source of the initiations which distinguished the
celebrated Mysteries of antiquity. The Magi of Chaldea, the Brah-
mins and Gymnosophists of India, the Priests of Egypt, and the
Druids of Gaul and Britain thus lived in .sequestered places and ob-
tained great reputation by their discoveries in astronomy, chemistry,
and mechanics, by the purity of their morals, and by their knowl-
edge of the science of legislation.

It was in the.se schools, says the abbd, that the first sages and
legislators of antiquity were formed, where the doctrines taught were
the unity of God and the immortality of the soul, and it was from
these Mysteries that the exuberant fancy of the Greeks drew much
of their mythology. From these ancient initiations he deduces the
orders of Chivalry which sprang into existence in the Middle Ages,

^ ** Rcchcrchcs sur Ics Initiations Anciennes et Modernes.”

FREEMASONRY AND THE ANCIENT MYSTERIES iSy

and certain branches of these, he thinks, produced the institution of
Freemasonry.

The theory of the Abbe Robin therefore traces the institutit)n
of Masonry to the ancient Mysteries, but in an indirect way,
through the orders of Chivalry. He might therefore more cor-
rectly be classed among those who maintain the doctrine of the
Templar origin of Freemasonry.

But it is Alexander Lenoir, the French archieologist, who has at-
tempted in the most explicit and comprehensive manner to estab-
lish the doctrine of the direct descent of Freemasonry from the
ancient Mysteries, and especially from the Egyi)tian. In the year
1814 he published an elaborate work on this subject.^ In this he
begins by affirming that we cannot expect to find in the Egyptian
and Greek initiations those modes of recognition which are used by
the F'reemasons of the present day, because these methods, which
arc only conventional and had been orally communicated under the
obligation of secrecy, can not be known to us, for they could not
have been transmitted through the lapse of ages. Omitting, there-
fore, all reference to these as matters of no real importance, he con-
fines himself to a comparison of the Masonic with the ancient riti.'s
of initiation. In this view he comes to the conclusion that Free-
masonry in all the points that it essentially comprehends is in direct
relation with the Mysteries of the ancient world, and that hence, ab-
stracting certain particular usages practiced by the modern Freema-
sons, it is evident that Freemasonry in no respect differs from the
ancient initiations of the Egyptians and the Greeks.

This theory has been embraeed by nearly all the French Masonic
writers except Rebold, who traces Masonry to the Roman Colleges
of Artificers.

Unfortunately for the general acceptance of this theory, M.
Lenoir has in the first place drawn his comparisons from the sys-
tem of ceremonies of initiation which are practiced in the lodges of
France, and especially from the “proofs and trials” of the Entered
Apprentice’s degree. But the tedious ceremonies and painful trials
of the candidate as they arc practiced in the French Rite constitute
no part of the original English Masonry whence the French Ma-
sonry derives its existence, and were adopted as a pure innovation

i“La Franchc-Ma^onnerie rcnduc sa veritable originc,” etc. Par M. Alexander
Lenoir. Paris, 1814.

190 ' PREHISTORIC MASONRY

long after the establishment of the Order in France by the Grand
Lodge of England.

And again, the Egyptian initiations, with which they have been
comj)ared by Lenoir, were not those which were actually practiced
by the priests of Egypt, or at least we have no authentic proof of
that fact, but were most probably suggested by the imaginative de-
tails given by the Abbe Terrasson in his romance entitled Set has, in
which he pretends to portray the initiation of an Egyptian prince.

The truth is that Lenoir and those writers who have followed
him and adopted his theory have not instituted a comparison be-
tween the original ceremonies of Masonic initiation and those of
the ancient My.sterics, but merely a comparison between a recent
.system of ceremonies, certainly not earlier than the middle of the
last century, and a fictitious system indebted for its birth to the in-
ventive genius of a French abbe, and first promulgated in a work
published by him in the year 1731.

As well might Mr. Turner or any other writer on Anglo-Saxon
history have cited, as authentic materials for his description of the
customs of the Anglo-Saxon, the romantic incidents given by Sir
Walter Scott in his novel of Jvanhoc.

H ence all the references of the xwyages of an Entered Ap-
prentice in a French Lodge to the similar voyages of an Aspirant
in the Mysteries of Osiris or Isis become nothing more than “the
baseless fabric of a vLsion,” which must fade and dissolve like an “ in-
substantial pageant ” when submitted to the crucial test of authentic
historical investigation.’

The Rev. Mr. King, the author of a very interesting treatise on
the Gnostics,® has advanced a theory much more plausible than
either of tho.se to which 1 have adverted. He maintains that some
of the Fagan Mysteries, especially those of Mithras, which had been
instituted in Persia, extended beyond the period of the advent of
Christianity, and that their doctrines and usages were adopted by
the secret societies which existed at an early period in Europe and

' “ Many of the explanations Riven as to the ceremonies used in Egyptian initiations
arc modern inventions, abounding in absurdities and purely imaginary.” — Tho. Pryer,
“ On the study of Masonic Antiquities,” in Freemasons' Quarterly Review^ 1847, p. 262.
Wilkinson was of the same opinion. See “ Manners and Customs of the Ancient Egyp-
tians,” vol. i.

-“The Gnostics and their Remains, Ancient and Mediseval.” By C. W. King,
M.A., London, 1865, p. 47 ct seq.

FREEMASONRY AND THE ANCIENT MYSTERIES 191

which finally assumed the form of Freemasonry. I have said that
this theory is a plausible one. It is so because its salient points are
sustained by historical evidence.

It is, for instance, a fact that some of the Mysteries of Paganism
were practiced in Europe long after the commencement of the
Christian era. They afforded a constant topic of denunciation to
the fathers of the church, who feared and attacked what they sup-
posed to be their idolatrous tendencies. It was not until the middle
of the 5th century that they were proscribed by an edict of the Em-
peror Theodosius. But an edict of proscription is not necessarily
nor always followed by an immediate abolition of the thing jno-
scribed.

The public celebration of the Mysteries must, of course, have
ceased at once when such cch:bration had been declared unlawful.
But a private and secret observance of them may have continued,
and probably did continue, for an indefinite time, pcrhai)s even to
as late a period as the end of the 5th or the beginning of the 6th
century.

Mosheim tells us that in the 4th century, notwithstanding the
zeal and severity of the Christian emj)erors, there still nanained in
several places, and especially in the remoter provinces, temples and
religious rites consecrated to the Pagan deities; that rites instituted
in honor of them were, in the 5th century, celebrated with tlie ut-
most freedom and impunity in the western empire ; and that even
in the 6th century remains of the Pagan worship were to be found
among the learned and the officers of state.’

During all this time it is known that seend associations, such as
the Roman Colleges of Artificers, existed in Europe, and that from
them ultimately sprang up the organizations of Builders, whieh, with
Como in Lombardy as their center, sj)read over Europe in the
Middle Ages, and whose members, undei the recognized name of
Iravcling Fi'ccninsoiis^ were the founders of Gothic architecture.

There is no forced or unnatural succession from them to the
Guilds of Operative Masons, who undoulHedly gave rise, about the
end of the 17th or the beginning of the j8th century, to the Specu-
lative Order or the Free and Accepted Masons, which is the organ-
ization that exists at the present day.

1 Mosheim, “Ecclesiast. History,” Maclaine’s Translation, vol. i., pp. 251, 332, 401.

192

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

There is, therefore, nothing absolutely untenable in the theory
that the Mithraic Mysteries which prevailed in Europe until the 5th
or perhaps the 6th century may have impressed some influence on
the ritual, form, and character of the association of early Builders,
and that this influence may have extended to the Traveling Free-
masons, the Operative Guilds, and finally to the Free and Accepted
Masons, since it can not be proved that there was not an uninter-
rupted chain of succession between these various organizations.

The theory of Mr. King can not, therefore, be summarily re-
jected. It may not be altogether true, but it has so many elements
of truth about it that it claims our serious consideration.

But, after all, we may find a sufficient explanation of the analogy
which undoubtedly exists between the rites of the ancient Mysteries
and those of the modem Freemasons in the natural tendency of the
human mind to develop its ideas in the same way when these ideas
are suggested by the same or similar circumstances. The fact that
both institutions have taught the same lessons by the same method
of instruction may be attributed not to a direct and uninterrupted
succession of organizations, each one a link of a long chain leading
consequentially to another, but rather to a natural and usual coin-
cidence of human thought.

The believers in the lineal and direct descent of Freemasonry
from the ancient Mysteries have of course discovered, or thought
that they had discovered, the most striking and wonderful analogies
between the internal organizations of the two institutions. Hence
the most credulous of these theorists have not hesitated to compare
the Hierophant, or the Explainer of the sacred rites in the Mys-
teries, with the Worshipful Master in a Masonic Lodge, nor to
style the Dadouehos, or Torch-Bearer, and the Hieroccryx, or
Herald of the Mysteries, Wardens, nor to assign to the Epibomos,
or Altar-Server, the title and duties of a Deacon.

That there arc analogies, and that many of them are very curi-
ous, can not be denied, but I shall attempt, before leaving this sub-
ject, to explain the reason of their existence in a more rational way
than by tracing the modern as a succession from the ancient system.

The analogies existing between the ancient Mysteries and Free-
masonry, upon which the theory of the descent of the one from the
other has been based, consist in the facts that both were secret so-
cieties, that both taught the same doctrine of a future life, and that

FREEMASONRY AND THE ANCIENT MYSTERIES 193

both made use of symbols and allegories and a dramatic form of in-
struction. But these analogies do not necessarily support the doc-
trine of descent, but may be otherwise satisfactorily explained.

Whether the belief in a personal immortality was communicated
to the first man by a divine revelation, and subsequently lost as the
intellectual state of future generations declined into a degraded
state of religious conceptions ; or whether the prehistoric man, cre-
ated but little superior to the wild beast with whom he daily con-
tended for dominion with insufficient weapons, was at first without
any conception of his future, until it had by chance dawned upon
some more elevated intellect and by him been communicated to his
fellows as a consoling doctrine, afterward to be lost, and then in the
course of time to be again recovered, but not to be universally ac-
cepted by grosser minds, are questions into which we need not enter
here.

It is sufficient to know that (here has been no period in the
world’s history, however dark, in which some rays of this doctrine
have not been thrown upon the general gloom. The belief in a
future life and an immortal destiny has always been so insej)arably
connected with elevated notions of God that the deep and reverent
thinkers in all ages have necessarily subscril)ed to its truth. It has
inspired the verses of poets and tempered and directed the discus-
sions of philosophers.

As both the Mysteries of the ancients and the Freemasonry of
the moderns were religious institutions, the conceptions of the true
nature of God which they taught to their disciples must of course
have involved the ideas of a future life, for the one doctrine is a
necessary consequence of the other. To seek, therefore, in this
analogy the proof of a descent of the modern from the ancient in-
stitution is to advance an utterly fallacious argument.

As to the secret character of the two institutions, the argument
is equally untenable. Under the benighted rule of I\agan idolatry
the doctrine of a future life was not the pojjular belief. Yet there
were also some who aspired to a higher thought — philosophers like
Socrates and Plato, who nourished with earnest longing the hope of
immortality. Now, it was by such men that the Mysteries were
originally organized, and it was for instruction in such a doctrine
that they were instituted. But opposed as this doctrine was to the
general current of popular thought, it became, necessarily and defen-
13

194

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

sively, esoteric and exclusive. And hence we derive the reason for
the secret character of the Mysteries. “They were kept secret,”
says Warburton, “ from a necessity of teaching the initiated some
things improper to be communicated to all.”^ The learned bishop
assigns another reason, which he sustains with the authority of an-
cient writers, for this secrecy. “Nothing," he says, “excites our
curiosity like that which retires from our observation, and seems to
forbid our search.” *

Syncsius, who lived in the 4th century, before the Mysteries
were wholly abolished, says that they owed the veneration in which
they were held to a popular ignorance of their nature.*

And Clemens of Alexandria, referring to the secrecy of the
Mysteries, accounts for it, among other reasons, because the truth
seen through a veil appears greater and more venerable.

Freemasonry also teaches the doctrine of a future life. But al.
though there was no necessity, as in the Pagan Mysteries, to conceal
this doctrine from the populace ; yet there is, for the reasons that
have just been assigned, a proneness in the human heart, which has
always existed, to clothe the most sacred subjects with the veil of
mystery. It was this spirit that caused Jesus to speak to the Jewish
multitudes in parables whose meaning his disciples, like initiates,
were to comprehend, but which would be unintelligible to the peo-
ple, so that “ seeing they might not see, and hearing they might not
understand.”

The Mysteries and Freemasonry were both secret societies, not
necessarily because the one was the legitimate .successor of the
other, but because both were human institutions and because both
partook of the same human tendency to conceal what was sacred
from the unhallowed eyes and ears of the profane. Tn this way may
be explained the analogy between the two institutions which ari.ses
from their secret character and their esoteric method of instruction.

The symbolic form of imparting the doctrines is another analogy
which may be readily explained. For when once the esoteric or secret
system was determined on, or involuntarily adopted by the force of
those tendencies to which I have referred, it was but natural that
the secret instruction should be communicated by a method of .sym-
bolism, because in all ages symbols have been the cipher by which

’ “ Div. Legal.,” I., p. 201. ^ Ibid., I., p. 200. ®“De Providentia.” Stromal.,” v., 419.

FREEMASONRY AND THE ANCIENT MYSTERIES 195

secret associations of every character have restricted the knowledge
which they imparted to their initiates only.

Again, in the Mysteries, the essential doctrine of a resurrection
from death to eternal life was always taught in a dramatic form.
There was a drama in which the aspirant or candidate for initiation
repre.sented, or there was visibly pictured to him, the death by vio-
lence and then the resuscitation or apotheosis — the resurrection to
life and immortality of some god or hero, in whose honor the peculiar
mystery was founded. Hence in all the Mysteries there were the
thanatos, the death or slaying of the vdetim ; the aphanistn, the con-
cealment or burial of the body by the slayers ; and the henresis, the
finding of the body by the initiates. This drama, from the charac-
ter of the plot, began with mourning and ended with joy.

The traditional “ heureka," sometimes attributed to Pythagoras
when he discovered the forty-seventh problem, and sometimes to
Archimedes when he accidentally learned the principle of specific
gravity, was nightly repeated to the initiates when, at the termina-
tion of the drama of the Mysteries, they had found the hidden body
of the Master.

Now, the recognized fact that this mode of inculcating a religious
or a philosophical idea by a dramatic representation was constantly
practiced in the ancient world, for the purpose of more permanently
impressing the conception, would naturally lead to its adoption by
all associations where the same lesson was to lie taught as that
which was the subject of the Mysteries. The tendency to dramatize
an allegory is universal, because the method of dramatization is the
most e.xpedient and has been proved to be the most successful. The
drama of the third or Master’s degree of Freemasonry is, as respects
the subject and the development of the plot and the conduct of the
scenes, the same as the drama of the ancient Mysteries. There is
the same thanatoc, or death ; the same aphanism, or concealment
of the body, and the same hcurcsis, or discovery of it. The
drama of the Master’s degree begins in sorrow and ends in joy.
Everything is so similar that wc at once recognize an analogy be-
tween Freemasonry and the ancient Mysteries ; but it has already
been explained that this analogy is the result of natural causes, and
by no means infers a descent of the modern from the ancient insti-
tution.

Another analogy between the Mysteries and Freemasonry is

196

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

the division of both into steps, classes, or degrees — call them what
you may — which is to be found in both. The arrangement of the
Masonic system into three degrees certainly bears a resemblance to
the distribution of the Mysteries into the three steps of Preparation,
Initiation, and Perfection which have been heretofore described.

But this analogy, remarkable as it may at first view appear, is
really an accidental one, which in no way shows an historical con-
nection between the two institutions.

In every system of instruction, whether open or secret, there
must be a gradual and not an immediate attainment of that which is
intended to be imparted. The ancient adage that “ no one suddenly
becomes wicked ” might with equal truth be read that “ no one sud-
denly becomes learned.” There must be a series of gradual ap-
proaches to the ultimate point in every pursuit of knowledge, like
the advancing parallels of a besieging army in its efforts to attain
possession of a beleaguered city. Hence the ladder, with its va-
rious steps, has from the earliest times been accepted as a sym-
bol of moral or intellectual progress from an inferior to a superior
sphere.

In this progress from the simplest to the most profound arena
of initiation — from the inception to the full accomplishment of the
instruction whereby the mind was to be gradually purged of many
errors, by preparatory steps, before it could bear the full blaze of
truth— ^both the Mysteries and Freemasonry have obeyed a common
law of intellectual growth, independently of any connection of the
one with the other institution.

The fact that there existed in both institutions secret modes
of recognition presents another analogy. It is known that in the
Mysteries, as in Freemasonry, there was a solemn obligation of
secrecy, with penalties for its violation, which referred to certain
methods of recognition known only to the initiates. But this may
safely be attributed to the fact that such peculiarities are and always
will be the necessary adjuncts of any secret organization, whether
religious, social, or political. In every secret society isolated from
the rest of mankind, we must find, as a natural outgrowth of its se-
crecy and as a necessary means of defense and isolation, an obliga-
tion of secrecy and methods of recognition. On such analogies it is,
therefore, scarcely worth while to dilate.

Thus, then, I have traced the analogies between the ancient

FREEMASONRY AND THE ANCIENT MYSTERIES iy7

Mysteries and modern Freemasonry in the following points of re-
semblance.

1. The Preparation, which in the Mysteries was called the Ltts~
tration. It was the first step in the Mysteries, and is the Entered
Apprentice’s degree in Freemasonry. In both sy'stems the candi-
date was purified for the reception of truth by washing. In one it
was a physical ablution ; in the other a moral cleansing ; but in
both the .symbolic idea was the same.

2. The Initiation, which in the ancient system was partly in the
Lesser Mysteries, but more especially in the Greater. In Masonry
it is partly in the Fellow Craft’s, but more especially in the Mas-
ter’s degree.

3. The Perfection, which in the Mysteries was the communica-
tion to the aspirant of the true dogma — the great secret symbolized
by the Initiation. In Freemasonry it is the same. The dogma
communicated in both is, in fact, identical. This Perfection came
in the Mysteries at the end of the Greater Mysteries. In Masonry
it is communicated at the close of the Master’s degree. In the
Mysteries the communication was made in the sacccum or holiest
place. In Masonry it is made in the Master’s Lodge, which is
said to represent the holy of holies of the Temple.

4. The .secret character of both in.stitutions.

5. The use of symbols.

6. The dramatic form of the initiation.

7. The division of both systems into degrees or steps.

8. And the adoption by both of secret methods of recognition.

These analogies, it must be admitted, arc very striking, and, if

considered merely as coincidences, must be acknowledged to be
very singular.

It is not, therefore, surprising that scholars have found it diffi-
cult to resolve the following problem :

Is modern Freemasonry a lineal and uninterrupted successor of
the ancient Mysteries, the succession being transmitted through the
Mithraic initiations which existed in the 5th and 6th centuries;
or is the fact of the analogies between the two systems to be at-
tributed to the coincidence of a natural process of human thought,
common to all minds and showing its development in symbolic
forms ?

For myself, I can only arrive at what I think is a logical con

198

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

elusion ; that if both the Mysteries and Freemasonry have taught
the same lessons by the same method of instruction, this has arisen
not from a succession of organizations, each one a link of a long
chain of historical sequences leading directly to another, until Hiram
is simply substituted for Osiris, but rather from those usual and
natural coincidences of human thought which are to be found in
every age and among all peoples.

It is, however, hardly to be denied that the founders of the
Speculative system of Masonry, in forming their ritual, especially of
the third degree, derived many suggestions as to the form and char-
acter of their funereal legend from the rites of the ancient initia-
tions.

But how long after Freemasonry had an organized existence
this funereal legend was devised, is a question that must hereafter
be entitled to mature consideration.

CHAPTER XXVII

DRUTDISM AND FREEMASONRY

R. PRESTON, in commcncinfi: his history of
Masonry in England, asserts that there are con-
vincing proofs that the science of Masonry was
not unknown to the early Britons even before
the time of the invasion of the l^omans. Hence
he suggests the probability that the Druids re-
tained among them many usages similar to those
of Masons ; but he candidly admits that this is a mere conjecture.*

Hutchinson thinks it probable that many of the rites and insti-
tutions of the Druids were retained in forming the ceremonies of
the Masonic society.*

Paine, who knew, by the way, as little of Masonry as he did of
the religion of the Druids, dogmatically asserts that “ Masonry is
the remains of the religion of the ancient Druids, who, like the
Magi of Persia and the priests of Heliopolis in Egypt, were priests
of the sun.”®

The learned Faber, a much more competent authority than
Paine, expresses the opinion that the Druidical Bards “ are probably
the real founders of English Freemasonry.”'*

Godfrey Higgins, whose inventive genius, fertile imagination,
and excessive credulity render his great work, the yltiani/ypsis,
altogether unreliable, says that he has “no doubt that the Masons
were Druids, Culidei, or Chaldei, and Casideans.”®

Dr. Oliver, it is true, denies that the Masons of the present day
were derived from the Druids. He thinks that the latter were a
branch of what he calls the Spurious Freemasonry, which was a
secession from the Pure Freemasonry of the Patriarchs. But he
finds many analogies in the rites and symbols of the two institu-

^ “ illustrations of Masonry,” Tl. IV., sec. i., p. 121, Oliver’s ed.

2 “ Spirit of Masonry,” led. iii., p. 41. Essay on Freemasonry,” p. 6.

“ Pagan Idolatry.” ^ “Anacalypsis,” vol. i., p. 718.

199

200

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

tions which indicate their common origin from a primitive system,
namely, the ancient Mysteries of the Pagans,

The theory of those who find a connection cither in analogy or
by succession between the Druids and the Freemasons accounts for
this connection by' supposing that the Druids derived their system
either from Pythagoras or from the ancient Mysteries through the
Phoenicians, who visited Britain at an early period for commercial
purposes.

But before we can profitably discuss the relations of Druidism to
Freemasonry, or be prepared to determine whether there were any re-
lations whatever between the two, it will be necessary to give a brief
sketch of the history and character of the former. This is a topic
which, irrespective of any Masonic reference, is not devoid of interest.

Of all the institutions of antiquity, there is none with which we
are less acquainted than that of the Druidism of Britain and Gaul.
The investigations of recent archaeologists have tended to cast much
doubt on the speculations of the antiquaries of the 17th and i8th
centuries. Stukely, for instance, one of the most learned of those
who have sought to establish out of the stone monuments of England
a connected history of Druidism, has been said by Fcrgu.son, in his
work on Rude Stone Monuments, to have been indebted more to a
prolific imagination than to authentic facts for the theory which
he has sought to establish.

The skepticism of Ferguson is, however, not less objectionable
in a critical inquiry than the credulity of Stukely. There is evi-
dently a middle way between them.

Ferguson can not deny the existence of Druids in Gaul and
Britain, since the fact is stated by Cm.sar. He supposes that there
were two distinct races in the island ; the original inhabitants, who
were of Turanian origin, and, being more uncivilized, were driven
by the other race, who were Celts, into the fastnesses of the Welsh
hills long before the Roman invasion. Among the former he
thinks that the religion of Druidism, consisting of tree and serpent
worship, may have been practiced. And he accounts for the error
of the classical writers in describing the priests of the latter race as
Druids by attributing it to the confounding of the two races by the
“uncritical Romans.”*

* Tree and Serpent Worship/^ p. 29.

DRUIDISM AND FREEMASONRY

201

Very recently a l)old and very skeptical theory has been ad-
vanced by Dr. Ignaz Goldziher, in his work on ]\Iythohgy Avtong
the Hebrews^ which aims at a total annihilation of Druidism as a
system of secret initiation among the ancient Britons (whose
Druidism was only a national religion), and attributes its invention
to the modern Welsh, who created it for the purpose of elevating
and strengthening their own nationality in their rivalry with the
English. He says :

“The Cymri of Wales, becoming alive to the opposition in na-
tionality between themselves and the English, felt the need of find-
ing a justification of this opposition m the oldest prehistoric times.
It was then first suggested to them that they were descendants of
the ancient, renowned Celtic nation ; and to keep alive this Celtic
national pride they introduced an institution i>f New Druids, a sort
of secret society like the Freemasons. The New Druids, like the
old ones, taught a sort of national religion, which, however, the i)eo-
ple having long become Christian and preserved no independent
national traditions, they had mostly to invent themselves. Thus arose
the so-called Celtic mythology of the god Hu and the goddess Ceri-
dolu (Ceridwen), etc. — mere poetical fictions which never lived in
popular belief.”

The questions involved in this difference of opinion are as yet
not critically decided, and I shall therefore content myself with giv-
ing the views of the history and religion of the Druids as they have
been generally received and believed, without confusing the subject
with the contending speculations which have bei:n fostered by tlie
credulity or the imagination of one side and imjmgned by the skepti-
cism of the other.

The Druids, which word signifies magicians,*' w<.‘r<' tin; j)riests of
the religion of the ancient Britons, among whom they oxeicised
almost unlimited influence and authority. They presided over and
directed the education of the youths ; they dt.cided without aj)])eal
all judicial controversies; they were exeini)ted from all ta.xes and
legal impositions ; and whoever refused to submit to their decisions
on any question was subjected to excommunication, by which he
was forbidden access to the altars or the performance of religious

^ Ably translated from the German by Mr. Russell Martincau, of the British Museum,
with valuable additions. For the passage quoted, .see p. 252.

2 In Anglo-Saxon dry is a magician ; and drycrofty magic.

202

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

rites, and was debarred from all intercourse with his relatives, his
friends, or his countrymen. Hence no superstition was ever more
terrible than that of the priest-ridden Britons.

The Druids were under the chief authority of an Archdruid,
which oITice was for life, but originally elective. They were divided
into three orders, the highest being the Druids, below which were
the Prophets and the Vaics or Bards. They held an annual assem-
bly, at which litigated questions were decided and new laws were
made or old ones abrogated. They held also four quarterly meet-
ings, on the days of the equinoxes and the solstices.

They permitted none of their doctrines or ceremonies to be com-
mitted to common writing, but used a cipher for their concealment.
This, Ca;sar says, consisted of the letters of the Greek alphabet ; a
statement by no means probable, since it would infer a knowledge
by them of the Greek language, of which we have no evidence.

The opinion of Toland is more plausible — that the characters
used were those of the Irish Ogum alphabet. Sir James Ware,
who wrote in Latin, about the middle of the 17th century, a work
on the Antiquities of Ireland, says that “the ancient Irish, besides
the vulgar characters, used also various occult or artificial forms of
writing, called Ogum, in which they wrote their secrets ; ’’ and he
adds that he himself was in possession of an ancient book or parch-
ment filled with these characters.'

Their places of worship were, accordirig to the contemporaneous
authority of Caesar and Tacitus, in sacred groves. Stukely and
other antiquaries of his school suppose that the megalithic monu-
ments found in Britain, such as at Stonehenge and Avebury, were
Druidical temples, but Ferguson denies this, and asserts that “ there
is no passage in any classical author which connects the Druids
either directly or indirectly with any stone temples or stones of any
sort.’’® The question remains unadjudicated, but the position taken
by Ferguson seems to be supported by better archaeological evidence.

Their worship, like that of the ancient Mysteries, was accompa-
nied by a .secret initiation. Their doctrines were communicated
only to the initiated, who were strictly forbidden to expose them to
the profane.

What were the precise forms of this initiation it is impossible to

’ “ Aniiq. Hibi-rn.,” cap. 2 . =*“Ru(le Stone Monuments," p. 20 .

DRUIDISM AND FREEMASONRY

203

say. The Druids themselves, wedded to their oral system of in-
struction, have left no records. But Dr. Oliver, depending on in-
ferences that he has drawn from the Welsh triads, from the poem
of the ancient bard Taleisin, and some other Cambrian authorities,
aided by the inventive genius of his own imagination, has afforded
us a very minute, if not altogether accurate, detail of these initia-
tory ceremonies. The account is entirely too long for reproduc-
tion, but a condensed view of it will not be uninteresting.’

Previous to admission to the first degree, or that of the 1 ’a/cs,
the candidate was submitted to a careful preparation, which in esi)e-
cial ca.ses extended to the long period of twenty years.

The ceremony of initiation began by placing the candidate in
the pastas, chest or coffin, in which he remained enclosed for three
days, to represent death, and was liberated or restored to life on the
third day.*

The sanctuary being now prepared for the business of initiation,
the Druids are duly arranged, being appropriately clothed and
crowned with ivy. The candidate, representing a blind man, is then
introduced while a hymn to the Sun is being chanted. 1 le is i)laced
under the care of an officer whose duty it is to receive him in the-
land of rest, and he is directed to kindle the fire under the caul-
dron of Ceridwen, the Druidical goddess. A pageant is then fr)rmed,
and the candidate makes a circumambulalion of nine times around
the sanctuary, in circles from cast to west by the south. The pro-
cession is first slow and amid a dcath-like silence ; at length the pace
is increased into a rapid and furious motion, accompanied with the
tumultuous clang of musical instruments and the screams of harsh
and dissonant voices reciting in verse the praises of those heroes
who were brave in war, courteous in peace, and patrons of re-
ligion.®

This sacred ceremony was followed by the administration of an
oath of secrecy, violation of which could be e,xi)iatcd only by death.

Then succeeded a series of ceremonies in which, by means of
masks, the candidate was made to assume the character of various
animals, such as the dog, the deer, the mare, the cock, etc,^

This, according to Oliver, conclu(l(;d the first part of the cere-

' ** History of Initiation," Icct. viii., p. 199 ct seq,

^ Ibid., p. 201. That this ceremony represented a death and resurrection is alto-
gether conjectural. ^ Ibid., p. 204. ** Ibid., p. 205.

204

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

mony of initiation. The second part began with striking the candi-
date a violent blow on the head with an oar, and a pitchy darkness
immediately ensued, which was soon changed into a blaze of light
which illuminated the whole area of the shrine.

This sudden transition from darkness to light was intended to
shadow forth the same transition which Noah experienced on emerg-
ing from the gloom of the ark to the brightness of the renovated
world.’

Thus it is contended that the Druids were Arkite worshippers —
a concession by Oliver to the theories of Faber and Bryant.

The light was then withdrawn and the candidate was again in-
volved in chaotic darkness. The most dismal bowlings, shrieks, and
lamentations salute his astonished ear. Thus the figurative death of
Noah, typified by his confinement in the ark, was commemorated
with every external mark of sorrow. Alarmed at the discordant
noises, the candidate naturally sought to escape, but this was ren-
dered impossible, for wherever he turned he was opposed by dogs
who pursued him. At length the gigantic goddess Ceridwen seized
him and bore him by main force to the mythological sea which rep-
resented the flood of waters over which Noah floated.

Here he is supposed to have remained for a year in the character of
Arawn, or Noah.® The same appalling sounds continued, until at
length, having emerged from the stream, the darkness was removed
and the candidate found himself surrounded by the most brilliant
coruscations of light. This change produced in the attendants cor-
resi)onding emotions, which were expressed by shouts and loud
pa\ans that testified their rejoicings at the resuscitation of their god.®

The aspirant was then presented to the Archdruid, who explained
to him the design of the mysteries and imparted some portion of the
secret knowledge of Druidism, and recommended to him the prac-
tice of fortitude, which was considered as one of the leading traits
of perfection.

With the performance of these painful ceremonies, the first de-
gree of initiation into the Druidical Mysteries was concluded.

In the second degree, where the trials appear, from Oliver’s

^ “ History of Initiation,” p. 208.

^ This detention of a year in the waters of the deluge was, I presume, like the four-
teen days of interment in the Master Mason’s degree, which period passes in the space
of a few minutes — only a symbolic idea. ® History of Initiation,” p. 21 1 .

D A:\IF. I COXH

hiist Grand Maslc'r in N-'itli Ainoiuaii </,l<.nn's. I'/Gn

DRUIDISM AND FREEMASONRY

205

description, to have been of a less severe character, the candidate un-
derwent lustration, or a t3’^pical ablution, which was followed by his
enlightenment. He was now instructed in the morality of the
order; taught that souls are immortal and must live in a future
state ; solemnly enjoined to the performance of divine worsliip and
the practice of virtue ; and was invested with some of the badges t)f
Druidism. Among these was the crystal, the unequivocal te.st of
his initiation. This crystal, or talisman against danger, was manu-
factured exclusively by the Druids, and its color varied in the three
degrees. In the first it was green, in the second blue, and in the
third white. The one presented to the aspirant was a combination
of these colors.^

Beyond the second degree very few advanced. The tliird was
conferred only on persons of rank and consequence, and in it tlie as-
pirant passed through still more arduous ceremonies of purilicalit)n.

The candidate was committed to secluded solitude for a ])eriod of
nine months, which time was devoted to refiection and to tlie study of
the sciences, so that he might be prepared more fully to understand
the sacred truths in which he was about to bi; instructed. 1 le was
again submitted to a .symbolic death and regeneration, by cere-
monies different from those of the first degree, lie was then sup-
posed to represent a new-born infant, and, being placed in a coracle
or boat, was committed to the mercy of the waters. The candidate,
says Oliver, was actually set adrift in the open sea, and was obliged
to depend on his own address and pre.sence of mind to reach the
opposite shore in safety.®

This was done at night, and this nocturnal expedition, which
sometimes cost the candidate his life, was the closing act of his in-
itiation. Should he refuse to undertake it, he was eontemjnuously
rejected and pronounced unworthy of a participation in the honors
to which he aspired and for which he was forever afterward ine l-
igible. But if he courageously entered on the voyage and landed
safely, he was triumphantly received by the Archdruid and his com-
panions. He was recognized as a Druid, and became eligible for
any ecclesiastical, civil, or military dignity. “The whole circle of
human science was open to his investigation ; the knowledge of
divine things was communicated without reserve ; he was now en-

‘^‘History of Iniliatitjn,” p. 212.

^ Ibid., p. 216.

2o6

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

abled to perform the mysterious rites of worship, and had his under-
standing enriched with an elaborate system of morality.”^

But little is known of the religion of the Druids, on which these
ceremonies are supposed to be founded, and concerning that little
the opinions of the learned greatly differ. " Among those institu-
tions,” says Toland, “ which are thought to be irrecoverably lost, one
is that of the Druids ; of which the learned have hitherto known
nothing but by some fragments concerning them out of the Greek
and Roman authors.”* Hence the views relating to their true wor-
ship have been almost as various as the writers who have discussed
them.

Caesar, who derived his knowledge of the Druids, imperfect as
it was, from the contemporary priests of Gaul, says that they wor-
shipped as their chief god Mercury, whom they considered as the
inventor of all the arts, and after him Apollo, Mars, Jupiter, and
Minerva." But the Romans had a habit of applying to all the
gods or idols of foreign nations the names and qualities of the dei-
ties of their own mythology. Hence his statement will scarcely
amount to more than that the Druids worshipped a variety of
gods.

Yet Davies, who, notwithstanding his national prejudices and
prepossessions, is, from his learning, an authority not to be con-
temned, concurs in the view of Caesar so far as to say that “it is an
historical fact, that the mythology and the rites of the Druids were
the same, in substance, with those of the Greeks and Romans and
of other nations which came under their observation."

Dionysius the Geographer, another writer of the Augustan age,
says that the rites of Bacchus were celebrated in Britain,® and
Strabo, on the authority of Artemidorus, who wrote a century be-
fore Christ, asserts that in an island close to Britain (probably the
isle of Mona, where the Druids held their principal seat) Ceres
and Proserpine were venerated with rites similar to those of
Samothraeia.®

Bryant, who traced all the ancient religions, principally on the
basis of etymology, to traditions of the deluge and the worship of

^ Oliver, History of Initiation,” p. 217.

History of the Druids,” in miscellaneous works, vol. i., p. 6.

y ** De liello Gallico.” ^ Mythology and Rites of the British Druids,” p. 89.

Perieget,” v., 565. ** Letter IV.

DRUIDISM AND FREEMASONRY

207

the patriarch Noah, conceived, of course, that Druidism was but a
part of this universal cull.’

Faber, who followed in the footsteps of his learned predecessor,
adopted the same hypothesis, and held the doctrine that the Druids
were addicted to what he denominated Arkile worship, or the wor-
ship of Noah, and that all their religious riles referred to the deluge,
death and immortality being typified by the confinement of the
patriarch in the ark and his subse(|iient emergence from it into a
new and renovated world, the symbol of the future life.*

It will be evident from the description already given of the
Druidical initiations as portrayed by Dr. Oliver, that he concurred
to a great extent in the views of Bryant and Faber.

Stukely, one of the most learned of Englisli antiquarians, be-
lieved that the Druids were addicted to tree and serpent worship,
and he adduces as evidence of the truth of this theory the mega-
lithic monuments of Stonehenge and Avebury, in the arrangement of
whose stones he thought that he had traced a serpentine form.

On the contrary, Mr. Ferguson* scoffs, in language not always
temperate, at the views of Stukely, and not only denies the serpen-
tine form of the .stone remains in England, as described by that
antiquary, but repudiates the hypothesis that the Druids ever erected
or had any connection with stone temples or monuments in anv
part of the world. But as Ferguson adduces nothing but negative
arguments in proof of his assertion, and as he even casts .some
doubt upon the existence of Druids at all in Britain, his views are
by BO means satisfactory, lie has sought to demolish a palace, but
he has not attempted to liuild even a hovel in its place. Repudiat-
ing all other theories, he has offered none of his own.

If the Druids did not erect the stone monuments of Britain,
who did ? Until the contrary is conclusively proved, we have but
little hesitation in attributing them to the Druids. But we need
not enter into this discussion, which pertains more properly to the
province of archa;ology than of Freemasonry.

Some writers have held that the Druids were Sun-worshippers,
and that the adoration of the solar orb constituted the national re-
ligion of the ancient Britons. Hence these theorists arc inclined to

Analysis of Ancient Mythology.** Drummond says of him : ** Mr. Bryant was a
man possessed of much learning and talent, but his etymologies are generally untenable.**
— Origines,*’ vol. iii., p. 191. Pagan Idolatry.** Old Stone Monuments.*’

208

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

believe that Stonehenge and Avebury were really observatories,
where the worshippers of the Sun might behold his rising, his
diurnal course, and his setting.

Mr. Davies, in his Celtic Researches and in his Mythology and
Rites of the British Druids, maintains that there was among them
a mutilated tradition of the Noachic deluge, * as there was among all
heathen nations. The legend was similar to that of the flood of
Deucalion, and was derived from Samothrace and the East, having
been brought by a colony from one nation to another and preserved
without interruption.*

Hti, the supreme god of the Druids, he therefore supposes to
have been identical with Noah, and he bestows upon him the vari-
ous attributes that were distributed among the different gods of the
more prolific mythology of the Greeks and Romans, all of which,
with Bryant and Faber, he considers were allusive to Sun-worship
and to the catastrophe of the deluge.

He therefore asserts that the Helio-Arkite god of the Britons,
the great IIu, was a Pantheon (a collection of deities), who under
his several titles and attributes comprehended the group of superior
gods whom the Greeks and other refined nations separated and ar-
ranged in distinct personages.*

In propounding his theory that the Druids were of Eastern or-
igin, and that they had brought from that source their religion and
their rites, Mr. Davies has been sustained by the opinions of more
recent scholars, though they have traced the birthplace to a more
distant region than the island of Samothracia.

It is now very generally believed that the Druids were Budd-
hists, and that they came into Britain with the great tide of emi-
gration from Asia which brought the Aryan race westward into
Europe.

If this be true, the religion of India must have greatly degener-
ated in the course of its migration. It is admitted that the Druids
cultivated the art of magic and in their rites were accustomed to
sacrifice human victims, both of which practices were repugnant to
the philosophic spirit of Buddhism.

The fact is that, notwithstanding the authority of the Welsh
Bards and the scanty passages in Cajsar, Tacitus, and a few other

^ “ British Druids,” p. 95.

^ Ibid., p. 99.

3 Ibid., p.

DRUIDISM AND FREEMASONRY

209

Roman writers, we arc entirely at sea in reference to cverythinp;
connected with the religious system of Druidism. Almost all on
this mysterious subject is guesswork and conjecture — extravagant
theories, the only foundation of which is in the imaginations of their
framers and bold assertions for the truth of which no competent
authority can be given.

Much of the confusion of ideas in respect to the customs and
manners of the ancient Britons has arisen from the ignorance of the
old writers in supposing that the inhabitants of Britain, at the time
of the Roman invasion and long before, were a homogeneous race.
The truth is that the island was inhabited by two very distinct races.
Those on the coast, derived from the opposite shores of Gaul, Ger-
many, and Scandinavia, were a people who had made some progress
in civilization. The interior of the island was populated by the
original natives, who were a very uncivilized and even barbarous
race, and it was among these that the Druidical religion prevailed
and its mystical and inhuman rites were practiced.

Mr. Ferguson, in his elaborate work on Tree and Serpent IVor-
ship, sustains this view. He says :

“ From whatever point of view the subject is looked at, it seems
almost impossible to avoid the conclusion that there were two races
in England — an older and less civilized people, who in the time of
the Romans had already been driven by the Celts into the fastnesses
of the Welsh hills, and who may have been serpent-worshippers and
sacrificers of human victims, and that the ecumenical Romans con-
founded the two.” ’

He is, however, in error in supposing that the Romans were
ignorant of this fact, for Caesar distinctly alludes to it. He says in
his Gallic War that “ the interior part of Britain was inhabited by
those who were natives of the island," thus clearly distinguishing
the inhabitants of the interior from those who dwelt on the coast
and who, he states, “ had passed over from Belgium."

In another place he speaks of them as a rude and barbarous
race, who in one of their embassies to him describe them.selves as
a savage and unpolished people wholly unacquainted with Roman
customs.

In speaking of the ancient Gauls, M. Thierry, in his history of

' “ Tree and Serpent Worship," p. 29.

14

210

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

that people, makes the following remarks, every one of which may be
equally attributed to the ancient Britons. He says :

“ When we attentively examine the character of the facts con-
cerning the religious belief of the Gauls, we are enabled to recog-
nize two systems of ideas, two bodies of .symbols and .superstitions
altogether distinct — in a word, two religions. One of these is alto-
gether sensible, derived from the adoration of the phenomena of
nature ; and by its forms and by its literal development it reminds
us of the polytheism of the Greeks. The other is founded upon a
material pantheism, mysterious, metaphysical, and sacerdotal, and
presents the most a.stonishing conformity with the religions of the
East, This last has received the name of Druidism, from the Druids
who were its founders and priests.” *

To- the former religion M. Thierry gives the name of Gaulish
polytheism. A similar distinction must have existed in Britain,
though our own writers do not seem generally to have carefully ob-
served it. In no other way can we attempt, with any prospect of
success, to reconcile the contending traditions in relation to the re-
ligion of the ancient Britons. The Roman writers have attributed
a polytheistic form of religion to the people of the coast, derived
apparently from Greece, the gods having only assumed different
names. But this religion was very far removed in its character
from the bloody and mysterious rites of the Druids, who seem to
have brought the forms and objects, but not the spirit of their
sanguinary and mysterious worship from the far East

The Masonic writers who have sought to trace some connection
between Druidism and Freema.sonry have unfortunately too much
yielded their judgment to their imagination. Having adopted a
theory, they have, in their investigations, substituted .speculation for
demonstration and assumptions for facts. By a sort of Procrustean
process of reasoning, they have fitted all sorts of legends and tradi-
tions to the length required for their preconceived system.

Preston had said that “the Druids retained among them many
usages similar to those of the Ma.son.s,” and hence he conjectured that
there might be an affinity between the rites of the two institutions,
leaving his readers, however, to determine the question for themselves.

Godfrey Higgins — of all writers not claiming to write fiction.

Hisloirc dcs Gaulois/* lorn, ii., p. 73.

DRUIDISM AND FREEMASONRY

211

the most imaginative and the most conjectural — goes a step further
and asserts that he has “no doubt that the Masons were Druids,"
and that they may be “traced downward to Scotland and York."
Of this he thinks “the presumption is very strong.”*

Hutchinson thinks it probable that some of the rites and institu-
tions of the Druids might be retained in forming the ceremonies of
the Masonic society.*

The theory of Dr. Oliver connected Druidism and Freemasonry
in the following way. The reader must be aware, from what has
already been said, that the Doctor held that there were two currents
of Masonry that came contemporaneously down the stream of time.
These were the Pure Freemasonry of the Patriarchs, that passed
through the Jewish people to King Solomon and thence onward
to the present day, and a schism from this pure system, fabricated
by the Pagan nations and develof)ed in the ancient Mysteries, which
impure system he called the Spurious Freemasonry of antiquity.
From this latter system he supposes Druidism to have been derived.

Therefore, in support of this opinion, he collates in several of his
works, but especially in his Hisiory of Initiation, the rites and cere-
monies of the Druids with those of the Eleusinian, Diony.sian, and
other mysteries of the Pagan nations, and attempts to show that the
design of the initiation was identical in all of them and the forms
very similar.

But, true to his theory that the Spurious Freemasonry was an
impure secession or offshoot from the Pure or Patriarchal system,
he denies that modern Freemasonry has derived anything from
Druidism, but admits that similarity in the design and form of initi-
ation in both which would naturally arise from the origin of both
from a common system in remote antiquity.

We have therefore to consider two theories in reference to the
connection of Druidism and Masonry.

The first is that Freemasonry has derived its system from that of
the British Druids. The second is that, while any such descent or
succession of the one system from the other is disclaimed, yet that
there is a very great similarity in the character of both which points
to some common origin.

I shall venture, before concluding this essay, to advance a third

‘ Anacalypsis,** vol. i., p. 769.

Spirit of Masonry,*’ Icct. iii., p. 41.

212

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

theory, which I think is far more reconcilable than either of the
others with the true facts of history.

The second of these theories may be dismissed with the remark
that it depends for its support on the truth of the theory that there
was any kind of historical connection between the Mysteries of
the Pagans and Freemasonry. But I think it has been conclusively
proved that any similarity of form or design in these institutions is
to be attributed not to any dependence or succession, but simply to
the influences of that law of human thought which makes men al-
ways pursue the same ends by the same methods.

Dr. Oliver has gone so far in the attempt to sustain his theory
of two systems of Masonry existing at the same time as to assert
that at the time of the Roman invasion, and after the establishment
of Christianity in the island, the True and the Spurious Freema-
sonry — that is, the Masonic system as now practiced and the impure
Masonry of Druidism — “ flourished at the same period and were
considered as distinct institutions in Britain.”'

Of the truth of this statement, there is not a scintilla of histor-
ical testimony. Even if we were to accept the doctrine of Ander-
son, that all great architects in past times were Freemasons, we
could hardly dignify the rude carpenters of the early Britons and
Anglo-Saxons with the title of Masonry.

The first of the theories to which I have alluded, which derives
Freemasonry, or at least its rites and ceremonies, from Druidism,
will require a more extended review.

In the first place, we must investigate the methods by which it is
supposed that the Greeks and Pythagoras communicated a knowl-
edge of their mysteries to the Druids in their secluded homes in
uncivilized Britain.

It is supposed that the principal scats of the British Druids were
in Cornwall, in the islands adjacent to its coast, in Wales, and in
the island of Mona ; that is to say, on the southwestern shores of
the island.

It is evident that in these localities they were accessible to any of
the navigators from Europe or Asia who should have penetrated to
that remote distance for the purpose of commerce. Now, just such

^ On Freemasonry, Evidences, Doctrines, and Traditions,** No. i, in Freemasoni
Quarterly Review ^ 1840, p. 15.

DRUIDISM AND FREEMASONRY

213

a class of navigators was found in the Phoenicians, an adventurous
people who were distinguished for their spirit of maritime enterprise.

The testimony of the Greek and Roman writers is, that in their
distant voyages in search of traffic the Phoenicians had penetrated
to the southwestern shores of Britain, and that they loaded their
vessels with tin, which was found in great abundance in Cornwall
and the Scilly islands on its coast.

The theorists who suppose that the religious rites practiced by the
Phoenicians at home were introduced l)y them into Britain are re-
quired, in proof of their theory, to show that the Phcenicians were
missionaries as well as merchants ; that thiy remained long enougli
in Britain, at each voyage, to implant their own religious riles in tlie
island; that these merchant-sailors, whose paramount object was
evidently the collection of a valuable and profitable cargo, would
divert any portion of the time appropriated to this object to the
propagation among the barbarians, whom they encountered in the
way of business, of the dogmas of their own mystical religion ; that
if they were so disposed, the Britons were inclined during these
necessarily brief visitations to e.xchange their ancient religion, what-
ever it was, for the worship attempted to be introduced by the new-
comers ; and, finally, that the fierce and sanguinary superstition of
the Druids, with its human sacrifices, bore any rcseml)lancc to or
could have possibly been derived from the purer and more benign
religion of the Phoenicians.

For not one of these points is there a single testimony of history,
and over every one of them there is cast an air of the greatest im-
probability. History tells us only that the Phtenician merchants
visited Britain for the purpose of obtaining tin. Gn this the Ma-
sonic theorists have erected a fanciful edifice of missionary enter-
prises successfully ending in the implanting of a new religion.

Experience shows us how little in this way was ever accom-
plished or even attempted by the modern navigators who visited the
islands of the Pacific and other unknown countries for the puri)oses
of discovery. Nor can wc be ignorant of how little progress in the
change of the religion of any people has ever been effected by the
efforts of professed missionaries who have lived and labored for
years among the people whom they sought to convert. They have
made, it is true, especial converts, but in only a very few exceptional
instances have they succeeded in eradicating the old faith of a na-

214

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

tion or a tribe and in establishing their own in its place. It is not
to be presumed that the ancient Phoenician merchants could, with
less means and less desires, have been more successful than our
modern missionaries.

For these reasons, I hold that the proposition that Druidism was
introduced from Greece and Asia into Britain by the Phoenicians is
one that is wholly untenable on any principle of historic evidence or
of probable conjecture.

It has also been asserted that Pythagoras visited Britain and in-
structed the inhabitants especially in the doctrine of metempsycho-
sis, or the transmigration of souls.

There is, however, not the slightest historical evidence that the
sage of Samos ever penetrated in his travels as far as Britain. Nor
is it certain that the dogma of the transmigration as taught by him
is of the same character as that which was believed by the Druids.
Besides, it is contrary to all that we know of the course pursued by
Pythagoras in his visits to foreign countries. He went to learn the
customs of the people and to acquire a knowledge of whatever
science they might possess. Had he visited Britain, which, how-
ever, he never did, it would have been to receive and not to impart
instruction.

As to the further explanation offered by these theorists, of a
connection between Druidism and Masonry, that the former ac-
quired a knowledge of the Eleusinian and other rites in consequence
of their communication with the Greeks, during the celebrated in-
vasion of the Celts, which extended to Delphos, and during the
intercourse of the Gauls with the Grecian colony of Marseilles, it
is sufficient to say that neither of these events occurred until after
the system of Druidism must have been well established among the
people of Britain and of Gaul.

But the great argument against any connection of Druidism and
Freemasonry is not only the dissimilarity of the two systems, but
their total repugnance to each other. The sanguinary superstition
of the Druids was developed in their sacrifice of human victims as a
mode of appeasing their offended deities, and their doctrine of a
future life was entirely irreconcilable with the pure belief in immor-
tality which is taught in Freemasonry and developed in its symbols.

The third theory to which I have referred, and which I advanced
in the place of the two others which I have rejected, traces Druid-

DRUIDISM AND FREEMASONRY

215

ism neither to the Phoenicians, nor to Pythagoras, nor to the Greeks.
It is that the ancient inhabitants of Britain were a part of the Celtic
division of that great Cimmerian race who, springing from their
Aryan origin in the Caucasian mountains, first settled for a time in
the region of Asia which lies around the Euxine Sea, and then
passed over into the north and west of Europe. One detachment of
them entered Gaul, and another, crossing the German Ocean, made
their home in Britain.

It is not at all improbable that these nomadic tribes carried with
them some memories of the religious faith which they had learned
from the original stock whence they .sprung. But there is no
fact more patent in ethnology than that of the tendency of all no-
madic races springing from an agricultural one to degenerate in civ-
ilization.

It has been said that the Druids were Buddhists. This might be
so, for Brahmanism and its schism. Buddhism, were the religions of
the early Aryan stock whence the Druids descended. But it is
very evident that in the course of their migrations the faith of
their fathers must have become gn't-'atly corrupted. Between Budd-
hism and Druidism the only connecting link is the dogma of the
transmigration of souls. Between the rites of the two sects there is
no .similarity.

I suppose, therefore, that the system of Druidism was the pure
invention of the Britons, ju.st as the My.steries of Osiris were the
fabrication of some Egyptian priest or body of priests. What as-
sistance the Britons had in the formation of their mystical system
must have been derived from dim recollections of the dogmas of
their fatherland, which, however, from the very dimne.ss of those
recollections, must have been greatly perverted. I do not find any
authentic proof or any reasonable probability that they had ob-
tained any suggestions in the fabrication or the improvement of
their system of religious rites from the Phoenicians, from the
Greeks, or from Pythagoras.

If, for the sake of argument, we accept for a time the theory
that Freemasonry and the Mysteries originated from a common
source, whence is derived a connection between the two, we can not
fail to see, on an examination of the doctrines and ceremonies of
the Druids, that they bore no relation to those of the Mysteries of
Egypt or of Greece. Hence the link is withdrawn which would

2i6

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

connect Druidisra with Freemasonry through the initiations of the
East.

But the fact is that there is not in Druidism the slightest resem-
blance to Freemasonry, except in the unimportant circumstance
that both have mystical ceremonies. The voyages of the candi-
date in Druidism, after a period of long solitude and confinement,
his pursuit by the angry goddess Ceridwen and her accompanying
dogs, his dangerous passage in a coracle or small boat over the
rough waters, and his final landing and reception by the Archdruid,
may have referred, as Dr. Oliver thought, to the transmigration of
the soul through different bodies, but just as probably symbolized
the sufferings and vicissitudes of human life in the progress to intel-
lectual and moral perfection. But they bear not the slightest anal-
ogy to the mystical death in Freemasonry, which is the .symbol of a
resurrection to a future and immortal life.

Hence the bold assertion of Payne, in his frivolous Essay on the
Origin of Freemasonry, that “ it is derived from and is the remains
of the religion of the ancient Druids,” simply shows that he was a
mere sciolist in the subject of what he presumptuously sought to
treat. Equally untenable is the proposition of the more learned
Faber, when he says that “ the Druids are probably the real found-
ers of English Freemasonry.”

The conclusion to which I think we mu.st arrive, from what we
learn of the two institutions from historical knowledge of one and
personal experience of the other, is that Freemasonry has no more
relation or reference or similitude to Druidism than the pure sys-
tem of Christianity has to the barbarous Fetichism of the tribes of
Africa.

CHAPTER XXVIII

FREEMASONRY AND THE CRUSADES

N all the legendary history of Freemasonry there
is nothing more interesting or more romantic
than the stories which connect its origin with
the Crusades ; nothing in which the judgment
and reasoning powers have been more com-
pletely surrendered to the imagination of the in-
ventors of the various theories on this subject
or to the credulity of the believers.

Before proceeding to discuss the numerous phases which have
been given by different writers to the theory which traces the origin
of Freema.sonry to the Crusades, to the chivalric orders of the Mid-
dle Ages, and especially to the Knights Templars, it will be proj)er
to take a very brief view of those contests between the Christians
and the Saracens which, under the name of the Crusades, cost Eu-
rope so vast an amount of blood and treasure in the unsuccessful
attempt to secure and maintain possession of the Holy Land. This
view, or rather synopsis, need not be more than a brief one, for the
topic has been frequently and copiou.sly treated by numerous histo-
rians, from Joinville to Michaux and Mills, and must therefore be
familiar to most readers.

About twenty years after the Moslems had conqiicrcd Jerusa-
lem, a recluse of Picardy in France had paid a pious visit to the
city. Indignant at the oppressions to which the Christians were
subjected in their pious pilgrimages to the sepulcher of their l.ord,
and moved by the complaints of the aged patriarch, Peter the Her-
mit — for such is the name that he bears in history — resolved on his
return to Europe to attempt to rouse the religious sentiment and
the military spirit of the sovereigns, the nobles, and the populace of
the West. Having first obtained the sanction of the Roman pon-
tiff, Peter the Hermit traveled through Italy and France, and by
fervent addresses in every place that he visited urged his auditors to

217

2i8

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

the sacred duty of rescuing Palestine from the hands of infidels.
The superstitious feelings of a priest-governed people and the mili-
tary spirit of knights accustomed to adventure were readily awa-
kened by the eloquence of a fanatical preacher. In every city and
village, in the ehurches and on the highways, his voice proclaimed
the wrongs and the sufferings of pious pilgrims, and his reproaches
awoke the remorse of his hearers for their past supineness and indif-
ference to the cause of their brethren, and stimulated their eager-
ness to rescue the sacred shrines from the pollution of their Saracen
possessors.

The spirit of enthusiasm which pervaded all classes of the peo-
ple — nobles and priests, princes and peasants — presented a wonderful
scene, which the history of the world had never before and has never
since recorded. With one voice war was declared by the nations
of western Europe against the sacrilegious Moslems. Tradesmen
and mechanics abandoned the pursuits by which they were accus-
tomed to gain their livelihood, to take up arms in a holy cause;
peasants and husbandmen left their fields, their flocks, and their
herds ; and barons alienated or mortgaged their estates to find the
means of joining the expedition.

The numerous conflicts that followed for the space of two hun-
dred years were called the Crusades, or, in French, Croisades, from
the blood-red cross worn by the warriors on the breast or shoulder,
first bestowed at the council of Clermont, by Pope Urban, on the
Bishop of Puy, and ever afterward worn by every Crusader as a
badge of his profession.

The first detachment of the great army destined for a holy war
issued, in the year 1096, from the western frontiers. It consisted of
nearly three hundred thousand men, composed for the most part of
the lowest orders of society, and was headed by Peter the Hermit.
It was, however, a huge, undisciplined mob rather than an army,
whose leader was entirely without military capacity to govern it or
to restrain its turbulence.

The march, or rather the progress, of this immense rabble
toward Asia Minor was marked at every step by crime. They de-
stroyed the towns and plundered the inhabitants of every province
through which they roamed in undisciplined confusion. The out-
raged inhabitants opposed their passage with arms. In many con-
flicts in Hungary and in Bulgaria they were slaughtered by thou-

FREEMASONRY AND THE CRUSADES

219

sands. Peter the Hermit escaped to the mountains, and of his
deluded and debased followers but few reached Constantinople, and
still fewer the shores of Asia Minor. They were speedily destroyed
by the forces of the Sultan. The war of the Crusades had not
fairly begun before three hundred thousand lives were lost in the
advance guard of the army.

The first Crusade was undertaken in the same year, and speedily
followed the advanced body whose disastrous fate has just been
recorded. This body was composed of many of the most distin-
guished barons and knights, who were accompanied by their feudal
retainers.

At the head of this more disciplined army, consisting of a hun-
dred thousand knights and horsemen and five times that number of
foot-soldiers, was the renowned Godfrey of Bouillon, a nobleman
distinguished for his piety, his valor, and his military skill.

This army, although unwieldy from its vast numbers and scarcely
manageable from the diverse elements of different nations of which
it was composed, was, notwithstanding many reverses, more fortu-
nate and more successful than the rabble under Peter the Hermit
which had preceded it. It reached Palestine in safety, though not
without a large diminution of knights and soldiers. At length
Jerusalem, after a siege of five weeks, was conquered by the Chris-
tian warriors, in the year 1099, and Godfrey was declared the first
Christian King of Jerusalem. In a pardonable excess of humility
he refused to accept a crown of gems in the place where his Lord
and Master had worn a crown of thorns, and contented himself
with the titles of Duke and Defender of the Holy Sepulcher.

In the course of the next twenty-five years Palestine had become
the home, or at lea.st the dwelling-place, of much of the chivalry of
Europe. The Latin kingdom of Jerusalem had extended eastward
from the shores of the Mediterranean Sea to the deserts of Arabia,
and southward from the city of Beritus (now Beirut), in Syria, to
the frontiers of Egypt, besides the country of Tripoli, which stretched
north of Beritus to the borders of the prineii»ality of Antioch.

The second Crusade, instigated by the preaching of the monk St.
Bernard, and promoted by Louis VII. of France, was undertaken
in the year 1147. The number of knights, soldiers, priests, women,
and camp-followers who were engaged in this second Crusade has
been estimated as approaching a million. At its head were the

220

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Emperor Conrad III. of Germany and King Louis VII. of France.
This effort to relieve and to strengthen the decaying Christian power
in Palestine was not a successful one. After a futile and inglorious
attempt to take the city of Damascus, whose near vicinity to Jeru-
salem was considered dangerous to the Latin kingdom, Louis re-
turned home with the small remnant of his army, in 1149, was
followed in the succeeding year by the Emperor Conrad. Thus
ended abortiv'ely the second Crusade, and the Christian cause in
Palestine was left to be defended by the feeble forces but invincible
courage of the Christian inhabitants.

The next thirty-five or forty years is a sad and continuous record
of the reverses of the Christians. They had to contend with a new
and powerful adversary in the person of the renowned Saracen, Sal-
lah-ud-deen, better known as Saladin, who, after sixteen years of
warfare with the Christian knights, in which he was sometimes de-
feated but oftener a victor, succeeded in taking Jerusalem, on the
2d of October, in the year 1187.

Thus, after a possession by the Christians of eighty-eight years,
the city of Jerusalem and the holy shrine which it contained fell
again into the power of the Moslems.

When the tidings of its fall reached Europe, the greatest sorrow
and consternation prevailed. It was at once determined to make a
vigorous effort for its rescue from its infidel conquerors. The en-
thusiasm of the people for its recovery was scarcely less than that
which had preceded the first and second Crusades under the elo-
quent appeals of Peter the Hermit and St. Bernard. The principal
sovereigns of Europe, Spain alone excepted, which was engaged in
its own struggles for the extirpation of the Moors, resolved to lead
the armies of their respective nations to the reconquest of Jerusalem.
Thus was inaugurated the third Crusade.

In the year 1188, innumerable forces from England, France,
Italy, and other countries rushed with impetuous ardor to Palestine.
In the year 1189 one hundred thousand Crusaders, under Guy de Lu-
signan, sat down before the city of Acre. The siege lasted for two
years, with a vast consumption of lives on both sides. At length
the city capitulated and the Mussulmans surrendered to the victo-
rious arms of Richard the Lionhearted, King of England.

This third Crusade is remarkable for the number of European
sovereigns who were personally engaged in it. Richard of England,

FREEMASONRY AND THE CRUSADES

2^1

Philip Augustus of France, Frederick Barharossa of Germany, and
the Dukes of Suabia and of Burgundy, had all left their dominions
to be governed by regents in their absence and had joined in the
pious struggle to redeem the Holy Land from Mohammedan rule.

But, notwithstanding many victories over Saladin in hard-fought
fields, and the conquest of many important places, such as Acre, ^Vs-
calon, Jaffa, and Caesarea, the Crusaders failed in their great design
of recovering Jerusalem, which still remained in the possession of
Saladin, who, however, having made a truce with King Richard,
granted, as one of the terms, free and undisturbed access to all pil-
grims who should visit the holy city.

Thus terminated the third Crusade. It can scarcely be called an
absolute failure, notwithstanding that Jerusalem still remained in
the hands of the infidels, but the total ruin with which, at its com-
mencement, the Latin kingdom had been threatened was aviTted ;
the conquering progress of the Mussulmans had been seriously
checked ; the hitherto victorious Saladin had been ct)m])elled to
make a truce ; the greater part of the scacoast of Palestine, with all
its fortresses and the cities of Acre, Jaffa, Antioch, and 'lyre, re-
mained in the possession of the Christians.

Saladin had survived the truce which he had made with Richard
but a few months, and on his death his dominions were divided
between three of his sons and his brother Saphadin. The last of
these, to whom most of the veterans who had fought under Saladin
adhered, secured for himself a sovereignty in Syria.

The death of their renowned and powerful foe had encouraged
the Christians of Palestine to make renewed efforts to recover Jeru-
salem as soon as the truce had expired. To aid in this design,
a new Crusade was invoked in Europe, The appeal, heard with
apathy in England and France, met with more favor in Germany.
Three large armaments of German chivalry arrived at Acre in 1195.
The campaign lasted, however, less than two years, and the troops,
having effected no decisive results, were recalled to Germany in
consequence of the death of the Emperor Henry VI. This, which
has been dignified by some writers with the name of a fourth Cru-
sade, has, however, more generally been considered as a mere epi-
sode in the history of the Holy Wars.

The fourth Crusade proper began in the year 1 203, when a large
armament of knights and men-at-arms of France, Germany, Italy,

222

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

and Flanders sailed for Constantinople in transports furnished by
the Venetians and commanded by the blind Do<re Dandolo. The
throne of the Byzantine Empire had been usurped by the elder
Alexius, who had imprisoned his brother, the legitimate monarch,
after having caused his eyes to be put out. The first object of the
Crusaders was to dethrone the usurper and to restore the govern-
ment to Isaac and his son, the younger Alexius, who had instigated
the enterprise and accompanied the expedition.

The siege and the conquest of Constantinople is told in the graphic
language of Gibbon ; but it is so wholly unconnected with the sub-
ject of our present inquiry as not to claim further attention. It
is sufficient to say that by it the Crusaders were entirely diverted
from the great object for which they had left Europe. None ever
reached or sought to reach the . land of Palestine, and the fourth
Crusade terminated without a blow having been struck for the re-
covery of Jerusalem and the deliverance of the Holy Sepulcher from
the pollution of its Paynim possessors.

The fifth Crusade commenced in the year 1217. In this war
the Crusaders attacked Egypt, believing that that country was the
key to Palestine. At first they were successful, and besieged and
captured the city of Damietta. But, influenced and directed by the
cupidity and ignorance of the papal legate, they refused the offer of
the Saracens, that if the Christians would evacuate Egypt they
would cede Jerusalem to them, they continued the campaign with
most di.sastrous results, and, finally abandoning the contest, the
Crusaders returned to Europe in 1229, never having even seen the
shores of the Holy Land.

A sixth Crusade was undertaken by the Freneh in 1238. They
were subsequently joined by Richard, Earl of Cornwall, the nephew
of Richard the Lionhearted. The military capacity and prowess of
this able leader led to successful results, and in 1 240 to the restora-
tion of Jerusalem to the Christians. The Crusade ended with the
return of the Earl of Cornwall to England in 1240.

The fortifications of Jerusalem were rebuilt by the Knights
Templars, but the necessary measures for defense had scarcely been
completed when the Christian kingdom was attacked by a new
enemy. The descendants of those barbaric tribes of Tartars who,
under the name of Huns, had centuries before overwhelmed the
Roman Empire, now commenced their ravages in Asia Minor.

FREEMASONRY AND THE CRUSADES 223

Twenty thousand Turcoman horsemen, under Barbacan, their chief,
assisted by Egyptian priests, were enabled in 1242 to wrest Jerusa-
lem from the Christians, who never again recovered it. The war
continued with scarcely varying disasters to the Christians. Pales-
tine was overrun by the barbarous hordes of Turcomans. The
Moslems of Damascus, Aleppo, and Ems, forgetful of their ancient
hatred and religious conflicts, united with the Knights Templars to
oppose a common enemy.

But the effort to stay the progress of the Turcoman invasion
was vain. Every city of the Latin kingdom, such as Tiberias,
Ascalon, Jaffa, and others, were conquered. Acre alone remained
to the Christian chivalry, and the Holy Sepulcher was again in the
possession of the infidels.

A seventh Crusade was commenced in 1245, to recover what
had been lost. It was undertaken by the chivalry of England and
France. Louis IX. commanded the French portion of the forces
in person, and William Longsword, who had distinguished himself
in the fifth Crusade, with many other English knights and nobles,
vowed that they would serve under his banner.

Egypt was again made the objective point of the cxj)cdition,
and after an unnecessary and imprudent delay of eight months at
Cyprus, Louis sailed, in 1 248, for Egypt, with a force of fifty thousand
men. The history of this Crusade is but a narrative of the defeats
of the Christians, by the arms of their enemies, by famine, and by
pestilence. At Mansora, in 1 250, the Crusaders were totally routed ;
thirty thousand Christians were .slain, among them the flow'er of the
French and English chivalry, and King Louis himself was taken
prisoner. He w’as only ransomed by the surrender of Damietta to
the Turks, the conquest of which city had been almost the only suc-
eessful trophy of the Christian arms. The king proceeded to Acre,
almost the only possession of the Christians in Syria, and soon after-
ward returneu to France, thus ending the seventh and penultimate
Crusade, in the year 1254.

For fourteen years Syria and Palestine were left to the inade-
quate protection that could be afforded by the Knights Templars
and Hospitallers, two Orders who even in the face of their com-
mon foe could not restrain their own bitter rivalry and dissensions.
These feelings culminated at length in a sanguinary battle between
them, in which the Templars were almost completely destroyed.

324

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

The Latin kingdom of Palestine being thus enfeebled by the in-
testine broils of its defenders, city after city was surrendered to the
Moslems, until Acre alone remained in the hands of the Christians.
In 126S the heaviest blow was inflicted by the fall of Antioch, the
I)roud capital of Syria. Forty thousand Christians were slain at the
time of its surrender and one hundred thousand were sold into slavery.

The fall of the Christian state of Antioch was a catastrophe that
once more aroused the military ardor and the pious spirit of Europe,
and a new Crusade was inaugurated — the eighth and last — for the
recovery of the Holy Land, the restoration of the Latin kingdom,
and the extirpation of the infidels from the sacred territory.

This Crusade was conducted entirely by Prince Edward, after-
ward Edward I. of England. It is true that Louis IX. of France, un-
deterred by the disasters which had previously befallen him, had with
undiminished ardor sought to renew his efforts for the recovery of
the Holy Sepulcher, and sailed from France for that purpose in

1270. But he had stopped short at Tunis, the king and people of
which he had hoped to convert to Christianity. But, although no
decisive battles took place between the Moors and the Christians,
the army of the latter was soon destroyed by the heat of the climate,
by fatigue, by famine and pestilence, and the king himself died but
little more than a month after his arrival on the shore of ancient
Carthage. Prince Edward had joined the French army at Tunis
with a slender body of knights, but, after the death of the French
monarch and the abandonment of the enterprise, he had sailed for
Syria with an army of only one thousand knights and men-at-arms,
and landed at Acre in 1270. But the knights of the chivalry of
Palestine gathered eagerly around his standard and increased his
force to seven thousand. With this insignificant body of soldiery,
weak in numbers but strong in courage and in the capacity of their
leader, Edward attacked the immense horde of Moslems who had
been besieging Acre, caused them to retire, and, following them to
Nazareth, captured that city, after a battle in which the infidels
were defeated with great slaughter.

But the reduction of Nazareth closed the military career of Ed-
ward in Palestine. After narrowly escaping death from a poisoned
wound inflicted by a Moslem assassin, he returned to England, in

1271, having first effected a truce of ten years with the Sultan of
Egypt.

FREEMASONRY AND THE CRUSADES

225

The defense of Palestine, or rather of Acre, the only point oc-
cupied by the Christians, as the titular capital of the Latin king-
dom, was left to the knights of the three Orders of Chivalry, the
Templars, the Hospitallers, and the Teutonic knights. By them
the truce was repeatedly violated and peaceable Moslem traders
often plundered. Redress for these aggressions having been de-
manded in vain, the Sultan at length determined to extirpate the
" faithless Franks,” and marched against Acre with an army of two
hundred thousand men.

After a siege of little more than a month, in which prodigies of
valor were performed by the knights of the three military orders,
Acre was taken, in 1271, by assault, at the cost of sixty thousand
Christian lives. The inhabitants who did not submit to the Mos-
lem yoke escaped to Cyprus with the remains of the Templars,
the Hospitallers, and the Teutonic knights who had survived the
slaughter.

Thus, after a sanguinary contest of two hundred years, the pos-
session of the Holy Land was abandoned forever to the enemies of
the Cross.

Thus ends the history of the Crusades. For fifty years after-
ward the popes endeavored to instigate new efforts for the recovery
of the holy places, but their appeals met with no response. The
fanatical enthusiasm which had inspired the kings, the nobles, and
the knights of Europe for two centuries had been dissolved, and
the thirst for glory and the love of arms were thenceforth to be di-
rected in different channels.

It is not my intention to inquire into the influence exerted by
the Crusades on the state of religion, of education, of commerce, or
of society in Europe. The theme is an interesting one, but it is
foreign to the subject of our discussion, which is the possible con-
nection that may have existed between them and the origin of Free-
masonry. But, in so far as they may have favored the growth of
municipal freedom and the perpetuation of the system of chivalry,
it may be necessary in a future part of this discussion that these
points should demand some attention.

In the present point of view, the most important subject to at-
tract our attention is the organization during the Crusades of three
military Orders of Knighthood, the Knights Hospi^llers, the
Knights Templars, and the Teutonic Knights. It is through these,
15

226

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

but principally through the second, that the attempt is made to find
the origin of the Masonic institution in the time of the Crusaders.

Whatever may have been the origin of the institution of chivalry,
whether from the equestrian order of the Romans, from the Scandi-
navians, the Arabians, the Persians, or, what is far more probable,
from the peculiar influences of the feudal system, it is certain that
that form of knighthood which was embodied in the organization
of religious and military orders took its rise in Palestine during the
wars of the Crusades, and that before that era no such organizations
of knighthood were known in Europe.

The Knights Hospitallers of St. John, now better known as the
Knights of Malta, was the first of the military and religious Orders
that was established in Palestine. Its origin must be traced to the
Hospitallers of Jerusalem, a purely charitable institution established
by certain merchants of Amalfi, in the kingdom of Naples, who,
trading in the East, built hospitals in Jerusalem for the entertain-
ment and relief of poor and sick i)ilgrims, about the middle of the
iith century. After the first Crusade had begun, many knights,
laying aside their arms, united with the Hospitallers in the pious
task of attending the sick. At length Gerard, the Rector of the
Hospital, induced his brethren to assume the vows of poverty,
obedience, and chastity, and to adopt a peculiar costume consist-
ing of a black robe bearing a white cross of eight points on the
left breast. This was in the year 1099. The knights, however, con-
tinued their peaceful vocation of attending the sick until 1118, when
Gerard, having died, was succeeded by Raymond de Puy as Rec-
tor. The military spirit of Raymond was averse to the monastic
seclusion which had been fostered by his predecessor. He therefore
proposed a change in the character of the society, by which it should
become a military order devoted to the protection of Palestine from
the attacks of the infidels. The members gladly acceded to this
proposition, and, taking new vows at the hands of the Patriarch of
Jerusalem, the military Order of Knights of St. John of Jerusalem
was established, in the year 1118. The Order continued to reside
in Palestine during its occupation by the Christians of the Latin
kingdom, taking an active part in all the wars of the eight Cru-
sades.

When the city of Acre fell beneath the victorious army of the
Sultan of Egypt, the Hospitallers, with the knights of the other two

FREEMASONRY AND THE CRUSADES

227

Orders, who had escaped the slaughter which attended the siege and
followed on the surrender, fled to Cyprus. Thence they repaired
to the island of Rhodes, where they remained for two hundred
years under the title of the Knights of Rhodes, and afterward per-
manently established themselves at Malta, where, w'ith a change of
name to that of the Knights of Malta, they remained until the island
was taken possession of by Napoleon, in the year 1798. This was
virtually the end of the career of these valiant knights, although to
this day the Order retains some remnant of its e.xistence in Italy.

The Order of Knights Templars w'as established in the year 1 1 iS
by Hugh de Payens, Godfrey de St. Aldcmar, and seven other
knights whose names history has not preserved. Uniting the char-
acters of the monk and the soldier, they took the vows of poverty,
chastity, and obedience in the presence of the Patriarch of Jerusa-
lem ; Baldwin, the King of Jerusalem, assigned them as a residence
a part of his palace, which stood near the site of the former Temple,
and as a place for an armory the street between the palace and the
Temple, from which circumstance they derived their name of Tem-
plars. The Templars took a most active part in the defense of Pal-
estine during the two centuries of the Crusades. They had also
established houses called Preceptories in every country of Europe,
where many of the knights resided. But the head of the Order was
always in Palestine. At the close of the contests for the conquest
of the Holy Land, when Acre fell and the L.alin kingdom was dis-
solved, the Templars made their escape to Europe and were distrib-
uted among their various Preceptories.

But their wealth had e.xcited the cupidity and their power the
rivalry of Philip the Fair, King of France, who, with the assistance
of a corrupt and weak Pope, Clement V., resolved to extirpate the
Order. Charges of religious heresy and of moral licentiousness
were preferred against them ; proofs w’erc not wanting when proofs
were required by a King and a Pontiff ; and on the nth of March,
1314, De Molay, the Grand Master, wdth the three principal digni-
taries of the Order, were publicly burnt at the stake, fifty-four
knights having suffered the same fate three years before.

The Order was suppressed in every country of Europe. Its vast
possessions were partly appropriated by the different sovereigns to
their own use and partly bestowed upon the Knights of Malta, be-
tween whom and the Templars there had always existed a rivalry.

228

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

and who were not unwilling to share the spoils of their ancient ad-
versaries. In Portugal alone they were permitted to continue their
existence, under the name of the Knights of Christ.

The Teutonic Knights, the last of the three Orders, was exclu-
sively German in its organization. Their humble origin is thus re-
lated : During the Crusades, a wealthy gentleman of Germany, who
resided at Jerusalem, built a hospital for the relief and support of
his countrymen who were pilgrims. This charity was extended by
other Germans coming from Lubeck and Bremen, and finally, dur-
ing the third Crusade, a sumptuous hospital was erected at Acre,
and an Order was formed under the name of Teutonic Knights, or
Brethren of the Hospital of our Lady, of the Germans of Jerusalem.
The rule adopted by the knights clo.sely resembled that of the Hos-
pitallers or Templars, with the exception that none but Germans
could be admitted into the Order.

Like the knights of the other two Orders, they remained in Pal-
estine until the fall of Acre, when they returned to Europe. For
many years they were engaged in a crusade for the conversion of
the Pagans of Prussia and Poland, and afterward in territorial
struggle with the Kings of Poland, who had invaded their domains.
After centuries of contests with various powers, the Order was at
length abolished by Emperor Napoleon, in 1809, although it still
has a titular existence in Austria.

In an inquiry into any pretended connection of the Crusaders
with Freemasonry, we may dismiss the two Orders of the Knights
of Malta and the Teutonic Knights with the single remark that in
their organization they bore not the slightest resemblance to that of
Freemasonry. They had no arcana in their system, no secret form
of initiation or admission, and no methods of recognition. And
besides this want of similarity, which must at once preclude any
idea of a connection between the Masonic and these Chivalric Or-
ders, we fail to find in histoiy any record of such a connection or
the faintest allusion to it.

If Freemasonry owed its origin to the Crusades, as has been as-
serted by some writers, or if any influence was exerted upon it by
the Knights who returned to Europe after or during these wars, and
found Freemasonry already existing as an organization, we must
look for such connection or such influence to the Templars only.

The probabilities of such a connection have been based upon the

FREEMASONRY AND THE CRUSADES

229

following historic grounds. The Knights Templars were a secret
society, differing in this respect from the other two Orders. They
had a secret doctrine and a secret ceremony of initiation into their
ranks. This secret character of their ceremonies was made the sub-
ject of one of the charges preferred against them by the pope. The
words of this charge are that “when they held their chapters, they
shut all the doors of the house or church in which they met .so
closely that no one could approach near enough to see or hear what
they were doing or saying.” It is further said, in the next charge,
that when they held their secret chapter “ they placed a watchman
on the roof of the house or church in which they met, to foresee
the approach of any one.”

Again, it is supposed that the Templars had held frequent and
intimate communication with some of the secret societies which,
during the Crusades, existed in the East, and that from them they
derived certain doctrines which they incorporated into their own
Order and introduced into Europe on their return, making them the
basis of a system which resulted, if not in the creation of the entire
Masonic institution, at least in the invention of the high degrees.

While it may not be possible to sustain this theory of the inter-
communion of the Templars and the secret societies of the East
by any authentic historical proof, it derives some feature of possi-
bility, and perhaps even of probability, from the admitted character
of the Templar Knights during the latter days of their residence in
Palestine. They have not been supposed to have observed with
strictness their vows of chastity and poverty. That they had lost
that humility which made them at first call themselves “ poor fel-
low-soldiers of Christ” and adopt as a seal two knights riding on
one horse, is evident from the well-known anecdote of Richard I, of
England, who, being advised by a zealous preacher to get rid of his
three favorite daughters, pride, avarice, and voluptuousness, replied :
“ You counsel well. I hereby dispose of the first to the Templars,
the second to the Benedictines, and the third to my bishops.” In
fact, the Templars were accused by their contemporaries of laxity in
morals and of infidelity in religion. The Bois du Guilbert drawn
by the graphic pen of Walter Scott, although a fiction, had many a
counterpart in history. There was, in short, nothing in the aus-
terity of manners or intolerance of faith which would have pre-
vented the Templars of the Crusades from holding frequent com-

230

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

munications with the infidel secret Societies around them. The
Druses, indeed, are said by some modern writers to have Templar
blood in them, from the illegal intercourse of their female ancestors
with the Knights.

Of these secret Societies three at least demand a brief attention,
from the supposed connection of the Templars with them. These
are the Essencs, the Druids, and the Assassins,

The Essencs were a Jewish sect which at the time of the Cru-
sades were dwelling principally on the shores of the Dead Sea. Of
the three schools of religion which were cultivated by the Jews in
the time of our Saviour, the Pharisees and the Sadducees were
alone condemned for their vices and their hypocrisy, while neither
He nor any of the writers of the New Testament have referred in
words either of condemnation or of censure to the Essenes. This
complete silence concerning them has been interpreted in their
favor, as indicating that they had not by their doctrines or their
conduct incurred the displeasure of our Lord or of his disciples.
Some have even supposed that St. John the Baptist, as well as some
of the Evangelists and Apostles, were members of the sect — an
opinion that is at least not absurd ; but we reject as altogether un-
tenable the hypothesis of De Quincey, that they were Christians.

Their ceremonies and their tenets are involved in great ob-
scurity, notwithstanding the laborious researches of the learned
Ginsburg. From him and from Josephus, who is the first of the
ancient writers who has mentioned them, as well as from Philo and
some other authorities, we get possession of the following facts.

The forms and ceremonies of the Essenes were, like those of the
Freemasons, eminently symbolical. They were all celibates, and
hence it became necessary to recruit their ranks, which death and
other causes decimated from time to time, by the admission of new
converts. Hence they had adopted a system of initiation which
was divided into three degrees. The first stage was preceded by a
preparatory novitiate which extended to three years. At the end of
the first degree, the trials of which continued for twelve months, he
was presented with a spade, an apron, and a white robe, the last be-
ing a symbol of purity. In the second degree or stage he was
called an approachcr, which lasted for two years, during which
time he was permitted to join in sorhe of the ceremonies of the
sect, but not admitted to be present at the common. He was then

FREEMASONRY AND THE CRUSADES 231

accepted as an associate. If his conduct was approved, he was
finally advanced to the third degree and received into full member-
ship as a companion or disciple.

Brewster, in the work attributed to Lawrie, seeks to find a
common origin for the Freemasons and the Essenes, and sup-
ports his opinion by the following facts, which, if they do not sus-
tain the truth of his hypothesis, are certainly confirmed by other
authorities. He says : “ When a candidate was proposed for ad-
mission, the strictest scrutiny was made into his character. If
his life had hitherto been exemplary, and if he appeared capable
of curbing his passions and regulating his conduct according to
the virtuous though austere maxims of the Order, he was presented
at the expiration of his novitiate with a white garment as an
emblem of the regularity of his conduct and the purity of his
heart. A solemn oath was then administered to him, that he would
never divulge the mysteries of the Order, that he would make no
innovations on the doctrines of the society, and that he would
continue in that honorable course of piety and virtue which he had
begun to pursue. Like Freemasons, they instructed the young
members in the knowledge which they derived from their an-
cestors. They admitted no women into their Order. They had
particular signs for recognizing each other, which have a strong
resemblance to those of Freemason.s. They had colleges or
places of retirement, where they resorted to practice their rites and
settle the aflfairs of the society ; and after the performance of
these duties they assembled in a large hall, where an entertainment
was provided for them by the president or master of the college,
who allotted a certain quantity of provisions to every individual.
They abolished all distinctions of rank, and if preference was ever
given, it was given to piety, liberality, and virtue. Treasurers
were appointed in every town to supply the wants of indigent
strangers.” *

Josephus gives the Essenian oath more in cxienso. He tells
us that before being admitted to the common meal, that is, before
advancement to full membership, the candidate takes an oath “ that
he will exercise piety toward God and observe justice toward men ;
that he will injure no one either of his own accord or by the com-

^ Lawrie, History of Freemasonry,” cd. 1804, p. 34.

232

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

mand of others ; that he will hate the wicked and aid the good ;
that he will be faithful to all men, especially to those in authority ;
that if cv'er placed in authority he will not abuse his power nor seek
to surpass those under him in the costliness of his garments or dec-
orations ; that he will be a lover of truth and a reprover of false-
hood ; that he will keep his hands clear from theft and his soul
from unlawful gains ; that he will conceal nothing from the mem-
bers of his own sect, nor reveal their doctrines to others, even at
the hazard of his life ; nor will he communicate those doctrines to
any one otherwise than as he has himself received them ; and,
finally, that he will preserve inviolate the books of the sect and the
names of the angels.”

This last expression is supposed to refer to the secrets connected
with the Tetragrammaton or Four-lettered Name and the other
names of God and the angelical hierarchy which are comprised in
the mysterious theosophy taught by the Cabalists and accepted, it
is said, by the Essenes. The myster}’’ of the name of God was
then, as it is now, a prominent feature in all Oriental philosophy
and religion.

I am inclined to the opinion of Brunet, who says that the
Essenes were less a sect of religion than a kind of religious order
or association of zealous and pious men whom the desire of at-
taining an exalted state of perfection had united together.^ But
whether they were one or the other, any hypothesis which seeks to
connect them with Freemasonry through the Knights Templars
is absolutely untenable.

At the time of the Crusades, and indeed long before, the
Essenes had ceased to hold a place in history. What little re-
mained of them was to be found in settlements about the north-
western shore of the Dead Sea. They had decreased almost to a
fraction in numbers, and had greatly corrupted their doctrines and
their manners, ceasing, for instance, to be celibate and adopting the
custom of marriage, while they had accepted much of the philosophy
of Plato, of Pythagoras, and of the school of Alexandria.

They still retained, however, their Judaic faith and much of their
primitive austerity, and it is therefore improbable that there could
have been any congenial intercommunion between them and the

^Brunet, “ Paralele dcs Religions,*' P. VI., sec. xllv.

FREEMASONRY AND THE CRUSADES

233

Templars. Their poverty and insignificance would have supplied
no attraction to the Knights, and their austerity of manners and
Judaism would have repelled them.

As to the similarity of Essenism and Freemasonry in the estab-
lishment by each of a brotherhood distinguished by love, charity,
and a secret initiation, we can draw no conclusion from these coin-
cidences that there was a connection of the two associations, since
the same coincidences will be found in all fraternities ancient and
modern. They arise from no spirit of imitation or fact of de-
scent, but are the natural outgrowth of the social condition of man,
which is ever developing itself in such mystical and fraternal associ-
ations.

But this subject will be treated more at length when, in a sub-
sequent chapter of this work, I come to treat of the theory which
deduces Freemasonry from Essenism by a direct descent, without
the invocation of a Christian chivalric medium. It has, however,
become inevitable, in considering the Secret Societies of the Itast at
the period of the Crusades, to anticipate to some extent what will
have to be hereafter said.

The Druses were another mystical religion with which the
Templars arc said to have come in contact and from whom they are
said to have derived certain dogmas and usages which were trans-
mitted to Europe and incorporated into the system of Freemasonry.

Of the communication of the Templars with the Druses there
is some evidence, both traditional and historic, but what iniluence
that communication had upon either Tem]>larism or Masonry is a
problem that admits only of a conjectural solution. The one pro-
posed by King, in his work on the Gnostics, will hereafter be re-
ferred to.

The Druses arc a mystical sect who have always inhabited the
southern side of Mount Lebanon and the western side of Anti-
Lebanon, extending from Beirut in the north to Sur in the semth,
and from the shores of the Mediterranean to the city of Damascus.
They trace their origin to Hakim, who was Sultan of Egypt in 926,
but derive their name from Mohammed Ben Israel Darasi, under
whose leadership they fled from Egypt in the loth century and
settled in Syria, in that part around Lebanon which they still in-
habit

Their religion appears to be a mixture of Judaism, Christianity,

234 PREHISTORIC MASONRY

and Mohammedanism, although what it precisely is it is impossible
to tell, since they keep their dogmas a secret, which is imparted
only to those of their tribe who have passed through a form of initi-
ation.

Of this initiation, Churchill says that there is a probation of
twelve months before the eandidate can be admitted to full mem-
bership. In the second year, the novitiate having been complete,
the Druse is permitted to assume the white turban as a badge of
his profession, and is permitted to participate in all the mysteries of
his religion.

These mysteries refer altogether to dogma, for their religion is
without ceremonies of any kind, and even without prayer.

Their doctrines have been summarized as follows : There is one
God, unknown and unknowable, without personal form and of
whom we can only predicate an existence. Nine times he has ap-
peared on earth in the form of man. These were not incarnations,
for God did not assume flesh, but merely put on flesh as a man puts
on a garment. There are five invisible intelligences, called Minis-
ters of Religion, and who have been impersonated by five Druse
teachers, of whom the first is Univcrsai Intelligence, personated by
Hamsa, whose creation was the immediate work of God. The sec-
ond is the Univcrsai Soul, personated by Ismael, and is the female
principal as to the first, as the Universal Intelligence is the male.
From these two proceed the Word, which is personated by Mo-
hammed Wahab. The fourth is the Right JVing, or the Proceed-
ing, produced from the Word and the Universal Soul and personated
by Selama. The fifth is the Left Wing, or the Following, pro-
duced in the same way from the Proceeding and personated by
Moetana Behsedecn. These form the religious hierarchy of Drus-
ism as the ten sephiroth make the mystical tree of the Cabalists,
from which it is probable that the Druses borrowed the idea. But
they are taken,' as Dr. Jessup says, “in some mysterious and incom-
prehensible sense which no Druse, man or woman, ever understood
or can understand.” ^ Yet their sacred books assert that none can
possess the knowledge of Drusism except he knows all these Minis-
ters of Religion.

They have also seven precepts or commandments, obedience to

^ “ Syrian Home-Life,” p. 183.

FREEMASONRY AND THE CRUSADES

235

which is enjoined but very seldom observed by the modern Druses,
and never in their intercourse with unbelievers.

1. To speak the truth.

2. To render each other mutual assistance.

3. To renounce all error.

4. To separate from the ignorant and wicked.

5. To always assert the eternal unity of God.

6. To be submissive under trials and sufferings.

7. To be content in any condition, whether of joy or sorrow.

Of their outward forms and ceremonies we have no reliable

information, for their worship is a secret one. In their sacred
edifices, which are embowered among high trees or placed on the
mountain summit, there are no ornaments. They have no pre-
scribed rites and do not offer prayer, but in their worship sing
hymns and read the sacred books. Churchill gives evidence of the
profound secrecy in which the Druses envelop their religion.
“ Two objects,” he says, “ engrossed my attention — the religion of
the Druses and the past history of the races which now occupy the
mountain range of Lebanon. In vain I tried to make the terms of
extreme friendship and intimacy which existed between myself and
the Druses available for the purpose of informing myself on the
first of these points. Sheiks, akkals, and peasants alike baffled my
inquiries, either by jocose evasion or by direct negation.” *

Finally, as if to complete their resemblance to a secret society,
we arc told that to enable one Druse to recognize another a system
of signs and passwords is adopted, without an interchange of which
no communication in respect to their mysteries is imparted.

The Rev. Mr. King, in his work on the Gnostics, thinks that
“the Druses of Mount Lebanon, though claiming for their founder
the Egyptian caliph Hakim, are in all probability the remains of the
numerous Gnostic sects noticed by Procopius as flourishing there
most extensively in his own times,” ® which was in the 6th century.
And he adds that “ the popular belief among their neighbors is that
they, the Druses, adore an idol in the form of a calf, and hold in their
secret meetings orgies similar to those laid to the charge of the
Ophites in Roman times, of the Templars in mediaeval, and of the

On the Druses and Maronites under Turkish Rule.’*
King’s “ Gnoatics,” p. 183.

236 PREHISTORIC MASONRY

continental Freemasons in modern times.”' This statement I have
found eonfirmed by other writers. But Mr. King thinks it an in-
teresting and significant point that “ the Druses hold the residence
of their Supreme head to be in Seotland ; ” a tradition which, he
says, has been “ evidently handed down from the times when the
Templars were all-powerful in their neighborhood." This would
prove, admitting the statement to be true, rather that the Druses
borrowed from the Templars than that the Templars borrowed from
the Druses ; though it would even then be very difficult to under-
stand why the Templars should have traeed their head to Scotland,
since the legend of Scottish Templarism is of more recent growth.

We may, however, judge of the weight to be attached to Mr.
King’s arguments from the fact that he deems it to be a “ singular
coincidence ’’ that our Freemasons are often spoken of by German
writers as the “Scottish Brethren." Not being a Mason, he was
ignorant of the meaning of the term, which refers to a particular
rite of Masonry, and not to any theory of its origin, and is therefore
no coincidence at all. The hypothesis of the supposed connection
of the sect of Gnostics with Freemasonry will be the subject of
future eonsideration.

But there was another secret society, of greater importance than
the Druses, which flourished with vigor in Syria at the time of the
Crusaders, and whose connection with the Temjilars, as historically
proved, may have had some influence over that Order in moulding,
or at least in suggesting, some of its esoteric dogmas and ceremo-
nies. This was the sect of the Assassin.s.

The Ishmaeleeh, or, as they are more commonly called, the Assas-
sins, from their supposed use of the herb hashish to produce a tem-
porary frenzy, was during the Crusades one of the most powerful
tribes of Syria, although their population is now little more than a
thousand. The sect was founded about the end of the iith cen-
tury, in Persia, by Hassan Sahab. From Persia, where they are
supposed to have imbibed many of the doetrines of the philosophical
sect of the Softs, they emigrated to Asia Minor and settled in Syria,
to the south of Mount Lebanon. Their chief was called Sheikh-
el-Jcber, literally translated “ the Old Man of the Mountain," a
name familiar to the readers of the Voyages of Sindbad. Higgins,

* King's “ Gnostics,” p. 183.

FREEMASONRY AND THE CRUSADES

237

who, when he had a theory to sustain, became insane upon the sub-
ject of etymology, translates it as “ the sage of the Kabbala or Tra-
ditions,” but the plain Arabic words admit of no such interpretation.

The credulity and the ignorance of the Middle Ages had assigned
to the sect of the Assassins the character of habitual murderers, an
historical error that has been perpetuated in our language by the
meaning given to the word assassin. This calumny has been ex-
ploded by the researches of modern scholars, who now class them
as a philosophical sect whose doctrines and instructions were secret.
Of the Softs, from whom the Ishmaeleeh or Assassins derived their
doctrine, it will be necessary soon to speak.

Von Hammer, who wrote a history of the Assassins,’ has sought
to trace a close connection between them and the Templars. lie has
shown himself rather as a prejudiced opponent than as an impartial
critic, but the sophistry of his conclusions does not affect the accuracy
of his historical statements. Subsequent writers have therefore, in
their accounts of this sect, borrowed largely from the pages of Von
Hammer.

The Assassins were a secret society having a religion and relig-
ious instructions which they imparted only to those of their tribe who
had gone through a pre.scribed form of initiation. According to
Von Hammer, that system of initiation was divided into three de-
grees. They administered oaths of secrecy and of passive obedience
and had modes of mutual recognition, thus resembling in many re-
spects other secret societies which have at all times existed. He
says that they were governed by a Grand Master and had regulations
and a religious code, in all of which he .supposes that he has found a
close resemblance to the Templars. Their religious views he states
to have been as follows :

“Externally they practice the duties of Islamism, although they
internally renounce them ; they believe in the divinity of Ali, in un-
created light as the principle of all created things, and in the Sheikh
Ras-ed-dia, the Grand Pror of the Order in Syria, and contempo-
rary with the Grand Ma.ster Hassan 1 1., as the last representative of
the Deity on earth.” *

The Rev. Mr. Lyde, who traveled among the remains of the

Geschicte dcr Assassnen aus Morgenliind-ischen Quellcn,” Tubingun, 1818.

* “ Geschicte der Assassnen,’’ Wood’s Translation, p. 221.

238

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

sect in 1852, says that they professed to believe in all the prophets,
but had a chief respect for Mohammed and his son-in-law Ali, and
he speaks of their secret prayers and rites as being loo disgusting to
be mentioned.^

During the Crusades, the Templars entered at various times into
amicable arrangements and treaty stipulations with the Assassins, in
whose territory several of the fortresses of the Knights were built,
and we may therefore readily believe that at those periods, when
war was not raging, there might have been a mutual interchange of
courtesies, of visits and of conferences.

Now, the Assassins were by no means incapable of communicat-
ing some elements of knowledge to their knightly neighbors. The
chivalry of that age were not distinguished for learning and knew
little more than their profession of arms, while the Syrian infidels
had brought from Persia a large portion of the intellectual culture
of the Sofis. Von Hammer, whose testimony is given in the face
of his adverse prejudices, admits that they produced many treatises
on mathematics and law, and he confesses that Ilassan, the founder
of the sect, possessed a profound knowledge of philosophy, and of
the mathematical and metaphysical sciences. We can not therefore
deny the probability that in the frequent communications with this
intellectual as well as warlike tribe the Templars may have derived
some of those doctrines and secret observances which characterized
the Order on its return from Palestine, and which, distorted and
misinterpreted by their enemies, formed the basis of those charges
which led to the persecution and the eventual extinction of Knight
Templarism.

Godfrey Higgins, whose sp)eculations are seldom controlled by a
discreet judgment, finds a close connection between the Freemasons
and the Assassins, through the Templars. “ It is very certain,” he
says, “ that the Ishmalians or Society of Assassins is a Mohammedan
sect ; that it was at once both a military and religious association,
like the Templars and Teutonic Knights ; and that, like the Jesuits,
it had its members scattered over extensive countries. It was a link
that connected ancient and modern Freemasonry.” ® And he subse-
quently asserts that “the Templars were nothing but one branch of

^ ** The Ansyreeh and Ishmaeleeh : a visit to the secret societies of Northern Syria,*’
by Rev. Samuel Lyde, B.A., London, 1853, p. 238.

’** “ Anacalypsib,'’ I., 700.

FREEMASONRY AND THE CRUSADES

239

Masons.”^ And so he goes on speculating, that Templarism and
Ishmaelism were identical, and Freemasonry sprung from them both,
or rather from the latter through the former. But as Higgins has
advanced several other theories of the origin of Masonry, we may
let the present one pass.

We may be prepared, however, to admit that the Templars
possibly modified their secret doctrines under the influence of their
friendly conferences with the Assassins, without recognizing the
further fact that the Templars exercised a similar inlluenec over
the Freemasons.

.1 have said that the Assassins are supposed to have derived
their doctrines from the sect of the Sofis in Persia. Indeed, the
Softs appear to have been the common origin of all the secret
societies of Syria, which will account for their general resemblance
to each other. 1 n any inquiry, therefore, into the probable or pos-
sible connection of Templarism with these societies, Softsm, or the
doctrine of the Softs, will form an interesting clement.

The sect of the Softs originated in Persia, and was extended
over other countries of the Fast. The name is generally supposiid
to be derived from the Greek Sophia, wisdom, and they bore also
the name of philosanph, which will easily suggest the word
philosopher. Dr. Hcrbelot, however, derived the name from the
Persian sauf or sof, wool, because, as he said, the ancient Softs
dressed in woolen garments. The former derivation is, however,
the most plausible.

Sir John Malcolm, who has given a very good account of them
in his Plistory of Persia, says that among them may be counted
some of the wisest men of Persia and the East The Mohammedan
Softs, he says, have endeavored to connect their mystic faith with
the doctrine of the prophet in a manner that will be better shown
from Von Hammer. That the Gnostic heresy was greatly infused
in the system of Softsm is very evident, and at the same time
there appears to have been some connection in ideas with the
school of Pythagoras. The object of all investigation is the attain-
ment of truth, and the labors of the initiate are symbolically di-
rected to its discovery.

In Softsm there is a system of initiation, which is divided into

Anacalypsis,” I., 712.

240

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

four degrees. In the first or preparatory degree, the novice is re-
quired to observe the rites of the popular religion in its ordinary
meaning. In the second degree, called the Pale of Sofism, he ex-
changes these exoteric rites for a spiritual and secret worship.
The third degree is called Wisdom, and in this the initiate is sup-
posed to be invested with supernatural knowledge and to have
become equal with the angels. The fourth and last degree is called
Truth, which the candidate is now supposed to have attained, and
to have become united with the Deity.

Sir William Jones has given a summary of their doctrines, so
far as they have been made known, as follows :

Nothing exists absolutely but God; the human soul is but an
emanation from 11 is essence, and, though temporarily separated
from its divine source, will eventually be united with it. From this
union the highest happiness will result, and therefore that the chief
good of man in this world consists in as perfect a union with the
Eternal Spirit as the incumbrances of flesh will permit.

Von Hammer’s history of the ri.se, the progress, and the char-
acter of Sofi.sm is more minute, more accurate, and therefore
more interesting than that of any other writer. In accepting it
for the reader, I shall not hesitate to use and to condense the
language of Sloanc, the author of the New Curiosities of Litera-
ture.

The German historian of the Assassins says that a certain
House of Wisdom was formed in Cairo at the end of the loth cen-
tury by the Sultan, which had thus arisen. Under Maimun, the
seventh Abasside Caliph, a certain Abdallah established a secret
society, and divided his doctrines into seven degrees, after the sys-
tem of Pythagoras and the Ionian schools. The last degree in-
culcated the vanity of all religion and the indifference of actions,
which are visited by neither future recompense or punishment. He
sent mis.sionaries abroad to enlist disciples and to initiate them in
the different degrees, according to their aptitude.

In a short time Karmath, one of his followers, improved this
system. He taught that the Koran was to be interpreted alle-
gorically, and, by adopting a system of .symbolism, made arbitrary
explanations of all the precepts of that book. Prayer, for instance,
meant only obedience to a mysterious Imam, whom the Ishmaeleeh
said that they were engaged in seeking, and the injunction of alms-

FREEMASONRY AND THE CRUSADES

241

giving was explained as the duty of paying him tithes. Fasting was
only silence in respect to the secrets of the sect.

The more violent followers of Karmath sought to subvert the
throne and the religion of Persia, and with this intent made war
upon the Caliphs, but were conquered and exterminated.

The more prudent portion, under the general name of Ishmael-
ites, continued to work in secret, and finally succeeded in placing
one of their sect upon the throne. In process of time they erected
a large building, which they called the House of Wisdom, and
furnished it with professors, attendants, and books, and mathemati-
cal instruments. Men and women were admitted to the enjoy-
ment of these treasures, and scientific and philosophical disputa-
tions were held. It was a public institution, but the secret Order of
the Sofis, under whose patronage it was maintained, had their mys-
teries, which could only be attained by an initiation extending
through nine degrees. While Sofism has by most writers been be-
lieved to be a religio-philosophical sect. Von Hammer thinks that
it was political, and that its principal object was to overthrow
the House of Abbas in favor of the Fatimites, which could only
be effected by undermining the national religion.

The government at length interfered, and the operations of the
society were suspended. But in about a year it resumed its func-
tions and established a new House of Wisdom. Extending its in-
fluences abroad, many of the disciples of Sofism passed over into
Syria about the close of the loth century, and there established
those secret societies which in the course of the Crusades came int o
contact, sometimes on the field of battle and sometimes in friendly
conferences during temporary truces with the Crusaders, but espe-
cially with the Knights Templars.

The principal of these societies were the Ishmaeleeh or Assas-
sins and the Druses, both of whom have been described.

There were other societies in Syria, resembling these in doc-
trine and ceremonies, who for some especial reasons not now known
had seceded from the main body, which appears to have been the
Assassins.

Such were the Ansyreeh, who were the followers of that Kar-
math of whom I have just spoken, who had seceded at an early
period from the Sofis in Persia and had established his sect in
Syria, on the coast, in the plain of Laodicea, now Ladikcch.

16

242

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

From them arose another sect, called the Nusairyeh, from the
name of their founder, Nusair. They settled to the north of Mount
Lebanon, along the low range of mountains extending from Anti-
och to Tripoli and from the Mediterranean to Hums, where their
descendants, numbering about two hundred thousand souls, still re-
main.

It is from their frequent communications with these various
secret societies, but especially with the Assassins, that Von Hammer
and Higgins, following Ramsay, have supposed that the Templars
derived their secret doctrines and, carrying them to Europe, com-
municated them to the Freemasons. Rather, I should say, that Von
Hammer and Higgins believed these Syrian societies to be Ma-
sonic, and that they taught the principles of the institution to the
Templars, who were thus the founders of Freemasonry in Europe.

Of such a theory there is not the slightest scintilla of historic
evidence. When we come to examine the authentic history of the
origin of Freemasonry, it will be seen how such an hypothesis is
entirely without support.

But that the Templars did have frequent communication with
those secret societies, that they acquired a knowledge of their doc-
trines, and were considerably influenced in the lives of many of
their members, and perhaps in secret modifications of their Order,
is an hypothesis that can not be altogether denied or doubted, since
there are abundant evidences in history of .such communications,
and since we must admit the plausibility of the theory that the
Knights were to some extent impressed with the profound doctrines
of Sofism as practiced by these sects.

Admitting, then, that the Templars derived some philosophical
ideas more liberal than their own from these Syrian secret philoso-
phers who were more learned than themselves, the next question
will be as to what influences the Templars exerted upon the people
of Europe on their return, and in what direction and to what ends
this influence was exerted ; and to this we must now direct our at-
tention.

But, before entering upon this subject, we may as well notice
one significant fact. Of the three Orders of Knighthood who dis-
played their prowess in Palestine and Syria during the two centuries
of the Crusades, the Hospitallers, the Teutonic Knights, and the
Templars, it is admitted that the Templars were more intimately

FREEMASONRY AND THE CRUSADES

243

acquainted with the Ishmaeleeh or Assassins than cither of the others.
It is also known that while the admission to membership in the
Hospitaller and Teutonic Orders was open and public, the Templars
alone had a secret initiation, and held their meetings in houses
guarded from profane intrusion.

Now, at what time the Templars adopted this secret formula of
initiation is not known. The rule provided for their government
by St. Bernard at the period of their organization makes no allusion
to it, and it is probable that there was no such secret initiation prac-
ticed for many years after their establishment as an order.

Now, this question naturally suggests itself : Did the Templars
borrow the idea and in part the form of their initiation from the
Assassins, among whom such a system existed, or, having obtained
it from some other source, was it subjected at a later period of their
career, but long before they left Palestine, to certain modifications
derived from their intercourse with the secret societies of Syria ?
This is a question that can not be historically solved. Wc must
rest for any answer on mere conjecture. And yet the facts of the
Templars being of the three Orders the only secret one, and of their
intercourse with the Assassins, who were also a secret order, are
very significant. Some light may be thrown upon this subject by a
consideration of the charges, mainly false but with certain elements
of truth, which were urged against the Order at the time of its sup-
pression.

Let us now proceed to an investigation of the theory that makes
the Templars the founders of the Order of Freemasonry, after the
return of the Knights to Europe. Rejecting this theory as wholly
untenable, it will, however, be necessary to inquire what were the
real influences exerted upon Europe by the Knights.

It must be remembered that if any influence at all was exercised
upon the people of Europe, the greater portion must be attributed
to the Templars. Of the three Orders, the Hospitallers, when they
left Palestine, repaired directly to the island of Rhodes, where they
remained for two hundred years, and then, removing to Malta, con-
tinued in that island until the decadence of their Order at the dose
of the last century. The Teutonic Knights betook themselves to
the uncivilized parts of Germany, and renewed their warlike voca-
tion by crusades against the heathens of that country. The Tem-
plars alone distributed themselves in the different kingdoms and

244

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

cities of the continent, and became familiar with the people who
lived around their preceptories. They alone came in contact with
the inhabitants, and they alone could have exercised any influence
upon the popular mind or taste.

It has been a generally received opinion of the most able archi-
tects that the Templars exerted a healthy influence upon the archi-
tecture of the Middle Ages. Thus Sir Christopher Wren says that
“ the Holy Wars gave the Christians who had been there an idea of
the Saracens’ works, which were afterward imitated by them in their
churches, and they refined upon it every day as they proceeded in
building.” *

But the most positive opinion of the influence of the Crusaders
upon the architecture of Europe was given in 1836 by Mr. West-
macott, a distinguished artist of England. In the course of a series
of lectures before the Royal Academy, he thus spoke of the causes
of the revival of the arts.

There were, he said, two principal causes which tended ma-
terially to assist the restoration of literature and the arts in England
and in other countries of Europe. These were the Crusades and
the extension or the establishment of the Freemason’s institution in
the north and west of Europe. The adventurers who returned from
the Holy Land brought back some ideas of various improvements,
particularly in architecture, and along with these a strong desire to
erect castellated, ecclesiastical, and palatial edifices, to display the
taste that they had acquired ; and in less than a century from the
first Crusade above six hundred buildings of the above description
had been erected in southern and western Europe. This taste, he
thinks, was spread into almost all countries by the establishment
of the Fraternity of Freemasons, who, it appears, had, under some
peculiar form of Brotherhood, existed for an immemorial period in
Syria and other parts of the East, whence some bands of them
migrated to Europe, and after a time a great efflux of these men,
Italian, German, French, Spanish, etc., had spread themselves in
communities through all civilized Europe; and in all countries
where they settled we find the same style of architecture from that
period, but differing in some points of treatment as suited the climate.

The latter part of this statement requires confirmation. I do not

1 Wren’s “ Parentalia.'

FREEMASONRY AND THE CRUSADES

245

think that there is any historical evidence of the ingress into Europe
of bands of the Syrian secret fraternities during or after the
Crusades, nor is there any probability that such an ingress could
have occurred.

But the historical testimonies are very strong that the literature
and arts of Europe, and especially its architecture, were materially
advanced by the influence of the returning Crusaders, whose own
knowledge had been enlarged and their taste cultivated by their
contact with the nations of the East.

This topic appertains, however, to the historical rather than to
the legendary study of Masonry, and will at a future time in the
course of this work command our attention. At present we must
restrict ourselves to the consideration of the theory that tradition-
ally connects the Crusaders, and especially the Knights Templars,
with the establishment of the Masonic institution, through their in-
tercourse with the secret societies of Syria.

The inventor of the theory that Freemasonry was instituted in
the Holy Land by the Crusaders, and by them on their return in-
troduced into Europe, was the Chevalier Michael Ramsay, to whom
Masonry is indebted (whatever may be the value of the debt) for
the system of high degrees and the manufacture of Rites.

In the year 1 740 Ramsay was the Grand Orator, and delivered
a discourse before the Grand Lodge of France, in which he thus
traces the origin of Freemasonry.

Rejecting as fabulous all hypotheses which trace the foundation
of the Order to the Patriarchs, to Enoch, Noah, or Solomon, he
finds its origin in the time of the Crusades.

“ In the time,” he says, “ of the Holy Wars in Palestine, many
princes, nobles, and citizens associated themselves together and en-
tered into vows to re-establish Christian temples in the Holy Land,
and engaged themselves by an oath to employ their talents and their
fortunes in restoring architecture to its primitive condition. They
adopted signs and symbolic words, derived from religion, by which
they might distinguish themselves from the infidels and recognize
each other in the midst of the Saracens. They communicated these
words only to those who had previously sworn a solemn oath, often
taken at the altar, that they would not reveal them. Some time
after, this Order was united with that of the Knights of St. John of
Jerusalem, for which reason in all countries our Lodges are called

246

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Lodges of St. John, This union of the two Orders was made in
imitation of the conduct of the Israelites at the building of the sec-
ond Temple, when they held the trowel in one hand and the sword
in the other.

“ Our Order must not, therefore, be regarded as a renewal of the
Bacchanalian orgies and as a source of senseless dissipation, of un-
bridled libertinism and of scandalous intemperance, but as a moral
Order instituted by our ancestors in the Holy Land to recall the
recollection of the most sublime truths in the midst of the innocent
pleasures of society.

“ The kings, princes, and nobles, when they returned from Pal-
estine into their native dominions, established Lodges, At the time
of the last Crusade several Lodges had already been erected in Ger-
many, Italy, Spain, France, and from the last in Scotland, in conse-
quence of the intimate relations which existed between those two
countries.

"James Lord Steward of Scotland was the Grand Master of a
Lodge established at Kilwinning in the west of Scotland, in the
year 1236, a short time after the death of Alexander III., King of
Scotland, and a year before J.ohn Baliol ascended the throne. This
Scottish Lord received the Earls of Gloucester and Ulster, English
and Irish noblemen, as Masons into his Lodge,

" By degrees our Lodges, our festivals, and solemnities were
neglected in most of the countries in which they had been estab-
lished. Hence the silence of the historians of all nations, except
Great Britain, on the subject of our Order. It was preserved, how-
ever, in all its splendor by the Scotch, to whom for several centuries
the kings of France had intrusted the guardianship of their person.*

“ After the lamentable reverses of the Crusades, the destruction
of the Christian armies, and the triumph of Bendoedar, the Sultan
of Egypt, in 1263, during the eighth and ninth Crusades, the great
Prince Edward, son of Henry HI., King of England, seeing that
there would be no security for the brethren in the Holy Land when
the Christians should have retired, led them away, and thus a colony
of the Fraternity was established in England, As this prince was

’ Ramsay here refers to the company of musketeers, composed entirely of Scotch-
men of noble birth, which constituted the body-guard of the kings of France. The reader
of the Waverley Novels will remember that the renowned Balafr^, in the story of ‘‘ Quen«
tin Durvrard,” was a member of this company.

FREEMASONRY AND THE CRUSADES

24;

endowed with all the qualities of mind and heart which constitute
the hero, he loved the fine arts and declared himself the protector
of our Order. He granted it several privileges and franchises, and
ever since the members of the confraternity have assumed the name
of Freemasons. From this time Great Britain became the seat of
our sciences, the conservatrix of our laws, and the depository of our
secrets. The religious dissensions which so fatally pervaded and
rent all Europe during the i6th century caused our Order to degen-
erate from the grandeur and nobility of its origin. Several of our
rites and usages, which were opposed to the prejudices of the times,
were changed, disguised, or retrenched. Thus it is that several of
our brethren have, like the ancient Jews, forgotten the spirit of
our laws and preserved only the letter and the outer covering. But
from the British islands the ancient science is now beginning to pass
into France.’’

Such was the theory of Ramsay, the principal points of which
he had already incorporated into the Rite of six degrees which bears
his name. This Rite might be called the mother of all the Rites
which followed it and which in a few years covered the continent
with a web of high degrees and of Masonic systems, all based on the
hypothesis that Freemasonry was invented during the Crusades, and
the great dogma of which, boldly pronounced by the Baron Von
Hund, in his Rite of Strict Observance, was that every Freemason
was a Templar.

It will be seen that Ramsay repudiates all the legends which as-
cribe Masonry to the Patriarchs or to the ancient Mysteries, and
that he rejects all connection with an Operative association, looking
to chivalry alone for the legitimate source of the Fraternity.

Adopting the method of writing Masonic history which had
been previously pursued by Anderson, and which was unfortunately
followed by other writers of the 18th century, and which has not
been altogether abandoned at the present day, Ramsay makes his
statements with boldness, draws without stint upon his imagina-
tion, presents assumptions in the place of facts, and cites no au-
thority for anything that he advances.

As Mossdorf says, since he cites no authority we are not bound
to believe him on his simple word.

Ramsay’s influence, however, as a man of ability, had its weight,
and the theory of the origin of Freemasonry among the Crusaders

248

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

continued to be taught in some one form or another by subsequent
writers, and it was infused by the system-makers into most of the
Rites that were afterward established. Indeed, it may be said that
of all the Rites now existing, the English and American are the only
ones in which some feature of this Templar theory may not be found.

The theory of Hutchinson varied somewhat from that of Ram-
say, inasmuch as while recognizing the influence of the Crusades
upon Masonry he is inclined to suppose that it was carried there by
the Crusaders rather than that it was brought thence by them to
Europe.

After alluding to the organization of the Crusades by Peter the
Hermit, and to the outpouring from Europe into Palestine of tens
of thousands of saints, devotees, and enthusiasts to waste their
blood and treasure in a barren and unprofitable adventure, he pro-
ceeds to say that “ it was deemed neeessary that those who took up
the sign of the Cross in this enterprise should form themselves into
such societies as might secure them from spies and treacheries, and
that each might know his companion and fellow-laborer by dark as
well as by day. As it was with Jephtha’s army at the passes of the
Jordan, .so also was it requisite in these expeditions that certain
signs, signals, watchwords, or passwords should be known amongst
them ; for the armies consisted of various nations and various
languages.”

“No project or device,” he thinks, “could answer the purpose
of the Crusaders better than those of Masonry. The maxims and
ceremonials attending the Master’s Order had been previously estab-
lished and were materially necessary on that expedition ; for as the
Mohammedans were also worshippers of the Deity, and as the en-
terprisers were seeking a country where the Masons were in the time
of Solomon called into an association, and where some remains
would certainly be found of the mysteries and wisdom of the an-
cients and of our predecessors, such degrees of Masonry as ex-
tended only to their being servants of the God of Nature would not
have distinguished them from those they had to encounter, had they
not assumed the symbols of the Christian faith.”

The hypothesis of Hutchinson is, then, that while there was some
Masonry in Palestine before the advent of the Crusaders, it was
only that earlier stage which he had already described as appertain-
ing to the Apprentice’s degree, and which was what both he and

FREEMASONRY AND THE CRUSADES

249

Oliver have called “ Patriarchal Masonry.” The higher stage repre-
sented by the Master’s degree was of course unknown to the Sara-
cens, as it was of Christian origin, and the possession of this degree
only could form any distinctive mark between the Crusaders and
their Moslem foes. This degree, therefore, he thinks, was intro-
duced into Palestine as a war-measure to supply the Christians with
signs and words which would be to them a means of protection.
The full force of the language bears only this intcri)retation, that
Freemasonry was used by the Crusaders not for purposes of peace,
but for those of war, a sentiment so abhorrent to the true spirit of
the institution that nothing but a blind adhesion to a [>reconceived
theory could have led so good a Mason as Hutchinson to adopt
or to advance such an opinion.

Differing still more from Ramsay, who had attributed the origin
of Masonry to* the Knights and nobles of the Crusades, Hutchinson
assigns the task of introducing it into Palestine to the religious and
not the military element of these exi)editions.

“All the learning of Europe in those times,” he continues, “was
possessed by the religious ; they had acquired the wisdom of the
ancient.s, and the original knowledge which was in the beginning
and now is the truth; many of them had been initiated into the
mysteries of Masonry, they were the projectors of the Crusades,
and, as Solomon in the building of the Temj)le introduced orders
and regulations for the conduct of the work, which his wisdom had
been enriched with from the sages of antiquity, so that no confusion
should happen during its progress, and so that the rank and office
of each fellow-laborer might be distinguished and ascertained be-
yond the possibility of doubt ; in like manner the priests projecting
the Crusades, being possessed of the mysteries of Masonry, the
knowledge of the ancients, and of the universal language which sur-
vived the confusion of Shinar, revived the orders and regulations of
Solomon, and initiated the legions therein who followed them to
the Holy Land — hence that secrecy which attended the Crusades.”

Mr. Hutchinson concludes this collection of assumptions, cumu-
lated one upon another, without the slightest attempt to verify his-
torically a single statement, by asserting that “among other evi-
dences which authorize us in the conjecture that Masons went to
the Holy Wars, is the doctrine of that Order of Masons called the
Higher Order" that is to say, the higher degrees, which he says

250

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

that he was induced to believe was of Scottish origin. He obtained
this idea probably from the theory of Ramsay. But be that as it
may, he thinks “ it conclusively proved that the Masons were Cru-
saders ; ” a conclusion that it would be difficult to infer from any
known rules of logic. The fact (if it be admitted) that these higher
degrees were invented in Scotland by no means proves that the
Masons who possessed them went to the Crusades. It is impossible,
indeed, to find any natural connection or sequence between the two
circumstances.

But the legend which refers to the establishment in Scotland of
a system of Masonry at the time of the suppression of the Order and
the martyrdom of de Molay, belongs to another portion of the
legendary history of Freemasonry and will be treated in a distinct
chapter.

Von Hammer shows to what shifts for arguments* those are re-
duced who pretend that the institution of Freemasonry was derived
at the Crusades, by the Knights Templars, from the secret societies
of (he East. He says, as a proof of the truth of this hypothesis,
which indeed he makes as a charge against the Templars, that their
secret maxims, particularly in so far as relates to the renunciation of
positive religion and the extension of their power by the acquisition
of castles and strong places, seem to have been the same as those of
the Order of Assassins. The similarity also of the white dress and
red fillet of the Assassins with the white mantle and red cross of the
Templars he thinks is certainly remarkable. Hence he assumes
that as the Assassins were a branch of the Ishmacleeh, whom he calls
the “ Illuminati of the East,” and as the former were a secret society
of revolutionary principles, which is a characteristic that he gra-
tuitously bestows upon the Freemasons, he takes it for granted that
the Assassins supplied the Templars with those ideas of organization
and doctrine out of which they created the system of Freemasonry
that they afterward introduced into Europe.

A series of arguments like this is scarcely worthy of a serious
refutation. The statement that the Templars ever renounced the pre-
cepts of positive religion, either at that early period of their career
or at any subsequent time, is a mere assumption, based on the
charges made by the malevolence of a wicked King and a still more
wicked Pope. The construction of fortresses and castles for their
protection, by both the Templars and the Assassins, arose from the

FREEMASONRY AND THE CRUSADES

251

military instinct which teaches all armies to provide the means of
defense when in the presence of an enemy. And lastly, the argu-
ment drawn from the similarity of the costumes of both Orders is
so puerile as to require no other answer than that as the mantle and
cross of the Templars were bestowed upon them, the former by Pope
Honorius and the latter by Pope Eugenius, therefore they could not
have been indebted to the Assassins for either. The best refutation
of the slanders of Von Hammer is the fact that to sustain his views
he was obliged to depend on such poverty of argument.

Recognizing as historically true the fact that the Templars, or
rather, perhaps, the architects and builders, who accompanied them
and were engaged in the construction of their fortresses and castles
in the Holy Land, the remains of some of which still exist, brought
with them to Europe some new views of Saracenic architecture
which they communicated to the guilds of Freemasons already es-
tablished in Europe, we may dismiss the further consideration of
that subject as having nothing to do with the question of how
much Freemasonry as a secret society was indebted for its origin to
Templarism.

On the subject of the direct connection of the Templars with
Freemasonry at the time of the Crusades, there are only two propo-
sitions that have been tnaintained. One is that the Templars carried
Freemasonry with them to Palestine and there made use of it for
their protection from their enemies, the Saracens.

Of this theory there is not the slightest evidence. No contem-
porary historian of the Crusades makes any mention of such a fact.
Before we can begin to even discuss it as something worthy of dis-
cussion, we must find the proof, which we can not, that in the 1 ith
and 1 2th centuries Freemasonry was anything more than an Opera-
tive institution, to which it was not likely that any Crusaders of in-
fluence, such as the nobles and knights, were attached as members.
As a mere conjecture it wants every element of probability. Hutch-
inson, the most prominent writer who maintains the theory, has
evidently confounded the Crusaders of the iith and 12th centuries,
who fought in Palestine, with the Templars, who are said to have
fled to Scotland in the 14th century and to have there invented eer-
tain high degrees. This manifest confusion of dates gives a feature
of absurdity to the argument of Hutchinson.

Another form has been given to this theory by a writer in the

252 PREHISTORIC MASONRY

London Freemasons' Magazine^ which has the air of greater plausi-
bility at least. The theory that he has advanced will be best given
in his own language : “ The traveling bodies of Freemasons (who
existed in Europe at the time of the Crusades) consisted of brethren
well skilled in every branch of knowledge ; among their ranks were
many learned ecclesiastics, whose names survive to the present day
in the magnificent edifices which they assisted to erect. The
Knights of the Temple, themselves a body of military monks par-
taking both of the character of soldiers and priests, preserved in
their Order a rank exclusively clerical, the individuals belonging to
which took no part in warfare, who were skilled in letters, and de-
voted themselves to the civil and religious affairs of the Order ; they
were the historians of the period, and we know that all the learning
of the time was in their keeping in common with the other ecclesi-
astics of the time. From the best information we are possessed of
regarding the Order, we believe there can be little doubt that these
learned clerks introduced the whole fabric of Craft Masonry into the
body of the Templars, and that not only was the Speculative branch
of the science by them incorporated with the laws and organization
of the Knights, but to their Operative skill were the Templars in-
debted for their triumphs in architecture and fortification. And it
is worthy of remark that in the records of the Order we find no
mention of individual architects or builders ; we may therefore not
unfairly draw the inference that the whole body were made partici-
pators in the knowledge and mysteries of the Craft.”

To this theory there is the same objection that has been already
made to the other, that it is wholly unsupported by historical
authority, and that it is a mere congeries of bold assumptions and
fanciful conjectures. Very strange, indeed, is the reasoning which
draws the inference that all the Templars were builders because
there is no mention of such a class in the records of the Order.
Such a silence would rather seem to indicate that there was no such
class among the Knights. That they employed architects and build-
ers, who may have belonged to the guilds of Traveling Freemasons
before they went to Palestine, is by no means improbable ; but there
is no evidence, and it is by no means likely, that they would engage
in anything more than the duties of their profession, or that there

^ Freemasons^ Maj^azine and Masonic Mirror^ vol. iv,, p. 962, London, 1858, Part I.

254

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

nection that can be sustained by historical proof or probable con-
jecture. As to the supposed subsequent connection of Templarism
with the Freemasonry of Scotland, that forms another and an en-
tirely different legend, the consideration of which will engage our
attention in the following chapter.

CHAPTER XXIX

THE STORY OF THE SCOTTISH TEMPLARS

HE Story which connects the Knights Templars
with Freemasonry in Scotland, after their return
from the Crusades and after the suppression of
their Order, forms one of the most interesting
and romantic legends connected with the history
of Freemasonry. In its incidents the elements
of history and tradition arc so mingled that it is
with difficulty that they can be satisfactorily separated. While there
are some writers of reputation who accept everything that has been
said concerning the connection in the 14th century of the Free-
masons of Scotland with the Templars who were then in that
kingdom, or who escaped to it as an asylum from the persecutions
of the French monarch, as an authentic narrative of events which
had actually occurred, there are others who reject the whole as a
myth or fable which has no support in history.

Here, as in most other cases, the middle course appears to be
the safest. While there arc some portions of the story which arc
corroborated by historical records, there arc others which certainly
are without the benefit of such evidence. In the present chapter 1
shall endeavor, by a careful and impartial analysis, to separate the
conflicting elements and to dissever the historical from the legen-
dary or purely traditional portions of the relation.

But it will be necessary, in clearing the way for any faithful in-
vestigation of the subject, to glance briefly at the history of those
events which were connected with the suppression of the ancient
Order of Knights Templars in France in the beginning of the
14th century.

The Templars, on leaving the Holy Land, upon the disastrous
termination of the last Crusade and the fall of Acre, had taken tem-
porary refuge in the island of Cyprus. After some vain attempts to
regain a footing in Palestine and to renew their contests with the

255

256

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

infidels, who were now in complete possession of that eountry, the
Knights had retired from Cyprus and repaired to their different
Commanderies in Europe, among which those in France were the
most wealthy and the most numerous.

At this period Philip IV., known in history by the soubriquet of
Philip the Fair, reigned on the French throne, and Clement V. was
the Pontiff of the Roman Church. Never before had the crown or
the tiara been worn by a more avaricious King or a more treacherous
Poj)e.

Clement, when Bishop of Bordeaux, had secured the influence
of the French monarch toward his election to the papacy by en-
gaging himself by an oath on the sacrament to perform six condi-
tions imposed upon him by the king, the last of which was reserved
as a secret until after his coronation.

This last condition bound him to the extermination of the
Templars, an Order of whose power Philip was envious and for
who.se wealth he was avaricious.

Pope Clement, who had removed his residence from Rome to
Poictiers, summoned the heads of the military Orders to appear be-
fore him for the purpose, as he deceitfully pretended, of concerting
measures for the inauguration of a new Crusade.

James de Molay, the Grand Master of the Templars, accordingly
repaired to the papal court. While there the King of France
preferred a series of charges against the Order, upon which he de-
manded its suppression and the punishment of its leaders.

The events that subsequently occurred have been well called a
black page in the hi.story of the Order. On the 1 3th of October,
T307, the Grand Master and one hundred and thirty-nine Knights
were arrested in the palace of the Temple, at Paris, and similar arrests
were on the same day made in various parts of France. The ar-
rested Templars were thrown into prison and loaded with chains.
They were not provided with a sufficiency of food and were refused
the consolations of religion. Twenty-six princes and nobles of the
court of France appeared as their accusers ; and before the judg-
ment of their guilt had been determined by the tribunals, the in-
famous Pope Clement launched a bull of excommunication against
all persons who should give the Templars aid or comfort.

The trials which ensued were worse than a farce, only because of
their tragical termination. The rack and the torture were un.spar-

THE STORY OF THE SCOTTISH TEMPLARS

257

ingly applied. Those who continued firm in a denial of guilt were
condemned either to perpetual imprisonment or to the stake. Ad-
dison says that one hundred and thirteen were burnt in Paris and
others in Lorraine, in Normandy, at Carcassonne, and at Senlis.

The last scene of the tragedy was enacted on the nth of March,
1314. James de Molay, the Grand Master of the Order, after a
close and painful imprisonment of six years and a half, was publicly
burnt in front of the Cathedral of Notre Dame, in Paris.

The Order was thus totally suppressed in France and its pos-
sessions confiscated. The other monarchs of Europe followed the
example of the King of France in abolishing the Order in their
dominions ; but, in a more merciful spirit, they refrained from in-
flicting capital punishment upon the Knights. Outside of France,
in all the other kingdoms of Europe, not a Templar was condemned
to death.

The Order was, however, everywhere suppressed, and a spoil
made of its vast possessions, notwithstanding that in every country
beyond the influence of the Pope and the King of France its gen-
eral innocence was sustained. In Portugal it changed its name to
that of the Knights of Christ — everywhere else the Order ceased to
exist.

But there are writers who, like Burnes,* maintain that the jjcrsc-
cution of the Templars in the 14th century did not close the history
of the Order, but that there has been a succession of Knights Tem-
plars from the 1 2th century down to these days. Dr. Burnes alluded
to the Order of the Temple and the pretended transmission of the
powers of de Molay to Larmenius.

With this question and with the authenticity of the so-called
“ Charter of Transmission,” the topic which we arc now about to
discuss has no connection, and I shall therefore make no further
allusion to it.

It is evident from the influence of natural causes, without the
necessity of any historical proof, that after the death of the Grand
Master and the sanguinary persecution and suppression of the Order
in France, many of the Knights must have sought safety by flight
to other countries. It is to their acts in Scotland that we are now
to direct our attention.

1 “ Sketch of the History of the Knights Templars,” by James Burnes, LL.D., F .R.S.,
etc., London, 1840, p. 39.

17

258 PREHISTORIC MASONRY

There arc two Legends in existence which relate to the connec-
tion of Templarism with the Freemasonry of Scotland, each of
which will require our separate attention. The first may be called
the Legend of Bruce, and the other the Legend of d’Aumont,

In Scotland the possessions of the Order were very extensive.
Their Prcceptories were scattered in various parts of the country.
A papal inquisition was held at Holyrood in 1 309 to try and, of
course, to condemn the Templars. At this inquisition only two
knights, Walter de Clifton, Grand Preceptor of Scotland, and Wilk
iam de Middleton appeared. The others absconded, and as Robert
Bruce was then marching to meet and repel the invasion of King
Edward of England, the Templars are said to have joined the army
of the Scottish monarch. Thus far the various versions of the Bruce
Legend agree, but in the subsequent details there are irreconcilable
differences.

According to one version, the Templars distinguished them-
selves at the battle of Bannockburn, which was fought on St. John
the Baptist’s Day, 1314, and after the battle a new Order was
formed called the Royal Order of Scotland, into which the Tem-
plars were admitted. But Oliver thinks very justly that the two
Orders were unconnected with each other.

Thory .says that Robert Bruce, King of Scotland under the title
of Robert I., created on the 24th of June, 1314, after the battle of
Bannockburn, the Order of St. Andrew of the Thistle, to which
was afterward added that of Heredom, for the sake of the Scottish
Masons, who had made a part of the thirty thousand men who had
fought with an hundred thousand English .soldiers. He reserved
for himself and his successors the title of Grand Master and founded
at Kilwinning the Grand Lodge of the Royal Order of Heredom.’

The Manual of the Order of the Temple says that the Tem-
plars, at the instigation of Robert Bruce, ranged themselves under
the banners of this new Order, whose initiations were ba.sed on
those of the Templars. For this apostasy they were excommuni-
cated by John Mark Larmenius, who is claimed to have been the
legitimate successor of de Molay.*

None of these statements are susceptible of historical proof.

^ Acta Latomorum,” tome p. 6.

* “ Manuel des Chevaliers de l*Ordre du Temple,** p. 8.

THE STORY OF THE SCOTTISH TEMPLARS 259

The Order of Knights of St. Andrew or of the Thistle was not
created by Bruce in 1314, but by James 11 . in 1440.

There is no evidence that the Templars ever made a part of
the Royal Order of Ileredom. At this day the two are entirely
distinct. Nor is it now considered as a fact that the Royal Order
was established by Bruce after the Battle of Bannockburn, although
such is the esoteric legend.

On the contrary, it is supposed to have been the fabrication of
Michael Ramsay in the 18th century. On this subject the remarks
of Bro, Lyon, who has made the Masonry of Scotland his especial
study, are well worth citation.

“The ritual of the Royal Order of Scotland embraces,” he says,
“ what may be termed a spiritualization of the supposed symbols and
ceremonies of the Christian architects and builders of primitive times,
and so closely associates the sword with the trowel as to lead to the
second degree being denominated an order of Masonic knighthood,
which its recipients are asked to believe was first conferred on the field
of Bannockburn, as a reward for the valor that had been displayed by
a body of Templars who aided Bruce in that memorable victory ; and
that afterward a Grand Lodge of the Order was established by the
King at Kilwinning, with the reservation of the office of Grand
Master to him and his successors on the Scottish throne. It is
further asserted that the Royal Order and the Masonic Fraternity
of Kilwinning were governed by the same head. As regards the
claims to antiquity, and a royal origin that are advanced in favor of
this rite, it is proper to say that modern inquiries have shown these to
be purely fabulous. The credence that is given to that part of the
legend which associates the Order with the ancient Lodge of Kil-
winning is based on the assumed certainty that that Lodge pos-
sessed in former times a knowledge of other degrees of Masonry
than those of St. John. But such is not the case. The fraternity of
Kilwinning never at any period practiced or acknowledged other
than the Craft degrees ; neither does there exist any tradition
worthy of the name, local or national, nor has any authentic docu-
ment yet been discovered that can in the remotest degree be held
to identify Robert Bruce with the holding of Masonic Courts, or
the institution of a secret society at Kilwinning.” ‘

^“History of the Lodge of Edinburgh.” by David Murray Lyon, chnp. xxxii., n. 307.

26o

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

After such a statement made by a writer who from his position
and opportunities as a Scottish Mason was better enabled to discover
proofs, if there were any to be diseovered, we may safely conelude that
the Bruce and Bannockburn Legend of Scottish Templarism is to
be deemed a pure myth, without the slightest historical element to
sustain it.

There is another Legend connecting the Templars in Scotland
with Freemasonry which demands our attention.

It is said in this Legend that in order to escape from the perse-
cution that followed the suppression of the Order by the King of
France, a certain Templar, named d’Aumont, accompanied by seven
others, disguised as mechanics or Operative Masons, fled into
Scotland and there secretly founded another Order ; and to preserve
as much as possible the ancient name of Templars as well as to re-
tain the remembrance of and to do honor to the Masons in whose
clothing they had disguised themselves when they fled, they adopted
the name of Masons in connection with the word Franc, and called
themselves Franc Masons. This they did because the old Templars
were for the most part Frenchmen, and as the word Franc means
both French and Free, when they established themselves in England
they called themselves Freemasons. As the ancient Order had been
originally established for the purpose of rebuilding the Temple of
Jerusalem, the new Order maintained their bond of union and pre-
served the memory and the design of their predecessors by building
symbolically spiritual Temples consecrated to Virtue, Truth, and
Light, and to the honor of the Grand Architect of the Universe.

Such is the Legend as given by a writer in the Dutch Freema-
sons' Almanac, from which it is cited in the London Freemasons'
Quarterly Review}

Clavel, in his Picturesgue History of Freemasonry} gives it
more in detail, almost in the words of Von Hund.

After the execution of de Molay, Peter d’Aumont, the Provincial
Grand Master of Auvergne, with two Commanders and five Knights,
fled for safety and directed their course toward Scotland, conceal-
ing themselves during their journey under the disguise of Oper-
ative Masons. Having landed on the Scottish Island of Mull they

^ Sec Freemasons^ Quarterly Review^ London, 1843, P* where the Legend is
given in full, as above.

Histoire Pitioresque de la Franc Ma^onnerie,” p. 184.

THE STORY OF THE SCOTTISH TEMPLARS 261

there met the Grand Commander Georjje Harris and several other
brethren, with whom they resolved to eontinue the Order, d’ Aumont
was elected Grand Master in a Chapter held on St. John’s Day, 1313.
To protect themselves from all chance of discovery and persecution
they adopted symbols taken from architecture and assumed the title
of Freemasons. In 1361 the Grand Master of the Temple trans-
ferred the seat of the Order to the old city of Aberdeen, and from
that time it spread, under the guise of Freemasonry, through Italy,
Germany, France, Portugal, Spain, and other places.

It was on this Legend that the Baron Von Ilund founded his
Rite of Strict Observance, and with spurious documents in his pos-
session, he attempted, but without success, to obtain the sanction of
the Congress of Wilhelmsbad to his dogma that every Freemason
was a Templar.

This doctrine, though making but slow progress in Germany,
was more readily accepted in France, where already it had been pro-
mulgated by the Chapter of Clermont, into whose Templar system
Von Ilund had been initiated.

The Chevalier Ramsay was the real author of the doctrine of the
Templar origin of Freemasonry, and to him we are really indebteil
(if the debt have any value) for thcd’y\umont Legend. The source
whence it sprang is tolerably satisfactory evidence of its fictitious
character. The inventive genius of Ramsay, as exhibited in the
fabrications of high degrees and Masonic legends, is well known.
Nor, unfortunately for his reputation, can it be doubted that in the
composition of his legends he cared but little for the .support of
history. If his genius, his learning, and his zeal had been consecrated,
not to the formation of new Masonic systems, but to a jirofound
investigation of the true origin of the Institution, viewed only from
an authentic historical point, it is impossible to say what incalculal)le
benefit would have been derived from his researches. The unpro-
ductive desert which for three-fourths of a century spread over the
continent, bearing no fruit except fanciful theories, absurd systems,
and unnecessary degrees, would have been occupied in all proba-
bility by a race of Masonic scholars whose researches would have
been directed to the creation of a genuine hi.story, and much of the
labors of our modern iconoclasts would have been spared.

The Masonic scholars of that long period, which began with
Ramsay and has hardly yet wholly terminated, assumed for the most

262

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

part rather the rdle of poets than of historians. They did not re-
member the wise saying of Cervantes, that the poet may say or sing,
not as things have been, but as they ought to have been, while the
historian must write of them as they really were, and not as he
thinks they ought to have been. And hence we have a mass of
traditional rubbish, in which there is a great deal of falsehood with
very little truth.

Of this rubbish is the Legend of Peter d’Aumont and his re-
suscitation of the Order of Knights Templars in Scotland. With-
out a particle of historical evidence for its support, it has neverthe-
less exerted a powerful influence on the Masonic organization of
even the present day. We find its effects looming out in the most
important rites and giving a Templar form to many of the high
degrees. And it cannot be doubted that the incorporation of Tem-
plarism into the modem Masonic system is mainly to be attributed
to ideas suggested by this d’Aumont Legend.

As there appears to be some difficulty in reconciling the sup-
posed heretical opinions of the Templars with the strictly Christian
faith of the Scottish Masons, to meet this objection a third Legend
was invented, in which it was stated that after the abolition of the
Templars, the clerical part of the Order — that is, the chaplains and
priests — united in Scotland to revive it and to transplant it into Free-
masonry. But as this Legend has not met with many supporters and
was never strongly urged, it is scarcely necessary to do more than
thus briefly to allude to it.

Much as the Legend of d’Aumont has exerted an influence in
mingling together the elements of Tcmplarism and Freemasonry,
as we see at the present day in Britain and in America, and in the
high degrees formed on the continent of Europe, the dogma of
Ramsay, that every Freemason is a Templar, has been utterly repu-
diated, and the authenticity of the Legend has been rejected by
nearly all of the best Masonic scholars.

Dr. Burnes, who was a believer in the legitimacy of the French
Order of the Temple, as being directly derived from de Molay
through Larmenius, and who, therefore, subscribed unhesitatingly
to the authenticity of the “Charter of Transmission," does not hes-
itate to call Von Hund “an adventurer” and his Legend of d’Au-
mont “ a plausible tale."

Of that part of the Legend which relates to the transfer of the chief

THE STORY OF THE SCOTTISH TEMPLARS 263

seat of the Templars to Aberdeen in Scotland, he says that “ the
imposture was soon detected, and it was even discovered that he had
himself enticed and initiated the ill-fated Pretender into his fabulous
order of chivalry. The delusions on this subject had taken such a
hold in Germany, that they were not altogether dispelled until a
deputation had actually visited Aberdeen and found amongst the
worthy and astonished brethren there no trace either of very an-
cient Templars or of Freemasonry.” *

In this last assertion, however, Bumes is in error, for it is alleged
that the Lodge of Aberdeen was instituted in 1541, though, as its
more ancient minutes have been, as it is said, destroyed by fire, its
present records go no further back than 1670. Bro. Lyon concurs
with Burncs in the statement that the Aberdeenians were much sur-
prised when first told that their Lodge was an ancient center of the
High Degrees.*

William Frederick Wilke, a German writer of great ability, has
attacked the credibility of this Scottish Legend with a closeness of
reasoning and a vigor of arguments that leave but little room for
reply.® As he gives the Legend in a slightly different form, it may
be interesting to quote it, as well as his course of argument.

“ The Legend relates,” he says, “ that after the sui)]iression of the
Order the head of the Templar clergy, Peter of Boulogne, fled from
prison and took refuge with the Commander Hugh, Wildgrave of
Salm, and thence escaped to Scotland with Sylvester von Grumbach.
Thither the Grand Commander Harris and Marshal d’Aumont had
likewise betaken themselves, and these three preserved the secrets
of the Order of Templars and transferred them to the Fraternity of
Freemasons.”

In commenting on this statement Wilke says it is true that
Peter of Boulogne fled from prison, but wdiither he went never
has been known. The Wildgrave of Salm never was in prison.
But the Icgendist has entangled himself in saying that Peter left the
Wildgrave Hugh and went to Scotland with Sylvester von Grum-
bach, for Hugh and Sylvester are one and the same person. His

5, “ Sketch of the History of the Knights Templars,'^ p. 71.

** History of the Lodge of Edinburgh/* p. 420.

^ In his ** Geschichte des Tempelhcrren’s Orders.’* I have not been able to obtain
the work, but I have availed myself of an excellent analysis of it in Findcl’s History
of Freemasonry,” Lyon’s Translation.

264 PREHISTORIC MASONRY

title was Count Sylvester Wildgravc, and Grumbach was the desig-
nation of his Templar Commandery. Hugh of Salm, also Wildgrave
and Commander of Grumbach, never took refuge in Scotland,
and after the abolition of the Order was made Prebendary of the
Cathedral of Mayencc.

Wilke thinks that the continuation of the Templar Order was
attributed to Scotland because the higher degrees of Freemasonry,
having reference in a political sense to the Pretender, Edward Stuart,
were called Scotch. Scotland is, therefore, the cradle of the higher
degrees of Masonry. But here 1 am inclined to differ from him and
am disposed rather to refer the explanation to the circumstance
that Ramsay, who was the inventor of the Legend and the first
fabricator of the high degrees, was a native of Scotland and was born
in the neighborhood of Kilwinning. To these degrees he gave the
name of Scottish Masonry, in a spirit of nationality, and hence Scot-
land was supposed to be their birthplace. This is not, however,
material to the present argument.

Wilke says that Harris and d’Aumontare not mentioned in the
real history of the Templars and therefore, if they were Knights, they
could not have had any prominence in the Order, and neither would
have been likely to have been chosen by the fugitive Knights as
their Grand Master.

He concludes by saying that of course some of the fugitive
Templars found their way to Scotland, and it may be believed that
some of the brethren were admitted into the building fraternities,
but that is no reason why either the Lodges of builders or the
Knights of St. John should be considered as a continuation of the
Templar Order, because they both received Templar fugitives, and
the less so as the building guilds were not, like the Templars, com-
posed of chivalrous and free-thinking worldlings, but of pious work-
men who cherished the pure doctrines of religion.

The anxiety of certain theorists to connect Templarism with
Freemasonry, has led to the invention of other fables, in which the
Hiramic Legend of the Master’s degree is replaced by others refer-
ring to events said to have occurred in the history of the knightly
Order. The most ingenious of these is the following :

Some time before the destruction of the Order of Templars, a
certain Sub-prior of Montfaugon, named Carolus de Monte Carmel,
was murdered by three traitors. From the events that accompanied

THE STORY OF THE SCOTTISH TEMPLARS 765

and followed this murder, it is said that an important part of the
ritual of Freemasonry has been derived. The assassins of the Sub-
prior of Montfau^on concealed his body in a grave, and in order to
designate the spot, planted a young thorn-tree ui)on it. The Tem-
plars, in searching for the body, had their attention drawn to the
spot by the tree, and in that way they discovered his remains. The
Legend goes on to recite the disinterring of the body and its removal
to another grave, in striking similarity with the same events narrated
in the Legend of Hiram.

Another theory connects the martyrdom of James dc Molay, the
last Grand Master of the Templars, with the Legend of the third
degree, and supposes that in that Legend, as now preserved in the
Masonic ritual, Hiram has been made to reidace de Molay, that the
fact of the Templar fusion into Masonry might be concealed.

Thus the events which in the genuine Masonic Legend are
referred to Hiram Abif are, in the Templar Legend, made applicable
to de Molay: the three assassins are said to be Pope Clement
Philip the Fair, King of I'rance, and a Tcm|)lar named Naffodei,
who betrayed the Order. They have even attempted to explain the
mystical search for the body by the invention of a fable that on t he
night after de Molay had been burnt at the stake, certain Knights
diligently sought for his remains amongst the ashes, but could find
only some bones to which the flesh, though scorched, still adhered,
but which it left immediately upon their being handled ; and in this
way they explain the origin of the substitute word, according to the
mistranslation too generally accepted.

Nothing could more clearly show the absurdity of the Legend
than this adoption of a popular interpretation of the meaning of this
word, made by someone utterly ignorant of the Hebrew language.
The word, as is now well known to all .scholars, has a totally different
signification.

But it is scarcely necessary to look to so unessential a part of
the narrative for proof that the whole Legend of the connection of
Tcmplarism with Freemasonry is irreconcilable with the facts of
history.

The Legend of Bruce and Bannockburn has already been dis-
posed of. The story has no historical foundation.

The other Legend, that makes d’Aumont and his companions
founders of the Masonic Order in Scotland by amalgamating the

266

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Knights with the fraternity of builders, is equally devoid of an his-
torical basis. But, besides, there is a feature of improbability if not
of impossibility about it. The Knights Templars were an aristocratic
Order, composed of high-bom gentlemen who had embraced the sol-
dier’s life as their vocation, and who were governed by the customs
of chivalry. In those days there was a much wider line of demar-
kation drawn between the various casts of society than exists at the
present day. The “ belted knight ” was at the top of the social scale,
the mechanic at the bottom.

It is therefore almost impossible to believe that because their
Order had been suppressed, these proud soldiers of the Cross, whose
military life had unfitted them for any other pursuit except that of
arms, would have thrown aside their swords and their spurs and
assumed the trowel ; with the use of this implement and all the mys-
teries of the builder’s craft they were wholly unacquainted. To have
become Operative Masons, they must have at once abandoned all the
prejudices of social life in which they had been educated. That a
Knight Templar would have gone into some religious house as a
retreat from the world whose usage of his Order had disgusted him,
or taken refuge in some other ehivalric Order, might reasonably hap-
pen, as was actually the case. But that these Knights would have
willingly transformed themselves into Stonemasons and daily work-
men is a supposition too absurd to extort belief even from the most
credulous.

We may then say that those legendists who have sought by their
own invented traditions to trace the origin of Freemasonry to Tem-
plarism, or to establish any close connection between the two Insti-
tutions, have failed in their object.

They have attempted to write a history, but they have scarcely
succeeded in composing a plausible romance.


# VOLUME II

31761 084341 7(

OPERATIVE MASO.NS OF THE MIDDLE AGES

THE

HISTORY of FREEMASONRY

ITS LEGENDS AND TRADITIONS
ITS CHRONOLOGICAL HISTORY

By ALBERT GALLATIN MACKEY, M.D., 33?

THE HISTORY OF THE

SYMBOLISM OF FREEMASONRY

THE

ANCIENT AND ACCEPTED SCOTTISH RITE

AND THE

ROYAL ORDER OF SCOTLAND

By WILLIAM R. SINGLETON, }??.

WITH AN

ADDENDA

By WILLIAM JAMES HUGHAN

P.\ S.\ G. - . D.\ of G.\ L. - . of England— P.'. S.\ G.'. W.\ of Eoypt, etc.

Volume Two

PUBLISHED BY

THE MASONIC HISTORY COMPANY
New York and London

H S

4Qb

Hj6

r°\ q6

(/■-l

CHAPTER XXX

FREEMASONRY AND THE HOUSE OF STUART

HE theory that connects the royal house of the
Stuarts with Freemasonry, as an Institution to be
cultivated, not on account of its own intrinsic
merit, but that it might serve as a political engine
to be wielded for the restoration of an exiled
family to a throne which the follies and even the
crimes of its members had forfeited, is so repug-
nant to all that has been supposed to be congruous with the true
spirit and character of Freemasonry, that one would hardly believe
that such a theory was ever seriously entertained, were it not for
many too conclusive proofs of the fact.

The history of the family of Stuart, from the accession of
James I. to the throne of England to the death of the last of his
descendants, the young Pretender, is a narrative of follies and some-
times of crimes. The reign of James was distinguished only by
arts which could gain for him no higher title with posterity than
that of a royal pedant. His son and successor Charles I. was
beheaded by an indignant people whose constitutional rights and
liberties he had sought to betray. His son Charles II., after a long
exile was finally restored to the throne, only to pass a life of indo-
lence and licentiousness. On his death he was succeeded by his
brother James II., a prince distinguished only for his bigotry. Zeal-
ously attached to the Roman Catholic religion, he sought to re-
store its power and influence among his subjects, who were for the
most part Protestants. To save the Established Church and the re-
ligion of the nation, his estranged subjects called to the throne the
Protestant Prince of Orange, and James, abdicating the crown, fled
to France, where he was hospitably received with his followers by
Louis XIV., who could, however, say nothing better of him than
that he had given three crowns for a mass. From 1688, the date
of his abdication and flight, until the year 1 745 the exiled family

267

268

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

were engaged in repeated but unavailing attempts to recover the
throne.

It is not unreasonable to suppose that in these attempts the
partisans of the house of Stuart were not unwilling to accept the
influence of the Masonic Institution, as one of the most powerful
instruments whereby to effect their purpose.

It is true that in this, the Institution would have been diverted
from its true design, but the object of the Jacobites, as they were
called, or the adherents of King James was not to elevate the
character of Freemasonry but only to advance the cause of the Pre-
tender.

It must however be understood that this theory which connects
the Stuarts with Masonry does not suppose that the third or Mas-
ter’s degree was invented by them or their adherents, but only that
there were certain modifications in the application of its Legend.
Thus, the Temple was interpreted as alluding to the monarchy, the
death of its Builder to the execution of Charles I., or to the de-
struction of the succession by the compulsory abdication of James
II., and the dogma of the resurrection to the restoration of the
Stuart family to the throne of England.

Thus, one of the earliest instances of this political interpretation
of the Master’s Legend was that made after the expulsion of James
II. from the throne and his retirement to France. The mother of
James was Henrietta Maria, queen of Charles I. The Jacobites
called her “ the Widow,” and the exiled James became “the Widow’s
son,” receiving thus the title applied in the Masonic Legend to
Hiram Abif, whose death they said symbolized the loss of the throne
and the expulsion of the Stuarts from England.

They carried this idea to such an extent as to invent a new sub-
stitute word for the Master’s degree, in the place of the old one,
which was known to the English Masons at the time of the Re-
vival in 1717.

This new word was not, as the significant words of Masonry
usually are, of Hebrew origin, but was derived from the Gaelic.
And this seems to have been done in compliment to the Highland-
ers, most of whom were loyal adherents of the Stuart cause.

The word Macbenac is derived from the Gaelic mac, a son, and
benach, blessed, and literally means the “ blessed son ; ” and this
word was applied by the Jacobites to James, who was thus not only

FREEMASONRY AND THE HOUSE OF STUART 269

a “ widow’s son ” but a “ blessed” one, too. Masonry was here made
subservient to loyalty.

They also, to mark their political antipathy to the enemies of
the Stuart family, gave to the most prominent leaders of the re-
publican cause, the names in which old Masonry had been appro-
priated to the assassins of the third degree. In the Stuart Masonry
we find these assassins designated by names, generally unintelligible,
but, when they can be explained, evidently referring to some well-
known opponent of the Stuart dynasty. Thus, Romvel is manifestly
an imperfect anagram of Cromwell , and Jubelum Guibbs doubtless
was intended as an infamous embalmment of the name of the Rev.
Adam Gib, an antiburgher clergyman, who, when the Pretender was
in Edinburgh in 1 745, hurled anathemas, for five successive Sundays
against him.

But it was in the fabrication of the high degrees that the parti-
sans of the Stuarts made the most use of Freemasonry as a political
instrument.

The invention of these high degrees is to be attributed in the
first place to the Chevalier Ramsay. He was connected in the most
intimate relation with the exiled family, having been selected by
the titular James III., or, as he was commonly known in England,
the Old Pretender, as the tutor of his two sons, Charles Edward
and Henry, the former of whom afterward became the Young Pre-
tender, and the latter Cardinal York.

Ardently attached, by this relationship, by his nationality as a
Scotchman, and by his religion as a Roman Catholic, to the Stuarts
and their cause, he met with ready acquiescence the advances of those
who had already begun to give a political aspect to the Masonic
system, and who were seeking to enlist it in the Pretender’s cause.
Ramsay therefore aided in the modification of the old degrees or the
fabrication of new ones, so that these views might be incorporated
in a peculiar system ; and hence in many of the high degrees in-
vented either by Ramsay or by others of the same school, we will
find these traces of a political application to the family of Stuart,
which were better understood at that time than they are now.

Thus, one of the high degrees received the name of “ Grand
Scottish Mason of James VI.” Of this degree Tessier says that
it is the principal degree of the ancient Master’s system, and was re-
vived and esteemed by James VI., King of Scotland and of Great

2/0

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Britain, and that it is still preserved in Scotland more than in any
other kingdom. 1

All of this is of course a mere fiction, but it shows that there has
been a sort of official acknowledgment of the interference with
Masonry by the Stuarts, who did not hesitate to give the name of
the first founder of their house on the English throne to one of the
degrees.

Another proof is found in the word Jekson, which is a significant
word in one of the high Scottish or Ramsay degrees. It is thus
spelled in the Cahiers or manuscript French rituals. There can be
no doubt that it is a corruption of Jacqicesson , a mongrel word com-
pounded of the French Jacques and the English son, and denotes
The son of James , that is, of James II. This son was the Old Pre-
tender, or the Chevalier St. George, who after the death of his
father assumed the empty title of James III., and whose son, the
Young Pretender, was one of the pupils of the Chevalier Ramsay.

These, with many other similar instances, are very palpable proofs
that the adherents of the Stuarts sought to infuse a political element
into the spirit of Masonry, so as to make it a facile instrument for
the elevation of the exiled family and the restoration of their head
to the throne of England.

Of the truth of this fact, it is supposed that much support is
to be found in the narrative of the various efforts for restoration
made by the Stuarts.

When James II. made his flight from England he repaired to
France, where he was hospitably received by Louis XIV. He took
up his residence while in Paris at the Jesuitical College of Cler-
mont. There, it is said, he first sought, with the assistance of the
Jesuits, to establish a system of Masonry which should be em-
ployed by his partisans in their schemes for his restoration to the
throne. After an unsuccessful invasion of Ireland he returned to
France and repaired to St. Germain-en-Laye, a city about ten miles
northwest of Paris, where he lived until the time of his death in
1 701. It is one of the Stuart myths that at the Chateau of St. Ger-
main some of the high degrees were fabricated by the adherents of
James II., assisted by the Jesuits.

The story is told by Robison, a professed enemy of Freemasonry,

1M Manuel G6nerale de Magonnerie,” p. 148.

FREEMASONRY AND THE HOUSE OF STUART 271

but who gives with correctness the general form of the Stuart Le-
gend as it was taught in the last century.

Robison says : “ The revolution had taken place, and King James,
with many of his most zealous adherents, had taken refuge in
France.

“ But they took Freemasonry with them to the Continent,
where it was immediately received by the French, and cultivated
with great zeal in a manner suited to the taste and habits of that
highly polished people. The Lodges in France naturally became
the rendezvous of the adherents of the exiled king, and the means
of carrying on a correspondence with their friends in England .” 1

Robison says that at this time the Jesuits took an active part in
Freemasonry, and united with the English Lodges, with the view of
creating an influence in favor of the re-establishment of the Roman
Catholic religion in England. But the supposed connection of the
Jesuits with Freemasonry pertains to an independent proposition,
to be hereafter considered.

Robison further says that “it was in the Lodge held at St. Gei-
main that the degree of Chevalier Mafon Ecossais was added to
the three symbolical degrees of English Masonry. The Constitution,
as imported, appeared too coarse for the refined taste of the French,
and they must make Masonry more like the occupation of a gentle-
man. Therefore the English degrees of Apprentice, Fellowcraft,
and Master were called symbolical , and the whole contrivance was
considered either as typical of something more elegant or as a prep-
aration for it. The degrees afterward superadded to this leave us
in doubt which of these views the French entertained of our
Masonry. But, at all events, this rank of Scotch Knight was called
the first degree of the Mafon Parfait. There is a device belong-
ing to this Lodge which deserves notice. A lion wounded by an
arrow, and escaped from the stake to which he had been bound,
with the broken rope still about his neck, is represented lying at
the mouth of a cave, and occupied with mathematical instruments,
which are lying near him. A broken crown lies at the foot of the
stake. There can be little doubt but that this emblem alludes to
the dethronement, the captivity, the escape, and the asylum of
James II., and his hopes of re-establishment by the help of the

1 “ Proofs of a Conspiracy,” p. 27.

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

272

loyal Brethren. This emblem is worn as the gorget of the Scotch
Knight. It is not very certain, however, when this degree was
added, whether immediately after King James’s abdication or about
the time of the attempt to set his son on the British throne.” 1

This extract from Robison presents a very fair specimen of the
way in which Masonic history was universally written in the last
century and is still written by a few in the present.

Although it cannot be denied that at a subsequent period the
primitive degrees were modified and changed in their application of
the death of Hiram Abif to that of Charles I., or the dethrone-
ment of James II., and that higher degrees were created with still
more definite allusion to the destinies of the family of Stuart, yet it
is very evident that no such measures could have been taken during
the lifetime of James II.

The two periods referred to by Robison, the time of the abdica-
tion of James II., which was in 1688, and the attempt of James III.,
as he was called, to regain the throne, which was in 1715, as being,
one or the other, the date of the fabrication of the degree of Scot-
tish Knight or Master, are both irreconcilable with the facts of his-
tory. The symbolical degrees of Fellow Craft and Master had not
been invented before 1717, or rather a few years later, and it is ab-
surd to speak of higher degrees cumulated upon lower ones which
did not at that time exist.

James II. died in 1701. At that day we have no record of any
sort of Speculative Masonry except that of the one degree which was
common to Masons of all ranks. The titular King James III., his
son, succeeded to the claims and pretensions of his father, of course,
in that year, but made no attempt to enforce them until 1715, at
which time he invaded England with a fleet and army supplied by
Louis XIV. But in 1715, Masonry was in the same condition that
it had been in 1701. There was no Master’s degree to supply a
Legend capable of alteration for a political purpose, and the high de-
grees were altogether unknown. The Grand Lodge of England,
the mother of all Continental as well as English Masonry, was not
established, or as Anderson improperly calls it, “ revived,” until 1717.
The Institution was not introduced into France until 1725, and there
could, therefore, have been no political Masonry practiced in a

1 Robison* “ Proofs of a Conspiracy,” p. 28.

FREEMASONRY AND THE HOUSE OF STUART 273

country where the pure Masonry of which it must have been a cor-
ruption did not exist. Scottish or Stuart Masonry was a superstruct-
ure built upon the foundation of the symbolic Masonry of the three
degrees. If in 1715 there was, as we know, no such foundation, it
follows, of course, that there could have been no superstructure.

The theory, therefore, that Stuart Masonry, or the fabrication of
degrees and the change of the primitive rituals to establish a system
to be engaged in the support and the advancement of the falling
cause of the Stuarts, was commenced during the lifetime of James
II., and that the royal chateau of St. Germain-en-Laye was the
manufactory in which, between the years 1689 and 1701, these de-
grees and rituals were fabricated, is a mere fable not only improbable
but absolutely impossible in all its details.

Rebold, however, gives another form to the Legend and traces the
rise of Stuart Masonry to a much earlier period. In his History of
the Three Grand Lodges he says that during the troubles which dis-
tracted Great Britain about the middle of the 1 7th century and after
the decapitation of Charles I. in 1649, the Masons of England, and
especially those of Scotland, labored secretly for the re-establishment
of the monarchy which had been overthrown by Cromwell. For the
accomplishment of this purpose they invented two higher degrees
and gave to Freemasonry an entirely political character. The dis-
sensions to which the country was a prey had already produced a
separation of the Operative and the Accepted Masons — that is to say,
of the builders by profession and those honorary members who were
not Masons. These latter were men of power and high position,
and it was through their influence that Charles II., having been re-
ceived as a Mason during his exile, was enabled to recover the
throne in 1660. This prince gratefully gave to Masonry the title of
the “ Royal Art,” because it was Freemasonry that had principally
contributed to the restoration of royalty. 1

Ragon, in his Masonic Orthodoxy , 2 is still more explicit and
presents some new details. He says that Ashmole and other
Brethren of the Rose Croix, seeing that the Speculative Masons
were surpassing in numbers the Operative, had renounced the simple
initiation of the latter and established new degrees founded on the

18

1 “ Histoire de Trois Grandes Loges,” p. 32.

2 Ragon, “ Orthodoxie Ma$onnique,” p. 29.

274

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Mysteries of Egypt and Greece. The Fellow Craft degree was
fabricated in 1648, and that of Master a short time afterward. But
the decapitation of King Charles I., and the part taken by Ashmole
in favor of the Stuarts produced great modifications in this third and
last degree, which had become of a Biblical character. The same
epoch gave birth to the degrees of Secret Master , Perfect Master ,
and Irish Master , of which Charles I. was the hero, under the
name of Hiram. These degrees, he says, were, however, not then
openly practiced, although they afterward became the ornament of
Ecossaism.

But the non-operative or “ Accepted ” members of the organiza-
tion secretly gave to the Institution, especially in Scotland, a politi-
cal tendency. The chiefs or protectors of the Craft in Scotland
worked, in the dark, for the re-establishment of the throne. They
made use of the seclusion of the Masonic Lodges as places where
they might hold their meetings and concert their plans in safety.
As the execution of Charles I. was to be avenged, his partisans
fabricated a Templar degree, in which the violent death of James de
Molay called for vengeance. Ashmole, who partook of that politi-
cal sentiment, then modified the degree of Master and the Egyptian
doctrine of which it was composed, and made it conform to the two
preceding degrees framing a Biblical allegory, incomplete and in-
consistent, so that the initials of the sacred words of these three de-
grees should compose those of the name and title of the Grand
Master of the Templars.

Northouck, 1 who should have known better, gives countenance
to these super cheries of history by asserting that Charles II. was
made a Mason during his exile, although he carefully omits to tell
us when, where, how, or by whom the initiation was effected ; but
seeks, with a flippancy that ought to provoke a smile, to prove that
Charles II. took a great interest in Masonry and architecture, by
citing the preamble to the charter of the Royal Society, an associa-
tion whose object was solely the cultivation of the philosophical
and mathematical sciences, especially astronomy and chemistry, and
whose members took no interest in the art of building.

Dr. Oliver, whose unfortunate failing was to accept without
careful examination all the statements of preceding writers, how-

1 “ Constitutions,” p. 141.

FREEMASONRY AND THE HOUSE OF STUART 275

ever absurd they might be, repeats substantially these apocryphal
tales about early Stuart Masonry.

He says that, about the close of the 17th century, the followers
of James II. who accompanied the unfortunate monarch in his
exile carried Freemasonry to France and laid the foundation of
that system of innovation which subsequently threw the Order into
confusion, by the establishment of a new degree, which they called
the Chevalier Mafon Eeossais, and worked the details in the Lodge
at St. Germain. Hence, he adds, other degrees were invented
in the Continental Lodges, which became the rendezvous of the
partisans of James, and by these means they held communication
with their friends in England. 1

But as the high degrees were not fabricated until more than a
third of the 18th century had passed, and as James died in 1701, we
are struck with the confusion that prevails in this statement as to
dates and persons.

It is very painful and embarrassing to the scholar who is really
in search of truth to meet with such caricatures of history, in which
the boldest and broadest assumptions are offered in the place of
facts, the most absurd fables are presented as narratives of act-
ual occurrences, chronology is put at defiance, anachronisms are
coolly perpetrated, the events of the 18th century are transferred
to the 17th, the third degree is said to have been modified in
its ritual during the Commonwealth, when we know that no third
degree was in existence until after 1717 ; and we are told that high
degrees were invented at the same time, although history records
the fact that the first of them was not fabricated until about the
year 1728. Such writers, if they really believed what they had
written, must have adopted the axiom of the credulous Tertullian.
who said, Credo quia impossible est — “ I believe because it is im-
possible.” Better would it be to remember the saying of Polybius,
that if we eliminate truth from history nothing will remain but an
idle tale.

We must, then, reject as altogether untenable the theory that
there was any connection between the Stuart family and Free-
masonry during the life of James II., for the simple reason that at
that period there was no system of Speculative Masonry existing

1 “ Historical Landmarks,’* II., p. 28.

276

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

which could have been perverted by the partisans of that family into a
political instrument for its advancement. If there was any connection
at all, it must be looked for as developed at a subsequent period.

The views of Findel on this subject, as given in \\\s History of Free-
masonry, are worthy of attention, because they are divested of that
mystical element so conspicuous and so embarrassing in all the state-
ments which have been heretofore cited. His language is as follows :

“ Ever since the banishment of the Stuarts from England in
1688, secret alliances had been kept up between Rome and Scot-
land ; for to the former place the Pretender James Stuart had re-
tired in 1719 and his son Charles Edward was born there in 1720;
and these communications became the more intimate the higher the
hopes of the Pretender rose. The Jesuits played a very important
part in these conferences. Regarding the reinstatement of the
Stuarts and the extension of the power of the Roman Church as
identical, they sought at that time to make the Society of Free-
masons subservient to their ends. But to make use of the Frater-
nity, to restore the exiled family to the throne, could not have been
contemplated, as Freemasonry could hardly be said to exist in Scot-
land then. Perhaps in 1 724, when Ramsay was a year in Rome, or
in 1 728, when the Pretender in Parma kept up an intercourse with
the restless Duke of Wharton, a Past Grand Master, this idea was
first entertained, and then when it was apparent how difficult it
would be to corrupt the loyalty and fealty of Freemasonry in the
Grand Lodge of Scotland, founded in 1 736, this scheme was set on
foot of assembling the faithful adherents of the banished royal family
in the High Degrees! The soil that was best adapted for this in-
novation was France, where the low ebb to which Masonry had sunk
had paved the way for all kinds of new-fangled notions, and where
the Lodges were composed of Scotch conspirators and accomplices
of the Jesuits. When the path had thus been smoothed by the
agency of these secret propagandists, Ramsay, at that time Grand
Orator (an office unknown in England), by his speech completed
the preliminaries necessary for the introduction of the High De-
grees ; their further development was left to the instrumentality of
others, whose influence produced a result somewhat different from
that originally intended.” 1

1 “ Geschichte der Freimaurerei.” — Translation of Lyon, p 209

FREEMASONRY AND THE HOUSE OF STUART 277

After the death of James II. his son, commonly called the Chev-
alier St. George, does not appear to have actively prosecuted his
claims to the throne beyond the attempted invasion of England in
1715. He afterward retired to Rome, where the remainder of his
life was passed in the quiet observation of religious duties. Nor is
there any satisfactory evidence that he was in any way connected
with Freemasonry.

In the meantime, his sons, who had been born at Rome, were
intrusted to the instructions of the Chevalier Michael Andrew Ram-
say, who was appointed their tutor. Ramsay was a man of learning
and genius — a Scotchman, a Jacobite, and a Roman Catholic — but
he was also an ardent Freemason.

As a Jacobite he was prepared to bend all his powers to accom-
plish the restoration of the Stuarts to what he believed to be their
lawful rights. As a Freemason he saw in that Institution a means, if
properly directed, of effecting that purpose. Intimately acquainted
with the old Legends of Masonry, he resolved so to modify them
as to transfer their Biblical to political allusions. With this design
he commenced the fabrication of a series of High Degrees, under
whose symbolism he concealed a wholly political object.

These High Degrees had also a Scottish character, which is to
be attributed partly to the nationality of Ramsay and partly to a
desire to effect a political influence among the Masons of Scotland,
in which country the first attempts for the restoration of the Stuarts
were to be made. Hence we have to this day in Masonry such
terms as “ Ecossaim,” “ Scottish Knights of St. Andrew,” “ Scottish
Master,” “ Scottish Architect,” and the “ Scottish Rite,” the use of
which words is calculated to produce upon readers not thoroughly
versed in Masonic history the impression that the High Degrees of
Freemasonry originated in Scotland — an impression which it was the
object of Ramsay to make.

There is another word for which the language of Masonry has
been indebted to Ramsay. This is Heredom , indifferently spelled in
the old rituals, Herodeni , Heroden and Heredon. Now the ety-
mology of this word is very obscure and various attempts have
been made to trace it to some sensible signification.

One writer 1 thinks that the word is derived from the Greek

1 London Freemason s* Magazine .

278

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

hieros — “holy,” and dornos — “house,” and that it means “the hoi ’)
house," that is, the Temple. This explanation is ingenious, and it
has been adopted by some recent authorities.

Ragon, 1 however, offers a different etymology. He thinks that
it is a corrupted form of the mediaeval Latin Jueredum, which signi-
fies a “ heritage,” and that it refers to the Chateau of St. Germain,
the residence for a long time of the exiled Stuarts and the only
heritage which was left to them. If we accept this etymology, 1
should rather be inclined to think that the heritage referred to the
throne of Great Britain, which they claimed as their lawful posses-
sion, and of which, in the opinion of their partisans, they had been
unrighteously despoiled.

This derivation is equally as ingenious and just as plausible as
the former one, and if adopted will add another link to the chain of
evidence which tends to prove that the high degrees were originally
fabricated by Ramsay to advance the cause of the Stuart dynasty.

Whatever may be the derivation of the word the rituals leave us
in no doubt as to what was its pretended meaning. In one of these
rituals, that of the Grand Architect, we meet with the following
questions and answers :

“ Q. Where was your first Lodge held ?

u A. Between three mountains, inaccessible to the profane,
where cock never crew, lion roared, nor woman chattered ; in a pro-
found valley.

“ Q ■ What are these three mountains named ?

•* A . Mount Moriah, in the bosom of the land of Gab-aon, Mount
Sinai, and the Mountain of Heredon.

“ Q. What is this Mountain of Heredon ?

“ A . A mountain situated between the West and the North of
Scotland, at the end of the sun’s course, where the first Lodge of
Masonry was held : in that terrestrial part which has given name to
Scottish Masonry.

“ Q • What do you mean by a profound valley ?

“ A I mean the tranquillity of our Lodges. '

From this catechism we learn that in inventing the word Here
don to designate a fabulous mountain, situated in some unknown
part of Scotland, Ramsay meant to select that kingdom as the birth

’ “ Orthodoxie Magonnique ” p. 91

FREEMASONRY AND THE HOUSE OF STUART 279

place of those Masonic degrees by whose instrumentality he expected
to raise a powerful support in the accomplishment of the designs of
the Jacobite party. The selection of this country was a tribute to
his own national prejudices and to those of his countrymen.

Again: by the “profound valley,” which denoted “the tranquil-
lity of the Lodges,” Ramsay meant to inculcate the doctrine that in
the seclusion of these Masonic reunions, where none were to be per-
mitted to enter except “ the well-tried, true, and trusty,” the plans
of the conspirators to overthrow the Hanoverian usurpation and to
effect the restoration of the Stuarts could be best conducted. Fort-
unately for the purity of the non-political character of the Masonic
Institution, this doctrine was not generally accepted by the Masons
of Scotland.

But there is something else concerning this word Heredon , in its
connection with Stuart Freemasonry, that is worth attention.

There is an Order of Freemasonry, at this day existing, almost
exclusively in Scotland. It is called the Royal Order of Scotland,
and consists of two degrees, entitled “ Heredon of Kilwinning,” and
“ Rosy Cross.” The first is said, in the traditions of the Order, to
have originated in the reign of David I., in the 12th century, and
the second to have been instituted by Robert Bruce, who revived
the former and incorporated the two into one Order, of which the
King of Scotland was forever to be the head. This tradition is,
however, attacked by Bro. Lyon, in his History of the Lodge 0 f
Edinburgh. He denies that the Lodge at Kilwinning ever at any
period practiced or acknowledged other than the Craft degrees, or
that there exists any tradition, local or national, worthy of the name,
or any authentic document yet discovered that can in the remotest
degree be held to identify Robert Bruce with the holding of Masonic
courts or the institution of a secret society at Kilwinning

“ The paternity of the Royal Order,” he says, “ is now pretty
generally attributed to a Jacobite Knight named Andrew Ramsay,
a devoted follower of the Pretender, and famous as the fabricator of
certain rites, inaugurated in France about 1735-40, and through the
propagation of which it was hoped the fallen fortunes of the Stuarts
would be retrieved.” 1

On September 24, 1745, soon after the commencement of his

1 “History of the Lodge of Edinburgh,” p. 307*

280

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

invasion of Britain, Charles Edward, the son of the Old Pretender
or Chevalier St. George, styled by his adherents James III., is said
to have been admitted into the Order of Knights Templars, and to
have been elected its Grand Master, a position which he held until
his death. Such is the tradition, but here again we are met by the
authentic statements of Bro. Lyon that Templarism was not in-
troduced into Scotland until the year 1798. 1 It was then impossible
that Charles Edward could have been made a Templar at Edin-
burgh in 1 745.

It is, however, probable that he was invested with official su-
premacy over the high degrees which had been fabricated by Ram-
say in the interest of his family, and it is not unlikely, as has
been affirmed, that, resting his claim on the ritual provision that the
Kings of Scotland were the hereditary Grand Masters of the Royal
Order, he had assumed that title. Of this we have something like
an authentic proof, something which it is refreshing to get hold of
as an oasis of history in this arid desert of doubts and conjectures
and assumptions.

In the year 1747, more than twelve months after his return from
his disastrous invasion of Scotland and England, Charles Edward
issued a charter for the formation at the town of Arras in France of
what is called in the instrument “a Sovereign Primordial Chapter
of Rose Croix under the distinctive title of Scottish Jacobite.”

In 1853, the Count de Hamel, Prefect of the Department in
which Arras is situated, discovered an authentic copy of the charter
in the Departmental archives.

In this document, the Young Pretender gives his Masonic titles
in the following words :

“We, Charles Edward, King of England, France, Scotland, and
Ireland, and as such Substitute Grand Master of the Chapter of H.,
known by the title of Knight of the Eagle and Pelican, and since our
sorrows and misfortunes by that of Rose Croix,” etc.

The initial letter “ H.” undoubtedly designates the Scottish
Chapter of Heredon. Of this body, by its ritual regulation, his
father as King of Scotland, would have been the hereditary Grand
Master, and he, therefore, only assumes the subordinate one of
Substitute.

1 “ History of the Lodge of Edinburgh,” p. 287.

FREEMASONRY AND THE HOUSE OF STUART 281

This charter, of the authenticity of which, as well as the transac-
tion which it records, there appears to be no doubt, settles the
question that it was of the Royal Order of Scotland and not
of the Knights Templars that Charles Edward was made Grand
Master, or himself assumed the Grand Mastership, during his visit
in 1745 to Edinburgh. As that Order and the other High De-
grees were fabricated by the Chevalier Ramsay to promote the in-
terests of his cause, his acceptance or assumption of the rank and
functions of a presiding officer was a recognition of the plan to use
Masonry as a political instrument, and is, in fact, the first and fun-
damental point in the history of the hypothesis of Stuart Masonry.
We here for the first time get tangible evidence that there was an
attempt to connect the Institution of Freemasonry with the fortunes
and political enterprises of the Stuarts.

The title given to this primordial charter at Arras is further
evidence that its design was really political ; for the words Ecosse
Jacobite , or Scottish Jacobite, were at that period universally accepted
as a party name to designate a partisan of the Stuart pretensions to
the throne of England.

The charter also shows that the organization of this chapter was
intended only as the beginning of a plan to enlist other Masons in
the same political design, for the members of the chapter were au-
thorized “not only to make knights, but even to create a chapter in
whatever town they might think proper,” which they actually did in
a few instances, among them one at Paris in 1780, which in 1801
was united to the Grand Orient of France.

A year after the establishment of the Chapter at Arras, the Rite
of the Veille Bru, or the Faithful Scottish Masons , was created at
Toulouse in grateful remembrance of the reception given by the
Masons of that place to Sir Samuel Lockhart, the aide-de-camp of
the Pretender. Ragon says that the favorites who accompanied this
prince to France were accustomed to sell to certain speculators
charters for mother Lodges, patents for Chapters, etc. These titles
were their property and they did not fail to use them as a means
of livelihood.

It has been long held as a recognized fact in Masonic history'
that the first Lodge established in France by a warrant from the
Grand Lodge of England was held in the year 1725. There is no
doubt that a Lodge of Freemasons met in that year at the house of

282

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

one Hure, and that it was presided over by the titular Earl of Der-
wentwater. But the researches of Bro. Hughan have incontestably
proved that this was what we would now call a clandestine body,
and that the first French Lodge legally established by the Grand
Lodge of England was in 1732. Besides the fact that there is no
record in that Grand Lodge of England of any Lodge in France at
the early date of 1725, it is most improbable that a warrant would
have been granted to so conspicuous a Jacobite as Derwentwater.
Political reasons of the utmost gravity at that time would have for-
bidden any such action.

Charles Radcliffe, with his brother the Earl of Derwentwater,
had been arrested in England for the part taken by them in the re-
bellion of 1715 to place James III. on the throne. They were
both condemned to death and the earl was executed, but Radcliffe
made his escape to France, where he assumed the title which, as he
claimed, had devolved upon him by the death of his brother’s son.
In the subsequent rebellion of 1745, having attempted to join the
Young Pretender, the vessel in which he sailed was captured by an
English cruiser, and being carried to London, he was decapitated in
December, 1746.

The titular Earl of Derwentwater was therefore a zealous Jaco-
bite, an attainted rebel who had been sentenced to death for his
treason, a fugitive from the law, and a pensioner of the Old Pretend-
er or Chevalier St. George, who, by the order of Louis XIV., had
been proclaimed King of England under the title of James III.

It is absurd, therefore, to suppose that the Grand Lodge of Eng-
land would have granted to him and to his Jacobite associates a
warrant for the establishment of a Lodge. Its statutes had declared
in very unmistakable words that a rebel against the State was not
to be countenanced in his rebellion. But no greater countenance
could have been given than to make him the Master of a new
Lodge.

Such, however, has until very recently been universally accepted
as a part of the authentic history of Masonry in France. In the
words of a modern feuilletonist, “ the story was too ridiculous to be
believed, and so everybody believed it.”

But it is an undeniable fact that in 1725 an English Lodge was
really opened and held in the house of an English confectioner
named Hure. It was however without regular or legal authority —

FREEMASONRY AND THE HOUSE OF STUART 283

was probably organized, although we have no recorded evidence to
that effect, through the advice and instructions of Ramsay — and was
a Jacobite Lodge consisting solely of the adherents and partisans
of the Old Pretender.

This is the most explicit instance that we have of the connection
of the Stuarts with Freemasonry. It was an effort made by the
adherents of that house to enlist the Order as an instrument to re-
store its fallen fortunes. The principal members of the Lodge
were Derwentwater, Maskelyne, and Heguertly or Heguety. Of
Derwentwater I have already spoken ; the second Was evidently a
Scotchman, but the name of the third has been so corrupted in its
French orthography that we are unable to trace it to its source. It
has been supposed that the real name was Haggerty ; if so, he was
probably an Irishman. But they were all Jacobites.

The Rite of Strict Observance, which at one time in the last
century took so strong a hold upon the Masons of Germany, and
whose fundamental doctrine was that of Ramsay — that Freemasonry
was only a continuation of the Templar system — is said to have been
originally erected in the interests of the Stuarts, and the Brotherhood
was expected to contribute liberally to the enterprises in favor of
the Pretender.

Upon a review of all that has been written on this very intricate
subject — the theories oftentimes altogether hypothetical, assump-
tions in place of facts, conjectures altogether problematical, and the
grain of history in this vast amount of traditional and mythical
trash so small — we may, I think, be considered safe in drawing a
few conclusions.

In the first place it is not to be doubted that at one time the po-
litical efforts of the adherents of the dethroned and exiled family of
the Stuarts did exercise a very considerable effect on the outward
form and the internal spirit of Masonry, as it prevailed on the con-
tinent of Europe.

In the symbolic degrees of ancient Craft Masonry, the influence
was but slightly felt. It extended only to a political interpretation
of the Legend of the Master’s degree, in which sometimes the de-
capitation of Charles I., and sometimes the forced abdication and
exile of James II., was substituted for the fate of Hiram, and to a
change in the substitute word so as to give an application of the
phrase the “ Widow’s son ” to the child of Henrietta Maria, the con-

284

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

sort of Charles I. The effect of these changes, except that of the
word, which still continues in some Rites, has long since disappeared,
but their memory still remains as a relict of the incidents of Stuart
Masonry.

But the principal influence of this policy was shown in the
fabrication of what are called the “ High Degrees,” the “ Hautes
Grades” of the French. Until the year 1728 these accumulations
to the body of Masonry were unknown. The Chevalier Ramsay,
the tutor of the Pretender in his childhood, and subsequently his
most earnest friend and ardent supporter, was the first to fabricate
these degrees, although other inventors were not tardy in following
in his footsteps.

These degrees, at first created solely to institute a form of
Masonry which should be worked for the purpose of restoring the
Pretender to the throne of his ancestors, have most of them become
obsolete, and their names alone are preserved in the catalogues of
collectors ; but their effect is to this day seen in such of them as
still remain and are practiced in existing Rites, which have been de-
rived indirectly from the system invented in the Chapter of Cler-
mont or the Chateau of St. Germain. The particular design has
passed away but the general features still remain, by which we are
enabled to recognize the relicts of Stuart Masonry.

As to the time when this system first began to be developed
there can be but little doubt.

We must reject the notion that James II. had any connection
with it. However unfitted he may have been by his peculiar tem-
perament from entering into any such bold conspiracy, the question
is set at rest by the simple fact that up to the time of his death there
was no Masonic organization upon which he or his partisans could
have acted.

His son the Chevalier St. George was almost in the same cate-
gory. He is described in history as a prince — pious, pacific and
without talents, incapable of being made the prominent actor in
such a drama, and besides, Speculative Masonry had not assumed
the proportions necessary to make it available as a part of a con-
spiracy until long after he had retired from active life to the prac-
tice of religious and recluse habits in Rome.

But his son Charles Edward, the Young Pretender as he was
called, was of an ardent temperament ; an active genius, a fair

FREEMASONRY AND THE HOUSE OF STUART 285

amount of talent, and a spirit of enterprise which well fitted him to
accept the place assigned him by Ramsay. Freemasonry had then
begun to excite public attention, and was already an institution that
was rapidly gaining popularity.

Ramsay saw in it what he deemed a fitting lever to be used in
the elevation of his patron to the throne, and Prince Charles Ed-
ward with eagerness met his propositions and united with him in
the futile effort.

To the Chevalier Ramsay we must attribute the invention of
Stuart Masonry, the foundations of which he began to lay early
in the 18th century, perhaps with the tacit approval of the Old
Pretender. About 1725, when the first Lodge was organized in
Paris, under some illegitimate authority, he made the first public
exposition of his system in the Scottish High Degrees which he at
that time brought to light. And finally the workings of the sys-
tem were fully developed when the Young Pretender began his
unsuccessful career in search of a throne, which once lost was never
to be recovered.

This conspiracy of Ramsay to connect Freemasonry with the
fortunes of the Stuarts was the first attempt to introduce politics
into the institution. To the credit of its character as a school of
speculative philosophy, the attempt proved a signal failure.

CHAPTER XXXI

THE JESUITS IN FREEMASONRY

HE opinion has been entertained by several writers
of eminence that the Company of Jesus, more
briefly styled the Jesuits, sought, about the end
of the 17th and the beginning of the 18th cen-
tury, to mingle with the Freemasons and to bend
the objects of that Institution to the ambitious
designs of their own Order. This view has been
denied by other writers of equal eminence, though it is admitted
that Roman Catholic, if not Jesuitical, features are to be found in
some of the high degrees.

It is contended by one German writer that the object of the
Jesuits in seeking a control of the Masonic Institution was that
they might be thus assisted in their design of establishing an aris-
tocracy within themselves, and that they sought to accomplish this
object by securing not only the direction of the Masonic Lodges,
but also by obtaining a monopoly of the schools and churches, and
all the pursuits of science, and even of business.

But the more generally accepted reason for this attempted inter-
ference with the Lodges is that they thus sought by their influence
and secret working to aid the Stuarts to regain the throne, and
then, as an expected result, to re-establish the Roman Catholic re-
ligion in England.

The first of these explanations is certainly more satisfactory than
the second. While there is a great want of historical testimony to
prove that the Jesuits ever mingled with Freemasonry — a question
to be hereafter decided — there is no doubt of the egotistical and
ambitious designs of the disciples of Loyola to secure a control of
the public and private affairs of every government where they could
obtain a foothold. It was a knowledge of these designs that led to
the unpopularity of the Order among even Catholic sovereigns and
caused its total suppression, in 1 773, by Pope Clement XIV., from

286

THE JESUITS IN FREEMASONRY 287

which it was not relieved until 1814, when their privileges were re-
newed by Pope Pius VII.

But I think that we must concur with Gadeike in the conclusion
to which he had arrived, that it is proved by history to be a false-
hood that Freemasonry was ever concealed under the mask of Jes-
uitism, or that it derived its existence from that source. 1 It is,
however, but fair that we should collate and compare the arguments
on both sides.

Robison, who, where Masonry was concerned, could find a spec-
ter in every bush, is, of course, of very little authority as to facts ;
but he may supply us with a record of the opinions which were prev-
alent at the time of his writing. He says that when James II. fled
from England to France, which was in 1688, his adherents took
Freemasonry with them to the continent, where it was received and
cultivated by the French in a manner suited to the tastes and
habits of that people. But he adds that “ at this time, also, the Jes-
uits took a more active hand in Freemasonry than ever. They
insinuated themselves into the English Lodges, where they were
caressed by the Catholics, who panted after the re-establishment of
their faith, and tolerated by the Protestant royalists, who thought no
concession too great a compensation for their services. At this
time changes were made in some of the Masonic symbols, particu-
larly in the tracing of the Lodge, which bear evident marks of Jes-
uitical interference.” 2

Speaking of the High Degrees, the fabrication of which, how-
ever, he greatly antedates, he says that “in all this progressive
mummery we see much of the hand of the Jesuits, and it would
seem that it was encouraged by the church.” 3 But he thinks that
the Masons, protected by their secrecy, ventured further than the
clergy approved in their philosophical interpretations of the symbols,
opposing at last some of “ the ridiculous and oppressive supersti-
tions of the church,” 4 and thus he accounts for the persecution of
Freemasonry at a later period by the priests, and their attempts to
suppress the Lodges.

The story, as thus narrated by Robison, is substantially that which
has been accepted by all writers who trace the origin of Freemasonry

1 “Freimaurer Lexicon,” art. “ Jesuiten 3 Ibid., p. 30.

2 c< Proofs of a Conspiracy,” p. 27. 4 Ibid.

z88

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

to the Jesuits. They affirm, as we have seen, that it was instituted
about the time of the expulsion of James II. from England, or that
if it was not then fabricated as a secret society, it was at least modi-
fied in all its features from that form which it originally had in Eng-
land, and was adapted as a political engine to aid in the restoration
of the exiled monarch and in the establishment in his recovered
kingdom of the Roman Catholic religion.

These theorists have evidently confounded primitive Speculative
Masonry, consisting only of three degrees, with the supplementary
grades invented subsequently by Ramsay and the ritualists who suc-
ceeded him. But even if we relieve the theory of this confusion and
view it as affirming that the Jesuits at the College of Clermont
modified the third degree and invented others, such as the Scottish
Knight of St. Andrew, for the purpose of restoring James II. to
the throne, we shall find no scintilla of evidence in history to support
this view, but, on the contrary, obstacles in the way of anachronisms
which it will be impossible to overcome.

James II. abdicated the throne in 1688, and, after an abortive
attempt to recover it by an unsuccessful invasion of Ireland, took
up his residence at the Chateau of St. Germain-en-Laye, in France,
where he died in 1701.

Between the two periods of 1688, when James abdicated, and
1701, when he died, no one has been enabled to find either in Eng-
land or elsewhere any trace of a third degree. Indeed, I am very
sure that it can be proved that this degree was not invented until 1 72 1
or 1 722. It is, therefore, absolutely impossible that any modification
could have been made in the latter part of the 17th century of that
which did not exist until the beginning of the 18th. And if there
was no Speculative Masonry, as distinguished from the Operative
Art practiced by the mediaeval guilds, during the lifetime of James,
it is equally absurd to contend that supplementary grades were in-
vented to illustrate and complete a superstructure whose foundations
had not yet been laid.

The theory that the Jesuits in the 17th century had invented
Freemasonry for the purpose of effecting one of their ambitious
projects, or that they had taken it as it then existed, changed it, and
added to it for the same purpose, is absolutely untenable.

Another theory has been advanced which accounts for the estab-
lishment of what has been called “Jesuitic Masonry,” at about the

THE JESUITS IN FREEMASONRY

289

middle of the 18th century. This theory is certainly free from the
absurd anachronisms which we encounter in the former, although
the proofs that there ever was such a Masonry are still very unsatis-
factory.

It has been maintained that this notion of the intrusion, as
it may 'veil be called, of the Jesuits into the Masonic Order
has been attributed to the Illuminati, that secret society which
was established by Adam Weishaupt in Bavaria about the year
1776.

The original object of this society was, as its founder declared, to
enable its members to attain the greatest possible amount of virtue,
and by the association of good men to oppose the progress of moral
evil. To give it influence it was connected with Freemasonry, whose
symbolic degrees formed the substratum of its esoteric instructions.
This has led it incorrectly to be deemed a Masonic Rite ; it could
really lay no claim to that character, except inasmuch as it required
a previous initiation into the symbolic degrees to entitle its disciples
to further advancement.

The charges made against it, that it was a political organization,
and that one of its designs was to undermine the Christian religion,
although strenuously maintained by Barruel, Robison, and a host
of other adversaries, have no foundation in truth. The principles
of the order were liberal and philosophical, but neither revolution-
ary nor anti-Christian.

As the defender of free thought, it came of course into conflict
with the Roman Catholic Church and the Company of Jesus, whose
tendencies were altogether the other way. The priests, therefore,
became its most active enemies, and their opposition was so success-
ful that it was suppressed in 1 784.

There was also between Illuminism and the many Masonic Rites,
which about the period of its popularity were constantly arising in
Germany and in France, a species of rivalry. With the natural ego-
tism of reformers, the Illuminati sought to prove the superiority of
their own system to that of their rivals.

With this view they proclaimed that all the Lodges of Free-
masons were secretly controlled by the Jesuits ; that their laws and
their mysteries were the inventions of the same Order, of whom
every Freemason was unconsciously the slave and the instrument.
Hence they concluded that he who desired to possess the genuine
19

290

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

mysteries of Masonry must seek them not among the degrees of
Rose Croix or the Scottish Knights, or still less among the English
Masons and the disciples of the Rite of Strict Observance in Ger-
many, but only in the Eclectic Lodges that had been instituted by
the Illuminati.

Such, says Barruel, was the doctrine of the Illuminati, advanced
for the purpose of elevating the character and aims of their own
institution. The French abbd is not generally trustworthy on any
subject connected with Freemasonry, of which he was the avowed
and implacable foe, but we must acknowledge that he was not far
from wrong in calling this story of Jesuitic Masonry “a ridiculous
and contemptible fable.” For once we are disposed to agree with
him, when he says in his fervent declamation, “ If prejudice did not
sometimes destroy the faculty of reasoning, we should be astonished
that the Freemasons could permit themselves to be ensnared in so
clumsy a trap. What is it, in fact, but to say to the Mother Lodge of
Edinburgh, to the Grand Lodges of London and York, to their
rulers, and to all their Grand Masters: ‘You thought that you held
the reins of the Masonic world, and you looked upon yourselves as
the great depository of its secrets, the distributers of its diplomas ;
but you are not so, and, without even knowing it, are merely puppets
of which the Jesuits hold the leading-strings, and which they move
at their pleasure .’” 1

I think that with a little trouble we may be able to solve this
apparently difficult problem of the Jesuitical interference with Free-
masonry.

The Jesuits appear to have taken the priests of Egypt for their
model. Like them, they sought to be the conservators and the in-
terpreters of religion. The vows which they took attached them to
their Order with bonds as indissoluble as those that .united the
Egyptian priests in the sacred college of Memphis. Those who
sought admission into their company were compelled to pass
through trials of their fortitude and fidelity. Their ambition was as
indomitable as their cunning was astute. They strove to be the
confessors and the counsellors of kings, and to control the education
of youth, that by these means they might become of importance in
the state, and direct the policy of every government where they

Memoircs pour scrvir a l’Histoire du Jacobanisme,” T. N., p. 291.

THE JESUITS IN FREEMASONRY

291

were admitted. And this policy was on all occasions to be made
subservient to the interests of the church.

At one time they had not less than an hundred schools or col-
leges in France, the most important being that of Clermont, which,
though at one time suppressed, had received renewed letters patent
from Louis XIV.

It was this College of Clermont, where James II. was a frequent
guest, led there by his religious feelings, that is said to have been
the seat of that conspiracy of the Stuart faction which was to ter-
minate either in the invention or the adoption of Freemasonry as a
means of restoring the monarch to his throne, and of resuscitating
the Roman Catholic religion in heretical England.

Now we may readily admit that the Jesuits were exceedingly
anxious to accomplish both these objects, and that for that purpose
they would enter into any intrigue which would probably lead to
success.

With this design there can be but little doubt that they united
with the adherents of the Stuarts. But this conspiracy could not
have had any reference to a Masonic organization, because Free-
masonry was during the life of James II. wholly unknown in
France, and known in England only as a guild of Operative Masons,
into which a few non-Masons had been admitted through courtesy.
It certainly had not yet assumed the form in which we are called
upon to recognize it as the political engine used by the Jesuits.
The Grand Lodge of England, the mother of all modern Specula-
tive Masonry, had no existence until 1717, or sixteen years after the
death of the king.

We are bound, therefore, if on the ground of an anachronism
alone, to repudiate any theory that connects the Jesuits with Free-
masonry during the life of James II., although we may be ready to
admit their political conspiracy in the interests of that dethroned
monarch.

During the life of his son and putative successor, the titular
James III., Speculative Masonry was established in England and
passed over into France.

The Lodge established in Paris in 1725 was, I have no doubt, an
organization of the adherents of the Stuart family, as has already
been shown. It is probable that most of the members were Catho-
lics and under the influence of the Jesuits. But it is not likely that

292

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

those priests took an active part in the internal organization of the
Lodge. They could jio their work better outside of it than within it
In the Rose Croix and some other of the High Degrees we find
the influences of a Roman Catholic spirit in the original rituals, but
this might naturally arise from the religious tendencies of their
founders, and did not require the special aid of Jesuitism.

After the year 1738 the bull of excommunication of Pope Clem-
ent XII. must have precluded the Jesuits from all connection with
Freemasonry except as its denouncers and persecutors, parts which
up to the present day they have uninterruptedly played.

In conclusion we must, I think, refuse to accept the theory which
makes a friendly connection between Freemasonry and Jesuitism
as one of those mythical stories which, born in the imagination of its
inventors, has been fostered only by the credulity of its believers.

At this day I doubt if there is a Masonic scholar who would ac-
cept it as more than a fable not even “ cunningly devised,” though
there was a time when it was received as a part of the authentic his-
tory of Freemasonry.

CHAPTER XXXII

OLIVER CROMWELL AND FREEMASONRY

HREE fables have been invented to establish a
connection between Freemasonry and the dy-
nasty of the Stuarts — one which made it the
purpose of the adherents of James II. to use
the Institution as a means of restoring that mon-
arch to the throne ; a second in which the Jesu-
its were to employ it for the same purpose, as
well as for the re-establishment of the Roman Catholic religion in
England ; the third and most preposterous of these fables is that
which attributes the invention of Freemasonry as a secret society to
Oliver Cromwell, who is supposed to have employed it as a political
engine to aid him in the dethronement of Charles I., in the abolition
of the monarchy, and in the foundation of a republic on its ruins,
with himself for its head.

The first and second of these fables have already been discussed.
The consideration of the third will be the subject of the present
chapter.

The theory that Freemasonry was instituted by Oliver Cromwell
was not at first received ’ike the other two by any large portion of
the fraternity. It was the invention of a single mind and was first
made public in the year 1 746, by the Abb6 Larudan, who presented
his views in a work entitled Les Franc- M a fons icrassis — a book
which Klass, the bibliographer, says is the armory from which all the
enemies of Masonry have since derived their weapons of abuse.

The propositions of Larudan are distinguished for their abso-
lute independence of all historical authority and for the bold as-
sumptions which are presented to the reader in the place of facts.

His strongest argument for the truth of his theory is that the
purposes of the Masonic Institution and of the political course of
Cromwell are identical, namely, to sustain the doctrines of liberty
and equality among mankind.

294

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Rejecting all the claims to antiquity that have been urged in he
half of the Institution, he thinks that it was in England where the
Order of Freemasonry first saw the light of day, and that it is to
Cromwell that it owes its origin. And this theory he claims (with
what truth we know not) to have received from a certain Grand
Master with whose astuteness and sincerity he was well acquainted.
But even this authority, he says, would not have been sufficient to
secure his belief, had it not afterward been confirmed by his reading
of the history of the English Protector and his mature reflections
on the morals and the laws of the Order, where he detected at every
step the presence of Cromwell.

The object of Cromwell, as it has been already said, was by the
organization of a secret society, whose members would be bound
by the most solemn ties of fraternity, to reconcile the various relig-
ions and political sects which prevailed in England in the reign of
Charles I. to the prosecution of his views, which were equally op-
posed to the supremacy of the king and to the power of the Parlia-
ment, and as a consequence of the destruction of both, to the eleva-
tion of himself to the headship of affairs.

In the execution of this plan Cromwell proceeded with his usual
caution and address. He first submitted the outline to several of
his most intimate friends, such as Algernon Sidney, Harrington,
Monk, and Fairfax, and he held with them several private meetings.
But it was not until the year 1648 that he began to take the neces-
sary steps for bringing it to maturity.

In that year, at a dinner which he gave to a large number of his
friends, he opened his designs to the company. When his guests,
among whom were many members of Parliament, both Presbyterians
and Independents, the two rival religious sects of the day, had been
well feasted, the host dexterously led the conversation to the subject
of the unhappy condition of England. He showed in a pathetic
manner how the unfortunate nation had suffered distracting conflicts
of politics and religion, and he declared that it was a disgrace that
men so intelligent as those who then heard him did not make an
exertion to put an end to these distracting contests of party.

Scarcely had Cromwell ceased to speak when Ireton, his son-in-
law, who had been prepared for the occasion, rose, and, seconding the
sentiments of his leader, proceeded to show the absolute necessity
for the public good of a conciliation and union of the many discordant

OLIVER CROMWELL AND FREEMASONRY

295

parties which were then dividing the country. He exclaimed with
fervor that he would not, himself, hesitate to sacrifice his fortune
and his life to remedy such calamities, and to show to the people the
road they ought to take, to relieve themselves from the yoke which
was oppressing them and to break the iron scepter under which they
were groaning. But to do this it was first necessary, he insisted,
to destroy every power and influence which had betrayed the na-
tion. Then, turning to Cromwell, he conjured him to explain his
views on this important matter, and to suggest the cure for these
evils.

Cromwell did not hesitate to accept the task which had, appar-
ently without his previous concurrence, been assigned to him. Ad-
dressing his guests in that metaphorical style which he was ac-
customed to use, and the object of which was to confuse their
intellects and make them more ready to receive his boldest proposi-
tions, he explained the obligation of a worship of God, the necessity
to repel force by force, and to deliver mankind from oppression and
tyranny. He then concluded his speech, exciting the curiosity of
his auditors by telling them that he knew a method by which they
could succeed in this great enterprise, restore peace to England, and
rescue it from the depth of misery into which it was plunged. This
method, he added, if communicated to the world, would win the
gratitude of mankind and secure a glorious memory for its authors
to the latest posterity.

The discourse was well managed and well received. All of his
guests earnestly besought him to make this admirable expedient
known to them. But Cromwell would not yield at once to their
importunities, but modestly replying that so important an enterprise
was beyond the strength of any one man to accomplish, and that he
would rather continue to endure the evils of a bad government than,
in seeking to remove them by the efforts of his friends, to subject
them to dangers which they might be unwiling to encounter.

Cromwell well understood the character of every man who sat at
the table with him, and he knew that by this artful address he should
still further excite their curiosity and awaken their enthusiasm.

And so it was that, after a repetition of importunities, he finally
consented to develop his scheme, on the condition that all the guests
should take a solemn oath to reveal the plan to no one and to con-
sider it after it had been proposed with absolutely unprejudiced

zg6

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

mind. This was unanimously assented to, and, the oath of secrecy
having been taken, Cromwell threw himself on his knees and, ex-
tending his hands toward heaven, called on God and all the celes-
tial powers to witness the innocence of his heart and the purity of
his intentions. All this the Abbe Larudan relates with a minute-
ness of detail which we could expect only from an eye-witness of
the scene.

Having thus made a deep impression on his guests, Cromwell
said that the precise moment for disclosing the plan had not
arrived, and that an inspiration from heaven, which he had just re-
ceived, instructed him not to divulge it until four days had elapsed.

The company though impatient to receive a knowledge of the
important secret, were compelled to restrain their desires and to
agree to meet again at the appointed time and at a place which was
designated.

On the fourth day all the guests repaired to a house in King
Street, where the meeting took place, and Cromwell proceeded to
develop his plan. (And here the Abbd Larudan becomes fervid and
diffuse in the minuteness with which he describes what must have
been' a wholly imaginary scene.)

He commenced by conducting the guests into a dark room,
where he prepared their minds for what was going to occur by a
long prayer, in the course of which he gave them to understand that
he was in communion with the spirits of the blessed. After this he
told them that his design was to found a society whose only objects
would be to render due worship to God and to restore to England
the peace for which it so ardently longed. But this project, he
added, required consummate prudence and infinite address to secure
its success. Then taking a censer in his hands, be filled the apart-
ment with the most subtle fumes, so as to produce a favorable dis-
position in the company to hear what he had further to say.

He informed them that at the reception of a new adherent it
was necessary that he should undergo a certain ceremony, to which
all of them, without exception, would have to submit. He asked
them whether they were willing to pass through this ceremony, to
which proposition unanimous consent was given. He then chose
from the company five assistants to occupy appropriate places and
to perform prescribed functions. These assistants were a Master,
two Wardens, a Secretary, and an Orator.

OLIVER CROMWELL AND FREEMASONRY

297

Having made these preparations, the visitors were removed to
another apartment, which had been prepared for the purpose, and in
which was a picture representing the ruins of King Solomon’s Term
pie. From this apartment they were transferred to another, and,
being blindfolded, were finally invested with the secrets of initiation.
Cromwell delivered a discourse on religion and politics, the purport
of which was to show to the contending sects of Presbyterians and
Independents, representatives of both being present, the necessity,
for the public good, of abandoning all their frivolous disputes, of
becoming reconciled, and of changing the bitter hatred which then
inspired them for a tender love and charity toward each other.

The eloquence of their artful leader had the desired effect, and
both sects united with the army in the establishment of a secret asso-
ciation founded on the professed principles of love of God and the
maintenance of liberty and equality among men, but whose real de-
sign was to advance the projects of Cromwell, by the abolition of
the monarchy and the establishment of a commonwealth of which
he should be the head.

It is unfortunate for the completed symmetry of this rather inter-
esting fable that the Abbd has refrained from indulging his imagi-
nation by giving us the full details of the form of initiation. He has,
however, in various parts of his book alluded to so much of it as to
enable us to learn that the instructions were of a symbolic character,
and that the Temple of Solomon constituted the most prominent
symbol.

This Temple had been built by divine command to be the sanct-
uary of religion and as a place peculiarly consecrated to the perform-
ance of its august ceremonies. After several years of glory and
magnificence it had been destroyed by a formidable army, and the
people who had been there accustomed to worship were loaded with
chains and carried in captivity to Babylon. After years of servitude,
an idolatrous prince, chosen as the instrument of Divine clemency,
had permitted the captives to return to Jerusalem and to rebuild the
Temple in its primitive splendor.

It was in this allegory, says the Abbd, that the Freemasons of
Cromwell found the exact analogy of their society. The Temple in
its first splendor is figurative of the primitive state of man. The re-
ligion and the ceremonies which were there practiced are nothing else
than that universal law engraved on every heart whose principles

298

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

are found in the ideas of equity and charity to which all men are
obliged. The destruction of this Temple, and the captivity and
slavery of its worshippers, symbolized the pride and ambition which
have produced political subjection among men. The unpitying
hosts of Assyrians who destroyed the Temple and led the people
into captivity are the kings, princes, and magistrates whose power has
overwhelmed oppressed nations with innumerable evils. And finally,
the chosen people charged with the duty of rebuilding the Temple
are the Freemasons, who are to restore men to their original dignity.

Cromwell had divided the Order which he founded into three
classes or degrees. The third or Master’s degree was of course not
without its Hiramic legend, but the interpretation of its symbolism
was very different from that which is given at the present day.

The Abbd thus explains it. The disorder of the workmen and
the confusion at the Temple were intended to make a profound im-
pression upon the mind of the candidate and to show him that the
loss of liberty and equality, represented by the death of Hiram, is
the cause of all the evils which affect mankind. While men lived
in tranquillity in the asylum of the Temple of Liberty they enjoyed
perpetual happiness. But they have been surprised and attacked
by tyrants who have reduced them to a state of slavery. This is
symbolized by the destruction of the Temple, which it is the duty
of the Master Masons to rebuild ; that is to say, to restore that lib-
erty and equality which had been lost.

Cromwell appointed missionaries or emissaries, says Larudan,
who propagated the Order, not only over all England, but even
into Scotland and Ireland, where many Lodges were established.

The members of the Order or Society were first called Freema-
sons ; afterward the name was repeatedly changed to suit the politi-
cal circumstances of the times, and they were called Levelers, then
Independents, afterward Fifth Monarchy Men, and finally resumed
their original title, which they have retained to the present day.

Such is the fable of the Cromwellian origin of Freemasonry
which we owe entirely to the inventive genius of the Abbd Larudan.
And yet it is not wholly a story of the imagination, but is really
founded on an extraordinary distortion of the facts of history.

Edmund Ludlow was an honest and honorable man who took at
first a prominent part in the civil war which ended in the decapita-
tion of Charles I., the dissolution of the monarchy, and the establish-

OLIVER CROMWELL AND FREEMASONRY

299

mem of the Commonwealth. He was throughout his whole life a
consistent and unswerving republican, and was as much opposed to
the political schemes of Cromwell for his own advancement to
power as he was to the usurpation of unconstitutional power by the
King. In the language of the editor of his memoirs, “ He was an
enemy to all arbitrary government, though gilded over with the most
specious pretences ; and not only disapproved the usurpation of
Cromwell, but would have opposed him with as much vigor as he
had done the King, if all occasions of that nature had not been cut
off by the extraordinary jealousy or vigilance of the usurpers.” 1

Having unsuccessfully labored to counteract the influence of
Cromwell with the army, he abandoned public affairs and retired to
his home in Essex, where he remained in seclusion until the restora-
tion of Charles II., when he fled to Switzerland, where he resided
until his death.

During his exile, Ludlow occupied his leisure hours in the com-
position of his Memoirs , a work of great value as a faithful record
of the troublous period in which he lived and of which he was him-
self a great part. In these memoirs he has given a copious narra-
tive of the intrigues by which Cromwell secured the alliance of the
army and destroyed the influence of the Parliament.

The work was published at Vevay, in Switzerland, under the title
of Memoirs of Edmund Ludlow, Esq. ; Lieutenant-General of the
Tories in Ireland \ One of the Council of State, and a Member of the
Parliament which began on November 3, 164.0. It is in two volumes,
with a supplementary one containing copies of important papers.
The edition from which I cite bears the date of 1698. There may
have been an earlier one. With these memoirs the Abbe Larudan
appears to have been well acquainted. He had undoubtedly read
them carefully, for he has made many quotations and has repeatedly
referred to Ludlow as his authority.

But unfortunately for the Abb6’s intelligence, or far more prob-
ably for his honesty, he has always applied what Ludlow said of the
intrigues of Cromwell for the organization of a new party as if it
were meant to describe the formation of a new and secret society.

Neither Ludlow nor any other writer refers to the existence of
Freemasonry as we now have it and as it is described by the Abbd

1 Ludlow’s “ Memoirs,” Preface, p. ir.

300

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Larudan in the time of the civil wars. Even the Operative Masons
were not at that period greatly encouraged, for, says Northouck,
“no regard to science and elegance was to be expected from the
sour minds of the puritanical masters of the nation between the fall
of Charles I. and the restoration of his son.” 1

The Guild of Freemasons, the only form in which the Order was
known until the 1 8 th century, was during the Commonwealth dis-
couraged and architecture was neglected. In the tumult of war the
arts of peace are silent. Cromwell was, it is true, engaged in many
political intrigues, but he had other and more effective means to
accomplish his ends than those of Freemasonry, of whose existence
at that time, except as a guild of workmen, we have no historical
evidence, but a great many historical facts to contradict its proba-
bility.

The theory, therefore, that Freemasonry owes its origin to Oliver
Cromwell, who invented it as a means of forwarding his designs
toward obtaining the supreme power of the state, is simply a fable,
the invention of a clerical adversary of the Institution, and devised
by him plainly to give to it a political character, by which, like his
successors Barruel and Robison, he sought to injure it.

1 Northouck’s “ Constitutions,” p. 141.

CHAPTER XXXIII

THE ROYAL SOCIETY AND FREEMASONRY

HE hypothesis that Freemasonry was instituted
in the 1 7th century and in the reign of Charles
II., by a set of philosophers and scientists who
organized it under the title of the “ Royal So-
ciety,” is the last of those theories which attempts
to connect the Masonic Order with the House of
Stuart that we will have to investigate.

The theory was first advanced by an anonymous writer in the
German Mercury , a Masonic journal published about the close of
the last century at Weimar, and edited by the celebrated Chris-
topher Martin Wieland.

In this article the writer says that Dr. John Wilkins, one of the
most learned men of his time, and the brother-in-law of Oliver
Cromwell, becoming discontented with the administration of Rich-
ard Cromwell, his son and successor, began to devise the means of
re-establishing the royal authority. With this view he suggested
the idea of organizing a society or club, in which, under the pre-
tence of cultivating the sciences, the partisans of the king might
meet together with entire freedom. General Monk and several
other military men, who had scarcely more learning than would en-
able them to write their names, were members of this academy.
Their meetings were always begun with a learned lecture, for the
sake of form, but the conversation afterward turned upon politics
and the interests of the king. And this politico-philosophical club,
which subsequently assumed, after the Restoration, the title of the
“ Royal Society of Sciences,” he asserts to have been the origin of
the fraternity of Freemasons.

We have already had abundant reason to see, in the formation
of Masonic theories, what little respect has been paid by their fram-
ers to the contradictory facts of history nor does the present hy

301

302

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

pothesis afford any exception to the general rule of dogmatic as-
sumption and unfounded assertion.

Christopher Frederick Nicolai, a learned bookseller of Berlin,
wrote and published, in 1783, an Essay on the Accusations made
against the Order of Knights Templars and their Mystery ; with
an Appendix on the Origin of the Fraternity of Freemasons}

In this work he vigorously attacks the theory of the anonymous
writer in Wieland’s Mercury , and the reasons on which he grounds
his dissent are well chosen, but they do not cover the whole ground.
Unfortunately, Nicolai had a theory of his own to foster, which also
in a certain way connects Freemasonry with the real founders of the
Royal Society, and the impugnment of the hypothesis of Wieland’s
contribution in its whole extent impugns also his own. Two
negatives in most languages are equivalent to an affirmative, but
nowhere are two fictions resolvable into a truth.

The arguments of Nicolai against the Wieland theory are, how-
ever, worth citation, before we examine his own.

He says that Wilkins could scarcely have been discontented
with the government of Richard Cromwell, since it was equally as
advantageous to him as that of his father. He was (and he quotes
Wood in the Athena Oxonienses as his authority) much opposed to
the court, and was a zealous Puritan before the rebellion.

In 1648 he was made the Master of Wadham College, in the
place of a royalist who had been removed. In 1649, after the de-
capitation of Charles I., he joined the republican party and took the
oath of allegiance to the Commonwealth. In 1656 he married the
sister of Cromwell, and under Richard received the valuable appoint-
ment of Master of Trinity College, which, however, he lost upon
the restoration of the monarchy in the following year.

“Is it credible,” says Nicolai, “that this man could have in-
stituted a society for the purpose of advancing the restoration of
the king ; a society all of whose members were of the opposite
party ? The celebrated Dr. Goddard, who was one of the most dis-
tinguished members, was the physician and favorite of Cromwell,
whom, after the death of the King, he attended in his campaigns in
Ireland and Scotland. It is an extraordinary assertion that a dis-

^‘Versuch iiber die Besschuldigungen, welche dem Tempelherrn orden gemacht
worden und iiber dessen Geheimniss ; nebst einem Anhange iiber das Enstehen der Frei-
maurergesellschaft,” Berlin and Stettin, 1783.

THE ROYAL SOCIETY AND FREEMASONRY 303

content with the administration of Richard Cromwell should have
given rise in 1658 to a society which was instituted in 1646. It is
not less extraordinary that this society should have held its meetings
in a tavern. It is very certain that in those days of somber Puritan-
ism the few taverns to be found in London could not have been
used as places of meeting for associations consisting of men of all
conditions, as is now the custom. There would have been much im-
prudence in thus exposing secret deliberations on an affair equally
dangerous and important to the inspection of all the spies who
might be congregated in a tavern.”

He asserts that the first meetings of the society were held at the
house of Dr. Goddard and of another member, and afterward at
Cheapside and at Gresham College. And these facts are proved by
the records of the society, as published by its annalists.

As to the statement that Monk was one of the members of the
society — a fact that would be important in strengthening the theory
that it was organized by the friends of the monarchy and with a
design of advancing its restoration — he shows the impossibility that
it could be correct, because Monk was a prisoner in the Tower from
1643 until 1647, and after his release in that year spent only a month
in London, not again visiting that city till 1659, when he returned at
the head of an army and was engaged in the arrangement of such
delicate affairs and was so narrowly watched that it is not possible
to be believed that with his well-known caution he would have
taken part in any sort of political society whatever, while the society
would have acted very inconsiderately in admitting into its ranks
military men who could scarcely write, and that too at a time when
distrust had risen to its height.

But a better proof than any advanced by Nicolai, that Monk
had nothing to do with the establishment of the Royal Society, what-
ever may have been its object, is that his name does not appear upon
the list of original or early members, taken from the official records
and published by Dr. Thompson in his history of the society.

Finally Nicolai asserts very truthfully that its subsequent history
has shown that this society was really engaged in scientific pursuits,
and that politics were altogether banished from its conferences.
But he also contends, but with less accuracy, that the political prin-
ciples of its members were opposed to the restoration of the mon-
archy, for which statement there is no positive authority.

304

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Hence Nicolai concludes that “ there is no truth in the statements
of the anonymous writer in Wieland’s Mercury , except that the
restoration was opposed in secret by a certain society.”

And now he advances his own theory, no less untenable than
the one he is opposing, that this society “ was the Freemasons, who
had nothing in common with the other, except the date of founda-
tion, and whose views in literature as well as in politics were of an
entirely opposite character.”

This was the theory of Nicolai — not that Freemasonry originated
in the Royal Society, but that it was established by certain learned
men who sought to advance the experimental philosophy which had
just been introduced by Bacon. But the same idea was sought by
the originators of the Royal Society, and as many of the founders of
this school were also among the founders of the Royal Society, it
seems difficult to separate the two theories so as to make of each a
distinct and independent existence. But it will be better to let the
Berlin bookseller explain his doctrine in his own language, before
an attempt is made to apply to it the canons of criticism.

He commences by asserting that one of the effects of the labors
of Andrea and the other Rosicrucians was the application of a
wholesome criticism to the examination of philosophical and scien-
tific subjects. He thinks even that the Fama Fraternitatis, the
great work of Andrea, had first suggested to Bacon the notion of
his immortal work on The Advancement of Learning. At the
same time in which Bacon flourisheb and taught his inductive phi-
losophy, the Rosicrucians had introduced a system of philosophy
which was established on the phenomena of nature.

Lord Bacon had cultivated these views in his book De Atigmen-
tis Scientiarum, except that he rejected the Rosicrucian method of
esoteric instruction. Everything that he taught was to be open
and exoteric. Therefore, as he had written his great work in the
Latin language, for the use of the learned, he now composed his
New Atlantis in English, that all classes might be able to read it.

In this work is contained his celebrated romance of the House
of Solomon, which Nicolai thinks may have had its influence in
originating the society of Freemasons.

In this fictitious tale Bacon supposes that a vessel lands on an
unknown island, called Bensalem, over which in days of yore a
certain King Solomon reigned. This King had a large establish-

HENRY PRICE

First Active Grand Master of North American Colonies, 1733

THE ROYAL SOCIETY AND FREEMASONRY

305

ment, which was called the House of Solomon or the College of the
Six Days’ Work, in allusion to the six days of the Mosaic account of
the creation. He afterward describes the immense apparatus which
was there employed in physical researches. There were deep grot-
toes and tall bowers for the observation of the phenomena of nature ;
artificial mineral-waters ; large buildings in which meteors, the wind,
rain and thunder and lightning were imitated ; extensive botanic
gardens, and large fields in which all kinds of animals were collected
for the study of their instinct and habits, and houses filled with all
the wonders of nature and art. There were also a great number of
learned men, to whom the direction of these things was intrusted.
They made journeys into foreign countries, and observations on what
they saw. They wrote, they collected, they determined results, and
deliberated together as to what was proper to be published.

This romance, says Nicolai, which was in accord with the prevail
ing taste of the age, contributed far more to spread the views of
Bacon on the observation of nature than his more learned and pro
found work had been able to do. The House of Solomon attracted
the attention of everybody. King Charles I. was anxious to estab-
lish something like it, but was prevented by the civil wars Never-
theless this great idea, associated with that of the Rosicrucians, con-
tinued to powerfully agitate the minds of the learned men of that
period, who now began to be persuaded of the necessity of experi-
mental knowledge.

Accordingly, in 1646, a society of learned men was established,
all of whom were of Bacon’s opinion, that philosophy and the phys-
ical sciences should be placed within the reach of all thinking minds.
They held meetings at which — believing that instruction in physics
was to be sought by a mutual communication of ideas — they made
many scientific experiments in common. Among these men were
John Wallis, John Wilkins, Jonathan Goddard, Samuel Foster,
Francis Glisson, and many others, all of whom were, fourteen years
afterward, the founders of the Royal Society.

But proceedings like these were not congenial with the intellect-
ual condition of England at that period. A melancholy and somber
spirit had overshadowed religion, and a mystical theology, almost
Gnostic in its character, had infected the best minds. Devotion had
passed into enthusiasm and that into fanaticism, and sanguinary
wars and revolutions were the result.

20

,00 PREHISTORIC MASONRY

It was then that such skillful hypocrites as Cromwefl and Ireton
took advantage of this weakness for the purpose of concealing and
advancing their own designs.

The taint of this dark and sad character is met with in all the
science, the philosophy, and even in the oratory and poetry of the
period. Astrology and Theurgy were then in all their glory. Chem-
istry, which took the place of experimental science, was as obscure
as every other species of learning, and its facts were enveloped in
the allegories of the Alchemists and the Rosicrucians. A few learned
men, disheartened by this obscuration of intellectual light, had or-
ganized a society in 1646 ; but as they were still imbued with a rem-
nant of the popular prejudice, they were the partisans of the esoteric
method of instruction, and did not believe that human knowledge
should be exoterically taught so as to become accessible to all.
Hence their society became a secret one. The first members of
this society were, says Nicolai, Elias Ash mole, the celebrated anti-
quary ; William Lilly, a famous astrologer ; Thomas Wharton, a
physician ; George Wharton ; William Oughtred, a mathematician ;
Dr. John Hewitt, and Dr. John Pearson, both clergymen, and sev-
eral others. The annual festival of the Astrologers gave rise to this
association. It had previously held one meeting at Warrington, in
Lancashire, but it was first firmly established at London.

Its object was to build the House of Solomon in a literal sense ;
but the establishment was to remain as secret as the island of Ben-
salem in Bacon’s New A tlantis ; that is, they were to be engaged in
the study of nature, but the instructions were to remain within the
society in an esoteric form ; in other words, it was to be a secret
society. Allegories were used by these philosophers to express their
ideas. First were the ancient columns of Hermes, by which Jam-
blichus pretended that he had enlightened all the doubts of Porphyry.
You then mounted, by several steps, to a chequered floor divided
into four regions, to denote the four superior sciences, after which
came the types of the six days, which expressed the object of the
society. All of which was intended to teach the doctrines that God
created the world and preserves it by fixed principles, and that he
who seeks to know these principles, by an investigation of the inte-
rior of nature, approximates to God and obtains from His grace the
power of commanding nature. This, says Nicolai, was the essence
of the mystical and alchemical doctrine of the age, so that we may

THE ROYAL SOCIETY AND FREEMASONRY 307

conclude that the society which he has been describing was in reality
an association of alchemists, or rather of astrologers.

In these allegories, for which Nicolai may have been indebted
to the alchemical writings of that period, to which he refers, or for
which he may have drawn on his own imagination — we are uncer-
tain which, as he cites no authorities — we may plainly detect Ma-
sonic symbols, such as the pillars of the porch of the Temple,
the mystical ladder of steps, and the mosaic pavement, and thus it
is that he seems to find an analogy between Freemasonry and the
secret society that he has been describing.

He still further pursues the hypothesis of their identity in the
following remarks :

“ It is known,” he says, “ that all who have the right of citizenship
in London, whatever may be their rank or condition, must be recog-
nized as members of some company or corporation. But it is al-
ways easy for a man of quality or of letters to gain admission into
one of these companies. Now, several members of the society that
has just been described were also members of the Company of Ma-
sons. This was the reason of their holding their meetings at Masons’
Hall, in Masons’ Alley, Basinghall Street. They all entered the
company and assumed the name of Free and Accepted Masons,
adopting, besides, all its external marks of distinction. Free is the
title which every member of this body assumes in England ; the
right or franchise is called Freedom ; the brethren call themselves
Freeme7i ; Accepted means, in this place, that this private society had
been accepted or incorporated into that of the Masons, and thus it
was that chance gave birth to that denomination of Freemasons
which afterward became so famous, although it is possible that some
allusion may also have been intended to the building of the House
of Solomon, an allegory with which they were also familiar.”

Hence, according to the theory of Nicolai, two famous associa-
tions, each of a character peculiar to itself, were at the same period
indebted to the same cause for their existence. These were the
Royal Society and the Freemasons. “ Both,” he says, “ had the
same object and the difference in their proceedings arose only from
a difference in some of the opinions of their members. The one
society had adopted as its maxim that the knowledge of nature
and of natural science should be indiscriminately communicated
to all classes of men, while the other contended that the secrets

308

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

of nature should be restricted to a small number of chosen recipi-
ents. The former body, which was the Royal Society, therefore
held open meetings ; the latter, which was the Society of Freema-
sons, enveloped its transactions in mystery.”

“ In those days,” says Nicolai, “the Freemasons were altogether
devoted to the King and opposed to the Parliament, and they soon
occupied themselves at their meetings in devising the means of sus-
taining the royal cause. After the death of Charles I., in 1649, the
Royalists becoming still more closely united, and, fearing to be
known as such, they joined the assemblies of the Freemasons for
the purpose of concealing their own identity, and the good intentions
of that society being well known many persons of rank were ad-
mitted into it. But as the objects which occupied their attention
were no other than to diminish the number of the partisans of Par-
liament, and to prepare the way for the restoration of Charles II. to
the throne, it would have been very imprudent to communicate to
all Freemasons, without exception, the measures which they deemed
it expedient to take, and which required an inviolable secrecy. Ac-
cordingly they adopted the method of selecting a certain number of
their members, who met in secret, and this committee, which had
nothing at all to do with the House of Solomon, selected allegories,
which had no relation to the former ones, but which were very
appropriate to their design. These new Masons took Death for
their symbol. They lamented the death of their master, Charles I. ;
they nursed the hope of vengeance on his murderers ; they sought
to re-establish the Word, or his son, Charles II., for they applied to
him the word Logos, which, in its theological sense, means both the
Word and the Son ; and the Queen, Henrietta Maria, the relict of
Charles I., being thenceforth the head of the party, they designated
themselves the Widow’s Sons.

“ They agreed also upon private signs and modes of recognition,
by which the friends of the royal cause might be able to distinguish
each other from their enemies. This precaution was of great utility
to those who traveled, and especially to those of them who retired
with the court to Holland, where, being surrounded by the spies of
the Commonwealth, it was necessary to be exceedingly diligent in
guarding their secret.”

Nicolai then proceeds to show how, after the death of Oliver
Cromwell and the abdication of his son Richard, the administration

THE ROYAL SOCIETY AND FREEMASONRY

309

of affairs fell into the hands of the chiefs of various parties, whence
resulted confusion and dissensions, which tended to render the cause
of the monarchy still more popular. The generals of the army
were, however, still opposed to any notion of a restoration, and the
hopes of the royalists centered upon General Monk, who com-
manded the army in Scotland, and who, it was known, had begun to
look favorably on propositions which he had received in 1659 from
the exiled King.

It then became necessary to bind their secret committee still
more closely, that they might treat of Scottish affairs in reference to
the interests of the King. They selected new allegories, which
symbolized the critical state to which they were reduced, and the
virtues, such as prudence, pliancy, and courage, which were nec-
essary to success. They selected a new device and a new sign,
“ and in their meetings spoke allegorically of taking care, in that
wavering and uncertain condition of falling, lest the arms should be
broken.” It is probable that, in this last and otherwise incompre-
hensible sentence, Nicolai refers to some of the changes made in the
High Degrees, fabricated about the middle of the 18th century, but
whose invention he incorrectly, but like most Masonic historians of
his day, attributes to an earlier date.

As some elucidation of what he says respecting the fact of
falling and the broken arm , we find Nicolai afterward quoting a
small dictionary which he says appeared about the beginning of the
1 8th century, and in which we meet with the following definition :

“ Masons Wound , An imaginary wound above the elbow, to
represent a fracture of the arm occasioned by a fall from an elevated
place.”

“This,” says Nicolai, “is the authentic history of the origin of
the Society of Freemasons, and of the first changes that it under-
went, changes which transformed it from an esoteric society of
natural philosophers into an association of good patriots and loyal
subjects ; and hence it was that it subsequently took the name of
the Royal Art as applied to Masonry.”

He concludes by affirming that the Society of Freemasons con-
tinued to assemble after the Restoration, in 1660, and even made, in
1663, several regulations for its preservation, hut the zeal of its
members was diminished by the changes which science and manners
underwent during the reign of Charles II. Its political character

3io

PkEHISTORIC MASONR\

ceased by the advent of the king, and its esoteric method of teach-
ing the natural sciences must have been greatly interrupted.

The Royal Society, whose method had been exoteric and open,
and from whose conferences politics were excluded, although its
members were, in principle, opposed to the Restoration, had a more
successful progress, and was joined by many of the Freemasons, the
most prominent of whom was Elias Ashmole, who, Nicolai says,
changed his opinions and became a member of the Royal Society.

But, to prevent its dissolution, the Society of Freemasons made
several changes in its constitution, so as to give it a specific design.
This was undertaken and the symbols of the Society were altered
so as to substitute the Temple of Solomon in the place of Bacon’s
House of Solomon, as a more appropriate allegory to express the
character of the new institution. Nicolai thinks that the building
of St. Paul’s Church and the persecutions endured by Sir Christo-
pher Wren may have contributed to the selection of these new sym-
bols. But on this point he does not insist.

Such is the theory of Nicolai. Rejecting the idea that the ori-
gin of the Order of Freemasonry is to be traced to the founders of
the Royal Society, he claims to have found it in a society of con-
temporaneous philosophers who met at Masons’ Hall, in Basinghall
Street, and assumed the name of Free and Accepted Masons, and who,
claiming, in opposition to the views of the members of the Royal
Society, that all sciences should be communicated esoterically, there-
fore held their meetings in secret, their real object therefor being to
nourish a political conspiracy for the advancement of the cause of
the monarchy and the restoration of the exiled King.

Nicolai does not expressly mention the Astrologers, but it is very
evident that he alludes to them as the so-called philosophers who
originated this secret society, and to them, therefore, he attributes
the invention of the Masonic system, as it now exists, after the
necessary changes which policy and the vicissitudes of the times
had induced.

Nicholas de Bonneville, the author of the essay entitled The
Jesuits chased out of Freemasonry , entertained a similar opinion.
He says that in 1646 a society of Rosicrucians was formed at Lon-
don, modeled on the ideas of the New Atlantis of Bacon. It
assembled in Masons’ Hall, where Ashmole and other Rosicru-
cians modified the formula of reception of the Operative Masons.

THE ROYAL SOCIETY AND FREEMASONRY

3 11

which had consisted only of a few ceremonies used by craftsmen,
and substituted a mode of initiation founded in part on the mysteries
of Ancient Egypt and Greece. They then fabricated the first de-
gree of Masonry as we now have it, and, to distinguish themselves
from common Masons, called themselves Freemasons. Thory cites
this without comment in his Acta Latomorum , and gives it as a part
of the authentic annals of the Order.

But ingenious and plausible as are these views, both of Nicolai
and Bonneville, they unfortunately can not withstand the touchstone
of all truth, the proofs of authentic history.

It will be seen that we have two hypotheses to investigate — first
that advanced by the contributor to Wieland’s Mercury , that the
Society of Freemasons was originated by the founders of the Royal
Society, and that maintained by Nicolai and Bonneville, that it owes
its invention to the Astrologers who were contemporary with these
founders. Both hypotheses place the date of the invention in the
same year, 1646, and give London as the place of the invention.

We must first direct our attention to the theory which maintains
that the Royal Society was the origin of Freemasonry, and that the
founders of that academy were the establishers of the Society of
Freemasons.

This theory, first advanced, apparently, by the anonymous con-
tributor to Wieland’s Merctiry, was exploded by Nicolai, in the
arguments heretofore quoted, but something may be added to in-
crease the strength of what he has said.

We have the explicit testimony of all the historians of that insti-
tution that it was not at all connected with the political contests of
the day, and that it was founded only as a means of pursuing philo-
sophical and scientific inquiries.

Dr. Thompson, who derives his information from the early rec-
ords of the society, says that “ it was established for the express pur-
pose of advancing experimental philosophy, and that its foundation
was laid during the time of the civil wars and was owing to the acci-
dental association of several learned men who took no part in the
disturbances which agitated Great Britain.” 1

He adds that “about the year 1645 several ingenious men who

1 “ History of the Royal Society,” by Thomas Thompson, M.D., F.R.S., LL.D.

London, 1812, p. 1.

*12

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

resided in London and were interested in the progress of mathemat-
ics and natural philosophy agreed to meet once a week to discourse
upon subjects connected with these sciences. These meetings were
suspended after the resignation of Richard Cromwell, but revived in
1660, upon the Restoration.” 1 2 *

They met at first in private rooms, but afterward in Gresham
College and then in Arundel House. Their earliest code of laws
shows that their conferences were not in secret, but open to properly
introduced visitors, as they still continue to be.

Weld, the librarian of the society, says that to it “attaches the
renown of having from its foundation applied itself with untiring
zeal and energy to the great objects of its institution.” 8 He states
that, although the society was not chartered until 1660, “there is no
doubt that a society of learned men were in the habit of assembling
together to discuss scientific subjects for many years previous to
that time.” 8

Spratt, in his history of the society, says that in the gloomy
season of the civil wars they had selected natural philosophy as
their private diversion, and that at their meetings “ they chiefly at-
tended to some particular trials in Chymistry or Mechanics.”

The testimony of Robert Boyle, Wallis, and Evelyn, contempo-
raries of the founders, is to the same effect, that the society was
simply philosophical in its character and without any political de-
sign.

Dr. Wallis, who was one of the original founders, makes this
statement concerning the origin and objects of the society in his
Account of some Passages in my own Life : 4

“ About the year 1645, while I lived in London (at a time when,
by our civil wars, academical studies were much interrupted in both
our Universities), besides the conversation of divers eminent di-
vines, as to matters theological, I had the opportunity of being
acquainted with divers worthy persons inquisitive into natural phi-
losophy and other parts of human learning, and particularly what has

1 “ History of the Royal Society,” by Thomas Thompson, M.D., F.R.S., LL.D.,
London, 1812, p. 1.

2 “A History of the Royal Society,” with Memoirs of its Presidents, by Charles Rich-
ard Weld, Esq., 2 vols., London, 1848, I., 27.

8 Ibid.

4 In Hearne’s edition of Langsteff s chronicle.

THE ROYAL SOCIETY AND FREEMASONRY 313

been called the New Philosophy or Experimental Philosophy. We
did, by agreements, divers of us meet weekly in London on a cer-
tain day to treat and discourse of such affairs.”

Wallis says that the subjects pursued by them related to physics,
astronomy, and natural philosophy, such as the circulation of the
blood, the Copernican system, the Torricellian experiment, etc.

In all these authentic accounts of the object of the society there
is not the slightest allusion to it as a secret organization, nor any
mention of a form of initiation, but only a reception by the unani-
mous vote of the members, which reception, as laid down in the by-
laws consisted merely in the president taking the newly elected
candidate by the hand and saluting him as a member or fellow of the
society.

The fact is that at that period many similar societies had been in-
stituted in different countries of Europe, such as the Academia del
Corriento at Florence and the Academy of Sciences at Paris, whose
members, like those of the Royal Society of London, devoted them-
selves to the development of science.

This encouragement of scientific pursuits may be principally at-
tributed to many circumstances that followed the revival of learn*
ing; the advent of Greeks into Western Europe, imbued with Gre-
cian literature ; Bacon’s new system of philosophy, which alone was
enough to awaken the intellects of all thinking men ; and the labors
of Galileo and his disciples. All these had prepared many minds
for the pursuit of philosophy by experimental and inductive meth-
ods, which took the place of the superstitious dogmas of preced-
ing ages.

It was through such influences as these, wholly unconnected with
any religious or political aspirations, that the founders of the Royal
Society were induced to hold their meetings and to cultivate with-
out the restraints of secrecy their philosophical labors, which culmi-
nated in 1660 in the incorporation of an institution of learned men
which at this day holds the most honored and prominent place
among the learned societies of the world.

But it is in vain to look in this society, either in the mode of
its organization, in the character of its members, or in the nature of
their pursuits, for any connection with Freemasonry, an institution
entirely different in its construction and its objects. The theory,
therefore, that Freemasonry is indebted for its origin to the Royal

3*4

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Society of London must be rejected as wholly without authenticity
or even plausibility.

But the theory of Nicolai, which attributes its origin to another
contemporaneous society, whose members were evidently Astrolo-
gers, is somewhat more plausible, although equally incorrect. Its
consideration must, however, be reserved as the subject of another
chapter.

CHAPTER XXXIV

THE ASTROLOGERS AND THE FREEMASONS

1 have seen, in the preceding chapter, that
Nicolai had sought to trace the origin of Free-
masonry to a society organized in 1646 by a sect
of philosophers who were contemporary with,
but entirely distinct from, those who founded
the Royal Society. Though he does not ex-
plicitly state the fact, yet, from the names of the
persons to whom he refers, there can be no doubt that he alluded to
the Astrologers, who at that time were very popular in England.

Judicial astrology, or the divination of the future by the stars,
was, of all the delusions to which the superstition of the Middle
Ages gave birth, the most popular. It prevailed over all Europe,
so that it was practiced by the most learned, and the predictions of
its professors were sought with avidity and believed with confidence
by the most wealthy and most powerful. Astrologers often formed
a part of the household of princes, who followed their counsels in
the most important matters relating to the future, while men and
women of every rank sought these charlatans that they might have
their nativities cast and secure the aid of their occult art in the re-
covery of stolen goods or the prognostications of happy marriages
or of successful journeys.

Astrology was called the Daughter of Astronomy, and the schol-
ars who devoted themselves to the study of the heavenly bodies for
the purposes of pure science were often called upon to use their
knowledge of the stars for the degrading purpose of astrological
predictions. Kepler, the greatest astronomer of that age, was com-
pelled against his will to pander to the popular superstition, that he
might thus gain a livelihood and be enabled to pursue his nobler
studies. In one of his works he complains that the scanty re-
ward of an astronomer would not provide him with bread, if
men did not entertain hopes of reading the future in the heavens.

315

3i6

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

And so he tampered with the science that he loved and adorned,
and made predictions for inquisitive consulters, although, at the same
time, he declared to his friends that “ they were nothing but worth-
less conjecture.”

Cornelius Agrippa, though he cultivated alchemy, a delusion but
little more respectable than that of astrology, when commanded by
his patroness, the Queen mother of France, to practice the latter, ex-
pressed his annoyance at the task. Of the Astrologers he said, in
his great work on the Vanity of the Arts and Sciences , “ these fort-
une tellers do find entertainment among princes and magistrates,
from whom they receive large salaries ; but, indeed, there is no class
of men who are more pernicious to a commonwealth. For, as their
skill lies in the adaptation of ambiguous predictions to events after
they have happened, so it happens that a man who lives by false-
hood shall by one accidental truth obtain more credit than he will
lose by a hundred manifest errors.”

The 16th and 1 7th centuries were the golden age of astrology in
England. We know all that is needed of this charlatanism and of the
character of its' professors from the autobiography of William Lilly,
himself an English astrologer of no mean note ; perhaps, indeed, the
best-educated and the most honest of those who practiced this delu-
sion in England in the x 7th century, and who is one of those to
whom Nicolai ascribes the formation of that secret society, in 1646,
which invented Freemasonry.

It will be remembered that Nicolai says that of the society of
learned men who established Freemasonry, the first members were
Elias Ashmole, the skillful antiquary, who was also a student of as-
trology, William Lilly, a famous astrologer, George Wharton, like-
wise an astrologer, William Oughtred, a mathematician, and some
others. He also says that the annual festival of the Astrologers gave
rise to this association. “ It had previously held,” says Nicolai, “ one
meeting at Warrington, in Lancashire, but it was first firmly estab-
lished at London.”

Their meetings, the same writer asserts, were held at Masons’
Hall, in Masons’ Alley, Basinghall Street. Many of them were
members of the Masons’ Company, and they all entered it and as-
sumed the title of Free and Accepted Masons, adopting, besides, all
its external marks of distinction.

Such is the theory which makes the Astrologers, incorporating

THE ASTROLOGERS AND THE FREEMASONS 317

themselves with the Operative Masons, who met at their Hall in
Basinghall Street, the founders of the Speculative Order of Free
and Accepted Masons as they exist at the present day.

It is surprising that in a question of history a man of letters of
the reputation of Nicolai should have indulged in such bold as-
sumptions and in statements so wholly bare of authority. But un-
fortunately it is thus that Masonic history has always been written.

I shall strive to eliminate the truth from the fiction in this narra-
tive. The task will be a laborious one, for, as Goethe has well said
in one of his maxims, “ It is much easier to perceive error than to
find truth. The former lies on the surface, so that it is easily reached ;
the latter lies in the depth, which it is not every man’s business to
search for.”

The Astrologers, to whose meeting in the Masons’ Hall is ascribed
the origin of the Freemasons, were not a class of persons who would
have been likely to have united in such an attempt, which showed
at least a desire for some intellectual progress. Lilly, perhaps the
best-educated and the most honest of these charlatans, has in the
narrative of his life, written by himself, given us some notion of the
character of many of them who lived in London when he practiced
the art in that city . 1

Of Evans, who was his first teacher, he tells us that he was a
clergyman ' of Staffordshire, whence he “ had been in a manner en-
forced to fly for some offences very scandalous committed by him ” ;
of another astrologer, Alexander Hart, he says “ he was but a cheat.”
Jeffry Neve he calls a smatterer ; William Poole was a frequenter
of taverns with “ lewd people,” and fled on one occasion from Lon-
don under the suspicion of complicity in theft; John Booker,
though honest, was ignorant of his profession ; William Hodges
dealt with angels, but “ his life answered not in holiness and sanctity
to what it should,” for he was addicted to profanity; and John k
Windsor was given to debauchery.

Men of such habits of life were not likely to interest themselves
in the advancement of science or in the establishment of a society
of speculative philosophers. It is true that these charlatans lived at
an earlier period than that ascribed by Nicolai to the organization

1 “ The Life of William Lilly, Student in Astrology, wrote by himself in the 66th year
of his Age, at Hersham, in the Parish of Walton upon Thames, in the County of Surrey.
Propria Manu

318

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

of the society in Masons’ Hall, but in the few years that elapsea it
is not probable that the disciples of astrology had much improved
in their moral or intellectual condition.

Of certain of the men named by Nicolai as having organized
the Society of Freemasons in 1646, we have some knowledge. Elias
Ashmole, the celebrated antiquary, and founder of the Ashmolean
Museum in the University of Oxford, is an historical character. He
wrote his own life, in the form of a most minute diary, extending
from July 2, 1633, to October 9, 1687. In this diary, in which he
registers the most trivial as well as the most important events of his
life — recording even the cutting of his wisdom teeth, or the taking
of a sudorific — he does not make the slightest allusion to the trans-
action referred to by Nicolai. The silence of so babbling a chroni-
cler as to such an important event is itself sufficient proof that it did
not occur. What Ashmole has said about Freemasonry will be pres-
ently seen.

Lilly, another supposed actor in this scene, also wrote his life
with great minuteness. His complete silence on the subject is
equally suggestive. Nicolai says that the persons he cites were either
already members of the Company of Masons or at once became so.
Now, Lilly was a member of the Salter’s Company, one of the
twelve great livery companies, and would not have left it to join
a minor company, which the Masons’ was.

Oughtred could not have been united with Ashmole in organiz-
ing a society in 1646, for the latter, in a note to Lilly’s life, traces
his acquaintance with him to the residence of both as neighbors in
Surrey. Now, Ashmole did not remove to Surrey until the year
1675, twenty-nine years after his supposed meeting with Oughtred
at the Masons’ Hall.

Between Wharton and Lilly, who were rival almanac-makers,
there was, in 1646, a bitter feud, which was not reconciled until
years afterward. In an almanac which Wharton published in 1645
he had called Lilly “ an impudent, senseless fellow, and by name
William Lilly.” It is not likely that they would have been en-
gaged in the fraternal task of organizing a great society at that very
time.

Dr. Pearson, another one of the supposed founders, is celebrated
in literary and theological history as the author of an Expositioji of
the Creed. Of a man so prominent as to have been the Master of

THE ASTROLOGERS AND THE FREEMASONS 319

Jesus College, Cambridge, and afterward Bishop of Chester, Ash-
mole makes no mention in his diary. If he had ever met him or
been engaged with him in so important an affair, this silence in
so minute a journal of the transactions of his every-day life would
be inexplicable.

But enough has been said to show the improbability of any such
meeting as Nicolai records. Even Ashmole and Lilly, the two
leaders, were unknown to each other until the close of the year
1646. Ashmole says in his diary of that year: “ Mr. Jonas Moore
brought and acquainted me with Mr. William Lilly : it was on a
Friday night, and I think on the 20th Nov. (1646).”

That there was an association, or a club or society, of Astrologers
about that time in London is very probable. Pepys, in his Me-
moirs, says that in October, 1660, he went to Mr. Lilly’s, “there
being a club that night among his friends.” There he met Esquire
Ashmole and went home accompanied by Mr. Booker, who, he
says, “ did tell me a great many fooleries, which may be done by
nativities, and blaming Mr. Lilly for writing to please his friends,
and not according to the rules of art, by which he could not well
erre as he had done.” The club, we may well suppose, was that of
the Astrologers, held at the house of the chief member of the pro-
fession. That it was not a secret society we conclude from the
fact that Pepys, who was no astrologer, was permitted to be present.
We know also from Ashmole’s diary that the Astrologers held an
annual feast, generally in August, sometimes in March, July, or
November, but never on a Masonic festival. Ashmole regularly at-
tended it from 1649 to 1658, when it was suspended, but afterward
revived, in 1682. In 1650 he was elected a steward for the follow-
ing year. He mentions the place of meeting only three times,
twice at Painters’ Hall, which was probably the usual place, and
once at the Three Cranes, in Chancery Lane. Had the Astrologers
and the Masons been connected, Masons’ Hall, in Basinghall Street,
would certainly have been the place for holding their feast.

Again, it is said by Nicolai that the object of this secret society
which organized the Freemasons was to advance the restoration of
the King. But Lilly had made, in 1645, the year before the meeting,
this declaration : “ Before that time, I was more Cavalier than Round-
head, but after that I engaged body and soul in the cause of Par-
liament.” He still expressed, it is true, his attachment to mon-

320

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

archy ; but his life during the Commonwealth showed his devotion
to Cromwell, of whom he was a particular favorite. After the Res-
toration he had to sue out a pardon, which was obtained by the in-
fluence of his friends, but which would hardly have been necessary
if he had been engaged in a secret society the object of which was
to restore Charles II. to the throne.

But Charles I. was not beheaded until 1649, so that a society
could not have been organized in 1646 for the restoration of his
son. But it may be said that the Restoration alluded to was of the
monarchy, which at that time was virtually at an end. So this ob-
jection may pass without further comment.

But the fact is that the whole of this fiction of the organization,
in 1 646, of a secret society by a set of philosophers or astrologers,
or both, which resulted in the establishment of Freemasonry, arose
out of a misconception or a misrepresentation — whether willful or
not, I will not say — of two passages in the diary of Elias Ashmole.
Of these two passages, and they are the only ones in his minute diary
of fifty-four years in which there is any mention of Freemasonry,
the first is as follows :

“ 1646, Octob. 16. 4 Hor. 30 minutes post merid. I was made a
Free-Mason at Warrington in Lancashire, with Colonel Henry
Mainwarring of Karticham in Cheshire ; the names of those that
were then at the lodge, Mr. Richard Penket Warden, Mr. James
Collier, Mr. Richard Sankey, Henry Littler, John Ellam, and
Hugh Brewer.”

And then, after an interval of thirty-five years, during which there
is no further allusion to Masonry, we find the following memo-
randum : “1682, Mar. 10. About 5 Hor. post merid. I received
a summons to appear at a lodge to be held the next day at Masons
Hall, London.

“II. Accordingly I went, and about noon was admitted into
the fellowship of Free-Masons, by Sir William Wilson Knight,
Captain Richard Borthwick, Mr. William Wodman, Mr. William
Grey, Mr. Samuel Taylour, and Mr. William Wise.

“ I was the senior fellow among them (it being thirty-five years
since I was admitted) there was present besides myself, the fellows
after mentioned. Mr. Thomas Wise, Master of the Masons Com-
pany, this present year; Mr. Thomas Shorthose, Mr. Thomas Shad-
bolt, Wardsfford, Esq ; Mr. Nicholas Young, Mr. John Short-

THE ASTROLOGERS AND THE FREEMASONS 2>2i

hose, Mr. William Hamon, Mr. John Thompson, and Mr. William
Stanton. We all dined at the Half- Moon-Tavern, in Cheapside, at
a noble dinner prepared at the charge of the new accepted Masons.”

Without the slightest show of reason or semblance of authority,
Nicolai transmutes the Lodge at Warrington, in which Ashmole was
made a Freemason, into an annual feast of the Astrologers. The
Society of Astrologers, he says, “ had previously held one meeting
at Warrington, in Lancashire, but it was first firmly established at
London.” And he cites as his authority for this statement the very
passage from Ashmole’s diary in which that antiquary records his
reception in a Masonic Lodge.

These events in the life of Ashmole, which connect him with
the Masonic fraternity, have given considerable embarrassment to
Masonic scholars who have been unable to comprehend the two ap-
parently conflicting statements that he was made a Freemason at
Warrington in 1646 and afterward received into the fellowship of
the Freemasons, in 1682, at London. The embarrassment and mis-
apprehension arose from the fact that we have unfortunately no
records of the meetings of the Operative Lodges of England in the
17th century, and nothing but traditional and generally mythical
accounts of their usages during that period.

The sister kingdom of Scotland has been more fortunate in this
respect, and the valuable work of Brother Lyon, on the History 0}
the Lodge of Edinburgh , has supplied us with authentic records of
the Scottish Lodges at a much earlier date. These records will fur-
nish us with some information in respect to the contemporaneous
English Lodges, which we have every reason to suppose were
governed by usages not very different from those of the Lodges in
the adjacent kingdom.

Mr. Lyon has on this subject the following remarks, which may
be opportunely quoted on the present occasion.

“ The earliest date at which non-professionals are known to have
been received into an English Lodge is 1646. The evidence of this
is derived from the diary of one of the persons so admitted ; but
the preceding minutes 1 afford authentic instances of Speculative
Masons having been admitted to the fellowship of the Lodge of

1 Minutes of the Lodge of Cannongate, Kilwinning, for 1635, quoted by him in a pre-
ceding page.

322

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Edinburgh twelve years prior to the reception of Colonel Main-
warring and Elias Ashmole in the Lodge of Warrington and
thirty-eight years before the date at which the presence of Gentle-
man Masons is first discernible in the Lodge of Kilwinning by
the election of Lord Cassillis to the deaconship. It is worthy of re-
mark that, with singularly few exceptions, the non-operatives who
were admitted to Masonic fellowship in the Lodges of Edinburgh
and Kilwinning, during the 1 7th century, were persons of quality,
the most distinguished of whom, as the natural result of its metro-
politan position, being made in the former Lodge. Their admission
to fellowship in an institution composed of Operative Masons associ-
ated together for purposes of their Craft would in all probability origi-
nate in a desire to elevate its position and increase its influence, and
once adopted, the system would further recommend itself to the
Fraternity by the opportunities which it presented for cultivating
the friendship and enjoying the society of gentlemen to whom in
ordinary circumstances there was little chance of their ever being
personally known. On the other hand, non-professionals connect-
ing themselves with the Lodge by the ties of membership would, we
believe, be actuated partly by a disposition to reciprocate the feel-
ings that had prompted the bestowal of the fellowship partly by
curiosity to penetrate the arcana of the Craft, and partly by the
novelty of the situation as members of a secret society and partici-
pants in its ceremonies and festivities. But whatever may have
been the motives which animated the parties on either side, the tie
which united them was a purely honorary one.” 1

What is here said by Lyon of the Scottish Lodges may, I think,
be with equal propriety applied to those of England at the same
period. There was in 1646 a Lodge of Operative Masons at War-
rington, just as there was a similar one at Edinburgh. Into this
Lodge Colonel Mainwarring and Elias Ashmole, both non-profes-
sional gentlemen, were admitted as honorary members, or, to use the
language of the latter, were “made Freemasons,” a technical term
that has been preserved to the present day.

But thirty-five years afterward, being then a resident of London,
he was summoned to attend a meeting of the Company of Masons,
to be held at their hall in Masons’ Alley, Basinghall Street, and

1 Lyon, “ History of the Lodge of Edinburgh," p. 81 .

THE ASTROLOGERS AND THE FREEMASONS 323

there, according to his own account, he was “ admitted into the fel-
lowship of Freemasons.” How are we to explain this apparent
double or renewed admission ? But mark the difference of lan-
guage. In 1646 he was “made a Freemason.” In 1682 he was
“admitted into the fellowship of Freemasons.” The distinction is
an important one.

The Masons’ Company in 1682 constituted in London one of
those many city companies which embraced the various trades and
handicrafts of the metropolis. Stowe, in his Stirvey of London ,
says that “the Masons, otherwise termed Freemasons, were a society
of ancient standing and good reckoning, by means of affable and
kind meetings divers times, and as a loving brotherhood should use
to do, did frequent their mutual assemblies in the time of King
Henry IV., in the 12th year of whose most gracious reign they
were incorporated.”

In Cheswell’s New View of London, printed in 1708, it is said
that the Masons’ Company “were incorporated about the year 1410,
having been called the Free Masons, a Fraternity of great account,
who have been honored by several Kings, and very many of the
Nobility and Gentry being of their Society. They are governed
by a Master, 2 Wardens, 25 Assistants, and there are 65 on the
Livery.”

Maitland, in his London and its Environs , says, speaking of the
Masons: “This company had their arms granted by Clarencieux,
King-at-Arms, in the year 1477, though the members were not in-
corporated by letters patent till they obtained them from King
Charles II. in 16 77. They have a small convenient hall in Masons’
Alley, Basinghall Street.”

There were then, in the time of Ashmole, two distinct bodies of
men practicing the Craft of Operative Masonry, namely, the Lodges
which were to be found in various parts of the country, and the
Company of Masons, whose seat was at London.

Into one of the Lodges, which was situated at Warrington, in
Lancashire, Ashmole had in 1646 received honorary membership,
which, in compliance with the technical language of that and of the
present day, he called being “ made a Freemason.” But this did
not constitute him a member of the Masons’ Company of London,
for this was a distinct incorporated society, with its exclusive rules
and regulations, and admission into which could only be obtained by

324

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

the consent of the members. There were many Masons who were
not members of the Company.

Ashmole, who had for thirty-five years been a Freemason, by
virtue of his making at Warrington, was in 1682 elected a member
of this Masons’ Company, and this he styles being “admitted into
the fellowship of Free-Masons” — that is, he was admitted to the
fellowship or membership of the Company and made “ free ” of it.

From all of which we may draw the following conclusions : First,
that in 1646, at the very date assigned by Nicolai for the organiza-
tion of the Freemasons as a secret political society, under the lead-
ership of Ashmole and Lilly, the former, being as yet unacquainted
with the latter, was at Warrington, in Lancashire, where he found a
Lodge of Masons already organized and with its proper officers and
its members, by whom he was admitted as an honorary non-profes-
sional member of the Craft. And secondly, that while in London
he was admitted, being already a Freemason, to the fellowship of
the Masons’ Company. And thirdly, that he was also a member of
the fraternity of Astrologers, having been admitted probably in 1649,
and regularly attended their annual feast from that year to 1658, when
the festival, and perhaps the fraternity, was suspended until 1682, when
it was again revived. But during all this time it is evident from the
memoranda of Ashmole that the Freemasons and the Astrologers
were two entirely distinct bodies. Lilly, who was the head of the As-
trologers, was, we may say almost with certainty, not a Freemason, else
the spirit of minuteness with which he has written his autobiography
would not have permitted him to omit what to his peculiar frame of
mind would have been so important a circumstance as connecting
him still more closely with his admired friend, Elias Ashmole, nor
would the latter have neglected to record it in his diary, written with
even still greater minuteness than Lilly’s memoirs.

Notwithstanding the clear historical testimony which shows that
Lodges of Freemasons had been organized long before the time of
Ashmole, and that he had actually been made a Freemason in one
of them, many writers, both Masonic and profane, have maintained
the erroneous doctrine that Ashmole was the founder of the Masonic
Society.

Thus Chambers, in their Encyclopedia , say that “ Masonry was
founded by Ashmole and some of his literary friends,” and De
Quincey expressed the same opinion.

THE ASTROLOGERS AND THE FREEMASONS 325

Mr. John Yarker, in his very readable Notes on the Scientific
and Religious Mysteries of A ntiquity, offers a modified view and
a compromise of the subject. He refers to the meeting of the
chemical adepts at Masons’ Hall (a fact of which we have no evi-
dence), and then to the “Feast of the Astrologers” which Ashmole
attended. He follows Nicolai in asserting that their allegories were
founded on Bacon’s House of Solomon, and says that they used as
emblems the sun, moon, square, triangle, etc. And he concludes,
“ it is possible that Ashmole may have consolidated the customs of
the two associations, but there is no evidence that any Lodge of this,
his speculative rite, came under the Masonic Constitution.” 1

We may also say that it is possible that Ashmole may have in-
vented a speculative rite of some kind, but there is no evidence
that he did so. Many things are possible that are not probable, and
many probable that are not actual. History is made up of facts, and
not of possibilities or probabilities.

Ashmole himself entertained a very different and much more
correct notion of the origin of Masonry than any of those who have
striven to claim him as its founder.

Dr. Knipe, of Christ Church, Oxford, in a letter to the publisher
of Ashmole’s Life, says : “ What from Mr. E. Ashmole’s collections
I could gather was, that the report of our society’s taking rise from
a bull granted by the Pope in the reign of Henry III., to some Ital-
ian architects to travel over all Europe, to erect chapels, was ill-
founded. Such a bull there was, and these architects were Masons ;
but this bull, in the opinion of the learned Mr. Ashmole, was con-
firmative only, and did not, by any means, create our Fraternity, or
even establish them in this kingdom.”

This settles the question. Ashmole could not have been the
founder of Freemasonry in London in 1646, since he himself ex-
pressed the belief that the Institution had existed in England be-
fore the 13th century.

There is no doubt, as I have already said, that he was very inti-
mately connected with the Astrologers. Dr. Krause, in his Three
Oldest Documents of the Masonic Brotherhood? quotes the follow-
ing passage from Lilly’s History of my Life and Times. (I can not

1 “ Notes on the Scientific and Religious Mysteries of Antiquity,” p. 106.
z “ Die drei altesten Kunsturkunden der Freimaurerbriiderschaft,” IV., 286.

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

326

find it in my own copy of that work, but the statements are corrob-
orated by Ashmole’s diary.)

“ The King’s affairs being now grown desperate, Mr. Ashmole
withdrew himself, after the surrender of the Garrison of Worcester,
into Cheshire, where he continued till the end of October, and then
came up to London, where he became acquainted with Master, af-
terwards Sir Jonas Moore, Mr. William Lilly, and Mr. John Booker,
esteemed the greatest astrologers in the world, by whom he was
caressed, instructed and received into their fraternity, which then
made a very considerable figure, as appeared by the great resort of
persons of distinction to their annual feast, of which Mr. Ashmole
was afterwards elected Steward.”

Ashmole left Worcester for Cheshire July 24, 1646, and removed
from Cheshire to London October 25, of the same year. In that
interval of three months he was made a Freemason, at Warrington.
At that time he was not acquainted with Lilly, Moore, or Booker,
and knew nothing of astrology or of the great astrologers.

This destroys the accuracy of Nicolai’s assertion that the meet-
ing held at Masons’ Hall, in 1682, by Ashmole, Lilly, and other
astrologers, when they founded the Society of Freemasons, was pre-
ceded by a similar and initiatory one, in 1646, at Warrington.

A few words must now be said upon the subject of Bacon’s
House of Solomon, which Nicolai and others supposed to have first
given rise to the Masonic allegory which was afterward changed to
that of the Temple of Solomon.

Bacon, in his fragmentary and unfinished romance of the New
Atlantis , had devised the fable of an island of Bensalem, in which
wai; an institution or college called the House of Solomon, the fel-
lows of which were to be students of philosophy and investigators
of science. He thus described their occupations :

“ We have twelve that sail into foreign countries, who bring in
the books and patterns of experiments of all other parts ; these we
call merchants of light. We have three that collect the experiments
that are in all books; these are called depredators. We have three
that collect experiments of all mechanical arts, and also of liberal
sciences, and also of practices which are not brought into the arts ;
these we call mystery men. We have three that try new experiments
such as themselves think good ; these we call pioneers or miners. We
have three that draw the experiments of the former four into titles and

THE ASTROLOGERS AND THE FREEMASONS 32 7

tablets to give the better light for the drawing of observations and ax-
ioms out of them; these we call compilers. We have three that bind
themselves looking into the experiments of their fellows and cast
about how to draw out of them things of use and practice for man’s life
and knowledge as well for works as for plain demonstrations and the
easy and clear discovering of the virtues and parts of bodies ; these
we call doing men and benefactors. Then after divers meetings
and consults of our whole number to consider of the former labors
and collections, we have three to take care out of them to direct new
experiments of higher light, more penetrating into nature than the
former ; these we call lamps. We have three others that do execute
the experiments so directed and report them ; these we call inocu-
lators. Lastly we have three that raise the former discoveries by
experiments into greater observations, axioms and aphorisms ; these
we call interpreters of nature.” 1

It is evident from this schedule of the occupations of the inmates
of the House of Solomon that it could not in the remotest degree
have been made the foundation of a Masonic allegory. In fact, the
suggestion of a Masonic connection could have been derived only
from a confused idea of the relation of the House to the Temple of
Solomon, a misapprehension which a reading of the New Atlantis
would readily remove.

As Plato had written his Republic and Sir Thomas More his
Utopia to give their ideas of a model commonwealth, so Lord Bacon
commenced his New Atlantis to furnish his idea of a model college
to be instituted for the study and interpretation of nature by experi-
mental methods. These views were first introduced in his Advance-
7 nent of Human Learning, and would have been perfected in his
New Atlantis had he ever completed it.

The new philosophy of Bacon had produced a great revolution
in the minds of thinking men, and that group of philosophers who
in the 1 7th century, as Dr. Whewell says, “ began to knock at the
door where truth was to be found ” would very wisely seek the key
in the inductive and experimental method taught by Bacon.

To the learned men, therefore, who first met at the house of Dr.
Goddard and the other members, and whose meetings finally ended
in the formation of the Royal Society, the allegory of the House of

1<4 New Atlantis,” Works, vol. ii., p. 376.

328

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Solomon very probably furnished valuable hints for the pursuit of
their experimental studies.

To Freemasons in any age the allegory would have been use
less and unprofitable, and could by no ingenious method have
been twisted into a foundation for their symbolic science. The
hypothesis that it was adopted in 1646 by the founders of Free-
masonry as a fitting allegory for their esoteric system of instruc-
tion is evidently too absurd to need further refutation.

In conclusion, we may unhesitatingly concur with Bro. W. J.
Hughan in his opinion that the theory which assigns the founda-
tion of Freemasonry to Elias Ashmole and his friends the Astrolo-
gers “is opposed to existing documents dating before and since his
initiation.” It is equally opposed to the whole current of authentic
history, and is unsupported by the character of the Institution and
the nature of its svmbolism

CHAPTER XXXV

THE ROSICRUCIANS AND THE FREEMASONS

F all the theories which have been advanced in
relation to the origin of Freemasonry from
some one of the secret sects, either of antiquity
or of the Middle Ages, there is none more in-
teresting than that which seeks to connect it
with the Hermetic philosophy, because there
is none which presents more plausible claims
to our consideration.

There can be no doubt that in some of what are called the High
Degrees there is a very palpable infusion of a Hermetic element.
This can not be denied, because the evidence will be most apparent
to any one who examines their rituals, and some by their very titles,
in which the Hermetic language and a reference to Hermetic prin-
ciples are adopted, plainly admit the connection and the influence.

There is, therefore, no necessity to investigate the question
whether or not some of those High or Philosophic Degrees which
were fabricated about the middle of the last century are or are not
of a Hermetic character, because the time of their invention, when
Craft Masonry was already in a fixed condition, removes them en-
tirely out of the problem which relates to the origin of the Masonic
Institution. No matter when Freemasonry was established, the
High Degrees were an afterthought, and might very well be tinct-
ured with the principles of any philosophy which prevailed at the
period of their invention.

But it is a question of some interest to the Masonic scholar
whether at the time of the so-called Revival of Freemasonry, in the
early part of the 18th century, certain Hermetic degrees did not exist
which sought to connect themselves with the system of Masonry.
And it is a question of still greater interest whether this attempt
was successful so far, at least, as to impress upon the features of

321

3 30

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

that early Freemasonry a portion of the characteristic tints of the
Hermetic philosophy, some of the marks of which may still remain
in our modern system.

But as the Hermetic philosophy was that which was invented
and taught by the Rosicrucians, before we can attempt to resolve
these important and interesting questions, it will be necessary to
take a brief glance at the history and the character of Rosicrucian-
ism. On the 17th of August, 1586, Johann Valentin Andrea was
born at Herrenberg, a small market-town of what was afterward
the kingdom of Wtirtemburg. After a studious youth, during which
he became possessed of a more than moderate share of learning, he
departed in 1610 on a pilgrimage through Germany, Austria, Italy,
and France, supplied with but little money, but with an indomitable
desire for the acquisition of knowledge. Returning home, in 1614,
he embraced the clerical profession and was appointed a deacon in the
town of Vaihingen, and by subsequent promotions reached, in 1634,
the positions of Protestant prelate of the Abbey of Bebenhausen
and spiritual counsellor of the Duchy of Brunswick. He died on
the 27th of June, 1654, at the ripe age of sixty-eight years.

On the moral character of Andrea his biographers have lavished
their encomiums. A philanthropist from his earliest life, he carried,
or sought to carry, his plans of benevolence into active operation.
Wherever, says Vaughan, the church, the school, the institute of
charity have fallen into ruin or distress, there the indefatigable An-
drea sought to restore them. He was, says another writer, the
guardian genius and the comforter of the suffering ; he was a prac-
tical helper as well as a theoretical adviser ; in the times of dearth
and famine, many thousand poor were fed and clothed by his exer-
tions, and the town of Kahv, of which, in 1 720, he was appointed
the superintendent, long enjoyed the benefit of many charitable
institutions which owed their origin to his solicitations and zeal. 1

It is not surprising that a man indued with such benevolent feel-
ings and actuated by such a spirit of philanthropy should have
viewed with deep regret the corruptions of the times in which he
lived, and should have sought to devise some plan by which the
condition of his fellow-men might be ameliorated and the dry, effete

1 Biographical Sketch by Wm. Bell, in Freemasons' Quarterly Magazine , London
vol. iL, N. S., 1854, p. 27.

THE R0SICRUC1ANS AND THE FREEMASONS 331

theology of the church be converted into some more living, active,
humanizing system.

For the accomplishment of this purpose he could see no better
method than the establishment of a practical philanthropical fra-
ternity, one that did not at that time exist, but the formation of
which he resolved to suggest to such noble minds as might be stim-
ulated to the enterprise.

With this view he invoked the assistance of fiction, and hence
there appeared, in 1615, a work which he entitled the Report of the
Rosicrucian Brotherhood, or, in its original Latin, Fama Fraterni-
tatis Roses Cruets. An edition had been published the year before
with the title of Universal Reformation of the Whole World ,
with a Report of the Worshipful Order of the Rosicrucian Broth-
erhood, addressed to all the Learned Men and Nobility of Europe}
There was another work, published in 1616, with the title of Che-
mische Ftochzeit, or Chemical Nuptials, by Christian Rosencreutz.

All of these books were published anonymously, but they were
universally attributed to the pen of Andre'a, and were all intended
for one purpose, that of discovering by the character of their recep-
tion who were the true lovers of wisdom and philanthropy, and of
inducing them to come forward to the perfection of the enterprise,
by transforming this fabulous society into a real and active organ-
ization.

The romantic story of Christian Rosencreutz, the supposed
founder of the Order, is thus told by Andre'a. I have borrowed for
the most part the language of Mr. Sloane,® who, although his views
and deductions on the subject are for the most part erroneous, has
yet given us the best English epitome of the myth of Andrea.

According to Andrea’s tale, a certain Christian Rosencreutz,
though of good birth, found himself compelled from poverty to
enter the cloister at a very early period of life. He was only six-
teen years old when one of the monks purposed a pilgrimage to the
Holy Sepulcher, and Rosencreutz, as a special favor, was permitted to
accompany him. At Cyprus the monk is taken ill, but Rosencreutz
proceeds onward to Damascus with the intention of going on to

1 “ Allgemeine und General Reformation der ganzen, weiten Welt. Beneben der
Fama Fraternitatis des Loblichen Ordens des Rosencreutzes, an alle Gelehrte und
Haiipter Europae geschreiben,” Cassel, 1614.

2 ** New Curiosities of Literature/* vol. ii., p. 44.

332

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Jerusalem. While detained in the former city by the fatigues of
his journey, he hears of the wonders performed by the sages of
Damascus, and, his curiosity being excited, he places himself under
their direction.

Three years having been spent in the acquisition of their most
hidden mysteries, he sets sail from the Gulf of Arabia for Egypt.
There he studies the nature of plants and animals and then repairs,
in obedience to the instructions of his Arabian masters, to Fez, in
Africa. In this city it was the custom of the Arab and African
sages to meet annually for the purpose of communicating to each
other the results of their experience and inquiries, and here he
passed two years in study. He then crossed over to Spain, but not
meeting there with a favorable reception, he returned to his native
country.

But as Germany was then filled with mystics of all kinds, his pro-
posals for a reformation in morals and science meets with so little
sympathy from the public that he resolves to establish a society of
his own.

With this view he selects three of his favorite companions from
his old convent. To them, under a solemn vow of secrecy, he com-
municates the knowledge which he had acquired during his travels.
He imposes on them the duty of committing it to writing and of
forming a magical vocabulary for the benefit of future students.

But in addition to this task they also undertook to prescribe
gratuitously for all the sick who should ask their assistance, and as in
a short time the concourse of patients became so great as materially
to interfere with their other duties, and as a building which Rosen-
creutz had been erecting, called the Temple of the Holy Ghost, was
now completed, he determines to increase the number of the broth-
erhood, and accordingly initiates four new members.

When all is completed, and the eight brethren are instructed in
the mysteries of the Order, they separate, according to agreement,
two only staying with Father Christian. The other six, after travel-
ing for a year, are to return and communicate the results of their
experience. The two who had stayed at home are then to be re-
lieved by two of the travelers, so that the founder may never be
alone, and the six again divide and travel for a year.

The laws of the Order as they had been prescribed by Rosen-
creutz were as follows :

THE ROSICRUCIANS AND THE FREEMASONS 333

1. That they should devote themselves to no other occupation
than that of the gratuitous practice of physic.

2. That they were not to wear a particular habit, but were to
conform in this respect to the customs of the country in which they
might happen to be.

3. That each one was to present himself on a certain day in
the year at the Temple of the Holy Ghost, or send an excuse for
his absence.

4. That each one was to look out for a brother to succeed him
in the event of his death.

5. That the letters R. C. were to be their seal, watchword, and
title.

6. That the brotherhood was to be kept a secret for one hundred
years.

When one hundred years old, Christian Rosencreutz died, but
the place of his burial was unknown to any one but the two broth-
ers who were with him at the time of his death, and they carried the
secret with them to the grave.

The society, however, continued to exist unknown to the world,
always consisting of eight members only, until another hundred and
twenty years had elapsed, when, according to a tradition of the
Order, the grave of Father Rosencreutz was to be discovered, and
the brotherhood to be no longer a mystery to the world.

It was about this time that the brethren began to make some
alterations in their building, and thought of removing to another
and more fitting situation the memorial tablet, on which were in-
scribed the names of their associates. The plate, which was of brass,
was affixed to the wall by means of a nail in its center, and so firmly
was it fastened that in tearing it away a portion of the plaster of
the wall became detached and exposed a concealed door. Upon
this door being still further cleansed from the incrustation, there
appeared above it in large letters the following words : Post CXX
Annos Patebo — After one hundred and twenty years I will be
opened.

Although the brethren were greatly delighted at the discovery,
they so far restrained their curiosity as not to open the door until
the next morning, when they found themselves in a vault of seven
sides, each side five feet wide and eight feet high. It was lighted
by an artificial sun in the centre of the arched roof, while in the

334

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

middle of the floor, instead of a tomb, stood a round altar covered
with a small brass plate, on which was this inscription :

A. C. R. C. Hoc , universi compendium , vivus mihi sepulchrum
feci — i.e ., while living, I made this epitome of the universe my
sepulcher.

About the outer edge was :

Jesus mihi omnia — i.e., Jesus is all things to me.

In the center were four figures, each enclosed in a circle, with
these words inscribed around them :

1. Nequaquam vacuus.

2. Legis Jugum.

3. Libertas Evangelii.

4. Dei gloria intacta.

That is — 1. By no means void. 2. The yoke of the Law. 3.
The liberty of the Gospel. 4. The unsullied Glory of God.

On seeing all this, the brethren knelt down and returned thanks
to God for having made them so much wiser than the rest of the
world. Then they divided the vault into three parts, the roof, the
wall, and the pavement. The first and the last were divided into
seven triangles, corresponding to the seven sides of the wall, each of
which formed the base of a triangle, while the apices met in the cen-
ter of the roof and of the pavement. Each side was divided into
ten squares, containing figures and sentences which were to be ex-
plained to the new initiates. In each side there was also a door
opening upon a closet, wherein were stored up many rare articles,
such as the secret books of the Order, the vocabulary of Paracelsus,
and other things of a similar nature. In one of the closets they dis-
covered the life of their founder ; in others they found curious mir-
rors, burning lamps, and a variety of objects intended to aid in re-
building the Order, which, after the lapse of many centuries, was to
fall into decav.

j

Pushing aside the altar, they came upon a strong brass plate,
which being removed, they beheld the corpse of Rosencreutz as
freshly preserved as on the day when it had been deposited, and
under his arm a volume of vellum with letters of gold, containing,
among other things, the names of the eight brethren who had
founded the Order.

Such is an outline of the story of Christian Rosencreutz and his
Rosicrucian Order as it is told in the Fama Fratcrnitatis. It is very

THE ROSICRUCIANS AND THE FREEMASONS 335

evident that Andrea composed this romance — for it is nothing else —
not to record the existence of any actual society, but only that it
might serve as a suggestion to the learned and the philanthropic to
engage in the establishment of some such benevolent association.
“ He hoped,” says Vaughan, “that the few nobler minds whom he
desired to organize would see through the veil of fiction in which
he had invested his proposal ; that he might communicate person-
ally with some such, if they should appear, or that his book might
lead them to form among themselves a practical philanthropic con-
federacy answering to the serious purpose he had embodied in his
fiction." 1

But his design was misunderstood then, as it has been since, and
everywhere his fable was accepted as a fact. Diligent search was
made by the credulous for the discovery of the Temple of the
Holy Ghost. Printed letters appeared continually, addressed to the
unknown brotherhood, seeking admission into the fraternity — a fra-
ternity that existed only in the pages of the Fama. But the irre-
sponsive silence to so many applications awoke the suspicions of
some, while the continued mystery strengthened the credulity of
others. The brotherhood, whose actual house “ lay beneath the
Doctor’s hat of Valentin Andrea,” was violently attacked and as
vigorouslydefended in numerous books and pamphlets which during
that period flooded the German press.

The learned men among the Germans did not give a favoring
ear to the philanthropic suggestions of Andrea, but the mystical
notions contained in his fabulous history were seized with avidity by
the charlatans, who added to them the dreams of the alchemists and
the reveries of the astrologers, so that the post-Andrean Rosicrucian-
ism became a very different thing from that which had been devised
by its original author. It does not, however, appear that the Rosi-
crucians, as an organized society, made any stand in Germany.
Descartes says that after strict search he could not find a single
lodge in that country. But it extended, as we will presently see,
into England, and there became identified as a mystical association.

It is strange what misapprehension, either willful or mistaken,
has existed in respect to the relations of Andrea to Rosicrucianism.
We have no more right or reason to attribute the detection of such

1 “Hours with the Mystics,” vol. ii., p. 103.

336

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

a sect to the German theologian than we have to ascribe the discov-
ery of the republic of Utopia to Sir Thomas More, or of the island
of Bensalem to Lord Bacon. In each of these instances a fiction
was invented on which the author might impose his philosophical or
political thoughts, with no dream that readers would take that for
fact which was merely intended for fiction.

And yet Rhigellini, in his Masonry Considered as the Result oj
the Egyptian , Jewish , and Christian Religions , while declining to
express an opinion on the allegorical question, as if there might be
a doubt on the subject, respects the legend as it had been given in
the Fama , and asserting that on the return of Rosencreutz to Ger-
many “ he instituted secret societies with an initiation that resembled
that of the early Christians.” 1 He antedates the Chemical Nuptials
of Andrea a century and a half, ascribes the authorship of that work
to Christian Rosencreutz, as if he were a real personage, and thinks
that he established, in 1459, the Rite of the Theosophists, the earliest
branch of the Rose Croix, or the Rosicrucians ; for the French make
no distinction in the two words, though in history they are entirely
different. History written in this way is worse than fable — it is an
ignis fatmcs which can only lead astray. And yet this is the method
in which Masonic history has too often been treated.

Nicolai, although the deductions by which he connects Free-
masonry with Rosicrucianism are wholly untenable, is yet, in his
treatment of the latter, more honest or less ignorant. He adopts
the correct view when he says that the Fama Fraternitatis only
announced a general reformation and exhorted all wise men to unite
in a proposed society for the purpose of removing corruption ana
restoring wisdom. He commends it as a charming vision, full of
poesy and imagination, but of a singular extravagance very common
in the writings of that age. And he notes the fact that while the
Alchemists have sought in that work for the secrets of their myste-
ries, it really contains the gravest satire on their absurd pretensions.

The Fama Fraternitatis had undoubtedly excited the curiosity
of the Mystics, who abounded in Germany at the time of its appear-
ance, of whom not the least prominent were the Alchemists. These,
having sought in vain for the invisible society of the Rosicrucians,
as it had been described in the romance of Andrea, resolved to form

l<t La Magonnerie consider^ comme le resultat des Religions Egyptienne, Juive ex
Chr6tienne,” L. iii., p. 108.

THE ROSICRUCIANS AND THE FREEMASONS 33?

such a society for themselves. But, to the disappointment and the
displeasure of the author of the Fama , they neglected or postponed
the moral reformation which he had sought, and substituted the vis*
ionary schemes of the Alchemists, a body of quasi-philosophers
who assigned their origin as students of nature and seekers of the
philosopher’s stone and the elixir of immortality to a very remote
period.

Thus it is that I trace the origin of the Rosicrucians, not to
Valentin Andrea, nor to Christian Rosencreutz, who was only the
coinage of his brain, but to the influence exerted by him upon certain
Mystics and Alchemists who, whether they accepted the legend of
Rosencreutz as a fiction or as a verity, at least made diligent use
of it in the establishment of their new society.

I am not, therefore, disposed to doubt the statement of L. C.
Orvius, as cited by Nicolai, that in 1622 there was a society of Al-
chemists at The Hague, who called themselves Rosicrucians and
claimed Rosencreutz as their founder.

Michael Maier, the physician of the Emperor Rudolf II., de-
voted himself in the early part of the 1 7th century to the pursuits
of alchemy, and, having adopted the mystical views of the Rosicru-
cians, is said to have introduced that society into England. Maier
was the author of many works in Latin in defense and in explanation
of the Rosicrucian system. Among them was an epistle addressed
“ To all lovers of true chemistry throughout Germany, and es-
pecially to that Order which has hitherto lain concealed, but is now
probably made known by the Report of the Fraternity ( Fama
Fraternitatis) and their admirable Confession.” 1 In this work
he uses the following language :

“ What is contained in the ‘ Fama ’ and ‘ confessio ’ is true. It
is a very childish objection that the brotherhood have promised so
much and performed so little. The Masters of the Order hold out
the Rose as a remote reward, but they impose the Cross on all who
are entering. Like the Pythagoreans and the Egyptians, the Rosi-
crucians extract vows of silence and secrecy. Ignorant men have
treated the whole as a fiction ; but this has arisen from the proba-
tion of five years to which they subject even well qualified novices,

1 “ Omnibus verse chymias Amantibus per Germaniam, et preciper£ illi Ordini ad-
hue delitescenti, at Fama Fraternitatis et confessione sua admiranda et probabile mani
festato.”

22

338

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

before they are admitted to the higher mysteries, and within that
period they are taught how to govern their own tongues ! ”

Although Maier died in 1622, it appears that he had lived long
enough to take part in the organization of the Rosicrucian sect,
which had been formed out of the suggestions of Andrea. His
views on this subject were, however, peculiar and different from
those of most of the new disciples. He denied that the Order had
derived either its origin or its name from the person called Ros-
encreutz. He says that the founder of the society, having given
his disciples the letters R. C. as a sign of their fraternity, they im-
properly made out of them the words Rose and Cross. But these
heterodox opinions were not accepted by the Rosicrucians in gen-
eral, who still adhered to Andreas legend as the source and the
signification of their Order.

At one time Maier went to England, where he became intimately
acquainted with Dr. Robert Fludd, the most famous as well as the
earliest of the English Rosicrucians.

Robert Fludd was a physician of London, who was born in
1574 and died in 1637. He was a zealous student of alchemy,
theosophy, and every other branch of mysticism, and wrote in de-
fense of Rosicrucianism, of which sect he was an active member.
Among his earliest works is one published in 1616 under the title of
A Compendious Apology clearing the Fraternity of the Rosy Cross
from the stains of suspicion and infamy cast upon them}

There is much doubt whether Maier communicated the system
of Rosicrucianism to Fludd or whether Fludd had already received
it from Germany before the visit of Maier. The only authority for
the former statement is De Quincey (a most unreliable one), and the
date of Fludd’s Apology militates against it.

Fludd’s explanation of the name of the sect differs from that of
both Andrea and Maier. It is, he says, to be taken in a figurative
sense, and alludes to the cross dyed with the blood of Christ. In
this explanation he approaches very nearly to the idea entertained
by the members of the modern Rose Croix degree.

No matter who was the missionary that brought it over, it is very
certain that Rosicrucianism was introduced from Germany, its birth-

1 “ Apologia Compendiaria, Fraternitatem de Rosea Cruce suspicionis et infamiae
maculis aspersum abluens.”

THE ROSICRUCIANS AND THE FREEMASONS 339

place, into England at a very early period of the 1 7th century, and
it is equally certain that after its introduction it flourished, though
an exotic, with more vigor than it ever had in its native soil.

That there were in that century, and even in the beginning of
the succeeding one, mystical initiations wholly unconnected with
Freemasonry, but openly professing a Hermetic or Rosicrucian
character and origin, may very readily be supposed from existing
documents. It is a misfortune that such authors as Buhle, Nicolai,
and Rhigellini, with many others, to say nothing of such non-
masonic writers as Sloane and De Quincey, who were necessarily
mere sciolists in all Masonic studies, should have confounded the
two institutions, and, because both were mystical, and one appeared
to follow (although it really did not) the other in point of time,
should have proclaimed the theory (wholly untenable) that Free-
masonry is indebted for its origin to Rosicrucianism.

The writings of Lilly and Ashmole, both learned men for the
age in which they lived, prove the existence of a mystical philosophy
in England in the 1 7th century, in which each of them was a partic-
ipant. The Astrologers, who were deeply imbued with the Hermetic
philosophy, held their social meetings for mutual instruction and
their annual feasts, and Ashmole gives hints of his initiation into
what I suppose to have been alchemical or Rosicrucian wisdom by
one whom he reverently calls “ Father Backhouse.”

But we have the clearest documentary testimony of the existence
of a Hermetic degree or system at the beginning of the 1 8th cen-
tury, and about the time of what is called the Revival of Masonry
in England, by the establishment of the Grand Lodge at London,
and which, from other undoubted testimony, we know were not
Masonic. This testimony is found in a rare work, some portions of
whose contents, in reference to this subject, are well worthy of a
careful review.

In the year 1722 there was published in London a work in small
octavo bearing the following title

“Long Livers: A curious History of such Persons of both
Sexes who have liv’d several Ages and grown Young again : With
the rare Secret of Rejuvenescency of Arnoldus de Villa Nova. And

1 A copy of this work, and, most probably, the only one in this country, is in the
valuable library of Bro. Carson, of Cincinnati, and to it I am indebted for the extracts
that I have made.

340

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

a great many approv’d and invaluable Rules to prolong Life : Also
how to prepare the Universal Medicine. Most humbly dedicated
to the Grand Master, Masters, Wardens, and Brethren of the Most
Ancient and Honorable Fraternity of the Free Masons of Great
Britain and Ireland. By Eugenius Philalethes, F.R.S., Author of
the Treatise of the Plague. Viri Fratres cuidite me. Act. xv. 13.
Diligite Fraternitatem timete Deum honorate Regem. I. Pet. ii.
17. London. Printed for J. Holland, at the Bible and Ball, in St.
Paul’s Church Yard, and L. Stokoe, at Charing Cross, 1722.” pp.
64-199.

Eugenius Philalethes was the pseudonym of Thomas Vaughn, a
celebrated Rosicrucian of the 17th century, who published, in 1652, a
translation of the Fama Fraternitatis into English. But, as he was,
born in 1612, it is not to be supposed that he wrote the present work.
It is, however, not very important to identify this second Philalethes.
It is sufficient for our purpose to know that it is a Hermetic treatise
written by a Rosicrucian, of which the title alone — the references to
the renewal of youth, one of the Rosicrucian secrets, to the recipe
of the great Rosicrucian Villa Nova, or Arnold de Villaneuve, and
to the Universal Medicine, the Rosicrucian Elixir Vitae — would be
sufficient evidence. But the only matter of interest in connection
with the present subject is that this Hermetic work, written, or at
least printed, in 1722, one year before the publication of the first edi-
tion of Anderson’s Constitutions , refers explicitly to the existence of
a higher initiation than that of the Craft degrees, which the author
seeks to interweave in the Masonic system.

This is evidently shown in portions of the dedication, which is
inscribed to “ the Grand Master, Masters, Wardens, and Brethren
of the Most Ancient and Most Honorable Fraternity of the Free
Masons of Great Britain and Ireland ” ; and it is dedicated to them
by their “ Brother Eugenius Philalethes. ” This fraternal subscrip-
tion shows that he was a Freemason as well as a Rosicrucian, and
therefore must have been acquainted with both systems.

The important fact, in this dedication, is that the writer alludes,
in language that can not be mistaken, to a certain higher degree,
or to a more exalted initiation, to the attainment of which the primi-
tive degrees of Ancient Craft Masonry were preparatory. Thus he
says, addressing the Freemasons :

“ I present you with the following sheets, as belonging more

THE ROSICRUCIANS AND THE FREEMASONS 341

properly to you than any else. But what I here say, those of you
who are not far illuminated, who stand in the outward place and are
not worthy to look behind the veil, may find no disagreeable or un-
profitable entertainment ; and those who are so happy as to have
greater light, will discover under these shadows, somewhat truly
great and noble and worthy the serious attention of a genius the
most elevated and sublime — the spiritual, celestial cube, the only
true, solid, and immovable basis and foundation of all knowledge,
peace, and happiness.” (Page iv.)

Another passage will show that the writer was not only thor-
oughly acquainted with the religious, philosophical, and symbolic
character of the institution, but that he wrote evidently under the
impression (rather I should say the knowledge) that at that day
others besides himself had sought to connect Freemasonry with
Rosicrucianism. He says :

“Remember that you are the salt of the earth, the light of the
world, and the fire of the universe. Ye are living stones, built up a
spiritual house, who believe and rely on the chief Lapis Angularis,
which the refractory and disobedient builders disallowed ; you are
called from darkness to light ; you are a chosen generation, a royal
priesthood.”

Here the symbolism is Masonic, but it is also Rosicrucian. The
Masons had derived their symbol of the Stone from the metaphor
of the Apostle, and like him had given it a spiritual signification.
The Rosicrucians had also the Stone as their most important symbol.
“Now,” says one of them, “in this discourse will I manifest to thee
the natural condition of the Stone of the Philosophers, apparelled
with a triple garment, even this Stone of Riches and Charity, the
Stone of Relief from Languishment — in which is contained every
secret ; being a Divine Mystery and Gift of God, than which there
is nothing more sublime.” 1

It was natural that a Rosicrucian, in addressing Freemasons,
should refer to a symbol common to both, though each derived its
interpretation through a different channel.

In another passage he refers to the seven liberal arts, of which he
calls Astronomy “ the grandest and most sublime.” This was the

dialogue of Arislaus in the Alchemist’s Enchiridion, 1672. Quoted by Hitchcock
in his '‘Alchemy and the Alchemists,” p. 30.

342

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Rosicrucian doctrine. In that of the Freemasons the precedency is
given to Geometry. Here we find a difference between the two
institutions which proves their separate and independent existence.
Still more important differences will be found in the following pas-
sages, which, while they intimate a higher degree, show that it was
a Hermetic one, which, however, the Rosicrucian writer was willing
to ingraft on Freemasonry. He says:

“And now, my Brethren, you of the higher class (note that
he does not call it a degree), permit me a few words, since you are
but few ; and these few words I shall speak to you in riddles, be-
cause to you it is given to know those mysteries which are hidden
from the unworthy.

“ Have you not seen then, my dearest Brethren, that stupendous
bath, filled with the most limpid water, than which no pure can be
purer, of such admirable mechanism, that makes even the greatest
philosopher gaze with wonder and astonishment, and is the subject
of the contemplation of the wisest men. Its form is a quadrate
sublimely placed on six others, blazing all with celestial jewels, each
angularly supported with four lions. Here repose our mighty King
and Queen, (I speak foolishly, I am not worthy to be of you), the
King shining in his glorious apparel of transparent, incorruptible
gold, beset with living sapphires ; he is fair and ruddy, and feeds
among the lilies ; his eyes, two carbuncles, the most brilliant, dart-
ing prolific never-dying fires ; and his large, flowing hair, blacker
than the deepest black or plumage of the long-lived crow ; his royal
consort vested in tissue of immortal silver, watered with emeralds,
pearl and coral. O mystical union ! O admirable commerce !

“ Cast now your eyes to the basis of this celestial structure, and
you will discover just before it a large basin of porphyrian marble,
receiving from the mouth of a large lion’s head, to which two bodies
displayed on each side of it are conjoined, a greenish' fountain of
liquid jasper. Ponder this well and consider. Haunt no more the
woods and forests ; (I speak as a fool) haunt no more the fleet ;
let the flying eagle fly unobserved ; busy yourselves no longer with
the dancing idiot, swollen toads, and his own tail-devouring dragon ;
leave these as elements to your Tyrones.

“ The object of your wishes and desires (some of you may, per-
haps, have attained it, I speak as a fool), is that admirable thing
which has a substance, neither too fiery nor altogether earthy, nor

THE ROSICRUCIANS AND THE FREEMASONS 343

simply watery; neither a quality the most acute or most obtuse, but
of a middle nature, and light to the touch, and in some manner soft,
at least not hard, not having asperity, but even in some sort sweet
to the taste, odorous to the smell, grateful to the sight, agreeable
and delectable to the hearing, and pleasant to the thought; in short,
that one only thing besides which there is no other, and yet every-
where possible to be found, the blessed and most sacred subject of
the square of wise men, that is ... I had almost blabbed it
out and been sacrilegiously perjured. I shall therefore speak of it
with a circumlocution yet more dark and obscure, that none but the
Sons of Science and those who are illuminated with the sublimest
mysteries and profoundest secrets of Masonry may understand.
. . . It is then what brings you, my dearest Brethren, to that

pellucid, diaphanous palace of the true disinterested lovers of wis-
dom, that triumphant pyramid of purple salt, more sparkling and
radiant than the finest Orient ruby, in the center of which reposes
inaccessible light epitomized, that incorruptible celestial fire, blazing
like burning crystal, and brighter than the sun in his full meridian
glories, which is that immortal, eternal, never-dying Pyropus; the
King of genius, whence proceeds everything that is great and wise
and happy.

“These things are deeply hidden from common view, and cov-
ered with pavilions of thickest darkness, that what is sacred may
not be given to dogs or your pearls cast before swine, lest they
trample them under foot, and turn again and rend you.”

All this is Rosicrucian thought and phraseology. Its counter-
part may be found in the writings of any of the Hermetic philoso-
phers. But it is not Freemasonry and could be understood by no
Freemason relying for his comprehension only on the teaching he
had received in his own Order. It is the language of a Rosicrucian
adept addressed to other adepts, who like himself had united with
the Fraternity of Freemasons, that they might out of its select
coterie choose the most mystical and therefore the most suitable
candidates to elevate them to the higher mysteries of their own
brotherhood.

That Philalethes and his brother Rosicrucians entertained an
opinion of the true character of Speculative Masonry very different
from that taught by its founders is evident from other passages of this
Dedication. Unlike Anderson, Desaguliers, and the writers purely

344

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Masonic who succeeded them, the author of the Dedication estab-
lishes no connection between Architecture and Freemasonry. In-
deed it is somewhat singular that although he names both David
and Solomon in the course of his narrative, it is with little respect,
especially for the latter, and he does not refer, even by a single
word, to the Temple of Jerusalem. The Freemasonry of this writer
is not architectural, but altogether theosophic. It is evident that as
a Hermetic philosopher he sought to identify the Freemasons with
the disciples of the Rosicrucian sect rather than with the Operative
Masons of the Middle Ages. This is a point of much interest in the
discussion of the question of a connection between the two associa-
tions, considering that this work was published only five years after
the revival. It tends to show, not that Freemasonry was established
by the Rosicrucians, but, on the contrary, that at that early period
the latter were seeking to ingraft themselves upon the former, and
that while they were willing to use the simple degrees of Craft
Masonry as a nucleus for the growth of their own fraternity, they
looked upon them only as the medium of securing a higher initia-
tion, altogether unmasonic in its character and to which but few
Masons ever attained.

Neither Anderson nor Desaguliers, our best because contempo-
rary authority for the state of Masonry in the beginning of the i Sth
century, give the slightest indication that there was in their day a
higher Masonry than that described in the Book of Constitutions of
1723. The Hermetic element was evidently not introduced into
Speculative Masonry until the middle of the 1 Sth century, when it
was infused in a fragmentary form into some of the High Degrees
which were at that time fabricated by certain of the Continental
manufacturers of Rites.

But if, as Eugenius Philalethes plainly indicates, there were in
the year 1721 higher degrees, or at least a higher degree, attached to
the Masonic system and claimed to be a part of it, which possessed
mystical knowledge that was concealed from the great body of the
Craft, “ who were not far illuminated, who stood in the outward
place and were not worthy to look behind the veil ” — by which it is
clearly implied that there was another class of initiates who were
far illuminated , who stood within the inner place and looked behind
the veil — then the question forces itself upon us, why is it that
neither Anderson nor Desaguliers nor any of the writers of that

THE ROSICRUCIANS AND THE FREEMASONS 345

period, nor any of the rituals, make any allusion to this higher and
more illuminated system ?

The answer is readily at hand. It is because no such system of
initiation, so far as Freemasonry was concerned, existed. The
Master’s degree was at that day the consummation and perfection
of Speculative Masonry. There was nothing above or beyond it.
The Rosicrucians, who, especially in their astrological branch, were
then in full force in England, had, as we see from this book, their
own initiation into their Hermetic and theosophic system. Free-
masonry then beginning to become popular and being also a mysti-
cal society, these mystical brethren of the Rosy Cross were ready to
enter within its portals and to take advantage of its organization.
But they soon sought to discriminate between their own perfect
wisdom and the imperfect knowledge of their brother Masons, and,
Rosicrucian-like, spoke of an arcana which they only possessed.
There were some Rosicrucians who, like Philalethes, became Free-
masons, and some Freemasons, like Elias Ashmole, who became
Rosicrucians.

But there was no legitimate derivation of one from the other.
There is no similarity between the two systems — their origin is
different ; their symbols, though sometimes identical, have always a
different interpretation ; and it would be an impossible task to de-
duce the one historically from the other.

Yet there are not wanting scholars whose judgment on other
matters has not been deficient, who have not hesitated to trace
Freemasonry to a Rosicrucian source. Some of these, as Buhle,
De Quincey, and Sloane, were not Freemasons, and we can easily
ascribe their historical errors to their want of knowledge, but such
writers as Nicolai and Reghellini have no such excuse for the fallacy
of which they have been guilty.

Johann Gottlieb Buhle was among the first to advance the hy-
pothesis that Freemasonry was an offshoot of Rosicrucianism. This
he did in a work entitled On the Origin and the Principal Events
of the Orders of Rosicrucianism and Freemasonry / published in
1804. His theory was that Freemasonry was invented in the year
1629, by John Valentin Andre'a, and hence that it sprang out of the

l4 ‘Uber den Ursprung und die vornehmsten Schicksale des Ordens der Rosenkreutz-
en und Freimaurer.”

346

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Rosicrucian system or fiction which was the fabrication of that
writer. His fallacious views and numerous inaccuracies met with
many refutations at the time, besides those of Nicolai, produced in
the work which has been heretofore cited. Even De Quincey him-
self, a bitter but flippant adversary of Freemasonry, and who translated,
or rather paraphrased, the views of Buhle, does not hesitate to brand
him as illogical in his reasoning and confused in his arrangement.

Yet both Nicolai and De Quincey have advanced almost the same
hypothesis, though that of the former is considerably modified in its
conclusions.

The flippancy and egotism of De Quincey, with his complete
ignorance as a profane, of the true elements of the Masonic institu-
tion, hardly entitle his arguments to a serious criticism. His theory
and his self-styled facts may be epitomized as follows:

He thinks that the Rosicrucians were attracted to the Operative
Masons by the incidents, attributes, and legends of the latter, and
that thus the two Orders were brought into some connection with
each other. The same building that was used by the guild of Masons
offered a desirable means for the secret assemblies of the early Free-
masons, who, of course, were Rosicrucians. An apparatus of imple-
ments and utensils, such as was presented in the fabulous sepulcher
of Father Rosencreutz, was introduced, and the first formal and
solemn Lodge of Freemasons, on which occasion the name of Free-
masons was publicly made known, was held in Masons’ Hall,
Masons’ Alley, Basinghall Street, London, in the year 1646. Into
this Lodge he tells us that Elias Ashmole was admitted. Private
meetings, he says, may have been held, and one at Warrington in
Lancashire, which is mentioned in Ashmole’s Life, but the name of
a Freemasons’ Lodge, with the insignia, attributes, and circumstances
of a Lodge, first, he assures us, came forward at the date above
mentioned.

All of this, he tells us, is upon record, and thus refers to historical
testimony, though he does not tell us where it is to be found. Now,
all these statements we know, from authentic records, to be false.
Ashmole is our authority, and he is the very best authority, because
he was an eye-witness and a personal actor in the occurrences which
he records.

It has already been seen, by the extracts heretofore given from
Ashmole’s diary, that there is no record of a Lodge held in 1646 at

THE ROSICRUCIANS AND THE FREEMASONS 347

Masons’ Hall ; that the Lodge was held, with all “ the attributes
and circumstances of a Lodge,” at Warrington ; that Ashmole was
then and there initiated as a Freemason, and not at London ; and
finally, that the record of the Lodge held at Masons’ Hall, London,
which is made by the same Ashmole, was in 1683 and not in 1646,
or thirty-five years afterward.

An historian who thus falsifies records to sustain a theory is not
entitled to the respectful attention of a serious argument. And so
De Quincey may be dismissed for what he is worth. I do not con-
cede to him the excuse of ignorance, for he evidently must have had
Ashmole’s diary under his eyes, and his misquotations could only
have been made in bad faith.

Nicolai is more honorable in his mode of treating the question.
He does not attribute the use of Freemasonry directly and imme-
diately from the Rosicrucian brotherhood. But he thinks that its
mystical theosophy was the cause of the outspring of many other
mystical associations, such as the Theosophists, and that, passing
over into England, it met with the experimental philosophy of Ba-
con, as developed especially in his New Atlantis , and that the com-
bined influence of the two, the esoteric principles of the one and the
experimental doctrines of the other, together with the existence of
certain political motives, led to a meeting of philosophers who es-
tablished the system of Freemasonry at Masons’ Hall in 1646. He
does not explicitly say so, but it is evident from the names that he
gives that these philosophers were Astrologers, who were only a
sect of the Rosicrucians devoted to a specialty.

The theory and the arguments of Nicolai have already been
considered in the preceding chapter of this work, and need no fur-
ther discussion here.

The views of Rhigellini are based on the book of Nicolai, and
differ from them only in being, from his Gallic ignorance of English
history, a little more inaccurate. The views of Rhigellini have
already been referred to on a preceding page.

And now we meet with another theorist, who is scarcely more
respectful or less flippant than De Quincey, and who, not being a
Freemason, labors under the disadvantage of an incorrect knowledge
of the principles of the Order. Besides we can expect but little
accuracy from one who quotes as authentic history the spurious
Leland Manuscript.

348

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Mr. George Sloane, in a very readable book published in Lon-
don in 1 849, under the title of New Curiosities of Literature ,
has a very long article in his second volume on The Rosicrucians
and Freemasons. Adopting the theory that the latter are derived
from the former, he contends, from what he calls proofs, but which
are no proofs at all, that “ the Freemasons are not anterior to the
Rosicrucians ; and their principles, so far as they were avowed about
the middle of the 17th century, being identical, it is fair to presume
that the Freemasons were, in reality, the first incorporated body of
Rosicrucians or Sapientes.”

As he admits that this is but a presumption, and as presump-
tions are not facts, it is hardly necessary to occupy any time in its
discussion.

But he proceeds to confirm his presumption, in the following
way.

“ In the Fama of Andrea,” he says, “ we have the first sketch
of a constitution which bound by oath the members to mutual
secrecy, which proposed higher and lower grades, yet leveled all
worldly distinctions in the common bonds of brotherhood, and which
opened its privileges to all classes, making only purity of mind and
purpose the condition of reception.”

This is not correct. Long before the publication of the Fama
Fraternitatis there were many secret associations in the Middle
Ages, to say nothing of the Mysteries of antiquity, in which such
constitutions prevailed, enjoining secrecy under the severest penal-
ties, dividing their system of esoteric instruction into different grades,
establishing a bond of brotherhood, and always making purity of
life and rectitude of conduct the indispensable qualifications for ad-
mission. Freemasonry needed not to seek the model of such a con-
stitution from the Rosicrucians.

Another argument advanced by Mr. Sloane is this :

“ The emblems of the two brotherhoods are the same in every
respect — the plummet, the level, the compasses, the cross, the rose,
and all the symbolic trumpery which the Rosicrucians named in
their writings as the insignia of their imaginary associations, and
which they also would have persuaded a credulous world concealed
truths ineffable by mere language ; both, too, derived their wisdom
from Adam, adopted the same myth of building, connected them-
selves in the same unintelligible way with Solomon’s Temple, af-

THE ROSICRUCIANS AND THE FREEMASONS 349

fected to be seeking light from the East — in other words, the Cab-
ala — and accepted the heathen Pythagoras among their adepts.”

In this long passage there are almost as many errors and mis-
statements as there are lines. The emblems of the two Orders were
not the same in any respect. The square and compasses were not
ordinary nor usual Rosicrucian emblems. In one instance, in a plate
in the Azoth Philosophorum of Basil Valentine, published in the
1 7th century, we will, it is true, find these implements forming part
of a Rosicrucian figure, but they are there evidently used as phallic
symbols, a meaning never attached to them in Freemasonry, whose
interpretation of them is derived from their operative use. Besides,
we know, from a relic discovered near Limerick, in Ireland, that the
square and the level were used by the Operative Masons as emblems
in the 16th or, perhaps, the 15th century, with the same signification
that is given to them by the Freemasons of the present day. The
Speculative Masons derived nearly all of their symbols from the
implements and the language of the Operative art ; the Rosicrucians
took theirs from astronomical and geometrical problems, and were
connected in their interpretations with a system of theosophy and
not with the art of building. The cross and the rose, referred to by
Mr. Sloane, never were at any time, not even at the present day, em-
blems recognized in Craft Masonry, and were introduced into such
of the High Degrees fabricated about the middle of the 18th cen-
turv as had in them a Rosicrucian element. Again, the Rosicrucians
had nothing to do with the Temple of Solomon. Their “ invisible
house,” or their Temple, or “ House of the Holy Ghost,” was a re-
ligious and philosophic idea, much more intimately connected with
Lord Bacon’s House of Solomon in the Island of Bensalem than it
was with the Temple of Jerusalem. And, finally, the early Freema-
sons, like their successors of the present day, in “seeking light from
the East,” intended no reference to the Cabala, which is never men-
tioned in any of their primitive rituals, but alluded to the East as
the source of physical light — the place of sunrising, which they
adopted as a symbol of intellectual and moral light. It would, in-
deed, be easier to prove from their symbols that the first Speculative
Masons were sun-worshippers than that they were Rosicrucians,
though neither hypothesis would be correct.

If any one will take the trouble of toiling through the three
books of Cornelius Agrippa’s Occult Philosophy , which may be

35 °

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

considered as the text-book of the old Rosicrucian philosophy, he
will see how little there is in common between Rosicrucianism and
Freemasonry. The one is a mystical system founded on the Cab-
ala ; the other the outgrowth of a very natural interpretation of
symbols derived from the usages and the implements of an opera-
tive art. The Rosicrucians were theosophists, whose doctrines were
of angels and demons, of the elements, of the heavenly bodies and
their influence on the affairs of men, and of the magical powers of
numbers, of suffumigations, and other sorceries.

The Alchemists, who have been called “ physical Rosicrucians,”
adopted the metals and their transmutation, the elixir of life, and their
universal solvent, as symbols, if we may believe Hitchcock, 1 by which
they concealed the purest dogmas of a religious life.

But Freemasonry has not and never had anything of this kind
in its system. Its founders were, as we will see when we come to
the historical part of this work, builders, whose symbols, applied in
their architecture, were of a religious and Christian character ; and
when their successors made this building fraternity a speculative as-
sociation, they borrowed the symbols by which they sought to teach
their philosophy, not from Rosicrucianism, not from magic, nor from
the Cabala, but from the art to which they owed their origin.
Every part of Speculative Masonry proves that it could not have
been derived from Rosicrucianism. The two Orders had in com-
mon but one thing — they both had secrets which they scrupulously
preserved from the unhallowed gaze of the profane.

Andrea sought, it is true, in his Faina Fraternitatis , to elevate
Rosicrucianism to a more practical and useful character, and to
make it a vehicle for moral and intellectual reform. But even his
system, which was the only one that could have exerted any influ-
ence on the English philosophers, is so thoroughly at variance in its
principles from that of the Freemasonry of the 1 7th century, that a
union of the two, or the derivation of one from the other, must have
been utterly impracticable.

It has been said that when Henry Cornelius Agrippa was in Lon-
don, in the year 1510, he founded a secret society of Rosicrucians.
This is possible, although, during his brief visit to London, Agrippa
was the guest of the learned Dean Colet, and spent his time with his

1 “ Remarks upon Alchemy and the Alchemists,*’ passim.

THE ROSICRUCIANS AND THE FREEMASONS 351

host in the study of the works of the Apostle to the Gentiles. “ I
labored hard,” he says himself, “at the Epistles of St. Paul.” Still
he may have found time to organize a society of Rosicrucians. In
the beginning of the 16th century secret societies “chiefly com-
posed,” says Mr. Morley, “of curious and learned youths had become
numerous, especially among the Germans, and towards the close of
that century these secret societies were developed into the form of
brotherhoods of Rosicrucians, each member of which gloried in
styling himself Physician, Theosophist, Chemist, and now, by the
mercy of God, Rosicrucian.” 1

But to say of this society, established by Agrippa in England in
1510 (if one was actually established), as has been said by a writer
of the last century, that “ this practice of initiation, or secret incor-
poration, thus and then first introduced has been handed down to
our own times, and hence, apparently, the mysterious Eleusinian con-
federacies now known as the Lodges of Freemasonry,” 2 is to make
an assertion that is neither sustained by historical testimony nor sup-
ported by any chain of reasoning or probability.

I have said that while the hypothesis that Freemasonry was orig-
inally derived from Rosicrucianism, and that its founders were the
English Rosicrucians in the 1 7th century, is wholly untenable, there
is no doubt that at a later period, a century after this, its supposed
origin, a Rosicrucian element, was very largely diffused in the
Hantes Grades or High Degrees which were invented on the con-
tinent of Europe about the middle of the 18th century.

This subject belongs more appropriately to the domain of his-
tory than to that of legend, but its consideration will bring us so
closely into connection with the Rosicrucian or Hermetic philoso-
phy that I have thought that it would be more convenient not to
dissever the two topics, but to make it the subject of the next
chapter.

1 “The Life of Henry Cornelius Agrippa von Netteshuri,” by Henry Morley, voi

P . 58.

* Monthly Review , London, 1798, vol. xxv., p. 30.

CHAPTER XXXVI

THE ROSICRUCIANISM OF THE HIGH DEGREES

HE history of the High Degrees of Masonry begins
with the inventions of the Chevalier Michael
Ramsay, who about the year 1 728 fabricated three
which he called Ecossais, Novice, and Knight
Templar. But the inventions of Ramsay had
nothing in them of a Rosicrucian character.
They were intended by him to support his hy-
pothesis that Freemasonry originated in the Crusades, and that the
first Freemasons were Templars. His degrees were therefore not
philosophic but chivalric. The rite-manufacturers who succeeded
him, followed for the most part in his footsteps, and the degrees that
were subsequently invented partook of the chivalric and military
character, so that the title of “ Chevalier ” or “ Knight,” unknown
to the early Freemasons, became in time so common as to form the
designation in connection with another noun of most of the new
degrees. Thus we find in old and disused Rites, as well as in those
still existing, such titles as “ Knight of the Sword,” “ Knight of the
Eagle,” “ Knight of the Brazen Serpent,” and so many more that
Ragon, in his Nomenclature, furnishes us with no less than two
hundred and ninety-two degrees of Masonic Knighthood, without
having exhausted the catalogue.

But it was not until long after the Masonic labors of Ramsay
had ceased that the element of Hermetic philosophy began to in-
trude itself into still newer degrees.

Among the first to whom we are to ascribe the responsibility of
this novel infusion is a Frenchman named Antoine Joseph Pernelty,
who was born in 1716 and died in 1800, having passed, therefore,
the most active and vigorous portion of his life in the midst of that
flood of Masonic novelties which about the middle quarters of the
18th century inundated the continent of Europe and more especially
the kingdom of France.

S3?

ROSICRUCIANISM OF THE HIGH DEGREES 353

Pernelty was at first a Benedictine monk, but, having at the age
of forty-nine obtained a dispensation from his vows, he removed
from Paris to Beriin, where for a short time he served Frederick the
Great as his librarian. Returning to Paris, he studied and became
infected with the mystical doctrines of Swedenborg, and published a
translation of one of the most important of his works. He then re-
paired to Avignon, where he established a new Rite, which, on its
transferrence to Montpellier, received the name of the “ Academy
of True Masons.” Into this Rite it may well be supposed that he
introduced much of the theosophic mysticism of the Swedish sage,
in parts of which there is a very strong analogy to Rosicrucianism,
or at least to the Hermetic Doctrines of the Rosicrucians. It will
be remembered that the late General Hitchcock, who was learned
on mystical topics, wrote a book to prove that Swedenborg was a
Hermetic philosopher ; and the arguments that he advances are not
easily to be confuted.

But Pernelty was not a Swedenborgian only. He was a man of
multifarious reading and had devoted his studies, among other
branches of learning, to theology, philosophy, and the mathematical
sciences. The appetite for a mystical theology, which had led him
to the study and the adoption of the views of Swedenborg, would
scarcely permit him to escape the still more appetizing study of the
Hermetic philosophers.

Accordingly we find him inventing other degrees, and among
them one, the “ Knight of the Sun,” which is in its original ritual a
mere condensation of Rosicrucian doctrines, especially as developed
in the alchemical branch of Rosicrucianism.

There is not in the wide compass of Masonic degrees, one more
emphatically Rosicrucian than this. The reference in its ritual to
Sylphs, one of the four elementary spirits of the Rosicrucians ; to
the seven angels which formed a part of the Rosicrucian hierarchy ;
the dialogue between Father Adam and Truth in which the doctrines
of Alchemy and the Cabala are discussed in the search of man for
theosophic truth, and the adoption as its principal word of recogni-
tion of that which in the Rosicrucian system was deemed the primal
matter of all things, are all sufficient to prove the Hermetic spirit
which governed the founder of the degree in its fabrication.

There have been many other degrees, most of which are now
obsolete, whose very names openly indicate their Hermetic origin.

23

354

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Such are the “ Hermetic Knight,” the “Adept of the Eagle” (the
word adept being technically used to designate an expert Rosicru-
cian), the “ Grand Hermetic Chancellor,” and the “ Philosophic
Cabalist." The list might be increased by fifty more, at least,
were time and space convenient. There have been whole rites fab-
ricated on the basis of the Rosicrucian or Hermetic philosophy,
such as the “Rite of Philalethes,” the “Hermetic Rite,” and
the “Rite of Illuminated Theosophists,” invented in 1767 by
Benedict Chartanier, who united in .it the notions of the Hermetic
philosophy and the reveries of Swedenborg. Gadicke tells us also,
in his Preimaurer- Lexicon, of a so-called Masonic system which
was introduced by the Marquis of Lernais into Berlin in 1758, the
objects of which were the Hermetic arcana and the philosopher’s
stone.

But the Hermetic degree which to the present day has exercised
the greatest influence upon the higher grades of Masonry is that of the
Rose Croix. This name was given to it by the French, and it must
be noticed that in the French language no distinction has ever been
made between the Rosenkreutzer and Rose Croix j or, rather, the
French writers have always translated the Rosenkreutzer of the
German and the Rosicrucian of the English by their own words
Rose Croix, and to this philological inaccuracy is to be traced an
historical error of some importance, to be soon adverted to.

The first that we hear in history of a Rosicrucian Masonry, under
that distinctive name, is about the middle of the 1 8th century.

The society to which I allude was known as the “Gold-und-
Rosenkreutzer,” or the “Golden Rosicrucians.” We first find this
title in a book published at Berlin, in 1714, by one Samuel Richter,
under the assumed name of Sincerus Renatus, and with the title of
A True and Complete Preparation of the Philosopher s Stone by
the Order of the Golden Rosicrucians. In it is contained the laws
of the brotherhood, which Findel thinks bear unmistakable evidence
of Jesuitical intervention.

The book of Richter describes a society which, if founded on
the old Rosicrucians, differed essentially from them in its principles.
Findel speaks of these “Golden Rosicrucians” as if originally
formed on this work of Richter, and in the spirit of the Jesuits, to
repress liberty of thought and the healthy development of the intel-
lect. If formed at that early period, in the beginning of the 1 8th

ROSICRUCIANISM OF THE HIGH DEGREES

355

century, it could not possibly have had a connection with Free-
mason ry.

But the Order, as an appendant to Masonry, was not really per-
fected until about the middle of the 18th century. Findel says after
1756. The Order consisted of nine degrees, all having Latin names,
viz.: 1, Junior; 2, Theoreticus ; 3, Practicus; 4, Philosophus ;

5, Minor; 6, Major; 7, Adeptus ; 8, Magister; 9, Magus. It
based itself on the three primitive degrees of Freemasonry only as
giving a right to entrance ; it boasted of being descended from
the ancient Rosicrucians, and of possessing all their secrets, and
of being the only body that could give a true interpretation of
the Masonic symbols, and it claimed, therefore, to be the head of the
Order. There is no doubt that this brotherhood was a perfect in-
stance of the influence sought to be cast, about the middle of the
1 8th century, upon Freemasonry by the doctrines of Rosicrucianism.
The effort, however, to make it a Hermetic system failed. The
Order of the Golden Rosicrucians, although for nearly half a cen-
tury popular in Germany, and calling into its ranks many persons of
high standing, at length began to decay, and finally died out, about
the end of the last century.

Since that period we hear no more of Rosicrucian Masonry,
except what is preserved in degrees like that of the Knight of the
Sun and a few others, which are still retained in the catalogue of the
Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite.

I have said that the translation of the. word Rosicrucian by Rose
Croix has been the source of an important historical error. This
is the confounding of the French degree of “ Rose Croix,” or
“ Knight of the Eagle and Pelican,” with Rosicrucianism, to which
it has not the slightest affinity. Thus Dr. Oliver, when speaking of
this degree, says that the earliest notice that he finds of it is in the
Fama Fratcrnitatis , evidently showing that he deemed it to be of
Rosicrucian origin.

The modern Rose Croix, which constitutes the summit of the
French Rite, and is the eighteenth of the Ancient and Accepted
Scottish Rite, besides being incorporated into several other Masonic
systems, has not in its construction the slightest tinge of Rosicru-
cianism, nor is there in any part of its ritual, rightly interpreted, the
faintest allusion to the Hermetic philosophy.

I speak of it. of course, as it appears in its original form. This

356

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

has been somewhat changed in later days. The French Masons,
objecting to its sectarian character, substituted for it a modification
which they have called the “ Philosophic Rose Croix.” In this they
have given a Hermetic interpretation to the letters on the cross, an
example that has elsewhere been more recently followed.

But the original Rose Croix, most probably first introduced to
notice by Prince Charles Edward, the “ Young Pretender,” in the
Primordial chapter which he established in 1 747, at Arras, in France,
was a purely Christian, if not a Catholic degree. Its most promi-
nent symbols, the rose, the cross, the eagle, and the pelican, its
ceremonies, and even its words and signs of recognition, bore al-
lusion to Jesus Christ, the expounder of the new law, which was to
take the place of the old law that had ceased to operate when “ the
veil of the temple was rent.”

The Rose Croix, as we find it in its pure and uncorrupted ritual,
was an attempt to apply the rites, symbols, and legends of the prim-
itive degrees of Ancient Craft Masonry to the last and greatest dis-
pensation ; to add to the first temple of Solomon, and the second of
Zerubbabel, a third, which is the one to which Christ alluded when
he said, “ Destroy this temple, and in three days will I raise it up ” —
an expression wholly incomprehensible by the ignorant populace
who stood around him at the time, but the meaning of which is per-
fectly intelligible to the Rose Croix Mason who consults the orig-
inal ritual of his degree.

In all this there is nothing alchemical, Hermetic, or Rosicrucian
and it is a great error to suppose that there is anything but Chris-
tian philosophy in the degree as originally invented.

The name of the degree has undoubtedly led to the confusion in
its history. But, in fact, the words “ Rosa Crucis,” common both
to the ancient Rosicrucian philosophers and to the modern Rose
Croix Masons, had in each a different meaning, and some have sup-
posed a different derivation. In the latter the title has by many
writers been thought to allude to the ros, or dew, which was deemed
by the alchemists to be a powerful solvent of gold, and to crux, the
cross, which was the chemical hieroglyphic of light. Mosheim
says :

“ The title of Rostcruczans evidently denotes the chemical philoso-
phers and those who blended the doctrines of religion with the
secrets of chemistry. The denomination itself is drawn from the

ROSICRUCIANISM OF THE HIGH DEGREES 35?

science of chemistry ; and they only who are acquainted with the
peculiar language of the chemists can understand its true significa-
tion and energy. It is not compounded, as many imagine, of the
two words rosa and crux, which signify rose and cross, but of the
latter of these words and the Latin word ros, which signifies dew.
Of all natural bodies dew is the most powerful solvent of gold. The
cross, in the chemical style, is equivalent to light, because the figure
of the cross exhibits at the same time the three letters of which the
word lux, i.e., light, is compounded. Now, lux is called by this
sect the seed or menstruum of the red dragon ; or, in other words,
that gross and corporeal, when properly digested and modified, pro-
duces gold.” 1

Notwithstanding that this learned historian has declared that
“ all other explications of this term are false and chimerical,” others
more learned perhaps than he, in this especial subject, have differed
from him in opinion, and trace the title to rosa, not to ros.

There is certainly a controversy about the derivation of Rosi-
crucian as applied to the Hermetic philosophers, but there is none
whatever in reference to that of the Masonic Rose Croix. Every-
one admits, because the admission is forced upon him by the ritual
and the spirit of the degree, that the title comes from rose and cross,
and that rose signifies Christ, and cross the instrument of his passion.
In the Masonic degree, Rose Croix signifies Christ on the cross, a
meaning that is carried out by the jewel, but one which is never
attached to the rose and cross of the Rosicrucians, where rose
most probably was the symbol of silence and secrecy, and the
cross may have had either a Christian or a chemical application ;
most probably the latter.

Again, we see in the four most important symbols of the Rose
Croix degree, as interpreted in the early rituals (at least in their
spirit), the same Christian interpretation, entirely free from all taint
of Rosicrucianism.

These symbols are the eagle, the pelican, the rose , and the cross,
all of which are combined to form the beautiful and expressive
jewel of the degree.

Thus the writer of the book of Exodus, in allusion to the be-

1 Mosheim, “Ecclesiastical History,” Maclane’s Translation, cent, xvii., sec. i., vol
iii.* p. 436, note.

358

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

lief that the eagle assists its feeble younglings in their first flights by
bearing them on its pinions, represents Jehovah as saying, “Ye
have seen what I did to the Egyptians, and how I bore you on eagle’s
wings and brought you unto myself.” Hence, appropriating this
idea, the Rose Croix Masons selected the eagle as a symbol of Christ
in his divine character, bearing the children of his adoption in their
upward course, and teaching them with unequalled love and tender-
ness to poise their unfledged wings, and soar from the dull cor-
ruptions of earth to a higher and holier sphere. And hence the
eagle in the jewel is represented with expanded wings, as if ready
for flight.

The pelican, “vulning herself and in her piety,” as the heralds
call it, is, says Mr. Sloane Evans, “a sacred emblem of great beauty
and striking import, and the representation of it occurs not unfre-
quently among the ornaments of churches.” 1 The allusion to Christ
as a Saviour, shedding his blood for the sins of the world, is too
evident to need explanation.

Of the rose and the cross I have already spoken. The rose is
applied as a figurative appellation of Christ in only one passage of
Scripture, where he is prophetically called the “rose of Sharon,”
but the flower was always accepted in the iconography of the church
as one of his symbols. But the fact that in the jewel of the Rose
Croix the blood-red rose appears attached to the center of the
cross, as though crucified upon it, requires no profound knowledge
of the science of symbolism to discover its meaning.

The cross was, it is true, a very ancient symbol of eternal life,
especially among the Egyptians, but since the crucifixion it has been
adopted by Christians as an emblem of him who suffered upon it.
“ The cross,” says Didron, “ is more than a mere figure of Christ ; it
is, in iconography, either Christ himself or his symbol.” As such
it is used in the Masonry of the Rose Croix.

It is evident, from these explanations, that the Rose Croix was,
in its original conception, a purely Christian degree. There was no
intention of its founders to borrow for its construction anything from
occult philosophy, but simply to express in its symbolization a purely
Christian sentiment.

I have, in what I have said, endeavored to show that while Rosi-

1 “ The Art of Blazon,” p. 130.

ROS1CRUC1ANISM OF THE HIGH DEGREES

359

crucianism had no concern, as has been alleged, with the origination
of Freemasonry in the 17th century, yet that in the succeeding cen-
tury, under various influences, especially, perhaps, the diffusion of
the mystical doctrines of Swedenborg, a Hermetic or Rosicrucian
element was infused into some of the High Degrees then newly
fabricated. But the diffusion of that element went no farther ; it
never affected the pure Masonic system ; and, with the few excep-
tions which I have mentioned, even these degrees have ceased to
exist. Especially was it not connected with one of the most impor-
tant and most popular of those degrees.

From the beginning of the 19th century Rosicrucianism has been
dead to Masonry, as its exponent, the Hermetic philosophy, has
been to literature. It has no life now, and we preserve its relics
only as memorials of a past obscuration which the sunbeams of
modern learning have dispersed.

CHAPTER XXXVII

THE PYTHAGOREANS AND FREEMASONRY

HE theory which ascribes, if not the actual origin
of Freemasonry to Pythagoras, at least its intro-
duction into Europe by him, through the school
which he established at Crotona, in Italy, which
was a favorite one among our early writers, may
very properly be placed among the legends of
the Order, since it wants all the requisites of his-
torical authority for its support.

The notion was most probably derived from what has been
called the Leland Manuscript, because it is said to have been found
in the Bodleian Library, in the handwriting of that celebrated
antiquary. The author of the Life of Leland gives this account of
the manuscript :

“The original is said to be the handwriting of King Henry VI.
and copied by Leland by order of his highness, King Henry VIII.
If the authenticity of this ancient monument of literature remains
unquestioned, it demands particular notice in the present publica-
tion, on account of the singularity of the subject, and no less from a
due regard to the royal writer and our author, his transcriber, inde-
fatigable in every part of literature. It will also be admitted, ac-
knowledgment is due to the learned Mr. Locke, who, amidst the
closest studies and the most strict attention to human understand-
ing, could unbend his mind in search of this ancient treatise, which
he first brought from obscurity in the year 1796.” 1

This production was first brought to the attention of scholars by
being published in the Gentlemans Magazine lor September, 1753,
where it is stated to have been previously printed at Frankfort, in
Germany, in 1 748, from a copy found in “ the writing-desk of a de
ceased brother.”

1 “ Life of John Leland, 1 ” p. 67.
360

THE PYTHAGOREANS AND FREEMASONRY 36 r

The title of it, as given in the magazine, is in the following
words :

“ Certeyne Questyons wyth Answeres to the same, concernynge
the Mystery of Maconrye ; wrytenne by the hande of Kynge Henrye
the Sixthe of the Name, and faythefullye copyed by me Johan Ley-
lande, Antiquarius, by the commaunde of His Highnesse.”

The opinion of Masonic critics of the present day is that the
document is a forgery. It was most probably written about the
time and in the spirit in which Chatterton composed his imitations
of the Monk Rowley, and of Ireland with his impositions of Shake-
speare, and was fabricated as an unsuccessful attempt to imitate the
archaic language of the 15th century, and as a pious fraud intended
to elevate the character and sustain the pretensions of the Masonic
Fraternity by furnishing the evidence of its very ancient origin.

Such were not, however, the views of the Masonic writers of the
last and beginning of the present century.

They accepted the manuscript, or rather the printed copy of it
— for the original codex has never been seen — with unhesitating
faith as an authentic document. Hutchinson gave it as an appendix
to his Spirit of Masonry , Preston published it in the second and
enlarged edition of his Illustrations , Calcott in his Candid Disqui-
sition , Dermott in his Ahiman Rezon, and Krause in his Drei Alt-
esten Kunslur kunden. In none of these is there the faintest hint of
its being anything but an authentic document. Oliver said : “ I en-
tertain no doubt of the genuineness and authenticity of this valuable
Manuscript.” The same view has been entertained by Reghellini
among the French, and by Krause, Fessler, and Lenning among
the Germans.

Mr. Halliwell was perhaps the first of English scholars to ex-
press a doubt of its genuineness. After a long and unsuccessful
search in the Bodleian Library for the original, he came, very natu-
rally, to the conclusion that it is a forgery. Hughan and Woodford,
both excellent judges, have arrived at the same conclusion, and it is
now a settled question that the Leland or Locke Manuscript (for it
is known by both titles) is a document of no historic character.

It is not, however, without its value. To its appearance about
the middle of the last century, and the unhesitating acceptance of
its truth by the Craft at the time, we can, in all probability, assign
the establishment of the doctrine that Freemasonry was of a Py-

362

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

thagorean origin, though it had been long before adverted to by
Dr. Anderson.

Before proceeding to an examination of the rise and progress of
this opinion, it will be proper to cite so much of the manuscript as
connects Pythagoras with Masonry. I do not quote the whole doc-
ument, though it is short, because it has so repeatedly been printed,
in even elementary Masonic works, as to be readily accessible to the
reader. In making my quotations I shall so far defer to the artifice
of the fabricator as to preserve unchanged his poor attempt to imi-
tate the orthography and style of the 15th century, and interpolate
in brackets, when necessary, an explanation of the most unintelligible
words.

The document purports to be answers by some Mason to ques-
tions proposed by King Henry VI., who, it would seem, must have
taken some interest in the “ Mystery of Masonry,” and had sought
to obtain from competent authority a knowledge of its true char-
acter. The following are among the questions and answers :

“ Q. Where dyd ytt [Masonry] begynne ?

“A. Ytt dyd begynne with the fyrst menne, yn the Este, which
were before the fyrste Manne of the Weste, and comynge westlye,
ytt hathe broughte herwyth alle comfortes to the wylde and com-
fortlesse.

“ Q- Who dyd brynge ytt Westlye ?

“A. The Venetians [. Phoenicians ] who beynge grate Mer-
chaundes, corned ffyrst ffrome the Este yn Venetia [ Phoenicia ] ffor
the commodyte of Merchaundysinge beithe [both] Este and Weste
bey the redde and Myddlelonde [M edit err anean] Sees.

“ Q. Howe comede ytt yn Englonde ?

“ A. Peter Gower [Pythagoras] a Grecian journeyedde ffor
kunnynge yn Egypt and in Syria and in everyche Londe whereat
the Venetians [Phoenicians] hadde plauntedde Maconrye and wyn-
nynge Entraunce yn al Lodges of Maconnes, he lerned muche, and
retournedde and woned [dwelt] yn Grecia Magna wachsynge [grow-
ing] and becommynge a myghtye wyseacre [philosopher] and grate-
lyche renouned and here he framed a grate Lodge at Groton
[Crotona] and maked many Maconnes, some whereoffe dyd jour-
neye yn Fraunce, and maked manye Maconnes wherefromme, yn
processe of Tyme, the Arte passed yn Engelonde.”

I am convinced that there was a French original of this docu-

THE PYTHAGOREANS AND FREEMASONRY 363

ment, from which language the fabricator translated it into archaic
English. The internal proofs of this are to be found in the numer-
ous preservations of French idioms. Thus we meet with Peter
Gozuer, evidently derived from Pythagore, pronounced Petagore , the
French for Pythagoras ; Maconrye and Maconnes, for Masonry and
Masons, the French c in the word being used instead of the English
s ; the phrase wynnynge the Faculty e of A brae, which is a pure
Gallic idiom, instead of acquiring the faculty, the word gayner being
indifferently used in French as signifying to win or to acquire ; the
word Freres for Brethren ; and the statement, in the spirit of French
nationality, that Masonry was brought into England out of France.

None of these idiomatic phrases or national peculiarities would
have been likely to occur if the manuscript had been originally writ-
ten by an Englishman and in the English language.

But be this as it may, the document had no sooner appeared
than it seemed to inspire contemporary Masonic writers with the
idea that Masonry and the school of Pythagoras, which he estab-
lished at Crotona, in Italy, about five centuries before Christ, were
closely connected — an idea which was very generally adopted by
their successors, so that it came at last to be a point of the orthodox
Masonic creed.

Thus Preston, in his Illustrations of Masonry, when comment-
ing on the dialogue contained in this document, says that “the
records of the fraternity inform us that Pythagoras was regularly
initiated into Masonry ; and being properly instructed in the mys-
teries of the Art, he was much improved, and propagated the prin-
ciples of the Order in other countries into which he aftenvards
travelled.”

Calcott, in his Candid Disquisition, speaks of the Leland Man-
uscript as “an antique relation, from whence maybe gathered many
of the original principles of the ancient society, on which the insti-
tution of Freemasonry was ingrafted” — by the “ancient society”
meaning the school of Pythagoras.

Hutchinson, in his Spirit of Masonry, quotes this “ancient Ma-
sonic record,” as he calls it, and says that “ it brings us positive evi-
dence of the Pythagorean doctrine and Basilidian principles making
the foundation of our religious and moral duties.” Two of the lectures
in his work are appropriated to a discussion of the doctrines of
Pythagoras in connection with the Masonic system.

364

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

But this theory of the Pythagorean origin of Freemasonry does
not owe its existence to the writers of the middle of the 18th cen-
tury. It had been advanced at an early period, and soon after the
Revival in 1717 by Dr. Anderson. In the first edition of the
Constitutions , published in 1723, he alludes to Pythagoras as having
borrowed great knowledge from the Chaldean Magi and the Baby-
lonish Jews, but he is more explicit in his Defense of Masonry ,
published in 1730, wherein he says: “I am fully convinced that
Freemasonry is very nearly allied to the old Pythagorean Discipline,
from whence, I am persuaded, it may in some circumstances very
justly claim a descent.”

Now, how are we to explain the way in which this tradition of
the connection of the Philosopher of Samos first acquired a place
among the legends of the Craft ? The solution of the problem
does not appear to be very difficult.

In none of the old manuscript constitutions which contain
what has been called the Legend of the Guild, or the Legend
of the Craft , is there, with a single exception, any allusion to the
name of Pythagoras. That exception is found in the Cooke MS.,
where the legendist, after relating the story of the two pillars in-
scribed with all the sciences, which had been erected by Jabal before
the flood, adds, in lines 318-326, this statement :

“And after this flode many yeres as the cronycle telleth these ii
were founde and as the polycronicon seyeth that a grete clerke that
called putogaras ^Pythagoras] fonde that one and hermes the phi-
lisophre fonde that other, and thei tought forthe the sciens that thei
fonde therein ywritten.”

Now, although the Cooke MS. is the earliest of the old records,
after the Halliwell poem, none of the subsequent constitutions have
followed it in this allusion to Pythagoras. This was because the
writer of the Cooke MS., being in possession of the Polychron-
icon of the monk Ranulph Higden, an edition of which had been
printed during his time by William Caxton, he had liberally bor-
rowed from that historical work and incorporated parts of it into
his Legend.

Of these interpolations, the story of the finding of one of the
pillars by Pythagoras is one. The writer acknowledges his indebt-
edness for the statement to Iligden’s Polychronicon. But it formed
no part of the Legend of the Craft , and hence no notice is taken of

THE PYTHAGOREANS AND FREEMASONRY 365

it in the subsequent manuscript copies of the Legend. In none of
them is Pythagoras even named.

It is evident, then, that in the 14th and following centuries, to
the beginning of the 1 Sth, the theory of the Pythagorean origin of
Freemasonry, or of the connection of the Grecian philosopher with
it, was not recognized by the Craft as any part of the traditional his-
tory of the Fraternity. There is no safer rule than that of the old
schoolmen, which teaches us that we must reason alike concerning
that which does not appear and that which does not exist — “ de non
apparentibus et de non existenlibits , eadem est ratio." The old
craftsmen who fabricated the Legend were workmen and not schol-
ars ; they were neither acquainted with the scholastic nor the ancient
philosophy ; they said nothing about Pythagoras because they knew
nothing about him.

But about the beginning of the 1 8th century a change took place,
not only in the organization of the Masonic institution, but also in
the character and qualifications of the men who were engaged in
producing the modification, or we might more properly call it the
revolution.

Although in the 17th, and perhaps in the 16th century, many
persons were admitted into the Lodges of Operative Masons who
were not professional builders, it is, I think, evident that the society
did not assume a purely speculative form until the year 1717. The
Revival in that year, by the election of Anthony Sayer, “ Gen-
tleman,” as Grand Master; Jacob Lamball, a “ Carpenter,” and
Joseph Elliott, a “ Captain,” as Grand Wardens, proves that the
control of the society was to be taken out of the hands of the
Operative Masons.

Among those who were at about that time engaged in the recon-
struction of the Institution were James Anderson and Theophilus
Desaguliers. Anderson was a Master of Arts, and afterward a Doc-
tor of Divinity, the minister of a church in London, and an author ;
Desaguliers was a Doctor of Laws, a fellow of the Royal Society,
and a teacher of Experimental Philosophy of no little reputation.

Both of these men, as scholars, were thoroughly conversant with
the system of Pythagoras, and they were not unwilling to take ad-
vantage of his symbolic method of inculcating his doctrine, and to
introduce some of his symbols into the symbolism of the Order
which they were renovating.

366

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Jamblichus, the biographer of Pythagoras, tells us that while the
sasre was on his travels he caused himself to be initiated into all the
mysteries of Byblos and Tyre and those which were practiced in
many parts of Syria. But as these mysteries were originally re-
ceived by the Phoenicians from Egypt, he passed over into that
country, where he remained twenty-two years, occupying himself in
the study of geometry, astronomy, and all the initiations of the gods,
until he was carried a captive into Babylon by the soldiers of Cam-
byses. There he freely associated with the Magi in their religion
and their studies, and, having obtained a thorough knowledge of
music, the science of numbers, and other arts, he finally returned to
Greece. 1

The school of philosophy which Pythagoras afterward estab-
lished at the city of Crotona, in Italy, differed from those of all the
other philosophers of Greece, in the austerities of initiation to which
his disciples were subjected, in the degrees of probation into which
they were divided, and in the method which he adopted of veiling
his instructions under symbolic forms. In his various travels he
had imbibed the mystical notions prevalent among the Egyp-
tians and the Chaldeans, and had borrowed some of their modes of
initiation into their religious mysteries, which he adopted in the
method by which he communicated his own principles.

Grote, in his History of Greece , has very justly said that “ Pythag-
oras represents in part the scientific tendencies of his age, in part
also the spirit of mysticism and of special fraternities for religious
and ascetic observance which became diffused throughout Greece in
the 6th century before the Christian era.”

Of the character of the philosophy of Pythagoras and of his
method of instruction, which certainly bore a very close resem-
blance to that adopted by the founders of the speculative system,
such cultivated scholars as Anderson and Desaguliers certainly were
not ignorant. And if, among those who were engaged with them
in the construction of this new and improved school of speculative
Masonry, there were any whose limited scholastic attainments would
not enable them to consult the Greek biographies of Pythagoras by
Jamblichus and by Porphyry, they had at hand and readily accessible
an English translation of M. Dacier’s life of the philosopher, con-

1 “ Jamblichus de Pythagorica Vita,” c. iii., iv.

THE PYTHAGOREANS AND FREEMASONRY 367

taining also an elaborate explication of his symbols, together with a
translation of the Commentaries of Hierodes on the Golden Verses oj
Pythagoras, all embraced in one volume and published in London
in the year 1707, by the celebrated bibliopole Jacob Tonson.

There was abundant material and ready opportunity for the par-
tially unlearned as well as for the more erudite to obtain a familiar-
ity with the philosophy of Pythagoras, his method of initiation, and
his system of symbols.

It is not, therefore, surprising that these “ Revivalists,” as they
have been called, should have delighted, as Anderson has done in
his Defense of Masonry, to compare the two schools of the Pythag-
oreans and the Freemasons ; that they should have dwelt on their
great similarity ; and in the development of their speculative system
should have adopted many symbols from the former which do not
appear to have been known to or used by the old Operative Ma-
sons whom they succeeded.

Among the first Pythagorean symbols which were adopted by
the Speculative Masons was the symbolism of the science of num-
bers, which appears in the earliest rituals extant, and of which Dr.
Oliver has justly said, in his posthumous work entitled The Pythag-
orean Triangle, that “ the Pythagoreans had so high an opinion of
it that they considered it to be the origin of all things, and thought
a knowledge of it to be equivalent to a knowledge of God.”

This symbolism of numbers, which was adopted into Specula-
tive Masonry at a very early period after the Revival, has been de-
veloped and enlarged in successive revisions of the lectures, until at
the present day it constitutes one of the most important and curious
parts of the system of Freemasonry. But we have no evidence that
the same system of numerical symbolism, having the Pythagorean
and modern Masonic interpretation, prevailed among the Craft an-
terior to the beginning of the 18th century. It was the work of the
Revivalists, who, as scholars familiar with the mystical philosophy
of Pythagoras, deemed it expedient to introduce it into the equally
mystical philosophy of Speculative Masonry.

In fact, the Traveling Freemasons, Builders, or Operative Ma-
sons of the Middle Ages, who were the real predecessors of the
Speculative Masons of the 1 8th century, did not, so far as we can
learn from their remains, practice any of the symbolism of Pythag-
oras. Their symbols, such as the vesica piscis, the cross, the

368

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

rose, or certain mathematical figures, were derived either from the
legends of the church or from the principles of geometry applied to
the art of building. These skillful architects who, in the dark ages,
when few men could read or write, erected edifices surpassing the
works of ancient Greece or Rome, and which have never been
equalled by modern builders, were wonderful in their peculiar skill,
but were wholly ignorant of metaphysics or philosophy, and bor-
rowed nothing from Pythagoras.

Between the period of the Revival and the adoption of the Pres-
tonian system, in 1772, the lectures of Freemasonry underwent at
least seven revisions. In each of these, the fabricators of which
were such cultivated scholars as Dr. Desaguliers, Martin Clare, a
President of the Royal Society, Thomas Dunckerley, a man of con-
siderable literary attainments, and others of like character, there
was a gradual increment of Pythagorean symbols. Among these,
one of the most noted is the forty-seventh proposition of Euclid,
which is said to have been discovered by Pythagoras, and which
the introducer of it into the Masonic system, in his explanation of
the symbol, claims the sage to have been “ an ancient brother.”

For some time after the Revival, the symbols of Pythagoras,
growing into gradual use among the Craft, were referred to simply
as an evidence of the great similarity which existed between the two
systems — a theory which, so far as it respects modern Speculative
Masonry, may be accepted with but little hesitation.

The most liberal belief on this subject was that the two systems
were nearly allied, but, except in the modified statement of Ander-
son, already quoted from his Defense of Masonry, there was no claim
in the years immediately succeeding the Revival that the one was in
direct descent from the other.

In none of the speeches, lectures, or essays of the early part of
the last century, which have been preserved, is there any allusion to
this as a received theory of the Craft.

Drake, in his speech before the Grand Lodge of York, delivered
in 1 726, does, indeed, speak of Pythagoras, not as the founder of
Masonry, but only in connection with Euclid and Archimedes as
great proficients in Geometry, whose works have been the basis
“ on which the learned have built at different times so many noble
superstructures.” And of Geometry, he calls it “that noble and
useful science which must have begun and goes hand-in-hand with

\

THE PYTHAGOREANS AND FREEMASONRY 369

Masonry,” an assertion which, to use the old chorus of the Masons,
“ nobody will deny.”

But to say that Geometry is closely connected with Operative
Masonry, and that Pythagoras was a great geometrician, is very dif-
ferent from saying that he was a Mason and propagated Masonry in
Europe.

Martin Clare, in his lecture on the Advantages E 7 ijoycd by the
Fraternity, whose date is 1735, does not even mention the name of
Pythagoras, although, in one passage at least, when referring to
“those great and worthy spirits with whom we are intimately re-
lated,” he had a fair opportunity to refer to that illustrious sage.

In a Discotirse Upon Masonry, delivered before a Lodge of Eng-
land in 1 742, now lying before me, in which the origin of the Order
is fully discussed, there is not one word of reference to Pythagoras.

The same silence is preserved in a Lecture on the Connection Be-
tween Freemasonry and Religion, by the Rev. C. Brockwell, pub-
lished in 1 747.

But after the middle of the century the frequent references in
the lectures to the Pythagorean symbols, and especially to that im-
portant one, in its Masonic as well as its geometrical value, the
forty-seventh proposition, began to lead the members of the society
to give to Pythagoras the credit of a relationship to the order to
which historically he had no claim.

Thus, in A Search After Truth, delivered in the Lodge in 1752,
the author says that “ Solon, Plato, and Pythagoras, and from them
the Grecian literati in general, in a great measure, were obliged for
their learning to Masonry and the labors of some of our ancient
brethren.”

And then, when this notion of the Pythagorean origin of Freema-
sonry began to take root in the minds of the Craft, it was more
firmly established by the appearance in 1753, in the Gentleman’s
Magazine, of that spurious document already quoted, in which, by a
“ pious fraud,” the fabricator of it sought to give the form of an his-
torical record to the statement that Pythagoras, learning his Masonry
of the Eastern Magi, had brought it to Italy, and established a
Lodge at Crotona, whence the institution was propagated through-
out Europe, and from France into England.

As to this statement in the Leland MS., it may be sufficient
to say that the sect of Pythagoras did not subsist longer than to the
24

37 °

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

end of the reign of Alexander the Great. So far from disseminat-
ing its Lodges or schools after the Christian era, we may cite the
authority of the learned Dacier, who says that “in after ages there
were here and there some disciples of Pythagoras, but these were only
private persons who never established any society, nor had the Py-
thagoreans any longer a public school.”

And so the result of this investigation into the theory of the
Pythagorean origin of Freemasonry may be briefly epitomized thus :

The mediaeval Freemasons never entertained any such theory,
nor in their architectural labors did they adopt any of his symbols.

The writer of the Cooke MS., in 1490, having at hand Higden’s
Polychronicon , in Trevisa’s translation, a new edition of which had just
been printed by Caxton, incorporated into the Legend of the Craft
some of the historical statements (such as they were) of the Monk
of Chester, but they were extraneous to and formed no part of the
original Legend. Therefore, in all the subsequent Old Records
these interpolations were rejected and the Legend of the Craft, as
accepted by the writers of the manuscripts which succeeded that of
the Cooke codex, from 1550 to 1701, contained nb mention of
Pythagoras.

Upon the Revival, in 1717, which was really the beginning of
genuine Speculative Masonry, the scholars who fabricated the
scheme, finding the symbolic teaching of Pythagoras very apposite,
adopted some of its symbols, especially those relating to numbers in
the new Speculative system which they were forming.

By the continued additions of subsequent ritualists these sym-
bols were greatly increased, so th'at the name and the philosophy
of Pythagoras became familiar to the Craft, and finally, in 1753, a
forged document was published which claimed him as the founder
and propagator of Masonry.

In later days this theory has continued to be maintained by a
few writers, and the received rituals of the Order require it as a part
of the orthodox Masonic creed, that Pythagoras was a Mason and
an ancient brother and patron of the Order.

Neither early Masonic tradition nor any historical records exist
which support such a belief.

CHAPTER XXXVIII

FREEMASONRY AND THE GNOSTICS

HE hypothesis which seeks to trace a connection
between Gnosticism and Freemasonry, and per-
haps even an origin of the latter from the former,
has been repeatedly advanced, and is therefore
worthy of consideration.

The latest instance is in a work of Mr. C. W.
King, published in 1864, under the title of The
Gnostics and their Remains , Ancient and Mediceval.

Mr. King is not a Freemason, and, like all the writers non-Ma-
sonic, such as Barnell, Robison, De Quincey, and a host of others,
who have attempted to discuss the history and character of Free-
masonry, he has shown a vast amount of ignorance. In fact, these
self-constituted critics, when treating of subjects with which they are
not and can not be familiar, remind one of the busybodies of Plautus,
of whom he has said that, while pretending to know everything, they
in fact know nothing — “ Qui omnia se simulant seise nec quicquam
sciunt .”

Very justly has Mr. Hughan called this work of King’s, so far
as its Masonic theories are concerned, one of an “ unmasonic and un-
historic character.”

But King, it must be admitted, was not the first writer who
sought to trace Freemasonry to a Gnostic origin.

In a pamphlet published in 1 725, a copy of which has been pre-
served in the Bodleian Library, among the manuscripts of Dr. Raw-
linson, and which bears the title of Two Letters to a Friend. The
First concerning the Society of Free-Masons. The Second, giving
an Account of the Most Ancient Order of Gormogons, etc., we find,
in the first letter, on the Freemasons, the following passage:

“ But now, Sir, to draw towards a conclusion ; and to give my
opinion seriously, concerning these prodigious Virtuosi ; — My belief
is, that if they fall under any denomination at all, or belong to any

371

372

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

sect of men, which has hitherto appeared in the world, they may be
ranked among the Gnostics, who took their original from Simon
Magus ; these were a set of men, which ridiculed not only Christian-
ity, but even rational morality ; teaching that they should be saved
by their capacious knowledge and understanding of no mortal man
could tell what. They babbled of an amazing intelligence they
had, from nobody knows whence. They amused and puzzled the
hair-brained, unwary crowd with superstitious interpretations of ex-
travagant talismanic characters and abstruse significations of uncom-
mon Cabalistic words ; which exactly agrees with the proceedings
of our modern Freemasons.”

Although the intrinsic value of this pamphlet was not such as to
have preserved it from the literary tomb which would have con-
signed it to oblivion, had not the zeal of an antiquary preserved a
single copy as a relic, yet the notion of some relation of Freema-
sonry to Gnosticism was not in later years altogether abandoned.

Hutchinson says that “under our present profession of Masonry,
we allege our morality was originally deduced from the school of
Pythagoras, and that the Basilidian system of religion furnished us
with some tenets, principles, and hieroglyphics.” 1 Basilides, the
founder of the sect which bears his name, was the most eminent of
the Egyptian Gnostics.

About the time of the fabrication of the High Degrees on the
continent of Europe, a variety of opinions of the origin of Masonry
— many of them absurd — sprang up among Masonic scholars.
Among these theorists, there were not a few who traced the Order
to the early Christians, because they found it, as they supposed,
among the Gnostics, and especially its most important sect, the
Basilidians.

Some German and French writers have also maintained the hy-
pothesis of a connection, more or less intimate, between the Gnos-
tics and the Masons.

I do not know that any German writer has positively asserted
the existence of this connection. But the doctrine has, at times,
been alluded to without any absolute disclaimer of a belief in its
truth.

Thus Carl Michaeler, the author of a Treahce on the Phoenician

1 “ Spirit of Masonry,” lect. x., p. 106.

FREEMASONRY AND THE GNOSTICS

373

Mysteries , has written some observations on the subject in an arti-
cle published by him in 1784, in the Vienna Jotirnale fur Frei -
viaurer, on the analogy between the Christianity of the early times
and Freemasonry. In this essay he adverts to the theory of the
Gnostic origin of Freemasonry. He is, however, very guarded in
his deductions, and says conditionally that, if there is any connection
between the two, it must be traced to the Gnosticism of Clement of
Alexandria, and on which simply as a school of philosophy and his-
tory it may have been founded, while the differences between the
two now existing must be attributed to changes of human concep-
tion in the intervening centuries.

But, in fact, the Gnosticism of Clement was something entirely
different from that of Basilides, to whom Hutchinson and King at-
tribute the origin of our symbols, and whom Clement vigorously op-
posed in his works. It was what he himself calls it, “a true gnosis
or Christian philosophy on the basis of faith.” It was that higher
knowledge, or more perfect state of Christian faith, to which St.
Paul is supposed to allude when he says, in his First Epistle to the
Corinthians, that he made known to those who were perfect a
higher wisdom.

Reghellini speaks more positively, and says that the symbols and
doctrines of the Ophites, who were a Gnostic sect, passed over into
Europe, having been adapted by the Crusaders, the Rosicrucians, and
the Templars, and finally reached the Masons. 1

Finally, I may refer to the Leland MS., the author of which dis-
tinctly brought this doctrine to the public view, by asserting that:
the Masons were acquainted with the “facultye of Abrac,” by
which expression he alludes to the most prominent and distinctive
of the Gnostic symbols. That the fabricator of this spurious docu-
ment should thus have intimated the existence of a connection be-
tween Gnosticism and Freemasonry would lead us to infer that the
idea of such a connection was not wholly unfamiliar to the Masonic
mind at that period — an inference which will be strengthened by the
passage already quoted from the pamphlet in the Rawlinson collec-
tion, which was published about a quarter of a century before.

But before we can enter into a proper discussion of this im-

1 “ Magonnerie consideries comme re Resultat des Relig. Egypt. Julve et Chre*
tienne,” tom. i. , p. 2Qi.

374

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

portant question, it will be expedient for the sake of the general
reader that something should be said of the Gnostics and of the
philosophical and religious system which they professed.

I propose, therefore, very briefly to reply to the questions, What
is Gnosticism, and Who were the Gnostics ?

Scarcely had the light of Christianity dawned upon the world
before a multitude of heresies sprang up to disturb the new religion.
Among these Gnosticism holds the most important position. The
title of the sect is derived from the Greek word yvucng (gnosis),
“ wisdom or knowledge,” and was adopted in a spirit of ostentation,
to intimate that the disciples of the sect were in possession of a
higher degree of spiritual wisdom than was attainable by those who
had not been initiated into their mysteries.

At so early a period did the heresy of Gnosticism arise in the
Christian Church, that we find the Apostle Paul warning the con-
verts to the new faith of the innovations on the pure doctrine of
Christ, and telling his disciple Timothy to avoid “profane and vain
babblings, and oppositions of science, falsely so called.” The trans-
lators of the authorized version have so rendered the passage. But.
in view of the greater light that has since their day been thrown
upon the religious history and spirit of the apostolical age, and the
real nature of the Gnostic element which disturbed it, we may bet-
ter preserve the true sense of the original Greek by rendering it
“oppositions of the false gnosis.”

There were then two kinds of Gnosis , or Gnosticism — the true
and the false, a distinction which St. Paul himself makes in a pas-
sage in his Epistle to the Corinthians, in which he speaks of the
wisdom which he communicated to the perfect, in contradistinction
to the wisdom of the world.

Of this true Gnosticism, Clement declared himself to be a fol-
lower. With it and Freemasonry there can be no connection, ex-
cept that modified one admitted by Michaeler, which relates only to
the investigation of philosophical and historical truth.

The false Gnosis to which the Apostle refers is the Gnosticism
which is the subject of our present inquiry.

When John the Baptist was preaching in the Wilderness, and for
some time before, there were many old philosophical and religious
systems which, emanating from the East, all partook of the mystical
character peculiar to the Oriental mind. These various systems were

FREEMASONRY AND THE GNOSTICS

375

then, in consequence of the increased communication of different
nations which followed the conquests of Alexander of Macedon,
beginning to approximate each other. The disciples of Plato were
acquiring some of the doctrines of the Eastern Magi, and these in
turn were becoming more or less imbued with the philosophy of
Greece. The traditions of India, Persia, Egypt, Chaldea, Judea,
Greece, and Rome were commingling in one mass, and forming out
of the conglomeration a mystical philosophy and religion which par-
took of the elements of all the ingredients out of which it was com-
posed, and yet contained within its bosom a mysticism which was
peculiar to itself.

This new system was Gnosticism, which derived its leading doc-
trines from Plato, from the Zend-Avesta, the Cabala, the Vedas,
and the hieroglyphs of Egypt. It taught as articles of faith the
existence of a Supreme Being, invisible, inaccessible, and incompre-
hensible, who was the creator of a spiritual world consisting of
divine intelligences called (eons , emanating from him, and of matter
which was eternal, the source of evil and the antagonist of the Su-
preme Being.

One of these (eons, the lowest of all, called the Demiurge,
created the world out of matter, which, though eternal, was inert
and formless.

The Supreme Father, or First Principle of all things, had dwelt
from all eternity in a pleroma, or fullness of inaccessible light, and
hence he was called Bythos, or the Abyss, to denote the unfathomable
nature of his perfections. “ This Being,” says Dr. Burton, in his
able exposition of the Gnostic system, in the Bampton Lectures ,
“ by an operation purely mental, or by acting upon himself, pro-
duced two other beings of different sexes, from whom by a series of
descents, more or less numerous according to different schemes, sev-
eral pairs of beings were formed, who were called crons, from the
periods of their existence before time was, or emanations from the
mode of their production. These successive (eons or emanations
appear to have been inferior each to the preceding; and their exist-
ence was indispensable to the Gnostic scheme, that they might ac-
count for the creation of the world, without making God the author
of evil. These (eons lived through countless ages with their first
Father. But the system of emanations seems to have resembled
that of concentric circles, and they gradually deteriorated as they

376

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

approached nearer and nearer to the extremity of the pleroma. Be-
yond this pleroma was matter, inert and powerless, though co-eternal
with the Supreme God, and like him without beginning. At length
one of the ceons (the Demiurge) passed the limits of the pleroma ,
and, meeting with matter, created the world after the form and
model of an ideal world, which existed in the pleroma or the mind
of the Supreme God.”

It is not necessary to enter into a minute recapitulation of the
other points of doctrine which were evolved out of these three. It
is sufficient to say that the old Gnosticism was not an original sys-
tem, but was really a cosmogony, a religion and a philosophy which
was made up of portions of the older Grecian and Oriental systems,
including the Platonism of the Greeks, the Parsism of the Persians,
and the Cabala of the Jews.

The advent of Christianity found this old Gnosticism prevailing
in Asia and in Egypt. Some of its disciples became converts to the
new religion, but brought with them into its fold many of the mys-
tical views of their Gnostic philosophy and sought to apply them to
the pure and simple doctrines of the Gospel.

Thus it happened that the name of Gnosticism was applied to a
great variety of schools, differing from each other in their interpre-
tations of the Christian faith, and yet having one common principle
of unity — that they placed themselves in opposition to the concep-
tions of Christianity as it was generally received by its disciples.
And this was because they deemed it insufficient to afford any germs
of absolute truth, and therefore they claimed for themselves the
possession of an amount of knowledge higher than that of ordinary
believers.

“They seldom pretended,” says the Rev. Dr. Wing, “to demon-
strate the principles on which their systems were founded by histor-
ical evidence or logical reasonings, since they rather boasted that
these were discovered by the intuitional powers of more highly en-
dowed minds, and that the materials thus obtained, whether through
faith or divine revelation, were then worked up into a scientific form,
according to each one’s natural power and culture. Their aim
was to construct, not merely a theory of redemption, but of tb<?
universe — a cosmogony. No subject was beyond their investiga
tions. Whatever God could reveal to the finite intellect they looked
upon as within their range. What to others seemed only specula-

FREEMASONRY AND THE GNOSTICS

377

tive ideas, were by them hypostatized or personified into real beings
or historical facts. It was in this way that they constructed systems
of speculation on subjects entirely beyond the range of human
knowledge, which startle us by their boldness and their apparent
consciousness of reality.” 1

Such was the Gnosticism whose various sects intruded with their
mystical notions and their allegorical interpretations into the Church,
before Christianity had been well established. Although denounced
by St. Paul as “ vain babblers,” they increased in strength and gave
rise to many heresies which lasted until the 4th century.

The most important of these sects, and the one from which the
moderns have derived most of their views of what Christian Gnosti-
cism is, was established in the 2d century by Basilides, the chief of
the Egyptian Gnostics.

The doctrine of Basilides and the Basilidians was a further de-
velopment of the original Gnostic system. It was more particularly
distinguished by its adoption from Pythagoras of the doctrine of
numbers and its use and interpretation of the word Abraxas — that
word the meaning of which, according to the Leland MS., so greatly
puzzled the learned Mr. Locke.

In the system of Basilides the Supreme God was incomprehen-
sible, non-existent, and ineffable. Unfolded from his perfection were
seven attributes or personified powers, namely, Mind ', Reason ,
Thought, Wisdom, Power, Holiness, and Peace. Seven was a sacred
number, and these seven powers referred to the seven days of the
week. Basilides also supposed that there were seven similar beings
in every stage or region of the spiritual world, and that these regions
were three hundred and sixty-five in number, thus corresponding to
the days in the solar year. These three hundred and sixty-five re-
gions were so many heavenly mansions between the earth and the
empyrean, and he supposed the existence of an equal number of
angels. The number three hundred and sixty-five was in the Basili-
dian system one of sacred import. Hence he fabricated the word
abraxas, because the Greek letters of which It is composed
have the numerical value, when added together, of exactly three
hundred and sixty-five. The learned German theologian, Bellerman,

1 Strong and McClintock’s “Cyclopaedia of Biblical, Theological, and Ecclesiastical
literature.”

378

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

thinks that he has found the derivation in the Captu, or old Egyp-
tian language, where the words abrah , signifying “word,” and
sadsch , signifying “blessed,” “holy,” or “adorable,” and therefore
abrahsadsch , Hellenized into Abraxas , would denote “the holy,
blessed, or adorable Word,” thus approximating to the spirit of the
Jewish Cabalists in their similar use of a Holy Name.

Whether the word was thus derived or was invented by Basilides
on account of the numerical value of its letters, is uncertain. He,
however, applied it in his system as the name of the Supreme God.

This word Abraxas, like the Tetragraminaton of the Jews,
became one of great importance to the sect of Basilidians. Their
reverence for it gave origin to what are called “abraxas gems.”

These are gems, plates, or tablets of metal, which have been dis-
covered principally in Egypt, but have also been found in France
and Spain. They are inscribed with the word Abraxas and an im-
age supposed to designate the Basilidian god. Some of them have
on them Jewish words, such as Jehovah or Adonai, and others con-
tain Persian, Egyptian, or Grecian symbols.

Montfaucon, who has treated the subject of “ abraxas gems ” elab-
orately, divides them into seven classes, i. Those inscribed with
the head of a cock as a symbol of the sun. 2. Those having the
head of a lion, to denote the heat of the sun, and the word Mithras.
3. Those having the image of the Egyptian god Serapis. 4. Those
having the images of sphinxes, apes, and other animals. 5. Those
having human figures with the words lao, Sabaoth, Adonai, etc .
6. Those having inscriptions without figures. 7. Those having
monstrous forms.

From these gems we have derived our knowledge of the Gnostic
or Basilidian symbols, which are said to have furnished ideas to the
builders of the Middle Ages in their decorative art, and which Mr.
King and some other writers have supposed to have been transmitted
to the Freemasons.

The principal of these Gnostic symbols is that of the Supreme
God, Abraxas. This is represented as a human figure with the head
of a cock, the legs being two serpents. He brandishes a sword in
one hand (sometimes a whip) and a shield in the other.

The serpent is also a very common symbol, having sometimes
the head of a cock and sometimes that of a lion or of a hawk.

Other symbols, known to be of a purely Gnostic or rather Basi-

FREEMASONRY AND THE GNOSTICS

379

Iidian origin, from the accompanying inscription, Abraxas , or lao, or
both, are Horns , or the Sun, seated on a lotus flower, which is sup-
ported by a double lamp, composed of two phallic images conjoined
at their bases ; the dog ; the raven ; the tancross surmounted by a
human head; the Egyptian god, Anubis ; and Father Nilus , in a
bending posture and holding in his hand the double, phallic lamp
of Horns. This last symbol is curious because the word Heilos ,
like Mithras , which is also a Gnostic symbol, and Abraxas , ex-
presses, in the value of the Greek letters of which it is composed, the
number three hundred and sixty-five.

All these symbols, it will be seen, make some reference to the
sun, either as the representative of the Supreme God or as the source
of light, and it might lead to the supposition that in the later Gnos-
ticism, as in the Mithraic Mysteries, there was an allusion to sun-
worship, which was one of the earliest and most extensively diffused
of the primitive religions. Evidently in both the Gnostic and the
Mithraic symbolism the sun plays a very important part.

While the architects or builders of the Middle Ages may have
borrowed, and probably did borrow, some suggestions from the
Gnostics in carrying out the symbolism of their art, it is not prob-
able, from their ecclesiastical organization and their religious charac-
ter, that they would be more than mere suggestions. Certainly they
would not have been accepted by these orthodox Christians with
anything of their real Gnostic interpretation.

We may apply to the use of Gnostic symbols by the mediaeval
architects the remarks made by Mr. Paley on the subject of the
adoption of certain Pagan symbols by the same builders. Their
Gnostic origin was a mere accident. They were employed not as
the symbolism of any Gnostic doctrine, but in the spirit of Christi-
anity, and “ the Church, in perfecting their development, stamped
them with a purer and sublimer character.” 1

On a comparison of these Gnostic symbols with those of
Ancient Craft or Speculative Masonry, I fail to find any reason to
subscribe to the opinion of Hutchinson, that “ the Basilidian system
of religion furnished Freemasonry with some tenets, principles, and
hieroglyphics.” As Freemasons we will have to repudiate the
“tenets and principles” of the sect which was condemned by

lu Manual of Gothic Architecture,” p. 4.

380

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Clement and by Irenseus; and as to its “ hieroglyphics,” by which
is meant its symbols, we will look in vain for their counterpart or
any approximation to them in the system of Speculative Masonry.

That the Masons at a very early period exhibited a tendency to
the doctrine of sacred numbers, which has since been largely devel-
oped in the Masonry of the modern High Degrees, is true, but this
symbolism was derived directly from the teachings of Pythagoras,
with which the founders of the primitive rituals were familiar.

That the sun and the moon are briefly referred to in our rituals
and may be deemed in some sort Masonic symbols, is also true, but
the use made of this symbolism, and the interpretation of it, very
clearly prove that it has not been derived from a Gnostic source.

The doctrine of the metempsychosis, which was taught by the
Basilidians, is another marked point which would widely separate
Freemasonry from Gnosticism, the dogma of the resurrection being
almost the foundation-stone on which the whole religious philosophy
of the former is erected.

Mr. King, in his work on the Gnostics, to which allusion has
already been made, seeks to trace the connection between Free-
masonry and Gnosticism through a line of argument which only
goes to prove his absolute and perhaps his pardonable ignorance of
Masonic history. It requires a careful research, which must be
stimulated by a connection with the Order, to enable a scholar to
avoid the errors into which he has fallen.

“ The foregoing considerations,” he says, “ seem to afford a
rational explanation of the manner in which the genuine Gnostic
symbols (whether still retaining any mystic meaning or kept as
mere lifeless forms, let the Order declare) have come down to these
times, still paraded as things holy and of deep significance. Treas-
ured up amongst the dark sectaries of the Lebanon and the Softs of
Persia, communicated to the Templars, and transmitted to their
heirs, the Brethren of the Rosy Cross, they have kept up an un-
broken existence.” 1

In the line of history which Mr. King has here pursued, he has
presented a mere jumble of non-consecutive events which it would
be impossible to disentangle. He has evidently confounded the old
Rosicrucians with the more modern Rose Croix, while the only

2<< The Gnostics and their Remains,” p. 191.

FREEMASONRY AND THE GNOSTICS

38i

connection between the two is to be found in the apparent similarity
of name. If he meant the former, he has failed to show a relation
between them and the Freemasons ; if the latter, he was wholly ig
norant that there is not a Gnostic symbol in their system, which is
wholly constructed out of an ecclesiastical symbolism. Such incon-
sequential assertions need no refutation.

Finally he says that “ Thus those symbols, in their origin, em-
bodying the highest mysteries of Indian theosophy, afterward eagerly
embraced by the subtle genius of the Alexandrian Greeks, and com-
bined by them with the hidden wisdom of Egypt, in whose captivat-
ing and profound doctrines the few bright spirits of the Middle Ages
sought a refuge from the childish fables then constituting ortho-
doxy, engendered by monkery upon the primal Buddhistic stock ;
these sacred symbols exist even now, but serve merely for the in-
signia of what at best is but a charitable, probably nothing more in
its present form than a convivial institution.”

These last lines indicate the precise amount of knowledge that
he possesses of the character and the design of Freemasonry. It is
to be regretted that he had not sought to explain the singular
anomaly that “ what at best is but a charitable, and probably noth-
ing more than a convivial institution ” has been made the depository
of the symbols of an abstruse theosophy. Benevolent societies
and convivial clubs do not, as a rule, meddle with matters of such
high import.

But to this uncritical essay there need be no reply. When any-
one shall distinctly point out and enumerate the Gnostic symbols that
made a part of the pure and simple symbolism of the primitive
Speculative Masons, it will be time enough to seek the way in which
they came there.

For the present we need not undergo the needless labor of
searching for that which we are sure can not be found.

CHAPTER XXXIX

THE SOCINIANS AND FREEMASONRY

HILE some of the adversaries of Freemasonry
have pretended that its origin is to be found in
the efforts of the Jesuits, who sought to effect
certain religious and political objects through
the influence of such a society, one, at least, has
endeavored to trace its first rise to the Socin-
ians, who sprang up as a religious sect in Italy
about the middle of the 16th century.

This hypothesis is of so unhistorical a character that it merits a
passing notice in the legendary history of the Institution.

It was first promulgated (and I do not know that it has ever
since been repeated) by the Abbe Le Franc, the Superior of the
House of the Eudists, at Caen, in a book published by him in the
year 1791, under the title of Le Voile levl pour les curieux, ou le
secret des Revolutions, rev eld a I'aide de la Franc-Magonnerie ; i.e.,
“The Veil lifted for the Inquisitive, or the Secret of Revolutions
revealed by the assistance of Freemasonry.” This work was deemed
of so much importance that it was translated in the following year
into Italian.

In this essay Le Franc, as a loyal Catholic ecclesiastic, hating
both the Freemasons and the Socinians, readily seized the idea, or
at all events advanced it, that the former was derived from the lat-
ter, whose origin he assigns to the year 1546.

He recapitulates, only to deny, all the other theories that have
been advanced on the subject, such as that the origin of the Institu-
tion is to be sought in the fraternities of Operative Masons of
the Middle Ages, or in the assembly held at York under the auspices
of King Athelstane, or in the builders of King Solomon’s Temple,
or in the Ancient Mysteries of Egypt. Each of these hypotheses he
refuses to admit as true.

On the contrary, he says the Order can not be traced beyond the

382

THE S0CIN1ANS AND FREEMASONRY

383

famous meeting of Socinians, which was held at the City of Vicenza,
in Italy, in the year 1546, by Laelius Socinus, Ochirius, Gentilis,
and others, who there and then established the sect which repudiated
the doctrine of the Trinity, and whose successors, with some modifi-
cation of tenets, still exist under the name of Unitarians, or Liberal
Christians.

But it is to Faustus Socinus, the nephew of Laelius, he asserts,
that the real foundation of Freemasonry as a secret and symbolical
society is to be ascribed. This “ artful and indefatigable sectary,’’
as he calls him, having beheld the burning of Servetus at Geneva by
Calvin, for maintaining only a part of the system that he advocated,
and finding that both Catholics and Protestants were equally hostile
to his views, is said to have concealed it under symbols and mys-
terious ceremonies, accompanied by oaths of secrecy, in order that,
while it was publicly taught to the people in countries where it was
tolerated, it might be gradually and safely insinuated into other
states, where an open confession of it would probably lead its preach-
ers to the stake.

The propagation of this system, he further says, was veiled under
the enigmatical allegory of building a temple whose extent, in the
very words of Freemasonry, was to be “ in length from the east to
the west, and in breadth from north to south.” The professors of it
were therefore furnished, so as to carry out the allegory, with the
various implements used in building, such as the square, the com-
passes, the level, and the plumb. And here it is that the Abb6 Le
Franc has found the first form and beginning of the Masonic Insti-
tution as it existed at the time of his writing.

I have said that, so far as I have been able to learn, Le Franc is
the sole author or inventor of this hypothesis. Reghellini attributes
it to three distinct writers, the author of the Voile levd , Le Franc,
and the Abbe Barruel. But in fact the first and second of these
are identical, and Barruel has not made any allusion to it in his His-
tory of Jacobinism. He attributes the origin of Freemasonry to the
Manicheans, and makes a very elaborate and learned collation of the
usages and ceremonies of the two, to show how much the one has
taken from the other.

Reghellini, in commenting on this theory of the Abbd Le Franc,
says that all that is true in it is that there was at the same period,
about the middle of the 16th century, a learned society of philoso

384

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

phers and literary men at Vicenza, who held conferences on the
theological questions which at that time divided Europe, and par-
ticularly Germany.

The members of this celebrated academy, he says, looked upon
all these questions and difficulties concerning the mysteries of the
Christian religion as points of doctrine which pertained simply to
the philosophy of the ancient Egyptians, Greeks, and Christians,
and had no relation whatever to the dogmas of faith. 1

Considering that out of these meetings of the philosophers at
Vicenza issued a religious sect, whose views present a very impor-
tant modification of the orthodox creeds, we may well suppose that
Reghellini is as much in error in his commentary as Le Franc has
been in his text.

The society which met at Vicenza and at Venice, though it
sought to conceal its new and heterodox doctrines under a veil of
secrecy, soon became exposed to the observation of the Papal court,
through whose influence the members were expelled from the V ene-
tian republic, some of them seeking safety in Germany, but most of
them in Poland, where their doctrines were not only tolerated, but
in time became popular. In consequence, flourishing congregations
were established at Cracow, Lublin, and various other places in
Poland and in Lithuania.

Lselius Socinus had, soon after the immigration of his followers
into Poland, retired to Zurich, in Switzerland, where he died. He
was succeeded by his nephew, Faustus Socinus, who greatly modified
the doctrines of his uncle, and may be considered as the real founder
of the Socinian sect of Christians.

Now, authentic history furnishes us with these few simple facts.

In the 1 6 th century secret societies were by no means uncom-
mon in various countries of Europe. In Italy especially many were
to be found. Some of these coteries were established for the culti-
vation of philosophical studies, some for the pursuit of alchemy,
some for theological discussions, and many were of a mere social
character. In all of them, however, there was an exclusiveness
which shut out the vulgar, the illiterate, or the profane.

Thus there was founded at Florence a club which called itself
the “ Societa della Cucchiara,” or the Society of the Trowel. The

Reghellini, “ La Ma^onnerie,’’ tom. iii., p. 60.

THE SOCINIANS AND FREEMASONRY

385

name and the symbols it used, which were the trowel, the hammer,
the square, and the level, have led both Lenning and Reghellini to
suppose that it was a Masonic association. But the account given
of it by Vasari, in his Lives of the Painters and Sculptors , shows
that it was merely a social club of Florentine artists, and that it de-
rived its existence and its name from the accidental circumstance
that certain painters and sculptors dining together once upon a time,
in a certain garden, discovered, not far from their table, a heap of
mortar in which a trowel was sticking. In an exuberance of spirits
they began to throw the mortar on each other, and to call for the
trowel to scrape it off. In the same sportive humor they then and
there resolved to form an association which should annually there-
after dine together, and to commemorate the ludicrous event which
had given rise to their association, they called it the Society of the
Trowel, and adopted as emblems certain tools connected with the
mystery of bricklaying.

Every city in Italy in which science was cultivated had its
academy, many of which, like the Platonic Academy, established at
Florence in 1540, held their sessions in secret, and admitted none
but members to participate in their mystical studies. In Germany
the secret societies of the Alchemists were abundant. These spread
also into France and England. To borrow the language of a mod-
ern writer, mystical interpretation ran riot, everything was symbol-
ized. and metaphors were elaborated into allegories. 1 2

It is a matter of historical record that in 1546 there was a soci-
ety of this kind, consisting of about forty persons, eminent for their
learning, who, in the words of Mosheim,* “held secret assemblies,
at different times, in the territory of V enice, and particularly at
Vicenza, in which they deliberated concerning a general reforma-
tion of the received systems of religion, and, in a more especial
manner, undertook to refute the peculiar doctrines that were after-
wards publicly rejected by the Socinians.”

Mosheim, who was rigorous in the application of the canons of
criticism to all historical questions that came under his review, says,
in a note appended to this passage : “ Many circumstances and rela-
tions sufficiently prove that immediately after the reformation had

1 Vaughan, “ Hours with the Mystics,” I., p. 119.

2 “ Kcclesiast. Hist. XVI. Cent.,” Part III., chap. iv.

25

3 86

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

taken place in Germany, secret assemblies were held and measures
proposed in several provinces that were still under the jurisdiction
of Rome, with a view to combat the errors and superstitions of the
times”

Such was the character of the secret society at Vicenza to which
Le Franc attributes the origin of Freemasonry. It was an assembly
of men of advanced thought, who were compelled to hold their
meetings in secret, because the intolerance of the church and the
jealous caution of the state forbade the free and open discussion of
opinions which militated against the common sentiments of the
period.

The further attempt to connect the doctrines of Socinus with
those of Freemasonry, because, when speaking of the new religion
which he was laboring to establish, he compared it to the building
of a new temple, in which his disciples were to be diligent workers,
is futile. The use of such expressions is to be attributed merely to
a metaphorical and allegorical spirit by no means uncommon in
writers of every age. The same metaphor is repeatedly employed
by St. Paul in his various Epistles, and it is not improbable that
from him Socinus borrowed the idea.

There is, therefore, as I conceive, no historical evidence what-
ever to support the theory that Faustus Socinus and the Socinians
were the founders of Freemasonry. At the very time when he
was establishing the sect whose distinctive feature was its denial of
the dogma of the Trinity, the manuscript constitutions of the
Masons were beginning their Legend of the Craft, with an in-
vocation to “the Might of the Father, the Wisdom of the Glorious
Son, and the Goodness of the Holy Ghost, three Persons and one
God.”

The idea of any such connection between two institutions
whose doctrines were so antagonistic was the dream — or rather tiie
malicious invention — of Le Franc, and has in subsequent times
received the amount of credit to which it is entitled.

CHAPTER XL

FREEMASONRY AND THE ESSENES

IAWRIE — or I should rather say Brewster — was
the first to discover a connection between the
Freemasons and the Jewish sect of the Essenes,
a doctrine which is announced in his History of
Freemasonry. He does not indeed trace the
origin of the Masonic Institution to the Essenes,
but only makes them the successors of the Ma-
sons of the Temple, whose forms and tenets they transmitted to
Pythagoras and his school at Crotona, by whom the art was dis-
seminated throughout Europe.

Believing as he did in the theory that Freemasonry was first or-
ganized at the Temple of Solomon by a union of the Jewish work-
men with the association of Dionysian Artificers — a theory which
has already been discussed in a preceding chapter — the editor of
Lawrie’s History meets with a hiatus in the regular and uninter-
rupted progress of the Order which requires to be filled up. The
ingenious mode in which he accomplishes this task may be best ex-
plained in his own words :

“To these opinions it may be objected, that if the Fraternity of
Freemasons flourished during the reign of Solomon, it would have
existed in Judea in after ages, and attracted the notice of sacred or
profane historians. Whether or not this objection is well founded,
we shall not pretend to determine ; but if it can be shown that there
did exist, after the building of the temple, an association of men re-
sembling Freemasons, in the nature, ceremonies, and object of their
institution, the force of the objection will not only be taken away,
but additional strength will be communicated to the opinion which
we have been supporting. The association here alluded to is that
of the Essenes, whose origin and sentiments have occasioned much
discussion among ecclesiastical historians. They are all, however, of

387

388

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

one mind concerning the constitution and observances of this re
ligious order .” 1

The peace-making quality of “if” is here very apparent. “If it
can be shown ” that there is a chronological sequence from the build-
ers of the Temple to the Essenes, and that there is a resemblance
of both to the Freemasons in “ the nature, ceremonies, and object of
their institution,” the conclusion to which Brewster has arrived will
be better sustained than it would be if these premises are denied or
not proved.

The course of argument must therefore be directed to these
points.

In the first place we must inquire, who were the Essenes and
what was their history ? This subject has already been treated to
some extent in a previous portion of this work. But the integrity of
the present argument will require, and I trust excuse, the necessity
of a repetition.

The three sects into which the Jews were divided in the time of
Christ were the Pharisees, the Sadducees, and the Essenes. Of
these, while the Saviour makes repeated mention of the first two, he
never alludes in the remotest manner to the third. This singular
silence of Jesus has been explained by some imaginative Masonic
writers, such, for instance, as Clavel, by asserting that he was probably
an initiate of the sect. But scholars have been divided on this sub-
ject, some supposing that it is to be attributed to the fact (which,
however, has not been established) that the Essenes originated in
Egypt at a later period ; others that they were not an independent
sect, but only an order or subdivision of Pharisaism. However, in
connection with the present argument, the settlement of this ques-
tion is of no material importance.

The Essenes were an association of ascetic celibates whose num-
bers were therefore recruited from the children of the Jewish com-
munity in which they lived. These were carefully trained by proper
instructions for admission into the society. The admission into the
interior body of the society and to the possession of its mystical doc-
trine was only attained after a long probation through three stages
or degrees, the last of which made the aspirant a participant in the
full fellowship of the community.

1 Lawrie’s “ History of Freemasonry, ” p. 33.

FREEMASONRY AND THE ESSENES

389

The history of the Essenes has been so often written by ancient
and modern authors, from Philo and Josephus to Ginsburg, that an
inquirer can. be at no loss for a knowledge of the sect. The Ma-
sonic student will find the subject discussed in the author’s Encyclo-
pedia of Freemasonry , and the ordinary reader may be referred to
the able article in McClintock and Strong’s Cyclopedia of Biblical,
Theological, and Ecclesiastical Literature. I shall content myself,
in fairness to the theory, with quoting the brief but compendious
description given by the editor of Lawrie’s History. It is in the
main correct and sustained by other authorities, except a few deduc-
tions which must be attributed to the natural inclination of every
theorist to adapt facts to his hypothesis. A few interpolations will
be necessary to correct manifest errors.

“When a candidate was proposed for admission, the strictest
scrutiny was made into his character. If his life had been hitherto
exemplary, and if he appeared capable of curbing his passions and
regulating his conduct according to the virtuous though austere
maxims of their order, he was presented, at the expiration of his
novitiate, with a white garment, as an emblem of the regularity of his
conduct and the purity of his heart.”

It was not at the termination, but at the beginning of the noviti-
ate, that the white garment or robe was presented, and it was accom-
panied by the presentation of an apron and a spade.

“ A solemn oath was then administered to him that he would
never divulge the mysteries of the Order ; that he would make no
innovations on the doctrines of the society ; and that he would con-
tinue in that honorable course of piety and virtue which he had be-
gun to pursue.”

This is a mere abstract of the oath, which is given at length by
Josephus. It was not, however, administered until the candidate
had passed through all the degrees or stages, and was ready to be
admitted into full fellowship.

“ Like Freemasons, they instructed the young member in the
knowledge which they derived from their ancestors.”

He might have said, like all other sects, in which the instruction
of the young member is an imperative duty.

“ They admitted no women into their Order.”

Though this is intended by the editor to show a point of identity
with Freemasonry, it does no such thing. It is the common rule ol

39 °

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

all masculine associations. It distinguishes the Essenes from other
religious sects, but it by no means essentially likens them to the
Freemasons.

“ They had particular signs for recognizing each other, which
have a strong resemblance to those of Freemasons."

This is a mere assumption. That they had signs for mutual rec-
ognition is probable, because such has been in all ages the custom
of secret societies. We have classical authority that they were em-
ployed in the ancient Pagan Mysteries. But there is no authority
for saying that these signs of the Essenes bore any resemblance to
those of the Freemasons. The only allusion to this subject is in the
treatise of Philo Judaeus, De Vita Contcmplativa , where that au-
thor says that “ the Essenes meet together in an assembly and the
right hand is laid upon the part between the chin and the breast,
while the left hand hangs straight by the side.” But Philo does not
say that it was used as a sign of recognition, but rather speaks of it
as an attitude or posture assumed in their assemblies. Of the re-
semblance every Mason can judge for himself.

“They had colleges, or places of retirement, where they resorted
to practice their rites, and settle the affairs of the society ; and after
the performance of these duties, they assembled in a large hall, where
an entertainment was provided for them by the president, or master,
of the college, who allotted a certain quantity of provisions to every
individual.”

This was the common meal, not partaken on set occasions and
in a particular place, as the writer intimates, but every day, in their
usual habitation and at the close of daily labor.

“ They abolished all distinctions of rank ; and if preference was
ever given, it was given to piety, liberality, and virtue. Treasurers
were appointed in every town to supply the wants of indigent
strangers. The Essenes pretended to higher degrees of piety and
knowledge than the uneducated vulgar, and though their pretensions
were high, they were never questioned by their enemies. Austerity
of manners was one of the chief characteristics of the Essenian Fra-
ternity. They frequently assembled, however, in convivial parties,
and relieved for awhile the severity of those duties which they were
accustomed to perform.”

In concluding this description of an ascetic religious sect, the
writer of Lawrie’s History says that “ this remarkable coinci-

FREEMASONRY AND THE ESSENES

39 1

dence between the chief features of the Masonic and Essenian Fra-
ternities can be accounted for only by referring them to the same
origin.” Another, and, perhaps, a better reason to account for these
coincidences will be hereafter presented.

While admitting that there is a resemblance in some points of
the two institutions to each other, such as their secrecy, their classi-
fication into different degrees, although there is no evidence that the
Essenian initiation had any form except that of a mere passage from
a lower to a higher grade, and their cultivation of fraternal love,
which resemblances may be found in many other secret associations,
I fail to see the identity “in the nature, the object, and the external
forms of the two institutions ” which Brewster claims.

On the contrary, there is a total dissimilarity in each of these
points.

The nature of the Essenian institution was that of an ascetic
and a bigoted religious sect, and in so far has certainly no resem-
blance to Freemasonry.

The object of the Essenes was to preserve in its most rigid re-
quirements the observance of the Mosaic law ; that of Freemasonry
is to diffuse the tolerant principles of a universal religion, which
men of every sect and creed may approve.

As to the external form of the two institutions, what little we
know of those of the Essenes certainly does not exhibit any other
resemblance than that which is common to all secret associations,
whatever may be their nature and objects.

But the most fatal objection to the theory of a connection be-
tween them, which is maintained by the author of Lawrie’s History,
has been admitted with some candor by himself.

“There is one point, however,” he says, “which may, at first
sight, seem to militate against this supposition. The Essenes ap-
pear in no respects connected with architecture ; nor addicted to
those sciences and pursuits which are subsidiary to the art of
building.”

This objection, I say, is fatal to the theory which makes the Es-
senes the successors of the builders of Solomon’s Temple and the
forerunners of the Operative Masons of the Middle Ages, out of
whom sprang the Speculative Masons of the 1 8th century. Admit*
ting for a moment the reality of the organization of Masonry at the
building of the Temple in Jerusalem, any chain which unites that

392

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

body of builders with the Freemasonry of the present day must
show, in every link, the presence and the continuance of pursuits and
ideas connected with the operative art of building. Even the Spec-
ulative Masons of the present day have not disturbed that chain, be-
cause, though the fraternity is not now composed, necessarily, of
architects and builders, yet the ideas and pursuits of those profes-
sions are retained in the Speculative science, all of whose symbolism
is founded on the operative art.

The Essenes were not even Speculative Masons. Their symbol-
ism, if they had any, was not founded on nor had any reference to
the art of building. The apron which they presented to their novice
was intended to be used, according to their practice, in baptism
and in bathing ; and the spade had no symbolic meaning, but was
simply intended for practical purposes.

The defense made by the author of the History , that in modern
times there are “ many associations of Freemasons where no archi-
tects are members, and which have no connection with the art of
building,” hardly needs a reply. There never has been an associa-
tion of Freemasons, either Operative or Speculative, which did not
have a connection with the art of building, in the former case prac-
tically, in the latter symbolically.

It is absurd to suppose the interpolation between these two classes
of an institution which neither practically nor symbolically cultivated
the art on which the very existence of Freemasonry in either condi-
tion is based.

But another objection, equally as fatal to the theory which makes
the Essenes the uninterrupted successors of the Temple builders, is
to be found in the chronological sequence of the facts of history.
If this succession is interrupted by any interval, the chain which
connects the two institutions is broken, and the theory falls to the
ground.

The Temple of Solomon was finished about a thousand years
before the Christian era, and, according to the Masonic legendary
account, the builders who were engaged in its construction imme-
diately dispersed and traveled into foreign countries to propagate
the art which they had there acquired. This, though merely a legend,
is not at all improbable. It is very likely that the Tyrian workmen,
at least (and they constituted the larger number of those employed
in the building), returned to their homes after the tasks for which

FREEMASONRY AND THE ESSENES

393

they had been sent to Solomon, by the King of Tyre, had been ac-
complished. If there were any Jewish Masons at ail, who were not
mere laborers, it is not unreasonable to suppose that they would
seek employment elsewhere, in the art of building which they had
acquired from their Tyrian masters. This is a proper deduction
from the tradition, considered as such.

Who, then, were left to continue the due succession of the fra-
ternity ? Brewster, in Lawrie’s History, and Oliver, in his Antiq-
uities, affirm that it was the Essenes.

But we do not hear of this sect as an organized body until eight
centuries afterward. The apocryphal statement of Pliny, that they
had been in being for thousands of years — “ per seculorunt millia " —
has met with no reception from scholars. It is something which, as
he himself admits, is incredible; and Pliny is no authority in Jewish
affairs.

Josephus speaks of them, as existing in the days of Jona-
than the Maccabsean ; but this was only 143 years before Christ.
They are never mentioned in any of the books of the Old Testa-
ment, written subsequently to the building of the Temple, and
the silence of the Saviour and the Apostles concerning them has
been attributed to the fact that they were not even at that time an
organized body, but merely an order of the Pharisees. The Rabbi
Nathan distinctly says that “those Pharisees who live in a state of
celibacy are Essenes;” and McClintock collates from various au-
thorities fourteen points of resemblance, which are enumerated to
show the identity in the most important usages of the two institu-
tions. At all events, we have no historic evidence of the existence
of the Essenes as a distinct organization before the war of the Mac-
cabees, and this would separate them by eight centuries from the
builders of Solomon’s Temple, of whom the theory under review
erroneously supposes them to be the direct descendants.

But Brewster 1 seeks to connect the Essenes and the builders of
Solomon through the Assideans, whom he also calls “an order of
the Knights of the Temple of Jerusalem, who bound them-
selves to adorn the porches of that magnificent structure and to pre-

1 The unfairness of the author of Lawrie’s “ History ” is apparent when he quotes the
“ Histoire des Juifs,” by Basnage, as authority for the existence of the Essenes three hun-
dred years before the Christian era. Basnage actually says that they existed in the reign
of Antigonus, but this was only 105 B.c.

394

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

serve it from injury and decay.” He adds that “ this association was
composed of the greatest men of Israel, who were distinguished for
their charitable and peaceful dispositions ; and always signalized
themselves by their ardent zeal for the purity and preservation of
the temple.” Hence he argues that “ the Essenes were not only an
ancient fraternity, but that they originated from an association of
architects who were connected with the building of Solomon’s
temple.”

All this is very ingenious, but it is very untrue. It is, however,
the style, now nearly obsolete, it is to be hoped, in which Masonic
history has been written.

The fact is that the Assideans were not of older date than the
Essenes. They are not mentioned by the canonical writers of the
Scriptures, nor by Josephus, but the word first occurs in the book
of Maccabees, where it is applied, not, as Brewster calls them, to
men of “ peaceful dispositions,” but to a body of devoted and war-
like heroes and patriots who, as Kitto says, rose at the signal for
armed resistance given by Mattathias, the father of the Maccabees,
and who, under him and his successors, upheld with the sword the
great doctrine of the unity of God, and stemmed the advancing
tide of Grecian manners and idolatries.

Hence the era of the Assideans, like that of the Essenes, is re-
moved eight centuries from the time of the building of the Solo-
monic Temple.

Scaliger, who is cited in Lawrie’s History as authority, only says
that the Assideans were a confraternity of Jews whose principal de-
votion consisted in keeping up the edifices belonging to the Temple ;
and who, not content with paying the common tribute of half a
shekel a head, appointed for Temple repairs, voluntarily imposed
upon themselves an additional tax.

But as they are not known to have come into existence until the
wars of the Maccabees, it is evident that the Temple to which they
devoted their care must have been the second one, which had been
built after the return of the Jews from their Babylonian captivity.
With the Temple of Solomon and with its builders the Assideans
could not have had any connection.

Prideaux says that the Jews were divided, after the captivity,
into two classes — the Zadikim or righteous, who observed only the
written law of Moses, and the Chasidim or pious, who superadded

FREEMASONRY AND THE ESSENES

395

the traditions of the elders. These latter, he says, were the Asside-
ans, the change of name resulting from a common alteration of the
sounds of the original Hebrew letters.

But if this division took place after the captivity, a period of
nearly five centuries had then elapsed since the building of Solo-
mon’s Temple, and an uninterrupted chain of sequences between
that monarch’s builders and the Essenes is not preserved.

After the establishment of the Christian religion we lose sight of
the Essenes. Some of them are said to have gone to Egypt, and
there to have founded the ascetic sect of Therapeutists. Others are
believed to have been among the first converts to Christianity, but
in a short time they faded out of all notice. I think, from what has
been said, that there can be no hesitation in pronouncing the theory
of the descent of Freemasonry to modern times through the Assid-
eans and the Essenes to be wholly untenable and unsupported by
historical testimony.

In relation to what has been called the “remarkable coinci-
dences” to be met with in the doctrines and usages of this Jewish
sect and the Freemasons, giving to them all the weight demanded,
the rational explanation appears to be such as I have elsewhere
given, and which I may repeat here.

The truth is that the Essenes and the Freemasons derive what-
ever similarity or resemblance they may have from that spirit of
brotherhood which has prevailed in all ages of the civilized world,
the inherent principles of which, as the natural results of any frater-
nization, where all the members are engaged in the same pursuit
and governed by one common bond of unity, are brotherly love,
charity, and generally that secrecy and exclusiveness which secures
to them an isolation, in the practice of their rites, from the rest of
the world. And hence, between all fraternities, ancient and modem,
these “remarkable coincidences” will be apt to be found.

CHAPTER XLI

THE LEGEND OF ENOCH

EFORE concluding this series of essays, as they
might be called, on the legendary history of
Freemasonry, it will be necessary, so that a com-
pletion may be given to the subject, to refer to
a few Legends of a peculiar character, which
have not yet been noticed. These Legends
form no part of the original Legend of the
Craft. There are, however, brief allusions in that document to
them ; so brief as almost to attract no especial observation, but which
might possibly indicate that some form, perhaps a very mutilated
one, of these Legends was familiar to the Mediaeval Masons,
or, perhaps, which is more probable, that they have suggested a
foundation for the fabrication of these legendary narratives at a later
period by the Speculative Freemasons of the 18th century.

Or it may be supposed that both those views are correct, and
that while the imperfect and fragmentary Legend was known to the
Freemasons of the Middle Ages, its completed form was thereby
suggested to the Fraternity at a later period, and after the era of the
Revival.

Whichever of these views we may accept, it is at least certain
that at the present day, and in the present condition of the Order,
these Legends form an important part of the ritualism of the Order.
They can not be rejected in their symbolic interpretation, unless we
are willing with them to reject the whole fabric of Freemasonry, into
which they have been closely interwoven.

Of these Legends and of some minor ones of the same class
Dr. Oliver has spoken with great fairness in his Historical Land-
marks , in the following words :

“ It is admitted that we are in possession of numerous legends
which are not found in holy writ, but being of very ancient date,
are entitled to consideration, although their authenticity may be

396

THE LEGEND OF ENOCH

397

questioned and their aid rejected. I shall not, however, in any case,
use their evidence as a prima facie means of proving any doubtful
proposition, but merely in corroboration of an argument which
might probably be complete without their aid. Our system of
typical or legendary tradition adds to the dignity of the institution
by its general reference to sublime truths, which were considered
necessary to its existence or its consistency, although some of the
facts, how pure soever at their first promulgation, may have been
distorted and perverted by passing through a multitude of hands in
their transmission down the stream of time, amidst the fluctuation
of the earth and the downfall of mighty states and empires.”

Without discussing the question of their great antiquity, or of
their original purity and subsequent distortion and perversion, I pro-
pose to present these Legends to the Masonic reader, because they
are really not so much traditional narratives of events that are
supposed to have at some time occurred, but because they are to be
considered really as allegorical attempts to symbolize certain ethical
or religious ideas, the expression of which lies at the very founda-
tion of the Masonic system.

So considered, they must be deemed of great value. Their in-
terest will also be much enhanced by a comparison of the facts
of history that are interwoven with them, and to certain tradi-
tions of the ancient Oriental nations which show the existence
of the same Legends among them. These may, indeed, have been
the foundation on which the Masonic ones have been built, the “ dis-
tortion or perversion ” being simply those variations which were
necessary to connect the legendary statements more intimately and
consistently with the Masonic symbolic ideas.

The first of these to which our attention will be directed is the
Legend of Enoch , the seventh of the Patriarchs, of whom Milton
has said :

. . “ him the Most High,

(Rapt in a balmy cloud with winged steeds)

Did, as thou seest, receive to walk with God
High in salvation and the claims of bliss,

Exempt from death.”

1 shall first present the reader with the Masonic Legend, and
then endeavor to trace out the idea which it was intended to con-
vev. by a comparison of it with historical occurrences, with Oriental

393

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

traditions of a similar nature, and with the Masonic symbolism which
it seems to embody. The Legend as accepted by the Craft, from
a time hereafter to be referred to, runs to the following effect.

Enoch, being inspired by the Most High, and in obedience to a
vision, constructed underground, in the bosom of Mount Moriah, an
edifice consisting of nine brick vaults situated perpendicularly be-
neath each other and communicating by apertures left in the arch
of each vault.

He then caused a triangular plate of gold to be made, each side
of which was a cubit long ; he enriched it with the most precious
stones, and engraved upon it the ineffable name of God. He then
encrusted the plate upon a stone of agate of the same form, which
he placed upon a cubical stone of marble, and deposited the whole
within the ninth or innermost vault.

When this subterranean building was completed, Enoch made a
slab or door of stone, and, attaching to it a ring of iron, by which it
might, if necessary, be raised, he placed it over the aperture of the
uppermost arch, and so covered it over with soil that the opening
could not easily be discovered. Enoch himself was not permitted
to enter it more than once a year, and on his death or translation
all knowledge of this building and of the sacred treasure which it
contained was lost until in succeeding ages it was accidentally dis-
covered while Solomon was engaged in building a temple above the
spot, on the same mountain.

The Legend proceeds to inform us that after Enoch had finished
the construction of the nine vaults, fearing that the principles of the
arts and sciences which he had assiduously cultivated would be lost
in that universal deluge of which he had received a prophetic vision,
he erected above-ground two pillars, one of marble, to withstand
the destructive influences of fire, and one of brass, to resist the action
of water. On the pillar of brass he engraved the history of the cre-
ation, the principles of the arts and sciences, and the doctrines of
Speculative Masonry as they were then practiced ; and on the pillar
of marble he inscribed in hieroglyphic characters the information
that near the spot where they stood a precious treasure was depos-
ited in a subterranean vault.

Such is the Legetid of Enoch , which forms a very important part
of the legendary history of the High Degrees. As a traditional
narrative it has: not the slightest support of authentic history, and

THE LEGEND OF ENOCH

399

the events that it relates do not recommend themselves by an air of
probability. But, accepted as the expression of a symbolic idea, it
undoubtedly possesses some value.

That part of the Legend which refers to the two pillars is un-
doubtedly a perversion of the old Craft Legend of Lamech’s sons,
which has already been treated in this work. It will need no further
consideration.

The germ of the Legend is the preservation through the efforts
of the Patriarch of the Ineffable Name. This is in fact the true
symbolism of the Legend, and it is thus connected with the whole
system of Freemasonry in its Speculative form.

There is no allusion to this story in the Legend of the Craft.
None of the old manuscript Constitutions contain the name of
Enoch, nor does he appear to have been deemed by the Mediaeval
Masons to be one of the worthies of the Craft. The Enoch spoken
of in the Cooke MS. is the son of Cain, and not the seventh Patri-
arch. We must conclude, therefore, that the Legend was a fabrica-
tion of a later day, and in no way suggested by anything contained
in the original Craft Legend.

But that there were traditions outside of Masonry, which pre-
vailed in the Middle Ages, in reference to subterranean caves in
Mount Moriah is evident from the writings of the old historians.
Thus there was a tradition of the Talmudists that when King
Solomon was building the Temple, foreseeing that at some future
time the edifice would be destroyed, he. caused a dark and intricate
vault to be constructed underground, in which the ark might be
concealed whenever such a time of danger should arrive ; and that
Josiah, being warned by Huldah, the prophetess, of the approaching
peril, caused the ark to be hidden in the crypt which had been built
by Solomon. There was also in this vault, as in that of Enoch, a
cubical stone, on which the ark was placed. 1

There is a tradition also, among the Arabians, of a sacred stone
found by Abraham beneath the earth, and made by him the stone of
foundation of the temple which Jehovah ordered him to erect — a
temple the tradition of which is confined to the Mohammedans.

But the most curious story is one told by Nicephorus Callistus,
a Greek historian of the 14th century, in his Ecclesiastical Histories.

1 Lightfoot, “ Prospect of the Temple,” ch. xv.

4°0

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

When detailing the events that occurred while Julian the Apostate
was making his attempt to rebuild the Temple of Jerusalem, he nar-
rates the following fable, but of whose fabulous character the too
credulous monk has not the slightest notion.

“ When the foundations were being laid, as has been said, one
of the stones attached to the lowest part of the foundation was re-
moved from its place and showed the mouth of a cavern which had
been cut out of the rock. But as the cave could not be distinctly
seen, those who had charge of the work, wishing to explore it, that
they might be better acquainted with the place, sent one of the
workmen down tied to a long rope. When he got to the bottom
he found water up to his legs. Searching the cavern on every side,
he found by touching with his hands that it was of a quadrangular
form. When he was returning to the mouth, he discovered a cer-
tain pillar standing up scarcely above the water. Feeling with his
hand, he found a little book placed upon it, and wrapped up in very
fine and clean linen. Taking possession of it, he gave the signal
with the rope that those who had sent him down, should draw him
up. Being received above, as soon as the book was shown all were
struck with astonishment, especially as it appeared untouched and
fresh notwithstanding that it had been found in so dismal and dark
a place. But when the book was unfolded, not only the Jews but
the Greeks were astounded. For even at the beginning it declared
in large letters : in the beginning was the word with god,
and the word was god. To speak plainly, the writing embraced
the whole Gospel which was announced in the Divine tongue of the
Virgin disciple.” 1

It is true that Enoch has been supposed to have been identical
with Hermes, and Keriher says, in the CE dipus Egyptiacus, “ Idris,
among the Hebrews, has been called Enoch, among the Egyptians
Osiris and Hermes, and he was the first who before the Flood had
any knowledge of astronomy and geometry.” But the authors of
the Legend of the Craft were hardly likely to be acquainted with
this piece of archeology, and the Hermes to whom, with a very cor-
rupt spelling, they refer as the son of Cush, was the Hermes Tris-
mcgistus, popularly known as the “ Father of Wisdom.”

Enoch is first introduced to the Craft as one of the founders of

JNicephori Callisti “ Ecclesiastical Historiae,” tom. ii., lib. x., cap. xxxiii.

GEORGE WASHINGTON

THE LEGEND OF ENOCH

401

Geometry and Masonry, by Anderson, in the year 1723, who, in the
Constitutions printed in that year, has the following passage :

“ By some vestiges of antiquity we find one of them (the off-
spring of Seth) prophesying of the final conflagration at the day of
Judgment, as St. Jude tells, and likewise of the general deluge for
the punishment of the world. Upon which he erected his two large
pillars (though some ascribe them to Seth), the one of stone and the
other of brick, whereon were engraven the liberal sciences, etc. And
that the stone pillar remained in Syria until the days of Vespasian,
the Emperor.” 1

Fifteen years afterward, wnen he published the second edition of
the Constitutions , he repeated the Legend, with the additional state-
ment that Enoch was “ expert and bright both in the science and
the art ” of Geometry and Masonry, an abridgment of which he
placed on the pillars which he had erected. He adds that “ the old
Masons firmly believed this tradition,” but as there is no appearance
of any such tradition in the old records, of which since his date a
large number have been recovered (for in them the building of the
pillars is ascribed to the sons of Lamech), we shall have to accept
this assertion with many grains of allowance, and attribute it to the
general inaccuracy of Anderson when citing legendary authority.

But as the first mention of Enoch as a Freemason is made by
Anderson, and as we not long afterward find him incorporated into
the legendary history of the Order, we may, I think, attribute to him
the suggestion of the Legend, which was, however, afterward greatly
developed.

It was not, however, adopted into the English system, since
neither Entick nor Northouck, who subsequently edited the Book
of Constitutions , say anything more of Enoch than had already been
said by Anderson. They, indeed, correct to some extent his state-
ment, by ascribing the pillars either to Seth or to Enoch, leaning,
therefore, to the authority of Josephus, but, equally with Anderson,
abandoning the real tradition of the old Legend, which gave them to
the children of Lamech.

It is, I think, very evident that the Legend of Enoch was of
Continental origin, and I am inclined conjecturally to assign its in-
vention to the fertile genius of the Chevalier Ramsay, the first fab-

26

lti Constitutions,” 1723, p. 3, notes.

'402

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

ricator of High Degrees, or to some of his immediate successors ill
the manufactory of Masonic Rites.

Ramsay was too learned a man to be ignorant of the numerous
Oriental traditions, Arabic, Egyptian, and Rabinical, concerning
Enoch, that had been long in existence. Of this we have evi-
dence in a very learned work on The Philosophical Principles of
Natural and Revealed Religion , published by him in 1 749.

In this work 1 he refers to the tradition extant in all nations, of
a great man or legislator who was the first author of sacred symbols
and hieroglyphics, and who taught the people their sacred mysteries
and religious rites. This man, he says, was, among the Phoenicians,
Thaut ; the Greeks, Hermes ; the Arabians, Edris. But he must
have known that Thaut, Hermes, and Edris were all synonymous of
Enoch, for he admits that “ all these lived some time before the uni-
versal deluge, and they were all the same man, and consequently
some antediluvian patriarch.”

And, finally, he adds that “some think that this antediluvian
patriarch was Enoch himself.” And then he presents, in the fol-
lowing language, those views which most probably supplied the
suggestions that were afterward developed by himself, or some
of his followers, in the full form of the Masonic Legend of
Enoch.

“Whatever be in these conjectures,” says Ramsay, “ it is certain,
from the principles laid down, that the antediluvian or Noevian
patriarchs ought to have taken some surer measures for transmitting
the knowledge of divine truths to their posterity, than by oral tradi-
tion, and, consequently, that they either invented or made use of
hieroglyphics or symbols to preserve the memory of these sacred
truths.” And these he calls the Enochian symbols.

He does not, indeed, make any allusion to a secret depository of
these symbols of Enoch, and supposes that they must have been
communicated to the sons of Noah and their descendants, though in
time they lost their true meaning. But the change made in the
Masonic Legend was necessary to adapt it to a peculiar system of
ritualism.

It is singular how Enoch ever became among the ancients a type
of the mysteries of religion. The book of Genesis devotes only

1 Vol. ii„ p. 12 ct seq .

THE LEGEND OF ENOCH

403

three short verses to an account of him, and nothing is there said of
him, his deeds, or his character, except an allusion to his piety.

The Oriental writers, however, abound in traditionary tales of
the learning of the Patriarch. One tradition states that God be-
stowed upon him the gift of knowledge, and that he received thirty
volumes from Heaven, filled with all the secrets of the most myste-
rious sciences. The Babylonians supposed him to have been inti-
mately acquainted with the nature of the stars, and they attribute to
him the invention of astrology.

The Jewish Rabbins maintained that he was taught by Adam
how to sacrifice and to worship the Deity aright. The Cabalistic
book of Raziel says that he received the divine mysteries through
the direct line of the preceding Patriarchs.

Bar Hebraeus, a Jewish writer, asserts that Enoch was the first
who invented books and writing ; that he taught men the art of
building cities — thus evidently confounding him with another Enoch,
the son of Cain ; that he discovered the knowledge of the Zodiac
and the course of the stars ; and that he inculcated the worship of
God by religious rites.

There is a coincidence in the sacred character thus bestowed
upon Enoch with his name and the age at which he died, and this
may have had something to do with the mystical attributes bestowed
upon him by the Orientalists.

The word Enoch signifies, in the Hebrew, initiated or consecrat-
ed , and would seem, as all Hebrew names are significant, to have
authorized, or, perhaps, rather suggested the idea of his connec-
tion with a system of initiation into sacred rites.

He lived, the Scriptures say, three hundred and sixty-five
years. This, too, would readily be received as having a mystical
meaning, for 365 is the number of the days in a solar year and was,
therefore, deemed a sacred number. Thus we have seen that the
letters of the mystical word Abraxas , which was the Gnostic name
of the Supreme Deity, amounted, according to their numerical value
in the Greek alphabet, to 365, which was also the case with Mithras ,
the god to whom the Mithraic mysteries were dedicated. And this
may account for the statement of Bar Hebrceus that Enoch ap-
pointed festivals and sacrifices to the sun at the periods when that
luminary entered each of the zodiacal signs.

Goldziher, one of the latest of the German ethnologists, has ad-

4°4

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

vanced a similar idea in his work on Mythology Among the Hebrews,
He says:

“The solar character of Enoch admits of no doubt. He is
brought into connection with the building of towns — a solar feature.
He lives exactly three hundred and sixty-five years, the number of
days of the solar year ; which can not be accidental. And even then
he did not die, but ‘ Enoch walked with Elohim, and was no more (to
be seen), for Elohim took him away.' In the old times when the
figure of Enoch was imagined, this was doubtless called Enoch’s
Ascension to heaven, as in the late traditional legends Ascensions
to heaven are generally acknowledged to be solar features.” 1

These statements and speculations have been objected to, be-
cause they would tend to make Enoch an idolater and a sun-worship-
per. This is a consequence by no means absolutely necessary, but,
as the whole is merely traditionary, we need waste no time in de-
fending the orthodox character of the Patriarch’s religious views.

After all, it would appear that the Legend of Enoch , being
wholly unknown to the Fraternity in the Middle Ages, unrecognized
in the Legend of the Craft , and the name even, not mentioned in
any of the old records, was first introduced into the rituals of some
of the higher degrees which began to be fabricated toward the mid-
dle of the 1 8 th century ; that it was invented by the Chevalier Ram-
say, or by some of those ritual-mongers who immediately succeeded
him, and that in its fabrication very copious suggestions were bor-
rowed from the Rabbinical and Oriental traditions on the same
subject.

It is impossible then to assign to this Legend the slightest his-
torical character. It is made up altogether out of traditions which
were the inventions of Eastern imagination.

We. must view it, therefore, as an allegory ; but as one which has
a profound symbolic character. It was intended to teach the doc-
trine of Divine Truth by the symbol of the Holy Name — the Tet-
ragrammaton — the Name most reverently consecrated in the Jew-
ish system as well as in others, and which has always constituted
one of the most important and prominent symbols of Speculative
Masonry.

In the Continental system of the High Degrees, this symbol is

1 Chap, v., sect, viii., p. 127, Martineau’s Translation.

THE LEGEND OF ENOCH

405

presented in the form of the Legend of Enoch. From the English
system of Ancient Craft Masonry, that Legend is rejected, or rather
it never has been admitted into it. In its place, there is another
esoteric Legend, which, differing altogether in details, is identical in
result and effects the same symbolism. But this will be more ap-
propriately discussed when the symbolism of Freemasonry is treated,
•n a future part of this work-

CHAPTER XLII

NOAH AND THE NOACHITES

N reality, there is no Legend of Noah to be found
in any of the Masonic Rituals. There is no
myth, like that of Enoch or Euclid, which in-
timately connects him with the legendary his-
tory of the institution. And yet the story of
his life has exercised a very important influence
in the origin and the development of the prin-
ciples of Speculative Masonry.

Dr. Oliver has related a few traditions of Noah which, he says,
are Masonic, but they never had any general acceptance among the
Craft, as they are referred to by no other writer, and, if they ever
existed, are now happily obsolete.

The influence of Noah upon Masonic doctrine is to be traced to
the almost universal belief of men in the events of the deluge, and
the consequent establishment in many nations of a system of re-
ligion known to ethnologists as the “ Arkite worship.” Of this a
brief notice must be taken before we can proceed to investigate the
connection of the name of Noah with Speculative Masonry.

The character and the actions of Noah are to be looked upon
from a twofold stand-point, the historic and the legendary.

The historic account of Noah is contained in portions of the sixth
and seventh chapters of the Book of Genesis, and are readily acces-
sible to every reader, with which, however, they must already be
very familiar.

The legendary account is to be found in the almost inexhausti-
ble store of traditions which are scattered among almost all the
nations of the world where some more or less dim memory of a
cataclysm has been preserved.

If we examine the ancient writers, we shall find ample evidence
that among all the pagan peoples there was a tradition of a deluge
which, at some remote period, had overwhelmed the earth. This

NOAH AND THE NOACHITES

407

tradition was greatly distorted from the biblical source, and the very
name of the Patriarch who was saved was forgotten and replaced by
some other, which varied in different countries. Thus, in different
places, he had received the names of Xisuthrus, Prometheus, Deu-
calion, Ogyges, and many others, where the name has been ren-
dered very unlike itself by terminations and other idiomatic changes.
But everywhere the name was accompanied by a tradition, which also
varied in its details, of a deluge by which mankind had been de-
stroyed, and the race had, through the instrumentality of this per-
sonage, been renewed.

It is to be supposed that so important an event as the deluge
would have been transmitted by the Patriarch to his posterity, and
that in after times, when, by reason of the oral transmission of the
history, the particular details of the event would be greatly distorted
from the truth, a veneration for this new founder of the race of men
would be retained. At length, when various systems of idolatry
began to be established, Noah, under whatever name he may have
been known, would have been among the first to whom divine
honors would be paid. Hence arose that system known to modern
scholars as the “Arkite worship,” in whose rites and mysteries,
which were eventually communicated to the other ancient religions,
there were always some allusions to the events of the Noachic flood —
to the ark, as the womb of Nature, to the eight persons saved in
it, as the ogdoad or sacred number — and to the renovation of the
world, as symbolizing the passage from death to immortal life.

It is not, therefore, surprising that Noah should have become a
mystical personage, and that the modern Speculative Masons should
have sought to incorporate some reference to him in their symbolic
system, though no such idea appears to have been entertained by the
Operative Masons who preceded them.

On examining the old records of the Operative Masons it will
be found that no place is assigned to Noah, either as a Mason or as
one of the founders of the “science.” He receives only the briefest
mention.

In the Halliwell Poem his name and the flood are merely re-
ferred to as denoting an era of time in the world’s history. It is
only a statement that the tower of Babel was begun many years
after “Noees flod.”

In the Cooke MS. the record is a little more extended, but still

408

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

is but an historical narrative of the flood, in accordance with the
biblical details.

In the Dowland MS. and in all the other manuscripts of the
Legend of the Craft that succeeded it, the reference to Noah is
exceedingly meager, his name only being mentioned, and that of his
sons, from whom descended Hermes, who found one of the pillars
and taught the science thereon described to other men. So far,
Noah has had no part in Masonry.

Anderson, who, in the Book of Constitutions modified and en-
larged the old Craft Legends at his pleasure, calls Noah and his
three sons “ all Masons true,” and says that they brought over from
the flood the traditions and arts of the antediluvians and communi-
cated them to their growing offspring. And this was perhaps the
first time that the Patriarch was presented to the attention of the
Fraternity in a Masonic character

Anderson seems to have cherished this idea, for in the second
edition of the Constitutions he still further develops it by saying that
the offspring of Noah, “as they journeyed from the East (the plains
of Mount Ararat, where the ark rested) towards the West, they
found a plain in the land of Shinar, and dwelt there together as
Noachid^:, or sons of Noah.” And, he adds, without the slightest
historical authority, that this word “ Noachidae” was “the first name
of Masons, according to some old traditions.” It would have puz-
zled him to specify any such tradition.

Having thus invented and adopted the name as the distinctive
designation of a Mason, he repeats it in his second edition or revis-
ion of the “Old Charges” appended to the Book of Constitutions.
The first of these charges, in the Constitutio 7 is of 1723, contained
this passage: “A Mason is obliged by his tenure to obey the moral
law.” In the edition of 1 738, Dr. Anderson has, without authority,
completed the sentence by adding the words “as a true Noachida.”
This interpolation was rejected by Entick, who edited the third and
fourth editions in 1756 and 1767, and by Northouck, who published
the fifth in 1 784, both of whom restored the old reading, which has
ever since been preserved m all the Constitutions of the Grand
Lodge of England.

Dermott, however, who closely followed the second edition of
Anderson, in the composition of his Ahiman Rezon of course
adopted the new term.

NOAIi AND THE NOACHITES

409

About that time, or a little later, a degree was fabricated on the
continent of Europe, bearing the name of “ Patriarch Noachite,”
one peculiar feature of which was that it represented the existence
of two classes or lines of Masons, the one descending from the
Temple of Solomon, and who were called Hiramites, and the other
tracing their origin to Noah, who were styled Noachites.

Neither Preston nor Hutchinson, nor any other writer of the
1 8th century, appear to have accepted the term. But it was a favor-
ite with Dr. Oliver, and under his example it has become of so
common use that Noachida and Freemason have come to be con-
sidered as synonymous terms.

What does this word really signify, and how came Anderson to
adopt it as a Masonic term ? The answers to these questions are
by no means difficult.

Noachida, or Noachides, from which we get the English Noach-
tte, is a gentilitial name, or a name designating the member of a
family or race, and is legitimately formed according to Greek usage,
where Atrides means a descendant of Atreus, or Heraclides a de-
scendant of Heracles. And so Noachides, or its synonyms Noach-
ida or Noachites, means a descendant of Noah.

But why, it may be asked, are the Freemasons called the de-
scendants of Noah ? Why has he been selected alone to represent
the headship of the Fraternity ? I have no doubt that Dr. Ander-
son was led to the adoption of the word by the following reason.

After Noah’s emergence from the ark, he is said to have promul-
gated seven precepts for the government of the new race of men of
whom he was to be the progenitor.

These seven precepts are : 1, to do justice ; 2, worship God ; 3,
abstain from idolatry ; 4, preserve chastity ; 5, do not commit mur-
der ; 6, do not steal ; 7, do not eat the blood.

These seven obligations, says the Rev. Dr. Raphall, 1 are held
binding on all men, inasmuch as all are descendants of Noah, and
the Rabbins maintain that he who observes them, though he be not
an Israelite, has a share in the future life, and it is the duty of every
Jew to enforce their due observance whenever he has the power to
do so.

In consequence of this, the Jewish religion was not confined

1 “ Genesis, with Translation and Notes,” by Rev. Morris J. Raphall, p. 52-

410

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

during its existence in Palestine to the Jewish nation only, but
proselytes of three kinds were freely admitted. One of these classes
was the “ proselytes of the gate.” These were persons who, without
undergoing the rite of circumcision or observing the ritual prescribed
by the law of Moses, engaged to worship the true God and to ob-
serve the seven precepts of Noah, and these things they were to do
whether they resided in Judea or in foreign lands. They were not,
however, admitted to all the privileges of the Jewish religion ; mar-
riage with Israelites was forbidden, and they were not permitted
to enter within the sacred inclosure of the temple. So that, although
they were Noachidae, they were not considered equal to the true
children of Abraham.

Anderson, who was a theologian, was, of course, acquainted with
these facts, but, with a more tolerant spirit than the Jewish law,
which gave the converted Gentiles only a qualified reception, he was
disposed to admit into the full fellowship of Freemasonry all the
descendants of Noah who would observe the precepts of the Patri-
arch, these being the only moral laws inculcated by Masonry.

In giving the history of the introduction of the word into Ma-
sonry, I have not cited among the authorities the document known
as the Stonehouse MS., because it was verified by a person of that
name, but more usually the Krause MS., because it was first pub-
lished in a German translation by Dr. Krause in his Three Oldest
Docziments. It is alleged to be a copy of the York Constitutions ,
enacted in 926, but is generally admitted by scholars to be spurious.
Yet, as it is probable that it was originally written by a contempo-
rary of Anderson, and about the time of the publishing of the Con-
stitutions of 1 738, it may be accepted, so far as it supplies us with a
suggestion of the motive that induced Anderson to interpolate the
word “ Noachida” into the “Old Charges.”

In the Krause MS., under the head of “ The Laws or Obligations
laid before his Brother Masons by Prince Edwin,” we find the fol-
lowing article. (I translate from the German of Krause, because
the original English document is nowhere to be found.)

“ The first obligation is that you shall sincerely honor God and
obey the laws of the Noachites, because they arc divine laws, which
should be obeyed by all the world. Therefore, you must avoid all
heresies and not thereby sin against God.”

The language of this document is more precise than that of Am

NOAH AND THE NO AC HITES

411

derson, though both have the same purpose. The meaning is that
the only religious laws which a Freemason is required to obey are
those which are contained in the code that has been attributed to
Noah. This sentiment is still further expressed toward the close of
the “ Old Charges,” where it is said that the Mason is obliged only “ to
that religion in which all men agree,” excluding, therefore, atheism,
and requiring the observance of such simple laws of morality as are
enjoined in the precepts of Noah.

Anderson had, however, a particular object in the use of the
word “ Noachida.” The Krause MS. says that the Mason “must
obey the laws of the Noachites that is, that he is to observe the
seven precepts of Noah, without being required to observe any
other religious dogmas outside of these — a matter which is left to

O O

himself.

But Anderson says he “must obey the moral law as a true
Noachida,” by which he intimates that that title is the proper desig-
nation of a Mason. And he has shown that this was his meaning
by telling us, in a preceding part of his book, that “ Noachidae was
the first name of Masons, according to some old traditions.”

Now the object of Anderson in introducing this word into the
second edition of the Coyistitutions was to sustain his theory that
Noah was the founder of the science of Freemasonry after the flood.
This was the theory taught by Dr. Oliver a century afterward, who
followed Anderson in the use of the word, with the same meaning
and the same object, and his example has been imitated by many
recent writers. But when Anderson speaks of a Noachida or a
Noachite as a word synonymous with Freemason, he is in error; for
although all Freemasons are necessarily the descendants of Noah, all
the descendants of Noah are not Freemasons.

And if by the use of the word he means to indicate that Noah was
the founder of post-diluvian Freemasonry, he is equally in error ; for
that theory, it has heretofore been shown, can not be sustained, and
his statement that Noah and his three sons were “ all Masons true ”
is one for which there is no historical support, and which greatly
lacks an element of probability.

It is better, therefore, when we speak or write historically of
Freemasonry, that this word Noachida, or Noachite, should be
avoided, since its use leads to a confusion of ideas, and possibly to
the promulgation of error.

CHAPTER XLIII

THE LEGEND OF HIRAM ABIF

HIS is the most important of all the legends of
Freemasonry. It will therefore be considered
in respect to its origin, its history, and its mean-
ing.

Before, however, proceeding to the discus-
sion of these important subjects, and the inves-
tigation of the truly mythical character of Hiram
Abif, it will be proper to inquire into the meaning of his name, or
rather the meaning of the epithet that accompanies it.

In the places in Scripture in which he is mentioned he is called
at one time (in 2 Chronicles ii., 13), by the King of Tyre, in the
letter written by him to King Solomon, Churam Abi ; in another
place (in 2 Chronicles iv., 16), where the writer of the narrative is
recording the work done by him for Solomon, Churam Abiv, or, as
it might be pronounced according to the sound of the Hebrew let-
ters, Abiu. But Luther, in his German translation of the Bible,
adopted the pronunciation Abif, exchanging the flat v for the
sharp f. In this he was followed by Anderson, who was the first to
present the full name of Hiram Abif to the Craft. This he did in
the first edition of the English book of Constitutions.

And since his time at least the appellation of Hiram Abif has
been adopted by and become familiar to the Craft as the name of
the cunning or skillful artist who was sent by Hiram, King of Tyre,
to assist King Solomon in the construction of the Temple. In
Chronicles and Kings we find Churam or Huram, as we may use the
initial letter as a guttural or an aspirate, and Chiram or Hiram, the
vowel u or i being indifferently used. But the Masonic usage has
universally adopted the word Hiram.

Now, the Abi and Abiv, used by the King of Tyre, in the book
of Chronicles form 110 part of the name, but are simply inflections
of the possessive pronouns my and his suffixed to the appellative Ab.

412

THE LEGEND OF HIRAM ABIF

413

Ab in Hebrew means father , i is my, and in, iv, or if is his.
Abi is therefore my father, and so he is called by the King of Tyre
when he is describing him to Solomon, “ Hiram my father Abif
is his father, and he is so spoken of by the historian when he
recounts the various kinds of work which were done for King
Solomon by “ Hiram his father.”

But the word Ab in Hebrew, though primarily signifying a
male parent, has other derivative significations. It is evident that
in none of the passages in which he is mentioned is it intended
to intimate that he held such relationship to either the King of Tyre
or the King of Israel.

The word “ father ” was applied by the Hebrews as a term of
honor, or to signify a station of pre-eminence. Buxtorf 1 says it
sometimes signified Master, and he cites the fourth chapter of Gen-
esis, where Jabal is called the father of cattle and Jubal the father
of musicians.

Hiram Abif was most probably selected by the King of Tyre to
be sent to Solomon as a skillful artificer of pre-eminent skill that he
might execute the principal works in the interior of the Temple and
fabricate the various utensils intended for the sacred services. He
was a master in his art or calling, and properly dignified with a title
which announced his distinguished character. The title of Father,
which was given to him, denotes, says Smith , 2 the respect and esteem
in which he was held, according to the similar custom of the people
of the East at the present day.

I am well pleased with the suggestion of Dr. McClintock that
“ Hiram my father seems to mean Hiram my counsellor ; that is
to say, foreman or master-workman." 3

Applying this meaning to the passages in Chronicles which re-
fer to this artist, we shall see how easily every difficulty is removed
and the Craftsman Hiram placed in his true light.

When King Hiram, wishing to aid the King of Israel in his con-
templated building, writes him a letter in which he promises to com-
ply with the request of Solomon to send him timber from Lebanon
and wood-cutters to hew it, as an additional mark of his friendship
and his desire to contribute his aid in building “a house for Je-

1 ‘‘Lexicon Talmudicum.” 2 “ Cyclopaedia of Biblical Literature”

3 ‘ 1 Cyclopaedia of Biblical, Theological, and Classical Literature.”

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

hovah,” he gives him the services of one of his most skillful artisans
and announces the gift in these words: “And now I have sent
a skillful man, endued with understanding, my master-workman
Hiram.”

And when the historian w T ho wrote the Chronicles of the king-
dom had recapitulated all the work that Hiram had accomplished,
such as the pillars of the porch, the lavers and the candlesticks, and
the sacred vessels, he concludes by saying that all these things were
made for King Solomon by his master-workman Hiram, in the
Hebrew gnasah Hiiram Abif Lammelech Schelomoh.

Hiram or Huram was his proper name. A b, father of his trade
or master-workman , his title, and i or if, my or his, the possessive
pronominal suffix, used according to circumstances. The King of
Tyre calls him Hiram Abi, “my master-workman.” When the
chronicler speaks of him in his relation to King Solomon, he calls
him Hiram Abif “ his master-workman.” And as all his Masonic
relations are with Solomon, this latter designation has been adopted,
from Anderson, by the Craft.

Having thus disposed of the name and title of the personage
who constitutes the main point in this Masonic Legend, I proceed
to an examination of the origin and progressive growth of the
myth.

“The Legend of the Temple-Builder,” as he is commonly but
improperly called, is so intimately connected in the ritual with the
symbolic history of the Temple, that we would very naturally be led
to suppose that the one has always been contemporary and coexist-
ent with the other. The evidence on this point is, however, by no
means conclusive or satisfactory, though a critical examination of
the old manuscripts would seem to show that the writers of those
documents, while compiling from traditional sources the Legend
of the Craft, were not altogether ignorant of the rank and services
that have been subsequently attributed by the Speculative Masons
of the present day to Hiram Abif. They certainly had some notion
that in the building of the Temple at Jerusalem King Solomon had
the assistance of a skillful artist who had been supplied to him by the
King of Tyre.

The origin of the Legend must be looked for in the Scriptural
account of the building of the Temple of Jerusalem. The story, as
told in the books of Kings and Chronicles, is to this effect.

THE LEGEND OF HIRAM ABIF

415

On the death of King David, his son and successor, Solomon,
resolved to carry into execution his father’s long-contemplated de-
sign of erecting a Temple on Mount Moriah for the worship of
Jehovah. But the Jews were not a nation of artisans, but rather
of agriculturists, and had, even in the time of David, depended on the
aid of the Phoenicians in the construction of the house built for that
monarch at the beginning of his reign. Solomon, therefore, applied
to his ally, Hiram, King of Tyre, to furnish him with trees from
Lebanon and with hewers to prepare them, for, as he said in his
letter to the Tyrian King, “ thou knowest that there is not any
among us that can skill to hew timber like unto the Sidonians.”

Hiram complied with his request, and exchanged the skilled
workmen of sterile Phoenicia for the oil and corn and wine of more
fertile Judea.

Among the artists who were sent by the King of Tyre to the
King of Israel, was one whose appearance at Jerusalem seems to
have been in response to the following application of Solomon,
recorded in the second book of Chronicles, the second chapter,
seventh verse :

“ Send me now therefore a man cunning to work in gold, and
in silver, and in brass, and in iron, and in purple and in crimson, and
blue, and that can skill to grave with the cunning men that are with
me in Judah, and in Jerusalem, whom David my father did provide.”

In the epistle of King Hiram, responsive to this request, con-
tained in the same book and chapter, in the thirteenth and four-
teenth verses, are the following words :

“ And now I have sent a cunning man, endued with understand-
ing, of Huram my father’s. The son of a woman of the daughters
of Dan, and his father was a man of Tyre, skillful to work in gold
and in silver, in brass, in iron, in stone, and in timber, in purple, in
blue, and in fine linen, and in crimson ; also to grave any manner of
graving, and to find out every device which shall be put to him, with
thy cunning men, and with the cunning men of my lord David, thy
father.”

A further description of him is given in the seventh chapter of
the first book of Kings, in the thirteenth and fourteenth verses, and
in these words :

“And King Solomon sent and fetched Hiram out of Tyre. Pie
was a widow’s son of the tribe of Naphtali — and his father was a

416

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

man of Tyre, a worker in brass ; and he was filled with wisdom and
understanding, and cunning to work all works in brass, and he came
to King Solomon and wrought all his work.”

It is very evident that this was the origin of the Legend which
was incorporated into the Masonic system, and which, on the insti-
tution of Speculative Freemasonry, was adopted as the most promi-
nent portion of the Third Degree.

The mediaeval Masons were acquainted with the fact that King
Solomon had an assistant in the works of the Temple, and that that
assistant had been sent to him by King Hiram. But there was con-
siderable confusion in their minds upon the subject, and an ignorance
of the scriptural name and attributes of the person.

In the Halliwell MS., the earliest known to us, the Legend is not
related. Either the writers of the two poems of which that manu-
script is composed were ignorant of it, or in the combination of the
two poems there has been a mutilation and the Hiramic Legend
has been omitted.

In the Cooke MS-, which is a hundred years later, we meet with
the first allusion to it and the first error, which is repeated in various
forms in all the subsequent manuscript constitutions.

That manuscript says: “And at the makyng of the temple in
Salamonis tyme as hit is seyd in the bibull in the iii boke of Regum
in tertio Regum capitulo quinto, that Salomon had iiii score thou-
sand masons at his werke. And the kyngis sone of Tyry was his
master mason.”

The reference here made to the third book of Kings is according
to the old distribution of the Hebrew canon, where the two books of
Samuel are called the first and second books of Kings. According
to our present canon, the reference would be to the fifth chapter of
the first book of Kings. In that chapter nothing is said of Hiram
Abif, but it is recorded there that “ Adoniram was over the levy.’’
Now the literal meaning of Adoniram is the lord Hiram. As the
King of Tyre had promised to send his workmen to Lebanon, and
as it is stated that Adoniram superintended tne men who were there
hewing the trees, the old legendist, not taking into account that the
levy of thirty thousand, over whom Adoniram presided, were Israel-
ites and not Phoenicians, but supposing that they had been sent to
Lebanon by Hiram, King of Tyre, and that he had sent Adoniram
with them, and viewing the word as meaning the lord Hiram.

THE LEGEND OF HIRAM ABIF

4i7

hastily came to the conclusion that this Lord or Prince Hiram was
the son of the King. And hence he made the mistake of saying
that the son of the King of Tyre was the person sent to Solomon
to be his master-mason or master-builder.

This error was repeated in nearly all the succeeding manuscripts,
for they are really only copies of each other, and the word Adon, as
meaning lord or prince, seems to have been always assumed in some
one or other corrupted form as the name of the workman sent by
King Hiram to King Solomon, and whom the Freemasons of the
present day know as Hiram Abif.

Thus in the Dowland MS., conjecturally dated at a.d. 1550, it
is said :

“ And furthermore there was a Kinge of another region that
men called I ram, and he loved well Kinge Solomon and he gave him
tymber to his worke. And he had a sonn that height (was called)
Aynon, and he was a Master of Geometrie and was chief Master
of all his Masons, and was Master of all his gravings and carvinge
and of all manner of Masonryethat longed to the Temple.”

There can be no doubt that Aynon is here a corruption of Adon.

In the Landsdowne MS., whose date is a.d. 1560, the language
is precisely the same, except that it says King Iram “ had a sonne
that was called a. man."

It seems almost certain that the initial letter a in this name has
been, by careless writing, dislocated from the remaining letters, man,
and that the true reading is A man, which is itself an error, instead of
Anton , and this a manifest corruption of Adon. This is confirmed
by the York MS., Number 1, which is about forty years later (a.d.
1600), where the name is spelled Avion. This is also the name in
the Lodge of Hope MS., dated a.d. 1680.

In the Grand Lodge MS., date of a.d. 1632, he is again called
the son of the King of Tyre, but his name is given as Aynone,
another corrupted form of Adon. In the Sloane MS., Number
3,848, a.d. 1646, it is Aynon , the final e being omitted. In the
Harleian MS., Number 1,942, dated a.d. 1670, both the final e and
the medial _y are omitted, and the name becoming Anon , approxi-
mates still nearer to the true Adon.

In the Alnwick MS., of a.d. 1701, the name is still further cor-
rupted into Ajuon. In all of these manuscripts the Legend con-
tinues to call this artist the son of the King of Tyre, whose name is

418

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

said to be Hiram , or more usually Iram ; and hence the corrupted
orthography of Anion , Ay non, or Anon, being restored to the true
form of A don, with which word the old Masons were acquainted, as
signifying Lord or Prince, we get, by prefixing it to his father’s
name, Adon-Iram or Adoniram, the Lord or Prince Hiram. And
hence arose the mistake of confounding Hiram Abif with Adon-
iram, the chief of the workmen on Mount Lebanon, who was a
very different person.

The Papworth MS., whose date is a.d. 1714, is too near the time
of the Revival and the real establishment of Speculative Masonry
to be of much value in this inquiry. It, however, retains the state-
ment from the Old Legend, that the artist was the son of King
Hiram. But it changes his name to that of Benaim. This is
probably an incorrect inflection of the Hebrew word Boneh, a builder,
and shows that the writer, in an attempt to correct the error of
the preceding legendists who had corrupted Adon into Anon or
Amon, or Ajuon, had in his smattering of Hebrew committed a
greater one.

The Krause MS. is utterly worthless as authority. It is a for-
gery, written most probably, I think I may say certainly, after the
publication of the first edition of Anderson’s Constitutions, and,
of course, takes the name from that work.

The name of Hiram Abif is first introduced to public notice by
Anderson in 1723, in the book of Constitutions printed in that
year.

In this work he changes the statement made in the Legend of
the Craft , and says that the King of Tyre sent to King Solomon
“his namesake Hiram Abif, the prince of architects.”

Then quoting in the original Hebrew a passage from the second
book of Chronicles, where the name of Hiram Abif is to be found,
he explains it “by allowing the word Abif to be the surname of
Hiram the Mason ; ” furthermore he adds that in the passage where
the King of Tyre calls him “Huram of my father’s,” the meaning is
that Huram was “the chief Master Mason of my father, King Abi-
balus,” a most uncritical attempt, because he intermixes, as its
foundation, the Hebrew original and the English version. He
had not discovered the true explication, namely, that Hiram.
is the name, and Ab the title, denoting, as I have before said,
Master Workman, and that in, or iv, or if, is a pronominal suf-

THE LEGEND OF HIRAM ABIF

419

fix, meaning his, so that when speaking of him in his relation to
King Solomon, he is called Hiram Abif, that is Hiram , his or
Solomons Master Work 7 nan.

But Anderson introduced an entirely new element in the Legend
when he said, in the same book, that “ the wise King Solomon was
Grand Master of the Lodge at Jerusalem, King Hiram was Grand
Master of the Lodge at Tyre, and the inspired Hiram Abif was
Master of Work.”

In the second or 1738 edition of the Constitutions , Anderson
considerably enlarged the Legend, for reasons that will be adverted
to when I come, in the next part of this work, to treat of the origin
of the Third Degree, but on which it is here unnecessary to dwell.

In that second edition, he asserts that the tradition is that King
Hiram had been Grand Master of all Masons, but that when the
Temple was finished he surrendered the pre-eminence to King Solo-
mon. No such tradition, nor any allusion to it, is to be found in
any of the Old Records now extant, and it is, moreover, entirely
opposed by the current of opinion of all subsequent Masonic
writers.

From these suggestions of Anderson, and from some others of a
more esoteric character, made, it is supposed, by him and by Dr.
Desaguliers about the time of the Revival, we derive that form of
the Legend of Hiram Abif which has been preserved to the present
day with singular uniformity by the Freemasons of all countries.

The substance of this Legend, so far as it is concerned in the
present investigation, is that at the building of the Temple there
were three Grand Masters — Solomon, King of Israel ; Hiram, King
of Tyre, and Hiram Abif, and that the last was the architect or
chief builder of the edifice.

As what relates to the fate of Hiram Abif is to be explained in
an altogether allegorical or symbolical sense, it will more appro-
priately come under consideration when we are treating, in a subse-
quent part of this work, of the Symbolism of Freemasonry.

Our present study will be the legendary character of Hiram Abif
as the chief Master Mason of the Temple, and our investigations
will be directed to the origin and meaning of the myth which has
now, by universal consent of the Craft, been adopted, whether cor-
rectly or not we shall see hereafter.

The question before us, let it be understood, is not as to the his

420

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

toric truth of the Hiramic legend, as set forth in the Third Degree of
the Masonic ritual — not as to whether this be the narrative of an
actual occurrence or merely an allegory accompanied by a moral
signification — not as to the truth or fallacy of the theory which finds
the origin of Freemasonry in the Temple of Jerusalem — but how it
has been that the Masons of the Middle Ages should have incorpo-
rated .into their Legend of the Craft the idea that a worker in
metal — in plain words, a smith — was the chief builder at the Temple.
This thought, and this thought alone, must govern us in the whole
course of our inquiry.

Of all the myths that have prevailed among the peoples of the
earth, hardly any has had a greater antiquity or a more extensive ex-
istence than that of the Smith who worked in metals, and fabricated
shields and swords for warriors, or jewelry for queens and noble
ladies. Such a myth is to be found among the traditions of the
earliest religions , 1 and being handed down through ages of popular
transmission, it is preserved, with various natural modifications, in
the legends of the Middle Ages, from Scandinavia to the most
southern limit of the Latin race. Long before this period it was to
be found in the mythology and the folk-lore of Assyria, of India,
of Greece, and of Rome.

Freemasonry, in its most recent form as well as in its older
Legend, while adopting the story of Hiram Abif, once called Adon
Hiram, has strangely distorted its true features, as exhibited in the
books of Kings and Chronicles ; and it has, without any historical
authority, transformed the Scriptural idea of a skillful smith into
that of an architect and builder. Hence, in the Old Legend he is
styled a “ Master of Geometry and of all Masonry,” and in the
modern ritual of Speculative Masonry he is called “ the Builder,”
and to him, in both, is supposed to have been intrusted the super-
intendence of the Temple of Solomon, during its construction,
and the government and control of those workmen — the stone
squarers and masons — who were engaged in the labor of its
erection.

To divest this Legend of its corrupt form, and to give to Hiram

5 “ Vala, one of the names of Indra, in the Aryan mythology, is traced,” says Mr.
Cox, “ through the Teutonic lands until we reach the cave of Wayland Smith, in War-
wickshire.” “ Mythology of the Aryan Nations,” vol. ii., p. 326.

THE LEGEND OF HIRAM ABIF

421

Abif, who was actually an historic personage, his true position among
the workmen at the Temple, can not affect, in the slightest degree,
the symbolism of which he forms so integral a part, while it will ra-
tionally account for the importance that has been attributed to him
in the old as well as in the new Masonic system.

Whether we make Hiram Abif the chief Builder and the Oper-
ative Grand Master of Solomon’s Temple, or whether we assign that
position to Anon, Amon, or Ajuon, as it is in the Old Legend, or to
Adoniram, as it is done in some Masonic Rites, the symbolism will
remain unaffected, because the symbolic idea rests on the fact of a
Chief Builder having existed, and it is immaterial to the develop-
ment of the symbolism what was his true name. The instruction
intended to be conveyed in the legend of the Third Degree must
remain unchanged, no matter whom we may identify as its hero ;
for he truly represents neither Hiram nor Anon nor Adoniram nor
any other individual person, but rather the idea of man in an ab-
stract sense.

It is, however, important to the truth of history that the real
facts should be eliminated out of the mythical statements which en-
velop them. We must throw off the husk, that we may get at the
germ. And besides, it will add a new attraction to the system of
Masonic ritualism if we shall be able to trace in it any remnant of
that oldest and most interesting of the myths, the Legend of the
Smith , which, as I have said, has universally prevailed in the most
ancient forms of religious faith.

Before investigating this Legend of the Smith in its reference
to Freemasonry and to this particular Legend of Hiram Abif
which we are now considering, it will be proper to inquire into the
character of the Legend as it existed in the old religions and in the
mediaeval myths. We may then inquire how this Legend, adopted
in Freemasonry in its stricter ancient form of the Legend of Tubal
Cain, became afterward confounded with another legend of a Tem-
ple-Builder.

If we go back to the oldest of all mythologies, that which is
taught in the Vedic hymns, we shall find the fire-god Agni, whose
flames are described as being “ luminous, powerful, fearful, and not
to be trusted.”

The element of fire thus worshipped by the primeval Aryans, as
an instrument of good or of evil, was subsequently personified by

422

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

the Greeks; the Vedic hymns, referring to the continual renova-
tion of the flame, as it was fed by fuel, called it the fire-god Agni ;
also Gavishtha, that is, the ever young. From this the Greeks got
their Hephaestus, the mighty workman, the immortal smith who
forged the weapons of the gods, and, at the prayer of Thetis, fab-
ricated the irresistible armor of Achilles. The Romans were in-
debted to their Aryan ancestors for the same idea of the potency
of fire, and personified it in their Vulcan, a name which is evidently
derived from the Sanscrit Ulka, a firebrand, although a similarity
of sound has led many etymologists to deduce the Roman Vulcan
from the Semitic Tubal Cain. Indeed, until the modern discov-
eries in comparative philology, this was the universal opinion of the
learned.

Among the Babylonians an important god was Bil-can. He was
the fire-god, and the name seems to be derived from Baal, or Bel,
and Cain, the god of smiths, or the master smith. George Smith,
in his Chaldee an Account of Genesis , thinks that there is possibly
some connection here with the Biblical Tubal Cain and the classical
Vulcan.

From the fragments of Sanchoniathon we learn that the Phoeni-
cians had a hero whom he calls Chrysor. He was worshipped after
his death, in consequence of the many inventions that he bestowed
on man, under the name of Diamichius ; that is, the great inventor.
To him was ascribed the invention of all those arts which the
Greeks attributed to Hephaestus, and the Romans to Vulcan.
Bishop Cumberland derives the name of Chrysor from the Hebrew
Charatz, or the Sharpener, an appropriate designation of one who
taught the use of iron tools. The authorized version of Genesis,
which calls Tubal Cain “ an instructor of every artificer in brass
and iron,” is better rendered in the Septuagint and the Vulgate as
“a sharpener of every instrument in brass and iron.”

Tubal Cain has been derived, in the English lectures of Dr. Flem-
ming, and, of course, by Dr. Oliver, from a generally received ety-
mology that Cain meant worldly possessions, and the true symbol-
ism of the name has been thus perverted. The true derivation is
from kin , which, says Gesenius, has the especial meaning to forge
iron, whence comes Kain , a spear or lance, an instrument of iron
that has been forged. In the cognate Arabic it is Kayin. “This
word,” says Dr. Goldziherin his work on Mythology Among the He-

THE LEGEND OF HIRAM ABIF

423

brews , “ which with other synonymous names of trades occurs sev-
eral times on the so-called Nabatean Sinaitic inscriptions, signifies
Smith , maker of agricultural implements , 1 and has preserved this
meaning in the Arabic Kayin and the Aramaic kinaya , whilst in
the later Hebrew it was lost altogether, being probably sup-
pressed through the Biblical attempt to derive the proper name
Cain etymologically from kana, “ to gain." Here it is that
Hemming and Oliver got their false symbolism of “worldly
possessions.”

Goldziher attempts to identify mythologically Cain the fratri-
cide with the son of Lamech. Whether he be correct or not in
his theory, it is at least a curious coincidence that Cain, which I
have shown to mean a smith, should have been the first builder of
a city, and that the same name should have been assigned to the
first forger of metals, while the old Masonic Legend makes the
master smith, Hiram of Tyre, also the chief builder of Solomon.

It will, I think, be interesting to trace the progress of the myth
which has given in every age and every country this prominent
position among artisans to the smith.

Hephaestus, or Vulcan, kindling his forges in the isle of Lemnos,
and with his Cyclops journeymen beating out and shaping and weld-
ing the red-hot iron into the forms of spears and javelins and hel-
mets and coats of mail, was the southern development of the Aryan
fire-god Agni. “Hephaestus, or Vulcan,” says Diodorus Siculus,
“ was the first founder in iron, brass, gold, silver, and all fusible
metals, and he taught the uses to which fire might be applied by
artificers.” Hence he was called by the ancients the god of black-
smiths.

The Scandinavians, or northern descendants of the Aryan race,
brought with them, in their emigration from Caucasus, the same
reverence for fire and for the working of metals by its potent use.
They did not, however, bring with them such recollections of Agni
as would invent a god of fire like the Hepheestus and Vulcan of the
Greeks and Romans. They had, indeed, Loki, who derived his name,
it is said by some, from the Icelandic logi , or flame. But he was an

! He confines the expression to * * agricultural” to enforce a particular theory then
under consideration. He might correctly have been more general and included all other
kinds of implements, warlike and mechanical as well as agricultural.

424

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

evil principle, and represented rather the destructive than the crea-
tive powers of fire.

But the Scandinavians, interpolating, like all the northern na-
tions, their folk-lore into their mythology, invented their legends
of a skillful smith, beneath whose mighty blows upon the yielding
iron swords of marvelous keenness and strength were forged, or
by whose wonderful artistic skill diadems and bracelets and jewels
of surpassing beauty were constructed. Hence the myth of a won-
derfully cunning artist was found everywhere, and the Legend of the
Smith became the common property of all the Scandinavian and
Teutonic nations, and was of so impressive a character that it con-
tinued to exist down to mediaeval times, and traces of it have ex-
tended to the superstitions of the present day. 'May we not justly
look to its influence for the prominence given by the old Masonic
legendists to the Master Smith of King Hiram among the work-
men of Solomon ?

Among the Scandinavians we have the Legend of Volund, whose
story is recited in the Volunddarkvitha, or Lay of Volund, contained
in the Edda of Saemund. Volund (pronounced as if spelled Way-
land ) was one of three brothers, sons of an Elf-king ; that is
to say, of a supernatural race. The three brothers emigrated to
Ulfdal, where they married three Valkyries, or choosers of the slain,
maidens of celestial origin, the attendants of Odin, and whose attri-
butes were similar to those of the Greek Parcae, or Fates. After
seven years the three wives fled away to pursue their allotted duty
of visiting battle-fields. Two of the brothers went in search of their
errant wives ; but Volund remained in Ulfdal. He was a skillful
workman at the forge, and occupied his time in fabricating works
in gold and steel, while patiently awaiting the promised return of
his beloved spouse.

Niduth, the king of the country, having heard of the wonderful
skill of Vblund as a forger of metals, visited his home during his
absence and surreptitiously got possession of some of the jewels
which he had made, and of the beautiful sword which the smith had
fabricated for himself.

Volund, on his return, was seized by the warriors of Niduth and
conducted to the castle. There the queen, terrified at his fierce
looks, ordered him to be hamstrung. Thus, maimed and deprived
of the power of escape or resistance, he was confined to a small

THE LEGEND OF HIRAM ABIF

425

island in the vicinity of the royal residence and compelled to fabri-
cate jewels for the queen and her daughter, and weapons of war for
the king . 1

It were tedious to recount all the adventures of the smith while
confined in his island prison. It is sufficient to say that, having
constructed a pair of wings by which he was enabled to fly (by
which we are reminded of the Greek fable of Daedalus), he made
his escape, having by stratagem first dishonored the princess and
slain her two brothers.

This legend of “a curious and cunning workman ” at the forge
was so popular in Scandinavia that it extended into other countries,
where the Legend of the Smith presents itself under various modi-
fications.

In the Icelandic legend Volund is described as a great artist in
the fabrication of iron, gold, and silver. It does not, however, con-
nect him with supernatural beings, but attributes to him great skill
in his art, in which he is assisted by the power of magic.

The Germans had the same legend at a very early period. In
the German Legend the artificer is called Wieland, and he is repre-
sented as the son of a giant named Wade. He acquires the art of
a smith from Minner, a skillful workman, and is perfected by the
Dwarfs in all his operations at the forge as an armorer and gold-
smith. He goes of his own accord to the king, who is here called
Nidung, where he finds another skillful smith, named Amilias, with
whom he contends in battle, and kills him with his sword, Mimung.
For this offense he is maimed by the king, and then the rest of the
story proceeds very much like that of the Scandinavian legend.

Among the Anglo-Saxons the legend is found not varying
much from the original type. The story where the hero receives the
name of Weland is contained in an ancient poem, of which frag-
ments, unfortunately, only remain. The legend had become so fa-
miliar to the people that in the metrical romance of Beowulf the
coat of mail of the hero is described as the work of Weland ; and
King Alfred, in his translation of the Consolation of Philosophy , by
Boethius, where the author alludes to the bones of the Consul Fabri-
cius, in the passage “ ubi sunt ossa Fabricie?" (where now are the
bones of Fabricius ?), thus paraphrases the question : “ Where now

1 All these smiths of mythology and folk-lore are represented as being lame, like
Hephaestus, who broke his leg in falling from heaven.

426

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

are the bones of the wise Weland, the goldsmith that was formerly
so famed?” Geoffrey of Monmouth afterward, in a Latin poem,
speaks of the gold, and jewels, and cups that had been sculptured
by Weland, which name he Latinizes as Gueilandus.

In the old French chronicles we repeatedly encounter the legend
of the skillful smith, though, as might be expected, the name under-
goes many changes. Thus, in a poem of the 6th century, entitled
Gautier a la main forte , or Walter of the strong hand , it is said
that in a combat of Walter de Varkastein he was protected from
the lance of Randolf by a cuirass made by Wieland.

Another chronicle, of the 12th century, tells us that a Count of
Angouleme, in a battle with the Normans, cut the cuirass and the
body of the Norman King in twain at a single stroke, with his sword
Durissima, which had been made by the smith Walander. A chron-
icle of the same period, written by the monk John of Marmontier,
describes the magnificent habiliments of Geoffrey Plantagenet, Duke
of Normandy, among which, says the author, was “ a sword taken
from the royal treasury and long since renowned. Galannus, the
most skillful of armorers, had employed much labor and care in mak-
ing it.” Galans, for Walans (the G being substituted for the W, as
a letter unknown in the French alphabet), is the name bestowed in
general on this skillful smith, and the romances of the Trouvbres
and Troubadours of northern and southern France, in the 12th and
13th centuries, abound in references to swords of wondrous keen-
ness and strength that were forged by him for the knights and
paladins.

Whether the name was given as Volund, or Wieland , or Weland,
or Galans, it found its common origin in the Icelandic Volundr,
which signifies a smith. It is a generic term, from which the myth-
ical name has been derived. So the Greeks called the skillful work-
man, the smith of their folk-lore, Dczdalus, because there is a verb
in their language daidallo, which means to do skillful or ornamental
work.

Here it may not be irrelevant to notice the curious fact that
concurrently with these legends of a skillful smith there ran in the
Middle Ages others, of which King Solomon was the subject. In
many of these old romances and metrical tales, a skill is attributed
to him which makes him the rival of the subordinate artisan. In-
deed, the artistic reputation of Solomon was so proverbial at the

THE LEGEND OF HIRAM ABIE

427

very time when these legends of the smith were prevalent, that in
the poems of those days we meet with repeated uses of the expres-
sion “l’uevre Salemon,” or “the work of Solomon,” to indicate
any production of great artistic beauty.

So fully had the Scandinavian sagas, the German chronicles,
and the French romances spoken of this mythical smith that the
idea became familiar to the common people, and was handed down
in the popular superstitions and the folk-lore, to a comparatively
modern period. Two of these, one from Germany and one from
England, will suffice as examples, and show the general identity of
the legends and the probability of their common origin . 1

Herman Harrys, in his Tales and Legends of Lower Saxony, tells
the story of a smith who dwelt in the village of Hagen, on the side
of a mountain, about two miles from Osnabriick. He was cele-
brated for his skill in forging metals ; but, being discontented with
his lot, and murmuring against God, he was supernaturally carried
into a cavernous cleft of the mountain, where he was condemned to
be a metal-king, and, resting by day, to labor at night at the forge
for the benefit of men, until the mine in the mountain should cease
to be productive.

In the coolness of the mine, says the legend, his good disposition
returned, and he labored with great assiduity, extracting ore from its
veins, and at first forging household and agricultural implements.
Afterward he confined himself to the shoeing of horses for the neigh-
boring farmers. In front of the cavern was a stake fixed in the ground,
to which the countryman fastened the horse which he wished to
have shod, and on a stone near by he laid the necessary fee. He
then retired. On returning in due time he would find the task com-
pleted ; but the smith, or, as he was called, the Hiller , i.e., Hider,
would never permit himself to be seen.

Similar to this is the English legend, which tells us that in a
vale of Berkshire, at the foot of White Horse Hill, evidently,
from the stones which lay scattered around, the site of a Druidic mon-
ument, formerly dwelt a person named Wayland Smith. It is easily

! For many of the details of these two legends, as well as for much that has already
been said of the mythological smith of the Middle Ages, I have been indebted to the
learned Dissertation of MM. Depping and Michel. It has been ably translated from the
French, with additions by Mr. S. W. Singer, London, 1847.

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

42S

understood that here the handicraft title has been incorporated with
the anglicized name, and that it is the same as the mediaeval Weland
the Smith. No one ever saw him, for the huge stones alforded him
a hiding-place. He, too, was a Hiller ; for the word in the pre-
ceding legend does not mean “the man of the hill,” but is from the
German hilllen , to cover or conceal, and denotes the man who con-
ceals himself. In this studious concealment of their persons by
both of these smiths we detect the common origin of the two
legends. When his services were required to shoe ^ horse, the
animal was left among the stones and a piece of money placed on
one of them. The owner then retired, and after some time had
elapsed he returned, when he found that the horse was shod and
the money had disappeared. The English reader ought to be fa-
miliar with this story from the use made of it by Sir Walter Scott
m his novel of Kenilworth.

It is very evident, from all that has been here said, that the smith,
as the fabricator of weapons for the battle-field and jewels for the
boudoir , as well as implements of agriculture and household use,
was a most important personage in the earliest times, deified by the
ancients, and invested by the moderns with supernatural gifts. It is
equally evident that this respect for the smith as an artificer was prev-
alent in the Middle Ages. But in the very latest legends, by a cus-
tomary process of degeneration in all traditions, when the stream
becomes muddled as it proceeds onward, he descended in character
from a forger of swords, his earliest occupation, to be a shoer of
horses, which was his last.

It must be borne in mind, also, that in the Middle Ages the re-
spect for the smith as a “ curious and cunning ” workman began by
the introduction of a new element, brought by the Crusaders and
pilgrims from the East to be shared with King Solomon, who was
supposed to be invested with equal skill.

It is not, therefore, strange that the idea should have been incor-
porated into the rituals of the various secret societies of the Middle
Ages, and adopted by the Freemasons, at first by the Operative
branch and afterward, in a more enlarged form, by the Speculative
Masons.

In all of the old manuscript constitutions of the Operative
Masons we find the Legend of the Craft, and with it, except in one
instance, and that the earliest, a reference to Tubal Cain as the one

THE LEGEND OF HIRAM ABIF 429

who “ found [that is, invented] the Smith Craft of gold and silver,
iron and copper and steel.”

Nothing but the universal prevalence of the mediaeval legend of
the smith, Volund or Weland, can, I think, account for this refer-
ence to the Father of Smith Craft in a legend which should have
been exclusively appropriated to Stone Craft. There is no connec-
tion between the forge and the trowel which authorized on any other
ground the honor paid by stone-masons to a forger of metals — an
honor so marked that in time the very name of Tubal Cain came
to be adopted as a significant and important word in the Masonic
ritual, and the highest place in the traditional labors of the Temple
was assigned to a worker in gold and brass and iron.

Afterward, when the Operative Art was superseded by the
Speculative Science, the latter supplemented to the simple Legend
of the Craft the more recondite Legend of the Temple. In this
latter Legend, the name of that Hiram whom the King of Tyre had
sent with all honor to the King of Israel, to give him aid in the con-
struction of the Temple, is first introduced under his biblical appella-
tion. But this is not the first time that this personage is made
known to the fraternity. In the older Legends he is mentioned,
always with a different name but always, also, as “ King Solomon’s
Master Mason.”

In the beginning of the 18th century, when what has been called
the Revival took place, there was a continuation of the general idea
that he was the chief Mason at the Temple ; but the true name of
Hiram Abif is, as we have already said, then first found in a written
or printed record. Anderson speaks of his architectural abilities in
exaggerated terms. He calls him in one place “the most accom-
plished Mason on earth," and in another “ the prince of architects.”
This character has adhered to him in all subsequent times, and the
unwritten Legend of the present day represents him as the “ Chief
Builder of the Temple,” the “ Operative Grand Master,” and the
“ Skillful Architect ” by whose elaborate designs on his trestle-board
the Craft were guided in their labors and the edifice was constructed.

Now, it will be profitable in the investigation of historic truth to
compare these attributes assigned to Hiram Abif by the older and
more recent legendists with the biblical accounts of the same per-
son which have already been cited.

In the original Hebrew text of the passage in the book of

43 °

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

Chronicles, the words which designate the profession of Hiram Abif
are khoresh nekhoshet ; literally, a worker in brass. The Vulgate,
which was the popular version in those days and from which the
old legendists must have derived their knowledge of biblical his-
tory, thus translates the letter of King Hiram to King Solomon :

“ Therefore I have sent to thee a wise and most skillful man, Hiram
the workman or smith, my father” — Hiram fabrem patrcm meum.

Indeed, in the close of the verse in the Authorized Version he
is described as being “cunning to work all works in brass.” And
hence Dr. Adam Clarke, in his Commentaries, calls him “a very in-
telligent coppersmith.”

The error into which the old legendists and the modern Masonic
writers have fallen, in supposing him to have been a stone-mason
or an architect, has arisen from the mistranslation in the Authorized
Version of the passage in Chronicles where he is said to have been
“skillful to work in gold and in silver, in brass, in iron, in stone, and in
timber.” The words in the original are Baabanun vebagnetsim, in
stones and in woods ; that is, in precious stones and in woods of vari-
ous kinds. That is to say, besides being a coppersmith he was a
lapidary and a carver and gilder. The words in the original Hebrew
are in the plural, and therefore the translation “ in wood and in tim-
ber ” is not correct. Gesenius says — and there is no better authority
for a Hebraism — that the word eben is used by way of excellence, to
denote a precious stone, and its plural, abanim, means, therefore,
precious stones. In the same wa y gnetz, which in the singular signifies
a tree, in the plural denotes materials of wood, for any purpose.

The work that was done by Hiram Abif in the Temple is fully
recounted in the first book of Kings, the seventh chapter, from the
fifteenth to the fortieth verse, and is briefly recapitulated in verses
forty-one to fifty. It is also enumerated in the third and fourth
chapters of second Chronicles, and in both books care is taken to
say that when this work was done the task of Hiram Abif was com-
pleted. In the first book of Kings (vii. 40) it is said: “ So Hiram
made an end of doing all the work that he made King Solomon for
the house of the Lord.” In the second book of Chronicles (iv.
2) the statement is repeated thus: “And Hiram finished the work
that he was to make for King Solomon for the house of God."

The same authority leaves us in no doubt as to what that work
wasto which the skill of Hiram Abif had been devoted. “ It was,” says

THE LEGEND OF HIRAM ABIF

43 1

the book of Chronicles, “ the two pillars, and the pommels and the
chapiters which were on the top of the pillars ; and four hundred
pomegranates on the two wreaths; two rows of pomegranates on
each wreath, to cover the two pommels of the chapiters which were
upon the pillars. He made also bases, and lavers made he upon the
bases ; one sea and twelve oxen under it. The pots also, and the
shovels and the flesh hooks and all their instruments, did Huram his
father (Hiram Abif) make to King Solomon, for the house of the
Lord, of bright brass.”

Enough has been said to show that the labors of Hiram Abif in
the Temple were those of a worker in brass and in precious stones,
in carving and in gilding, and not those of a stonemason. He was
the decorator and not the builder of the Temple. He owes the
position which he holds in the legends and in the ritual of Freema-
sonry, not to any connection which he had with the art of architect-
ure, of which there is not the slightest mention by the biblical au-
thorities, but, like Tubal Cain, to his skill in bringing the potency
of fire under his control and applying it to the forging of metals.

The high honor paid to him is the result of the influence of that
Legend of the Smith , so universally spread in the Middle Ages,
which recounted the wondrous deeds of Volund, or Wieland, or Way-
land. The smith was, in the mediaeval traditions, in the sagas of
the north and in the romances of the south of Europe, the maker
of swords and coats of mail; in the Legends of Freemasonry he was
transmuted into the fabricator of holy vessels and sacred implements.

But the idea that of all handicrafts smith-craft was the greatest
was unwittingly retained by the Masons when they elevated the skill-
ful smith of Tyre, the “cunning” worker in brass, to the highest
place as a builder in their Temple legend.

The spirit of critical iconoclasm, which strips the exterior husk
from the historic germ of all myths and legends, has been doing
much to divest the history of Freemasonry of all fabulous assump-
tions. This attempt to give to Hiram Abif his true position, and
to define his real profession, is in the spirit of that iconoclasm.

But the doctrine here advanced is not intended to affect in the
slightest degree the part assigned to Hiram Abif in the symbolism
of the Third Degree. Whatever may have been his profession, he
must have stood high in the confidence of the two kings, of him
who sent him and him who received him, as “ a master workman ; ”

432

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

and he might well be supposed to be entitled in an allegory to the
exalted rank bestowed upon him in the Legend of the Craft and in
the modern ritual.

Allegories are permitted to diverge at will from the facts of his-
tory and the teachings of science. Trees may be made to speak, as
they do in the most ancient fable extant, and it is no infringement
of their character that a worker in brass may be transmuted into a
builder in stone to suit a symbolic purpose.

Hence this “ celebrated artist,” as he is fairly called, whether
smith or mason, is still the representative, in the symbolism of Free-
masonry, of the abstract idea of man laboring in the temple of life,
and the symbolic lesson of his tried integrity and his unhappy fate
is still the same.

As Freemasons, when we view the whole Legend as a myth in-
tended to give expression to a symbolic idea, we may be content to
call him an architect, the first of Masons, and the chief builder of
the Temple ; but as students of history we can know nothing of him
and admit nothing concerning him that is not supported by authen-
tic and undisputed authority.

We must, therefore, look upon him as the ingenious artist, who
worked in metals and in precious stones, who carved in cedar and in
olive-wood, and thus made the ornaments of the Temple.

He is only the Volund or Wieland of the olden legend, changed,
by a mistaken but a natural process of transmuting traditions, from
a worker in brass to a worker in stone.

CHAPTER XLIV

THE LELAND MANUSCRIPT

HE Leland Manuscript, so called because it is
said to have been discovered by the celebrated
antiquary John Leland, and sometimes called
the Locke Manuscript in consequence of the
supposititious annotations appended to it by
that metaphysician, has for more than a century
attracted the attention and more recently ex-
cited the controversies of Masonic scholars. After having been
cited with approbation by such writers as Preston, Hutchinson,
Oliver, and Krause, it has suffered a reverse under the crucial
examination of later critics. It has by nearly all of these been
decided to be a forgery — a decision from which very few at this
day would dissent.

It is in fact one of those “pious frauds” intended to strengthen
the claim of the Order to a great antiquity and to connect it with
the mystical schools of the ancients. But as it proposes a theory
concerning the origin of the Institution, which was long accepted
as a legend of the Order, it is entitled to a place in the legendary
history of Freemasonry.

The story of this manuscript and the way in which it was in-
troduced to the notice of the Craft is a singular one.

In the Gentlemans Magazine for September, 1753, the so-
called manuscript was printed for the first time under the title
of “ Certayne Questyons with Awnserers to the same, Concern-
ynge the Mystery of Maconrye, wrytenne by the Hande of Kynge
Henrye the Sixthe of the Name, and faythfullye copyed by me
Johan Leylande Antiquaries, by the Commaunde of His High-
nesse.” That is, King Henry the Eighth, by whom Leland was
employed to search for antiquities in the libraries of cathedrals,
abbeys, priories, colleges, and all places where any ancient records
were to be found.

433

434

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

The article in the Gentleman s Magazine is prefaced with these
words :

“The following Treatise is said to be printed at Franckfort,
Germany, 1748, under the following Title. Ein Brief Vondem
Beruchmten Herr Johann Locke, betreffend die Frey-Maureren.
So auf einem Schrieb-Tisch enines verstorbnen Bruders ist gefun-
den worden. That is, A Letter of the famous Mr. John Locke
relating to Freemasonry ; found in the Desk or Scritoir of a de-
ceased Brother.”

The claim, therefore, is that this document was first published at
Frankfort in 1748, five years before it appeared in England. But
this German original has never been produced, nor is there any evi-
dence before us that there ever was such a production. The labo-
rious learning of Krause would certainly have enabled him to dis-
cover it had it ever been in existence. But, although he accepts
the so-called manuscript as authentic, he does not refer to the Frank-
fort copy, but admits that, so far as he knows, it first made its ap-
pearance in Germany in 1780, in J. G. L. Meyer’s translation of Pres-
ton’s Illustrations}

Kloss, it is true, in his Bibliography, gives the title in German,
with the imprint of “Frankfort, 12 pages.” But he himself says
that the actuality of such a document is to be wholly doubted. 3

Besides, it is not unusual with Kloss to give the titles of
books that he has never seen, and for whose existence he had no
other authority than the casual remark of some other writer. Thus
he gives the titles of the Short Analysis of the Unchanged Rites and
Ceremonies of Freemasons, said to have been printed in 1676, and
the Short Charge, ascribed to 1698, two books which have never
been found. But he applies to them the epithet of “ doubtful ” as
he does to the Frankfort edition of the Leland Manuscript.

But before proceeding to an examination of the external and
internal evidence of the true character of this document, it will be
expedient to give a sketch of its contents. It has been published in
so many popular works of easy access that it is unnecessary to pre-
sent it here in full.

It is introduced by a letter from Mr. Locke (the celebrated

1 u Kunsturkunden der Freimaurerei,” I., 14.

2 “ Bibliographic der Freimaurerei,” No. 329.

THE LELAND MANUSCRIPT

435

author of the Essay on the I Inman Understanding ), said to be ad-
dressed to the Earl of Pembroke, under date of May 6, 1696, in

which he states that by the help of Mr. C ns he had obtained a

copy of the MS. in the Bodleian Library, which he therewith had
sent to the Earl. It is accompanied by numerous notes which were
made the day before by Mr. Locke for the reading of Lady Masham,
who had become very fond of Masonry.

Mr. Locke says : “The manuscript oi which this is a copy, appears
to be about 160 years old. Yet (as your Lordship will observe by the
title) it is itself a copy of one yet more ancient by about 100 years.
For the original is said to have been the handwriting of K. H. VI.
Where the Prince had it is at present an uncertainty, but it seems to
me to be an examination (taken perhaps before the king) of some
one of the Brotherhood of Masons ; among whom he entered him-
self, as ’tis said, when he came out of his minority, and thenceforth
put a stop to the persecution that had been raised against them.”

The “examination,” for such it purports to be, as Mr. Locke
supposes, consists of twelve questions and answers. The style and
orthography is an attempted imitation of the language of the 1 5th
century. How far successful the attempt has been will be discussed
hereafter.

Masonry is described to be the skill of Nature, the understanding
of the might that is therein and its various operations, besides the
skill of numbers, weights and measures, and the true manner of
fashioning all things for the use of man, principally dwellings and
buildings of all kinds, and all other things that may be useful to
man.

Its origin is said to have been with the first men of the East, who
were before the Man of the West, by which Mr. Locke, 1 in his note,
says is meant Pre- Adamites, the “Man of the West” being Adam.
The Phoenicians, who first came from the East into Phoenicia, are
said to have brought it westwardly by the way of the Red and
Mediterranean seas.

It was brought into England by Pythagoras, who is called in the
document “ Peter Gower,” evidently from the French spelling of
the name, “ Petagore,” he having traveled in search of knowl-

1 It will be seen that in this and other places I cite the name of Mr. Locke as if he
were really the author of the note, a theory to which I by no means desire to commit my*
self. The reference in this way is merely for convenience.

436

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

edge into Egypt, Syria, and every other land where the Phoenicians
had planted Masonry. Having obtained a knowledge of the art in
the Lodges of Masons into which he gained admission, on his re-
turn to Europe he settled in Magna Grecia (the name given by the
ancients to Southern Italy), and established a Grand Lodge at Cro-
tona, one of its principal cities, where he made many Masons. Some
of these traveled into France and made many Masons, whence in
process of time the art passed over into England.

Such is the history of the origin and progress of Masonry which is
given in the Leland Manuscript. The remainder of the document
is engaged in giving the character and the objects of the Institution.

Thus it is said, in relation to secrecy, that Masons have at all
times communicated to mankind such of their secrets as might gen-
erally be useful, and have kept back only those that might be harm-
ful in evil hands — those that could be of no use unless accompanied
by the teachings of the Lodge, and those which are employed to bind
the brethren more strongly together.

The arts taught by Masons to mankind are enumerated as being
Agriculture, Architecture, Astronomy, Geometry, Arithmetic,
Music, Poetry, Chemistry, Government, and Religion.

Masons are said to be better teachers than other men, because
the first of them received from God the art of finding new arts, and
of teaching them, whereas the discoveries of other men have been
but few, and acquired only by chance. This art of discovery the
Masons conceal for their own profit. They also conceal the art of
working miracles, the art of foretelling future events, the art of
changes (which Mr. Locke is made in a note to interpret as signify-
ing the transmutation of metals), the method of acquiring the faculty
of Abrac, the power of becoming good and perfect without the aid
of fear and hope, and the universal language.

And lastly it is admitted that Masons do not know more than
other men, but only have a better opportunity of knowing, in which
many fail for want of capacity and industry. And as to their virtue,
while it is acknowledged that some are not so good as other men,
yet it is believed that for the most part they are better than they
would be if they were not Masons. And it is claimed that Masons
greatly love each other, because good and true men, knowing each
other to be such, always love the more the better they are.

“ And here endethe the Questyonnes and Awnsweres.”

THE LELAND MANUSCRIPT

437

There does not appear to be any great novelty or value in this
document. . The theory of the origin of Masonry had been advanced
by others before its appearance in public, and the characteristics of
Masonry had been previously defined in better language.

But no sooner is it printed in the Gentleman's Magazine for the
month of September, and year 1753, than it is seized as a bonne
bouche by printers and writers, so that being first received with sur-
prise, it was soon accepted as a genuine relic of the early age of
English Masonry and incorporated into its history, a position that it
has not yet lost, in the opinion of some. The forgeries of Chatter-
ton and of Ireland met a speedier literary death.

Of the genuine publications of this document, so much as this is
known.

It was first printed, as we have seen, in the Gentleman s Maga-
zine, in September, 1753. Kloss records a book as published in 1754,
with no place of publication, but probably it was London, with the
title of A Masonic Creed , with a curious letter by Mr. Locke. This,
we can hardly doubt, was the Leland Manuscript with a new title.
The republications in England pursued the following succession.
In 1756 it was printed in Entick’s edition of the Constitutions and
in Dermott’s Ahiman Rezon ; in 1763, in the Free-Masons' Pocket
Companion ; in 1769, in Wilkinson’s Constitutions of the Grand
Lodge of Ireland, and in Calcott’s Candid Disquisition ; in 1772,
in Huddesford’s Life of Leland , and in Preston’s Illustrations
of Masonry ; in 1775, in Hutchinson’s Spirit of Masonry ; and in
1784, in Northouck’s edition of the Constitutions.

In Germany it first appeared in 1776, says Krause, in J. G. L.
Meyer’s translation of Preston; in 1780, in a translation of Hutch-
inson, published at Berlin ; in 1805, in the Magazin fur Freimaurer
of Professor Seehass; in 1807, in the collected Masonic works of
Fessler; in 1810, by Dr. Krause in his Three Oldest Doctiments ;
and in 1824, by Mossdorf in his edition of Lenning’s Encyclopadie.

In France, Thory published a translation of it, with some com-
ments of his own, in 1815, in the Acta Latomorzim.

In America it was, so far as I know, first published in 1783, in
Smith’s Ahiman Rezon of the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania; it
was also published in 1817, by Cole, in his Ahiman Rezon of Mary-
land, and it has been copied into several other works.

In none of these republications, with one or two exceptions, is

43 »

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

there an expression of the slightest doubt of the genuineness of tht
document. It has on the contrary been, until recently, almost every -
where accepted as authentic, and as the detail of an actual examina-
tion of a Mason or a company of Masons, made by King Henry
VI., of England, or some of his ministers, in the 15th century.

Of all who have cited this pretended manuscript, Dr. Carl Chris-
tian Friederich Krause is perhaps the most learned, and the one who
from the possession of great learning, we should naturally expect
would have been most capable of detecting a literary forgery,
speaks of it, in his great work on The Three Oldest Documents of
the Fraternity of Freemasons , as being a remarkable and instructive
document and as among the oldest that are known to us. In Eng-
land, he says, it is, so far as it is known to him, accepted as authen-
tic by the learned as well as by the whole body of the Craft, without
a dissenting voice. And he refers as evidence of this to the facl
that the Grand Lodge of England has formally admitted it into its
Book of Constitutions , while the Grand Lodge of Scotland has ap-
proved the work of Lawrie, in which its authenticity is supported
by new proofs.

And Mossdorf, whose warm and intimate relations with Krause
influenced perhaps to some extent his views on this as well as they
did on other Masonic subjects, has expressed a like favorable opin-
ion of the Leland Manuscript. In his additions to the Encyclopadie
of Lenning, he calls it a remarkable document, which, notwithstand-
ing a singularity about it, and its impression of the ancient time in
which it originated, is instructive, and the oldest catechism which we
have on the origin, the nature, and the design of Masonry.

The editor of Lawrie’s History is equally satisfied of the genuine
character of this document, to which he confidently refers as conclu-
sive evidence that Dr. Plot was wrong in saying that Henry VI. did
njt patronize Masonry.

Dr. Oliver is one of the most recent and, as might be expected
fiom his peculiar notions in respect to the early events of Masonry,
one of the most ardent defenders of the authenticity of the manu-
script, although he candidly admits “ that there is some degree of
mystery about it, and doubts have been entertained whether it be not
a forgery.”

But, considering its publicity at a time when Freemasonry was
beginning to excite a considerable share of public attention, and that

THE LELAND MANUSCRIPT

439

the deception, if there was one, would have been publicly exposed
by the opponents of the Order, he thinks that their silence is pre-
sumptive proof that the document is genuine.

“ Being thus universally diffused,” he says, “ had it been a sus-
pected document, its exposure would have been certainly attempted —
if a forgery, it would have been unable to have endured the test of
a critical examination. But no such attempt was made, and the pre-
sumption is that the document is authentic.”

But, on the other hand, there are some writers who have as
carefully investigated the subject as those whom I have referred
to, but the result of whose investigations have led them irresistibly
to the conclusion that the document never had any existence until
the middle of the 18th century, and that the effort to place it in
the time of Henry VI. is, as Mounier calls it, “ a Masonic fraud.”

As early as 1787, while the English Masons were receiving it as
a document of approved truth, the French critics had begun to doubt
its genuineness. At a meeting of the Philalethes, a Rite of Hermetic
Masonry which had been instituted at Paris in 1775, the Marquis de
Chefdebien read a paper entitled Masonic Researches for the use of
the Primitive Rite of Narbonne .* In this paper he presented an un-
favorable criticism of the Leland Manuscript. In 1801 M. Mounier
published an essay On the Influence attributed to the Philosophers, the
Freemasons and the Illuminati in the French Revolution , s in which
he pronounces the document to be a forgery and a Masonic fraud.

Lessing was the first of the German critics who attacked the
genuineness of the document. This he did in his Ernst und Falk,
the first edition of which was published in 1778. Others followed,
and the German unfavorable criticisms were closed by Findel, the
editor of the Bauhiitte, and author of a History of Freemasonry, first
published in 1865, and which was translated in 1869 by Bro. Lyon.
He says : “There is no reliance, whatever, to be placed on any asser-
tions based on this spurious document ; they all crumble to dust.
Not even in England does any well-informed Mason of the present
day, believe in the genuineness of this bungling composition.”

In England it is only recently that any doubts of its authentic-

1 “ Recherches Ma^onniques h. l’usage des Fr£res du Regime Premitifde Narbonne.”

2 “ De ^Influence attribute aux Philosophes, aux Franc-Masons et aux Illumines sui
la Revolution de France,” per F. F. Mounier.

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

44 '

i ty have been expressed by Masonic critics. The first attack upon
it was made in 1849, by Mr. George Sloane, in his New Curiosities
of Literature. Sloane was not a Freemason, and his criticism, vig-
orous as it is, seems to have been inspired rather by a feeling of en-
mity to the Institution than by an honest desire to seek the truth.
His conclusions, however, as to the character of the document are
based on the most correct canons of criticism. Bro. A. F. A.
Woodford is more cautious in the expression of his judgment, but
admits that “ we must give up the actual claim of the document to
be a manuscript of the time of King Henry VI., or to have been
written by him or copied by Leland.” Yet he thinks “ it not unlikely
that we have in it the remains of a Lodge catechism conjoined with a
Hermetic one.” But this is a mere supposition, and hardly a plaus-
ible one.

But a recent writer, unfortunately anonymous, in the Afasonic
Magazine? of London, has given an able though brief review of the
arguments for and against the external evidence of authenticity, and
has come to the conclusion that the former has utterly failed and
that the question must fall to the ground.

Now, amid such conflicting views, an investigation must be con-
ducted with the greatest impartiality. The influence of great
names, especially among the German writers, has been enlisted on
both sides, and the most careful judgment must be exercised in de-
termining which of these sides is right and which is wrong.

In the investigation of the genuineness of any document we
must have resort to two kinds of evidence, the external and the in-
ternal. The former is usually more clear and precise, as well as
more easily handled, because it is superficial and readily compre-
hended by the most unpracticed judgment. But when there is no
doubt about the interpretation, and there is a proper exercise of
skill, internal evidence is freer from doubt, and therefore the most
conclusive. It is, says a recent writer on the history of our lan-
guage, the pure reason of the case, speaking to us directly, by which
we can not be deceived, if we only rightly apprehend it. But, al-
though we must sometimes dispense with external evidence, because
it may be unattainable, while the internal evidence is always exist-
ent, yet the combination of the two will make the conclusion to

1 Vol. vi., No. 64, October, 1878, p. 148.

THE LELAND MANUSCRIPT

44i

which we may arrive more infallible than it could be by the appli-
cation of either kind alone.

If it should be claimed that a particular document was written
in a certain century, the mention of it, or citations from it, by con-
temporary authors would be the best external evidence of its genu-
ineness. It is thus that the received canon of the New Testament
has been strengthened in its authority, by the quotation of numerous
passages of the Gospels and the Epistles which are to be found in
the authentic writings of the early Fathers of the Church. This is
the external evidence.

If the language of the document under consideration, the pecul-
iar style, and the archaic words used in it should be those found in
other documents known to have been written in the same century,
and if the sentiments are those that we should look for in the au-
thor, are in accord with the age in which he lived, this would be inter-
nal evidence and would be entitled to great weight.

But this internal evidence is subject to one fatal defect. The
style and language of the period and the sentiments of the pre-
tended author and of the age in which he lived may be successfully
imitated by a skillful forger, and then the results of internal evidence
will be evaded. So the youthful Chatterton palmed upon the world
the supposititious productions of the monk Rowley, and Ireland
forged pretended plays of Shakespeare. Each of these made ad-
mirable imitations of the style of the authors whose lost productions
they pretended to have discovered.

But when the imitation has not been successful, or when there
has been no imitation attempted, the use of words which were un-
known at the date claimed for the document in dispute, or the ref-
erence to events of which the writer must be ignorant, because they
occurred at a subsequent period, or when the sentiments are incon-
gruous to the age in which they are supposed to have been written,
then the internal evidence that it is a forgery, or at least a produc-
tion of a later date, will be almost invincible.

It is by these two classes of evidence that I shall seek to inquire
into the true character of the Leland Mamiscript.

If it can be shown that there is no evidence of the existence of
the document before the year 1753, and if it can also be shown that
neither the language of the document, the sentiments expressed in
it, nor the character attributed to the chief actor, King Henry VI.,

442

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

are in conformity with a document of the 15th century, we shall be
authorized in rejecting the theory that it belongs to such a period
as wholly untenable, and the question will admit of no more dis-
cussion.

But in arriving at a fair conclusion, whatever it may be, the rule
of Ulpian must be obeyed, and the testimonies must be well con-
sidered and not merely counted. It is not the number of the whole
but the weight of each that must control our judgment.

Those who defend the genuineness of the Leland Manuscript
are required to establish these points :

1. That the document was first printed at Frankfort, in Ger-
many, whence it was copied into the Gentleman s Magazine for
September, 1753.

2. That the original manuscript was, by command of King Henry
VIII., copied by John Leland from an older document of the age
of Henry VI.

3. That this original manuscript, of which Leland made a copy,
was written by King Henry VI.

4. That the manuscript of Leland was deposited in the Bodleian
Library.

5. That a copy of this manuscript of Leland was made by a

Mr. C ns, which is said to mean Collins, and given by him to

John Locke, the celebrated metaphysician.

6. That Locke wrote notes or annotations on it in the year 1696,
which were published in Frankfort in 1 748, and afterward in Eng-
land, in 1 753.

The failure to establish by competent proof any one of these six
points will seriously affect the credibility of the whole story, for each
of them is a link of one continuous chain.

1. Now as to the first point, that the document was first printed
at Frankfort in the year 1748. The Frankfort copy has never yet
been seen, notwithstanding diligent search has been made for it by
German writers, who were the most capable of discovering it, if it
had ever existed. The negative evidence is strong that the Frank-
fort copy may be justly considered as a mere myth. It follows that
the article in the Gentleman' s Magazine is an original document,
and we have a right to suppose that it was written at the time for
some purpose, to be hereafter considered, for, as the author of it
has given a false reference, we may conclude that if he had copied it

THE LELAND MANUSCRIPT

443

at all he would have furnished us with the true one. Kloss, it is
true, has admitted the title into his catalogue, but he has borrowed
his description of it from the article in the Gentleman' s Magazine ,
and speaks of this Frankfort copy as being doubtful. He evidently
had never seen it, though he was an indefatigable searcher after Ma-
sonic books. Krause’s account of it is, that it first was found worthy
of Locke’s notice in England ; that thence it passed over into Ger-
many — “how, he does not know” — appeared in Frankfort, and then
returned back to England, where it was printed in 1753. But all
this is mere hearsay, and taken by Krause from the statement in the
Gentleman' s Magazine. He makes no reference to the Frankfort
copy in his copious notes in his Kunsturkunden, and, like Kloss,
had no personal knowledge of any such publication. In short,
there is no positive evidence at all that any such document was
printed at Frankfort-on-the-Main, but abundant negative evidence
that it was not. The first point must therefore be abandoned.

2. The second point that requires to be proved is that the mam
uscript was, by command of King Henry VIII., copied by John
Leland from an older document of the age of Henry VI. Now,
there is not the slightest evidence that a manuscript copy of the orig-
inal document was taken by Leland, except what is afforded by the
printed article in the Gentleman' s Magazine , the authenticity of
which is the very question in dispute, and it is a good maxim of
the law that no one ought to be a witness in his own cause. But
even this evidence is very insufficient. For, admitting that Locke
was really the author of the annotations (an assertion which also
needs proof), he does not say that he had seen the Leland copy, but
only a copy of it, which had been made for him by a friend. So
that even at that time the Leland Manuscript had not been brought
to sight, and up to this has never been seen. Amid all the laborious
and indefatigable researches of Bro. Hughan in the British Museum,
in other libraries, and in the archives of lodges, while he has discov-
ered many valuable old records and Masonic Constitutions which
until then had lain hidden in these various receptacles, he has failed
to unearth the famous Leland Manuscript. The hope of ever
finding it is very faint, and must be entirely extinguished if other
proofs can be adduced of its never having existed.

Huddesford, in his Life of Leland, had, it is true, made the fol-
lowing statement in reference to this manuscript : “ It also appears

444

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

that an ancient manuscript of Leland’s has long remained in the Bod-
leian Library, unnoticed in any account of our author yet published.
This Tract is entitled Certayne Questyons with Awnswercs to the
same concernynge the mystery of Maconrye. The original is said
to be the handwriting of K. Henry VI., by order of his highness
K. Henry VIII.” 1 And he then proceeds to dilate upon the im-
portance of this “ ancient monument of literature, if its authen-
ticity remains unquestioned.”

But it must be remembered that Huddesford wrote in 1772, nine-
teen years after the appearance of the document in the Gentleman s
Magazine, which he quotes in his Appendix, and from which it is
evident that he derived all the knowledge that he had of the pseudo-
manuscript. But the remarks on this subject of the anonymous
writer in the London Masonic Magazine, already referred to, are so
apposite and conclusive that they justify a quotation.

“Though Huddesford was keeper of the Ashmolean Library, in
the Bodleian, he does not seek to verify even the existence of the
manuscript, but contents himself with ‘it also appears ’ that it is from
the Gentleman' s Magazine of 1 753. He surely ought not to have put
in here such a statement, that an ancient manuscript of Leland has
long remained in the Bodleian, without inquiry or collation. Either
he knew the fact to be so, as he stated it, or he did not ; but in either
case his carelessness as an editor is, to my mind, utterly inexcusable.
Nothing would have been easier for him than to verify an alleged
manuscript of Leland, being an officer in the very collection in which
it was said to exist. Still, if he did not do so, either the manuscript
did exist, and he knew it, but did not think well, for some reason,
to be more explicit about it, or he knew nothing at all about it, and
by an inexcusable neglect of his editorial duty, took no pains to
ascertain the truth, and simply copied others, by his quasi recog-
nition of a professed mamiscript of Leland.”

But it is utterly incredible that Huddesford could have known
and yet concealed his knowledge of the existence of the mamcscript.
There is no conceivable motive that could be assigned for such con-
cealment and for the citation at the same time of other authority for
the fact. It is therefore a fair inference that his only knowledge of
the document was derived from the Gentleman 's Magazine. There

1 Huddcsford’s “ Life of John Leland," p. 67.

THE LELAND MANUSCRIPT

445

is, therefore, no proof whatever that Leland ever copied any older
manuscript.

Referring to certain obvious mistakes in the printed copy, such
as Peter Gower for Pythagoras , it has been said that it is evident
that the document was not printed from Leland’s original transcript,
but rather from a secondary copy of an unlearned. Huddesford
adopts this view, but if he had ever seen the manuscript of Leland
he could have better formed a judgment by a collation of it with the
printed copy than by a mere inference that a man of Leland’s learn-
ing could not have made such mistakes. As he did not do so, it
follows that he had never seen Leland' s Manuscript. The sec-
ond point, therefore, falls to the ground.

3. The third point requiring proof is that the original manu-
script , of which Leland made a copy , was written by King Henry
VI. There is a legal rule that when a deed or writing is not pro-
duced in court, and the loss of it is not reasonably accounted for, it
shall be treated as if it were not existent. This is just the case of
the pretended manuscript in the handwriting of Henry VI. No one
has ever seen that manuscript, no one has ever had any knowledge
of it ; the fact of its ever having existed depends solely on the state-
ment made in the Gentleman s Magazine that it had been copied by
Leland. Of a document “ in the clouds ” as this is, whose very
existence is a mere presumption built on the very slightest founda-
tion, it is absurd to predicate an opinion of the handwriting. Time
enough when the manuscript is produced to inquire who wrote it.
The third point, therefore, fails to be sustained.

4. The fourth point is that the mamiscript of Leland was de-
posited in the Bodleian Library. This has already been discussed
in the argument on the first and third point. It is sufficient now to
say that no such manuscript has been found in that library. The
writer in the London Masonic Magazine , whom I have before
quoted, says that he had had a communication with the authorities
of the Bodleian Library, and had been informed that nothing is
known of it in that collection. Among the additional manuscripts
of the British Museum are some that were once owned by one
Essex, an architect, who lived late in the last century. Among these
is a copy of the Leland Mamiscript — evidently a copy made by
Essex from the Gentleman s Magazine , or some one of the other
works in which it had been printed. I say evidently, because in the

446

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

same collection is a copy of the Grand Mystery , transcribed by
him as he had transcribed the Lela 7 id Manuscript , as a, to him per-
haps, curious relic. The original Leland Ma 7 iuscript is nowhere to
be found, and there the attempt to prove the fourth point is unsuc-
cessful.

5. The fifth point is that a copy of Leland' s MS. was made by a

Mr. C ns, and given by him to Locke. The Pocket Companion

printed the name as “ Collins,” upon what authority I know not.
There were only two distinguished men of that name who were
contemporaries of Locke — John Collins, the mathematician, and
Anthony Collins, the celebrated skeptical writer. It could not have
been the former who took the copy from the Ashmolean Library in
1696, for he died in 1683. There is, however, a strong probability
that the latter was meant by the writer of the prefatory, since he was
on such relations with Locke as to have been appointed one of his
executors, 1 and it is an ingenious part of the forgery that he should
be selected to perform such an act of courtesy for his friend as the
transcription of an old manuscript. Yet there is an uncertainty
about it, and it is a puzzle to be resolved why Mr. Locke should
have unnecessarily used such a superabundance of caution, and given
only the initial and final letters of the name of a friend who had
been occupied in the harmless employment of copying for him a
manuscript in a public library. This is mysterious, and mystery is
always open to suspicion. For uncertainty and indefiniteness the
fifth point is incapable of proof.

6. The sixth and last point is that the notes or annotations were
written by Mr. Locke in / 6 p 6 , and fifty-two years afterward printed
in Frankfort-on-the-Main. We must add to this, because it is a
part of the story, that the English text, with the annotations of
Locke, said to have been translated into German, the question — was
it translated by the unknown brother in whose desk the document
was found after his death ? — and then retranslated into English for
the use of the Gentle 7 nan s Magazine.

It is admitted that if we refuse to accept the document printed
in the magazine in 1753 as genuine, it must follow that the notes

1 It is strange that the idea that the Collins mentioned in the letter was Collins, the
friend and executor of Locke, should not have suggested itself to any of the defenders or
oppugners of the document. The writer in the “ London Masonic Magazine ” intimates
that he was “a book-collector, or dealer in MSS.”

THE LELAND MANUSCRIPT

447

supposed to have been written by Locke are also spurious. The
two questions are not necessarily connected. Locke may have
been deceived, and, believing that the manuscript presented to him

by C ns, or Collins, if that was really his name, did take the

trouble, for the sake of Lady Masham, to annotate it and to explain
its difficulties.

But if we have shown that there is no sufficient proof, and, in
fact, no proof at all, that there ever was such a manuscript, and there-
fore that Collins did not transcribe it, then it will necessarily follow
that the pretended notes of Locke are as complete a forgery as the
text to which they are appended. Now, if the annotations of Locke
were genuine, why is it that after diligent search this particular one
has not been found ? It is known that Locke left several manu-
scripts behind him, some of which were published after his death by
his executors, King and Collins, and several unpublished manu-
scripts went into the possession of Lord King, who in 1829 pub-
lished the Life and Correspondence of Locke. But nowhere has
the notorious Leland Manuscript appeared. “ If John Locke’s let-
ter were authentic,” says the writer already repeatedly referred to,
“a copy of this manuscript would remain among Mr. Locke’s
papers, or at Wilton House, and the original manuscript prob-
ably in the hands of this Mr. Collins, whoever he was, or in
the Bodleian.”

But there are other circumstances of great suspicion connected
with the letter and annotations of Locke, which amount to a con-
demnation of their authenticity. In concluding his remarks on
what he calls “this old paper,” Locke is made to say: “It has so
raised my curiosity as to induce me to enter myself into the frater-
nity ; which I am determined to do (if I may be admitted) the next
time I go to London, and that will be shortly.”

Now, because it is known that at the date of the pseudo-letter,
Mr. Locke was actually residing at Oates, the seat of Sir Francis
Masham, for whose lady he says that the annotations were made,
and because it is also known that in the next year he made a visit to
London, Oliver says that there “ he was initiated into Masonry.’
Now, there is not the slightest proof of this initiation, nor is it im
portant to the question of authenticity whether he was initiated or
not, because if he was not it would only prove that he had aban-
doned the intention he had expressed in the letter. But I cite the

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

MS

unsupported remark of Dr. Oliver to show how Masonic histoiy has
hitherto been written — always assumptions, and facts left to take
care of themselves.

But it is really most probable that Mr. Locke was not made a
Freemason in 1697 or at any other time, for if he had been, Dr.
Anderson, writing the history of Masonry only a few years after-
ward, would not have failed to have entered this illustrious name in
the list of “ learned scholars ” who had patronized the Fraternity.

It appears, from what is admitted in reference to this subject,
that the Leland Manuscript, having been obtained by Mr. Collins
from the Bodleian Library, was annotated by Mr. Locke, and a let-
ter, stating the fact, was sent with the manuscript and annotations to
a nobleman whose rank and title are designated by stars (a needless
mystery), but who has been subsequently supposed to be the Earl of
Pembroke. All this was in the year 1696. It then appears to have
been completely lost to sight until the year 1 748, when it is suddenly
found hidden away in the desk of a deceased brother in Germany.
During these fifty-two years that it lay in abeyance, we hear nothing
of it. Anderson, the Masonic historian, could not have heard of it,
for he does not mention it in either the edition of the Constitutions
published in 1723, or in that more copious one of 1738. If anyone
could have known of it, if it was in existence, it would have been
Anderson, and if he had ever seen or heard of it he would most
certainly have referred to it in his history of Masonry during the
reign of Henry VI.

He does say, indeed, that according to a record in the reign of
Edward IV. “ the charges and laws of the Freemasons have been
seen and perused by our late Sovereign, King Henry VI., and by
the Lords of his most honourable Council, who have allowed them
and declared that they be right good and reasonable to be holden
as they have been drawn out and collected from the records of
ancient times,” etc. 1

But it is evident that this is no description of the Leland Manu-
script, which does not consist of “ charges and laws,” but is simply a
history of the origin of Masonry, and a declaration of its character
and objects. And yet the fact that there is said to have been some-
thing submitted by the Masons to Henry VI. and his Council was

Anderson’s “ Constitutions,” edition of 1738, p. 75.

THE LELAND MANUSCRIPT

449

enough to suggest to the ingenious forger the idea of giving to his
pseudo-manuscript a date corresponding to the reign of that mon-
arch. But he overleaped the bounds of caution in giving the pe-
culiar form to his forgery. Had he fabricated a document similar to
those ancient constitutions, many genuine manuscripts of which are
extant, the discovery of the fraud would have been more difficult.

But to continue the narrative : The manuscript , having been
found in the desk of this unknown deceased brother, is forthwith
published at Frankfort, Germany, in a pamphlet of twelve pages
and in the German language.

Here again there are sundry questions to be asked, which can
not be answered. Had the tale been a true one, and the circum-
stances such as always accompany the discovery of a lost document,
and which are always put upon record, the replies and explanations
would have been ready.

Was the letter of Locke, including of course the catechism of the
Leland Manuscript , which was found in the desk of the unknown
brother, the original document, or was it only a copy ? If the lat-
ter, had it been copied in English by the brother, or translated by
him into German ? If not translated by him, by whom was it trans-
lated? Was the pamphlet printed in Frankfort merely a German
translation, or did it also contain, in parallel columns, the English
original, as Krause has printed the English documents in his Kun-
sturkunden , and as, in fact, he has printed this very document ?
These are questions of very great importance in determining the
value and authenticity of the Frankfort pamphlet. And yet not one
of them can be answered, simply because that pamphlet has never
been found, nor is it known that anyone has ever seen it

The pamphlet next makes its appearance five years afterward in
England, and in an English translation in the Gentleman! s Maga-
zine for September, 1753. Nobody can tell, or at least nobody has
told, how it got there, who brought it over, who translated it from
the German, how it happened that the archaic language of the text
and the style of Locke have been preserved. These are facts abso-
lutely necessary to be known in any investigation of the question of
authenticity, and yet over them all a suspicious silence broods.

Until this silence is dissipated and these questions answered by
the acquisition of new knowledge in the premises, which it can
hardly now be expected will be obtained, the stain of an imposture

29

450

PREHISTORIC MASONRY

must remain upon the character of the document. The discov-
erer of a genuine manuscript would have been more explicit in his
details.

As to internal evidence, there is the most insuperable difficulty
in applying here the canons of criticism which would identify the
age of the manuscript by its style.

Throwing aside any consideration of the Frankfort pamphlet on
account of the impossibility of explaining the question of transla-
tion, and admitting, for the time, that Mr. Locke did really anno-
tate a copy of a manuscript then in the Bodleian Library, which
copy was made for him by his friend Collins, how, with this admis-
sion, will the case stand ?

In Mr. Locke’s letter (accepting it as such) he says : “The man-
uscript, of which this is a copy, appears to be about 160 years old.”
As the date of Locke’s letter is 1696, this estimate would bring us to
1536, or the thirty-first year of the reign of Henry VIII. Lockecould
have derived his knowledge of this fact only in two ways : from the
date given in the manuscript, or from its style and language as be-
longing, in his opinion, to that period.

But if he derived his knowledge from the date inserted at the
head of the manuscript, that knowledge would be of no value, be-
cause it is the very question which is at issue. The writer of a
forged document would affix to it the date necessary to carry out
his imposture, which of course would be no proof of genuineness.

But if Locke judged from the style, then it must be said that,
though a great metaphysician and statesman, and no mean theolo-
gian, he was not an archaeologist or antiquary, and never had any
reputation as an expert in the judgment of old records. Of this we
have a proof here, for the language of the Leland Manuscript is
not that of the period in which Leland lived. The investigator
may easily satisfy himself of this by a collation of Leland’s gen-
uine works, or of the Cranmer Bible, which is of the same date.

But it may be said that Locke judged of the date, not by the style,
but by the date of the manuscript itself. And this is probably true,
because he adds : “ Vet (as your Lordship will observe by the title)
it is itself a copy of one yet more ancient by about 100 years: For
the original is said to have been in the handwriting of K. H. VI.”

Locke then judged only by the title — a very insufficient proof,
as I have already said, of authenticity. So Locke seems to have

THE LELAND MANUSCRIPT

45i

thought, for he limits the positiveness of the assertion by the quali-
fying phrase “ it is said.” If we accept this for what it is worth, the
claim will be that the original manuscript was written in the reign of
Henry VI., or about the middle of the 15th century. But here
again the language is not of that period. The new English, as it is
called, was then beginning to take that purer form which a century
and a half afterward culminated in the classical and vigorous style of
Cowley. We find no such archaisms as those perpetrated in this
document in the Repressor of over-much Blaming of the Clergy ,
written in the same reign, about 1450, by Bishop Pecock, nor in
the Earl of Warwick’s petition to Duke Humphrey, written in 1432,
nor in any other of the writings of that period. It is not surprising,
therefore, that the glossary or list of archaic words used in the docu-
ment, by which from internal evidence we could be enabled to fix its
date, has, according to Mr. Woodford, “ always been looked upon
with much suspicion by experts.”

If I may advance an hypothesis upon the subject, I should say
that the style is a rather clumsy imitation of that of Sir John Man-
deville, whose Voiage and Travaile was written in 1356, about a
century before the pretended date of the Leland Manuscript.

An edition of this book was published at London in 1725. It
was, therefore, accessible to the writer of the Leland document.
He being aware of the necessity of giving an air of antiquity to his
forgery, and yet not a sufficiently skillful philologist to know the
rapid strides that had taken place in the progress of the language
between the time of Mandeville and the middle of the reign of
Henry VI., adopted, to the best of his poor ability, the phraseology
of that most credulous of all travelers, supposing that it would well
fit into the period that he had selected for the date of his fraudu-
lent manuscript. His ignorance of philology has thus led to his
detection. I am constrained, from all these considerations, to in-
dorse the opinion of Mr. Halliwell Phillips, that “ it is but a clumsy
attempt at deception, and quite a parallel to the recently discovered
one of the first Englishe Mercuric!'

But the strangest thing in this whole affair is that so many men
of learning should have permitted themselves to become the dupes
of so bungling an impostor.

PART TWO

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

CHAPTER I

PRELIMINARY OUTLOOK

F the reader has bestowed any attention on the
preceding part of this work, he will have been
enabled to discover that what I have designated
as “ Prehistoric Masonry ” is nothing more than
a collection of legends and traditions derived
from various sources and, apparently, invented
at different periods during the Middle Ages,
when the Fraternity of Freemasons was a thoroughly Operative as-
sociation, composed of architects and builders, with a few unpro-
fessional men of rank and wealth, who had been accepted by the
Craft as patrons or honorary members.

It is, however, only in compliance with the usage of historians
that I have consented to adopt the use of this term “ prehistoric ”
in reference to the present subject, and not because I have consid-
ered it to be an absolutely correct one when applied to the history
of Freemasonry.

Anthropologists have divided the chronological series of events
in every nation or race into two distinct periods — the prehistoric and
the historic. The former includes the time when the inhabitants of
a country were in a condition of utter barbarism, from which they
gradually raised themselves to a higher state of civilization.

Of the fact even of the existence of such a primitive people we
have no evidence, except certain myths and legends, in which they
appear to have embodied their ideas of religious belief, and, at a
somewhat later period in their progress toward civilization, some

455

45<5

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

fragmentary records, to be found principally in the hieroglyphic
monuments of ancient Egypt and in the cuneiform inscriptions of
old Assyria.

But when a nation or race began, by the natural process of ad-
vancement, to emerge from this lower sphere of intellectual debase-
ment to a higher one, its first labor was to preserve the evidences of
its existence and the memorial of its transactions in written records.

All before this era of emergence from oral traditions to records
has been called by anthropologists the “ prehistoric period ” — all
after it, the “ historic.”

Now, it is very evident that no such division can, in strictness,
be applied to the history of Freemasonry. Viewed as an association of
builders, when there ceases to be a record of the association, it must
be supposed that it did not exist. There are no legends or traditions
whose existence can be traced to a period anterior to that which con-
tains historic records of the society.

These legends and traditions, all of which have been given in
the first part of this work, were not, like the primeval myths of the
prehistoric nations, the outgrowth of an uneducated religious senti-
ment wholly unconnected with and independent of any record of
real events which occurred, or were occurring, at the same time.

On the contrary, they sprang up in the Middle Ages, at the very
time when Freemasonry was making its indelible record in the his
tory of Europe. They were fabricated by Freemasons who had
long before been recognized in history as an association of some
importance. They were not the spontaneous growth of some prim-
itive body of builders, known to us only by these legends which had
been orally transmitted from the earliest prehistoric times. They
were the inventions of a later period, most of the facts which they
detailed being borrowed from historical records, principally from
the Bible or from ecclesiastical historians, and they were indebted
for their fabrication partly to a desire to magnify the antiquity of
the Institution and partly to the influence of that legendary spirit
which prevailed in the Middle Ages, and which we find still more
extensively developed in the legends of the Saints which have been
accepted by the Roman Catholic Church.

These Masonic legends differ also in another respect from the
prehistoric myths of antiquity.

As soon as a nation began to make its history, its myths were

PRELIMINARY OUTLOOK

457

relegated to their proper place in the region of mythology, and the
history continued to be written without any admixture with them.
They were considered as things of the past. They had their inevi-
table influence upon the religion of the people, but they were not
intruded into its political history.

But from the very time of the fabrication of the Masonic le-
gends and traditions, they were accepted as a part of the annals of
the association and were incorporated into it as a portion of its true
history. As such they have been maintained almost to the present
day. In this way we have two histories of Freemasonry which
have always been presenting themselves to our consideration with
the assumption of an equal claim to our credence.

We have, in the first place, the authentic history, gathered from
the records of all the building guilds and confraternities from the
time of Numa, and which, assuming various forms at different pe-
riods, finally has culminated in the Speculative Freemasonry of the
present day.

And then we have a mass of legends and traditions fabricated
in the Middle Ages, and some others of a later day. These have
been obtruded into the authentic history, have grown up alongside
of it, and have presented and sought to preserve a different and, of
course, an apocryphal form of history.

Looking at the time and manner of the fabrication of these
legends, and the persistent way in which for some centuries they
have traveled down the stream of time pari passu with the authen-
tic history, it would perhaps have been better to designate them as
“extra-historic,” rather than “ pre-historic ” — something not before
history, but something outside of history.

Yet, as they have been made to assume the appearance of pre-
historic legends, and have claimed, however incorrectly, to be tradi-
tions of the origin and progress of the Institution at a time when
there were no written records of its existence, I have felt myself
excusable, and perhaps even justifiable, in tolerating temporarily this
mistaken view, under the protest of this explanation, and of adopt-
ing the usage of historians in their treatment of the histories of
nations.

As a matter, therefore, of convenience I have used the term “ pre-
historic,” although I am well convinced that there is no such thing
as a “ prehistoric Freemasonry.”

453

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

There is, unquestionably, a prehistoric architecture. The art of
building, so as to secure shelter from the inclemencies of the seasons
and protection from the incursions of wild beasts, was practiced at a
period long antecedent to the existence of any written records of
the existence of the arts. The Troglodytes must have made alter-
ations for their greater comfort, convenience, and security in the rude
caves which they made their homes, and the lake-dwellers of pre-
historic Helvetia exhibited, as we may judge from their remains,
considerable skill and ingenuity in the construction of their lacus-
trine houses.

But architecture, when it is not united with and practiced by an
organized craft, guild, or fraternity, is not Freemasonry.

Therefore prehistoric architecture and prehistoric Freemasonry
are two entirely different things. Of the former we have monu-
mental records ; of the latter we have no evidence, and the term
is used only as a fagon deparler , as a matter of convenience, and
as a concession to common usage in the treatment of historical
subjects.

There is one very marked difference in character between the
prehistoric myths of antiquity and the legends of Freemasonry,
which, for the reason just assigned, I have placed in the suppositi-
tious prehistoric period of that institution.

The myths of the earliest peoples found their origin and ground-
work in an enforced observance of the contending powers of nature.
The nomadic races, wandering over the wide plains and lofty moun-
tains of the East, were necessarily struck by the alternate changes of
darkness and light, of night and day. They saw and they feared the
dark sky with its diadems of glittering stars and its murky clouds ;
these they beheld dispersed by the rosy dawn, before which stars and
clouds and darkness fled as the wild game flees before the hunter.
Then they beheld the glorious sun, ushered in by the dawn, traverse
the sky, at length to be destroyed in the far West by the recuperated
forces of night, which again reigned supreme over *he earth, until
it was anew dispersed by the ever-renewing dawn.

This perpetually recurring elemental strife gave rise to the for-
mation of myths, which formulated fables of the wars of these op-
posing forces of nature, just as, later, men in the historic period de-
scribed the battles of contending armies.

These simple myths were undoubtedly the first acts of the human

PRELIMINARY OUTLOOK

459

mind . 1 * 3 As time passed onward and the intellect became more culti-
vated, the myths were developed into a definite form of religious
faith. The forces of nature were impersonated as actual, living
deities.

The primitive Aryans, out of the fire which descended from the
clouds in the forked lightning, and the fire which they brought by
friction out of the wood, both of which they deemed to be identical,
made their god Agni. a

At a later period their Greek descendants symbolized the all-
healing and purifying sun, whose rays disperse the morbific influ-
ences of malaria, as Herakles destroying the hydra of the Lernaean
marshes, or as the light-diffusing Phoebos Apollo, who pictured the
solar rays by his flowing locks of golden hair and his quiver filled
with arrows.

Thus it was that the simple nature-myths of the primeval na-
tions, Aryan and Semitic, were in the progress of time resolved
into a system of complicated mythology that became the popular
religion of the ancient nations.

But this mythologywas perfectly separated from political and
national history. The prehistoric mythology of Greece and Rome
was always distinct from Grecian and Roman authentic history.

Though in the earliest period when history began to emerge
from tradition there was, undoubtedly, some confused admixture of
the two, yet, as each nation began to keep its records, the two
streams were made to flow in different channels, and the mythical
and the historical elements were not permitted to intermingle. The
priests preserved the former in their temple services, and the poets
only referred to them in their epics and in their odes ; the philoso-
phers and the historians confined their instructions to the latter.

But it has not been so with the legends, which may be called
the myths, of Freemasonry. Springing into existence not at any
early, prehistorical period, but receiving their form at the very time
when Masonry was already an historical institution, these traditions

1 Goldziher says that the myth is the result of a purely psychological operation, and
is, together with language, the oldest act of the human mind. “ Mythology Among the

Hebrews,” ch. i., p. 3.

3 In the old Vedic faith, Agni is sometimes addressed as the one great god who makes
all things, sometimes as the light which fills the heavens, sometimes as the blazing light-
ning, or as the clear flame of earthly fire. “ Con. Aryan Mythology,” vol. ii., p. 19a

460

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

have traveled down contemporaneously with its authentic narratives,
not in two independent and separated streams, but in one com-
mingled current.

At the period when the speculative element of Masonry with-
drew itself from the alliance which it had always maintained, the
traditions contained in the Legend of the Craft , which constitute
the great body of Masonic myths, were incorporated into and made
an inseparable part of the true history. Nothing was rejected;
everything was accepted as authentic; and indeed other legends
borrowed from or suggested by Rabbinical and Talmudical reveries
were added.

Hence has arisen that inextricable and deplorable confusion of
tradition and history, of false and true, of apocryphal and authentic,
that we find in all the so-called histories of Freemasonry which were
written in the 18th century. Nor did this false method of writing
cease with the expiration of that period. It was continued into the
19th century, and its influence is still felt, not only in the opinions
entertained by the masses of the Fraternity, but in the statements
made in annual addresses before lodges, by men not always un-
learned or unscholarly, but who do not hesitate to advance tradi-
tions and legends as a substitute for the true history of the Order.

Of this mode of writing Masonic history, let us take at random
a single passage from one of the works of the most eminent of the
writers of this school.

“The Druidical Memoranda,” says Dr. Oliver, 1 “were made in
the Greek character, for the Druids had been taught Masonry by
Pythagoras himself, who had communicated its arcana to them,
under the name he had assigned to it in his own country. This dis-
tinguished appellation (Mesouraneo), in the subsequent declension
and oblivion of the science, during the dark ages of barbarity and
superstition, might be corrupted into Masonry, as its remains,
being merely operative, were confined to a few hands, and these
artificers and working Masons.”

Here are no less than five positive assertions, of which but one
rests on the slightest claim of authority, while the whole of them
are absolutely unhistorical.

1. The statement that the Druids used the Greek character in

1 “ Antiquities of Freemasonry, ” Period I., ch. i., p. 17.

PRELIMINARY OUTLOOK

461

their secret writing is made on the authority of a casual remark of
Cmsar ; but later authorities, much better than Caesar, on the sub-
ject of Druidism have shown that the character used by them was
the old Irish Oghum alphabet.

2. The assertion that the Druids practiced or were acquainted
with Masonry is altogether untenable. It is known that the dog-
mas and practices of their religion were antagonistic to those of
Masonry.

3. The statement that they were taught Masonry by Pythagoras
is met by the simple fact that that philosopher never visited Britain.

4. All that is said about the Greek word Mesoziraned, as the
term under which Masonry was known to Pythagoras and com-
municated by him to the Druids, is a mere fable. It had its origin
in a whimsical etymology first proposed by Hutchinson, and which
has never been accepted by competent philologists.

5. The implied doctrine contained in the close of the paragraph,
that the first form of Masonry was Speculative, and that the Opera-
tive branch was merely what remained after the declension and
decay of the science, to be practiced by working Masons, is in di-
rect violation of all historic truth, which makes the Speculative ele-
ment an after-thought and a development out of the Operative.

When history is thus caricatured, what chance is there that the
unlearned shall find the truth ; and what labor must be imposed on
the learned in striving to extract the pure gold of facts from the
worthless ore of tradition in which it has been imbedded ?

The mode of writing Masonic history which was adopted in the
1 8th century, and which, with some honorable exceptions, has been
pursued almost to the present day, was one which was by no means
calculated to elicit truth or to satisfy the inquiring mind.

A groundwork for the history of Freemasonry was found in the
Legend of the Craft. All the statements in that old document
were accepted as authentic narratives of events that had actually oc-
curred. Hence the origin of the institution was placed at a period
anterior to the flood. All the patriarchs were declared to have been
Masons; Noah and his sons were said to have been the means of
transmitting its tenets from the antediluvians to the post-diluvians.
Its progress was traced from Noah to Moses, who was said to have
practiced its mystic rites in the wilderness. From Moses it was made
to pass over to Solomon, who, in some incomprehensible way, was

462

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

supposed to have organized, as its first Grand Master, an association
which, however, according to the preceding history, appears to have
been in existence thousands of years before. From the King of
Israel it was made to pass over from Palestine to Europe, and is
landed with little respect, or at least with no accounting for the lapse
of time, in the kingdom of France, and in the time of Charles Martel.
From him it crosses the Channel, and is reorganized in England in
the reign of King Athelstan and by his brother Edwin.

Such is the history of Freemasonry that for a century and a half
has claimed and received almost universal belief from the Craft.
And yet, perhaps there never was a history of any kind that could
present so few claims to belief.

It is fragmentary in its details. Centuries are passed over with
no connecting link. From Abraham, who, it is said, “ had learned
well the science and the art ” (that is, Geometry and Operative Ma-
sonry), to Moses, who is called the Grand Master of the Jewish
Masons, a period of more than four centuries passes with the most
inefficient and unsatisfactory account, if it can be called an account
at all, of how this science and art were transmitted from the one to
the other. From Moses to Solomon there occurs a vast chasm of
fifteen centuries, with scarcely an attempt to fill it up with a con-
secutive series of intervening events. And so the fragmentary his-
tory goes on in intermittent leaps from Solomon to Zerubbabel,
from Zerubbabel to Augustus, from Augustus to Charles Martel,
and finally from him to Athelstan.

It is contradictory in its statements. Claiming for the Institution
a purely Hebrew character, it intermixes with strange inconsistency
the labors and the patronage of Jewish patriarchs and Pagan mon-
archs, and finds as much of true Masonry in the works of the idola-
trous Nebuchadnezzar as in those of King Solomon.

But perhaps the most important fault of these 1 8th century his
torians of Freemasonry is the entire absence of all citation of au-
thority for the records which they have made. They assume a state-
ment to suit their theory, but give no evidence or support from
contemporary profane or sacred writers that it is a genuine fact and
not a bare assumption. The scholar who is seeking in his historical
studies for truth and truth only, finds himself thus involved in a
labyrinth of doubts, from which all the canons of criticism fail, how.
ever skillfully applied, to extricate him. He knows not when the

PRELIMINARY OUTLOOK 463

writer is acting on the results of his own or some predecessor’s in-
vention, or when he is reciting events that have really occurred.

We are not to attribute to those writers who have thus made a
romance instead of a history any willful intention to falsify the facts
of history. At first led astray by a misinterpretation of the Legend
of the Craft , they had on this misinterpretation framed a theory of
the antiquity of Freemasonry in a wrong direction, and then, as has
occurred thousands of times before, they proceeded to fit the facts
to the theory, and not, as they should have done, the theory to the
facts. The doctrines of the new school of anthropology, which does
not admit that the origin of the whole human family is to be found
solely in the Semitic race, were, in their day, unknown. If Free-
masonry was older than the era of the revival and the establishment
of the Grand Lodge of England, its antiquity was to be sought only
in the line of the Jewish patriarchs. Thus it became venerable, not
only by its age but by its religious character. To this line they
wished, therefore, to confine the direction of its rise and progress,
and they thought that they could find the proofs of this line of
progress in their own interpretation of the Legend of the Craft, and
the application to it of certain passages of Holy Writ. They suc-
ceeded in this, at least to their own satisfaction, because “ the wish
was father to the thought.”

But as they recognized the symbolic character of Freemasonry,
and as they found some of the most important and expressive of
these symbols prevailing in the Pagan associations of antiquity, they
thought it necessary to account for this contempoiary prevalence of
the same ideas in two entirely different systems of religion in such
a way as not to impair the validity of the claim of Masonry to a
purely Semitic origin.

This they did by supposing that while the Divine truths incul-
cated by Speculative Masonry were preserved in their purity by those
of the descendants of Noah who had retained the instructions
which they had received from their great ancestor, there was at some
era, generally placed at the time of the attempted building of the
Tower of Babel, a secession of a large number of the human race
from the purer stock.

These seceders rapidly lost sight of the Divine truths which they
had received at one time, and fell into the most grievous religious
errors. Thus they corrupted the purity of the worship and the or-

464

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

thodoxy of the faith, the principles of which had been originall)
communicated to them.

In this way there sprung up two streams of Masonry, distin-
guished by Dr. Oliver as the “ Pure” and the “Spurious.” The
former was practiced by the descendants of Noah in the Jewish line ;
the latter by his descendants in the Pagan line.

It is thus that these theorists account for the presence of a
Masonic element though a perverted one, in the mysteries of the
ancient Pagan nations.

There was afterward a union of these two lines, the Pure and the
Spurious, at the building of the Temple of Jerusalem, when King
Solomon invoked the assistance and the co-operation of the heathen
and idolatrous workmen of the King of Tyre.

The Spurious Freemasonry did not, however, cease to exist in
consequence of this union at the Temple of the Jewish and Tyrian
Freemasons. It lasted, indeed, for many centuries subsequent to
this period. But the Jewish and Tyrian co-operation had effected a
mutual infusion of their respective doctrines and ceremonies, which
eventually terminated in the abolition of the two distinctive systems
and the establishment of a new one, which was the immediate fore-
runner of the present Institution.

This delightful romance, in which the imagination has been
permitted to run riot, in which assumptions are boldly advanced for
facts, and in which statements are made which there is no attempt to
corroborate by reference to authority, has for years been accepted by
thousands upon thousands of the Fraternity, and is still accepted by
the masses as a veritable history of the rise and progress of Free-
masonry.

In my younger days, when my researches were directed rather to
the design and to the symbolism of the Order than to its history,
which I was willing to take from older and more experienced heads,
I had been attracted by the beauty and ingenuity of this romantic
tale, and gave, without hesitation, my adhesion to it.

But when my studies took an historical direction, and I began to
apply the canons of criticism to what I was reading on this subject,
I soon found and recognized that the landscape which I had viewed
with so much pleasure was, after all, only a wonderful mirage.

I have, therefore, been compelled to abandon this theory and to
seek for one more plausible and more consistent with the facts of

PRELIMINARY OUTLOOK

465

history. I have come to this conclusion, I admit, with great reluc-
tance, because I was unwilling to throw aside the picture which I had
so long admired and which was the work of masters whose labors I
respected and whose memory I venerated. But I am forced to say,
with Aristotle, that though Plato and Socrates be my friends, yet
truth is a greater friend and one that I must value above them
both.

When we look at the course pursued by these Masonic historians
of the early part of the 1 8th century, it is lamentable to think how
many glorious opportunities of preserving facts in the history of the
Institution have been lost by the mistaken direction of their views.
We have in the History of St. Marys Lodge , by Bro. J. Mur-
ray Lyon, a fair sample of what might have been done by Dr. An-
derson, if he had pursued a similar plan in the composition of the
two editions of the Constitutions compiled by him.

In 1723 he must have had access to many documents of great
importance bearing on the history of Masonry in the latter part of
the 17th and in the beginning of the 18th century. There were un-
doubtedly minutes of lodges which were accessible to him, but the
lodges are now extinct and the records perhaps forever lost. In
these he would have found authentic evidence of the manners and
customs, the organization and the regulations, of the Operative
Masons, and could have accurately defined the line through which
Operative Masonry passed in its transmission and transmutation to
a purely Speculative system.

But on these subjects he has maintained unbroken silence. In
the first edition he has not said a single word of the actual condition
of Freemasonry at the time of his writing. But he has wasted pages
in an inaccurate and unauthentic history of the rise and progress of
architecture, which had been already written by far better authority,
because a professional architect with equal ability can write history
of his own science more skillfully than can a doctor of divinity.

Even of the four lodges which in 1717 organized the Grand
Lodge of England, a few lines comprise the brief account that he
gives. He tells us their names and the locality in which they held
their meetings, and no more. And yet these lodges must have had
their history, there must have been a minute-book of some kind,
however brief and imperfect might have been the records. And
these minute-books, only three or four, must have been in existence

30

4 66

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

before Anderson began the compilation of his book, and from his
position in the Order must have been accessible to him. And yet
he has treated these invaluable records — invaluable to the future
Masonic historian and which should have been invaluable to him —
with a silence bordering almost on contempt.

Comparing this treatment of the early English records with the
manner in which Lyon has treated those of Scotland, we can not too
much deplore this neglect of the real duties of a historian. The re-
sult of this difference of treatment of the same subject by two differ-
ent historians has been that while we are made by Lyon familiar
with the true history of the Scottish Lodges in the 1 7th century —
with their regulations, their usages, their modes of reception, and
almost everything that appertains to their internal organization —
we are, so far as we can gather anything from Anderson, absolutely
as ignorant of all that relates to the English Lodges of the same
period as if no such bodies had ever existed.

Such neglect of opportunities never to be recalled, such obdu-
rate silence on topics of the deepest interest, and such waste of time
and talent in the compilation of a jejune history of architecture
instead of an authentic narrative of the Masonic history which was
passing before his eyes, or with which he must have been familiar
from existing documents, and from oral communication with many
of the actors in that history, is to be not only deeply regretted, but
to be contemplated almost as a crime.

Anderson’s compilation has been that which gave form and feat-
ure to all subsequent histories of Freemasonry until a recent period.
Smith, Calcott, Preston, and Oliver have followed in his footsteps,
only pouring, as it were, from one vial into another, so that all the
treatment of early Freemasonry anterior to the year 1717, as treated
by English and French writers, has been almost wholly without the
necessary element of authenticity. These historians have dealt in
hypotheses, suggestions, assumptions, and romantic legends, so as to
lead the scholar who studies their pages in search of historical light
into an inextricable web of doubt and confusion.

The Germans have done better, and bringing the Teutonic in-
stinct of laborious research to the investigation of Masonic history,
they have made many approximations to the discovery of truth.
And later English Masons, forming a school of iconoclasts, have
begun, by the rejection of anachronisms and improbabilities, to give

PRELIMINARY OUTLOOK 467

to that history a shape that will stand the crucial test of critical ex-
amination.

It must be evident to the reader, from what has been said, that
the history of Freemasonry, upon which this book is about to enter,
will be treated in a method that seeks to approach that accuracy
with which authentic history should always be written. From the
causes already assigned, there must often be an embarrassment in
finding proper evidence to authenticate the material offered to the
inspection of the reader. But in no case will assumption be pre-
sented in the place of facts. When the supposed occurrence of
events can not be proved by contemporaneous authority, such
events will not be recorded as historical. It may be conjectured that
such events may have occurred, and such a conjecture is entirely
legitimate, but its value will be determined by its plausibility. It
will be a matter of logical inference, and not of historical statement.
Thus one of the great errors of Anderson will be avoided, who con-
tinually presents his conjectures as facts, without discrimination, and
thus leaves his reader in doubt as to when he is writing history and
when indulging in romance or in assumptions.

Pursuing this method, I am compelled to reject the universally
received hypothesis that Freemasonry received its organization at
the Temple of Solomon.

I reject it because there is no historical evidence of the fact.
The only authorities on this subject are the books of Kings and
Chronicles. That of Josephus need not be referred to, because it is
simply a compilation of Jewish history made up out of the Script-
ural account.

Now, the account of the events that occurred at the building of
the Temple is very briefly related in those books, and it gives us no
authority for saying that there was any organization of the builders,
at that edifice, at all like the one described in our Masonic his-
tories.

Similar objections may be urged against all other propositions or
theories which seek to connect the rise of the Masonic Institution
from bodies which were not architectural in their character.

I fall back, therefore, upon that theory which since the time of
the Abbe Grandidier has been gradually gaining strength, and
which connects the Speculative Masonry of our own times with the
Operative Masonry of the Middle Ages.

468

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

Never abandoning, for a moment, the predominant idea that
Freemasonry, in whatever aspect it may be viewed, whether as Op-
erative or Speculative, whether as ancient or modern, has always been
connected in some way with the art of building and with a guild
organization, I shall proceed to trace its early history not in religious
communities or in social fraternities, but solely in the associations
which have been organized for the pursuit and practice of archi-
tecture.

Finding such associations among the ancient Romans, 1 shall
endeavor to pursue the course of these associations, from their birth
in the imperial city and in the time and under the fostering care of
Numa, to their dissemination with the Roman legions into the con-
quered provinces of Gaul, Germany, and Britain ; their subsequent
establishment in these countries of confraternities which they called
Colleges of Workmen ( Collegia Fabrorum), out of which, after the
decay of the Empire and the extinction of the armies, was developed
in the gradual course of civilization the societies of Traveling Free-
masons, who sprang from the school of Como in Lombardy.

Thence, by slow but certain steps, we shall advance to the time
of the Operative or Stonemasons of Germany, France, and Britain,
who were a development and result of the Comacine Fraternity.

And lastly this will bring us to the era when the Operative sys-
tem was wholly abandoned as a practice, and when the society was
delivered up to the pursuit of a Speculative Philosophy, still, how-
ever, retaining the evidence within itself of its architectural parent-
age, by the selection of its symbols and its peculiar language as well
as by many features of its internal organization.

The connection, according to this theory, of Freemasonry with
the art of building, a connection that has never, even in its Specu-
lative form, been wholly severed, will necessarily lead to digressions
in the course of this history upon the subjects of Roman, Byzan-
tine, and Gothic architecture.

These subjects will have to be discussed, not as architectural
studies, but solely in their close relationship to Freemasonry, and in
respect to the reciprocal influences that were exerted upon Free-
masonry and its followers by the varying systems of architecture
and that produced on them by the skill and intelligence of the Free-
masons.

There will be no attempt to write a history of Architecture and

PRELIMINARY OUTLOOK

469

to call it, as Dr. Anderson has unfortunately done, a history of Free-
masonry, but the effort will be made to write a history of Freema-
sonry in its connection with, and its reference to, Architecture.

“ Every Freemason,” said the Chevalier Ramsay, in his vision-
ary hypothesis, “ is a Templar.” The truer doctrine is that in the
olden time every Freemason was an architect, using this word in
its purest and primitive meaning, to signify a builder.

Mr. Hallam says, in his History of the Middle Ages, that “the
curious subject of Freemasonry has unfortunately been treated of
only by panegyrists or calumniators, both equally mendacious.”
And he thinks that it would be interesting to know more of the
history of the Craft during a period in which they were literally
architects.

The desire here expressed, it is the object and the design of this
work to gratify. Whether the object has been successfully achieved
«an be determined only when the work is finished.

Let me say, in concluding this preliminary essay — and I say it
lest there should be any misconception of my views — that the theory
which I shall seek to establish is not that the Freemasons of the
present day are in direct and uninterrupted descent from the Roman
Colleges of Artificers, but that these latter associations brought, by
the Roman legions from the civilization of the Empire, into the com-
paratively unenlightened provinces of Gaul, Germany, and Britain,
those sentiments of architectural beauty, as well as those principles
of architectural skill, which gave rise to the establishment of associa-
tions of builders, who in time constituted themselves into the form
of guilds.

These guilds, or fraternities, at a very early period assumed an
important place in the history and practice of the building art, and
associated themselves together for the purpose of disseminating the
principles and practice of building over certain parts of Europe.

Thence arose the association known as “Traveling Freemasons,”
who, starting from their school in Lombardy, perambulated the con-
tinent and erected many important edifices, mostly of a religious
character, such as monasteries and cathedrals.

From these the Stonemasons of Germany, of France, and of
England borrowed the system of guild-formation, that is to say,
the usages and regulations of a guild in the practice of their pro-
fession.

4/0

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

These Operative Masons at various times admitted into the mem-
bership and privileges of their guild many persons of rank, influence,
and learning, who were not professionally connected with the build-
ing art. These honorary admissions accomplished two objects : they
were received as gratifying compliments by the non-professional
members, and at the same time secured their good wishes and pro-
tection for the guild.

But eventually a schism took place between the Operative Ma-
sons and the honorary members. The former adhered to the Oper-
ative Craft, but the latter, eliminating altogether the Operative
element, formed a new guild or fraternity of Speculative Masons
whose only connection with architecture or building was that they
preserved much of its technical language and implements, but con-
secrated them to symbolical purposes.

Having thus abandoned the professional practice of the craft of
building, and assumed a merely ethical character, they became the
Freemasons, or the Speculative Masons, of the present day.

Such is a brief outline of the plan which will be pursued in the
future prosecution of this history of the rise and progress of the
Order of Freemasonry.

CHAPTER II

THE ROMAN COLLEGES OF ARTIFICERS

T will be evident, from what has been said in the
preceding chapter, that the plan upon which it
is intended to write the history of Freemasonry
in the present work will utterly preclude any
search for the origin of the Institution among the
purely religious associations of antiquity, whether
they be of Jewish or of Gentile character.

Hence I reject as untenable either of the hypotheses which
traces the rise of the Order to the Patriarchal religion, the ancient
Mysteries, the workmen at the Temple of Solomon, the Druids,
the Essenes, or the Pythagoreans.

If we contemplate the Speculative Freemasonry of the present
day as the outgrowth of the Operative system which prevailed in
the Middle Ages, we must look for the remote origin of the former
in the same place in which we shall find that of the latter.

Now, the mediaeval Operative Masons, known as the Steinmetzen
of Germany, the Tailleurs de pierre of France, and the Freemasons
of England, were congregated and worked together under the form
and regulations of a Guild. But as all institutions in their gradual
growth and development are apt to preserve some of the most im-
portant features of their original construction, notwithstanding all
the changes and influences of surrounding circumstances to which
they are subject in the course of time, we may very legitimately
come to the conclusion that whatever was the original body or
prototype from which the Masonry of the Middle Ages derived its
existence, or of which it was a continuation, that prototype must
have had some of the forms of a Guild.

It is true that when the Operative Masons organized themselves
into an association, at some period between the 10th and the 17th cen-
turies, which period is not at this time and in this place to be accu-
rately determined, they may as an original body have assumed a

472

HISTORY of freemasonry

form, independent of all previous influences. But we know that
such is not the fact, and the Masons of that period were the succes-
sors of other bodies that had preceded them, and that they only
developed and improved the principles of art that had already been
long in existence.

Then the body of men — the association, the sodality — of which
they were the outgrowth must have some features in its form and
character that were imitated by the body of Masons who succeeded
them, who pursued the same objects, and only developed and im-
proved the same principles.

Now, what were the features that must distinguish and identify
the original, the exemplar, of which the more modern Freemasonry
was an outgrowth ?

I answer to this question that those features, to which we must
look for an identification of the original body, are at least two in
number :

First, the original body must have had the form and character of
a sodality, a confraternity, or what in more modern times would be
called a Guild.

And secondly, that this sodality, confraternity, or guild must
have consisted of members who were engaged in the practice of
the art of building.

The absence of either of these two features will make a fatal break
in the process of identification, by which alone we are enabled to
trace a connection between the original and the copy.

We can easily find in the records of ancient history numerous
instances of sodalities or confraternities, but as they had no refer-
ence to the art of building, it is clear that not one of them could
have been the exemplar or source of mediaeval Masonry.

The members of those religious associations of antiquity, which
were called the “ Mysteries,” and to which Speculative Masonry is
thought, not altogether incorrectly, to bear a great similitude, were
undoubtedly united in a sodality or confraternity. They had ad-
mitted into their association none but those who had been duly
chosen, and reserved to themselves the power of rejecting those
whom they did not deem worthy of a participation in their rites ;
they had ceremonies of initiation ; they adopted secret methods of
recognition ; and in many other ways secured the isolation of an
exclusive society. They were in every respect a confraternity, and

THE ROMAN COLLEGES OF ARTIFICERS

473

their organization bore a very striking resemblance to that of the
modern Freemasons. And hence it is that some writers have pro-
fessed to find in these religious Mysteries of the ancient pagans an
origin to which they might trace the Masonic Institution. But the
hypothesis is untenable, because these religious associations had no
connection with architecture or the art of building. Freemasonry,
which always has been either an operative art or been closely con-
nected with it, could not, by any possible contingency, have derived
its origin from what was a wholly religious association.

The Society of Dionysiac Artificers, who flourished in Asia
Minor, did indeed unite with the observance of the Mysteries of
Dionysus the practice of architecture. Hence the compiler of Law-
rie’s History of Masonry has pretended to trace the origin of our
modern system to the connection of the Pagan Dionysiacs with the
Jewish builders at the construction of King Solomon’s Temple.
There would be a great deal of plausibility in this theory, if it could
be proved that the Dionysiacs as architects were contemporane-
ous with Hiram of Tyre and Solomon of Israel. But unfortu-
nately the authentic annals of chronology prove that they were only
known as builders of temples, palaces, and theaters about seven
hundred years after the era of the building of the Temple at
Jerusalem.

So, too, of the Essenes, we may say that the doctrine can not be
sustained which attributes to them the continuation and preserva-
tion of the Masonry of the Temple builders, and which assigns to
them the origin of the modern Speculative system. Leaving out
of the question the fact that it is impossible to account for the lapse
of time which occurred between the construction of the Temple and
the first appearance of the Essenes, about the era of the Maccabees,
we meet with the insurmountable objection that the Essenian sect
was wholly unconnected with architecture.

So, too, of all the other schemes of tracing Masonry to the
Druids, the Pythagoreans, or the Rosicrucians, we always have the
invincible obstacle in our way, that all of these were associations
not devoted to, nor pursuing the art of building. It is impossible to
trace the origin of a fraternity of working Masons, all of whose
ideas, principles, pursuits, usages, and customs prominently and ex-
clusively connected them with the cultivation of architecture and
the art of building, not theoretically but practically, to any other and

474

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

older sodality which knew nothing of architecture and whose mem-
bers never were engaged in the construction of edifices.

But if we should discover in long-past time a sodality, whose
members were builders and who were congregated together for the
purpose of pursuing their professional labors, in a society which
partook of the main features of a modern guild, we should be en-
couraged to make the inquiry whether such a sodality may not have
given birth, and suggested form, to the mediaeval associations of
Operative Masons, from whom afterward sprang, in direct succes-
sion, the Speculative Masons of the 18th century.

Now just such a sodality will be found in the Roman Colleges
of Artificers — the Collegia Fabrorum — which are said to have been
instituted by Numa, the successor of Romulus, and, therefore, the
second king of Rome.

That the establishment of these colleges of workmen of various
crafts was one of the numerous reforms instituted by Numa, among
his subjects, is a fact that has not been denied by historians. The
evidence of the existence of these colleges in the later days of the
empire and of their dispersion into various provinces, is attested by
numerous inscriptions in votive tablets and other monuments that
remain to the present day.

The important relation which it is supposed that the Roman
colleges bore to medieval stonemasonry, makes it proper that
something more than a mere glance should be given at the his-
tory of their origin and progress as well as at their character and
design.

Of Numa himself, a few words may be said. He was undoubt-
edly one of those great reformers who, like Confucius, Moses, Bud-
dha, and Zoroaster, have sprung up at different periods in the world’s
history and have changed the character and the religion of the people
among whom they lived and placed them on the first steps of the
march of civilization. That such was the career of Numa, is testi-
fied by the fact that he so transformed the military disorder of the
heterogeneous multitude that had been left by Romulus, into the
orderly arrangements of a well-regulated municipality, that, as Livy
says, that which the neighboring nations had hitherto called a camp,
they now began to designate as a city.

Numa, who was a native of Cures, a considerable city of the
Sabines, was, on account of his nationality, selected, through the

THE ROMAN COLLEGES OF ARTIFICERS

475

influence of the Sabine population of Rome, to succeed Romulus,
and was called to the throne, according to the generally received
chronology, 686 years before the Christian era.

Having borne in his private life the character of a wise and just
man, with no distinction as a warrior, he cultivated, when he assumed
the reins of government, all the virtues of peace. He found the
Romans a gross and almost barbarous people. He refined their
manners, purified their religion, built temples, instituted festivals,
and established a regular order of priesthood.

As Plutarch says, the most admirable of all his institutions was
his distribution of the citizens according to their various arts and
trades. Before his accession to the throne, the different craftsmen
had been confusedly mixed up with the heterogeneous Roman and
Sabine population, and had no laws or regulations to maintain their
rights or to secure their skill from the rivalry of inexperienced
charlatans.

But Numa divided the several trades into distinct and inde-
pendent companies, which were designated as Collegia or colleges.
Plutarch names but eight of these colleges, namely : musicians, gold-
smiths, masons, dyers, shoemakers, tanners, braziers, and potters,
but he adds that the other artificers were also divided into companies,
so that the exact number of colleges that were instituted by Numa
cannot be learned from the authority of Plutarch. If we suppose
that the other artificers alluded to by him comprehended all the re-
maining crafts, which were united in another college, which was
afterward developed into new societies, the whole number which,
according to Plutarch, were originally instituted by Numa would
amount to nine.

But as, besides the Collegia, such as those of the augurs and
priests which were specially established by legal authority, there were
many others formed by the voluntary association of individuals, the
number of the colleges of handicraftsmen became in the later days
of the republic, and especially of the Empire, greatly increased.

There were, among the Greeks, sodalities or fraternities which
they called etaireiai. They were established by Solon, and Gaius
thinks that the Roman colleges borrowed some of their regulations
from them. But this could not have been the case in reference to
any regulations established by Numa, since Solon lived about a cen-
tury after him. The Greek etaireiai were, however, not confined to

476

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

craftsmen but, according to the law of Solon, cited by Gaius, 1 they
comprehended brethren assembled for sacrifices, or sailors, or peo-
ple who lived together and used the same sepulcher for burial, or
who were companions of the same society, or who, inhabiting the
same place, were united in the pursuit of any business, which last
division might be supposed to refer to workmen of the same craft.
All of these were permitted to make regulations for their own
government, provided they were not forbidden by the laws of the
state.

Among the Romans a college generally signified any association
which, being permitted by the state and recognized as an independ-
ent association, devoted itself to some determined object.

Its recognition by the state gave to the college the character of
a legal personage, such as is now called a corporation.

If we examine the laws which were made for the establishment
and the government of the colleges, we shall be impressed with
their similarity to those which have always existed among the Ma-
sonic Lodges, both Operative and Speculative. The identity of reg-
ulations are amply sufficient to warrant us in believing that the reg-
ulations of the one were derived from, or at least had been suggested
by, the other.

The laws and usages by which the workmen at the Temple of
King Solomon were distributed into classes and regulated, which
have been given by Masonic historians, and by none more exten-
sively than by Dr. Oliver, are all supposititious and apocryphal ; but
those that describe the government of the Roman colleges or guilds
of craftsmen have been recorded by various historians, and espe-
cially in the different codes of the Roman law and have, therefore, all
the character and value of authenticity. Whatever conclusions we
may think proper to deduce in connecting these colleges with the
modern Masonic guilds, must of course be judged according to their
logical weight, but the facts on which these conclusions are based
are patent and have an authentic record.

It was required by the Roman law that a college should not con-
sist of less than three members. It is hardly necessary to remind the
reader that a Lodge can not be composed of less than three Masons.
As in Freemasonry there are “ regular Lodges ” which have been

1 Gaius, lib. iv., ad Legem duodecim tabularum.

THE ROMAN COLLEGES OF ARTIFICER^

477

established by competent authority, and “clandestine Lodges ” which
have been organized without such authority, and whose members are
subject to the severest Masonic penalties, so there were legal col-
leges — Collegia licita — which were formed by authority of the gov-
ernment — and illegal colleges — Collegia illicita — which assembled
under no color of law and which were strictly prohibited.

Illicit colleges, says Ulpian , 1 are forbidden, under the same pen-
alties as are adjudged to men violating public places or temples ;
and Marcian 2 says that they must be dissolved by virtue of the de-
crees of the Senate, but their members when they separate are per-
mitted to divide the common property.

According to the Justinian code, no college of any kind was
permitted to assemble unless by an act of the Senate, or a decree of
the emperor . 3

Each college was permitted to make its own internal regula-
tions, provided that they were not in contravention of the laws of
the state. The regulations were proposed by the officers, and after
due deliberation adopted or rejected by a vote of the members, in
which a majority ruled.

The members of a college ( sodales ), says Gaius , 4 were permitted
to make their own regulations if they did not contravene the public
law ; and he shows that the same privilege was granted by Solon to
the Greek etaireiai or fraternities.

The colleges had also the right of electing their officers, and of
receiving members by a vote of the body on their application. The
applicants for admission were required to be freemen ; but the Jus-
tinian code permitted slaves to be received into a college if it was
done with the consent of the Domini or Masters ; but not otherwise,
under a penalty of one hundred pieces of gold to be inflicted on the
Curatores or Wardens . 5

As in the mediaeval Lodges of Freemasons we find that distin-
guished persons not belonging to the Craft were sometimes admitted,
so a similar usage prevailed in the Roman colleges. To them the
law had granted the privilege of selecting from the most honorable
of the Roman families, persons who were not connected with the
Craft, as patrons and honorary members. That they exercised this

1 Ulpian, “ De Officis Pro Consulis,” lib. ii, p. 7. Zii De Jud. Pub.,” lib. ii.

y “ Digest,” lib. xlvii., tit. xxii., $ 1. 4 “ Ad Legem,” xii., tab. lib. iv«

5 “ Digest,” ut supra, $ 2.

478 HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

privilege is evident from inscriptions and some remaining lists of
members . 1

We have also the authority on this point of Pliny, who in his
correspondence when he was governor of Bithynia with the Emperor
Trajan, shows by implication that it was the usage of the colleges
of builders to admit non-professional persons into their guild. A
conflagration having destroyed a great part of the city of Nico-
media, Pliny applied to the Emperor for permission to establish a
College of Workmen — collegium fabrorum, to consist of one
hundred and fifty men ; and knowing that it was the custom in
these colleges to admit persons who were not of the Craft, he
adds : “ I will take care that no one not a workman shall be received
among them, and that they shall not abuse the privileges conceded
to them by their establishment .” 2

Each college had also its area, or common chest, in which the
funds of the guild were kept. These funds were collected from the
monthly contributions of the members, and were, of course, devoted
to defraying the expenses of the college. At a later period when
these societies, or sodalities, had become objects of suspicion to the
government, in consequence of their sometimes engaging in politi-
cal intrigues, they were forbidden to assemble. But there is a de-
cree of the Emperor Severus, cited by Marcianus, which, while it
forbids the governors of provinces to permit collegia sodalitia
or confraternities, even of soldiers, in the camps, yet allows the
poorer soldiers to make a monthly contribution in a common
chest, provided they did not meet more than once a month, lest
under this pretext they should form an illicit college. The per-
mission thus given to make monthly contributions (what in modern
Freemasonry we should call “monthly dues”) was most probably
derived from the custom long before practiced by the Colleges of
Workmen.

The members of the colleges were exempt by Constantine from
the performance of public duties ; but this exemption appears to
have applied to all craftsmen as well as to those who were united in
corporations. And the reason assigned was that they might have
better opportunities of acquiring skill in their professions or trades

1 Krause, “ Kunsturkunden,” iv., p. 136.

2 Ego attendam ne,quis nisi faber, recipiatur, neve jure concesso in aliud utatun
Pliny, “ Epistolae,” lib. x., ep. 42.

THE ROMAN COLLEGES OF ARTIFICERS

479

and of imparting it to their children. And therefore this immunity
from public employments was confined in the colleges to those
members who were really craftsmen, and in the code of Theodosius 1
it was expressly declared that this immunity should not be granted
promiscuously to all who had been received in the colleges, but only
to the craftsmen. Patrons and honorary members were not to be
included in the exemption.

The meetings of a college were held in a secluded hall called a
Curia, which was the name originally given to the Senate-house,
but afterward came to signify any building in which societies met
for the transaction of business or for the performance of religious
rites. Each of these corporations, says Smith, had its common
hall, called Curia, in which the citizens met for religious and other
purposes . 2 In the old inscriptions we frequently meet with this word
in connection with a college, as the Curia Saliorum , or the Hall of
the College of the Priests of Mars, and C2tria Dendrophororum,
or the Hall of the College of Woodcutters . 3 4 Krause says that they
sometimes met in private houses. He does not give his authority
for this statement, but it was probably in cases where the college was
too poor to afford the expense of owning or hiring a common hall
or Cztria.

Officers were elected by the members to preside or to perform
other duties in the college. There seems to have been some variety
at different periods and under different circumstances in the titles of
these officers.

The officer who presided was called the Magister or Master. It
would seem that in some of the legionary colleges he was called the
Profectzis or Prefect. In the Justinian code he is styled the Cu-
rator}

Corresponding in some sense to our Masonic Wardens were the
Decuriones, whose number was not however confined to two. In a
list of the officers and members of a college, which has been pre-
served and which is given by Muratori, there are seven Decuriones.

A Decurio denoted, as the word imports among the Romans,

1 “ Cod. Theodos. de excus. Artificum,” lib. v., § 12.

2 “Diet. Greek and Roman Antiq.,” citing Dionysius of Halicarnassus, ii., 23.

3 This was one of the original colleges of Numa. There is some dispute about their
occupation ; but the one given above is the most plausible.

4 “Digest,” lib. xlvii., tit. xxii., $ 2.

480

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

one who commanded or ruled over ten men. Hence Dr. Krause
supposes that the members of a college were divided into sections
of about ten, over each of which a Dectirio presided. It will be
remembered that Sir Christopher Wren states in the Parentalia,
while describing the regulations that prevailed among the Traveling
Freemasons of the Middle Ages, that “ the members lived in a
camp of huts reared beside the building on which they were em-
ployed ; that a surveyor or Master presided over and directed the
whole ; and that every tenth man was called a Warden and over-
looked those who were under his charge.” This is at least a coinci-
dence, and it may give some color to the hypothesis of Krause,
that the Dectiriones of the Roman colleges presided over sections of
ten men.

Reference has been made to a list of the officers of a college,
which has been preserved by the celebrated Italian antiquary, Mu-
ratori, in his work on inscriptions. Similar lists are to be found in
the works of Gruter, who has made the best collection of ancient
inscriptions.

These lists, like those published at this day by the Masonic
Lodges, were intended to preserve the names of the officers and
members for the information of the government.

In the list published by Muratori we find the following names
and titles of officers, which will give us a very good idea of the
manner in which the internal government of a Roman College of
Artificers was regulated.

In this list first appears the names of fifteen Patrons, who, as
has already been said, were not craftsmen. The last of these is
called the Bisellarius of the college.

There is some difficulty in coming to an exact understanding of
the meaning of this word. A bisellium was a double seat — a seat
capable of holding two — as Hesychius calls it, “ a distinguished and
splendid seat,” remarkable for its size and grandeur. It might be
compared to the “ Oriental chair ” appropriated to the use of the
Worshipful Master in our modern Lodges. It was, in short, a
chair of state, capable of holding two persons ; though it is evident,
from several specimens which were found at Pompeii and which
were accompanied by a single footstool, that it was occupied only by
one. These chairs were used in the theaters and other public places
at Rome and in the provinces as seats of honor. The privilege of

THE ROMAN COLLEGES OF ARTIFICERS

48 1

occupying a bisellium was granted as an honor by a decree of the
Senate or an edict of the emperor, and the person to whom the
privilege was granted was called a Bisellarius.

Its form was like that of a modern ottoman, but larger and
higher, and there was also a stool or suppcdancum , on which the feet
rested.

Krause says that some of the colleges had several Bisellarii
among their members, and he thinks the word is equivalent to hon-
orary member. But as the Patrons were generally persons of wealth
and distinction, selected by the college to defend and promote its
interests, it is not likely that of the fifteen named in Muratori’s list
only one should have been elected an honorary member. But as the
privilege of a Bisellarius was a dignity conferred as an honor on
certain persons, it is more probable that of the fifteen the last one
only had arrived at this honor, and that the record of it was made in
the list, just as in the present day titles are appended to the names
of persons in catalogues.

The next officers mentioned in this list are seven Decuriones.
Then follow the names of the following officers : An Haruspex , a
Soothsayer and Diviner, who may be considered as equivalent to our
modern chaplain, and whose duty it was to attend to the sacrifices
and conduct the religious services of the college ; a Medicus , or Phy-
sician ; a Scriba Perpetuus, or Permanent Secretary, and a Scriba ,
or Secretary. Against the names of two of the members is written
the word immunes, or exempt, to show that for some reason, not
explained, these members were relieved from the payment of the
monthly contribution.

In this list no title of M agister or Master appears. The same oc-
curs in an inscription on a marble plinth, which has been preserved
by Gruter. It is dedicated on the front side by the College of Car-
penters ( Collegium Fabrorum Tignariorzmi) to the Emperor M.
Aurelius Antoninus. On the other side are forty names, many of
which have the title affixed of Honoratus, or Honorary. The last six
names have the title of Scriba, or Secretary, attached to each ; hence
Krause thinks it probable that each Decuria, or section of ten men,
had its Master, who was a Demrio, its Secretary and its Patron,
and, besides, its own property, obtained from bequests or donations.

If this be true, a college would not appear to have been a single
lodge, but rather an aggregation of lodges. The mediaeval divis

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

48^

ion, described by Wren, where in a building the workmen were
divided into tens, each having its own warden, would precisely meet
this ancient condition of the Decuricz.

In the time of the Empire, when the government began to be
suspicious of the revolutionary tendencies of the craftsmen, care was
taken to place officers over the colleges who might have a control of
their arts. These officers differed at different times and in different
places. Sometimes he was called a Procurator , or Superintendent ;
sometimes a Prczpositus , or Overseer, and sometimes a Prczfectus ,
or Prefect. In fact, the legionary colleges, which accompanied
the legions and which were principally concerned in the fabrication
of weapons, as armorers and smiths, had an officer over them who
was called the Prcefectus Pabrum, or Prefect of the Workmen.

But originally the title of Magister , or Master, was applied to
him who was ever the Decurio7ies, and who controlled all the acts,
the labors, and the hours of rest of the members of the college, as
well as their sacrifices and other religious ceremonies. There is
abundant evidence of this in the inscriptions, and from them also we
learn that the Master was chosen annually, and afterward with all
the other officers quinquennially. But sometimes he was elected
for life, a custom that was observed at a long subsequent period by
the French Lodges, whose Venerables were chosen ad vitam.

Thus we meet with such inscriptions as Magister quinquennatis
Collegium Fabrorum Tignariorum and Magister quinquennatis
Collegium Aurijicum, that is, Quinquennial Master of the College
of Carpenters and Quinquennial Master of the College of Gold-
smiths. Sertorius also refers to certain peculiar powers of the
Magister Collegium , or Master of the College. There can be no
doubt that this was a well-recognized title of the presiding officer of
those sodalities.

But the Patrons, who were selected from the most wealthy and
influential families of Rome, and who were not craftsmen, seemed
to have exercised very important powers. Chosen that they might
protect the interests of the society, no regulation was enacted, no
contracts were made, and no work undertaken without their sanc-
tion. The kings, prelates, and nobles so often recorded as Grand
Masters by Dr. Anderson in his history of early English Masonry,
may very well be supposed to correspond in position and duties to
these Patrons of the Roman Colleges.

THE ROMAN COLLEGES OF ARTIFICERS 483

Dr. Krause thus describes the internal organization of these col-
leges :

“ It was only the Masters who could undertake any work. The
members of the Dcczirice (or sections) who corresponded to the Fel-
low Crafts of the present day, worked under them ; and under these
and under the Masters, were the Alumni or Apprentices, who were
still being instructed in the schools (attached to the college) and
whose names, as they were not yet members of the college, are not
mentioned in any of the Inscriptions .” 1

That there was a distinction of ranks among the members of a
college is very evident from several of the inscriptions, and from
passages in the codes. It is, besides, in the nature of things that in
every trade or craft there should be some well skilled and experienced
in the Mystery, who will take the highest place ; others with less
knowledge who must be subordinate to these ; and finally scholars
or apprentices who are only beginning to learn the principles of their
art. As in the Lodges of Operative Masons, in the Middle Ages,
there were Masters, Journeymen, and Apprentices, so must there
have been in the colleges of Rome, a similar division of ranks.

The passage in the Justinian code, already referred to, provides
that slaves could be received in the colleges only with the consent
of their masters ; if received without this consent the Curator or
Master of the College was liable to a penalty of one hundred
pieces of gold. This would indicate that in the Roman colleges,
the distinction of bond and free, so much insisted on in the modern
Masonic system, was not recognized among the craftsmen of Rome.
But it must be remembered that among the Romans, a condition of
servitude did not always imply the debasement of ignorance. Slaves
were sometimes instructed in literature and the liberal arts, and
many of them were employed in trade and in various handicrafts.
It was these last who were to be conditionally admitted into the
Colleges of Artificers.

It is evident that with the prosecution of their craft, the mem-
bers of the colleges connected the observance of certain religious
rites. In the list from Muratori, heretofore cited, it is seen that
among the officers designated was a Harzispex or Sacrifices This
semi-religious character, first introduced in their establishment by

1 Krause, “ Kunsturkunden,” iv., 165.

484

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

the pious Numa, continued to prevail to the latest days of the Em-
pire. It was in the spirit of paganism, which connected the trans-
action of all private as well as public business with sacrificial rites.

Hence every college had its patron deity, which was called its
Genius, under whose divine protection it was placed. The Ctiria,
or hall of the college, was often built in the near vicinity of the tem-
ple of this god, and meetings of the guild were sometimes held in
the body of the temple. Sacrifices were offered to him ; festival
days were kept in his honor, and were often celebrated by public
processions. Among the paintings discovered at Pompeii is one that
represents a procession of the College of Carpenters.

Krause gives ample proof that the Colleges of Artificers made
use of symbols derived from the implements and the usages of their
craft. We need not be surprised at this, for the symbolic idea was,
as we know, largely cultivated by the ancients. Their mythology,
which was their religion, was made up out of a great system of sym-
bolism. Sabaism, their first worship, was altogether symbolic, and
out of their primitive adoration of the simple forces of nature, by
degrees and with the advancement of civilization was developed a
multiplicity of deities, every one of which could be traced for his
origin to the impersonation of a symbol. It would, indeed, be
strange if, with such an education, the various craftsmen had failed
to have imbued their trades with that same symbolic spirit which
was infused into all their religious rites and their public and private
acts.

But it is interesting to trace, as I think we may, the architectural
symbolism of the mediaeval builders to influences which were ex-
erted upon them by the old builders of Rome, and which they in
turn communicated to their successors, the Speculative Masons of
the 1 8th, and perhaps the 17th century.

This is, I think, one of the most important links in the chain
that connects the Roman colleges with modern Freemasonry.
Nothing of the kind can be adduced by those who would trace the
latter institution to a Jewish or Patriarchal source. The Jews were
not an aesthetic people. They rejected as vainly superstitious the
use of painting and sculpture in their worship.

Though we find among them a few symbols of the simplest kind,
symbolism was not cultivated by them as an intellectual science.
Christian iconography, which succeeded the Jewish and the Pagan,

THE ROMAN COLLEGES OK ARTIFICERS

485

has been more indebted for its eminently symbolic character to the
latter than to the former influences.

It is the same with the symbolism that has always been cultivated
in Masonry, both in its Operative and in its Speculative form. It
has been indebted for its warmth and beauty rather to the Roman
colleges than to the Jewish Temple.

The most important of these colleges in the present inquiry were
the Collegia Fabrorum, which has generally been translated the
Colleges of Artificers.

The word Faber, in the Latin language, means generally one
who works in any material, but the signification is limited by some
adjoining word. Thus faber tignarius meant a carpenter, faber
ferrarius a blacksmith, faber aurarius a goldsmith, and so on.
But it was very generally used to designate one who was employed
in building — a stone-cutter or mason.

We meet in Gruter, and elsewhere, with many inscriptions in
which the word can only bear this meaning. In the passage above
cited from Pliny, we see that when he asks the imperial consent to
establish a society of artisans to reconstruct the burned edifices of
Nicomedia, for which purpose builders only could be of use, he calls
the desired society a Collegium Fabrorum , which may be fairly in-
terpreted a College or Guild of Masons.

There were, of course, colleges of other trades, such as the Col-
legium Pislorum, or College of Bakers, the Collegium Sictorum , or
College of Shoemakers, of whom a votive tablet was found at Osma
in Castile , 1 2 and many others. But, as Dalloway says, the Fabri
were “ workmen who were employed in any kind of construction
and were subject to the laws of Numa Pompilius .” 8

It is to these Collegia Fabrorum , or Roman guilds of Masons
or Builders, that Dr. Krause, whose opinion on this subject I adopt
with some modifications, has sought to trace the origin of the Medi-
feval corporations of stonemasons and the more recent Lodges ol
Freemasons.

In concluding this survey of the character and internal organiza-
tion of these Roman colleges, the prototypes of the modern Ma-
sonic guilds, it will not be inappropriate to cite the language on this

1 Don Cean-Bermudez, “ Sumario de las Antiguedas Romanas que hay in Espafia, 1
Madrid, 1832, p. 179.

2 “ Master and Freemason,” p. doo*

486

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

subject of the latest and most classical writers on the antiquities of
Greece and Rome. The following brief description is taken from
Guhl and Komer’s able work on The Life of the Greeks and
Romans}

“ Mechanics guilds ( Collegia Opipiuni) existed at an early period,
their origin being traced back to King Numa. They were nine in
number, viz., pipers, carpenters, goldsmiths, dyers, leather-workers,
tanners, smiths, and potters, and another guild combining, at first,
all the remaining handicrafts, which afterward developed into new,
separate societies. Amongst these later guilds, frequently mentioned
in inscriptions, we name the goldsmiths, bakers, purple-dyers, pig-
dealers, sailors, ferry-men, physicians, etc. They had their separate
inns ( 'curia , schola ), their statutes and rules of reception and expul-
sion of members, their collective and individual privileges, their laws
of mutual protection and their widows’ fund, not unlike the medi-
aeval guilds. There was, however, no compulsion to join a guild.
In consequence, there was much competition from freedmen — for-
eign, particularly Greek, workmen who settled in Rome, as also
from the domestic slaves who supplied the wants of the large fami-
lies — reasons enough to prevent the trades from acquiring much
importance.

“ They had, however, their time-honored customs, consisting of
sacrifices and festive gatherings at their inns, on which occasions
their banners ( vexilla ) and emblems were carried about the streets
in procession. A wall-painting at Pompeii is most likely intended
as an illustration of a carpenters’ procession. A large wooden tray
( ferculum ) surmounted by a decorated baldachin is being carried on
the shoulders of young workmen. On the tray stands a carpen-
ter’s bench in miniature, with two men at their work, the figure of
Daedalus being seen in the foreground.”

In reading this brief description, the principal details of which
have already been given in our preceding pages, the reader can
hardly fail to be struck with the far closer resemblance the usages of
Freemasonry bear to those Roman colleges or guilds, than they do
those of the Jewish workmen at the Temple, as we learn them from
the very imperfect and unsatisfactory allusions contained in the Bible
or in the Antiquities of Josephus. One can hardly fail to see that

1 Hueffer , s Translation from third German edition, New York, 1875, p. 519.

THE ROMAN COLLEGES OF ARTIFICERS 487

the derivation of Masonry from the former is a far more reasonable
hypothesis than a derivation from the latter.

Though but indirectly and remotely connected with this subject,
one fact may be mentioned that shows how much the spirit of the
guild organization, itself the spirit of Freemasonry, had imbued the
common life of the Romans.

The benefit societies of the present day, which are said to be and
most probably are but coarse imitations of the Masonic Lodges,
were not unknown to the ancient Romans. They had their burial-
clubs, called Collegia Tenuirom, the literal meaning of which is
Guilds of the Poor. They were, as their name imports, societies
formed by the poorer classes, from whose funds, derived from annual
contributions, the expenses of the burial of a member were defrayed
and a certain sum was paid to the surviving family. 1

Having shown that there existed among the Romans guild-like
associations of craftsmen, presenting a very close resemblance in
their usages and purposes to the guilds or corporations of Stone-
masons of the Middle Ages, who are admitted to have been the
predecessors of the Speculative Freemasons of the 18th century and
of the present day, the further connection of these two institutions
can be identified only by tracing the progress of the Roman colleges
from their rise in the reign of Numa, to their dissolution at the time
of the decline and fall of the Empire, and their absorption into the
architectural associations which sprang up in those parts of Europe
which had once been Roman provinces.

The inquiry into this difficult but interesting topic must be the
appropriate subject of the following chapter.

i Hueffer’s Translation from third German edition, New York, 1875, P* 59

CHAPTER III

GROWTH OF THE ROMAN COLLEGES

T has been shown in the preceding chapter that
Numa, in his sagacious efforts to improve the
civilization of the early Romans, and to recon-
cile the heterogeneous elements of which the
population was composed had instituted colleges
or guilds of mechanics.

I do not intend to complicate this question
by any reference to the theory of Niebuhr and his disciples who have
ignored the existence of any true history at that period, but who
deem every theory connected with regal Rome as merely mythical
and traditionary. I content myself with the fact that when Roman
history began to present itself under the authentic form of records,
the pre-existence of these guilds was fully recognized. It is suffi-
cient for the present purpose to accept the generally received opin-
ion, and while it is not denied that in primitive Rome such guild-
formations prevailed, we may safely attribute their origin to some
early reformer, who may be represented by the name of Numa as
well as by any other.

In treating the subject of the rise and progress of these colleges
or guilds, I shall pursue the course of Roman history as it has been
generally received by scholars. As we advance to later times we
shall find ourselves amply fortified by the contemporaneous author-
ity of classical writers, and by numerous monuments and inscriptions.
Except the mere question whether they were first established by
Numa or by somebody else, in what Niebuhr would call prehistoric
Rome — a question of but little or no importance in reference to
their connection with the mediaeval guilds — there is no statement
concerning them that is not a part of authentic history.

It has therefore been proved that these colleges were guild-like
in their organization ; that they had all the legal rights of a corpora-
tion ; that they elected their own members ; that they were governed

488

GROWTH OF THE ROMAN COLLEGES

489

by certain officers chosen by the votes of the society ; that they were
supported by monthly contributions ; that they had a guild-chest or
common fund, which was the property of the corporation ; that they
had a tutelary deity, in honor of whom they performed religious
rites ; that they had honorary members not belonging to the Craft,
who, as patrons of the colleges, and being selected from the wealth-
iest and most influential families of the Republic or the Empire,
protected their interests ; and finally, that they had, like our modern
corporations, laws, regulations, usages, and a jurisdiction which
were all sanctioned by the authority of the state.

In tracing the progress of the Colleges of Artificers, through the
reigns of the seven kings, the long period of the Republic and the
rise and fall of the Empire, we need not dwell upon the age of
Romulus. Though the narrative of his reign was accepted as au-
thentic by Dionysius and Plutarch, by Livy and Cicero, the in-
credulity of modern scholars, stimulated by their researches, has led
to the very general opinion that the first of the Roman kings was a
mythical personage, and that his history was founded, as Niebuhr
says, on a heroic lay. Yet even he admits that portions of the nar-
rative are to be accepted as matters of fact. Made up as it has been
of traditions, which were believed from the earliest periods, the reign
and the character of Romulus may be considered as an exposition of
that of the time in which he is supposed to have lived.

From these traditions we learn that he was, as the founder of an
empire might well be supposed to be, a warlike king, who was en-
gaged in constant contests with the inhabitants of neighboring and
rival cities. Though claimed to have been a legislator of the high-
est order, who exercised his skill in the organization of a new state,
the necessity of defending his territory from aggression and of in-
creasing its limits, gave him but little opportunity or inclination to
cultivate the arts of peace.

He is said to have created those religious institutions of the
Romans, which were afterward developed into greater matur-
ity by Numa and some of his successors. But he discouraged the
cultivation of the arts, and interdicted the citizens from the practice
of all mechanical and sedentary trades, which were left to foreign-
ers and slaves, while the free Romans were confined to agricultural
labors and warlike pursuits.

His successor, Numa, was, on the contrary, distinguished for his

490

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

pacific character. During his long reign of forty-three years, the
state over which he ruled enjoyed an uninterrupted flow of peace.
There were no domestic dissensions and no foreign wars. He was
not only a king but a philosopher, and by an anachronism which Nie-
buhr attempts, but vainly, to explain, he was considered as a disciple
of the sage Pythagoras. He established the religious institutes
and pontifical regulations, whose cruder form had been attributed
to Romulus; he built several temples, especially that of Janus; he
reformed the calendar ; instituted public markets and festivals ; en-
couraged the pursuit of agriculture and the mechanic arts ; and cre-
ated the brotherhoods or corporations of the trades and handicrafts-
men, which continued to exist through the whole history of the
Roman state under the name which he had originally given them
of Colleges of Artificers.

Tullus Hostilius was the successor and the contrast of Numa.
He was a warlike monarch, and his reign was marked by a series of
military successes. He was not, like his predecessor, of a religious
turn of mind, and it was only in moments of trepidation, says Livy , 1
that he made vows to build temples or had recourse to expiatory
sacrificial rites. Heineccius 2 thinks it probable that he abolished
the craft associations which had been instituted by Numa, because
they were calculated to divert the citizens from military pursuits and
to deprive him of the services of active soldiers.

Ancus Martius, the fourth king, was the grandson of Numa.
He revived the institutions of his grandfather and brought the
Romans back from the warlike habits of the previous reign to a
cultivation of the arts of peace. With this view he caused the sacred
institutes of Numa to be written out by the Pontifex Maximus
upon tablets and to be exhibited to the inspection of the public . 3
Under his reign, the colleges must have revived from the oppression
they had experienced under his predecessor.

The history of the next king, Tarquinius Priscus, if we are to
judge from the legends upon which it is founded, afford no reason
for believing that his reign was unfavorable to the craft associations.
He is said to have been a patron of architecture and of a construe-

1 “ In re trepida,” lib., i., 27.

2ii De Collegiis et corporibus opificum.”

8 Sir George Cornwall Lewis, “An Inquiry into the Credibility of the Early Roman
History,” ii., 465.

GROWTH OF THE ROMAN COLLEGES

491

tive character. He is said to have adorned the Forum, to have formed
the Circus Maximus, to have constructed the Cloacce or sewers, to
have laid the foundations of the temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, and
to have built a stone wall around the city. All these labors would
have required the aid of architects and builders, and we suppose that
the corporations or colleges of these craftsmen were encouraged by
a monarch so well disposed to the cultivation of the arts of con-
struction.

Servius Tullius, the sixth king, has had the reputation of a re-
former. He was the first to make a census of the people, and to dis-
tribute them into classes.

Florus says that he made the division in curiae and colleges, and
that things were so ordered that all distinctions of property, station,
age, occupation, and office must have been well marked. In this
reign the colleges and craftsmen took a recognized position among
the classes of the community.

Tarquinius Superbus, the last of the race of Roman kings, whose
name has been stained by the record of his tyranny, was the enemy
oi the people. His life was that of a despot. He surrounded him-
self with a body-guard to protect his person ; he prohibited all assem-
blies of the people either in the country or in the city, so that no
opportunity might be afforded them of consulting on the affairs of
the state ; he occupied them in forced labors for the construction of
the sewers and the completion of the Circus ; he repealed all the
popular laws of his predecessor ; abolished the equitable distribution
into classes which had been made by the census ; and suppressed the
colleges and craft sodalities. As the natural and expected result of
this oppressive course, the people rose to the assertion of their lib-
erties. Tarquin and his family were perpetually banished, the mon-
archy ceased to exist, and the republic rose on its ruins.

For a time after the expulsion of the King the Patricians ruled
over the Plebeians with a hand not always light. Dissensions sprang
up between the oppressors and the oppressed, and the Colleges of
Artificers became a subject of suspicion and dislike to the former
class, because as these associations were wholly made up out of the
latter, they were supposed to be the fomenters of discontent and
bodies in which seditious factions would be nourished.

Nevertheless, one of the first acts of the Consular government
was to re-establish the mild and beneficent laws of Servius Tullius,

492

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

and to permit the free assemblage of the people, whence resulted the
restoration of the colleges.

The severity of a famine which occurred in the Year of the
City 276, is attributed by Dionysius of Halicarnassus to the fact that
the number of women, children, slaves, and handicraftsmen who
were unproductive classes, was three times greater than that of the
citizens who were engaged in agricultural pursuits.

Though history, such as it was at that time, is silent on the
subject, yet it must be evident that the continual discords for many
of the early years of the Republic, between the Patricians and the
Plebeians, must have seriously affected the interests of the Colleges
of Artificers and secured to them only intermittent periods of spas-
modic activity.

But when the people had extorted from the Senate the Tribune-
ship by which they became a part of the governing power, and the
right of holding offices of honor and of entering the priesthood, the
colleges of handicraftsmen appear to have been more firmly estab-
lished. The laws of the Twelve Tables, which were adopted in the
Year of the City 302, confirmed their privileges, a decree which Gaius
in his Commentary on these laws thinks was suggested by and copied
from the decree of Solon in reference to similar associations among
the Greeks.

In the Year of the City 687, the Senate had suppressed the col-
leges, but eight years afterward they were restored by the Tribune
Publius Clodius.

From that time the Roman citizens began to pay much attention
to the arts and to mechanics. But though the craftsmen were united
in the Tribes and had the right of voting, they were not highly re-
spected and were not permitted to serve in the army except on ex-
traordinary occasions, such as domestic seditions. 1

Yet a great many new colleges were created, some by legal enact-
ment and some by voluntary association. Such, for example, were
the colleges of Ship Carpenters, of Smiths, and especially the Col-
legia Structoram , or Colleges of Builders, who were the same as the
Fabrii Ccementarii , or as it must be literally translated, the Stone-
masons.

But these guilds or Colleges of Artificers were not confined to

1 “ Sigonio de ant. jur. civil Rom.”

GROWTH OF THE ROMAN COLLEGES

493

the city of Rome. They spread into the provinces and the munici-
pal cities, or those which had been invested with the right of Roman
citizenship.

For a long time these corporations of workmen pursued a quiet
and exemplary course, engaged in the lawful pursuit of the various
trades and handicrafts.

But the number in time greatly increased ; Clodius, the Tribune,
in abrogating the decree of the Senate which had suppressed them,
unfortunately had extended the privilege to slaves and foreigners of
creating new colleges or of uniting with the old ones. Hence many
of these sodalities gradually degenerated into factions and political
clubs, and thus became dangerous to the state.

In addition to this fault, the classical writers speak in terms of
denunciation of the sumptuous feasts in which many of the col-
leges indulged. They carried this species of dissipation to such an
extent, that Varro complains that the extravagant banquets of the
colleges had greatly enhanced the price of food at Rome.

These follies were of gradual growth. The colleges continued
to exercise their functions during the existence of the Republic, and
were found in a flourishing condition at the advent of the Empire.

It is not to be supposed that in a change of government from the
simplicity of a democracy to the corruptions of a monarchy, based
on a revolution, the faults of political intrigue and extravagant con-
duct would not increase rather than abate.

Hence we find the emperors generally opposed to the increase of
these sodalities, and there are frequent decrees suspending or sup-
pressing them. But it must be remarked that this opposition ap-
pears to have been directed rather against the creation of new cor-
porations than to the suppression of the old ones.

To properly appreciate the true condition of the Roman Colleges
of Workmen, we must advert to the fact that while there were a cer-
tain number of them which had existed from the earliest period,
being the continuation of the primitive system which had been es-
tablished by Numa, and which had, except at intermittent periods
of suspicion, been tolerated and even patronized by the government,
there were many others which had sprung up in later times, and
which were formed by the voluntary association of individuals.

These bodies were for the most part the creation of political fac-
tions, whose revolutionary designs were sought to be concealed in

494

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

the exclusiveness of secret consultations, or sometimes of less worthy
craftsmen who, not having been admitted into the fellowship of the
old colleges, were willing to set up a rivalry in business.

Hence had arisen a distinction well recognized in the decrees of
the Senate, or of the emperors, and constantly referred to in the
various codes of Roman law.

This distinction was into lawful and unlawful colleges, or, to use
the legal terms, into Collegia licita and Collegia illicita. The vol-
untary associations, to which allusion has just been made, were of
the latter class. They were illicit or illegal colleges, and held a
somewhat similar position to the old and lawful colleges that, in
modern times, an unincorporated society does in its privileges and
franchises to a corporation. The analogy goes so far at least as this,
that the illicit colleges, like the unincorporated societies of the
present day, had no recognition in law — in other words, possessed
no rights which the law recognized. But, in another respect, the
analogy fails. The illicit colleges were not only not recognized,
but were actually discountenanced by the state, an interference to
which our unincorporated associations are not subjected. If the
law does not protect them, it does not persecute them. They are
allowed, if guilty of no violation of the laws, to continue without
let or hindrance.

But this was not the happy lot of the illegal colleges. They
were repeatedly denounced and suppressed by the state, which
looked upon them always as associations of a dangerous character.

It has been supposed that it was the policy of the Empire to de-
stroy the corporations of craftsmen which had been originally insti-
tuted by Numa, and decrees and laws have been quoted to prove
the statement. If such had been the case, we should meet with an
insurmountable difficulty in tracing back the corporations of build-
ers of the Middle Ages, to the Roman colleges. The total and
permanent suppression at any time of these, would naturally destroy
the links of that chain of continuity which is absolutely necessary
to identify the one with the other in the progress of history.

But we can not find any evidence that the primitive colleges,
and especially those of the builders, ever were suppressed. The de-
crees of the Senate and of the emperors were directed against the
new, and not against the old, associations of craftsmen.

Thus Suetonius tells us that Julius Ctesar abolished “ all colleges

GROWTH OF THE ROMAN COLLEGES

495

except those which had been anciently constituted the same author
informs us that Augustus “ dissolved all colleges except the old and
legitimate.” 1

The same reservation is made in all references through the
Digest of Justinian, to any decrees or enactments which affected
these corporations. It is only Collegia illicita against which the
penalties of law are to be enforced. “It is permitted to assemble
for religious purposes,” says the Digest, “ provided that by this the
decree of the senate prohibiting illicit colleges is not contravened.”
Ulpian says that “ illicit colleges are forbidden under the same pen-
alties as are adjudged to armed men who take possession of tem-
ples or public places.”

There was a very wholesome dread, both in the times of the re-
public and under the emperors, of those illegal associations, volun-
tarily assembled, too often for the promotion of factions or the en-
couragement of political opinions which were dangerous to the state.

When the greater part of the city of Nicomedia had been de-
stroyed by fire, Pliny , 2 who was then the governor of Bithynia, ap-
plied to Trajan for permission to organize for the purpose of re-
building a College of Masons ( Collegium Fabrorum'), which should
not consist of more than one hundred and fifty artisans, and in
which he would take care, by the exclusion of every person who
was not a Mason, that the purposes of the new college should not
be diverted into an improper direction.

There is a good deal of suggestive history in this passage of
Pliny’s letter to the Emperor.

It indicates, in the first place, that it was not unusual to create
new Colleges of Masons 3 for special purposes, which purposes being
accomplished, the colleges were dissolved. Pliny would hardly have
asked permission to perform an act of such importance, if it had
not been sanctioned by previous custom.

But this brings us very near to the similar custom of the Stone-

lti Cuncta Collegia praetor antiquitus constituta distraexit ” and “ Collegia praetor an-
tiqua et legitima dissolvit ” are the expressions of the Roman biographer.

2 See the 42d and 43d Epistles for the correspondence on this subj‘ect between Pliny
and the Emperor Traj'an.

3 1 cannot hesitate to translate the words (( Collegium Fabrorum ” into the English
“ College of Masons.” The whole tenor of the classical writings and especially the in
scriptions show that it was not usual to add to the generic word faber the distinctive one.
*>*rmoriarius to show that he was a worker in stone or in marble.

496

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

masons in the Middle Ages, who, we know, were accustomed to
create their temporary or especial Lodges of workmen, when any
building was to be undertaken. We see in this, if not a proof of
the direct continuation of the mediaeval Masons from the Roman
colleges (which Mr. Findel is unwilling to admit), at least a very ex-
act imitation in an interesting point, by the former of the customs
of the latter.

And in the next place, we learn from this epistle of Pliny that
it was not unusual to admit into these colleges of workmen members
who were not of the Craft, and that this was often done for an evil
purpose.

On this fact, indeed, was based the objection of the state to
illicit colleges. Voluntary associations were often formed which,
assuming the name and pretending to practice the professions of the
regular colleges, consisted really, in great part, of non-operatives
who met together in secret to concoct political and insurrectionary
schemes.

If the illicit colleges had confined themselves to a rivalry in
work with the regular bodies, it is not likely that the state would
have meddled with the contests between regular and irregular work-
men, or, as in after times they were called, Freemasons and Cowans.
Government does not at this day, in any country, interfere between
constitutional and clandestine Lodges of Masons. It leaves, as it
is probable that it would have done in Rome, the settlement of the
controversy to the Masonic law.

But it was the admission of these non-operative members into
the illicit colleges, who converted them from bodies of honest work-
men into political clubs, that made all the evil and awoke the sus-
picions and the interference of the state.

Trajan consequently declines to permit the creation of a new and
temporary college at Nicomedia, and he assigns the reason for his
refusal in these words.

ITe says, in reply to Pliny: “You have suggested the establish-
ment of a College of Masons (Collegium Fabrorum ) at Nicomedia,
after the example of many other cities. But we should not forget
that this province, and especially its cities, have been greatly troubled
by this kind of factions. Whatever name we may give to them for
any cause, bodies of men, however small in number, who are drawn
together by the same design, will become political clubs.”

JOHN THEOPHILUS DESAGULIERS

GROWTH OF TIIE ROMAN COLLEGES

497

The last two words are in the original hctcerice. This from
the Greek, among which people hctceria: or hetairiai were associa-
tions originally instituted for convivial purposes or for mutual relief,
like our benefit societies. They became, in later times, very common
in the Greek cities of the Roman Empire, but, as Mr. Kennedy
says, “ were looked on with suspicion by the emperors as leading to
political combinations.” 1

I think, therefore, that we may safely arrive at the conclusion
that the primitive colleges of artisans, who derived their origin from
the time of Numa, and to which we may trace the idea of the medi-
aeval guilds of Masons, were generally undisturbed by the govern-
ment, whether regal, republican, or imperial, and continued their
existence and their activity to a very late period in the history of the
empire. The persecutions, suppressions, and dissolutions of col-
leges of which we read, refer only to those illegal and irregular ones,
which, not confining their operations within the legitimate limits of
their craft, were voluntary associations made up, for the most part,
of non-operative members, who were engaged in factious schemes
against the powers of the state.

This point being settled, we may next direct our attention to the
condition of these colleges, and especially the Colleges of Masons,
or Collegia Fabrorum (for with them only are we concerned), in the
empire and in the provinces until the final overthrow of the Roman
power.

The Romans, in the earlier portion of their history, were with-
out any taste or refinement. The people were entirely military in
their character, and they cultivated the rude arts of war rather than
the polished ones of peace. Architecture, therefore, was in a de-
based condition. The principles of building extended only to the
construction of a shelter from the weather. Their houses were of
the rudest form, and, as their name imported, were merely coverings
from the sun and rain. “ These sheds of theirs," says Spence, “ were
more like the caves of wild beasts than the habitations of men ; and
rather flung together, as chance led them, than formed into regular
streets and openings. Their walls were half mud ; and their roofs
pieces of boards stuck together.” 2

1 Smith, “ Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities,” article Eranoi.
*Spence, “ Polymatis,” Dialogue V., p. 36.

32

498

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

The builders of the college established by Numa could at that
time have been occupied only in the most inglorious part of their
profession. They were engaged in works of utility and absolute
necessity, and could have had no knowledge of or inclination for
ornament. The most bungling carpenter or bricklayer of the present
time must have greatly surpassed them in skill.

During that period the colleges furnished no architects to the
army. The only workmen that we find there were the smiths and
the carpenters ; they were soldiers who exercised with but little need
of skill the mysteries of these trades, being employed in the renova-
tion of weapons and in needful repairs about the camp. It was not
until centuries afterward that workmen were supplied by the col-
leges and authorized by the state to accompany the legions in their
campaigns and in their occupation of conquered provinces . 1 2

It was not until about the era of Augustus — that monarch who
boasted that he had found Rome a city of brick and left it a city of
marble — that the Romans began to exhibit a fondness for the fine
arts, and especially for architecture. Marcellus, the conqueror of
Syracuse, had, two centuries before, implanted the seeds of a refined
taste in his countrymen, and invited the invectives of the ascetic
Cato, by the works of Grecian art which he brought to Rome
from the spoliation of the city which he had conquered. To him,
therefore, has been attributed the introduction of the arts into
Rome.

But it is to Augustus that architecture was indebted for the high
position as an art that it assumed among the Romans, and from the
period of his reign must we date the rise of the Colleges of Builders,
as associations of architects, whose cultivated and encouraged genius
produced its influence upon the conquered provinces into which they
migrated with the Roman legions.

Pittacus says, in his Lexicon of Roman Antiquities , s that those
workmen who at first confined their labors to the city of Rome,
afterward spread over the whole of Italy and then into the various
provinces of the empire, furnishing everything that was needed by
the army.

The government seems to have taken especial care of these

1 Pittacus, “ Lexicon Antiquitatum Romanorum,” article Fabru

2 “ Lexicon Antiquitatum Romanorum,” article Collegium.

GROWTH OF THE ROMAN COLLEGES

499

colleges, for besides the officers elected by the members themselves,
the state placed over them other officers, whose duty it was to give
them a general superintendence. In the provinces this duty was en-
trusted to the proconsul or government. Thus we have seen that
Pliny, as governor of the province of Bithynia, proposed to create a
College of Builders, over which he was to exercise a control such as
would regulate it in the admission of its members. In the municipal
cities this officer was called sometimes a Procurator, and sometimes a
Prcepositus. In every legion the artisans were under the government
of a Prefect, who was styled the Prcef ectus Fabrum, or Prefect of the
Artisans. I am not willing to confound this officer with the Prefect
of the Camp, who was, like our modern quartermaster, of a purely
military character. There is an inscription copied by Reinesius, in
which occur the words Faber et Prcef. Fabr. Leg., XX., i.e., Artif-
icer and Prefect of the Artificers. This would seem to imply that
the Prefect himself was sometimes, if not always, an artificer and
“ one of the Craft.”

Under the officer appointed by the state, as the general superin-
tendent of the artificers of the college, was a subordinate one, ap-
pointed also by the state or perhaps by himself, whose duty it was to
inspect and to direct the labors of the workmen, and to see that
everything was done in an artistic and workmanlike manner. He
was, in fact, what in later times the Freemasons called the Magis-
ter Operis, or Master of the Work.

When, therefore, we meet in Gaul, in Britain, or in any other
province which had been penetrated by the legions, with a monu-
ment of the labors of these Roman Masons, which some well-
preserved inscription attests to have been the work of a Collegium
Fabr or um, or College of Masons, we may suppose that it was ac-
complished in the following manner.

In the first place, the men, the materials, the site, the character
of the building, and all other matters relating to the general design,
were determined by the Proconsul, Procurator, Commander of the
Legion, or whomsoever had been appointed by the state or the em-
peror as superintendent of the artificers and the colleges.

The workmen being then assembled, commenced their labors by
congregating themselves, or being congregated, into a college, if
such a college did not already exist, and they were placed under the
immediate control and direction of a subordinate officer, who was

500

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

an artificer or an architect, and who regulated their labors, made
designs or plans, and corrected the errors of the workmen.

In all this we see a great analogy to the method pursued by the
operative Stonemasons of the Middle Ages.

First, there was a prelate, nobleman, or man of wealth and
dignity, who had formed the design of building a cathedral, an
abbey, ora castle. In the old English Constitutions this great per-
sonage is always referred to as “the Lord,” and the work or build-
ing was called “the Lord’s work.”

Having congregated in huts or temporary dwellings around the
site of the edifice they were about to erect, they formed a Lodge,
which was under the control of a Master. And then there was the
architect or Master of the Works, who was responsible for the faith-
ful performance of the task.

The convenience of military operations, such as the establishment
or removal of camps, and the passage of armies from one place to
another, required that the legions should carry with them in their
marches architects and competent workmen to accomplish these
objects. Bergerius, who wrote a treatise On the Ptcblic and Mili-
tary Roads of the Roman Empire' estimates, with perhaps some ex-
travagance, that the number of architects and workmen engaged in
the Roman states in the repairs of roads, the construction of bridges
and other works of a similar kind, exceeded those employed in the
building of the Pyramids of Egypt and the Temple of Solomon.

Of these a great number were distributed among the legions ; ac-
companied them in their marches; remained with them wherever
they were stationed ; created their colleges and proceeded to the
erection of works, sometimes of a temporary and sometimes of a
more permanent character.

Dr. Krause says, citing as his authority the Corpiis Juris and the
inscriptions, that in every legion there were corporations or colleges
of workmen who were employed for building and other purposes
needed in military operations.

Hence, in tracing the advance of the Roman legions into differ-
ent colonies, we are also tracing the advance of the Roman archi-
tects and builders who accompanied them. And when the legion

1 “ De publicis et militaribus Imperii Romani Viis,” contained in vol. x. of the
“ Thesaurus Antiq. Rom.” of Graevius.

GROWTH OF THE ROMAN COLLEGES

501

stopped in its progress and made any colony its temporary home, it
exercised all the influence of a conquering army of civilized soldiers
over a country of barbarians. Of all these influences of civilization
the one that has been the most patent was that of the architects who
substituted for the rude constructions which they found in the coun-
tries which had been invaded, the more refined principles of build-
ing. The monuments of the edifices erected in Spain, in Gaul, and
in Britain have, for the most part, disappeared under the destructive
agencies of time ; but their memorials remain to us in ruins, in in-
scriptions, and in the history of the improved condition of archi-
tecture, among these barbarous and uncultivated peoples. It was,
it is true, developed in subsequent times, and greatly modified by the
instructions of Byzantine artists, but the first growth and outspring
of the architecture practiced by the mediaeval guilds of Freemasons
must be traced to the introduction of the art into the Roman prov-
inces by the Colleges of Builders which accompanied the Roman
legions in the stream of conquest which these victorious armies
followed.

Having thus presented the details of the history of these Roman
Colleges of Builders from their organization by Numa, through the
successive eras of regal, of republican, and of imperial Rome ; hav-
ing shown their continued existence and eventually their spread into
the municipal or free cities and into the conquered provinces, im-
pressing everywhere the evidences of an influence on the art of build-
ing, it is proper that we should now pause to examine the memorials
of their labors in the different provinces and colonies.

It is thus that we shall be enabled to establish the first link in
that chain which connects the Freemasonry of the mediaeval and
more recent periods of Europe with the building corporations of
Rome.

CHAPTER IV

THE FIRST LINK : SETTLEMENT OF ROMAN COLLEGES OF ARTIFICERS
IN THE PROVINCES OF THE EMPIRE

HE first link of the chain which connects the
Roman Colleges of Artificers with the building
corporations of the Middle Ages, is found in
the dispersion and settlement of the former in
the conquered colonies of Rome.

It has been satisfactorily shown that the Ma-
sons at Rome were incorporated into colleges,
where the principles of their art were diligently studied and taught
to younger members who stood for that purpose in the place occu-
pied by the Apprentices in the Stonemasons’ lodges at a long sub-
sequent period. We have seen that an immunity from all public ser-
vices was granted by the Emperor Constantine to workmen, and
among others to architects for the express reason that they might
have the opportunity of acquiring a knowledge of their professions
and of imparting it to their disciples.

Now these architects, one of whom was always appointed to a
legion with workmen from the colleges under him, carried the skill
which they had been enabled to acquire at home, with them into the
colonies or provinces which they visited, and there, if they remained
long enough, which was usually the case, as the legions were for the
most part stationed for long periods, they erected, besides the mili-
tary defences constructed for the safety of the army, and the roads
which they opened for its convenience, more permanent edifices,
such as temples. Of this we have abundant evidence in the ruins
which still remain of some of these structures, ruins so dilapidated
as to supply us with only meagre and yet sufficient evidence of their
former existence and even splendor, but more especially in the
numerous inscriptions on stone or marble tablets, hundreds of which,
in every province, have been collected by Gruter, Muratori, Reine-

502

THE FIRST LINK

503

sms and other writers who have devoted themselves to the study of
Roman antiquities.

Thus we shall find in Spain, in Gaul, and in Britain abundant
evidences, of the kind referred to, of these labors of the Roman
architects, while these provinces were under Roman domination.
It can not be denied that this must have exercised a certain influence
on the original inhabitants and have introduced a more refined taste
and a superior skill in the art of building. Nor was the influence
thus exerted of an altogether ephemeral nature. When the Roman
domination ceased, and the legions were withdrawn to sustain the
feeble powers of a decaying empire, threatened by the barbarian
hordes of the north with extinction, not all the Romans who had
come with the legions, or since their advent immigrated into the
country, left with them. A very long series of years had passed,
and many of these architects and builders had been naturalized, as it
were, and were unwilling to depart from the homes which they had
made. They remained, and continued to perpetuate among the peo-
ple with whom they were domiciliated the skill and the usages which
they had originally brought from Rome.

M. Viollet-le-Duc says, in his Dictionary of Architecture ,* that
in the Middle Ages the workmen of the southern cities of Europe
preserved the Roman traditions, and that in them the corporations
or colleges did not cease to exist, but that these bodies were not es-
tablished in the northern cities until the time of the affranchisement
of the communes.

Even if this were the fact, it would only be lengthening the
chain of connection, for it is fair to suppose that the corporations
of the north, at whatever later period they were established, must
have adopted the system of confraternities from the southern cities
where they had long existed as a part of the Roman tradition.
So that even in this view the chain is uninterrupted which binds
the corporations of builders of the Middle Ages with those of
Rome.

But I think that it will hereafter be shown to be historically true
that the traditions and the usages of the Roman colleges were well
preserved in the early period of English architecture, and that out
of these traditions sprang, in part, the regulations of the Saxon

1 (l Dictionnaire Raisonne de PArchitecture deXI mft auXVI me si£cle,” tome vi., p. 34^

504

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

guilds. But this is a question for future consideration when we
come to the investigation of the post-Roman architecture of Gaul
and England.

The evidences of the influence of the Roman colleges on the
province of Spain are very abundant, arising from the peculiar rela-
tions of that province to the Empire.

Upon the expulsion of the Carthaginians from Spain, which oc-
curred 206 B.c., it was erected into a Roman province, at least so
much as had been conquered by the Romans under the Scipios,
which did not include more than half of the peninsular. Thence-
forward it was governed sometimes by one praetor and sometimes
by two, and two legions were always kept stationary in the province.

The influence of this political arrangement was of the most im-
portant character. The soldiers intermarried with the native women,
and thus became so estranged from Italy that when the legions were
disbanded, many of them refused to return home, and continued
their residence in Spain. 1

A little more than a century after its conquest, such a system of
internal communication had been established by the opening of
roads, and especially the military one of Pompey over the Pyr-
enees, that the country was laid open to travelers, many of whom
settled there. In the time of Strabo, a portion of the province had
been so Romanized in manners as to have become almost Roman.
The great privilege of citizenship had been granted to many of the
inhabitants, and they had even forgotten their native language.

Spain, thus becoming more intimately connected with the Em-
pire than any of the other provinces, furnished, as it is well known,
some distinguished names to Latin literature, such as Lucanus, the
poet, the older and the younger Seneca, Columelle, Quintilian, and
the epigrammatist, Martial.

In the reign of Augustus manyconsiderablecolonieswere founded,
represented by the modern cities of Zaragossa, Merida, Badajoz, and
many others. In these cities the art of building flourished, and they
were adorned with some of the finest productions of Roman archi-
tecture, of many of which the magnificent ruins still remain, while
temples, theaters, baths, circuses, and other public edifices, which
had been erected by the Roman masons, have perished through the

1 Niebuhr, “ Lectures on Roman History,” ii., p. 208.

THE FIRST LINK

505

waste of time and the destructive influences of invasions and intes-
tine wars.

It is well known that while Spain was, from the earliest times,
an object of the grasping ambition of foreign peoples, and that it
was in turns invaded and conquered by the Phoenicians, the Greeks,
the Romans, the Goths, and the Arabs, all of whom were attracted
by the delights of the climate, the fertility of the soil, and the rich-
ness of the mines, the Romans, from the longer duration of their
domination and from the more solid character of the edifices which
they constructed, have left a greater number of architectural monu-
ments, and these in a greater state of preservation, than the other
nations who preceded or followed them . 1

But the invasion of the Goths, after the departure of the Ro-
mans, and the subsequent more permanent occupation of the pen-
insular by the Saracenic Arabs or Moors, so completely withdrew
the architects of Spain from all communication with those of the
rest of Europe, and so completely obliterated all effects of the
earlier Roman influence, that it is impossible to trace a continued
and uninterrupted connection between the Roman Colleges of Ma-
sons, who left behind such wonderful evidences of their skill, and the
mediaeval guilds or corporations of the Middle Ages, who in other
countries were their successors.

It is a curious historical fact that while of all the Roman prov-
inces Spain was the one in which the Roman domination was most
firmly established, it was also the one in which, after the decay of
the Empire, all the results of that domination were the most thor-
oughly obliterated.

Spain has, therefore, been alluded to on the present occasion
not with any intention of making it a part of that train of succession
which, beginning with the colleges of Numa, ended in the mediaeval
guilds of Stonemasons, but because it furnishes a very complete
instance of how these Roman Colleges of Artificers extended their
labors and introduced their art into foreign countries.

In the three other provinces of the western empire, the two
Gauls and Britain, the connection of the Roman colleges with the
guilds or corporations which subsequently sprang up may be more
readily traced.

1 Don Caen-Bermudez, “ Sumario de las Antigiiedades Romanas que hay in Esparza.”
Madrid, 1852, p. 2.

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

506

Cisalpine or Citerior Gaul was the name given by the classical
writers to that part of Gallia which was south of the alpine moun-
tains, and which constituted what is more familiarly known as
northern Italy. Deriving its first settlement, if we may trust to the
authority of Livy, which, however, Niebuhr rejects, by an immigra-
tion of the Gauls beyond the mountains, in the time of Tarquinius
Priscus, these people were for centuries engaged in struggles with
the Romans, whose attempts to subdue them were always unsuccess-
ful. When Hannibal, the Carthaginian general, invaded Italy and
sought the destruction of Rome and the Roman power, many of
them willingly became his allies But about two hundred years be-
fore the Christian era, the two most important tribes, the Insubrians
and the Boians, were subdued by the Roman legions under the
Consuls C. Cornelius Cethegus and Q. Minucius Rufus, and from
that time to the reign of Augustus, Cisalpine Gaul came slowly but
surely under the Roman domination. When it was established as a
Roman province, it was rapidly filled with a Roman population,
and became one of the most valuable of the Roman possessions.
Most of the towns received that political status known as the Jus
Latii, or the Latinitas, by which they were placed in a middle posi-
tion between strangers and the Roman citizens, and the pure right
of citizenship was bestowed on their magistrates, which was, in
the time of Caesar, extended to all the inhabitants, the larger towns
being made municipalities.

Fifty years before Christ all Cisalpine Gaul had been invested
with the right of citizenship, and consisted of Roman communities
organized after the Roman fashion. This would necessarily indicate
the introduction among the people of Roman civilization and refine-
ment. Among the arts that were encouraged, that of architecture
was not the least, and we have ample evidence in Still remaining
monuments and in inscriptions that the Roman architects or mem-
bers of the colleges were industriously employed in the labors of
their Craft.

The proofs of this are to be found in the modern cities of
northern Italy, which are the successors of the Cisalpine colonies,
and which have preserved in their museums or in private col-
lections the memorials and relics of their ancient prosperity and
refinement.

Thus Mutina, now the modern Modena, was one of the most

THE FIRST LINK

5°7

flourishing of the Lombard towns. Cicero did not hesitate to call it
“ the strongest and most splendid colony of the Roman people.”
It was so wealthy as to have been able to support for a long time
the large army of Brutus. It fell at length into decay, but was
never abandoned, and again rose to prosperity in the Middle Ages
under the name of Modena, by which it is still known. Although
the magnificent architectural remains of the ancient city were em-
ployed in the construction of the cathedral and other public build-
ings of the modern one, or were buried under the depositions of
alluvial soil, yet the Museum of Modena contains a valuable collec-
tion of sarcophagi and of inscriptions which have been excavated at
various times and which furnish the evidence of the existence and
the labors of the Roman architects and builders under the empire.

There was another town of Cisalpine Gaul, called Aquileia,
which was built by the Romans to defend the fertile plains of Italy
on the northeast from the incursions of barbarians. Two centuries
before Christ it was settled by several thousand colonists from Rome
and became a place of great commercial prosperity. In the 5th
century it was plundered and burnt by Attila, King of the Huns ;
but though it never again became a place of importance, it was
always inhabited, and in the 6th century was the See of a bishop,
and, to borrow the language of Mr. Bunbury, 1 “ It maintained a
sickly existence throughout the Middle Ages." At the present
day it is an obscure village, with only a cathedral. Although it con-
tains no vestiges of Roman edifices, the site, says the same writer,
“abounds with remains of antiquity, coins, engraved stones, and
other minor objects as well as shafts and capitals of columns, frag-
ments of frieze, etc., the splendour and beauty of which sufficiently
attest the magnificence of the ancient city.” Among the inscriptions
found there are some which relate to the temple and the worship of
Belenus, a local sun-god whom the Romans identified with Apollo.
All the works of which we have these memorials must have been
effected by the Roman architects, who, with their colleges, were
surely among the six or seven thousand who emigrated from Rome
and built up the city.

Bononia, or the modern Bologna, was built, it is supposed, by
the Tuscans, and was raised to the rank of a Roman colony about

1 Smith’s “Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography.’’

508

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

two centuries before Christ. It continued to be an important ano
flourishing city under the empire. Though it suffered decay, it was
able, in the 5th century, to withstand successfully the attacks of
Alaric. It never lost the continuity of its existence, but after the
fall of the empire regained, in a great measure, its prosperity, and at
length assumed, in the Middle Ages, a pre-eminence among the
cities of northern Italy which it still retains. It is not probable that
it had soon lost its traditions of those arts which it practiced when a
Roman colony, and which are attested by fragments of sculpture
and traditions which have been preserved.

The modern city of Ivrea, which is an important place, was the
ancient Eporedia, a Roman colony founded about one hundred years
before Christ. The strength of its position, as commanding two
important passes of the Alps, gave it great military value, and it
does not, therefore, appear to have been subjected to any great proc-
ess of decay. As late as the close of the 4th century it was a con-
siderable town and occupied, as a military station, by a portion of a
legion. The modern city still contains a fine Roman sarcophagus
and some other remains of its ancient splendor.

But the most interesting of all the cities of Cisalpine Gaul, in a
reference to the connection of the Roman colleges, which labored in
them, with the sodalities of the Middle Ages which succeeded them,
is Comum, an important city at the foot of the Alps and on the
borders of the Lake of Como. The present name of the city is
Como. It is supposed to have been the birthplace of both the elder
and the younger Pliny, the latter of whom made it his favorite resi-
dence, and established in it a school of learning. It was under the
empire a flourishing municipality, and its prosperity was secured by
the beauty and convenience of its position at the extremity of the
lake, for it became the point of embarkation for travelers who were
proceeding to cross the Rhaetian Alps. It retained its prosperity to
the close of the Roman Empire. In the 4th century a fleet was
stationed there for the protection of the lake. Cassiodorus speaks
of it in the 6th century as one of the military bulwarks of Italy, and
extols the richness of the palaces with which the siiores of the lake
in its vicinity were adorned. It continued to retain its importance
in the Middle Ages, and it is from there that the “ Masters of Co-
mo,” the Traveling Freemasons, proceeded to traverse Europe in the
xoth century, and to erect cathedrals, monasteries, and palaces in

THE FIRST LINK

505

the various countries which they visited. But this body, whose acts
form the most valuable portion of the historical testimony of the
connection between the Roman Colleges of Artificers and the
corporations of Freemasons in the Middle Ages, will be hereafter
discussed and described in a more extended manner. For the
present, this simple allusion to them must suffice.

We next come to the consideration of the architectural condition
of Transalpine Gaul, or Gaul proper, under the Roman domination.
This subject may be briefly discussed, as the early condition of Ro-
man architecture in Gaul will be more diffusely treated in a subse-
quent chapter.

The name of Transalpine Gaul was given by the Romans to that
country which extended from the Pyrenean mountains to the river
Rhine, within which limits modern France is embraced. It was
first conquered by the Roman arms under Julius Caesar, and re-
mained a province of the empire until its final decline. The Gauls
are represented to have been a ferocious and sanguinary people,
though at the time of the conquest Caesar found an improvement in
the manners of some of the tribes. But their progress toward civil-
ization and refinement was rapid after they came under the domin-
ion of the Romans. Caesar had formed a legion of Gaulish soldiers
whom he armed and drilled after the Roman fashion, and subse-
quently when he had arrived at the Dictatorship he made them
Roman citizens, and sent Roman colonies to several of the cities.

Under the Emperor Augustus, Gaul became rapidly Romanized.
Schools were established in the large towns, and the Latin language
and the Roman law were adopted. In religion there was a compro-
mise and there was a mixture of Gallic and Roman worship, though
wherever the Romans made a permanent settlement, temples were
erected to the Roman deities.

Architectural works were pursued with great energy but with
little prudence. Temples and other public buildings, together with
bridges, roads, and aqueducts, were erected over all the country.
These must have cost immense sums, and as the expenditure was
wholly defrayed by the inhabitants without aid from the mother-
government, great distress began to prevail among the people, which
led to several mutinies.

But though the embellishments of the Roman architects had im-
poverished the colonists, the influences of refinement in art con-

5 io

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

tinued long after these troubles to prevail, and in Gaul we find an
almost uninterrupted connection between the architecture of the
Roman colleges and that of the mediaeval Freemasons.

That part of Gaul which lay along the shore of the Mediterranean
Sea, and which the Romans emphatically called the Province (Pro-
vincia), had been civilized and Romanized long before the conquest
of the other parts of the country. It was in the towns of this
province that the most extensive operations in architecture were ex-
hibited. It must be remarked, however, that all over Gaul outside
of the Provincia, as well as within it, there are ample evidences of
the splendid style of architecture that was cultivated by the archi-
tects who accompanied the legions, or the colonists who went from
Rome to settle in Gaulish towns.

Baeterrae, now Beziers, received a colony of soldiers of the
seventh legion, who constructed a causeway, of which some traces
still exist. There are also the vestiges of an amphitheater and the
remains of an aqueduct.

Arelate, now known as Arles, was a city of the Provincia. The
Roman remains are very numerous there ; among them an obelisk
of Egyptian granite which was excavated some centuries ago, and in
1675 was set up in one of the public squares. The amphitheater
was estimated as capable of holding twenty thousand persons.
There is also an old cemetery which contains many ancient tombs,
both Pagan and Christian.

Nemausus, the modern Nimes, which was also a city of the
Provincia, contains many remains of the skill of the old Roman
architects and the splendor of their works. The amphitheater, not
quite as large as that of Arles, is in a good state of preservation.
There is also a temple still existing which, as Arthur Young says, in
his Travels in France , is beyond comparison the most light, ele-
gant, and pleasing building that he ever beheld. Under the modern
name of “ Maison Carrde ” it is now used as a museum of painting
and antiquities.

But the noblest monument that the Romans have left in Gaul is
the aqueduct now called the Pont du Gard , which is between three
and four leagues from Nimes. The bridge on which the aqueduct
is laid is still solid and strong, and is, says Mr. George Long, “ a
magnificent monument of the grandeur of Roman conceptions, and
of the boldness of their execution.”

THE FIRST LINK

5*i

It is useless to extend these descriptions farther. All over Gaul
were cities colonized by the Romans, who imparted to the native
inhabitants a portion of their skill, their taste, and their refine-
ment. Temples, amphitheaters, theaters, aqueducts, and public and
private buildings of every kind are to be found in all the large and
many of the small cities of modern France, which, sometimes well
preserved and sometimes in ruins, always indicate that the spirit
of architectural enterprise was imparted to the people under the
Roman government and by Roman architects and builders. How
well that spirit was preserved and how it became afterward devel-
oped in the Freemasonry of the Middle Ages will remain to be
elucidated in our further historical researches.

Britain was twice invaded by Caesar, but on neither occasion
did he stay long enough in the island to effect any influence on
the inhabitants. Augustus afterward planned an expedition to
Britain, but the plan was never consummated. It was not until
the time of Claudius that any serious attempt at conquest was
made. Under his orders an army was led by Aulus Plautus into
the southeastern part of the island. The city of Camalodunum,
now Malden, was taken. Claudius, who had visited Britain to par-
take of the triumphs of the victory, returned to Rome and as-
sumed the surname of Britannicus in attestation of his success,
leaving his general, Plautus, to complete the conquest, which,
however, he did not accomplish.

Vespasian soon after subdued the Isle of Wight and took twenty
of the oppida or British towns. His son Titus also distinguished
himself in many battles with the native tribes.

But though the island was at this time penetrated to some extent
by the Roman legions, and the southern coasts were occupied by them,
the island was not yet conquered. The struggle between the inde-
pendent spirit of the natives and the ambitious designs of their
Roman invaders lasted for nearly half a century, and the subjec-
tion of the whole island was not achieved until the reign of Domi-
tian. Thereafter Britain took the form and felt all the influences
of a Roman province, but unlike Spain and Gaul, a discontented
one.

It is hardly germane to the objects of the present work to trace,
with any particularity of detail, the progress of the Roman power
under the various emperors who governed the island from the date

512

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

of its conquest to the final withdrawal of the Roman armies in the
beginning of the 5 th century.

It is sufficient to say that during the period of time intervening
between these two epochs, Britain had become completely Romanized.
Colonies were founded, cities possessing the right of Roman citi-
zenship were established, legions were distributed in various places,
veteran soldiers and immigrants from the imperial city had made
permanent settlements, so that, as Gildas says, it was to be viewed
not as a British but as a Roman island.

“Britain,” says Sharon Turner, “was not nowin the state in
which the Romans had found it. Its towns were no longer barri-
cadoed forests, nor its houses wood cabins covered with straw, nor
its inhabitants naked savages with painted bodies or clothed with
skins. It had been, for above three centuries, the seat of Roman
civilization and luxury. Roman emperors had been born and others
had reigned in it. The natives had been ambitious to obtain and
hence had not only built houses, temples, courts, and market-places
in their towns, but had adorned them with porticoes, galleries,
baths, and saloons, and with mosaic pavements, and emulated every
Roman improvement. They had distinguished themselves as legal
advocates and orators and for their study of the Roman poets.
Their cities had been made images of Rome itself, and the natives
had become Romans .” 1

It can not be doubted that the skill and experience of the Roman
architects who accompanied the legions or who came from Rome
to Britain after its conquest had been imparted to the native Britons,
and that the chain of connection between the Roman colleges and
the local Colleges of Artificers in the island was well established.
Of this, numerous inscriptions and the remains of Roman buildings,
found everywhere in modern England, furnish ample evidence.

In Dorchester, which was the Roman Durnovaria, besides the
remains of the old Roman ruins and several camps, those of what
was probably an amphitheater attest its former importance and the
labors of the Roman builders.

In Dover, the ancient Dubris, there is now an octagon tower at-
tached to a church, and which is almost built of Roman bricks. It
is supposed to have been a light-house in the time of the Romans.

1 “ History of the Anglo-Saxons,” vol. i., p. 136.

THE FIRST LINK

513

London, or Londinium, was a very old city, and was the capital
of ancient Britain as it now is of modern England. Though not
invested by the Romans with the rights of a municipality, it was
always, as Tacitus says, from the abundance of its trade, a place of
great importance. The remains of Roman monuments which have
been found in London show that it contained many splendid build-
ings. When the foundations of an old wall which bordered the
river were laid open, several years ago, it was found to be composed
of materials that had been previously used in the construction of
ancient buildings.

“The stones of which this wall was constructed,” says Mr. Charles
Roach Smith , 1 “were portions of columns, friezes, cornices, and also
foundation-stones. From their magnitude, character, and number,
they gave an important and interesting insight into the obscure his-
tory of Roman London, in showing the architectural changes
that had taken place in it.” Architectural fragments, and the re-
mains of tesselated pavements in great number have been discovered,
which attest the magnificence of the Roman city, and traces of tem-
ples have also been found.

It has been said that London was the station of a cohort of
native Britons, which was contrary to the usage of the Roman Em-
perors, who never stationed auxiliaries in their native countries,
but we know that a colony of veterans had been established at Cama-
lodunum or Malden not far off, and there are inscriptions which attest
the presence, at various times, of the soldiers of the second, sixth,
and twentieth legions in the city. It is easy, therefore, to trace, as
we must, the construction of these magnificent works to Roman
architects, supplied by the legions or the colonies.

Eboracum, or York, is familiar to the Masonic scholar from the
important part that it plays in the traditional history of English Free-
masonry. It was a town of much importance in the times of the
Romans, and seems to have been a favorite place of residence. It
was the permanent station of the sixth or victorious legion. The
Emperors Severus and Constantius died there, and it is said to have
been the birthplace of Constantine the Great. Among the memo-
rials of the Roman domination which have been found at York are
numerous remains of temples, baths, altars, votive tablets, and even

1 Dr. William Smith’s “ Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography . 1
33

514

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

private residences. Of the many inscriptions that have been pre-
served, one dedicated to the Egyptian god Serapis, and a tablet or
slab containing the carved figure of a man with a cap and chlamys,
or short mantle, who is stabbing a bull, indicate the introduction by
the Romans of the worship of a foreign god as well as the cultiva-
tion of the mystical rites of Mithras.

In the beginning of the 5th century, the Roman Empire being
imminently threatened with downfall, the legions and the Roman
authority, which had ruled and protected Britain for so long a period,
were withdrawn. The people were left to defend themselves from
the incursions of the Danes and other barbarous invaders from the
opposite shores of the Continent. Many changes took place in
the laws, the language, and the habits of the island. In time, after
many wars, Britain became Anglo-Saxon England.

But, as on the retirement of the Romans, many voluntarily re-
mained, because they had become habituated to the country and, in
numerous cases, had been connected by intermarriages with the na-
tives, Britain did not altogether lose the influence of the seed that
had been sown. Especially in the art of building, although there
was a deterioration, all the effects of the Roman civilization were
not lost. And it will not, I think, be difficult to trace the develop-
ment of the system of trade guilds which afterward existed among
the Anglo-Saxons and the English to the suggestions of the similar
guilds of the Roman colleges. But the consideration of this ques-
tion must be postponed to a future chapter.

What has been here attempted has been to show that the Roman
colleges, sending their architects to the colonies and cities estab-
lished in the conquered provinces of the Roman Empire, had
secured, in an uninterrupted succession, not only the principles of
architecture but the co-operative and well-regulated system of work
which, beginning at the earliest period of Roman history in the Col-
leges of Artificers, was to be carried throughout its acquired domin-
ions by its legions and its colonists, and finally to be developed in a
modern form in the corporations of operative Masons of the Middle
Ages, and finally in the lodges of Speculative Masons of the pres-
ent day.

So far the first and second links of this chain of connection have
been shown ; we here close the history with the fall of the Roman
dominion over the provinces at the beginning of the 5th century.

THE FIRST LINK

SIS

As we proceed in our investigations our inquiries must bring us
successively to the condition of architecture and its gradual growth
into new systems and various styles in all the countries which were
once under the Roman dominion.

We shall, I believe, find the principles of architecture changing
from the influences of different causes exerted at different times.
Architecture will be constantly changing its features. The Roman,
the Byzantine, the Gothic, and other styles will succeed and displace
each other, but the system of co-operative or guild labor, which is
the true connecting chain between the ancient and the modern
methods of building, will always prevail and show, in every suc-
cessive age, the unweakened influence of the old Roman guild or
college.

CHAPTER V

EARLY MASONRY IN FRANCE

1TH the condition of Masonry in Gaul, wmcn
afterward became France, immediately subse-
quent to the decadence of the Roman Empire,
and afterward up to the Middle Ages, we are by
no means as familiar as we are with its condi-
tion during the same period in Germany and
in Britain. French Masonic writers have been
too speculative in their views, and have given too loose a rein to
their imaginations, to permit us to attach any value to the authen-
ticity of what they present as historical statements.

This is a fault, which it is but fair to say has been shared by the
English writers of what has been called Masonic history. Clavel
and Thory are hardly to be considered more reliable as historians
than Anderson and Oliver. In the works of each of these distin-
guished writers we find many statements which are hardly plausible,
and which, although offered as historical facts, are wholly unsup-
ported by any authentic authority.

But recently in England a new school of Masonic history has
sprung up, which is rapidly clearing away the cobwebs of absurdity
and inconsistency, of doubt and error which had been woven around
the pure form of history by the older writers of the last and the be-
ginning of the present century.

In France, no such school has been established. In that coun-
try there have been no Hughans, Woodfords, or Lyons to exhume
from their sepulcher, on the shelves of national or private libraries,
the old charters and capitularies which might throw some light on
the real condition of the Masonic sodalities which were left behind
in Gaul on the retreat of the Roman legions, and which were after-
ward developed, by a gradual but uninterrupted growth, into the
building corporations of the Middle Ages.

If the scholars of France supply us with no valuable assistance

EARLY MASONRY IN FRANCE

5 r 7

in our inquiries on this subject, we shall look in vain for aid from
English or German writers.

These have, in general, thought it a task sufficiently arduous to
seek the elucidation of the Masonic history of their own countries,
and have not, therefore, found either time or inclination to labor, to
any great extent, in other fields.

Even Findal, who is somewhat exhaustive in his account of the
early and mediaeval Masonry of Britain, and more especially of
Germany, passes over that of France without notice. Indeed, he
begins his chapter on French Masonry with the year 1725 as his
starting-point, and thus entirely ignores all the events that preceded
the organization of the modern lodges in Paris after the revival, as
it is called, which took place in London in the year 1717.

Hence his history is not really that of Masonry in France, but
only that of the French Grand Lodge.

From Kloss, another German writer of eminence, we derive no
better information. He wrote in two volumes a History of Free-
masonry in France , Drawn from Authentic Documents, but his
theory is that the Institution was introduced into France from Eng-
land, and he goes, like Findal, no farther back than to the organiza-
tion of a French lodge in 1725, under the auspices of the Grand
Lodge of England.

It will be seen, when we come to the consideration of the origin
of the Grand Lodge of Speculative Masons in France, that there is
great question of the correctness of this date, for the researches of
Bro. Hughan have led to the doubt whether there was a legal lodge
in France, deriving its authority from the English Grand Lodge
before the year 1 732. This, however, is not germane to the present
inquiry.

It is altogether in vain that we look in the pages of French
Masonic writers, such as Thory and Clavel, for any documentary
history of French Freemasonry anterior to the beginning of the
1 8th century.

Thory, in his Acta Latomorum, commences his annals, so far as
they relate to France, with the year 1725, and the establishment of a
lodge in Paris by the titular Earl of Derwentwater. Not a single
word does he say of the condition of the association, either as Oper-
ative or Speculative, previous to that date.

Clavel. in his Histoire Picturesque, gives a very loose and indefr

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

518

nite account of the origin of Freemasonry in France. He traces
it, and in so far he is correct, to the Roman Colleges of Artificers
through the architects of Lombardy, and passes very rapidly on to
the connection of the French operative Masons with the building
corporations of Germany and the Grand Lodge of Strasburg. But
he does not attempt to show how that connection was effected.
There is no objection to the theory which he propounds. His prin-
cipal fault, as an historian, lies in his extreme generalization and in
the meagerness of his details. Taking as his point of departure the
Roman colleges, he leaps almost at a bound from them to the
mediaeval corporations. He devotes no attention to the period
which immediately succeeded the fall of the empire, nor to the in-
fluences exerted on, or the methods pursued by, the Roman and
Gallic Masons who were left in Gaul on the departure of the legions,
and which led to the gradual development of the guilds, sodalities,
or lodges which sprang up in time as the successors of the Roman
colleges.

But another failing of Clavel as an historian, and one which pro-
duces the most unsatisfactory results upon the minds of his read-
ers. is that he produces no documents, does not even refer to any,
and cites no authority to corroborate any of the statements that he
makes.

Even in a writer of acknowledged care and attention to the
credibility and genuineness of the facts that he records, such a
method of treating an historical narrative would be objectionable.
But what little claim Clavel’s unsupported assertions have to our re-
spect, and how far they are from necessarily demanding our belief,
may be learned from the fact that he cites as an undoubted instance
of the existence of a Masonic lodge in the year 1512, what is now
known to have been merely a convivial society of literary men who
met at Florence in that year under the title of the “ Society of the
Trowel.” 1

1 It counted some of the most distinguished inhabitants of Florence among its mem-
bers. Its symbols were the trowel, the square, the hammer, and the level, and its patron
saint was St. Andrew. Vasari describes it as a festive association of Florentine artists,
who met annually to dine together. He describes the origin of its existence and its title
to the merely accidental circumstance that certain painters and sculptors, dining together
in a garden, observed in the vicinity of their table a mass of mortar in which a trowel
was sticking. Some rough practical jokes passed thereupon, such as casting portions of
the mortar on each other and the calling for the trowel to scrape it off. They then re-

EARLY MASONRY IN FRANCE

519

The allusion to an implement of operative masonry in the title
of the society, led Clavel, as it has done Reghellini, Lenning, and
some others, to believe that it was a Masonic organization. But a
reference to the authority of Vasari, in his Lives of the Painters,
would have shown that the apparently professional title was actually
selected by a mere accident and in reference to a jocular proceeding
which suggested the name.

There is hardly any necessity to refer to the writings of the
Chevalier Ramsay, as throwing any light on the early history of Ma-
sonry in France. His theory is that Freemasonry originated among
the Crusaders and was introduced into France by the Templars, who
brought it with them on their return from Palestine. This hypoth-
esis is now generally, perhaps I should say universally, admitted to
be untenable. It comprises a history, or the figment of a history,
not founded on facts nor supported by any documentary evidence,
but one that was simply invented to sustain a preconceived theory.
The theory was first invented and then the history was written.
Hence it has been rejected by all scholars and has fallen into utter
extinction together with the system of Strict Observance that was
founded in it. In this work, which seeks to trace Freemasonry
back to the Colleges of Artificers of Rome, it can of course have
no place.

Rebold is a pleasing exception to the rest of his countrymen
who have treated or attempted to treat this subject, though it is
to be regretted that he has not thought proper to corroborate his
statements by a reference to authorities, or by what would have
been most valuable, the citation of any old records or constitu-
tions. On the whole, however, he is more satisfactory than any
other writer of early French Masonic history, and gives a fuller ac-
count of the institution as it existed when Gaul emerged from the
dominion of Rome.

His history , * 1 briefly analyzed, is to the following effect. He
says that Masonry was introduced into Gaul by the Roman confra'
ternities of builders, one of which was attached to each legion of the
army. He describes the vicissitudes to which these architects were

solved to dine together annually, and as a memorial of the ludicrous event that had led
to their organization as a dinner-club they called themselves the Societh della Cuechiara,
or the Society of the Trowel.

1 “ Histoire des Trois Grandes Loges de Franc-magons en France,” Paris, 1864.

520

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

subjected during the repeated conflicts of the Romans with the
hordes of barbarians, whose alternate defeats and successes were
followed by the destruction or the renewal of the labors of the
Masons. At length, in the year 426, the victorious arms of Clovis,
King of the Franks, put an end to the Roman domination, and the
armies of the empire left, forever, the soil of Gaul.

But the confraternities of builders, which had come into the
country with the Roman legions, remained there after their depart-
ure. They, however, underwent material alterations in their or-
ganization, and developed a new system, which Rebold thinks be-
came the basis of that Freemasonry which existed for a long time
afterward in France.

M oiler, in his Memorials of German Gothic Architecture ,*
when referring to the fact that the Roman architecture of the 5th
and 6th centuries prevailed at a much later period in Italy, Spain,
Gaul, and Britain, explains the circumstance as follows :

“ The conquerors did not exterminate the old inhabitants, but
left to them exclusively, at least in the first periods of their invasion,
the practice of those arts of peace, upon which the rude warrior
looked with contempt. And even at a later time, the intimate con-
nection with Rome, which the clergy, then the only civilized part of
the nation, entertained, and the unceasing and generally continued
use of the Latin language in the divine service, gave considerable in-
fluence to Roman arts and sciences. This must have been so much
more the case, from the constant obligation of all freemen to de-
vote themselves to war ; whereby the practice of the arts was left
almost exclusively to the clergy.”

The corporations of builders which had been attached, some to
the legions and some to the governors of the provinces, under
whose orders they had constructed many great edifices, then began
to admit into their bosom a large number of native Gauls who had
been converted to Christianity.

The most important modification, however, to which they were
compelled to submit, was this, that being originally a general asso-
ciation of artisans, whose central sect and school of instruction
was at Rome, they were obliged to abandon this relation on the
retreat of the Roman armies from Gaul, and the severance of al)

translation by W. H. Leeds, London, 1836, p. 17.

EARLY MASONRY IN FRANCE

521

political connection between the province and the imperial gov-
ernment.

The builders, as well as the other craftsmen, then divided them-
selves into a variety of sodalities, each being occupied with the culti-
vation of a different art or trade.

It is here that Rebold should have cited some authority for his
statement of a fact that is contrary to what has always been sup-
posed to be the true character of the Roman colleges. The division
into different trades, which he supposes to have been a forced neces-
sity in Gaul, was in existence., if history be correct, from the first
organization of the colleges by Numa, when they were ten in num-
ber, which was subsequently increased to a large extent under the
empire.

These sodalities of different trades, he says, subsequently gave
rise to the corporations or guilds of the Middle Ages.

Of these sodalities, that of the builders, or Masons, being the
most important, and the one most needed in the countries where
they were left after the departure of the Romans, especially in Gaul
and Britain, were alone enabled to retain the ancient organization
and the ancient privileges which they had possessed under the domi-
nation of the Romans.

But amid the continued invasions of barbarians, and the wars
and political disturbances that followed, the confraternities of build-
ers were at last everywhere without occupation. The arts and archi-
tecture among them, paralyzed by international contests, found a
refuge only in the monasteries, where they were successfully culti-
vated by the ecclesiastics who had been admitted into the fraternity
of Masons.

Among the most celebrated architects of France who were the
products of those monastic schools of architecture, Rebold men-
tions St. Eloi, Bishop of Noyon ; St. Fereol, of Limoges; Dalmac,
of Rodez ; and Agniola, of Chalons, all of whom flourished in the
7th century. But he says that there were among the laity, also,
architects not less distinguished, under whose direction numerous
edifices were built in Gaul and in Britain at a later period.

The most distinguished of those whom Rebold has described
as architects and as the disciples of the monastic schools of archi-
tecture was St. Eloi, or Eligius. But St. Eloi was not an archi-
tect, but a goldsmith, having regularly served an apprenticeship

522

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

to that trade, even after his appointment by Clothaire II. to the
position of treasurer, or master of the mint. Subsequently, when
fifty-two years of age, he was elevated to the bishopric of Noyon,
for which he was obliged to prepare himself by two years of study
and admission to ecclesiastical orders.

As a prelate he patronized, as many others had done, the archi-
tects by the erection of churches and monasteries. But his connec-
tion with Operative Masonry is rather through the guild organiza-
tions than through any close connection with the craft of building.
He organized the monks of his abbey, according to St. Croix, 1 into
a guild or school of smiths, for whom he drew up a code of regula-
tions.

According to the same authority the statutes for the govern-
ment of the craftsmen of Paris, prepared in the 14th century by
Stephen Boileau, were but a transcript of those of St. Eloi.

Whittington says that St. Eloi belonged, properly, to the class of
professional artists who were magnificently patronized and held in
high estimation by him. 2

The writer of his life in the Spicilegium describes him as “a very
skillful goldsmith and most learned in all constructive arts.” 3

It is very evident that Rebold has so far given us the early his-
tory of architecture in France rather than that of Freemasonry. In
this respect, his work follows, in its spirit, that of Dr. Anderson in
the first and especially in the second edition of the Book of Co 7 isiitu-
tions. To the student of Masonic history such annals are of value
only because of the traditional relations that exist between the
Operative and the Speculative systems.

Well-authenticated history leaves us no room to doubt that the
Romans introduced architecture into France, or, to speak more cor-
rectly, into Gaul at a very early period, and many magnificent ruins
are still remaining in the older cities as Arles, Avignon, Nimes,
and other ancient places, which are the vestiges of the labors of build-
ers and architects under the Roman domination. In fact, when the
barbarians began their irruptions into Gaul, the soil was covered
with the monuments of Roman art. Many of these were destroyed,

1 “ Lcs Arts au Moyen Age et la Renaissance.”

2 “ Ecclesiastical Antiquities of France, M p. 27.

8 Aurifex partissimus atque in omni arte fabricaudi doctissimus. 4< Spicilegium, rt

t. v., in Vita S. Eligiu

EARLY MASONRY IN FRANCE

S23

but there still remained, in the 6th century, a great number of pub-
lic and private edifices which had been spared. In fact, there is at
Nimes a temple and an aqueduct still remaining in a state of excel-
lent preservation. The former is now used as a museum of an-
tiquities, and the latter, known as the pont du gard , is solid and
strong, and is admitted by antiquaries to be the noblest Roman
monument in France.

The people, during a long period of subjection to the Roman
rule, had been traditionally educated in the architectural taste and
spirit of Rome, and hence with the revival of the art of construction
in the 6th, 7th and 8th centuries, the Christian churches became but
the reflection of the Pagan basilica, and the palaces of kings and the
castles of nobles were but copies of the Romano-Gallic villas.

Hence French Masonic writers have, with a great claim to plausi-
bility, assumed that the Masons of France were a continuation in
regular and uninterrupted descent of the Roman Colleges of Artif-
icers. This view has been strengthened by another historical fact,
that admits of no doubt, that Charlemagne, whose name and that of
his grandfather Charles Martel are frequently referred to as patrons
of Masonry in the old English records, was distinguished for his zeal
in the erection of churches and palaces and brought many architects
from Byzantium into France, founding there, or rather transplanting
there, the Byzantine Order of Architecture which, however, after-
ward gave place to the Gothic, or that Order of which the mediaeval
Freemasons were, it is generally conceded, the inventors.

Rebold, 1 who, as an historian, occupies a middle term between the
incredulous iconoclasm of the modern school and the facile credulity
of the early Masonic annalists, says that after the final evacuation of
Gaul by the Romans, about the end of the 5th century, though many
of the Colleges of Artificers which had been established under the
Roman domination remained in Gaul, yet their organization under-
went important modifications. In the first place the general associ-
ation of the different artisans who were necessary to the pursuit of
architecture, religious, naval, and hydraulic, or the building of tem-
ples, of ships, and of bridges and aqueducts, being no longer able to
maintain itself in a country which had been abandoned by the Ro-
mans, and having lost its center of action and its principal school at

1 “ Histoirc des Trois Grandes Logcs,” p. 24.

524

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

Rome, no longer practiced architecture as a profession in common
and under one head, but was divided into various associations, each
of which occupied itself thereafter with only the study and practice
of a single art or trade.

It is in this way that he accounts for the rise of the corporations
which flourished subsequently in the Middle Ages, and which were
in the transition period between the ancient colleges and the mod-
ern lodges.

Of these different sodalities, which sprang out of the general
association of artisans existing under the Roman Empire, the cor-
poration of builders or masons, as being the most important frac-
tion, preserved, says Rebold, their ancient organization and their
ancient privileges, because the countries in which they resided after
the departure of the Romans, being greatly in need of their services
as builders, freely accorded to them the privileges which they had
possessed under the Romans.

The Teutonic invaders of Gaul who drove out the Romans,
though barbarians, were wise enough not to destroy the old monu-
ments of Roman art and civilization, but to make use of and profit
by them.

But in the same century the cathedral erected by Naumatius,
Bishop of Auvergne, surpassed that of Perpeticus. Gregory of
Tours, who was a native of Auvergne, describes the edifice with
much eloquence of phrase in his Historia Francorum , and states
the fact, interesting as showing the connection of high ecclesiastics
with operative Masonry, that he built it according to his own de-
signs — ecclesiam sno studio fabricavit.

The invasion of the Franks into Gaul in the 6th century caused
at first, amid the tumult of war, while the arts of peace were silent,
the destruction of religious edifices. But the conversion and bap-
tism of Clovis placed Christianity on a firm foundation and caused
the preservation of the remaining monuments of the ancient civili-
zation.

The Franks, who were a bold, enterprising and warlike offshoot
from the great Teutonic race, and who were the real founders of the
kingdom which afterward became modern France, were notwith-
standing their intestine broils and their conflicts with neighboring
people, inclined to cultivate the arts of peace. They occupied, says
Mr. Church, a land of great natural wealth and great geographical

EARLY MASONRY IN FRANCE

525

advantages, which had been prepared for them by Latin culture ;
they inherited great cities which they had not built, and fields and
vineyards which they had not planted ; and they had the wisdom not
to destroy but to use their conquest. 1

The Franks were indeed friendly to Roman culture ; preserved
many of the Roman laws and customs, and accepted for their ver-
nacular a modified form of the Latin language.

Hence architecture, which had languished during the stormy
period when the Romans were unsuccessfully striving to defend
their acquired provinces and the very existence of the empire itself
from the barbarous hordes of northern invaders, began, in the 5th
and 6th centuries, to revive. The confraternities of builders and
the art of architecture to some extent, says Rebold, 2 resumed
activity.

The fact, already adverted to elsewhere, that the art of building,
especially of religious edifices, had passed into the hands of the
monks, is found to prevail also in the history of the art in France at
this early period. The remarks of Mr. Whittington on this subject
in his Historical Survey are well worthy of quotation.

“ The ancient writers often mention instances of an abbot giving
a plan which his convent assisted in carrying into execution. The
edifices of religion owed their first existence to the zeal of the clergy.
The more enlightened prelates invented or procured the plans and
carried them into execution. But although from record as well as
from probability we may conclude that the arts in this age were
principally cultivated by the clergy, it is no less certain that there
were persons who practiced them as a profession. What that pow-
erful Order found necessary to promote by their own exertions, they
did not fail to patronize in others, and to the common masons and
carpenters who might be found in the different cities of France per-
sons of superior skill and intelligence were added who were invited
from distant quarters by the enterprising liberality of the bishops.
The superstition of the times and the authority of the Church se-
cured them employment and protection ; they gradually increased in
numbers and improved in science, till at length they produced the
most able artificers from among themselves. France, in fact, at this

1 “ The Beginning of the Middle Ages,” by R. W. Church, Dean of St. Paul’s, p. 85.

2 “Histoire des Trois Grandes Loges” p. 25.

526

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

time was not without professional artists, but they seem to have
been neither numerous nor eminent, and the clergy were frequently
left to their own exertions and resources. Gregory of Tours (who
flourished in the 6th century) speaks of several of his predecessors
as if they had superintended the building of their churches, particu-
larly Ommatius, who rebuilt the Church of Sts. Gervase and Pro-
tasius and began that of St. Mary ; and he expressly affirms that
Leo, Bishop of Tours, was an artist of great skill, particularly in
works of carpentry, and that he built towers which he covered with
gilt bronze, some of which had lasted till his time. One general
spirit indeed seems to have prevailed among the French Bishops of
the 6th century to establish new churches and to improve the towns
of their dioceses.” 1

The progress of architecture in the 7th century under St. Eloi,
or Eligius, and during the reign of Clothaire II., has already been
referred to. In the 7th and 8th centuries the mode of building and
the artistic taste of the builders remained about the same as in the 6th,
but the features were somewhat enlarged and enriched, and towers
and belfries became common.

In the 9th century, architecture and operative Masonry received
a new impetus under the fostering care of Charlemagne. The build-
ings erected in his reign exceeded in taste and extent the works of
preceding monarchs. There was an increased intercourse with the
East and with Byzantine artists. Italian architects were brought
from Lombardy, and the monuments of ancient Rome were imi-
tated. 2 3 * *

The anonymous Monk of the Monastery of St. Gall, who wrote
the Gestes de Charlemagne , in describing the cathedral of Aix-la-
Chapelle, which was erected by Charlemagne, says that it surpassed
in splendor the works of the ancient Romans, and that for its con-
struction he called together masters and workmen from all parts of
the continent. 8

Rebold thinks that the fact that Charlemagne had sought for
builders in other countries is an evidence of their diminution in

1 u Historical Survey of the Ecclesiastical Antiquities of France,” p. 22.

2 Ibid., p. 30.

3 “ Basilica, antiquis Romanorum operibus prsestantiore, brevi ab eo fabricata, ex

omnibus cismarinis regionibus, magistris et opificibus advocatis.” Legend, lib. i., cap.

xxxii.

EARLY MASONRY IN FRANCE

527

France. This is scarcely a legitimate conclusion. The monarch
might very properly avail himself of the skill and experience of for-
eign artists, without necessarily indicating by their importation that
there were none in his own country. The wrecks of the ancient
Roman colleges were still remaining in Lombardy, and it has al-
ready been shown that there was a flourishing school of architecture
at Como.

Indeed it cannot be doubted that the intercourse established by
Charlemagne, between France and other countries of Europe, was
very favorable to the progress and improvement of the arts. The
number of artists was greatly increased, and they were supplied with
better models for imitation.

“ Charlemagne,” says Sismondi, “ was one of the greatest char-
acters of the Middle Ages. Contrasted with his contemporaries,
he possessed all the advantages of a man who was a stranger to his
age. As we have seen before his time, extraordinary men who
have subjugated a civilized people by the energy of a character
half savage, so in him we see a man who, being in advance of
the civilization of his times, has subdued barbarians by the force of
his intellect and by his knowledge. He combined the qualities of a
legislator with those of a warrior, and united the genius which creates
with the vigilant prudence which preserves and maintains an empire.
He drew together in one chain barbarians and Romans, the con-
querors and the conquered, and united them in a new empire. He
laid the foundations of a new order for Europe, an order which
essentially reposed on the virtues of a hero, and on the respect and
admiration which he inspired.” 1

Such has been at all times the concurrent opinion of all histo-
rians with the exception of Voltaire, and perhaps a few others. And
even they, while charging him with unproved faults and even crimes,
admit the magnificence of his enterprises and the splendor of his
reign. It is therefore singular that in the traditions of the early
Masons his name has not been permitted to occupy a place.

In the Legend of the Craft , found in the Old Records of the
English Masons, the introduction of Masonry into France is attrib-
uted to a certain Greek artist who had been at the building of the
Temple of Solomon, and came into France in the time of Charles

1 Sismondi, ft Histoire des Republique Italiennes,” tome i., chap, i., p. 19.

52b

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

Martel, who patronized the Craft, made Masons, and gave then*
charges . 1

The gross anachronism of making a workman at Solomon’s
temple a visitor at the court of Charles Martel at once, exposes the
great ignorance and the liability to error of the original composer
of the Legend. It is not, therefore, at all improbable that he con-
founded Charles Martel with his grandson Charlemagne.

It is very evident that the spirit of the Legend does not apply to
Martel, who, during his administration under two feeble kings, was
fully occupied in wars with rebellious subjects, with the Saxons on
the north and the Saracens from Spain in the south, and who had
neither time nor inclination to devote to the arts of peace. The
monks, who were then the principal builders, were not his favorites,
and St. Boniface has not hesitated to call him “ the destroyer of
monasteries.” It is hardly to be doubted that he destroyed more
than he built.

Charlemagne, on the contrary, was, as we have seen, the patron
of the arts of civilization, and might, with but a little stretch of
imagination, be called the founder of operative Masonry in France.
His intercourse with Byzantium and the East gives color also to the
legend that he was visited by a Greek architect, which is simply a
symbolic expression of the idea that Byzantine architecture and
Greek art and culture were beginning to be introduced into France
and the West during the period in which Charlemagne reigned.

We may, therefore, I think very safely correct the English

1 It may be well to note here an error as to the signification of the name of this cele-
brated Mayor of the Palace, who, without assuming the title, exercised all the functions
of a king. It has been the universal custom to derive the word Martel from the French
Marteau y which signifies a hammer , and it has been supposed that he obtained the cog-
nomen from the fact that he crushed the barbarians with whom he fought, as with a ham-
mer as potent as that of Thor. And so it has been very usual with English writers to
Anglicize his name as Charles the “ Hammer.” But M. de Feller (Biographic Univcr-
selle ), a very competent authority on French etymology, has shown that Martel is only a
synonym of Martin ; that Martin was a familiar name in the family of Pepin, of which
Charles Martel was a member, and that it was adopted in the spirit of devotion to St.
Martin, who was then the favorite saint of the Franks. This note is not exactly germane
to the history we are pursuing, but the subject is interesting enough to claim a passing
notice. It must, however, in fairness be admitted that M. Michelet (Histoire de France ,
lib. ii., p. 1 12), an authority as good, at least, as M. de Feller, recognizes the current deri-
vation from Afarieaj /, which he thinks referred to the hammer of the Scandinavian god
Thor, and he thence concludes that Charles was not a Christian.

YOUTH, MANHOOD AND OLD AGE

EARLY MASONRY IN FRANCE

529

Legend of the Craft by substituting the name of Charlemagne for
that of Charles Martel.

Louis the Feeble, the son and successor of Charlemagne, though,
as the sobriquet which was bestowed upon him imports, a prince of
no force of character, yet patronized architecture, and in his reign
many religious structures were built, under the superintendence of
his architect. The name of this artist was Rumalde. We know
scarcely more of him than the fact that he was the architect of
Louis. Whittington thinks it probable that he was not an ecclesi-
astic, since it is clear that he practiced his art as a profession, and
professional architects were at that time becoming common.

The universal belief that prevailed in the 10th century, in the
approaching destruction of the world and the advent of the millen-
nium, had naturally the effect of paralyzing all industrial arts, and
architecture made little or no progress.

But in the 1 ith century there was a revival, and the records of
that period contain the names of many distinguished architects, who
were not monks but professional architects, for Masomy had for
some time been passing away out of the hands of the ecclesiastics in
those of the laity and the guilds.

The guilds, or trade corporations, in France began about this
time to take an active existence and to exert a powerful interest on
the progress of the arts. The consideration of their history is well
worthy of a distinct chapter. But our attention must now be
turned to the early history of Masonry in other countries.

34

CHAPTER VI

EARLY MASONRY IN BRITAIN

ROM the time of the conquest of Britain by
Claudius to the final evacuation of the island
by the Romans in the beginning of the 5th
century, a period of about three hundred and
fifty years had elapsed. During this long occu-
pation the Romans had held, if not undisputed,
at least dominant sway over the greater part of
the island. Roman legions had been permanently stationed in dif-
ferent towns ; Roman colonies had been established ; Roman citizens
had immigrated and settled in greater numbers ; Roman arts and
civilization had been introduced ; and, as we have already shown in a
preceding chapter, the native inhabitants had become almost Roman-
ized in their manners and customs.

It is not to be supposed that the domination for so long a con-
tinuity of years of a powerful empire, distinguished for its cultivation
of the arts, should not have been productive of the effects that must
always result from the protracted mixture of a refined with an un-
civilized people.

Among the arts introduced by the Romans, there is none that
could have so much attracted the attention of the natives as that of
architecture. Of all the methods of human industry that are in-
tended to supply the wants or promote the comforts of life, the art
of building is placed in the most prominent position. All the arts,
says Cicero, which relate to humanity have a certain bond of union
and a kind of kinship to each other. But it must be acknowledged
that the art which proposes to secure to man a protection from the
elements and a shelter from the inclemencies of the seasons must
hold the highest place in the family scale. It is the first art that
man cultivates in his progress from utter barbarism to civilization.
It is the most salient mark of that progress. No sooner did the
primitive Troglodytes emerge from their cave dwellings than they
began to erect, however rudely, huts for their habitation.

53 °

EARLY MASONRY IN BRITAIN

5JJ

And so when a nation or a tribe begins to make an advancement
in civilization, its first step is to improve its mode of dwelling.
When conquest brings a superior race to an ignorant and uncultured
people, the industrial arts of the former are speedily diffused among
the latter, and architecture, as the most striking and the most useful,
more speedily attracts the attention and is more readily imitated
than any other.

When the Romans first invaded Britain they found the country
inhabited by various tribes deriving their origin from different
nomadic stocks, and therefore somewhat heterogeneous in their
condition and their habits. The Belgians, for instance, who had
passed over from Gaul and occupied, by the right of conquest, the
coast bordering on the British Channel, were an agricultural people,
and are described by Caesar as being more advanced in the arts of
civilized life than the tribes in the interior who were pastoral, who
lived on milk and flesh and were clothed in skins.

Mela Pomponius, the Roman geographer, who wrote about the
same time, describes the Britons as being in general uncivilized and
much behind the continental nations in their social culture. Fields
and cattle constituted their only wealth.

Mr. Wright, in an Essay of the Ethnology of South Britain at
the Extinction of the Roman Government , says that “ we may form
a notion best and most correctly of the mode of life and of the de-
gree of civilization of the ancient Britons, by comparing them with
what we know of those of the wild Irish and of the Celtic highland-
ers of Scotland in the Middle Ages. Living in septs or clans, each
collected round a petty chieftain, who had his residence or place of
refuge in the least accessible part of his little territory, they had
no towns, properly so-called, and no tie of union except the tem-
porary one of war or a nominal dependence on some powerful
chieftain who had induced, by some means, a certain number of
the smaller clans to acknowledge his sovereignty.” 1

Their houses, says Turner, were chiefly formed of reeds or wood,
and were usually seated in the midst of woods, a space being cleared
on which they built their huts and folded their cattle . 2

The improved condition of Britain, in consequence of their in-

1 Thomas Wright, “ Essays on Archeological Subjects,” vol. i., p. 68.

2 “ History of the Anglo-Saxons,” vol. i., p. 64.

532

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

tercoursc with their more civilized conquerors, is thus described by
Mr. Wright : 1

“ Under the Romans, on the contrary, Britain consisted polit-
ically of a number of cities or towns, each possessing its own in-
dependent municipal government, republican in form and principle
within themselves, but united under the empire through the fiscal
government of the province to which they were tributary. Each of
these cities inhabited by foreigners to the island, was expected to
defend itself if attacked, while three legions and numerous bodies
of auxiliaries protected the province from hostilities from without
and held it internally in obedience to the imperial government.
The country was unimportant and the towns were everything.”

The numerous inscriptions found in England in recent times
prove another fact, namely, that the legionary troops which were
sent from Rome to Britain did not pay merely ephemeral or transi-
tory visits, from which no important influence could have been de-
rived, but that they remained in the same locality during the whole
occupation of the country by the Romans, and actually constituted
military colonies, making homes in the towns in which they lived,
and insensibly imparting the use of the Latin language and the
adoption of Roman manners to the people. So much, in fact, did
they become identified with the native inhabitants, that they often
made common cause with them in tumults or insurrections against
the imperial government.

The result of this constant intercommunication must have been
just that which might anywhere, under such circumstances, have
been expected. The architects who accompanied the legions in
their visits to Britain and who remained with them during its occu-
pation did not confine their labors to the construction of military
works, such as the erection of defensive walls and fortresses. They
engaged during the period of tranquillity which had been secured by
the presence of strong bodies of troops in the peaceful avocations
of their art. They organized their Colleges of Artificers, which,
considering the works in which they were engaged, might correctly
be designated as Colleges of Masons ; they began the building of
temples and other public edifices ; they took to their assistance the
more intelligent natives, and introduced their Roman architecture
by methods which imitated those of the Colleges at home.

1 “ Essays on Archaeological Subjects,” vol. i., p. 69.

EARLY MASONRY IN BRITAIN

533

The rude huts of the native Britons were replaced by more
comfortable houses, and the art of building, under the guidance of the
Roman Masons, assumed a new form and was prosecuted by new
methods, which thus introduced the character and customs of the
Roman Colleges into the island, and thus by the example of asso-
ciated workmen continued the chain of connection which was to be
more fully extended in Anglo-Saxon times by the establishment of
building guilds.

Tacitus has shown us, in his Life of Agricola, how and at what
an early period this system of Romanizing Britain began. In the last
quarter of the ist Christian century, Agricola arrived in Britain,
having been appointed governor of the province. The island, which
had hardly yet recovered from the recent insurrection of Queen
Boadicea, was still in an insurgent condition. The first efforts of
Agricola were of course directed to the restoration of peace and
order, and to the correction of civil and political abuses. His next
business was to introduce a system of regulations whose tendency
should be to civilize the natives. He encouraged them, therefore,
says Tacitus , 1 by his exhortations and aided them by public assist-
ance to build temples, courts of justice, and commodious dwellings.
He praised those who were cheerful in their obedience; he re-
proached those who were slow and uncomplying, and thus excited a
spirit of emulation. He established a plan of education and caused
the sons of the chiefs to be instructed in learning and to cultivate
the Latin language. The Roman dress was adopted by many, and the
Britons, allured by the luxurious example of their conquerors, began
to erect baths and porticoes and to indulge in sumptuous banquets.

To do all this was not within the narrow scope of native skill.
In the erection of these improved edifices the Britons, being only
partly reclaimed from their pristine barbarity, must have invoked
and received the advice and assistance of the Roman architects.

The co-operative and guild-like methods of building practiced by
these, as well as their skill in architecture, was thus imparted to the
Britons. What had been wisely begun by Agricola was as wisely
imitated by his successors in the provincial government, and the
Roman Collegiate system was completely established in the island
long before the extinction of the Roman domination and the fall of
the Roman empire.

1 “ Vita Agricolae,” cap. xxi.

534

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

That the builders or Masons introduced into Rome, or educated
there by their Roman Masters, had increased to a very great number
is evident from a remark of the panegyrist Eumenius in his Pane-
gyric of the Emperor Maximian. He describes the ancient Gallic
city of Bibracte, afterward Augustodunum, but now the modern
Autun, which abounds in the remains of Roman architecture, many
of them in a good state of preservation. The re-edification of
private houses and the construction of temples and other buildings
with which Maximian had embellished the city, he attributes to the
concourse of architects whom the emperor had brought from Britain,
which province, he says, abounded with them. The number of these
Roman architects in Britain was so great and their skill so pre-
eminent, that, as we shall hereafter see, they were exported into
many of the continental cities to construct buildings in the Roman
method.

The remains of Roman buildings found at different times in
England and a multitude of ancient inscriptions testify to the fact
that the conquerors had brought their architectural art with them
into Britain. But the mere existence of pieces of architecture
would not alone serve to establish the connection of these Roman
architects and their British disciples with the mediaeval guilds. In
this way we might, as Anderson has done, write a history of architect-
ure, but would hardly be authorized to call it a history of Freemasonry.
It is necessary to show that the Roman architects not only brought
with them their skill in the art of building but also introduced the
associated methods of organization which had been practiced by
the ancient Roman Colleges. Of this we have ample evidence.

The Reverend James Dallaway, in his Collections for an His-
torical Account of Masters and Free Masons , appended to his
Discourses upon Architecture in England. , says that the first notice
that occurs of an associated body of Roman artificers who had es-
tablished themselves in Britain is a votive inscription in which the
College of Masons dedicate a temple to Neptune and Minerva, and
to the safety of the family of Claudius Caesar. It was discovered at
Chichester in the year 1725. It is a slab of gray Sussex marble and
was found by the workmen who were digging a cellar and who ig-
norantly or carelessly fractured it. Having been pieced together the
slab is now preserved at Goodwood, the seat of the Duke of Rich-
mond, near Chichester.

EARLY MASONRY IN BRITAIN

53?

In his History of West Sussex, Mr. Dallaway gives a fac-s.mile
of the slab and the inscription, which is in the following words :

EPTVMO ET MINERVAE
TEMPLVM

B. SALVTE. DO. DIVINAE
AVCTORITA. CLAVD.

GIDVBNI. R. IC CAI. BRIT.

. . GIVM. FABROR. E. QVI. IN. FO.

C.D.S.D. DONANTE. AREAM.

. . . ENTE. PVDENTINI. FIL.

The original is here given, to furnish to the unlearned reader an
idea of the character of the inscriptions, which are the palpable
monuments of the labors of these Colleges of Artificers, which have
been found in all countries into which the Romans extended their
power. The literal, but in some places conjectural, translation of
this inscription is as follows :

“ The College of Artificers and they who there preside over the
sacred rites by authority of King Cogidubnus, the Legate of Tibe-
rius Claudius Augustus in Britain , dedicated this Temple to Nep-
tune and Minerva, for the welfare of the imperial family. Pudens,
the son of Pudentinus, having given the site."

In an article on the Origin and Progress of Gothic Architecture,
by Governor Pownall, inserted in the 9th volume of the Archce-
ologia of the London Society of Antiquaries, this subject of the
influence of the Roman artists on the native Britons is exhibited in
an interesting point of view.

“ When the Romans conquered and held possession of our isle,”
says Governor Pownall, “ they erected every sort of building and
edifice of stone or of a mixture of stone and brick, and universally
built with the circular arch. The British learned their arts from
these Masters.”

But the Continent being more subject to the ravages of invading
barbarians than the isolated province of Britain, many of the Gaulish
cities and the fortresses on the Rhine \vere destroyed. And when
Constantius Chlorus resolved, at the close of the 3d century, to re-
build them, he sent to Britain for architects to execute the work of
re-edification.

536

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

By this withdrawal of the builders from the island of Britain and
by transferring them to the Continent, Britain itself soon lost the
knowledge which it had formerly acquired of the Roman architecture.

But after the establishment of the Christian religion in the em-
pire, missionaries being sent to the provinces to convert the inhab-
itants, they brought with them from Rome not only the new
religion but a revived knowledge of the arts, and especially of
architecture, which was necessary for the building of churches.

As to the influence produced upon the Britons by their conver-
sion to Christianity, Camden tells us that no sooner was the name
of Christ preached in the English nation, than with a most fervent
zeal they consecrated themselves to it and laid out. their utmost
endeavors to promote it by discharging all the duties of Christian
piety, by erecting churches and endowing them ; so that no part of
the Christian world could show either more or richer monasteries . 1

Thus the skill, which for a time had been suspended if not lost,
was again revived by the architects and builders who were again
brought from Rome to Britain by the Christian missionaries, who, says
Pownall, “ were the restorers of the Roman architecture in stone.”

The huge buildings of stone erected by the monks in England,
ought perhaps to be attributed to a later period when the Saxons
had gained possession of the island. But as Christianity had been
introduced into England before that period and under the Roman
domination, we may accede to the hypothesis that some of that kind
of work was done at that early period.

VVe may, therefore, grant a large amount of plausibility to that
part of the Legend of the Craft which reports the tradition that
under the usurped reign of Carausius, St. Alban had organized the
fraternity of Masons and bestowed upon them his patronage.

Whether the Legend is correct or not in attributing this impor-
tant work to the protomartyr, it may at least be accepted as tra-
ditionally preserving the historical fact that Freemasonry was re-
organized after the Roman method by the Christian missionaries.

There is abundant evidence in the old chronicles that the meth-
od of building in stone and with circular arches was always desig-
nated as opus Romanum or the Roman work, and an edifice so
constructed was said to be built more Romanum, or according to
the Roman method.

1 Camden, “Britannia,” p. cxxxii.

EARLY MASONRY IN BRITAIN

537

The error of the legendists, however, is that they attributed per-
sonally to Carausius, the usurper of the imperial power, the patron-
age of Masonry and the appointment of St. Alban as his chief
architect or Master Mason ; an error in which they have been fol-
lowed by Anderson and all other Masonic writers.

Of this statement there is no competent historical evidence.
Bede, Matthew of Westminster, and all the other old chroniclers,
describe Carausius as a man of very mean extraction, treacherous to
the government which employed him, unfaithful to the people
whom he was sent to protect, sacrificing their interests to his own
greed for spoil, and distinguished only for his ability as a soldier.

Of the piety and Christian constancy of Alban the same writers
are lavish in their praises, but they make no reference to his skill as
an architect or to his labors under Carausius as a builder. Even of
his martyrdom there are said to be great chronological difficulties.
Matthew of Westminster places its date eleven years after the death
of Carausius. This would not militate against his previous employ-
ment by Carausius as “ the steward of his household,” to use the
words of Anderson, and the Master of his works, if there were any
historical evidence of the fact.

If we appeal to the testimony of Camden, whose laborious re-
searches have left no authority uncollected and no statement unex-
amined which refer to the early history of Britain under the
Romans, we shall find no support for the traditions of the legendists
or for their expansion by Anderson and the writers who have ser-
vilely followed him.

Of Carausius we only learn from Camden that after his recon-
ciliation with Maximian, he governed Britain in perfect peace, and
that he repaired the wall at the mouth of the Clud and fortified it
with seven castles . 1 The only reference made by Camden to St.
Alban is in a passage where he says that toward the end of Diocle-
tian’s and Maximian’s reign a long and bloody persecution broke out
in the Western Church and many Christians suffered martyrdom,
among the chief of whom he names Albanus Verolamiensis or St.
Alban. But he makes no allusion to him as an architect, nor
does he mention the name of the apocryphal Amphibalus. Fur-
ther on he attributes to the town of Verulam the honor of having

1 Camden, “ Britannia,” p. lxxiv.

533

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

given birth to St. Alban, whom he calls “ a man justly eminent fof
his piety and steadiness in the Christian faith ; who with an invinci-
ble constancy of mind suffered martyrdom the first man in Britain . 1
He relates the legends which were extant in connection with his
passion, but while he dwells on his piety and his constancy to the
faith which gave him all his fame, he says nothing of his labors as
an architect nor does he in any way connect him with Carausius.

We must, therefore, reject the whole story of Carausius and
St. Alban as apocryphal ; so far as it implies that the Emperor was a
great patron of Masonry and the Saint his Master Workman, we
find no historical foundation for it ; but we may accept it as a
mythical statement, the true interpretation of which is that there was
a revival of Masonry in England toward the time of the extinction
of the Roman domination, through the influence of the Christian
missionaries, a fact for the truth of which we have, as has already
been seen, sufficient authority.

Anderson says that “ the true old Masonry departed from
Britain with the Roman legions; for though many Roman families
had settled in the south and were blended with the Britons, who had
been well educated in the science and the art, yet the subsequent
wars, confusions, and revolutions in this island, ruined ancient learn-
ing, till all the fine artists were dead without exception .” 9

Mr. Fergusson, a more learned and more accurate writer than
Anderson, has arrived at almost the same conclusion. He says :

“ When Rome withdrew her protecting care, France, Spain, and
Britain relapsed into, and for centuries remained sunk in, a state of
anarchy and barbarism as bad, if not worse than that in which Rome
had found them three or four centuries before. It was in vain to
expect that the hapless natives could maintain either the arts or the
institutions with which Rome had endowed them .” * 3

But Fergusson subsequently makes a very important admission
which greatly modifies the opinion he had just expressed when, in
continuing the paragraph, he says :

“ But it is natural to suppose that they would remember the evi-
dences of her greatness and her power, and would hardly go back for
their sepulchers to the unchambered mole-hill barrows of their fore-

1 Camden, “ Britannia,” p. 296. ' l “ Constitutions,” second edition, p. 59.

3 Fergusson, “ Rude Stone Monuments,” p. 394.

EARLY MASONRY IN BRITAIN

539

fathers, but attempt something in stone, though only in such rude fash-
ion as the state of the arts among them enabled them to execute.” 1

This is all that the theory advanced in this work contends for.
The assertion of Anderson is altogether too sweeping and general.
That of Fergusson admits that the influences of Roman domination
had not been entirely obliterated by the departure of the legions.
Rome, which had administered the government for centuries, “could
hardly fail,” to use his own language, “ to leave some impress of her
magnificence in lands which she had so long occupied.”

The concurrent testimony of all historians will not permit us to
deny or to doubt that after the extinction of the Roman dominion
in Britain, there was a decadence of architecture as well as of the
other arts. But this did not amount to a total destruction, but only
to a suspension. Nations who have emerged from barbarism to
civilization, and who for centuries have enjoyed the refinements
of culture, do not at once relapse into their primitive savage state.
There was certainly not sufficient time for the exhibition of this
ethnological curiosity in the period embraced between the departure
of the Romans and the firm establishment of the Anglo-Saxons.
Nor was there that isolation which was necessary to hasten this fall
from national light to national darkness. The southern parts of
Britain, at least, were in too close a propinquity to more civilized
and more Romanized Gaul to lose at once all traces of Roman re-
finement. And above all, the presence and the influence of the
Christian missionaries who, coming from Rome, were uninter-
ruptedly engaged in the task of converting the natives to the new
faith, must have been a powerful stay to any downward progress to
utter barbarism.

The links of the chain that united the builders of Britain with
those of Rome had only rusted ; they were not rudely snapped
asunder. The influence of the methods of building pursued by the
Roman Colleges of Artificers, who had done so much work and left
so many memorials in Britain, were still to be felt and to be re-
newed when these links were strengthened and brightened by the
Anglo-Saxons.

But this is a new and an important subject that demands consider
ation in another chapter, for it brings us to an interesting phase in
the history of Freemasonry.

1 Fergusson, “ Rude Stone Monuments,” p. 394.

CHAPTER VII

MASONRY AMONG THE ANGLO-SAXONS

FTER the departure of the Roman legions and
the withdrawal of the Roman protection, Brit-
ain, left to its own resources, was soon har-
assed by the invasions of Scots and Piets, by
predatory excursions of barbarians from the
opposite shores of the North Sea, and by civil
distractions which were the natural result of
the division of power among many rival petty principalities.

Among the Britons there was one leader, Gwotheyrn, or, as he
is more generally called, Vothgern, who seems to have assumed, if
he did not legally possess it, a predominating position over the
other British princes. Feeling, after various unsuccessful attempts,
that he could not, by his unaided forces, repulse the invaders, he
sought the assistance of the Saxons.

The Saxons were a tribe of warlike sea-kings who occupied the
western shore of what has since been known as the Duchy of Hol-
stein, with the neighboring islands on the coast. Brought across the
sea by the invitation of the Britons, they soon expelled the Piets
and Scots. But, attracted by the delights of the climate and the fer-
tility of the soil, so superior to the morasses of their own restricted
and half-submerged territory, they remained to contest the posses-
sion of the island with its native inhabitants.

Hence there followed a series of conflicts which led at last to the
expulsion of the native Britons, who were forced to retire to the
southwestern parts of the island, and the establishment of the Saxon
domination in England.

During the period of intestine wars which led to this change, not
only of a government, but of a whole people, it is not to be sup-
posed that much attention could have been paid to the cultivation
of architecture or Masonry. Amid the clash of arms the laws are
silent, and learning and the arts lie prostrate.

540

MASONRY AMONG THE ANGLO-SAXONS

54 '

Yet we are not to believe that all the influences of the preced-
ing four or five centuries were wholly paralyzed. Gildas, it is true,
complains in querulous language and an involved style , 1 in the
Epistle which is annexed to his History , of the wickedness both of
the clergy and the laity, but the greatest licentiousness is not alto-
gether incompatible with the preservation of some remains of the
architectural skill and taste which had been originally imparted by
the Roman artificers.

The Saxons themselves were not a thoroughly barbarous people.
The attempts to subdue the tribes of Germany as they had those of
Spain, of Gaul, and of Britain were not very successful. The fero-
cious bravery of the Germans under the leadership of the great
Hermann, romanized into Herminius by Tacitus, was able to stem
the progress of the Roman legions in the interior of the country and
to confine them eventually to the possession of a few fortresses on
the Rhine.

The German tribes, among whom we are, of course, to count the
Saxons, were thus enabled to retain their own manners, customs,
and language, while their communication with the legions, both in
war and in peace, must have imbued them with some portion of
Roman civilization.

“ Many new ideas, feelings, reasoning and habits,” says Mr.
Turner, “must have resulted from this mixture, and the peculiar
minds and views of the Germans must have been both excited and
enlarged. The result of this union of German and Roman improve-
ment was the gradual formation of that new species of the human
character and society which has descended, with increasing meliora-
tion, to all the modern states of Europe .” 2

Dr. Anderson, when describing the Saxon invasion of Britain,
says that “ the Anglo-Saxons came over all rough, ignorant hea-
thens, despising everything but war ; nay, in hatred to the Britons
and Romans, they demolished all accurate structures and all the re-
mains of ancient learning, affecting only their own barbarous man-
ner of life, till they became Christians .” 3

* Of all the post-classical writers in Latin none is so difficult to comprehend or to
translate as Gildas. Besides, the fact that there are in existence only two codices of the
original manuscript, and that subsequent editions have indulged in many, various, and
sometimes contradictory readings, add to the difficulty of a correct interpretation of his
writings.

2 “ History of the Anglo-Saxons,” i.,p. 96. 3 “Constitutions,” 2d edition, p.6o.

542

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

Entick and Northouck, in their subsequent editions of the Book
of Constitutions, have repeated this slander, which, even if it were
a truth, could not have forever obliterated the connection which we
are seeking to trace between the Masonry of the Roman Colleges
and that of mediaeval England ; because, although it might have
been suspended by Saxon barbarism, it is easy to prove that it could
have been renewed by subsequent intercourse with the architects of
France.

But against this careless misrepresentation of Anderson and his
subsequent editors, let us place the more accurate and better digested
views of the historian of the Anglo-Saxons.

Mr. Turner, when writing of the arrival of Hengist with his
Saxon followers in England, says :

“ The Anglo-Saxon invasion of Britain must therefore not be
contemplated as a barbarization of the country. Our Saxon ances-
tors brought with them a superior domestic and moral character
and the rudiments of new political, juridical, and intellectual bless-
ings. An interval of slaughter and desolation unavoidably occurred
before they established themselves and their new systems in the
island. But when they had completed their conquest, they laid the
foundations of that national constitution, of that internal polity, of
those peculiar customs, of that female modesty, and of that vigor
and direction of mind, to which Great Britain owes the social prog-
ress which it has so eminently acquired .” 1

The fact is that, though the Saxons introduced a style of their
own, to which writers on architecture have given their name, they bor-
rowed in their practice of the art the suggestions left by the Romans
in their buildings, and used the materials of which they were com-
posed. Thus a writer 2 on this subject says that the Saxons appear
to have formed for themselves a tolerably regular and rude style,
something midway between the indigenous and the Roman in its
details, and he attributes this to the buildings left by the Romans in
the country, which, though rare, must have been sufficiently abun-
dant long after their departure from the island.

Abundant evidence will be shown in the course of the present
chapter that there was not a total disruption of Saxon architecture

1 “ History of the Anglo-Saxons,” i., p. 179.

2 Paley, “ Manual of Gothic Architecture,” p. 14.

MASONRY AMONG THE ANGLO-SAXONS

543

and Masonic methods of associated labor from that which was first
introduced into Britain by the architects of the Roman Colleges.
There were, of course, some modifications to be attributed partly to
a want of experienced skill, partly to the suggestions of new ideas,
and partly to the influence of novel religious relations. The tem-
ple, for instance, of the Romans had to be converted into the church
of the Christians, but the Roman basilica was the model of the
Saxon church, and the Roman architect was closely imitated, as
well as could be, by his Saxon successor. The spirit and the in-
fluence and the custom of the Roman College was not lost or
abandoned.

Scarcely more than a century elapsed between the arrival of the
Saxons and the entire subjugation of the country, and that space of
time is to be divided among the briefer periods required for the
continued successes of different chieftains. Thus it took Hcngist
only eight years after his first coming to firmly establish himself in
the kingdom of Kent.

Only forty years after the establishment of the Saxon octarchy,
Pope Gregory sent St. Augustine from Rome with missionaries to
convert the Saxons to the faith of Christianity.

During all this interval many Roman buildings had existed in
England, which, from their size and magnificence of construction,
must have become models familiar to the Saxons. The temples of
the Saxon idols had been constructed of wood, and as Gregory per-
mitted them to be converted into Christian places of worship, the
Saxon churches at first were almost all of that material. There was
a deficiency of better materials. But we find an effort to use them
whenever they could be obtained, so that a kind of construction
called “ stone carpentry ” prevailed, in which we find a wood design
contending with stone materials . 1 But in not much later times, and
long before the Norman Conquest or the introduction of Gothic
architecture, the Saxons built their churches, monasteries, and other
public edifices entirely of stone.

Although it may be admitted that the pagan Saxons on their
first arrival did indeed destroy many of the churches which had been
erected by the British Christians and expelled the priests, yet it must
be remembered that by the subsequent advent of Augustine from

1 Paley, “ Manual of Gothic Architecture,” p. 12.

544

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

Rome a new life was restored to architecture and the arts, and that
as Mr. Paley says, “the frequent missions and pilgrimages to Rome,
together with the importation of Italian churchmen, which took
place as early as the end of the 7th century, must have exercised
great influence upon ecclesiastical architecture in England.” 1

It will be seen hereafter that the Saxons repeatedly resorted to
the aid of foreign workmen from Rome or from Gaul in the con-
struction of their churches, so that the influences of the Roman sys-
tem which was derived in former times from the Roman Colleges
continued at frequent intervals to be renewed, and the link of con-
nection was thus kept unbroken.

The principal difference between the works of the Roman and
the Saxon architects has been supposed to be that the former built
in stone and the latter in wood. And if this were true, it is evident
that all inquiry into the nature of Saxon architecture must be at an
end ; for as the wooden edifices must have long since perished, all
the remains of stone structures which have been excavated in Eng-
land will have to be attributed to the age of the Roman domination
before the invasion of the Saxons, or to that which succeeded the
conquest by the Normans. The perishable fabrics of timber
erected by the Saxons would have left no traces behind.

The erroneous opinion that the Saxons built all their churches
of timber was first advanced by Stow, in his Survey of London, and
afterward by Mr. Somner, in his Antiquities of Canterbury , who
says that “before the Norman advent most of our monasteries and
church buildings were of wood,” and he asserts that upon the Nor-
man Conquest these fabrics of timber grew out of use and gave
place to stone buildings raised upon arches.

But the Rev. J. Bentham, in his History of the Cathedral
Church of Ely , has refuted the correctness of this view with unan-
swerable arguments. He has shown that although there were some
instances of wooden edifices, yet that the Saxon churches were gen-
erally built of stone, with pillars, arches, and sometimes vaultings of
the same material. And he adds the following remarks, which are
important in the present connection as showing that the Roman in-
fluence continued to be felt in the Saxon times, and thus that the
chain which we are tracing remained unbroken.

1 Paley, “ Manual of Gothic Architecture,” p. 13.

MASONRY AMONG THE ANGLO-SAXONS

545

“ There is great probability that at the time the Saxons were
converted the art of constructing arches and vaultings and support-
ing stone edifices by columns was well known among them ; they
had many instances of such kind of buildings before them in the
churches and other public edifices erected in the times of the Ro-
mans. For notwithstanding the havoc that had been made of the
Christian churches by the Piets and Scots, and by the Saxons them-
selves, some of them were then in being. Bede mentions two in
the city of Canterbury. . . . Besides these two ancient Roman

churches it is likely there were others of the same age in different
parts of the kingdom, which were then repaired and restored to their
former use.” 1

Of the two Roman churches for whose existence Bcntham re-
fers to the authority of Bede, that venerable historian says, “ There
was on the east side of the city a church dedicated to the honor of
St. Martin, built while the Romans were still in the island, wherein
the queen, who, as has been said before, was a Christian, used to
pray,” * 3 and of the other that “ Augustine recovered in the royal
city a church which he was informed had been built by the ancient
Roman Christians, and consecrated it to our Saviour.” 3

In an article on Anglo-Saxon architecture, published in the
Archeological Journal for March, 1844, Mr. Thomas Wright (no
mean authority on antiquarian science) has, like Mr. Bcntham, suc-
cessfully combated the doctrine that all the Saxon churches were
wooden. “ I think,” he says, “ the notion Anglo-Saxon churches
were all built of wood will now hardly find supporters.” He ad-
mits, which none will deny, that there were structures of this kind.
A few wooden churches are mentioned in Domesday Book, and we
learn from other authorities that there were some others. But he
contends that “ a careful perusal of the early chroniclers would af-
ford abundant proof that churches were not only abundant among
the Anglo-Saxons, but that they were far from being always mean
structures.”

Speaking of the Saxon churches, which Odericus Vitalis tells us
were repaired by the Normans immediately after the conquest, he re-
marks that “if they had been mean structures and in need of repairs,

1 “ History of the Cathedral Church of Ely,” sec. v., p. 17.

3 Bede, “ Histoire Ecclesiasticle,” lib. i., cap. 26. 3 Ibid., lib. i., cap. 33.

3 ;

546

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

it is more probable that the Normans would have built new ones.”
The conclusions which are to be drawn from Mr. Wright’s article
are that while there were undoubtedly some wooden structures, just
as there are in this day, the Anglo-Saxons built many churches, and
built them sumptuously of stone, and in the Roman manner.

The Rev. Richard Hart is therefore right when he says, on the
authority of the architect Mr. Rukman, that “ in the construction
of their churches, the Anglo-Saxons imitated Roman models ; as
might naturally be expected, considering that Rome was the source
from which their Christianity had been derived, the birthplace of
many of their prelates and clergy, and at that period the very focus
of learning and civilization .” 1

It has been conceded that during the comparatively brief period
that was occupied by the Saxons after their arrival in Britain until
they obtained complete possession of the country, the intestine wars
between them and the natives must have had the effect of suspend-
ing the pursuit of architecture. But it has been shown that this
suspension did not altogether obliterate the influence of the Roman
builders, who had established their methods of building when the
island was a province of the empire. And it has also been seen
that the destruction by the Saxons of the Christian churches which
had been built by Roman architects was not so thorough or so uni-
versal as has been supposed by some writers, and that they did not,
as Northouck, amplifying the language of Anderson, says, “ root out
all the seeds of learning and the arts that the Romans had planted
in Britain .” 2

On the contrary, we have the evidence of the Venerable Bede
and the repeated testimony of modern excavations that there were
at the time of the Saxon conversion to Christianity at least two Ro-
man churches standing which might serve as models for the Saxon
Masons, and numerous remains of Roman buildings which afford
materials for new structures.

And now, after the conversion, we find the chain connecting
Roman Masonry with that pursued by the Saxons renewed and
strengthened not only by these models, but by the direct influence
of the prelates who were sent from Rome, and who brought with

1 “Ecclesiastical Records,” ch. v., note 2, p. 217.

2 Northouck, “ Constitutions,” Part II., ch. ii., p. 90.

MASONRY AMONG THE ANGLO-SAXONS

547

them or sent for workmen to Rome and Gaul, who might carry our
More Romano (in the Roman manner) their designs in the build-
ing of churches and monasteries.

Butler, in his Lives of the Saints , a work, however, in which we
must not place implicit confidence, says that on the permanent
settlement of Augustine in Britain, at the close of the 6th century,
when Ethelbert, the King, had been converted, and the people
generally were accepting the new religion, the princes and nobles
were very zealous in building and endowing churches and religious
houses, and many of them travelled to Rome and other foreign
parts to improve themselves in the sacred sciences. 1

That there was at that time a constant and uninterrupted com-
munication between Rome and Britain is evident from the frequent
epistles from Gregory, the Pontiff, to Augustine and to the King,
Ethelbert. Missionaries were also sent to Britain to assist Augustine
in his pious work, and it is not at all improbable that Masons came
with them from Rome, or from Gaul, to be employed in the con-
struction of churches and monasteries, with which the land was
being rapidly filled.

But we have more to rely on than mere supposition. There
are abundant records showing that workmen were imported from
abroad for the purpose of building, and that thus the Roman method
was renewed in the island.

Anderson is not, therefore, strictly correct when he says that the
Anglo-Saxons, “ affecting to build churches and monasteries, palaces
and fine mansions, too late lamented the ignorant and destructive
conduct of their fathers, but knew not how to repair the public loss
of old architecture.” 2 It has been shown that there were some
models of Roman buildings still remaining, and there was no igno-
rance of the need of obtaining workmen from Rome or Gaul, and
no want of opportunity to obtain them.

He is, therefore, more historically right when he adds, though it
contradicts his former assertion, that these works “ required many
Masons, who soon formed themselves into societies or lodges by
direction of foreigners who came over to help them.” 3

1 “ Lives of the Saints,” vol. v., pp. 418, 419.

2 “ Constitutions,” 2d edition, p. 61 .

8 Ibid. He is altogether wrong in saying that the Saxons adopted the Gothic style in
building. That style of architecture was not invented until long afterward.

548

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

In the year 627, Edwin, King of Northumbria, who had been
converted by Paulinus, one of the missionaries of Augustine, was
baptized in the city of York, the capital of his kingdom. While
receiving the necessary religious instructions he built a temporary
church of timber, in which the sacrament of baptism might be ad-
ministered. But immediately afterward, under the direction of
Bishop Paulinus, he caused the foundation to be laid of a larger and
nobler church, of stone, which, although immediately begun, was not
finished until after his death, by his successor, Oswald. 1

Although Bede, in narrating the event, says nothing of any for-
eign aid that had been asked or received in its construction, yet it
is evident from the facts that the church was built of stone and in a
square form, like a Roman basilica , 2 and would imply the necessity
of Roman Masons, or other foreigners imbued with the Roman
method, to superintend the work.

In the assembling of foreign Masons at York to erect St. Peter’s
Church, under the auspices of King Edwin, is supposed by modem
Masonic writers to be the assembly incorrectly referred to in the
Legend of the Craft as an assembly held at York, under the patron-
age of Prince Edwin, the son of Athelstan, three hundred years
afterward. But this subject has been so thoroughly discussed in
the preceding part of this work, under the head of the York Le-
gend, that it is unnecessary to renew the controversy.

Besides St. Peter’s, at York, Paulinus built many other churches.
Some of them we know were of stone, and the others might have
been of the same material, as Bentham says, “ for aught that appears
to the contrary.” He was certainly a great patron of ecclesiastical
architecture, but Anderson makes no mention of him, although, ac-
cording to his fashion, he should have styled him, as he does Charles
Martel, a “Right Worshipful Grand Master.”

Another distinguished architect, of a not much later period, was
Benedict Biscop, Abbot of Weremouth, whom the Roman Church
has canonized. In the year 675 he built a church at Weremouth,
and two monasteries, one at Weremouth and one six miles distant

1 Bede, “ History,” lib. ii., cap. 14.

2 This is the very word used by Bede. u Majorem et augustiorem de lapida fabricare
curavit basilicam .” The Roman basilica , or Hall of Justice, was the model of all the early
churches built by Roman architects, and the old basilica were often converted with but
little change into churches by the Christian emperors.

MASONRY AMONG THE ANGLO-SAXONS

545

from Jarrow. Of these Bede has given a particular account in his
history of them. He tells us that the abbot went over into France
to engage workmen to build his church after the Roman manner,
and brought many back for that purpose. The work was prosecuted
with such vigor that within a year the church was completed and
divine service performed in it.

But a very important fact stated by Bede is that when the church
was nearly finished Benedict sent over to France for artificers skilled
in the mystery of making glass (an art hitherto unknown in Britain),
who glazed the windows and taught the art to the Saxons. We
learn from this statement that it was customary with the Saxons to
seek assistance from the skill of the continental artists and handi-
craftsmen. This will explain the true meaning of the passage in the
Legend of the Craft , which refers to the introduction of French
and other Masons into England in the 7th century, in the time
of Charles Martel, and afterward at the supposed Assembly at York,
in the 10th century. And it affords a confirmation of what has
been frequently said in the previous part of this work, that the
Legend of the Craft , though often chronologically absurd and in-
correct in many of its details, yet has throughout in its most im-
portant particulars a really historical foundation.

The historians of that period supply us with many proofs that
churches and monasteries were erected by the Saxons of stone after
the Roman manner, or that they sent abroad for architects to super-
intend the construction of their buildings.

Eddius Stephanus, who flourished at the beginning of the 8th
century, and whose name has been transmitted to posterity by his
Life of Saint Wilfrid , informs us that that saint, who was also
Bishop of York about the middle of the 7th century, erected
many sumptuous buildings in his diocese and thoroughly repaired
the church of St. Peter at York, which had been much injured in
the war between the Mercians and the Northumbrians. But Eddius
especially refers to two churches built by Wilfrid, the one at Ripon
in Yorkshire and the other at Hexham in Northumberland.

Of the former he says that Wilfrid built a church at Ripon from
the foundations to the top of polished stone, 1 and supported it with

1 Polito lafiide is the language used by Eddius. “ Vita S. Wilfridi,” cap. xvii., p. 59.
He uses the same words in describing the materials of the church at Hexham.

55 °

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

various columns and porticos. This polished stone as a material
and these columns and porticos, where arches would probably be re-
quired, indicate the presence and the instruction of Roman archi-
tects, whether they came from Rome or Gaul.

But of all his works, the church of St. Andrew at Hexham seems
to have been the most magnificent. Hexham was a part of the
crown-lands of the Kings of Northumbria, and, having been settled
in dower on Queen Ethelreda by King Egfrid, a grant of it was
made to Wilfrid for the purpose of erecting it into an episcopal see.

Wilfrid began to lay the foundations of the cathedral church in
the year 674. Eddius speaks of it in terms of great admiration, and
says that there was no other building like it on this side of the Alps.
He describes its deep foundations and the subterranean rooms, all
of wonderfully polished stones, and of the building consisting of
many parts above ground, supported by various columns and many
porticos, ornamented with a surprising length and height of walls,
and surrounded by mouldings, and having turnings of passages some-
times ascending or descending by winding stairs, so that he asserts
that he had not words to explain what this priest, taught by the
spirit of God, had contemplated doing.

Five centuries after, in 1 180, the remains of this famous church
were still standing, though in a condition of decay. Richard, Prior
of Hexham, who lived at that time, describes the church with still
more minuteness. He says that the foundations were laid deep in
the earth for crypts and subterranean oratories, and the passages un-
derground which led to them were contrived with great exactness.
The walls were of great length and height, and divided into three sep-
arate stories, which were supported by square and other kinds of
well-polished columns. The walls, the capitals of the columns
which supported them, and the arch of the sanctuary were decorated
with historical representations, images, and various figures in relief,
carved in stone and painted in an agreeable variety. The body of
the church was encompassed with penthouses and porticos which,
above and below, were divided with wonderful art by partition walls
and winding stairs. Within the staircases and upon them were
flights of stone steps and passages leading from them, both ascending
and descending, which were disposed with so much art that multi-
tudes of people might be there and go all around the church without
being perceived by any one who was in the nave. Many beautiful

MASONRY AMONG THE ANGLO-SAXONS

55i

private oratories were erected with great care and workmanship in
the several divisions of the porticos, in which were altars in honor of
the Blessed Virgin, of St. Michael, Archangel, of St. John the Bap-
tist, and of the holy Apostles, martyrs, confessors, and virgins, with
the proper furniture for each. Some of these, Prior Richard says,
were remaining at his day, and appeared like so many turrets and
fortified places . 1

Of a church of such grand proportions, such massive strength,
and such artistic construction, it cannot, for a single moment, be
supposed that it was built by the uncultivated skill of Saxon Ma-
sons. The stone material, the supporting arches, the intricate pas-
sage, the winding stairs, all proclaim the presence of foreign archi-
tects and a continuation or a resumption in England of the methods
of Roman Masonry.

Nor is this at all improbable. Wilfrid, although a Saxon, had
from an early age received his ecclesiastical education in Rome, and
after his return to Northumberland had not only maintained a con-
stant correspondence with, but had made several visits to, the im-
perial city, and was personally well acquainted with France. When,
therefore, he commenced the construction of important religious
houses of such magnitude, he had every facility for the importation
of foreign workmen, and there can be no reason for denying that he
availed himself of the opportunities which were afforded to him.
Indeed the Venerable Bede confirms this when he says that the
most reverend Wilfrid was the first of the English bishops who
taught the churches of the English nation the Catholic, that is the
Roman, mode of life.*

During the long period of forty-five years, in which he occupied
the Episcopal See of York, Bishop Wilfrid caused a very great num
ber of churches and monasteries to be built, and must in that waj>
have greatly enlarged and improved the architectural skill of his
people by the introduction of foreign artists.

Singularly enough, neither Anderson nor his successors, Entick
and Northouck, in the various editions of the Book of Consti-
tutions have thought him to be worthy of the slightest mention,
though undoubtedly we have historical evidence that he was far
better entitled than that less important and less useful man, St

1 M Richardi, Prior Hagustal,” lib. i., chap. iii. 2 Bede, “ History, 1 ” lib. iv., cap. ii.

552

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

Alban, to have it said of him that “ he loved Masons well and
cherished them much.”

Indeed all that is said in the Legend of the Craft of the proto-
martyr might with more plausibility be ascribed to Wilfrid, Bishop
of York.

Bentham, in his History of the Cathedral Church of Ely? has
said of Wilfrid, relying on the almost contemporaneous authority of
Bede, of Eddius Stephanus, and of Richard, the Prior of Hexham,
that in consequence of the favor and the liberal gifts bestowed upon
him by the kings and the nobility of Northumberland, he rose to a
degree of opulence so as to vie with princes in state and magnifi-
cence, and was thus enabled to found several rich monasteries and
to build many stately edifices. In the prosecution of these great
undertakings he gave due encouragement to the most skillful build-
ers and artificers of every kind who were eminent in their several
trades. He kept them in his service by proper rewards, or, as the
Legend of the Craft says of St. Alban, “he made their pay right
good.”

Some of these he obtained at Canterbury, whither they had been
introduced by Augustine to aid him in the construction of the
churches in Kent. Eddius is distinct on this point, for he says, in
his Life of Wilfrid, that when he returned home from his visit to
Canterbury, he brought back not only skillful singers, who might in-
struct his choirs in the Roman method of singing, but also Masons
and artists of almost every kind . 1 2

Richard, Prior of Hexham, says that he secured from Rome,
Italy, France, and other countries where he could find them, Ma-
sons and skillful artificers of other kinds, whom he brought to Eng-
land for the purpose of carrying on his works . 3

William of Malmesbury also says that to construct the buildings
that Wilfrid had designed Masons had been attracted from Rome

1 “ History of the Cathedral Church of Ely,” p. 23.

2 Eddius, 4< Vita S. Wilfridi,” cap. xiv. C&mentariis is the word employed by Eddius.
Now, ccementarius was the word used in mediaeval Latin to designate an Operative Mason.
Ducange cites Magister camentariorum, the “ Master of the Masons,” as used by mediaeval
writers to denote one who presided over the building, him whom he calls the Master of
the Works.

3 De Roma quoque, et Italia, et Francia, et de aliis terris ubicumque invenire poterat,
ccetnentarios et quoslibet alios industrios artifices secum retinuerat, et ad opera sua fa-
cienda secum in Angliam adduxerat. “ Richardi, Prior Hagustal,” lib. i., cap. v.

MASONRY AMONG THE ANGLO-SAXONS

553

by the hope of liberal rewards, 1 2 and both Eddius, his biographer,
and William of Malmesbury concur in declaring that he was emi-
nent for his knowledge and skill in the science of architecture.

The spirit of improvement and the skill in architecture which
had been introduced into Northumberland by its Bishop were not
confined to his own country, but through his influence were extended
to the other kingdoms of the Heptarchy. They made their way
even into the more northern parts of the island, for Bede informs us 8
that in the beginning of the 8th century, Naitan, King of the Piets,
sent messengers to Ceolfrid, Abbot of the Monastery of Weremouth,
praying to have architects sent him to build a church in his nation
after the Roman manner.

“ Hence,” says Bentham, “ it should seem that the style of archi-
tecture generally used in that age in England was called the Roman
manner, and was the same that was then used at Rome in Italy
and in other parts of the empire.” 3

Mr. John M. Kemble, when commenting on circumstances like
these in the learned Introduction to his Diplomatic Codex of the
Saxon s£ra, has very justly said that “the great advance in civiliza-
tion made especially in Northumberland before the close of the 7th
century proves that even the rough denizens of that inhospitable
portion of our land were apt and earnest scholars.” 4 * * *

The next eminent Saxon patron of Masonry of whom we have
any record is Albert, who in 767 became the successor of Egbert as
Archbishop of York. The church which had been built by Paulinus
in the 7th century, having been much dilapidated by a conflagration
and not having been sufficiently repaired, was wholly taken down by

1 “ Caementarios, quos ex Roma spes munificentiae attraxerat. Gulilm. Malsmb. de
Gestis Pontif.” AngL, p.272. The “spes munificentiae ” was the expectation of higher
wages, j'ust what the “ Legend of the Craft” says that St. Alban established. It is curious
to remark how everything that that Legend ascribes to St. Alban may with equal propriety
be attributed on historic authority to St. Wilfrid. It is strange that the later Masonic
writers as well as the legendists should have completely ignored St. Wilfrid, who was the
real reformer, if not actual founder, of the English Masonry in connection with the Roman.

2 In Book V., chapter xxi, of his “ Ecclesiastical History.”

3 “ History of the Cathedral Church of Ely,” p. 25.

4 “ Codex Diplomaticus Aevi Saxonici.” This learned and laborious work, edited by

Mr. Kemble and published in 1839, in six large octavo volumes, by the English Historical

Society, contains copies either in Saxon or in Latin of nearly all the royal and other

charters issued during the Saxon domination which have been preserved in various

collections.

5S4

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

Albert, who determined to rebuild it. This he did with the as-
sistance of two eminent architects, his disciples, Eanbald, who suc-
ceeded him in the see of York, and the celebrated Alcuin, who af-
terward introduced learning into the court of Charlemagne, of whom
he became the preceptor. Alcuin, in a poem On the Pontiffs and
Saints of the Church of York , 1 2 has given a full description of the re-
building of the church, from which we may learn the degree of per-
fection to which architecture had then arrived. We find in that de-
scription the account of a complete and exquisitely finished piece
of architecture, “the new construction of a wonderful church,” as
Alcuin expresses it, consisting of a tall building supported by solid
columns, with arches, vaulted roofs, splendid doors and windows,
porticos, galleries, and thirty altars variously ornamented. This tern-
plum, says the poem of Alcuin, 8 was built under the orders of the
Master Albert by his two disciples, Eanbald and Alcuin, working
harmoniously and devotedly.

The predatory aggressions of the Danish pirates, and their more
permanent invasion in the latter part of the 9th century, though
marked by all the atrocities of a barbarous enemy, and with the de-
struction of innumerable churches and monasteries and the burning
of many towns and villages, must of course have suspended for a
time all progress in architecture. But it could have been only a
temporary suspension. Their occupancy lasted but twelve years,
and the knowledge of the Roman method which had been acquired
by the Saxons could not have been lost in that brief period, nor
were all the monuments of their skill destroyed. Enough remained
for models, and many of the old Masons must have been still living
when civilization was renewed in England by the restoration of
Alfred to the throne.

Asser, the contemporary and the biographer of Alfred or who-
ever assumed his name, 3 * * * * admits that during the Danish domination

1 “ Pontificibus et Sanctis Ecclesiae Eboracensis.” It was published in 1691 by Dr,
Thomas Gale in his “ Historiae Britanicae,” Saxoniae et Anglo-Danicae Scriptores quin-
decim, usually cited as “ Gale’s XV Scriptores.”

2 “Hoc duo discipali templum doctore jubente,

^Edificarunt Eanbaldus et Alcuinus, ambo

Concordes operi devota mente studentes.”

Alcuin De Pontifet Sanct. Eccl. Ebor.

8 Doubt has been entertained by Mr. Wright, and plausible reasons assigned for the

doubt, of the authenticity of Asser’s a Life of Alfred,” which work he is disposed to be-

MASONRY AMONG THE ANGLO-SAXONS

555

the arts and sciences had begun to be neglected, but the wise and
vigorous measures pursued by Alfred on his accession soon restored
them to more than their former condition of prosperity.

Matthew of Westminster, a Benedictine monk who lived in the
14th century and whose narrative of events is valuable because it is
that of a careful observer, tells us that with a genius of his own, not
hitherto displayed by others, Alfred occupied himself in building
edifices which were venerable and noble beyond anything that had
been attempted by his predecessors, and that many Frenchmen and
natives of other countries came to England, being attracted by his
amiable and affable character and by the protection and gifts which
he bestowed on all strangers of worth, whether noble or low-born.
Among these foreigners we must naturally suppose that there were
many architects and builders from France and Italy, who came to
find employment in the various works on which the king was en-
gaged. * 1 Matthew also tells us that Alfred bestowed one-sixth of
his revenues on the numerous artisans whom he employed and who
were skillful in every kind of work on land. 2

Florence of Worcester, a monk who wrote in the 12th century,
says that among the other accomplishments of Alfred he was skilled
in architecture and excelled his predecessors in building and adorn-
ing his palaces, in constructing large ships for the security of his
coasts, and in erecting castles in convenient parts of the country. 3

Indeed all the chroniclers of his own and following ages concur
in attributing to the great Alfred, the best and wisest monarch who
ever sat on the English throne, the resuscitation of Saxon architect-
ure and the introduction anew into the kingdom of foreign archi-
tects from Italy and France, so that the connection between the
Roman and the Saxon was continued without material interruption.

In the last year of the 9th century, Alfred was succeeded by his
eldest son, Edward, a prince who has been described as inferior to
his father in learning and the love of literature, but who by his
martial prowess greatly extended the boundaries of his dominions.

lieve was written as late as the latter part of the 12th century (“ Essays on Archaeology," i.,
183). But even if this were correct, it would not affect the truth of the statement in the
text.

1 “ Matthew of Westminster,” c. xvi., ad annum 871.

2 Ibid., ad annum 888.

2 Flor. Wegorn, ad annum 871,887. He calls him “ in arte architectonica sumo*
nus ” (pre-eminent in the art of architecture).

556

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

Though not so great a patron of architecture as his predecessor, the
science was not deteriorated during his reign. He founded or re-
paired some churches and monasteries, and built several cities and
towns, which he encompassed with massive walls as a protection
against the sudden incursions of the Danes.

In 924 Edward was succeeded by his illegitimate son, Athelstan.
Although the records of the old chroniclers of England speak only
of a few monasteries that were founded by Athelstan, the legendary
history of the Craft assigns to him an important character as having
granted a charter for the calling of an Assembly of Masons at the
city of York. And to this Assembly the legendist as well as all
modern writers up to a very recent period have sought to trace the
origin of Freemasonry in England.

This subject has already been very fully discussed in the chapter
on the York Legend , in the first part of the present work, and it will
be unnecessary to renew the discussion here. I will only add that
since writing that chapter I have diligently examined all the char-
ters granted by King Athelstan, copies of the originals of which are
contained in the Codex Diplomaticus , published by the English
Historical Society, and have failed to find in them any one in which
there is the slightest allusion to the calling of an Assembly of Ma-
sons at York. If such a charter ever existed (of which I have no
idea), it has been irretrievably lost. The non-appearance of the
charter certainly does not prove that it never was granted, but its
absence deprives the advocates of the York theory of what would
be the best and most unanswerable evidence of the truth of the
Legend.

In fact Edgar, his nephew, who ascended the throne in 959,
after the brief reigns of his father, Edmund, his uncle, Edred, and
his brother, Edwy, was a greater encourager of architecture, or, as
the old historians of Masonry would have called him, “a better pa-
tron of the Craft,” than Athelstan. During his reign the land was
so seldom embroiled in strife that the early chroniclers have styled
him “ Edgar the Pacific.” Thus was he enabled to devote himself
to the improvement of his kingdom and the condition of his sub-
jects. He founded more than forty monasteries, and among them
the magnificent abbey of Ramsay, in Huntingdonshire. Prom a
description of this abbey, given in its history, which has been pre-
served by Gale, we are led to believe that in the reign of Edgar the

MASONRY AMONG THE ANGLO-SAXONS

557

old style of building churches in the square form of a basilica or
Roman Hall of Justice was beginning to be abandoned for the
cruciform shape, as more symbolically suited to a Christian temple.
He built also the old abbey church of Westminster, which Sir
Christopher Wren says, in the Parentalia , “was probably a good,
strong building after the manner of the age, not much altered from
the Roman way.”

This way, Wren says, was with piers or round pillars (stronger
than Tuscan or Doric), round-headed arches and windows. And
he refers, as instances of this method borrowed from the Roman,
to various buildings erected before the Conquest.

Whatever may be said of the private and personal character of
Edgar, and he can not be acquitted of the charge of licentiousness,
as a monarch he certainly sought to improve the condition of his
kingdom, to secure the comfort of his subjects, and to encourage
the cultivation of the arts and sciences, among which architecture
was not the least prominent.

It is hardly necessary to pursue the details of the condition of
the art of building in the few remaining years of the Anglo-Saxon
dynasty. Such a plan would be appropriate to a professional his-
tory of English architecture. But enough has been said to maintain
the hypothesis of the origin and rise of Masonry, which is the
special object of the present work.

It has already been shown that the system of associated work-
men in the craft of building arose in the Roman Colleges of Artif-
icers, of Builders, or of Masons, call them by either name : that
this system, with the skill that accompanied it, was introduced from
Rome into Britain at the time of the real conquest of that island by
Claudius, by the artisans who followed the legions and became col-
onists of the province ; that on the accession of the Saxons to the
government of che country, though the Britains were driven to the
remoter parts of the island in the West, monuments of the Roman
workmen remained to perpetuate the method ; that the Saxons
themselves were not a wholly barbarous people, and that by their
rapid conversion to Christianity the communication with Rome
was renewed through the missionaries who came to them from that
city ; that when the monks began the construction of religious
houses they sent to Italy or to Gaul for workmen who were edu -
cated in the Roman method ; and that thus, by the architectural

558

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

works which were accomplished under ecclesiastical auspices, the
continuous chain which connected the Masons of the Roman Col-
leges with the Saxon builders remained unbroken.

From the death of Edgar to the final extinction of the Saxon
dynasty and the establishment of the Norman race upon the throne
of England, though history records few great architectural achieve-
ments, nothing was absolutely lost of the skill and the methods of
Masonry which had been acquired in the lapse of centuries and from
continual communications with foreign artists. Even the interpo-
lation of the reigns of three Danish kings, of which two were very
brief, produced no disastrous effects. So when Harold, the last
Saxon monarch, was slain at the battle of Hastings, in the year
1066, and the crown passed into the possession of the Norman Will-
iam, many specimens of Saxon architecture were still remaining.

There is one episode in the history of the Anglo-Saxons which
is of too much importance to be passed over without an extended
notice. I allude to the establishment of Guilds. These were con-
fraternities which, as will hereafter be shown, gave “ form and feat-
ure ” to the organization of the modern Masonic Lodges.

But this is a subject of so much interest in the present inquiry
that it can not be dismissed at the close of the investigation of a dif-
ferent though cognate topic. Its consideration must therefore be
deferred to the succeeding chapter.

CHAPTER VIII

THE ANGLO-SAXON GUILDS

GUILD signified among the Saxons a fraternit)
or sodality united together for the accomplish-
ment by the co-operative exertions of the mem-
bers of some predetermined purpose.

The word is derived from the Anglo-Saxon
verb gildan, “ to pay,” and refers to the fact
that every member of the Guild was required
to contribute something to its support. Hence Cowel defines
Guilds to be “ fraternities originally contributing sums towards a
common stock.”

Assuming that the characteristic of a Guild organization is that
it is a society of men united together for mutual assistance in the
accomplishment of an object, or for the cultivation of friendship, or
for the observance of religious duties, we may say that the Guild
has under some of these aspects existed in all civilized countries
from the earliest ages.

The priesthood of Egypt was a fraternity containing in its
organization much that resembles the more modern Guild, the
priests possessing peculiar privileges and constituting a body isolated
from the rest of the nation, by the right of making their own laws
and electing their own members, who were received into what may
be appropriately called the sacerdotal Guild, by certain ceremonies
of initiation. The trades and handicrafts were divided into their
various professions. Thus the artificers and the boatmen of the Nile
were each a separate class , 1 and as the practice of a trade was made
hereditary and was restricted to certain families, we may well sup-
pose that each of these classes constituted a Guild. And it may be
remarked, in passing, that while the handicraftsmen and traders were
generally held by the higher orders among the Egyptians in low re-

^enreck, “Ancient Egypt,” vol. ii., p. 36.
559

560

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

pute, the art of building seems to have occupied a higher place in the
national estimation, for while we find no record on the funeral mon-
uments of any of the other working-classes, the names of architects
alone appear in the inscriptions with those of priests, warriors,
judges, and chiefs of provinces, the only ranks to which the honor
of a funeral record was permitted . 1

The Eranos among the Greeks was in every minute respect the
analogue of the Guild. Donnegal defines it to be “ a society under
certain rules and regulations, having a fund, contributed by the
members, formed for various purposes, such as succoring indigent
members .” 2

Clubs or societies of tnis kind established for charitable or con-
vivial purposes, and sometimes for both, were very common at
Athens, and were also found in other cities of Greece. These Gre-
cian Guilds were founded on the principle of mutual relief. If a
member was reduced to poverty, or was in temporary distress for
money, he applied to the Eranos , or Guild, and the relief required
was contributed by the members. Sometimes it was considered as
a loan, to be repaid when the borrower was in better circumstances.
The Eranos met at stated periods, generally once a month, had
its peculiar regulations, was presided over by an officer styled the
Eranarches , and the Eranistai, or members, paid each a monthly
contribution. There does not really appear to have been any ma-
terial difference between the organization of these sodalities and the
Saxon and mediaeval social Guilds.

It is scarcely necessary, after the description that has already
been given of the Roman Colleges of Artificers, to say that they
were analogous to the Craft Guilds. Indeed, it is a part of the
hypothesis maintained in the present work, that the latter derived,
directly or indirectly, the suggestion of their peculiar form as asso-
ciated craftsmen from the former.

The Agapce or Love Feasts of the early Christians, though at
first established for the commemoration of a religious rite, subse-
quently became guild-like in their character, as they were sustained
by the contributions of the members, and funds were distributed for
the Telief of widows, orphans, and the poorer brethren. Indeed,
they are supposed by ecclesiastical writers to have imitated the Gre-

1 Kcnreck, “ Ancient Egypt,” vol. ii., p. 37.

2 “ Lexicon,” in voce.

THE ARK OF THE COVENANT, AND THE TABERNACLE

TIIE ANGLO-SAXON GUILDS 561

cian Eranos. The Government looked upon them as secret socie-
ties, and they were consequently denounced by imperial edicts.

Brentano, who has written a learned introduction to Toulmin
Smith’s English Guilds , published by the Early English Text So-
ciety, is disposed to trace the origin of Guilds to the feasts of the old
German tribes from Scandinavia, which were also called Guilds.
Among the German tribes, all events that especially related to the
family, such as births, marriages, and deaths, were celebrated by
sacrificial feasts in a family reunion. Similar feasts took place on
certain public occasions and anniversaries, which often afforded an
opportunity for the conclusion of alliances for piracy and plunder
by one tribe or another.

I am not inclined to trace the origin of the Saxon and English
Guilds to so degenerate a source, and I subscribe to the opinions ex-
pressed by YVilda , 1 one of the ablest of the German writers on this
subject, who cannot find anything of the true nature of the Guild
in these Scandinavian feasts of the family. Hartvvig , 2 who has also
investigated this point, agrees with Wilda.

Yet it is very evident that the sentiment of the Guild — that
is, the desire to establish fraternal relations for mutual aid and pro-
tection — was not peculiar to the Saxons. It may rather be contem-
plated as a human sentiment, arising from the innate knowledge of
his own condition, which makes man aware of his infirmity and
weakness in isolation, and causes him to seek for strength in associa-
tion with his fellow-man.

The similitude, therefore, if not the exact form of the Guild, has
appeared in almost all civilized nations, even at the remotest periods
of their own history. Wherever men accustom themselves to meet
on stated occasions, to celebrate some appointed anniversary or fes-
tival and to partake of a common meal, that by this regular com-
munion a spirit of fraternity may be established, and every member
may feel that upon the association with which he is thus united he
may depend for relief of his necessities or protection of his interests,
such an association, sodality, or confraternity, call it by whatever
name you may, will be in substantial nature a Guild.

Wilda thinks that the peculiar character of the Guilds was de*

36

1 “ Das Gildwesen in Mittelalter.”

2 “ Untersuchungen liber die ersten Anfange des Gildveerens. 1

562

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

rived from the Christian principle of love, and that they actually
originated in the monastic unions, where every member shared the
benefits of the whole community in good works and prayers, into
the advantages of which union laymen were afterward admitted.

But the untenableness of this theory is evident from the fact
that the same characteristic of mutual aid existed in the pagan na-
tions long before the advent of Christianity, and was presented in
those sodalities which represent the form of the modern Guild.

Besides the admission of Wilda and Hartwig that the early
Saxon Guilds were so tinctured with the superstitious customs of
the pagan sacrificial feasts, and that the Church had to labor strenu-
ously and for a long time for their suppression, would prove that we
must look beyond the monasteries for the true origin of the Guild.

I am inclined, therefore, to attribute them to that spirit of asso-
ciated labor and union of refreshment which had existed in the Ro-
man Colleges of Artificers, where, as has been already shown, there
existed that organized union of inter 'As which continued to be dis-
played in the Guilds.

I will not aver that the Guilds were the legitimate and uninter-
rupted successors of the Roman Colleges, but I will say that the sug-
gestion of the advantages to be derived from an association in work,
regulated by ordinances that had been agreed on, governed by offi-
cers who might judiciously direct the exercise of skill and the em-
ployment of labor, the result of all of which was a combination of
interests and the growth of a fraternal feeling, was suggested by
these Roman institutions, and more especially adopted by the Craft
Guilds, which, at a later period in the Middle Ages, directed all the
architectural labors in every country of Europe.

Of these Craft Guilds many authors have traced the origin to
the Roman Colleges. Brentano does not absolutely deny this hy-
pothesis, but he thinks it needs to be proved historically by its de-
fenders. He thinks it more probable that they descended from
“ the companies into which, in episcopal and royal towns, the bond
handicraftsmen of the same trade were ranged under the superin-
tendence of an official, or that they took their origin from a common
subjection to police control or from common obligations to pay cer-
tain imposts.” 1

l “ English Guilds,” in Early English Text Society Publications, p. 114.

THE ANGLO-SAXON GUILDS

563

It was in Germany that these episcopal communities existed.
Arnold, in his Constitutional History of the German Free Cities /
describes one at Worms in the nth century. To the Manor of the
Bishop were attached, among other dependants, a class of villeins
or bondsmen called dagezvardi. These were divided into coloni, or
workmen on the country manor, and operarii, or handicraftsmen,
who were ranged, according to their trades, into different unions or
societies. And it is from these that the continental Guilds of the
Middle Ages have been erroneously supposed to have been derived.
Still, when their bondage ceased, these societies may have developed
themselves into Free Guilds; but the Free Guilds existed before,
and the bond unions enforced by episcopal authority must have been
organized simply for the convenience of the employer. There
could not have been in them any of the peculiar characteristics of
the free and independent Guild.

But even if this speculative notion of Brentano, that the Guilds
were derived from the enforced association of the episcopal and
royal bond handicraftsmen, were admitted to be correct, it would be
only lengthening the chain which connects them with the Roman
Colleges by the insertion of another link, for we should have to
look to these Roman sodalities for the idea of union and concerted
action, which in either of those instances must have influenced the
combination of handicraftsmen.

However, Brentano immediately repudiates the views which he
had just advanced, and admits that they deserve no further consider-
ation, because Wilda has shown that the Craft Guilds did not spring
from subjection, but arose from the freedom of the handicraft class.

Now, it is precisely in this point that the Craft Guilds most re-
semble the Roman Colleges. Founded originally in the earliest
days of Rome for the express purpose of giving to the working-
classes a separate and independent place in the public polity, they
preserved this independence to the latest times and cultivated the
spirit of freedom which sprang naturally from it. Their spirit of
freedom and independence indeed often bordered upon excess.
Thus they were watched and feared in the latter days of the repub-
lic and during the empire, because their love of freedom sometimes
led them to inaugurate conspiracies against the Government, which

1 “Verfasserungs geschichte der Deutschen Freistadte. ”

564

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

they supposed had the design of subverting or diminishing their
privileges. To protect these privileges and to preserve this freedom
they instituted the office of Patrons, men of distinction and influ-
ence, not of their trade, but selected from the order of patricians,
who were to be the conservators of their franchises.

There is abundant historical evidence that the system of Guilds
was well known to the Anglo-Saxons. Mr. Toulmin Smith, to
whom we are indebted for the collection of Guild charters of a later
date, says that “ English Guilds, as a system of widespread practical
institutions, are older than any kings of England. They are told
of in the books that contain the oldest relics of English laws. The
old laws of King Alfred, of King Ina, of King Athelstan, of King
Henry I., reproduce still older laws in which the universal existence
of Guilds is treated as a well-known fact, and in which it is taken to
be a matter of course that everyone belonged to some Guild. As
population increased Guilds multiplied ; and thus, while the begin-
nings of the older Guilds are lost in the dimness of time and remain
quite unknown, the beginnings of the later ones took place in
methods and with accompanying forms that have been recorded.” 1 2

But it is not upon those laws alone that we have to depend for
proof of the antiquity of the Saxon Guilds. The records of a few of
the old Guilds still remain and show that the idea of association for
mutual assistance, which is the very spirit of the Guild organization,
was prevalent at least twelve centuries ago among our Saxon an-
cestors.

Among the laws of Ina, who reigned from 688 to 725, are two
which relate to the liability of the brethren of a Guild in the case of
slaying a thief. 3 King Alfred also refers to the duties of the Guild
when he decrees that in the case of a crime the Brothers of the Guild
(gegyldan) shall pay a portion of the fine. 8

The Judicia Civitatis Lundonicc, or Statutes of the City of
London, contain several ordinances for the regulation of the various
Guilds, and prescribing the duties of the members. The “ Cnyhten
Gyld,” or Young Men’s Guild, is mentioned by Stow as existing in
the time of King Edgar, who granted the liberty of a Guild for-
ever to “thirteene knights or soldiers well beloved of the king

1 “ Traditions of the Old Crown House, ” p. 28.

2 Thorpe’s “ Anglo Laws,” Ina 16, 21. 3 “ Leges Ailf,” 27.

THE ANGLO-SAXON GUILDS

565

and the realnie (for service by them done), which requested to have
a certaine portion of land on the cast part of the citie, left desolate
and forsaken by the inhabitants by reason of too much servitude .” 1

Thirteen was a favorite number in the religious Guilds. Ducange
explains the reason in a quotation which he makes from an Epistle
to the Church of Utrecht, wherein it is said that “a fraternity, com-
monly called a Guild, was formed, consisting of twelve men to rep-
resent the twelve apostles, and one woman to represent the Virgin
Mary.” 2

The text of the “ writing,” or charter, by which Orky instituted
a Guild at Abbotsbury has been preserved. Orky was the “ huscarl,”
or one of the household troops , 3 of Edward the Confessor, and there
is a charter of that monarch extant in which he gives permission
to Tole, the widow of Orky, or Urk, to bequeath her lands to the
monastery at the same place in which the Guild was established.

The original charter of Orky’s Guild, as written in the Anglo-
Saxon language, with a generally correct translation into English,
has been inserted by Thorpe in his Diplomatarium .* * As it is one
of the earliest of the Saxon charters that is extant, and as it will be
interesting in enabling the reader to collate its provisions with those
of the later Guilds on the pattern of which the Masonic Guilds, or Fra-
ternities, were formulated, it is here presented entire. It must, how-
ever, be observed that it was not a Craft, but a religious Guild, and
hence we find no allusion to the privileges and obligations of the
former, which always composed a part of their ordinances.

orky’s guild at abbotsbury.

“ Here is made known in this writing that Orky has given the
Guildhall and the place at Abbotsbury to the praise of God and St.
Peter, and for the guildship to possess now and henceforth of him
and his consort for long remembrance. Who so shall avert this, let
him account with God at the great day of judgment.

1 “ Survaye of London,” p. 85. ’Ducange, “Glossarium” in voce, Gilda.

’The “huscarlas,” says Kemble, were among the Saxons, and, until after the Norman
Conquest, the household troops or immediate body-guard of the King. “The Saxons in
England,” vol. ii., p. 118.

* “Diplomatarium Ang.,” pp. 605-608. I have ventured to make a few alterations in
Thorpe’s translation, to conform more strictly to the Anglo-Saxon original.

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

500

“ Now these are the covenants which Orky and the guild brothers
at Abbotsbury have chosen to the praise of God and the honor of
St. Peter and their souls’ need.

“This is first : Three nights before St. Peter’s Mass, from every
guild brother one penny, or one penny worth of wax, whichever be
most needed in the monastery, and on the mass’ eve one broad loaf,
well raised and well sifted, for our common alms ; and five weeks
before Peter’s Mass day let each guild brother contribute one guild-
sester full of clean wheat, and let that be rendered within two days,
on pain of forfeiting the entrance fee (ingang), which is three sesters
of wheat. And let the wood be rendered within three days after
the corn contribution, from every full guild brother (riht gegyldan) 1
one burthen (byrthene) of wood, and two from those who are not
full brothers, or let him pay one guild sester of corn. And he who
undertakes a charge, and does it not satisfactorily, let him be liable
in his entrance fee, and let there be no remission. And let the guild
brother who abuses another within the guild, with serious intent,
make atonement to all the society to the amount of his entrance,
and afterward to the man whom he abused, as he may settle it, and
if he will not submit to compensation, let him forfeit the fellowship
and every other privilege of the Guild. And let him who introduces
more men than he ought, without leave of the steward and the pur-
veyors (feomera), pay his entrance. And if death befall any one in our
society, let each guild brother contribute one penny at the corpse for
the soul, or pay according to three guild brothers (gylde be pry gegil-
dum ). 2 And if any one of us be sick within sixty miles, then we
shall find fifteen men who shall fetch him ; and if he be dead thirty ;
and they shall bring him to the place which he desired in his life.
And if he die in the vicinity, let the steward have warning to what

1 There is some difficulty here. The words “riht gegyldan ” in the original mean
iiterally “lawful members of the Guild ; ” and the word “ ungyldan ” signifies “ those who
are not members,” for the particle un has the privative power in Anglo-Saxon as in Eng-
lish. Thorpe translates as “ regular and non-regular guild brothers” I have adopted
with hesitation Kemble’s translation (“ Saxons in England,” i., 51 1). But what are “ non-
regular” or “not full brethren ?” As “gegyldan” also means “ to pay a contribution.”
we might suppose that the “ riht gegyldan ” were those who had paid their dues to the
guild, and the “ ungegyldan” were those who were in arrears. This would be a reasonable
explanation of the passage ; but there are grammatical difficulties in the way.

2 Literally translated, but unintelligible. Kemble does not attempt a translation,
but gives the passage the benefit of a blank.

THE ANGLO-SAXON GUILDS

557

place the coipse is to go, and let the steward then warn the guild
brothers, as many as ever he can ride to or send to, that they come
thereto and worthily attend the corpse and convey it to the monas-
tery and earnestly pray for the soul. That will rightly be called a
guildlaw which we thus do and it will beseem it well both before God
and before the world ; for we know not which of us shall soonest
depart hence. Now we believe through God’s support that this
aforesaid agreement will benefit us all, if we rightly hold it.

“ Let us fervently pray to God Almighty that he have mercy
on us ; and also to his holy Apostle St. Peter, that he intercede for
us and make our way clear to everlasting rest ; because for love of
him we have gathered this guild (gegaderodon). He has the power
in heaven that he may let into heaven whom he will, and refuse
whom he will not ; as Christ himself said to him in his Gospel :
‘ Peter, I deliver to thee the key of heaven’s kingdom ; and whatso-
ever thou wilt have bound on earth, that shall be bound in heaven,
and whatsoever thou wilt have unbound on earth, that shall be un-
bound in heaven.’ Let us have trust and hope in him that he will
ever have care of us here in the world, and after our departure
hence, be a help to our souls ; May he bring us to everlasting rest.”

These covenants, which in later Guild charters are called ordi-
nances, and by the Mason Guilds constitutions, very clearly define the
objects of the association. These were not connected with the pur-
suit of any handicraft, but were altogether of a religious and charita-
ble nature. Infirm brethren were to be supported, the dead were to
be buried, prayers were to be said for the repose of their souls, and
religious services were to be performed. There was an annual meet-
ing on the feast of St. Peter, and regulations were made for the col-
lection of alms on that day for the benefit of the poor. Especial
attention was paid to the preservation of fraternal relations of mut-
ual kindness between the members.

In all this we see the germ of those similar regulations which
are met with in the “ Constitutions of the Freemasons,” compiled in
the 15th, 1 6th, and 17th centuries, and which were, vmtatis mutandis,
finally developed in the regulations of the Speculative Masons in the
1 8th century.

The essence of the regulations of this as well as of two other
Guilds established about the same time, one at Exeter and the third
at Cambridge, was the binding together in close fraternal union of

568

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

man to man, which was sometimes fortified by oaths for the faithful
performance of mutual help.

The charter of the “ Thanes’ Guild at Cambridge ” has been pub-
lished by both Thorpe and Kemble from a Cottonian manuscript.
As it contains some points not embraced in the charter of the Orky
Guild, it is here presented, as a further means of collation with the
charters of the later Craft Guilds. The original is of course in Anglo-
Saxon, and I have adopted the translation of Thorpe, with the ex-
ception of a few emendations.

THE THANES’ GUILD AT CAMBRIDGE.

“ Here in this writing is the declaration of the agreement which
this society has resolved in the Thanes’ Guild at Cambridge. That
then is first that each should take an oath to the others on the hali-
dom of true fidelity before God and the world. And all the society
should support him who had most right. If any guild brother die let
all the guildship bring him to where he desired; and let him who
should come thereto pay a sester (about eight quarts) of honey; and
let the guildship inherit of the deceased half a farm. And let each
contribute two pence to the alms and thereof bring what is fitting
to St. iEtheldryth. And if any guild brother be in need of his fel-
lows’ aid and it be made known to the fellow nearest to the guild
brother and, unless the guild brother himself be nigh, the fellow neg-
lect it, let him pay one pound. If the lord neglect it, let him pay
one pound unless he be on the lord’s need or confined to his bed.
And if any one slay a guild brother let there be nothing for compen-
sation but eight pounds. But if the slayer scorns the compensation
let all the guildship avenge the guild brother and all bear the feud.
But if a guild brother do it let all bear alike. And if any guild
brother slay any man and he be an avenger by compulsion and com-
pensate for his violence and the slain be a nobleman let each guild
brother contribute half a mark for his aid; if the slain be a churl
(ceorl) two oras (ioo pence) if he be Welch one ora. But if the
guild brother slay any one through wantonness and with guile, let
himself bear what he has wrought. And if a guild brother slay his
guild brother through his own folly let him suffer on the part of the
kindred for that which he has violated, and buy back his guildship
with eight pounds, or forever forfeit our society and friendship.

THE ANGLO-SAXON GUILDS

569

And if a guild brother eat or drink with him who slew his guild
brother unless it be before the king or the bishop of the diocese or
the aldermen, let him pay one pound unless with his two bench
comrades (gesetlung) he can deny that he knew him. If any guild
brother abuse another let him pay a sester of honey unless he can
clear himself with his two bench comrades. If a servant (cniht)
draw a weapon let the lord pay one pound and let the lord get what
he can and let all the guildship aid him in getting his money. And
if a servant wound another let the lord avenge it and all the guildship
together, so that seek he whatever he may (sece whet he sece) he
have not life (feorh). And if a servant sit within the storeroom let
him pay a sester of honey; and if any one have a footstool let him
do the same. And if any guild brother die out of the land or be
taken sick let his guild brethren fetch him and convey him, dead or
alive, to where he may desire, under the same penalty that has been
said, if he die at home and the guild brother attend not the corpse.
And let the guild brother who does not attend his morning discourse
(morjen space) pay his sester of honey.”

In this agreement of an early Guild, we will again notice that,
though the regulations are few, they all partake of that spirit of
mutual kindness which has characterized the Guild organizations of
all ages, and of which the Masonic Lodge is but a fuller develop-
ment.

The principal points worthy of notice are as follows:

1. There was an oath of fidelity.

2. The sick were to be nursed and the dead buried.

3. A brother was bound to give aid to another brother if he were
called upon.

4. If a member got into trouble or difficulty the Guild was to
come to his assistance.

5. The injuries or wrongs of a member were to be espoused by
the Guild.

6. To associate knowingly with one who had done injury to a
member was a penal offense.

7. The severest punishment that could be inflicted on a member
was expulsion from the body.

These seven points embrace the true spirit of the Masonic in-
stitution, and may be advantageously collated with the mediaeval

57 o

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

Constitutions, and with the regulations and obligations of the mod-
ern Lodges.

That this collation of the older and the newer Constitutions may
be more conveniently made, it will be necessary to anticipate the
chronological sequence, and to present the reader the ordinances of
two Craft Guilds, both of the 14th century.

The first of these Constitutions, though the date affixed to it
makes it apparently sixty years later than the second, was really
much older. Toulmin Smith says that “the internal evidence
shows that the substance of the ordinances is older than the date
given.” As, in the beginning, they are said to be ordinances “ made
and of ancient time assigned and ordained by the founders of the
Guild,” he conjectures that they were first written in Latin, and that
what we have “are the early translation of a lost original with some
later additions and alterations.”

The document now presented to the reader, and which has been
taken from Toulmin Smith’s collection of English Guilds, which
was published by the Early English Text Society, is the Guild of
the Smiths of Chesterfield. The Guild united with that of the Holy
Cross of Merchants in 1387. But, as has already been said, the date
of its institution must have been much earlier.

GUILD OF THE SMITHS OF CHESTERFIELD.

(The paragraphs are numbered for the convenience of future reference. There is no
numbering in the original.)

1. “This is the agreement of the Masters and brethren of the
Guild of Smiths of Chesterfield, worshipping before the greater
cross in the nave of the church of All Saints there. The head men
are an Elder Father, Dean, Steward and four Burgesses by whose
oversight the guild is managed. Lights are to be found and be
burnt before the cross on days named.

2. “ If any brother is sick and needs help, he shall have a half-
penny daily from the common fund of the guild until he has got
well. If any of them fall into want they shall go, singly, on given
days, to the houses of the brethren where each shall be courteously
received, and there shall be given to him, as if he were the Master of
the house, whatever he wants of meat, drink and clothing, and he
shall have a halfpenny like those that are sick, and then he shall go
home in the name of the Lord.

THE ANGLO-SAXON GUILDS

571

3. “ On the death of a brother twelve lights shall be kept burning
round the body, until buried, and offerings shall be made. Round
the body of a stranger or of the son of a brother, dying in the house
of a brother four lights shall be kept burning.

4. “ If it befall that any of the brethren, by some hapless chance,
and not through his own folly, is cast into prison, all his brethren
are bound to do what they can to get him freed and to defend
him.

5. “ If any sick brother makes a will, having first bequeathed his
soul to God, his body to burial and the altar gifts to the priests, he
shall then not forget to bequeath something to the guild according
to his means.

6. “ Whenever any one has borrowed any money from the
guild, either to traffic with or for his own use, under promise to
repay it on a given day, and he does not repay it, though three
times warned, he shall be put under suspension, denunciation and ex-
communication — all contradiction, cavil and appeal aside — until he
shall have wholly paid it. If he has been sick, the claim of the
guild must be first to be satisfied. And if he dies intestate, his
goods shall be held bound to the guild, to pay what is owing to it,
and shall not be touched or sequestrated until full payment has been
made to the guild.

7. “ Should it happen, [which God forbid] that any brother is con-
tumacious ; or sets himself against the brethren ; or gainsays any of
these ordinances ; or being summoned to a feast will not come ; or
does not obey the Elder Father when he ought nor show him due
respect ; or does not abide by what has been ordained by the Elder
Father and greater part of the guild ; he shall pay a pound of wax
and half a mark. Moreover he shall be put under suspension, de-
nunciation and excommunication, without any contradiction, cavil
or appeal.

8. “ Any one proved to be in debt, or a wrong-doer, shall be
deemed excommunicate, and shall presume to come to the meetings
of the brethren, his company shall be shunned by all, so that no
brother shall dare to talk with him, unless to chide him, until he has
fully satisfied the Elder Father and the brethren, as well touching
any penalty as touching the debt or wrong doing.

9. “To keep and faithfully perform these constitutions, all the
brethren have bound themselves by touch of relics.”

572

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

Although, as its name imports, this is the sodality of a body of
handicraftsmen, yet there is no reference to any regulations for work.
In this respect it more resembles a Social than a Craft Guild. This
deficiency is, however, supplied in the ordinances of the Tailors’
Guild at Lincoln, which is next to be given. This circumstance is
one of the internal evidences that the Smiths’ Guild was much older
than its charter purports.

The Tailors’ was a Craft Guild, and its provisions for the regula-
tion of labor, though few, are striking and may be profitable com-
pared with the more developed system subsequently adopted by the
Masonic Craft Guilds. The date of the institution of the Tailors’
Guild is the year 1328. The paragraphs are here numbered for ref-
erence, as in the case of the former Guild.

THE TAILORS’ GUILD AT LINCOLN.

1. “ All the brethren and sisters shall go in procession in the feast
of Corpus Christi.

2. “ None shall enter the Guild as whole brother until he has paid
his entry, a quarter of harley, which must be paid between Michael-
mas and Christmas. And if it is not then paid, he shall pay the
price of the best malt as sold in Lincoln Market on Midsummer
day. And each shall pay 12 pence to the ale.

3. “ If any one of the Guild falls into poverty (which God forbid)
and has not the means of support he shall have every week 7
pence out of the goods of the Guild ; out of which he must discharge
such payments as become due to the Guild.

4. “ If any one dies within the city, without leaving the means
for burial, the Guild shall find the means according to the rank of
him who is dead.

5. “ If anyone wishes to make pilgrimage to the Holy Land each
brother and sister shall give him a penny; and if to St. James or to
Rome a halfpenny; and they shall go with him outside the gates of
the city of Lincoln, and on his return they shall meet him and go
with him to his mother church.

6. “ If a brother or sister dies outside the city on pilgrimage or
elsewhere, and the brethren are assured of his death they shall do for
his soul what would have been done if he had died in his own parish.

7. “ When one of the Guild dies, he shall, according to his means,
bequeath 5 shillings or 40 pence or what he will to the Guild.

THE ANGLO-SAXON GUILDS

573

8. “ Every brother and sister coining into the Guild, shall pay to
the chaplain as the others do.

9. “ There shall be four mornspeeches held in every year, to take
order for the welfare of the Guild ; and whoever heeds not his sum-
mons shall pay two pounds of wax.

10. “ If any Master of the Guild takes any one to live with him
as an apprentice in order to learn the work of the tailors’ craft, the
apprentice shall pay 2 shillings to the Guild or his Master for him,
or else the Master shall lose his Guildship.

11. ‘‘If any quarrel or strife arises between any brethren or sis-
ters of the Guild, (which God forbid) the brethren and sisters shall
with the advice of the Graceman and Wardens do their best to
make peace between the parties, provided the case is such as can be
thus settled without a breach of the law. And whoever will not
obey the judgment of the brethren shall lose his Guildship, unless he
thinks better of it within three days, and then he shall pay a stone
of wax, unless he have grace.

12. “ On feast days, the brethren and the sisters shall have three
flagons and six tankards with prayers and the ale in the flagons
shall be given to the poor who most need it. After the feast, a
Mass shall be said and offerings made for the souls of those who
are dead.

13. “ Four lights shall be put round the body of any dead brother
or sister until burial and the usual services and offerings shall follow.

14. “ If any Masterof the Craft keeps anylad or sewerof another
Master for one day after he has well known that the lad wrongly
left his Master, and that they had not parted in a friendly and rea-
sonable manner he shall pay a stone of wax.

15. “ If any Master of the Craft employs any lad as a sewer, that
sewer shall pay 5 pence or his Master for him.

16. “ Each brother and sister shall every year give 1 penny for
charity when the Dean of the Guild demands it, and it shall be
given in the place where the giver thinks it most needed together
with a bottle of ale from the store of the Guild.

17. “ Officers who are elected and will not serve are to pay fines.”

It will be seen, on an inspection of these seventeen ordinances,
that the Guild of Tailors of Lincoln combined the character of a
Religious and a Craft Guild. The 15th and the 16th statutes regu-

574

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

late the conduct of the Masters in the prosecution of their trade, but
all the others are appropriate to the regulation of religious services,
to the practice of charity, and the inculcation of friendly and frater-
nal relations among the members.

In process of time the Craft Guilds, without losing altogether
their religious features, which have been preserved to this day in
the institution of Speculative Masonry, which is descended from
them, began to enlarge the number of their ordinances for the regu-
lation of work and workmen. As it will be necessary to give
directly a specimen of the old Constitutions of the English Med-
iaeval Masons, which were nothing more nor less than ordinances
of Masonic Craft Guilds, it will be proper, at the expense of a little
recapitulation, to glance at the progress of these Craft Guilds.
Some of the facts will refer equally to the Craft Guilds of the Con-
tinent, but only incidentally, as that topic will be treated hereafter
as an independent topic. For the present our attention must be
directed exclusively to the rise and growth of the English Guilds of
Craftsmen.

It has been already seen that in the nth century, and even be-
fore, the inhabitants of a town were divided by the officers who gov-
erned the municipality, into freemen and bondsmen. To this last
class belonged the handicraftsmen who were subjected to the payment
of certain taxes and the performance of certain feudal services.

But there was also a class of free handicraftsmen who were not,
as respects the carrying on of their business, subjected to the same
servile indignities as the bondsmen. As the law made the distinc-
tion between the bond and free craftsmen, there was no necessity
for the latter to enter into any association for the protection of their
rights and privileges. They already formed a part of the governing
and law-making power of the municipality, and were thus able to
protect themselves.

But by a course of revolutions, which it is unnecessary to detail,
the free handicraftsmen lost their place in the general Guild of the
citizens. The burghers then began to feel a desire to subject them
to the same imposts as were paid by the bond craftsmen . 1 These
burghers, anxious for the prosperity of their towns, allowed foreign-
ers. on the payment of a fee, to carry on their trade, which of course

1 Brentano, “Development of Guilds,” p. 115.

THE ANGLO-SAXON GUILDS

575

greatly affected the interests of the free craftsmen, by introducing
competition.

Hence arose the necessity of association for that mutual protec-
tion of interests, which could not have been effected if the crafts-
men continued in an isolated state, and from this arose the formation
of Craft Guilds, which took the suggestion of their form from the
older Guilds which had preceded them, most of which were, how-
ever, of a social or religious character.

The Craft Guilds thus established to suppress the encroachments
of the burghers on their rights consisted at first, both in England
and on the Continent, in France and in Germany especially, of the
most eminent of the Craftsmen who were free, freedom being an
indispensable qualification for admission into the fraternity.

But after the bond craftsmen were, by the liberal and human-
izing progress of the age, emancipated from their bondage, many of
them, leaving the companies into which they had been distributed
during their bondage by their masters, became members of the
Guilds of free craftsmen.

So now the handicrafts were divided into those who had always
been free and those who had originally been bondsmen. And the
only way in which the ci-devant bond craftsman could mingle on
equal terms with the free craftsmen was by obtaining admission
into and becoming, as it is called, “ free of the Guild.” This was a
high privilege and not easily conceded or obtained.

The free craftsman always held aloof from the craftsman who
was not free, the word free not being used as the opposite of bonds-
man i, but only to indicate one who was not a freeman of the Guild
and who worked outside of its regulations.

We find that this allusion to freemen of the Guild is constantly
used in the old charters. Such expressions as Free Carpenters, Free
Weavers, Free Tailors, are not, it is true, to be found on record,
though it is not unlikely that they were in colloquial use. But in
the charter of the Guild of Tailors of Exeter, granted by Edward
IV., and the original of which is in the archives of the Corporation
of Exeter, whence it was copied by Toulmin Smith , 1 is the follow-
ing heading of one of the sections of the Ordinances: “The Othe
of the Free Brotherys” — i.e., The Oath of the Free Brothers.

^‘English Guilds,” in- Early English Text Society Publications, p. 318.

5/6

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

“Free Brothers” was a recognized expression in the early period
of the organization of Craft Guilds, to indicate one who was a free-
man of the Guild. The Masons appear to have preserved the use
of the epithet with great pertinacity, and used the term “ Free-
mason ” to distinguish those who were free of the Guild from those
“rough layers” or “cowans ’’who had not been admitted to the
privileges of the fraternity and with whom they were forbidden to
work.

In every Masonic Constitution that has been preserved is the
ordinance that “ no Mason shall make any mould, square, or rules
to any rough layer.” The Free Mason could not, by the laws of
the Guild, engage in labor with one who was not free.

It is thus that I trace the derivation of the word “ Freema-
son,” used now exclusively to indicate the member of a Lodge of
Speculative Masons, but originally to denote a Mason who was free
of his Guild.

I think this derivation much better than that which traces the
origin of the term to the French Frlre Mafon, or Brother Mason.
Such a derivation would necessarily assign the birth of the English
Masonic Guilds to a French parentage, a theory not only wholly
unsupported by historical authority, but actually in contradiction to
it. Indeed, the French themselves have repudiated the idea, for
they call a Freemason not a “ Frere Magon,” or brother Mason,
but a “ Franc Magon,” Franc being the old French for free.

At first the Craft Guilds were voluntary associations, and could
enforce their regulations only by the common consent of the mem-
bers, but as in time some of these, unwilling to submit to the re-
strictions laid upon them, would withdraw and carry on their trade
independently, it was found necessary to obtain the authority from
the law of the land to punish such contumacy and to protect the in-
terests of the Guilds.

This was effected by a confirmation of the Guild ordinances by
the lord, the citizens, or afterward by the King, and in this way
arose the charters under which, after the time of Henry I., all the
Craft Guilds acted and continued to act to the present day.

This process did not, however, entirely cure the evil, and in the
1 2th century artisans of different trades and mysteries in London,
being unwilling to unite with the incorporated Guilds or being un-
able to obtain admission into them, erected themselves into fraterni-

THE ANGLO-SAXON GUILDS

577

ties without the necessary powers of incorporation. These were
not recognized by the companies of freemen and were condemned by
the king for their contumacious proceedings. 1 They were oppro-
briously denominated “Adulterine Guilds,” and they remind us of
the Collegia illicit a, or unlawful Colleges, among the Romans, as
well as of the “ clandestine Lodges ” among the modern Speculative
Masons.

The number of these Adulterine Guilds in the year 1180 was,
according to Madox in his History of the Exchequer , fourteen, but
no Guild of Masons is enumerated in the list.

Before proceeding to a comparison of the statutes, ordinances,
or regulations of these early Guilds with the Masonic constitutions
contained in the Old Records of the Order, it will be proper, at the
expense of some recapitulation, to survey briefly the condition and
character of these Saxon and Norman Craft Guilds. I have said on
a former occasion, and here repeat the assertion, that an investiga-
tion of the usages of these Mediasval Guilds and a comparison of
their regulations with the old Masonic Constitutions will furnish a
fertile source of interest to the Masonic archaeologist and will throw
much light on the early history of Freemasonry.

The custom of meeting on certain stated occasions was one of
the most important of the Guild regulations. These meetings of
the whole body of the Guild were sometimes monthly, but more
generally quarterly. At these meetings all matters concerning the
common interests of the Guild were discussed, and the meet-
ings were held with certain ceremonies, so as to give solemnity to
the occasion. The Guild chest, which was secured by several
locks, was opened, and the charter, ordinances, and other valu-
able articles contained in it were exposed to view, on which
occasion all the members uncovered their heads in token of
reverence.

The Guild elected its own officers. This was a prerogative pe-
culiar to the English Guilds. On the Continent the presiding offi-
cer was frequently appointed by the municipal or other exterior
authorities.

In the early Saxon Guilds, and for some time after the Con-
quest, the presiding officer was called the “ Alderman.” At a later

1 Allen, “ New History of London,” vol. i., p. 61.

578

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

period we find him designated sometimes as the “ Graceman,” some-
times as the “ Early Father,” and sometimes by other titles.

But eventually it became the uniform usage to call the chief
officers of the Guild the “ Master and Wardens,” a usage which has
continued ever since to prevail and which was adopted by the Spec-
ulative Masons.

The Craft Guilds not only directed themselves to the welfare of
their temporal concerns, such as the regulation of their trade, which
was called a “ Mystery,” but also took charge of spiritual matters,
and for that purpose employed a priest or chaplain, who conducted
their religious services and offered up masses or prayers for the dead.
In this connection each Guild appears to have had a patron saint,
and they were often connected with a particular church, where, on
appointed occasions, they performed special services, and received
in return a participation in the advantages of all the prayers of the
church.

In these respects they resembled the Roman Colleges of Artif-
icers, which, it will be remembered, were often connected with a
particular temple, and the College was dedicated to the God wor-
shipped therein.

Almsgiving was also practiced by the Guild, and while there
was a general distribution of food and money to the poor indiscrim-
inately, special attention was paid to the wants of their own indi-
gent members, their widows and orphans.

To support the current expenses of the Guild an entrance-fee was
demanded from every one on his admission, and all the members
contributed monthly or quarterly a certain sum to the general fund.

The Guild administered justice among its members, and in-
flicted punishments for offenses committed against the statutes of
the Guild. These punishments consisted of pecuniary fines, or of
suspension, or even expulsion, commonly called excommunication.
They discouraged suits at law between the members, and endeavored
to settle all disputes, if possible, by arbitration.

Finally, there was an annual festival on the day of the patron
saint of the Guild, when the members assembled for religious wor-
ship, almsgiving, and feasting. It was deemed an offense for any
one to be absent from this general assembly without sufficient ex-
cuse.

There was also a ceremony of admission and an oath adminis-

THE ANGLO-SAXON GUILDS

579

tered to the candidate on his reception. As these will be of great
importance in a comparison of the usages of the Saxon Guilds with
the Masonic sodalities, I copy the following form of admission and
oath from the charter of St. Catherine’s Guild at Stamford. The
date of this charter is 1494, but Smith observes that there is inter
nal evidence showing that the Guild was established at a much ear
lier period.

ADMISSION OF BROTHERS AND SISTERS IN THE GUILD OF ST.

CATHERINE.

“Then it is ordained that when the said first even-sons: is done
the Alderman and his brethren shall assemble in their hall and
drink ; and there have a courteous communication for the weal of
the said Guild. And then shall be called forth all those that shall
be admitted brethren or sisters of the Guild ; and the Alderman
shall examine them in this wise: ‘ Sir or Syse be ye willing to be
brethren among us in this Guild and will desire and ask it in the
worship of Almighty God, our Blessed Saint Mary and of the Holy
Virgin and Martyr Saint Catherine in whose name this Guild is
founded and in the way of charity?’ And by their own will they
shall answer, ‘Yea’ or ‘Nay.’ Then the Alderman shall command
the Clerk to give this oath to them in form and manner following:

“ ‘ This hear you, Alderman : I shall true man be to God Al-
mighty, to our Lady Saint Mary, and to that Holy Virgin and
Martyr Saint Catherine in whose honor and worship this Guild is
founded ; and shall be obedient to the Alderman of this Guild and
to his successors and come to him and his brethren when I have
warning and not absent myself without cause reasonable. I shall be
ready at scot and lot and all my duties truly pay and do ; the ordi-
nances, constitutions and rules what with the council of the same
Guild, keep, obey and perform and to my power maintain to my
life’s end ; so help me God and halidome and by this book.’
And then kiss the book and be lovingly received with all the
brethren ; and then they drink about ; and after that depart for
that night.”

Such is a brief sketch of the principal characteristics of the early
Guilds. The main object of presenting it has been to enable the
reader to compare these regulations with those of the Old Masonic

580

HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

Constitutions of the 15th, 16th, and 17th centuries, so as to show the
growth and development of the Masonic law from them. It will,
for the sake of convenient reference, be therefore necessary to select
from these Old Masonic Constitutions one at least, and one of the
earliest, that the reader may in making his comparison have the regu-
lations of the Guild and the charges of the Masons side by side be-
fore him. But this investigation will perhaps be better continued
in a separate chapter.

t

PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY

HS

403

M26

1906

v.2

Mackey a lbert Gallatin

Ihe history of freemasonry


# VOLUME III

Brigham   Young    University  M^.     m^^^^^    ^BBh«^^!5l

SSLUSk

No. .  M19ZA No 2.1.8591.   Iff.  If    rail  I      &M  !7im9

7.    3  jff^

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2011  with  funding  from
Brigham  Young  University

http://www.archive.org/details/historyoffreemas03mack

EXECUTION    OF    JAMES   DE    MOLAY
At  Paris,  March  11,  1314

THE

HISTORY  of  FREEMASONRY

ITS  LEGENDS  AND  TRADITIONS
ITS  CHRONOLOGICAL  HISTORY

By  ALBERT  GALLATIN  MACKEY,  M.D.,  **?

THE  HISTORY  OF  THE

SYMBOLISM  OF  FREEMASONRY

THE

ANCIENT  AND  ACCEPTED  SCOTTISH  RITE

AND  THE

ROYAL  ORDER  OF  SCOTLAND

By  WILLIAM  R  SINGLETON,  }}?  T>

WITH  AN

ADDENDA

» »

By  WILLIAM  JAMES  HUGHAN

P.".  S.\  G.\  D.\  of  G.\  L.".  of  England— P.".  S.\  G.*.  W.-.  of  Egypt,  etc.

Volume  Three

218591

PUBLISHED  BY

THE  MASONIC  HISTORY  COMPANY
New  York  and  Londom

1  < «

COPYRIGHTED  1888  &  1906  BY

ALLRiQilXS  RESERVED.

PRINTBD    IN    THE    UNITED    STATES    OF    AMERICA

«    .*    <       •'

CHAPTER   IX

THE    EARLY    ENGLISH    MASONIC    GUILDS

^%0  Brother  William  James  Hughan  are  we  indebt-
ed, more  than  to  any  other  person,  for  the  collec-
tion and  publication  of  all  the  Masonic  Guild
ordinances  that  have  been  preserved  in  the  Brit-
ish Museum,  in  the  archives  of  old  Lodges,  or
in  private  hands.

In  the  beginning  of  his  work  on  The  Old
Charges  of  the  British  Freemasons  (a  book  so  valuable  and  so  nec-
essary that  it  should  be  in  the  library  of  every  Masonic  archaeol-
ogist), Brother  Hughan  says :

11  Believing  as  we  do  that  the  present  Association  of  Freemasons
is  an  outgrowth  of  the  Building  Corporations  and  Guilds  of  the
Middle  Ages,  as  also  a  lineal  descendant  and  sole  representative  of
the  early,  secret  Masonic  sodalities,  it  appears  to  us  that  their  an-
cient Laws  and  Charges  are  specially  worthy  of  preservation,  study
and  reproduction.  No  collection  of  these  having  hitherto  been
published  we  have  undertaken  to  introduce  several  of  the  most  im-
portant to  the  notice  of  the  Fraternity."

As  Brother  Hughan  is  distinguished  for  the  accuracy  and  fidel-
ity with  which  he  has  himself  made,  or  caused  to  be  made  by  com-
petent scribes,  copies  of  these  Constitutions  from  the  originals,  I
shall  select  from  one  of  the  earliest  of  them  the  ordinances  or  reg-
ulations, which  shall  be  collated  with  those  of  the  early  Saxon
Guilds,  specimens  of  which  have  been  given  in  the  preceding
chapter.

An  account  of  these  Old  Records,  as  they  are  sometimes  called,
will  be  found  in  the  first  part  of  this  work,  where  the  subject  of  the
Legend  of  the  Craft,  which  they  all  contain,  is  treated.  It  will  be
unnecessary  therefore  to  repeat  here  that  account.

I  might  have  selected  for  collation  the  statutes  contained  in  the

poem  published  by  Halliwell,  or  those  in  the  Cooke  manuscript,  as

581

582  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

both  are  of  an  older  date  than  any  in  the  collection  of  Hughan.
But  as  they  are  all  substantially  the  same  in  their  provisions,  and
the  latter  have  the  advantage  of  greater  brevity,  I  shall  content
myself  with  referring  occasionally,  when  required,  to  the  former.

The  manuscript  which  is  selected  for  collation  is  that  known  as
the  Landsdowne,  whose  date  is  supposed  to  be  1560.  The  date  of
the  manuscript  is,  however,  no  criterion  of  the  date  of  the  Guild
whose  ordinances  it  recites,  for  that  was  of  course  much  older.  It
is  thought  to  be  next  in  point  of  antiquity  to  the  poem  published
by  Mr.  Halliwell,  to  which  the  date  of  1390  is  assigned,  and  Hughan
says  that  "  the  style  of  caligraphy  and  other  considerations  seem  to
warrant  so  early  a  date  being  ascribed  to  it."  In  copying  the  stat-
utes from  the  copy  published  by  Brother  Hughan,  I  have  made  an
exact  transcript,  except  that  I  have  numbered  the  statutes  consec-
utively instead  of  dividing  them,  as  is  done  in  the  original,  into  two
series.  This  has  been  done  for  convenience  of  collation  with  the
Guild  ordinances  inserted  in  the  preceding  chapter  and  which  have
been  numbered  in  a  similar  method.  The  orthography,  for  a  similar
reason,  has  been  modernized.

CHARGES   IN    THE    LANDSDOWNE    MANUSCRIPT.

i.  "  You  shall  be  true  to  God  and  Holy  Church  and  to  use  no
error  or  heresy,  you  understanding  and  by  wise  mens  teaching,  also
that  you  shall  be  liege  men  to  the  King  of  England  without  treason
or  any  falsehood  and  that  you  know  no  treason  or  treachery  but
that  you  amend  and  give  knowledge  thereof  to  the  King  and  his
Council ;  also  that  ye  shall  be  true  to  one  another  (that  is  to  say)
every  Mason  of  the  Craft  that  is  Mason  allowed,  you  shall  do  to
him  as  you  would  be  done  to  yourself.

2.  "  Ye  shall  keep  truly  all  the  counsel  of  the  Lodge  or  of  the
chamber  and  all  the  counsel  of  the  Lodge  that  ought  to  be  kept  by
the  way  of  Masonhood,  also  that  you  be  no  thief  nor  thieves  to
your  knowledge  free  ;  that  you  shall  be  true  to  the  King,  Lord  or
Master  that  you  serve  and  truly  to  see  and  work  for  his  advantage  ;
also  you  shall  call  all  Masons  your  Fellows  or  your  Brethren  and
no  other  names.

3.  "  Also  you  shall  not  take  your  Fellow's  wife  in  villainy,  nor  de-
flower his  daughter  or  servant,  nor  put  him  to  disworship  ;  also  you

THE  EARLY   ENGLISH   MASONIC   GUILDS  583

shall  truly  pay  for  your  meat  or  drink  wheresoever  you  go  to  table
or  board  whereby  the  Craft  or  science  may  be  slandered."

These  are  called  "the  charges  general  that  belong  to  every  true
Mason,  both  Masters  and  Fellows."  Then  follow  sixteen  others,
that  are  called  "  charges  single  for  Masons  Allowed."  The  only
difference  that  I  can  perceive  between  the  two  sets  of  charges  is
that  the  first  set  refer  to  the  moral  conduct  of  the  members  of  the
Guild,  while  the  second  refer  to  their  conduct  as  Craftsmen  in  the
pursuit  of  their  trade.  The  former  were  laws  common  or  general
to  all  the  Guilds,  the  latter  were  peculiar  to  the  Masons  as  a  Craft
Guild.     The  second  set  is  as  follows  :

4.  "  That  no  Mason  take  on  him  no  Lord's  work,  nor  other  mens,
but  if  he  know  himself  well  able  to  perform  the  work,  so  that  the
Craft  have  no  slander.

5.  "  That  no  Master  take  work  but  that  he  take  reasonable  pay
for  it,  so  that  the  Lord  may  be  truly  served  and  the  Master  live
honestly  and  pay  his  Fellows  truly ;  also  that  no  Master  or  Fellow
supplant  others  of  their  work  (that  is  to  say)  if  he  have  taken  a
work  or  else  stand  Master  of  a  work  that  he  shall  not  put  him  out
without  he  be  unable  of  cunning  to  make  an  end  of  his  work ;  also
that  no  Master  nor  Fellow  shall  take  no  apprentice  for  less  than
seven  years  and  that  the  apprentice  be  able  of  birth  that  is  freeborn
and  of  limbs  whole  as  a  man  ought  to  be,  and  that  no  Mason  or
Fellow  take  no  allowance  to  be  made  Mason  without  the  assent  of
his  Fellows  at  the  least  six  or  seven  and  that  he  be  made  able  in  all
degrees  that  is  freeborn  and  of  a  good  kindred,  true  and  no  bonds-
man and  that  he  have  his  right  limbs  as  a  man  ought  to  have.

6.  "Also  that  a  Master  take  no  apprentice  without  he  have
occupation  sufficient  to  occupy  two  or  three  Fellows  at  least.

7.  "  Also  that  no  Master  or  Fellow  put  away  lords  work  to  task
that  ought  to  be  journey  work.

8.  "  Also  that  every  Master  give  pay  to  his  Fellows  and  servants
as  they  may  deserve,  so  that  he  be  not  defamed  with  false  working.

9.  "  Also  that  none  slander  another  behind  his  back  to  make  him
lose  his  good  name.

10.  "  That  no  Fellow  in  the  house  or  abroad  answer  another
ungodly  or  reprovably  without  cause.

11.  "That  every  Master  Mason  reverence  his  elder;  also  that  a
Mason  be  no  common  player  at  the   dice,  cards  or  hazard   nor  at

584  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

any  other  unlawful   plays  through  the  which  the  science  and  craft
may  be  dishonored.

1 2.  "  That  no  Mason  use  no  lechery  nor  have  been  abioad  where-
by the  Craft  may  be  dishonored  or  slandered.

13.  "That  no  Fellow  go  into  the  town  by  night  except  he  have
a  Fellow  with  him  who  may  bear  record  that  he  was  in  an  honest
place.

14.  "Also  that  every  Master  and  Fellow  shall  come  to  the  As
sembly  if  it  be  within  fifty  miles  of  him  if  he  have  any  warning  and
if  he  have  trespassed  against  the  Craft  to  abide  the  award  of  the
Masters  and  Fellows.

15.  "  Also  that  every  Master  Mason  and  Fellow  that  have  tres-
passed against  the  Craft  shall  stand  in  correction  of  other  Masters
and  Fellows  to  make  him  accord  and  if  they  cannot  accord  to  go  to
the  common  law.

16.  "Also  that  a  Master  or  Fellow  make  not  a  mould  stone,
square  nor  rule  to  no  lowen  nor  set  no  lowen  work  within  the
Lodge  nor  without  to  no  mould  stone.1

17.  "Also  that  every  Mason  receive  or  cherish  strange  Fellows
when  they  come  over  to  the  country  and  set  them  on  work  if  they
will  work  as  the  manner  is  (that  is  to  say)  if  the  Mason  have  any
mould  stone  in  his  place  on  work  and  if  he  have  none  the  Mason
shall  refresh  him  with  money  unto  the  next  Lodge.

18.  "Also  that  every  Mason  shall  truly  serve  his  Master  for  his
pay.

19.  "  Also  that  every  Master  shall  truly  make  an  end  of  his  work
task  or  journey  which  soever  it  be."

Now,  in  the  collation  of  these  "  Charges "  with  the  ordinances
of  the  early  Guilds  we  will  find  very  many  points  of  striking  re-
semblance, showing  the  common  prevalence  of  the  Guild  spirit  of
religion,   charity,   and   brotherly  love  in  each,  and  confirming  the

1  The  Freemason  must  not  make  for  one  who  is  not  a  member  of  the  Guild  a  mould
or  pattern  stone  as  a  guide  for  construction  of  mouldings  or  ornaments,  whereby  he  would
be  imparting  to  him  the  secrets  of  the  Craft.  The  word  "  lowen,"  which  is  found  in  no
other  manuscript,  is  supposed  to  be  a  clerical  error  for  "cowan."  It  is  just  as  probable
that  it  is  a  mistake  for  "  layer,"  a  word  used  in  other  manuscripts  and  denoting  a  "  rough
mason."  The  stone-mason  and  the  bricklayer  are  at  this  day  separate  trades.  But
whether  the  correct  word  be  "  cowan"  or  "  layer,"  the  object  of  the  law  was  the  same,
namely,  that  a  member  of  the  Guild  should  not  work  with  one  who  was  not.

THE   EARLY   ENGLISH   MASONIC   GUILDS  585

opinion  of  Hughan,  and  the  hypothesis  which  has  been  constantly
advanced,  that  the  one  was  an  outgrowth  of  the  other.

The  religious  spirit  which  pervaded  all  the  Guilds  is  here  ex-
hibited in  number  1,  which  requires  the  Mason  to  be  true  to  the
Church  and  to  use  no  error  or  heresy.

The  charge  in  number  2,  to  keep  the  counsel  of  the  Lodge,  is
met  with  in  nearly  all  the  Guild  ordinances.  Thus  in  the  ordinances
of  the  Shipmen's  Guild,  of  the  date  of  1368,  it  is  said :

"  Whoso  discovereth  the  counsel  of  the  Guild  of  this  fraternity
to  any  strange  man  or  woman  and  it  may  have  been  proved
.  .  .  shall  pay  to  the  light  two  stone  of  wax  or  shall  lose  (for-
feit) the  fraternity  till  he  may  have  grace.  That  is  he  shall  be  sus-
pended from  the  Guild  until  restored  by  a  pardon."

The  same  regulation  is  found  in  the  ordinances  of  several  other
Guilds,  whose  charters  have  been  copied  by  Toulmin  Smith.  In
those  of  the  Guild  of  St.  George  the  Martyr,  dated  1376,  there  is  no
option  afforded  of  a  pecuniary  fine.  The  words  of  the  statute  are
that  "  no  brother  nor  sister  shall  discover  the  counsel  of  this  frater-
nity to  no  stranger  on  the  pain  of  forfeiture  of  the  fraternity  for-
evermore."  Nothing  short  of  absolute  expulsion  was  meted  out  to
the  betrayer  of  Guild  secrets.

In  the  "  Charges  of  a  Free  Mason,"  said  to  be  "  extracted  from
the  ancient  Records,"  published  by  Anderson  in  1723,  and  adopted
by  the  Grand  Lodge,  soon  after  the  Revival,  for  the  government  of
the  Speculative  Masons,  this  principle  of  the  Guilds  has  been  pre-
served. It  is  there  said,  in  Charge  VI.,  sec.  5,  that  the  Mason  is
"  not  to  let  his  family,  friends,  and  neighbors  know  the  concerns  of
the  Lodge."  It  is  at  this  day  an  almost  unpardonable  crime  to  dis-
close the  secrets  of  the  Lodge.  The  spirit  of  the  Guild  has  been
preserved  in  its  successor,  the  modern  Lodge.

The  prohibition  in  the  fourth  charge,  to  dishonor  a  brother,  or
"  put  him  to  disworship,"  is  found  in  the  earliest  of  the  Guilds.
That  of  Orky,  for  example,  prescribes  a  punishment  to  any  member
who  "misgretes,"  that  is,  insults,  abuses,  or  injures  another  member.
The  Guild  was  always  careful  to  preserve  a  feeling  of  brotherly  love
and  harmony  among  its  members,  a  disposition  which  is  also  the
characteristic  of  the  Masonic  fraternity.  Llence  we  find  the  tenth
point  of  these  Masonic  charges  declaring  that  "  none  shall  slander
another  behind  his  back."     But  the  very  language  of  the  fourth

586  HISTORY   OF    FREEMASONRY

point  of  the  charges  would  appear  to  have  been  borrowed  from  the
ordinances  of  some  of  the  Guilds.

In  those  of  the  Guild  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  whose  date  is  1377,
we  meet  with  these  statutes  :

"  No  one  of  the  Guild  shall  do  anything  to  the  loss  or  hurt  of
another,  nor  allow  it  to  be  done  so  far  as  he  can  hinder  it,  the  laws
and  customs  of  the  town  of  Lancaster  being  always  saved.

"  No  one  of  the  Guild  shall  wrong  the  wife  or  daughter  or  sis-
ter of  another,  nor  shall  allow  her  to  be  wronged,  so  far  as  he  can
hinder  it."

From  the  fifth  to  the  twentieth  charge,  the  regulations  princi-
pally relate  to  the  government  of  the  Craft  in  their  work.  There  is
some  difficulty  in  comparing  these  with  the  early  Craft  Guilds,  from
the  paucity  of  charters  of  the  latter  which  have  been  preserved.
But  wherever  there  are  any  points  common  to  both,  the  analogy  and
resemblance  between  the  two  is  at  once  detected.

Thus  in  the  Charter  of  the  Guild  of  Fullers  at  Lincoln,  which
Guild  was  begun  in  1297,  it  is  said  that  "none  of  the  Craft  shall
work  at  the  wooden  bar  (full  cloth),  with  a  woman,  unless  with  the
wife  of  a  Master  or  his  handmaid."

Toulmin  Smith  says  that  he  cannot  explain  this  restriction.  But
it  was  in  fact  only  an  effort  of  the  Guild  spirit  common  to  all  the
Craft  Guilds,  which  forbade  one  who  was  a  member  or  freeman  of
the  Guild  from  working  with  one  who  was  not  a  member.

The  Guild  of  the  Tailors  of  Exeter  had  an  ordinance  that  "  no
one  shall  have  a  board  or  shop  of  the  Craft  unless  free  of  the  city."
And  in  the  charter  of  the  Guild  of  Tylers  or  Poyntours  (pointers  of
walls)  of  Lincoln  it  is  said  that  "no  Tyler  or  Poyntour  shall  stay  in
the  city  unless  he  enters  the  Guild."

The  same  spirit  of  exclusiveness  is  shown  in  the  seventeenth
point  of  the  Masonic  Constitutions,  which  forbids  a  Master  or  Fel-
low from  working  with  a  Cowan,  or  one  who  was  not  a  "  Mason
Allowed,"  that  is  to  say,  one  who  has  been  admitted  into  the  frater-
nity or  Guild.

This  exclusion  from  a  participation  in  labor  of  all  who  were  not
members  of  the  sodality  was  a  regulation  common  to  all  the  Craft
Guilds,  but  was  perhaps  more  fully  developed  and  more  stringently
urged  in  the  Constitution  of  the  Masonic  Guild  than  in  those  of  any
of  the  others.      It  is  from  this  principle  of  exclusiveness  that  the

THE   EARLY   ENGLISH   MASONIC  GUILDS  587

modern  Lodges  of  Speculative  Masonry  have  derived  their  strict
regulation  of  holding  no  communication  with  Masons  who  have  not
been  "duly initiated,"  or  with  Lodges  which  have  not  been  "legally
constituted."

Contumacy,  rebellion,  or  disobedience  to  the  laws  of  the  Craft
or  of  the  Guild  was  severely  punished.  The  ordinances  of  the
Smiths'  Guild  of  Chesterfield  prescribed  that  any  brother  who  is
"  contumacious  or  sets  himself  against  the  brethren  or  gainsays  any
of  these  ordinances"  shall  be  suspended,  denounced,  and  excom-
municated.    A  similar  regulation  is  to  be  found  in  other  Guilds.

According  to  the  Landsdowne  Statutes,  a  Mason  is  required  to  be
true  to  eve^y  member  of  the  Craft,  and  to  reverence  his  elder  or  su-
perior, and  in  the  points  of  the  statutes  of  the  Masonic  Guild,  as  set
forth  in  the  Halliwell  MS.,  it  is  said  that  the  Mason  must  be  "true
and  steadfast  to  all  these  ordinances  wheresoever  he  goes."

Suits  at  law  between  the  members  were  discouraged  and  forbid-
den, except  as  a  last  resort,  in  all  the  Saxon  Guilds.

The  Shipmen's  Guild  provided  that  the  Alderman  (or  Master)
and  the  other  members  should  do  their  best  to  adjust  a  quarrel,  but
if  they  were  unable,  then  the  Alderman  should  give  them  leave  "  to
make  their  suit  at  common  law."

In  the  Guild  of  the  Holy  Cross  it  was  declared  that  no  brother
or  sister  of  the  Guild  should  go  to  law  for  a  debt  or  a  trespass  until
he  had  asked  leave  of  the  Alderman  and  of  the  men  of  the  Guild.

The  Statutes  of  the  Guild  of  St.  John  the  Baptist,  enacted  in
1374,  are  more  explicit.  There  it  is  said  that  a  member  "  cannot
sue  until  he  has  shown  his  grievance  to  the  Alderman  and  Guild
brethren  that  are  chief  of  the  Council,"  and  it  adds  that  "  the  Al-
derman and  the  Guild  brethren  shall  try  their  best  to  make  them
agree  ;  and  if  they  cannot  agree  they  may  make  their  complaint  in
what  place  they  will."

The  same  provision  is  met  with  in  all  the  Constitutions  of  the
Masonic  Guild.  The  earliest  of  them,  the  Halliwell  MS.,  pre-
scribes in  case  of  a  dispute  a  "love-day,"  or  arbitration.  The
Landsdowne  says  that  when  a  wrong  is  done  by  one  of  the  mem-
bers to  another,  the  other  Masters  and  Fellows  must  try  to  make
them  agree,  and  if  they  cannot  agree  they  may  then  "go  to  the
common  law,"  which  is  the  very  expression  used  in  the  Shipmen's
Guild  above  cited.

588  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

It  is  a  very  strong  proof  of  the  connection  between  the  early
Guilds  and  the  modern  Lodges  that  this  reluctance  to  permit  the
brethren  to  carry  their  personal  disputes  out  of  the  Craft  and  into
the  publicity  of  the  courts  was  fully  developed  in  the  "  Charges  of
the  Speculative  Masons,"  adopted  in  1723.  In  these  it  is  said,  in
the  true  spirit  of  the  old  Guilds  to  which  Speculative  Masonry  suc-
ceeded, that,  "  with  respect  to  Brothers  or  Fellows  at  law,  the  Mas-
ter and  Brethren  should  kindly  offer  their  mediation,  which  ought
to  be  thankfully  accepted  by  the  contending  brethren ;  but  if  that
submission  is  impracticable,  they  must,  however,  carry  on  their
process  or  law-suit  without  wrath  and  rancor."

It  is  needless  to  extend  these  comparisons.  Sufficient  has  been
done  to  show  that  there  is  a  close  resemblance  in  their  mode  of  or-
ganization, method  of  action,  constitution,  and  spirit  between  the
Saxon  Guilds  and  the  modern  Masonic  Lodges,  which  actually  are,
under  another  name,  only  Masonic  Guilds.  This  resemblance  indi-
cates an  historical  connection  between  the  two,  and  this  connection
may  be  more  closely  traced  through  the  civic  companies  of  London
and  other  cities  of  England.  That  these  latter  were  the  direct  off-
shoot from  the  former  is  a  fact  generally  admitted  by  writers  on  the
subject,  and  of  it  there  can  be  no  doubt.  M  In  the  Trade  Guilds,"
says  Mr.  Thorpe,  "we  may  see  the  origin  of  our  civic  companies."  !

To  these  civic  companies,  and  to  one  of  them  particularly,  the
Masons'  Company  in  Basinghall  Street,  the  reader's  attention  must
be  invited.

1  "  Diplomatarium  Anglicum  ^Evi  Saxonici,"  Preface,  p.  xvi.

CHAPTER  X

THE    LONDON    COMPANIES    AND    THE    MASONS     COMPANY

iv^BOUT  the  middle  of  the  14th  century,  perhaps
a  little  earlier,  and  in  the  reign  of  Edward  III.,
the  various  trades  began  to  be  reconstituted
under  the  name  of  Livery  Companies  and  to
change  their  name  from  Guilds  to  Crafts  and
Mysteries.  There  was,  however,  very  little  real
difference  between  their  new  and  their  old  or-
ganization, and  the  Guild  spirit  of  fraternity  remained  the  same.

There  has  been  a  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  meaning  of  the
word  "  Mystery,"  which  was  applied  to  these  companies  in  such
phrases  as  "  the  Mystery  of  the  Tailors,"  or  "  the  Mystery  of  the
Saddlers."

Herbert  says  that  the  preservation  of  their  trade-secrets  was  a
primary  ordination  of  all  the  fraternities,  and  continued  their  lead-
ing law  as  long  as  they  remained  actual  "  working  companies,"
whence  arose  the  names  of  "Mysteries"  and  "Crafts,"  by  which
they  were  for  so  many  ages  designated.1

This  derivation  is  a  reasonable  one,  especially  when  we  remem-
ber that  the  word  "  craft,"  which  was  always  associated  with  the
word  "  mystery  "  in  its  primitive  usage,  signified  art,  knowledge,  or
skill.

But  this  explanation  has  not  been  universally  accepted,  and  the
word  "  Mystery,"  in  its  application  to  a  trade  or  handicraft,  has  more
generally  been  derived  from  the  old  or  Norman  French,  where
mestilre  was  used  to  denote  a  craft,  art,  or  employment.  There
is  no  certainty,  however,  that  the  word  was  not  employed  to  denote
the  trade-secrets  of  a  Guild  or  Company,  as  Herbert  suggests.  If
mestibre  denoted,  in  old  French,  a  trade,  mestre  meant,  in  the
same  language,  a  mystery,  and  the  former  word  may  have  been  de-

1 "  History  of  the  Twelve  Great  Livery  Companies,"  vol.  i.,  p.  45 .

589

590  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

rived  from  the  latter.  But  the  modern  Masons,  in  borrowing  the
word  "  Mystery"  from  the  old  companies,  where  they  find  their  ori-
gin, undoubtedly  use  it  in  the  sense  of  something  hidden  or  con-
cealed.

The  origin  of  the  livery  and  other  companies  out  of  the  earlier
Guilds  is  a  matter  of  historical  record.

Guilds,  it  has  been  already  shown,  existed  in  England  from  a
very  early  period,  but,  as  all  tradesmen  and  artificers  did  not  belong
to  Guilds,  or,  if  they  did,  often  acted  irregularly  in  buying  and  sell-
ing a  variety  of  wares  or  working  in  different  handicrafts,  a  petition
was  presented  to  Parliament  in  the  year  1355,  in  consequence  of
which  it  was  enacted  that  all  artificers  and  "  people  of  mysteries  "
should  choose  forthwith  each  his  own  mystery,  and,  having  chosen
it,  should  thenceforth  use  no  other.

It  is  here  that  we  may  assign  the  origin  of  the  chartered  com-
panies, many  of  which  exist  to  the  present  day,  and  among  whom
we  shall  find  at  a  later  period  the  Masons'  Company,  which  was  the
direct  predecessor  of  the  Masons'  Lodges,  both  of  the  Operative  be-
fore and  the  Speculative  after  the  beginning  of  the  18th  century.

In  a  document  found  in  the  records  of  the  City  of  London,  of
the  date  of  1364,  and  which  has  been  published  by  Mr.  Herbert,1
we  find  the  names  of  the  principal,  if  not  the  whole  of  the  city  com-
panies, which  were  in  existence  in  that  year.  This  document  is  an
account,  in  Latin,  of  the  sums  received  by  the  city  chamberlain
from  those  companies  as  gifts  to  the  King,  to  aid  him  in  carrying
on  the  war  with  France.

The  list  records  the  names  of  thirty-two  companies.  Though
we  find  several  Craft  Guilds,  such  as  the  Tailors,  the  Glovers,  the
Armorers,  and  the  Goldsmiths,  there  is  no  mention  of  a  Guild  or
Company  of  Masons.  Whether  such  a  body  did  not  then  exist  as
a  chartered  company,  or  whether,  if  in  existence,  it  was  too  poor
to  make  a  contribution,  which  seems  to  have  been  a  voluntary  act,
are  questions  which  the  document  gives  us  no  means  of  deciding.

Five  years  afterward,  in  1369,  a  law  was  enacted  by  the  munici-
pal authorities  of  London,  which  must  have  tended  to  encourage
the  organization  of  these  Companies.  By  this  law  the  right  of  elec-
tion of  all  city  dignitaries,  and   all   officers,  including  members  of

1  "  History  of  the  Twelve  Great  Livery  Companies,"  vol.  i.,  p.  30.

LONDON   COMPANIES   AND   MASONS'  COMPANY      591

Parliament,  was  transferred  from  the  representatives  of  the  wards,
who  had  hitherto  exercised  this  franchise,  to  the  trading  companies.
A  few  members  of  each  of  these  were  selected  by  the  Masters  and
Wardens,  who  were  to  repair  to  Guildhall  for  election  purposes.
This  right  has  ever  since  remained,  with  some  subsequent  modifica-
tions in  the  twelve  Livery  Companies  of  London.

The  effect  of  this  law  in  increasing  the  number  of  Companies
very  speedily  showed  itself.  In  a  list  in  Norman  French  of  the
"  number  of  persons  chosen  by  the  several  mysteries  to  be  the
Common  Council "  in  the  year  1370,  it  appears  that  the  Compa-
nies had  increased  from  thirty-two  to  forty-eight.

In  this  list  we  find  the  seventeenth  to  be  the  Company  of  Free-
masons, and  the  thirty-fourth  the  Company  of  Masons.  The  former
appears  to  have  been  a  more  select,  or  at  least  a  smaller,  Company
than  the  latter,  for  while  the  Masons  sent  four  members  to  the
Common  Council  the  Freemasons  sent  only  two.  Afterward  the
two  Companies  were  merged  into  one,  that  of  the  Masons,  to  which
I  shall  hereafter  again  revert.

The  constitution  and  government  of  these  Companies  appear
to  have  been  framed  very  much  after  the  model  of  the  earlier
Guilds.

They  had  the  power  of  making  their  own  by-laws  or  ordinances,
and  of  enforcing  their  observance  among  their  members.  These
ordinances  were  called  "  Points."  The  word  is  first  used  in  the
charters  of  Edward  III.,  who  wills  that  the  said  ordinances  shall  be
kept  and  maintained  en  touz  pointz,  or  "in  all  points."  We  find
the  same  word  in  the  Constituciones  Geometric  in  the  Halliwell
MS.,  where  the  ordinances  are  divided  into  fifteen  articles  and  fif-
teen points.  It  is  also  met  with  in  all  subsequent  constitutions.
As  a  technical  term  the  word  is  preserved  in  the  Speculative  Ma-
sonry of  to-day,  whose  obligations  of  duty  are  to  be  obeyed  by  ini-
tiates into  the  fraternity  in  all  their  "arts,  parts,  and  points."  These
little  incidents  serve  to  show  the  uninterrupted  succession  of  our
modern  Lodges  from  the  early  Guilds  and  the  later  Companies
which  were  formed  out  of  them.  They  are  therefore  worthy  of
notice  in  a  history  of  the  rise  and  progress  of  Freemasonry.

It  has  been  seen  that  in  the  most  of  the  Saxon  Guilds  the  prin-
cipal officer  was  called  the  Alderman.  After  the  Guilds  were  char-
tered as  Companies,  the  chief  officers  received  the  title  of  Masters

592  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

and  Wardens,  titles  still  retained  in  the  government  of  Masonic
Lodges.

The  ordinances  required  that  there  should  be  held  four  meetings
in  every  year  to  treat  of  the  common  business  of  the  Company.
These  were  the  quarterly  meetings  to  which  reference  is  made  by  Dr.
Anderson  when,  in  his  History  of  the  Revival  of  Masonry,  in  the
year  171 7,  he  says  that  "  the  quarterly  communication  of  the  officers
of  the  Lodges"  was  revived.

The  regulation  of  apprentices  formed  an  important  part  of  the
system  pursued  by  the  Companies.  No  one  was  admitted  to  the
freedom  or  livery  of  any  Company  unless  he  had  first  served  an  ap-
prenticeship, which  was  generally  for  the  period  of  seven  years.
And  even  then  he  could  not  be  admitted  into  the  fellowship  except
with  the  consent  of  the  members.  Masters  were  not  permitted  to
take  more  than  a  certain  number  of  apprentices,  lest  the  trade  or
art  should  be  overstocked  with  workmen  and  the  journeymen  or
fellows  find  less  opportunity  for  employment.

Care  was  taken  that  one  member  should  not  undersell  another
member,  or  work  for  a  less  amount  of  pay  or  interfere  with  his  con-
tracts for  labor.  It  was  the  duty  of  the  Company  to  protect  the
interests  of  all  alike.

There  were  judicious  regulations  for  the  settlement  of  disputes
between  the  members,  so  as  to  avoid  the  necessity  of  a  resort  to
law.  The  spirit  of  the  early  Guild  was  in  this  exactly  followed.
"  If  any  debate  is  between  any  of  the  fraternity,"  says  an  ordinance
of  one  of  these  Companies,  "  for  misgovernance  of  words  or  asking
of  debt  or  any  other  things,  then  anon  the  party  plaintiff  shall  come
to  the  Master  and  tell  his  grievance  and  the  Master  shall  make  an
end  thereof."  !

To  speak  disrespectfully  of  the  Company  ;  to  strike  or  insult  a
brother  member ;  to  violate  the  regulations  for  clothing  or  dress  ;
to  employ  or  work  with  men  who  were  not  free  of  the  Company,
and  who  were  generally  designated  as  "  foreigners,"  or  to  commit
any  kind  of  fraud  in  carrying  on  the  trade  or  handicraft,  were  all
offenses  for  which  the  ordinances  provided  ample  punishment.

The  feeling  of  brotherly  love  exhibited  in  charity  to  an  indi-
gent or  distressed  member  prevailed  in  all  the  Companies.     When

1  a

Ordinances  of  the  Company  of  Grocers,"  anno  1463.

GEORGE    OLIVER.    D.D.

LONDON   COMPANIES   AND   MASONS'   COMPANY       593

a  member  became  poor  from  misfortune  or  sickness,  he  was  to  be
assisted  out  of  the  common  fund.

All  of  these  regulations  will  be  found  copied  in  the  Old  Consti-
tutions of  the  Operative  Masons,  a  fact  which  conclusively  proves
that  they  were  originally  a  Company  following  the  general  usage
which  had  been  adopted  by  the  other  Companies,  whether  Trade  or
Craft,  such  as  the  Grocers,  the  Mercers,  the  Goldsmiths,  or  the  Tai-
lors.

The  subject  of  "  Liveries  "  is  one  that  will  be  interesting  to  the
Speculative  Freemason,  from  the  rule  with  which  he  is  familiar,  that
a  Mason,  on  entering  his  Lodge,  must  be  "  properly  clothed."  The
word  "clothing"  here  indicates  the  dress  which  he  should  wear,  es-
pecially and  imperatively  including  his  "  lambskin  apron."

We  have  the  very  important  and  very  authentic  evidence  of  the
fact  that  secret  societies  existed  in  the  14th  century,  marked  by  all
the  peculiarities  we  have  seen  distinguishing  the  English  Companies.

In  the  year  1326  the  Council  of  Avignon  fulminated  what  has
been  called  the  "  Statute  of  Excommunications,"  its  title  being
"  Concerning  the  Societies,  Unions  and  Confederacies  called  Confra-
ternities, which  are  to  be  utterly  extirpated."

This  statute  is  contained  in  Hardouin's  immense  collection  of  the
arts  of  Councils.1  The  following  is  a  part  of  the  preamble,  and  it
shows  very  clearly  that  the  Church  at  that  time  recognized  and  con-
demned the  existence  of  those  Guilds,  Companies,  or  Societies  for
mutual  help,  some  of  which  were  the  precursors  of  the  modern  Ma-
sonic Lodges,  against  which  the  Romish  Church  exhibits  the  same
hostility.

The  statute  passed  at  Avignon  commences  as  follows :

M  Whereas,  in  certain  parts  of  our  provinces,  noblemen  for  the
most  part,  and  sometimes  other  persons  have  established  unions,
societies  and  confederacies,  which  are  interdicted  by  the  canon  as
well  as  by  the  municipal  laws,  who  congregate  in  some  place  once  a
year,  under  the  name  of  a  confraternity,  and  there  establish  assem
blies  and  unions  and  enter  into  a  compact  confirmed  by  an  oath  that
they  will  mutually  aid  each  other  against  all  persons  whomsoever,
their  own  lords  excepted,   and  in  every  case,  that  each  one  will

1  "  Acta  Conciliorum  et  Epistolae  Decretales  ae  Constitutiones  Summorum  Pontifi*
cum,"  Paris,  1714,  tome  vii ,  p.  1,507.

38

594  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

give  to  another,  help,  counsel  and  favor ;  and  sometimes  all  wear*
ing  a  similar  dress  with  certain  curious  signs  or  marks,  they  elect
one  of  their  number  as  chief  to  whom  they  swear  obedience  in  all
things."

The  decree  then  proceeds  to  denounce  these  confraternities,  and
to  forbid  all  persons  to  have  any  connection  with  them  under  the
penalty  of  excommunication.  And  here  again  is  a  pointed  refer-
ence to  the  subject  of  livery :

11  They  shall  not  institute  confraternities  of  this  kind  ;  one  shall
not  give  obedience  nor  afford  assistance  or  favor  to  another ;  nor
shall  they  wear  clothing  which  exhibits  the  signs  or  marks  of  the
condemned  thing."

That  the  mediaeval  Masons  wore  a  particular  dress  when  at
work,  which  was  the  same  in  all  countries,  is  evident  from  the
plates  in  several  illuminated  manuscripts  from  the  ioth  to  the  16th
centuries,  copies  of  which  have  been  inserted  by  Mr.  Wright  in  his
essay  on  mediaeval  architecture.1  The  dress  of  the  Masons  in  all
these  plates,  whether  in  England,  in  France,  or  in  Italy,  is  similar.
"  In  reviewing  and  comparing  these  various  representations,"  says
Mr.  Wright,  "  of  the  same  process  at  so  widely  distinct  periods,  we
are  struck  much  less  with  their  diversity  than  with  the  close  resem-
blance between  both  workmen  and  tools,  which  continues  amid  the
continual,  and  sometimes  rapid,  changes  in  the  condition  and  man-
ners of  society.  Whether  this  be  in  any  measure  to.be  attributed  to
the  circumstance  of  the  Masons  forming  a  permanent  society  among
themselves,  which  transmitted  its  doctrines  and  fashions  unchanged
from  father  to  son,  it  is  not  very  easy  to  determine."2

The  question  is  not,  however,  of  so  difficult  a  solution  as  Mr.
Wright  supposes,  when  we  see  that  every  Guild  or  Company  of
tradesmen  or  artificers  had  its  form  of  dress  peculiar  to  itself,  which
was  called  its  "livery."  The  Masons,  as  a  Company,  followed  the
usage  and  adopted  their  own  livery  or  clothing.  The  modern  Specu-
lative Masons  preserve  the  memory  of  the  usage  by  declaring  that
none  shall  enter  a  Lodge  or  join  in  its  labors  unless  he  is  "  properly
clothed  ;  "  that  is,  wears  the  livery  of  the  fraternity.

According  to  the  authority  of  Stow,  in  his  Survey  of  London,
liveries  are  not  mentioned  as  having  been  worn  before  the  reign  of

^'Essays  on  Archaeological  Subjects,"  vol.  ii.,  pp.  129-250.  a  Ibid.,  p.  136.

LONDON   COMPANIES   AND   MASONS'   COMPANY     595

Edward  I.,  or  about  the  beginning  of  the  14th  century.  That  is,
they  were  then  first  licensed  at  that  time  or  mentioned  in  the  char-
ters of  the  Companies,  but  he  admits  that  they  had  assumed  them
before  that  time  without  such  authority.  And  this  is  confirmed  by
the  illuminated  manuscripts  to  which  allusion  has  been  made  above,
which  show  that  the  Masons  used  a  particular  clothing  as  far  back
as  the  10th  century.

In  the  "  Statute  of  Excommunications,"  passed  in  the  beginning
of  the  14th  century  by  the  Council  of  Avignon,  societies  or  con-
fraternities are  denounced  which  had  been  established  for  mutual
aid,  and  which  are  described  as  "all  wearing  a  similar  dress  with
certain  curious  signs  or  marks."

About  the  middle  of  the  14th  century  there  began  a  separation
between  the  wealthier  and  the  more  indigent  Companies,  which
ended  after  a  long  contention  in  the  exclusion  from  the  municipal
government  of  all  except  what  are  now  called  "The  Twelve  Great
Livery  Companies,"  namely,  the  Companies  of  Mercers,  Grocers,
Drapers,  Fishmongers,  Goldsmiths,  Skinners,  Merchant  Tailors,
Haberdashers,  Salters,  Ironmongers,  Vintners,  and  Clothworkers.
These  Companies,  as  distinguished  by  wealth,  by  political  power
and  commercial  importance  from  the  minor  Companies,  which  were
often  only  voluntary  associations  of  men  of  the  same  trade  or  craft,
were  called  the  "substantial  companies,"  the  "principal  crafts,"  the
"  chief  mysteries,"  and  other  similar  titles  which  were  intended  to
imply  their  superiority,  though  many  of  the  so-called  "  minor  com-
panies," as  the  weavers  and  bakers,  were  really  of  greater  antiquity,
of  more  public  utility  and  importance.

Among  these  "  minor  companies,"  the  one  of  especial  im-
portance to  the  present  inquiry  is  the  "  Masons'  Company."

Of  this  Company,  Stow  gives  the  following  account  in  his  Sur-
vey of  London  :

"  The  Masons,  otherwise  termed  free  masons,  were  a  society  of
ancient  standing  and  good  reckoning,  by  means  of  affable  and  kind
meetings  divers  times  and  as  a  loving  brotherhood  should  use  to  do,
did  frequent  their  mutual  assemblies  in  the  time  of  King  Henry  IV.
in  the  12th  year  of  whose  most  gracious  reign  they  were  incor-
porated."

A  fuller  account  of  the  Company  is  given  by  Chiswell  in  the
New  View  of  London,  printed  in  1708,  in  the  following  words  :

596  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

"Masons'  Company  was  incorporated  about  the  year  1410,
having  been  called  the  Free  Masons,  a  fraternity  of  great  account,
who  have  been  honored  by  several  Kings,  and  very  many  of  the
Nobility  and  Gentry  being  of  their  Society.  They  are  governed
by  a  Master,  2  Wardens,  25  Assistants,  and  there  are  65  on  the
Livery.

"Their  armorial  ensigns  are,  Azure,  on  a  Chevron  Argent,  be-
tween 3  Castles  Argent,  a  pair  of  Compasses,  somewhat  extended,
of  the  first  Crest,  a  Castle  of  the  2nd."1

The  Hall  of  the  Company,  in  which  they  held  their  meetings,
was  "  situated  in  Masons  Ally  in  Basinghall  street  as  you  pass  to
Coleman  street."3

Maitland,  who  published  his  London  and  its  Environs  in  1761,
gives  a  later  date  for  the  charter.  He  says  that  "  this  Company  had
their  arms  granted  by  Clarencieux,  King-at-Arms  in  1477,  though
the  members  were  not  incorporated  by  letters  patent  till  they  ob-
tained them  from  King  Charles  II.  in  1677."  3

The  conflict  in  dates  between  Stow,  with  whom  Chiswell  agrees,
and  Maitland,  the  former  ascribing  the  charter  of  the  Company  to
Henry  IV.,  in  1410,  and  the  latter  to  Charles  II.,  in  1677,  may  be
reconciled  by  supposing  that  the  original  charter  of  Henry  was  sub-
mitted to  a  review  and  confirmation,  which  was  technically  called  an
"  inspeximus,"  an  act  which  we  constantly  meet  with  in  old  charters.
In  other  words,  the  Masons  first  received  a  charter  for  their  Com-
pany from  Henry  IV.  in  14 10,  which  charter  was  confirmed  by
Charles  II.  in  1677.

These  Companies  of  traders  and  craftsmen  were  not  confined  to
London,  but  were  to  be  found  in  other  cities.  The  Masons,  how-
ever, do  not  appear  to  have  always  maintained  a  separate  organiza-
tion, but  seem  sometimes  to  have  united  with  other  craftsmen.
Thus  among  the  thirteen  Companies  which  were  incorporated  in  the
city  of  Exeter,  the  thirteenth  consisted  of  the  Painters,  Joiners,  Car-
penters, Masons,  and  Glaziers,  who  were  jointly  incorporated  into  a
Company  in  1602.  It  may  be  remarked  that  all  of  these  crafts  were
connected  in  the  employment  of  building.  Each,  however,  had
its  separate  arms,  that  of  the  Masons  being  described  by  Izacke  in

l"  New  View  of  London,"  vol.  ii.,  p.  61 1.  8  Ibid,

3  "  London  and  its  Environs,"  vol.  iv.,  p.  304.

LONDON  COMPANIES   AND   MASONS'  COMPANY     597

his  Antiquities  of  Exeter  thus :  "  Sable,  on  a  chevron  between  3
towers  argent,  a  pair  of  Compasses,  dilated  Sable."  '

This  will  be  an  appropriate  place  to  examine  this  subject  of  the
Masonic  Arms  as  historically  connecting  the  Operative  Craft  with
the  Speculative  Grand  Lodge.

According  to  Stow,  the  Arms  of  the  "  Craft  and  Fellowship  of
Masons  "  of  London  were  granted  to  them  by  William  Hawkeslowe,
Clarencieux  King-of-Arms  in  the  twelfth  year  of  Edward  IV.,  that
is,  in  1473,  and  were  subsequently  confirmed  by  Thomas  Benott,
Clarencieux  King-of-Arms  in  the  twelfth  year  of  Henry  VIII.,  or  in
1 52 1.  These  arms,  which  are  blazoned  in  the  original  grant,  now  in
the  British  Museum,  are  as  follows  :  "  Sable,  on  a  chevron,  engrailed
argent  between  3  castles  of  the  second,  with  doors  and  windows
of  the  field,  a  pair  of  compasses  extended  of  the  first."  Translating
the  technical  language  of  heraldry,  the  arms  may  be  plainly  de-
scribed as  a  silver  or  white  scalloped  chevron,  between  three  white
castles  with  black  doors  and  windows  on  a  black  field,  and  on  the
chevron  a  pair  of  compasses  of  a  black  color.  Woodford  says  that
these  arms  are  supposed  to  have  been  adopted  by  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Speculative  Masons  in  171 7.  Kloss  gives  the  same  arms,  except
that  the  chevron  is  not  scalloped  (engrailed),  but  plain,  as  the  seal
of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  in  1 743  and  in  1 767.  The  arms
adopted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  at  the  union  in  181 3,  and
still  used,  consist  of  a  combination  of  the  old  Operative  arms  (the
colors  being,  however,  changed)  with  those  of  the  Athol  Grand
Lodge,  which  are  impaled.  But  as  the  latter  arms  were  most  prob-
ably an  invention  of  Dermott,  they  are  of  no  historical  value.

From  all  this  we  see,  so  far  as  heraldry  throws  a  light  on  history,
that  the  English  Speculative  Masons  have  to  the  present  day
claimed  to  deduce  their  origin  from  the  Operative  Masons  who
were  incorporated  as  a  Company  in  the  15th  century.  They  claimed
to  be  their  heirs,  and  according  to  the  law  of  heraldry  assumed  their
arms.

To  resume  the  subject  of  the  Masons'  Companies,  we  have  no
records  of  the  existence  of  those  organizations  under  that  name  in
more  than  a  few  places  in  England.

1  "  Remarkable  Antiquities  of  the  City  of  Exeter."     By  Richard  Izacke,  heretofore
chamberlain  thereof.     Second  edition,  London,  1724,  p.  68.

598  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

But  the  Masons  seem  often  to  combine  with  other  Guilds  for
purposes  of  convenience.  Several  instances  of  this  kind  occur  in
old  records,  as  in  an  appendix  to  the  charter  of  the  Guild  of  Car-
penters of  Norwich,  begun  in  1375,  where  it  is  stated  that  "  Robert
of  Elfynghem,  Masoun,  and  certeyn  Masouns  of  Norwiche"  had
contributed  two  torches  or  lights  for  the  altar  of  Christ's  Church  at
Norwich.  Now,  as  that  church  was  the  place  where  the  Carpenters'
Guild  celebrated  their  mass,  and  as  the  fact  of  the  contribution  is
noted  in  their  charter,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  Masons,
having  no  Guild  or  Company  of  their  own  in  Norwich,  had  united
in  religious  services  with  the  carpenters.

The  impossibility  of  obtaining  any  continuous  narrative  of  the
transactions  of  the  Masons'  Company,  which  was  one  of  the  forty
companies  of  London  mentioned  by  Stow,  must  render  many  of
the  deductions  which  may  be  drawn  from  certain  portions  of  the
Harleian  MS.  altogether  conjectural.  The  probability  or  correct-
ness of  the  conjecture  will  have  to  be  determined  by  the  reason  and
judgment  of  the  reader.

The  Masonic  public  has  in  its  possession  at  this  day,  and  easily
accessible  by  any  student,  some  twenty  or  thirty  documents  printed
from  manuscripts  ranging  in  date  from  the  end  of  the  14th  to  the
beginning  of  the  18th  century.  These  documents  are  usually  denom-
inated "  Masonic  Constitutions."  A  very  few  of  them  were  known
to  Dr.  Anderson,  and  he  has  given  inaccurate  quotations  from  them
in  both  of  his  editions  of  the  Book  of  Constitutions.  But  for  the
greater  number,  new  until  a  recent  period,  to  the  world,  we  are  in-
debted to  the  researches  of  Masonic  archaeologists,  by  whose  unpaid
industry  they  have  been  unearthed,  as  we  may  say,  from  the  shelves
of  the  British  Museum,  from  the  archives  of  old  Lodges,  or  from
the  libraries  of  private  collectors.

But  though  we  possess  transcripts  of  these  Constitutions  cor-
rectly made  from  the  original  manuscripts,  there  is  nothing  on  rec-
ord to  tell  us  by  whom  they  were  written,  nor  under  what  authority.
Internal  evidence  alone  assures  that  they  are  all,  except  the  first
two,  copies  of  some  original  not  yet  found,  and  that  they  contain
the  legend  or  traditionary  history  of  Freemasonry  which  was  believed
and  the  laws  and  regulations  which  were  obeyed  by  the  Operative
Masons  who  lived  from  the  15th  to  the  18th  century,  if  not  some
centuries  before.

LONDON   COMPANIES   AND    MASONS'   COMPANY     599

To  make  any  conjecture  as  to  the  source  whence  they  have  em-
anated and  for  what  purpose  they  were  written,  we  must  recapitu-
late what  little  we  know  of  the  history  of  the  Masons'  Company  of
London.

The  Masons'  Company  was  incorporated,  according  to  Chiswell,
in  the  year  1410,  or  thereabouts,  by  King  Henry  IV.,  which  charter
was  renewed  by  Charles  II.  in  1677,  I  suppose  by  an  " insfteximus"
or  confirmation  of  the  original  charter,  as  was  usual.

But  we  know  from  the  list  contained  in  the  records  of  the  city
of  London,  and  published  by  Herbert,  which  has  already  been  re-
ferred to,  that  in  the  year  1379,  in  the  reign  of  Edward  III.,  there
were  in  London  a  company  of  Freemasons  and  a  company  of  Ma-
sons, the  former  of  which  sent  two  and  the  latter  four  members  to
the  Common  Council  of  the  city.  These  two  were  wholly  distinct
from  each  other,  but  Stow  tells  us  that  at  a  subsequent  period  they
united  together  and  were  merged  into  one  Company.

What  was  the  difference  between  these  two  Companies,  is  a  ques-
tion that  will  naturally  be  asked,  and  which  can  not  very  easily  be
answered.

My  own  conjecture,  and  it  is  merely  a  conjecture,  though  I  think
not  an  unplausible  one,  is  that  the  Company  of  Freemasons  was  the
representative  in  England  of  that  body  of  Traveling  Freemasons  who
had  spread,  under  the  auspices  of  the  Church,  over  every  country
of  Europe,  and  whose  history  will  constitute  hereafter  an  important
portion  of  the  present  work  ;  while  the  Company  of  Masons  was
the  representative  of  the  general  body  of  the  Craft  in  the  kingdom,
who  had  formed  themselves  into  a  Guild,  Company,  or  Sodality,
just  as  the  Mercers,  the  Grocers,  the  Tailors,  the  Painters,  and  other
tradesmen  and  mechanics  had  done  at  the  same  period.  The  two
companies  were,  however,  afterward  merged  into  one,  which  retained
the  title  of  "  The  Company  of  Masons."

Each  of  the  Trade  and  Craft  Guilds  or  Companies  kept  a  book
in  which  was  contained  its  ordinances  and  a  record  of  its  transac-
tions. The  language  of  these  books  was  at  first  the  Norman-French  ;
sometimes,  says  Herbert,  intermixed  with  abbreviated  Latin,  or  the
old  English  of  Chaucer's  day.  Afterward,  during  the  reign  of
Henry  V.,  and  by  his  influence,  the  ordinances  were  translated  into
the  vernacular  language  of  the  period,  and  the  books  of  the  Com-
panies were  thereafter  kept  in  English.

6oo  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

We  find  just  such  changes  in  the  dialect  of  the  old  Masonic
Constitutions  from  the  archaic  and,  to  unused  ears,  almost  unintelli-
gible style  of  the  Halliwell  poem  to  the  modern  English  of  the  later
manuscripts.

If  the  Masons'  Company  had  had  an  historian  like  Herbert,  who
would  have  given  a  detailed  history  of  its  transactions  from  its  ori-
gin, as  he  has  done  in  respect  to  the  twelve  Livery  Companies  of
London,  we  should,  I  think,  have  had  no  difficulty  in  defining  the
true  character  of  the  Old  Constitutions.  Many  heroes  have  lived
before  Agamemnon,  but  they  have  died  unwept  because  they  had
no  divine  poet  to  record  their  deeds.1  So,  too,  we  are  left  to  dark
conjecture  in  almost  all  that  relates  to  the  early  history  of  the  Ma-
sonic Craft  in  their  primary  Guild-life,  for  want  of  an  authentic
chronicler.

It  may,  however,  be  assumed,  as  a  more  than  plausible  conject-
ure, that  there  must  have  been  for  the  Masons'  Company  a  book  of
records  and  of  their  ordinances,  just  as  there  were  for  the  other
Trade  and  Craft  Companies.

Indeed,  Dr.  Anderson  says,  in  his  second  edition,  that  "  the
Freemasons  had  always  a  book  in  manuscript  called  the  Book  of
Constitutions  (of  which  they  had  several  very  ancient  copies  re-
maining), containing  not  only  their  Charges  and  Regulations,  but
also  the  history  of  architecture  from  the  beginning  of  time."

Dr.  Plot,  also,  in  his  Natural  History  of  Staffordshire,  tells  us
that  the  society  of  Freemasons  "  had  a  large  parchment  volume
amongst  them  containing  the  history  and  rules  of  the  craft  of  Ma-
sonry." And  the  contents  of  that  volume,  as  he  describes  them,
accord  very  accurately  with  what  is  contained  in  the  Old  Constitu-
tions that  are  now  extant.

We  have,  then,  good  reason  to  believe  that  the  manuscript  Con-
stitutions, which  consist  of  the  Legend  of  the  Craft  and  the  statutes
or  Ordinances  of  the  Guild,  are  all  copies  of  an  original  contained  in
the  archives  of  the  Company,  and  which  original  Anderson  says  was
called  the  Book  of  Constitutions.

It  is  not  necessary  that  we  should  contend  that  the  title  given  by
Anderson  is  the  right  one,  or  that  he  had  authority  for  the  state-
ment    It  is  sufficient  to  believe  that  there  was  a  book  in  the  ar-

,  -        ,       .  , ,,  ,  ,  ■■ii.  -■-*

1  Horace,  Carm.,  lib.  iv.,  9.

LONDON   COMPANIES  AND   MASONS'  COMPANY    601

chives  of  the  Masons'  Company,  as  there  was  a  similar  book  in  the
archives  of  the  other  Companies,  and  that  the  manuscript  Constitu-
tions, as  we  now  have  them,  were  copied  at  various  times  and  by
different  persons  from  that  book.

But  it  must  be  evident,  to  anyone  who  will  carefully  collate  these
manuscripts,  that  there  must  have  been  two  originals  at  least.  The
Legend  of  the  Craft  and  the  set  of  ordinances  differ  so  materially  in
the  Halliwell  poem  from  those  in  the  later  manuscript  as  to  indicate
very  clearly  that  the  latter  could  not  have  been  copied  from  the
former,  but  must  have  been  derived  from  some  other  original.

Now,  in  1 410  there  were,  according  to  the  catalogue  given  by
Herbert  from  the  London  records,  two  distinct  Companies,  that  of
the  Freemasons  and  that  of  the  Masons.  It  is  very  reasonable  to
conclude  that  each  of  these  Companies  had  a  Book  of  Constitutions
of  its  own.  If  so,  the  Halliwell  Constitutions  may  have  found  their
original  in  the  Company  of  Freemasons,  and  the  later  manuscripts,
so  unlike  it  in  form  and  substance,  may  have  had  their  original  in
the  Company  of  Masons.

If,  as  Findal  and  some  others  have  supposed,  the  Halliwell  Con-
stitution was  of  German  or  Continental  origin,  the  invocation  to  the
Four  Crowned  Martyrs  leading  to  that  supposition,  then  the  fact
that  this  manuscript  of  Halliwell  was  copied  from  the  Book  of  Con-
stitutions of  the  Company  of  Freemasons  would  give  color  to  the
hypothesis  which  I  have  advanced,  that  the  Company  of  Freemasons,
as  distinguished  from  that  of  the  Masons  in  the  year  14 10,  was  an
offshoot  from  the  sodality  of  Traveling  Freemasons,  who,  at  an
earlier  period,  sprang  from  the  school  of  Como  in  Lombardy.

A  new  charter,  or  rather,  as  I  suppose,  a  confirmation  of  the  old
one,  was  granted  to  the  Masons'  Company  in  1677  by  King  Charles
II.  About  this  time  we  might  look  for  some  changes  in  the  long-
used  Book  of  Constitutions  of  the  old  Masons'  Company,  which  had
been  incorporated  in  1410,  and  of  which  the  earlier  manuscripts,  from
the  Landsdowne  to  the  Sloane,  are  exemplars.

Now,  just  such  changes  are  to  be  found  in  the  Harleian
MS.,  which  has  been  conjecturally  assigned  to  the  approximate
date  of  1670.  An  examination  of  this  manuscript  will  show  that  it
materially  differs  in  several  important  points  from  all  those  that  pre-
ceded it.  Besides  the  old  ordinances,  which  are  much  like  those  in
the  preceding  manuscripts,   but  couched   in.  somewhat  better  Ian-

602  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

guage,  there  are  in  the  Harleian  MS.  fifteen  "  new  articles,"  as  rec-
ognizing for  the  first  time  a  distinction  between  the  Company  and
the  Lodges.

Article  30,  which  is  the  fifth  of  the  new  articles,  is  in  the  follow-
ing words  :

"  That  for  the  future  the  said  Society,  Company,  and  Fraternity
of  Free  Masons  shall  be  regulated  and  governed  by  one  Master  and
Assembly  and  Wardens  as  the  said  Company  shall  think  fit  to
choose  at  every  yearly  General  Assembly."

There  are  several  points  in  this  article  which  are  worthy  of  at-
tention, as  throwing  light  on  the  condition  of  the  fraternity  at  that
time.

1  st.  The  words  for  the  future  imply  that  there  was  a  change
then  made  in  the  government  of  the  Society,  which  must  have  been
different  in  former  times.

2d.  The  use  of  the  word  Company  shows  that  these  regulations,
or  "new  articles,"  were  not  for  the  government  of  Lodges  only,  but
for  the  whole  Company  of  Masons.  The  existence  of  the  Masons'
Company  is  here  for  the  first  time  recognized  in  actual  words.

3d.  The  word  "  Assembly "  is  entirely  without  meaning  in  its
present  location,  or  if  there  is  any  meaning  it  is  an  absurd  one.  It
can  not  be  supposed  that  the  Company  at  a  General  Assembly  would
choose  an  Assembly  to  govern  it.  Doubtless  this  is  a  careless  tran-
scription of  the  original  by  a  copyist,  who  has  written  "Assembly"
instead  of  "  Assistants."  In  the  charters  of  the  other  Companies
we  frequently  see  the  provision  that  besides  the  Master  and  Warden
a  certain  number  of  "Assistants"  shall  be  appointed  out  of  the
Guild,  to  aid  the  former  officers  by  their  counsel  and  advice.  For
instance,  in  a  charter  of  the  Drapers'  Company,  after  providing  for
the  election  of  a  Master  and  four  Wardens,  it  is  added  that  there
may  and  shall  be  constituted  and  appointed  certain  others  of  the
Guild  "  who  shall  be  named  assistants  of  the  Guild  or  fraternity
aforesaid,  and  from  that  time  they  shall  be  assisting  and  aiding  to
the  Master  and  Wardens  in  the  causes,  matters,  business,  and  things
whatsoever  touching  or  concerning  the  said  Masters  and  Wardens."

Now,  as  assistants  formed  no  part  of  the  government  of  a
Lodge,  but  were  common  in  the   Livery  Companies,  it  is  evident

*See  the  Charter  in  Herbert's  "  Twelve  Great  Livery  Companies,"  vol.  i.,  p.  487.

LONDON  COMPANIES  AND   MASONS*  COMPANY    603

that  the  article  under  consideration,  and  therefore  that  the  Harleian
MS.,  in  which  it  is  contained,  were  copied  from  the  Book  of  the
Masons'  Company.

4th.  This  article  decides  the  fact  that  there  was  at  that  day  a
"  yearly  assembly  "  of  the  Company.  We  are  not,  however,  to  infer
that  this  "yearly  assembly  "  of  the  Masons'  Company  constituted,  as
some  of  our  earlier  histories  have  supposed,  a  Grand  Lodge.  If  so,
as  the  Master  of  the  Company  must  necessarily  have  presided  over
the  General  Assembly,  he  would  have  been  its  Grand  Master,  and
as  there  were  other  Masons'  Companies  in  other  parts  of  England,
there  would  have  been  several  Grand  Lodges  as  well  as  several
Grand  Masters,  all  of  which  is  unsupported  by  any  historical  au-
thority. Indeed,  neither  the  words  "  Grand  Master  "  nor  "  Grand
Lodge  "  are  to  be  met  with  in  any  of  the  Old  Constitutions,  from
the  H  alii  well  MS.  onward  to  the  latest.  Both  titles  seem  to  have
come  into  use  at  the  time  of  what  is  called  the  Revival,  in  171 7,  and
not  before.

There  are  some  other  articles  in  this  Harleian  MS.  that  are
worthy  of  attention,  as  showing  the  condition  and  the  usages  of
the  Craft  in  the  1 7th  century,  and  which  will  be  again  referred  to
when  that  subject  is  under  consideration  in  a  subsequent  chapter.

CHAPTER  XI

THE    GENERAL    ASSEMBLIES    AND    THE    LODGES   OF    MEDLEVAL    MASONS

IHERE  were  two  conditions  of  the  Craft  in  the
period  embraced  between  the  14th  and  17th
centuries  which  are  peculiarly  worth  the  notice
of  the  student  of  Masonic  history.  These  are
the  General  Assembly  of  the  Craft  at  stated
periods,  and  their  more  customary  meetings  in
Lodges.

It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  early  records  of  English  Masonry
furnish  but  the  slightest  and  most  unsatisfactory  accounts  of  the
transactions  of  either  of  these  bodies,  so  that  most  of  our  informa-
tion on  this  subject  is  merely  conjectural.

"  We  possess,"  says  Mr.  Halliwell,  "  no  series  of  documents,  nor
even  an  approach  to  a  series,  sufficiently  extensive  to  enable  us  to
form  any  connected  history  of  the  ancient  institutions  of  Masons
and  Freemasons.  We  have,  in  fact,  no  materials  by  which  we  can
form  any  definite  idea  of  the  precise  nature  of  those  early  societies." 1
This  is  very  true,  and  the  historian  finds  himself  impeded  in
every  step  of  his  labor  in  tracing  the  early  progress  of  the  institution.
"We  must  therefore,"  as  he  continues  to  observe,  "rest  con-
tented with  the  light  which  a  few  incidental  notices  and  accidental
accounts,  far  from  being  altogether  capable  of  unsuspected  reliance,
afford  us."

In  the  forty  years  which  have  elapsed  since  this  passage  was
written,  the  energetic  industry  of  Masonic  archaeologists  has
brought  to  light  many  old  records  which  are  "  of  unsuspected  reli-
ance," which,  though  still  too  few  to  form  a  complete  series  of  historic
stages,  will  enable  us  to  understand  better  than  we  did  a  half  century
ago  the  real  condition  of  the  Masonic  sodalities  in  the  Middle
Ages.  Had  these  records  been  in  Mr.  Halliwell's  possession  when
he  presented  the  first  of  them  as  a  valuable  contribution  to  Ma-

1  "  Society  of  Antiquaries,"  April  18,  1839,  p.  444.

604

THE   LODGES   OF   MEDIAEVAL   MASONS  605

sonic  history,  he  would  hardly  have  erred  as  he  did  in  his  belief  of
the  truth  of  the  Prince  Edwin  story,  or  of  the  authenticity  of  the
Leland  MS.

As  the  geologist  has  been  enabled  to  trace  the  gradual  changes
in  the  earth's  surface,  and  in  the  character  of  its  living  inhabitants
at  the  remotest  period,  by  the  fossil  which  he  finds  embedded  in  its
early  strata,  or  as  the  anthropologist  learns  the  true  character  of
prehistoric  man  from  the  stone  and  bronze  implements  that  he  has
discovered  in  ancient  caves  and  mounds,  so  the  archaeologist  can
form  a  very  correct  notion  of  the  state  of  mediaeval  Freemasonry
from  the  scattered  records  of  that  period,  which,  long  preserved  in
the  obscurity  of  neglected  archives  or  in  the  vast  collections  of  the
British  Museum,  have  at  length  been  published  to  the  world,  to  form
the  authentic  materials  of  a  Masonic  history.

They  confirm  many  statements  hitherto  supposed  to  be  without
authority,  and  enable  us  by  their  silence  to  reject  much  that  has
been  fancifully  presented  as  authentic.

Thus  in  the  manuscript  which  was  discovered  and  published  by
Mr.  Halliwell,  and  which  he  very  correctly  considered  to  be  the
earliest  document  yet  brought  forward  connected  with  the  progress
of  Freemasonry  in  Great  Britain,  we  may  learn  that  at  least  as  early
as  toward  the  end  of  the  14th  century  the  Masons  met  on  specified
occasions  and  under  certain  rules  and  regulations  in  a  body  which
they  called  the  "  Congregation  "  or  the  "  Assembly."  Of  this  there
can  not  be  the  slightest  doubt,  since  the  genuineness  of  the  Halliwell
poem  is  universally  recognized  as  having  been  written  between  the
years  1350  and  1400,  and  as  containing  an  authentic  account  of  the
condition  of  the  Craft  at  that  period.

In  the  second  article  of  the  Constitutions  contained  in  this  work
it  is  said  that  "every  Mason  who  is  a  Master,  must  be  at  the  general
congregation  if  he  is  informed  in  sufficient  time  where  that  assembly
is  to  be  holden,  unless  he  should  have  a  reasonable  excuse."1

*"That  every  Mayster  that  ys  a  mason
Most  ben  at  the  generale  congregacyon,
So  that  he  hyt  resonably  y-tolde
Where  that  the  semble  schal  be  holde  ;
And  to  that  semble  he  most  nede  gon
But  he  have  a  resenabul  skwsacyon."

Halliwell  MS. ,  lines  107-112,

606  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

I  have  spared  the  reader  the  archaic  and,  to  most  persons,  unin-
telligible language,  but  have  given  the  true  meaning  in  the  transla-
tion, and  append  the  original  in  a  marginal  note.

From  this  law  it  would  appear  that  in  the  14th  century  it  was
the  usage  of  Master  Masons  to  assemble  from  various  parts  of  the
country  for  purposes  connected  with  the  business  or  interests  of  the
Craft.

In  the  Cooke  MS.,  whose  date  is  at  least  an  hundred  years  later,
the  writer  gives  an  account  of  the  origin  of  this  custom.  It  arose,
he  says,  in  the  time  of  King  Athelstan,  who  ordained  that  annually,
or  every  three  years,  all  Master  Masons  and  Fellows  should  come
up  from  every  province  and  country  to  congregations,  where  the
Masters  should  be  examined  in  the  laws  of  the  Craft,  and  their  skill
and  knowledge  in  their  profession  be  investigated,  and  where  they
should  receive  charges  for  their  future  conduct.

As  this,  however,  is  a  mere  tradition,  founded  on  the  legend  of
Athelstan's,  or  rather  Prince  Edwin's,  Assembly  of  Masons  at  York,
it  can  not  be  accepted  as  a  foundation  for  any  historical  statement.

But  in  the  same  manuscript  we  find  the  evidence  that  it  was  the
custom  of  Masters  coming  from  their  Lodges  or  places  where  they
worked  with  the  Fellows  under  them,  and  their  Apprentices,  to
some  sort  of  gathering  which  was  presided  over  by  one  of  the  Mas-
ters as  the  principal  or  chief  of  the  meeting.  It  is  the  second  ar-
ticle of  the  Constitutions,  according  to  the  Cooke  MS.,  which  is  in
the  following  words.  I  again  translate  the  archaic  language  into
modern  English.

"  That  every  Master  should  be  previously  warned  to  come  to  his
congregation,  that  he  may  come  in  due  time  unless  excused  for
some  reason.  But  those  who  had  been  disobedient  at  such  congre-
gations, or  been  false  to  their  employers,  or  had  acted  so  as  to  de-
serve reproof  of  the  Craft,  could  be  excused  only  by  extreme  sick,
ness,  of  which  notice  was  to  be  given  to  the  Master  that  is  princi
pal  of  the  assembly."  '

I  say  that  this  is  evidence  that  in  the  latter  part  of  the  15th
century,  which  is  the  date  of  the  manuscript,  the  custom  did  exist
of  several  Masters  assembling  from  different  points  for  purposes  of
consultation,  because  a  law  would  hardly  be  enacted  for  the  due  ob-

1"  Cooke  MS.,"  lines  740-755.

THE   LODGES   OF   MEDIAEVAL   MASONS  607

servance  of  a  certain  custom  unless  that  custom  had  a  substantial  ex-
istence. This  is  not  a  tradition  or  legend,  but  the  statement  in  a
manuscript  constitution  of  the  existence  of  a  law.  The  manuscript
is  admitted  to  be  genuine.  That  it  tells  us  what  were  the  regula-
tions of  the  Craft  that  were  in  force  when  it  was  written  is  not  de-
nied. And  therefore,  as  it  gives  us  the  rules  that  were  to  govern
Masters  in  their  attendance  upon  an  assembly  or  congregation  of
Masters,  we  must  recognize  the  historical  fact  that  at  that  time  such
assemblies  or  congregations  did  exist  among  the  Craft  of  Masons.

These  assemblies  were  probably  extemporary,  or  called  at  un-
certain times,  as  necessity  required.  If  they  were  held  at  stated  and
regular  periods,  it  would  hardly  have  been  required  that  a  Master
must  have  received  previous  notice  to  render  him  amenable  to  pun-
ishment for  non-attendance.  This  would  also  lead  us  to  presume
that  there  was  some  person  in  whom,  by  general  concurrence,  was
vested  the  authority  to  designate  the  time  of  meeting,  and  whose
duty  it  was  to  give  the  necessary  warning.  And  it  would  seem  that
this  person  must  have  been  the  one  to  whom  excuses  were  to  be
rendered,  and  who  is  styled,  in  the  quaint  language  of  the  manuscript,
"pryncipall  of  that  gederyng."

What  was  the  circuit  within  which  the  jurisdiction  of  such  an
assembly  extended,  or  what  was  the  distance  from  which  Master
Masons  were  expected  to  repair  to  it,  we  must  learn  from  later
manuscript  Constitutions,  for  the  Cooke  MS.  leaves  us  in  ignorance
on  the  subject.  It  tells  us  only  that  assemblies  were  occasionally
held,  but  says  nothing  of  the  number  of  representatives  who  con-
stituted them  nor  of  the  circuit  of  country  which  they  governed.

This  is,  however,  determined  by  the  later  Constitutions.  In
the  Landsdowne  MS.,  whose  date  is  sixty  years  after  that  of  the
Cooke,  it  is  said  that  "every  Master  and  Fellow  shall  come  to  the
Assembly  if  it  be  within  fifty  miles  of  him."  This  distance  is  re-
peated in  the  York  MS.,  dated  1600,  in  the  Grand  Lodge  MS.  of
1632,  in  the  Sloane  MS.  of  1646,  in  the  Lodge  of  Antiquity  MS.
of  1686,  and  in  the  Alnwick  MS.  as  late  as  1701.

There  is,  however,  a  discrepancy  not  to  be  explained  in  some  of
the  Constitutions.  The  Harleian  MS.,  whose  ascribed  date  is  1650,
says  that  the  Mason  must  come  to  the  Assembly  if  it  be  within  ten
miles  of  his  abode,  and  in  the  Constitutions  in  the  Lodge  of  Hope
MS.,  whose  date  is  1680,  and  those  in  the  Papworth  MS.,  whose  date

6o8  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

is  as  late  as  1714,  but  must  undoubtedly  have  been  a  mere  copy  of
some  older  one,  the  distance  is  reduced  to  five  miles.

Those  who,  in  this  reference  to  what  is  called  sometimes  a  con-
gregation, sometimes  a  general  assembly,  and  once,  as  in  the  Pap-
worth  MS.,  an  association,  have  sought  to  discover  the  evidence  of
the  existence  before  the  18th  century  of  a  Grand  Lodge  for  Eng-
land and  a  Grand  Master  presiding  over  all  the  Craft  in  the  king-
dom, will  not  find  themselves  supported  by  any  expressions  either
in  these  Old  Constitutions  or  in  any  other  records  of  the  times  which
will  warrant  such  an  interpretation  of  the  nature  of  these  meetings
of  the  Craft.

The  object  of  these  Assemblies,  as  described  with  great  uni-
formity in  all  the  Constitutions,  was  to  submit  those  who  had  tres-
passed against  the  rules  of  the  Craft  to  the  judgment  and  award  of
their  brethren,  and  where  there  were  disputes  to  endeavor  to  recon-
cile the  difference  by  a  brotherly  arbitration.  If  we  may  rely  on  a
statement  made  in  what  is  called  the  Roberts  MS.,  from  which  we
get  the  earliest  printed  book  in  Masonry,  and  which  manuscript
could  not  have  been  later  than  the  latter  part  of  the  17th  century,
these  General  Assemblies  had  also  the  power  of  making  new  reg-
ulations for  the  government  of  the  Craft

A  book  was  printed  in  1722  by  J.  Roberts,  under  the  title  of
The  Old  Constitutions  belonging  to  the  Ancient  and  Honourable
Society  of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons.  This  book  was,  he  says,
11  taken  from  a  Manuscript  wrote  above  five  hundred  years  since,"
but  the  internal  evidence  shows  that  it  could  not  have  been  written
earlier  than  about  the  middle  of  the  1 7th  century.  It  has  indeed
all  the  appearance  of  being  a  careless  copy  of  the  Harleian  MS.,
with  some  additional  matter  which  is  not  found  in  that  document,
the  source  of  which  is  not  known.

In  this  book  of  Roberts  are  some  new  regulations  which  are
said  to  be  "  additional  orders  and  Constitutions  made  and  agreed
upon  at  a  General  Assembly  held  at  ...  on  the  eighth  day  of
December,  1663."

Dr.  Anderson,  who,  it  is  very  probable,  had  seen  this  statement
in  the  work  of  Roberts,  has  with  an  unwarranted  inaccuracy,  of
which  the  Masonic  historians  of  the  18th  century  were  too  often
guilty,  materially  altered  the  statement  in  the  second  edition  of  his
Book  of  Constitutions,  and  says  that  "  Henry  Jermyn,  Earl  of  St

THE   LODGES   OF   MEDIEVAL   MASONS  609

Albans  as  their  Grand  Master  held  a  General  Assembly  and  Feast
on  St.  John's  Day  27  Dec.  1663."

It  will  be  seen  that  the  Roberts  Constitution  says  nothing  of
the  Earl  of  St.  Albans,  nothing  of  his  having  exercised  the  func-
tions or  assumed  the  title  of  Grand  Master,  nothing  of  a  feast,  and
nothing  of  the  time  of  assembly  being  on  St.  John  the  Evangelist's
day,  which  is  an  entirely  modern  Masonic  festival.  All  that  Ander-
son has  here  said  is  merely  supposititious,  and  by  this  act  of  unfair-
ness, Bro.  Hughan  very  correctly  says,  his  "  character  as  an  accurate
historian  is  certainly  not  improved."

It  has  been  seen  that  the  earlier  manuscript  Constitutions  do  not
speak  of  any  specific  time  when  the  Assembly  was  held,  and  it  is
possible,  or  perhaps  probable,  that  at  first  they  were  called  at  extem-
poraneous periods  and  according  to  the  needs  of  particular  districts
where  there  were  Master  Masons  engaged.  This  is,  however,  alto-
gether conjectural.

But  it  would  seem  that  about  the  middle  of  the  1 7th  century,
and  indeed  perhaps  long  before,  there  was  instituted  an  annual  as-
sembly. The  Harleian  MS.  leaves  us  no  doubt  upon  the  point,
for  it  says,  "  that  for  the  future  the  sayd  Society,  company  and
fraternity  of  Free  Masons  shal  bee  regulated  and  governed  by  one
Master  and  Assembly  and  Wardens,  as  the  said  Company  shall
think  fit  to  choose  at  every  year -ely  general  Assembly."

That  this  was  to  be  done  "  for  the  future  "  would  seem  to  imply
that  it  had  not  been  done  theretofore,  or  it  might  mean  that  what  had
formerly  been  an  authorized  usage  was  thereafter  to  be  confirmed
as  a  law  by  this  new  regulation,  and  this  is  probably  the  more  cor-
rect interpretation.

It  is,  however,  very  satisfactorily  shown  by  this  Harleian  docu-
ment that  at  the  time  when  it  was  written,  namely,  in  1670,  the  Ma-
sons had  begun  to  meet  in  an  annual  assembly,  even  if  they  did  not
do  so  before.

There  is  another  feature  in  the  mediaeval  condition  of  Freema
sonry,  which  we  may  discover  from  an  examination  of  these  old
manuscript  Constitutions.  While  it  is  very  clear  that  the  Masons
were  in  the  habit  of  assembling  annually,  or  perhaps  at  more  frequent
periods,  in  congregations,  for  general  consultation  on  the  interests  of
the  whole  body  of  craftsmen,  they  also  united  in  other  associations
of  a  local  character,  which,  in  the  earliest  records  to  which  we  have
39

6io  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

obtained  access,  were  known  by  the  name  of  "  Lodges."  This  was
an  institution  peculiar  to  the  Masons.  We  hear  of  the  Guilds,  and
afterward  of  the  Company  of  Carpenters,  the  Company  of  Smiths,
the  Company  of  Tailors,  and  others  belonging  to  various  crafts,  but
we  have  no  knowledge  that  there  ever  existed  any  lodges  of  Car-
penters, Smiths,  or  Tailors.  The  Masons  alone  met  in  these  local
sodalities,  which  were  of  course  in  some  way  connected  with  the
Company,  after  it  had  been  chartered,  and  even  before,  when  it  ex-
isted as  a  Guild  without  incorporation.

The  existence  of  these  Lodges  is  not  conjectural,  but  capable  of
the  most  convincing  historical  proof  derived  from  these  old  manu-
scripts, whose  genuineness  has  never  been  and  can  not  be  doubted,
as  well  as  from  the  testimony  of  other  writers,  some  of  them  not  of
Masonic  character,  and  therefore  less  suspicious.

The  proofs  of  the  existence  of  Lodges  in  which  Masons  in  dif-
ferent parts  of  the  kingdom  met  may  be  first  presented  as  they  are
found  in  the  Old  Constitutions.

The  Halliwell  poem,  which  is  the  earliest  of  these  manuscript
records,  plainly  refers  to  the  fact.  In  the  4th  Article  of  the  Con-
stitutions which  it  prescribes,  the  Master  Mason  is  forbidden  to
take  a  bondman  as  an  Apprentice.  And  the  reason  assigned  why
this  prohibition  is  made  is  that  the  lord  whose  bondman  he  is  has
the  right  to  bring  him  away  from  any  place  where  he  might  go,  and
if  he  were  to  take  him  from  the  Lodge  it  would  be  a  cause  of  great
trouble.

"  For  the  lorde  that  he  ys  bonde  to

May  fache  the  prentes  whersever  he  go.
Gef  yn  the  logge  he  were  y-take
Much  desese  hyt  myght  ther  make."  x

And  in  the  third  point  of  the  same  Constitution  it  is  forbidden
to  the  Apprentice  to  tell  anyone  the  private  concerns  of  his  Master's
house  or  whatsoever  is  done  in  the  Lodge.

"  The  prevystye  of  the  chamber  telle  he  no  man,
Ny  yn  the  logge  whatsever  they  done."  2

The  Cooke  MS.,3  which  is  the  next  of  these  old  records  that
have  been  brought  to  light  by  modern  researches,  repeats  these  two
prohibitions.     It  goes  more  at  length  into  the  causes  which  should

1 "  Halliwell  MS."  2  Ibid.  3  "  Cooke  MS. ,"  lines  7^9-777  ■

THE   LODGES   OF   MEDIAEVAL   MASONS  611

prevent  a  bondman  from  being  made  a  Mason,  and  explains  the
nature  of  the  trouble,  briefly  alluded  to  in  the  former  manuscript,
which  might  arise  if  the  lord  should  seek  to  seize  his  bondman  in
the  lodge.  The  bondman,  it  says,  should  not  be  received  as  an  Ap-
prentice, because  his  lord  to  whom  he  is  bound  might  take  him,  as  he
had  the  right  to  do,  from  his  business,  and  lead  him  "  out  of  his  logge
or  out  of  the  place  where  he  is  working,  and  the  trouble  that  might
then  be  apprehended,  would  be  that  his  fellows  would  peradventure
help  him  and  dispute  for  him  and  therefrom  manslaughter  might
arise."

And  in  the  third  point  of  these  Constitutions  it  is  said  that  the
Mason  "  can  hele  (must  conceal)  the  counsel  of  his  fellows  in  logge
and  in  chamber." :

In  the  later  manuscripts  we  find  the  same  recognition  of  the
lodge  as  in  these  first  two.

In  the  Landsdowne  MS.  it  is  said  that  Masons  must  "keep
truely  all  the  councell  of  the  lodge  or  of  the  chamber."  This  is
repeated  in  substantially  similar  words  in  all  the  subsequent  Consti-
tutions. The  lodge  is  also  recognized  as  a  place  where  the  work
of  Operative  Masonry  was  pursued,  for  the  Freemason  is  forbidden
to  set  the  cowan  to  work  within  the  lodge  or  without  it.

We  see,  also,  that  there  were  many  lodges  as  distinct  organiza-
tions, but  all  connected  by  one  bond  of  fellowship,  scattered  over
the  country.  One  of  the  regulations  in  all  these  Constitutions  was
that  strange  Fellows  were  to  be  cherished  and  put  to  work,  if  there
were  any  work  for  them,  and  if  not,  they  were  "  to  be  refreshed  with
money  and  sent  unto  the  next  lodge."

These  Operative  Lodges  were  as  exclusive  in  relation  to  any
connection  with  cowans,  rough  layers,  or  Masons  who  were  not  ac-
cepted as  free  of  the  Guild,  as  the  modern  Speculative  Lodges  are
in  relation  to  any  connection  with  the  uninitiated,  or,  as  they  are
often  called,  "the  profane."

Thus  we  find  in  all  the  Constitutions  up  to  the  year  1701  a  reg-
ulation which  forbade  the  giving  of  employment  to  "  rough  layers,"
or  Masons  of  an  inferior  class,  who  had  not  been  admitted  into  the
society.  "Noe  Mason,"  says  the  latest  of  these  Constitutions,*
"  shall  make  moulds,  square  or  Rule  to  any  Rough   Layers,  alsoe

1  u  Cooke  MS.,"  lines  441-453.  2  "  Alnwick  MS.,"  anno  1701.

612  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

that  noe  Mason  sett  any  Layer  within  a  Lodge  or  without  to  hew
or  mould  stones  with  noe  mould  of  his  own  makeing."  In  brief
words,  he  was  to  give  such  an  intruder  no  work  that  was  connected
with  the  higher  principles  of  the  art,  for  the  mould  was  the  model
or  pattern  constructed  by  the  geometrical  rules  that  were  the  most
important  secrets  of  the  mediaeval  builders.  It  is  probable  that
these  unfreemen  were  sometimes  employed  in  the  more  menial  oc-
cupations of  the  craft.

The  Papworth  MS.,  whose  date  is  1714,  is  the  only  one  which
omits  this  prohibition.  Whether  this  omission  arose  from  the
growth  at  that  late  period  of  a  more  liberal  spirit,  or  whether  it  was
the  clerical  error  of  a  careless  copyist,  are  questions  not  easily  deter-
mined. It  is,  however,  probable  that  the  latter  was  the  case,  as  the
spirit  of  exclusiveness  adhered  to  the  Masonic  Guilds  as  it  did  to  all
the  guilds  of  other  crafts,  and  is  continued  to  the  present  day  by
the  Livery  Companies,  which  are  the  successors  of  the  early  guilds,
where  the  same  spirit  of  exclusiveness  prevailed.

The  system  of  apprenticeship,  which  was  common  to  all  the
guilds,  was  maintained  with  very  strict  regulations  by  the
Masons.

No  Master  or  Fellow  was  to  take  an  Apprentice  for  less  than
seven  years,  nor  was  any  Master  to  take  an  Apprentice  unless  his
business  was  so  extensive  as  to  authorize  the  employment  of  at  least
two  or  three  Journeymen.  The  spirit  of  monopoly  is  plainly  per-
ceptible in  this  regulation.  The  Fellows  or  Journeymen  were  un-
willing to  give  to  Masters  of  moderate  means  the  opportunity,  by
the  employment  of  Apprentices  who  might  soon  learn  the  trade,  to
add  to  the  number  of  craftsmen  and  thus  to  diminish  the  value  of
their  labor.

Great  regard  was  paid  to  the  physical  condition  of  the  Apprentice.
In  all  the  constitutions,  from  the  very  earliest  to  the  latest,  care  is
taken  to  declare  that  the  Apprentice  must  be  able-bodied.  "  The
Master,"  says  the  Halliwell  MS.,  "shall  for  no  consideration  of
profit  or  emolument  make  an  Apprentice  who  is  imperfect,  that  is
whose  limbs  are  not  altogether  sound.  It  would  be  a  great  disgrace
to  the  craft  to  make  a  halt  and  lame  man.  An  imperfect  man  of
this  kind  would  do  but  little  good  to  the  craft.  So  every  one  may
know  that  the  craft  wishes  to  have  a  strong  man."  And  the  com-
piler of  the  Constitutions  quaintly  adds  the  warning  that  "  a  maimed

THE   LODGES   OF   MEDIEVAL  MASONS  613

man  has  no  strength,  as  will  be  known  long  before  night ; "  that  is,
he  will  show  his  weakness  by  failing  in  his  work.

"...     maymed  mon,  he  hath  no  might,
Ye  mowe  hyt  knowe  long  yer  night."

This  was  written  about  the  end  of  the  14th  century.  A  hundred
years  afterward  the  Cooke  MS.  repeats  the  admonition  in  these
words :  "The  sixth  article  is  this,  that  no  Master  for  no  covetous-
ness  nor  no  profit  take  no  Apprentice  to  teach  that  is  imperfect,  that
is  to  say,  having  any  maim  for  the  which  he  may  not  truly  work  as
he  ought  to  do."

The  same  rigid  rule  of  physical  perfection  in  the  Apprentice  is
perpetuated  in  all  the  subsequent  constitutions.  Thus  the  Lands-
downe  MS.  (1560)  says  he  "  of  limbs  whole  as  a  man  ;"  the  York
MS.  (1600),  he  must  be  "able  of  body  and  sound  of  limbs;"  the
Grand  Lodge  MS.  (1632),  he  must  be  "of  limbs  as  a  man  ought
to  be;"  the  Harleian  MS.  (1670),  he  must  have  "his  right  and
perfect  limbs  and  personal  of  body  to  attend  the  said  science,"  and
the  Alnwick  MS.  (1701),  that  he  must  have  "his  right  limbs  as  he
ought  to  have."

When,  in  171 7,  the  Speculative  superseded  the  Operative  order,
this  regulation,  which  had  been  enforced  for  at  least  three  centuries,
was  abandoned,  and  in  the  charges  adopted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  in
1722,  Masons  were  required  to  be  only  good  and  true  men,  free-
born,  and  of  mature  age.

Sixteen  years  afterward,  when  Anderson  compiled  and  published
the  second  edition  of  the  Book  of  Constitutions,  he,  apparently  with-
out authority,  restored  the  original  rule  of  the  guild,  for  in  the  same
cftarge  the  words  in  that  edition  were  altered  by  the  insertion  of  the
regulation  that  the  men  made  Masons  must  be  "  hail  and  sound,  not
deformed  or  dismembered  at  the  time  of  their  making."

I  say  that  this  change  was  apparently  made  without  authority,
for  in  the  subsequent  editions  of  the  Book  of  Constitutions,  pub-
lished after  the  death  of  Anderson,  the  language  of  the  first  edition
was  restored.  Hence  the  present  Grand  Lodge  of  England  does
not  require  bodily  perfection  as  a  preliminary  qualification  for  ini-
tiation.

But  as  Dermott  in  compiling  his  Ahiman  Rezon  for  the  use  of
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ancients  or  the   Schismatic  Grand  Lodge,

oi4  HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

adopted  Anderson's  second  edition  as  the  basis  of  his  work,  all  the
lodges  emanating  from  that  Grand  Lodge  exacted  the  rigid  guild
law  of  corporeal  perfection.  As  a  very  large  number  of  the  lodges
in  the  United  States  had  been  chartered  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Ancients,  it  has  happened  that  the  old  rule  of  the  guild  has  been
retained  sometimes  in  its  full  extent  and  sometimes  with  slight
modifications  in  the  Constitutions  of  the  American  Grand  Lodges,
all  of  which  forbid  the  initiation  into  Masonry  of  one  who  is  defi-
cient in  any  of  his  limbs  or  members.

The  American  usage,  however  much  it  may  be  objected  to  be-
cause  it  sometimes  closes  the  door  of  the  lodges  to  worthy  men  on
certain  occasions,  has  certainly  maintained  more  perfectly  than  the
English  the  connection  between  the  old  Operative  and  the  more
modern  Speculative  branch,  a  connection  whose  preservation  is  im-
portant because  it  constitutes  a  part  of  the  history  of  the  Order.

Another  fact  in  the  character  of  the  mediaeval  Guild  or  Com-
pany of  Masons  that  shows  the  connection  with  that  association  and
the  Speculative  Masonry  that  grew  out  of  it  is  the  system  of  secrecy
that  was  practiced.  It  has  been  hitherto  shown  that  all  the  early
guilds,  whether  Masonic  or  otherwise,  required  their  members  to
keep  the  secret  counsels  of  the  body.  And  this  regulation  has  been
very  correctly  supposed  to  allude  to  the  secrets  of  the  trade,  in  their
transaction  of  business  if  it  were  a  Commercial  Guild,  or  if  it  were
a  Craft  Guild  the  methods  of  work.  These  secrets  could  only  be
acquired  by  a  long  apprenticeship  to  the  trade  or  art,  and  it  was  un-
lawful to  impart  them  to  any  persons  who  were  not  members  of  the
guild.

The  evidence  of  this  has  already  been  shown  by  extracts  from
various  guild  ordinances,  and  from  the  old  Masonic  Constitutions.
But  the  secrets  of  the  Guild  or  Company  of  Masons  seems  to  have
been  maintained  more  rigidlv  by  their  statutes  than  were  those  of
any  other  guild.  What  the  secrets  of  mediaeval  Freemasonry  were
will  be  discussed  when  we  come  to  treat  of  the  Traveling  Freema-
sons,  who  spread  in  the  nth  and  12th  centuries  from  Lombardy  over
Europe,  and  established  themselves  in  all  the  countries  which  they
visited  ;  that  their  arcana  consisted  of  a  secret  system  adopted  by
the  Freemasons  in  building.     Of  this,  as  Mr.  Paley  !  has  observed,

1 "  Manual  of  Gothic  Architecture,"  chap,  vi.,  p.  208.

THE   LODGES   OF   MEDIAEVAL  MASONS  615

little  or  nothing  has  ever  transpired,  and  we  may  reasonably  attrib-
ute our  ignorance  on  the  subject  to  the  conscientious  observance  by
the  members  of  the  fraternity  of  the  oath  of  secrecy  administered  to
them  on  their  admission  into  the  society.

The  earlier  Masonic  Constitutions  do  not  give  the  form  of  the
oath,  or  indeed  refer  to  an  oath  at  all.  They  simply  direct  that  the
counsels  of  the  Lodge  and  of  Masonry  shall  be  kept  inviolate.  It
is  not  until  1670  that  we  find,  in  the  Harleian  MS.,  supposed  to
have  been  written  in  that  year,  the  very  words  of  the  obligation  that
was  to  be  administered.  The  constitutions  or  ordinances  of  that
Constitution  prescribe  "  That  no  person  shall  be  accepted  a  Free-
mason or  know  the  secrets  of  the  said  society  until  he  hath  first
taken  the  oath  of  secrecy  hereafter  following."

The  "  oath  of  secrecy  "  thus  prescribed  is  given  in  the  following
words,  which  will  on  comparison  be  found  to  be  much  more  pre-
cise and  solemn  than  the  oath  which  was  administered  in  the  other
guilds  or  companies :

"  I,  A.  B.,  do,  in  the  presence  of  Almighty  God  and  my  Fellows
and  Brethren  here  present,  promise  and  declare,  that  I  will  not  at
any  time  hereafter,  by  any  act  or  circumstance  whatsoever,  directly
or  indirectly,  publish,  discover,  reveal  or  make  known  any  of  the
secrets,  privileges,  or  counsels  of  the  fraternity  or  fellowship  of  Free
Masonry,  which  at  this  time,  or  at  any  other  time  hereafter,  shall  be
made  known  unto  me.  So  help  me  God  and  the  holy  contents  of
this  book."

The  last  words  indicate  that  this  was  a  corporeal  oath  adminis-
tered on  the  Gospels,  as  was  the  form  always  used  at  that  period  in
administering  oaths.  As  to  the  language,  the  intelligent  Mason
will  readily  perceive  how  closely  the  spirit  of  this  old  Masonic  ob-
ligation has  been  preserved  by  the  modern  Speculative  fraternity.
It  is  another  indirect  mark  pointing  out  the  close  connection  and
uninterrupted  succession  of  the  old  and  the  new  systems.

It  is  unnecessary  to  dilate  further  on  the  ordinances  which  are
contained  in  these  Constitutions.  The  object  has  been  sufficiently
attained,  of  proving  the  correctness  of  the  hypothesis  that  the  mod-
ern Lodges  are  the  direct  successors  of  these  bodies  whose  laws  and
customs  are  so  plainly  exhibited  in  the  old  Masonic  manuscripts.

CHAPTER  XII

THE    HARLEIAN     MANUSCRIPT    AS    A   GERM    OF    HISTORY — USAGES    OF
THE   CRAFT   IN    THE   SEVENTEENTH    CENTURY

has  been  seen  in  the  preceding  chapter  how
much  information  as  to  the  usages  of  the  craft  in
mediaeval  times  may  be  derived  from  the  stat-
utes and  regulations  contained  in  the  manuscript
Constitutions,  and  more  especially  in  that  most
valuable  and  interesting  one,  the  Harleian  MS.
This  document  differs  very  materially  from  all
the  others  that  preceded  it,  and  suggests  to  us  that  there  were  im-
portant changes  which  about  that  time  took  place  in  the  usages  of
the  craft.

Of  this  manuscript,  the  date  of  which  is  supposed  to  be  1670,
Bro.  Hughan  has  said  that  it  "contains  the  fullest  information  of
any  that  we  are  aware  of  and  is  of  great  value  and  importance  in
consequence."1

An  analysis  of  this  manuscript  will  sustain  the  statement  of  this
indefatigable  explorer  of  old  records  and  to  whom  we  are  indebted
for  a  correct  transcription  from  the  original  which  is  deposited  in
the  British  Museum.

No  analysis,  so  far  as  I  know,  has  ever  been  attempted  of  this
important  manuscript,  so  as  to  deduce  its  true  character  from  the
internal  evidence  which  it  contains.

It  has  been  already  shown  that  the  Masons'  Company  received  a
new  charter  or  act  of  incorporation  from  Charles  II.  just  about  the
time  that  the  Harleian  MS.  appears  to  have  been  written.  It  has
also  been  suggested  that  the  granting  of  the  new  charter  would
probably  be  considered  as  a  very  opportune  period  for  the  Masons'
Company  to  make  some  changes  in  its  Book  of  Constitutions  by
the  adoption  of  new  regulations.

1 "  Old  Charges  of  the  British  Freemasons,"  p.  1 1 ,

616

HARLEIAN   MANUSCRIPT  A  GERM   OF   HISTORY    617

Now,  I  have  supposed  that  the  Harleian  MS.,  differing  so  much,
as  it  does,  from  all  preceding  manuscripts,  is  a  copy  or  transcript  of
the  Book  of  Constitutions  of  the  Masons'  Company  as  it  was  mod-
ified in  the  reign  of  Charles  II.

In  presenting  us  with  the  laws  of  the  Craft  which  were  at  that
day  in  force,  it  supplies  us  with  a  very  accurate  and  authentic  ex-
position of  the  usages  and  customs  of  the  fraternity  as  they  then
prevailed.

A  brief  analysis  therefore  of  some  of  the  most  important  ar-
ticles will  certainly  advance  us  very  considerably  in  our  knowledge
of  the  progress  of  Freemasonry  in  the  1 7th  century,  about  a  hun-
dred years  before  the  Operative  element  of  Freemasonry  was  ab-
solutely extinguished  by  the  Speculative.  Hence  it  is  that  I  call
the  Harleian  MS.  a  germ  of  Masonic  history.

We  may  profitably  commence  our  analysis  of  the  historical
points  developed  in  this  manuscript  by  directing  our  •  attention  to
the  origin  and  meaning  of  the  words  "  Accepted  Mason,"  which  are
so  familiar  at  the  present  day  in  the  title  given  to  the  Order  as  that
of  "  The  Free  and  Accepted  Masons."

The  26th  Article  of  the  Harleian  Constitutions  directs  that  "  no
person  shall  be  accepted  a  Mason,  unless  he  shall  have  a  lodge  of
five  free  Masons  ; "  and  the  next  article  says  that  "  no  person  shall
be  accepted  a  Free  Mason  but  such  as  are  of  able  body,  honest  par-
entage," etc.

The  word  "  accepted  "  here  used  is  of  some  importance  as  hav-
ing been  one  of  the  titles  afterward  adopted  by  the  Speculative
Masons,  who  called  themselves  "  Free  and  Accepted,"  in  allusion  to
this  very  article.  The  word  is  first  employed  in  the  Harleian  MS.
In  the  older  manuscripts  we  find  the  expression  "  Masons  allowed,"
which,  however,  evidently  means  the  same  thing.  In  the  two  ar-
ticles cited  above  it  is  very  plain  that  an  "  Accepted  Mason  "  is  one
who  has  been  admitted  into  the  fraternity  by  some  ceremony,  which
is  called  his  "  acception,"  or  acceptation.  It  is  equivalent  to  the
modern  word  "  initiation."

But  in  the  28th  Article  we  find  the  same  word  used  in  a  double
sense,  of  both  "  initiation  "  and  "  affiliation."  It  prescribes  that  "  no
person  shall  be  accepted  a  Free  Mason  nor  shall  be  admitted  into
any  lodge  or  assembly  until  he  hath  brought  a  certificate  of  the
trnie  of  acception  from  the  lodge  that  accepted  him  unto  the  Mas-

6i8  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

ter  of  that  Limit  and  Division  where  such  lodge  was  kept  which
said  Master  shall  enroll  the  same  in  parchment  in  a  roll  to  be  kept
for  that  purpose,  to  give  an  account  of  all  such  acceptions  at  every
General  Assembly."

There  is  a  very  large  and  interesting  amount  of  knowledge  of
the  character  of  the  Masonic  organization  and  of  its  usages  in  the
1 7th  century  to  be  derived  from  this  article,  if  understanding^  in-
terpreted.

No  one  was  to  be  accepted  a  Freemason,  that  is,  admitted  into
the  fellowship  or  made  free  of  the  Guild  or  Company,  or,  as  we
would  say  in  modern  phrase,  "affiliated,"  in  contradistinction  to  a
"  cowan  "  or  "  rough  layer,"  one  who  was  not  permitted  to  work  or
mingle  with  the  Freemasons,  unless  he  had  brought  to  the  Master
of  the  limit  or  division  in  which  a  certain  lodge  was  situated  a
certificate  that  he  had  been  accepted  (the  word  here  signifying  in-
itiated or  admitted  by  some  ceremony  into  the  craft)  in  that  lodge.
The  Master  of  that  division  or  limit  must  have  been  possessed  of
an  authority  or  jurisdiction  over  several  lodges,  something  like  the
Provincial  Grand  Masters  in  England  or  the  District  Deputy
Grand  Masters  in  the  United  States.  This  Master  kept  a  list  of
the  Masons  thus  made  whose  making  had  been  certified  to  him  and
made  a  return  of  the  same  to  the  General  Assembly  at  the  annual
meeting.  This  is  much  the  same  as  is  done  at  the  present  day,  when
the  lodges  make  a  return  to  the  Grand  Lodge  at  its  annual  com-
munication of  the  number  and  names  of  the  candidates  that  have
been  initiated  by  it  during  the  year.

So  there  were  two  kinds  of  acceptation.  The  acceptation  into
the  lodge,  which  was  also  called  "  making  a  Mason,"  and  the  ac-
ceptation afterward  into  the  full  fellowship  of  the  Society  or  Com-
pany, which  was  to  be  done  only  on  the  production  of  a  certificate
of  the  time  and  place  when  the  first  acceptance  or  initiation  oc-
curred.

We  find  an  analogous  case  in  the  modern  usage.  A  man  is  first
initiated  in  a  lodge,  and  then  he  is  made  a  member  of  it.  The  one
usually  follows  the  other,  but  not  necessarily.  A  candidate  may  be
initiated  in  a  lodge  and  yet  not  claim  or  receive  membership  in  it.
Such  cases  sometimes  occur.  The  candidate  has  been  accepted  in
the  old  sense  of  initiated,  in  the  lodge,  but  if  he  goes  away  and
desires  to  be  accepted  into  the  full  fellowship  of  the  fraternity,

HARLEIAN   MANUSCRIPT   A   GERM   OF   HISTORY    619

which  act  in  modern  language  is  called  "  affiliation,"  by  uniting  with
another  lodge,  he  can  not  be  so  accepted  or  affiliated  into  its  fellow-
ship unless  he  brings  a  certificate  of  his  previous  acceptation  or  in-
itiation in  the  lodge  in  which  he  was  made.

There  is  an  apparent  confusion  in  the  double  sense  in  which  the
word  acceptation  or  acception  is  used,  which  can  only  be  removed
by  this  interpretation,  which  explains  the  two  kinds  of  acceptance
referred  to  in  the  same  article.  This  will  hereafter  be  applied  to  an
explanation  of  some  interesting  Masonic  circumstances  that  oc-
curred in  the  life  of  the  celebrated  antiquary  Elias  Ashmole.

One  more  point,  however,  in  this  important  article  must  be  first
referred  to.

It  is  prescribed  that  when  a  Mason  is  to  be  made  or  accepted,  it
must  be  in  a  lodge  of  at  least  five  Free  Masons,  one  of  whom  must
be  a  Master  or  Warden,  of  the  limit  or  division  where  the  said
lodge  shall  be  kept.  Masters  and  Wardens  were  therefore  ranks
(it  does  not  follow  that  they  were  degrees)  in  whom  alone  was  in-
vested the  prerogative  of  presiding  at  the  making  of  Masons.  It
was  not  necessary  that  he  should  be  the  Master  or  Warden  of  the
lodge  where  the  initiation  or  acceptation  was  made.  The  lodge
might,  indeed,  be  a  mere  extemporary  affair,  consisting  of  five  Free
Masons  called  together  for  the  especial  purpose  of  accepting  a  new
brother  of  the  craft.  But  it  was  essential  that  a  Free  Mason,  not  a
stranger  brought  from  some  other  section  of  the  country,  but  one
residing  or  working  in  the  vicinity,  and  who  was  not  a  mere  Fellow,
but  who  had  reached  the  rank  of  a  Master  or  a  Warden,  should  be
present  and,  of  course,  preside  at  the  meeting.

Preston  confirms  this  in  a  note  in  his  Illustrations  of  Masonry ',
where  he  says  :

"  A  sufficient  number  of  Masons  met  together  within  a  certain
district,  with  the  consent  of  the  sheriff  or  chief  magistrate  of  the
place,  were  empowered,  at  this  time,  to  make  masons  and  practice
the  rites  of  Masonry  without  warrant  of  Constitution."1

The  consent  of  the  sheriff  or  chief  magistrate  which  Preston  sup-
poses to  be  necessary  to  the  making  of  a  Mason  is  not  required  by
the  Harleian  or  any  subsequent  regulations  which  represent  the  Con-
stitutions of  the  Masons'  Company.     The  Halliwell  poem  and  the

1  Preston,  "  Illustrations,"  Oliver's  edition,  p.  182,  note.

620  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Cooke  MS.,  which  closely  follow  it,  do  say  that  the  sheriff  of  the
county,  the  mayor  of  the  city,  and  many  knights  and  nobles  are  to  be
at  the  General  Assembly.  But  I  have  endeavored  to  show  that  the
Halliwell  statutes  belonged  to  a  different  organization  of  the  craft.

Another  expression  in  this  28th  Harleian  regulation  elucidates
an  important  point  in  the  organization  of  the  Masonic  sodality  at
that  time.  Of  the  five  Free-Masons  who  were  required  to  be  present
at  the  acceptance  of  a  candidate,  one  was  to  be  a  Master  and  Warden
"and  another  of  the  trade  of  Free  Masonry."  Hence  it  follows
that  the  other  three  might  be  non-Masons,  or  persons  not  belonging
to  the  craft.  This  is  the  very  best  legal  evidence  that  we  could
have  that  in  the  middle  of  the  1 7th  century  non-professional  per-
sons  were  admitted  as  honorary  members  into  the  fraternity.  The
Speculative  element,  as  we  now  have  it,  was  of  course  not  yet  intro-
duced, but  the  craft  did  not  consist  exclusively  of  working  Masons.

These  explanations  will  enable  us  to  understand  the  often-
quoted  passages  from  the  Diary  of  Elias  Ashmole,  which  without
them  would  seem  to  bear  contradictory  meanings.

Mr.  Ashmole  says,  under  the  date  of  October  16,  1646,  at  half
past  four  in  the  afternoon  :

"  I  was  made  a  Free  Mason  at  Warrington  in  Lancashire  with
Colonel  Henry  Mainwaring  of  Karticham  in  Cheshire,  the  names
of  those  that  then  were  at  the  lodge,  Mr.  Richard  Penket  Warden,
Mr.  James  Collier,  Mr.  Richard  Sankey,  Henry  Littler,  John  Ellam
and  Hugh  Brewer."

The  circumstances  of  the  ceremony  here  detailed  are  strictly  in
accord  with  the  regulations  which  were  then  in  force  and  which
were  not  long  afterward  incorporated  in  the  Constitutions  as  these
are  preserved  in  the  Harleian  MS.

That  manuscript  says  that  at  the  acceptance  of  a  Free-Mason
there  shall  be  "a  Lodge  of  five  Free  Masons."  The  Landsdowne
MS.  says  there  should  be  "at  least  six  or  seven."  The  "new  regu.
lations"  in  the  Harleian  MS.  reduced  the  number  to  five,  which  is
the  exact  quorum  required  at  the  present  day  in  Speculative  Ma-
sonry for  the  admission  of  a  Fellow  Craft.

Of  these  five,  one  was  to  be  a  Master  or  Warden.  And  here  we
find  Mr.  Richard  Penket  acting  as  Warden.  Another  one  of  the
five  was  to  be  "  of  the  trade  of  Free  Masonry."  We  know  what
respect  was  in  those  days  paid  to  the  distinction  of  ranks,  so  that

HARLEIAN   MANUSCRIPT   A   GERM   OF   HISTORY   621

the  titles  of  Esquire  and  Gentleman  were  carefully  observed,  the
former  having  the  magic  letters  "  Esq."  affixed  and  the  latter  the
letters  "  Mr.  "  prefixed  to  his  name,  while  the  yeoman,  merchant,
or  tradesman  was  entitled  to  neither,  but  was  designated  only  by
his  simple  name.

"He  who  can  live  without  manual  labor,"  says  an  old  heraldic
authority,1  "or  can  support  himself  as  a  gentleman  without  interfer-
ing in  any  mechanic  employment,  is  called  Mr.  and  may  write  him-
self Gentleman."

As  Ashmole  was  a  distinguished  herald  and  careful  in  observing
the  rules  of  precedency,  we  may  safely  conclude  that  "  Mr.  James
Collier"  and  "  Mr.  Richard  Sankey"  were  gentlemen  and  not  pro-
fessional Masons,  while  plain  "  Henry  Littler,  John  Ellam  and
Hugh  Brewer,"  who  are  recorded  without  the  honorable  prefix,
were  only  workmen  "  of  the  trade  of  Free  Masonry."

So  far  Ashmole  had  only  been  made  a  Free-Mason  ;  that  is,  been
received  as  a  member  of  the  Craft.  According  to  the  regulations
another  step  was  necessary  before  he  could  be  accepted  into  the
freedom  and  fellowship  of  the  Company.

"  No  person  shall  hereafter  be  accepted  a  Free  Mason,"  says  the
New  Articles,  "  until  he  hath  brought  a  certificate  of  the  time  of
his  acceptance  from  the  lodge  that  accepted  him ; "  and  further,
that  "  every  person  who  is  now  a  Free  Mason  shall  bring  to  the  Mas-
ter a  note  of  his  acception,  to  the  end  the  same  may  be  enrolled  in
such  priority  of  place  as  the  person  shall  deserve  and  to  the  end  the
whole  Company  and  Fellows  may  the  better  know  each  other."

And  here  is  the  way  in  which  Ashmole  obeyed  this  regulation,
which  was  then  in  full  force.

He  writes  in  his  Diary,  under  the  date  of  March  10,  1682,
about  five  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  as  follows :

"  I  received  a  summons  to  appear  at  a  lodge  to  be  held  the
next  day  at  Masons  Hall  in  London."

On  the  next  day,  or  March  1  ith,  he  writes  as  follows  :

"  Accordingly  I  went  and  about  noon  was  admitted  into  the  fel-
lowship of  Free-Masons  by  Sir  William  Wilson,  Knight,  Captain
Richard  Borthwick,  Mr.  William  Wodman,  Mr.  William  Grey,
Mr.  Samuel  Taylor  and  Mr.  William  Wise.

1 "  Laws  of  Honour,"  p.  286.

622  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

"  I  was  the  senior  fellow  among  them  (it  being  thirty-five  years
since  I  was  admitted)  there  was  present  besides  myself  the  fellows
afternamed.  Mr.  Thomas  Wise,  Master  of  the  Masons-company
this  present  year  ;  Mr.  Thomas  Shorthose,  Mr.  Thomas  Shadbolt,

Waidsfford,  Esq.    Mr.  Nicholas  Young,  Mr.  John  Shorthose,

Mr.  William  Hamon,  Mr.  John  Thompson,  and  Mr.  William
Stanton.

"We  all  dined  at  the  Half-Moon  Tavern  in  Cheapside,  at  a
noble  dinner  prepared  at  the  charge  of  the  new-accepted  Masons."

To  many  who  have  read  these  two  extracts  from  Ashmole  s
Diary,  the  eminent  antiquary  has  appeared  to  involve  himself  in  a
contradiction  by  first  stating  that  he  was  made  a  Mason  at  Warring-
ton in  the  year  1646,  and  afterward  that  he  was  admitted  into  the
fellowship  of  Free  Masons  in  1682.

But  there  is  really  no  contradiction  in  these  statements.  The
New  Articles  in  the  Harleian  MS.  afford  the  true  explanation,
which  is  entirely  satisfactory.

In  1646,  while  Ashmole  was  on  a  visit  to  Lancashire,  he  was
induced  to  become  a  Free  Mason  ;  that  is,  as  a  non-professional  mem-
ber to  unite  himself  with  the  Craft.  This  had  been  frequently  done
before  by  other  distinguished  men,  and  the  regulations,  which  are
not  necessarily  of  the  date  of  the  manuscript,  had  provided  for  the
admission  or  initiation  of  persons  who  were  not  workmen  or  pro-
fessional Masons.

A  lodge  for  the  purpose  had  been  called  at  Warrington.
Whether  this  was  a  permanent  lodge  that  was  there  existing  or
whether  it  was  only  a  temporary  one  called  together  and  presided
over  by  a  Warden  of  that  district  is  immaterial.  The  passage  in  the
Diary  throws  no  light  on  the  question.  It  was,  however,  most
probably  a  temporary  lodge,  called  together  by  Warden  Penket  for
the  sole  purpose  of  admitting  Ashmole  and  Mainwaring,  or  making
them  Free  Masons.  The  regulations  authorized  this  act.  The  only
restrictions  were  that  there  should  be  five  Free  Masons  present,  one
of  whom  was  to  be  a  Master  or  Warden  and  another  a  workman
of  the  Craft  or  Operative  Mason.  All  these  restrictions  were  duly
observed  in  the  admission  of  Ashmole  and  his  companion.

But  this  act,  though  it  made  him  a  Free  Mason,  did  not  admit
him  to  a  full  fellowship  in  the  Society.  To  accomplish  this  another
step  was  necessary.

HARLEIAN   MANUSCRIPT  A  GERM   OF   HISTORY   623

As  persons  were  often  made  in  temporary  or  occasional  lodges,
which  were  dissolved  after  they  had  performed  the  act  of  admitting
new-comers,  for  which  sole  purpose  they  had  been  organized,  it  was
necessary  that  the  person  so  admitted  should  present  a  certificate  of
the  time  when  and  the  place  where  he  had  been  admitted  or  ac-
cepted, to  some  superior  officer,  who  is  called  in  the  regulations  "  the
Master  of  that  limit  and  division  where  such  lodge  was  kept ; "
and  who  was  probably  the  Master  Mason  who  presided  over  the
Craft,  who  lived  and  worked  in  that  section  of  the  kingdom,  or
perhaps  also  the  Master  of  the  permanent  lodge,  composed  of  all
the  Craft  in  that  division  which  assembled  at  stated  periods.

This  permanent  lodge,  to  which  all  the  Craft  repaired,  might
have  been  called  an  "  Assembly."  If  so  that  would  account  for
the  frequent  use  of  the  word  "  Assembly  "  in  all  the  old  manu-
scripts, to  which  every  Mason  was  required  to  repair  on  due  notice
if  it  was  within  five  or  ten,  or,  as  some  say,  within  fifty  miles  of  him.
And  this  surmise  will  also  explain  the  meaning  of  the  regulation
which  says  that  no  one,  unless  he  produced  a  certificate  of  his  previous
acception,  could  be  "  admitted  into  any  lodge  or  assembly,"  where
the  words  "  Lodge  "  and  "  Assembly  "  would  seem  to  indicate  two
different  kinds  of  Masonic  congregation,  the  former  referring  to
the  lodges  temporarily  organized  for  special  purposes,  and  the  lat-
ter to  the  regular  assemblage  of  Masons  in  a  permanent  body  upon
stated  occasions  and  for  the  transaction  of  the  general  business  of
the  Craft  there  congregated,  and  to  which  body  the  certificates  were
to  be  presented  of  those  who  had  been  accepted  or  initiated  in  the
temporary  lodge.

But  Ashmole  did  not  at  the  time,  or  at  any  time  soon  after,  present
such  a  certificate  to  the  Master  of  that  limit  in  Lancashire  that  he
had  been  made  a  Free  Mason  in  a  lodge  at  Warrington  on  October
16,  1646.  If  he  had  done  so  we  may  be  sure  that  he  would  have  men-
tioned the  fact  in  his  Diary,  which  is  so  excessively  minute  in  its  de-
tails as  to  frequently  make  a  record  of  matters  absurdly  unimportant.

Accordingly,  though  a  Free  Mason  by  virtue  of  his  acceptance  or
making  at  Warrington,  he  was  not  admitted  to  the  fellowship  of  the
Craft,  he  was  not  "  free  of  the  Company,"  was  not  entitled  to  an
entrance  into  any  of  its  lodges  or  assemblies,  nor  could  he  take
part  in  any  of  the  proceedings  of  the  sodality.  He  was  a  regularly
made  Free  Mason,  and  that  was  all  ;  he  was  in  fact  very  much  in  the

624  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

isolated  position  of  those  who  are  called  "unaffiliated  Masons"  in
the  present  day.  He  had  received  initiation  but  had  not  applied  for
membership.

Thirty-five  years  afterward  Ashmole  did  what  he  had  neglected
to  do  before,  and  perfected  his  relationship  to  the  Craft.  On  March
ii,  1682,  he  attended  the  meeting  of  a  lodge  held  in  Masons'  Hall,
the  place  of  meeting  of  the  Masons'  Company.  The  lodge  was
thus  held  under  the  sanction  of  that  Company.  Mr.  William  Wise,
the  Master  of  the  Company,  was  present,  but  is  not  spoken  of  as
one  of  the  members  of  the  lodge.  The  lodge  consisted  of  Sir
William  Wilson  and  six  others.  As  Wilson  is  mentioned  first,  we
may  presume  that  he  was  the  Master.  By  these  seven  Ashmole  and
some  others  (who  it  seems  paid  the  scot  for  a  dinner  eaten  on  the
occasion)  were  "  admitted  into  the  fellowship  of  Free  Masons."

In  1646  he  was  made  a  Free  Mason  ;  in  1682  he  was  admitted  to
the  fellowship  of  the  Society.  Thenceforth  he  became  not  only  a
Free  Mason  but  an  Accepted  Mason ;  he  was,  in  other  words,  by
the  ceremony  performed  at  Masons'  Hall,  a  "  Free  and  Accepted
Mason,"  and  his  name  was  enrolled  in  the  parchment  roll  "  kept  for
that  purpose,"  that  he  and  the  company  might  "  the  better  know
each  other."

The  account  of  the  acceptance  of  Elias  Ashmole,  recorded  by
himself  and  therefore  of  the  most  undoubted  authenticity,  when  thus
interpreted,  supplies  us  with  nearly  all  the  details  which  are  necessary
to  understand  the  usages  of  the  Craft  in  respect  to  initiations  and  ad-
missions in  the  1 7th  century.  They  will  be  more  fully  analyzed  at
the  close  of  the  present  chapter.  But  it  will  be  necessary  first  to
refer  to  another  authority  of  great  importance  on  the  same  subject.

Robert  Plott,  who  was  the  keeper  of  the  Museum  presented  by
Elias  Ashmole  to  the  University  of  Oxford,  wrote,  and  in  1686  pub-
lished, The  Natural  History  of  Staffordshire,  in  which  work  he
gives  an  account  of  the  Masonic  customs  prevailing  at  that  time  in
the  country.  Plott  was  not  a  Free  Mason.  "  The  evidence  of  Dr.
Plott  is  extremely  valuable,"  says  Oliver,  "  because  it  shows  the  ex-
istence of  Lodges  of  Masons  in  Staffordshire  and  the  practice  of
certain  ceremonies  of  initiation  in  the  1 7th  century  in  accordance
with  the  regulations  laid  down  in  the  manuscript  Constitution  whose
authenticity  is  thus  confirmed."

Dr.  Plott  says  that  they  had  in  Staffordshire  a  custom  "  of  ad-

HARLEIAN   MANUSCRIPT  A  GERM   OF  HISTORY   625

mitting  men  into  the  Society  of  Free  Masons,  that  in  the  moorlands
of  this  country  seems  to  be  of  greater  request  than  anywhere  else,
though  I  find  the  custom  spread  more  or  less  all  over  the  nation,
for  here  I  found  persons  of  the  most  eminent  quality,  that  did  not
disdain  to  be  of  this  fellowship."

He  then  proceeds  to  relate  and  unfavorably  to  criticise  the
Legend  of  the  Craft,  which  it  is  not  necessary  to  quote.  He  after-
ward continues  his  account  of  the  customs  of  the  Masonic  Society,
in  the  following  words  :

"  Into  which  Society,  when  they  are  admitted,  they  call  a  meet-
ing (or  Lodg,  as  they  term  it  in  some  places),  which  must  consist  at
least,  of  five  or  six  of  the  Ancients  of  the  Order,  whom  the  candidates
present  with  gloves,  and  so  likewise  to  their  wives,  and  entertain
with  a  collation,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  place.  This  ended
they  proceed  to  the  admission  of  them,  which  chiefly  consists  in
the  communication  of  certain  secret  signs,  whereby  they  are  known
to  one  another  all  over  the  nation,  by  which  means  they  have
maintainance  whither  ever  they  travel ;  for  if  any  man  appear,
though  altogether  unknown,  that  can  show  any  of  these  signs  to  a
fellow  of  the  society,  whom  they  otherwise  call  an  Accepted  Ma-
son, he  is  obliged,  presently  to  come  to  him,  from  what  company  or
place  soever  he  be  in  ;  nay,  though  from  the  top  of  a  steeple,  what
hazard  or  inconvenience  soever  he  run,  to  know  his  pleasure  and  as-
sist him  ;  viz.,  if  he  want  work  he  is  bound  to  find  him  some  ;  or  if
he  can  not  do  that  to  give  him  money  or  otherwise  support  him  till
work  can  be  had,  which  is  one  of  their  articles ;  and  it  is  another
that  they  advise  the  Masters  they  work  for,  according  to  the  best  of
their  skill  acquainting  them  with  the  goodness  or  badness  of  their
materials ;  and  if  they  be  any  way  out  in  the  contrivance  of  the
buildings,  modestly  to  rectify  them  in  it,  that  Masonry  be  not  dis-
honoured ;  and  many  such  like  that  are  commonly  known  ;  but
some  others  they  have  (to  which  they  are  sworn  after  their  fashion)
that  none  know  but  themselves."1

There  is  another  document  of  far  more  importance  than  those
which  have  been  cited,  and  which  gives  a  more  complete  description
of  the  usages  of  the  Craft  in  the  1 7th  century.  I  refer  to  the  old
record  which  has  been  designated  as  the  Sloane  MS.  No.  3329.

1Plott,  "Natural  History  of  Staffordshire,"  chap,  viii.,  p.  316.
40

626  HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Of  the  three  copies  of  the  Constitutions  which  are  preserved  in
the  British  Museum  and  known  as  the  Sloane  MS.  the  one  num-
bered 3329  is  by  far  the  most  valuable  and  interesting.  A  part  of
it  was  inserted  by  Mr.  Findel  in  the  Appendix  to  his  History  of
Freemasonry.  But  the  complete  text  was  published  by  Bro.
Hughan  in  the  Voice  of  Masonry  for  October,  1872,  and  in  the
National  Freemason  for  April,  1873.

There  has  been  some  doubt  about  the  exact  date  of  the  manu-
script. Hughan  thinks  it  was  written  between  1640  and  1700.
Messrs.  Bond  and  Sims,  of  the  British  Museum,  experts  in  old  manu-
scripts, suppose  that  its  date  is  "  probably  of  the  beginning  of  the
1 8th  century."  Bro.  Woodford  mentions  a  great  authority  in  man-
uscripts, but  he  does  not  give  the  name,  who  declares  it  to  be  pre-
vious to  the  middle  of  the  1 7th  century.  Finally,  Findel  thinks  it
originated  at  the  end  of  the  1 7th  century,  and  that  "  it  was  found
among  the  papers  which  Dr.  Plott  left  behind  him  on  his  death,  and
was  one  of  the  sources  whence  his  communications  on  Freemasonry
were  derived."

But  if  Plott  used  this  manuscript  in  writing  his  article  on  Free-
masonry, of  which  there  is  certainly  very  strong  internal  evidence,
then  the  date  of  the  manuscript  could  not  have  been  later  than  1685,
for  he  published  his  book  in  1686,  and  it  was  most  probably  written
some  time  before.

We  are  safe  then,  I  think,  in  assuming  the  middle  of  the  1 7th
century  as  the  approximate  date  of  the  Sloane  MS.

It  differs  from  all  the  other  manuscripts  in  containing  neither  the
Ordinances  nor  the  Legend  of  the  Craft.  It  is  simply  a  description
of  the  Ritual  of  the  Society  of  Operative  Masons  as  practiced  at
the  period  when  it  was  written,  namely,  as  is  conjectured,  about  the
middle  of  the  1 7th  century.

From  all  these  important  documents — the  Harleian  Constitu-
tions, the  Diary  of  Ashmole,  the  narrative  of  Dr.  Plott,  and  the
Sloane  MS. — collated  with  each  other  and  confirming  each  other,
we  are  enabled  to  form  a  very  accurate  notion  of  what  were  the
usages  of  the  Craft  in  the  1 7th  century,  and  approximately  in  the
1 6th  and  15th  centuries.  A  careful  analysis  will  lead  to  the  follow-
ing results :

There  was  an  incorporated  Company  of  Masons,  just  as  there
were  incorporated  companies  of  other  trades  and  crafts,  such  as  the

HARLEIAN   MANUSCRIPT   A  GERM   OF   HISTORY   627

Mercers,  the  Drapers,  the  Carpenters,  the  Smiths,  etc.  As  this
Company  had  been  originally  chartered  in  1410,  it  must  have  exer-
cised its  influence  over  the  Craft  from  that  early  period,  and  the
early  manuscript  Constitutions  were  doubtless  copies  of  its  Guild
Book  of  Laws  and  Records ;  but  it  is  not  mentioned  by  name  in
any  of  the  manuscripts  anterior  to  the  middle  of  the  1 7th  century.
There  is  a  frequent  allusion  to  lodges  as  the  place  where  Masters
and  Fellows  worked,  and  there  are  references  to  an  Assembly,  which,
from  the  language  used,  must  have  been  a  congregation  of  several
Masters  and  Fellows.  But  there  is  no  express  recognition  of  the
Company  in  any  manuscript  before  the  Harleian.  From  that  time
forth  the  Masons'  Company  seems  to  have  constituted  the  head  of
the  Craft  in  a  certain  district.  There  were  several  of  these  com-
panies in  different  cities,  but  the  principal  one  was  that  at  London.

However  or  wherever  a  person  was  admitted  as  a  Free  Mason,
he  could  only  be  considered  as  "Accepted"  when  he  had  reported
the  fact  to  some  superior  authority  in  the  district  where  he  had
been  made,  whereupon  his  name  was  enrolled  in  a  parchment  book
or  roll.

There  were,  besides  these  companies,  lodges  in  various  parts
of  the  country.  Some,  of  these  lodges,  at  least  toward  the  close
of  the  century,  were  permanent  bodies.  But  many  were  merely  ex-
temporaneously organized  for  the  purpose  of  initiating  a  candidate,
who  was  afterward  reported  to  the  Master  of  the  limit  or  divis-
ion in  which  the  lodge  had  been  held.

There  was  some  ceremony,  though  a  very  brief  one,  at  the  time
of  admitting  a  newly  made  brother.  There  were  secret  signs  and
words,  and  an  oath  of  secrecy  and  fidelity,  but  there  are  no  docu-
ments extant  to  enable  us  to  determine  the  nature  of  the  ceremony
of  initiation.

We  have  no  evidence  of  the  existence  of  any  degrees  of  initia-
tion. Indeed,  Masonic  scholars  have  now  come  very  generally  to
the  conclusion  that  what  are  called  in  the  modern  rituals  the  First,
Second,  and  Third  Degrees  were  the  later  invention  of  the  Specula-
tive Free  Masons  of  the  18th  century.  But  this  subject  will  here-
after be  discussed  at  length  in  a  chapter  exclusively  devoted  to  its
consideration.

On  the  whole  it  will  be  readily  seen  that  the  sodalities  of  the
Operative  Masons  of  the   17th  and  preceding  centuries   were  the

628  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

germ  which  afterward  was  developed  in  the  18th  century  into  the
full  fruit  of  Speculative  Masonry.  The  Harleian  Constitutions  pre-
sent us  with  the  basis  of  the  laws  which  still  govern  the  institution  ,
the  Diary  which  details  Ashmole's  reception  and  Plott's  narrative
prove  that  many  usages  of  the  present  day  were  in  existence  at  that
period,  and  from  the  Sloane  MS.  we  learn  that  certain  points  of
esoteric  instruction  which  prevailed  in  the  1 7th  century  have  been
incorporated,  with  necessary  modifications  of  course,  into  the  mod-
ern rituals.  By  comparing  the  Sloane  document  with  the  rituals
that  were  published  soon  after  the  Revival,  in  171 7,  and  these  again
with  those  of  the  present  day,  we  will  be  able  to  see  how  the  later
and  perfected  system  has  been  gradually  developed  out  of  the  prim-
itive one  of  the  middle  of  the  1 7th  century,  and  we  will  be  justified
in  believing  that  the  same  system  was  in  existence  at  a  much  earlier
period.

Not  only,  then,  is  there  no  difficulty  in  tracing  the  connection
between  the  lodges  of  Operative  Masons  which  were  existing  be-
fore the  year  171 7  with  those  of  the  non-operative  Free  Masons  who,
in  that  year,  established  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  but  it  is  ab-
solutely impossible  to  exclude  from  our  minds  the  conviction  that
there  has  been  a  regular  and  distinct  progression  by  which  the  one
became  merged  in  the  other.

We  have  now  arrived  at  that  period  in  the  history  of  English
Freemasonry  which  brings  us  into  direct  contact  with  the  events
that  immediately  preceded  and  accompanied  the  organization  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England,  or,  as  it  has  been  also  called,  the  Revival
of  Masonry,  in  1717.

But  before  that  subject  can  be  discussed  it  will  be  necessary  for
us  to  return,  in  our  historical  inquiries,  to  the  events  connected
with  the  transmission  of  Masonry  in  the  sister  kingdom  of  Scotland
and  afterward  on  the  Continent  of  Europe,  and  more  especially  to
the  Traveling  Freemasons,  who  came  from  Lombardy  in  the  10th
century,  and  to  the  later  organization  of  the  Stonemasons  of  Ger-
many, interesting  and  prolific  subjects  which  will  require  several
chapters  for  their  treatment.

CHAPTER  XIII

EARLY    MASONRY    IN    SCOTLAND

HAT  the  tradition  of  York  is  to  the  Freemasons
of  England,  that  of  Kilwinning  is  to  the  Ma-
sons of  Scotland.  The  story  which  traces  the
birth  of  the  Order  to  the  celebrated  Abbey  of
Kilwinning  was  for  many  years  accepted  as  the
authentic  history  of  Scottish  Masonry.

Thus  Sir  John  Sinclair,  in  his  Statistical  Ac-
count of  Scotland,  states  that  "  a  number  of  Freemasons  came  from
the  continent  to  build  a  monastery  at  Kilwinning  and  with  them  an
architect  or  Master  Mason  to  superintend  and  carry  on  the  work.
This  architect  resided  at  Kilwinning,  and  being  a  gude  and  true
Mason,  intimately  acquainted  with  all  the  arts  and  parts  of  Mason-
ry, known  on  the  continent,  was  chosen  Master  of  the  meetings  of
the  brethren  all  over  Scotland.  He  gave  rules  for  the  conduct  of
the  brethren  at  these  meetings,  and  decided  finally  in  appeals  from
all  the  other  meetings  or  lodges  in  Scotland."  *

This  tradition  has  been  accepted  by  the  author  of  Laurie's  His-
tory, who  says  that  "  Freemasonry  was  introduced  into  Scotland  by
those  architects  who  built  the  Abbey  of  Kilwinning."3  He  con-
nects those  architects  with  the  trading  association  of  artists  who
were  engaged  in  the  construction  of  religious  buildings  on  the  Con-
tinent, under  the  patronage  of  the  Pope,  and  who  provided  build-
ers for  both  England  and  Scotland.  And  he  suggests  as  an  evi-
dence that  Masonry  was  introduced  into  Scotland  by  these  foreign
workmen  the  fact  that  in  a  town  in  Scotland  where  there  is  an
elegant  abbey,  he  had  "  often  heard  that  it  was  erected  by  a  com-
pany of  industrious  men  who  spoke  in  a  foreign  language  and  lived
separately  from  the  town's  people."

1  Vol.  xi.,  art.  "  Kilwinning."  2  "  History  of  Freemasonry,"  p.  89.

620.

630  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

The  Abbey  of  Kilwinning,  which  has  been  claimed  as  the  birth-
place of  Masonry  in  Scotland,  was  situated  in  the  town  of  the  same
name,  and  in  the  county  of  Ayr,  on  the  southwestern  coast  of  Scot-
land. It  was  founded  by  Hugh  de  Morville,  High  Constable  of
Scotland,  in  the  year  1 157.  The  abbey  is  now  and  has  long  been
in  ruins,  though  what  now  remains  of  it  attests,  says  Mr.  Robert
Wylie,  who  has  written  a  History  of  the  Mother  Lodge,  Kilwin-
ning, "  the  zeal  and  opulence  of  its  founder,  and  furnishes  indubita-
ble evidence,  fragmentary  as  it  is,  of  its  having  been  one  of  the
most  splendid  examples  of  Gothic  art  in  Scotland."

It  is  only  very  recently  that  anyone  has  attempted  to  deny  the
authenticity  of  the  Legend  which  traces  the  introduction  of  Free-
masonry into  Scotland  to  the  workmen  who  came  over  in  the  1 2th
century  to  construct  the  Abbey  of  Kilwinning.

Bro.  D.  Murray  Lyon  has  attacked  the  tradition,  together  with
some  others  connected  with  Scottish  Masonry,  all  of  which  he
deems  destitute  of  historical  support.

The  tradition,  however,  like  that  of  York  among  the  English
Masons,  has  not  wanted  its  zealous  supporters  among  the  Scottish
brethren,  and  more  especially  among  the  members  of  the  Kilwin-
ning, which  claims  to  have  a  legitimate  descent  from  the  primitive
lodge  which  was  established  in  the  12th  century  by  the  foreign
architect  who  settled  in  the  town  of  Kilwinning.

It  has,  however,  been  attempted  to  trace  the  introduction  of  the
Order  into  Scotland  to  a  much  earlier  period,  and  one  writer,  cited
by  Wylie  with  apparent  approval,  says  that  Scotland  can  boast  of
many  noble  remains  of  the  ancient  Roman  buildings  which  plainly
evince  that  the  Romans  when  they  entered  the  country  brought
along  with  them  some  of  their  best  designers  and  operative  masons,
who  were  employed  in  rearing  those  noble  fabrics  of  which  we  can
at  this  day  trace  the  remains.  And  it  is  asserted  that  these  Roman
builders  communicated  to  the  natives  and  left  behind  them  a  pre-
dilection for  and  a  knowledge  of  Masonry  which  have  descended
from  them  to  the  present  generation.1

It  is  very  probable  that  more  is  here  claimed  than  can  be  au-
thenticated by  history.  The  influences  exerted  upon  English  archi-
tecture by  the  Roman  colleges  of   Masons  is  very  patent,  as  has

1  Wylie,  "  History  of  the  Mother  Lodge,  Kilwinning,"  p.  47.

EARLY    MASONRY   IN   SCOTLAND  631

been  already  shown.  The  Romans  had  been  enabled  to  make  for
centuries  a  home  in  England,  had  introduced  into  it  their  arts  of
civilization,  and  made  it  in  every  respect  a  Roman  colony.

But  Scotland  had  never  been  completely  subjugated  by  the
Roman  arms  ;  the  incursions  of  the  legions  were  altogether  of  a  pred-
atory nature,  nor  are  there  many  evidences  from  Roman  remains
that  the  Roman  artists  had  been  enabled  to  make,  or  had  even  at-
tempted to  make,  the  same  impression  on  the  warlike  Scots  and
Picts  that  they  had  been  enabled  to  produce  in  the  more  docile  and
more  easily  civilized  inhabitants  of  the  southern  part  of  the  island.

The  theory  which  assigns  the  introduction  of  Freemasonry  into
Scotland  to  the  workmen  who  came  over  from  England  or  from  the
Continent  in  the  12th  century,  and  erected  the  religious  buildings  at
Kilwinning,  Melrose,  Glasgow,  and  other  places,  is  a  much  more
plausible  one.  The  bodies  of  Traveling  Freemasons  were  at  that
time  in  existence,  and  we  know  that  they  were  perambulating  the
Continent  and  erecting  ecclesiastical  edifices ;  we  know  too  that
at  that  period  there  were  corporations  or  guilds  of  Masons  in
England  ;  and  it  is  a  very  fair  deduction  from  historical  reasoning,
though  there  be  no  historical  records  to  confirm  it,  that  the  churches
and  abbeys  which  were  erected  in  Scotland  in  the  12th  and  13th
centuries  must  have  been  the  work  of  Freemasons  who  came  partly
from  England  and  partly  from  the  Continent.

Bro.  D.  Murray  Lyon,  the  Historian  of  the  Lodge  of  Edin-
burgh, has  said  that  "  not  the  slightest  vestige  of  authentic  evidence
has  ever  been  adduced  in  support  of  the  legends  in  regard  to  the
time  and  place  of  the  institution  of  the  first  Scotch  Masonic
Lodge."1  This  is,  however,  a  merely  local  question  affecting  the
claims  to  precedency  on  the  roll  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  and  must  not
be  mixed  up  with  the  question  of  the  introduction  of  the  Freema-
sons into  Scotland  as  an  organized  society  of  builders.  I  can  not
consider  it  as  quite  aprocryphal  to  assign  this  to  the  time  when  relig-
ious establishments  were  patronized  by  King  David  I.,  which  was
toward  the  close  of  the  1  ith  and  the  beginning  of  the  12th  century.

The  Mother  Kilwinning  Lodge,  at  Kilwinning,  the  St.  Mary's
Chapel  Lodge,  at  Edinburgh,  and  the  Freemen  St.  John's,  at  Glas-
gow, have  each  preferred  the  claim  that  it  is  the  oldest  lodge  in

1 "  History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  2.

632  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

Scotland.  Each  has  its  proofs  and  each  has  its  adherents,  and  the
controversy  has  at  times  waxed  warm  among  the  Scottish  Masons.
Yet,  as  I  have  already  said,  it  is,  as  a  matter  of  general  history,  of
but  little  importance.

We  have  seen  that  we  are  almost  compelled  to  suppose  that  the
institution  of  Masonry  was  introduced  into  Scotland  by  the  build-
ers who  were  engaged  in  the  erection  of  religious  houses  from  the
nth  to  the  13th  centuries.  We  can  not  get  over  the  belief  that
these  builders  formed  a  part  of  the  fraternity  which  already  existed
in  the  Continent  of  Europe  and  in  England,  and  who  were  then
engaged  in  the  same  occupation  of  constructing  cathedrals  and
monasteries.

Knowing  from  other  evidence  what  was  the  usage  of  these
Traveling  Freemasons,  and  that  wherever  they  were  engaged  in
the  labors  of  their  Craft  they  established  lodges,  we  are  again  forced
to  the  belief  that  in  Scotland  they  followed  the  usages  they  had
adopted  elsewhere,  and  erected  their  lodges  there  also.

Doubtless  there  is  no  authentic  evidence  that  the  modern  lodges
at  Glasgow,  at  Kilwinning,  and  at  Edinburgh  were  the  legitimate
and  uninterrupted  successors  of  those  which  were  established  by  the
Masons  who  were  engaged  in  the  construction  of  the  Cathedral,  the
Abbey,  and  Holyrood ;  indeed  it  is  very  probable  that  they  are  not.
Nor  is  there  any  historical  material  which  will  enable  us  to  deter-
mine which  of  these  primitive  lodges  was  first  established  by  the
mediaeval  builders.  The  probability  is,  as  Bro.  Lyon  has  suggested,
that  the  erection  of  the  earliest  Scottish  lodges  was  a  nearlv  simul-
taneous  occurrence,  as  wherever  a  body  of  mediaeval  Masons  were
employed  there  also  were  the  elements  to  constitute  a  lodge.1

The  facts,  therefore,  would  appear  to  be  that  lodges  must  have
existed  in  Scotland  from  the  time  when  those  edifices  were  being
erected,  and  that  the  Freemasons  who  came  over  from  the  Conti-
nent to  erect  those  edifices  brought  with  them  the  Freemasonry  of
the  Continent.

We  can  not  indeed  prove  these  facts  by  historical  records  of  un-
doubted authenticity,  but  we  can  advance  no  reason  for  denying  or
doubting  their  probability.

Ascribing  the  first  introduction  of  Freemasonry  into  Scotland

1 "  History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  242.

EARLY   MASONRY   IN  SCOTLAND  633

to  the  continental  Masons,  we  have  some  evidence  that  at  a  later
period  there  was  a  considerable  influence  exercised  by  England  on
Scottish  Masonry.  This  is  apparent  from  the  fact  that  the  Consti-
tutions used  in  the  Kilwinning  Lodge,  and  in  others  established  by
it  in  the  middle  of  the  1 7th  century,  and  known  as  the  "  Edinburgh
Kilwinning  MS.,"  is  a  nearly  exact  copy  of  an  English  manuscript,
and  contains  a  charge  to  be  "  liegemen  to  the  King  of  England,
without  treason  or  other  falsehood."

This  manuscript,  which  was  kept  in  the  archives  of  the  Kilwin-
ning Lodge,  and  known,  says  Lyon,  as  "  the  old  buck,"  was  fre-
quently copied,  and  the  copies  sold  by  the  Lodge  of  Kilwinning
to  those  lodges  which  had  received  charters  from  it.

The  fact  that  these  Constitutions  require  allegiance  to  the  King
of  England,  that  the  legend  which  refers  to  the  introduction  of  Ma-
sonry into  England,  and  its  subsequent  expansion,  dwells  on  the
patronage  extended  to  the  Craft  by  the  English  Kings,  and  finally
that  the  narrative  contains  no  allusion  to  the  Kilwinning  or  another
Scottish  legend,  induce  Brothers  Hughan  and  Lyon  to  come  to  the
conclusion  that  the  manuscript  was  brought  from  England  into  Scot-
land, and  that  its  adoption  by  the  Kilwinning  Lodge,  and  by  those
which  were  chartered  by  it,  proves  that  the  Masonry  of  England
exercised  in  the  middle  of  the  1 7th  century  a  very  great  influence
over  that  of  Scotland,  an  influence  which,  as  it  will  be  seen,  was  still
further  exerted  in  after  times  in  assimilating  the  rituals  and  ceremo-
nial usages  of  the  two  countries.

This  English  influence  on  Scotch  lodges  at  so  early  a  period  is  a
fact  of  great  importance  in  the  history  of  Masonry.  From  it  is  to
be  presumed  that  there  was  a  great  intimacy  and  frequent  commu-
nication between  the  Freemasons  of  the  two  countries.  It  is  to  be
presumed  also  that  there  was  a  great  similarity — indeed,  in  many
respects,  an  identity — of  usages  in  Scotland  and  England.  There-
fore we  may  with  great  safety  apply  what  we  know  of  the  Masonry
of  one  country  to  that  of  another,  where  we  have  no  other  knowl-
edge but  that  which  is  derived  from  such  a  collation.

Now,  it  is  a  well-known  fact  that  while  the  literature  of  English
Masonry  is  exceedingly  deficient  in  any  authentic  records  of  lodges
which  existed  anterior  to  the  Revival  of  171 7,  the  Scottish  lodges
have  preserved  original  minutes  or  records  of  their  proceedings  as
far  back  as  the  end  of  the  16th  century.

634  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Lyon,  in  his  History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,  has  torn  away,
with  an  unsparing  and  relentless  hand,  the  meretricious  garments
which  the  imaginations  of  Anderson  and  Brewster  (Lawrie's  edi-
tion) had  cast  around  the  statute  of  Scottish  Masonic  history.  It
will  not  be  safe  in  writing  such  a  history  to  lose  sight  of  the  incis-
ive criticism  of  Lyon  and  trust  to  the  deceptive  and  fallacious  au-
thority of  earlier  historians.

At  the  beginning  of  the  12th  century,  Masons  had  been  im-
ported into  Scotland  from  Strasburg,  in  Germany,  for  the  purpose
of  building  Holyrood  House ;  in  the  middle  of  the  same  century
other  Masons  were  engaged  in  erecting  Kilwinning  Abbey.  From
these  epochs  historians  have  been  wont  to  date  the  origin  of  Scot-
tish Masonry.  We  have  no  documents  referring  to  that  early  pe-
riod, but  we  know  that  King  David  L,  who  then  reigned,  was  what
Anderson  would  call  a  "great  patron  of  Masonry,"  and  that  he
nearly  beggared  the  kingdom  by  the  prodigality  with  which  he  in-
vested its  resources  in  the  construction  of  religious  edifices.

But  it  is  not  until  we  reach  the  commencement  of  the  15th  cen-
tury that  we  begin  to  find  any  records  which  seem  to  indicate  the
existence  of  a  craft  or  guild  like  that  which  we  know  at  the  same
time  existed  in  England.  It  is  not  asserted  here  that  there  were
no  lodges  or  guild  meetings  in  the  12th,  13th,  and  14th  centuries.
Judging  from  the  condition  of  things  in  England  at  that  time,  we
may  conclude  that  guilds  or  lodges  of  Masons  were  in  existence
also  in  Scotland,  but  we  have  no  documentary  evidence  of  any  au-
thentic value  to  sustain  the  supposition.

The  first  period  in  which  Freemasonry  in  Scotland  begins  to  as-
sume an  historic  form  is  the  beginning  of  the  15th  century.

James  I.  had  been  confined  as  prisoner  in  England  from  the
year  1406  to  1424.  During  those  eighteen  years  of  his  enforced  ab-
sence, the  kingdom  had  been  greatly  harassed  by  the  contentions  of
what  were  called  "leagues"  or  "bands" among  the  craftsmen  of  the
different  trades,  including  the  Masons,  and  which  might  be  com-
pared to  the  modern  trades-unions  and  strikes.

When  James  I.  returned  to  Scotland,  in  1424,  he  at  once  began
to  reform  the  abuses  which  had  resulted  from  these  illegal  con-
federacies. He  suppressed  the  "  leagues,"  and  instituted  the  office
of  "  Deacon  "  or  "  Master-man,"  as  a  method  of  preserving  the  com-
munity from  the  frauds  of  the  crafts.     For  this  purpose  the  "  Dea-

EARLY   MASONRY   IN   SCOTLAND  635

cons  "  were  authorized,  by  act  of  Parliament,  to  regulate  the  works
of  all  the  crafts,  to  establish  the  rate  of  wages,  and  to  punish  any
who  should  transgress  the  law.

But  these  powers  having  been  found  to  be  in  many  instances
oppressive  to  the  people  and  an  encroachment  on  the  prerogatives
of  the  municipal  authorities,  were,  after  a  year's  trial,  abrogated,  and
a  new  class  of  officials  was  instituted,  called  "  Wardens,"  one  of
whom  was  selected  from  each  trade.  These  Wardens  were  not  the
representatives  of  the  crafts,  but  had  a  greater  affinity  with  the
town-councils  of  each  burgh,  whose  prerogatives  iii  regulating  work
and  wages  they  exercised.

Now  the  Masons  who  originally  came  to  Scotland  in  the  12th
century  from  the  Continent  and  from  England  had  enjoyed  the  priv-
ilege from  the  Pope  of  regulating  their  own  concerns  and  pre-
scribing their  own  wages.  This  privilege  they  must  of  course  have
communicated  to  their  successors  in  Scotland,  and  it  was  there  ap-
parently exercised,  up  to  and  including  the  time  of  the  institution
of  Deacons,  under  whom  the  trade  and  craft  unions  exercised  the
same  prerogative.

But  when  the  Deaconship  was  abolished,  and  Wardens  estab-
lished as  representatives  of  the  municipal  authorities,  this  right  of
regulating  their  own  concerns  was  taken  from  the  craft.

To  this  there  was  naturally  resistance,  and  Lyon  tells  us  that  "the
Deacons  continued  holding  meetings  of  their  respective  crafts,  for
the  purpose  doubtless  of  keeping  alive  the  embers  of  discontent  at
their  degraded  position  and  organizing  the  means  for  carrying  on
the  struggle,  not  only  to  regain  independence  of  action  in  trade
affairs  but  also  to  acquire  a  political  status  in  the  country."1

There  is  nothing  in  the  history  of  the  reigns  of  the  two  succeed-
ing kings,  James  II.  and  III.,  that  connects  them  with  the  Masonic
fraternity.  None  of  the  acts  of  the  Scottish  Parliament,  during
these  two  reigns,  has  any  special  reference  to  the  Craft  of  Masons.
James  III.  is  said  indeed  to  have  had  "  a  passionate  attachment  for
magnificent  buildings."  Beyond  this,  says  Lyon,  "  his  name  can
not  in  any  special  degree  be  associated  wTith  Masons."  But  in  truth,
though  documentary  evidence  of  particular  facts  may  be  wanting,
this  attachment  to  magnificent  edifices  must  have  led  the  monarch

1  "History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  3.

636  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

to  have  bestowed  his  patronage  upon  that  fraternity  whose  duty  it
was  to  erect  them.

Brewster  (Lawrie's  edition)  has  sought  to  give  an  importance
to  the  reign  of  James  II.,  by  the  statement  that  that  monarch  had
invested  the  Earl  of  Orkney  and  Caithness  with  the  dignity  of
"Grand  Master"  of  the  Masons  of  Scotland,  and  subsequently
made  the  office  hereditary  in  his  heirs  and  successors  in  the  barony
of  Roslin.

This  statement,  long  accepted  by  Masonic  writers  and  by  all  the
Masons  of  Scotland  as  a  veritable  fact,  has  been  proved  by  more
recent  researches  to  be  wholly  unsupported  by  historic  evidence  and
even  to  be  contradicted  by  those  authentic  documents  which  are
known  as  the  "  St.  Clair  Charters."

There  are  two  Charters  bearing  this  name,  which  were  once  the
property  of  Mr.  Alexander  Deuchar,  and  were  purchased  at  the
sale  of  his  library  by  Dr.  David  Laing  of  the  Signet  Library,  and
exchanged  by  him  for  other  documents  with  Professor  Aytoun  of
the  University  of  Edinburgh,  who  presented  them  to  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Scotland,  in  whose  archives  they  are  still  preserved.  The
manuscripts  have  been  carefully  examined,  and  their  authenticity  is
without  doubt.

The  date  of  the  first  of  these  Manuscripts  is  not  given,  but  from
internal  and  other  evidence  it  seems  presumable  that  it  was  written
between  the  years  1600  and  1601.

It  is  signed  by  William  Schaw  as  "  Master  of  Work"  and  by
several  Masons  of  Edinburgh  and  various  towns  in  Scotland.

It  is  unnecessary  to  give  the  text  of  the  manuscript,  as  it  has
been  printed  by  Lawrie,  by  Lyon,  and  by  some  others,  but  its  sub-
stance may  be  cited  as  follows :

It  begins  by  stating  that  the  Lords  of  Roslin  have  from  "  age
to  age  "  been  patrons  and  protectors  of  the  Masons  of  Scotland  and
of  their  privileges,  and  as  such  have  been  obeyed  and  acknowledged.
That  within  a  few  years  past  this  position  has  from  sloth  and  neg-
ligence been  allowed  to  go  out  of  use,  whereby  the  Lord  of  Roslin
has  been  lying  out  of  his  just  rights  and  the  Craft  been  destitute  of
a  patron  and  protector,  and  other  evils  have  arisen  ;  wherefore  it
goes  on  to  say  that,  not  being  able  to  wait  on  the  tedious  and  ex-
pensive courses  of  the  ordinary  courts,  the  signers,  in  behalf  of  all
the  Craft  and  with  their  consent,  agree  that  William   Sinclair  of

EARLY   MASONRY   IN   SCOTLAND  637

Roslin  and  his  heirs  shall  obtain  at  the  hands  of  the  King  liberty,
freedom, .  and  jurisdiction  upon  them  and  their  successors,  in  all
times  to  come,  so  that  he  shall  be  acknowledged  by  the  Craft  as
their  patron  and  judge  under  the  King.

The  second  charter,  which  purports  to  be  issued  by  the  Deacons,
Masters,  and  Freemen  of  the  Masons  and  Hammermen  of  Scot-
land, is  supposed  by  Lyon,  with  good  reason,  to  have  been  written
in  the  year  1628.

This  document  is  confirmatory  of  the  other,  making  the  same
statement  of  the  recognition  of  the  Sinclairs  of  Roslin  as  patrons
and  protectors  of  the  Scottish  Craft,  but  adding  an  additional  fact,
which  will  hereafter  be  referred  to.

Upon  this  authority  Brewster  has  said,  in  Lawrie's  History,
that  King  James  II.  had  granted  to  William  St.  Clair,  Earl  of  Ork-
ney and  Caithness,  Baron  of  Roslin,  the  office  of  Grand  Master,
and  made  it  hereditary  to  his  heirs  and  successors  in  the  barony  of
Roslin ;  and  he  adds  that  "  the  Barons  of  Roslyn,  as  hereditary
Grand  Masters  of  Scotland,  held  their  principal  annual  meetings
at  Kilwinning."

Anderson  had  previously  asserted  that  James  I.  had  instituted
the  office  of  Grand  Master,  who  was  to  be  chosen  by  the  Grand
Lodge,  and  this,  he  says,  "  is  the  tradition  of  the  old  Scottish  Ma-
sons and  found  in  their  records."

The  language  of  Anderson  shows  that  he  was  not  acquainted
with  the  St.  Clair  Charters,  as  they  are  called,  because  if  he  had  seen
them  it  is  not  likely  that  he  would  have  omitted  to  take  notice  of
the  important  point  of  hereditary  occupation.  But  the  authority  of
Anderson  as  an  authentic  historian  is  of  so  little  value  that  we  need
not  discuss  the  question  whether  any  such  tradition  ever  existed.

The  statement  made  in  Lawrie's  History  is,  however,  professedly
based  on  the  authority  of  the  St.  Clair  Charters.  This  statement
has  been  impugned  by  James  Maidment  in  his  Genealogie  of  the
Saint  Clair s  of  Rossly?i,  by  Lyon  in  his  History  of  the  Lodge  of
Edinburgh,  and  by  several  other  writers.

As  the  statement  made  in  Lawrie's  work  depends  for  its  verity
or  its  fallacy  on  the  question  whether  these  charters  have  been  faith-
fully interpreted  or  not,  it  will  be  necessary  in  making  the  issue  to
investigate  more  particularly  the  express  language  which  is  used  in
these  documents.

638  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

The  words  of  the  first  charter,  literally  translated  from  the  Scot-
tish dialect  of  the  original,  are  as  follows  :

"  We,  Deacons,  Masters,  and  Freemen  of  the  Masons  within  the
realm  of  Scotland,  with  express  consent  and  assent  of  William
Schaw,  Master  of  Work  to  our  Sovereign  Lord,  forasmuch  as  from
age  to  age  it  has  been  observed  among  us  that  the  Lords  of  Ros-
lin  have  ever  been  patrons  and  protectors  of  us  and  our  privileges,
likewise  our  predecessors  have  obeyed  and  acknowledged  them  as
patrons  and  protectors,  while  through  negligence  and  sloth  the  same
has  past  out  of  use.  .  .  .  We,  for  ourselves  and  in  the  name
of  all  our  brethren  and  craftsmen,  consent  to  the  aforesaid  agree-
ment and  consent  that  William  St.  Clair,  now  of  Roslin,  for  himself
and  his  heirs,  shall  purchase  and  obtain,  at  the  hands  of  our  Sover-
eign Lord,  liberty,  freedom,  and  jurisdiction  upon  us  and  our  suc-
cessors, in  all  times  coming,  as  patrons  and  judges  to  us  and  all  the
professors  of  our  craft  within  this  realm,  ...  so  that  here-
after we  may  acknowledge  him  and  his  heirs  as  our  patron  and
judge  under  our  Sovereign  Lord,  without  appeal  or  declination
from  his  judgment,  and  with  power  to  the  said  William  to  deputize
one  or  more  judges  under  him,  and  to  use  such  ample  and  large
jurisdiction  upon  us  and  our  successors,  in  town  and  in  country,  as
it  shall  please  our  Sovereign  Lord  to  grant  to  him  and  his  heirs."

The  second  charter  is  but  a  repetition  of  the  statements  of  the
first,  with  a  few  additional  details  which  make  it  a  longer  docu-
ment. It  approves  and  confirms  the  former  "letter  of  jurisdic-
tion and  liberty  made  and  subscribed  by  our  brethren  and  his  high-
ness,1 formerly  Master  of  Work  for  the  time  to  the  said  William
St.  Clair  of  Roslin."

There  is,  however,  one  statement  not  to  be  found  in  the  first
charter,  and  which  is  of  much  importance.  It  is  stated  that  the
St  Clairs  of  Roslin  had  letters  of  protection  and  of  other  rights
which  were  "granted  to  them  by  his  majesty's  most  noble  progen-
itors of  worthy  memory,  which,  with  sundry  others  of  the  Lord  of
Roslin's  writings,  were  consumed  and  burnt  in  a  flame  of  fire  within
the  castle  of  Roslin  in  the  year  ."

1  Mr.  Lyon  objects  to  the  opinion  that  Schaw  was  an  Operative  Mason  and  thinks
that  he  was  of  higher  social  position  and  merely  an  honorary  member  of  the  Craft.  If
there  were  no  other  evidence  to  sustain  Bro.  Lyon  in  this  view,  the  fact  that  the  appel-
lation of  "highness,"  as  here  applied  to  him,  would  be  sufficient  to  prove  its  accuracy.

EARLY   MASONRY    IN   SCOTLAND  639

The  last  two  words  are  "  in  an,"  evidently  meaning  "in  anno,"
but  being  at  the  end  of  the  line,  the  two  last  letters  with  the  date
have  been  apparently  torn  or  worn  off  from  the  manuscript.  We
can  from  this  only  gather  the  fact  that  there  was  a  tradition  among
the  Scottish  Masons  that  some  one  of  the  Kings  of  Scotland,  pre-
vious to  James  VI.,  in  whose  reign  the  manuscript  was  undoubtedly
written,  had  by  letters  patent  granted  to  the  Lords  of  Roslin  the
patronage  and  protection  of  the  Craft  in  Scotland.

Now,  it  is  very  evident  that  Brewster  had  no  authority  from
these  charters  to  make  the  statement  that  James  II.  had  appointed
the  Barons  of  Roslin  hereditary  Grand  Masters  of  Scotland.  There
is  not  the  remotest  allusion  in  either  of  these  documents  to  the  use
of  such  a  title.  One  of  William  Schaw's  titles  was  "  Chief  Master
of  Masons,"  but  that  of  "Grand  Master"  was  never  recognized  in
Scotland  until  one  was  elected  in  1731  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Edinburgh.

But  the  charters  do  not  themselves  declare  that  the  Sinclairs  of
Roslin  had  received  any  such  appointment  from  the  King.  It  is
true  that  the  second  charter  does  refer  to  the  fact  that  letters  of
protection  had  been  granted  by  the  predecessors  of  James  VI.,
which  letters  were  burnt  in  a  fire  that  took  place  at  Roslin  Castle
at  a  time  the  date  of  which  has  been  lost.

On  this  subject  it  has  very  properly  been  asked  why  was  the
fact  of  the  burning  of  these  papers  not  stated  in  the  first  charter ;
how  is  it  that  there  is  no  certain  knowledge  of  the  year  when  this
fire  took  place  ;  and  how  was  it  that  while  all  the  other  charters
belonging  to  the  house  of  Roslyn  were  preserved  these  alone  were
consumed  by  this  fatal  fire  ?

When  the  last  Roslin  resigned  in  the  year  1736  his  hereditary
rights  as  patron,  he  certainly  did  allude  to  the  possibility  that  some
King  of  Scotland  may  have  granted  a  charter  to  his  predecessors.
But  he  expressly  designates  those  predecessors  as  William  St.  Clair
and  his  son,  Sir  William,  the  very  persons  who  are  mentioned  in
the  two  charters  as  deriving  their  rights  from  the  Masons  in  the
beginning  of  the  17th  century.  But  there  is  no  evidence  in  his
letter  of  resignation  that  he  was  at  all  acquainted  with  any  charter
granted  by  James  II.  to  the  Earls  of  Orkney  and  Barons  of  Roslin.

On  the  whole,  I  think  we  may  explain  this  story  of  the  St
Clair  Charters  in  the  following  way  :

640  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

At  the  beginning  of  the  1 7th  century  there  was  possibly  a  tra«
dition,  unsupported,  however,  by  any  historical  evidence,  that  the
St.  Clairs  of  Roslin  had  been  the  hereditary  patrons  and  protectors
of  the  Craft  of  Masons  in  Scotland.

In  the  year  1601,  when  William  Schaw  was  the  "  Chief  Mason  "
and  "  Master  of  the  Work,"  the  St.  Clairs,  if  they  had  ever  exercised
their  patronage  and  protection,  had  ceased  to  do  so.

The  Masons  needing  at  that  time  such  a  patron,  designated
William  St.  Clair  as  such,  and  to  give  a  greater  prestige  to  the  po-
sition, either  invented  a  tradition  that  the  office  had  been  hereditary
in  the  family  of  the  St.  Clairs  or  repeated  one  that  already  existed.

About  thirty  years  afterward,  the  Masons  of  Scotland  renewed
and  confirmed  the  appointment  of  Sir  William  St.  Clair,  the  son  of
the  one  who  had  received  the  appointment  in  1601.  And  now,  in
accordance  with  the  unhappy  method  of  treating  Masonic  docu-
ments which  seems  always  to  have  prevailed  whenever  it  was  nec-
essary to  make  a  point,  the  writers  of  the  second  charter  changed
the  tradition  which  in  the  first  charter  was  to  the  effect  that  the
Masons  had  always  appointed  the  St.  Clairs  as  their  patrons,  and
asserted  that  the  appointment  had  been  given  at  an  early  period
by  one  of  the  Scottish  Kings.  This  was  a  falsification  of  the  orig-
inal tradition  and  must  be  rejected.

It  was,  however,  accepted  by  Sir  David  Brewster  and  has  until
recently  been  recognized  as  a  part  of  the  authentic  history  of  Scot-
tish Masonry.

I  think  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  St.  Clairs  accepted  the
honorable  position  of  patrons  of  Scotch  Masonry  which  had  been
bestowed  upon  them  in  1601  and  retained  the  office  until  it  was
finally  vacated  in  1 736  by  William  St.  Clair,  who  resigned  all  claim
or  pretense  that  he  had  to  any  hereditary  right  to  be  "  patron,  pro-
tector, judge  or  Master  of  the  Masons  in  Scotland."  Upon  this
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland,  which  had  then  been  duly  formed,
first  adopted  for  their  presiding  officer,  under  the  influence  of  the
example  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  the  title  of  "  Grand  Mas-
ter" and  elected  St.  Clair  to  the  office.

Looking  back  to  the  12th  century,  when  Kilwinning  Abbey,
Glasgow  Cathedral,  and  Holyrood  and  other  religious  houses  were
built  by  Freemasons  brought  over  from  England  and  from  the  Con-
tinent, we  are  to  suppose,  for  we  are  without  documentary  informa-

EARLY   MASONRY   IN   SCOTLAND  641

tion,  that  the  Masons  of  that  and  the  succeeding  centuries  up  to  the
end  of  the  16th  century  must  have  observed  the  usages  and  customs
of  the  English  and  Continental  Masons.

In  the  reigns  of  James  IV.  and  V.,  the  statutes  of  Parliament
show  that  there  were  continual  controversies  between  the  Masons
and  the  public  authorities,  the  former  seeking  to  enlarge  their
privileges  and  the  latter  to  restrict  them.  When  Mary  ascended
the  throne  she  found  the  Masons  suffering  under  an  act  passed
during  the  regency  which  suppressed  the  Deaconry,  and  which
with  previous  ones  that  forbade  their  meetings  in  "  private  conven-
tions "  or  framing  statutes,  seemed  to  have  deprived  the  Masons  of
almost  all  their  prerogatives.

All  these  laws  Queen  Mary  abolished,  and  granted  letters  under
the  Great  Seal,  which  restored  the  office  of  Deacon,  confirmed  the
Craft  in  the  privilege  of  self-government,  in  the  observance  of  the
customs  and  the  exercise  of  the  prerogatives  which  they  had  for-
merly enjoyed.1

During  the  reign  of  James  VI.  we  find  a  recognized  connection
between  the  Sovereign  and  the  Craft,  the  office  of  Warden  and  that
of  Master  of  the  Works,  being  made  by  the  King's  authority.

It  is  at  this  period  that  we  begin  to  find  records  or  minutes  of
lodges  and  statutes  well  authenticated,  by  which  we  are  enabled  to
form  a  correct  judgment  of  the  condition  and  the  customs  of  the
Craft  in  Scotland  at  that  early  period.

In  this  respect  Scotland  has  the  advantage  of  England,  where,
we  find  no  authentic  records  of  any  lodge  until  the  18th  century,
while  the  first  minutes  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh  date  back  to  the
year  1598.

A  very  fair  analysis  of  the  early  minutes  of  the  Scottish  lodges,
and  especially  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,  has  been  given  by  Bro.
D.  Murray  Lyon  in  his  valuable  history  of  that  Lodge.  Whoever
expects  to  write  a  faithful  history  of  Freemasonry  in  Scotland  must
depend  on  that  work  as  almost  the  only  source  of  authentic  facts.
As  histories  of  the  early  period  the  imaginative  illustrations  of
Anderson's,  and  of  Lawrie's  edition,  are  almost  utterly  valueless.

The  minutes  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,  or  St.  Mary's  Chapel,
extend  from  December  28,  1598,  to  November  29,  1869.     They  are

1  Lyon,  "  History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  5.
4i

642  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

contained  in  six  volumes,  which  are  in  an  excellent  state  of  preserva-
tion, with  comparatively  very  few  omissions.  The  first  and  second
volumes,  which  include  the  space  of  one  hundred  and  sixty-three
years,  that  is,  from  1598  to  1761,  with  a  hiatus  of  only  thirteen
years,  supply  an  ample  store  of  authentic  materials  for  early  Scotch
Masonic  history.

The  first  volume  contains  a  copy  of  what  are  called  "  The  Schaw
Statutes,"  the  earliest  Constitutions  extant  of  Scotch  Freemasonry.
The  date  of  this  document  is  December  28,  1598.  They  are  en-
titled "  The  Statutes  and  Ordinances  to  be  observed  by  all  the  Mas-
ter Masons  within  this  realm  ;  set  down  by  William  Schaw,  Master
of  Work  to  his  Majesty  and  General  Warden  of  the  said  Craft  with
the  consent  of  the  Masters  hereafter  specified."1

Of  these  statutes,  the  most  important  for  understanding  the  true
condition  and  usages  of  the  Masonic  Craft  of  Scotland  in  the  1 7th
century  are  the  following :

The  first  point  intimates  that  the  ordinances  thereafter  prescribed
are  but  a  continuation  of  those  which  had  previously  prevailed,  but
of  these  no  copy  is  in  existence.

The  second  point  requires  them  "to  be  true  to  one  another,  and
to  live  charitably  together."  This  is  in  exact  accord  with  the  guild
spirit,  to  be  found  in  all  the  old  English  Constitutions.

The  third  enjoins  obedience  "to  their  Wardens,  Deacons,  and
Masters  in  all  things  concerning  their  Craft."

The  fourth  directs  them  to  be  honest,  faithful,  and  diligent,  and
to  deal  uprightly  with  the  Masters  or  owners  of  the  work  in  what-
soever they  shall  take  in  hand.  This  is  evidently  a  transcript  from
the  English  Constitutions.

The  fifth  point  prescribes  that  no  one  shall  take  in  hand  any
work  which  he  is  not  able  duly  to  perform.  This  is  the  same  as
the  regulation  in  the  English  Constitution,  but  the  Schaw  statutes
direct  the  compensation  that  is  to  be  made  for  an  infraction  of  the
rule.

The  sixth  provides  that  no  Master  shall  take  another  one's
work  from  him,  after  the  latter  has  made  a  contract  with  the  owner

1  In  quoting  from  these  statutes,  from  the  minutes  of  lodges  or  any  other  documents,
for  the  convenience  of  the  English  reader,  the  Scottish  dialect  of  the  originals  has  been
translated  into  the  vernacular,  but  with  literal  exactness.  The  object  has  been  to  im-
part the  meaning,  and  not  merely  to  preserve  the  original  phraseology.

EARLY    MASONRY    IN    SCOTLAND  643

of  the  work  (who  in  the  English  Constitutions  is  called  "the  lord"),
under  a  penalty  of  forty  pounds.

The  seventh  point  is  that  none  shall  finish  any  work  begun,  and
not  completed  by  another,  until  the  latter  has  received  his  pay  for
what  he  has  done.

The  eighth  point  provides  for  the  election  by  the  Masters  of
every  lodge  of  a  Warden  to  take  charge  of  the  lodge,  whose  elec-
tion is  to  be  approved  by  the  Warden-General.

The  ninth  point  directs  that  no  Master  shall  take  more  than  three
apprentices  unless  with  the  consent  of  the  Wardens,  Deacons,  and
Masters  of  the  shriffalty  (district)  where  the  apprentice  dwells.

The  tenth  point  is  that  no  apprentice  shall  be  taken  for  less  than
seven  years,  nor  shall  that  apprentice  be  made  a  brother  and  fellow
of  the  Craft  until  he  has  served  seven  years  more  after  the  expira-
tion of  his  term  of  apprenticeship,  unless  by  the  special  license  of
the  Wardens,  Deacons,  and  Masters  assembled  for  that  purpose,  nor
without  a  sufficient  trial  of  his  worthiness,  qualifications,  and  skill.

The  eleventh  point  makes  it  unlawful  for  a  Master  to  sell  his
apprentice  to  any  other  Master  or  to  dispense  with  the  years  of  his
apprenticeship  by  selling  them  to  the  apprentice  himself.  The  ap-
prentice was  to  fulfil  the  full  term  of  his  servitude  with  his  original
Master.

By  the  twelfth  point  the  Master,  when  he  received  an  appren-
tice, was  to  notify  the  fact  to  the  Warden  of  the  lodge,  so  that  his
name  and  the  day  of  his  reception  might  be  properly  enrolled  in  the
book  of  the  lodge.

The  thirteenth  point  prescribed  that  the  names  of  the  apprentices
should  be  enrolled  in  the  order  of  the  time  of  their  reception.

By  the  fourteenth  point  a  Master  or  Fellow  was  to  be  received
or  admitted  only  in  the  presence  of  six  Masters  and  two  Entered  Ap-
prentices, the  Warden  of  the  lodge  being  one  of  the  six  ;  the  time
of  the  reception  and  the  name  and  mark  of  the  Master  or  Fellow
were  to  be  enrolled  in  the  lodge  book,  together  with  the  names  of
the  six  Masters  and  two  apprentices  who  received  him  and  the
names  of  the  "  intendars  "  or  persons  chosen  to  give  him  instruction.
Nor  was  he  to  be  admitted  without  an  "  assay"  or  specimen  of  his
work  and  a  sufficient  trial  of  his  skill  and  worthiness.

By  the  fifteenth  no  Master  was  to  do  any  work  under  the  charge
or  command  of  any  other  craftsman.

644  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

The  sixteenth  strictly  prohibited  all  work  with  cowans.

The  seventeenth  forbade  an  apprentice  to  accept  any  work  be-
yond a  certain  amount  without  the  license  of  the  Masters  or
Warden.

By  the  eighteenth  all  disputes  were  to  be  referred  for  reconcilia-
tion to  the  Wardens  or  Deacons  of  the  lodge.

The  nineteenth  provided  for  the  careful  erection  of  scaffolds  and
footways  so  as  to  prevent  any  danger  or  injury  to  the  workmen.

By  the  twentieth  apprentices  who  had  ran  away  from  their  Mas-
ters were  not  to  be  received  or  employed  by  other  Masters.

The  twenty-first  commended  all  the  craftsmen  to  come  to  the
meeting  when  duly  warned  of  the  time  and  place.

The  twenty-second  point  required  all  Masters  who  were  sum-
moned to  the  Assembly  to  swear  under  "a  great  oath"  not  to  con-
ceal the  wrongs  or  faults  done  to  each  other  nor  to  the  owners  of
the  works  on  which  they  were  employed.

The  twenty-third  and  last  point  prescribed  that  all  the  fines  and
penalties  inflicted  for  a  violation  of  these  ordinances  should  be  col-
lected by  the  Wardens,  Deacons,  and  Masters  of  the  lodges  and
distributed  according  to  their  judgment  for  pious  uses.

Bro.  Lyon  very  properly  suggests  that  this  code  of  laws  was  ap-
plicable only  to  Operative  Masons.  This  is  certainly  true,  but  so
also  were  all  the  Constitutions  of  the  English  Craft  and  the  Ordi-
nances of  the  German  and  French  Masons.  Originally  Freema-
sonry was  an  exclusively  operative  institution.  But  out  of  it  grew
the  present  Speculative  system,  in  all  these  countries.  To  under-
stand, then,  the  growth  of  the  one  out  of  the  other,  it  is  necessary  to
examine  these  constitutions  and  the  minutes  of  the  Operative
lodges,  of  which  latter  Scotland  only  supplies  us  with  authentic
materials.

The  great  resemblance  between  the  statutes  of  Schaw  and  the
early  English  Constitutions  indicates  very  clearly  the  close  connec-
tion that  existed  between  the  two  bodies  of  craftsmen  in  these  coun-
tries, and  leaves  us  in  no  doubt  that  both  derived  their  laws  and  their
customs  from  a  common  source,  namely,  that  body  of  architects  and
builders  who  sprang  up  out  of  the  Roman  Colleges  of  Artificers
and  in  time  passed  over  into  the  Traveling  Freemasons  of  Lom-
bardy,  who  disseminated  their  skill  and  the  principles  of  their  profes-
sion over  all  Europe  and  to  its  remotest  islands.

EARLY   MASONRY   IN   SCOTLAND  645

Having  thus  traced  the  rise  of  Masonry  in  Scotland  to  the
builders  who  came  over  in  the  1 2th  century  from  the  Continent,  and
perhaps  from  England,  to  be  employed  in  the  construction  of  relig-
ious houses  at  Kilwinning,  at  Glasgow,  at  Edinburgh,  and  other
places,  and  having  shown  the  condition  of  the  Craft,  so  far  as  the
great  dearth  of  materials  would  permit,  between  that  period  and  the
year  1598,  when  the  Schaw  Statutes  were  enacted,  we  are  next  to
inquire  into  the  customs  and  usages  of  the  Scottish  Craft  in  the
17th  century  and  until  the  organization  of  the  Speculative  Grand
Lodge  of  Scotland  in  the  year  1736.  In  performing  a  similar  task
in  reference  to  the  Masons  of  England,  we  were  restricted  for  our
sources  of  information  to  the  manuscript  Constitutions  which  could
supply  us  only  with  logical  deductions  and  suggestions,  which  made
our  narrative  more  a  plausible  conjecture  than  an  absolute  certainty.

But  in  tracing  the  customs  and  usages  of  the  Scottish  Craft  in
the  1 7th  century,  we  are  enabled  to  take  as  guides  the  minutes  of
the  Operative  lodges  which,  unlike  those  of  England,  have  been
preserved  from  the  early  date  of  the  last  years  of  the  1 6th  century,
and  which  have  been  collected  and  published  by  Bro.  D.  Murray
Lyon  in  his  most  valuable  History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,  a
work  to  which,  in  the  following  chapter,  I  shall  almost  wholly  con-
fine myself  for  facts,  though  not  always  concurring  in  his  views  and
deductions.  The  facts  are  incontrovertible  and  authentic — the  de-
ductions, whether  they  be  his  or  mine,  may  be  erroneous,  and  their
acceptance  must  be  left  to  the  reader's  judgment

CHAPTER   XIV

CUSTOMS   OF   THE    SCOTTISH    MASONS    IN    THE    1 7TH    CENTURY

HE  Masons  of  the  16th  century  in  Scotland  ap-
pear to  have  been  divided  into  two  classes,  the
Incorporations  and  the  Lodges.  These,  al-
though not  exactly  similar  to  the  Masons'  Com-
pany and  the  lodges  of  England,  may  be  con-
sidered as  in  some  degree  analogous.

In  1475  the  Mayor  and  Town  Council  of  Ed-
inburgh chartered  the  Incorporation  of  Masons  and  Wrights.  In
this  body  two  Masons  and  two  Wrights  were  selected  and  sworn  to
see  that  all  work  was  properly  done,  to  examine  all  new-comers  into
the  town  who  were  seeking  employment,  to  make  the  necessary  reg-
ulations for  the  reception  and  government  of  apprentices,  to  settle
disputes  between  the  craftsmen,  to  bury  the  dead,  and  generally
to  make  laws  for  the  two  trades  of  Masons  and  Wrights.

Incorporations  were  also  invested  in  Glasgow  and  other  cities
with  the  same  prerogatives.  Controversies  repeatedly  and  naturally
arose  between  these  Incorporations  and  the  Lodges  with  whose  priv-
ileges and  regulations  they  sought  to  interfere.  But  early  in  the
1 7th  century  the  former  ceased  to  exercise  some  of  their  offensive
prerogatives,  and  especially  that  of  receiving  and  admitting  Fellows
of  the  Mason's  Craft.  But  as  Lyon  justly  observes,  the  fact  that
Wrights  were  present  with  Masons  at  the  passing  of  apprentices  to
the  rank  of  Fellow,  favors  the  opinion  that  the  ceremony  of  passing
was  simply  a  testing  of  the  candidate's  fitness  for  employment  as  a
journeyman.

But  the  Incorporations  were  really  extraneous  bodies  having
their  origin  in  the  municipal  spirit  of  interference.  In  investigating
the  Masonic  usages  and  customs  of  the  1 7th  century  we  must  look
really  to  the  lodges  and  to  what  is  suggested  or  developed  of  them
in  the    Schaw  and   other  statutes,  and  in  the  early  minutes  of  the

lodges  that  have  been  preserved.

646

CUSTOMS  OF  THE  SCOTTISH    MASONS  647

The  assertion  of  Anderson,  Preston,  and  other  writers  of  the
i  8th  century,  as  well  as  some  of  a  later  date,  that  there  was  from  the
earliest  period  a  government  of  the  Craft  in  England  by  a  Grand
Master  has  been  proved  to  be  wholly  untenable.  Something  of  the
kind  appears,  however,  to  have  prevailed  in  Scotland  at  least  from
the  end  of  the  16th  century.

William  Schaw,  in  his  signature  subscribed  to  the  Statutes  en-
acted by  him,  and  in  various  records  going  back  as  far  as  1583,  calls
himself,  and  is  called,  "  the  King's  Master  of  Work."  This  is  a
very  common  title  in  the  Middle  Ages,  but  by  no  means  indicated
that  the  possessor  of  it  was  a  Mason.  The  Maj ester  Operis,  or
"  Master  of  the  Work,"  sometimes  called  the  Majister  Operum,
or  "  Master  of  the  Works,"  was  an  officer  to  whom  was  entrusted
the  superintendence  of  the  public  works.  Sometimes,  but  not  nec-
essarily, he  was  an  architect,  and  hence  Anderson  always  calls  these
Masters  of  the  Works,  Grand  Masters,  an  error  which  has  a  very  un-
fortunate effect  in  confusing  true  Masonic  history.  The  office  was
a  monastic  one  also,  and  in  early  times  the  monk  who  was  made
the  Master  of  the  Work  superintended  the  Masons  employed  by  the
monastery  in  conducting  repairs  or  erecting  buildings.

It  does  not,  therefore,  follow  that  Schaw  was,  from  being  called
by  this  title,  an  Operative  Mason.  The  evidence,  though  circum-
stantial, is  the  other  way.  Indeed,  the  office  of  King's  Master  of
the  Work  was  an  old  one  in  Scotland,  and  Schaw  himself,  in  1583,
succeeded  Sir  Robert  Drummond  in  the  office.

But,  in  1600,  as  it  appears  from  a  minute  of  the  Lodge  of  Ed-
inburgh, he  presided  over  a  Masonic  trial,  and  to  do  this  he  must
have  been  a  member  of  the  Craft.  He  was,  therefore,  it  is  to  be
supposed,  a  non-professional  who  was  admitted  to  honorary  mem-
bership, and  he  is  only  one  instance  among  many  of  the  adoption
into  the  brotherhood  of  persons  who  were  not  Masons.

But,  in  that  minute,  Schaw  is  described  as  "  the  principal
Warden  and  Chief  Master  of  Masons."

Now,  this  title  of  "  Principal  Warden "  is  the  same  as  that
called  in  the  Statutes  of  1599  the  "Lord  Warden-General."  This
office  of  Warden-General,  or  General  Warden,  as  it  is  also  called,
approaches  nearer  to  the  idea  of  a  Grand  Master  than  anything
that  we  can  find  in  Anderson's  Constitutions  in  respect  to  the  Eng-
lish Masons.

648  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

The  General  Warden  appears,  according  to  the  Scottish  Stat-
utes, to  have  been  possessed  of  several  important  prerogatives.  He
had  the  power  of  calling  the  representatives  of  the  lodges  to  a  Gen-
eral Assembly  ;  he  enacted  the  statutes  for  the  government  of  the
Craft — the  election  of  Wardens  in  the  particular  lodges  was  to  be
submitted  to  him  for  his  approval — and  he  exercised  a  general
supervision  over  all  the  lodges ;  in  short,  the  General  Warden
was,  in  fact,  though  not  in  name,  the  Grand  Master  of  the  Masons
in  Scotland.

There  is  some  confusion  about  the  names  of  the  officers  of  the
private  lodges.  In  some  instances  we  find  the  presiding  officer
called  the  Deacon,  and  in  others  the  Warden.  But  it  has  been  ex-
plained that  the  Warden  was  recognized  as  the  head  of  the  lodge
in  its  relations  with  the  General  Warden,  while  the  Deacon  was  the
chief  of  the  Masons  in  their  incorporate  capacity  and  also  the  head
of  the  lodge.  Sometimes  both  offices  were  united  in  the  same  person,
who  was  then  called  "  the  Deacon  of  the  Masons  and  the  Warden
of  the  lodge."  As  a  general  rule,  however,  the  Warden  appears  to
have  been  the  presiding  officer  of  the  lodge,  the  custodian  of  its
funds,  and  the  dispenser  of  its  charities.  That  he  held  a  prece-
dence over  the  Deacon  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  when  both  are
spoken  of  in  a  minute  or  in  a  regulation,  the  Warden  is  named  be-
fore the  Deacon.  It  is  always  "  the  Warden  and  Deacon,"  and
never  "  the  Deacon  and  Warden."

Both  officers  were  elected  by  the  suffrages  of  the  Master  Masons
of  the  lodge,  and  the  election  was  held  annually.

In  every  lodge  there  were  three  classes  of  members  :  Masters,
Fellows,  and  Apprentices ;  but  it  must  be  remarked  that  these  were
only  three  ranks,  and  that  they  do  not  by  any  means  indicate  that
there  were  three  degrees,  in  the  sense  in  which  that  word  is  now
understood.

The  Masters  were  those  who  undertook  contracts  for  building
and  were  responsible  to  their  employers  for  the  fidelity  of  the  work  ;
the  Fellows  were  the  journeymen  who  were  employed  by  these
Master-builders  ;  and  the  apprentices  were  those  youths  who  were
engaged,  under  the  Masters,  in  acquiring  a  knowledge  of  their  Craft.

If  there  was  a  ceremonial  of  initiation  or  reception  and  an  es-
oteric knowledge  of  certain  arcana,  that  ceremony  and  that  knowl-
edge must  have  been  common  to  and  participated  in  by  each  of  the

CUSTOMS   OF  THE   SCOTTISH   MASONS  649

three  classes.  Whatever  was  the  Mason's  secret  the  Apprentice  knew
it  as  well  as  the  Master,  for  one  of  Schaw's  regulations  required  that
at  the  admission  or  reception  of  a  Master  or  Fellow,  there  should
be  present  besides  six  Masters,  two  Entered  Apprentices,  whence  it
is  evident  that  nothing  could  have  been  imparted  to  the  newly  ac-
cepted Master  that  the  Apprentice  was  not  already  in  possession  of.

That  the  ceremony  of  initiation  was  in  the  1 7th  century  a  very
simple  one  is  very  evident  from  the  slight  references  to  it  in  the
minutes  of  the  lodges.  The  Statutes  of  1598  required  it  to  be  per-
formed in  the  presence  alike  of  Masters  and  Apprentices,  which
shows,  as  has  already  been  said,  that  it  was  a  ceremony  common  to
both.  It  appears  to  have  consisted  principally  of  the  impartation
of  what  was  called  the  "  Mason  Word,"  and  a  few  secrets  connected
with  it,  which  are  called  in  one  of  the  old  minute  books,  "  the  se-
crets of  the  Mason  Word."  What  these  "secrets  "  were,  it  is  now
impossible  to  discover,  but  as  it  has  been  seen  that  the  Scottish  Craft
customs  were  originally  derived  from  the  English  and  the  Continental
Freemasons  it  is  most  probable  that  the  secrets  of  the  Word  and  the
ceremonies  of  initiation  were  much  the  same  as  those  described  in
the  Sloane  MS.,  heretofore  quoted  as  practiced  by  the  English  Ma-
sons, and  those  described  by  Findel  as  used  by  the  German  Masons
in  the  12th  century.

The  Squaremen  were  companies  of  Wrights  and  Slaters  in  Scot-
land who  were  very  intimately  connected  with  the  Masons,  and  who
appear  to  have  had,  in  many  respects,  a  similarity,  if  not  an  identity,
of  customs.

Now  these  Squaremen  had  a  ceremony  of  initiation,  a  word
which  was  called  the  "  Squaremen's  word  "  and  secret  methods  of
recognition.  In  the  ceremony  of  initiation,  which  was  called  the
"  brithering," 1  the  candidate  was  blindfolded  and  prepared  in  other
ways ;  an  oath  of  secrecy  was  administered,  and  after  the  perform-
ances, which  were  in  a  guarded  chamber,  were  finished,  a  banquet
was  given,  the  expenses  of  which  were  paid  by  the  fee  of  initiation.

The  banquet  was  in  fact  so  important  a  part  of  the  ceremony  of
initiation  among  the  Masons  that  special  provision  for  it  was  made
by  Schaw,  the  Warden  General,  in  the  Statutes  of  1598.     Appren-

1  Jamieson  defines  the  word  to  brither  thus  :  "  To  unite  into  a  society  or  Corporation,
sometimes  by  a  very  ludicrous  process." — "  Dictionary  of  the  Scottish  Language  "  in  voc.

650  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

tices  were  to  pay  on  their  admission  six  pounds  to  the  "common
banquet,"  and  Fellow  Crafts  ten  pounds.

The  Fellow  Craft  was  also  required  to  provide  the  lodge  with
ten  shillings'  worth  of  gloves.  Nothing  more  conclusively  proves
the  connection  of  the  Scottish  with  the  Continental  Masons  than
this  reference  in  the  Statutes  of  the  former  to  the  article  of  gloves  to
be  provided  for  the  lodge.  The  use  of  gloves  as  a  portion  of  the
dress  of  an  Operative  Mason,  is  shown  in  early  records  to  have  been
very  common  from  early  times  on  the  Continent.  M.  Didron  gives,
in  the  Annales  Archeologiques,  several  examples  from  old  docu-
ments of  the  presentation  to  Masons  and  Stonecutters  of  gloves.
Thus  in  1381  the  Chatelan  of  Vallaines  bought  a  considerable  quan-
tity of  gloves  to  be  given  to  the  workmen,  and  the  reason  assigned
for  the  gift  is  that  they  might  "  Shield  their  hands  from  the  stone
and  lime."  In  1383  three  dozen  gloves  were  distributed  to  the
Masons  when  they  began  the  buildings  at  the  Chartreuse  of  Dijon.
At  Amiens  twenty-two  pairs  of  gloves  were  given  to  the  Masons.

The  use  of  gloves  seems  to  have  been,  among  the  different
crafts,  peculiar  to  the  Masons,  and  their  use  is  well  explained  as  be-
ing intended  for  protection  against  the  corrosive  nature  of  the  mor-
tar which  they  were  compelled  to  handle.

When  Operative  was  superseded  by  Speculative  Masonry  the
use  of  this  article  of  dress  was  not  abandoned,  and  in  the  Conti-
nental lodges  to  this  day,  the  candidate  is  required  to  present  two
pair  of  gloves  to  the  lodge  on  the  night  of  his  initiation.  But
the  explanation  now  made  of  their  use  is,  of  course,  altogether
symbolical.

Another  important  ceremony  connected  with  advancement  to  a
higher  rank  in  the  fraternity  was  the  production  of  the  Essay  or
Trial  piece.

It  was  a  very  common  custom  among  the  early  continental
guilds  to  require  of  every  apprentice  to  any  trade  before  he  could
be  admitted  to  his  freedom  and  the  prerogatives  of  a  journeyman,
that  he  should  present  to  the  guild  into  which  he  sought  member-
ship, a  piece  of  finished  work  as  a  specimen  and  a  proof  of  his  skill
in  the  art  in  which  he  had  been  instructed.

This  custom  was  adopted  among  the  Scottish  Masons,  and  when
an  apprentice  had  served  his  time  of  probation  and  was  desirous  of
being  advanced  to  the  rank  of  a  fellow  or  journeyman,  he  was  re-

CUSTOMS   OF   THE   SCOTTISH    MASONS  651

quired  by  the  statutes  to  present  an  Essay  or  piece  of  work  to  prove
his  skill  and  competent  knowledge  of  the  trade.

At  first  the  privilege  of  inspecting  and  judging  the  character  of
this  trial  piece  was  intrusted  to  the  lodge,  but  afterward  it  seems  to
have  been  taken  from  them  and  given  to  the  Incorporations,  who,
however,  resigned  it  early  in  the  1 7th  century.  When  an  Appren
tice  wished  to  become  a  Fellow,  he  applied  to  his  lodge,  which,
in  Edinburgh,  referred  him  to  the  Incorporation  of  Masons  and
Wrights  of  St.  Mary's  Chapel.  By  that  body  the  piece  of  work
to  be  done  was  prescribed  ;  Essay  masters  were  appointed  to  attend
the  candidate  and  see  that  he  did  the  work  himself,  and  when  it  was
done,  it  was  submitted  to  the  brethren,  who  by  an  open  vote  admit-
ted or  rejected  the  piece  of  work.

Lyon  very  correctly  finds  a  parallel  to  these  Essay  pieces  of  the
.Scottish  Operative  Masons,  in  the  examinations  for  advancement
from  a  lower  to  a  higher  degree,  in  the  Speculative  Lodges,  but  he
is  wrong  in  supposing  that  these  tests  for  advancement  were,  in  the
"inflated  language  of  the  Masonic  diplomas  of  the  last  century
characterized  as  the  '  wonderful  trials  '  which  the  neophyte  had  had
the  '  fortitude  to  sustain  '  before  attaining  to  the  sublime  degree  of
Master  Mason."

The  "  wonderful  trials  "  thus  referred  to  were  not  the  examina-
tions to  which  the  neophyte  had  been  subjected  to  test  his  pro-
ficiency in  the  preceding  degrees,  but  were  the  actual  ceremonies  of
initiation  through  which  he  had  passed,  and  considering  their  sever-
ity in  the  continental  lodges,  it  is  hardly  an  "  inflation  of  language,"
rto  speak  of  some  fortitude  being  needed  to  sustain  them.

Annually  both  the  Masters  and  the  Fellows  were  required  to
renew  their  oath  of  fidelity  and  obedience  to  the  brotherhood,  and
^especially  to  take  the  obligation  that  they  would  not  work  with
cowans.

It  was  also  provided  by  the  statutes  that  yearly  the  Fellows  and
Apprentices  should  submit  to  an  examination  which  should  test
their  memory  and  knowledge  of  the  principles  of  the  art.

Now  as  it  would  not  have  been  fair  to  expect  an  Apprentice  or

Fellow  to  remember  what  he  had  never  been  taught,  this  regulation

iled  to  the  introduction  of  a  particular  class  of  persons  in  the  lodges

who  were  called  "  intendars "  or  instructors,  whose  duty  it  was  to

instruct  the  newly  admitted  persons  in  the  principles  of  the  art.

6$2  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONR\

This  custom,  according  to  Lyon,  still  prevails  in  some  of  the
Scottish  lodges.  In  the  United  States,  it  is  a  very  general  usage  at
the  present  day  to  provide  an  Apprentice  as  soon  as  he  has  been
initiated  and  a  Fellow  Craft  when  he  has  passed,  with  an  instructor
whose  duty  it  is  to  drill  him  accurately  in  the  lecture  of  the  degree
into  which  he  has  just  been  admitted,  so  that  when  he  applies  for
advancement  he  may  be  enabled  to  answer  the  questions  that  will
be  asked,  and  thus  prove  that  he  has  made  "  due  proficiency."

The  transition  of  Operative  into  Speculative  Masonry  which
took  place  soon  after  the  beginning  of  the  18th  century,  is  the
most  important  portion  of  the  history  of  the  Institution.  The
gradual  approaches  to  that  condition  in  which  the  Operative  ele-
ment was  wholly  superseded  by  the  Speculative,  must  therefore  be
regarded  with  great  interest.

These  approaches  are  marked  by  the  introduction  of  persons
who  were  not  professional  Masons  into  the  Operative  lodges.  Oc-
casion has  been  had  heretofore  to  speak  of  the  reception  by  a  lodge
of  Operative  Masons  at  Warrington  in  England,  of  two  gentlemen
who  certainly  were  not  Operative  Masons,  namely,  Colonel  Main-
waring  and  Elias  Ashmole.  This  event  occurred  in  the  year  1646,
and  it  is  the  earliest  record  in  England  of  the  acceptance  of  a  non-
professional member  by  a  lodge  of  Operative  Masons.

It  does  not,  however,  follow  because  this  reception  is  the  first
recorded  that  it  was  therefore  the  first  that  took  place.  On  the
contrary  it  is  most  probable  that  the  custom  of  receiving  non-oper-
ative members  was  a  very  old  one.  It  had,  as  we  have  seen,  been
practiced  by  the  Roman  Colleges  of  Artificers,  and  was  by  them
propagated  into  the  early  Craft  and  Trade  Guilds,  and  eventually
imitated  by  the  more  modern  Operative  lodges.  The  practice  still
prevails  in  the  London  Livery  Companies,  which  we  know  are  the
successors  of  the  Trade  Guilds  of  the  Middle  Ages.

In  Scotland  the  custom  of  admitting  non-operatives  into  the
lodges  has  a  much  older  record  than  that  of  England  just  re-
ferred to.

A  minute  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh  of  the  date  of  June  8th,  in
the  year  1600,  a  facsimile  of  which  is  given  by  Lyon,  records  the
presence  at  the  meeting  of  the  lodge  of  William  Boswell,  Laird  of
Auchinlech.  The  meeting  was  called  for  the  purpose  of  consider-
ing a  penalty  that  had  been  imposed  upon  the  Warden.     The  Laird

CUSTOMS   OF  THE   SCOTTISH   MASONS  653

of  Auchinlech  took  a  part  in  the  deliberations,  acquiesced  in  the
decision  at  which  the  lodge  arrived,  and  signed  his  name  and  affixed
his  mark  to  the  minutes  just  as  the  Operative  Masons  did.

There  are  abundance  of  other  instances  of  the  admission  of
noblemen  and  gentlemen  as  honorary  members.  The  case  already
cited  of  Boswell  proves  conclusively  that  the  practice  existed  be-
fore the  close  of  the  16th  century.  If  we  had  the  records  we  might,
I  think,  find  many  cases  still  earlier.

In  the  admission  of  these  "  gentlemen  masons,"  as  they  were
sometimes  called,  the  ceremonies  of  initiation,  whatever  they  were,
appeal  to  have  been  the  same  as  those  practiced  in  the  reception  of
operative  members.  As  in  the  present  day,  and  in  Speculative
Masonry,  rank  or  condition  secures  no  exemption.

Several  instances  are  recorded  during  the  1 7th  century  of  breth-
ren who  were  not  operative  Masons  being  elected  to  preside  over
lodges.  Thus  Elphingston,  who  was  tutor  of  Airth  and  collector  of
the  King's  Customs,  was  in  1670  one  of  the  Masters  or  Past  Mas-
ters of  the  Lodge  of  Aberdeen.  The  Earl  of  Cassilis  was,  in  1672,
chosen  as  Deacon  or  head  of  the  Lodge  of  Kilwinning.  He  had
been  preceded  in  the  same  office  by  Sir  Alexander  Cunningham,  in
1671,  and  by  the  Earl  of  Eglinton  in  1670.  In  1678  Lord  William
Cochrane,  the  son  of  the  Earl  of  Dundonald,  was  elected  Warden
of  the  same  lodge.

All  these  appointments  were  merely  honorary,  and  intended,  it  is
to  be  presumed,  to  secure  the  patronage  and  influence  of  the  noble-
men or  men  of  wealth  and  rank  who  were  thus  honored.  They
were  not  expected  to  perform  any  of  the  laborious  duties  of  the
office,  for  which  task  it  is  most  probable  that  they  were  unfit.  This,
as  Bro.  Lyon  observes,  "  may  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  when  a
nobleman  or  a  laird  was  chosen  to  fill  any  of  the  offices  named,
deputies  were  elected  from  the  operative  members  of  the  Kilwin-
ning Lodge."1

The  relation  of  females  to  Freemasonry  in  Scotland  during  the
1 7th  century  is  worthy  of  attention.

It  has  already  been  seen  that  in  one  of  the  English  Constitu-
tions, when  referring  to  the  Charges,  it  is  written  that  "one  of  the
Elders  taking  the  Booke  and  that  he  or  shee  that  is  to  be  made

1 "  History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  52.

654  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

a  Mason  shall  lay   their   hands  thereon   and    the  charge   shall  be
given."

From  this  passage  some  persons  have  drawn  the  apparently
natural  inference  that  females  were  admitted.  Bro.  Hughan,  in
commenting  on  it,  thinks  that  the  manuscript  being  a  copy  from  a
much  older  one,  the  word  "shee"  was  carelessly  retained,  and  that
it  is  only  an  evidence  that  females  were  admitted  in  the  early  Guilds,
an  historical  fact  that  can  not  be  denied.  But  he  is  not  prepared  to
advocate  the  opinion  that  women  were  admitted  into  the  Mysteries
of  Masonry.  And  he  admits  that  the  custom  of  the  Guilds  to  ad-
mit women  was  gradually  discontinued.

As  the  passage  quoted  is  found  only  in  the  York  MS.  of  1693,
it  is  more  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  word  "shee"  was  a  cleri-
cal error  for  "they."  Hence  we  have  no  satisfactory  evidence  that
women  were  connected  with  the  Masonic  lodges  in  England.

But  Bro.  Lyon  contends  that  the  obligation  of  the  apprentice  to
protect  the  interests  of  his  "  dame,"  which  is  mentioned  in  the  same
manuscript,  would  indicate  that  it  was  lawful  at  that  time  in  Eng-
land for  females,  as  employers,  to- execute  the  work  of  Masons.

This  statement  derives  probability  from  the  fact  that  at  that  time,
in  Scotland,  the  widows  and  daughters  of  freemen  Masons  were,
under  certain  restrictions,  permitted  to  exercise  the  privilege  of  bur-
gesses in  executing  Mason's  work.

Lyon  cites  a  minute  of  the  Ayr  Squaremen  Incorporation  of  the
date  of  1628,  which  enacts  that  every  freeman's  daughter  shall  pay
for  her  freedom  the  sum  of  eight  pounds.  But  it  is  clear  that  if  a
fine  was  imposed  for  the  freedom,  there  must  have  been  a  privilege
accompanying  it,  which  could  have  been  nothing  other  than  the
right  to  do  a  freeman's  work.

The  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,  in  1683,  recognized  this  privilege  and
qualified  it  by  certain  restrictions.  It  was  then  enacted  that  a
widow  should  not  undertake  work  or  employ  journeymen  herself,
but  might  have  the  benefit  of  the  work  under  the  favor  of  some
freeman  "  by  whose  advice  and  concurrence  the  work  shall  be  under-
taken and  the  journeymen  agreed  with."

It  is  apparent  from  these  two  minutes  that,  from  1628  to  1683
women,  the  widows  or  daughters  of  masons,  were  in  the  habit  of
employing  journeymen  to  do  work  given  to  them  by  the  patrons  of
their  husbands  or  fathers.

CUSTOMS   OF  THE   SCOTTISH   MASONS  655

But  this  custom,  growing  into  an  evil,  in  time  the  females  act-
ing independently  and  assuming  the  position  and  exercising  the
prerogatives  of  Master  Masons,  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh  found  it
necessary  at  length  to  correct  the  abuse  and  to  restrict  the  privilege
by  compelling  the  females  to  undertake  the  work  and  employ  the
journeymen  under  the  direction  of  a  Master  Mason,  who,  acting  for
the  widow,  discharged  the  duties  without  receiving  compensation
(which  was  strictly  prohibited)  and  gave  her  the  profits.

Another  usage  of  the  Scottish  Masons  in  the  17th  century  was
that  of  opening  the  lodge  with  prayer.  There  is  no  record  of  the
existence  of  such  a  usage  in  England,  although  it  is  highly  probable
that  the  same  practice  prevailed  in  both  countries,  since  Freemasonry
being  a  later  institution  in  Scotland,  we  have  seen  that  it  derived
many  of  its  customs  from  the  sister  kingdom.

The  use  of  prayer  as  an  introductory  ceremony  has  always  been
practiced  in  the  English  speculative  lodges,  and  combining  this
with  the  fact  now  known  that  it  was  observed  by  the  Scottish  op-
eratives, we  have  an  additional  reason  for  believing  that  it  was  a
usage  among  the  English  operative  masons  of  the  1 7th  and  earlier
centuries.

Bro.  Lyon  says  that  in  opening  with  prayer,  the  Lodge  of  Edin-
burgh "  followed  an  example  which  had  been  set  in  the  ancient
Constitutions  of  the  English  Masons  which  open  and  close  with
prayer."  Here  our  generally  accurate  historian  appears  to  have
fallen  into  an  error  in  confounding  the  form  of  composition  adopted
in  writing  a  manuscript  with  that  of  opening  a  lodge,  two  things
evidently  very  distinct.

It  is  of  course  admitted  that  all  of  the  old  English  Constitutions
commence  with  a  religious  invocation,  and  that  they  end  either  with
a  prayer  for  help  or  an  imprecatory  formula  like  the  condition  of
an  oath  to  keep  the  statutes.

But  in  a  careful  examination  of  all  these  Constitutions  from  the
Halliwell  MS.  to  the  Papworth  MS.,  that  is  from  the  first  to  the
last,  I  have  failed  to  find  any  regulation  or  article  which  prescribes
that  the  business  of  a  lodge  shall  be  preceded  by  prayer.  The  only
regulation  that  has  a  religious  bearing  is  the  one  that  prescribes  a
reverence  for  God  and  Holy  Church  and  the  avoidance  of  heresy
or  error.

That  it  was  the  practice  of  the  early  English  operative  lodges

656  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

to  open  and  close  with  prayer,  is  an  opinion  founded  wholly  on  con-
jecture, but  for  the  reasons  already  assigned,  the  conjecture  appears
to  be  a  plausible  one.

But  the  use  of  prayer  in  the  Scottish  lodges  of  the  1 7th  century
is  not  conjectural,  but  is  proved  by  actual  records,  and  Bro.  Lyon,
in  his  invaluable  work,  to  which  I  have  been  almost  wholly  in-
debted for  the  facts  in  the  present  and  the  preceding  chapter,  sup-
plies us  with  two  forms  of  prayers,  one  "  to  be  said  at  the  convening,"
and  the  other  "to  be  said  before  dismissing."  Both  are  extracted
from  the  minute-books  of  Mary's  Chapel  Incorporation  for  the  year
1699,  and  it  will  be  interesting  to  compare  them  with  the  oldest
English  formula,  namely,  that  given  by  Preston.

The  first  of  these,  or  the  prayer  at  the  opening  of  the  lodge,  is
in  the  following  words  :

"  O  Lord,  we  most  humblie  beseech  thee  to  be  present  with  us
in  mercy,  and  to  bless  our  meeting  and  haill  (whole)  exercise  which
wee  now  have  in  hand.  O  Lord,  enlighten  our  understandings  and
direct  our  hearts  and  mynds,  so  with  thy  good  Spirit,  that  wee  may
frame  all  our  purposes  and  conclusions  to  the  glory  of  thy  name  and
the  welfare  of  our  Brethren ;  and  therefore  O  Lord,  let  no  partiall
respect,  neither  of  ffeed  (enmity)  nor  favour,  draw  us  out  of  the  right
way.  But  grant  that  we  may  ever  so  frame  all  our  purposes  and
conclusions  to  the  glory  of  thy  name  and  the  welfare  of  our  Breth-
ren. Grant  these  things,  O  Lord,  unto  us,  and  what  else  thou  sees
more  necessarie  for  us,  and  that  only  for  the  love  of  thy  dear  Son
Jesus  Christ,  our  alone  Lord  and  Saviour  ;  To  whom,  with  thee,  O
Father,  and  the  blessed  Spirit  of  Grace,  wee  render  all  praise,  honor
and  glory,  for  ever  and  ever,  Amen."

The  second  prayer,  or  that  used  at  the  dismission  or  closing  of
the  lodge,  is  as  follows :

"  O  Lord,  wee  most  humbly  acknowledge  thy  goodnesse  in
meeting  with  us  together  at  this  tyme,  to  confer  upon  a  present
condition  of  this  world.  O  Lord,  make  us  also  study  heaven  and
heavenly  myndednesse,  that  we  may  get  our  souls  for  a  prey.  And
O  Lord,  be  with  us  and  accompany  us  the  rest  of  this  day,  now  and
forever,  Amen."

The  importance  of  this  record  of  prayers  at  opening  and  closing
in  the  Scottish  lodges,  is  that  it  adds  great  force  to  the  conjecture
that  a  similar  custom  prevailed  in  the  English   lodges  at  the  same

PHOTOGRAVURE    REPRODUCTION    OF    ONLY    ILLUSTRATION    IN

ORIGINAL    "BOOK    OF    CONSTITUTIONS,"    LONDON,    1723

Supposed  to  be  the  oldest  illustration  in  Speculative  Freemasonry

^a%  ay

CUSTOMS   OF  THE  SCOTTISH   MASONS  657

period.  The  statement  made  by  the  biographer  of  Wrenn  and
quoted  by  Findel,  that  the  mediaeval  Masons  of  England  com-
menced their  labor  each  day  at  sunrise  by  a  prayer,  the  Master
taking  his  station  in  the  East  and  the  Brethren  forming  in  a  half
circle  around  him,  is  a  mere  tradition.  There  is  the  want  of  a
contemporary  record.  But  the  fact  that  there  is  such  a  record,
absolutely  authentic  in  the  minutes  of  a  Scottish  lodge  of  the
period,  throws  necessarily  an  air  of  great  probability  upon  the
tradition.

That  the  record  of  the  Scottish  lodge  is  a  minute  made  in  the
last  year  but  one  of  the  1 7th  century  does  not  necessarily  lead  to
the  inference  that  the  custom  had  just  then  begun.  The  record  is
more  likely,  when  there  is  no  evidence  to  the  contrary,  to  have
been  that  of  a  custom  long  previously  in  existence  than  of  one  that
has  just  then  been  adopted.

So  we  may  fairly  conclude  that  it  was  the  usage  of  the  Scottish
lodges  of  the  17th  century  to  open  and  close  their  meetings  with
prayer,  a  usage  that  we  have  reason  to  infer  was  also  practiced  by
the  English  lodges  of  the  same  period.

The  last  of  the  Scottish  Masonic  customs  to  which  it  is  neces-
sary to  refer  is  that  of  the  use  of  Marks,  instead  of,  or  sometimes
as  supplemented  to,  the  written  signature.

This  is  an  interesting  subject  and  claims  a  very  careful  and  thor-
ough consideration.

The  presence  of  certain  figures  chiselled  on  the  stones  of  a
building  has  been  remarked  by  travelers  as  occurring  in  almost  all
countries  where  architecture  had  made  any  progress  and  at  very
early  epochs.  It  has  been  remarked  by  Mr.  Ainsworth,  an  oriental
traveler,  that  he  found  among  some  ruins  in  Mesopotamia  that
"  every  stone,  not  only  in  the  chief  building  but  in  the  walls  and
bastions  and  other  public  monuments,  when  not  defaced  by  time,
is  marked  with  a  character  which  is  for  the  most  part  either  a  Chal-
dean letter  or  numeral."

On  the  floor  of  a  tomb  at  Agra,  in  India,  it  was  found  that
every  stone  was  inscribed  with  a  peculiar  mark  chiseled  upon  it
by  the  workman.  Copies  of  over  sixty  of  these  marks  were  given
in  1865  by  a  writer  in  the  London  Freemasons  Quarterly
Review.

In  an  interesting  work  on  Architecture  by  Mr.  George  God-

42

658  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

win,1  the  author,  referring  to  the  Freemasons  of  the  Middle  Ages,
makes  the  following  remarks  :

"  Several  years  ago  my  attention  was  led  to  the  fact  that  many  of
our  ancient  buildings  exhibited  on  the  face  of  the  walls,  both  inside
and  outside,  marks  of  a  peculiar  character  on  the  face  of  the  stones
which  were  evidently  the  work  of  the  original  builders  ;  and  it  oc-
curred to  me  that  if  examined  and  compared  they  might  serve  to
throw  light  upon  these  bands  of  operatives.  I  made  a  large  col-
lection of  them  in  England,  France,  Belgium  and  Germany,  some
of  which  were  published  in  the  Archceologia.  These  are  simply  the
marks  made  by  the  Masons  to  identify  their  work  ;  but  it  is  curious
to  find  them  exactly  the  same  in  different  countries  and  descending
from  early  times  to  the  present  day  ;  for  in  parts  of  Germany  and
Scotland  tables  of  marks  are  still  preserved  in  the  lodges,  and  one
is  given  to  the  (practical)  mason  on  taking  up  his  freedom.  He
cuts  it,  however,  on  the  bed  of  the  stone  now  instead  of  on  its  face.
The  marks  are  usually  two  or  three  inches  long."

These  marks  were,  it  is  evident,  prescribed  by  the  Masters  or
Superintendents  of  the  buildings  in  process  of  construction  to  be
used  by  the  workmen,  so  that  each  one's  work  might  be  identified
when  censure  or  approval  was  to  be  awarded.  It  was  a  measure  of
precaution,  and  the  employment  of  marks  is  no  evidence,  unless  the
mark  itself  is  of  a  purely  Masonic  character,  that  the  workmen  who
used  them  were  Freemasons.

At  first,  it  seems  from  the  observations  of  Mr.  Ainsworth,  they
were  merely  letters  or  numbers.  Afterward  those  found  at  Agra
were  principally  astronomical  or  mathematical.  But  when  used  by
organized  bands  of  Freemasons  we  find  among  these  marks  such
symbols  as  the  hour-glass,  the  pentalpha,  and  the  square  and  com-
passes. When  the  Freemasons  followed  the  precautionary  system
of  the  ordinary  stonecutters  and  adopted  the  use  of  marks,  they  gave,
most  generally,  a  symbolic  character  to  them,  though  sometimes
they  made  use  of  monograms  of  their  names,

M.  Didron,  who  discovered  these  marks  at  Spire,  Worms,  Stras-
burg,  Rheims,  Basle,  and  several  other  places,  and  who  made  a  re-
port of  his  investigations  to  the  Historical  Committee  of  Arts  and

1 "  History  in  Ruins  ;  a  Handbook  of  Architecture  for  the  Unlearned."  By  George
Godwin,  F.R.S.,  London,  1858.

CUSTOMS   OF   THE  SCOTTISH   MASONS  659

Sciences  of  Paris,  believed  that  he  could  discover  in  them  reference
to  distinct  schools  or  lodges  of  Masons.  He  divides  them  into  two
classes,  those  of  the  overseers  and  those  of  the  men  who  worked  the
stones.  The  marks  of  the  first  class  consist  of  monogrammatic
characters,  while  those  of  the  second  are  of  the  nature  of  symbols,
such  as  shoes,  trowels,  and  mallets.

It  is  possible  that  something  like  this  distinction  is  to  be  found
in  the  old  Scottish  marks.  Of  the  91  marks,  copies  of  which  are
given  in  facsimile  by  Bro.  Lyon  as  taken  from  the  minute-book  of
the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,  16  are  evidently  monograms,  such  as  gi,
me,  al,  vh,  ni,  etc.,  while  the  remaining  75  are  symbols,  princi-
pally the  cross  in  various  forms,  the  triangle,  the  hour-glass,  repre-
sented by  two  triangles  joined  at  their  apices,  the  pentalpha,  etc.
In  one  instance  the  monogram  and  the  symbol  are  combined,  where
David  Salmon  adopts  as  his  mark  a  fish  or  salmon,  with  the  head  in
the  form  of  the  Delta  or  Greek  letter  equivalent  to  d.

There  was  undoubtedly  a  distinction  of  monogrammatic  and  sym-
bolic marks,  but  whether  Didron's  idea  that  they  belonged  to  two
different  classes  of  workmen  is  correct  or  not,  it  is  impossible  posi-
tively to  ascertain.  Bro.  Lyon,  however,  affirms  that  "  in  regard  to
the  arrangement  of  Marks  into  distinctive  classes,  one  for  Apprentices,
one  for  Fellow  Crafts,  and  a  third  for  Foremen — the  practice  of  the
Lodge  of  Edinburgh,  or  that  of  Kilwinning,  as  far  as  can  be  learned
from  their  records,  was  never  in  harmony  with  the  teachings  of  tra-
dition on  that  point."

It  has  been  supposed  the  degree  now  called  the  "Mark  Mas-
ter's Degree  "  was  originally  manufactured  by  some  ritual  mongers
toward  the  close  of  the  last  century  and  attached  as  a  supernume-
rary degree  to  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  or  Scottish  Rite.  I  have
in  my  possession  the  original  charter  granted  in  1802  by  the  Grand
Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  of  Charleston,  S.  C,  to  American
Eagle  Mark  Lodge  No.  i.1  When  Thomas  Smith  Webb  was  es-
tablishing his  new  system  he  incorporated  the  Mark  degree  in  his
ritual  and  made  it  the  fourth  degree  of  the  American  Rite,  as  it  is
practiced  in  the  United  States  of  America.  It  has  been  supposed
that  Webb  derived  his  degree  from  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite,

1  It  was  published  in  1851  by  the  author  in  the  "  Southern  and  Western  Masonic  Mis-
cellany," vol.  ii.,  p.  300.

<56o  HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

and  it  is  not  improbable  that  he  did  so.  But  more  recently  it  has
been  discovered  that  the  degree  of  Mark  Mason  and  that  of  Mark
Master  Mason  was  given  in  Scotland  by  some  of  the  Craft  lodges
as  early  as  1778.  An  excerpt  made  by  that  indefatigable  Archae-
ologist, Bro.  W.  J.  Hughan,  from  the  minutes  of  the  Lodge  Opera-
tive Banff  under  date  of  January  7,  1778,  shows  that  the  degree  of
Mark  Mason  was  conferred  on  Fellow  Crafts,  and  that  of  Mark
Master  Mason  on  Master  Masons.

I  think,  therefore,  that  we  may  fairly  attribute  the  origin  of  the
degree  to  the  Masons  of  Scotland.  The  ritual  has  of  course  grown,
as  all  rituals  do,  by  gradual  accretions  to  its  present  extent.  But  it
is  hardly  necessary  to  say  that  the  allegory  and  the  tradition  of  tbe
origin  of  the  degree  at  the  Temple  of  King  Solomon  is  a  mere  sym-
bolic myth,  which  is  wholly  unsupported  by  historical  authority.

The  statutes  enacted  by  William  Schaw,  in  1598,  for  the  govern-
ment of  the  Masons  of  Scotland,  direct  that  on  the  reception  and
admission  of  every  Fellow  Craft  his  name  and  mark  shall  be  in-
serted in  the  book  or  register  of  the  lodge.

The  subsequent  lodge  minutes  show  that  giving  or  taking  a
mark  was  accompanied  by  a  fee,  which  was  paid  by  the  Fellow  for
this  privilege.

The  minutes  also  show  that  Apprentices  were  also  permitted  to
select  and  use  a  mark.

The  position  and  the  prerogatives  of  Apprentices  in  the  Scottish
lodges  is  worthy  of  notice,  especially  as  throwing  some  light  on  their
condition  in  the  English  lodges,  of  which  so  little  is  said  in  the  old
Constitutions.

The  presence  of  Apprentices  at  the  admission  of  Fellow  Crafts,
was  provided  for  in  the  Statutes  of  Schaw,  as  has  already  been
seen.

Another  prerogative  granted  to  the  Apprentices  was  that  of
giving  or  withholding  their  assent  to  any  proposed  accession  of  their
ranks  in  the  lodge.

They  thus  appear  to  have  been  so  far  recognized  as  active  mem-
bers. But  Lyon  says  that  this  concession  does  not  appear  to  have
been  granted  to  all  Apprentices,  but  only  to  such  as  being  "  bound
for  the  freedom  "  afterward  became  "  Mason  burgesses  "  and  mem-
bers of  the  Incorporation — Apprentices  whose  aim  was  that  of  be-
coming qualified  for  employment  as  journeymen.

CUSTOMS   OF   THE   SCOTTISH    MASON'S  66 1

If  this  view  of  Lyon  is  correct  it  would  show  an  aristocratic
distinction  of  rank,  which  was  certainly  unknown  to  the  English
Masons.

Apprentices  were  sometimes  permitted  to  undertake  work,  of
no  very  great  value,  on  their  own  account,  but  with  the  consent  of
their  Masters ;  a  privilege  that  does  not  appear  to  have  been  con-
ceded by  the  English  Statutes.

The  "  passing  "  of  an  Apprentice  to  the  rank  of  a  Fellow  Craft,
although  not  a  ceremony  which  added  anything  to  the  store  of  his
Masonic  knowledge,  was  still  necessary  to  the  extension  of  the  in-
fluence and  the  increase  of  the  revenues  of  the  lodge.  Apparently
toward  the  end  of  the  1 7th  century,  many  Apprentices  were  disin-
clined, at  the  expiration  of  their  time  of  service,  to  undergo  the
trouble  and  expense  of  passing,  but  were  disposed  to  work  as  un-
passed  journeymen.  So  at  the  beginning  of  the  18th  century  it  was
made  imperative  on  Apprentices  soon  after  their  time  of  apprentice-
ship was  out  to  "make  themselves  Fellow  Crafts."

Fellow  Crafts,  or  journeymen,  were  permitted  to  have  Appren-
tices of  their  own,  and  it  was  provided  by  law  that  a  Master  might
employ  such  fellows  and  yet  not  also  employ  their  Apprentices,  or
he  might  employ  the  Apprentice  and  not  the  Fellow  to  whom  he
was  bound.  This  seems  to  have  been  a  peculiarity  of  Scottish
Masonry  in  the  17th  century.  No  similar  provision  is  found  in
the  English  Constitutions.

Apprentices  were  prohibited  from  marrying,  a  very  necessary
provision,  considering  their  relation  to  their  Master's  houses,  which
it  may  well  be  supposed  existed  in  every  other  country.

In  all  of  these  usages  of  the  Scottish  Masons  in  the  17th  cen-
tury, we  see  the  characteristics  of  an  operative  system.  But  this
system  was  admitting  the  gradual  encroachment  of  the  Speculative
element  exhibited  in  the  admission  into  the  operative  lodges  of
non-professional  members.

The  progress  of  this  transition  from  an  Operative  to  a  Specu-
lative character  is  better  marked  or  rather  better  recorded  in  the
Scottish  than  in  the  English  history  of  Freemasonry.

In  the  latter  we  are  aroused  with  suddenness  from  the  contem-
plation of  the  operative  system  as  detailed  in  the  manuscript  Con-
stitutions extending  into  the  very  beginning  of  the  18th  century,  to
the  unexpected  organization,  without  previous  notice,  of  a  purely

662  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Speculative  Grand  Lodge  a  very  few  years  after  the  date  of  the  last
written  Constitution,  which  makes  no  reference  to  such  an  institu-
tion.

But  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  was  not  organized  until  nine-
teen years  after  that  of  the  sister  kingdom.  The  approaches  to  the
change  were  gradual  and  well  marked,  and  the  struggle  which  ter-
minated in  the  victory  of  Speculative  or  modern  Freemasonry  has
been  carefully  recorded.

But  the  narrative  of  the  events  which  led  to  the  establishment
in  the  year  1736  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  will  form  the  in-
teresting materials  for  a  distinct  chapter.

M^j*£5

vwKfi

WkS&

CHAPTER  XV

THE    FRENCH    GUILDS    OF    THE    MIDDLE    AGES

|N  account  has  already  been  given  in  this  work  of
the  character  of  the  English  Craft  guilds  or
corporations  of  workmen.  I  have  not  been
able  to  concur  in  the  views  of  Mr.  Thorpe,
nor  in  the  qualified  opinion  of  Brentano,  that
we  are  to  look  for  the  origin  of  these  guilds,
not  in  the  Roman  Colleges,  but  in  the  Scandi-
navian confraternities.

In  Gaul,  and  subsequently,  with  greater  development,  in  France,
we  find  the  existence  of  similar  guilds  or  corporations  of  work-
men, and  here  we  are  able  to  trace  them  more  directly  to  the  Ro-
man Colleges  of  Artificers,  as  their  models,  because,  after  the  fall  of
the  Empire  and  the  invasion  of  the  barbarians,  the  old  inhabitants
were  not  exterminated  by  the  invaders.  On  the  contrary,  the
Franks  were  well  disposed  to  the  Roman  culture  and  civilization,
accepted  many  of  the  Roman  laws  and  customs,  imitated  the  remain-
ing monuments  of  Roman  taste  and  skill,  and  finally  adopted,  in
the  place  of  their  own  rough  Teutonic  dialect,  a  modified  form  of
the  Latin  language.

The  Craft  guilds  or  corporations  of  workmen  which  were  in
existence  in  Gaul  at  an  early  period  after  the  decay  of  the  Roman
Empire,  continued  to  exist  with  spasmodic  interruptions  until  the
1 2th  and  13th  centuries,  when  they  were  fully  developed  in  the  Cor-
porations des  Metiers.

The  writers  of  the  exhaustive  article  on  this  subject  in  Lacroix's
massive  work  on  the  Middle  Ages  and  the  Renaissance,  have  ad-
vanced the  theory  that  the  guilds  came  into  Gaul  with  the  conquer-
ors, and  were  therefore  of  Scandinavian  or  Teutonic  origin,  but
in  their  subsequent  investigations  they  appear  tacitly  to  admit  the
fact  that  there  was  a  very  close  connection  between  them  and  the
Roman  Colleges.

663

664  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

M.  Aug.  Thierry  is  of  the  opinion  that  the  corporations,  like  the
municipal  communes,  found  their  origin  in  the  principles  that  gov-
erned the  Roman  Colleges.  The  guild,  he  says,  was  the  moving
power ;  the  Roman  Colleges  the  material  on  which  it  acted  and  out
of  which  it  was  generated,  and  he  thinks  it  would  be  interesting  to
examine  how  this  motive  principle  as  a  new  element  has  been  ap-
plied to  the  ancient  element  of  municipal  organization  which  we
historically  know  to  have  been  of  Roman  origin  and  in  what  pro-
portion it  is  combined  with  them.

In  other  words,  he  would  seek  to  trace  the  connection  between
the  Guilds  and  the  Roman  Colleges  and  to  determine  the  influence
of  one  upon  the  other.

Now  this  is  the  very  investigation  in  which  I  propose  to  be  en-
gaged in  the  present  chapter,  as  I  have  already  pursued  in  the  pre-
vious discussion  of  the  early  English  guilds.

The  theory  that  I  have  hitherto  maintained,  and  which  I  have
seen  no  reasonable  cause  to  repudiate,  is  that  the  Guilds  were  the
successors,  as  it  were,  by  inheritance  of  the  Roman  Colleges.

Therefore,  though  the  subject  of  these  institutions  has  already
been  very  fully  treated,  it  will  be  expedient  to  introduce  the  history
of  the  early  guilds  of  Gaul  and  of  their  progress  until  they  culmi-
nate in  the  1 2th  century  in  the  Corporations  des  Metiers,  by  a  brief
recapitulation  of  what  has  been  before  said  at  length  on  the  subject
of  the  Colleges  of  Artificers  of  ancient  Rome.

The  corporations  of  artisans,  which  received  the  name  of  Collegia
Artificuin  or  Colleges  of  Artificers,  are  supposed  to  have  been  insti-
tuted by  Numa,  who  first  divided  the  .artisans  of  Rome  into  nine
colleges,  gave  them  regulations  for  their  government,  and  prescribed
peculiar  rites  and  customs  to  be  observed  by  them.  They  met  in
their  course  from  the  Kingdom  to  the  Empire  with  many  vicissitudes.
They  were  abolished  by  Tullus  Hostilius,  re-established  by  Servius,
again  interdicted  and  anew  instituted  and  enlarged  in  their  faculties
by  the  decemvirs.  Under  the  republic  they  were  a  constant  source
of  inquietude  and  danger  ;  their  turbulent  members,  misled  by  dem-
agogues, repeatedly  threatened  the  security  of  the  state.  They  were,
during  the  latter  years  of  the  republic,  often  dissolved  and  as  often
re-established.  Finally,  Caligula  definitively  re-constituted  them  and
invested  them  with  all  their  ancient  prerogatives.  Trajan  and  his
successors   showed  the  colleges  but  little  favor;  they  were,    how-

THE   FRENCH    GUILDS   OF   THE   MIDDLE   AGES      665

ever,  tolerated  because  the  artisans,  deprived  of  consideration  in  the
city,  were  much  better  received  in  the  provinces,  and  could  be
retained  at  the  Capital  only  by  securing  to  them  their  privileges.
At  this  epoch  they  had  become  very  numerous  both  at  Rome  and  in
its  provinces.  A  contemporary  of  Alexander  Severus  names  thirty-
two  colleges  ;  Constantine  designates  thirty  more,  and  the  inscrip-
tions preserved  by  Heineccius,  their  most  reliable  historian,  enumer-
ates many  more.

The  colleges  required  for  their  legal  existence  the  authority  of
the  law — in  modern  phrase  it  was  necessary  for  them  to  be  incor-
porated. Those  which  were  not  were  styled  illicit  and  their  exist-
ence was  prohibited.

Into  each  college,  the  artisans  of  only  a  particular  profession  or
handicraft  were  admitted  ;  slaves  even  might  become  members  with
the  consent  of  their  masters ;  and  at  length,  persons  of  distinction
who  were  not  of  the  profession  practiced  by  the  college  were  re-
ceived as  patrons  or  honorary  members,  and  these  became  the  pro-
tectors of  the  college.

Some  of  the  trades,  as  for  instance  that  of  the  bakers,  were  hered-
itary, and  the  practice  of  the  trade  descended  from  father  to  son.

No  artist  or  handicraftsman  was  permitted  to  belong  to  more
than  one  college.

Each  college  had  the  right  to  enact  its  own  regulations  for  its
internal  government ;  for  this  purpose,  and  for  the  discussion  of
their  common  interests,  the  members  frequently  assembled,  they
elected  their  officers,  and  imposed  a  tax  for  the  support  of  the  com-
mon chest  and  decided  these  and  all  other  questions  by  a  majority
of  suffrages.

Each  college  had  its  patron  deity  and  exercised  peculiar  religious
rites  of  sacrifice  and  commemorative  feasts,  which  sometimes  de-
generated into  Bacchanalian  banquets.

Such  is  a  brief  outline  of  the  Craft  guilds,  as  they  may  justly  be
styled,  which  prevailed  in  Rome  at  the  time  of  the  dissolution  of  the
Empire,  and  which,  for  the  reason  already  assigned,  flourished  with
great  popularity  in  all  the  provinces  from  southern  Gaul  to  the  north-
ern limits  of  England,  the  evidence  of  which  is  extant  in  the  numer-
ous inscriptions  which  have  been  preserved  commemorative  of  their
residence  and  their  labors  in  every  part  of  Europe.

The  writers  of  the  article  on  the  Corporations  of  Craftsmen,  in

666  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

the  work  of  Lacroix,  assert  that  under  the  conquering  Germans,
from  the  moment  that  Europe  emerged  from  the  government  of
Rome,  without  ever  completely  escaping  from  the  influence  of  its
laws,  the  confraternities  of  workmen  never  for  an  instant  ceased  to
exist.  The  rare  vestiges  that  we  possess  of  them  do  not  permit  us
to  believe  in  their  prosperous  condition,  but  they  attest  at  least  their
persistence.1

These  fraternities  of  workmen  were  the  Provincial  colleges
which  the  invaders  found  when  they  entered  the  countries  whence
they  had  expelled  the  former  Roman  masters.  But  the  Teu-
tonic tribes,  whose  invasion  was  for  the  purpose  of  a  permanent  set-
tlement, and  not  like  that  of  the  Huns,  merely  for  temporary  occu-
pation and  devastation,  were  not,  as  has  been  well  observed,  alien  in
mind  and  spirit  from  the  Romans  whom  they  had  conquered.  They
had,  to  some  extent,  become  familiar  with  the  civilization  which  in
the  trial  of  strength  they  had  overcome.  Some  of  them  had  been
soldiers  in  the  imperial  service  or  at  the  court,  and  many  of  them
had  listened  to  the  teachings  of  Christian  missionaries,  and,  though
in  an  imperfect  way,  adopted  Christianity  as  their  religion.2

When,  therefore,  says  Mr.  Church,  they  founded  their  new  king-
dom in  Gaul,  in  Spain,  and  in  Italy,  the  things  about  them  were
not  absolutely  new  to  them.  The  influences  of  the  Christian  relig-
ion, which  they  imperfectly  professed,  of  the  Roman  laws,  which
they  did  not  altogether  abolish,  and  of  the  Latin  language,  which
they  began  insensibly  to  adopt,  were  exerted  in  producing  a  tolerance
for  the  Roman  corporations  of  workmen,  as  well  as  for  many  other
Roman  customs,  and  a  facility  for  adopting  the  same  system  of
organizing  workmen,  which  led  in  time  to  the  establishment  of  the
guilds.

Of  the  regular  progress  of  these  guilds  in  the  earlier  centuries,
as  if  they  were  a  mere  continuation  of  the  corporations  of  the  Ro-
man colleges,  we  have  sufficient,  if  not  abundant,  records.

Lucius  Ampelius,  a  Latin  writer  of  the  5th  century,  mentions,

1  The  article  in  Lacroix's  "  Le  Moyen  Age  et  la  Renaissance,"  which  treats  of  the
"  Corporations  de  Metiers,"  was  written  by  MM.  Monteil  and  Rabutaux.  To  their  re-
searches I  have  been  indebted  for  much  that  is  contained  in  this  chapter ;  but  for  the
sake  of  brevity  and  convenience  I  shall  cite  authority  under  the  general  reference  to
Lacroix.

*  Church,  "  The  Beginning  of  the  Middle  Ages,"  p.  46.

THE  FRENCH   GUILDS   OF  THE   MIDDLE  AGES      667

in  his  Liber  Memorialis,  a  consul  or  chief  of  the  locksmiths,  whence
we  may  infer  an  organized  body  of  those  craftsmen.  Under  the
Merovingian  kings,  or  the  first  dynasty  of  France,  we  meet  with  a
corporation  of  goldsmiths.  The  bakers  were  probably  organized
under  Charlemagne,  as  he  took  measures  for  their  regulation,  and  in
630  they  are  distinctly  spoken  of  as  a  corporation  in  the  ordinances
of  Dagobert

In  Lombardy,  which  after  its  conquest  by  Charlemagne  was  in
close  relations  with  France,  there  were  many  colleges  or  corpora-
tions of  artisans.  We  find  in  Ravenna,  in  943,  a  college  of  fisher-
men, and  ten  years  afterward  a  chief  of  the  corporation  of  mer-
chants;  in  1001  a  chief  of  the  corporation  of  butchers.  In  1061
Philip  I.  granted  certain  privileges  to  the  Master  chandlers.

The  "  ancient  customs "  of  the  butchers  are  mentioned  in  the
time  of  Louis  VII.,  in  1162  ;  the  same  prince,  in  1160,  granted  to
the  wife  and  heirs  of  one  Yves  Laccohre  the  faculty  of  practicing
five  trades,  namely,  those  of  the  glovers,  the  purse-makers,  the  belt-
makers,  the  cobblers,  and  the  shoemakers.1

Under  the  subsequent  reign  of  Philip  1 1,  similar  grants  or  con-
cessions are  more  numerous.

This  monarch,  whose  military  exploits  had  won  for  him  the  title
of  "Conqueror"  and  "Augustus,"  is  said  to  have  approved  the
statutes  of  several  corporations;  in  1182  he  confirmed  those  of  the
butchers,  and  granted  them  several  privileges ;  in  the  next  year
the  skinners  and  the  drapers  were  also  the  objects  of  his  favor.2

In  all  Europe,  say  the  writers  in  Lacroix's  work,  toward  the
1 2th  century,  Italy  gave  the  first  impulse  to  that  restoration  to
splendor  of  the  corporations  which  for  some  centuries  had  been
diminishing  in  importance.  The  confraternities  of  artisans  in  the
north  of  France  also  constituted  themselves  into  corporations,
whence  they  spread  into  the  cities  across  the  Rhine.  In  Germany
the  guild  had  for  a  long  time  preserved  its  primitive  form,  and
therefore  the  German  and  the  French  corporations  are  not  to  be
confounded,  though  they  had  a  common  origin.

The  most  important  event  that  marked  the  reign  of  Louis  VI.
in  the  1 2th  century  was  the  affranchisement  of  the  inhabitants  of

1 "  Et  Boileau,  Livre  des  Metiers."    Introduction  by  M.  Depping.
'Lacroix,  "Le  Moyen  Age  et  la  Renaissance."

668  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

the  cities,1  and  the  establishment  of  the  Communes,  or  independent
municipal  governments.  One  of  the  results  of  this  movement  was
the  revived  organization  of  the  Parisian  Hanse.  This,  which  La-
croix  calls  the  oldest  and  most  considerable  of  the  French  corpora-
tions, was  a  company  of  the  recently  affranchised  citizens  of  Paris
under  the  name  of  the  Merchadise  de  I'eau.  It  was  a  corporation
to  which  was  assigned  the  control  of  river  navigation.  A  corpora-
tion similar  in  character  had  existed  during  the  Roman  domination,
but  in  the  lapse  of  time  and  under  changes  of  government  had  be-
come extinct.  To  this  ancient  corporation,  however,  it  is  probable
that  the  new  one  owed  its  origin.  The  Parisian  Hanse  was  always
treated  with  great  favor  bv  the  Kings.  Louis  VII.  confirmed  their
privileges,  and  Philip  II.  increased  them.  At  length  it  obtained
the  privilege  of  the  navigation  of  the  Seine  and  Yonde  between
Mantes  and  Auvern.  Foreign  merchants  could  not  pass  these  limits
and  bring  goods  into  Paris  unless  they  had  affiliated  with  the  Hanse,
and  associated  in  their  mercantile  gains  a  citizen  who  served  as
their  guaranty.  It  presided  over  the  disembarkation  of  all  goods
brought  into  Paris,  and  controlled  all  buying  and  selling.  After  a
short  time  similar  corporations  were  established  in  all  the  cities
bordering  on  the  sea  or  on  rivers.

Previous  to  the  second  part  of  the  1 3th  century  several  corpora-
tions of  artists  or  Craft  guilds  had  been  authorized  by  different
monarchs,  but  it  is  only  in  the  reign  of  St.  Louis,  from  1226  to
1 2  70,  that  we  are  to  date  the  first  general  measures  taken  for  the
establishment  of  the  communities  in  France,  and  of  the  corporations
on  a  legal  basis.  Up  to  that  time  the  Prevostship  of  Paris  had  been
a  venal  office,  which  was  sold  to  the  highest  bidder.  Louis  resolved
to  reform  this  abuse,  and  appointed  Stephen  Boileau  to  the  office  of
Prevost  of  Paris.

Of  Etienne,  or  Stephen  Boileau,2  French  writers  have  not  been
niggardly  in  their  encomiums.  He  was  undoubtedly  a  magistrate
worthy  of  the  greatest  praise.  To  him  Paris  is  indebted  for  its
police.  He  moderated  and  fixed  the  taxes  and  imposts  which,
under  previous  Prevosts,  had  been  levied  arbitrarily  on  trade  and

1  It  was  not  until  the  14th  century  that  the  stain  of  serfdom  was  removed  from  the
peasants.

2  The  name  has  been  indifferently  spelled,  Boileau,  Boyleau,  Boleaue,  or  Boylesve.  I
have  adhered  to  the  most  usual  orthography.

THE  FRENCH   GUILDS   OF  THE   MIDDLE  AGES     669

commerce.  But  his  most  important  act  in  relation  to  our  present
subject  was  the  distribution  of  the  merchants  and  artisans  into  dis-
tinct communities  or  corporations  under  the  name  of  confrater-
nities, with  specific  statutes  for  their  government.

He  collected  from  old  records  and  other  ancient  sources  the
customs  and  usages  of  the  various  crafts,  most  of  which  had  never
been  written  ;  collated  them,  and  most  probably  improved  them  in
many  parts,  preserved  them  as  monuments  in  the  archives  of  the
Chatelet,  which  was  the  Guildhall  of  Paris,  and  thus  composed  his
invaluable  work  entitled  Livre  des  Metiers,  or  the  "  Book  of  the
Crafts."1

In  his  introduction  to  this  work,  M.  Depping  says  that  "  it  has
the  advantage  of  being  for  the  most  part  the  work  of  the  corpora-
tions themselves,  and  not  a  series  of  regulations  drawn  up  by  the
authority  of  the  State."

The  systems  of  corporations  now  began  to  enter  into  the  regular
framework  of  the  social  organization.  Royal  confirmations  of  char-
ters, which  had  been  rare  during  the  12th  century,  were  multiplied
in  the  13th,  and  became  a  universal  usage  in  the  14th  century.9

As  an  evidence  of  the  growth  of  these  fraternities  in  cities
neighboring  to  France,  it  may  be  noted  that  in  the  year  1228  Bo-
logna had  twenty-one  corporations  of  crafts;  in  132 1  Parma  had
eighteen,  and  in  1376  Turin  had  twenty-six.

The  Livre  des  Metiers  of  Boileau  contains  the  statutes  or  regu-
lations of  one  hundred  different  corporations,  and  these  were  not  all
that  were  then  existing  in  Paris.  Some,  for  various  reasons,  had
neglected  or  declined  to  have  themselves  inscribed  at  the  Chatelet.

In  succeeding  reigns  the  corporations  were  greatly  multiplied.
Under  the  administration  of  the  Chancellor  Tellier,  in  the  reigns  of
Louis  XIII.  and  Louis  XIV.,  Sauval  records  in  his  Histoire  des
Antiquitis  de  la  Ville  de  Paris,  that  he  had  counted  1,531  corpo-
rations in  that  city.

Some  of  these  Parisian  corporations  possessed  distinguished
privileges.  Such  were  the  guild  or  corporation  of  Drapers,  who
held  a  pre-eminence  over  all  others,  the  Grocers,  the  Mercers,  the
Skinners,  the  Hosiers,  and  the  Goldsmiths.

1  This  work,  long  in  manuscript,  was  first  printed  and  published  in  1837  in  one  volume
quarto  at  Paris  by  M.  Depping,  who  has  enriched  it  with  a  learned  Introduction.
3Lacroix,  "  Le  Moyen  Age  et  la  Renaissance."

670  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

Some  of  the  corporations  were  held  directly  under  the  royal  au-
thority and  some  under  certain  high  officers  of  the  court

In  the  first  centuries  after  the  dissolution  of  the  Roman  Empire
the  Roman  law  as  to  illicit  or  unauthorized  corporations  seems
to  have  become  obsolete  or  to  have  been  wholly  disregarded,  and
the  corporations  were  constituted  and  organized  at  the  will  of  their
organizers.  But  subsequently,  and  more  especially  after  the  12th
century,  the  approval  of  their  regulations  by  the  King  or  other  per-
son, in  whose  jurisdiction  they  were,  was  required  to  impart  to  them
a  legal  condition.

These  corporations  had  their  peculiar  privileges  conceded  to
them  by  the  royal  or  other  competent  authority,  and  their  stat-
utes and  regulations  enacted,  for  the  most  part,  by  themselves.
They  were  distinguished  from  each  other  by  their  coats  of  arms,
which  they  displayed  in  their  processions  and  on  other  public
occasions.

Each  of  the  corporations  held  its  General  Assembly,  to  which
the  members  frequently  came  from  a  great  distance.  Absentees
were  often  fined.

The  number  of  craftsmen  who  attended  was  frequently  great.
For  instance,  in  1361,  the  General  Assembly  of  the  Drapers  of
Rouen  was  composed  of  more  than  a  thousand  persons.1

These  Assemblies  were  generally  convened  by  the  officers  of
the  King,  who  assisted  at  them  either  in  person  or  by  their  dele-
gates; but  sometimes  they  were  called  together  by  the  artisans
without  royal  authority.

To  render  the  attendance  on  them  more  convenient,  artisans  of
the  same  profession  usually  inhabited  the  same  quarter  of  the  city,
and  even  the  same  street.  Sometimes  this  common  residence  was
made  obligatory,  as  in  the  case  of  the  booksellers  of  Paris,  who
were  compelled  to  dwell  beyond  the  bridges  on  the  right  bank  of
the  Seine.

The  writers  in  Lacroix  assert  that  these  communities  or  cor-
porations were  in  possession  of  all  the  privileges  that  formerly  at-
tached to  the  Roman  Colleges.  They  could  possess  property,  sus-
tain actions  at  law  through  a  procurator,  and  accept  legacies.  They
had  a  common  chest,  exacted  dues  of  their  members,  and  exercised

1  Lacroix,  ut  supra.

THE   FRENCH   GUILDS   OF   THE   MIDDLE  AGES      671

a  police  jurisdiction  over  them,  and,  to  some  extent,  a  criminal
one.  They  struggled  to  preserve  and  to  augment  their  privileges,
and  took  part  in  all  the  conflicts  of  those  turbulent  times  and  in  the
quarrels,  which  were  by  no  means  few,  between  the  Masters  and
the  workmen.  Some  of  them  even  exercised  a  jurisdiction  over
artisans  who  were  not  members  of  the  corporation.

In  most  of  the  corporations  the  officers  were  elected  by  the
community,  though  in  some  cases  they  were  appointed  by  the  King
or  other  extraneous  authority.

The  members  of  the  corporation  were  divided  into  three  classes ;
Apprentices,  Companions,  and  Masters.  The  writers  in  Lacroix
speak  of  these  classes  as  degrees,  but  evidently  without  attaching  to
the  word  the  meaning  conveyed  in  the  modern  Masonic  use  of  it
They  were  simply  ranks,  or  classes,  the  lower  subordinate  to  the
higher.

The  duration  of  apprenticeship  was  from  two  to  eight  years,
and  in  most  of  the  trades  the  Companion  had  to  undergo  a  consid-
erable probation  before  he  could  become  a  Master.  The  Compan-
ion was  usually  called  a  varlet  gaignant ;  that  is,  a  man  who  earns
wages  equivalent  to  the  English  journeyman,  or,  as  he  was  called
in  the  old  Masonic  charges,  a  Fellow.

When  the  Apprentice,  having  completed  his  apprenticeship,  or
the  Companion  was  desirous  of  being  promoted  to  the  rank  of  Mas-
ter, he  assumed  the  title  of  Aspirant.1  He  was  subjected  to  frequent
rigid  examinations,  and  was  required  to  prove  his  fitness  for  advance-
ment by  executing  some  of  the  principal  products  of  the  trade  or
craft  which  he  professed.  This  was  called  his  chef-d'ceuvre,  and  in
its  execution  he  was  surrounded  by  minute  formalities.  He  was
closely  confined  in  an  edifice  or  apartment  specially  prepared  for  the
occasion  ;  he  was  deprived  of  all  communication  with  his  relations
or  friends,  and  worked  under  the  eyes  of  officers  of  the  corpora-
tion. His  task  lasted  sometimes  for  several  months.  It  was  not
always  confined  to  the  direct  products  of  the  trade,  but  sometimes
extended  to  the  fabrication  of  the  tools  used  in  his  craft.

The  aspirant  having  successfully  submitted  to  the  examinations
and  trials  imposed  upon  him,  and  having  renewed  his  oath  of  fidelity
to  the  King,  an  oath  which  he  must  have  previously  taken  as  an  Ap-

1  Lacroix,  ut  supra.

672  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

prentice,  was  required  afterward  to  pay  a  tax,  which  was  sometimes
heavy,  and  which  was  divided  between  the  King  or  Lord  and  the
corporation.  This  tax  was,  however,  remitted  or  greatly  reduced  in
the  case  of  the  son  of  a  Master  of  the  Craft.  From  this  usage  has
been,  undoubtedly,  derived  the  custom  which  still  prevails  in  the
Speculative  Masonry  of  some  countries,  and  which  was  once  univer-
sal, of  initiating  a  louveteau,  or  the  son  of  a  Mason,  at  an  earlier  age
than  that  prescribed  for  other  candidates.

The  statutes  of  every  corporation  exercised  great  vigilance  over
the  private  life  and  morals  of  the  members.

Bastards  could  not  be  accepted  as  Apprentices.  To  be  admitted
to  the  Mastership  it  was  necessary  that  the  Aspirant  should  enjoy  a
stainless  reputation.  To  use  the  modern  Masonic  phrase,  he  must
be  "  under  the  tongue  of  good  report."

If  an  artisan  associated  with  heretics  or  excommunicated  persons,
or  eat  or  drank  with  them,  he  was  subject  to  punishment.

The  statutes  cultivated  good  feelings  and  affectionate  relations
between  the  members.

The  merchant  or  craftsman  could  not  strive  to  entice  a  customer
to  enter  his  shop  when  he  was  approaching  that  of  his  neighbor.

Improper  language  to  each  other  subjected  the  offender  to  a  fine.

In  reference  to  religion,  each  corporation  constituted  a  religious
confraternity,  which  was  placed  under  the  patronage  of  some  saint,
who  was  deemed  the  special  protector  of  the  profession.  Thus  St.
Crispin  was  the  patron  saint  of  the  Shoemakers,  and  St.  Eloy  of  the
Smiths.

Every  corporation  possessed  a  chapel  in  some  church  of  the
quarter,  and  often  maintained  a  chaplain.

The  corporations  had  religious  exercises  on  stated  occasions  for
the  spiritual  and  temporal  prosperity  of  the  community  ;  they  ren-
dered funeral  honors  to  the  dead,  and  took  care  of  the  widows  and
orphans  of  deceased  members ;  they  distributed  alms  and  sent  to  the
hospitals  the  contributions  which  had  been  collected  at  their  ban-
quets.

The  brethren  received  a  strange  workman  in  their  trade  when
entering  a  citv,  welcomed  him,  provided  for  his  first  wants,  sought
work  for  him,  and  if  that  failed  the  eldest  Companion  yielded  his
place  to  him.

But  this  character  in  time  degenerated,  the   banquets  became

>

THE   FRENCH   GUILDS   OF  THE   MIDDLE  AGES     673

debauches,  conflicts  took  place  between  the  workmen,  and  coalitions
were  formed  against  the  industrial  classes.

The  law  then  interfered,  and  these  confraternities  or  guilds  were
forbidden,  but  without  much  success.

It  will  be  very  evident  to  the  reader  that  the  details  here  given
of  the  rise  and  progress,  the  form  and  organization  of  the  mediaeval
corporations  or  guilds  do  not  refer  to  the  Masons  exclusively,  but
to  the  circle  of  the  handicrafts  of  which  the  Masons  constituted  only
one,  but  an  important,  portion.  Before  the  middle  of  the  1 2th,  or
the  beginning  of  the  1 3th,  century,  the  corporations  of  Freemasons
were  not  distinguished  from  the  other  crafts  by  any  peculiar  organi-
zation. They  had  undoubtedly  derived  a  prominence  over  the
other  guilds  in  consequence  of  their  connection  with  the  construc-
tion of  Cathedrals  and  other  great  public  buildings  ;  but  "  at  that
time,"  says  Mr.  Fergusson,1  "  all  trades  and  professions  were  organ-
ized in  the  same  manner,  and  the  guild  of  Masons  differed  in  no
essential  particulars  from  those  of  the  Shoemakers  or  Hatters,  the
Tailors  or  Vintners — all  had  their  Masters  and  Past  Masters,  their
Wardens  and  other  Officers,  and  were  recruited  from  a  body  of  Ap-
prentices, who  were  forced  to  undergo  years  of  probationary  servi-
tude before  they  were  admitted  to  practice  their  arts."

Mr.  Fergusson  draws  incorrectly  a  deduction  that  the  Freemasons
were  an  insignificant  body,  and  hence  in  his  book,  he  pays  no  atten-
tion to  them  outside  of  Germany.  He  even  underrates  their  con-
structive capacity,  and  thinks  that  the  designs  of  the  Cathedrals
and  other  religious  edifices  were  made  by  Bishops,  who,  taking  as  a
model  some  former  building,  verbally  corrected  its  mistakes  and
suggested  his  improvements  to  his  builder.  But  history  has  shown
that  in  France,  as  well  as  elsewhere,  there  were  at  an  early  period
laymen  who  were  distinguished  architects.

The  only  legitimate  inference  that  can  be  deduced  from  the
fact  that  all  the  other  handicrafts  were  organized  on  the  same  plan
as  the  Masons,  is  that  the  guild  spirit  universally  prevailed,  and
that  there  was  a  common  origin  for  it,  which  most  writers  have  cor-
rectly referred  to  the  Roman  Colleges,  which  were  the  most  ancient
guilds  with  which  we  are  ac     ainted.

1 "  History  of  Architecture  in  all  Countries  from  the  Earliest  Times  to  the  Present
Day."     By  James  Fergusson,  F.R.S.,  etc.,  London,  1867,  voh  i.,  p.  477.

43

674  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Having  thus  far  treated  of  the  guilds  in  general,  or  the  corpo-
rations of  all  the  trades,  it  is  now  proper  to  direct  our  attention  ex-
clusively to  the  Masonic  Guilds  as  they  present  themselves  to  us  in
France  during  the  Middle  Ages.

Larousse,  who  has  compiled  the  best  and  most  exhaustive  ency-
clopaedic dictionary  in  the  French  language,  makes  a  distinction  be-
tween the  associations  of  Masons  and  those  of  the  Freemasons  in
France,  a  distinction  which  has  existed  in  other  countries,  but  with
more  especial  peculiarities  in  France.  Like  all  the  other  crafts,  they
were  divided  into  three  ranks  or  degrees  of  Apprentice,  Journey-
man, and  Master.  But  I  fail  to  find  any  evidence  that  there  was  a
separate  initiation  or  an  esoteric  knowledge  peculiar  to  each  rank
which  would  constitute  it  a  degree  in  the  modern  and  technical  sense
of  that  word.

Larousse  mixes  the  history  of  the  French  with  that  of  the  Ger-
man Freemasons,  but  makes  the  Operative  Masonic  Guilds  spring
out  of  a  jealousy  or  rivalry  on  the  part  of  the  Operative  with  the
better-cultured  architects.

He  says  that  while  the  nomadic  constructors  of  cathedrals  and
castles,  that  is  to  say,  the  Traveling  Freemasons,  who,  springing  out
of  Lombardy,  were  organized  at  Strasburg,  at  Cologne,  and  proba-
bly at  York,  formed  a  kind  of  aristocracy  of  the  Craft,  other  Ma-
sons, attached  to  the  soil  and  living,  therefore,  always  in  one  place,
formed  independent  and  distinct  corporations  in  the  1 5th  century.
I  think,  however,  that  such  organizations  may  be  found  at  an  earlier
period.

These  Masons  did  not,  like  the  German  and  English  Freema-
sons, claim  to  be  the  disciples  of  St.  John  the  Baptist,  but  placed
themselves  under  the  patronage  of  St.  Blaise.

St.  Blaise  was  a  bishop  and  martyr  who  suffered  in  the  3d  cen-
tury, during  the  persecution  of  Diocletian.  His  legend  says  that  he
was  tortured  by  having  his  flesh  torn  with  iron  combs,  such  as  are
used  in  carding  wool.  Hence  he  has  been  adopted  by  the  wool-
staplers  as  their  patron.  But  it  is  inexplicable  why  he  should  have
been  selected  by  the  Masons  of  France  as  their  protecting  saint,
since  there  is  nothing  in  the  legend  of  \j  life  that  connects  him  with
architecture  or  building.

The  Guild  or  Corporation  of  Masons  comprised  Masons  proper;
that  is,  Builders,  Stonecutters,  Plaisterers,  and  Mortar  Mixers.     This

THE   FRENCH   GUILDS   OF    THE   MIDDLE   AGES      675

we  learn  from  the  Regulations  for  the  Arts  and  Trades  of  Paris,
drawn  up  by  Stephen  Boileau  and  contained  in  the  48th  chapter  of
his  Livre  des  Metiers.

It  will  be  interesting  to  compare  these  regulations  of  the  French
Masons,  drawn  up  or  copied  as  is  said  by  Boileau  from  the  older
ones  enacted  by  St.  Eloy,  with  the  statutes  or  constitutions  of  the
English  Masons  contained  in  their  Old  Records.  I  have  therefore
inserted  below  a  literal  translation  of  them  from  the  Livre  des
Mdtiers.

REGULATIONS   OF   THE     MASONS,    STONECUTTERS,    PLAISTERERS,    AND

MORTAR    MIXERS.

1.  Whosoever  desires  may  be  a  Master  at  Paris  provided  that
he  knows  the  trade  and  works  according  to  the  usages  and  customs
of  the  craft.

2.  No  one  can  have  more  than  one  Apprentice  and  he  can  not
take  him  for  less  than  six  years  of  service,  but  he  may  take  him  for
a  longer  period  and  for  money  (a  fee)  if  he  has  it.  And  if  he  takes
him  for  a  less  period  than  six  years  he  is  subject  to  a  fine  of  twenty
sous  of  Paris,  to  be  paid  to  the  Chapel  of  St.  Blaise,  except  only
that  he  should  be  his  son  born  in  lawful  wedlock.

3.  A  Mason  may  take  another  Apprentice,  as  soon  as  the  other
has  accomplished  five  years  of  his  service,  for  the  same  period  that
the  other  had  been  taken.

4.  The  present  King  on  whom  may  God  bestow  a  happy  life
has  given  the  Mastership  of  the  Masons  to  Master  William  de  Saint
Pater,  during  his  pleasure.  The  said  Master  William  swore  at
Paris  in  the  lodges  of  the  Pales  before  said,  that  he  would  to  the
best  of  his  power,  well  and  loyally  protect  the  Craft,  the  poor  as  well
as  the  rich,  the  weak  as  well  as  the  strong  as  long  as  it  was  the
king's  pleasure  that  he  should  protect  the  Craft  aforesaid  and  then
Master  William  took  the  form  of  oath  before  said,  before  the  Pre-
vost  of  Paris  in  the  Chatelet  (or  town  hall).

5.  The  Mortar  Masters  and  the  Plaisterers  have  the  same  condi-
tion and  standing,  in  all  things  as  the  Masons.

6.  The  Master  who  presides  over  the  Craft  of  Masons,  of  Mortar
Mixers  and  of  Plaisterers,  of  Paris,  by  the  King's  order  may  have
two  Apprentices,  but  only  on  the  conditions  before  said,  and  if  he

676  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

should   have  more,  he  will  be  assessed  in  the  manner  above  pro
vided  for.

7.  The  Masons,  the  Mortar  Mixers  and  the  Plaisterers  may  have
as  many  assistants  and  servants  as  they  please  so  long  as  they  do
not  in  any  point  teach  them  the  mystery  of  the  trade.

8.  Every  Mason,  every  Mortar  Mixer  and  every  Plaisterer  must
swear  on  the  gospels  that  he  will  maintain  and  do  well  and  loyally
to  the  Craft,  each  in  his  place  and  that  if  he  knows  that  any  one  is
doing  wrong  and  not  acting  according  to  the  usages  and  Craft
aforesaid  he  will  every  time  make  it  known,  under  his  oath,  to  the
Master.

9.  The  Master  whose  Apprentice  has  completed  his  time  of
service,  must  go  before  the  Master  of  the  Craft  and  declare  that  his
Apprentice  has  finished  his  time  well  and  faithfully  ;  and  the  Master
who  presides  over  the  Craft  must  make  the  Apprentice  swear  on  the
gospels  that  he  will  conform  well  and  truly  to  the  usages  and  cus-
toms of  the  Craft.

10.  No  one  should  work  at  the  aforesaid  trade  on  days  when
flesh  may  be  eaten  after  nones  have  been  sounded  at  Notre  Dame
(i.e.,  3  o'clock  in  the  afternoon)  and  on  Saturday  in  Lent  after  Ves-
pers have  been  chanted  at  Notre  Dame  unless  it  be  on  an  arch,  or
to  close  a  stair  way  or  door  opening  on  the  street.  And  if  any  one
should  work  after  the  aforesaid  hours  except  in  the  above  mentioned
works  of  necessity  he  shall  pay  a  fine  of  four  derniers  to  the  Master
who  presides  over  the  Craft  and  the  Master  may  take  his  tools  for
the  fine.

11.  The  Mortar  Mixers  and  the  Plaisterers  are  under  the  juris-
diction of  the  Master  aforesaid  appointed  by  the  king  to  preside
over  the  Craft.

12.  If  a  Plaisterer  should  send  any  man  plaister  to  be  used  in  a
work,  the  Mason  who  is  working  for  him  to  whom  the  plaister
is  sent,  should  by  his  oath,  take  care  that  the  measure  of  the
plaister  is  good  and  lawful ;  and  if  he  suspects  the  measure  he  should
measure  the  plaister  or  cause  it  to  be  measured  in  his  presence.
And  if  he  finds  that  the  measure  is  not  good,  the  plaisterer  must
pay  a  fine  of  5  sous ;  that  is  to  say,  2  sous  to  the  Chapel  of  St.
Blaise,  2  sous  to  the  Master  who  presides  over  the  Craft  and  1 1
(12?)  deniers  to  him  who  has  measured  the  plaister.  And  he  to
whom  the  olaister  was  delivered  shall  rebate  from  each  sack  that  he

THE   FRENCH   GUILDS   OF   THE   MIDDLE   AGES      677

shall  receive  in  that  work,  as  much  as  should  have  been  in  that
which  was  measured  in  the  beginning.  But  where  there  is  only  one
sack,  it  shall  not  be  measured.

13.  No  one  can  become  a  Plaisterer  at  Paris  unless  he  pays  5
sous  to  the  Master  who,  by  the  King's  order  presides  over  the  Craft ;
and  when  he  has  paid  the  5  sous  he  must  swear  on  the  gospels  that
he  will  mix  nothing  but  plaister  with  his  plaister,  and  that  he  will
deliver  good  and  true  measure.

14.  If  the  Plaisterer  puts  anything  which  he  ought  not,  in  his
plaister  he  shall  be  fined  5  sous,  to  be  paid  to  the  Master  every  time
that  he  is  detected.  And  if  the  Plaisterer  makes  it  a  practice  to
do  this,  and  will  not  submit  to  fine  or  punishment,  the  Master  may
exclude  him  from  the  Craft,  and  if  he  will  not  leave  the  Craft  at
the  Master's  order,  the  Master  must  make  it  known  to  the  Prevost
of  Paris,  and  the  Prevost  must  compel  the  Plaisterer  to  quit  the
Craft  aforesaid.

15.  The  Mortar  Mixer  must  swear  before  the  Master  and  before
other  syndics  of  the  Craft,  that  he  will  make  Mortar  only  out  of
good  limestone,  and  if  he  makes  it  of  any  other  kind  of  stone  or  if
the  mortar  is  made  of  limestone  but  of  inferior  quality  he  should  be
reprimanded  and  should  pay  a  fine  of  4  deniers  to  the  Master  of
the  Craft.

1 6.  A  Mortar  Mixer  can  not  take  an  Apprentice  for  a  less  time
of  service  than  six  years  and  a  fee  of  100  sous  for  teaching.

1 7.  The  Master  of  the  Craft  has  petty  jurisdiction  and  the  in-
fliction of  fines  over  the  Masons,  Plaisterers,  and  Mortar  Mixers,
their  assistants  and  apprentices,  as  it  will  be  the  King's  pleasure,  as
well  as  over  those  who  intrude  into  their  trades  and  over  the  inflic-
tion of  corporal  punishment  without  drawing  blood  and  over  the
right  of  clamor  or  immediate  arrest  and  trial  if  it  did  not  affect
property.

18.  If  any  one  of  the  Craft  departs  before  the  Master  of  the
Craft,  if  he  is  in  contempt  he  must  pay  a  fine  of  4  deniers  to  the
Master ;  and  if  he  returns  and  asks  admission  he  should  give  a
pledge ;  and  if  he  does  not  pay  before  night,  there  is  a  fine  of  4  de-
niers to  the  Master ;  and  if  he  refuses  and  acts  wrongly,  there  is  a
fine  of  4  deniers  to  the  Master.

19.  The  Master  who  presides  over  the  Craft,  can  inflict  only  a
fine  for  a  quarrel ;  and  if  he  who  has  been  fined  is  so  hot  and  foolish

678  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

that  he  will  not  obey  the  commands  of  the  Master  nor  pay   the
fine,  the  Master  may  exclude  him  from  the  Craft.

20.  If  any  one  who  has  been  excluded  from  the  Craft  by  the
Master,  works  at  the  trade  after  his  exclusion,  the  Master  may  take
away  his  tools  and  retain  them  until  he  pays  a  fine  ;  and  if  he  offers
resistance,  the  Master  must  make  it  known  to  the  Prevost  of  Paris
who  must  overcome  the  resistance.

21.  The  Masons  and  the  Plaisterers  are  liable  to  do  watch,  to
pay  taxes,  and  are  subject  to  all  the  duties  which  the  other  citi-
zens of  Paris  owe  to  the  King.

22.  The  Mortar  Mixers  are  exempt  from  watching,  and  also  the
stonecutters  as  the  syndics  have  heard  said  from  father  to  son  from
the  time  of  Charles  Martel.

23.  The  Master,  who  by  the  King's  order  presides  over  the
Craft,  is  exempt  from  watching  in  consequence  of  that  he  does  in
presiding  over  the  Craft.

24.  He  who  is  over  sixty  years  old,  or  whose  wife  is  dead,  ought
not  to  serve  on  the  watch ;  but  he  ought  to  make  it  known  to  the
King's  Keeper  of  the  Watch.

From  these  Regulations  we  learn  that  there  was  an  officer  who
presided  over  the  Craft  in  general,  and  who  in  many  respects  re-
sembled the  Chief  Warden  or  Master  of  the  Work  of  the  Scottish
Masons  and  the  similar  officer  among  the  English,  upon  whom
Anderson  has  gratuitously  bestowed  the  title  of  Grand  Master.  He
was  appointed  by  the  King,  and  in  the  Regulations  is  sometimes
called  "the  Master  who  protects  the  Craft"  (le  mestre  qui  garde  le
mestier),  and  sometimes  "the  Master  of  the  Craft"  (le  mestre  du
mestier).

At  a  later  period  he  was  styled  "  Master  and  General  of  the
Works  and  Buildings  of  the  King  in  the  Art  of  Masonry,"  and  still
later  "  Master  General  of  the  Buildings,  Bridges,  and  Roads  of  the
King."

It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  one  of  these  Regulations  refers  to  a
privilege  as  having  been  enjoyed  by  the  Craft  according  to  an  un-
interrupted tradition  from  the  time  of  Charles  Martel.  This  refer-
ence to  the  great  Mayor  of  the  Palace  as  being  connected  with
Masonry,  in  a  French  document  of  the  13th  century,  and  which  is
believed  to  have  a  much  earlier  origin,  would  authorize  the  hypothe-
sis that  the  story  of  the  connection  of  Charles  Martel  with  Masonry

THE   FRENCH    GUILDS   OF    THE   MIDDLE   AGES      679

which  is  attributed  to  him  in  the  English  legend  was  derived  by  the
English  Masons  from  those  French  builders  who  both  history  and
tradition  concur  in  saying  brought  their  art  into  England  at  a  very
early  period.

The  confounding  of  the  name  of  Charles  Martel  the  Warrior
with  that  of  his  grandson  Charlemagne,  the  Civilizer — if  confusion
there  was,  as  is  strongly  to  be  suspected — must  be  attributed  to  the
French  and  not  to  the  English  Masons.

The  statutes  of  the  Community,  Corporation,  or  Guild  of  Masons
were  confirmed  by  Charles  IX.  and  Henry  IV.  in  the  16th,  and  by
Louis  XIII.  and  Louis  XIV.  in  the  17th  century.  A  great  many
letters-patent  and  decrees  of  the  King's  council  are  in  existence,
which  define  the  jurisdictional  powers  of  the  Masters-General  of  the
Buildings,  and  which  contain  regulations  that  release  the  Masons
from  all  judicial  summonses  and  from  all  judgments  pronounced
against  them  in  other  jurisdictions,  remitting  them  to  the  Masters-
General  of  the  Buildings  as  their  natural  judges.

Some  of  these  letters-patent  related  to  the  police  of  the  Craft.
Thus  those  of  1574  prescribed  that  Apprentices  should  be  received
by  the  Warden  {Maitre  Garde),  and  regulated  the  fee  which  should
be  paid  under  various  circumstances.  By  an  edict  of  October,  1574,
sworn  Master  Masons  were  appointed  as  assistants  to  the  Warden,
who  were  to  visit  and  inspect  the  works  in  Paris  and  the  suburbs.
These  were  at  first  twenty  in  number,  but  they  were  subsequently
increased  to  sixty.

The  Master-General  of  the  Buildings  had  two  jurisdictions,  one
which  had  existed  for  several  centuries,  and  the  other,  which  was
established  in  the  year  1645.  The  seat  of  the  former  was  at  Paris,
in  the  Chatelet ;  that  of  the  latter  at  Versailles.

Three  architects,  says  Lacroix,  who  bore  the  title  of  "  King's
Counsellors,  Architects,  and  Masters-General  of  the  Buildings,"  ex-
ercised their  jurisdiction  year  by  year.  They  decided  all  disputes
between  the  employers  and  the  workmen  and  between  the  workmen
themselves.  Their  courts  were  held  on  Mondays  and  Fridays,  and
there  was  an  appeal  from  their  judgment  to  the  parliament.

In  1789  the  Revolution  in  proclaiming  freedom  of  labor  abol-
ished all  corporative  regulations  and  exempted  the  workmen  from
any  sort  of  restraint,  while  at  the  same  time  they  were  deprived  of
all  special  privileges.

680  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

The  Operative  Masons  of  France,  at  the  present  day,  consti-
tute a  large  Confraternity,  who  have  a  kind  of  organization,  but  very
singularly  they  are  the  only  body  of  workmen  who  do  not  practice
the  system  of  compagnage  or  fellowship  adopted  by  the  other  trades.

They  have,  however,  their  legends,  and  pretend  that  they  are  the
successors  of  the  Tyrians,  who  wrought  at  the  building  of  the
Temple  in  Jerusalem,  calling  themselves,  therefore,  the  children  of
Solomon.

But  they  have  no  corporate  existence  and  must  be  considered  as
working  only  on  an  independent  and  voluntary  principle.  There  is,
apparently,  no  similitude  between  them  and  the  Compagnons  de  la
tour,  or  brotherhoods  of  the  other  handicrafts  in  France.  Accord-
ing to  Larousse,  they  do  not  possess  nor  practice  the  topage,  chal-
lenge, or  formula  of  salutation  by  which  the  members  of  any  one
of  these  brotherhoods  are  enabled  to  recognize  each  other  when
meeting  in  a  strange  place.

From  the  sketch  of  the  progress  of  architecture  as  a  science
and  its  practical  development  in  the  art  of  building  in  Gaul  and  in
France,  as  presented  in  this  chapter,  we  learn  that  the  origin  of  the
French  Freemasons  can  not  be  traced  as  precisely  as  we  do  that  of
the  German  and  British.

Rebold1  says,  very  correctly,  that  the  Masonic  corporations
never  presented  in  France  the  peculiar  character  that  they  had  in
England  and  Scotland,  and  that  hence  their  influence  on  the  prog-
ress of  civilization  was  much  less  than  in  those  countries.

He  further  affirms  that  the  custom  adopted  by  the  architectural
corporations,  of  affiliating  men  of  learning  and  condition  as  patrons
or  honorary  members,  appears  to  have  resulted  in  France,  as  it  had
in  other  countries,  namely,  in  the  formation,  outside  of  the  corpora-
tions, of  lodges  for  the  propagation  of  the  humanitarian  doctrines
of  the  institution ;  and  he  adds  that  when  the  Masonic  corporations
were  dissolved  in  France  at  the  beginning  of  the  16th  century,
lodges  of  this  nature  appear  then  to  have  existed.

All  this  is,  however,  mere  assumption — an  hypothesis  and  not  an
historical  fact.  Rebold  himself  admits  that  there  is  no  longer
any  trace  to  be  found  of  these  Speculative  Lodges.2

1 "  Histoire  des  Trois  Grandes  Loges,"  p.  31.

*  Nous  n'en  trouvons  plus  aucune  trace.     Rebold,  ut  supra

THE   FRENCH   GUILDS   OF   THE   MIDDLE  AGES      681

In  fact,  there  never  was  in  France  that  gradual  development
of  Speculative  out  of  Operative  Masonry  which  took  place  in
England  and  in  Scotland.

The  Speculative  Masonry  of  France  came  to  it,  not  out  of  any
change  in  or  any  action  of  the  Masonic  guilds  or  corporations,
by  which  they  abandoned  their  Operative  and  assumed  a  Specu-
lative character.  The  Speculative  lodges,  the  lodges  of  Free
and  accepted  Masons,  which  we  find  springing  up  in  Paris  about
that  epoch,  were  due  to  a  direct  importation  from  London  and
under  the  authority  of  the  Speculative  Grand  Lodge  of  England.

The  history  of  the  rise  and  progress  of  Speculative  Masonry
in  France  comprises,  therefore,  a  distinct  topic,  to  be  treated  in  a
future  chapter.

But  we  must  first  discuss  the  condition  of  Masonry  in  other
countries  and  at  other  epochs.

CHAPTER    XVI

THE     TRAVELING     FREEMASONS   OF    LOMBARDY    OR     THE     MASTERS    OF

COMO

|N  the  effort  to  trace  the  gradual  growth  of  the
modern  system  of  Speculative  Masonry  out  of
the  ancient  organization  of  Operative  Masons,  we
are  arrested  by  an  important  era  when  the  Guilds
of  architects  and  builders,  issued  about  the  ioth
century  from  the  north  of  Italy  and  under  the
name  of  "  Traveling  Freemasons,"  perambulated
Europe,  and  with  the  patronage  of  the  churches  extended  the  prin-
ciples of  their  art  into  every  country  from  Germany  to  Scotland.

Before  we  can  properly  appreciate  the  events  connected  with  the
origin  of  this  body  of  organized  Masons  as  the  undoubted  link  which
connects  the  artificers  of  the  Roman  Colleges  with  the  Masonic
Guilds  which  sprang  up  in  Gaul,  in  Germany,  and  in  Britain,  we  must
take  a  brief  view  of  the  condition  of  the  Roman  Empire  in  respect
to  the  cultivation  of  the  arts  at  the  time  of  its  declension  and  after
the  seat  of  government  had  been  removed  from  Rome  to  Byzantium.
Mr.  Thomas  Hope  has  devoted  some  thirty  pages  of  his  His-
torical Essay  on  Architecture  to  an  investigation  of  the  circum-
stances which  toward  the  end  of  the  ioth  century  affected  archi-
tecture, generally  and  extensively,  throughout  Europe.  To  this
admirable  inquiry  I  shall  be  indebted  for  many  of  the  details  and
leading  ideas  which  will  constitute  the  present  chapter.

In  this  work,  Mr.  Hope  remarks  that  the  architecture  of  Chris-
tian Greece  and  Rome,  that  is  to  say,  the  Byzantine  and  the  Roman
styles,  exhibited,  while  it  was  confined  within  the  limits  bounded  by
the  Alps,  more  local  diversities  than  after  it  had  crossed  the  moun-
tain-ranges and  advanced  successively  through  France  and  Germany
to  the  farthest  inhabited  regions  of  northern  Europe.1

1  Hope,  "  Historical  Essay  on  Architecture,"  p.  220.

68a

THE  TRAVELING   FREEMASONS   OF   LOMBARDY    683

But  as  this  advancement  from  the  plains  of  Italy  into  more
northern  regions  was  accompanied  by  a  style  of  architecture  the
adoption  of  which  was  at  once  the  cause  and  the  effect  of  that  united
action  which  distinguished  the  Freemasons  of  the  Middle  Ages,  it
will  be  necessary  to  give  a  brief  glance  at  the  condition  of  architect-
ure in  the  times  which  preceded  the  exodus  of  artists  from  Italy.

It  must  be  remembered  that  it  is  impossible  to  trace  with  any
prospect  of  certainty,  the  progress  of  events  which  finally  led  to  the
institution  of  Speculative  Masonry,  unless  we  direct  our  attention
to  the  early  history  of  Operative  Masonry.

Though  Speculative  and  Operative  Masonry  never  were  and
never  can  be  identical — a  mistake  into  which  early  Masonic  histo-
rians like  Dr.  Anderson  have  fallen — yet  it  must  be  always  remem-
bered that  the  former  sprung  by  a  process  of  mental  elaboration
out  of  the  latter.  Operative  Masonry  is  the  foundation  and  Spec-
ulative Masonry  the  superstructure  which  has  been  erected  on  it.

This  is  the  theory  which  is  advanced  in  the  present  work,  in  con-
tradistinction to  that  untenable  one  which  traces  a  connection  of  the
modern  society  with  any  of  the  religious  institutions  of  antiquity.

If  then  the  old  Masonry  of  the  mediaeval  builders,  which  was
essentially  operative  in  its  character,  is  the  foundation  on  which  the
Freemasonry  of  the  modern  philosophers,  which  is  essentially  spec-
ulative in  its  character,  is  built,  we  can  not  pretend  to  write  a  history
of  the  superincumbent  building  and  at  the  same  time  totally  ignore
the  underlying  foundation.

It  is  necessary,  therefore,  to  glance  at  the  history  of  architecture
and  at  its  condition  before  and  after  the  10th  century,  if  we  would
understand  how  Freemasonry  in  the  beginning  of  the  18th  century
was  transmuted  from  an  Operative  to  a  Speculative  system,  from  an
art  of  building  to  a  science  of  philosophy.

It  has  been  noted  as  an  evidence  of  the  union  of  principles  which
began  to  distinguish  the  architects  of  and  after  the  10th  century,
who  called  themselves  Freemasons,  that  in  the  time  of  Caesar  a  hab-
itation in  Helvetia  differed  more  from  a  dwelling  in  the  northern
part  of  Italy,  though  the  regions  were  adjacent,  than  the  church
reared  in  England  or  Sweden  did  from  one  erected  in  Sicily  or  Pal-
estine, remote  as  the  countries  were  from  each  other.1

1Hope,  "  Historical  Essay  on  Architecture,"  p.  220.

684  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Now  let  it  be  remembered  that  this  unity  of  design  was  intro-
duced by  the  Traveling  Freemasons ;  that  these  derived  a  knowl-
edge of  the  great  principles  of  the  art  of  building  from  the  artificers
sent  by  the  Roman  Colleges,  in  company  with  the  Legions  of  the
Roman  army,  into  all  the  conquered  provinces  and  who  there  estab-
lished colonies ;  that  those  Traveling  Freemasons  communicated
their  knowledge  to  the  Stonemasons  of  Germany,  France,  England,
Scotland,  and  other  countries  which  they  visited  in  pursuit  of  em-
ployment and  in  the  practice  of  their  craft ;  and  finally  that  those
stonemasons  having  from  time  to  time,  for  purposes  of  their  own
aggrandizement,  admitted  non-professional,  that  is  to  say  non-ma-
sonic members  into  their  ranks,  the  latter  eventually  overcame  the
former  in  numbers  and  in  influence  and  transmuted  the  Operative
into  a  Speculative  institution.

Remembering  these  points,  which  give  the  true  theory  of  the
origin  of  modern  Freemasonry,  as  it  were,  in  a  nutshell,1  it  will  be
at  once  seen  how  necessary  it  is  that  the  Masonic  student  should  be
thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  history  of  these  mediaeval  Masons,
and  with  the  character  of  the  architecture  which  they  invented,  with
the  nature  of  the  organization  which  they  established,  and  with  the
method  of  building  which  they  practiced.

To  attain  a  comprehensive  view  of  this  subject,  it  is  necessary
that  we  should,  in  the  first  place,  advert  to  the  history  of  the  king-
dom of  Lombardy,  which  is  admitted  to  have  been  the  cradle  of
mediaeval  architecture.

At  the  close  of  the  5th  century,  the  Ostrogoths,  instigated  and
supported  by  the  jealousy  of  the  Byzantine  Emperor,  had  invaded
Italy  under  the  celebrated  Theodoric.  Odoacer,  who  then  ruled
over  the  Roman  Empire  of  the  East,  having  been  treacherously
slain,  Theodoric  was  proclaimed  King  of  Italy  by  the  Goths.  He
reigned  for  thirty-three  years,  during  the  greater  part  of  which  long
period  he  was  distinguished  for  his  religious  toleration,  his  adminis-
tration of  justice,  and  the  patronage  of  the  arts.

In  a  passage  written  by  Magnus  Aurelius  Cassiodorus,  who  was
the  Chancellor  of  Theodoric,  the  Minister  describes,  in  a  glowing
panegyric,  the  exalted  condition  of  architecture  during  the  reign  of
that  monarch.     Tiraboschi,  who  cites  the  passage  in  his  History  of

1  Translation  by  W.  H.  Leeds,  London,  1836,  p.  17.

THE   TRAVELING   FREEMASONS   OF   LOMBARDY     685

the  Sciences  in  Italy,  attributes  this  flourishing  state  of  the  art  to  the
influence  of  the  Goths.  But  Moller,  in  his  Memorials  of  German
Gothic  Architecture,  dissents  from  this  view,  especially  as  the
Gothic  domination  in  Italy  lasted  scarcely  more  than  half  a  century,
and  contends  that  were  it  even  demonstrable  that  architecture  had
been  at  that  time  such  as  Cassiodorus  describes  it,  the  fact  is  to  be
ascribed  rather  to  the  Byzantine  Romans,  among  whom  he  thinks
that  we  must  search  for  all  that,  at  that  era,  was  preserved  of  the  city
and  the  sciences.

The  Goths  were  finally  driven  out  of  Italy  in  the  reign  of  Jus-
tinian, and  by  the  armies  of  the  renowned  Belisarius.  This  event
occurred  about  the  middle  of  the  6th  century.

They  were  succeeded  by  another  tribe  of  semi-barbarians,  who,
though  they  did  not,  as  the  Ostrogoths  had  done,  assume  the  domina-
tion of  the  whole  of  the  Italian  peninsular,  yet  exerted  an  influence  on
the  state  of  mediaeval  architecture  that  produced  results  of  most  inter-
esting character.

The  Longobardi,  a  word  which  by  a  generally  accepted  etymol-
ogy signifies  the  Longbeards,  a  title  which  they  obtained  from  their
manner  of  wearing  that  appendage  to  the  face,  were  a  Scandinavian
tribe  who,  coming  down  from  their  almost  arctic  home,  first  settled
on  the  eastern  banks  of  the  Elbe,  but  gradually  extended  their  mi-
grations southwardly  until  in  the  year  568  they  invaded  Italy,  and
founded  in  its  northeastern  part  the  kingdom  which  to  this  day  bears
the  name  of  Lombardy.

The  kingdom  of  Lombardy  existed  in  a  condition  of  prosperity
for  two  hundred  years,  but  was  finally  obliterated  toward  the  end  of
the  8th  century,  in  774,  from  the  roll  of  independent  monarchies
by  the  victorious  arms  of  Charlemagne.

During  that  period  it  had  been  governed  by  one-and-twenty
kings,  several  of  whom  displayed  great  talents  and  who  left  their
monuments  in  the  wisdom  and  prudence  of  the  laws  which  they
gave  to  the  kingdom.1

In   their   first   invasion   under  Alboin,  their  King,  the  Longo-

1  Sismondi,  "  Histoire  des  Republiques  Italiennes  du  Moyen  Age,"  tome  i.,  p.  14,
Charles  Butler  says  that  no  ancient  code  of  law  is  more  famous  than  the  "  Law  of  the  Lom-
bards ;  "  none  discovers  more  evident  traces  of  the  feudal  policy.  It  survived  the  destruc-
tion of  that  empire  by  Charlemagne,  and  is  said  to  be  in  force  even  now  in  some  cities
of  Italy.     "  Horae  Judicae  Subsecivae,"  p.  85.

686  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

bards,  or,  as  they  were  more  briefly  called,  the  Lombards,  who  were
a  fierce  and  warlike  people,  were  pagans,  and  inflicted  many  perse-
cutions on  the  Roman  Christians.  But  their  manners  became  grad-
ually more  mild,  and  in  the  year  587,  Anthairs,  their  third  monarch,
embraced  Christianity  according  to  the  faith  of  the  Arians.  His
successor  afterward  adopted  the  orthodox  or  Catholic  creed.

It  was  in  the  6th  century  that  the  germs  of  the  interference  of  the
Church  with  the  arts  and  sciences,  and  the  control  of  architecture,
were  first  planted.  During  the  repeated  incursions  of  barbarians,
the  gradual  decline  and  ultimate  fall  of  the  power  of  the  Roman
Empire,  and  the  continual  recurrence  of  wars,  the  arts  and  sciences
would  have  been  totally  extinguished  had  they  not  found  a  place  of
refuge  among  the  priests,  the  bishops,  and  the  monastic  orders.

Whatever  there  was  remaining  of  the  old  culture  was  preserved
from  perishing  in  the  monasteries,  the  churches,  and  the  dwellings
of  the  ecclesiastics.  Schools  were  erected  in  the  cathedral  churches
in  which  youths  were  instructed  by  the  bishop  or  someone  appointed
by  him,  in  the  knowledge  of  the  seven  liberal  arts  and  sciences.  In
the  monasteries  the  monks  and  nuns  devoted  as  a  part  of  their  dis-
cipline a  certain  portion  of  their  time  to  reading  the  works  of  the
ancient  doctors,  or  in  copying  and  dispersing  manuscripts  of  classi-
cal as  well  as  Christian  writers.

To  these  establishments,  says  Mosheim,  are  we  indebted  for  the
preservation  and  possession  of  all  the  ancient  authors  who  thus  es-
caped the  fury  of  barbaric  ignorance.

Architecture,  which  because  its  principles  were  generally  and
almost  exclusively  applied  to  the  construction  of  churches  and
other  religious  edifices  had  become  almost  a  sacred  art,  was  at  first
and  for  a  long  time  under  the  entire  control  of  the  clergy.  The
laity  were  either  an  ignorant  peasantry  or  soldiers  trained  to  war ;
the  ecclesiastics  alone  exercised  the  arts,  and  especially  architecture.
Missionaries  sent  to  teach  the  Christian  faith  carried  with  them
into  the  fields  of  their  labor,  builders  whom  they  directed  in  the
construction  of  the  new  churches  which  they  made  their  converts
erect.1

Ecclesiastical  writers  have  remarked  upon  the  incredible  number
of  churches  which,  under  the  influence  of  religious  enthusiasm,  were

1 "  Historical  Essay  on  Architecture,"  p.  213.

THE   TRAVELING   FREEMASONS   OF   LOMBARDY     687

erected  all  over  Europe,  but  more  especially  in  Gaul  and  Italy  at  so
early  a  period  as  the  6th  century.

Lombardy  is,  as  Mr.  Hope  has  remarked,  "the  country  in  which
associations  of  Freemasons  were  first  formed,  and  which  from  its
more  recent  civilization  afforded  few  ancient  temples  whence
materials  might  be  supplied,  was  the  first  after  the  decline  of  the
Roman  Empire  to  endow  architecture  with  a  complete  and  con-
nected system  of  forms,  which  soon  prevailed  wherever  the  Latin
Church  spread  its  influence  from  the  shores  of  the  Baltic  to  those  of
the  Mediterranean."1

M oiler,  a  learned  German  writer  on  architecture,2  asserts  that  the
Lombards  were  in  the  habit  of  building  much,  and  appear  to  have
quickly  attained  a  higher  degree  of  civilization  than  the  Goths,
to  whom  they  succeeded.  As  a  proof  of  their  skill  and  architectural
culture  we  may  refer  to  D'Agincourt's  History  of  Art  by  its
Monuments?  where  is  exhibited  a  plate  of  the  church  of  St.  Julia
near  Bergamo,  that  of  St.  Michael  at  Pavia,  and  that  of  the  round
church  of  St.  Momus,  all  of  which  he  ascribes  to  the  Lombards.
Hope  also  enumerates  among  the  churches  erected  in  what  he  calls
the  Lombard  style  the  Basilica  of  St.  Eustorgio,  which  was  built  in
the  7th  or  8th  century.

But,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Goths,  Moller  ascribes  whatever  there
was  of  excellence  in  Lombard  architecture  not  to  the  Lombards  them-
selves, who  were  originally  a  rude,  invading  people  who  adopted  the
civilized  manners  of  the  people  whom  they  conquered  as  well  as
their  architecture,  but  to  the  Byzantine  Romans.

Other  writers  on  this  subject  do  not  concur  with  Moller  in  this
view.4  It  is  not  denied  that  there  was  a  constant  influx  of  Grecian
artists  from  Byzantium  into  Lombardy,  who  unquestionably  must
have  influenced  the  condition  of  the  arts  by  their  superior  skill ;  it
can  not  be  doubted  that  at  the  time  of  the  extinction  of  their  king-
dom they  had  attained  a  very  considerable  share  of  civilization,  and
had  made  much  progress  in  the  art  of  building.  This  is  evident
from  the  few  monuments  that  still  remain  as  well  as  from  the  fact

1  "  Historical  Essay  on  Architecture,"  p.  250.

2SeeMoller's  "Memorials  of  German  Gothic  Architecture,"  translated  by  W.  H.
Leeds,  London,  1836,  p.  18.

8"  L'Histoire  de  l'art  par  les  monumens,"  PI.  xxiv.
4  See  Sismondi,  "  Histoire  des  Repub.     Italy,"  ch.  L

688  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

that  Charlemagne  made  but  little  change  in  their  government  when
he  established  his  Lombard  Empire  by  their  conquest.

Nicholson  speaks  of  these  Lombards  in  terms  of  commenda-
tion. He  says  that  "  Italy  does  not  seem  to  have  suffered  much
but  rather  the  reverse  from  their  government,  and  during  their  pos-
session the  arts  flourished  and  were  cultivated  with  greater  success
than  during  the  periods  either  immediately  preceding  or  following.
It  is  certain  that  they  gave  a  great  impetus  to  building,  for  during
the  two  hundred  years  of  their  sway  the  northern  and  central  por-
tions of  Italy  had  become  studded  with  churches  and  baptisteries."1

We  may  therefore  very  safely  say  that  the  ancient  architecture
of  the  Romans  derived  from  their  Colleges  of  Artificers  was  imi-
tated by  the  Lombards  and  with  its  inevitable  improvements  brought
to  them  from  Byzantium  by  Grecian  architects  was  subsequently
extended  over  Europe.

But  it  was  only  after  the  conquest  of  Lombardy  by  Charle-
magne that  that  province  began  to  assume  that  high  place  in  archi-
tecture which  was  won  for  it  by  the  labors  of  the  builders  who  dis-
seminated over  all  Europe  the  principles  of  the  new  style  which
they  had  invented.

This  style,  which  was  designated  as  the  Lombard  from  the  place
of  its  origin,  differed  both  from  the  Roman  and  the  Byzantine,
though  it  adapted  and  appropriated  portions  of  both.

Notwithstanding  that  the  rule  over  Lombardy  by  Charlemagne,
a  monarch  whose  genius  in  acquiring  empires  was  equalled  by  his
prudence  in  preserving  them,  must  have  tended  to  advance  the  civili-
zation of  the  inhabitants,  the  long  succession  of  a  race  of  degenerate
descendants  had  a  retarding  effect,  and  it  was  not  until  two  centuries
after  his  death  that  the  architects  of  Lombardy  established  that
reputation  as  builders  which  has  so  closely  connected  their  labors
with  the  history  of  Freemasonry  in  the  Middle  Ages.

It  has  been  already  seen,  when  this  subject  was  treated  in  a  pre-
vious part  of  this  work,  that  the  Roman  Colleges  of  Artificers  con-
tinued to  exist  in  all  their  vigor  until  the  complete  fall  of  the  Em-
pire. The  invasion  of  the  hordes  of  barbarians  which  led  to  that
result  had  diminished  their  number  and  impaired  their  organization,
so  long  as  paganism  was  the  religion  of  the  State.     But  when  the

1 "  Dictionary  of  Architecture  "  in  voce  Lombardii  Architecture.

THE  TRAVELING  FREEMASONS   OF  LOMBARDY    689

people  were  converted  to  Christianity,  the  Colleges,  under  the  new
name  of  Corporations,  began  to  flourish  again.  The  bishops  and
priests,  who  were  admitted  into  them  as  patrons  and  honorary  mem-
bers, soon  assumed  the  control  of  them  and  occupied  the  architects
and  builders  in  the  construction  of  churches,  cathedrals,  monas-
teries, and  other  religious  edifices.

What  Whittington  '  has  said  of  Gaul,  may  with  equal  propriety
be  applied  to  the  other  portions  of  Europe.  The  people  were  de-
graded, the  barons  only  semi-civilized,  commerce  had  not  yet  elevated
the  lower  classes,  and  the  arts  had  made  but  little  progress  among  the
higher  classes.  It  was  therefore  chiefly  through  the  clergy  that  the
art  of  building  was  revived,  which  under  these  barbaric  influences
had  previously  led  to  its  decay.

All  the  writers  who  have  made  this  subject  a  study  agree  in  the
statement  of  the  great  influence  of  the  clergy  in  the  practice  and  prop-
agation of  mediaeval  architecture.  Fergusson  goes  so  far  as  to  say
that  in  the  13th  century  the  Masons,  though  skilled  in  hewing  and
setting  stones  and  acquainted  with  all  the  inventions  and  improve-
ments in  their  art,  never  exercised  their  calling,  except  under  the  guid-
ance of  some  superior  person,  who  was  a  bishop,  an  abbot,  or  an  ac-
complished layman.2

This  too  broad  assertion  is,  however,  hardly  reconcilable  with
the  fact  that  in  France  alone  in  the  1 3th  century,  to  say  nothing  of
England,  Italy,  or  Germany,  there  were  many  architects  who,  though
neither  bishops  nor  abbots,  both  designed  and  built  great  works.
Such,  for  instance,  as  Hugues  Libergier,  the  builder  of  the  Cathe-
dral of  Rheims,  Robert  de  Lusarches,  the  builder  of  the  Cathedral
of  Amiens,  and  Eudes  de  Montreuil  who,  says  Whittington,  was
"  an  artist  equally  remarkable  for  his  scientific  knowledge  and  the
boldness  of  his  conceptions.  He  accompanied  St.  Louis  in  his
expeditions  to  the  Holy  Land,  where  he  fortified  the  city  and  port
of  Joppa,  and  on  his  return  to  France,  was  employed  by  the  King
in  the  constructing  of  several  religious  buildings."1

The  important  place  occupied  by  the  Church  in  the  revival  of
architecture  can  not,  however,  be  too  highly  estimated.     Though  it

1M  An  Historical  Survey  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Antiquities  of  France."    London,  181 1,
p.  19.

2  "History  of  Architecture  in  all  Countries,"  etc.,  vol.  i.,  p.  479.
8  "  Historical  Survey,"  p.  68.
44

690  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

would  be  an  error  to  suppose  that  there  were  no  laymen  who  were
architects,  it  must  be  confessed  that  the  most  eminent  ecclesiastics
made  architecture  a  study,  and  that  in  the  construction  of  religious
houses,  the  bishops  or  abbots  designed  the  plans  and  the  monks
executed  them.  And  even  if  the  architect  and  the  Masons  were  lay-
men, the  house  was  almost  always  built  under  the  superintendence
and  direction  of  some  ecclesiastic  of  high  rank.

The  view  taken  of  this  subject  is  the  one  that  is  historically  the
most  tenable.     Whittington's  language  is  worthy  of  quotation.

"  In  those  ages  of  barbarism,  when  the  lay  portion  of  the  com-
munity was  fully  employed  in  warfare  and  devastation,  when  churches
and  convents  were  the  only  retreats  of  peace  and  security,  they  also
became  the  chief  foci  of  productive  industry.  Convents  have  long
been  celebrated  as  the  chief  asylums  of  letters  in  those  ages.  They
also  deserve  to  be  remembered  as  the  sole  conservators  of  art ;  not
only  painting,  sculpture,  enameling,  engraving,  and  portraiture,  but
even  architecture  was  chiefly  exercised  in  them ;  and  the  more  as
the  edifices  which  showed  any  elegance  of  skill  were  only  required
for  sacred  purposes.  In  every  region  where  a  religious  order
wanted  a  new  church  or  convent,  it  was  an  ordinary  thing  for  the
superior,  the  prior,  the  abbot,  nay,  the  bishop,  to  give  the  design
and  for  the  monks  to  fulfill,  under  his  direction,  every  department  of
the  execution  from  the  meanest  to  the  highest." !  It  is  important
that  the  reader  should  be  thoroughly  impressed  with  the  position
and  the  services  of  the  clergy  in  the  architecture  of  the  Middle
Ages,  because  it  accounts  for  the  character  of  the  institution  of
Stonemasons,  who  succeeded  the  ecclesiastical  artists,  and  who
though  released  from  the  direct  service  of  the  Church  still  remained
under  its  influence.  This  is  well  shown  in  the  symbols  used  by
them  in  the  decoration  of  the  buildings  which  they  erected,  most  of
which  belong  to  Christian  iconography,  in  the  charters  and  consti-
tutions by  which  they  were  governed,  which  inculcate  religious  faith
and  respect  for  the  Church,  and  finally  in  the  transmission  of  a  relig-
ious character  to  the  Speculative  Masons  who  succeeded  them,  and
of  whose  institution  it  has  been  said  that  if  Freemasonry  be  not  an
universal  religion,  it  forms  an  auxiliary  to  every  system  of  faith.

The  only  difference  between  the  Freemasonry  of  to-day  and  that

1 "  Historical  Essay,"  p.  222.

THE   TRAVELING   FREEMASONS   OF   LOMBARDY    69J

of  the  ioth  or  the  nth  century,  in  respect  to  the  question  of  relig-
ion is  that  the  former  is  cosmopolitan  and  universal  in  its  creed,
whose  only  unalterable  points  are  the  existence  of  God  and  the  im-
mortality of  the  soul,  while  the  latter  was  strictly  Christian  accord-
ing to  the  orthodox,  catholic  form  in  its  belief  and  practice.

But  notwithstanding  the  change  from  intolerance  to  liberality  of
sentiment  which  the  progress  of  the  age  has  introduced,  it  must
never  be  forgotten  that  whatever  there  is  of  a  religious  or  sacred
character  in  the  constitution  or  the  ritual  of  the  Freemasonry  of  to-
day must  be  traced  to  the  influences  of  the  Church  over  the  Opera-
tive Masons  of  the  Middle  Ages.

But  it  is  necessary  to  resume  the  thread  of  our  history.  At  the
beginning  of  the  nth  century  Lombardy  was  the  active  center  of
civilization  in  Europe.  It  had  prospered  under  the  free  institutions
of  its  kings  for  two  centuries,  and  on  the  extirpation  of  the  royal
line,  the  people  shared  in  the  benefits  of  the  wise  policy  and  prudent
government  of  their  conqueror,  Charlemagne.

The  workmen  of  Lombardy  still  maintained  the  relics  of  those
ancient  Sodalities,  which  had  carried  under  the  Roman  domination
the  principles  and  practices  of  the  Colleges  of  Artificers  into  the
conquered  provinces  of  the  Empire.

The  policy  of  the  kings  had  led  them  to  give  various  craftsmen
the  exclusive  privilege  of  exercising  their  own  trades,  and  under  the
form  of  guilds  or  corporations  to  establish  bodies,  which  were  gov-
erned by  peculiar  laws,  and  which  were  sought  to  be  perpetuated  by
the  introduction  into  them  of  youths  who  were  to  be  instructed  by
the  Masters,  so  that  having  served  a  due  probation  as  apprentices,
they  might  become  associates  and  workers  in  the  guild  or  corpora-
tion.

It  was  in  this  way  that  at  that  time  all  trades  and  professions  were
organized.  In  so  far  as  respects  the  union  in  a  corporation  en-
dowed with  peculiar  privileges,  the  Masons  did  not  differ  essentially
from  the  shoemakers,  the  hatters,  or  the  tailors.  Each  had  its  Mas-
ters, its  Wardens  or  equivalent  officers,  and  each  was  governed  by
its  own  laws  and  was  recruited  from  a  body  of  apprentices.1

There  was,  however,  one  very  important  difference  between  the
Masons  and  the  other  crafts  which  was  productive  of  singular  results.

"  —  -— — ■  -  ■■  i. ..   .■

1  Fergusson,  "  History  of  Architecture,"  vol.  i.,  p.  477.

692  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

This  difference  arose  from  the  nature  of  the  work  which  was  to
be  done,  and  which  affected  the  relations  of  the  craftsmen  to  each
other.

The  trade  of  the  tailor  or  the  shoemaker  was  local.  The  custom
was  derived  from  the  place  in  which  he  lived.  The  members  of  the
corporation  or  guild  all  knew  each  other,  they  lived  in  the  same
town  or  city — and  their  apprentices,  having  accomplished  their  time
of  service  and  gone  forth  to  see  the  world,  almost  always  returned
home  and  settled  among  their  relatives  and  their  friends.

Hence  the  work  done  by  these  trades  was  work  that  came  to
them.  It  was  brought  to  them  by  the  neighbors  who  lived  around
them.  Every  shoemaker  in  a  city  knew  every  other  shoemaker  in  the
same  place  ;  every  tailor  was  familiar  with  the  face,  the  life,  and  the
character  of  every  other  tailor.  While  such  intimacy  existed  there
was  no  necessity  for  the  establishment  of  any  peculiar  guards  against
impostors,  for  the  trade  was  seldom  troubled  with  the  presence  of
strangers.

But  it  was  not  so  with  the  Masons.  Theirs  was  not  a  local
craft.  Work  did  not  come  to  them,  but  they  had  to  go  to  the  work.
Whenever  a  building  was  to  be  erected  which  required  a  force  of
workmen  beyond  the  number  who  resided  usually  near  the  place,
Masons  had  to  be  sent  for  from  the  adjacent  towns  and  districts,  and
sometimes  from  even  much  greater  distances.

There  was  therefore  a  great  necessity  for  caution  in  the  admis-
sion of  these  "  strangers  among  the  workmen  "  lest  some  should  in-
trude who  were  not  legally  entitled  to  employment  by  having  ac-
quired a  knowledge  of  the  craft  in  the  regular  way ;  that  is,  by  having
passed  through  the  probation  of  an  apprenticeship  to  some  lawful
Master.

Hence  arose  the  necessity  of  adopting  secret  modes  of  recogni-
tion, by  which  a  stranger  might  be  known  on  his  first  appearance
as  a  member  of  the  Craft,  as  a  true  craftsman,  or  be  at  once  de-
tected as  an  impostor.

Mr.  Fergusson  has  adopted  this  view  of  the  origin  of  signs  and
passwords  among  the  Masons.  As  a  scholar  of  much  research,  but
who,  not  being  a  member  of  the  modern  confraternity,  derives  his
opinions  and  deductions  from  history  unconnected  with  any  guild
traditions,  his  remarks  are  interesting.     He  says  :

"  At  a  time  when  writing  was  almost  wholly  unknown  among

THE   TRAVELING   FREEMASONS   OF   LOMBARDY    693

the  laity,  and  not  one  Mason  in  a  thousand  could  either  read  or  write,
it  is  evidently  essential  that  some  expedient  should  be  hit  upon  by
which  a  Mason  traveling  to  his  work  might  claim  assistance  and
hospitality  of  his  brother  Masons  on  the  road,  by  means  of  which  he
might  take  his  rank  at  once  on  reaching  the  lodge  without  going
through  tedious  examinations  or  giving  practical  proofs  of  his  skill.
For  this  purpose  a  set  of  secret  signs  was  invented  which  enabled
all  Masons  to  recognize  one  another  as  such,  and  by  which  also  each
man  could  make  known  his  grade  to  those  of  similar  rank  without
further  trouble  than  a  manual  sign,  or  the  utterance  of  some  recog-
nized password.  Other  trades  had  something  of  the  same  sort,  but
it  never  was  necessary  for  them  to  carry  it  either  to  the  same  extent
nor  to  practice  it  so  often  as  Masons,  they  being,  for  the  most  part,
resident  in  the  same  place  and  knowing  each  other  personally."  *

Freemasonry  was  therefore  in  the  following  condition  at  the  be-
ginning of  the  1  ith  century,  so  far  as  respects  the  Kingdom  of  Lom-
bardy,  to  which  the  honor  has  been  universally  assigned  of  being  the
center  from  which  the  Masonic  corporations  spread  abroad  into  the
rest  of  Europe.

Lombardy  being,  as  has  already  been  shown,  the  active  center
whence  the  arts  and  sciences  were  radiated  into  other  countries,
architecture,  as  one  of  the  most  useful  of  the  arts  and  one  of  an  almost
sacred  character  from  its  use  in  the  construction  of  religious  edifices,
took  a  prominent  place  among  the  crafts  that  were  cultivated  in
that  country.  Schools  of  architecture  and  corporations  of  archi-
tects principally  ecclesiastics,  were  formed.  These,  passing  into
other  countries  and  disseminating  the  principles  of  their  science
which  they  had  acquired  in  the  schools  at  home,  have  been  hence
known  in  history  by  the  title  of  the  "  Traveling  Freemasons  of  the
Middle  Ages."

Among  these  schools  one  of  the  most  distinguished  was  that  of
Como.

The  ancient  city  of  Comum,  lying  at  the  southern  extremity  of
the  Lacus  Larius,  now  called  the  Lake  of  Como,  was,  even  under
the  Empire,  a  place  of  some  distinction,  as  it  had  obtained  from
Caesar  the  full  franchises  of  a  Roman  community.  It  was  probably
the  birthplace  of  the  elder  and  the  younger  Pliny,  and  was  certainly

1  "  History  of  Architecture,"  vol.  i.,  p.  478.

694  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

the  favorite  residence  of  the  latter,  who  writes  of  it  in  one  of  his
letters  to  Canidius  Rufus  in  words  of  endearing  fondness,  calling  it
his  darling.  "What,"  he  says,  "  is  doing  at  Como,  our  darling?"1
Pliny  established  there  a  school  of  learning,  and  at  an  early  period
it  was  noted  for  its  foundries  of  iron.  It  retained  its  prosperity  un-
til the  fall  of  the  Empire,  and  continued  in  a  nourishing  condition
under  the  Goths  and  under  the  Lombards.  It  retained  its  impor-
tance during  the  Middle  Ages  and  is  still  populous  and  flourishing.

The  architectural  school  of  Como  was  of  such  repute  in  the  ioth
century  that,  according  to  Muratori,  the  historian  of  Italy,  the  name
of  Magistri  Comacini,  or  Masters  from  Como,  came  to  be  the  ge-
neric name  for  all  these  associations  of  architects.

The  influx  of  Grecian  artists  from  Byzantium  into  Italy  at  that
time  was,  most  probably,  one  of  the  means  by  which  the  Lombardic
architects  were  enabled  to  improve  their  system  of  building.  It
was  from  the  Greek  Empire  of  Byzantium  that  the  light  of  the  arts
and  sciences,  and  of  literature,  proceeded,  which  poured  its  intel-
lectual rays  into  the  darkness  of  western  Europe.  At  that  time
the  word  Greek,  or  Grecian,  was  synonymous  with  all  intellectual
culture.

We  find  a  curious  illustration  of  this  in  the  Legend  of  the  Craft,
where  Charles  Martel,  evidently  a  mistake  for  Charlemagne,  is  said
to  have  been  indebted  for  the  improvements  in  architecture  or  Ma-
sonry in  his  Kingdom  to  the  visit  of  Naimus  Grecus.  I  have  shown,
in  the  first  part  of  this  work,  that  this  expression  simply  means  "  a
certain  Greek."  The  legend  thus  recognized  the  fact  that  Europe
was  instructed  in  architecture  by  the  Greeks  of  Byzantium,  who
visited  Italy  and  Gaul.

The  labors  of  these  Masons  could  not  long  be  confined  within
the  narrow  limits  of  Lombardy.  Opulent  as  it  was  and  populous,
it  could  not  fail  to  be  fitted  with  churches  and  religious  edifices,
so  that  in  time  the  need  and  the  means  of  building  more  must
have  become  exhausted.

There  being  no  further  demand  for  their  services  at  home,  they
looked  beyond  the  Alps,  which  formed  their  northern  boundary,  for
new  fields  in  which  to  exercise  their  skill  and  to  avail  themselves
of  the  exclusive  privileges  which  they  are  said  to  have  possessed.

1  Quid  agit  Comum,  tuas  meze  que  deliciae ?     Pliny,  "Epistles,"  lib.  i.,  cap.  3.

THE  TRAVELING  FREEMASONS   OF  LOMBARDY    695

A  certain  number,  says  Mr.  Hope,  united  and  formed  them-
selves into  a  single  greater  association  or  fraternity  which  proposed
to  seek  for  occupation  beyond  its  native  land,  and  in  any  ruder,
foreign  region,  however  remote,  where  new  religious  edifices  and
skillful  artists  to  erect  them  were  wanted,  to  offer  their  services  and
bend  their  steps  to  undertake  the  work.1

The  connection  of  these  Freemasons  with  the  Church  forms  an
interesting  and  important  part  of  their  history.

Governor  Pownall,  in  an  article  on  this  subject  in  the  Archao-
logia,  was  one  of  the  first  to  make  the  statement  that  the  origin  of
Freemasonry  as  an  organized  institution  is  to  be  traced  to  the  build-
ers who  issued  from  Italy  about  the  12th  century  and  traveled  all
over  Europe,  disseminating  the  principles  of  their  art  and  erecting
religious  buildings  under  the  patronage  of  the  Pope.  On  this  sub-
ject he  writes  as  follows :  "The  churches  throughout  all  the  north-
ern parts  of  Europe  being  in  a  ruinous  state,  the  Pope  created  sev-
eral corporations  of  Roman  or  Italian  architects  and  artists,  with
corporate  powers  and  exclusive  privileges,  particularly  with  a  power
of  setting  by  themselves  the  prices  of  their  own  work  and  labor,  in-
dependent of  the  municipal  laws  of  the  country  wherein  they
worked,  according  as  Hiram  had  done  by  the  corporations  of  archi-
tects and  mechanics  which  he  sent  to  Solomon.  The  Pope  not  only
thus  formed  them  into  such  a  corporation,  but  is  said  to  have  sent
them  (as  exclusively  appropriated)  to  repair  and  rebuild  these
churches  and  other  religious  edifices.  This  body  had  a  power  of
taking  apprentices,  and  of  admitting  or  accepting  into  their  corpora-
tion approved  Masons.  It  will  be  found  that,  claiming  to  hold  pri-
marily and  exclusively  under  the  Pope,  they  assumed  a  right,  as
Freemasons,  of  being  exempt  from  the  regulations  of  the  statutes
of  laborers,  laws  in  England  which  made  regulations  for  the  price  of
labor  ;  secondly,  in  order  to  regulate  these  matters  amongst  them-
selves as  well  as  all  matters  respecting  their  corporation,  they  held
general  chapters  and  other  congregations.  Doing  this  they  con-
stantly refused  obedience  or  to  conform  themselves  to  these  statutes,
which  regulated  the  price  of  the  labor  of  all  other  laborers  and  me-
chanics, although  they  were  specifically  mentioned  therein." 8

Dr.  Henry,  the  historian,  in  speaking  of  them  in  his  History  of

lw  Historical  Essay/'  pp.  230,  231.  8"  Archaeologia,"  p.  117.

696  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Great  Britain,  says  that  "the  Popes,  for  very  obvious  reasons,
favored  the  erection  of  churches  and  convents,  and  granted  many
indulgences  by  their  bulls  to  the  society  of  Masons  in  order  to  in-
crease their  numbers.  These  indulgences  produced  their  full  effect
in  those  superstitious  times,  and  that  society  became  very  numerous
and  raised  a  prodigious  multitude  of  magnificent  churches,  about
this  time,  in  several  countries."1

Sir  Christopher  Wren  makes  the  same  statement,  and  I  quote  at
length  the  passage  contained  in  the  Parentalia  (which  is  one  of
the  rarest  of  modern  English  books),  because  it  not  only  re-
peats the  statement  of  Papal  encouragement,  but  gives  a  very  de-
tailed account  of  the  mode  of  traveling  adopted  by  these  wander-
ing Masons  and  their  usages  in  constructing  buildings.  His  words
are :

"  We  are  told  by  one  who  was  well  acquainted  with  their  history
and  constitutions  that  the  Italians,  with  some  Greek  refugees,  and
with  them  Frenchmen,  Germans,  and  Flemings,  joined  into  a  frater-
nity of  architects,  procuring  Papal  bulls  for  their  encouragement  and
their  particular  privileges  ;  they  styled  themselves  Freemasons,  and
ranged  from  one  nation  to  another  as  they  found  churches  to  be
built ;  for  very  many,  in  those  days,  were  every  day  building  through
piety  or  emulation  ;  their  government  was  regular ;  and  where  they
fixed  near  the  building  in  hand,  they  made  a  camp  of  huts.  A  sur-
veyor governed  in  chief ;  every  tenth  man  was  called  a  Warden,  and
overlooked  each  nine.  The  gentlemen  in  the  neighborhood,  either
out  of  charity  or  commutation  of  penance,  gave  the  materials  and
carriage.  Those  who  have  seen  the  accounts  in  records  of  the
charge  of  the  fabrics  of  some  of  our  cathedrals  near  four  hundred
years  old,  can  not  but  have  a  great  esteem  for  their  economy  and  ad-
mire how  soon  they  erected  such  lofty  structures." 2

Hope  is  still  more  explicit  in  referring  to  the  Papal  patronage
which  is  said  to  have  been  bestowed  upon  these  Traveling  Free-
masons. He  says  that  when  they  were  no  longer  restricted  in  the
exercise  of  their  profession  to  Lombardy,  but  had  begun  to  travel
into  the  most  distant  countries,  wherever  their  services  as  builders
might  be  required,  it  was  found  necessary  to  establish  a  monopoly
in  the  construction  of  religious  edifices  by  which  all  craftsmen,  even

1 "  History  of  Great  Britain,"  vol.  viii.,  p.  275.  'l  "  Parentalia,"  p.  306.

THE  TRAVELING  FREEMASONS   OF   LOMBARDY    697

the  natives  of  the  country  where  they  went  as  strangers  were,  if
not  members  of  their  body,  to  be  excluded  from  employment

Now  this  exclusive  privilege  was  one  which  no  temporal  potentate
could  give  to  have  effect  beyond  his  own  dominions.  In  all  those
countries  which  recognized  the  Pope  as  the  head  of  the  Church — that
is  to  say  in  all  the  countries  of  Europe — the  authority  of  a  Papal  bull
was  the  only  power  by  which  this  monopoly  could  be  universally
secured.

The  Masons,  says  Mr.  Hope,  could  be  regarded  only  as  different
troops  of  laborers  working  in  the  cause  of  the  Pope,  extending  his
estates  by  the  erection  of  new  churches ;  and  he  thinks  that  they
thus  obtained  the  requisite  powers  soon  after  Charlemagne  had  put
an  end  to  the  rule  of  the  Lombards  in  Italy,  and  had  annexed  that
Kingdom  to  his  own  Empire.

"The  Masons  were,"  he  says,  "fraught  with  Papal  bulls  or  di-
plomas not  only  confirming  the  corporate  powers  given  to  them  by
their  own  native  sovereign,  on  their  own  native  soil,  but  granting  to
them,  in  every  other  foreign  country  which  they  might  visit  for  pur-
poses connected  with  their  association,  where  the  Latin  creed  was
avowed,  and  the  supremacy  of  the  spiritual  head  acknowledged,  the
right  of  holding  directly  and  solely  under  the  Pope,  alone,  entire
exemption  from  all  local  laws  and  statutes,  edicts  of  the  sovereign
or  municipal  regulations,  whether  with  regard  to  the  force  of  labor
or  any  other  binding  upon  the  native  subjects ;  they  acquired  the
power,  not  only  themselves  to  fix  the  price  of  their  labor,  but  to
regulate  whatever  else  might  appertain  to  their  own  internal  govern-
ment, exclusively  in  their  own  general  chapters ;  prohibiting  all  na-
tive artists,  not  admitted  into  their  society,  from  entering  with  it  into
any  sort  of  competition,  and  all  native  sovereigns  from  supporting
their  subjects  in  such  rebellion  against  the  Church,  and  commanding
all  such  temporal  subjects  to  respect  these  credentials  and  to  obey
these  mandates  under  pain  of  excommunication." *

This  statement  in  reference  to  the  granting  of  bulls  or  charters
of  privilege  to  the  Traveling  Freemasons  is  given  by  Mr.  Hope,
probably  on  the  authority  of  Governor  Pownall.

In  February,  1788,  a  letter  from  Governor  Pownall  was  read
before  the  Society  of  Antiquaries  of  London,  and  subsequently  pub-

1— —  ■  '  MM    !■—.»■  —  ■■■■.■  1. 1-  —  —  .  ,  .,.,  I  -     -  ..  ■■■.!        I— — — |

1 "  Historical  Essay  on  Architecture,"  p.  232.

698  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

lished  in  the  ninth  volume  of  the  Archceologia?-  under  the  title  of
"  Observations  on  the  Origin  and  Progress  of  Gothic  Architecture,
and  on  the  Corporation  of  Free  Masons  supposed  to  be  the  Estab-
lishes of  it  as  a  Regular  Order."

Governor  Pownall  commences  his  letter  by  the  assertion  of  his
belief  that  the  College  or  Corporation  of  Freemasons  were  the
formers  of  Gothic  architecture  into  a  regular  and  scientific  order  by-
applying  the  models  and  proportions  of  timber  frame-work  to  build-
ing in  stone.  Without  stopping  to  discuss  the  question  of  the  cor-
rectness of  this  theory  of  the  origin  of  the  Gothic  style,  which  must
be  a  subject  of  future  consideration,  I  proceed  to  analyze  those  parts
of  the  letter  which  refer  to  the  patronage  of  the  Freemasons  by  the
Papal  See.

According  to  Governor  Pownall,  the  churches  throughout  all  the
northern  parts  of  Europe  being  in  a  ruinous  state,  the  Pope  erected
several  corporations  of  Roman  or  Italian  architects  and  artists  with
corporate  powers  and  exclusive  privileges,2  particularly  with  a  power
of  setting  by  themselves  the  prices  of  their  own  work  and  labor,
independent  of  the  municipal  laws  of  the  country  wherein  they
worked.  The  Pope  not  only  thus  formed  them  into  such  a  corpo-
ration, but  is  said  to  have  sent  them  with  exclusive  powers  to  repair
and  rebuild  the  churches  and  other  religious  edifices  which  in  dif-
ferent countries  had  fallen  into  decay,  but  also  to  build  new  ones
when  required.  In  England,  into  which  these  builders  had  pene-
trated at  an  early  period,  they  were  styled  "  Free  and  Accepted
Masons."

In  respect  to  the  historical  authority  for  the  existence  of  this
Papal  bull,  charter,  or  diploma,  which  is  said  to  have  been  issued
about  the  close  of  the  12th  or  the  beginning  of  the  13th  century,
Pownall  says  that  being  convinced  from  "  incontrovertible  record "
that  the  Corporation  of  Architects  and  Masons  had  been  thus  insti-
tuted, he  was  very  solicitous  to  have  inquiry  and  search  made  among
the  archives  at  Rome,  whether  it  was  not  possible  to  find  there  some
record  of  the  transaction.

Application  was  accordingly  made  to  the  librarian  of  the  Vati-

1 "  Archaeologia,"  vol.  ix.,  pp.  1 10-126.

*  Although  it  was  never  competent  for  the  Pope  to  create  a  corporation  in  England,
yet  according  to  Mr.  Ayliffe,  on  the  Continent  that  power  was  conceded  to  him  and  shared
by  him  with  the  prince  or  temporal  sovereign.     "  Treatise  on  the  Civil  Law,"  p.  21a

THE  TRAVELING  FREEMASONS   OF   LOMBARDY    699

can,  and  the  Pope  himself  is  said  to  have  ordered  minute  search  to
be  made.  But  the  report  was  that  "  not  the  least  traces  of  any  such
record  "  could  be  found.  Governor  Pownall,  notwithstanding  this
failure,  thought  that  some  record  or  copy  of  the  charter  must  be
buried  somewhere  at  Rome  amidst  forgotten  and  unknown  bundles
and  rolls — a  circumstance  which  he  says  had  frequently  occurred  in
relation  to  important  English  records.

Unfortunately  for  the  positive  settlement  of  the  historic  ques-
tion, it  by  no  means  follows  because  the  Roman  Catholic  librarian
of  the  Vatican  could  not  or  would  not  find  a  bull  or  diploma  which
in  the  1 2th  century  had  granted  special  indulgences  to  an  associa-
tion which  the  Popes  in  the  18th  century  had  denounced  and  ex-
communicated, that  no  such  bull  is  in  existence.  The  policy  of  the
Papal  Church  overrules,  without  compunction,  all  principles  of  his-
toric accuracy  and  by  its  undeviating  course,  whenever  the  end
seemed  to  justify  the  means,  forged  or  suppressed  documents  are  of
no  uncommon  occurrence.

This  question  still  divides  Masonic  writers.  Krause,  for  in-
stance, on  the  supposed  authority  of  a  statement  of  Elias  Ashmole,
communicated  by  Dr.  Knipe  to  the  compiler  of  his  Life,  admits  the
fact  of  a  Papal  charter,  while  Stieglitz,  accepting  the  unsuccessful
application  of  Pownall  to  the  Vatican  librarian,  contends  for  the
absurdity  of  any  such  claim.

The  preponderance  of  historical  authority  is,  however,  in  favor
of  the  statement.  There  is  certainly  abundant  evidence  of  the  sub-
ordination of  these  Masons  to  ecclesiastical  authority.  And  it  is
not  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  the  entire  supervision  of  church
buildings  exercised  by  bishops  and  abbots,  who,  as  Fergusson
says,  made  the  designs  while  the  Masons  only  followed  the  plans
laid  down  for  them,  must  have  been  supported  by  the  express  au-
thority of  the  head  of  the  Church.

The  Traveling  Freemasons  were  at  an  early  period  simply  the
servants  of  the  Church.

Another  fact  worthy  of  attention  is  that  the  relationship  of
trade  and  the  frequency  of  intercourse  for  other  reasons  between
the  different  cities  of  Lombardy  and  Constantinople  brought  to
Italy  many  Greeks,  some  of  whom  came  seeking  for  employment
and  others  were  driven  from  their  homes  by  political  or  religious
persecutions.      Among   these    emigrants   were    many   artists   who

Too  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

united  with  the  Masonic  Corporations  of  Lombardy,  and  infused
into  them  a  large  portion  of  their  Byzantine  art.

These  Freemasons,  thus  armed  with  the  authority  of  the  Pon-
tiff, having  been  well  organized  at  home,  were  ready  to  set  forth;
like  missionaries  at  the  call  of  the  Church,  to  build  cathedrals,
churches,  and  monasteries  as  they  might  be  needed  by  the  extension
of  the  Christian  religion.  From  the  ioth  to  the  12th  century,  and
in  some  places  even  earlier,  we  find  them  perambulating  Europe
and  spreading  the  knowledge  of  the  art  in  Germany,  in  France,  in
England,  Scotland,  and  elsewhere.

The  remarks  of  Mr.  Hope  on  the  professional  wanderings  of
these  Craftsmen  of  the  Middle  Ages,  though  they  have  the  air  of
romance,  are  really  well  supported  by  historical  authority.

"  Often  obliged,"  says  that  pleasing  writer,  "  from  regions  the
most  distant,  singly  to  seek  the  common  place  of  rendezvous,  and
departure  of  the  troop,  or  singly  to  follow  its  earlier  detachments  to
places  of  employment  equally  distant,  and  that  at  an  era  when  travel-
ers met  on  the  road  every  obstruction  and  no  convenience,  when  no
inns  existed  at  which  to  purchase  hospitality,  but  lords  dwelt  every-
where, who  only  prohibited  their  tenants  from  waylaying  the  trav-
eler, because  they  considered  this,  like  killing  game,  one  of  their
own  exclusive  privileges ;  the  members  of  these  communities  con-
trived to  render  their  journeys  more  easy  and  safe  by  engaging  with
each  other,  and  perhaps  even  in  many  places,  with  individuals  not
directly  participating  in  their  profession,  in  compacts  of  mutual  as-
sistance, hospitality,  and  good  services,  most  valuable  to  men  so
circumstanced.  They  endeavored  to  compensate  for  the  perils
which  attended  their  expeditions,  by  institutions  for  their  needy  or
disabled  brothers ;  but  lest  such  as  belonged  not  to  their  communi-
ties should  benefit  surreptitiously  by  these  arrangements  for  its  ad-
vantage, they  framed  signs  of  mutual  recognition  as  carefully  con-
cealed from  the  knowledge  of  the  uninitiated  as  the  mysteries  of
their  art  themselves.  Thus  supplied  with  whatever  could  facilitate
such  distant  journeys  and  labors  as  they  contemplated,  the  members
of  these  Corporations  were  ready  to  obey  any  summons  with  the
utmost  alacrity,  and  they  soon  received  the  encouragement  they  an-
ticipated. The  militia  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  which  diffused  itself
all  over  Europe  in  the  shape  of  missionaries,  to  instruct  nations  and
to  establish  their  allegiance  to  the   Pope,  took  care  not  only  to

THE   TRAVELING   FREEMASONS   OF   LOMBARDY    701

make  them  feel  the  want  of  churches  and  monasteries,  but  likewise
to  learn  the  manner  in  which  the  want  might  be  supplied.  Indeed
they  themselves  generally  undertook  the  supply ;  and  it  may  be  as-
serted that  a  new  apostle  of  the  Gospel  no  sooner  arrived  in  the
remotest  corner  of  Europe,  either  to  convert  the  inhabitants  to
Christianity  or  to  introduce  among  them  a  new  religious  order,  than
speedily  followed  a  tribe  of  itinerant  Freemasons  to  back  him  and
to  provide  the  inhabitants  with  the  necessary  places  of  worship  or
reception.

11  Thus  ushered  in,  by  their  interior  arrangements  assured  of  as-
sistance and  safety  on  the  road ;  and  by  the  bulls  of  the  Pope  and
the  support  of  his  ministers  abroad  assured  of  every  species  of  im-
munity and  preference  at  the  place  of  their  destination  ;  bodies  of
Freemasons  dispersed  themselves  in  every  direction,  every  day
began  to  advance  farther  and  to  proceed  from  country  to  country  to
the  utmost  verge  of  the  faithful,  in  order  to  answer  the  unceasing
demand  for  them  or  to  seek  more  distant  custom." l

One  fact  peculiarly  worthy  of  remark  is  that  throughout  all
Europe,  from  its  southern  to  its  northern,  from  its  western  to  its
eastern  limit — wherever  the  Christian  religion  had  penetrated  and
churches  had  been  erected — a  surprising  uniformity  existed  in  the  style
of  all  edifices  wheresoever  built  at  the  same  period.  No  better  evi-
dence than  this  could  be  furnished  of  the  existence  of  an  association
whose  members,  wherever  they  might  be  scattered,  must  have  been
controlled  by  the  same  rules  of  art.

Sidney  Smith,  Esq.,  in  a  paper  in  the  Archczologia,  alludes  to
this  fact  in  the  following  language,  in  which  he  speaks  of  this  as-
sociation as  having  been  established  in  the  early  part  of  the  13th
century  by  a  Papal  bull :

"Thus  associated  and  exclusively  devoted  to  the  practice  of
Masonry,  it  is  easy  to  infer  that  a  rapid  improvement,  both  in  the
style  and  execution  of  their  work,  would  result.  Forming  a  con-
nected and  corresponding  society,  and  roving  over  the  different
countries  of  Europe,  wherever  the  munificent  piety  of  those  ages
promised  employment  to  their  skill,  it  is  probable,  and  even  a  neces-
sary consequence,  that  improvements  by  whomsoever  introduced
would  quickly  become  common  to  all ;  and  to  this  cause  we  may  re-

*  u  Historical  Essay  on  Architecture,"  p.  235.

702  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

fer  the  simultaneous  progress  of  one  style  throughout  Europe  which
forms  so  singular  a  phenomenon  in  the  history  of  architecture."1

Mr.  Hope  is  subsequently  still  more  elaborate  in  his  remarks  on
this  subject.

"  The  architects,"  he  says,  "  of  all  the  sacred  edifices  of  the  Latin
Church,  wherever  such  arose — north,  south,  east,  or  west — thus  de-
rived their  science  from  the  same  central  school ;  obeyed,  in  their
designs,  the  same  hierarchy ;  were  directed  in  their  construction  by
the  same  principles  of  propriety  and  taste  ;  kept  up  with  each  other,
in  the  most  distant  parts  to  which  they  might  be  sent,  the  most  con-
stant correspondence  ;  and  rendered  every  minute  improvement  the
property  of  the  whole  body  and  a  new  conquest  of  the  art.  .  .  .
The  result  of  this  unanimity  was,  that  at  each  successive  period  of
the  Masonic  dynasty,  on  whatever  point  a  new  church  or  new
monastery  might  be  erected,  it  resembled  all  those  raised  at  the
same  period  in  every  other  place,  however  distant  from  it,  as  if  both
had  been  built  in  the  same  place,  by  the  same  artist.  .  .  .  For
instance,  we  find  at  particular  epochs,  churches  as  far  distant  from
each  other  as  the  north  of  Scotland  and  the  south  of  Italy  more
minutely  similar  than  those  erected  within  the  single  precincts  of
Rome  or  Ravenna."2

Paley  also  speaks  of  this  uniformity  of  style  which  prevailed
everywhere  throughout  all  countries  as  one  of  the  most  remarkable
facts  connected  with  the  history  of  mediaeval  architecture.  And  he
cites  the  remark  of  Willis  in  his  Architecture  of  the  Middle  Ages,
that  whereas  in  our  own  age  it  is  the  practice  to  imitate  every  style
of  architecture  that  can  be  found  in  all  the  countries  of  the  earth,  it
appears  that  in  any  given  period  and  place  our  forefathers  admit-
ted but  of  one  style,  which  was  used  to  the  complete  exclusion  of
every  other  during  its  prevalence.

Paley  very  correctly  accounts  for  this  by  the  fact  that  Free-
masonry was  in  the  Middle  Ages  "  a  craft  in  the  hands  of  a  cor-
porate ecclesiastical  confraternity  the  members  of  which  seem  to
have  been  bound  down  to  certain  rules."  8

After  what  has  already  been  said  in  this  work,  it  is  very  evident
that  this  "  craft  in  the  hands  of  a  corporate  ecclesiastical  confrater-

1  "  Archaeologia,"  vol.  xxi.,  p.  521.

2"  Historical  Essay  on  Architecture,"  pp.  238,  239.

'Paley,  "Manual  of  Gothic  Architecture,"  p.  206.

THE   TRAVELING  FREEMASONS   OF   LOMBARDY    703

nity  "  must  make  a  very  important  link  in  the  great  chain  which
connects  the  history  of  Freemasonry  in  one  continued  series  from
the  first  development  of  the  art  in  a  corporate  form  in  the  Colleges
of  Numa,  until  that  transition  period  when  the  Operative  was
merged  in  the  Speculative  element.

Mr.  Hope,  who  devoted  much  labor  to  an  investigation  of  the
influences  which  toward  the  end  of  the  10th  century  affected  archi-
tecture generally  and  diffusively  throughout  Europe,  wrote  an  ex-
haustive chapter  on  this  subject  in  his  Historical  Essay,  whence
copious  citations  have  been  made  in-  the  present  work.  It  will  be
sufficient  in  making  a  summary  of  what  has  been  already  presented
to  the  reader,  to  say  of  these  influences  he  considered  the  most  im-
portant to  be  the  establishment  of  a  school  of  architecture  in  Lom«
bardy  and  the  organization  of  Guilds  of  Builders  who,  under  the
name  of  "  Freemasons,"  perambulated  the  whole  continent,  passing
over  to  England  and  Scotland,  and  taught  the  art  of  building  under
the  inspiration  of  the  same  principles  of  architecture,  directed  by
the  same  ideas  of  taste,  and  governed  by  the  same  guild  spirit  of
fraternity.

Subsequently  to  the  appearance  of  this  work  of  Mr.  Hope,  Lord
Lindsay  entered  the  same  field  of  investigation  and  presented  the
public  with  the  result  of  his  inquiries  in  a  work  entitled  Sketches  of
the  History  of  Christian  Art,  from  whose  pages  much  interesting
information  may  be  gleaned  in  respect  to  the  condition  of  mediaeval
Freemasonry  and  architecture.

These  mediaeval  Freemasons  at  first  adopted  the  principles  of  By-
zantine art  in  their  construction  of  churches  and  afterward  invented
that  new  system  known  as  the  Gothic  style  of  architecture.  Before
the  organization  of  the  Lombard  school  the  architecture  of  Europe
was  that  which  had  been  derived  from  the  builders  of  Rome,  and  all
the  churches  constructed  in  Italy,  in  Gaul,  and  even  as  far  as  Britain,
were  built  upon  the  model  of  the  Roman  basilica,  an  edifice  which
in  pagan  Rome  served  as  a  court  of  law  and  an  exchange,  or  a  place
of  public  meeting  for  merchants  and  men  of  business.

As  after  the  conversion  of  the  Empire  to  the  new  religion,  many
of  these  edifices  were  converted  into  Christian  places  of  worship,  the
word  was  used  in  the  low  Latin  of  the  period  to  designate  a  cathe-
dral or  metropolitan  church,  and  the  style  was  readily  adopted  and
followed  in  the  construction  of  new  churches.

704  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

The  style  of  architecture  which  prevailed  in  Byzantium  or  Con-
stantinople was  very  different  from  the  Roman.  The  principal  dif-
ferences were  the  four  naves  as  parts  of  a  cross  of  equal  limbs,  and
especially  the  surmounting  dome  or  cupola,  which  was,  generally,
octagonal  in  shape.

This  style  the  Lombard  Freemasons  adopted  in  part,  modifying
it  with  the  Roman  style,  and  finally  developing  the  Gothic  as  a  new
system  peculiarly  their  own.  The  history  of  this  style,  its  progress
in  different  countries,  and  the  gradual  changes  it  underwent,  is  there-
fore intimately  connected  with  Freemasonry.

The  question  naturally  arises  why  these  Lombard  Masons,  who
had  derived  their  first  lessons  from  the  descendants  of  the  old  build-
ers of  the  Roman  Colleges  of  Artificers  and  who  were  surrounded
by  the  examples  of  Roman  art,  should  have  so  materially  modified
their  system  as  to  have  given  to  it  a  much  greater  resemblance  to  the
Byzantine  than  to  the  Roman  style.

The  answer  to  this  question  will  be  found  not  only  in  the  fact
that  between  the  shores  of  northern  and  eastern  Italy  there  was  a
very  frequent,  continuous  intercourse  with  Byzantium,  but  also  in
the  additional  fact  that  the  religious  architects  of  Lombardy  were
very  thoroughly  imbued  with  the  principles  of  the  science  of  sym-
bolism, and  that  they  found  these  principles  far  better  developed
in  the  Byzantine  than  in  the  Roman  style.  "The  basilica,"  says
Lord  Lindsay,  "  is  far  less  suggestive,  far  less  symbolical  than  the
Byzantine  edifice,  and  hence  the  sympathy  always  manifested  for
Byzantium  by  the  Lombard  architects."  -1

How  the  Freemasons  of  Lombardy  became  imbued  with  the
science  of  symbolism  and  made  it  a  prominent  part  of  their  art  of
building,  are  questions  of  very  great  interest,  because  they  refer  to  the
only  bond  which  connects  the  Speculative  Masons  of  the  present
day  with  the  old  Operative  Masons  of  the  Middle  Ages.  This  im-
portant topic  will  be  hereafter  discussed  in  a  separate  chapter  when
I  come  to  the  consideration  of  that  period  of  time  in  the  history  of
Freemasonry  which  is  marked  by  the  transition  of  the  Operative
into  the  Speculative  institution.

All  that  is  necessary  to  be  said  here  is  that  this  symbolic  style  of
architecture,  beginning  in  Lombardy  somewhere  between  the  7th

1 "  Sketches  of  Christian  Art."

THE   TRAVELING   FREEMASONS   OF   LOMBARDY     705

and  the  10th  centuries,  diffused  itself  gradually  at  first,  but  rapidly
afterward  over  the  whole  of  Europe.

For  this  diffusion  of  a  peculiar  religious  architecture  Lord  Lind-
say assigns  the  following  reason  as  germane  to  the  subject  of  the
present  chapter :

"  What  chiefly  contributed  to  its  diffusion  over  Europe  was  the
exclusive  monopoly  in  Christian  architecture,  conceded  by  the  Popes
toward  the  close  of  the  8th  century,  to  the  Masons  of  Como,  then
and  for  ages  afterward,  when  the  title  Magistri  Comacini  had  long
been  absorbed  in  that  of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons,  associated  as  a
craft  or  brotherhood  in  art  and  friendship.  A  distinct  and  powerful
body,  composed,  eventually,  of  all  nations,  concentrating  the  talent
of  each  successive  generation  with  all  the  advantages  of  accumulated
experience  and  constant  mutual  communication — imbued,  moreover,
in  that  age  of  faith,  with  the  deepest  Christian  reverence,  and  re-
taining these  advantages  unchallenged  till  their  proscription  in  the
15th  and  1 6th  centuries — we  cannot  wonder  that  the  Freemasons
should  have  carried  their  art  to  a  pitch  of  perfection  which,  now
that  their  secrets  are  lost,  it  may  be  considered  hopeless  to  attempt
to  rival." 1

The  result  of  all  these  observations  has  been,  I  think,  to
strengthen  and  substantiate  the  theory  which,  all  through  this  work,
has  been  maintained,  of  the  origin  of  Freemasonry  as  a  Speculative
institution  founded  on  an  Operative  art.  In  every  country  where  it
has  been  founded  we  are  enabled  to  trace  its  first  beginning  as  a
craft  organized  into  a  Guild,  Corporation,  or  Confraternity,  to  the
Roman  Colleges  of  Artificers — the  Collegia  Fabrorum — which  were
originally  established,  or  are  said  to  have  been  established,  by  Numa.

Thus  we  find  the  architects  who  came  out  of  these  Colleges  fol-
lowing the  Roman  legions  in  their  marches  to  conquest,  settling  to
work  in  the  colonies,  municipalities,  and  free  cities  which  were  es-
tablished by  the  Roman  government  in  the  colonies  of  Gaul  and
Britain,  and  perpetuating  the  Roman  taste  and  the  Roman  method
of  work.

So  have  we  traced  the  progress  of  these  Masons  of  Rome  in  the
different  colonies  where  they  settled  and  continued  their  labors
after  the  Empire  had  fallen.

*"  Sketches  of  Christian  Art,"  vol.  ii.,  p.  14.
45

706  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

And  now  we  see  the  links  of  the  historical  chain  more  distinctly
visible  in  the  rise  and  progress  of  these  Masons  of  Lombardy.  Orig-
inally, undoubtedly  Roman  Colleges  must  have  had  their  seats  in  the
northern  part  of  Italy,  that  highly  favored  province  which,  more
than  any  other,  had  received  its  civilization  and  its  art  cultivation
from  the  imperial  city.  Then,  when  the  glory  of  Rome  had  de-
parted, the  Lombard  kings  preserved  the  Roman  architecture,  and
after  their  conversion  to  Christianity,  practiced  it  under  the  aus-
pices of  the  Church.

Then  came,  toward  the  ioth  century,  those  Corporations  of  Free-
masons, who,  imitating  in  their  form  of  government  the  example
which  had  been  set  by  the  Colleges,  presented  themselves  as  a  Con-
fraternity of  workmen  who,  first  having  filled  their  own  country  with
specimens  of  their  skill,  at  length  leaving  Como  and  other  cities  of
Lombardy,  crossed  the  Alps  and  proceeded  to  communicate  to  other
countries  the  knowledge  of  that  art  and  the  mode  of  practicing  it,
which  they  had  acquired  at  home.

One  of  the  first  countries  into  which  these  Traveling  Freema-
sons penetrated — perhaps  the  very  first — was  Germany.  There  we
find,  in  the  1 2th  century,  the  Steinmetzen,  or  the  Stonemasons,  who
appear  to  have  been  almost  a  direct  continuation  of  the  Comacine
Masters,  or  Traveling  Freemasons  of  Lombardy.

These  German  Stonemasons  have  played  too  important  a  part
in  the  history  of  Masonry  to  permit  them  to  be  passed  over  without
an  extended  survey  of  all  that  is  connected  with  their  rise  and  prog-
ress, and  with  their  wonderful  achievements  in  mediaeval  Masonry
or  Architecture.

The  Stonemasons  of  Germany  will  then  be  the  topic  discussed
in  the  following  chapter.

CHAPTER  XVII

THE    STONEMASONS   OF   GERMANY

|E  must  not  look  in  the  early  history  of  the  Ger-
manic tribes  for  that  gradual  and  uninterrupted
growth  of  architecture  and  its  cultivation  as
coming  down  to  them  in  a  direct  line  from  the
Roman  Colleges.  First  heard  of  in  the  time  of
Caesar,  the  barbarians  who  occupied  the  vast
region  comprised  within  the  Rhine,  the  Danube,
the  Carpathian  Mountains,  and  the  Baltic  Sea,  were  described  by
Tacitus  as  an  illiterate  and  warlike  people,  whose  religion  was  a
gross  superstition,  who  had  no  knowledge  of  the  arts  or  of  archi-
tecture.

The  Roman  Colleges,  which  had  sent  their  branches  with  the
legions  into  Spain  and  Gaul  and  Britain,  were  never  planted  in  Ger-
many. While  those  provinces  were  enjoying  the  advantages  of
Roman  culture  and  civilization,  Germany,  overspread  with  forests
and  morasses,  was  inhabited  by  warlike  tribes  of  barbarians,  to
whom  the  arts  of  peace  were  unknown.

As  late  as  the  end  of  the  3d  century,  Germany  was  an  uncon-
quered  province,  and  the  Roman  emperors  were  engaged  not  in
colonizing  the  wild  region  north  of  the  Danube  and  east  of  the
Rhine,  but  rather  in  striving  to  avert  the  southern  progress  of  the
barbarous  tribes  of  the  Allemanni  from  the  invasion  and  occupation
of  Italy.

The  Romans  built,  it  is  true,  several  towns  of  some  note  on  the
banks  of  the  Rhine,  but  in  the  vast  interior  region  which  extended
from  that  river  to  the  shores  of  the  Baltic  Sea,  there  was  hardly  a
single  city  previous  to  the  9th  century.1  To  the  history  of  archi-
tecture or  of  its  connection  with  the  Roman  Empire,  as  in  the  case
of  the  other  provinces,  there  is  no  early  German  contribution.

1  Robertson,  "  History  of  Charles  V.,"  vol.  i.,  p.  217.

T07

708  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

It  was  in  the  beginning  of  the  5th  century  that  the  Franks,  a
confederation  of  German  tribes,  began  to  take  a  place  in  the  history
of  Europe.  We  need  not  dwell  on  the  progress  of  their  conquests.
Sufficient  to  say,  that  having  invaded  the  province  of  Gaul,  they
settled  in  it  permanently  and  established  the  kingdom  of  the  Franks
which,  in  the  course  of  time,  became  that  of  France.

The  Franks  were,  of  all  the  Teutonic  tribes,  the  most  intelligent,
and  though  the  most  warlike,  were  the  least  ferocious.  Hence  in
invading  and  in  settling  a  Roman  province,  they  readily  adapted
themselves,  in  great  measure,  to  Roman  habits  and  customs,  and
were  very  willing  to  accept  and  to  practice  the  civilization  of  the
more  cultivated  inhabitants  of  the  country  which  they  had  invaded
and  had  made  their  home.

The  result  was  that  from  the  time  of  Clovis,  the  first  of  the
Merovingian  race  of  kings  who  reigned  at  the  end  of  the  5th  and
beginning  of  the  6th  century,  and  who  has  been  deemed  the  founder
of  the  Frankic  kingdom,  the  Franks  imparted  to  the  Germans  the
civilization  they  had  attained  by  their  conquest  of  a  civilized  people.
Hence  the  introduction  of  architecture,  and  any  Operative  Masonry,
beyond  the  building  of  mere  dwellings,  into  Germany  is  to  be  at-
tributed principally  to  the  Franks.

We  find  very  few  monuments  of  the  work  of  Roman  builders
in  Germany,  and  therefore  we  can  trace  the  progress  of  architecture,
not  by  any  regular  descent  from  the  Roman  Colleges  of  Artificers,
but  only  through  the  indirect  operation  of  Frankic  artists.

Indeed,  according  to  Moller,1  the  authentic  history  of  German
architecture  begins  with  the  reign  of  Charlemagne,  but  the  only
monuments  remaining  of  that  period  are  the  Cathedral  of  Aix-la-
Chapelle  and  the  portico  of  the  Convent  of  Lorsch  near  the  city  of
Worms.

Rebold  2  says  that  architecture  flourished  greatly  under  Charle-
magne, who  introduced  into  Gaul  architects  and  stonecutters  from
Lombardy.  Rebold  does  not  always  found  his  assertions  on  well-
authenticated  facts,  but  in  this  case  he  has  the  concurrent  support
of  other  historians,  more  scrupulously  correct  in  their  statements.

The  efforts  of  Charlemagne,  who  was  a  legislator  as  well  as  a

1  George  Moller,  "  Denkmaler  der  Deutschen  Beuenkunst,"  4to.  Darmstadt,  1 82 1,
cap.  iii.,  s.  6.

•"Histoire  Generate  de  la  Franc  Maconnerie,"  p.  104.

THE  STONEMASONS   OF  GERMANY  709

warrior,  to  promote  the  civilization  of  the  Germanic  nations  which
he  governed,  led  him,1  after  the  subjugation  of  Lombardy,  to  draw
materials  from  that  comparatively  cultured  kingdom  to  advance  his
projects,  and  to  introduce  among  his  Teutonic  subjects  some  taste
for  architecture,  in  which  the  Lombards  at  that  time  excelled  the
rest  of  the  world.

Moller  shows  very  plainly  the  evidence  of  this  transmission  of
architecture  into  Germany  from  the  south — that  is,  from  Italy.

He  tells  us  that  in  the  beginning  of  the  practice  of  architecture
in  Germany  there  were  two  styles  of  building  which  materially
differed  from  each  other.  The  earliest  was  a  foreign  style,  evidently
imported  from  the  south — that  is  to  say,  from  Italy  or  Lombardy —
and  a  more  modern  one,  which  Moller  says  was  invented  by  the
Germans  themselves.  This  was  a  modification  of  the  first,  and  was
intended  to  accommodate  the  building  to  the  nature  of  a  northern
climate.  It  is  in  this  style  that  we  find  the  grandest  monuments  of
architecture  which  Germany  possesses.9

The  leading  form  of  the  churches  built  during  the  10th  and  nth
centuries  was  the  same,  says  Moller,  as  that  of  the  churches  built  at
the  same  period  in  England,  France,  and  Italy.

Here  are  two  propositions,  each  of  great  importance  in  a  train
of  reasoning  for  the  purpose  of  tracing  the  history  of  early  Ger-
man Freemasonry  through  the  progress  of  its  groundwork,  archi-
tecture.

First  we  have  a  confirmation  of  what  has  already  been  said,  that
the  first  architecture  and,  of  course,  the  first  Masonry  of  Germany
were  derived  from  Lombardy.

It  is  true  that  Moller  (whose  authority  on  the  history  of  Ger-
man architecture  is  not  to  be  despised)  thinks  it  erroneous  to  ascribe
to  the  Lombards  any  material  influence  upon  the  architecture  of  the
west  and  north  of  Europe.  But  almost  in  the  same  breath  he
admits  that  in  the  beginning  German  architecture  was  introduced
from  Italy,  and  confesses,  also,  that  the  Lombards  were  in  the  habit
of  building  a  great  deal,  and  appear  to  have  quickly  attained  a
higher  degree  of  civilization  than  the  Goths.3

Accepting  these  admissions  as  strictly  and  historically  correct,  I

1  See  Sismondi,  "  Republiques  Italiennes,"  torn,  i.,  p.  30.
'Moller,  "  Denkmaler,"  ut  supra.
*"  Denkmaler,"  cap.  ii.,  s.  v.

710  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

am  prepared  to  accept  the  theory  of  Mr.  Hope,  that  the  Lombards,
the  Magistri  Comacini,  the  Traveling  Freemasons  from  the  school
of  Como,  in  the  ioth  century,  introduced  their  system  of  architect-
ure into  Germany  at  that  early  period  of  time.

Secondly,  in  the  statement  that  the  style  of  building  then  prac-
ticed in  Germany  was  the  same  as  that  used  in  England,  France
and  Italy,  we  have  a  further  confirmation  of  the  theory  so  ably  de-
veloped by  Mr.  Hope,  that  the  Traveling  Freemasons  who  peram-
bulated Europe,  and  under  ecclesiastical  supervision  erected  cathe-
drals and  monasteries,  were  a  secret  organization,  distinguished  by
an  identity  of  principles  in  the  construction  of  edifices  in  all  coun-
tries from  the  south  of  Italy  to  the  north  of  Scotland.

While  dwelling  on  this  period  we  must  not  neglect  to  advert  to
the  influence  of  religion,  which  seems  to  have  played  a  very  im-
portant part  in  the  propagation  of  the  science  of  architecture,  a  part
which  it  is  well  worth  considering.

Christianity  was  introduced  into  Germany,  and  the  gradual
civilization  of  the  people  proceeded  with  a  few  exceptions  from  the
south  and  west  parts  of  the  country — that  is,  from  those  parts  which
were  contiguous  to  Italy  and  Gaul.

It  is  there  where  the  clergy,  as  the  ministers  and  missionaries  of
the  new  religion  exercised  the  greatest  influence  and  were  engaged
in  directing  the  construction  of  churches  and  convents,  that  we  must
look  for  the  first  appearance  of  architecture.

Architecture,  whose  boldest  conceptions  are  exhibited  in  the
construction  of  houses  for  worship,  is  very  closely  connected  with
religion.  Hence,  after  the  diffusion  of  Christianity,  it  became  a
necessary  art,  and  we  may  trace  its  growth  as  concurrent  with  that
of  the  new  faith  in  Germany.  Therefore,  it  is  that  we  find  so
learned  a  writer  as  Moller  ascribing  the  origin  of  the  German  build-
ing art  in  Germany  to  the  time  of  Charles  the  Great,  and  to  those
countries  bordering  on  the  Rhine  and  in  the  south,  where  Roman
culture  and  religion  had  been  first  introduced.1

With  these  preliminary  remarks,  which  were  necessary  to  show
what  was,  in  the  early  period  of  German  history,  the  condition  of
architecture,  of  which  the  principles  were  almost  always  practically
enforced  in  the  form  of  organized  Operative  Masonry,  we  may  pro-

1 "  Denkmaler,"  cap.  iii.,  s.  vi.

THE  STONEMASONS   OF  GERMANY  711

ceed  to  investigate  its  gradual  development  until  we  reach  the  era
of  the  organized  Stonecutters'  Guild.

It  is  not  until  the  10th  century  that  we  find  the  Operative  Ma-
sons of  Germany  assuming  anything  like  an  organized  condition.
It  was  in  the  reign  of  Otho  the  Great  (crowned  at  Aix-la-Chapelle
in  936),  who  has  been  called  the  Civilizer  of  Germany,  that  Roman
culture  began  to  be  introduced  into  that  country.  The  Germans,
possessing  no  native  or  original  architecture,  readily,  when  the  way
was  opened  to  them  by  the  increase  of  intercourse,  copied  the
monuments  of  Roman  civilization.

In  Germany,  as  in  Gaul  and  in  Britain,  the  arts  were  at  first
cultivated  by  the  ecclesiastics,  and  the  monasteries  were  their  work-
shops. Especially  may  this  be  said  of  architecture,  and  still  more
especially  of  ecclesiastical  architecture  or  the  construction  of  relig-
ious edifices.

Sulpice  Boisserde,  who  has  furnished  a  most  exhaustive  treatise
in  his  Histoire  et  Description  de  la  Cathedrale  de  Cologne,  gives  so
lucid  a  view  of  the  motives  which  led  these  old  Stonecutters  to
unite  in  a  fraternity  and  to  connect  themselves  closely  with  the
clergy,  that  I  am  tempted  to  translate  it,  though  it  be  at  the  ex-
pense of  some  repetition  of  what  has  already  been  said  in  other
parts  of  this  work.  But  we  can  not  too  often  call  the  attention  of
the  student  and  the  disciple  of  Speculative  Masonry  to  the  remote
origin  from  which  the  ponderous  institution  of  the  present  day  has
sprung.

In  those  early  days,  when  Masonry  was  beginning  to  take  its
place  in  Germany,  whoever  wished,  says  Boisser£e,  to  assume  the
profession  of  an  architect  must  begin  by  learning  to  cut  stone.
When  he  had  become  a  Master  in  that  art,  there  grew  up  between
himself  and  his  former  companions  a  sort  of  fraternity  which  was
wisely  maintained  by  the  customs  and  statutes  of  the  Order,  and
which  was  especially  observed  among  those  who  devoted  themselves
to  the  building  of  houses  of  worship.  As  they  were  persuaded  that
this  work  of  erecting  houses  of  God  was  a  very  noble  and  a  very
pious  occupation,  and  as  even  the  secular  labor  of  constructing,  for
this  purpose,  monuments  of  solidity,  elegance,  and  perfection  re-
quired men  formed  by  experience  and  united  by  sentiments  of
honor  and  fidelity,  they,  by  their  union,  established  a  confraternity
or  private  community,  which  was  distinguished  from  the  common

712  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

body  of  craftsmen  by  being  exclusively  devoted  to  ecclesiastical
architecture  and  the  building  of  churches.  This  fraternity  pre-
served, in  all  their  purity,  the  rules  and  practices  of  the  art  which
they  transmitted  as  a  secret  to  the  depository  of  succeeding  genera-
tions.

This  fraternity  had  an  organization  similar  to  that  of  the  Han-
seatic  league.  The  Masters  and  workmen  employed  on  edifices  of
less  size  or  importance  were  subordinate  to  the  architects  of  the
principal  fabrics,  and  the  fraternity  was,  in  the  course  of  time,  di-
vided into  districts  which  extended  over  all  Germany.  But  this
large  development  belongs  to  a  later  period,  that  of  the  1 2th  and
13th  centuries,  when  the  Stonemasons  adopted  that  distinct  organ-
ization as  a  Guild,  which  was  first  exhibited,  or,  at  least,  of  which
we  have  the  first  authentic  records,  in  the  labors  of  the  workmen
who  produced  those  wonders  of  architecture,  the  cathedrals  of  Co-
logne and  Strasburg.

This  subject  will  be  treated  in  the  succeeding  chapter.  At  pres-
ent we  must  restrict  our  investigations  to  the  architects  and  Masons
of  the  earlier  period.

The  building  of  churches  was,  therefore,  of  course,  under  the
care  of  ecclesiastics.  The  monasteries,  says  Findel,  were  the  nur-
series of  science  and  civilization,  the  center  of  all  energy  and  zeal
in  art,  and  the  fosterers  of  architecture.1  Fergusson  thinks  that  in
the  Middle  Ages,  in  the  construction  of  religious  edifices,  the  de-
signs were  made  by  bishops,  who,  taking  as  a  model  some  former
building,  verbally  corrected  its  mistakes  and  suggested  his  improve-
ments to  the  builder.9  He  thus  impliedly  admits  the  existence  of
two  classes,  the  clergy  and  the  laity,  both  of  which  were  engaged  in
the  pursuit  of  architecture,  and  of  which  classes  the  former  greatly
predominated  in  the  infancy  of  the  art.

Fergusson,  who  is  not  always  right  in  his  conclusions,  here  at
least,  is  correct.  It  will  be  found,  as  we  pursue  our  history,  that
architecture  as  a  science  and  Operative  Masonry  as  an  art  be-
gan under  ecclesiastical  auspices  and  were  confined  to  monks  and
monasteries.  Michelet,  in  his  Histoire  de  la  France,  speaking  of
the  wonderful  architecture  of  the  Middle  Ages  and  of  the  science  of

ltt  History  of  Freemasonry,"  Lyon's  Translation,  p.  51.
•"History  of  Architecture  in  all  Countries,"  etc.,  p.  80.

THE  STONEMASONS  OF  GERMANY  jr$

mystical  numbers  which  occurs  in  all  the  churches  of  that  period,
which  he  considers  as  the  secret  of  the  mediaeval  Masons,  at-
tributes this  mystical  knowledge  to  the  Church.

"  To  whom,"  says  he,  "  belonged  this  science  of  numbers,  this
divine  mathematics  ?  To  no  mortal  men  but  to  the  Church  of  God.
Under  the  shadow  of  the  Church,  in  chapters  and  in  monasteries,
the  secret  was  transmitted,  together  with  instruction  in  the  mysteries
of  Christianity.  The  Church  alone  could  accomplish  these  miracles
of  architecture."

But  in  time,  and  indeed  at  an  early  period  after  the  renaissance
of  architecture  in  the  ioth  and  nth  centuries,  the  practice  and
eventually  the  control  of  architecture  passed  away  from  the  eccle-
siastics as  an  exclusive  possession  and  began  to  be  shared  by  the
laymen.

There  were  then,  in  the  history  of  mediaeval  architecture  in
Germany  (as  well  as  in  other  countries),  three  distinct  epochs  or
periods.

First,  when  the  science  of  architecture  and  the  art  of  building
were  wholly  in  the  hands  of  the  clergy ;  second,  when  they  were
shared  by  the  clergy  and  the  laity ;  and  third,  when  the  science  and
the  art  passed  away  entirely  from  the  clergy  into  the  hands  of  the
laity.

It  was  in  the  third  period  that  bishops  ceased  to  be  "Masters  of
the  Work "  (Magister  Operis)  and  the  position  was  assumed  by
wholly  professional  lay  artists.

The  second  period  may  be  styled,  if  we  borrow  an  expression
from  geology,  the  "transition  period"  of  mediaeval  architecture.

In  Germany  this  transition  time  is  marked  by  the  organization
of  the  Steinmetzen,  and  the  establishment  of  the  workshops  known
as  the  Bauhuiten.

The  Steinmetzen  l  (literally  the  Stonecutters)  of  Germany  were
builders  or  architects  or  both,  who  in  the  Middle  Ages,  dating  from
the  9th  century  at  least,  associated  themselves  together  in  fraterni-
ties and  were  engaged,  sometimes  alone  and  sometimes  in  connec-

*Dr.  Krause  (drei  altest  kunst,  iv.,  362)  thinks  that  the  last  syllable  in  Steinmetz
comes  from  masa,  mets,  or  mess,  signifying  a  measure,  and  conveyed  the  idea  that  the
chief  object  of  a  laborer  in  stone  was  to  form  his  stone  according  to  a  just  measure  of
proportion.  Hence  a  Steinmetz  would  signify,  literally,  a  stone-measurer.  But  I  prefer
to  adopt  the  generally  accepted  etymology  and  derive  the  word  from  the  obsolete  verb,
metzen,  to  cut.     The  Steinmetzen  were  the  Stonecutters.

7H  HISTORY  OF   FREEMASONRY

tion  with  a  monastery  or  under  a  bishop  or  other  prelate  of  the
Church,  in  the  construction,  principally,  of  religious  edifices.1

Fallon,  in  Mysterien  der  Freimaurer,  cites  various  customs
practiced  by  the  Steinmetzen  which  would  seem  to  indicate  that
there  was  a  close  connection  between  them  and  the  modern  Specu-
lative Freemasons,  who  sprung  up  in  the  1 8th  century.

The  most  important  of  these  customs  may  be  enumerated  as
follows :

i.  The  German  Steinmetzen  divided  their  members  into  three
classes,  Afezster,  Gesellen,  and  Lehrlinge,  answering  to  the  Masters,
Fellows,  and  Apprentices  of  the  English  Masons.  But  there  is  no
^evidence  that  these  were  degrees  in  the  modern  sense  of  that  word.
As  has  already  been  shown  in  England  and  Scotland,  they  were
Tanks,  promotion  into  which  depended  on  length  of  service  and
•skill  in  labor.

2.  The  existence  of  some  esoteric  knowledge,  some  peculiar
ceremonies,  and  some  form  of  initiation  in  consequence  of  which
strangers  were  excluded  from  the  association.

3.  The  adoption  of  secret  modes  of  recognition,  by  means  of
signs,  tokens,  and  words,  by  which  a  strange  member  could  make
himself  known.

4.  Their  establishment  as  a  confraternity  or  brotherhood,  in
which  each  member  was  bound  by  solemn  obligations  to  afford  re-
lief to  his  poorer  brethren.

5.  Laws  and  usages  were  adopted  which  resembled  in  many  re-
spects those  of  the  modern  Speculative  Masons.  Some  of  these
were  the  natural  result  of  their  organization  as  a  brotherhood,  but
others,  such  as  their  usages  at  banquets,  the  prerogatives  of  a  Mas-
ter's son  over  other  persons,  and  some  others,  were  peculiar,  and
were  adopted  by  the  Freemasons  of  the  16th  century,  and  have
been  perpetuated  in  the  modern  Lodges.

The  increase  in  the  number  of  churches  and  other  religious  edi-
fices naturally  caused  a  proportionate  increase  in  the  number  of
workmen.     The  monks,  not  being  able  to  supply  the  requisite  num-

1  As  in  narrating  the  early  history  of  Masonry  in  Scotland  I  was  compelled  to  depend
on  the  laborious  researches  of  Bro.  Lyon,  so,  in  treating  of  mediaeval  Masonry  in  Ger-
many, I  have  not  hesitated  to  draw  liberally  from  the  invaluable  pages  of  Bro.  Findel's
"  Geschichte  der  Freimaurer,"  using,  for  convenience,  the  able  translation  of  Bro.
Lyon.  But  I  have  not  omitted  to  consult  also  the  works  of  Krause,  Kloss,  Steiglitz,  and
many  other  writers,  both  Masonic  and  profane

THE   STONEMASONS   OF  GERMANY  715

<ber,  the  laity  were  admitted  to  a  participation  in  architectural  and
masonic  labors.  Still  they  were  for  a  long  time  kept  in  strict
dependence  on  their  ecclesiastical  superiors.

Hence  the  lay  craftsmen  lived  in  close  connection  with  the
monasteries  and  assisted  the  monks  in  their  labors  as  builders,  form-
ing, for  this  purpose,  associations  among  themselves  and  living  in
huts  near  the  monastery  or  other  building  which  they  were  erecting.
To  this  usage  Findel,  with  much  reason,  attributes  the  rise  of  the
"  Bauhiitten."*

Hiitte  is  denned  as  meaning  a  hut,  cottage,  or  tent.  Bauhutte,
which  is  literally  a  building-hut,  was  the  booth  made  of  boards
erected  near  the  edifice  which  was  being  built,  and  where  the  Stein-
metzen,  or  Stonecutters,  kept  their  tools,  carried  on  their  work,  as-
sembled to  discuss  matters  of  business,  and  probably  ate  and  slept.8

It  will  be  remembered  that  Sir  Christopher  Wren,  in  the  Paren-
ialia,  describes  a  similar  custom  among  the  English  Masons  of
erecting  temporary  places  of  habitation  near  the  buildings  which
they  were  erecting.

These  they  call  "  Lodges,"  a  word  which  has  about  the  same  sig-
nification in  English  that  the  word  Hiitten  has  in  German.

The  Bauhiitten  were  therefore  the  Lodges  of  the  German  Stein-
tnetzen  in  the  Middle  Ages.  The  word  continued  to  convey  this
meaning  until  the  18th  century,  the  English  expression  Lodge  mod-
ified into  Loge  was  substituted  for  it,  by  the  Speculative  Masons
who  received  their  charters  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.

Findel  says  that  the  real  founder  of  the  Bauhiitten  was  Wilhelm,
Count  Palatine  of  Scheuren  and  Abbot  of  the  Monastery  of  Hir-
schau.  For  the  purpose  of  enlarging  the  monastery  he  had  brought
workmen  together  from  many  places.  He  had  incorporated  them
with  the  monastery  as  lay  brethren.  He  instructed  them  in  art,
regulated  their  social  life  by  special  laws,  and  inculcated  the  doctrine
that  brotherly  concord  should  prevail  because  it  was  only  by  work-
ing together  and  by  a  loving  union  of  their  strength  that  they  could
expect  to  accomplish  the  great  works  in  which  they  were  engaged.8

The  Bauhiitten  or  Lodges  flourished  for  a  long  time,  principally
under  the  patronage  of  the  Benedictine  order  of  monks.  But  at
length  the  transition  period  of  which  I  have  already  spoken  began

1Findel,  "  History,"  p.  52.        a  Ibid.,  ut  supra,  p.  54.        8  Ibid.,  ut  supra,  p.  54.

716  HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

to  pass  away  and  the  third  to  arrive,  and  the  Master  Builders  who
had  received  their  architectural  knowledge  from  the  monks  sepa-
rated themselves  from  them  and  established  independent  Lodges.
As  early  as  the  13th  century  there  were  many  Lodges  which  had  no
connection  with  the  monasteries,  but  were  bound  together  in  a
general  association  that  included  all  the  Stonecutters  of  Germany.

Until  the  12th  century  our  knowledge  of  the  Masonic  associa-
tions, other  than  the  schools  of  architecture  which  were  established
in  the  bosom  of  the  monasteries,  is  unsupported  by  any  documentary
evidence.  Indeed,  the  first  written  Constitution  of  the  German  Free-
masons which  has  reached  the  present  day  is  that  of  Strasburg,  in
the  year  1459,  which  purports,  however,  to  be  a  revision  of  the  Reg-
ulations of  the  Stonecutters  founded  at  that  city  in  1275.  Of  the
latter  there  is  no  copy  extant.

But  as  Winzer,  who  wrote  on  the  German  Brotherhoods  of  the
Middle  Ages,1  has  remarked,  such  regulations  may  have  existed  long
before  they  had  written  constitutions,  the  necessity  of  which  could
have  been  felt  only  when  the  craftsmen  had  obtained  a  formed  rec-
ognition, and  when  their  laws  were  committed  to  writing  to  give
them,  as  it  were,  a  superior  sanction.

Though  this  is  but  an  hypothesis,  it  is  not  without  the  support  of
great  probability.  In  the  nth  century  the  Traveling  Freemasons
from  the  celebrated  school  of  Lombardy  had  entered  Germany  and
begun  to  propagate  the  principles  and  the  practice  of  their  art.9

Of  this  fact  we  find  abundant  evidence  in  the  construction  dur-
ing that  century  of  numerous  cathedrals  in  Germany.  Such  were
those  of  Bamberg,  finished  in  1019  ;  of  Worms,  in  1020 ;  of  Spire,
in  1 06 1  ;  of  Constance,  of  Bonn,  in  1100;  and  a  great  many  others.3

Until  we  approach  the  period  when  the  Lombard  architects  dif-
fused the  principles  of  their  art  in  Germany,  under  the  peculiar  form
of  an  association  of  Freemasons,  which  was  not  until  about  the  nth
or  1 2th  century,  the  history  of  Masonry  in  Germany  is  really  only
that  of  the  Operative  art  in  its  simplest  form,  and  deriving  what

1  Cited  by  Findel,  "  History,"  p.  57.

2  En  1060  les  confe*ries  maconniques  de  la  Lombardie  se  repandent  en  Allemagne.
en  France,  en  Normandie  et  en  Bretagne.  Rebold,  "  Histoire  Gen.  de  la  Franc-Macon-
nerie,"  p.  109.

*Mr.  Hope  especially  cites  the  cathedrals  of  Spire  and  Worms  as  specimens  of  the
Lombard  style  of  architecture.

THE  STONEMASONS  OF  GERMANY  717

little  there  was  of  it  in  common  with  the  Masonry  of  other  coun-
tries, principally  from  France.

To  the  Franks  coming  from  Germany  and  invading  Gaul  was
France  indebted  for  its  political  character.  To  the  same  Franks,
returning  in  the  time  of  Charlemagne  and  his  successors,  to  com-
municate a  portion  of  the  culture  and  civilization  that  they  had
acquired  from  mingling  with  the  native  inhabitants  of  the  conquered
Roman  province,  was  Germany  indebted  for  all  the  architectural
and  Masonic  character  that  it  had,  until  the  peaceful  invasion  of  the
Lombard  Freemasons  in  the  nth  century.

From  that  time  the  Freemasonry  of  Germany  began  to  assume  a
new  modification  as  a  Guild  or  Corporation  of  associated  workmen,
like  those  which  we  have  already  seen  existing  in  Britain  and  Gaul.

To  the  German  Freemasonry  of  that  period  we  must  therefore
now  direct  our  attention.

CHAPTER  XVIII

THE   CATHEDRAL  OF   STRASBURG   AND    THE   STONEMASONS   OF

GERMANY

E  Abbe  Philip  Andrew  Grandidier  was  a  learned
historian  and  canon  of  the  great  choir  of  the
Cathedral  of  Strasburg.  He  was  the  author  of
several  historical  works  on  Alsatia  and  Stras-
burg, where  he  was  born  in  1752.  Among
them  were  Historical  and  Typographical  Es~
says  on  the  Cathedral  Church  of  Strasburg}
It  is  evident  that  he  had  paid  much  attention  to  the  antiquities  of
his  native  city,  and  although  not  a  Mason,  his  learning,  his  impar-
tiality, and  his  abundant  opportunities  of  acquiring  information,
gave  no  little  authority  to  the  views  that  he  may  have  expressed  on
the  antiquities  of  German  Masonry.

In  the  year  1778  he  wrote  a  letter  to  Madame  d'Ormoy,  which
first  appeared  in  the  following  year  in  the  Journal  de  Nancy  and
which,  copied  ten  years  afterward  in  the  Marquis  de  Luchet's  Essai
sur  la  Secte  des  Illumines,  has  since  been  repeated  in  French,  Ger-
man, and  English,  in  dozens  of  Masonic  books  and  magazines.

This  letter  he  afterward  enlarged  and  made  it  the  frame  of  a
narrative  which  he  embodied  in  his  Historical  Essays,  published
four  years  afterward.  In  this  work  he  has  advanced  a  theory  on
the  origin  of  Freemasonry  which,  notwithstanding  Dr.  Krause's  dis-
paraging criticism,8  has  been  accepted  as  true  by  most  of  the  recent
Masonic  historians.

As  the  statement  of  the  Abbe  Grandidier  is  very  interesting,  it
is  here  presented  to  the  reader  as  a  groundwork  of  what  will  be
said,  with  some  modifications,  on  the  same  subject  in  the  present

a"Essais  Historiques  et  Typographiques  sur  l'Eglise  Cathedral  de  Strasburg,"  Stras-
burg, 1782.

8"  Kunsturkunden  der  Freimaurersbrudersheft,"  iv.,  p.  251.

718

THE  CATHEDRAL  OF  STRASBURG  7*9

chapter.  And  I  shall  interpolate  some  portions  of  the  letter  which
are  not  embraced  in  the  essay.

The  Abbe  begins  by  saying  that,  "  opposite  to  the  church  and
the  episcopal  palace  is  a  building  appendant  to  the  Cathedral  and
the  Chapel  of  St.  Catherine  which  serves  as  the  Maurerhof,  or
workshop,  of  the  Masons  and  Stonecutters  of  the  Cathedral.  This
workshop  is  the  origin  of  an  ancient  fraternity  of  Freemasons  of
Germany."1

The  Cathedral  Church  of  Strasburg,  and  especially  its  tower,
which  was  begun  in  1277  by  the  architect  Erwin  of  Steinbach,  is
one  of  the  masterpieces  of  Gothic  architecture.  The  edifice  as  a
whole  and  in  its  details  is  a  perfect  work  and  worthy  of  all  admi-
ration, since  it  has  not  its  equal  in  the  world.  Its  foundation  was
built  with  such  solidity  that,  notwithstanding  the  apparent  fragility
of  its  open-work,  it  has  to  the  present  day  resisted  storms  and  earth-
quakes.' The  tower  of  the  Cathedral  was  finished  in  1439.  This
prodigious  work  spread  far  and  wide  the  reputation  of  the  Masons
of  Strasburg.

The  Duke  of  Milan,  in  the  year  1479,  wrote  a  letter  to  the  mag-
istrates of  Strasburg  in  which  he  asked  for  a  person  capable  of  di-
recting the  construction  of  a  superb  church  which  he  wished  to
build  in  his  own  capital.3  Vienna,  Cologne,  Zurich,  Friburg,  and
Landshutt  constructed  towers  in  imitation  of  that  of  Strasburg,  but
they  did  not  equal  it  in  height,  in  beauty,  or  in  delicacy.  The  Ma-
sons of  those  different  fabrics  and  their  pupils  spread  over  the  whole
of  Germany,  and  their  name  soon  became  famous.

As  an  evidence  of  their  renown  he  quotes  Jacobus  Wimphelin-
gius,  who  flourished  at  about  the  end  of  the  15th  century,  as  saying
that  the  Germans  are  most  excellent  architects  and  that  ^Eneas  Sil-

a"  Essais  Historiques  et  Typographiques,"  p.  413.

8  Lettre  a  Madame  d'Ormoy.

3  From  the  Letter.  Grandidier  says,  "  I  possess  a  copy  of  this  letter  in  Italian."  It
is  a  pity  that  the  writers  of  the  18th  century,  when  referring  to  facts  connected  with  Ma-
sonic history,  have  so  often  made  their  accuracy  doubtful  and  their  authority  suspicious
by  careless  anachronisms  or  improbable  statements.  In  1479,  the  Duke  of  Milan  was  a
boy  of  fifteen,  the  son  of  the  licentious  tyrant  Galeaz,  who  had  been  assassinated  in  1476.
The  Duchy  was  administered  by  the  Bonne  of  Savoy,  the  widow  of  Galeaz,  as  regent,
during  the  minority  of  her  son.  Nor  was  Milan,  torn  at  that  time  by  intestine  contests
and  the  revolution  of  the  Genoese,  in  a  condition  to  indulge  in  the  luxury  of  archU
lecture.

720  HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

vius  (who  was  Pope  of  Rome  from  1458  to  1464)  declared  that  in
architecture  they  excelled  all  other  nations.

That  they  might  distinguish  themselves  from  the  common  herd
of  the  Masonic  craft,  they  formed  associations  to  which  they  gave
the  German  name  of  Hiitten,  signifying  lodges.  All  of  these  lodges
agreed  to  recognize  the  superiority  of  that  of  Strasburg,  which  was
called  Haupthutte  or  Metropolitan  or  Grand  Lodge.

Afterward  the  project  was  conceived  of  forming,  out  of  these
different  associations,  a  single  society  for  the  whole  of  Germany ;
but  it  was  not  thoroughly  developed  until  thirteen  years  after  the
complete  construction  of  the  tower  of  Strasburg.

Jodoque,  or  Jos  Dotzinger,  of  Worms,  who  succeeded  John
Htiltz  in  1449  as  architect  of  the  Cathedral,  formed,  in  1452,  a  sin-
gle body  of  all  the  Master  Masons  who  were  dispersed  over  Ger-
many. He  gave  them  a  particular  word  and  sign  by  which  they
could  recognize  those  who  were  of  their  fraternity.

The  different  Masters  of  the  particular  lodges  met  at  Ratisbon
on  April  25,  1459,  and  there  drew  up  their  first  statutes.  The  act
of  confraternity  digested  in  this  Assembly  constituted  Jos  Dot-
zinger and  each  of  his  successors,  by  virtue  of  the  office  of  architect
of  the  Cathedral  of  Strasburg,  as  sole  and  perpetual  Grand  Masters
of  the  General  Fraternity  of  Freemasons  of  Germany.

The  second  and  third  General  Assemblies  of  the  lodges  were
held  at  Spire  on  April  9,  1464,  and  April  23,  1469.  The  Constitu-
tions of  the  fraternity  were  confirmed,  and  it  was  enacted  that  a
Provincial  Chapter  should  be  annually  held  in  each  district.  John
Hammerer,  who  lived  in  i486,  and  James  of  Landshutt,  who  died  in
1495,  succeeded  Jos  Dotzinger  in  the  place  of  Architect  of  the
Cathedral  of  Strasburg  and  in  that  of  Grand  Master  of  the  Masons
of  Germany.  Conrad  Wagt,  who  succeeded  them,  obtained  from  the
Emperor  Maximilian  I.  the  confirmation  of  their  institution  and  of
the  statutes  of  the  lodges.  The  diploma  of  this  Prince  is  dated  at
Strasburg,  October  3,  1498.  Charles  V.  and  Ferdinand  I.,  and  their
successors,  renewed  these  privileges  on  different  occasions.

This  Fraternity,  composed  of  Masters,  Companions,  and  Ap-
prentices (in  German,  Meister,  Gesellen,  and  Diener),  formed  a
particular  jurisdiction  independent  of  the  body  of  other  Masons.

The  Society  of  Strasburg  embraced  all  those  of  Germany.  It
held  its  tribunal  in  the  lodge,  or,  as  it  is  now  called,  the  Maurerhof^

GOOSE   AND    GRID    IRON    TAVERN,    LONDON,    r?i?
The  Grand  Lodge  of  England  was  organized  in  this  Building

* —

THE  CATHEDRAL  OF  STRASBURG  721

and  judged  without  appeal  all  causes  brought  before  it,  according  to
the  rules  and  statutes  of  the  Fraternity.

The  inhabitants  of  Strasburg  resorted  to  it  in  all  litigated  cases
relating  to  building.  In  1461  the  Magistracy  entrusted  to  it  the
entire  cognizance  of  such  cases,  and  in  the  same  year  prescribed  the
forms  and  the  laws  which  it  should  observe,  and  this  privilege  was
renewed  in  1490.  The  judgments  which  it  gave  received  the  name
of  Hiittenbrief  or  lodge-letters.  The  archives  of  the  city  are  full
of  such  documents,  and  there  are  few  old  families  in  Strasburg
which  have  not  preserved  some  of  them  among  their  papers.  But
its  jurisdiction  has  been  much  diminished,  especially  since  1620,  at
which  time  the  Magistracy  took  from  the  Lodge  of  Strasburg  the
inspection  of  buildings  which  had  so  long  been  entrusted  to  it.
The  necessity  for  this  suppression  arose  from  the  abuse  of  its  au-
thority by  the  lodge.

The  statutes  or  constitutions  of  the  Freemasons  of  Germany,  at
first  limited  to  the  number  of  thirteen,  were  afterward  extended  to
seventy-eight  regulations.  These  were  renewed  and  put  in  better
order  by  the  General  Assembly  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  held  on  August
24,  1563,  at  Basle,  and  on  the  29th  of  the  following  September,  at
Strasburg,  seventy-two  Masters  and  thirty  Companions  were  present
at  this  Assembly,  which  was  presided  over  by  Mark  Schau,  the
architect  of  the  Cathedral.  Twenty-two  lodges  directly  depended
on  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Strasburg.  The  lodges  of  the  Masons  of
Swabia,  of  Hesse,  of  Bavaria,  of  Franconia,  of  Westphalia,  of  Saxe,
of  Misnia,  of  Thuringia,  and  of  the  countries  situated  along  the
river  Moselle,  as  far  as  the  frontiers  of  Italy,  acknowledged  the
authority  of  the  same  Grand  Lodge.

At  the  beginning  of  the  18th  century  the  Master  Masons  of  the
fabric  of  Strasburg  imposed  a  fine  on  the  lodges  of  Dresden  and
Nuremberg,  and  the  fine  was  paid.  It  was  only  by  an  edict  of  the
imperial  diet  of  Ratisbon  that  the  correspondence  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Strasburg  with  the  lodges  of  Germany  was  interdicted.1

The  Grand  Lodge  of  St.  Stephen  of  Vienna,  which  founded  the
lodges  of  Austria,  of  Hungary,  of  Styria,  and  of  all  the  countries

1  This  was  because  Alsace,  of  which  Strasburg  was  the  capital,  had  ceased  to  be  a
part  of  the  German  Empire  and  been  annexed  to  France.  This  was  the  first  precedent
of  the  doctrine  now  held  by  American  Masonic  jurists,  that  Masonic  and  political  terri-
torial jurisdiction  must  be  coterminous.

d6

722  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

adjacent  to  the  Danube,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Cologne,  which  had
under  its  dependence  the  places  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Rhine,  that
of  Zurich,  whose  jurisdiction  extended  over  the  lodges  of  Berne,  of
Lucerne,  of  Shaffhausen,  of  St.  Gal,  and  of  the  cantons  of  Switzer-
land, all  these  referred  in  all  grave  and  doubtful  cases  to  the  Mother
Lodge  of  Strasburg.

The  members  of  this  Society  held  no  communication  with  the
other  Masons,  who  knew  only  the  use  of  mortar  and  the  trowel.
The  erection  of  buildings  and  the  cutting  of  stone  constituted  their
principal  labor.  So  they  regarded  their  art  as  far  superior  to  that  of
the  other  Masons.  The  square,  the  level,  and  the  compasses  be-
came their  attributes  and  their  characteristic  marks.

As  they  were  resolved  to  form  a  body  distinct  from  the  herd  of
workmen,  they  invented  for  their  own  use  rallying  words  and  grips
for  mutual  recognition.  These  they  called  das  Wortzeichen,  or  the
"  word  sign,"  der  Gruss,  or  the  "  salute,"  and  the  Handschenk,  or
"grip."  The  Apprentices,  Companions,  and  Masters  were  received
with  certain  ceremonies  which  were  performed  in  secret.1  The  Ap-
prentice when  he  was  advanced  to  the  degree  took  an  oath  never  to
divulge  by  mouth  or  by  writing  the  secret  words  of  the  salute.  The
Masters  as  well  as  the  Companions  were  forbidden  to  divulge  to
strangers  the  constitutional  statutes  of  Masonry.  It  was  the  duty
of  every  Master  of  a  lodge  carefully  to  preserve  the  book  of  the
society,  so  that  no  one  should  transcribe  any  of  the  regulations.  He
had  the  right  to  judge  and  punish  the  Masters,  Companions,  and
Apprentices  who  belonged  to  the  lodge.

The  Apprentice  who  desired  to  become  a  Companion  had  to  be
proposed  by  a  Master,  who,  as  his  sponsor,  bore  witness  of  his  life
and  manners.  A  Companion  was  subject  to  the  Master  for  the
time  fixed  by  the  statutes,  which  was  from  five  to  seven  years.  Then
he  might  be  admitted  as  a  Master.

Those  who  did  not  fulfil  their  religious  duties,  who  led  a  life  of
libertinism,  or  who  were  scarcely  Christians,  or  who  were  known  to
be  unfaithful  to  their  wives,  were  not  received  into  the  society,  or
Were  expelled  from  it,  and  all  Masters  and  Companions  were  for-
bidden to  hold  intercourse  with  them.

*In  the  letter  the  Abbe  says  that  they  took  for  their  motto  "liberty,"  which  they
sometimes  abused  by  refusing  the  legitimate  authority  of  the  Magistrates.

THE  CATHEDRAL  OF  STRASBURG  723

No  Companion  could  depart  from  the  lodge  or  speak  while  in  it
without  permission  of  the  Master.

Every  lodge  possessed  a  chest  in  which  the  money  given  by
Masters  and  Companions  at  their  reception  was  deposited.  This
money  was  used  for  the  relief  of  poor  or  sick  brethren.

The  Abbe  Grandidier  thinks  that  in  these  traits  we  may  recog-
nize the  Freemasons  of  modern  times.  In  fact,  he  says  that  the
analogy  is  plain,  and  the  allegory  exact.  There  is  the  same  name
of  lodges  for  their  places  of  meeting ;  the  same  order  in  their  distri-
bution ;  the  same  division  into  Masters,  Companions,  and  Appren-
tices ;  both  are  presided  over  by  a  Grand  Master ;  both  have  par-
ticular signs,  secret  laws,  and  statutes  against  profanes — in  fine  they
may  say  to  each  other,  "my  brethren  and  my  companions  know  me
for  a  Mason."

For  so  much  are  we  indebted  to  the  letter  and  to  the  Essay  of
the  Abbe  Grandidier.  The  Abbe  has  been  supposed  to  be  the  first
writer  who  has  adverted  to  the  history  of  the  Strasburg  Masons  as
a  fraternity.  But  this  is  not  the  fact.  Nearly  thirty  years  before
the  publication  in  the  Journal  de  Nancy  of  his  letter  to  Madame
d'Ormoy,  attention  had  been  called  to  this  subject  by  John  Daniel
Schoepflin,  whose  work,  entitled  Alsatia  Illustrated,  first  appeared
at  Colmer  in  the  year  1751.  Schoepflin,  who  died  in  1771,  had
been  for  fifty  years  professor  of  history  in  the  Protestant  University
of  Strasburg.  In  the  work  referred  to  he  gives  an  account  of  the
Masons  of  Strasburg,  to  which  Grandidier  must  have  been  indebted
for  much  that  he  has  written  on  the  same  subject.

From  the  Alsatia  Illustrated  of  Schoepflin,  the  following  frag-
ment is  translated,  that  the  reader  may  compare  the  two  accounts.

"  Before  dismissing  the  subject  of  the  government  and  judicial
institutions  of  the  city,  some  notice  must  be  taken  of  the  singular
institution  of  the  Masons  of  Strasburg,  who  formerly  held  not  the
lowest  place  in  the  city,  and  at  this  day  of  all  the  Masons  of  Ger-
many occupy  the  highest.  The  construction  of  the  magnificent
cathedral,  and  especially  of  its  tower,  greatly  extended  the  fame  of
the  Masons  of  the  city  and  excited  an  emulation  among  the  other
German  craftsmen.  Vienna  and  Cologne  erected  towers  after  the
model  of  that  of  Strasburg,  and  the  associations  of  workmen  and
the  workshops  of  those  cities  were  pre-eminent.  To  these  Zurich
was  added,  with  which  Cologne  not  long  after  was  joined.

724  HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

"  On  these  principal  workshops  called  Tabernacles x  (lodges)  de-
pended from  olden  time  all  the  rest  of  the  cities  of  Germany.

"In  former  times  there  was  a  long  deliberation  at  Strasburg,
Spire,  and  other  cities  on  the  subject  of  constituting  a  common  so-
ciety of  all  the  Stonemasons.

"  Finally  at  Ratisbon,  on  St.  Mark's  day  (25th  of  April),  1459,  was
instituted  that  great  society  under  the  name  of  a  Fraternity,  of  which
the  Master  of  the  work  of  the  Cathedral  of  Strasburg  was  constituted
the  perpetual  presiding  officer.

"  This  institution  having  been  for  a  long  time  neglected  the  Em-
peror Maximilian  I.  confirmed  it  at  Strasburg  by  a  solemn  charter
in  the  year  1498.  This  charter  was  renewed  by  Charles  V.,  Ferdi-
nand I.  and  by  others.

"In  the  lodge  tribunal  the  Masters  and  their  Companions  sat
and  judged  causes  and  pronounced  sentences  according  to  the
statutes  without  appeal.

"The  authority  of  this  tribunal  was  acknowledged  by  the  Ma-
sons of  Saxony,  Thuringia,  Westphalia,  Hesse,  Franconia,  Bavaria,
Swabia  and  all  the  region  of  the  Moselle.

"  The  lodge  at  Vienna,  from  which  those  of  Styria  and  Hungary
are  derived,  and  of  Zurich,  under  which  are  those  of  Switzerland,
in  all  grave  and  doubtful  cases  resort  to  the  lodge  at  Strasburg  as
to  a  mother.

"  All  the  members  of  the  sodality  have  in  common  a  secret  watch-
word. We  know  that  the  society  of  Stonemasons  spread  through-
out Europe  has  this  form  and  origin.  There  is  the  same  division
of  the  Order  into  lodges,  Masters  of  lodges,  Companions  and
Apprentices  ;  there  are  the  same  laws  and  secret  words.  A  Grand
Master  presides  over  all.

"  The  Stonecutters 8  have  an  aversion  to  the  common  tribe  of
Masons  who  are  enrolled  with  them,  because  they  think  not  unjustly

1  In  classical  Latinity  the  word  "  tabernaculum  "  denotes,  according  to  Festus,  a
tent  made  like  a  booth  or  hut  with  planks  with  a  boarded  roof  and  covered  with  skins  or
canvas.  The  mediaeval  writers  on  Masonry  have  accepted  it  as  the  appellation  of  the
"  Hutte,"  which  afterward  became  the  "  Loge  "  in  German  and  the  "  Lodge  "  in  English.
The  word  is  thus  used  in  the  Charter  of  Cologne,  which  may  be  taken  or  not,  as  the  reader
pleases,  for  an  evidence  of  the  genuineness  of  that  much  disputed  document.

2Schoepflin  makes  in  this  passage  a  distinction  which  is  worthy  of  notice,  between
the  "  lapicida,"  or  stonecutter  and  the  "  caementarius,"  or  worker  in  rough  stones,  such
as  are  used  in  building  walls.     The  mediaeval  Germans  preserved  this  distinction,  when

THE  CATHEDRAL   OF   STRASBURG  725

tftat  their  art  of  stonecutting  is  far  above  the  Craft  of  the  Oper-
ative Masons.

"The  citizens  of  Strasburg  often  submitted  questions  concerning
building  to  the  judgment  of  the  lodge,  wherefore  the  Magistracy
in  the  year  146 1,  committed  to  it  the  power  of  deciding  on  building
matters,  and  prescribed  for  this  purpose  certain  laws  and  regula-
tions. To  these  officers  was  added  a  Scribe  skilled  in  the  laws.
But  as  in  the  course  of  time  this  power  of  adjudication  began  to
be  abused,  it  was  taken  away  in  1620  and  committed  to  a  smaller
court."  *

The  reader  may  now  compare  these  two  accounts,  that  of  Gran-
didier  with  that  of  Schoepflin.  The  former  was  written  in  the  let-
ter in  1778,  and  in  the  Essays  in  1782.  The  latter  was  published
in  1751.

Now  it  is  very  evident  that  Grandidier  has  borrowed  almost  his
very  language  from  Schoepflin,  if  they  did  not  both  borrow  from
Father  Laguille,  as  I  have  suggested  in  a  note.*

Both  were  men  of  learning — both  were  natives  and  residents  of
Strasburg — and  both  had  devoted  their  minds  to  the  study  of  the
antiquities  of  that  city  and  of  the  province  of  Alsatia.  We  may,
therefore,  accept  what  they  have  said  on  the  subject  of  the  Masons
of  Strasburg  and  their  connection  with  the  Cathedral  as  historically
authentic  facts.  But  we  shall  find  that  they  are  further  confirmed
bv  other  documents,  which  are  in  existence,  and  to  which  both  of
these  writers  have  referred.

Grandidier  has,  however,  fallen  into  one  error  which  Schoepflin
had  escaped,  and  which  is  to  be  attributed  in  all  probability  to  the
fact  of  his  being  a  profane  and  not  therefore  conversant  with  the
peculiar  differences  between  Operative  and  Speculative  Masonry.
He  says  that  while  the  usages  of  the  two  bodies  of  Masons,  with
whose  existence  at  Strasburg  he  was  acquainted,  show  a  palpable

they  called  the  higher  class  of  Freemasons,  "  Steinmetzen"  or  Stonecutters  and  the  low-
er class,  who  were  not  free  of  the  Guild,  "  Maurer,"  or  wall-builders.  The  reader  will
remember  the  degrading  use  of  the  term  "  rough-masons,"  constantly  used  in  the  old
Constitutions  of  England.

1  "  Alsatia  Illustrated,"  tome  i.,  p.  338.

3  It  is  possible  that  both  have  borrowed  from  the  Jesuit  Laguille,  who  published,  in
1725,  at  Strasburg,  in  two  volumes,  8vo,  a  "  Histoire  d'Alsace,  ancienne  et  moderne."  I
can  not  decide  the  point  because  I  have  not  been  able  to  get  access  to  a  copy  of  La-
guille's  work.

726  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

analogy  between  the  Stonemasons  of  Strasburg  whose  association
he  supposes  to  have  been  founded  in  1459  an<^  tne  more  modern
Order  that  came  over  from  England  near  the  middle  of  the  18th
century,  he  yet  appears  to  be  wholly  ignorant  of  the  historical  con-
nection that  can  easily  be  traced  between  them.  While  he  gives  a
greater  antiquity  to  the  old  association  of  Strasburg  Operative
Masons  than  to  the  recent  one  of  Speculative  Masons,  he  does  not
comprehend  the  fact  that  the  latter  was  merely  a  modification  of*
the  mediaeval  system  of  the  Traveling  Freemasons  from  whom
both  associations  were  descended.

It  is  this  error  that  he  who  would  write  a  true  history  of  the  rise
and  progress  of  the  German  Steinmetzen  must  carefully  avoid.

There  have  been  evidently  three  distinct  periods  in  the  history
of  Freemasonry  in  Germany.

The  first  period  beginning  with  the  introduction  of  architecture
into  Germany,  from  Gaul,  and  from  Italy,  extends  to  the  12th  cen-
tury. In  this  period  we  have  no  documentary  evidence  of  the  or-
ganization of  a  fraternity  We  know,  however,  from  their  works,
that  there  were  during  that  time  architects  and  builders  of  great
skill,  and  we  have  every  right  to  suppose  that  the  feudal  system  had
the  same  effect  upon  the  Masons,  as  it  had  upon  other  crafts  in  giv-
ing rise  to  the  formation  of  protective  guilds.

The  effect  of  the  feudal  system  in  the  Middle  Ages  was  to  con-
centrate power  in  the  hands  of  the  nobles,  and  to  deprive  the  people
of  their  just  rights.  The  natural  result  of  all  oppression  is  to  awaken
the  oppressed  to  a  sense  of  the  wrong  endured  long  before  the  op-
pressor is  aware  of  the  injustice  he  inflicts.'

The  people  therefore  combined  together  by  the  bond  of  a  com-
mon oppression  to  secure  by  their  combination  the  undoubted  rights
which  should  never  have  been  denied  them.  Thus  it  was  that  "  the
butchers,  the  bakers,  the  brewers  of  the  town  met  secretly  together
and  swore  to  one  another,  on  the  gospels,  to  defend  their  meat,  their
bread,  and  their  beer."

Doubtless  the  Masons  followed  the  example  of  the  butchers,  the
brewers,  and  the  bakers,  and  although,  as  Findel  very  justly  remarks,
we  have  no  written  constitutions  to  prove  the  existence  of  such
associations,  we  can  hardly  doubt  the  fact.  Those  who  were  free
born,  of  good  manners,  and  skilled  in  their  craft,  it  is  reasonable  to
suppose,  united  themselves  into  associations  whose  members  were

THE  CATHEDRAL  OF  STRASBURG  727

governed  by  a  common  obligation  and  constituted  a  common
brotherhood.

The  history  of  this  period  in  German  Freemasonry  has  already
been  discussed  in  the  preceding  chapter.

The  second  period  begins  with  the  organization  of  the  corpora-
tions of  Freemasons  at  the  building  of  the  Cathedrals  of  Cologne
and  Strasburg.     Some  writers  think  at  an  earlier  period.

The  third  period  commences  with  the  introduction  of  Speculative
Freemasonry  into  Germany  in  the  18th  century  under  the  auspices
of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  at  London.

The  second  period  alone  occupies  our  attention  in  the  present
chapter.

It  has  been  very  generally  believed  that  this  second  period — the
period  marked  by  a  well-defined  organization  of  the  craft — dates  its
origin  from  the  time  when  that  style  of  architecture,  denominated
the  Gothic,  began  to  flourish.

In  this  style  the  high  pitched  gable  and  the  pointed  arch  took
the  place  of  the  low,  flat  gable  and  the  semicircular  arch,  which  had
hitherto  prevailed.

Of  this  style  of  architecture  much  has  been  written  by  the  ablest
professional  pens,  and  much  as  to  its  history  and  its  character  has
been  left  undetermined.  When  was  it  first  known,  and  when  did
it  cease  to  exist  ?  Who  was  its  inventor  ?  And  in  what  distinct
and  salient  points  does  it  differ  specifically  from  other  styles  ?  All
these  are  questions  to  which  no  qualified  school  of  architects  has
yet  been  able  to  respond  with  satisfaction  either  to  the  querist  or  to
the  respondent.

One  thing,  however,  we  do  know  with  very  great  certainty.
And  this  is  that  it  was  the  style  universally  practiced  by  the  Free-
masons of  the  Middle  Ages  in  all  countries  of  Europe,  having  been
introduced  about  the  end  of  the  12th  and  the  beginning  of  the  13th
century.

We  have  also  the  tradition,  which  is  not  altogether  a  tradition,
that  these  Freemasons,  wandering  from  country  to  country,  and
planting  everywhere  the  almost  divine  principles  of  their  symbolic
art,  were  really  the  inventors  of  Gothic  architecture.

But  be  that  as  it  may,  the  memorials  of  these  arts,  in  the  massive
buildings  which  they  erected,  have  so  mixed  up  the  history  of  Gothic
Architecture  with  that  of  Freemasonry  in  the  Middle  Ages,  that  it

728  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

is  impossible,  in  any  treatise  on  the  latter  subject,  to  leave  the
former  unnoticed.

M  The  spirit  of  the  Middle  Ages,"  says  Frederic  Schlegel,  in  his
History  of  Ancient  and  Modern  Literature,  "more  especially  as  it
developed  itself  in  Germany,  is  in  nothing  so  impressively  manifest-
ed as  in  that  style  of  architecture  which  is  called  the  Gothic.  .  .  .
The  real  inventors  of  this  style  are  unknown  to  us ;  yet  we  may  be
assured  that  it  did  not  originally  emanate  from  one  single  master-
,  mind,  or  else  his  name  would  certainly  have  been  transmitted  to  us.
The  Master  artificers  who  produced  those  astonishing  works  appear
rather  to  have  formed  a  particular  society  or  corporation,  which  sent
out  its  members  through  different  countries.  Let  them,  however,
have  been  who  they  may,  they  did  more  than  merely  rear  stone  on
stone,  for  in  doing  so  they  arrived  at  expressing  bold  and  mighty
thoughts."

Mr.  Paley  expresses  the  same  exalted  opinion  when  he  says  that
mediaeval  architecture,  by  which  he  means  the  Gothic,  "  was  not  a
mere  result  of  piling  together  stone  and  timber  by  mechanical  cun-
ning and  ingenious  device.  It  was  the  visible  embodying  of  the
highest  feelings  of  adoration  and  worship  and  holy  abstraction  ;  the
expression  of  a  sense  which  must  have  a  language  of  its  own,  and
which  could  have  utterance  in  no  worthier  or  more  significant
way." l

This  symbolic  style,  in  which  the  Stonecutter  became  not  only
the  builder  of  churches,  but  the  preacher  to  their  congregations,  and
in  which  there  were  literally  "  sermons  in  stones,"  was  gradually  de-
veloped by  the  skill  of  the  Freemasons,  and  lasted  from  about  the
middle  of  the  12th  to  the  middle  of  the  16th  century.

These  are  Paley  s  dates,  but  Dr.  Moller 9  gives  the  style  a  more
diffused  extent  and  an  earlier  origin,  though  he  confines  the  true
Gothic  within  the  limits  of  four  centuries  prescribed  to  it  by  Paley.

He  says  that  the  various  styles  of  architecture  which  appeared  in
Europe  after  the  decay  of  Roman  architecture,  and  continued
till  the  1 6th  century,  when  they  were  superseded  by  the  modern
Graeco- Roman  art,  were  all  for  a  long  time  comprised  under  the
general  name  of  Gothic  architecture.     This  epithet  was  afterward

1 "  Manual  of  Gothic  Architecture,"  chap,  i.,  p.  5.
'"Denkmaler  der  Deutschen  Baukund,"  cap.  i.,  p.  9.

THE   CATHEDRAL   OF   STRASBURG  729

applied  to  the  pointed  arch  style  which  predominated  in  the  13th
century.1

I  have  said  that  the  invention  of  this  style,  so  expressive  in  all
its  manipulations  of  a  profound  thought,  has  been  attributed  to  the
mediaeval  fraternity  of  Freemasons.  And  if  this  hypothesis  be  cor-
rect, of  which  there  can  scarcely  be  a  doubt,  then  that  invention  was
most  probably  made,  or  at  least  perfected,  after  the  Masons  had  re-
leased themselves  from  ecclesiastical  control,  and  withdrawing  from
the  monks  and  the  monasteries  had  become  an  independent  Order  of
laymen.

"  If  we  consider,"  says  Boisser£e,  "the  impetus  given  in  the  13th
century  by  the  wealth  and  the  liberty  of  the  cities  to  commerce,  to
industry,  and  to  the  arts,  we  will  readily  comprehend  that  it  is  in  the
class  of  citizens,  and  not  in  that  of  the  clergy,  that  we  are  to  look
for  the  inventors  of  that  admirable  architecture  which  was  conse-
crated to  divine  worship.  Notwithstanding  all  the  great  and  useful
things  that  the  clergy  have  done  for  literature  and  science,  they  have
been  deficient  in  that  liberty  which  comes  from  an  active  life  in  the
world,  and  which  is  a  necessary  element  in  the  elevation  of  the  arts,
as  well  as  of  poetry."  2

This  new  style,  the  invention  of  the  Freemasons  after  their  sep-
aration from  ecclesiastical  control,  prevailed  at  the  same  time  in  all
the  countries  of  Europe.  In  Germany  the  two  most  celebrated  in-
stances are  the  Cathedrals  of  Cologne  and  Strasburg.

Each  of  these  cities  has  been  claimed  by  different  authors  as  the
birthplace  of  German  Freemasonry  in  its  guild  or  corporate  form.

What  has  been  said  by  Schoepflin  and  Grandidier  in  reference
to  the  pretensions  of  Strasburg  to  be  the  center  whence  Freema-
sonry sprung  in  the  13th  century,  has  been  heretofore  shown.

Of  Cologne  the  pretensions  are  equally  as  strong,  although  not
so  demonstratively  expressed,  nor  has  it  furnished  any  documents,
as  Strasburg  has  done,  of  its  claims  to  be  the  Masonic  center  of
Germany.  The  document  known  as  the  "  Charter  of  Cologne,"  if
it  had  really  emanated  from  the  lodge  of  that  city,  would  undoubt-
edly have  been  of  great  value  as  testimony  in   favor  of  the  theory

1 "  Spater  wurde  dieser  Name  nur  auf  den  im  13  Jahrhundert  herrschend  werdenden
Spitzbogen  style  angewendet."

2"  Histoire  et  description  de  la  Cathedral  de  Cologne,"  par  Sulpice  Boisseree,  Mu-
nich, 1843,  p.  14.

730  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

that  makes  Cologne  the  seat  of  German  Freemasonry.  But,  un
fortunately,  there  is  now  no  doubt,  among  Masonic  archaeologists,
that  that  document  is  spurious.

Boisseree,  whose  work  on  the  Cologne  Cathedral  exhibits  much
research,  seeks  to  remove  the  difficulty  arising  from  the  rivalry  of
Cologne  and  Strasburg  by  proposing  a  compromise.

He  says  that  as  the  city  of  Cologne  gave  the  first  example  of  a
fraternity  of  Masons,  the  Architect  of  the  Cathedral  was  considered
as  the  chief  of  all  the  Masters  and  Workmen  of  Lower  Germany,
just  as  the  Architect  of  the  Cathedral  of  Strasburg,  which  was  com-
menced nineteen  years  after  that  of  Cologne,  was  made  the  Chief  of
all  the  Masters  and  Workmen  employed  in  constructions  of  the
same  kind  in  the  countries  situated  between  the  Danube  and  the
Moselle.  Thus,  he  says,  the  lodge  of  Stonecutters  employed  at  the
Cathedral  of  Cologne,  was  the  seat  of  the  Grand  Mastership  of
Lower  Germany,  and  that  of  the  Cathedral  of  Strasburg  was  the
seat  of  the  Grand  Mastership  of  Upper  Germany.

Afterward  there  was  established,  he  says,  a  central  Mastership
for  all  Germany,  and  Strasburg,  where  the  works  were  continued  for
a  long  time,  disputed  this  pre-eminent  position  with  Cologne  as
Lubeck  did  for  the  Hanseatic  league.

It  would  seem  then,  that,  according  to  Boisseree,  there  were  at
first  two  Grand  Lodges,  one  at  Cologne  and  one  at  Strasburg,  be-
tween which  the  jurisdiction  over  Germany  was  divided  ;  that  after-
ward there  was  but  a  single  central  head  for  all  Germany,  which  was
claimed  by  both  Cologne  and  Strasburg..

But  Boisseree  produces  no  authority  to  substantiate  this  state-
ment, and  we  shall  therefore  have  to  be  satisfied  with  looking  to
Strasburg  only  as  the  seat  of  the  first  known  and  recognized  head  of
mediaeval  Freemasonry  in  Germany.

But  Cologne  must  not  be  passed  over  in  silence.  Whatever  may
have  been  the  authority  that  its  lodge  exercised  as  a  Masonic  tribu-
nal, it  must  at  least  be  acknowledged  that  in  its  Cathedral,  the  purely
symbolic  principles  of  Gothic  architecture,  as  the  peculiar  style  of
the  mediaeval  Masons  were  developed  in  a  profounder  significance
than  in  any  other  building  of  the  time.

It  may  be  permitted  to  suspend  for  a  time  our  researches  into
the  progress  of  mediaeval  Freemasonry  and  devote,  as  an  episode,  a
brief  chapter  to  this  wonderful  Cathedral.

CHAPTER  XIX

THE  CATHEDRAL  OF  COLOGNE  AND  THE  STONEMASONS  OF  GERMANY

|Y  the  general  consent  of  architectural  writers,  the
Cathedral  of  Cologne  has  been  admitted  to  be
one  of  the  most  beautiful  religious  edifices  in
the  world.  It  is  considered  to  be  a  perfect  type
of  the  old  Germanic  or  Gothic  style  of  archi-
tecture, and  it  has  been  deemed  a  central  point
around  which  have  gathered  the  most  important
historical  and  artistic  researches  on  the  subject  of  the  architecture  of
the  Middle  Ages.

So  high  did  it  stand  in  contemporary  estimation,  and  so  much
were  its  builders  valued  for  the  skill  which  they  had  displayed  in  its
construction,  that,  as  Boisser£e  tells,  the  Master  Masons  of  Cologne
were  often  sent  for  to  superintend  the  building  of  many  other
churches.  Thus  the  continuation  of  the  steeple  of  the  Cathedral  of
Strasburg  was  intrusted  to  John  Hiiltz,  of  Cologne.  Another  John
of  Cologne,  in  1369,  built  the  two  churches  of  Campen,  on  the
shores  of  the  Zuyder  Zee  ;  and  he  adopted  as  his  plan  that  of  the
Cologne  Cathedral.  The  Cathedrals  of  Prague  and  of  Metz  were
built  on  the  same  plan.  In  1442  the  Bishop  of  Burgos  imported
into  Spain  two  stonecutters  of  Cologne  to  complete  the  towers  of
his  cathedral.

To  this  prominent  position  of  the  cathedral  and  of  its  builders
in  the  history  of  mediaeval  architecture  must  we  assign  the  equally
prominent  position  which  has  been  assumed  for  it  in  the  traditions
of  modern  Freemasonry.  The  fabrication  of  that  very  popular,  but
altogether  supposititious  document,  known  as  the  "  Charter  of
Cologne,"  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  fact  that  at  the  date  assigned
to  it  the  Masons  of  Cologne  were  considered  as  the  chiefs  of  the
craft,  and  there  was  some  apparent  plausibility  in  assigning  to  them
the  duty  of  convening  a  Grand  Lodge,  whose  representatives  were
brought  from  every  part  of  Europe.

731

732  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

The  present  Cathedral  is  the  successor  of  two  others.  The  first
is  said  to  have  been  founded  by  St.  Maternus,  who  was  Bishop  of
Cologne  in  the  4th  century.  That  edifice,  if  the  account  of  it  is
not  altogether  traditional,  and  perhaps  mythical,  must  have  been
constructed  in  the  Roman  method  and  by  Roman  artisans,  for  the
city  did  not  come  under  the  control  of  the  Franks  until  the  5th
century.

The  second  Cathedral,  the  history  of  which  is  also  very  imper-
fect, is  said  to  have  been  consecrated  in  the  year  873.  Of  its  having
been  burnt  in  1248  there  is  no  doubt.  This  edifice  does  not  seem
to  have  met  the  growing  needs  or  the  increasing  pride  and  wealth
of  the  church,  for  before  its  destruction  by  fire,  Archbishop  Con-
rad is  said  to  have  had  plans  prepared  for  the  construction  of  a  new
one,  which  should  surpass  all  existing  churches  in  magnificence.
And  Archbishop  Engelbert  had  designed  to  do  the  same  thing
twenty-five  years  before,  but  was  prevented  from  carrying  out  his
plan  by  his  assassination  in  1225.

The  second  Cathedral  was  burnt  in  the  year  1 248,  and  the  new
one  was  begun  the  same  year.  Larousse  and  some  other  writers
state  that  the  work  was  commenced  in  1 249.  But  Boisser£e,  upon
whose  authority  one  may  securely  rely,  says  that  the  foundation-stone
of  the  new  edifice  was  laid  on  the  eve  of  the  feast  of  the  Assump-
tion, August  14,  1248,  by  Archbishop  Conrad,  in  the  presence  of
the  Emperor,  Frederick  II.,  and  a  concourse  of  nobility  and  ecclesi-
astics of  every  grade.

The  solemn  ceremonies  which  accompanied  this  event  have
been  described  at  length  by  the  historian  of  the  Cathedral,  Sulpice
Boisser^e.

The  foundation-stone  was  deposited  in  the  spot  which  was  des-
tined for  the  high  altar,  and  where  was  temporarily  erected  a  wooden
cross.

After  the  preparatory  prayers  and  canticles  the  Archbishop  pro-
ceeded, with  the  assistance  of  the  architect  and  by  means  of  a  chisel
and  mallet,  to  engrave  the  figure  of  a  cross  on  the  four  angles  of  the
stone.  In  the  interior  of  the  stone,  in  an  excavation  made  for  the
\  purpose,  was  deposited  an  account  of  the  ceremony,  some  images  of
saints  made  in  consecrated  wax,  some  coins,  and  other  objects  which
bore  relation  more  or  less  to  the  epoch  of  time  in  which  the  stone
was  laid.

THE   CATHEDRAL   OF   COLOGNE  733

Afterward  the  Archbishop  blessed  the  stone,  sprinkled  it  with
holy  water,  and  then  delivered  it  to  the  workmen,  who  lowered  it
into  the  pit  which  had  been  prepared  for  it.

The  Archbishop  then  descended,  accompanied  by  several  attend-
ants, and  after  spreading  some  mortar  with  a  trowel  over  the  face  of
the  stone,  gave  it  a  blow  with  a  hammer  and  placed  a  second  stone
upon  the  first.  The  Emperor,  the  Pope's  legate,  and  several  princes
and  nobles  imitated  the  Archbishop,  and  the  trowel  and  hammer
passed  from  hand  to  hand  until  it  came  to  the  architect,  while  the
choir  chanted  the  87th  Psalm,  beginning  "  His  foundation  is  in  the
holy  mountains."1

The  work  was  continued  until  1509.  During  that  period,  the
labors  were  often  suspended  in  consequence  of  the  sanguinary  con-
tests which  took  place  in  the  13th  and  14th  centuries  between  the
city  and  the  archbishops.  Hence  at  the  beginning  of  the  16th  cen-
tury, only  the  choir  and  the  surrounding  chapels  had  been  finished.
In  succeeding  wars  the  building  suffered  much,  and  would  at  length
have  been  pulled  down  had  it  not  been  for  the  active  exertions  of  a
Fleming,  Gerhard  de  Saint  Trond,  who  caused  subscriptions  to  be
made  and  the  work  was  resumed.

The  historical  question,  who  was  the  architect  that  drew  the
plans  and  first  presided  over  their  execution  has  never  been  satisfac-
torily settled  ;  while  the  fame  of  Erwin  Von  Steinback  has  been
preserved  as  the  architect  of  the  rival  Cathedral  of  Strasburg,  the
name  of  the  surpassing  artist  who  was  the  architect  of  that  of
Cologne  has  been,  apparently,  irrecoverably  lost.

There  is  a  legend  in  connection  with  this  which  if  of  no  value
historically,  is  of  some  interest  as  a  romance.

The  Archbishop  had  called  upon  the  architects  of  Germany  for
plans  for  the  construction  of  the  Cathedral.  Many  were  submitted,
but  none  were  satisfactory  to  the  prelate,  who  rejected  them  all.

Among  the  rejected  applicants  was  a  young  architect,  who  was
so  despondent  at  his  want  of  success,  that  one  day  he  repaired  to  the

1 "  Histoire  et  Description  de  la  Cathedral  de  Cologne,"  p.  7.

I  have  inserted  this  description  to  show  how  the  spirit  of  symbolism  was  preserved  in
all  things  connected  with  the  architecture  of  those  mediaeval  Masons,  a  heritage  which  they
have  bequeathed  to  their  successors,  the  Speculative  Freemasons.  In  the  modern  ritual
for  the  laying  of  foundation-stones,  it  will  be  seen  that  some  of  the  leading  points  have  a
very  close  resemblance  to  this  Cologne  ceremony.

734  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

banks  of  the  Rhine  and  there  meditated  suicide.  But  before  cast-
ing himself  into  the  river,  he  tried,  but  in  vain,  to  draw  a  new  plan.

Suddenly  the  devil  appeared  before  him  as  a  venerable  old  gen-
tleman, in  black,  and  offered  him  a  plan  which  he  promised  him
should  be  accepted,  but  would  not  give  it  to  the  architect  except  in
exchange  for  his  soul.

The  youth  daring  neither  to  accept  nor  to  refuse  the  offer,  asked
for  a  day's  consideration.  To  this  Satan  assented,  and  they  agreed
to  meet  again  at  the  same  place  on  the  afternoon  of  the  next  day.

In  the  interval  the  young  architect  consulted  the  Archbishop
and  the  canons  of  the  Chapter,  and  by  their  advice  he  repaired  to
the  rendezvous  at  the  appointed  time.

The  devil  again  showed  the  plan  and  renewed  his  offer  of  an  ex-
change— the  parchment  with  the  plan  inscribed,  for  the  soul  of  an
architect.  The  youth  snatched  the  plan  out  of  the  devil's  hand  and
placed  it  in  his  bosom  beneath  a  relic  of  St.  Ursula.

The  devil,  enraged,  exclaimed :  "  This  is  a  trick  of  the  rascally
priests ;  but  mark  me,  the  Cathedral,  the  plan  of  which  you  have
stolen  from  me,  shall  never  be  finished,  and  your  own  name  shall
forever  remain  unknown."

In  the  struggle  to  get  possession  of  the  plan,  the  devil's  claws
had  torn  off  a  corner  of  the  parchment,  and  thus  mutilated  the  plan.

The  young  artist  having  attempted  to  invent  something  which
should  appropriately  fill  the  missing  part,  and  always,  after  many
trials,  failing  to  succeed,  at  length  died  of  chagrin.  His  name  has
passed  into  oblivion,  and  the  Cathedral,,  for  six  hundred  years,  re-
mained unfinished.

The  story  of  the  unknown  architect  of  Cologne  and  his  unhappy
fate,  told  in  different  ways,  has  always  been  a  favorite  myth  with  the
German  poets.     Thus  Frederick  Ruckert :

"  Der  Meister,  der's  entwarf
Baut  es  nicht  aus,  und  starb ;
Niemand  mocht'  sich  getraun,
Seitdem  ihn  aufzubau'n,
Den  hohen  Dom  zu  Koln."

The  Master  who  designed  the  plan  did  not  finish  it  but  died ;
no  one  since  has  dared  to  build  it  up ;  the  lofty  Cathedral  oj
Cologne.

There  are  but  two  names  that   have  been  proffered  as  claim*

THE   CATHEDRAL   OF   COLOGNE  735

ants  for  the  honor  of  being  the  architect  of  the  Cathedral  of
Cologne — at  least  there  are  only  two  names  whose  apparent  merits
are  such  as  to  have  secured  any  sort  of  consideration.  These  are
the  celebrated  philosopher,  Albertus  Magnus,  or  Albert  the  Great,
and  a  distinguished  Mason  known  as  Maitre  Gerard.

Let  us  first  dispose  of  the  claims  of  the  philosopher.

Albertus  Magnus  was  born  of  an  illustrious  family  at  Laevingen
in  Swabia  in  the  year  i  j  93.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  entered  the
Dominican  Order,  of  which  afterward  he  became  the  Provincial.
Pope  Alexander  VI.  appointed  him  Bishop  of  Ratisbon  ;  but  Al-
bertus, having  held  the  office  for  only  three  years,  renounced  the
miter  to  reassume  the  cowl  and  retired  to  the  convent  of  his  Order
in  Cologne,  and  employed  himself  in  giving  public  instructions  in
philosophy.  He  died  in  the  year  1280  at  the  ripe  age  of  eighty-
seven.

Albertus's  knowledge  of  the  principles  of  natural  science  were
so  far  in  advance  of  the  times  in  which  he  lived,  and  many  of  his  ex-
periments were  of  so  extraordinary  a  nature  that  he  obtained,  in
a  credulous  and  ignorant  age,  the  reputation  of  being  a  magician,
and  many  wonderful  stories  were  related  of  his  power  in  the  oc-
cult art.

Thus,  for  example,  it  was  said  that  he  had  occupied  thirty  years
in  making  an  entire  man  of  brass,  which  would  answer  all  sorts  of
questions  and  would  even  perform  domestic  services.  Another
legend  relates  that  on  a  certain  occasion  he  invited  William,  Earl  of
Holland  and  King  of  the  Romans,  who  was  passing  through  Co-
logne, to  a  banquet  in  the  open  air.  It  was  in  the  depth  of  winter,
and  the  whole  face  of  the  earth  was  covered  with  snow.  The  king,
however,  was  no  sooner  seated  at  table,  than  the  snow  disap-
peared, the  temperature  of  the  air  rose  to  that  of  summer  and  the
sun  burst  forth  with  dazzling  splendor.  The  ground  became  covered
with  rich  verdure,  the  trees  were  suddenly  clothed  with  foliage,
with  flowers  and  with  fruits,;  vines  presented  clusters  of  luscious
grapes  to  the  company.  The  table  was  loaded  with  dishes  of  ex-
quisite food  which  was  served  by  a  train  of  gracefully  dressed  pages,
who  came,  no  one  knew  whence.  But  as  soon  as  the  feast  was
over,  everything  disappeared ;  all  became  wintry  as  before  ;  the
snow  lay  upon  the  ground,  and  the  guests,  chilled  by  the  sudden
change,    gathered    up    the    cloaks    and    mantles   which    they    had

716  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

previously   thrown    aside,    and    hurried   to    the   fires  in  the  apart
ments.

Such  an  extravagant  legend  shows  what  was  the  reputation  of
Albertus  among  his  contemporaries,  who  did  not  hesitate  to  ascribe
to  him  the  possession  of  an  almost  illimitable  amount  of  learning.

It  is  not  surprising  therefore  that  to  him  in  the  uncertainty  of
who  was  the  real  architect,  should  have  been  ascribed  the  honor  of
devising  the  plans  of  the  Cathedral  of  Cologne,  especially  since  the
erection  of  that  stupendous  edifice  was  commenced  during  his  resi-
dence in  the  city.

To  him,  too,  has  by  some  writers  been  ascribed  the  invention  of
the  Gothic  style  of  architecture,  of  which  the  Cathedral  of  Cologne
was  one  of  the  earliest  and  most  magnificent  specimens.

Those  who  have  believed  that  he  invented  the  plans  for  the  con-
struction of  the  Cologne  Cathedral,  have  founded  their  belief  on  the
profound  symbolism  of  the  plan,  and  on  the  supposition  that  Albertus
was,  according  to  the  views  of  Heidelof,1  the  one  who  restored  the
symbolic  language  of  the  ancients  and  applied  it  to  the  principles  of
architecture.

But  this  seems  to  be  but  the  exchanging  of  one  conjectural
hypothesis  for  another.  It  would  be  as  difficult  to  prove  that  Al-
bertus was  the  discoverer  of  the  principles  of  symbolic  architecture,
which  certainly  does  constitute,  or  at  least  among  the  mediaeval
Masons  did  constitute  the  distinguishing  element  of  their  style,  as
it  would  be  to  prove  that  he  was  the  deviser  of  the  plans  for  the
construction  of  the  cathedral.

If  either  of  these  hypotheses  were  satisfactorily  proved,  it  would
give  much  plausibility  to  the  other,  but,  unfortunately,  the  required
proof  is  wanting.

Hence  Boisseree,  who  has  carefully  discussed  the  question,  re-
fuses to  adopt  the  opinion  which  attributes  the  plan  of  the  Cathedral
to  Albertus.2  He  does  not  believe  that  ecclesiastics  alone  were  the
possessors  of  symbolic  ideas,  but  he  is  sure  that  an  architect  only
could  give  expression  to  those  ideas.

He  therefore  supposes  that  the  plans  of  the  Cathedral  must  have
been  devised  by  an  architect.      But  Albertus  Magnus,  though  justly

1  In  his  "  Bauhiitte  des  Mittelalters,"  quoted  by  Findel.
8"  Histoire  et  Descrip.  de  la  Cathedral  de  Cologne,"  p.  12.

THE  CATHEDRAL  OF   COLOGNE  737

venerated  for  his  vast  erudition,  never  practiced  architecture,  and
could  not  therefore  have  made  the  plans  or  superintended  their  exe-
cution.

The  other  person  to  whom  has  been  ascribed  the  honor  of  being
the  architect  of  the  Cathedral  of  Cologne  is  one  Maitre  Gerard,
or  Master  Gerard.

"Historians,"  says  Boisseree,  "are  silent  concerning  this  Ger-
ard, as  they  are  concerning  all  other  architects  of  the  Cathedral.  I,
however,  consider  him  as  being  the  first  of  them  and  consequently
as  the  author  of  the  admirable  plan  which  is  not  less  bold  than  it
is  ingenious.  If  the  plan  had  been  furnished  by  another  architect,
we  must  suppose  that  he  died  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  work,
and  this  we  have  no  reason  for  believing.

"  There  is  still  less  reason  for  supposing  that  the  plan  was  the
production  of  some  man  of  genius,  versed  in  the  knowledge  of  the
art  but  not  himself  a  professional  architect ;  for  the  plan  of  an  ed-
ifice so  immense,  of  a  composition  so  rich  and  bold,  calculated  with
so  much  wisdom  in  its  minutest  details  and  with  such  a  due  regard
to  the  execution,  could  have  been  invented  only  by  an  artist  who,
to  great  experience,  added  the  most  exact  knowledge  of  all  tech-
nical methods  and  the  certainty  of  being  able  to  realize  in  practice
his  happy  conceptions."  !

Hence  it  is  that  he  declines  to  attribute  the  position  of  first
architect  of  the  Cathedral  to  Albertus  Magnus,  and  assigns  it  to
Master  Gerard.

In  the  volume  of  the  proces  verbaux,  or  reports  of  cases  of  the
Senate  of  Cologne,  commenced  in  1396,  there  is  a  list  of  the  found-
ers and  benefactors  of  the  Hospital  of  St.  Ursule  at  Cologne,  the
name  of  Master  Gerard  is  found  and  he  is  there  described  as  the
Werk-Meister  von  Dom,  or  "  Master  of  the  Work  of  the  Cathe-
dral." 2

The  Livre  Copial  of  the  Chapter  of  Cologne  is  preserved,  says
Boisseree,  in  the  archives  of  the  city  of  Darmstadt.  On  page  92  of
this  book  is  a  copy  of  a  charter  in  which  the  Chapter  grants  to
Master  Gerard  a  spot  of  ground  on  which  he  had  erected  at  his
own  expense  a  house  built  of  stone,  in  consideration  of  the  services
performed  by  him.

1  Boisseree,  ut  supra,  p.  10.  2  Ibid.,  p.  12.

47

738  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

In  this  charter  he  is  styled  "  a  stonecutter,  the  director  of  our
Cathedral."1

As  the  date  of  the  charter  is  1257,  which  is  only  eight  years
after  the  commencement  of  the  Cathedral,  it  is,  as  Boisser£e  has
maintained,  not  probable  that  there  had  been  an  earlier  architect
who  had  died  or  been  dismissed.  And  as  the  charter  distinctly  calls
him  a  lapicida,  a.  "  stonecutter,"  and  designates  him  as  the  rector
fabricce,  "  the  director,  or  ruler  of  the  Cathedral,"  I  think  the  ques-
tion may  be  considered  as  settled  that  Gerard  was  the  name  of  the
first  architect  of  the  Cathedral  of  Cologne  and  that  he  was  a  Mason
by  profession.

As  to  the  influence  which  this  building  and  the  artists  engaged
in  its  construction  had  upon  the  organization  of  the  fraternity  of
Stonemasons  of  Germany,  historical  records  are  silent,  and  we  are
left  mainly  to  conjecture.

It  is  said  by  Winzer  that  Albertus  Magnus  altered  the  consti-
tution of  the  Fraternity  and  gave  them  a  new  code  of  laws.  But
as  at  the  same  time,  and  almost  in  the  same  passage,  he  ascribes  to
the  same  person  the  designing  of  the  plans  for  the  Cathedral,  we
may  be  inclined  to  give  no  more  credit  to  the  one  assertion  than  we
do  to  the  other.

But  as  the  Cathedral  is  one  of  the  grandest  and  most  elaborate
of  all  the  works  of  Gothic  architecture,  and  as  that  style  was,  it  is
admitted,  the  invention  of  the  Freemasons  of  the  Middle  Ages,  we
arrive  at  the  legitimate  conclusion  that  the  workmen  who  were
members  of  that  Fraternity,  which  came  into  Germany  about  the
10th  century  from  Italy,  but  of  the  nature  of  whose  organization,
of  the  customs  they  practiced,  and  of  the  laws  which  they  adopted
for  their  government  we  have  no  documentary  evidence,  until  the
15th  century,  when  we  find  the  ordinances  of  the  Stonecutters
adopted  at  Strasburg  in  the  year  1459.

We  have  documentary  evidence  of  the  existence  of  guilds  in
Germany  before  the  middle  of  the  12th  century.  "At  that  time,"
says  Mr.  Fergusson,  "  all  trades  and  professions  were  organized  in
the  same  manner,  and  the  guild  of  Masons  differed  in  no  essential

1  Magistro  Gerardo,  lapicede  (says  the  charter),  rectori  fabrice  nostre,  propter  mer-
itoriae  obsequia  nobis  facta,  unam  aream  latiorem  et  majorem  aliis  prout  ubi  jacet,  et
comprehendit  magnam  domum  lapideam,  quam  idem  Magister  Gerardus  propriis  edifi-
cavit  sumptibus,  duximus  concedendam,  etc.

THE  CATHEDRAL  OF   COLOGNE  739

particulars  from  those  of  the  shoemakers  or  hatters,  the  tailors  or
vintners,  all  had  their  Masters  and  Past  Masters,  their  Wardens  and
other  officers,  and  were  recruited  from  a  body  of  apprentices  who
were  forced  to  undergo  years  of  probationary  servitude  before  they
were  admitted  to  practice  their  art."  *

There  is  no  doubt  that  this  statement  is  substantially  correct,
although  there  were  some  important  differences  between  the  guilds
of  Masons  and  those  of  other  crafts,  to  one  of  which  (the  nomadic
character  of  the  former)  he  subsequently  alludes.

We  have  a  right,  therefore,  to  conclude  that  at  Cologne,  during
the  construction  of  the  Cathedral,  the  Freemasons  who  were  en-
gaged in  that  labor  were  already  organized  as  a  corporation  and  had
their  regulations,  usages,  and  laws,  though  they  have  not  been  pre-
served to  us  in  a  written  form.

But  as  it  has  been  observed  by  a  writer  on  this  subject,2  we  have
no  reason  to  doubt  the  existence  of  such  associations  even  before
the  1 2th  century,  because  we  have  no  positive  documentary  evi-
dence of  the  fact  in  the  transmission  of  written  constitutions  ;  because
it  was  not  until  they  had  succeeded  in  obtaining  formal  recognition,
and  when  they  were  desirous  of  obtaining  some  special  privilege  that
the  necessity  of  a  written  Constitution  was  felt,  so  as  to  give  it,  as
it  were,  a  superior  sanction.

Hence,  though  the  Cathedrals  of  Cologne  and  Strasburg  and
some  others  of  less  grandeur  were  begun  in  the  12th  century,  the
earliest  extant  written  Constitution  is  that  of  Strasburg,  whose  date
is  about  the  middle  of  the  1 5th  century.

Whether  these  Statutes  of  the  Strasburg  Masons  were  enacted
for  the  first  time  in  1459,  which  is  wholly  improbable,  or  whether
they  were  only  confirmations  of  other  regulations,  are  questions
which  will  be  mooted  in  a  subsequent  chapter.

This  much,  however,  I  think  has  been  determined  as  historically
plausible,  even  if  not  historically  demonstrable.

The  most  important  essay  of  the  Freemasons  of  Germany  as  a
corporate  guild,  in  the  development  of  their  peculiar  style  of  archi-
tectural symbolism,  was  the  Cathedral  of  Cologne.  This  fabric
must  then  at  that  time   have  been   the  central  point  of  German

1  "  History  of  Architecture  in  all  Countries,"  vol.  i.,  p.  2.     B.  II.,  chap,  viii.,  p.  477.

2  Winzer, "  German  Brotherhoods  of  the  Middle  Ages,"  quoted  by  Findel,  "  History,"
D.  57.

740  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

mediaeval  Masonry.  Nineteen  years  afterward  the  Cathedral  of
Strasburg  was  begun.  Then  it  is  probable  that  the  jurisdiction  was
divided  and  both  Cologne  and  Strasburg  became  the  separate  centers
in  Lower  and  in  Upper  Germany  whence  other  bauhiitten,  guilds  or
lodges  emanated.

In  time,  however,  probably  from  the  suspension  of  the  labors  on
the  Cologne  Cathedral  in  1 509,  that  Cathedral  was  shorn  of  its  im-
portance as  a  Masonic  head,1  and  the  power  and  jurisdiction  cf  the
Fraternity  was  concentrated  in  the  Haupt-Hiitte  or  Grand  Lodge  of
Strasburg,  which  in  1549  modified  the  old  regulations  and  preserved
them  in  the  form  of  a  written  Constitution  which  has  been  handed
down  to  the  present  day.

1  This  decadence  of  Cologne  as  a  Masonic  power  affords  another  argument  against
the  genuineness  of  the  Charter  said  to  have  been  issued  in  1535.

CHAPTER  XX

CUSTOMS   OF   THE   GERMAN    STONEMASONS

HATEVER  knowledge  we  can  obtain  from  ex-
isting documents  of  the  customs  and  regulations
of  the  Stonemasons  who  wrought  at  the  build-
ing of  Cathedrals  and  other  religious  edifices  in
Germany  during  the  Middle  Ages,  will  be  so
much  in  the  way  of  enabling  us  to  understand
the  theory  which  derives  the  present  institution
of  Speculative  Masons  from  the  Operative  Masons  of  that  period.

The  two  most  frequently  cited  authorities  among  the  German
writers  on  the  subject  of  these  customs  of  the  Middle  Ages  are
Fallon  in  his  Mysteries  of  the  Freemasons  as  well  as  their  only  true
Foundation  and  Origin?-  and  Winzer  in  his  work  entitled  The
German  Brotherhood  of  the  Middle  Ages?

These  works  contain  much  interesting  matter,  and  the  general
conclusion  to  which  the  authors  have  arrived,  as  to  the  origin  of  the
institution,  are  in  accordance  with  the  opinions  already  expressed  in
this  work.  But  like  some  of  our  older  English  writers  on  the  history
of  Freemasonry,  Fallon  especially  has  indulged  in  some  speculations
which  are  by  no  means  calculated  to  increase  our  respect  for  his  ac-
curacy as  an  historian.  Both  these  authors  have,  however,  been
freely  and  favorably  cited  by  Findel,  who  is  himself  conservative
and  but  little  inclined  to  take  any  theory  on  trust.

The  theory  advanced  by  Fallon  and  Winzer  is  that  the  German
Stonemasons  were  fraternities  in  possession  of  secrets  which  related
to  the  craft  or  mystery  which  they  exercised.  They  have  sought  to
prove  that  "the  Freemasons  of  the  present  day  have  derived  the
ritual  which  they  practice  from  the  mediaeval  Stonecutters,  a  point
which  I  do  not  think  that  they  have  successfully  maintained  in  its

1  "  Die  Mysterien  der  Freimaurer,  sowie  ihr  einzig  wahrer  Grund  und  Ursprung,"
Leipsic,  1859.

2"  Die  Deutschen  Bruderschaften  des  Mittelalters,"  Giessen,  1859.

741

742  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

full  extent.  There  is,  however,  undoubtedly  evidence  that  certain
words  and  signs  have  been  handed  down,  but  slightly  changed,  if
changed  at  all,  in  their  transmission,  to  the  Freemasons  of  this
day.

Another  point  advanced  by  these  authors  is  that  the  German
Stonecutters  borrowed  their  customs  and  laws  partly  from  other
corporations  contemporary  with  them,  and  partly  from  the  regula-
tions of  the  monastic  order,  which  becomes  a  very  plausible  theory
when  we  remember  the  close  connection  which  originally  existed
between  the  monks  and  the  architects.

Their  last  proposition  is  that  the  English  Stonemasons  received
their  mysteries  from  the  German  Steinmetzen,  a  proposition  which
is,  I  think,  only  partly  true,  as  the  English  Masons  undoubtedly
were  reinforced  from  time  to  time  by  the  accession  of  Continental
workmen  who  came  from  Italy  and  France  as  well  as  from  Ger-
many.

I  have  always  believed  that  the  earliest  of  the  old  English
Constitutions,  that,  namely,  known  as  the  Halliwell  MS.,  is  a
translation  from  a  German  original,  and  is  a  pregnant  proof  of  the
introduction  in  the  14th  century  of  German  Stonemasonry  into
England.

A  most  invaluable  aid  to  the  scholar  engaged  in  researches  into
the  character  of  the  mediaeval  Stonemasons,  is  the  work  of  George
Kloss,  entitled  Freemasonry  in  its  real  meaning  as  shown  by  ancient
and  genuine  records  of  the  Stonecutters,  Masons  and  Freemasons}

In  this  work  we  will  find  details. of  all  the  known  laws  and  writ-
ten Constitutions  of  the  mediaeval  Stonemasons  of  Germany  and
England  chronologically  arranged  and  so  collated  as  to  show  the
progress  of  the  gradual  transition  from  the  Operative  to  the  Specu-
lative institution.

Kloss,  as  the  result  of  his  labors,  comes  to  the  conclusion  that
the  Freemasonry  of  the  present  day  is  a  transition  from  the  Stone-
masonry  of  the  Middle  Ages,  and  that  no  distinction  can  be  main-
tained between  the  old  Operative  and  the  recent  Speculative  system,
the  old  laws,  usages,  and  charges  being  the  same  with  but  slight,  if
any,  modern  alteration.

1  "  Die  Freimaurerei  in  ihrer  wahren  Bedeutung  aus  den  alten  und  achten  Urkunden
der  Steinmetzen,  Masonen  und  Freimaurer,  nachgewiesen,"  Leipsic,  1845.

CUSTOMS   OF  THE   GERMAN   STONEMASONS        743

With  some  reservations,  this  hypothesis  may  perhaps  be  accepted
in  its  second  clause,  and  unreservedly  in  its  first.

But  the  great  value  of  the  work  of  Kloss  consists  in  the  mediaeval
German  Constitutions  which  it  contains  and  from  which  and  from
some  other  sources  we  may  derive  a  competent  knowledge  of  the
usages  of  the  German  Stonemasons  of  the  13th,  14th,  and  15th  cen-
turies, which  is  the  subject  of  the  present  chapter.

The  two  oldest  Constitutions  extant  of  the  German  Stonema-
sons are  those  enacted  at  Strasburg,  in  1459,  and  those  enacted  at
Torgau,  in  1462.

The  ancient  laws  of  the  brotherhood  were  first  given  a  perma-
nent form  in  the  code  adopted  at  Ratisbon  on  Easter  day,  in  the
year  1459,  Dy  tne  Masters  and  Fellows  there  assembled  in  the
manner  of  a  Chapter.1  This  code  of  regulations  was  soon  after
ratified  at  Strasburg  and  then  promulgated  as  the  "  Ordinances  of
the  Stonecutters  of  Strasburg."  Heldmann  published  them  in  the
year  18 19  in  his  book  entitled  The  three  most  ancient  histori-
cal Memorials  of  the  German  Freemasons  Brotherhood?'  They
were  subsequently  published  by  other  writers,  but  to  Heldmann
must  be  attributed  the  honor  of  first  giving  this  important  docu-
ment to  the  public.

Heldmann  tells  the  story  of  how  it  came  into  his  possession.  All,
he  says,  who  have  written  of  the  Cathedral  of  Strasburg  speak  of
the  old  statutes  of  the  Grand  Lodge  there,  without  imparting  them
to  their  readers,  or,  indeed,  being  able  to  do  so,  since  they  have
always  been  carefully  preserved  under  a  triple  custody.  While  pass-
ing through  Strasburg  in  the  year  181 7,  he  took  extraordinary  pains
to  get  possession  of  a  copy  of  these  statutes,  but  in  vain.  But  he
afterward  obtained  a  copy  of  the  Statutes  of  1459  from  an  architect,
who  had  caused  it  to  be  made  during  an  accidental  residence  at
Strasburg  in  the  beginning  of  the  revolution,  and  also  got  possession,
through  another  architect,  of  a  copy  of  the  revised  code  of  1563.
Bro.  Osterneth,  who  was  a  member  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Strasburg,  and  who  had  in  his  possession  a  copy  of  the  Statutes  of

1  Kapitelsweise  is  an  expression  borrowed,  says  Findel,  from  the  Benedictine  monks,
whose  convent  meetings  were  called  "  capitula."  But  the  word  and  the  thing  were  com-
mon to  all  the  Monastic  Orders.     See  Forbrooke,  "  Brit.  Monachism,"  ii.,  133.

2  "Die  drei  altesten  geschietlichen  Denkmale  der  Deutschen  Freimaurerbruder-
schaft,"  Arau,  18 19.

744  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

1459,  collated  it  with  Heldmann's  exemplar  and  authenticated  the
latter.

It  appears,  therefore,  that  the  Statutes  of  1459,  as  published  by
Heldmann  in  1819,  have  the  mark  of  genuineness  and  may  be  ac-
cepted as  a  faithful  exposition  of  the  usages  of  the  Craft  at  the  time
of  their  adoption.

The  Constitutions  of  Torgau  are  the  next  authentic  document
in  the  history  of  the  German  Fraternity  of  the  15th  century.
Torgau  is  a  town  in  the  Prussian  province  of  Saxony,  and  has  an
historical  reputation  as  being  the  place  where  the  Lutherans  and  the
Elector  Frederick  concluded  a  league.  The  Stonemasons,  whose
seat  was  there,  had  accepted  the  Statutes  of  Strasburg  when  first
promulgated,  but  three  years  afterward  thought  it  necessary  to
modify  them  to  some  extent,  and  therefore  drew  up,  in  1462,  a
code  of  112  articles,  which  are  known  as  the  "Constitutions  of
Torgau."

A  duplicate  of  these  Constitutions  was  deposited  in  the  Stone-
masons' lodge,  or  Hiitte,  at  Rochlitz,  in  i486.  Steiglitz  published,
in  1829,  a  copy  of  these  Constitutions  in  a  work  written  by  him
On  the  church  of  St.  Kunigund  at  Rochlitz,  and  on  the  Stonema-
sons' lodge  at  the  same  place*

These  two  Constitutions,  those  of  Strasburg  and  Torgau,  are  the
only  authentic  statutes  of  the  Stonemasons  which  are  known,  and
from  them  only  can  we  derive  any  reliable  information  on  the  sub-
ject of  the  usages  of  the  Craft  at  that  period.

We  learn  in  the  first  place  from  these  Constitutions  that  there
were  in  former  times  unwritten  regulations  by  which  the  whole
Craft  had  been  governed;  that  these  regulations  had  been  much
neglected,  in  consequence  of  which  dissensions  and  differences  had
arisen  among  the  workmen,  which  evils  it  was  the  object  of  these
Constitutions  to  avoid  in  future  by  the  adoption  of  statutes  for  the
government  of  those  who  should  unite  in  the  establishment  of  a
fraternity.

In  Germany,  therefore,  as  we  have  seen,  in  England,  in  France,
and  in  other  countries,  the  work  of  building  was  carried  on  by  two
distinct  classes  of  workmen  ;  one  class  who  were  not  associated  in

1 "  Ueber  die   Kirche  der  heiligen  kunigunde  zu  Rochlitz  und  die  Steinmetzhutte
daselbst."

CUSTOMS   OF   THE   GERMAN   STONEMASONS        745

a  guild,  corporation,  or  society  ;  and  another  class  who,  by  these
Constitutions,  had  formed  themselves  into  a  brotherhood.

In  the  English  Constitutions  this  distinction  of  classes  is  very
forcibly  expressed,  and  the  Freemason  who  is  a  member  of  the  Guild
is  forbidden  to  hold  any  communication  with  the  layer,  rough
mason,  or  Cowan,  all  of  which  names  are  used  to  designate  a  Stone-
mason who  has  not  been  admitted  into  the  Fraternity.

The  German  Statutes  also  show  this  distinction  very  clearly.
11  No  craftsman  or  Master,"  say  the  Constitutions  of  Strasburg,
"  who  does  not  go  to  the  holy  sacrament  shall  be  received  into  the
fraternity,"  and  in  repeated  places  they  speak  of  "  Masters  and
Craftsmen  who  are  of  the  fraternity,"  which,  of  course,  involves  the
contrary  proposition,  namely,  that  there  were  Masters  and  Crafts-
men who  were  not  of  the  fraternity.

What  were  the  peculiar  ceremonies  which  accompanied  the  re-
ception into  the  fraternity,  or  whether  there  were  any  such  ceremo-
nies or  not,  are  questions  that  can  never  be  settled  in  such  a  satisfac-
tory way  as  we  should  desire  all  historical  problems  to  be  solved.

That  there  were  some  ceremonies  it  is  natural  to  suppose ;  these
Steinmetzen  had  architectural  secrets  at  least,  and  admission  into  all
secret  societies  is  attended  by  some  form  of  initiation.

Fallon  asserts  that  it  was  imitated  from  the  rite  of  consecration
practiced  by  the  Order  of  Benedictine  monks.  But  we  need  author-
ity to  sustain  the  assertion.

Findel,  in  his  History  of  Freemasonry,  gives  a  very  detailed  ac-
count of  the  mediaeval  initiation  into  German  Freemasonry.  I  shall
make  use  of  his  account  of  the  ceremonies  used  on  that  occasion,
without  admitting  that  I  am  satisfied  as  to  the  correctness  of  every
detail.

The  Fellow  Craft,  as  we  style  him,  the  Gesell  of  the  Germans,
before  he  could  be  admitted  into  the  fraternity  was  required  to
prove  that  he  was  born  in  wedlock,  of  respectable  parents,  and  that
he  himself  bore  a  good  reputation,  with  due  mental  and  physical
capacity.  He  was  then  presented  with  his  mark,  which  thencefor-
ward he  had  to  cut  into  every  stone  on  which  he  was  engaged.

I  give  the  account  of  the  succeeding  ceremonies  in  the  words  of
Findel,  as  translated  by  Lyon.

"  On  the  day  fixed  the  candidate  went  into  the  house  where  the
assemblies  were  held,  where  the  Master  in  the  Chair  had  everything

746  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

prepared  in  due  order  in  the  Hall  of  the  Craft ;  the  Brethren  were
then  summoned,  of  course  bearing  no  weapons  of  any  kind,  it  being
a  place  dedicated  to  peace,  and  the  Assembly  was  opened  by  the
Master,  who  first  acquainted  them  with  the  proposed  inauguration
of  the  candidate,  dispatching  a  brother  to  prepare  him.  The  mes-
senger, in  imitation  of  an  ancient  heathen  custom,  suggested  to  his
companion  that  he  should  assume  the  demeanor  of  a  suppliant ;  he
was  then  stripped  of  all  weapons  and  every  thing  of  metal  taken
from  him  ;  he  was  divested  of  half  his  garments,  and  with  his  eyes
bound  and  breast  and  left  foot  bare,  he  stood  at  the  door  of  the  hall,
which  was  opened  to  him  after  three  distinct  knocks.  The  Junior
Warden  conducted  him  to  the  Master,  who  made  him  kneel  and
repeat  a  prayer.  The  candidate  was  then  led  three  times  round  the
hall  of  the  Guild,  halting  at  last  at  the  door  and  putting  his  feet  to-
gether in  the  form  of  a  right  angle,  that  he  might  in  three  upright
steps  place  himself  in  front  of  the  Master.  Between  the  two,  lying
open  on  the  table,  was  a  New  Testament,  a  pair  of  Compasses,  and
a  Mason's  square,  over  which,  in  pursuance  of  an  ancient  custom,
he  stretched  out  his  right  hand,  swearing  to  be  faithful  to  the  duties
to  which  he  pledged  himself,  and  to  keep  secret  whatever  had  been
or  might  be  thereafter  made  known  to  him  in  that  place.  The
bandage  was  then  removed  from  his  eyes,  the  three  Great  Lights
were  shown  him,  a  new  apron  bound  round  him,  the  password  given
him,  and  his  place  in  the  hall  of  the  Guild  pointed  out  to  him.  The
manner  of  knocking  and  gripe  of  the  hand  were  and  are  the  same  as
those  now  used  by  the  Apprentices  in  Freemasonry.  After  the
Master  had  inquired  if  any  one  had  anything  else  to  submit  to  the
decision  of  the  Assembly,  he  closed  the  proceedings  with  the  usual
knocks  of  the  Stonemason's  hammer.

"At  the  banquet  which  invariably  succeeded  the  reception  of  the
candidate,  which  feasts  were  always  opened  and  closed  with  prayer,
the  chief  Master  proposed  to  drink  the  health  of  the  newly  accepted
Brother  in  the  drinking-cup  of  the  Brotherhood  called  Willcommen,
to  which  the  Brother  replied  by  drinking  to  the  welfare  of  the  whole
Fraternity.  At  that  time,  as  now,  and  in  all  other  Guilds,  healths
were  drunk  with  three  times  three ;  the  cup  was  taken  hold  of  with
a  glove  or  pocket-handkerchief,  the  cover  lifted  off,  and  lastly  it  was
carried  to  the  lips ;  the  cup  was  emptied  in  three  separate  draughts
and  replaced  on  the  table  in  three  separate  motions."

CUSTOMS   OF   THE   GERMAN   STONEMASONS        747

The  minuteness  with  which  these  details  are  given  makes  them
very  interesting,  but  at  the  same  time  it  makes  them  very  suspicious,
and  we  require  to  relieve  our  doubts  with  the  full  authentication  of
the  fact,  by  contemporary  documents  which  shall  be  just  as  full  and
complete  in  the  detail,  and  this  is  a  want  that  has  not  been  supplied.

Some  points,  however,  in  this  described  initiation,  are  supported
by  satisfactory  evidence,  beside  which  we  are  enabled  to  draw  legit-
imate conclusions  from  contemporary  authority  or  relevant  and  con-
nected circumstances  which  satisfactorily  support  and  confirm  other
points.

Thus,  that  the  mediaeval  Masons,  at  least  from  the  middle  of
the  15th  century  were  a  secret  society,  that  is  to  say,  an  association
of  craftsmen,  who  were  in  possession  of  certain  secrets  that  were
imparted  only  to  those  who  were  members  of  the  fraternity,  and
were  withheld  from  all  other  persons,  though  they  might  be  of  the  '
same  craft,  but  who  had  not  been  made  free  of  the  fraternity  or
guild,  is  a  fact  that  is  duly  substantiated  by  the  ordinances,  statutes,
or  constitutions,  French,  English,  and  German  of  that  period.

Thus  in  the  French  regulations  of  Stephen  Boileau  it  is  said
that  Masons  may  employ  as  many  assistants  and  servants  as  they
please  provided  they  do  not  show  them  any  point  of  their  trade.

The  Statutes  of  Strasburg  forbid  any  workman  to  instruct  any
one  in  any  part  if  he  be  not  of  the  craft.

And  the  English  Charges  impress  upon  the  Mason  to  keep
secret  the  counsels  "  of  Lodge  and  Chamber  and  all  other  Counsels
that  ought  to  be  kept  by  way  of  Masonhood."

Now  the  fact  that  there  were  secrets  to  be  kept  by  the  associ-
ation, necessarily  required  that  there  should  be  some  safeguard  im-
posed upon  the  members,  by  which  they  should  be  reminded  of
the  importance  and  necessity  of  preserving  their  exclusiveness  and
their  identity  as  a  secret  society.

But  there  could  not  possibly  be  a  better  method  of  securing
such  a  safeguard  than  to  impart  to  the  admission  of  each  member
into  the  fraternity  a  deeply  impressive  character  derived  from  the
solemnity  of  a  formal  initiation.

That  method  has  been  adopted  in  all  ages  and  in  all  countries,
and  the  ancient  formula :  "  Depart,  ye  Profane,"  has  been  pro-
nounced whenever  secrets,  however  valueless,  were  to  be  communi-
cated to  an  aspirant.

748  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

It  may,  therefore,  be  accepted  as  an  undoubted  fact,  substanti-
ated by  direct  allusions  in  the  old  Statutes  that  the  mediaeval
fraternity  of  Stonemasons  or  stonecutters  was  in  Germany,  as  well
as  in  every  other  country  where  they  had  penetrated,  a  secret  so*
ciety.

What  these  secrets  were,  presents  an  enterprising  inquiry,  but
which  must,  however,  be  deferred  to  a  future  chapter.

That  this  initiation  was  accompanied  by  an  oath  or  obligation  of
secrecy  is  not  only  a  natural  conclusion  which  we  are  authorized  to
deduce  from  the  lessons  of  experience  but  is  a  fact  thoroughly  sub-
stantiated by  the  old  statutes  and  regulations.

Thus  in  most  of  the  English  charges  we  have  this  sentence,
curiously  enough  put  in  Latin,  as  if  the  administration  of  this
ceremony  was  to  be  concealed  under  the  veil  of  a  dead  language.
"  Then  one  of  the  elders  shall  hold  the  book  so  that  he  or  they  (the
candidate  or  candidates)  shall  place  his  or  their  hands  on  the  book,
and  then  the  charges  should  be  read."1

In  the  Steinmetzen  Ordinances  of  1462  it  is  provided  that  when
the  Parlirer,  or  Warden,  is  inducted  into  office  he  takes  an  oath  to
the  Saints.  But  it  is  very  worthy  of  remark  that  this  oath  was  not
taken  as  in  modern  times  on  the  square  and  compasses,  but  on  the
gauge  and  square.2  This  would  impugn  the  correctness  of  the  de-
scription given  by  Findel  that  on  the  table  was  a  New  Testament,
and  on  it  a  square  and  compass.  The  gauge  and  square  seem  to
have  been  the  mediaeval  symbols  which  accompanied  the  book  in
the  solemnity  of  the  obligation.     .

There  is  no  evidence  of  the  existence  in  the  Bauhiittcn,  or
lodges,  of  such  a  system  of  government  as  is  found  in  the  lodges  of
the  Modern  Freemasons,  where  as  an  invariable  rule  there  are  a
Master  and  two  Wardens.

But  the  regulations  of  Strasburg  and  Torgau  describe  an  officer
between  the  Master  of  the  work  and  the  Fellows  or  workmen  who
was  called  the  Parlirer?

1  Tunc  unus  ex  senioribus  teneat  librum  ut  ille  vel  illi  potiat  vel  potiant  manus  super
librum  et  tuncex  precepta  deberent  legi.  "York  MS.,  No.  1."  We  have  the  same  pas-
sage in  other  manuscripts,  but  the  Latin  is  no  better.

2  Die  eide  strebe  mit  Maszstable  und  Winkelmas  zu  den  Heyligen,  die  gebende  und
dess  Meisters  Schaden  zu  bewaren.     Ord.,  1462,  No.  18.

3  The  duties  of  a  Parlirer  are  elaborately  explained  on  the  authority  of  the  Constitu
tions,  by  Kloss  in  his  "  Freimaurerei  in  ihrer  wahren  Bedeutung."

CUSTOMS  OF   THE   GERMAN   STONEMASONS        749

From  these  regulations  it  is  very  evident  that  the  Parlirer  per-
formed many  of  the  duties  which  we  are  accustomed  to  attribute  in
English  Masonry  to  the  Warden,  and  which  have  been  figuratively
commemorated  in  the  symbolic  duties  of  the  Warden  of  a  lodge  of
Speculative  Masons.

Thus  the  Parlirer 'was  to  be  present  in  the  morning  at  the  open-
ing, and  in  the  evening  at  the  closing  of  the  lodge,  and  he  was  with
the  craft  at  their  noontide  meal.

The  Parlirer  paid  the  craftsmen  their  wages,  which  was  gen-
erally done  at  sunset  of  each  day.

He  is  also  supposed  to  have  performed  the  duties  of  Secretary
and  Treasurer,  that  is  to  say  he  kept  the  roll  of  the  members  and
had  charge  of  the  finances  of  the  lodge.

The  Parlirer  was  appointed  by  the  Master,  but  in  the  appoint-
ment he  was  restricted  by  certain  regulations.  Thus  the  Strasburg
Constitutions  provide  that  no  Master  shall  promote  one  of  his  ap-
prentices to  the  office  of  Parlirer  who  is  still  in  his  years  of  appren-
ticeship. A  similar  rule  is  found  in  the  English  charge  which  says
that  "  no  Brother  can  be  a  Warden  until  he  has  passed  the  part  of
a  Fellow  Craft."

Being  thus  invested  with  such  important  functions  it  may  be
supposed  that  the  Parlirer  was  inducted  into  office  with  impressive
ceremonies.  We  know  that  his  installation  was  sanctioned  by  the
administration  of  a  solemn  oath  on  the  Gospels  and  on  the  twenty-
four-inch  gauge  and  the  square.

In  the  Stonecutters'  Bauhutten  of  Germany,  as  in  the  modern
Speculative  lodges,  the  office  of  Master  was  one  of  paramount  im-
portance.

All  the  Fellows  or  journeymen  who  were  employed  in  the  con-
struction of  the  same  building  constituted  a  single  lodge  and  were
under  the  government  of  the  same  Master.  The  Strasburg  Con-
stitutions are  very  express  on  this  point  and  leave  no  doubt  of  the
fact.  "  Two  Masters  shall  not  share  in  the  same  work  or  build-
ing."1 An  exception  is  made  in  the  case  of  a  small  building  which
can  be  finished  in  the  space  of  a  year.  In  such  a  work  two  Masters
might  engage.

1  Es  sollent  auch  nit  zevey  Meister  ein  Werk  oder  einen  Gebaue  geme  in  mit  einan-
der  haben.     "  Ordnungen  der  Strassburger  Haupthiitte,"  art.  9.

75o  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

The  Master  was  enjoined  to  keep  his  lodge  free  from  all  discord
and  to  administer  justice  in  it  between  the  Fellows.  For  this  pur-
pose he  was  invested  with  absolute  power  to  rule  his  lodge,  provided
only  that  he  governed  it  according  to  the  ancient  usages  of  the
Craft,  and  did  not  arbitrarily  oppress  the  brethren.

In  every  district  there  was  a  lodge  over  which  a  Master  presided,
and  over  all  these  there  was  a  still  higher  officer,  to  whom  appeals
might  be  made,  where  there  was  complaint  of  injustice  or  wrong.

These  were  the  Masters  who  presided  over  the  work — the  Mag-
istri  Operts,1  Master  of  the  Work,  called  in  the  German  Constitu-
tions, the  Werkmeister.  One  of  these  heard  both  parties  and  ap-
pointed a  day  when  the  trial  should  take  place,  which  was  always  in
the  place  where  the  offense  had  been  committed  and  before  the
nearest  Master  who  kept  the  Statutes.2

After  an  Apprentice  had  been  promoted  to  the  rank  of  Fellow,
he  was  required,  or  permitted,  to  travel  throughout  Germany  and  to
visit  the  most  important  towns  and  cities.  The  years  employed  in
this  pilgrimage  were  called  his  Wanderjahre — his  years  of  travel.

During  his  travels  the  Fellowcraft  was  always  received  with  kind-
ness and  treated  with  hospitality  by  every  lodge  which  he  visited.
A  formula  of  salutation  and  reception  was  prescribed  by  which,  with
certain  signs  of  recognition  and  passwords,  the  stranger  could  make
himself  known  to  his  brethren  and  secure  a  welcome.

When  a  traveling  Fellow  visited  a  lodge  for  the  first  time,  in
some  town  where  he  had  arrived,  he  knocked  three  times  distinctly,
and  on  being  admitted  approached  the  Master,  or  in  his  absence  the
Parlirer,  with  three  regular  steps,  all  the  brethren  standing  around.

The  salutations  of  the  traveling  craftsman  were  such  phrases  as
these  :  "  God  guide  you,"  or  "  God  reward  you,  Master,  Parlirer,  and
all  good  Companions."  The  Master  or  Parlirer  having  returned
thanks,  the   Fellowcraft  was  submitted  to  an  examination,3  which

1  This  title  of"  Magister  Operis,"  or  Master  of  the  Work,  came  to  the  Stonemasons
from  the  monks,  and  is  a  relic  of  the  original  ecclesiastical  control  of  architecture.  Du-
cange  (Glossarium)  says  that  it  was  "  officium  monasticum" — a  monastic  office,  exercised
by  one  who  had  the  charge  of  public  work.  In  *he  Masonic  usage  of  the  Middle  Ages,  it
was  synonymous  with  the  architect  or  Chief  Builder  of  an  edifice.

a  "  Statutes  of  Strasburg,"  article  17.

3  The  examination  given  in  the  Constitutions-Buch  of  the  lodge  Archimedes  and  which
will  be  found  in  Krause,  Fallon,  Findel  and  other  German  writers,  does  not,  I  think,  bear
internal  evidence  of  a  date  so  early  as  the  13th  or  even  the  14th  century.

CUSTOMS   OF   THE   GERMAN   STONEMASONS        751

proving  satisfactory  he  received  such  assistance  as  he  needed,  either
in  work,  or  if  work  could  not,  then  and  there,  be  obtained,  in  money
sufficient  to  supply  his  immediate  wants  and  to  send  him  on  to  the
next  lodge.

The  regulations  that  relate  to  Apprentices  are  very  explicit  in
the  Strasburg  Constitutions,  much  more  so  indeed  than  those  of
the  English  or  Scottish  Masons.

In  the  first  place,  no  bastard  could  be  accepted  as  an  Apprentice,
and  the  Master  is  directed  to  inquire  earnestly  whether  the  parents
were  duly  united  in  lawful  wedlock.

An  Apprentice  could  not  be  made  a  Parlirer.  On  the  same
principle  the  English  Statutes  required  a  Warden  to  have  passed
the  grade  of  Fellowcraft.

Apprentices,  after  they  had  served  their  years  of  apprenticeship,
were  required  to  travel  for  at  least  one  year.

If  one  had  served  with  a  Maurer,  that  is  to  say  with  a  common
Mason  who  was  not  of  the  guild,  and  desired  to  learn  still  more
of  his  profession  of  a  Freemason  he  was  required  to  serve  three  years
as  an  Apprentice.

The  term  of  apprenticeship  was  not  to  be  less  than  five  years.

An  Apprentice  who  left  his  Master  without  sufficient  reason,
before  serving  out  his  full  term  of  service,  was  put  under  the  ban.
No  other  Master  was  to  receive  him  nor  was  any  fellow  to  work
with  him,  until  he  had  returned  and  completed  his  time,  giving  satis-
faction to  his  Master.

An  Apprentice  wishing  to  marry  must  obtain  the  consent  of  his
Master.

Apprentices  do  not  appear  to  have  met  with  the  same  considera-
tion in  the  German  regulations  as  they  did  in  the  English  and  in  the
Scottish,  where  they  are  spoken  of  as  constituting  a  part  of  the  great
body  of  the  Craft,  and  seem  to  have  been  intrusted  with  many  of
the  mysteries  of  the  trade,  since  they  are  warned  not  to  divulge
them.

An  Apprentice  who  believed  that  he  had  not  been  justly  dealt
with  might  appeal  for  redress  to  the  Masters  and  Fellows  of  the  dis-
trict in  which  his  lodge  was  situated.

But  no  one  can  correctly  understand  the  usages  and  customs  of
the  mediaeval  Masons  of  Germany  unless  he  has  made  himself  ac-
quainted with  the  Statutes  enacted  by  the  Assembly  held  in  1459  at

752  HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Strasburg  and  modified  by  statutes  subsequently  enacted  at  other
places  and  by  various  confirmations  of  the  German  Emperors.

Of  all  these  laws,  the  Constitutions  of  Strasburg  are  the  founda-
tion, as  they  were  the  earliest  written  Constitutions.  Like  the  old
English  Charges  they  were  probably,  for  the  most  part,  the  commit-
tal to  writing  of  usages  which  had  prevailed  long  before.  Their
similarity  to  the  English  Constitutions,  to  the  Scottish  Statutes  and
to  the  French  Regulations,  prove,  very  conclusively,  that  all  these
laws  were  at  one  time  peculiar  to  a  Fraternity  of  Builders  who  ex-
isted at  a  much  earlier  period  and  from  whom  the  Guilds  or  Cor-
porations of  Freemasons  in  all  these  various  countries  sprang  as
from  a  common  stock.

As  the  reader  has  already  been  put  in  possession  of  the  Eng-
lish, Scottish,  and  French  Constitutions,  it  is  proper,  for  a  thor-
ough comprehension  of  the  subject  of  the  connection  existing  be-
tween all  these  bodies  of  Freemasons  that  he  should  be  able  to
compare  those  laws  with  those  which  prevailed  among  the  German
Steinmetzen.

I  devote  therefore  the  next  chapter  to  a  translation  of  the  Con-
stitutions of  Strasburg,  appending  such  marginal  remarks  as  may  be
necessary  for  their  elucidation.

w       .*>

k.

I

»

'

^P

%

7S*

HISTORY

cY

isburg  and  m<  by  statutes  subsequently  enacted  at  other

ices  and  by  various  confirmations  of  the  German  Emperors.
Of  all  these  laws,  the  Constitutions  of  Strasburg  are  the  founda-
tion, a  ore  the  earliest  written  Constitutions.     Like  the  old
Engli-           rges  they  were  probably,  for  the  most  part,  the
tal            iting  of  usages  which  had  prevailed  long  before.

to  the  English  Constitutions,  to  the  Scottish  Statuu
he  French  Regulations,  prove,  very  conclusively,  that  all  tl

at  one  time  peculiar  to  a  Fraternity  of  Builders  who  ex-

I  at  a  much  earlier  period  i
porations  of  Freemasons  in  all
from  a  common  stock.

As  the  reader  has  alread^
lish,  Scottish,  end  French
ough  comprehension  of  the
tween  all  these  bodies  of  1
compare  those  laws  with  th
Steinmetzen.

I  devote  therefore  the  n
stitutions  of  Strasburg,  apy
necessary  for  their  elucidu

>m  whom  the  Guilds  or  Cor-
ese  various  countries  sprang  as

it  in  possession  of  the  Eng-
>ns,  it  is  proper,  for  a  thor-

t  of  the  connection  existing  be-
s  that  he  should  be  able  to

:h  prevailed  among  the  German

to  a  translation  of  the  Con-
marginal  remarks  as  may  be

*[

l^&II

CHAPTER  XXI

THE    SECRETS   OF   THE    MEDIEVAL   MASONS

|HAT  the  Stonemasons  of  the  Middle  Ages  had
in  their  possession  certain  very  important  secrets,
which  they  religiously  abstained  from  communi-
cating to  any  other  Masons  who  were  not  of  the
fraternity,  is  a  fact  of  which  there  cannot  be  a
doubt.  But  to  discover  what  these  secrets  were
is  a  task  that  has  puzzled  the  brains  of  more
than  one  investigator.

We  have  seen  that  there  were  passwords,  signs,  and  other  methods
of  recognition  which  were  established  to  enable  the  members  of  the
Craft  to  make  themselves  known  in  strange  places  and  to  strange
brethren,  and  which  were  simply  matters  of  convenience  forming  the
part  of  a  system  not  peculiar  to  the  Masons,  but  which  has,  in  all
ages,  been  practiced  by  every  association  of  men  who  desired  to  pre-
serve an  exclusive  organization.

But  these  modes  of  recognition  did  not  constitute  the  secrets  of
the  Freemasons,  which  bound  them  together  as  a  united  sodality
having  in  every  country  the  same  aims  and  objects.  Such  secrets
were  of  far  more  value  and  importance  than  any  arbitrary  code  of
signals  adopted  as  a  means  of  communication  and  mutual  recognition.
The  evidence  is  very  patent,  in  all  the  old  Constitutions  and
Regulations,  that  the  Freemasons  were  in  possession  of  secrets  which
the  members  of  the  fraternity  were  strictly  forbidden  to  communi-
cate to  outsiders.  Thus  the  Strasburg  Constitution  forbid  any
Master  or  Fellow  Craft  to  instruct  anyone  who  is  not  of  the  Craft
in  any  part  belong-ing  to  Masonry.

There  was  in  the  lodge  a  certain  book  which  was  kept  by  the
Master  under  an  oath  that  he  would  permit  no  part  of  it  to  be  copied.
It  is  evident  that  this  book  must  have  contained  something  besides
the  Statutes,  because  a  book  of  mere  regulations  would  hardly  have
been  invested  with  such  a  character  of  sanctity.
48  753

754  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

But  the  earliest  of  the  English  Constitutions,  that  known  as  the
Halliwell  MS.,  is  still  more  explicit  on  this  subject.  The  third
point  —  tercius  peonctus  —  is  an  admonition  to  Apprentices  to
keep  the  secrets  of  the  Craft  which  have  been  entrusted  to  them.
He  was  to  keep  close  the  counsel  of  his  Master  and  his  Fellows ;
he  was  to  reveal  to  no  man  matters  which  had  been  privately  dis-
cussed (the  prevystye  of  the  chamber),  nor  what  had  been  done  in
the  lodge.

"  The  thrydde  poynt  most  be  severele,

With  the  prentes  knowe  hyt  wele.

Hys  Mayster  cownsel  he  kepe  and  close

And  hys  felows  by  hys  goode  purpose  ;

The  prevystye  of  the  chamber  tell  he  no  man,

Ny  yn  the  logge  whatsever  they  done  ;

Whatsever  thou  heryst  or  syste  hem  do,

Telle  hyt  no  mon,  whersever  thou  go  ;

The  cownsel  of  halle  and  yeke  of  boure,

Kepe  hyt  wel  to  gret  honoure

Lest  hyt  wolde  torne  thyself  to  blame,

And  brynge  the  craft  ynto  gret  shame." l

It  seems  scarcely  capable  of  a  doubt  that  these  secrets  were  of
an  architectural  nature.  The  architects  and  builders  who  invented
the  Gothic  style  of  architecture,  and  built  all  the  religious  edifices  of
the  Middle  Ages,  and  who,  as  Mr.  Hope  says,  whatever  might  be
the  locality  in  which  they  were  placed,  either  north,  south,  east,  or
west,  derived  their  science  from  a  central  school,  must  have  been  in
possession  of  certain  principles  of  their  art,  which  they  kept  exclu-
sively to  themselves.  From  the  most  distant  points  whither  these
"  Traveling  Freemasons "  might  have  wandered,  they  maintained,
with  their  brethren  of  the  Craft,  a  constant  correspondence,  and
communicated  to  each  other  the  minutest  improvement  in  their  art.2

It  was  in  the  ioth  century  that  the  science  of  geometry  is  sup-
posed to  have  first  given  its  aid  to  architecture  by  the  learned  Ger-
bert,  who  from  the  archbishopric  of  Ravenna  had  been  advanced,  in

1,1  Halliwell  MS.,"  t.  275-286.

2  Hope,  "  Historical  Essay  on  Architecture,"  p.  238.  The  whole  object  of  this  part
of  Mr.  Hope's  work  is  to  show  that  the  Masons  who  issued  from  Lombardy  and  spread
over  Europe  after  the  ioth  century  were  in  possession  of  rules  of  construction  which  con-
stituted the  secrets  of  the  great  Fraternity  which  they  formed.

THE   SECRETS   OF   THE   MEDIAEVAL   MASONS       755

the  year  999,  to  the  papacy,  under  the  name  of  Sylvester  II.  Mos-
heim  says  of  him  that  his  genius  was  extensive  and  sublime,  em-
bracing all  the  branches  of  literature,  but  more  particularly  math*
ematics.  His  studies  in  geometry  were  so  far  beyond  the  attainments
of  the  age  in  which  he  lived  that  his  geometrical  figures  were  regarded
by  the  monks  as  magical  operations,  and  he  himself  considered  as  a
magician  and  a  disciple  of  Satan.

To  him  Europe  is  said  to  have  been  indebted  for  the  intro-
duction of  the  Arabic  numerals,  which  he  brought  from  Cordova,  in
Spain,  where  he  spent  several  years  in  acquiring  the  language  and
the  learning  of  the  Arabians.

I  am  not  ready  to  subscribe  to  the  opinion  of  some  writers  who
suppose  that  the  builders  of  the  10th  century  were  placed  in  posses-
sion of  the  method  of  applying  geometric  science  to  the  secrets  of
architecture.  But  I  think  it  highly  probable  that  by  his  learning  as
a  mathematician  he  gave  the  first  impetus  to  the  study  of  geometry
by  the  monkish  and  the  lay  architects  of  his  times.  This  led  to  the
application  of  the  principles  of  that  science  at  a  little  later  period  to
the  art  of  building,  so  as  to  develop  into  the  system  of  geometrical
secrets,  which  distinguished  the  builders  of  the  Gothic  style,  or  the
Freemasons  of  the  Middle  Ages.

Lord  Lindsay,  in  his  Sketches  of  the  History  of  Christian  Art,
significantly  alludes  to  this  possession  of  architectural  secrets  as  an
important  element  in  the  strength  of  these  mediaeval  Masons.  His
language  is  well  worth  quotation.

Speaking  of  the  symbolic  style  of  architecture — an  architecture
in  which  everything  was  made  subservient  to  the  expression  of  relig-
ious ideas  by  means  of  symbolism,  which,  beginning  in  Lombardy,
had  been  diffused  over  all  Europe,  both  north  and  south  of  the  Alps
— Lord  Lindsay  assigns  the  following  as  the  cause  of  that  diffusion :

"  What  chiefly  contributed  to  its  diffusion  over  Europe,  was  the
exclusive  monopoly  in  Christian  architecture,  conceded  by  the  Popes
toward  the  close  of  the  8th  century,  to  the  Masons  of  Como,  then,
and  for  ages  afterward,  when  the  title  of  Magistri  Comacini  had
long  been  absorbed  in  that  of '  Free  and  Accepted  Masons,'  associated
as  a  craft  or  brotherhood  in  art  and  friendship.  A  distinct  and  pow-
erful body,  composed  eventually  of  all  nations,  concentrating  the
talent  of  each  successive  generation,  with  all  the  advantages  of  ac-
cumulated  experience   and   constant  mutual  communication  —  im-

756  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

bued,  moreover,  in  that  age  of  faith,  with  the  deepest  Christian
reverence,  and  retaining  their  advantages  unchallenged  till  their  pro-
scription in  the  15th  and  1 6th  centuries — we  cannot  wonder  that  the
Freemasons  should  have  carried  their  art  to  a  pitch,  which  now  that
their  secrets  are  lost,  it  may  be  considered  hopeless  to  attempt  to
rival."  '

Mr.  Paley,  in  his  Manual  of  Gothic  Architecture,  touches  rather
tenderly  on  this  subject,  for  he  thinks  that  little  or  nothing  has  ever
transpired  of  the  secret  system  which  the  Freemasons  adopted  in
building,  nor  of  the  organization  of  their  body,  except  that  it  was
ecclesiastical  and  under  the  jurisdiction  and  benediction  of  the  Pope.
He  supposes,  however,  that  there  was  some  central  school  whence
emanated  all  the  rules  which  were  developed  in  a  positive  identity  of
architectural  details  in  the  minutest  points  ;  or  if  there  were  no  such
school,  that  the  Master  Masons  went  about  like  missionaries  teaching
these  principles.9

Elsewhere,  in  the  same  work,  he  becomes  more  explicit  in  respect
to  these  secrets,  and  thinks  that  they  consisted  in  an  application  of
the  principles  of  geometry  to  architecture.  It  is,  he  says,  certain
that  geometry  lent  its  aid  in  the  planning  and  designing  of  buildings,
and  the  methods  of  application  were,  he  thinks,  evidently  "  profound
secrets  in  the  keeping  of  the  Freemasons."8

He  expatiates  on  this  theory  and  supposes  that  the  equilateral  tri-
angle was  probably  the  basis  of  most  formations,  as  it  is  exhibited  in
a  majority  of  pointed  arches  as  well  as  in  the  vesica  piscis,  a  promi-
nent mystic  symbol  of  the  mediaeval  Masons.

And  this  theory  is  greatly  strengthened  by  the  fact — which  was
probably  not  known  to  Mr.  Paley,  or  at  least  he  does  not  refer  to
it — that  the  equilateral  triangle  is  one  of  the  most  important  and  sig-
nificant of  the  symbols  of  the  Speculative  Masons,  who  indeed  have
founded  most  of  their  symbolism  on  geometrical  principles  borrowed
from  or  suggested  by  the  practices  of  the  mediaeval  Operative  Ma-
sons, who  were  their  predecessors.

Michelet,  in  his  History  of  France,4  has  some  very  profound  re-

1  "  Sketches  of  the  History  of  Christian  Art,"  ii.,  p.  14.

i "  Manual  of  Gothic  Architecture,"  chap,  vi.,  p.  210.       3  Ibid.,  chap,  iii.,  p.  78.

4  "  Histoire  de  France,"  par  M.  Michelet.  Bruxelles,  1840.  The  same  views  had  been
previously  announced  by  Boisseree  in  his  description  of  the  Cathedral  of  Cologne,  and
Michelet  acknowledges  his  indebtedness  to  that  writer.

THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  MEDIAEVAL  MASONS       757

marks  on  this  subject  of  the  secret  of  the  mediaeval  Masons.  He
shows  that  it  was  geometrical  and  consisted  in  an  application  of  the
science  of  numbers,  used  in  a  mystical  sense  to  the  art  of  building
according  to  the  principles  of  Gothic  architecture,  which  was  the
peculiar  style  of  the  Freemasons.

He  illustrates  this  view  from  examples  furnished  by  cathedrals
built  by  the  fraternity  from  the  nth  century  onward.  His  views
are  worth  consideration.

He  says  that  this  geometry  of  beauty,  as  he  calls  it,  is  conspicu-
ous in  the  type  of  Gothic  architecture  as  exhibited  in  the  Cathe-
dral of  Cologne.  This  is  a  regular  body  which  has  grown  in  its  ap-
propriate proportions  with  a  regularity  equal  to  that  of  the  formation
of  crystals.  The  cross  of  this  church  is  strictly  deduced  from  the
figure  by  which  Euclid  constructs  the  equilateral  triangle.  The
numbers  10  and  12,  with  their  divisors  and  their  multiples,  were
the  numbers  which  guided  and  controlled  all  the  measures  of  the
edifice.

Of  these,  10  was  the  human  number,  because  it  was  that  of  the
fingers ;  1 2  was  the  divine  number,  being  astronomical  in  its  relations.
To  these  7  were  added  as  the  number  of  the  planets.  The  inferior
parts  of  the  building  are  modeled  on  the  square,  and  subdivided  into
the  octagon  ;  the  superior  are  modeled  on  the  triangle  and  are  devel-
oped in  the  hexagon  and  the  lodecagon.

The  arcade,  thrown  from  one  pillar  to  another,  is  fifty  feet  wide,
and  this  number  is  repeated  throughout  the  building  in  some  of  its
multiples.  Thus  the  side-aisles  are  25  feet,  or  one-half  the  width
of  the  arcade ;  the  facade  is  thrice  its  width,  or  1 50  feet.  The
entire  length  of  the  church  is  three  times  its  entire  breadth,  or
nine  times  the  width  of  the  arcade.  The  breadth  of  the  whole
church  is  equal  to  the  length  of  the  choir,  of  the  nave,  and  to  the
height  of  the  middle  of  the  roof.

The  proportion  of  the  length  to  the  height  is  as  2  is  to  5.  Finally,
the  numbers  of  the  arcade  and  the  side-aisles  are  repeated  externally
in  the  counter-foils  and  buttresses.  There  are  seven  chapels  of  the
choir,  which  is  the  number  of  the  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  the
Sacraments,  according  to  the  Catholic  Church,  and  the  choir  is  sup-
ported by  twice  seven  columns.

This  predilection  for  mystical  numbers  occurs  in  all  the  churches
of  the  mediaeval  period.     Thus  the  Cathedral  of  Rheims  has  J

758  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

entrances,  and  both  it  and  the  Cathedral  of  Chartres  have  7  chapels
around  the  choir.  The  choir  of  Notre  Dame,  at  Paris,  has  7  arcades.
The  cross-aisle  is  144  feet  long,  which  is  16  times- 9,  and  42  feet
wide,  which  is  6  times  7.  The  towers  of  Notre  Dame  are  204  feet
high,  which  is  17  times  12,  the  astronomical  number.  The  length
of  the  church  of  Notre  Dame  at  Rheims  is  408  feet,  or  34  times  1 2.
The  Cathedral  of  Notre  Dame  has  297  columns  ;  but  297  divided  by
3  gives  99,  and  this  divided  by  3  again  produces  ^t,.  The  naves  of  St.
Ouen.  at  Rouen,  and  of  the  Cathedrals  of  Strasburg  and  Chartres,  are
of  the  same  length,  or  244  feet.  The  Saint  Chapelle,  at  Paris,  is  1 10
feet  long  and  27  feet  wide,  but  no  is  10  times  11,  and  27  is  3  times  9.

In  these  few  examples  we  have  developed  the  numbers  3,  7,  9,
10,  1 1,  and  12,  all  of  which  have  been  retained  in  the  mystical  system
of  the  Speculative  Freemasons,  and  their  appearance  among  the
mediaeval  Masons  could  have  been  neither  by  an  accident  nor  a  co-
incidence, but  must  have  arisen  from  a  predetermined  selection.

"To  whom,  then,"  says  Michelet,  "belonged  this  science  of
numbers,  this  divine  mathematics  ?  To  no  mortal  man,  but  to  the
Church  of  God."  Under  the  shadow  of  the  Church,  in  chapters  and
in  monasteries,  the  secret  was  transmitted  together  with  instruction
in  the  mysteries  of  Christianity.  The  Church  alone  could  accom-
plish these  miracles  of  architecture.  She  would  often  summon  a
whole  people  to  complete  a  monument.  A  hundred  thousand  men
labored  at  once  on  that  of  Strasburg,  and  such  was  their  zeal  that
they  did  not  suffer  night  to  interrupt  their  labors,  but  continued
them  by  the  light  of  torches.  The  Church  would  often  expend  cen-
turies on  the  slow  accomplishment  of  a  perfect  work.  Renaud  de
Montauban,  for  instance,  bore  stones  for  the  building  of  the  Cathe-
dral of  Cologne,  and  to  this  day  it  is  still  in  process  of  erection.1

Michelet  has  found,  in  the  geometrical  proportions  observed  in
the  construction  of  religious  edifices,  a  conformity  to  the  principles
of  art  laid  down  by  Vitruvius  and  by  Pliny,  and  thus  in  the  Gothic
style  of  architecture  the  Freemasons  have  preserved  the  traditions
of  antiquity.*  Here,  then,  we  see  apparently  another  link  in  the
chain  which  connects  the  Middle  Age  Corporations  of  Craftsmen
with  the  Roman  builders  of  the  Collegia  Artificum.

1,1  Histoire  de  France,"  liv.  iv.,  chap,  ix.,  p.  369.  (The  Cathedral  of  Cologne  has
since  been  completed.)  •*  Ut  supra.

THE   SECRETS   OF   THE   MEDIAEVAL   MASONS       759

In  defining  the  secret  or  secrets  of  the  mediaeval  Masons  to
have  consisted  in  an  application  of  the  principles  of  geometry  to
the  processes  of  building,  M.  Michelet  has  taken  that  view  of  the
subject  which  is  now  very  generally  accepted  by  Masonic  and
archaeological  writers.

Findel  says  that  the  secrets  of  the  Stonemasons  consisted  of
instruction  in  architecture  and  in  mystical  numbers ;  of  these  he
says  that  3,  5,  7  and  9  were  especially  sacred.  But  Michelet  has
shown  that  while  the  numbers  mentioned  by  Findel  were  venerated,,
the  numbers  10  and  12,  or  the  human  and  divine  numbers,  were
deemed  the  most  important,  and  were  the  most  used  in  symbol-
ization.  He  says,  also,  that  the  colors  gold  or  yellow,  blue  and
white,  were  sacred  as  having  especial  allusions  to  the  art.

The  symbolization  of  colors,  as  well  as  of  the  implements  of  the
Craft,  which  have  been  described  by  Findel  and  some  other  Ger-
man writers,  did  not  constitute  any  part  of  those  secrets  of  the
Craft  the  knowledge  of  which  distinguished  the  members  of  the
Guild  or  Fraternity  of  Freemasons  from  the  common  workmen,  to
whom  these  secrets  were  never  communicated,  and  to  whom  they
never  could  be  imparted  except  by  a  positive  violation  of  the  Guild
law.

It  is  therefore  a  matter  of  but  very  little  importance — in  fact  of
none  at  all — whether  M.  Michelet  is  or  is  not  correct  in  assigning
to  the  Church  the  office  of  inventing  the  architectural  symbolism
which  pervaded  all  the  religious  edifices  of  the  Middle  Ages.  It  is
true  that  the  Christian  Church  had  scarcely  emerged  from  the  chrys-
alis state  in  which  it  had  existed  during  the  apostolic  age,  when
dogmas  were  taught  without  figurative  illustration,  before  it  began
to  impress  its  religious  instructions  upon  its  disciples  by  means  of
symbols.1

But  as  early  as  the  1 2th  century,  at  least,  the  Freemasons  had
begun  to  cut  adrift  from  their  monastic  and  ecclesiastic  connections,
and  had  established  themselves  as  an  independent  body  of  Crafts-
men. It  would  be  safe  to  suppose,  as  Boissere*e  contends,  that
both  geometrical  architecture  and  architectural  symbolism  were  the
invention  rather  of  skilled  professional  architects  than  of  monks  or

1  This  is  not  the  place  to  discuss  the  question  of  how  much  the  Freemasons  were  in-
debted to  the  Church  for  their  symbolism.  It  will  be  hereafter  treated  on  a  more  appro-
priate occasion.

760  HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

prelates  who  were  not  practical  Masons.  The  Church,  however,
must  have  undoubtedly  exercised  some  influence  in  early  times  in
moulding  the  system.

At  first,  in  the  earliest  periods  of  the  rise  of  ecclesiastical  archi-
tecture, the  abbots  and  bishops,  taking,  as  Fergusson  says,  some
former  building  as  a  model,  made  their  designs  and  verbally  cor-
rected its  mistakes  or  suggested  their  improvements  to  the  builder.1

But  afterward  the  professional  architects  and  Masons  usurped  to
themselves  the  task  of  designing  as  well  as  erecting  the  churches  and
other  buildings.  The  methods  of  geometrical  and  mathematical
construction  became  arcana,  to  be  confined  to  the  members  of  the
Guild  of  Freemasons  and  to  constitute  those  secrets,  so  often  spoken
of,  which  were  lost  at  the  dissolution  of  the  fraternity.

The  gradual  disseverance  of  the  professional  Masons  from  their
ecclesiastical  relations,  and  the  improvement  in  the  science  of  archi-
tecture which — of  course,  developed  that  geometrical  system  which
the  wiser  craftsmen  kept  to  themselves — has  been  described  by  Mr.
Whittington  in  his  Historical  Survey  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Antiqui-
ties of  France  ;  and  though  what  he  says  has  direct  reference  to  that
kingdom,  it  can,  with  perfect  correctness,  be  applied  to  Germany.

The  ancient  writers  often  mention  instances  of  an  abbot  giving
a  plan  which  his  convent  assisted  in  carrying  into  execution,  and  this
was  certainly  the  case  in  the  beginning  of  the  revival  of  learning  after
the  decadence  of  the  Roman  Empire,  when  the  arts  were  almost  ex-
clusively cultivated  by  the  clergy.

But  it  is  equally  certain  that  the  ecclesiastics  patronized  the  pro-
fessors of  the  arts  among  the  laity,  and  especially  in  the  arts  of  build-
ing there  were  men  of  superior  skill  and  intelligence  who,  being
brought  from  distant  places  by  the  liberality  of  the  prelates,  were
added  to  the  common  Masons  and  carpenters  who  were  found  in
the  different  cities,  and  whose  mere  manual  labor  was  made  use  of
by  the  monks  in  the  construction  of  religious  edifices.  This  associ-
ation, elevated  by  the  intermixture  of  the  superior  intelligence  of  the
more  skilled  workmen,  and  patronized  by  the  authority  of  the
Church,  secured  employment  and  protection.  The  members  grad-
ually increased  in  numbers  and  improved  in  science  until,  at  length,
they  produced  the  most  able  artificers  among  themselves.

*"  History  of  Architecture  in  all  Countries,"  i.,  p.  480.

THE  SECRETS   OF  THE   MEDIAEVAL  MASONS       761

Thus  it  was  that  the  builders  were,  about  the  1 2th  century,  enabled
to  withdraw  altogether  from  their  dependence  on,  and  from  their
connection  with,  the  ecclesiastics.  They  formed  that  fraternity  of
Freemasons  who  were  distinguished  in  every  country  where  they
appeared,  from  the  common  herd  of  craftsmen — the  Maurer  of  the
Germans  and  the  "  rough  Masons  "  *  of  the  English — by  the  posses-
sion of  important  secrets  connected  with  the  art  of  building.

11  So  studiously,"  says  Mr.  Halliwell,  "  did  they  conceal  their
secrets,  that  it  may  be  fairly  questioned  whether  even  some  of  those
who  were  admitted  into  the  Society  of  Freemasons  were  wholly
skilled  in  all  the  mysterious  portions  of  the  art."8

Doubtless  in  this,  as  in  every  association  of  men,  must  have  been
a  diversity  of  skill  and  talent.  But  the  fraternal  spirit  of  the  Craft
led  to  a  willingness  on  the  part  of  the  best  instructed  to  supply  the
needs  of  their  less  informed  brethren.  Thus  in  one  of  the  earliest
of  the  old  English  Constitutions  it  is  provided  that  if  a  Mason  be
wiser  and  more  subtile  than  his  fellow  working  with  him  in  his  lodge
or  any  other  place,  and  he  perceives  that  he  must  leave  the  stone
upon  which  he  is  working  for  want  of  skill,  and  he  can  teach  him
how  to  work  the  stone  better,  he  shall  instruct  him  and  help  him,
that  the  more  love  may  increase  among  them,  and  that  the  work  of
the  Lord  be  not  lost.3  A  similar  regulation  will  be  found  in  the
Constitutions  of  Strasburg.

Thus,  though  there  were  of  course  some  workmen  more  skilled
than  others,  and  though  they  were  strictly  exclusive  in  confining
their  knowledge  of  the  secrets  of  their  art  to  their  own  fraternity,
yet  those  secrets  were  freely  imparted  to  every  member  who  desired
the  knowledge.

The  theory  that  the  secret  of  the  mediaeval  Freemasons  consisted
in  an  application  of  the  principles  of  geometry  to  architecture  enables
us  to  explain  many  things  otherwise  inexplicable  in  the  old  records
of  the  Operative  Masons  and  in  the  modern  rituals  of  the  Specula-
tive Free  and  Accepted  Masons.  We  are  thus  enabled  to  under-
stand all  the  allusions  made  to  geometry  as  the  most  important  of
the  sciences  and  as  the  synonym  of  Masonry.  Dr.  Anderson,  most
probably  with  some  old  manuscript  before  him,  the  suggestions  of

1  Called  also  "  rottghlayers."  2  "  Archaeologia,"  vol.  xxviii.,  p.  44$.

3 Cooke  MS.,  line  888.

762  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

which  he  followed,  commenced  the  Book  of  Constitutwis  with  a
eulogium,  not  on  Masonry,  but  on  Geometry,  which  he  declared  was
the  foundation  of  Masonry  and  Architecture.

In  the  second  edition  of  the  Constitutions  he  says  that  the  Ma-
sons always  had  a  book  in  manuscript  which,  besides  the  Charges
and  Regulations,  contained  the  history  of  architecture,  in  order  to
show  the  antiquity  of  the  Craft  or  Art,  "  and  how  it  gradually  arose
upon  its  solid  foundation,  the  noble  science  of  Geometry." *  The
discovery  since  his  time  of  many  copies  of  this  manuscript  book  of
Constitutions  confirms  what  he  here  says  of  the  connection  of
Geometry  with  Masonry.

Elsewhere  he  writes  in  the  same  strain  of  Geometry  and  Masonry
as  identical  arts.  Thus  he  says  :  "  No  doubt  Adam  taught  his  sons
Geometry,"  and  "Seth  took  equal  care  to  teach  Geometry  and
Masonry  to  his  offspring."  But  the  best  illustration  in  the  work  of
Anderson,  of  the  theory  that  the  secret  of  the  Freemasons  consisted
in  the  application  of  the  principles  of  Geometry  to  Architecture,  is
his  statement  that  Noah's  ark  "  was  certainly  fabricated  by  Geome-
try and  according  to  the  rules  of  Architecture."

All  the  old  English  manuscript  Constitutions  maintain  the  same
idea  of  the  very  close  connection,  and,  indeed,  identity,  of  Geometry
and  Masonry.

Thus  in  the  earliest  of  them,  the  Halliwell  MS.t  whose  date  is
supposed  to  be  about  the  year  1390,  it  is  said  :

M  In  that  time  through  good  Geometry,
The  honest  craft  of  good  Masonry
Was  ordained  and  made  in  this  manner."

In  the  Cooke  MS.,  whose  date  is  about  a  hundred  years  later,  we
are  told  that  "  Isidore  saith  in  his  Etymologies,  that  Euclid  calleth
the  craft  geometry."  In  the  York  MS.,  of  the  date  of  1600,  we  are
still  more  distinctly  told  that  "  Euclid  was  the  first  that  gave  it  the
name  of  Geometry,  the  which  is  now  called  Masonry."

But  it  is  hardly  necessary  to  multiply  the  instances  in  which  the

1  Anderson's  "Constitutions,"  second  edition,  1738,  p.  vii.  Krause  says  ("  Kuns-
turkunden,"  i.,  23)  that  Geometry  is  to  be  here  taken  in  a  double  sense  :  1,  as  the  foun-
dation of  architecture,  and,  2,  as  the  social  design  of  the  brotherhood  of  Freemasons.  But
this  appears  to  be  really  a  "  distinction  without  a  difference."  Architecture  and  the  de-
sign of  the  Masons  are,  in  the  present  view  of  the  subject,  one  and  the  same  thing.

THE   SECRETS    OF   THE   MEDIAEVAL   MASONS        763

old  Constitutions  have  referred  to  Geometry  as  the  foundation  of
Masonry,  or  as  an  art  indeed  identical  with  it.  All  of  these  refer-
ences to  Geometry  are  but  corroborating  proofs  of  what  has  been
already  said,  that  the  great  secret  of  the  mediaeval  Masons  consisted
in  the  application  of  the  principles  of  Geometry  to  the  art  of  build-
ing by  methods  known  only  to  themselves,  and  which  they  developed
in  the  Gothic  style  of  architecture  which  they  invented.  This  secret
perished  with  the  dissolution  of  the  Operative  Fraternity,  or  by  its
transmission  into  the  Speculative  Association.

Yet  this  Speculative  Association,  the  Free  and  Accepted  Ma-
sons of  the  present  day,  have  retained  the  memory  of  their  descent
from  these  Operative  Masons  of  the  Middle  Ages  by  a  sacred  pres-
ervation in  their  ritual  of  a  reference  to  Geometry  as  the  "  fifth
and  noblest  of  the  sciences  and  the  one  on  which  the  superstructure
of  Masonry  is  founded."

The  retention  in  the  ritual  of  the  letter  G,  the  earliest  and  the
most  extensively  propagated  of  all  the  symbols  of  Speculative  Ma-
sonry, is  an  ever-present  and  a  loudly  speaking  testimony  in  every
lodge  that  the  brethren  there  congregated  have  not  forgotten  that
the  great  secret  of  their  predecessors  was  a  geometrical  one.

Indeed,  if  there  were  no  other  proof  that  the  mediaeval  Free-
masons did  all  their  work  according  to  certain  principles  of  Geom-
etry, the  method  of  applying  which  was  known  only  to  themselves,
and  that  therefore  the  science  of  Geometry  was  to  them  a  most  im-
portant and  indispensable  part  of  their  Craft,  and  which  entitled  it
peculiarly  to  the  appellation  of  a  "  mystery,"  a  word  applied  indif-
ferently to  designate  a  trade  or  a  secret.1

But  the  very  fact  that  these  Freemasons  were  possessed  of  im-
portant secrets  in  reference  to  the  art  and  practice  of  building,
and  to  preserve  their  own  pre-eminence,  it  became  necessary
that  they  should  have  some  method  of  securing  these  secrets  to
themselves  and  of  preventing  the  intrusion  of  strangers  and  work-
men who  were  not  of  their  guild  or  fraternity  into  a  community  of

1  There  is  doubt  among  philologists  whether  "  Mystery"  is  derived  from  the  French
"  mestier,"  a  trade,  or  from  the  Latin  "  mysterium,"  a  secret.  The  word  has  always  been
used  in  both  senses.  Thus  Chaucer  says  the  reeve  had  learned  "  a  good  mester,  he  was
a  well  good  wright  a  carpenter  "  ("  Canterbury  Tales,"  Pro.  613),  and  Wiclif  speaks  of
"  the  mysterie  whych  was  kepte  secrete  since  the  worlde  beganne."  The  legal  term,  at
this  day,  for  an  art,  trade,  or  occupation  is  "  Mystery."

764  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

labor  with  them  and  the  acquisition  of  any  part  of  their  mystical
knowledge.

Now  the  only  method  by  which  these  ends  could  be  attained
was  that  of  a  code  or  system  of  signs  and  words  by  which  any  one
of  these  Freemasons  could  make  himself  known  to  the  others,  when
he  might  be  in  a  strange  place,  and  thus  secure  to  himself  a  par-
ticipation in  the  benefits  of  the  association.  A  form  of  reception
or  initiation  would  also,  probably,  be  adopted,  either  for  further
security  or  for  the  purpose  of  giving  solemnity  to  the  admission  of
new  members.

We  have  the  best  historical  records  to  prove  that  modes  of  rec-
ognition were  adopted  for  the  purpose  named  by  the  mediaeval
Freemasons,  and  that  they  had  a  form  of  initiation,  though  what  that
form  precisely  was  I  am  disposed  to  think  we  are  ignorant  of,  not-
withstanding the  authority  of  recent  German  writers,  some  of  whom
have  pretended  to  give  it  in  full.

The  English  and  Scottish  authorities — that  is  to  say,  the  contem-
porary manuscript  records — certainly  supply  us  with  no  information
on  that  subject,  save  that  there  was  some  formula  of  reception  for
an  Apprentice,  a  Fellow,  and  a  Master,  the  authorities  indicating
that  the  same  formula  was  used  on  each  occasion,  or  perhaps  that
one  form  of  reception  only  was  used,  and  on  only  one  occasion.
There  is  a  great  amount  of  obscurity  on  this  subject  which  can  be
removed  only  by  future  investigations  and  by  the  discovery  of  more
explicit  manuscripts,  which,  if  any  such  exist,  have  not  yet  been
brought  to  light.

The  German  writers,  however,  have  furnished  from  documents
in  their  possession  many  almost  minute  details  of  the  usages  of  the
Traveling  Freemasons  of  that  country  and  which  in  the  course  of
time  must  have  extended  into  other  lands.

In  the  Book  of  Constitutions  of  the  Lodge  Archimedes,  at  Al-
tenburg,  is  contained  an  examination  of  a  German  Steinmetsen,
which  has  been  copied  by  Krause,  by  Findel,  and  by  other  writers,
and  which  is  declared  by  all  of  them  to  be  a  genuine  document.  I
do  not  see  any  reason  to  doubt  its  genuineness  and  I  give  it  as  it
has  been  published  in  Findel's  History  of  Freemasonry,  with  a  few
alterations  or  amendments,  on  the  authority  of  Krause's  copy  of
the  same  document.

When  a  Fellow,  traveling  in  his  "Wander  Year,"  or  at  any  time

THE  SECRETS   OF  THE  MEDIAEVAL  MASONS       7<5S

In  search  of  employment,  arrived  at  a  strange  Hiitte  or  Lodge,  he
approached,  says  Findel,  by  three  regular  steps,  and  knocking  three
times  was  admitted,  when,  the  brethren  all  standing  around,  their
feet  placed  at  right  angles,  he  saluted  the  Master,  or  in  his  absence,
the  Parlirer  or  Warden,  with  the  following  salutations,  which
were,  "  God  greet  you — God  guide  you — God  reward  you — Master,
Parlirer  and  Fellows."  After  some  other  mutual  courteous  greet-
ings, the  examination  proceeded  as  follows  :

Q.  Worthy  Fellow-craftsmen,  are  you  a  letter  Mason  (tin
Briefer)  or  a  salute  Mason  (ein  Griisser)  ?

A.   I  am  a  salute  Mason.

Q.  How  shall  I  know  you  to  be  such  ?

A.  By  my  salute  and  the  words  of  my  mouth.

Q.  Who  has  sent  you  ?

A.  My  worshipful  Master,  the  worshipful  townsmen,  and  the
worshipful  Craft  of  Masons  at  N.N.

Q.   For  what  purpose  ?

A.  For  honorable  advancement,  instruction,  and  honesty.

Q.  What  are  instruction  and  honesty  ?

A.  The  customs  and  usages  of  the  Craft.

Q.  When  do  they  begin  ?

A.  As  soon  as  I  have  honestly  and  faithfully  finished  my  Ap-
prenticeship.

Q.  When  do  they  end  ?

A.  When  death  breaks  my  heart

Q.  How  shall  we  know  a  Mason  ?

A.  By  his  honesty.

Q.  What  kind  of  a  Mason  are  you?

A.  A  Mouth-mason  (ein  Mund-Maurer).

Q.   How  shall  we  know  that  ?

A.  By  my  salute  and  mouth  speech.

Q.  Where  was  the  worshipful  Craft  of  Masonry  in  Germany  in-
stituted ?

A.  In  Magdeburg,  at  the  CathedraL1

1  It  was  a  tradition  of  the  German  Masons  that  they  were  first  formed  into  a  brother-
hood at  the  building  of  the  Cathedral  of  Magdeburg,  which  was  commenced  about  the
year  121 1.  Bishop  Lucy,  a  few  years  before,  in  1202,  created  a  company  of  builders  for
the  construction  of  the  Cathedral  of  Winchester.  Hence  Findel  suggests  that  they  were
most  probably  the  founders  of  the  Fraternity  of  Freemasons  in  England.'  We  have  no
positive  authority  for  this,  but  the  coincidence  of  time  is,  at  least,  remarkable.

766  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

Q.   Under  what  monarch  ?

A.   Under  the  Emperor  Charles  II.,  in  the  year  876.
Q.  How  long  did  that  Emperor  reign  ?
A.  Three  years.

Q.  How  was  the  first  Mason  called  ?

A.  Anton  Hieronymus,  and  the  working  tool  was  invented  by
Walkan.

Q.  How  many  words  has  a  Mason  ?

A.  Seven.

Q.  What  are  for  the  Words  ?

A.  Riganische,  Riganse,  Rigaische.

Q.   How  do  they  run  ?

A.  God  bless  honesty.

God  bless  honorable  wisdom.

God  bless  a  worshipful  Craft  of  Masons.

God  bless  a  worshipful  Master.

God  bless  a  worshipful  Parlirer  (or  warden).

God  bless  a  worshipful  Society.

God  bless  an  honorable  advancement  here  and  there  and
everywhere,  on  the  water  and  on  the  land.
Q.  What  is  secrecy  in  itself  ?

A.  Earth,  fire,  air,  and  snow,  through  which  to  a  Worshipful
Master's  advancement  I  go.

Q.  What  do  you  carry  under  your  hat  ?

A.  A  praiseworthy  wisdom.

Q.  What  do  you  carry  under  your  tongue  ?

A.  A  praiseworthy  truth.

Q.  Why  do  you  wear  an  apron  ?

A.  To  do  honor  to  the  Worshipful  Craft  and  for  my  profit

Q.  What  is  the  strength  of  our  Craft  ?

A.  That  which  fire  and  water  cannot  destroy.

Q.  What  is  the  best  for  a  Mason  ? *

A.  Water.

Such  was  according  to  the  Kcmstitutions  Buck  of  the  Altenburg

1  Findel  gives  this  last  question  and  answer  thus  :  "  Q.  What  is  the  best  part  of  a
wall?  A.  Union."  There  is  certainly  more  sense  apparently  in  this  than  in  the  formula
as  I  have  given  it.  Yet  it  is  the  language  of  Krause,  who  quotes  the  "  Konstitutions
Buch"  in  his  "Drei  Altesten  Kunsturkenden,"  and  it  is  from  him  that  I  have  made  my
translation.

THE  SECRETS   OF  THE   MEDIAEVAL  MASONS       767

Lodge  of  "  Archimedes  of  the  three  Tracing  Boards,"  the  catechism
or  examination  of  a  Freemason  in  the  Middle  Ages  in  Germany.

It  is  very  evident  that  its  only  design  was  to  establish  a  system
of  questions,  the  capacity  of  giving  the  correct  answers  to  which
were  to  prove  the  just  claim  of  the  person  questioned  to  be  a  mem-
ber of  the  guild.  In  this  respect  this  catechism  resembles  that
which  was  in  use  among  the  English  Masons  at  the  time  of  the
organization  of  Speculative  Masonry.

One  of  the  answers  in  this  mediaeval  catechism  presents  the  dog-
gerel form  of  verse  which  is  so  common  in  the  early  English  cate-
chisms, and  hence  we  find  another  resemblance.  In  the  original
German  catechism  we  find  this  answer  :

"  Was  ist  Heimlichkeit  an  sick  selbst  ?
Erde,  Feur,  Luft^  und  Schnee,
Wodunt  ich  auf  eines  Ehrbaren  Meisters  Beforderung  geh."

Which  may  be  translated  :

"  What  is  Secrecy  in  itself  ?
Earth,  Fire,  Air,  and  Snow,
Through  which  to  a  worshipful  Master's  advancement  I  go."

This  must  strongly  remind  us  of  the  doggerel  verses  in  the  Eng-
lish catechisms.  So  common  indeed  was  this  practice  of  doggerel
versification  in  all  the  old  rituals  that  its  presence  may  be  deemed
a  proof  of  relative  antiquity,  as  its  absence  would  be  a  proof  of
want  of  genuineness.  The  long  ritual  of  the  Royal  Order  of  Scot-
land, which  is  among  the  oldest  of  the  High  Degrees,  is  made  up
almost  entirely  from  beginning  to  end  of  doggerel  verses,  which
even  for  doggerel  are  for  the  most  part  very  inferior  in  structure.

The  secret  words  in  this  catechism  are  also  worthy  of  remark.
Of  Riganse,  with  its  variations,  it  is  impossible  to  trace  the  origin.
The  supposition  in  the  Constitution  Book  that  it  is  a  corruption  of
the  English  "wriggle,"  is  too  puerile  for  consideration.  It  is  said
that  the  number  of  the  letters  being  seven  is  significant,  and  hence
Krause,  who  admits  that  this  is  a  mutilated  word,  thinks  the  letters
may  be  composed  of  the  initials  of  the  names  of  the  seven  liberal
arts  and  sciences.  But  this  hypothesis  is,  I  think,  wholly  untenable,
and  it  must  remain  as  another  instance  of  the  numerous  irreparable
corruptions  of  the  old  Masonic  manuscripts.

Not  so,  however,  with  the  other  words  in  this  catechism,  Adon

768  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Hieronymus  and  Walkan.  The  former,  evidently,  is  a  corrup-
tion of  Adonhiram,  who,  Krause  says,  has  been  confounded  with
either  Hiram,  the  King  of  Tyre,  or  with  Hiram  Abif  ;  I  think  most
probably  the  latter,  because  the  person  described  by  that  name  in
the  Books  of  Kings  and  Chronicles  is  called  "  Adon  "  in  some  of  the
English  Constitutions.

The  word  Walkan,  evidently,  is  a  corruption  of  Tubal  Cain.
Mossdorf  thinks  it  was  meant  for  Vulcan.  But  this  is  untenable.
Vulcan  is  never  mentioned  in  any  of  the  old  Masonic  records,  and
it  is  not  probable  that  the  Freemasons  were  at  all  acquainted  with
this  pagan  god  of  blacksmiths.  On  the  other  hand,  the  old  Consti-
tutions had  made  them  familiar  with  the  name  of  Tubal  Cain,  whom
the  Legend  of  the  Craft  had  placed  with  the  other  children  of  La-
mech  as  the  founders  of  Masonry.

We  see,  therefore,  the  close  connection  between  the  Steinmetzen
of  Germany  and  the  Freemasons  of  England.  They  were  both,
evidently,  branches  of  the  same  common  body  of  artists,  and  had,
if  we  may  judge  from  these  two  words,  the  same  legend.

The  Altenburg  Constitution  Book  asserts,  indeed,  that  the  forms
of  initiation  and  the  ritual  used  by  the  German  Stonemasons  came
originally  from  England.

This  may  have  been  so,  though  we  have  no  direct  or  distinct
proof  of  the  fact  If  it  were  so  it  would  not  militate  with  the  fact
that  the  other  and  greater  secret  of  the  Craft,  that  of  building  in  the
Gothic  style  and  on  geometric  principles,  came  to  both  England
and  to  Germany  from  the  school  of  Lombardy  and  the  Masters
of  Como.

We  have  thus  seen  that  the  Freemasons  of  the  Middle  Ages —
the  Steinmetzen,  Stonecutters  or  Stonemasons,  as  they  have  been
indifferently  called,  were  in  possession  of  and  were  distinguished  by
two  classes  of  secrets.

One  of  these  classes  consisted  in  the  possession  of  certain  meth-
ods of  recognition  by  which  one  Mason  might  know  another,  as  the
modern  rituals  say,  "in  the  dark  as  well  as  in  the  light."

Now  this  class  of  secrets  is  not  of  any  historical  importance,  nor
was  it  peculiar  to  the  fraternity  of  Masons.  At  all  times  and  in  all
countries,  men,  when  they  unite  into  a  brotherhood  for  the  pursuit
of  any  special  object,  certain  details  of  which  they  desire  to  conceal
from  the  world,  protect  their  exclusiveness  and  their  secrecy  by

THE    SECRETS  OF   THE   MEDIAEVAL  MASONS       769

some  method  of  signs  or  pass-words  which  will  secure  them  from  the
intrusion  of  those  who  are  not  of  their  sodality,  and  are  therefore  to
them  as  profanes.  We  have  ample  proof  that  those  who  practiced
the  Pagan  Mysteries  of  antiquity  had  this  secret  method  of  protect-
ing their  ceremonies  and  the  dogmas  which  they  taught  from  the
uninitiated.

44  Every  trade,  art,  and  occupation,"  said  Harris,  44  has  its  secrets,
which  are  not  to  be  indiscriminately  communicated  to  all  who  seek
to  obtain  them  without  having  undergone  the  necessary  probation,
and  have  not  thus  become  members  of  the  sodality,  guild,  or  craft.''

The  Freemasons  of  the  Middle  Ages  did  not,  therefore,  differ
in  this  respect  from  other  associations  of  a  similar  kind.  Their  pos-
session of  signs  and  words,  by  which  they  made  themselves  known
to  each  other,  is  of  no  special  importance  in  the  history  of  the  Craft,
except  insomuch  as  that  if  there  can  be  shown  to  be  any  similarity
or  analogy  between  those  used  by  the  Freemasons  of  the  present
day  and  those  which  were  practiced  by  the  mediaeval  Masons,  we
should  have  another  proof  of  the  descent  of  the  former  as  a  frater-
nity from  the  latter.

Such  a  similarity  or  analogy  has,  I  think,  been  already  shown  in
the  course  of  our  present  investigations.  The  use  among  the  Ger-
man Stonemasons  of  such  words  as  Walkan  and  Adon  Hierony-
mus,  which  are  evidently  corruptions  of  44  Tubal  Cain  "  and  "Adon
Hiram  "  or  "  Adoniram,"  together  with  some  similar  analogies  among
the  English  and  the  Scotch  Stonemasons,  render  it  very  probable
that  the  secret  methods  of  recognition  which  were  in  use  among  the
Stonemasons  or  Masonic  Corporations  of  the  Middle  Ages,  have
for  the  most  part  been  preserved,  and  are  to  this  day  employed  by
their  successors,  the  Speculative  Freemasons.

But  the  real  secrets  of  the  mediaeval  Masons  were  those  whose
loss  are  still  deplored,  and  whose  importance  is  testified  to  by  the
fact  universally  admitted,  that  from  the  knowledge  of  them,  and
from  their  practical  application,  have  resulted  the  magnificent  archi-
tectural works  of  the  Middle  Ages,  some  of  which,  as  the  Cathedrals
of  Cologne  and  Strasburg,  still  remain,  while  of  others,  though  time-
worn  and  dilapidated,  the  ruins  still  attest  the  skill  and  the  taste
(unsurpassed  in  modern  times)  of  their  builders.

These  secrets,  which  were  the  application  of  Geometry  to  the
art  of  building,  intimately  connect  the  history  of  Freemasonry  with
49

770  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

the  history  of  Gothic  architecture,  and  thus  they  acquire  an  impor-
tance far  surpassing  that  of  the  former  class,  or  the  methods  of
recognition.

The  use  by  the  Masons  of  the  Middle  Ages  of  Geometry  in  the
practice  of  their  profession  as  architects  gave  rise  to  geometrical
symbols,  the  preservation  of  many  of  which  by  the  Speculative
Freemasons  of  our  day  is  another  proof  of  the  succession  of  the
later  from  the  older  society,  and  is  in  this  way  again  of  great  histor-
ical importance  in  the  history  of  the  institution.

The  geometrical  symbols  which  are  found  in  the  ritual  of  mod-
ern or  Speculative  Freemasonry,  such  as  the  triangle,  the  square,
the  right  angle,  and  the  forty-seventh  problem,  may  be  considered  as
the  ddbris  of  the  "  lost  secrets"  of  the  mediaeval  Stonemasons.  As
these  founded  their  operative  art  on  the  application  to  architecture
of  the  principles  of  Geometry,  of  which  they  were  wont  to  say  that
"  there  is  no  handycraft  that  is  wrought  by  man's  hand  but  it  is
wrought  by  Geometry,"  so  the  modern  Freemasons,  imitating  them
in  their  reverence  for  that  science  (though  not  possessing  the  same
knowledge  of  its  principles),  have  drawn  from  it  their  most  impres-
sive symbols.

Thus  we  may  easily  explain  the  origin  and  the  meaning  of  the
phrase,  "  Geometrical  Masons,"  which  was  applied  in  the  beginning
of  the  1 8th  century  to  the  Speculative  Freemasons,  who  thus  claimed
to  be  considered  as  the  successors  of  the  Masonic  Guilds  of  the
Middle  Ages,  who  had  called  themselves  Freemasons  and  whose
secrets  were  of  a  geometric  character.

This  claim,  too  often  rejected  or  laid  aside  for  the  sake  of  seek-
ing a  more  ancient  but  wholly  mythical  origin  of  Freemasonry,
either  from  the  Pagan  Mysteries  or  from  the  Temple  of  Solomon,
is  rapidly  gaining  ground  among  the  Fraternity.

It  is  evident  that  the  Speculative  Freemasons  of  the  last  century
sought  to  strengthen  the  claim  by  applying  to  themselves  the  title
of  "  Geometrical  Masons,"  by  which  they  intended  to  distinguish
themselves  from  the  Operative  Masons  of  their  own  time,  just  as
the  old  Freemasons  of  the  Middle  Ages  distinguished  themselves,
by  the  possession  of  geometrical  secrets,  from  the  "  rough  layers "
or  "rough  Masons" — workmen  who  were  not  entitled  to  be
called,  and  who  were  not  called,  "Freemasons"  because  they  were
not  freemen  of   the   Guild,  were  not  in  possession  of  those   geo-

THE  SECRETS  OF  THE  MEDIAEVAL  MASONS       771

metrical  secrets,  and  were  not  therefore  admitted  into  the  brother-
hood.

There  are,  however,  between  the  Speculative  Masons,  who  date
their  organization  from  the  year  1 7 1 7,  and  the  Freemasons  of  the
Middle  Ages  some  very  significant  differences  and  some  equally
significant  resemblances.

The  consideration  of  these  differences  and  of  these  resemblances
will  come  into  view  when  treating,  in  another  chapter,  of  the  tran-
sition of  Operative  into  Speculative  Masonry.

CHAPTER  XXII

GOTHIC   ARCHITECTURE   AND   THE    FREEMASONS

\MB  J."j  -UNI  '              II            1*

biWi] .  h      y

ROM  what  has  been  heretofore  said,  the  reader
will  readily  perceive  that  there  was  a  very  close
connection  between  the  Freemasons  of  the  Mid-
dle Ages  and  that  system  of  architecture  which
has  been  called  the  Gothic  style.

It  is  not  my  intention  to  enter  into  any
elaborate  discussion  of  the  character  and  the  ori-
gin of  that  style.  Such  a  discussion  would  be  irrelevant  to  the  de-
sign of  the  present  work,  which  is  a  history  not  of  architecture  but
of  Freemasonry.

But  as  it  has  been,  by  general  consent,  admitted  that  the
Gothic  style,  if  not  absolutely  invented  by  the  mediaeval  Freema-
sons, was  exclusively  cultivated  by  them  as  the  style  of  the  ecclesi-
astical buildings  which  they  erected  in  every  country  of  western
Europe,  during  the  period  of  from  four  to  five  centuries  or  per-
haps more,  in  which  they  flourished  as  a  well-organized  fraternity.

Gothic  architecture  has,  therefore,  very  justly  been  called  the
architecture  of  the  Freemasons.

It  has,  however,  received  other  names,  some  of  which  have  less
appropriateness,  whether  we  look  to  the  character  of  the  style  or  to
the  history  of  its  origin  and  its  progress.

Sir  Christopher  Wren,  indulging  in  the  hypothesis  that  this
style  was  introduced  into  Europe  by  the  Crusaders,  called  it  the
Saracenic  style.

He  maintains  his  theory  with  great  ingenuity,  and  I  shall
quote  the  passage  from  the  Parentalia,  at  the  expense  of  some  repe-
tition, because,  whatever  may  be  thought  of  the  Saracen  origin  at-
tributed to  the  Gothic  style,  we  have  the  important  testimony  of
this  great  architect  to  the  guild  or  corporation  character  of  the  Stone-
masons of  the  Middle  Ages.  We  find  the  following  passages  in  the
Parentalia  :

772

GOTHIC  ARCHITECTURE  AND   THE   FREEMASONS  773

"  The  Holy  War  gave  the  Christians  who  had  been  there  an  idea
of  the  Saracen  works ;  which  were  afterward  by  them  imitated  in
the  West ;  and  they  refined  upon  it  every  day,  as  they  proceeded  in
building  churches.  The  Italians  (among  which  were  some  Greek
refugees),  and  with  them  Frenchmen,  Germans,  and  Flemings,
joined  into  a  fraternity  of  architects ;  procuring  Papal  bulls  for  their
encouragement  and  particular  privileges  ;  they  styled  themselves
Freemasons,  and  ranged  from  one  nation  to  another,  as  they  found
churches  to  be  built."  *

Britton,  an  architect  of  much  reputation,  rejecting  the  Saracenic
theory  of  Wren,  uses  the  term  "  Christian  Architecture  "  in  prefer-
ence to  Gothic,  as  more  analogous,  more  correct,  and  more  histori-
cal. He  defines  this  phrase,  "  Christian  Architecture,"  as  one  "  ap-
plied to  all  the  classes  of  buildings  which  were  invented  and  erected
by  the  Christians,  and  which  essentially  varied  from  the  Pagan
architecture  of  the  Egyptians,  Greeks,  and  Romans.  It  includes  all
the  varieties  of  designs  used  in  churches  and  monasteries,  from  the
6th  to  the  end  of  the  16th  century."  2

Mr.  T.  G.  Jackson,  a  professional  architect,  who  has  written  a
very  readable  little  work  on  Modern  Gothic  Architecture,  dissents
from  this  view.  He  asserts  that  Gothic  architecture  was  not  exclu-
sively connected  with  the  system  of  the  Christian  Church,  nor  in-
tended by  its  forms  to  symbolize  Christian  doctrine.

Gothic  architecture  is  not,  he  says,  the  creation  of  any  religious
creed  or  doctrine.  It  is  the  offspring  of  modern  European  civiliza-
tion. It  is  Christian,  only  because  modern  Europe  is  Christian.  It
is  connected  with  the  Church  only  so  far  as  the  Church  enters  into
the  composition  of  our  social  state  as  one  among  many  elements.8

But  a  previous  admission  of  the  author  contradicts  the  theory
which  he  has  here  advanced  that  Gothic  architecture  was  not  Chris-
tian architecture,  except  incidentally,  and  that  its  forms  did  not
symbolize  Christian  doctrine.

"  It  is  true,"  he  says,  "that  this  style  was  at  first  nurtured  in  the
Church,"  and  he  assigns  as  a  reason  for  this  fact  that  "  amid  the
turmoil  and  confusion  of  society  during  the  nth  and  12th  centu*

1  Wren's  "  Parentalia,"  p.  304.

'Britton,  "Dictionary  of  the  Architecture  and  Archaeology  of  the  Middle  Ages,"  in
voce.

3  "  Modern  Gothic  Architecture,"  by  T.  G.  Jackson,  Architect,  London,  1873,  P-  io3*

774  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

ries  it  was  only  in  the  kindly  shelter  of  the  cloister  that  learning  and
the  peaceful  arts  were  able  to  live  and  grow  ;  but  it  did  not  develop
itself  into  a  perfect  style,  it  never  shook  off  the  traditions  of  that
classic  art  from  which  it  was  derived,  it  never  merged  into  an  inde-
pendent, energizing  life,  till  the  13th  century,  when  it  passed  from
the  hands  of  the  clergy  into  those  of  the  laity.  Till  then,  all  those
great  architects  were  clerks ;  since  then  they  have  mostly  been  lay-
men.  *

Now  this  admission  is  all  that  the  most  zealous  advocates  of  the
close  relation  borne  by  the  Freemasons  to  Gothic  architecture  could
require.  It  is  not  denied  that  in  the  earlier  periods  of  the  revival
of  art,  the  monastic  institutions  and  the  prelates  of  the  Church,  in
whose  hands  were  deposited  all  the  seeds  of  learning,  and  who  were
the  architects  of  that  period,  cultivated,  almost  as  a  necessity,  the
classic  style  which  they  borrowed  from  the  Roman  artificers.

But  neither  the  Gothic  style  nor  the  corporations  of  Free-
masons existed.  They  both  sprung  into  active  life  at  the  same
time.  Paley,  in  his  classification,  traces  Gothic  architecture  in  its
different  styles  from  the  middle  of  the  12th  to  the  middle  of  the  16th
century.2  This  embraces  the  very  period  in  which  the  Freemasons
of  the  Middle  Ages  present  themselves  as  guilds  or  a  fraternity.

It  was  then  that  architecture  passed  out  of  its  classic  form,
whether  you  call  that  form  Roman,  Byzantine,  Norman  or  what
you  please,  and  assumed  that  more  symbolic  form  which  has  re-
ceived the  name  of  the  Gothic.

This  style,  coming  into  existence  at  the  very  time  that  the  lay
builders  had  emerged  from  the  control  of  the  clergy,  and  established
themselves  as  an  independent  body  of  architects  with  the  organiza-
tion of  a  guild  and  under  the  name  of  Freemasons,  was,  it  can  not
be  doubted,  from  the  coincidence  of  time  and  circumstances,  the
invention  of  that  Fraternity.

It  may  therefore  be  accepted  as  an  historical  fact,  capable  of
demonstration,  that  the  Gothic  style  of  architecture  was  the  inven-
tion of  the  mediaeval  Freemasons.

And  this  style,  so  full  of  high  art,  developed  in  the  profoundest
symbolism,  was  that  peculiar  characteristic  of  the  Freemasons  of

1  "  Modern  Gothic  Architecture,"  by  T.  G.  Jackson,  Architect,  London,  1873,  p.  99*
*  Paley,  "  Manual  of  Gothic  Architecture,"  p.  29.

GOTHIC   ARCHITECTURE   AND   THE   FREEMASONS  775

the  Middle  Ages,  which  distinguished  them  from  the  artisans  of
every  other  trade  or  profession,  and  in  time  when  as  a  body  of
operatives  they  were  dissolved,  enabled  them  to  transmute  them-
selves into  a  Speculative  association  founded  on  the  teaching  of
moral  and  religious  doctrines  by  architectural  and  geometrical
symbols.

We  can  not  properly  or  fairly  appreciate  this  mediaeval  architect-
ure if  we  confound  it  with  the  mere  practice  of  building  by  laying
one  stone  on  another.  The  Freemasons,  justly  appreciative  of  the
high  aims  of  their  profession,  held  themselves  proudly  aloof  from
the  ordinary  rough  masons,  who  could  do  no  more  than  build  a  wall
or  construct  a  house.

"  Mediaeval  architecture,"  says  Paley,  "  was  the  visible  embodying
of  the  highest  feelings  of  adoration  and  worship,  and  holy  abstrac-
tion ;  the  expression  of  a  sense  which  must  have  a  language  of  its
own  and  which  could  have  utterance  in  no  worthier  or  more  sig-
nificant way."  *

So  these  Freemasons  became  the  preservers  and  the  teachers  of
the  doctrines  of  their  religious  faith,  and  gave  a  moral  in  every
sculptured  form.  Among  their  works,  the  moralizing  Jacques
might  have  well  said  that  he  could  find  "sermons  in  stones."

The  Freemasons  of  the  Middle  Ages,  coming  originally  from
Lombardy  and  extending  over  Europe  in  the  1 2th  and  succeeding
centuries,  thus  applied  to  their  works  the  taste  and  skill  and  spirit
of  symbolism  which  they  had  originally  learned  from  their  Masters
on  the  borders  of  the  Lake  of  Como.  Congregating  in  the  bauhiit-
ten,  the  hut  or  lodge  which  they  had  erected  near  the  building  about
to  be  constructed  by  their  skill,  they  devised  the  plans  for  the  future
edifice,  which  in  almost  every  instance  was  one  intended  for  relig-
ious purposes,  for  to  nothing  secular  or  profane  would  they  devote
their  art.

Hence  arose  the  monasteries,  the  churches,  and  cathedrals,  which
although  now  for  the  most  part  in  ruins,  present,  even  in  wreck,
such  wonderful  evidence  of  architectural  beauty  as  to  excite  the  ad-
miration of  every  spectator,  as  well  as  the  envy  of  modern  artists,
who  have  sought  in  vain  to  rival  or  even  to  imitate  these  old
builders.

1  "  Manual  of  Gothic  Architecture,"  p.  g.

776  HISTORY  OF   FREEMASONRY

Speaking  of  them  as  the  inventors  of  the  system  of  architectural
symbolism,  Lord  Lindsay  calls  the  humble  lodges  in  which  they
held  their  consultations  and  produced  their  designs,  "  parliaments  of
genius."  1

They  were  possessed  of  wondrous  skill  in  art,  and  were  actuated
purely  by  elevated  religious  thought.  Yet  have  they  passed  away
unknown  save  as  component  parts  of  that  vast  association  which  had
spread  over  all  civilized  countries,  and  who  labored  at  the  great
works  in  which  they  were  engaged  with  a  noble  abnegation  of
self.  Of  the  wholly  disinterested  zeal  with  which  they  worked,
Michelet  cites  one  striking  proof.  "Ascend,"  he  says,  "to  the  top-
most points  of  those  aerial  spires  which  they  were  constructing,  to
heights  which  only  the  slater  mounts  with  fear  and  trembling,  and
you  will  often  find  some  masterpiece  of  sculpture,  on  which  the
pious  workman  had  perhaps  consumed  his  life,  without  the  remotest
expectation  that  the  eye  of  man  would  ever  behold  its  delicate,
artistic  tracing.  On  it  there  is  no  name,  not  a  mark  or  a  letter.
He  had  worked  not  for  human  praise,  but  only  for  the  glory  of  God
and  the  health  of  his  soul."  2

An  English  historian  has  thus  expressed  a  similar  view  of  the
self-abnegation  of  these  old  builders  :

"  The  elaborate  and  costly  ornaments  which  were  lavished  on
architecture  were  meant  to  do  God  honor,  though  spending  their
beauties  perhaps  on  some  remote  and  secluded  wilderness,  to  be  wit-
nessed only  by  the  rude  peasants  of  the  neighborhood  and  the  birds
that  hovered  about  the  pinnacle."3

Mr.  Paley  has  been  led  to  say,  with  great  truth,  that  these  an-
cient builders,  working  as  a  body  and  not  as  individuals,  cared  less
about  personal  profit  or  celebrity  than  about  the  good  of  the  Church,
and  hence  he  concludes  that  if  they  had  intended  only  to  please  the
eye  of  man  they  would  not  have  let  their  finest  works  stand  alone
in  the  midst  of  the  marsh  and  the  moor.4

The  name  of  Gothic  Architecture,  applied  to  the  style  of  build-
ing adopted  by  the  Freemasons  of  the  Middle  Ages,  is  by  no  means
suggestive  of  its  true  origin  or  character.     The  opinion  once  enter-

1 "  Sketches  of  Christian  Art."  2  Michelet,  "Histoire  de  France,"  p.  37a

8 Rev.  T.  T.  Blunt,  "  Sketch  of  the  Reformation  in  England,"  p.  76.
4  "  Manual  of  Gothic  Architecture,"  p.  82.

GOTHIC  ARCHITECTURE  AND   THE  FREEMASONS  777

tained  that  it  was  the  invention  of  the  Goths,  has  long  since  been
exploded ;  and  notwithstanding  the  various  hypotheses  that  have
been  advanced  at  different  times,  it  is  now  generally  conceded  that
this  distinct  style  was  the  system  of  building  applied  by  the  medi-
aeval Freemasons  to  the  erection  of  cathedrals  and  other  religious
edifices.

Of  this  style,  the  distinguishing  features  are  the  pointed  arch,
long  lancet  windows,  clustered  columns,  and  a  general  tendency  to
vertical  and  ascending  lines.  Comparing  it  with  the  preceding  styles,
we  see  the  whole  contour  and  composition  of  building  changed  from
the  horizontal  to  the  perpendicular,  "  we  might  almost  say,"  to  bor-
row the  words  of  Paley,  "  from  earthly  to  heavenly,  from  Pagan  to
Christian."  1

It  began  to  make  its  appearance  toward  the  close  of  the  12th
century,  and  having  been  adopted,  or  more  properly  speaking  in-
vented, by  the  association  of  Freemasons  spread  from  Italy  into
France,  into  Germany,  and  into  England,  as  well  as  every  other
country  of  Europe  where  these  architects  and  builders  penetrated.

Governor  Pownall,  toward  the  close  of  the  last  century,  wrote
a  very  able  article  containing  Observations  on  the  Origin  and
Progress  of  Gothic  Architecture,  and  on  the  Corporation  of  Free
Masons,  Supposed  to  be  the  Establishers  of  it  as  a  Regular  Order?
in  which  he  admits  that  William  of  Sens  had  used  the  same  style  a
century  before  in  the  reconstruction  of  the  Cathedral  of  Canterbury,
yet  he  asserts  that  the  Corporations  of  Freemasons  "were  the  first
architects  who  reduced  it  to  and  introduced  it  as  a  regular  order."

He  further  asserts  that  the  Corporation  which  existed  in  Eng-
land was  instituted  by  a  similar  corporation  from  abroad,  and  that
all  these  corporations  had  been  created  by  the  Pope,  by  bull,  di-
ploma, or  charter,  about  the  close  of  the  1 2th  or  the  commencement
of  the  1 3th  century.  This  statement  of  the  existence  of  a  Papal
bull  bestowing  certain  privileges  on  the  Freemasons  has  been  re-
peatedly made  since  the  date  of  Governor  Pownall's  article,  by
other  writers,  who  most  probably  borrowed  his  authority  for  the
statement.

I  think  that  it  will  be  admitted  that  the  Freemasons,  who  were
at  first  exclusively  ecclesiastics,  and  whose  schools  of  architecture

1 "  Manual  of  Gothic  Architecture,"  p.  76.

2  Published  in  the  "  Archaeologia,"  vol.  ix.,  pp.  1 10-126.

778  HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

were  originally  established  in  the  monasteries,  were  under  the  pro-
tection and  patronage  of  the  Church.  But  that  any  especial  bull  in
their  favor  was  ever  issued,  though  not  at  all  improbable,  has  never
yet  been  established  as  an  historical  fact.  Governor  Pownall,  anx-
ious to  prove  the  truth  of  his  statement,  caused  application  to  be
made  to  the  librarian  of  the  Vatican,  and  the  Pope  himself  is  said  to
have  ordered  a  minute  search  to  be  made.

The  search  was  a  vain  one.  The  official  report  was  that  "  not
the  least  traces  of  any  such  documents  could  be  found."  Pownall,
however,  persistently  believed  that  some  record  or  copy  of  this  char-
ter or  diploma  must  be  somewhere  buried  at  Rome  amid  forgotten
and  unknown  bundles  or  rolls  of  manuscripts — a  circumstance  that
he  says  had  frequently  occurred  in  relation  to  important  English
records.

Unfortunately,  therefore,  for  the  settlement  of  the  historic  ques*
tion,  it  by  no  means  follows,  because  the  Roman  Catholic  librarian
of  the  Vatican,  a  few  centuries  ago,  could  not  find  a  bull  granting
special  indulgences  to  an  association  which  the  Popes  had  at  a  later
period  denounced,  that  no  such  document  is  in  existence.  Besides
the  too  common  result  of  an  unsuccessful  search  for  old  manuscripts
which  has  occurred,  and  is  continually  occurring,  to  investigators,
we  have  in  this  particular  case  the  other  factor  to  contend  with,
the  policy  of  the  Roman  Church.  That  policy  has  always  overruled
all  principles  of  historic  accuracy.  Hence  in  subjects  over  which
that  Church  has  had  control,  suppressed  documents  are  of  no  un-
common occurrence.

This  question  of  a  Papal  charter,  therefore,  still  remains  sub  lite.
Krause,  for  instance,  on  the  supposed  authority  of  a  statement  of
Ashmole,  which  had  been  communicated  by  Dr.  Knipe  to  the  author
of  the  life  of  that  antiquary,  admits  the  fact  of  Papal  indulgences,
while  Steiglitz,  accepting  the  unsuccessful  result  of  the  application
of  Pownall  as  conclusive  evidence,  contends  for  the  absurdity  of  any
such  claim.

But  whether  there  is  or  is  not  in  existence  such  a  charter,  diploma,
or  bull,  it  is  very  evident  from  history  that  the  Freemasons  of  the
Middle  Ages  first  enjoyed  the  protection  and  afterward  the  patron-
age of  the  Church  extended  to  them  by  ecclesiastical  chiefs.

CHAPTER  XXIII

TWO    CLASSES   OF   WORKMEN,    OR    THE    FREEMASONS   AND    THE    ROUGH

MASONS

HE  art  of  building  in  the  Middle  Ages  is  pre-
sented to  us  by  authentic  history  as  being  prac-
ticed by  two  distinct  classes  of  workmen ;  first,
the  association  of  builders  who  have  already
been  repeatedly  described  under  the  name  of
44  Freemasons  ;  "  and,  secondly,  another  class  of
workmen  who  were  not  members  of  the  frater-
nity, though  they  were  often  in  the  cities  incorporated  as  independ-
ent bodies.

Thus  we  find  that  in  London  in  the  14th  century,  during  the
reign  of  Edward  III.,  there  was  an  incorporated  Company  of  Ma-
sons who  sent  four  delegates  to  the  Common  Council,  and  a  Com-
pany of  Freemasons,  which  being  a  smaller,  and  probably  a  more
select  body,  sent  only  two.1

The  Strasburg  Constitutions  prohibited  those  who  had  been  ad-
mitted as  members  of  the  Fraternity  of  Freemasons  from  working
with  any  other  craftsmen,8  evidently  referring  to  other  Masons
whether  incorporated  or  not,  and  who  had  not  been  made  free  of
the  Guild  or  Fraternity.

The  old  English  Charges  furnish  the  evidence  that  the  same
distinction  of  workmen  existed  in  England  as  in  Germany.  For
instance  the  "  Mason,  allowed,"  that  is,  he  who  had  been  accepted
by  the  Fraternity,  is  forbidden  to  instruct  the  44  layer  "  by  furnish-
ing him  with  moulds  or  patterns  for  work.  44  Also,"  says  the  York
MS., <4  that  no  Master  or  Fellow  make  any  mould,  rule,  or  square  of
any  layer  nor  set  any  layer  (within  the  Lodge)  or  without  to  hew
any  mould  stones."

1  Herbert,  "  History  of  the  Twelve  Great  Livery  Companies,"  vol.  i.,  p.  34.

2  "  Strasburg  Ordinances,"  No.  2,  mit  keinem  Antwerk  dienent  :  thus  interpreted  by
Krause — daher  sollen  sie  auch  mit  keinem  andern  Handwerke  dienen.

779

;8o  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

The  date  of  the  York  MS.  is  about  the  close  of  the  16th  cen-
tury. But  the  same  regulation  is  found  in  all  the  subsequent
manuscripts.  In  the  Landsdowne  MS.,  however,  as  well  as  in  the
Antiquity  MS.,  which  appears  to  be  only  a  copy  of  the  Landsdowne,
the  word  is  Lowen.  This  is  evidently  a  blunder  of  a  careless  or  an
ignorant  copyist,  who  has  retained  the  initial  capital,  because  in  it
there  could  have  been  no  chance  of  confounding  it  for  C,  but  has
changed  the  rest  of  the  word  layer,  badly  written  most  probably  in
the  exemplar  from  which  he  copied,  into  Lowen.

The  correct  word  is,  therefore,  layer;  and  from  this  regulation
we  learn  that  the  division  of  the  builders  in  the  Middle  Ages  was
into  two  classes :  a  superior  one,  who  are  always  designated  in  the
English  manuscript  Constitutions  and  Charges  as  Masons,  and  an
inferior  class  called  layers,  and  sometimes,  as  in  the  Alnwick  MS.,
rough  layers.  In  contemporary  works  of  the  same  period,  not  Ma-
sonic Constitutions,  we  also  find  the  distinction  of  free  mason  and
rough  mason,  being  no  doubt  the  same  thing  as  a  stone  layer  in
contradistinction  to  a  brick  layer,  a  craft  which  belonged  no  more
than  the  carpenter  to  the  great  body  of  Masons.1

Now  what  is  the  meaning  of  this  word  layer,  which  is  to  be
classed  among  "  the  lost  beauties  of  the  English  language,"  being
retained  only  in  the  compound  bricklayer  ?

There  can  be  no  difficulty  in  answering  this  question.  In  the
Promptorium  Parvulorum,  the  oldest  dictionary  of  our  language
extant,  which  was  compiled  in  the  year  1440  by  a  Dominican  Friar
of  Norfolk,  and  the  latest  edition  of  which  was  published  in  1865
by  the  Camden  Society,  with  copious  and  learned  annotations  by
the  late  Mr.  Albert  Way,  is  the  following  :

"  Leyare,  or  werkare  wythe  stone  and  mortere."  And  the  Latin
equivalent  given  for  it  is  C&mentarius.

In  classical  Latinity,  as  well  as  in  the  Low  Latin  of  the  Middle
Ages,  a  cczmentarius  was  a  builder  of  walls,  who  handled  the  cce-
menta  or  rough  stones  as  they  came  from  the  quarries.  St.  Jerome,
in  one  of  his  Epistles  (53),  defines  a  camentarius  as  one  who  builds
rough  walls  of  ccementa,  or  unhewn  stones.     A  layer  or  stonelayer

1  In  a  work  published  in  1559,  entitled  "  The  Booke  for  a  Justice  of  the  Peace,"  is
the  following  passage  :  "  None  artificer,  nor  labourer  hereafter  named,  take  no  more  nor
greater  wages  than  hereafter  is  limited  .  .  .  that  is  to  say,  a  free  mason,  master
carpenter,  rough  mason,  bricklayer,"  etc.,  fol.  17.

THE  FREEMASONS   AND   THE   ROUGH   MASONS     781

(the  word  "  stone "  being  understood),  which  the  Promptorium
Latinizes  by  cczmentarius,  was  a  rough  mason  whose  business  was
simply  to  follow  the  plan  of  the  architect,  and  in  the  erection  of
the  walls  of  an  edifice  to  lay  one  stone  upon  another,  just  as  the
bricklayer  does  at  the  present  day  with  bricks.

Mr.  Way  has  this  interesting  note  on  the  word  Leyare  and  its
definition  in  the  Promptorium  Parvulorum  :

"  In  the  account  of  works  at  the  palace  of  Westminster  and
Tower  during  the  14th  century,  preserved  among  the  miscellaneous
records  of  the  Queen's  Remembrancer,  mention  is  made  continually
of  cudatores,1  or  stone  layers.  See  also  the  abstract  of  accounts  re-
lating to  the  erection  of  St.  Stephen's  Chapel  in  the  reign  of  Ed-
ward III.,  printed  in  Smith's  Antiquities  of  Westminster.  In  this
contract  for  building  Fotheringhay  Church,  the  chief  mason  under-
takes neither  to  ■  set  more  nor  fewer  freemasons,  rogh  setters  ne
leye(r)s '  upon  the  work  but  as  the  appointed  overseer  shall  ordain."

The  same  distinction  between  the  two  classes  is  preserved  in  a
statute  passed  in  the  reign  of  Edward  VI.,  anno  1548.  It  is  then
enacted  "  that  noe  person  or  persons  shall  at  anye  tyme  after  the
firste  daye  of  Aprille  next  comynge,  interrupte,  denye,  lett  or  dis-
turbe  any  Freemason,  rough  mason,  carpenter,  bricklayer,  playsterer,"
etc.2

The  appellation  of  rough  masons,  rough  setters,  or  rough  layers
bestowed  upon  these  workmen  of  an  inferior  class  was  derived  from
the  German.  In  the  Strasburg  Ordinances  ruh  or  roh  is  applied  to  an
unskilled  or  ignorant  apprentice.  In  the  German  rituals  rohenstein
is  the  rough  ashlar.  Richardson  defines  the  word  rough  as  meaning
"coarse,  unpolished,  savage,  rude,  uncivil."  When  the  English
Charges  speak  of  a  "  rough  mason,"  they  mean  one  whose  work  is
coarse  and  unpolished,  and  who  has  not  the  skill  in  stonecutting
possessed  by  the  members  of  the  fraternity  of  Freemasons.

To  the  Freemasons,  who  were  a  brotherhood  devoted  to  the
erection  principally  of  cathedrals  and  other  religious  edifices,  every
other  Mason  was  looked  upon  with  a  species  almost  of  contempt

JTo  make  "  cubator"  signify  a  man  who  lays  stone,  alayer,because  a  poet  in  the  iron
age  of  the  Latin  language,  Plotinus,  of  Nola,  had  used  the  same  word  to  designate  a  man
who  lies  down  (that  is  to  denote  a  Her  and  a  layer  by  the  same  word),  is  a  travesty  well
calculated  to  astound  an  etymologist.     But  the  Low  Latinists  were  not  purists.

3"  Statutes  of  the  Realm,"  vol.  iv.,  p.  59.

782  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

as  rude  and  ignorant ;  he  was  called  a  rough  Mason,  and  they  re-
fused to  work  with  him  or  to  impart  to  him  any  information  which
would  assist  him  in  his  own  work.

Now  as  to  the  higher  class,  called  by  historians  the  "  Free-
masons," but  who  in  the  English  Constitutions  are  always  desig-
nated as  "  Masons."

But  in  other  documents  of  the  Middle  Ages  we  frequently  meet
with  the  word  "  Freemason,"  used  in  a  sense  evidently  denoting  a
particular  class  of  artisans.

As  early  as  the  year  1350,  in  the  reign  of  Edward  III.,  of  Eng-
land, an  act  of  Parliament  was  passed  in  which  the  wages  of  a  Mas-
ter Freemason  are  fixed  at  4  pence  and  that  of  other  Masons  at  3
pence.  This  is  the  earliest  date  for  the  use  of  the  word,  but  it  was
subsequently  used  in  other  statutes,  in  monumental  inscriptions,  and
in  old  records,  and  always  so  as  to  indicate  that  the  Freemason  was
of  a  class  differing  from  other  Masons.

Whence  then  comes  the  term,  from  what  is  it  derived,  and  what
was  in  former  times  its  exact  meaning  ?  These  are  questions  that
have  greatly  exercised  the  minds  of  Masonic  etymologists  who  have
arrived  at  three  very  different  conclusions.

The  first  of  these  conclusions,  namely,  that  free  in  the  word  Free-
mason was  originally  Frere  or  Brother,  which  was  prefixed  by  the
workmen  who  used  the  French  language  to  the  word  Mason,  so  as
to  make  the  word  Frere  Mason  or  Brother  Mason,  which  was  after-
ward corrupted  into  Free  Mason,  is  mere  etymological  fancy  hardly
worth  a  serious  refutation.

Paley  says,  quite  dogmatically  :  "  The  name  Freemasons  is  a  cor-
ruption of  Freres  Ma  cons,  or  fraternity,"  and  he  quotes  Dallaway  as
his  authority  for  the  opinion.1

But  Dallaway,  in  his  Historical  Account  of  Master  and  Free*
mason,  has  expressed  an  opinion  the  reverse  of  this.  He  admits
that  a  passage  in  the  Leland  MS.  authorizes  the  conjecture  that  the
denomination  of  Freemasons  in  England  was  merely  a  corruption
of  Frlre  Magons,  but  immediately  afterward  he  says,  "  but  I  am  not
borne  out  by  their  appellations  on  the  continent,"  and  he  gives  their
appellations  such  as  Franc-Magon  in  French,  Fret  Maurer  in  Ger-
man, and  Libero  Muratore  in  Italian.2     None  of  these  titles  could

*'•  Manual  of  Gothic  Architecture,"  p.  2X1.
'Dallaway,  "Master  and  Freemason,"  p.  434.

THE   FREEMASONS  AND   THE   ROUGH   MASONS    783

of  course  have  been  translations  of  Frerey  but  must  have  been  in-
tended to  convey,  in  each  of  these  languages,  the  idea  conveyed  in
English  by  the  word  Free.

It  is  strange,  too,  that  Dallaway  should  have  laid  any  stress  on  the
Leland  MS.  as  authorizing  even  a  conjecture  (admitted  afterward  to
be  implausible)  that  Freemason  was  originally  Frere  Magon.

Now  the  word  Frere  Magon  does  not  occur  in  the  Leland  MS.
Only  once  do  we  meet  with  freres,  in  its  usual  sense  of  brothers  or
members  of  a  coufrerie  or  confraternity,  a  sense  in  which  it  is  still
employed.  The  word  invariably  used  is  Masons,  or  rather  Ma-
connes  and  Maconrye.  There  is  no  mention  of  either  Freemasons
or  Frere  Mapons,  and  nothing  can  be  learned  from  it  of  the  deri-
vation or  original  meaning  of  the  word  Free.

But  in  fact  the  Leland  MS.  is  now  very  generally  admitted  to
be  of  no  value  as  an  historical  document.  Purporting  to  have  been
written  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VI.,  and  by  the  king  himself,  it  is  now
known  to  have  been  a  forgery  in  the  middle  of  the  last  century.

I  think  we  may  dismiss  the  attempted  derivation  of  Free  from
Frere,  as  one  of  those  allusions  to  which  etymologists  are  unfortu-
nately too  often  addicted.

Again  it  has  been  supposed  that  Freemasons  were  so  called  be-
cause they  worked  in  Freestone,  and  because  they  were  thus  distin-
guished from  other  Masons,  who  were  called  Rough  Masons,  be-
cause they  worked  in  rough  stones.  But  for  several  reasons  I
cannot  accept  this  derivation,  although  it  is  not  as  objectionable
as  the  preceding  one.

In  the  first  place,  if  the  name  of  the  class  was  derived  from  the
character  of  the  stone  worked,  the  proper  words  would  be  Free
Stone  Mason  and  Rough  Stone  Mason,  and  Free  Mason  and
Rough  Mason.

Again,  Free  Stone  is  not  the  apposite  or  antithesis  of  Rough
Stone.  There  is  no  relation,  contradictory  or  otherwise,  between
them.

Free  Stone  is  any  stone  composed  of  sand  or  grit,  which,  on  ac-
count of  its  softness,  is  easily  cut  or  wrought.

Rough  Stone  is  any  stone,  no  matter  what  may  be  its  geological
character,  that  is  still  in  its  native  state,  and  has  not  been  formed  or
polished  by  the  hands  of  the  workmen.  A  stone  may  be  at  the
same  time  free  stone  and  rough  stone.     The  word  ruh  or  roh —

784  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

English  rough — is  used  in  the  German  Constitutions  to  signify  un-
skilled or  unpolished.  An  Apprentice  is  spoken  of  in  them  as  be-
ing taken  "  from  his  rough  state  "  (von  Ruhem  auff),  which  Krause
interprets  as  "one  still  wholly  ignorant."1  And  so,  also,  the
unpolished  stone  which  we  call  the  rough  Ashlar,  the  German  rituals
name  das  rohen  Stein.

By  a  "  rough  Mason  "  or  a  "  rough  layer,"  the  old  English  Ma-
sons meant  a  Mason  who  had  not  been  thoroughly  educated  in  the
art,  one  who  was  ignorant  of  the  principles  and  geometrical  secrets
which  were  possessed  by  the  higher  fraternity.

The  etymology  is,  therefore,  I  think,  not  tenable,  which  would
derive  the  two  appellations  Free-Mason  and  Rough  Mason  from
the  different  geological  nature  of  the  stones  on  which  the  two  classes
worked.  The  Rough  Mason  often  used  free  stone  in  building  his
walls,  but  he  did  not  thereby  become  a  Free  Mason.

It  must  be  observed  that  the  word  Free  Mason  is  never  employed
in  the  English,  German,  or  French  Constitutions  or  Regulations  of
the  Craft.  There  the  simple  word  Mason  or  its  equivalent  is  used.
The  appellation  is  to  be  found  only  in  statutes  and  contracts.

But  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  the  framers  of  these  were  ac-
quainted with  the  fact  that  there  was  a  distinction  between  the  two
classes  founded  on  the  possession  of  certain  secrets.  They  simply
intended,  by  the  words  "  Free  Mason  "  and  "  Rough  Mason,"  to
recognize  the  fact  that  there  were  two  classes  of  workmen,  one  of
superior  skill  and  superior  station  to  the  other.

But  though  the  word  "  Free  Mason  "  is  not  to  be  found  in  the
Masonic  Constitutions,  it  is  evident  that  the  Masons  themselves  had
recognized  it  as  a  distinguishing  title  as  early  as  the  14th  century,
because  in  the  year  1377  we  meet  with  the  Company  of  Freemasons
and  the  Company  of  Masons  in  the  Catalogue  of  those  which  were
authorized  to  send  delegates  to  the  Common  Council  of  London.2

It  is  then  evident  that  the  word  "  Free  "  was  employed,  no  matter
what  was  its  original  meaning,  to  designate  a  superior  class.  I  think
it  may  justly  be  considered  as  referring  to  the  fact  that  the  persons
called  "  Freemasons  "  were  men  of  superior  abilities,  who,  by  being
accepted  into  the  fraternity,  had  become  free  of  the  guild  or  corpo-
ration.    Masons  who  were  not  possessed  of  this  amount  of  skill,  and

1  Als  einen  noch  ganz  Umvissenden  Krause,  "  Kunsturkunden,"  ii.,  284.
'Herbert,  "  History  of  Livery  Companies,"  i.,  34.

WILLIAM  HUTCHINSON

wo?:/\h:>tjr  uku

THE  FREEMASONS   AND   THE   ROUGH   MASONS    785

who  were  employed  in  labors  of  a  less  artistic  character,  were  not  per-
mitted to  work  with  these  Freemasons — were  not  accepted  into
their  fraternity ;  in  other  words,  were  not  made  free  of  the  guild.

A  writer  in  the  London  Freemason  says  :  "  Originally  the  Opera
tive  Mason  was  free  of  his  guild,  and  probably  we  have  in  the  word
a  remembrance  of  emancipation  through  honest  labor  in  towns  of
those  who  were  originally  villani  adscripti  glebes  " — serfs  who  were
attached  to  the  soil,  and  who  could  not  be  admitted  to  the  freedom
of  the  guild  because  the  lord  who  owned  them  might  at  any  time
reclaim  them.

In  the  earliest  periods  of  the  feudal  system,  before  the  munici-
palities began  to  assert  their  rights,  the  handicrafts  were  for  the  most
part  pursued  by  slaves.  At  a  later  period  freemen  also  practiced
the  trades,  but  there  was  always  a  distinction  between  the  free  and
the  servile  craftsman — a  distinction  which  the  Masons  apparently
retained  after  the  cause  had  ceased.  Krause  says  that  these  Masons
were  called  Free  because  they  possessed  certain  municipal  privileges.1
These  privileges,  according  to  Hope,  Pownall,  and  many  other
writers,  consisted  in  the  monopoly  of  building  churches,  cathedrals,
and  other  religious  edifices,  and  in  certain  franchises  granted  them
by  Popes  and  other  sovereigns.

Dallaway,  it  is  true,  denies,  at  least  so  far  as  England  is  con-
cerned, that  any  such  privileges  existed.  "  No  proof,"  he  says,  "  has
been  as  yet  adduced  from  any  chronicle  or  history  of  this  country
that  as  a  fraternity  or  guild  the  Freemasons  in  England  possessed
or  held  by  patent  any  exclusive  privilege  whatever."  2

But  if  there  is  no  positive  testimony  extant  of  patents  or  char-
ters granting  such  privileges,  the  whole  course  of  history,  the  phrase-
ology of  contract  between  Masons  and  their  employers,  the  distinc-
tion made  between  the  Freemasons  and  the  Rough  Masons  in  the
matter  of  wages  and  many  other  incidental  circumstances,  clearly
show  that  the  Freemasons  were  looked  upon  as  a  superior  class,  and
were  in  possession  of  certain  privileges,  social  as  well  as  professional,
which  were  denied  to  the  lower  order  of  workmen.

A  proof  of  the  rank  and  estimation  which  Master  Masons,  Arch-
itects, or  Freemasons  held  in  society  during  the  Middle  Ages  is  to
be  found  in  the  contract  made  in  the  year  1439  between  the  Abbot

1  Krause,  "  Kunsturkunden,"  i.,  p.  74.

2  "  Master  and  Freemasons,"  p.  425.
SO

786  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

of  St.  Edmundsbury  and  John  Wood,  "  Masoun,"  for  the  repairs
and  restoration  of  the  great  towers  "  in  all  manner  of  things  that
longe  to  Freemasonry."

In  this  contract,  Wood,  the  Master  Mason,  is  allowed  "  borde
for  himself  as  a  gentilman  and  his  servant  as  a  yeoman,  and  thereto
two  robys,  one  for  himself e  after  a  gentilman's  livery."  *

Though  in  the  English  Constitutions  we  do  not  meet,  as  I  have
already  said,  with  the  word  "  Freemason,"  yet  its  equivalent  is
found  in  the  constant  use  of  the  phrase  "  Mason  allowed  "  to  des-
ignate one  who  had  become  a  member  of  the  fraternity  ;  that  is,
who  had  been  made  "  free  of  the  guild."  But  I  have  hereto-
fore shown  that  the  meaning  of  "  allowed  "  is  "  accepted,"  and  there-
fore a  Freemason  was  a  Mason  who  had  been  accepted  into  the
Fraternity.

The  founders  of  Speculative  Masonry,  who  in  the  year  171 7
seceded  from  the  operative  branch  of  the  Institution  and  formed
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  seemed  to  be  aware  of  this  significa-
tion of  the  word  "  Free,"  as  designating  one  who  had  been  "  al-
lowed "  or  "accepted"  into  the  fraternity,  for  they  assumed  for
themselves  the  title  of  "  Free  and  Accepted  Masons."  In  this  way
they  meant  to  put  forward  the  claim  that  they  were  Freemasons
who  had  been  Accepted  into  the  Fraternity.  "  Free  and  Accepted
Masons  "  now  denoted  Speculative  Masons,  and  by  this  title  they
distinguished  themselves  from  the  lower  class  of  Operative  Masons.

Just  in  the  same  way,  when  they  were  all  Operatives,  the  higher
class  were  called  "  Freemasons  "  to  distinguish  themselves  from  the
lower  class,  who  were  known  as  "  Rough  Masons."

Toward  a  perfect  understanding  of  the  true  organization  of  the
mediaeval  Masons,  it  is  not  necessary  that  we  should  know  the  cor-
rect derivation  of  the  word  Free.  It  is  not  material  to  this  purpose
that  we  know  whether  it  comes  from  the  French  frere,  and  conse-
quently that  the  word  "  Freemason  "  signifies  a  Brother  Mason ;  or
from  freestone,  and  that  it  means  a  Mason  who  works  on  that  ma-
terial ;  or  lastly  that  it  is  derived  from  freeman  and  denotes  one
who  had  been  made  free  of  the  fraternity.

All  that  is  really  material  to  be  known  on  this  subject  is  that
there  was  always    a  division  of  the    mediaeval  builders   into  two

1 "  Anthologia,"  vol.  xxiii.,  p.  331.

THE  FREEMASONS  AND  THE  ROUGH   MASONS    787

classes,  distinctly  separate  the  one  from  the  other  ;  and  that  the
Freemasons  occupied  the  superior  place,  superior  in  skill,  superior
in  the  possession  of  certain  privileges,  and  therefore  superior  in
social  standing.

There  are,  however,  two  points  worthy  of  notice  in  connection
with  this  subject.

In  the  first  place,  the  word  "  Freemason  "  was  confined  as  a
descriptive  term  to  the  workmen  of  England.  Neither  this  nor  any
equivalent  of  it  is  to  be  found  in  the  Masonic  documents  of  France
or  Germany.  The  words  Franc-Magon  and  Fret  Maurer,  now  so
common  in  these  languages,  were  not  known  until  after  the  organ-
ization of  Speculative  Masonry  in  England  and  its  propagation  in
those  countries  by  the  "  Grand  Lodge  of  Free  and  Accepted  Ma-
sons "  established  in  171 7  in  London.

The  words  Franc-Ma$on  and  Fret  Maurer  were  never  applied
in  any  document,  Masonic  or  non-Masonic,  to  any  of  the  builders
of  the  Middle  Ages  in  France  or  Germany,  as  Freemason  was  in
England.

The  growth  of  those  words  in  those  languages  appears  to  have
been  in  this  way.  There  were  in  England,  as  early  as  the  14th  cen-
tury, a  class  of  skillful  builders  who  excluded  from  their  companion-
ship  all  other  builders  whose  standard  of  knowledge  and  skill  was
lower  than  theirs.

This  exclusive  and  more  skillful  class  were  recognized  in  the
statutes  of  the  realm,  in  contracts  made  with  them,  in  sepulchral
inscriptions,  in  church  registers,1  and  in  some  other  documents  by
the  title  of  "  Freemasons. "

In  the  1 7th  century,  at  least,  if  not  before,  the  word  began  to  be
used  by  the  Masons  themselves  as  a  distinctive  appellation.  Thus  in
1646  Ashmole  wrote  that  he  had  been  "made  a  Freemason  at
Warrington,"  and  he  calls  those  who  had  been  just  received  into  the
fraternity,  "new  Accepted  Masons."2

In  1717,  when  the  Speculative  Institution  was  established,  the
founders  adopted  both  the  words  "  Free "  and  "  Accepted,"  and
called  themselves  "  Free  and  Accepted  Masons."     In  the  "  Charges

1  Thus  in  the  church  register  of  the  parish  of  Astbury  are  the  following  entries  :
"  1685.     Smallwod,  Jos.  fils  Jos.  Henshaw  Freemason  bapt.  3  die  Nov.
**  1697.    Jos.  fils  Jos.  Henshaw,  Freemason,  buried  7  April."
8Ashmole's  "  Diary,"  October  16,  1646,  and  March  II,  1682.

788  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

of  a  Free-Mason,"  published  in  1723  in  the  first  edition  of  the  Con-
stitutions, the  word  "  Freemason "  is  adopted  as  the  recognized
title  of  the  members  of  the  Fraternity,  being  there  adopted  in  place
of  the  simple  word  "  Mason,"  which  was  used  in  all  the  Old  Charges.
Thus  the  Old  Charge  which  forbade  "  Masons  to  work  within  or
without  the  Lodge  with  rough  layers,"  reads  in  the  Book  of  Consti-
tutions of  1 723  that  "  Freemasons  shall  not  work  with  those  that
are  not  Free."

The  title  "  Freemason "  afterward  came  quite  commonly  into
use.  In  1734  a  book  was  published  called  the  "  Free  Masons'  Vade
Mecuni"  and  it  is  several  times  employed  in  Masonic  publications
of  that  period.  "  Free  and  Accepted  Masons  "  and  "  Freemasons  "
were  then,  as  it  appears  from  contemporary  publications,  terms
adopted  by  and  in  common  use  immediately  after  what  has  been
called  the  Revival,  in  the  beginning  of  the  18th  century.

Now  when  deputations  began  to  be  "  sent  beyond  sea  "  to  estab-
lish lodges  in  foreign  countries — beginning  with  the  Deputation
granted  in  1728  by  the  Earl  of  Inchiquin,  Grand  Master,  "to  some
Brothers  in  Spain  to  constitute  a  lodge  at  Gibraltar,"  succeeded  very
rapidly  by  others  in  Germany,  Holland,  France,  and  other  countries —
the  title  of  "  Freemasons,"  which  had  been  adopted  by  the  Specula-
tive Masons  of  England  to  distinguish  themselves  from  the  purely
Operative  Masons,  from  whom  they  had  separated,  was  carried  into
these  foreign  countries  by  those  who  had  been  appointed  under  the
various  deputations  to  disseminate  the  system.

Necessarily  the  English  word  was  in  each  of  these  countries
translated  by  those  who  entered  the  Order  into  an  equivalent  word
in  their  own  language.

So  "Freemason"  became  in  Germany  " Freimaurer"  in
France  "  Franc-Ma  f  on"  in  Italy  "  Libero  Muratore"  and  so  on.
In  all  of  these  it  will  be  seen  that  the  expression  "  Free"  has  been
translated  by  a  word  that  has  no  relation  either  to  fr ere,  brother,  or
to  freestone.

Freimaurer,  in  German,  and  Franc-Mapn,  in  French,  like
Freemason  in  English,  conveys  the  idea  of  a  freeman,  who  is  a  Ma-
son ;  originally  indicating  a  freeman  of  the  guild,  and  afterward,  and
now,  a  man  of  a  superior  class.

For  example,  in  the  1 7th  century  a  Freemason  was  a  Mason  of
great  skill,  engaged  in  the  designing  and  erecting  of  cathedrals,  as

THE   FREEMASONS   AND   THE   ROUGH    MASONS    789

distinguished  from  the  common  workman,  who  only  built  walls  and
laid  or  set  stones.

In  the  1 8th  century  a  Freemason  was  a  Speculative  Mason,
engaged  in  the  erection  of  a  spiritual  temple,  as  distinguished  from
the  purely  Operative  Masons,  who  labored  without  symbolism  or
philosophy  at  the  construction  of  material  edifices.

This  same  distinction  into  two  classes  was  still  more  explicitly
marked  in  the  mediaeval  Masonry  of  Germany.

If,  for  instance,  we  refer  to  the  Strasburg  Ordinances,  we  find
a  very  distinct  reference  to  two  classes  of  Masons  under  various
names.

The  traternity  of  Masons  who  were  united  together  for  the  con-
struction of  Cathedrals  and  other  religious  and  important  edifices,  was
called  the  Craft  of  Stonework.1  Each  member  of  this  body  is  de-
nominated in  the  ordinances  either  a  Meister,  Master,  a  Gesell,
Companion  or  Fellow,  or  a  Werkmann?  Workman,  or,  as  it  has  been
generally  translated,  a  Craftsman.  The  word  Maurer  (in  the  old
German,  Murer)  is  the  name  given  to  those  Masons  of  the  lower
class  who  in  the  English  Constitutions  are  designated  as  rough  lay-
ers. They  were  permitted  to  work  only  on  inferior  tasks,  in  cases
of  necessity.

Thus  one  of  the  ordinances  of  Strasburg  provides  as  follows  :  If
there  be  a  need  of  Masons  (Murer)  to  hew  or  set  stone,  the  Master
may  employ  them,  so  that  the  employers'  work  may  not  be  hindered,
and  the  men  so  employed  shall  not  be  subject,  except  with  their  own
free  will,  to  the  regulations  of  the  Craft.3

But  the  exclusive  position  maintained  by  this  higher  class  is  dis-
tinctly expressed  in  the  second  of  the  Strasburg  Constitutions  in
the  following  words :

"  Whosoever  wishes  to  be  received  into  this  fraternity  as  a  mem-
ber, according  to  these  regulations  as  they  are  written  in  this  book,
must  promise  to  keep  all  the  points  and  articles  of  our  Craft  of
Stonework,  which  consists  only  of  Masters  (Meyster)  who  are
skilled  in  constructing  costly  buildings  and  works  which  they  have

'Das  handwerk  der  Steinwerk.     "  Strasburg  Ordinances."

1  In  that  old  English  dictionary  of  the  15th  century,  the  "  Promptorium  Pavulorum,*'
Masone  is  defined  to  be  a  werkemann  with  the  Latin  equivalent  lathomus.

3Wer  es  auch  das  man  der  Murer,  es  were  Stein  zu  bauwen  oder  zu  muren  .  .  .
die  mag  ein  Meister  wol  furdern,  u.  s.  w.     "  Strasburg  Ordinances,"  No.  8.

790  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

been  made  free  '  (have  the  privilege  to  erect).  They  shall  not  work
with  the  men  of  any  other  Craft."

The  distinction  between  the  Werkmann,  or  Freemason,  and  the
Murer  (Maurer),  or  Wall  Builder,  is  expressly  made  in  one  of  the
Strasburg  regulations  which  relates  to  Apprentices.  It  is  there  said
that  "  if  any  one  who  has  served  with  a  Murer  comes  to  a  Werk-
mann to  learn  of  him,  the  Werkmann  can  not  receive  him  as  an  Ap-
prentice unless  he  consent  to  serve  for  three  years."  3

But  the  Freemasons  of  Germany  had  another  and  a  still  more
significant  method  of  distinguishing  themselves  from  the  lower  class
of  rough  Masons  ;  while  these  latter  were  known  as  Maurer,  liter-
ally wall  builders  (for  the  German  for  wall  is  maurer),  the  higher
class,  the  Freemasons,  the  men  who  invented  and  practiced  Gothic
architecture,  called  themselves  Stcinmetze7i.

Now  in  German  the  verb  metzen  signifies  to  cut  with  a  knife,  a
chisel,3  or  any  other  cutting  instrument.

A  Stcinmetz  is,  therefore,  a  Stonecutter — one  who  with  the  chisel
cuts  the  stone  into  various  forms  or  decorates  it  with  objects  in  re-
lief. On  the  other  hand,  a  Maurer  is  a  builder  of  walls — a  mason
who  roughly  sets  or  lays  one  stone  upon  another,  without  any  refer-
ence to  beauty  of  design  or  skill  of  art.

The  Steinmetz,  or  Stonecutter,  was  the  Freemason  ;  the  Mau-
rer, or  wall  builder,  was  the  rough  mason  or  rough  layer.

Now  the  adoption  of  this  word  Steinmetzen,  or  Stonecutters,  by
the  Masons  who  invented  Gothic  architecture  in  the  Middle  Ages,
throws  a  flood  of  light  upon  the  history  of  Masonry  at  that  period.

A  Master  Stonecutter  was  an  honorable  term,  and  whoever
wished  to  become  an  architect  had  to  begin  by  learning  to  cut
stone.4

The  cutting  of  stone  ornaments  was  not  used  before  the  12th
century.  In  the  early  Norman  work,  says  Parker,  the  chisel  was
very  little  employed.     Most  of  the  ornaments  in  the  churches  ante-

1  Uffgefreyget,  befreiheitel,  made  free,  that  is,  as  Krause  interprets  it,  authorized  and
privileged  to  do  these  things  ;  and  such,  I  think,  is  the  true  meaning  of  the  word  free  in
the  word  Freemason.

3  Wer  es  auch  das  einer  vor  einem  Murer  gedient  und  hun  zu  einem  Werkmann  kunv
men,  u.  s.  w.  "  Strasburg  Ordinances."

3  Thus  a  knife  is  messer,  a  chisel  meisel,  and  a  butcher  one  who  cuts  flesh,  a  metzger.

4Boisseree,  "  Histoire  de  la  Cathedral  de  la  Cologne,"  p.  14.

THE   FREEMASONS   AND   THE   ROUGH    MASONS    791

rior  to  that  period  are  such  as  could  have  been  readily  wrought  by
the  axe,  and  could  have  been  readily  produced  by  stone  hewers.
Whatever  sculpture  there  is  appears  to  have  been  executed  after-
ward, for  it  was  a  general  practice  to  execute  sculptured  work  after
the  stones  were  placed  in  position.1

We  do  not  find  that  the  chisel  was  used,  as  it  must  have  been,  for
deep  cutting,  and  especially  under-cutting,  in  any  buildings  of  ascer-
tained date  before  the  year  1120.2  Carving  in  stone  occurred  in
Italy  and  the  south  of  France  at  an  earlier  period ;  later  in  northern
France  and  Germany,  and  still  later  in  England.

This  gradual  extension  northwardly  of  the  art  of  stonecutting —
the  Freemasons'  art — confirms  the  theory  maintained  by  Mr.  Hope
and  other  writers,  that  the  Freemasonry  of  the  Middle  Ages  arose
in  Lombardy  and  spread  thence  over  the  rest  of  Europe.

The  monk  Gervase,  in  his  description  of  the  reconstruction  of
the  Cathedral  of  Canterbury,3  tells  us  that  in  the  old  work  there
was  no  deep  sculpture  with  the  chisel.  He  says  that  in  the  old
Cathedral,  "  the  arches  and  everything  else  were  plain  or  sculptured
with  an  axe  and  not  with  a  chisel."

But  when  with  their  geometrical  system  of  building  the  Free-
masons had  introduced  the  art  of  deep  stonecutting  with  the  chisel,
they  reveled  in  the  art  and  the  profusion  of  sculptured  ornaments ;
most  of  them  having  a  symbolic  meaning,  became  wonderful  in  the
churches  and  cathedrals  which  they  erected.

Rightly,  therefore,  did  the  Freemasons  of  Germany,  the  builders
of  the  great  Cathedrals  of  Magdeburg,  of  Cologne,  and  of  Strasburg
assume  the  title  of  Stonecutters,  and  held  themselves  above  the
mere  wall  builders,  who  only  hewed  stone.

The  Steinmetz,  or  Stonecutter  in  Germany,  like  the  Mason  or
the  Freemason  of  England,  was  of  a  higher  class  than  the  Maurer
or  builder  of  walls,  the  rough  Mason  or  the  rough  layer.

1  Parker,  Introduction  to  the  "  Study  of  Gothic  Architecture,"  p.  41.

2  Ibid.,  p.  66.

3  The  work  of  the  monk  Gervasius  Dorobornensis,  or  Gervase  of  Canterbury,  is  con-
tained in  the  collection  of  the  "  Decern  Scriptores  Angliae."

CHAPTER  XXIV

masons'  marks

|HE  subject  of  Marks  forms  an  interesting  epi-
sode in  the  history  of  Masonry,  both  Operative
and  Speculative.

A  Mason's  Mark  is  a  monogram,  a  symbol,
or  some  other  arbitrary  figure  chiseled  by  a  ma-
son on  the  surface  of  a  stone  for  the  purpose  of
identifying  his  own  work  and  distinguishing  it
from  that  of  other  workmen.

Mr.  Godwin,  in  an  article  "  On  Masons'  Marks  observable  on
Buildings  of  the  Middle  Ages,"  published  some  years  ago,1  has
given,  perhaps,  the  best  definition  that  we  possess  of  the  true  char-
acter of  these  Sculptural  figures.

He  says  that  it  can  perhaps  hardly  be  doubted  that  these  marks
11  were  made  chiefly  to  distinguish  the  work  of  different  individuals.
At  the  present  time  the  man  who  works  a  stone  (being  different
from  the  man  who  sets  it)  makes  his  mark  on  the  bed  or  other  in-
ternal face  of  it  so  that  it  may  be  identified.  The  fact,  however,
that  in  the  ancient  buildings  it  is  only  a  certain  number  of  stones
which  bear  symbols — that  marks  found  in  different  countries  (al-
though the  variety  is  great)  are  in  many  cases  identical,  and  in  all
have  a  singular  accordance  in  character — seems  to  show  that  the  men
who  employed  them  did  so  by  system,  and  that  the  system,  if  not
the  same  in  England,  Germany,  and  France,  was  closely  analogous
in  one  country  to  that  of  the  others."

He  adds  that  many  of  these  signs  are  evidently  religious  and
symbolical,  "and  agree  fully  with  our  notions  of  the  body  of  men
known  as  the  Freemasons."

That  there  should  be  a  purpose  of  identification  so  that  the  par-
ticular work  of  every  Mason  might,  by  a  simple  inspection,  be  rec-
ognized by  his  Fellows  and  the  Lord  or  Master  of  the  Works  might

1  In  the  "  Archaeologia,"  vol.  xxx.
792

MASONS'   MARKS  79$

be  enabled  to  attribute  any  defect  or  any  excellence  to  its  proper
source,  was  essentially  necessary  to  constitute  a  Masonic  Mark.

By  observing  this  distinction  we  avoid  the  error  committed  by
several  writers  of  calling  every  device  found  upon  a  stone  a  mark,
and  thereby  giving  to  the  system  of  marks  a  greater  antiquity  than
really  belongs  to  it.

Thus  it  has  been  said  by  one  writer  that  "  Masonic  Marks  have
been  discovered  on  the  Pyramids  of  Egypt,  on  the  ruined  buildings
in  Herculaneum,  Pompeii,  Greece,  and  Rome,  and  on  the  ancient
cathedrals,  castles,  etc.,  that  are  to  be  found  in  almost  every  coun-
try of  Europe."  *

But  the  fact  is  that  the  inscriptions  and  devices  found  on  stones
in  buildings  of  antiquity  were  most  probably  mythological,  symbol-
ical, or  historical,  being  a  brief  record  of  or  allusion  to  some  impor-
tant event  that  had  occurred.  If  any  of  them  were  proprietary — that
is,  intended  to  identify  the  work  or  the  ownership  of  some  particu-
lar person — there  is  no  evidence  that  any  well-organized  system  of
proprietary  marks  existed  in  that  very  early  period.

Lord  Lindsay,  in  his  Letters  on  Egypt,  Edom,  and  the  Holy
Land,  inserts  a  description  of  a  square  building  or  monumental
chamber,  near  Baalbeck,  given  to  him  by  Mr.  Farren,  Consul-General
in  Syria,  which  was  covered  with  small  marks,  on  which  Mr.  Farren
makes  the  following  remarks  :

"  It  is  very  remarkable  that  the  faces  of  this  monument  are  cov-
ered with  small  marks  cut  on  the  stones — hieroglyphics  I  can  not
call  them — they  are  too  numerous  to  be  accidental.  I  was  con-
vinced that  they  were  not  from  the  mere  process  of  chiseling."  9

On  this  statement,  Mr.  Godwin  remarks :  "  Whether  or  not
they  were  analogous  to  the  marks  under  consideration  (Masons
Marks)  I  do  not  pretend  to  say."  3

I  can  not  myself  doubt  that  they  were  not.  The  fact  that  innu-
merable monuments  of  the  ancient  East  have  been  found  covered
with  devices  and  hieroglyphics  which  the  comparatively  recent
labors  of  learned  mentalists  and  antiquaries  have  deciphered  and
shown  to  be  mythological  or  symbolical,  and  very  often  historical,

1Lyon,  "  History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  chap,  ix.,  p.  67.
2  Lord  Lindsay,  "  Letters  on  Egypt,  Edom,  and  the  Holy  Land,"  vol.  ii.,  p.  361 .
'Two  letters  to  Mr.  Ellis  on  Masonic   Marks,  by  George  Godwin,  in  the  "  Archaeo
logia,"  vol.  xxx.,  p.  12a

794  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

would  lead  us  to  infer  that  those  on  the  monument  near  Baalbeck
were  of  the  same  character.

The  sculptures  on  the  Pyramids,  which  Lyon  refers  to  as  "  Ma-
sonic Marks,"  are  really  inscriptions,  mostly.

Thus  Mr.  Ainsvvorth  tells  us  that  in  the  ruins  of  Al-Hadhr,  in
Mesopotamia,  "  every  stone,  not  only  in  the  chief  building,  but  in
the  walls  and  bastions  and  other  public  monuments  when  not  de-
faced by  time,  is  marked  with  a  character,  which  is  for  the  most
part  either  a  Chaldean  letter  or  numeral.  Some  of  the  letters  re-
semble the  Roman  A,  and  others  were  apparently  astronomical
signs,  among  which  the  ancient  mirror  and  handle  9  were  very-
common."1

Ainsworth's  description  is  too  meager  to  supply  the  foundation
for  an  hypothesis,  but  we  are  hardly  warranted  in  ascribing  to  the
Chaldean  letters  and  astronomical  signs  the  character  of  proprietary
marks,  such  as  those  practiced  by  the  Freemasons  of  the  Middle
Ages.

The  sculptures  on  the  Pyramids  which  Mr.  Lyon  refers  to  as
"  Masonic  marks,"  are,  as  we  have  reason  for  believing,  inscriptions,
mostly  in  the  cursive  character  generally  recording  the  names  of  the
different  kings  in  whose  reigns  they  were  constructed.

Again,  the  Messrs.  Waller,  in  a  work  on  Monumental  Brasses?
describe  a  monument  to  Sir  John  de  Creke  and  Lady  Alyne,  his
wife,  at  Wesley  Waterless,  in  Cambridgeshire,  about  1325,  which  is
inscribed  with  a  monogram  or  device  consisting  of  the  letter  N,
with  a  half  moon  on  one  side,  and  a  star,  or  more  probably  the
sun,  on  the  other,  and  a  mallet  above.  This  is  supposed  to  have
been  the  device  of  the  artist.  But  the  same  is  found  on  a  seal
attached  to  a  deed  dated  1272,  wherein  Walter  Dixi,  called  Ccb-
mentarius  de  Bernewelle,  conveys  certain  lands  to  his  son  Law-
rence. The  seal  has  for  its  legend  the  words,  S.  Walter :  Le :
Massune.

Messrs.  Waller  think  that  the  occurrence  of  a  similar  device  in
two  instances  seems  to  show  that  it  was  not  an  individual  mark,  but
that  it  may  have  been  the  badge  of  some  guild  of  Masons.  On  the
contrary,  the  use  of  it  as  a  seal  on  a  deed  of  conveyance  proves  that

1  Ainsworth's  "  Travels,"  vol.  ii.,  p.  167.

2  "  A  Series  of  Monumental  Brasses  from  the  13th  to  the  16th  Century,"  by  J.  G.  and
L.  A.  B.  Waller.

MASONS'   MARKS  795

it  was  a  family  device.  It  is  probable  that  the  monumental  brass
referred  to  above  was  the  work  of  the  son  or  grandson  of  the  Cce-
mentarius  or  Mason  who  conveyed  the  land  fifty-three  years  before,
and  whose  family  seal  as  well  as  his  profession  was  retained  by  his
descendant.

Mr.  Godwin  gives  from  the  Gloucester  Cathedral  a  mark  or  de-
vice in  the  form  of  a  seal,  consisting  of  a  mallet  between  a  half
moon  and  a  sun.  This  will  give  some  show  of  probability  to  the
hypothesis  that  this  device  was  the  badge  of  some  early  Masonic
guild.  But  the  interpolation  of  the  letter  would  also  tend  to  show
that  Walter  Dixi  had  adopted  the  guild  device  with  the  addition  of
the  letter,  to  form  his  own  private  seal,  which  he  also  used  as  his
mark.

If  this  be  so,  then  this  would  be  a  very  early  specimen  of  a  pro-
prietary mark.  While,  however,  it  presents  the  characteristic  of  a
mark  used  to  designate  the  personality  of  a  workman  who  con-
structed the  brass,  it  differs  in  its  complicated  form  from  the  more
simple  marks  used  by  the  mediaeval  Masons.  The  Messrs.  Waller,
whose  theory  was  that  it  was  the  badge  of  a  guild  of  Masons,  say
that  this  will  suggest  "that  the  same  minds  that  designed  the  archi-
tectural structures  of  the  Middle  Ages  also  designed  the  sepulchral
monuments."  Without  accepting  the  truth  of  the  premises  there
can  be  no  doubt  of  the  correctness  of  the  conclusion.  The  same
artistic  skill  and  taste  that  were  displayed  in  the  exterior  construc-
tion of  churches  and  cathedrals  was  also  employed  in  their  interior
decorations,  sepulchral  and  otherwise,  and  the  same  class  of  artists
were  engaged  in  both  tasks.

If  the  profession  and  the  "seal  of  Walter  the  Mason  "  were  re-
tained, as  we  may  well  suppose,  by  his  descendant,  then  we  have
the  very  best  evidence  that  the  sepulchral  brass  of  Sir  John  de
Creke  and  his  wife  were  designed  and  constructed  by  a  Mason,
who  used  his  family  seal  as  his  proprietary  mark.

Letters,  as  initials  of  the  names  of  the  workmen,  are  repeat-
edly found  among  the  mediaeval  Masons'  marks.  This  letter  N  is
met  with  on  stones  in  the  Church  of  St.  Rudegonde,  at  Poitiers,  in
France,  and  in  different  churches  in  Scotland.

Mr.  Lyon  gives,  from  the  Minute  Book  of  the  Lodge  of  Edin-
burgh, and  Mr.  Godwin,  from  personal  observation  of  stones  in
the  churches  of  England  and  the  continent  of  Europe,  many  marks

79&

HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

consisting  only  of  letters,  single  and  double,  of  which  the  following
are  specimens  :

A-w

w         ^  ^Km^mn wwBi mm — ■

Besides  this  class  of  what  may  be  called  literal  marks,  being  evi-
dently the  initials  of  the  names  of  the  workmen  who  inscribed
them,  there  was  a  second  class  of  marks  which  were  geometrical,
consisting  of  angles,  curves,  circles,  and  other  mathematical  figures.
These  were  far  more  common  than  the  literal,  and  have  been  found
in  great  variety.  The  following  are  a  few  specimens  taken  from
English,  Scottish,  and  Continental  churches :

$>*X

The  great  prevalence  of  these  marks,  composed  of  mathematical
lines,  is  a  strong  confirmation  of  the  truth  of  the  opinion  entertained
by  Paley,  Lindsay,  and  many  other  writers,  that  the  secret  of  the
mediaeval  Freemasons  was  the  application  of  the  principles  of
geometry  to  the  art  of  building.  This  secret,  the  magnificent  re-
sults of  which  were  exhibited  in  the  great  Cathedrals  and  other
massive  edifices  erected  during  the  Middle  Ages  in  the  Gothic
style,  has  been  lost  to  the  professional  or  Operative  Masons  of  the
present  day.  But  its  influence  is  still  felt  by  the  Speculative  Free-
masons, who  succeeded  the  Operative  Lodges  as  organized  bodies,.

MASONS'   MARKS  797

and  who,  when  they  abandoned  the  operative  art,  or  rather  trans-
muted it  into  a  science,  still  retained,  so  far  as  they  possibly  could*
the  relics  of  the  older  institution.

Kence  we  find  these  Speculative,  or,  as  they  called  themselves,
■  Free  and  Accepted  Masons,"  made  "  right  angles,  horizontals,  and
perpendiculars  "  the  basis  of  all  their  manual  modes  of  recognition,
and  declared  that  "  geometry  was  the  foundation  of  Masonry."

A  third  class  of  marks  may  be  designated  as  the  symbolical
And  here  I  am  compelled  to  dissent  from  the  views  of  Bro.  Lyon,
who  says  that  "there  is  no  ground  for  believing  that  in  the  choice
of  their  marks  the  16th  century  Masons  were  guided  by  any  con-
sideration of  their  symbolical  quality  or  of  their  relation  to  the
propositions  of  Euclid." !

Symbolism,  as  a  means  of  giving  a  language  and  a  spiritual
meaning  to  their  labor,  was  a  science  thoroughly  understood  and
practiced  by  the  Masons  who  invented  the  Gothic  style.  Findel
says  that  they  symbolized  their  working  tools,  a  custom  in  which
they  have  been  closely  imitated  by  their  Speculative  successors.

The  symbolism  of  the  Gothic  architects  has  already  been  suffi-
ciently discussed  in  a  previous  chapter,  and  it  is  now  necessary  to
advert  to  it  only  in  reference  to  the  fact  that  the  symbols  used  by
the  builders  in  the  ornamentation  of  the  churches  furnished  them
also  with  a  fertile  supply  of  marks.

We  must  not,  therefore,  confound  the  more  complicated  decora-
tions used  as  symbols  on  the  exterior  and  in  the  interior  of  churches,
such  as  gargoyles,  rose  windows,  cathedral  wheels,  etc.,  with  the
simpler  forms  of  some  of  these  symbols  which  were  adopted  by
the  builders  as  proprietary  marks.

As  these  symbolic  marks  presupposed  that  those  who  adopted
them  to  designate  their  work  must  have  understood  their  mean-
ing, it  would  not  be  a  very  bold  assumption  to  believe  that  the
use  of  them  for  that  purpose  was  confined  to  the  more  intel-
lectual portion  of  the  workmen.  The  adoption  of  a  symbol  for
a  mark  would,  in  general,  indicate  that  the  person  who  adopted
it  was  one  who  had  extended  his  studies  to  the  highest  principles
of  his  art  and  had  made  himself  conversant  with  the  science  of
symbolism.

1 "  History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  68.

798  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

If  this  reasoning  were  accepted,  we  should  then  recognize  an-
other class  lower  in  culture  than  the  former  and  less  familiar  with
the  occult  elements  of  their  profession,  though  perhaps  equally
skillful  in  all  its  practical  operations.  Being  therefore  familiar  with
the  method  of  applying  geometry  to  the  art  of  building,  these
workmen  would  be  likely  to  select  mathematical  figures  for  marks.

Pursuing  the  same  train  of  reasoning  we  would  find  a  third
and  still  lower  class,  far  inferior  to  either  of  the  two  preceding
classes  in  intellectual  culture  and  having  sluggish  minds  wholly
uninspired  by  anything  that  was  not  purely  practical  in  their  pro-
fession. As  they  would  be  compelled,  by  the  regulations  of  the
guild  or  as  they  were  guided  by  their  own  inclination,  to  distin-
guish the  stones  which  they  had  wrought  from  those  of  other  work-
men, we  might  suppose  that  they  would  be  content  to  achieve  that
object  by  using  the  simplest  method  that  could  present  itself,
which,  of  course,  would  be  the  initial  letter  of  their  name.

We  would  thus  have,  if  we  accepted  this  theory,  an  easy  method
of  detecting  when  we  inspected  the  stones  of  a  mediaeval  edifice
constructed  by  the  old  Gothic  Freemasons,  not  only  the  practical
skill  in  architecture  of  the  builders  whose  works  have  been  indi-
vidualized by  their  proprietary  marks,  but  also  the  intellectual  cul-
tivation of  each  workman.  This  one  we  might  say  was  high  in  art,
for  he  had  cultivated  the  symbolism  which  was  its  highest  develop-
ment ;  this  one  had  not  aspired  so  high,  but  had  confined  himself
to  its  geometric  formula ;  but  this  one  was  low  in  intellectual  cul-
tivation, with  little  if  any  identity  or  imagination,  for  he  had  con-
tented himself  with  no  more  ingenious  device  to  designate  his  labor
than  the  simple  sculpture  of  a  letter  of  his  name.

The  acceptance  of  such  a  theory  as  this  would,  I  confess,  very
readily  relieve  the  antiquary  from  all  the  embarrassments  which  he
encounters,  in  the  attempt  to  explain  the  reason  of  this  diversity  in
the  character  of  the  Masonic  marks  of  the  Middle  Ages,  and  would
enable  him  to  explain  why  they  are  not  all  of  one  kind — not  all
monogrammatic,  or  all  geometrical,  or  all  symbolic.

Unfortunately,  however,  for  the  easy  solution  of  the  problem.
another  theory  has  been  proposed  by  M.  Didron,  to  which  further
reference  will  be  directly  made,  which  ascribes  the  monogrammatic
marks  to  the  higher  class  of  workmen  or  overseers,  and  the  sym-
bolic and  mathematical  to  the  inferior  class  of  masons.

MASONS'    MARKS  799

This  theory  is  not  untenable,  because  it  is  based  upon  the
well-known  fact  that  in  the  Middle  Ages  the  art  of  writing  was
not  so  generally  diffused  as  it  is  now.  Many  persons  of  high  sta-
tion were  unable  to  sign  their  names,  and  there  are  instances  where
kings  have  affixed  the  sign  of  the  cross  to  charters,  assigning  as  a
reason  pro  ignorantia  liter  arum  in  consequence  of  their  ignorance
of  writing.  Now,  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  the  lower  order  of
Masons  were  any  better  instructed,  and  as  the  use  of  initials  would
indicate  a  knowledge  of  letters,  it  may  be  inferred  that  only  the
more  educated  part  of  the  fraternity  used  this  method  of  making
their  proprietary  mark,  while  crosses,  angles,  shoes,  triangles,  and
other  similar  figures  would  be  adopted  by  those  who  were  unac-
quainted with  the  use  of  letters.

But  reasonable  and  plausible  as  this  theory  may  at  first  glance
appear,  neither  it  nor  the  former  are  sustained  by  the  facts  that  are
within  our  knowledge.

In  Mr.  Lyon's  most  valuable  work  on  the  Edinburgh  Lodge  we
will  find  several  fac-similes  of  minutes  of  the  lodge,  in  which  are
the  signatures  of  the  officers  and  members.  Now,  a  careful  inspec-
tion of  these  marks  does  not  reveal  any  such  arraignment  as  is  in-
dicated in  either  of  the  two  theories,  and,  therefore,  supports  neither.

Let  us  take,  for  instance,  a  minute  of  the  lodge  in  June,  1600.
Here  there  are  thirteen  signatures  and  thirteen  marks.  Of  these
but  one,  that  of  the  Warden,  Thomas  Vier,  or  Weir,  is  a  mono-
gram ;  the  twelve  others,  all  of  them  Maisteris,  or  Masters,  are
mathematical,  or  symbolical.  Here  we  might  infer  that  the  chief
officer  alone  used  a  monogram,  which  would,  to  some  extent,  sus-
tain M.  Didron's  theory.

But  on  the  inspection  of  another  minute  of  the  year  1634  we
find  that  the  Deacon  and  Warden  use  initial  letters  for  their  marks,
while  Anthony  Alexander,  the  highest  Masonic  officer  in  the  king-
dom, being  the  King's  Master  of  the  Work,  adopts  a  symbolic
mark,  a  practice  that  was  imitated  by  Sir  Alexander  Strachan,  who
had  just  been  admitted  as  a  Fellow  Craft.

There  is  so  much  contradiction  in  these  records,  in  reference  to
any  appropriation  of  marks  of  a  particular  kind  to  distinctive  classes
•of  workmen,  that  we  are  compelled  to  leave  the  whole  question
41  under  advisement."

It  is,  perhaps,  a  plausible  solution  to  suppose  that  the  choice  of

800  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

a  mark  being  left  entirely  to  each  workman  it  became  a  mere  mat-
ter of  taste,  and  that  while  some  were  contented  with  a  monogram
or  merely  an  initial  letter,  others,  more  imaginative,  would  select
a  symbol,  or,  if  they  were  peculiarly  mathematical  in  their  notions,
would  take  a  geometrical  figure.

It  was  probably  only  to  one  of  the  first  class  that  could  be  truth-
fully assigned  the  title  borne  by  that  skillful  architect,  who  had  been
summoned  from  Germany  by  Ludovic  Sforza  to  complete  the  Ca-
thedral of  Milan,  and  who,  doubtless  for  his  skill  in  symbolic  archi-
tecture by  which  he  gave  to  stones  an  instructive  voice,  was  called
Magister  de  vivis  lapidibus — "  Master  of  living  stones."

Four  of  these  symbolic  marks,  which  are  of  comparatively  fre-
quent occurrence,  are  the  pentalpha,  the  double  triangle,  the  fylfot,
and  the  vesica  pisczs,  which  are  delineated  in  that  order  in  the  fol-
lowing cut :

■f

It  is  worthy  of  note  that  not  one  of  these  four  marks  here  de-
lineated are  of  purely  Masonic  origin.  The  first,  which  is  the  Pen-
talpha, is  derived  from  the  Greek,  and  was,  in  the  school  of  Pythag-
oras, a  symbol  of  health.  Among  the  Orientalists  it  was  deemed
to  be  a  talisman  against  evil,  and  is  often  seen  on  old  coins  of
Britain  and  Gaul,  where  it  is  supposed  to  have  been  a  symbol  of
Deity.  It  was  finally  adopted  by  the  early  Christians,  who  referred
its  five  points  to  the  five  wounds  of  Jesus,  and  it  is  probable  that
through  this  character  as  an  ecclesiastical  symbol  it  passed  over  to
the  Freemasons,  whose  organization,  as  we  have  seen,  was  at  first
purely  ecclesiastical.

The  second  is  a  Hebrew  symbol  and  known  as  the  shield  of
David,  and  sometimes  as  the  seal  of  Solomon,  and  was  considered
by  the  ancient  Jews  as  a  talisman  of  great  efficacy,  because  it  had  a
recondite  allusion  to  the  Tetragrammaton  or  four-lettered,  incom-
municable name  of  God.  The  early  Christians  adopted  it  and  made
the  two  intersecting  triangles  symbols  of  the  two  natures  of  Christ,

MASONS'   MARKS  801

the  divine  and  human.  Thence  it  became  a  favorite  decoration  of
the  Gothic  architects  and  is  to  be  found  in  most  of  the  mediaeval
churches.

The  third  mark,  here  delineated,  is  what  is  known  as  the  Fyl-
fot, or  Mystic  cross  of  the  Buddhists.  It  is  found  in  Egypt,  in
Etruria,  on  the  Scandinavian  Runic  stones,  and  on  British  and
Gaulish  coins.

The  fourth  of  these  marks  is  known  as  the  Vesica  Piscis.  The
fish  was  universally  accepted  among  the  early  Christians  as  a  sym-
bol of  Jesus,  and  is  found  constantly  inscribed  on  the  tombs  in  the
Catacombs.  The  fish  was  adopted  as  an  emblem  of  Jesus,  because
the  letters  of  the  Greek  word  for  fish  form  the  initials  of  the  words
in  the  same  language  which  signify  "  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,
the  Saviour."  At  first,  as  it  appears  in  the  Catacombs,  it  presented
the  correct,  though  rudely  drawn,  shape  of  a  fish.  It  afterward  as-
sumed the  abbreviated  form  of  an  oval.  In  this  latter  form  it  was
frequently  employed  by  the  Freemasons  of  the  Middle  Ages  as  a
symbolic  decoration,  and  the  seals  of  all  religious  communities  and
ecclesiastical  persons  were  made  of  the  same  shape.

Albert  Durer,  who  was  a  distinguished  architect  of  the  15th
century,  wrote  a  work  on  Geometry  in  which  he  says  that  the
vesica  piscis  is  formed  by  two  intersecting  circles  which  produce  two
pointed  arches,  one  above  and  one  below.  It  is  probable  that  it
was  in  reference  to  this  idea,  which  was  not  confined  to  Albert
Durer,  that  the  pointed  arch,  the  peculiar  characteristic  of  the  Gothic
style,  was  suggested  by  the  intersection  of  the  two  circles  which  also
form  the  vesica  piscis,  that  the  Freemasons  adopted  it  as  a  mark,
though  its  early  religious  origin  would  also  sufficiently  account  for
the  introduction  of  it  into  church  or  Gothic  architecture.

But  the  further  discussion  of  these  symbolic  marks  appertains
more  properly  to  a  subsequent  portion  of  this  work  which  is  to  be
specially  devoted  to  the  investigation  and  interpretation  of  Masonic
symbolism.

Various  other  classifications  of  these  marks  have  been  made  by
different  writers  who  have  investigated  this  interesting  subject.

M.  Didron,  who  collected  a  great  many  of  these  marks  in  France,

thought  that  they  were  divided  into  two  classes,  namely,  those  of

the  overseers  of  the  works,  the  magistri  operum,  and  the  men  who

wrought  the  stones.     The  marks  of  the  first  class,  he  says,  consist

51

802  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

generally  of  monogram matic  characters  and  are  placed  separately  on
the  stones  ;  while  those  of  the  second  class  partake  more  of  the  nat-
ure of  symbols,  such  as  shoes,  trowels,  mallets,  and  other  objects  of  a
similar  kind.

Other  writers  have  divided  these  marks  into  three  classes,  and
suppose  that  some  were  peculiar  to  the  Apprentices,  others  to  the
Fellows,  and  others  again  to  the  Masters.

There  is  abundant  historical  evidence,  especially  in  the  Ordi-
nances of  the  German  Masons,  that  Apprentices  were  sometimes  in-
vested with  a  mark,  particularly  when,  for  certain  reasons,  they  were
permitted  to  travel,  before  the  expiration  of  their  time,  in  search  of
employment.

But  I  do  not  find  any  authentic  means  by  which  we  can  distin-
guish from  the  appearance  of  any  mark,  or  from  any  other  cause,
the  marks  which  were  peculiar  to  any  grade,  or  by  which  we  can
authoritatively  distinguish  the  mark  of  an  Apprentice  from  that  of
a  Fellow  or  Master.

Speaking  of  the  traditional  arrangement  of  marks  into  distinctive
classes  for  each  of  the  three  grades  of  Masters,  Fellows,  and  Ap-
prentices, Mr.  Lyon  says  that  "the  practice  of  the  Lodge  of  Edin-
burgh, or  that  of  Kilwinning,  as  far  as  can  be  learned  from  their
records,  was  never  in  harmony  with  the  teachings  of  tradition  on
that  point." 1

What  is  thus  said  of  the  Scottish  Masons  may,  I  think,  be  said
with  equal  correctness  of  those  of  Germany  and  England.  Indeed
if,  as  will  hardly  be  denied,  the  system  of  proprietary  marks  was
originally  derived  from  the  German  Masons,  who  perfected,  if  they
did  not  invent,  it  at  Strasburg,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the
same  or  very  similar  regulations  must  have  prevailed  in  every  coun-
try into  which  the  system  was  introduced.  There  might  have  been
some  modifications  to  suit  local  circumstances,  but  there  would  have
been  no  radical  changes.

We  must,  therefore,  reject  the  theory  that  there  was  any  distinc-
tion of  marks  appropriated  to  the  three  ranks  of  workmen.  Cer-
tainly, at  the  present  day,  we  have  no  authority  for  recognizing  any
such  distinction.

There  are,  however,  outside  of  any  question  as  to  the  classifica-

1 "  History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  69.

MASONS'    MARKS  803

tion  of  the  marks  many  circumstances  and  conditions  connected
with  them  which  are  of  a  highly  interesting  character.

In  the  first  place,  the  antiquity  of  the  custom  among  architects
and  builders  of  placing  marks  upon  stones  is  worthy  of  notice.  But
in  treating  this  question  of  the  early  origin  and  use  of  marks  by
builders,  we  must  not  forget  the  distinction,  which  has  already  been
referred  to,  between  such  marks  as  were  used  simply  as  symbols,
and  intended  to  express  some  religious  idea,  and  those  which  were
adopted  by  builders  to  designate  and  claim  the  proprietorship  in  a
stone,  and  which  have  hence  been  called  proprietary  marks.

There  is  the  very  best  evidence,  that  of  the  stones  themselves,
to  prove  that  symbols  were  sometimes  represented  by  hieroglyphics,
and  sometimes  by  pictured  representations  of  objects.  The  hiero-
glyphical  inscriptions  on  the  monuments  of  ancient  Egypt  and  the
emblems  sculptured  in  profusion  on  the  topes  or  Buddhist  towers
of  Central  India,1  though  often  resembling  the  more  modern  Ma-
sonic marks,  are  known  to  have  been  used  only  as  the  expressions
of  religious  ideas.     They  were  symbols  and  not  marks.8

The  proprietary  marks  may,  however,  be  traced  as  far  back  as
the  end  of  the  10th  century,  and  are  to  be  found  upon  the  walls  of
the  Cathedral  of  St.  Mark  in  Venice.  As  this  edifice  was  con-
structed after  the  Byzantine  method  and  by  Greek  architects  brought
to  Venice  by  the  government  for  that  purpose,  we  may  safely  adopt
the  conclusion  of  Mr.  Fort,  that  Masonic  proprietary  marks  were
first  introduced  into  western  Europe  by  the  corporations  of  Byzan-
tine Masons.3

It  is  very  probable  that  the  use  of  Masonic  marks  at  that  period
was  regulated  by  a  system  similar  to  that  which  prevailed  at  a  later
time  among  the  German  Masons.  But  this  can  be  only  a  matter  of
conjecture.  No  regulations  on  the  subject  have  been  preserved,  if
any  such  existed.  All  that  we  can  presume  from  the  testimony  of
the  stones  themselves,  is  that  as  the  design  of  these  marks  was  to

xSee  Fergusson's  "  Tree  and  Serpent  Worship  ;  or,  Illustrations  of  Mythology  and
Art  in  India,"  passim.

2  Belzoni,  in  his  narrative  of  his  operations  in  opening  the  second  pyramid,  had  said
that  he  got  a  clew  to  the  entrance  by  certain  marks  on  the  exterior  stones,  and  this  has
been  fancifully  accepted  as  a  proof  that  proprietary  marks  were  used  by  the  pyramid
builders,  although  it  is  very  evident  that  those  marks  were  only  hieroglyphic  inscriptions.

8  Fort,  "  Early  History  and  Antiquities  of  Masonry,"  ii.,  p.  325.

804  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

afford  the  means  of  distinguishing  the  work  of  each  artisan,  each
mark  must  have  been  the  exclusive  property  of  the  mason  who
used  it.

It  is  not  until  the  organization  of  the  fraternity  of  Freemasons,
which  took  place  at  Strasburg  Cathedral  in  the  1 5th  century,  and
the  adoption  of  their  Ordinances,  that  we  obtain  any  documentary
information  of  the  mode  in  which  the  proprietary  marks  of  the  med-
iaeval builders  were  regulated.

The  universality  of  these  marks  is  another  point  in  their  history
that  is  worthy  of  notice.  By  their  universality  is  meant  their  prev-
alence in  every  country  into  which  the  Freemasons  penetrated,  and
into  which  they  extended  their  peculiar  system  of  architecture.
From  the  northern  parts  of  Scotland  to  the  island  of  Malta,  we  will
meet  with  these  marks  sculptured  on  the  stones  of  buildings  which
had  been  constructed  by  this  brotherhood  of  builders.  It  is  curi-
ous says  Mr.  Godwin,  to  find  these  marks  exactly  the  same  in  dif-
ferent countries,  and  descending  from  early  times  to  the  present
day.1

The  fact  that  in  a  great  many  instances  identical  marks  have
been  found  in  countries  widely  separated,  proves,  as  Mr.  Godwin
claims,  in  a  passage  already  quoted,  that  the  men  who  employed
them  did  so  by  a  system  which  must  have  prevailed  in  all  essential
points  in  all  those  countries.

M.  Didron  gives  the  following  illustration  of  this  fact.  He
found  stones  marked  in  the  Cathedral  of  Rheims  with  a  certain
monogrammatic  character,  and  the  outline  of  the  sole  of  a  shoe ;
other  stones  with  the  same  monogram  and  the  outline  of  two  soles,
and  others  again  with  the  same  character  and  the  outline  of  three
soles.

The  use  of  the  same  monogram  would  indicate  a  close  connec-
tion, perhaps  in  the  same  guild  or  lodge,  while  the  variation  in  the
number  of  soles  would  indicate  that  each  of  the  marks  belonged  to
a  different  person.

This  mark  M.  Didron  calls  the  shoe  mark — a  very  proper  desig-
nation. As  he  found  the  same  shoe  mark  at  Strasburg,  and  in  no
other  place,  he  accounts  very  reasonably  for  that  fact  by  supposing

*"  History  in  Ruins;  a  Handbook  of  Architecture  for  the  Unlearned,"  by  George
Godwin,  F.R.S.,  London,  1858.

MASONS'   MARKS  805

that  certain  of  the  workmen  at  Rheims  had  been  brought  from
Strasburg.

Dr.  Krause  has  given  in  his  great  work  a  plate  of  marks  found
in  the  church  of  Batalha  in  Portugal,  and  which  he  says  are  similar
to  marks  found  in  a  church  near  Jena  in  Germany.1     One  of

them  of  a  rather  ^7  complicated  form  is  also  to  be  seen  among
the  marks  re-  ]>£  corded  in  the  minute  book  of  the  Lodge  of
Edinburgh,  cop-  ies  of  which  are  contained  in  Mr.  Lyon's

History  of  that  lodge.

Amid  the  immense  variety  of  marks  suggested  to  the  mind  of
the  Mason,  by  an  unlimited  number  of  objects,  it  is  very  likely  that
sometimes  two  stonecutters,  living  at  remote  distances  from  each
other,  might,  by  a  mere  accident  of  caprice,  select  the  same  object
for  the  mark  of  each.  This  especially  might  happen  in  the  case  of
figures  well  known,  from  some  religious  or  symbolic  use  to  which
they  had  been  applied.  Such,  for  instance,  were  the  pentalpha,  the
mystical  vesica  piscis,  or  fish,  the  shield  of  David,  the  square  and
compass,  and  others  of  a  like  import,  which  were  familiarly  known
in  the  Middle  Ages  as  religious  symbols.

Hence  the  fact  that  any  one  of  these  figures  is  found  to  be  in-
scribed on  stones  in  two  or  more  places,  would  not  necessarily  indi-
cate that  the  same  workman  had  migrated  from  one  of  these  places
to  the  others  and  carried  with  him  his  own  peculiar  mark.  Two,
three,  or  more  Masons,  living  in  different  places  and  who  had  never
seen  each  other,  might  each  have  selected,  without  reference  to  the
others,  so  familiar  a  figure  as  the  pentalpha  or  the  fish,2  for  his  pro-
prietary mark.  And  this  undoubtedly  did  occur,  for  we  find  these
figures  used  as  marks  in  buildings  very  remotely  distant  from  each
other,  and  sculptured  at  such  different  epochs  as  to  make  it  impos-
sible that  they  could  all  have  been  the  work  of  one  and  the  same
man.

But,  as  a  general  rule,  when  we  meet  with  the  same  mark  in  two

1  "  Drei  altest.  Kunsturkunden,"  iii.,  311.

2  The  vesica  piscis,  at  first  in  the  form  of  a  fish,  was  placed  by  the  early  Christians  on
the  tombs  in  the  Catacombs  of  Rome,  as  a  symbol  of  salvation  by  the  waters  of  baptism.
It  was  adopted,  afterward,  as  a  symbol  in  Christian  art  of  the  Saviour,  and  was  so  used
by  the  Freemasons  in  the  decoration  of  churches.  Then  some  of  the  workmen,  impressed
with  a  religious  feeling,  took  it  as  a  proprietary  mark,  and  it  is  found  as  such  on  stones
of  many  mediaeval  buildings.

8o6  HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

places,  between  which  there  may  have  been  a  possible  connection,
and  at  times  not  far  separated,  it  is  a  legitimate  presumption  that
the  marks  belonged  to  the  same  person,  and  that  he  had  migrated
from  one  place  to  the  other  and  had  carried  his  skill  and  the  mark
of  his  skill  with  him.

The  method  by  which  these  marks  were  obtained  by  the  work-
men or  bestowed  upon  them  is  perhaps  the  most  important  and  the
most  interesting  part  of  their  history.

The  knowledge  of  the  Regulations  of  the  Strasburg  Masons  and
of  the  customs  of  the  same  fraternity  in  Scotland  has  been  trans-
mitted to  us,  and  we  are  at  no  loss  to  describe  the  method  of  be-
stowing marks  which  was  practiced  in  Germany  and  Scotland.1

It  is,  however,  singular  that  neither  in  the  Regulations  of  Eti-
enne  Boileau  in  France,  nor  in  any  of  the  old  Constitutions  in  Eng-
land, is  there  the  slightest  reference  to  the  subject  of  Masonic  pro-
prietary marks.

We  learn,  however,  from  the  inspection  of  buildings  still  re-
maining, that  the  custom  of  using  proprietary  marks  was  practiced
by  the  Masons  in  both  those  countries,  and  we  may  justly  presume
that  the  same  or  analogous  regulations  as  to  their  government  ex-
isted among  the  French  and  English  Masons  as  did  among  the
German  and  Scottish.

Among  the  German  Freemasons  of  the  Middle  Ages,  when  an
Apprentice  had  served  his  time  he  became  a  Fellow,  and  on  being
admitted  into  the  Fraternity  he  received  a  mark,  which  he  was  to
carve  on  the  stones  which  he  wrought,  so  as  to  identify  his  work.

The  peculiar  form  of  the  mark  may,  we  suppose,  have  been  se-
lected by  the  workman,  though  the  statutes  speak  of  it  as  having
been  "granted  and  conceded  to  him  by  the  craft  or  corporation,"
and  having  been  once  selected  or  granted,  he  was  never,  as  we  learn
from  a  clause  in  the  Strasburg  Ordinances  of  I563,8  permitted  after-
ward to  change  it — wherever,  in  the  course  of  his  nomadic  life  as

1  It  is  very  true  that  the  existence  of  marks  is  recognized  only  in  a  single  passage  of
the  Ordinances  of  Strasburg,  but  we  have  ample  information  as  to  the  regulations  on  the
subject  in  the  writings  of  Steiglitz,  Fallon,  Winzer,  and  other  German  authors  who  have
thoroughly  investigated  the  subject.

2Essoll  auch  keiner  sein  ehrenzeichen,  das  irne  von  einem  Handtwerck  verlichen
und  vergont  worden  ist,  fur  sich  selbs  und  eigens  gewaltz  nicht  endern  "  Ordnung  dei
Sta?*nmetz,"  anno  1462,  art.  73.

MASONS'    MARKS  807

a  wandering  artisan,  he  might  travel — into  whatsoever  region  he
might  go  in  search  of  work,  however  distant  it  might  be,  he  was
bound  to  use  the  same  mark  in  designating  the  materials  which  he
had  wrought.

Hence  it  is  that  we  account,  in  a  great  many  instances,  for  the
repetition  of  the  same  mark  in  various  places  widely  separated.
Sometimes  it  might  happen  that,  by  a  casual  coincidence,  two  ma-
sons, in  different  places  and  wholly  unknown  to  each  other,  would
choose  the  same  figure  for  a  mark,  but,  as  a  general  rule,  especially
where  the  mark  was  at  all  complicated  or  peculiar  in  shape,  it  would
be  right  to  infer  that  the  stone  so  marked  in  two  places  must  have
been  the  work  of  the  same  artisan  who  had  immigrated  from  one
place  to  the  other.

Thus,  as  it  has  already  been  shown,  the  "  shoe  marks,"  as  they
have  been  called,  which  are  very  peculiar  and  complex,  accompanied
as  each  is  by  a  monogram,  having  been  found  in  the  Cathedral  of
Strasburg  and  also  in  that  of  Rheims,  it  has  been  justly  assumed  by
M.  Didron  that  they  were  the  proprietary  marks  of  certain  Masons
of  Strasburg  who  had  been  brought  to  Rheims  and  who  continued  to
use  there  those  marks  of  proprietorship  which  they  had  originally
adopted  at  the  former  place.

From  this  necessity  of  identification,  so  that  the  stones  wrought
by  one  Mason  might  be  easily  distinguished  from  those  which  were
worked  by  all  the  others,  it  followed  that  no  two  workmen  who
were  attached  to  the  same  sodality  or  lodge  ever  selected  precisely
the  same  mark.  There  were  some  forms,  such  as  angles,  crosses,
squares,  and  triangles,  which,  being  familiar  to  these  geometric
Masons,  would  naturally  be  suggested  to  the  mind  as  appropriate
figures  for  marks,  and  such  figures  were,  accordingly,  often  selected.
But  in  every  case  some  modification  of  the  original  form  has  been
made,  which,  however  minute,  has  been  sufficient  to  show  a  distinct
difference,  so  as  to  easily  enable  every  inspector  to  recognize  it.

Thus  of  ninety-one  proprietary  marks  copied  by  Mr.  Lyon  in
his  History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh  from  the  minute-book  of
that  lodge,  no  two  can  be  found  which  are  precisely  alike.  Yet  it
will  be  also  found  that  certain  forms  seem  to  have  been  suggested
to  different  minds,  but,  as  has  been  already  said,  the  original  form
has  always  been  adopted,  with  some  addition  or  change  necessary  to
preserve  its  character  and  usefulness  as  a  token  of  proprietorship.

8o8  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Thus  the  figure  of  a  lozenge  with  two  sides  extended  inferiorly,
which  I  am  inclined  to  think  was  at  first  suggested  by  the  vesica
piscis  given  in  a  preceding  page  of  this  work,  with  the  circle
changed  into  straight  lines  for  the  greater  facility  of  being  carved
on  stone,  appears  to  have  been  a  favorite  mark.

Of  this  mark  I  have  found  no  less  than  eleven  variations,  all  of
them  completely  distinct,  each  from  the  others,  and  yet  every  one
preserving  evident  traces  of  the  original  type.  Of  these  marks  the
following  copies  are  here  inserted,  taken  from  the  two  plates  in  Bro.
Lyon's  work.  The  first  is  the  original  type,  and  it  will  be  readily
seen,  by  inspection,  how  much  and  yet  how  little  all  the  others  differ
from  it

*K

£*

This  is  a  very  striking  instance  of  the  manner  in  which  these  old
Masons  often  fabricated  their  proprietary  marks.  One  would  select
some  popular  and  well-known  symbol,  and  several  others  of  less  in-
ventive genius  would  copy  his  design  with  some  slight  modification,
or,  in  the  language  of  the  heralds,  each  would  bear  his  mark  "  with
a  difference."

And  as  the  heralds  invented  and  used  these  "  differences"  in  coat
armor,  to  indicate  a  descent  of  all  the  bearers  from  one  common
ancestor,  so  might  we  not,  with  the  aid  of  a  very  little  romance,
suppose  that  the  owners  of  these  similar  marks  bore  some  close
affinity  by  relationship  or  friendship  and  intimacy  to  the  owner  of
the  original  type.

But  this  thought  is  scarcely  worth  pursuing,  though  the  results
of  an  investigation  on  this  point  would  be  very  interesting  if  we  had
any  authentic  method  of  making  it.

As  a  general  rule,  Masters  and  Fellows  only  were  entitled  to  use
marks.  But  in  Germany  there  were  certain  circumstances  under
which  the  privilege  was  extended  to  Apprentices.     Thus  according

MASONS'    MARKS  809

to  the  Statutes  of  1462,  when  a  Master  had  no  employment  for  his
Apprentice,  he  permitted  him  to  go  forth  in  search  of  work,  and  on
such  occasions  a  mark  was  assigned  to  him.1

But  this  was  only  a  temporary  loan  to  be  used  by  the  Apprentice
while  away.  It  was  still  the  Master's  mark.  Apprentices  in  Ger-
many were  not  invested  with  marl's  during  their  Lehrjaren  or  time
of  apprenticeship.

This  appears  from  the  next  statute  in  the  same  Ordinances,  where
it  is  expressly  stated  that  "  no  Master  shall  be  permitted  to  bestow
a  mark  upon  his  Apprentice  until  he  had  served  out  his  time."8

It  will  be  noted  that  in  the  former  of  these  regulations  which
have  just  been  cited,  the  verb  "  to  lend,"  verleihen,  is  used,  and  in
the  latter  the  verb  is  "to  grant  or  bestow,"  verschenken.  The  Ap-
prentice might  get  the  temporary  loan  of  a  mark  for  a  special  pur-
pose, but  under  no  circumstances  could  he  be  permanently  invested
with  one.  That  prerogative  belonged  only  to  the  Masters  and  Fel-
lows.

It  was  different  with  the  Scottish  Freemasons.  The  Schaw
Statutes,  promulgated  by  William  Schaw,  Master  of  Work  in  1598
and  in  1 599,  had  the  same  authority  with  the  Masons  in  Scotland  as
the  "Old  Charges"  had  in  England,  the  Ordinances  of  Strasburg
and  Torgau  had  in  Germany,  or  the  Regulations  of  Etienne  Boileau
had  in  France.

Accepting  the  authority  of  these  Statutes  we  can  be  at  no  loss
on  the  subject  of  marks.  They  say  nothing  about  the  marks  of
Apprentices,  but  they  direct  that  on  the  reception  into  the  fraternity
of  a  Master  or  Fellow,  his  name  and  mark  shall  be  inserted  in  a
book  kept  for  the  purpose,  together  with  the  date  of  his  reception.

But  the  minutes  of  Mary's  Chapel  Lodge  and  of  Kilwinning
Lodge  furnish  ample  evidence  that  the  privilege  of  the  mark  was
sometimes  extended  to  Apprentices,  that  their  marks  were  also  reg-
istered, and  that  they  paid  a  fee  for  the  registration.

It  is  probable  that  a  satisfactory  reason  may  be  assigned  why  the
Apprentices  in  Scotland  received  the  privilege  of  marks  which,  as  far
as  can  be  learned,  was  not  conferred  upon  them  in  other  countries.

Apprentices  elsewhere  were  always  under  the  immediate  control
of  their  Masters,  and  did  no  work  independently  and  for  which  they

,4<Ordnung  der  Steinmetzen  vom  Jahre,  1462,"  No.  30.  2Ibid.,  No.  31.

810  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

were  responsible  to  the  owners,  the  Masters  of  course  assuming  all
responsibility  for  the  acts  of  their  Apprentices.

But  in  Scotland,  Apprentices  were  sometimes  permitted  to  un-
dertake work  for  themselves,  and  thus  for  a  time  they  became  as
Masters,  and  were  therefore,  like  them,  required  to  have  a  proprie-
tary mark.

Thus  in  the  Schaw  Statutes  for  1598  we  meet  with  this  clause,
which  is  here,  however,  transferred  from  the  archaic  Scottish  idiom
of  the  original  to  our  modern  intelligible  vernacular :

"  Item,  it  shall  not  be  lawful  for  an  Entered  Apprentice  to  take
in  hand  any  greater  task  or  work  than  will  extend  to  the  sum  of  ten
pounds,  under  the  penalty  aforesaid,  namely  twenty  pounds,  and  that
task  being  done,  he  shall  undertake  no  more  without  the  license
of  the  Masters  or  Warden  where  they  dwell."

Here  the  position  of  the  Scotch  Apprentice  was  similar  to  that
occupied  by  the  German,  when  the  Master,  having  no  work  for  him,
permitted  him  to  travel  in  search  of  employment  and  at  the  same
time  loaned  him  his  mark  ;  that  is,  gave  him  permission  to  use  it  and
to  inscribe  it  on  the  stones  which  he  finished.

But  the  Scotch  Apprentice  was  more  liberally  treated.  His
mark  became  a  permanent  possession,  and  like  those  of  the  Masters
and  Fellows  was  registered  in  the  book  of  the  lodge.

As  to  the  formality  with  which  the  Mason  was  invested  with  his
mark,  the  custom  varied  in  Scotland  and  in  Germany.  What  it  was
in  England  and  France  we  can  not  tell,  as  no  records  touching  this
subject  are  extant.

In  Scotland  the  registering  of  the  mark  as  well  as  the  name  of
the  Fellow  Craft  appears  from  the  Schaw  Statutes  to  have  been  a
necessary  part  of  the  form  of  reception.  But  it  does  not  follow  that
he  was  at  that  time  invested  with  it,  for  he  may  have  selected  it  while
an  Apprentice,  for  the  minutes  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh  show  that
any  Apprentice  might  have  a  mark  if  he  was  willing  to  pay  for  it.1
There  is  no  evidence  that  any  especial  ceremony  beyond  that  of
registration  accompanied  what  in  Scottish  phraseology  was  called
the  giving,  choosing,  taking  or  receiving  of  a  mark.  In  none  of  the
Scottish  records,  says  Bro.  Lyon,  is  there  anything  pointing  to  a
special  ceremony  in  connection  with  their  adoption.*

1 "  History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  68.  2  Ibid.,  p.  74.

MASONS'   MARKS  811

The  custom  was  otherwise  in  Germany.  Findel  describes  the
ceremony  of  reception,  which  resembled,  in  many  respects,  the  mod-
ern form  of  initiation  into  the  First  degree.  Of  this  rather  impres-
sive ceremony  the  investment  with  a  peculiar  mark  constituted  a
preliminary  part.1

The  Ordinances  of  1462  prescribed  that  when  a  mark  is  presented
there  shall  be  a  banquet  given  by  the  Master  of  the  Lodge,  to  which
a  few  ecclesiastics  and  not  more  than  ten  Fellows  shall  be  invited.
The  cost  of  this  feast  was  to  be  very  moderate,  and  if  the  workman
who  received  the  mark,  and  in  whose  honor  it  was  given,  desired  to
have  a  larger  provision,  it  was  to  be  provided  at  his  expense.8

Dr.  Krause,  in  commenting  on  this  article  of  the  1563  Ordi-
nances, says  that  everyone  who  was  to  be  admitted  a  Fellow  re-
ceived at  the  time  a  mark  which  was  to  be  peculiar  to  himself,
consisting  of  straight  lines  and  curves  joined  together  in  the  form
of  angles.3

According  to  Heldmann  this  mark  was  called  the  Ehrenzeichen^
or  distinctive  mark  of  a  Fellow,  and  that  a  copy  of  it  was  appended
to  the  margin  of  the  register  or  record  of  his  admission.4

Krause  calls  it  also  " Namenchiffer"  the  cipher  of  the  name,
and  adds,  that  with  it  the  Fellow  marked  all  stones  in  the  making
of  which  superior  skill  was  employed.

"  Hence  we  find,"  he  says,  "in  every  country  of  Europe  in  the
buildings  which  were  constructed  by  Gothic  art  on  single  stones,  and
also  on  the  outside  of  the  edifice,  such  name,  ciphers,  or  marks."

Krause  also  says  that  at  the  time  of  giving  the  Fellow  his  mark,
he  probably  also  received  a  particular  name.

But  of  this  circumstance,  which,  after  all,  Krause  relates  as  only  a
probability,  I  have  met  with  no  substantiating  testimony  in  any  other
authority.

I  am  inclined  to  believe,  contrary  to  the  opinion  of  some  writers,
that  there  was  but  little  or  indeed  no  ceremony  of  any  secret  nature
accompanying  the  bestowal  of  the  mark.  The  only  formality  ap-
pears to  have  consisted  in  the  giving  by  the  lodge  of  a  banquet.

1 "  History  of  Freemasonry  "  (Lyon's  Translation),  p.  65.
8"  Ordnung  der  Steinmetzen  vom  Jahre,  1563."
3"  Kunsturkunden,"  iii.,  p.  311.

4  "Die  drei  altesten  geschichtlichen  Denkmale  der  Deutschen  Freimaurerbrader-
schaft,"  Arnan,  1819,  s.  282.

812  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

But  that  there  were  exoteric  ceremonies  accompanying  this  is  to  be
inferred  from  the  fact  that  a  few  ecclesiastics  were  admitted  among
the  guests.

The  giving  of  a  banquet  by  the  lodge  was  also  prescribed  by
the  Schaw  Statutes  of  1599  to  be  given  by  and  in  the  lodge  on  the
entry  of  Apprentices  and  the  admission  of  Fellow  Crafts.1  But
Mr.  Lyon  thinks  that  the  custom  was  afterward  abolished  and  the
feast  compounded  for  by  a  sum  of  money  paid  by  the  entrant  to
the  lodge.8

The  Masons  often  made  use  of  their  marks  as  seals,  and  Steig-
litz  has  given,  in  his  work  on  Old  German  Architecture?  several
specimens  of  marks  used  as  seals.  We  have  already  seen,  in  a  pre-
ceding part  of  this  chapter,  that  the  mark  of  Walter  Dixi,  the  Eng-
lish Mason,  was  adopted  by  him  as  a  family  seal  and  affixed  as  such
to  a  deed  of  conveyance  in  the  14th  century.

Lastly  we  have  to  inquire  whether  proprietary  marks  were  hered-
itary. We  have  no  evidence  that  there  was  any  statute  or  Ordi-
nance regulating  this  matter,  but  there  can  hardly  be  any  doubt  that
in  many  instances  the  son  voluntarily  adopted  the  mark  of  his
father.  The  case  of  the  family  of  Dixi,  just  referred  to,  is  an  in-
stance in  point  where  a  mark  appears  to  have  descended  through  at
least  three  generations.

But  a  circumstance  occurred  during  the  Session  of  the  Archae-
ological Association  at  Canterbury  in  September,  1844,  which  it
would  seem  ought  to  set  this  question  of  the  descent  of  marks  by
voluntary  inheritance  completely  at  rest.

It  is  stated  in  the  Archceological  Journal  that  a  member  of  the
Association,  believing  that  marks  were  quite  arbitrary  on  the  part
of  the  workmen  and  had  no  connection  either  one  with  another  or
with  Freemasonry,  requested  Mr.  Godwin  to  accompany  him  to
the  Mason's  yard  which  was  attached  to  the  Cathedral.  When
there  he  called  one  of  the  elder  men  and  asked  him  to  make  his
mark  upon  a  piece  of  stone.  The  man  complied,  and  being  asked
why  he  made  that  particular  form,  said  that  it  was  his  father's  mark

,A11  bankattis  for  entrie  of  prenteis  or  fallow  of  craftis  to  be  maid  within  the  said
Lodge  of  Kilwinning,  Schaw  Statutes,  1599.

•'*  History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh, "  p.  44.

•"Von  altdeutscher  Baukunst."     C.  S.  Steiglitz,  Leipzig,  182a

MASONS'   MARKS  813

and  his  grandfather's  mark,  and  that  his  grandfather  had  received  it
from  the  lodge.1

Doubtless  if  the  inquiry  had  been  continued  it  would  have  been
found  that  many  other  marks  had  passed  from  father  to  son.  In-
deed, nothing  is  more  natural  where  the  latter  has  pursued  the
profession  of  the  former.

Our  investigations  have  led  to  the  following  conclusions :

1.  The  existence  of  proprietary  marks  on  European  buildings
may  be  traced  as  far  back  as  the  10th  century,  and  they  were  prob-
ably brought  over  at  that  time  by  the  Greek  artists  who  introduced
the  Byzantine  style  of  architecture,  for  which  the  Freemasons  after-
ward substituted  the  Gothic.

2.  But  it  was  not  until  the  15th  century  that  we  were  furnished
with  any  historical  evidence  that  there  was  an  organized  system  of
laws  by  which  the  imparting,  owning,  and  using  of  these  marks
was  regulated.  Doubtless  such  a  system  had  been  in  existence
long  before,  but  its  practice  was  regulated  by  oral  and  traditional
usages,  until  old  customs,  having  begun  to  be  neglected  or  for-
gotten, it  was  found  necessary  to  renew  them  by  written  Constitu-
tions.

Hence  it  is  in  the  German  Ordinances  of  1462  that  we  are  to
look  for  the  first  written  laws  regulating  the  subject  of  proprietary
marks.

If  we  have  no  authentic  documents  which  refer  to  this  subject
anterior  to  the  15th  century,  it  is  not  because  a  system  of  giving
and  receiving  marks,  and  a  prescribed  method  of  using  them,  did
not  exist  anterior  to  that  period,  but  because,  to  use  the  language
of  Bro.  Findel,8  it  was  only  when  the  ancient  forms  had  begun  to
fall  into  disuse,  when  the  taste  for  forming  leagues  and  confedera-
cies was  on  the  wane,  and  when  the  true  comprehension  of  the  sig-
nification of  the  ancient  ritual,  usages,  and  discipline  was  beginning
to  disappear,  that  the  Masons  felt  the  necessity  of  reviving  the
ancient  landmarks  and  of  giving  them  authority  by  written  Consti-
tutions.

Of  these  "  ancient  landmarks "  not  the  least  important  was  the

1 "  Archaeological  Journal,"  vol.  i.,  p.  383,  note,  cited  by  Mr.  Pryor  in  the  *'  Freema-
sons' Quarterly  Review,"  1845,  p.  441.

8"  History  of  Freemasonry "  (Lyon's  Translation),  p.  73.

8i4  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

use  by  Stonemasons  of  proprietary  marks,  and  hence  we  find  that
regulations  for  their  government  were  not  revived  or  re-established,
but  transferred  from  oral  tradition  to  a  written  document,  so  that
there  might  be  no  defense  or  palliation  of  a  disobedience  or  in-
fringement of  them.

3.  As  we  find  this  system  of  marks  prevailing  in  Germany,  in
France,  in  England,  and  in  Scotland,  as  well  as  in  many  other
places,  we  have  a  right  to  infer  that  as  the  marks  were  often  of  the
same  form,  the  same  system  of  regulations  prevailed  in  all  those
countries.

4.  The  marks  were  not  arbitrarily  selected,  and  liable  to  be  changed
at  the  fancy  or  caprice  of  the  owner,  but  were  only  obtained  after
laborious  study  of  the  principles  of  the  Gothic  art  and  adequate
proofs  of  skill ;  and  having  been  bestowed  with  some  formal  cere-
mony, however  brief,  the  proprietor  was  not  permitted  at  any  time
or  for  any  cause  to  change  the  form  or  character  of  the  mark,  but
was  obliged  always  after  its  acceptance  to  retain  it  and  to  affix  it
to  all  stones  which  he  fabricated  with  superior  skill  and  care.

5.  These  marks  were  sometimes  monogrammatic,  sometimes
geometrical,  and  sometimes  symbolic,  but,  notwithstanding  some
few  writers  have  entertained  a  contrary  opinion,  there  is  no  au-
thentic evidence  that  the  choice  of  the  character  of  the  mark  was
governed  by  any  rules  which  bestowed  the  marks  with  either  of
these  characteristics  upon  different  classes  or  ranks  of  the  work-
men. Yet  it  is  not  improbable  that  some  such  rules  may  have
prevailed,  though  there  is  no  documentary  evidence  extant  of  their
existence.  It  must,  however,  be  confessed  that  the  fact  that  in  Ger-
many Apprentices  were  permitted,  under  certain  circumstances,  to
employ  the  marks  of  their  Masters,  would  seem  to  indicate  that
there  could  not  have  been  any  difference  in  the  character  of  the
marks  used  by  different  ranks  of  Masons.

6.  In  some  cases  proprietary  marks  were  hereditary,  and  there
are  instances  known  where  the  son  or  the  grandson  has  assumed
the  mark  of  his  father  or  grandfather.  But  there  does  not  seem
to  have  been  any  law  making  such  hereditary  transmission  obliga-
tory. If  the  son  adopted  the  mark  of  his  father  it  was  because  he
chose  to  do  so,  and  he  might,  with  perfect  propriety,  and  most  fre-
quently did,  select  a  different  mark.  All  Statutes  and  Ordinances
are  silent  on  the  subject.

MASONS'   MARKS  815

Very  intimately  connected  with  this  subject  of  proprietary
marks  is  that  of  the  Mark  degree,  which,  whatever  was  the  date
and  the  place  of  its  origin,  was  undoubtedly  founded  on  and  to  be
traced  to  the  usages  of  the  Operative  Masons.

The  fact  of  the  existence  of  this  degree,  which  continues  the
usage  of  marks  in  modern  rituals,  is  another  important  link  in  the
chain  which  connects  the  Operative  Masonry  of  the  Middle  Ages
with  the  Speculative  Masonry  of  the  present  day.

As  such  it  is  entitled  to  due  investigation,  and  it  will  therefore
be  made  the  subject  of  the  succeeding  chapter,  though  the  continu-
ity of  our  researches  into  the  progress  of  mediaeval  Masonry  will,
by  this  course,  be  to  some  extent  interrupted.

But  I  know  no  better  plan  than  to  let  the  history  of  Speculative
Mark  Masonry  immediately  and  continuously  follow  that  of  Oper-
ative Mark  Masonry.  It  is  but  the  transfer  from  the  treatment  of
a  cause  to  that  of  its  effect

CHAPTER  XXV

THE   MARK   DEGREE

I HERE  is  no  stronger  or  more  convincing  proof
of  the  connection  between  the  Operative  Free-
masons of  the  Middle  Ages  and  those  of  the
present  day,  and  of  the  regular  descent  of  the
one  from  the  other,  than  that  furnished  by  the
existence  in  the  modern  rituals  of  a  degree  the
ceremonies  of  which  have  been  evidently  found-
ed on  the  system  of  proprietary  marks  which  prevailed  among  the
Stonemasons  of  Germany,  and  which  passed  from  them  into  all  the
other  countries  of  Europe.

If  all  the  other  authentic  testimonies  of  the  fact  that  about  the
beginning  of  the  18th  century  there  was  a  transmutation  of  an  Op-
erative Art  into  a  Speculative  Science,  were  expunged  from  the
record,  the  apparently  extraordinary  phenomenon  that  there  exists
in  the  latter,  and  in  the  latter  only,  a  peculiar  and  extraordinary  sys-
tem, which  also  prevailed  in  the  former,  and  in  the  former  only,
would  be  sufficient  to  warrant  the  conclusion  that  there  must  have
been  a  very  intimate  relation  between  the  two  associations  with
which  this  system  was  connected.

Therefore,  as  a  connecting  link  of  that  great  chain  which,  be-
ginning with  the  Roman  Colleges  of  Artificers,  extended  to  the
early  Masons  of  Gaul  and  Britain,  to  the  Traveling  Freemasons
of  Lombardy  and  Germany,  and  finally  terminated  in  the  Free  and
Accepted  Masons  of  modern  times,  a  thorough  consideration  of  the
rise  and  progress  of  the  Mark  degree  must  be  deemed  essential  to
the  completeness  of  any  work  on  the  history  of  Freemasonry.

In  pursuing  this  investigation  it  will  be  necessary  to  inquire,
firstly,  what  is  the  position  of  the  Mark  degree  in  the  modern  rituals  ;
secondly,  what  is  its  character  and  legendary  history  ;  and,  thirdly,
what  was  its  real  historical  origin  as  distinguished  from  the  mythi-
cal account  of  its  fabrication,  as  it  is  given  in  its  legends.

816

THE   MARK   DEGREE  817

To  an  investigation  of  these  important  and,  to  the  student  of
Masonic  Antiquities,  interesting,  points,  the  present  chapter  will  be
devoted.

The  Mark  degree,  or  to  define  it  more  accurately  according  to
the  received  phraseology,  the  degree  of  Mark  Master,  constitutes
the  fourth  degree  or  the  first  of  what  are  called  the  capitular  degrees
in  the  American  Rite  as  it  is  practiced  in  the  United  States.  In
Scotland  and  Ireland  it  is  a  degree  recognized  under  the  jurisdiction
of  the  Grand  Chapter.  In  England  it  is  not  recognized  by  the
Grand  Lodge.  The  articles  of  Union,  adopted  in  18 13,  defined
Ancient  Craft  Masonry  to  consist  only  of  the  first  three  degrees,  in-
cluding the  Royal  Arch.  Hence,  there  being  no  place  provided  for
the  Mark  degree,  it  was  ignored  in  English  Masonry  until  its  intro-
duction a  few  years  ago,  when  it  was  placed  under  an  independent
jurisdiction  called  the  Mark  Grand  Lodge,  a  body  which  was  estab-
lished in  1856.

On  the  Continent  of  Europe  and  in  all  countries  the  Freema-
sonry of  which  is  not  derived  immediately  from  and  is  in  intimate
connection  with  the  Masonry  of  England  and  America,  the  Mark
degree  is  entirely  unknown.  There  is  not  in  any  of  the  German,
French,  Italian,  or  Spanish  rituals  the  slightest  allusion  to  it.

In  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite  the  Mark  degree  at
one  time  held  a  distinct  position,  though  it  has  ever  since  the  begin-
ning of  this  century  or  the  close  of  the  last,  been  stricken  from  its
ritual.     Of  this  fact  there  is  undeniable  proof.

I  have  in  my  possession  an  original  Warrant  or  charter,  granted
in  the  year  1804  by  the  Grand  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem  to
American  Eagle  Master  Mark  Masons'  Lodge  No.  1,  in  Charleston,
South  Carolina,  and  there  is  in  the  archives  of  the  Supreme  Council
for  the  Southern  Jurisdiction  of  the  United  States,  the  ritual  of  the
degree  as  at  the  time  conferred,  which  appears  to  have  been  only  on
Past  Master  Masons  of  the  Scottish  Rite  who  were  recognized  by
the  possession  of  Scottish  degrees  as  Past  Masters.1

There  is  no  evidence,  however,  that  other  lodges  were  established

1  That  is,  on  Master  Masons  who  had  received  the  preliminary  degrees  of  the  Scot-
tish Rite,  who  were  assumed  in  their  own  Rite  to  be  Past  Masters.  In  the  Circular  of  the
Charleston  Supreme  Council,  issued  in  1802,  it  is  said  that  "throughout  the  Continent  of
Europe,  England,  Ireland,  and  the  West  Indies,  every  Sublime  Mason  is  recognized  as  a
lawful  Past  Master."

5*

818  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

by  the  same  authority.  At  least  no  other  Charters  have  to  my
knowledge  been  discovered.1

At  the  time  of  the  establishment  of  the  Supreme  Council  at
Charleston,  in  1801,  the  jurisdiction  over  the  degree  had  probably
been  assumed  by  the  Scottish  Rite  Masons,  for  the  Warrant  just
mentioned  was  granted  by  the  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  which
was  a  body  subordinate  to  the  Supreme  Council.

At  the  present  time  the  Mark  degree  constitutes  a  part  of  the
Rite  practiced  in  the  United  States,  and  is  under  the  jurisdiction  of
the  Grand  Chapter,  being  the  fourth  of  the  capitular  degrees.

Up  to  nearly  the  middle  of  the  present  century  the  degree  was
conferred  sometimes  in  a  lodge  working  under  the  Warrant  granted
by  the  Grand  Chapter  to  a  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons,  and
sometimes  in  a  Mark  Masters'  lodge  working  under  a  special  and
distinct  charter  from  the  Grand  Chapter.  But  in  1853  this  system
was  abolished  by  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  and  independent
Mark  Masters'  lodges  no  longer  exist  in  America.

In  Scotland,  after  the  transition  of  Operative  into  Speculative
Masonry,  the  Mark  degree  was  worked  originally  by  a  few  lodges
under  their  Craft  Warrant,  and  it  was  then  conferred  as  an  append-
age to  the  Fellow-Craft  degree.  This  was  done  as  late  as  1 860,  by
a  lodge  at  Glasgow,  which  action,  however,  attracted  the  notice  of
the  Grand  Chapter,  and  having  in  conference  with  the  Grand  Lodge
thoroughly  investigated  the  subject,  the  following  report  was  made,
which  as  giving  a  summary  of  the  rise  and  progress  of  the  degree  in
Scotland,  and  of  the  changes  of  position  to  which  it  was  subjected,
is  well  worthy  of  quotation.

In  this  report  it  was  unanimously  agreed  by  the  Committee  of
Conference  "  that  what  is  generally  known  under  the  name  of  the
Mark  Master's  degree  was  wrought  by  the  Operative  lodges  of
St.  John's  Masonry2  in  connection  with  the  Fellow-Craft  degree
before  the  institution  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland.  That  since
that  date  it  has  continued  to  be  wrought  in  the  Old  Operative
lodges,  but  in  what  may  be  called  the  Speculative  lodges,  it  was
never  worked  at  all — or  at  all  events  only  in  a  very  few.     That  this

1  The  American  Eagle  Master  Mark  Masons'  Lodge  was  in  existence  at  least  as  late  as
1807,  and  a  list  of  its  officers  is  given  in  the  register  published  in  that  year  by  J.  J.  Negrin,
and  appended  to  his  "  Free  Masons'  Vocal  Assistant,"  page  25.

2  By  St.  John's  Masonry  is  meant  in  Scotland  the  three  symbolic  degrees.

THE   MARK   DEGREE  819

degree  being,  with  the  exception  of  the  Old  Operative  lodges  above
mentioned,  entirely  abandoned  by  the  lodges  of  St.  John's  Masonry,
the  Supreme  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter  assumed  the  management
of  it  as  the  Fourth  degree  of  Masonry,  in  order  to  complete  the
instruction  of  their  candidates  in  the  preliminary  degrees,  before
admitting  them  to  the  Royal  Arch.  And,  finally,  that  this  degree,
whether  viewed  as  a  second  part  of  the  Fellow-Craft  degree  or  as  a
separate  degree,  has  never  been  recognized  or  worked  in  England,
Ireland,  or  the  Continent,  or  in  America,  as  a  part  of  St.  John's
Masonry."

It  was  also  stated  by  a  delegate  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland
at  a  conference  on  the  subject  of  the  Mark  degree,  held  at  London
in  1 87 1,  that  long  anterior  to  the  institution  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Scotland  two  classes  of  lodges  existed  in  that  kingdom  ;  namely,
those  which  worked  only  the  First  and  Second  degrees  and  of  which
the  Mark  Master  or  Overseer  was  Master,  and  those  which  worked
the  First,  Second,  and  Third  degrees,  over  which  the  Master  Mason
presided.

In  both  of  these  statements  there  are  errors  in  respect  to  the
Mark  degree,  which  have  been  corrected  by  subsequent  investiga-
tions. Bro.  Lyon,  whose  authority  on  this  subject  is  unquestion-
able, says  that  the  statements  in  regard  to  an  organization  for  con-
ferring the  Mark  under  Mark  Masters  or  Overseers  are  unsupported
by  any  existing  records.  The  lodges  previous  to  the  18th  century
"  knew  nothing  of  the  degrees  of  Mark  Men,  Mark  Master,  or
Master  Mason." 1-

As  a  degree  of  Masonry,  in  the  sense  which  we  give  to  the  word
degree,  the  system  of  Mark  Masonry  was  wholly  unknown  to  the
Operative  Masons  of  the  Middle  Ages.  It  has  been  shown  that  in
Germany  every  Apprentice  who  had  served  his  time,  on  being  ad-
mitted as  a  Fellow  Craft  received  a  Mark,  which  was  to  be  his  un-
changeably during  his  life.  The  reception  of  this  was  generally
accompanied  by  a  banquet,  furnished  to  a  certain  extent  of  expendi-
ture by  the  lodge  which  admitted  him  ;  but  there  is  not  the  slightest
allusion  in  any  document  extant  to  the  fact  that  the  bestowal  of  the
mark  was  accompanied  by  esoteric  ceremonies  which  would  give  it
the  slightest  resemblance  to  a  degree.

1  "  History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  71.

820  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

In  Scotland  the  Statutes  of  William  Schaw  required  all  Fellows,
and  sometimes  Apprentices,  to  select  their  marks,  which  were  to  be
recorded,  and  a  fee  was  paid  for  their  registration  ;  but  as  Bro.  Lyon
says,  there  is  not  anything  in  the  records  of  the  period  which  points
to  a  special  ceremony  in  connection  with  their  adoption.

In  England  preceding  the  middle  of  the  18th  century  we  have
nothing  in  reference  to  marks  in  the  Old  Charges  or  to  the  Mark
degree  in  the  minutes  of  lodges,  either  in  Operative  or  Speculative
Masonry.

We  are  indebted  to  Bro.  Hughan,  that  indefatigable  investigator,
for  the  earliest  authentic  record  we  possess  of  the  existence  of  the
Mark  degree  in  Scotland.  It  is  contained  in  an  extract  from  the
minutes  of  the  Operative  lodge  at  Banff,  the  date  of  which  is  Jan-
uary 7,  1778.     The  minute  is  in  the  following  words  :

"  That  in  time  coming  all  members  that  shall  hereafter  raise  to
the  degree  of  Mark  Mason,  shall  pay  one  mark  Scots,  but  not  to
obtain  the  degree  of  Mark  Mason  before  they  are  passed  Fellow-
Craft.  And  those  that  shall  take  the  degree  of  Mark  Master
Masons  shall  pay  one  shilling  and  sixpence  sterling  into  the  Treas-
urer for  behoofe  of  the  lodge.  None  to  attain  to  the  degree  of
Mark  Master  Mason  until  they  are  raised  Master."

From  this  record  we  learn  that  at  that  time  there  were  two  de-
grees in  connection  with  the  mark — one  called  "  Mark  Mason,"
probably  the  same  which  was  distinguished  elsewhere  as  "  Mark
Man,"  to  which  degree  Fellows  were  eligible,  and  another  called
"  Mark  Master  Mason,"  which  was  conferred  only  on  Master
Masons.

We  are  not,  however,  to  ascribe  the  year  1778,  the  date  of  the
record,  as  the  date  of  the  institution  of  either  of  the  degrees.  The
minutes  only  prove  that  the  degrees  were  then  in  existence,  and
show  the  regulation  by  which  they  were  governed.

Their  fabrication  must  have  taken  place  at  an  earlier  period,  but
how  much  earlier  we  are  unable  to  say.  But  I  imagine  that  we
would  be  safe  in  saying  that  neither  of  the  degrees  was  fabricated
anterior  to  the  middle  of  the  18th  century.  If  earlier,  some  no-
tice of  them  would  occur  in  the  minutes  of  the  Lodges  of  Mary's
Chapel  and  Kilwinning.  But  those  minutes  have  been  thoroughly
digested  by  Bro.  Lyon,  and  no  such  notice  has  been  met  with.

The  earliest  mention  of  the  two  Mark  degrees  in  England  is

THE   MARK   DEGREE  82*

found  in  the  Minute   Books  of  St.  Thomas  Lodge  No.    142  in.
London.

The  minutes  of  the  lodge  in  connection  with  this  subject  were
transcribed  by  Bro.  H.  C.  Levander,  Secretary  of  the  lodge,  and
are  contained  in  a  letter  from  Bro.  T.  B.  Whytehead,  Past  Master
of  York  Mark  Lodge,  which  was  inserted  in  the  Report  of  the
Committee  on  Correspondence  to  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Pennsyl-
vania, and  published  in  the  proceedings  of  that  body  for  the  year
1879.  From  the  minutes  of  the  lodge,  of  August  14,  1777,  we  are
put  in  possession  of  important  facts  bearing  on  this  subject  The
minute  is  as  follows  :

"August  14,  1777.

u  Regular  Lodge  night,  the  W.  M.,  the  Wardens,  the  Secretary,
and  Treasurer  present  worked  in  the  First  and  Second  degrees,  made
the  following  brothers  Mark  Masons  and  also  Mark  Master  Masons,
opened  at  6  o'clock."

From  this  and  from  other  minutes  of  the  lodge  of  subsequent
date  but  of  the  same  purport,  we  glean  the  facts  that  in  1777,  and
no  doubt  earlier  (the  lodge  was  warranted  in  1775),  the  two  degrees
of  Mark  Man  and  Mark  Master  were  worked  in  the  South  of  Eng-
land as  an  appendage  to  the  Fellow-Craft's  degree.

The  Lodge  of  St.  Thomas  received  its  Warrant  from  the  Grand
Lodge  of  "  Ancients,"  or  Athol  Grand  Lodge,  which  held  close  and
amicable  relations  with  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland.  But  there  is
also  evidence  that  at  a  later  period,  the  Mark  degree  was  worked  by
an  English  lodge  holding  its  Warrant  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of
"  Moderns,"  or  the  legitimate  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  though
that  body  religiously  repudiated  all  degrees  except  the  three  sym-
bolic degrees.

Bro.  Whytehead,  in  the  article  before  referred  to,  supplies  us
with  an  extract  from  the  minutes  of  the  Imperial  George  Lodge  of
Middleton  in  Lancashire,  which  had  been  warranted  in  1752  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  "  Moderns."  The  minute  is  dated  March  9,  1809,
and  is  in  these  words :

"  This  lodge  was  opened  in  due  form  at  8  o'clock,  in  peace  and
good  harmony.

"  When  the  following  Brethren  were  made  Mark  Masons."

Bro.   Whytehead  also  cites   the  Directory   of  Minerva   Lodge

822  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

No.  250  at  Hull,  as  showing  that  in  the  year  1802  that  lodge  con«
ferred,  besides  several  other  degrees,  those  of  "  Ark,  Mark,  and
Link."

Though  there  was  no  regular  book  of  the  Mark  Lodge,  yet  the
Secretary,  Bro.  M.  C.  Peck,  states  that  the  marks  were  entered  in
the  Craft  minute  book.

In  Kenning's  Masonic  Cyclopedia,  Bro.  Woodford  says:  "It  is
undoubtedly  true  that  in  Scotland  the  '  Falows  of  Craft '  took  up
their  marks,  but  we  are  not  aware,  so  far,  of  any  corresponding  use
in  England."1

But  the  records  of  St.  Thomas  Lodge  of  Lancashire  in  1775  and
of  Minerva  Lodge  of  Yorkshire  in  1809,  marks  were  regularly  se-
lected and  recorded  by  brethren  when  they  received  the  Mark
degree.     The  mark  was  always  appended  to  the  name  of  the  brother.

So  that  if,  by  the  expression  "  Taking  up  their  marks,"  of  which,
he  says,  there  was  no  "  corresponding  use  in  England,"  he  means
that  the  English  Mark  Masons  did  not  select  and  register  their
marks,  just  as  they  did  in  Scotland,  these  records  show  that  he  is
clearly  in  error.

Bro.  Woodford  also  says,  in  the  same  article,  "  Mark  Man,  in
our  humble  opinion,  is  historically  synonymous  with  Mark  Mason."

But  the  same  records  prove  that  in  1 775  the  degree  of  Mark
Man  was  distinct  from  that  of  Mark  Master,  though  in  1809  the
Minerva  Lodge  does  not  appear  to  have  practiced  the  former.

Whether  we  call  the  first  of  these  degrees  Mark  Man  or  Mark
Mason,  and  the  latter  Mark  Mason  or  Mark  Master  Mason,  the
words  Mark  Man  and  Mark  Mason,  in  the  meaning  given  to  them
at  the  present  day,  are  not  synonymous,  and  never  could  have  been,
because  they  indicate  two  distinct  things.

These  minutes  also  show  that  in  the  18th  century  the  Mark
degree  was  worked  independently  by  certain  Blue  lodges  under  their
Grand  Lodge  Warrants.  It  was,  however,  rejected  as  a  degree,  or
rather  not  recognized  by  the  United  Grand  Lodge,  in  the  articles
of  union  adopted  in  18 13.  It  has,  however,  always  been  recognized
in  Scotland  and  in  Ireland  as  a  part  of  Speculative  Masonry  neces-
sarily preparatory  to  the  Royal  Arch.

The  Mark  degree  was  introduced  into  the  United  States  at  a

J  Kenning's  "  Cyclopaedia, '  in  voce.     Mark  Man,  p.  453.

THE   MARK   DEGREE  823

time  subsequent  to  the  middle  of  the  last  century.  In  the  sparse-
ness  of  authentic  documents,  it  is  impossible  to  affix  the  precise  date
of  the  introduction  of  the  Mark  degree  into  America,  but  it  would
be,  I  think,  more  correct  to  place  that  date  at  about  the  close
rather  than  immediately  after  the  middle  of  the  century.  "  Inde-
pendent Mark  Lodges,"  says  Bro.  Hughan,1  "were  scattered
throughout  the  United  States  of  America  during  the  latter  part  of
the  last  century  and  early  in  the  present  one."  This,  I  have  no
doubt,  as  the  result  of  my  own  investigations,  is  the  proper  date  of
the  introduction  of  the  degree  in  this  country.

The  late  Bro.  F.  G.  Tisdall,  who  was  the  Master  of  St.  John's
Lodge  No.  1  in  the  city  of  New  York,  asserted  in  an  address  de-
livered at  the  Centennial  of  the  lodge,  in  1857,  that  the  lodge  re-
ceived its  original  Warrant  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  in
the  year  1757,  under  the  Grand  Mastership  of  Lord  Aberdour,  and
that  to  its  Warrant  was  "  annexed  a  Warrant  with  power  to  make
Mark  Masons."

If  this  assertion  were  true  it  would  establish  two  important  his-
torical facts  :  first,  that  the  Mark  degree  was  recognized  in  the
middle  of  the  last  century  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  (Mod-
erns), and  secondly,  that  it  was  practiced  at  the  same  period  in  the
United  States.

Unfortunately,  Bro.  Tisdall  has  verified  neither  of  these  state-
ments by  authentic  documents,  and  we  are  compelled  to  relegate
them  to  the  regions  of  the  mythical,  where  so  many  hundreds  of
hap-hazard  statements  of  Masonic  history  have  found  at  last  a
quiet  resting-place.8

He  has,  however,  cited  an  extract  from  the  minutes  which
shows  that  in  the  year  1 796  there  was  a  Mark  lodge,  connected  in
some  way  with  the  Craft  Lodge,  St.  John,  and  that  at  that  time
the  Mark  degree  was  conferred  by  it.3

It  must  be  admitted  as  a  well-proven  historical  fact  that  Mark

1  Mackey's  "National  Freemason,"  February,  1873,  vol.  ii.,  p.  348.

'In  the  article  just  cited  from  Mackey's  "  National  Freemason,"  Bro.  Hughan
has  written  an  able  criticism  on  the  address  of  Bro.  Tisdall  as  well  as  some  Essays  on
the  same  subject  published  by  Tisdall  in  Pomeroy's  "  Democrat."  Hughan  has  very
conclusively  proved  that  the  claims  of  Tisdall  for  so  early  an  existence  in  America  of
the  Mark  degree  have  no  historical  foundation.

•The  minute  reads  as  follows  :  "The  accounts  of  St.  John's  Mark  Lodge  No.  1,
made  up  to  December  23,  1796,  show  a  balance  due  to  the  treasury  of  £1  18s."

824  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

lodges  existed  in  America  and  that  the  Mark  Master's  degree  was
conferred  at  the  earliest  about  the  close  of  the  last  century.

It  was  most  probably  introduced  from  Scotland  or  from  the
Athol  Grand  Lodge  of  England.  St.  John's  Lodge  of  New  York,
already  mentioned,  though  it  was  originally  warranted  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  "  Moderns,"  afterward  attached  itself  to  the  Grand  Lodge
of  New  York  which  was  established  by  the  "  Ancients  "  under  the
Duke  of  Athol  in  1781.  It  will  be  remarked,  as  has  been  proven
by  Bro.  Hughan,  that  notwithstanding  the  assertion  of  Tisdall,
there  is  no  mention  in  the  records  of  a  Mark  lodge  or  of  the  Mark
degree  in  the  records,  until  after  it  became  connected  with  the
"Ancients."

Though  it  is  probable  that  in  America,  as  in  Scotland  and  in
England,  the  Mark  Master's  degree  was  conferred  in  connection
with  Craft  lodges,  we  learn  by  authentic  testimonies  that  it  was
about  the  beginning  of  the  present  century,  perhaps  a  few  years
earlier,  conferred  in  Mark  lodges,  which  seem  to  have  been  under
the  charge  of  Chapters.

Webb,  in  the  18 12  edition  of  his  Freemasons  Monitor,  records
two  Mark  lodges  as  existing  in  Rhode  Island  and  seventeen  in  New
York.  The  Grand  Chapters  of  both  of  these  states  were  organized
in  1 798.  But  there  were  Royal  Arch  Chapters  in  existence  before
this  date,  and  Mark  lodges  also.

The  first  constitution  adopted  in  1 798  by  the  Grand  Royal  Arch
Chapter  of  the  Northern  States  of  America,  which  body  afterward
became  the  General  Grand  Chapter  of  the  United  States,  recog-
nized the  Mark  Master  Mason's  degree  as  a  part  of  its  system  of
degrees.  The  Constitutions  adopted  in  1799  expressly  provided
for  the  granting  of  warrants  to  hold  Mark  Master  Masons'  Lodges
separately.

For  a  long  time  afterward  Mark  lodges  were  held  generally  in
the  bosom  of  the  Chapters  and  under  Chapter  Warrants,  and  some-
times in  distinct  lodges  under  Warrants  issued  by  the  State  Grand
Chapters.  Perhaps  the  last  of  these  was  St.  John's  Mark  Lodge
No.  1,  in  the  city  of  Charleston,  South  Carolina.

But  in  the  year  1856  the  General  Grand  Chapter  abolished  in-
dependent Mark  lodges,  and  ever  since  the  degree  has  been  con-
ferred in  a  lodge  working  in  the  bosom  of  a  Chapter  and  under  the
Chapter  Warrant.

THE   MARK   DEGREE  825

The  theory  entertained  by  some  that  the  Mark  degree  was  in-
troduced into  America  by  the  Masons  of  the  Scottish  Rite,  founded
on  the  isolated  fact  that  in  the  year  1803  a  Mark  lodge  had  been
warranted  in  the  city  of  Charleston  by  the  Grand  Council  of  Princes
of  Jerusalem,  is  wholly  untenable.  It  is  more  probable  that  the
jurisdiction  over  the  degree  was  assumed  in  that  case  by  the  Coun-
cil, the  degree  having  existed  long  before  in  this  country,  whither
it  had  been  brought  from  Scotland  and  England  through  Char-
ters issued  for  the  establishment  of  subordinate  lodges  of  Craft
Masons.

The  Mark  degree  appears,  indeed,  to  have  been  something  of  a
waif  floating  on  the  waters — a  sort  of  flotsam  and  jetsam — with-
out any  lawful  owner,  and  claimed  and  seized  sometimes  by  Royal
Arch  Chapters,  sometimes  by  Craft  lodges,  sometimes  by  inde-
pendent Mark  lodges,  and  lastly  by  the  Grand  Council  of  Princes
of  Jerusalem  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite.  The
degree  was  traveling  about  during  the  close  of  the  last  and  the
beginning  of  the  present  century  like  Marryat's  "  Japhet,"  in  search
of  a  father.  Fortunately,  it  has  at  last  found  a  parent  in  Scotland,
Ireland,  and  this  country,  in  the  Grand  Chapter,  which  has  assumed
the  paternity.  In  England,  maternal  relations  are  exercised  by  the
Grand  Mark  Lodge,  which  is  nursing  the  bantling  until  such  time
as  the  Grand  Chapter  shall  acknowledge  a  fatherhood.

From  this  indicative  sketch  of  the  position  occupied  by  Mark
Masonry  in  the  series  of  Masonic  grades,  we  pass  to  a  consideration
of  its  legend — that  mythical  history  fabricated  at  the  time  of  its
adoption,  as  a  part  of  the  system  of  Speculative  Masonry.

In  pursuing  our  further  investigations  in  this  way  we  necessarily
abandon  the  functions  of  the  historian  and  assume  those  of  the
fabulist.  Yet  the  investigation  is  of  great  importance,  for  the  fact
of  the  direct  descent  of  Speculative  Masonry  from  the  Operative
art  practiced  by  the  mediaeval  builders,  is  by  no  circumstance  more
clearly  and  positively  proved  than  by  the  modification  of  the  system
of  Marks  peculiar  to  the  latter,  which  was  invented  by  the  former.

This  modification  was,  however,  a  very  important  one.  The
practice  of  using  proprietary  Marks,  which  was  in  use  among  the
Operative  Masons  of  the  Middle  Ages,  and  which  lasted  longer  in
Scotland  than  in  any  other  country,  undoubtedly  suggested  to  the
Speculative  Masons  the  thought  which  resulted  in  the  fabrication  of

826  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

the  Mark  degree.  At  first  the  idea  of  a  proprietary  mark  may  have
occurred  to  the  inventors  of  the  different  legends.  If  so,  it  gradu-
ally became  obsolescent,  and  at  this  day  the  Mark  of  a  Speculative
Mark  Master  bears  in  its  accepted  character  and  use  a  much  nearer
resemblance  to  the  tessera  hospitalis  of  the  Ancients  than  to  the
proprietary  mark  of  an  Operative  Mason  of  the  Middle  Ages.  To
this  particular  point  I  shall  have  occasion  hereafter  to  revert.

As  the  government  of  the  Mark  degree  differed  in  different
countries  and  at  different  times,  so  the  legend  seems  also  to  have
varied,  and  we  find  several  forms  of  it  in  the  rituals  of  the  degree.

In  the  middle  of  the  last  century,  or  a  little  later,  when  in  Scot-
land and  in  England  the  Mark  system  was  divided  into  two  grades
or  ranks,  that  of  Mark  Man  and  that  of  Mark  Master,  the  design  of
the  Mark  was  supposed  to  be  very  different  from  that  of  indicating
a  proprietorship.

The  duty  of  the  Mark  Men  is  said  in  the  ritual  to  have  been  to
examine  the  materials  as  they  came  out  of  the  hands  of  the  work-
men, and  then  to  place  a  Mark  upon  them  so  as  to  enable  them  to
be  put  together  with  greater  facility  and  precision  when  brought
from  the  quarries,  the  forest,  and  the  clay-grounds  to  the  city  of
Jerusalem.  These  marks  were  mathematical  figures,  name  squares,
levels,  and  perpendiculars  which  were  used  by  command  of  King
Solomon.

The  Mark  Masters  were  to  examine  the  materials  when  they
were  brought  to  the  Temple  to  see  that  every  part  duly  corresponded,
and  thus  to  prevent  confusion  and  mistake  in  fitting  the  respective
parts  to  their  proper  places.

In  doing  this  they  were,  of  course,  guided  by  the  marks  which
had  been  placed  upon  the  stones  and  other  materials  by  the  Mark
Men.  The  Mark  Masters  then  placed  an  additional  Mark  upon
them  to  show  that  they  approved  the  work  which  had  been  pre-
viously examined  by  the  Mark  Men.

In  all  this  there  is  not  the  slightest  notion  of  a  proprietorship.
The  stones  were  marked  by  the  mediaeval  Mason,  so  that  the  work
of  each  man  might  be  identified  and  he  be  made  responsible  for  its
imperfection  or  receive  due  credit  for  its  merit.

But  the  stones  and  timbers  were  not  according  to  this  legend
marked  for  any  such  purpose  by  the  workmen,  who  "  hewed,  cut,
and  squared  "  them.     The  Mark  was  placed  upon  them  by  the  Mark

THE   MARK  DEGREE  827

Masters,  who  superintended  the  Masons  and  carpenters  in  the  quarries
and  the  forests,  and  who  placed  a  Mark  on  each  stone  and  timber
so  that  when  transported  to  Jerusalem,  the  Mark  Masters  would
find  no  difficulty,  when  guided  by  these  Marks,  in  placing  those
materials  together  which  were  intended  to  be  in  juxtaposition.

Such  a  system  prevails  at  the  present  day  among  stonemasons,
carpenters,  and  joiners,  so  as  to  point  out  precisely  the  positions  to
be  occupied  by  the  different  parts  of  the  work  upon  which  they  are
engaged  when  they  are  to  be  put  together.

But  this  is  altogether  different  from  the  system  of  proprietary
Marks  which  was  pursued  by  the  Operative  Masons  of  the  Middle
Ages.

There  was  another  legend  introduced  at  a  later  period,  for  the
preliminary  degree  of  Mark  Man  appears  to  have  been  omitted  by
that  time  from  the  system.  It  was  most  probably  the  ritual  prac-
ticed in  this  country  before  the  close  of  the  last  century.  It  is  that
which  was  used  by  the  Mark  lodge  in  Charleston,  which  had  been
chartered  in  1804  by  the  Grand  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem.
We  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  this  was  the  ritual  used  at  that
time  by  the  Mark  lodges  in  America,  from  whom  the  Charleston
Mark  lodge  must  have  received  it,  as  there  is  no  other  source  known
from  which  it  could  have  been  derived.

The  legend  in  this  ritual  differs  very  materially  from  the  former,
which  has  been  just  described.  There  is  no  longer  a  pretension
that  the  Mark  was  used  as  a  means  of  indicating  that  two  distinct
pieces  of  material  were  when  brought  together  to  be  put  in  juxta-
position. That  idea  has  now  been  entirely  eliminated  from  the  de-
gree.

In  this  more  modern  legend,  the  Mark  is  said  to  have  been  used
for  two  purposes.  In  the  first  place,  Hiram  Abif,  seeing  that  it  was
impossible  to  superintend  so  large  a  number  of  workmen  as  were
employed  in  the  building  of  the  Temple,  appointed  overseers  to  the
different  classes.  He  was  careful  to  select  only  men  of  irreproach-
able character  for  this  responsible  office.

He  was  particularly  attached  to  the  Giblemites  or  Stonecutters,
whom  he  formed  into  a  body,  whose  duty  it  was,  as  overseers,  to
procure  from  the  Treasurer-General  such  sums  of  money  as  were
necessary  to  pay  off  the  workmen  over  whom  they  presided,  which
was  done  at  a  particular  time  and  in  a  particular  place.

828  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

To  expedite  the  task  of  payment,  and  to  prevent  confusion  and
imposition  among  the  workmen,  the  Giblemites  were  ordered  to
provide  for  themselves  a  particular  Mark  by  which  they  and  the
amount  due  to  each  one  were  easily  recognized  ;  and  presenting
this  Mark  in  a  particular  manner,  each  Mark  Master  received  at
once  the  wages  due  to  him.

But  the  Mark  thus  selected  was  to  be  used  not  on  the  stone  as
a  proof  of  who  was  the  cutter  of  the  stone,  but  only  as  a  jewel  to
be  employed  at  the  hour  of  paying  wages,  so  that  the  paymaster
might  commit  no  error  in  the  payment.

But  the  Mark  was  used  also  for  another  purpose.  This  purpose
was  one  utterly  unknown  to  the  Operative  Masons  or  to  the  Specula-
tive Masons  who  first  founded  the  degree.

A  Mark  Master  being  in  distress  or  danger,  has  a  talisman  for
relief  in  his  Mark.  He  sends  it,  says  the  ritual,  to  a  Mark  Mason,
who  instantly  obeys  the  summons  and  flies  to  his  relief  with  a  heart
warmed  with  the  impulse  of  brotherly  love.

The  Mark  might  also  be  put  in  pledge  if  the  owner  was  "in
the  utmost  distress ; "  and  he  was  to  redeem  it  as  soon  as  it  should
be  in  his  power.

In  this  way  the  Mark  of  the  Speculative  Masons  began  to  cease
to  bear  any  analogy  to  that  of  the  Operative  Stonecutters  whence
it  was  originally  derived.  It  was  no  longer  a  device  placed  by  a
builder  upon  the  stone  which  he  had  wrought,  and  the  proprietor-
ship of  which  he  by  this  token  claimed — not  a  proprietorship  in  the
material,  but  in  the  workmanship  with  which  his  skill  had  fitted  it
for  the  building.

In  the  first  ritual  of  the  Mark  degree,  adopted  at  the  time,  most
probably,  of  its  institution,  though  this  design  of  a  proprietary  Mark
was  not  exactly  observed,  still  the  Speculative  Mark  referred  to  an
architectural  purpose,  that  of  indicating  the  proper  position  of  the
materials.

There  was  enough  of  analogy  to  the  Operative  preserved  by  the
Speculative  Mark  to  indicate  and  to  clearly  prove  the  one  was  the
outcome  of  the  other.

But  now  all  analogy  or  resemblance  to  the  operative  art  was
obliterated,  and  the  more  recent  Mark  Masters  began  to  look  out-
side of  the  Craft  of  Operative  Masons  for  characteristics  to  apply
to  the  Mark.     It  became  to  him,  as  it  is  called  in  the  ritual  quoted

THE   MARK   DEGREE  829

above,  a  "talisman,"  a  means  of  obtaining  relief,  either  by  summon-
ing with  it  a  brother  Mark  Master  to  his  assistance,  or  by  pledging
it  to  obtain  the  loan  of  money.

In  plain  words  it  ceased  to  have  any  relation  to  the  proprietary
mark  of  the  Cologne  and  Strasburg  Masons,  and  found  its  true
analogy  in  the  tessera  hospitalis  of  the  ancient  Greeks  and  Romans.

The  tessera  hospitalis,  or  "  hospitable  die,"  was  a  piece  of  bone,
of  stone,  or  ivory,  or  any  other  material.  It  was  a  custom  among
the  ancients  that  when  two  persons  became  allied  as  friends,  they
took  such  a  die,  which  they  divided  into  two  parts,  each  one  inscrib-
ing his  name  upon  one  of  the  halves,  which  were  then  interchanged.
The  Scholiast  on  Euripides  says  that  if  at  any  future  period  either
needed  assistance,  on  showing  his  broken  half  of  the  die  to  the  other
the  required  aid  was,  if  possible,  granted.

Plautus,  the  Roman  dramatist,  gives  an  interesting  instance  of
the  use  of  the  tessera  in  the  interview  between  Agorastocles  and
his  unknown  uncle,  Hanno,  described  in  the  play  of  "  Pcenulus."

"  Hanno.     Hail,  my  countryman.

11  Agorastocles.  Whosoever  thou  art,  I  hail  thee  also  in  the
name  of  Pollux.  If  thou  needest  anything,  speak,  I  beseech  thee,
and  ask  it  for  the  sake  of  thy  country.

"  Hanno.  I  thank  thee,  but  I  have  a  lodging  here.  Show  me,
if  you  know  him,  Agorastocles,  the  son  of  Antedamas.  Knowest
thou  here  a  certain  youth  called  Agorastocles  ?

''Agorastocles.  If  thou  art  lboking  for  the  adopted  son  of
Antedamas,  I  am  the  one  thou  art  seeking.

"  Hanno.     Ha  !  what  do  I  hear  ?

11  Agorastocles.     That  I  am  the  son  of  Antedamas.

11  H  tnno.  If  this  be  so,  compare  with  me,  if  thou  pleasest,  the
hospitable  die  {tessera  hospitalis)  ;  here  it  is,  I  have  brought  it  with
me.

"  Agorastocles.  Come  then,  let  me  see  it ;  it  is  the  exact  counter-
part of  that  which  I  have  at  home.

"  Hanno.  Much  I  greet  thee,  oh,  my  friend  !  for  thy  father,
Antidamas,  thy  father,  I  say,  was  bound  to  me  by  the  ties  of
hospitality.  This  hospitable  die  {tessera  hospitalis)  was  in  com-
mon with  him  and  me.

44  Agorastocles.     Therefore  thou   shalt  lodge  with  me.     For  I

830  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

deny  neither  the  rights  of   hospitality  nor  Carthage  where  I  was
born."1

The  early  Christians  also  had  their  tessera,  which  they  carried
about  in  their  journeys  from  one  place  to  another  as  a  means  of
introduction  to  their  fellow-Christians  whom  they  might  meet  Dr.
Mason  Harris,  in  a  dissertation  on  this  subject,  says  that  the  use  of
these  tessera  in  the  place  of  written  certificates  of  character  lasted
until  the  nth  century.

It  is  very  evident  that  the  fabricator  of  the  Mark  ritual  which
we  are  considering  was  well  acquainted  with  the  nature  of  these
Greek,  Roman,  and  Christian  tessera,  and  that  they  suggested  to
him  the  idea  of  transmuting  the  proprietary  Mark  of  the  Operative
Masons  which  had  given  origin  to  the  Mark  degree  from  a  token
of  ownership  in  the  work  of  the  stone  to  a  badge  of  fraternity,  and
a  means  of  claiming  brotherly  assistance.

In  the  early  part  of  the  present  century,  perhaps  even  much
earlier,  the  ritual  was  again  changed,  and  that  form  adopted  which
being  either  invented  or  approved  by  Thomas  Smith  Webb,  the  most
prominent  ritual  maker  of  his  day,  is  now  the  form  universally  prac-
ticed in  this  country.

The  legend  attached  to  this  ritual  enters  into  several  details  not
embraced  in  the  former  ones,  but  it  continues  to  maintain  the  theory
that  the  Mark  is  a  token  of  friendship,  a  theory  which  I  have  al-
ready said  a  dozen  times  was  utterly  unknown  to  the  old  Operative
Masons.

The  legend  is  to  this  effect.  At  the  building  of  the  Temple  of
Solomon,  a  young  craftsman  found  in  the  quarries  a  stone  of  a
peculiar  form  and  beauty,  and  on  which  was  inscribed  certain  mysti-
cal characters  the  meaning  of  which  was  wholly  unknown  to  him.
Nevertheless,  he  carried  it  up  to  the  inspectors  of  the  materials
brought  up  for  the  construction  of  the  temple,  and  disingenuously
but  unsuccessfully  attempted  to  pass  it  off  as  a  stone  wrought  by
himself.  Some  time  afterward  this  very  stone,  which  had  been  pre-
pared by  Hiram  Abif,  for  a  special  purpose  in  the  building,  was
found  to  be  wanting.  After  a  strict  search  it  was  discovered  among
the  rubbish    and  applied  to  its  original  destination.     In  honor  of

xPlautus,  "  Pcenulus,"  Act  V.,  Scene  2,  ver.  80.

THE   MARK   DEGREE  831

Hiram  Abif,  who  had  constructed  the  stone  and  placed  his  own
mark  upon  it,  a  representation  of  this  stone  in  gold  or  silver  is  used
as  the  decoration  of  the  degree ;  it  is  worn  by  Mark  Masters,  and
the  traditional  mark  of  Hiram  being  a  circle  of  letters,  each  brother
is  directed  to  select  his  own  mark  and  place  it  within  the  circle.
This  mark  is  inscribed  by  the  lodge  in  its  register  or  Book  of  Marks.
The  representation  of  it  in  metal  is  often,  but  not  always,  nor  by
any  obligation,  worn  upon  his  person.  It  is  sometimes  used  when
in  distress  as  a  means  of  obtaining  aid  and  relief.

To  be  more  precise  in  the  description  :  the  American  ritual  re-
quires the  jewel,  as  it  is  called,  to  be  "  made  of  gold  or  silver,  usually
of  the  former  metal  (sometimes  of  a  precious  stone,  as  opal  or  agate),
and  in  the  form  of  a  keystone.  On  the  obverse  or  front  surface  the
device  or  mark  selected  by  the  owner  must  be  engraved  within  a
circle  composed  of  the  letters  H.T.W.S.S.T.K.S.  On  the  reverse
surface  the  name  of  the  owner,  of  his  chapter,  and  the  time  of  his
advancement  to  the  degree  may  be  inscribed,  though  this  is  not
legally  necessary.

In  Scotland  the  usage  is  a  little  different.  The  jewel  must  be
of  mother-of-pearl  and  wedge-shaped.  In  a  circle  on  one  side  are
the  Hebrew  letters  Bia»lD»ayn;  on  the  other  side  are  letters
conveying  the  same  meaning  in  the  vernacular  language  with  the
wearer's  mark  in  the  center.1

In  this  ritual  and  legend,  as  in  the  preceding  one,  the  Mark  has
altogether  lost  the  proprietary  character  which  it  had  among  the
Craft  in  the  Middle  Ages.  It  has  become  a  Masonic  decoration
and  a  means  of  proving  the  claims  of  its  owner  to  certain  pre-
rogatives peculiar  to  Mark  Masters.

In  one  point,  however,  all  the  legends  agree.  Each  fixes  the
time  and  place  of  instituting  the  degree  at  the  building  of  Solomon,
and  they  attribute  the  establishment  of  the  regulations  which  then
governed  it  to  the  wisdom  and  foresight  of  Hiram  Abif,  though  ac-
cording to  the  most  modern  ritual,  the  circumstances  which  are  com-
memorated in  the  ceremony  of  initiation  occurred  after  the  death  of
that  distinguished  artist.

As  the  result  of  our  investigation,  I  think  that  we  are  forced  to
come  to  the  conclusion    that  the    Mark  degree  first  made  its  ap-

1  Laws  of  the  Supreme  Grand  Chapter  of  Scotland,  cap.  vii.,  4.

832  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

pearance  in  Speculative  Masonry  about  the  middle  of  the  18th  cen-
tury. We  can  find  no  records  in  which  such  a  degree  is  mentioned
previous  to  that  period.

In  a  report  made  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Mark  Masons  of  Eng-
land in  1873,  it  is  said,  with  a  great  deal  more  of  boldness  than  of
accuracy,  that  "  there  is  probably  no  degree  in  Freemasonry  that
can  lay  claim  to  greater  antiquity  than  those  of  Mark  Man  or  Mark
Mason  and  Mark  Master  Mason."  It  is  a  very  great  pity,  for  it  is
vastly  detrimental  to  the  intelligent  study  of  Masonic  history,  that
men  otherwise  accurate  and  trustworthy  should  indulge  in  such  fan-
ciful speculations.  To  say  nothing  of  the  Fellow-Craft  and  Master's
degrees  which  antedate  all  allusions  to  Mark  degrees  by  about  half
a  century,  all  the  degrees  of  the  Chevalier  Ramsay's  system  and
many  other  high  degrees  were  known  and  practiced  at  a  time  when
Mark  Masonry  as  a  Speculative  degree  or  degrees  had  been  un-
heard of.

There  can  not,  I  think,  be  any  doubt  that  Scotland  was  the  place
where  the  Mark  degree  was  instituted.  "  It  is  to  Scotland,"  says
Bro.  Whytehead  (in  the  letter  heretofore  cited),  "  that  we  must  look
for  the  birthplace  of  the  Mark  degree  as  a  Speculative  working  ; "
and  he  feels  sure  that  the  degree  "  came  into  working  existence
toward  the  close  of  the  last  century,  when  there  was  a  rage  for  the
multiplication  of  Orders."

In  both  of  these  opinions  I  concur,  except  that  I  would  prefer
to  make  the  time  of  birth  about  the  middle,  rather  than  toward  the
close,  of  the  last  century.  But  in  either  way  the  difference  would
not  be  much  more  than  a  score  of  years.

We  must  also,  I  am  sure,  ascribe  the  fabrication  of  the  degree
to  suggestions  derived  from  the  use  of  proprietary  marks  by  the
Freemasons  of  Germany,  whence  they  were  introduced  into  Scot-
land. There  they  remained  long  after  they  had  ceased  to  be  em-
ployed in  other  countries.

It  has  been  shown  that  in  Operative  Masonry  the  Mark  was  be-
stowed upon  the  Fellow-craft  or  sometimes  upon  the  Apprentice,
unaccompanied  with  any  other  ceremonial  than  that  of  a  modest
banquet  in  Germany  at  the  expense  of  the  lodge,  and  that  of  a
registration  of  the  mark  in  Scotland  at  the  expense  of  the  candidate.

Notwithstanding  this,  when  the  inclination  to  create  a  new  de-
gree in  Speculative  Masonry  took  possession  of  the  minds  of  cer-

THE   MARK   DEGREE  833

tain  Scottish  Masons,  the  very  fact  that  the  Mark  was  bestowed
without  any  ceremonial,  inspired  the  thought  that  this  manifest
want  of  any  formality  in  the  bestowal  might  be  well  supplied  by
the  fabrication  of  a  degree  in  which  the  ceremony  might  take  place.

Whytehead  supposes,  but  I  can  not  agree  with  him,  that  "  it  may
have  even  been  the  case  that  originally  some  kind  of  Mark  work-
ing, though,  of  course,  not  the  same  as  at  present,  once  formed  an
integral  part  or  complement  of  the  Second  degree,  just  as  some
Masons  imagine  the  Royal  Arch  did  of  the  Third  degree,  and  that
for  the  sake  of  abbreviating  the  ceremonies  both  were  divorced
and  fashioned  into  separated  and  distinct  workings  under  newly  in-
vented names."

But  it  is  not  necessary  to  indulge  in  any  such  supposition,  which,
besides,  is  not  sustained  by  the  records.  The  mere  fact  that  there
was  in  Operative  Masonry  a  Mark,  which  every  Fellow  received
upon  his  admission  to  the  Craft  and  preparatory  to  his  going  to
work  as  a  journeyman,  would  have  been  sufficient  to  suggest  to  an
inventive  genius  the  most  fitting  points  of  a  new  degree,  at  a  time
when  the  manufactory  of  degrees  had  been  established  as  a  popular
and  successful  branch  of  business  in  Speculative  Masonry.

Notwithstanding  that  the  use  of  proprietary  Marks  by  the  German
and  Scottish  Operative  Masons  had  furnished  the  suggestion  for  the
invention  of  a  degree  in  Speculative  Masonry,  the  fabricators  of  that
degree  did  not  strictly  preserve  the  system  by  which  the  use  of
Marks  had  always  been  regulated,  which  was  simply  to  each  stone-
cutter the  means  of  identifying  the  stones  which  he  had  cut.

I  do  not  believe  that  the  Mark  was  employed  simply  to  give  the
Overseers  and  Masters  of  the  works  a  ready  means  of  calculating  the
amount  of  pay  due  to  each  workman.  Nothing  of  this  is  to  be
found  in  any  of  the  old  statutes  or  regulations.

Besides,  the  Mark  was  not  placed  on  all  stories  indiscriminately,
and  if  the  calculation  of  wages  was  made  by  the  marked  stones
only,  the  workmen  would  be  constantly  defrauded  of  a  part  of  their
dues.

It  was  a  regulation  that  those  stones  only  should  be  marked
which  were  of  importance  in  the  building  and  which  required  skill
and  dexterity  in  their  construction.

The  inscribing  of  a  Mark  on  a  well-cut  and  polished  stone  was
rather  intended  to  secure  to  the  stonecutter  a  just  reputation  for  his
53

834  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

work  than  to  enable  an  overseer  to  calculate  the  amount  of  wages
which  were  due.

If  I  am  correct  in  my  views,  the  Masons  placed  their  Marks
upon  the  stones  which  they  cut  in  the  same  spirit  in  which  the  early
printers  affixed,  each  one,  a  peculiar  device  on  the  title-pages  of  the
books  which  were  issued  from  his  press.1

It  is  evident  from  what  has  been  here  said  that  the  design  of  the
Mark  has  been  greatly  changed  in  its  adoption  by  the  Speculative
Masons  from  that  of  the  Operative  Builders,  from  whom,  however,
the  former  derived  it.

In  one  respect  the  various  rituals  of  Mark  Masonry  agree,  with-
out the  slightest  variation.  They  all  placed  the  institution  of  the
system  of  giving  Marks  to  a  portion  of  the  Craft  at  the  time  of
building  King  Solomon's  Temple,  and  the  legend  connects  them
with  Hiram  Abif,  whose  supposed  personal  Mark,  surrounding  that
of  the  wearer,  constitutes  the  decoration  of  the  degree  of  Mark
Master  according  to  the  modern  ritual.

I  need  hardly  say  that  this  story  of  the  Temple  origin  of  the
Mark  degree  is  a  mere  myth,  having  no  more  foundation  in  history
than  the  Hiramic  legend  of  the  Third  degree.

Its  adoption  in  the  Mark  Master's  degree  is,  however,  a  conclu-
sive proof  that  that  degree  in  Speculative  Masonry  was  fabricated
after  the  invention  of  the  Third  degree,  in  the  first  quarter  of  the
1 8th  century.

In  conclusion,  as  it  has  been  shown  that  the  Mark  of  the  modern
Speculative  Freemason  was  evidently  suggested  by  that  of  the  Ger-
man and  especially  the  Scottish  Operative  Masons,  and  as  the  em-
ployment of  Marks  by  the  latter  has  evidently  suggested  their  adop-
tion by  the  Mark  Masters  when  fabricating  their  degree,  so  I  may
repeat  what  was  said  in  the  beginning  of  this  chapter,  that  there  is
no  stronger  or  more  convincing  proof  of  the  connection  between
the  Operative  Freemasons  of  the  Middle  Ages  and  the  Speculative
Freemasons  of  the  present  day,  and  of  the  direct  descent  of  the
latter  from  the  former,  than  that  which  is  furnished  by  the  Mark
Master's  degree.

1  Some  of  these  old  printers'  devices  bear  a  very  striking  resemblance  to  the  stone-
cutters' marks.  That  resembling  an  inverted  4  is  very  common  to  both.  See  Fosbrook's
**  Encyclopedia  of  Antiquities,"  p.  445,  or  the  title-page  of  any  old  book.

THE   MARK   DEGREE  835

But  we  must  be  careful  to  repudiate  as  simply  a  myth  of  modern
origin,  the  notion  that  there  was  ever  a  Mark  degree  before  the
middle  or  toward  the  close  of  the  last  century.

Still  the  Mark  degree,  though  it  has  no  antiquity,  has  its  his-
torical value  as  a  factor  in  determining  the  true  origin  of  the  Specu-
lative system,  no  investigation  of  which  could  be  correctly  or  use-
fully conducted  without  a  due  consideration  of  the  modern  Mark
degree.

CHAPTER  XXVI

TRANSITION  FROM   OPERATIVE  TO    SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY

|HE  history  of  the  institution  of  Freemasonry  is
naturally  divided  into  two  distinct  yet  closely
connected  periods.  The  first  period  embraces
the  history  of  Operative  Freemasonry ;  the  sec-
ond that  of  Speculative  Freemasonry.

But  the  first  of  these  periods  did  not  pass  at
once  and,  as  it  were,  by  a  leap  into  the  second.
The  change  which  took  place  was  a  gradual  one.  The  steps  which
led  from  the  one  to  the  other  were  almost  imperceptible.  The
progress  was  slow  and  gradual.  There  was  a  time  when  all  Free-
masonry was  purely  Operative,  and  there  was  a  time  when  it  be-
came solely  Speculative.  We  have  abundant  facts  to  prove  this
statement.  But  it  is  impossible  from  any  records  in  our  possession
to  define  the  precise  epoch  when  the  change  took  place.

The  naturalist  with  all  the  science  in  his  possession  is  at  a  loss
to  determine  the  precise  limits  which  bound  the  different  kingdoms
of  nature.  The  mineral  passes  by  an  imperceptible  gradation  into
the  vegetable,  and  the  highest  species  of  the  vegetable  assimilate
with  a  remarkable  likeness  of  organization  to  the  lowest  tribes  of
the  animal  kingdom.  It  requires  even  in  this  advanced  state  of
science,  the  largest  amount  of  professional  knowledge  and  experi-
ence to  determine  in  certain  instances  to  which  division  of  nature
certain  specimens  rightly  belong.

So  in  the  history  of  the  Masonic  institution,  there  are  well-
marked  eras  in  its  annals  when  we  are  at  no  loss  to  define  the  dis-
tinctive character  of  its  workings.  There  are  again  points  on  the
extreme  limits  of  its  two  periods,  when  the  Operative  and  the
Speculative  elements  are  so  intimately  connected  and  clash  so  con-
fusedly together,  like  the  prismatic  colors  of  the  spectrum,  that  it
becomes  extremely  difficult,  if  not  absolutely  impossible,  to  define
the  precise  line  of  demarcation.

836

OPERATIVE  TO   SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY      837

Thus  we  know  with  certainty  that  the  Freemasonry  of  the  1 2th
century,  which  had  penetrated  every  country  of  the  Continent  of
Europe,  was  wholly  Operative,  without  a  particle  of  the  Speculative
element  in  it ;  we  know,  too,  that  the  Freemasonry  of  the  19th  cen-
tury, which  prevails  over  the  whole  civilized  world,  is  entirely  Specu-
lative and  has  ceased  to  have  any  social  connection  with  the  Opera-
tive Craft.

But  at  what  precise  period  the  Operative  art  ceased  to  form  a
part  of  the  institution  of  Freemasonry,  and  when  the  Speculative
science  threw  off  all  connection  with  it,  are  historical  questions
which  admit  hardly  of  a  possible  conjecture,  certainly  not  of  any
positive  solution.

A  great  difficulty  which  we  encounter  in  the  discussion  of  this
subject  is  that  the  change  from  one  to  the  other  branch  began  to
assume  a  distinct  form  in  different  countries  at  different  periods.

Thus,  in  London,  Speculative  Freemasonry  had  assumed  a  dis-
tinct and  independent  form  many  years  before  the  lodges  of  Scot-
land had  divested  themselves  of  the  Operative  influence,  and  even
in  the  same  kingdom  there  were  English  lodges  in  the  provinces
which  mingled  Operative  and  Speculative  Freemasonry  in  their  work,
long  after  the  former  system  had  been  wholly  abandoned  by  the
lodges  in  the  Metropolis.

Though  it  is  probable  that  most  readers  understand  the  distinc-
tion between  Masonry  and  Freemasonry,  it  may  be  well  to  impress
that  distinction  upon  their  minds,  that  during  this  investigation
they  may  perfectly  appreciate  the  train  of  reasoning  that  is  pursued.

Masonry  is  merely  the  art  of  building.  It  has  existed  from  the
earliest  historic  times,  when  men  began  to  need  places  of  shelter
from  the  inclemency  of  the  seasons,  and  must  continue  to  exist  so
long  as  they  require  houses  for  their  habitation.  With  its  history
we  have  no  concern.

Freemasonry  is  the  art  of  building  connected  in  its  practical
operations  with  a  Guild  organization.  It  was  always  a  confraternity
or  corporation  constructed  on  the  plan  of  a  guild,  and  maintaining
throughout  all  its  progress  that  idea  derived  first  from  the  Roman
Colleges  of  Artificers,  until  finally  it  was  merged  in  the  non-opera-
tive system  of  Freemasonry,  which  exists  at  the  present  day  and
whose  history  it  is  the  object  of  the  present  work  to  treat.

This  distinction,  it  will  be  remembered,  never  ceased  to  be  main-

838  HISTORY    OK   FREEMASONRY

tained  by  the  Operative  Freemasons,  who  always  held  themselves
aloof  as  a  higher  class  from  the  lower  body  of  "  rough  masons  "  who
were  not  "  free  "  of  the  guild.

In  pursuing  our  researches  into  that  indefinable  period  during
which  the  Operative  organization  was  slowly  advancing  to  a  trans-
formation into  a  Speculative  society,  it  will  be  necessary  that  we
should  first  thoroughly  understand  one  of  the  characteristics  which
marked  the  Freemasons  of  the  Middle  Ages,  and  which  rendered
them  unlike  every  other  class  of  contemporary  craftsmen.

This  was  the  admission  into  their  ranks  and  into  full  fraternity
with  them  of  non-professional  persons,  whose  only  claim  to  a  con-
nection with  the  craft  was  derived  from  their  learning,  their  rank,  or
their  wealth,  which  gave  them  the  means  of  elevating  the  character
and  promoting  the  interests  of  the  fraternity.

We  have  seen  the  existence  of  the  same  system  in  the  Roman
Colleges  of  Artificers,  who  strengthened  their  corporations  by  the
adoption  of  men  of  rank  and  political  influence  as  Patrons.

The  early  Freemasons  were  patronized  by  the  Church,  and  were
engaged  almost  solely  in  the  construction  of  religious  edifices.
Hence  there  was  a  close  and  friendly  connection  between  them  and
the  ecclesiastics  of  that  period.  Lodges  were  for  the  most  part  held
in  the  vicinity  and  under  the  patronage  of  monasteries,  and  the  monks
were  often  architects  and  builders.  At  a  later  period,  when  the
Freemasons  became  independent  of  monastic  influence,  the  primi-
tive alliance  was  not  completely  dissolved,  and  the  clergy,  especially
in  France,  in  Germany,  and  in  England,  were  often  admitted,  though
not  professional  Masons,  into  the  corporation  of  the  Craft.  They
were  among  the  first  of  non-masons  who  received  from  Operative
Lodges  the  compliment  of  honorary  membership.

The  result  of  thus  securing  the  patronage  of  bishops  and  other
high  ecclesiastics  was,  of  course,  favorable  to  the  interests  of  the
corporations  of  workmen  and  was,  to  a  great  extent,  the  control-
ling motive  with  them,  as  it  had  previously  been  with  the  Roman
Colleges,  for  introducing  into  their  guild  men  who  were  not  of  the
Craft.

It  was  seen  in  the  12th  and  13th  centuries,  when  the  corporations,
not  only  of  Masons  but  of  other  crafts,  having  sought  to  exercise  un-
due power  in  the  cities,  incurred  the  displeasure  of  the  government.
Many  sanguinary  contests  ensued,  with  alternate  successes.     But

OPERATIVE   TO   SPECULATIVE   FREEMASONRY      839

when  the  Emperors  Frederick  II.  and  Henry  VII.  of  Germany
sought  to  end  them  by  abolishing  the  corporations  of  workmen,
these  associations  had  grown  so  strong  that  they  were  able  to  suc-
cessfully resist  the  Imperial  power.1

Dr.  Anderson,  in  the  second  edition  of  the  Book  of  Constitzttions,
gives  repeated  instances  of  bishops,  noblemen,  and  even  kings,  who
were  admitted  to  the  privileges  of  the  Craft  and  exercised  author-
ity over  the  Operative  Masons  as  members  and  patrons  of  the
guild.  But  as  the  accuracy  of  Anderson  as  an  historian  has  ceased
to  be  respected  through  the  researches  of  modern  scholars,  his  au-
thority on  this  subject  need  not  be  pressed.  Elias  Ashmole,  how-
ever, whose  truthfulness  and  minuteness  as  an  annalist  has  never  been
doubted,  furnishes  unquestioned  instances  in  which  he  and  other
gentlemen  had  been  made  members  of  an  Operative  Lodge  in
the  1 7th  century.  Nor  does  he  speak  of  these  admissions  as  if  they
were  of  unusual  occurrence.  Indeed,  he  leads  us,  by  his  silence,  to
the  contrary  inference.

But  it  is  in  the  annals  of  the  lodges  of  Scotland  that  we  find  the
most  satisfactory  history  of  the  rise  and  progress  of  the  custom  of
admitting  persons  who  were  not  Operative  Masons  as  members  of
the  guild.  For  this  we  are  indebted  to  the  researches  of  Bro.
Murray  Lyon,  whose  History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh  is  of  in-
valuable use  to  the  scholar  who  is  seeking  to  trace  the  authentic
history  of  Freemasonry  outside  and  independent  of  its  mythical
elements.  To  that  work  I  shall  have  constant  occasion  to  refer  in
the  course  of  this  part  of  the  present  investigation.

Lyon  says  that  the  earliest  authentic  record  of  a  non-operative
being  a  member  of  a  Masons'  lodge  is  contained  in  a  minute  of  the
Lodge  of  Edinburgh  under  date  of  June  8,  1600,  where  John  Bos-
well  Laird,  of  Achinflek,  is  mentioned  among  the  members  of  the
lodge.  His  name  with  his  mark  is  signed  to  the  minute  with  the
names  and  marks  of  twelve  others  who  evidently  were  Operative
Masons.3

But  twelve  years  anterior  to  that,  in  1598,  we  find  that  William
Schaw,  who  was  also  a  non-operative,3  acted  as  Master  of  the  Work,

1  Lacroix,  "  Le  Moyen  Age  et  la  Renaissance,"  torn,  iii.,  Part  I.,  art.  3.

2  Lyon,  "  History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  51.

8  Lyon  thinks  that  there  is  no  proof  that  he  was  an  Operative  Mason,  and  says  there
can  be  little  doubt  that  he  was  an  honorary  member  of  the  fraternity.     "  Hist,"  p.  56.

840  HISTORY   OF    FREEMASONRY

and  that  a  year  afterward  he  signed  his  name  to  the  supplementary
statutes  issued  by  him,  as  "  Master  of  the  Work,  Warden  of  the
Masons."

His  predecessor  in  that  office  was  a  nobleman,  and  in  his  own
time  the  Wardenship  over  the  Masons  in  Aberdeen,  Banff,  and
Kincardine  was  held  by  a  country  gentleman,  the  Laird  of  Udaught,
which  shows,  says  Lyon,  "  that  it  was  not  necessary  that  either  ap-
pointment should  be  held  by  a  Craftsman."  But  there  is  just  reason
for  inferring  that  to  hold  such  offices  it  was  necessary  to  have  hon-
orary membership  in  the  fraternity.

At  a  later  period  in  the  1 7th  century  the  practice  of  admitting
non-operatives  appears  to  have  begun  to  be  common.

In  July,  1634,  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh  admitted  as  Fellow-
Craft  the  following  gentlemen  :  Lord  Alexander,  Viscount  Canada,
Sir  Anthony  Alexander,  and  Sir  Alexander  Strachan.  The  two
first  were  sons  of  the  Earl  of  Stirling,  and  the  last  a  well-known
public  man  in  his  time.

"  These  brethren,"  says  Lyon,  "  seem  from  their  subsequent
attendance  in  the  lodge  to  have  felt  an  interest  in  its  proceedings.
In  the  month  immediately  succeeding  their  initiation  they  were
present,  and  attested  the  admission  of  three  Operative  Apprentices
and  one  Fellow  of  Craft.  They  attended  three  meetings  of  the
lodge  in  1635,  one  in  1636,  and  one  in  1637.  In  signing  the  min-
ute of  their  own  reception  each  appends  a  mark  to  his  name.1

Throughout  the  rest  of  the  1 7th  century  there  are  repeated  rec-
ords in  the  minutes  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh  of  the  admission  of
non-operatives  to  the  rank  of  Fellow-Crafts  and  sometimes  of
Masters.

Thus,  in  1637,  David  Ramsay,  a  "gentleman  of  the  Privy  Cham-
ber," was  admitted  ;  in  1638,  Henry  Alexander,  another  son  of  the
Earl  of  Stirling;  in  1640,  General  Alexander  Hamilton;  in  1667,
Sir  Patrick  Hume;  and  in  1670,  the  Right  Honorable  William
Murray,  son  of  Lord  Balvaird,  and  Walter  Pringle  and  Sir  John
Harper,  both  members  of  the  Scotch  Bar.

It  is  not  necessary  to  cite  any  more  instances  to  show  that  in  the
17th  century  the  practice  existed  of  admitting  non-operative  persons
into  the  brotherhood  of  the  Craft.     In  the  18th  century  it  had  be-

1  Lyon,  p.  86.

OPERATIVE   TO   SPECULATIVE   FREEMASONRY      841

come  so  common  as  finally  to  give  to  the  Speculative  element  a  pre-
ponderance over  the  Operative  in  the  fraternity.

The  following  remarks  of  Bro.  Lyon  on  the  subject  of  the  ad-
mission of  non-operatives  into  the  membership  of  the  Craft  are  of
great  value  in  connection  with  this  subject:

"  It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  with  singularly  few  exceptions,  the
non-operatives  who  were  admitted  to  Masonic  fellowship  in  the
Lodges  of  Edinburgh  and  Kilwinning  during  the  17th  century
were  persons  of  quality,  the  most  distinguished  of  whom,  as  the
natural  result  of  its  metropolitan  position,  being  made  in  the  former
lodge.  Their  admission  to  fellowship  in  an  institution  composed  of
operative  Masons  associated  together  for  purposes  of  their  craft,
would  in  all  probability  originate  in  a  desire  to  elevate  its  position
and  increase  its  influence,  and  once  adopted  the  system  would  fur-
ther recommend  itself  to  the  Fraternity,  by  the  opportunities  which
it  presented  for  cultivating  the  friendship  and  enjoying  the  society
of  gentlemen,  to  whom,  in  ordinary  circumstances,  there  was  little
chance  of  their  ever  being  personally  known.

"  On  the  other  hand,  non-professionals  connecting  themselves
with  the  lodge  by  the  ties  of  membership  would,  we  believe,  be
actuated  partly  by  a  disposition  to  reciprocate  the  feelings  which
had  prompted  the  bestowal  of  the  fellowship,  partly  by  curiosity  to
penetrate  the  arcana  of  the  Craft,  and  partly  by  the  novelty  of  the
situation  as  members  of  a  secret  society  and  participants  in  its  cere-
monies and  festivities."1

The  members  thus  admitted  received  various  designations,  such
as  "Gentlemen  Masons,"  "Theoretical  Masons,"  "  Geomatic  Ma-
sons," and  "  Honorary  Members."  The  use  of  these  terms  evi-
dently shows  that  the  Working  Masons — the  "  Domatic  Masons,"  a
as  Lyon  styles  them — recognized  that  there  was  a  very  palpable  dif-

1 "  History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  81.

2  The  words  domatic,  used  for  an  Operative  Mason,  and  geomatic,  for  a  Theoretic
Mason,  I  have  met  with  only  in  the  work  of  Bro.  Lyon.  They  are  not  to  be  found  in  the
Scottish  dictionary  of  Jamieson,  nor  in  any  English  Dictionary  from  Phillips  to  Webster.
Neither  are  they  used  in  any  of  the  old  Constitutions,  Scotch  or  English,  nor  have  I  en-
countered them  in  any  Masonic  work  that  I  have  read.  Lyon  derives  domatic  from  the
Latin  domus,  a  house,  and  says  it  means  "  of  or  belonging  to  a  house."  Geomatic  he
deriTes  from  the  Greek  gea,  land,  and  he  says  Geomatic  Masons  were  "  landed  pro-
prietors or  men  in  some  way  or  other  connected  with  agriculture."  I  do  not  like  the
words.     I  like  less  the  definitions,  and  still  less  the  etymology.

842  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

ference  between  the  two  classes  of  members.  It  is  well  to  remem-
ber this  fact,  as  it  supplies  one  of  the  motives  for  the  result  which
afterward  occurred  in  the  complete  separation  of  the  Speculative
from  the  Operative  element.

The  Scotch  Constitutions  of  1598  and  1599  were  certainly  con-
structed solely  for  the  government  of  Operative  Masons.  Yet  there
is  no  prohibition,  express  or  implied,  of  the  admission  of  non-opera-
tives as  members  of  lodges.  The  fact  that  Schaw,  the  framer  of  the
Constitutions,  was  himself  present  at  a  meeting  of  the  Lodge  of
Edinburgh,  where  a  non-operative  took  a  part  in  the  proceedings,
shows  that  he  did  not  view  such  admissions  as  illegal  innovations  on
the  usages  and  laws  of  the  fraternity.

We  are  not  without  the  requisite  information  as  to  the  status  of
these  "  Honorary  Members."

The  form  of  initiation  or  admission  must  have  differed  in  some
respects  from  that  prescribed  for  an  Operative  Mason.  The  presen-
tation of  an  "  essay"  or  Master-piece  of  work,  as  a  trial  of  skill,  must
have  been  dispensed  with  in  the  case  of  candidates  whose  previous
education  and  profession  had  not  supplied  them  with  the  necessary
mechanical  knowledge.

"  It  can  not  now  be  ascertained,"  says  Bro.  Lyon,  "  in  what  re-
spect the  ceremonial  preceding  the  admission  of  theoretical,  differed
from  that  observed  in  the  reception  of  practical  Masons ;  but  that
there  was  some  difference  is  certain,  from  the  inability  of  non-pro-
fessionals to  comply  with  the  tests  to  which  Operatives  were  sub-
jected ere  they  could  be  passed  as  Fellows  of  Craft.  The  former
class  of  entrants  would,  in  all  likelihood,  be  initiated  into  a  knowl-
edge of  the  legendary  history  of  the  Mason  Craft,  and  have  the
Word  and  such  other  secrets  communicated  to  them  as  was  neces-
sary to  their  recognition  as  brethren."  l

At  first  they  were  not  chargeable  with  admission  fees  ;  but  in
1727,  when  an  attempt  was  made  to  exclude  them  on  account  of
this  exemption,  a  fee  of  one  guinea  was  exacted  as  entrance  money.
But  this  was  done  at  so  late  a  period  that  we  may  infer  that  exemp-
tion from  fees  was  the  usage  with  respect  to  all  "Theoretic  Masons,"
while  the  lodges  were  purely  Operative  in  character.

Notwithstanding  this  exemption,  Theoretic  Masons  were  quali-

1  Lyon,  "  History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  82.

OPERATIVE   TO   SPECULATIVE   FREEMASONRY      843

fied  to  hold  the  highest  office  in  the  lodge.  Lyon  says  that  "for  a
time  the  occupancy  of  the  chair  alternated  between  the  two  grand
classes  into  which  its  membership  was  divided.  Though  to  Specu-
lative concurrence  the  Operative  section  owed  the  more  frequent
possession  of  the  coveted  honor."  1

In  Scotland  the  Operatives  and  Speculatives  do  not  appear  to
have  lived  always  in  peace  and  concord  ;  some  jealousy  seems  to  have
existed  at  times,  which  finally  culminated  in  the  year  1727  in  an  at-
tempt by  the  Operatives  to  exclude  Theoretical  Masons  from  the
lodge.  "  Exclusion  "  is  the  word  used  by  Lyon,  by  which  I  suppose
he  means  not  only  the  expulsion  of  the  Theoretic  Masons  who  had
been  already  admitted,  but  also  the  discontinuance  in  future  of  the
custom  of  admitting  them.

The  attempt  did  not  succeed.  Speculative  Masonry  was  already
the  preponderating  element  in  the  lodges,  which  a  few  years  after-
ward abandoned  in  Scotland,  as  they  had  long  before  done  in  Eng-
land, the  Operative  character.

It  is  admitted  that  the  earliest  authentic  record  of  the  admission
of  "  Gentlemen  Masons  "  into  the  lodges  of  England,  or  in  other
words  the  introduction  of  the  Speculative  element,  occurred  in  1646,
when  Elias  Ashmole,  the  celebrated  antiquary,  and  Colonel  Henry
Mainwaring  were  made  "  Free-Masons  "  in  a  lodge  at  Warrington
in  Lancashire.

But  it  does  not,  by  any  means,  follow,  because  this  is  the  first
recorded  instance,  that  Theoretical  Masons  had  not  been  admitted
in  England  long  before.  But  the  records  have  not  come  down  to
us,  because  of  the  loss  or  disappearance  of  the  ancient  minute  books
of  the  English  Operative  lodges.

"Why,"  says  Bro.  W.  J.  Hughan,  "so  many  minute  books  are
still  preserved  in  Scotland,  dating  long  before  the  institution  of
the  Grand  Lodge,  even  some  in  the  17th  century,  and  yet  scarcely
any  are  to  be  found  in  England,  seems  inexplicable."2

We  have  a  right  to  presume,  judging  by  the  usages  of  the  sister
kingdom,  that  the  initiation  of  Ashmole  and  Mainwaring  in  1646
was  not  the  introduction  of  a  new  custom,  but  only  the  continua-
tion of  an  old  one.

1Lyon,  "  History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  201.
•"  Masonic  Sketches  and  Reprints,"  p.  19.

844  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

If  we  have  not  the  names  of  those  gentlemen  who  had  previ-
ously been  admitted  to  the  fellowship  of  English  lodges,  it  is  be-
cause the  records  are  not  extant.

Many  brave  heroes,  says  the  Roman  poet,  have  lived  before
Agamemnon,  but  they  have  died  unwept,  because  there  was  no
poet  to  sing  their  deeds.

The  same  thing  may  be  said  of  the  corporations  and  lodges  of
France  and  Germany.  Though  the  records  are  not  extant,  we  have
collateral  evidence  that  in  both  of  them,  as  well  as  in  other  countries
of  the  Continent,  Theoretical  or  Honorary  Members  were  admitted
among  the  Operative  craftsmen.

We  may  therefore  lay  it  down  as  an  authentic  historical  state-
ment, which  if  not  supported  in  other  places  as  in  Scotland  by
positive  testimony,  is  yet  sustained  by  the  strongest  logical  infer-
ence, that  from  the  earliest  period  Speculative  Masons  who  were
not  practical  workmen,  builders,  or  architects,  began  to  be  ad-
mitted into  the  ranks  of  the  Operative  Craft  As  time  passed  on
the  number  of  these  Speculatives  increased,  as  in  the  nature  of
things  must  have  occurred,  until  they  predominated  over  the  Opera-
tives. Finally,  when  this  predominance  became  sufficiently  power-
ful, the  control  of  Freemasonry  passed  into  their  hands,  and  as  a
necessary  result  the  institution  ceased  to  be  Operative  and  became
wholly  Speculative  in  its  character.

The  terms  "  Gentleman  Mason,"  "  Theoretical  Mason,"  and
"  Honorary  Member,"  formerly  employed  to  distinguish  a  non-
Operative  from  an  Operative,  are  no  longer  in  use.  For  them  has
been  substituted  the  word  "  Speculative."  The  thing  itself  was  in
existence  long  before  the  word  which  was  to  define  it.

The  first  place  in  which  we  find  the  word  Speculative  in  con-
nection with  Masonry  is  in  the  Cooke  MS.,  whose  conjectural
date  is  about  1490.  In  this  document  it  is  said  that  the  youngest
son  of  King  Athelstan,  being  a  master  of  the  Speculative  science  of
geometry  or  masonry,  added  to  it  by  his  connection  with  the  Craft
of  Masons  a  knowledge  of  the  practical  science.1

It  must  be  admitted,   as  Bro.   Cooke  says,  that  "  no  book  or

aHe  "  lovyd  well  the  sciens  of  Gemetry  and  he  wyst  well  that  hand  craft  had  the
practyke  of  the  sciens  of  Gemetry  so  well  as  masons  wherefore  he  drewe  hym  to  consell
and  lernyd  practyke  of  that  sciens  to  his  speculatyf.  For  of  speculatyfe  he  was  a  master
and  he  lovyd  well  masonry  and  ma6ons." — Cooke  MS.,  lines  615,  626.

OPERATIVE  TO   SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY      845

writing  so  early  as  this  manuscript  has  yet  been  discovered  in  which
Speculative  Masonry  is  mentioned."1  It  is  equally  certain  that  the
word  appears  to  have  been  used  in  the  sense  given  to  it  at  the
present  day,  and  the  writer  of  the  manuscript  drew  a  distinction
between  Practical  or  Operative  and  Speculative  Masonry.

The  word,  however,  is  not  repeated  in  any  of  the  subsequent
Constitutions,  and  we  do  not  hear  of  it  again  until  the  time  of
Preston,  who  is  the  first  to  give  its  definition  in  these  words  :

"  Masonry  passes  and  is  understood  under  two  denominations ;
it  is  operative  and  speculative.  By  the  former  we  allude  to  the
useful  rules  of  architecture,  whence  a  structure  derives  figure,
strength,  and  beauty,  and  whence  result  a  due  proportion  and  just
correspondence  in  all  its  parts.  By  the  latter  we  learn  to  subdue
the  passions,  act  upon  the  square,  keep  a  tongue  of  good  report,
maintain  secrecy,  and  practice  charity."8

The  lexicographers  define  Speculative  as  opposed  to  Practical.
Hence,  "  Speculative  Masons,"  the  term  used  at  the  present  day,  is
precisely  synonymous  with  "  Theoretic  Masons,"  the  term  which
was  applied  by  the  Scotch  Masons  of  the  16th  and  17th  centuries  to
those  persons  who  were  admitted  into  their  lodges  though  they  had
no  practical  knowledge  of  the  Operative  art  of  building.

In  contemplating  that  period  in  the  history  of  Freemasonry
when  the  institution  was  gradually  preparing  for  the  important
change  in  its  organization  from  an  Operative  Art  to  a  Speculative
Science,  which  period  may  be  called,  borrowing  a  term  from  the
language  of  geology,  the  transition  period,  we  must  first  properly
appreciate  what  was  its  real  condition  just  previous  to  the  change.

In  the  first  place,  we  find  that  before  the  present  organization
of  Grand  and  Subordinate  Lodges,  the  Society  was  an  Operative
one  whose  members  were  actually  engaged  in  the  manual  labor  of
building,  as  well  as  in  the  more  intellectual  task  of  architecture  or
the  designing  of  plans.

But  not  every  man  who  was  engaged  in  building  or  in  handling
stones  was  a  member  of  this  society  or  entitled  to  its  privileges.  In
every  country  were  two  distinct  and  well-recognized  classes  of  work-
men.

1  Cooke  MS.,  lines  615,  636,  note  K.

2  Preston,  "Illustrations  of  Masonry,"  2d  edit.,  p.  19,  In  subsequent  editions  he
enlarged  the  phraseology  without  materially  changing  the  sense.

846  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

In  Germany  the  Craftsman  {Werkmann)  of  the  Corporation
was  distinguished  from  the  Matirer  or  wall  builder,  the  man  who
simply  hewed  and  set  stones.  The  Craftsman,  the  Stonecutter,  was
employed  in  the  higher  walks  of  the  art.  These  Craftsmen  formed
a  fraternity  of  themselves,  and  no  workman  was  permitted  to  work
with  a  Mason  who  was  not  a  member,  except  under  special  circum-
stances which  were  provided  for  by  the  regulations.  These  facts
are  well  authenticated  in  the  Strasburg  and  other  German  Ordi-
nances.

In  France,  the  regulations  of  Etienne  Boileau  prescribe  a  sim-
ilar difference  between  the  Masons  and  Stonecutters  who  were  mem-
bers of  the  Corporation  and  those  who  were  not.  The  former
could  employ  the  latter  only  as  assistants  and  servants  {aides  et
vallis),  but  were  forbidden  to  instruct  them  in  any  of  the  secrets  of
the  mystery  or  trade.

In  Scotland  the  Masons  of  the  Guild,  who  were  called,  certainly
as  early  as  the  middle  of  the  1 7th  century,  Freemasons,1  were'  dis-
tinguished from  the  Masons  who  were  not  "  free  of  the  Guild,"  and
who  were  called  "  Cowans,"  a  term  which  has  been  preserved  in  the
ritual  of  modern  Speculative  Freemasonry  with  a  similar  meaning.
With  the  Cowans  the  Freemasons  were  forbidden  to  work.

In  England  the  distinction  was  between  Masons  or  Freemasons
and  "  Rough  layers,"  and  the  same  prohibition  as  to  fellowship  in
labor  prevailed  there  that  did  in  other  countries.

Though  all  were  Operative  workmen  and  all  were  engaged  in  the
practical  art  of  building,  there  was  in  every  country  a  broad  line  of
demarcation  between  the  Freemasons  who  were  instructed  in  the
highest  principles  of  the  art  and  the  lower  class  of  Masons,  who
were  without  any  pretension  to  a  knowledge  of  the  sciences  of  ar-
chitecture and  geometry  which  were  cultivated  by  the  higher  class.

"  Those  only,"  said  the  Strasburg  builders,  with  an  excusable
pride  in  their  elevated  position,  "  shall  be  Masters  who  can  design
and  erect  costly  edifices  and  works  for  the  execution  of  which  they
are  authorized  and  privileged,  nor  shall  they  be  compelled  to  work
with  any  other  craftsmen."2

But  this  higher  class  of  Freemasons  were,  as  we  have  already

1  See  Lyon's  "  History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  79.
*"  Strasburg  Constitutions,"  art.  2.

OPERATIVE   TO   SPECULATIVE   FREEMASONRY      847

seen,  divided  also  into  two  classes,  the  Operative  and  the  non-
Operative  members  of  the  Guild,  Corporation,  or  Fraternity.

It  is  not  difficult  to  suppose  how  this  division  into  two  classes
originally  arose.  In  the  earliest  times  of  the  society  of  Freemasons
it  was  closely  connected  with  and  under  the  patronage  of  the  Church.
Among  its  practical  members  were  often  monks  who  were  skilled  in
the  manual  labor  of  the  Craft,  and  the  architectural  designs  for  the
construction  of  Cathedrals  and  monasteries  were  often  drawn  by
bishops  or  abbots  who  were  well  skilled  in  the  theory  of  architect-
ure. These  sometimes  from  choice,  and  sometimes  from  necessity,
in  consequence  of  the  intimate  relations  they  held  with  it,  became
members  of  the  Fraternity.

Subsequently,  when  the  Operative  Masons  had  released  them-
selves from  the  rule  of  their  ecclesiastical  superiors  and  had  estab-
lished an  independent  brotherhood,  they  found  it  politic,  if  not
positively  necessary,  to  secure  the  patronage  of  wealthy  nobles,  and
men  of  rank  and  science,  who  by  their  social  position  secured  pro-
tection to  the  association  and  elevated  its  character.

The  same  process  had  occurred  in  the  Roman  Colleges  of  Artifi-
cers, from  whose  peculiar  organization  the  Freemasons  had  derived
the  idea  of  their  own.

Thus  it  happened  that  the  Fraternity  of  Freemasons  consisted
from  the  very  earliest  period  of  its  history  of  two  classes,  the  Opera-
tive Masons  who  did  the  work,  and  the  Theoretic,  or,  as  we  now  call
them,  the  Speculative  Masons.

The  word  "  Speculative,"  as  has  been  already  shown,  is  of  very
modern  origin.  If  the  single  passage  in  the  Cooke  MS.  be  excepted,
it  is  never  met  with  in  any  Masonic  writing  until  after  the  organiza-
tion of  Grand  Lodges.

I  use  it,  in  the  present  work,  as  a  mere  matter  of  convenience,
because  it  is  most  familiar  to  the  general  reader  as  a  recent  synonym
of  the  old  word  "  Theoretic."

Thus  there  always  existed,  we  may  say,  from  the  earliest  times,
so  far  as  we  can  trace  authentic  history,  two  classes  of  Freemasons,
namely,  Operative  and  Speculative.

The  Speculative  Masons,  however,  though  very  definitely  distin-
guished after  the  separation  of  the  Fraternity  from  its  monastic  con-
nections, from  the  Operative,  by  their  want  of  practical  skill,  did
not  form  an  independent  and  distinct  class.

848  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

In  the  lodges  into  which  they  were  admitted  they  mingled  with
the  members  on  a  common  footing.  We  presume  that  this  was  the
case  in  all  countries ;  we  know  that  it  was  so  in  Scotland.  They
underwent  a  modified  initiation  into  membership,  in  which  of  course
the  presentation  of  an  essay,  piece,  or  chef  d'ceuvre  was  omitted ;
they  assisted  in  the  admission  of  new  members,  took  part  in  the  de-
liberations of  the  society  on  affairs  of  business,  voted,  and  even  held
office.

Starting  with  our  inquiries  from  the  time  when  the  Fraternity
dissolved  its  connection  with  the  monasteries,  where  it  really  played
the  role  of  a  subordinate,  we  may  well  suppose  that  at  first  the  num-
ber of  these  Speculative  Masons  or  Honorary  members  must  have
been  very  small.

But  they  never  could  have  been  an  insignificant  element.
The  Operative  Masons  held  the  ascendency  in  members,  but  the
Speculative  Masons  must  have  always  exerted  a  powerful  influ-
ence by  their  better  culture,  their  wealth,  and  their  higher  social
position.

These  two  elements  of  Freemasonry  continued  to  exist  together
for  a  very  long  period  of  time.  But  at  length,  from  causes  which
must  be  attributed  to  the  increasing  power  and  influence  of  the
Speculative  element,  as  well  as  to  intellectual  progress,  there  came
a  total  and  permanent  disseverance  of  the  two.

The  precise  time  of  this  disseverance  must  be  placed  at  the  be-
ginning of  the  1 8th  century,  though  it  is  evident  that  for  some  years
previously  the  feeling  which  eventually  led  to  it  must  have  been
gradually  growing.  The  men  of  culture  and  science  who  were  in
constant  communion  with  their  operative  associates,  were  getting
dissatisfied  with  a  society  of  mechanics  who  had  lost  much  of  that
skill  as  architects  which  had  given  so  bright  a  reputation  to  their
predecessors  of  the  Middle  Ages,  and  who  were  now  not  very  much
superior  to  the  "Cowans,"  the  "wall  builders,"  and  the  "rough
layers  "  whom  these  skillful  predecessors  had  so  much  contemned —
contemned  so  much  that  the  Freemasons  would  not  work  in  com-
mon with  them  on  the  same  building.

The  first  act  of  severance  occurred  in  England  in  the  year
171 7,  when  the  Grand  Lodge  of  "Free  and  Accepted  Masons"
was  organized,  an  event  that  has  been  very  generally  designated  by
Masonic  writers  by  the  rather  questionable  title  of  the  Revival.

OPERATIVE   TO   SPECULATIVE   FREEMASONRY      849

This  was  followed  nineteen  years  afterward  by  the  organization
of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  with  similar  methods.

Both  of  these  bodies  were  formed  by  lodges  that  were  Oper-
ative, but  in  each  case  the  Operative  character  was  abandoned,  and
the  Grand  Lodges  and  the  lodges  under  them  became  entirely  Spec-
ulative ;  that  is  to  say,  they  ceased  to  cultivate  practical  Masonry,
and  were  composed  for  the  most  part  of  members  who  were  totally
ignorant  of  the  Mystery  of  the  handicraft  of  building.

In  other  countries  the  process  of  disseverance  did  not  take  place
according  to  the  English  and  Scottish  method.  Elsewhere  than  in
those  two  countries  the  organization  of  Freemasonry  as  it  prevailed
in  the  Middle  Ages  had  long  ceased  to  exist.

In  France  the  Corporations  des  Metiers  and  in  Germany  the
Hiitten  had  been  abolished,  though  in  both  countries  the  Stone-
masons still  continued  to  maintain  an  organization,  which,  however,
was  outside  of  the  law,  and  without  legal  protection  or  recognition.

But  we  must  look  for  the  real  causes  of  the  change  from  Opera-
tive to  Speculative  Masonry  to  England,  for  it  was  in  that  country
that  the  change  was  first  developed  and  consummated.

CHAPTER  XXVII

THE  REMOTE   CAUSES   OF   THE   TRANSITION

HE  transition  from  Operative  to  Speculative
Freemasonry  was  not  a  spontaneous  and  sudden
act,  commencing  and  completing  itself  by  an
instantaneous  movement,  through  which  that
which  was  the  peculiar  characteristic  of  the  in-
stitution was  at  once  changed  into  another  and
entirely  different  one.
On  the  contrary,  the  epoch  of  the  change  can  not  be  precisely
determined  within  the  period  of  six  years  at  least  during  which  the
Speculative  Masons  were  engaged  in  slowly  perfecting  it.  The
fortress  of  Operative  Freemasonry,  which  had  derived  its  strength
from  its  comparative  antiquity  and  from  the  imperishable  labors  of
the  mediaeval  architects,  was  not  to  be  taken  by  storm.  It  was
only  by  gradual  approaches  that  its  stronghold  in  the  lodges  was  to
be  overcome.

We  are  not  to  suppose  that  on  that  eventful  festival  of  St  John
the  Baptist,  when  the  members  of  the  Four  Old  Lodges  of  the
Metropolis  of  England  met  at  the  Goose  and  Gridiron,  and  elected
for  the  first  time  a  Grand  Master  to  preside  in  their  new  organiza-
tion, that  the  special  and  well-understood  design  of  that  meeting
was  at  once  to  change  the  entire  character  of  the  fraternity.

The  fact  is  that  the  beginning  of  the  18th  century  was  in  Eng-
land, and  more  especially  in  London,  the  age  of  clubs.  We  shall
soon  see  how  associations  of  men  for  all  sorts  of  purposes,  but
principally  for  convivial  ones,  were  established  in  that  city.

Now  the  Masonic  lodges,  consisting  as  they  did  and  as  they  had
done  for  many  years  past  of  professional  Masons  and  of  non-pro-
fessional gentlemen,  and  the  latter  preponderating,  perhaps  in  num-
bers, certainly  in  influence,  would  seem  to  have  afforded  an  ad-
mirable opportunity,  by  their  coalition  into  one  body,  for  the
establishment  of  a  club  of  the  very  highest  rank,  one  indeed  of  a

850

THE   REMOTE   CAUSES   OF   THE   TRANSITION       851

rank  and  prestige  very  far  superior  to  that  of  the  obscure  and  often
ridiculous  coteries  of  that  day,  such  as  the  "  No  Nose  Club,"  or
the  "  Ugly  Faced  Club."

We  know  that  for  many  years  previous  to  1 717  the  Operative
lodges  contained  many  non-operative  or  "  Gentlemen  Masons,"  and
that  outside  of  London  and  its  suburbs  this  condition  lasted  for
many  years  afterward.  And  yet  during  all  that  period  we  have  no
record  of  any  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  latter  to  infuse  a  Specu-
lative element  into  those  lodges.

Even  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge  on  St.  John  the
Baptist's  day,  171 7,  does  not  seem,  if  we  may  judge  from  the
meager  details  of  that  event  which  Anderson  has  transmitted  to  us,
to  have  been  intended  to  accomplish  at  once  a  total  severance  of
the  Speculative  from  the  Operative  element.  The  "  Charges  of  a
Freemason,"  which  were  adopted  in  1718,  for  the  government  of
the  new  form  of  the  institution,  were  only  a  collation  of  the  old
laws  which  had  formerly  regulated  the  Operative  lodges,  and  were
wholly  inapplicable  to  a  system  from  which  practical  Masonry  had
been  eliminated.

Nor  was  there  any  pretense  that  these  were  new  laws,  framed
for  a  new  society.  It  was  thus  acknowledged  that  the  old  Constitu-
tions of  the  Operative  were  to  be  preserved.  The  disruption  was
not  to  be  suddenly  effected.  Anderson,  recording  the  transactions
of  1 718,  under  the  Grand  Mastership  of  George  Payne,  says  that
"  this  year  several  old  copies  of  the  Gothic  Constitutions  were  pro-
duced and  collated." l

The  preservation  and  publication  of  these  "charges"  as  the
standard  of  Masonic  law  very  clearly  show  that  at  that  time  the
thought  of  a  purely  Speculative  institution,  fully  dissolved  from  any
association  with  Operative  Masonry,  had  not  yet  entered  the  minds
of  those  who  were  engaged  in  the  establishment  of  a  Grand  Lodge.

The  most  that  we  can  say  of  their  ulterior  views  at  that  early
period,  was  that  they  intended  to  enforce,  with  greater  rigor,  the
usage  which  had  long  before  prevailed,  and  to  interpret  with  the
utmost  liberality  the  standing  regulation  which  admitted  persons
who  were  not  Masons  by  profession  to  the  privileges  of  the  Society.

It  was  not  until    1721,  four  years  after  the  organization  of  the

1  Anderson,  "  Constitutions,"  2d  ed.,  p.  no.

852  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

Grand  Lodge,  that  a  set  of  "  General  Regulations,"  which  had  been
compiled  by  Payne  the  year  before,  were  adopted,  which  were  ap-
plicable to  the  requirements  of  a  purely  Speculative  association,  in
which  the  Operative  element  was  wholly  ignored.

It  will  be  seen  hereafter,  when  the  early  records  of  the  Grand
Lodge  are  brought  under  review,  that  though  no  Operative  Mason
was  ever  elected  Grand  Master,  yet  until  the  year  1723  that  class
was  recognized  by  being  chosen  to  the  high  office  of  Grand  Warden
on  several  occasions.

After  that  year  the  Operative  Masons  appear  to  have  retired
cither  voluntarily  or  involuntarily  from  all  prominence,  and  prob-
ably from  all  participation  in  the  concerns  of  the  Society.  It  had
by  this  time  assumed  a  thoroughly  speculative  character ;  its  laws
and  usages  were  such  as  were  appropriate  to  a  non-operative  system  ;
ai  d  its  offices  were  given  only  to  noblemen,  to  scholars,  and  to  men
of  h'igh  social  position.

The  immediate  cause  of  these  changes  has  with  very  great  cer-
tainty been  attributed  to  the  efforts  of  three  persons — John  Theoph-
ilus  Desaguliers,  a  philosopher,  James  Anderson,  a  clergyman,  and
George  Payne,  an  antiquary.  To  them  are  we  to  attribute  the  in-
fluences which  gradually  but  successfully  led  between  the  years  171 7
and  1723  to  the  complete  separation  of  the  Speculative  from  the
Operative  Order,  and  to  the  birth  of  that  system  which,  after  many
subsequent  accretions,  modifications,  and  improvements,  has  been
developed  into  the  widely  extended  Freemasonry  of  the  present
day.

But  there  were  other  causes  in  operation  which  assisted  in  the
accomplishment  of  those  results,  in  which  these  celebrated  persons
played  so  important  a  part,  and  without  which  their  labors  would
hardly  have  been  successful.

The  first  and  perhaps  the  most  important  event  which  prepared
the  way  for  the  transition  was  the  decadence  of  architecture  in  Eng-
land, where  in  the  1 7th  century  the  principles  of  the  Gothic  style
with  all  its  symbolism  began  to  give  way  to  the  corrupt  forms  of
the  Renaissance,  which  was  a  revival  of  the  Roman  style.  It  was
on  Gothic  architecture  that  the  Freemasons  of  the  Middle  Ages  had
founded  that  school  of  symbolism  which  gave  to  every  stone  a  living
voice,  and  supported  the  claim  of  the  Fraternity  to  the  elevated
position  which  it  had  long  held  above  all  other  handicrafts.

THE   REMOTE  CAUSES  OF  THE  TRANSITION       853

But  when  the  Craft  had  abandoned  this  so  long  honored  art  and
the  lodges  ceased  to  be,  as  Lord  Lyndsay  has  called  them,  "  parlia-
ments of  genius,"  there  must  have  been  some,  as  there  are  now,  who
deplored  the  change  from  high  to  low  taste,  and  who  were  anxious
to  perpetuate,  if  not  the  practical  part  of  the  art,  as  it  has  been  pur-
sued by  the  Gothic  Masons,  at  least  to  preserve  the  spirit  of  symbol-
ism which  had  been  in  mediaeval  times  its  principal  and  peculiar
characteristic.

Thus  the  way  was  gradually  prepared  in  the  1 7th  century  for
that  spiritualizing  of  the  labors  and  implements  of  Operative  Masonry
which  resulted  finally,  after  many  slow  steps,  in  the  formation  of  that
system  of  purely  symbolic  Masonry  which  exists  at  the  present  day,
wholly  distinct  from  the  body  of  working  Masons.

The  science  of  symbolism  had  been  originally  practiced  only  by
the  Church  and  by  the  Gothic  Freemasons.  When  it  had  been
abandoned  in  the  former  by  the  Reformation  and  in  the  latter  by  the
decay  of  architecture,  it  was  still  preserved  in  some  of  its  forms,  not
in  all  its  excellence,  by  the  Rosicrucian  society  which  sprung  into
existence  in  the  1 7th  century.  Though  the  mystical  association  of
Rosicrucianism  was  not,  in  any  way,  connected  with  Freemasonry,
it  can  not  be  doubted  that  it  played  an  important  part  in  inspiring
many  members  of  the  Masonic  lodges  of  Operative  Masonry  with
a  renewed  taste  for  the  mystical  symbolism  of  their  predecessors,
which  in  its  progressive  cultivation  led  to  the  inauguration  of  a
purely  symbolic  association  founded  on  architecture.

Another  important  cause  is  to  be  found  in  the  intellectual  revo-
lution which  took  place  in  the  17th  century,  and  toward  which
the  Reformation  in  religion  had  contributed  essential  aid.  The
writings  of  Bacon  had  produced  a  school  of  experimental  philoso-
phy in  England,  one  result  of  which  was  the  organization  of  the
Royal  Society,  in  whose  bosom  a  race  of  thinkers  was  nursed  who.,
in  their  search  for  the  attainment  of  knowledge,  were  ever  ready
to  convert  an  art  such  as  Operative  Masonry  into  a  Speculative
Science.

At  one  time  it  was  a  favorite  theory  with  some  Masonic  historians
that  the  origin  of  Speculative  Freemasonry  was  to  be  traced  to  the
Royal  Society.  Though  the  theory  was  a  fallacious  one,  as  has
been  shown  in  a  preceding  part  of  this  work,  its  very  existence
proves  that  that  Society  must,  in  an  indirect  way,  have  had  some

854  HISTORY    OF  FREEMASONRY

influence  upon  the  birth  and  the  growth  of  the  Speculative  insti-
tution.

It  is  singularly  pertinent  to  this  question  that  Dr.  Desaguliers,
to  whom,  beyond  all  other  men,  we  must  ascribe  the  organization
of  Speculative  Freemasonry  in  England,  was  a  distinguished  experi-
mental philosopher  of  the  Baconian  school  and  a  Fellow  of  the
Royal  Society.

It  can  not,  however,  be  doubted  that  as  the  low  state  of  morals,
the  general  depression  of  learning,  and  the  decay  of  art,  which  dis-
tinguished the  close  of  the  1 7th  century,  had  a  very  unfavorable
effect  on  the  character  of  Operative  Masonry ;  so  the  improvement
of  the  moral  and  intellectual  condition  of  England,  and  the  cultiva-
tion of  a  refinement  in  literature  and  science  which  sprang  up  soon
after  the  beginning  of  the  18th  century,  must  have  awakened  a  new
spirit  in  the  thinkers  of  the  age.

Dr.  Oliver,  in  an  essay  on  this  subject,1  attributes  this  revolution
principally  to  the  influence  of  Addison,  Steele,  and  the  other  peri-
odical writers  of  the  day.  He  quotes  the  opinion  of  Foster,*  who
had  said  that  "  it  is  incredible  to  conceive  the  effect  these  writings
have  had  on  the  town  ;  .  .  .  they  have  set  all  our  wits  and
men  of  letters  upon  a  new  way  of  thinking  of  which  they  had  little
or  no  notion  before."  Hence  Oliver  says,  "It  will  not  be  conced-
ing too  much  to  the  influence  of  these  immortal  productions,  if  we
admit  that  the  Revival  of  Freemasonry  in  171 7  was  owing,  in  a
great  measure,  to  their  operation  on  public  taste  and  public  mo-
rality." 3

As  of  the  two  most  important  and  effective  of  these  periodical
essays  by  Steele  and  Addison,  the  Tatler  was  begun  in  1 709,  and
the  Spectator  in  1711,  while  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge
which  was  the  prelude  to  the  establishment  of  Speculative  Free-
masonry has  the  date  of  171 7,  the  inference  of  Oliver  as  to  their
influence  will  hardly  be  deemed  untenable.

Another  cause  leading  directly  to  the  establishment  of  Specula-
tive Freemasonry  has  been  adduced  by  Kloss  in  his  German  work

1  Introductory  Dissertation  on  the  State  of  Freemasonry  in  the  18th  century,  affixed
to  his  edition  of  Hutchinson's  "  Spirit  of  Masonry,"  p.  5.

8  Essays,  in  a  series  of  "  Letters  to  a  Friend,'*  by  John  Foster.
8  Intro.  Dissertation,  p.  6.

THE   REMOTE   CAUSES   OF   THE   TRANSITION       855

on  the  History  of  Freemasonry  in  France,  which  is  well  worth  con-
sideration.     He  says  :

"  When  Wren  had  completed  the  building  of  St.  Paul's  Cathe-
dral in  London,  in  1708,  and  thus  the  workmen  had  no  common
center  remaining,  their  corporate  customs,  like  those  of  many  other
bodies,  would,  in  the  course  of  time,  have  been  lost  and  wiped
away,  if  the  brotherhood  had  not  been  sustained  as  such  by  the
power  of  that  ancient  addition — the  non-professional  members,
taken  from  the  various  grades  of  society.  The  religious  conten-
tions, which  had  prevailed  for  two  centuries,  were  at  last  compelled
to  recede  before  the  spirit  of  toleration.  Hence  the  necessity  of
some  place  of  rest,  where  political  discussions  could  not  enter,  was
the  cause  and  the  reason  for  the  formation  and  adoption  of,  about
the  year  1 716,  an  organized  system,  then  first  appearing  as  Free-
masonry." *

Of  the  correctness  of  two  assertions  made  in  this  paragraph  we
have  convincing  proofs.  The  decay  of  the  Operative  branch  of
Freemasonry  is  evident,  since,  according  to  Oliver,  there  were  in
1688  only  seven  lodges  in  existence,  and  of  them  there  were  but
two  that  held  their  meetings  regularly.2  There  was  some  improve-
ment at  the  beginning  of  the  next  century,  which,  however,  it  would
be  but  fair  to  attribute  to  the  influence  and  the  energy  of  the  honor-
ary or  non-professional  members.

In  respect  to  the  question  of  religious  toleration,  it  is  very  evi-
dent that  in  the  matter  of  a  creed  there  was  a  very  great  difference
between  the  two  systems,  the  Operative  and  the  Speculative.  The
early  Operative  Freemasons  were,  of  course,  Roman  Catholics.
After  the  Reformation  in  England  they  became  Protestants,  but
strict  adherents  to  the  church.  This  is  apparent  from  the  older  and
the  more  recent  Constitutions.3

There  was  another  cause  which  must  have  exercised  a  very  potent
influence  in  hastening  the  establishment  of  a  Grand  Lodge  of  Specu-
lative Freemasonry.  This  was  the  universal  passion  for  the  forma-
tion of  clubs  which  took  possession  of  the  English  people  toward
the  close  of  the  17th  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  18th  century.

1  "  Geschichte  der  Freimaurer  in  Frankreiche,"  i.,  13.

2  Introductory  Essay  on  the  State  of  Freemasonry.

3  In  the  oldest  of  the  Old  Constitutions  which  are  extant,  the  Halliwell  poem,  there
ire  directions  for  hearing  Mass.

856  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

The  word  Club,  as  signifying  a  society  or  assembly  of  persons
each  contributing  his  share  of  the  expenses,  came  into  the  English
language,  as  the  thing  itself  did  into  English  social  customs,  at  the
period  specified.  Dryden  is  the  first  writer  who  speaks  of  political
clubs,  but  the  word  is  in  familiar  use  in  the  pages  of  the  Taller  and
Spectator.  These  new  organizations  had  in  a  short  time  become  so
important  as  to  claim  a  place  in  literary  history  ;  and  in  1 709  a  work
of  some  magnitude  was  published  in  London,  entitled  The  Secret
History  of  Clubs,  particularly  of  the  Golden  Fleece.  With  their
Original :   And  the  Characters  of  the  most  noted  Members  thereof. 1

Dr.  Oliver,  to  whose  indefatigable  industry  and  research  (how-
ever they  were  sometimes  illy  regulated)  we  are  indebted  for  an  ad-
mirable Essay  on  the  Usages  and  Customs  of  Symbolical  Masonry
in  the  18th  Century?  supplies  us  with  the  following  information  on
the  subject  of  Clubs  :

"The  1 8th  century  was  distinguished  by  the  existence  of  numer-
ous local  institutions,  which  periodically  congregated  together  differ-
ent classes  of  society,  for  divers  purposes,  the  chief  of  which  appears
to  have  been  the  amusement  of  an  idle  hour,  when  the  business  of
the  day  was  ended.  Few  of  these  ephemeral  societies  aimed  at  a
higher  flight.  Some  met  weekly,  while  the  members  of  others  as-
sembled every  evening.  Each  profession  and  calling  had  its  club,
and  in  large  towns  the  trade  of  every  street  was  not  without  its
means  of  thus  killing  the  evening  hour.

"  Such  societies  embraced  every  class  of  persons,  from  the  noble
to  the  beggar  ;  and  whatever  might  be  a  man's  character  or  disposi-
tion, he  would  find  in  London  a  club  that  would  square  with  his
ideas.  If  he  were  a  tall  man,  the  tall  club  was  ready  to  receive  him  ;
if  short,  he  would  soon  find  a  club  of  dwarfs ;  if  musically  inclined,
the  harmonic  club  was  at  hand  ;  was  he  fond  of  late  hours,  he  joined
the  owl  club  ;  if  of  convivial  habits,  he  would  find  a  free  and  easy
in  every  street  ;  if  warlike,  he  sought  out  the  lumber  troopers ;  if  a
buck  of  the  first  water,  he  joined  the  club  of  choice  spirits ;  and  if
sober  and  quiet,  the  humdrum.  If  nature  had  favored  him  with  a
gigantic  proboscis,  an  unsightly  protuberance  on   his  shoulders,  or

1 1  give  this  title  on  the  authority  of  Dr.  Kloss.     It  is  numbered  237  in  his  Bibli-
ography der  Freimaurerei,  and  is  said  to  have  extended  to  392  octavo  pages.
2  Prefixed  to  the  third  volume  of  his  **  Golden  Remains."

THE  REMOTE  CAUSES   OF  THE  TRANSITION       857

any  other  striking  peculiarity,  he  would  have  no  difficulty  in  finding
a  society  to  keep  him  in  countenance."  1

Before  the  middle  of  the  century  the  number  of  clubs  had  in-
creased amazingly.  Dermott  gives  in  his  Ahiman  Rczon  the
names  of  thirty-eight,  besides  "  many  others  not  worth  notice."3

Most  of  these  clubs  were  of  a  convivial  character.  There  were,
however,  some  whose  members  aimed  at  higher  pursuits  and  de-
voted themselves  to  the  cultivation  of  art,  science,  and  literature.
It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  Royal  Society  was  originally
formed  on  the  pattern  of  a  club.

Dermott  mentions  a  circumstance  connected  with  these  clubs
which  is  worthy  of  notice  as  showing  the  popularity  of  Freemasonry
at  the  time,  and  the  existence  then,  as  at  the  present  day,  of  socie-
ties which  sought  to  imitate  its  forms,  if  not  always  its  principles.

"  Several  of  these  Clubs  or  Societies,"  he  says,  "  have,  in  imita-
tion of  the  free-masons,  called  their  club  by  the  name  of  lodge,  and
their  president  by  the  title  of  grand  master  or  most  noble  grand."3

Addison,  speaking  in  the  Spectator  of  these  associations,  says  :

"  Man  is  said  to  be  a  social  animal,  and  as  an  instance  of  it  we
may  observe  that  we  take  all  occasions  and  pretenses  of  forming
ourselves  into  those  little  nocturnal  assemblies  which  are  commonly
known  as  clubs.  When  a  set  of  men  find  themselves  agree  in  any
particular,  though  never  so  trivial,  they  establish  themselves  into  a
kind  of  fraternity  and  meet  once  or  twice  a  week  on  account  of
such  a  fantastic  resemblance."4

The  presumption  will  not,  then,  be  a  violent  one  that  the  first
successful  effort  toward  a  secession  from  Operative  Freemasonry,
must  have  been  stimulated  by  the  usage  among  men  of  all  classes,
in  the  early  part  of  the  last  century,  of  inaugurating  separate  socie-
ties or  clubs.

The  meeting  in  1716  consisting  of  honorary  or  non-professional
members  of  the  London  Operative  lodges,  being  held,  too,  at  a
tavern,  as  was  the  custom  with  all  clubs,  might  very  properly  and
with  the  utmost  respect,  be  looked  upon  as  a  club  of  the  highest
class.  This  club  of  scientific  and  literary  gentlemen  who  were
desirous  of  separating  from  the  coarser  and  less  intellectual  materials

1  *'  On  the  Usages  and  Customs  of  Symbolic  Masonry  in  the  18th  Century,"  page  2.

2  "Ahiman  Rezon,"  p.  xii.        8  "  Ahiman  Rezon,"  ut  supra.         4 Spectator ;  No.  IX.

858  HISTORY   OF   FREEiMASONRY

which  composed  the  lodges  of  practical  Masons,  was  not  long  after-
ward, in  June,  171 7,  resolved  into  a  Grand  Lodge,  the  mother  of
all  the  Speculative  lodges  in  the  world,  Scotland  excepted,  just  as
the  club  of  philosophers  who  first  met  in  the  latter  part  of  the  pre-
ceding century,  was  finally  developed  into  the  Royal  Society,  the
most  prominent  institution  of  learning  in  England.1

That  such  was  the  opinion  of  the  learned  Dr.  Oliver  may  be
justly  inferred  from  the  language  used  by  him  in  his  essay  On  the
Usages  and  the  Customs  of  Symdo/zca/  Masonry  in  the  18th  Cen-
tury. Speaking  of  the  character  of  the  Clubs  in  which  conviviality
appears  to  have  been  always  carried  to  an  excess,  he  says :

"  There  was,  however,  one  society  in  that  period,  which,  if  it  did
indulge  its  members  with  the  enjoyment  of  decent  refreshment,  had
a  standing  law  which  provided  against  all  excess ;  declaring  that
1  they  ought  to  be  moral  men,  good  husbands,  good  parents,  good
sons,  and  good  neighbors,  not  staying  too  long  from  home,  and
avoiding  all  excess.'  This  society  was  Freemasonry ;  the  exclu-
sive character  of  which  excited  the  envy  of  all  other  periodical  as-
semblies of  convivial  men."2

Five  causes  appear  to  have  been  instrumental  in  producing  that
separation  of  the  Speculative  from  the  Operative  element  in  Free-
masonry which  led  to  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng-
land and  to  the  establishment  of  the  present  system.  These,  which
have  been  fully  treated  in  the  present  chapter,  may  be  briefly  sum-
marized as  follows :

1.  The  gradual  decay  of  Gothic  architecture  and  the  abandon-
ment of  scientific  methods  by  the  Operative  Masons.

2.  The  intellectual  revolution  in  Europe,  which  led  to  the  more
general  cultivation  of  science  and  literature.

3.  The  loss  of  a  common  center  and  a  commencing  disintegra-
tion of  the  Operative  Masons  in  England,  after  their  last  great
work,  the  Cathedral  of  St.  Paul's,  had  been  finished.

4.  The  growing  desire  among  men  of  culture  and  refinement  to

1  From  the  year  1716,  when  the  Speculative  Masons  first  met  at  the  Apple  Tree
Tavern,  until  June,  1 7 17,  when  the  Grand  Lodge  was  organized  at  the  Goose  and  Grid-
iron, a  period  of  more  than  six  months  elapsed.  During  that  time  it  is  not  unreasonable
to  suppose,  from  contemporary  custom,  that  the  members  met  under  a  club  organization.
But  this  subject  will  be  fully  discussed  in  a  future  chapter.

2  "On  Usages  and  Customs,"  etc.,  p.  7.

THE   REMOTE   CAUSES   OF  THE   TRANSITION       859

establish  an  association  from  which  the  spirit  of  political  partisan-
ship and  of  religious  intolerance  should  be  banished.

5.  And,  lastly,  the  social  example  given  in  the  beginning  of  the
1 8th  century  by  the  universal  formation  of  clubs  and  private  socie-
ties for  all  sorts  of  purposes.

But  none  of  these  causes  could  have  been  productive  of  a  soci-
ety of  philosophers  whose  formulas  of  instruction  were  derived
from  the  principles  of  Operative  Masonry,  had  not  the  way  been
prepared  for  the  establishment  of  such  a  society  by  relations  which
had  previously  existed  between  the  two  elements.

To  this  subject  I  shall  accordingly  invite  the  attention  of  the
reader  in  the  following  chapter.

CHAPTER  XXVIII

THE  WAY   PREPARED   FOR   THE   TRANSITION

| HE  very  great  change  from  an  Operative  art  to  a
Speculative  Science,  by  which  the  whole  practical
character  of  the  former  was  abandoned  and  a
system  of  philosophy  was  established  on  its
basis,  could  never  have  been  accomplished  by
any  human  efforts,  if  there  had  not  been  some
previous  provision,  which,  though  undesigned
originally  for  that  purpose,  rendered  the  transition  from  the  one  to
the  other  practicable,  if  not  easy  of  execution.

In  the  process  of  locomotion,  the  act  of  removal  from  one  point
to  another  can  not  be  effected  unless  there  be  a  pathway  which  will
render  the  removal  possible.  If  there  be  no  pathway,  there  can  be
no  removal  ;  and  the  more  direct  the  pathway  is,  and  the  less  it  is
encumbered  by  obstructions,  the  more  readily  will  the  removal  be
accomplished.

So  in  the  intellectual  transmutation  of  an  old  society  into  a  new
one,  it  is  just  as  necessary  that  there  should  be  a  way  prepared  by
which  the  change  may  be  effected.  The  old  society  may  be  of  such
a  nature  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  convert  it  into  the  contem-
plated new  society.  The  design  and  objects  of  the  former  might
be  such  as  to  be  antagonistic  even,  and  not  favorable  to  the  trans-
formation.

Thus  it  would  be  impossible  to  convert  a  guild  of  Weavers  or  of
Mercers  into  an  association  having  the  character  of  a  lodge  of  Spec-
ulative Freemasons.  The  way  is  not  open  to  such  a  conversion.
The  foundation-stone  upon  which  the  system  of  modern  Freema-
sonry is  built  must  have  been  a  fraternity  of  Operative  Builders  in
stone.  It  is  useless  to  look  for  it  elsewhere,  because  the  symbol-
ism of  Freemasonry  is  derived  altogether  from  the  art  of  archi-
tecture.

This  is  the  best  reason  that  we  possess  for  the  rejection  of  the

860

THE    WAY    PREPARED    FOR   THE  TRANSITION      861

theory  that  the  origin  of  Freemasonry  is  to  be  sought  in  the  ancient
mysteries  of  Egypt,  of  Greece,  or  of  Persia.  There  is  no  passable
way  leading  from  these  Mysteries  to  Speculative  Freemasonry.  In
the  secret  doctrines  and  in  the  usages  of  these  Mysteries  we  find  no
reference  to  architecture.  They  were  simply  systems  intended  to
teach  in  a  mystical  way  what  they  supposed  to  be  religious  truth.
Their  organization  was  so  different  from  that  on  which  the  Freema-
sonry of  the  present  day  is  based,  that  we  can  find  no  road  directly
connecting  the  two.

Those  who  have  sought  to  make  the  Speculative  Freemasons  the
legitimate  descendants  of  the  Crusaders  and  the  Knights  Templars,
must  meet  with  the  same  difficulty  in  connecting  the  two.  Military
associations  could  never  give  rise  to  sodalities,  all  of  whose  principles
are  those  of  peace  and  brotherly  love.  It  would  have  been  utterly
impossible  to  transform  a  camp  of  knights  in  armor,  thirsting  for  the
blood  of  their  Saracen  foes,  into  a  peaceful  lodge  of  Freemasons,
engaged,  as  the  French  song  says,  in  erecting  temples  for  virtue  and
dungeons  for  vice.

It  is  true  that  at  a  later  period,  when  Craft  Masonry  was  supplied
with  new  rituals  and  when  what  are  called  the  high  degrees  were  in-
vented, a  great  deal  of  dogma  was  borrowed  from  or  rather  found
to  be  identical  as  to  the  unity  of  God  and  the  immortality  of  the
soul  with  those  of  the  ancient  Mysteries,  and  something  like  the
usages  of  chivalry  was  introduced  into  the  developed  system  of  Free-
masonry.

But  the  Speculative  Freemasonry  which  at  the  beginning  of  the
1 8th  century  was  boldly  separated  from  the  Operative  Masonry,
within  which  it  had  quietly  slept,  waiting  patiently  for  its  time  of
birth,  knew  nothing — recognized  nothing — imitated  nothing  of  the
Mysteries  of  Osiris,  of  Dionysus,  or  of  Mithras,  and  cared  still  less
for  the  daring  deeds  of  the  warriors  of  Palestine.

In  1 716,  when  the  resolve  was  first  made  to  segregate  Speculative
from  Operative  Freemasonry,  and  in  171 7,  when  that  resolve  was
carried  into  effect  by  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng-
land, those  who  undertook  the  enterprise,  looked  only  to  the  usages
and  principles  of  the  English  Stonemasons  for  the  pattern  on  which
they  were  to  construct  the  new  edifice  in  which  they  were  thereafter
to  dwell.  Hence  it  is  that  the  pure,  Speculative  Freemasonry  at
its  origin  borrowed  and  spiritualized,   not  the  sacred  baskets  and

862  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

phallic  emblems  of  the  Mysteries,  nor  the  glittering  swords  and  in-
vincible armor  of  the  Crusaders,  but  the  working  tools  and  profes-
sional phrases  of  the  sodality  of  builders,  whence  they  sprang.

They  even,  in  deference  to  and  in  memorial  of  their  descent,
preserved  the  name  of  the  association  to  which  they  thus  unequiv-
ocally ascribed  their  origin.

They  did  not  profess  to  be  Free  Mystagogues  or  Hierophants,
nor  Free  Knights,  but  simply,  as  they  then  spelt  the  word,  Free
Masons,  Builders  free  of  the  Guild,  who  still  continued  to  build.
They  only  transmuted  the  material  cathedral,  where  God  was  to  be
worshipped  in  all  the  splendor  of  art,  to  the  spiritual  temple  of
the  heart,  where  the  same  worship  was  to  be  continued  in  purity
and  truth.

It  is  true  that  we  thus  materially  abridge  the  pretensions  of  the
institution  to  a  profound  antiquity.  But  unfounded  claims  never
win  honor  or  respect  from  the  honest  inquirer.  If  we  were  disposed
to  treat  the  rise  and  progress  of  Freemasonry  as  a  romance,  we  might
indulge  the  imagination  in  its  wildest  flights,  with  no  other  object
than  to  make  the  narrative  interesting.  But  as  the  purpose  is  to
write  a  history,  we  must  confine  ourselves  to  authenticated  facts,  and
take  the  result,  whatever  it  may  be,  without  reservation.

Accepting,  then,  as  true  the  theory  that  the  Freemasons  who  com-
menced the  organization  of  the  Speculative  system  in  the  year  1716
at  the  "Apple  Tree  "  Tavern  in  London,  and  afterward  completed  it
in  1 71 7  at  the  "Goose  and  Gridiron,"  framed  their  association  after
the  model  of  the  Stonemasons  of  the  Middle  Ages,  whose  fraternity
was  still  preserved,  though  in  a  degenerated  form,  in  the  four
Operative  Lodges  of  London,  we  must  inquire  what  were  the
circumstances  that  prepared  the  founders  of  the  new  Order  which
they  were  instituting  for  this  transition  from  an  Operative  art  to  a
purely  Speculative  science  ?  We  must  go  over  the  road  which  they
traversed  in  making  the  transition  from  one  system  to  the  other.

If  we  carefully  inspect  the  organizations  of  the  two  associations,
we  will  observe  that  while  between  them  there  are  some  very  im-
portant differences,  there  were,  on  the  other  hand,  some  equally
important  resemblances.

The  differences  present  that  well-marked  line  of  demarcation
which  gave  to  each  an  independent  individuality.  They  show  that
there  have  been  two  very  distinct  fraternities,  while  the  resemblances

THE   WAY   PREPARED   FOR  THE   TRANSITION      863

between  the  two,  directly  considered,  show  also  the  dependence  of
one  upon  the  other  and  the  relation  that  existed  between  them.

The  differences  between  them  were  only  three,  and  were  as
follows  :

1.  The  mediaeval  Freemasons  were  exclusively  a  body  of  Opera-
tive builders.  They  admitted,  it  is  true,  as  honorary  members  a
class  of  persons  who  were  not  stonemasons  by  profession.  This
did  not,  however,  in  the  slightest  degree  affect  the  purely  Operative
character  of  the  institution.

The  modern  Speculative  Freemasons  are  not  Operative  builders.
No  member  is  necessarily  a  stonemason.  Stonemasons,  it  is  true,
are  admitted  into  the  brotherhood,  just  as  persons  of  any  other
Craft  may  be,  if  morally  and  intellectually  qualified.

2.  The  mediaeval  Freemasons  constituted  a  guild  which  was
restricted  to  men  of  one  peculiar  handicraft.  No  one  could  be
admitted  into  the  guild  except  the  Honorary  Members,  or  Theoretic
Masons,  as  they  were  sometimes  called,  unless  he  had  served  a  long
apprenticeship  to  the  mystery,  extending  from  one  to  seven  years.

The  Speculative  Freemasons  have  no  such  provision  in  their
Constitution.  Although  they  derive  their  existence  from  an  as-
sociation of  Stonemasons,  and  though  they  preserve  much  of  the
language  and  use  all  the  implements  of  Operative  Masonry  in  their
own  association,  yet  men  of  every  craft  and  profession,  and  men
without  either,  are  freely  admitted,  without  distinction,  into  their
Brotherhood.

3.  Another  difference  is  in  the  religious  character  of  the  two
associations.  This  difference  is  a  very  important  one,  and  has  al-
ready been  assigned  as  one  of  the  causes  that  led  to  the  separation.

The  mediaeval  Masons  were  at  first  Roman  Catholic,  and  after-
ward, when  the  Reformation  had  gained  a  foothold,  and  become
the  religion  of  the  country  in  which  they  resided,  the  Freemasons
professed  to  be  Protestants,  but  in  all  their  regulations  a  strict
allegiance  to  the  Church  was  required.  The  mediaeval  Operative
Freemasons  all  professed  and  maintained  the  Christian  religion.

But  one  of  the  first  acts  of  the  Speculative  Freemasons  after
their  organization  was  to  establish  a  system  of  toleration  in  respect
to  religious  doctrines.  The  Mason  was  required  to  be  of  "that
religion  in  which  all  men  agree."  Consequently  atheists  only  were
precluded   from    admission   to   the    Brotherhood.     In   Speculative

864  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Masonry  every  member  is  permitted  to  enjoy  his  own  peculiar
views  on  religious  matters,  provided  that  he  does  not  deny  the  ex-
istence of  a  personal  God  and  of  a  future  life.

These  are  the  essential  differences  which  exist  between  the  two
associations.  To  counterbalance  them,  there  are  several  very  im-
portant and  significant  resemblances.     These  are  as  follows :

i.  Both  systems  had  some  form  of  initiation  into  the  Brother-
hood, and  certain  methods  of  recognition  by  which  one  member
could  make  himself  known  to  another.  These  forms  and  methods
were  exceedingly  simple  in  the  older  fraternity,  and  varied  then  as
they  do  now  in  different  countries.  They  afforded  only  the  germ
from  which  in  the  newer  fraternity  was  developed,  by  slow  steps,
the  full  fruit  of  a  perfect  form  of  initiation  and  more  complicated
methods  of  recognition.

It  must  be  very  evident  that  when  the  first  movement  was  in-
augurated toward  the  separation  of  the  Speculative  from  the  Opera-
tive element,  the  existence  in  the  latter  of  a  form  of  initiation  and
modes  of  recognition,  however  simple. they  may  have  been,  must
have  suggested  the  policy  of  continuing,  and  as  the  organization
became  more  mature,  of  improving  them.

That  the  Modern  Order  of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons  is  a
secret  society,  in  the  meaning  usually  but  not  accurately  ascribed  to
that  phrase,  arises  from  the  fact  that  the  Operative  Freemasons  of
the  Middle  Ages  were  of  the  same  character.  Of  the  fact  that  the
Operative  Freemasons  were  a  secret  association  there  is  not  the
least  doubt.1

If  the  Operative  Masons  had  not  practiced  these  forms  and
methods,  we  may  safely  infer  that  nothing  of  that  nature  would
have  been  adopted  by  the  Speculative  Masons.  No  other  of  the
contemporary  clubs  or  societies  which  at  that  day  were  springing
abundantly  into  existence  had  adopted  any  such  methods  of  organiza-
tion until  a  few  of  them,  which  were  established  after  the  year  171 7,
such  as  the  Gormagons,  followed  the  example  of  the  Freemasons.

These  forms  were  peculiar  to  the  Operative  Freemasons,  and
that  they  were  adopted  by  the  Speculatives  is  one  of  the  strongest

1  "  So  studiously  did  they  conceal  their  secrets,"  says  Hallivvell,  "that  it  may  be
fairly  questioned  whether  even  some  of  those  who  were  admitted  into  the  Society  of  the
(Operative)  Freemasons  were  wholly  skilled  in  all  the  mysterious  portions  of  the  art."
— "  Archaeologia,"  vol.  xxviii.,  p.  445.

THE   WAY   PREPARED   FOR   THE   TRANSITION      865

proofs  that  could  be  presented  that  the  latter  are  the  direct  de-
scendants of  the  former.

2.  Both  the  Operative  and  Speculative  Freemasons  held  Geom-
etry in  the  greatest  esteem  as  being  the  most  important  of  the  sci-
ences. Indeed,  in  the  Old  Constitutions,  the  words  were  held  to  be
synonymous.  The  secrets  of  the  mediaeval  Architects  are  admitted
to  have  been  geometrical,  that  is,  they  consisted  in  an  application  of
the  principles  of  geometry  to  the  art  of  building.

Mr.  Paley,  in  a  sentence  that  has  heretofore  been  quoted,  says
that  "  it  is  certain  that  geometry  lent  its  aid  in  the  planning  and
designing  of  buildings  .  .  .  which  were  evidently  profound
secrets  in  the  keeping  of  the  Freemasons."  *

When  Speculative  Freemasonry  arose  out  of  the  declining  con-
dition of  the  Operative  system,2  this  respect  for  geometry  was  re-
tained as  the  basis  of  the  symbolic  science,  as  it  had  been  of  the
building  art.  "  Right  angles,  horizontals,  and  perpendiculars,"
which  had  been  applied  to  the  construction  of  edifices,  received  now
a  spiritual  signification  as  symbols.  But  seven  years  after  the  or-
ganization of  Speculative  Freemasonry,  we  find  the  "  Free  Masons'
Signs "  depicted  in  the  oldest  ritual  extant 3  as  acute,  obtuse,  and
right  angles.  The  equilateral  triangle  which  Palfrey  says  was  prob-
ably the  basis  of  most  of  the  formations  of  the  Operative  Free-
masons has  become  the  most  sacred  of  the  symbols  of  their  Specu-
lative descendants.

In  fact,  all  the  geometrical  symbols  (and  there  are  very  few
others)  which  are  found  in  the  rituals  of  modern  Freemasonry,  such
as  the  triangle,  the  square,  the  right  angle,  and  the  forty-seventh
problem  of  Euclid  may  be  considered  as  the  debris  of  what  has  been
called  the  "lost  secrets"  of  the  old  Freemasons.     As  these  founded

1  "  Manual  of  Gothic  Architecture."

2  When  an  allusion  is  made  to  the  "  decline  "  of  Operative  Masonry,  it  must  be  un-
derstood that  the  reference  is  to  that  system  of  elevated  art  which  was  founded  and  prac-
ticed by  the  Freemasons  of  the  Middle  Ages.  Pure  Masonry,  or  the  mere  art  of  building,
is  so  necessary  to  the  wants  of  man,  that  it  must  flourish  in  every  civilized  Society.  But
there  is  the  same  difference  between  Operative  Freemasonry  and  Operative  Masonry  as
there  is  between  the  gorgeous  Cathedral  erected  for  God's  worship  and  the  unassuming
house  built  for  man's  dwelling.  That  Freemasonry  in  the  sense  here  given  was  in  a  de-
clining condition  and  had  "  fallen  from  its  high  estate  "  at  the  close  of  the  17th  and  the
beginning  of  the  18th  century,  is  the  concurrent  record  of  all  architectural  historians.

8  "  The  Grand  Mystery  Discovered,"  London,  1724.

55

866  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

their  art  on  the  application  of  the  principles  of  Geometry  to  the  art  of
building,  declaring  in  their  veneration  for  the  science  that  "  there  is
no  handicraft  that  is  wrought  by  man's  hand  but  it  is  wrought  by
geometry,"  so  the  Speculative  Freemasons,  imitating  them  in  that
veneration,  have  drawn  from  it  their  most  important  symbols  and
announced  it  in  all  their  rituals  to  be  "  the  first  and  noblest  of  the
sciences,  and  the  basis  on  which  the  superstructure  of  Freemasonry
is  founded."

Of  the  various  links  of  the  chain  which  connects  the  Operative
Freemasonry  of  the  Middle  Ages  with  the  Speculative  system  of  the
present  times,  there  is  no  stronger  one  than  this  common  cultivation
of  the  science  of  geometry  by  both — in  the  one,  as  the  aid  to  a  style
of  architecture  ;  in  the  other,  as  the  foundation  of  a  profound  system
of  symbolism.

Moreover,  it  supplies  an  unanswerable  objection  to  the  theory
which  seeks  to  deduce  Freemasonry  from  the  Ancient  Mysteries.
Between  the  two  this  common  bond  is  wanting.  The  hierophants
of  Egypt,  of  Greece,  and  of  Persia  presented  no  geometric  teach-
ings in  their  religious  systems,  and  a  modern  mystical  association
which  was  derived  from  the  Osirian,  the  Dionysiac,  or  the  Mithraic
secret  culture,  would  have  been  as  devoid  as  its  original  to  any  allu-
sions to  the  science  of  Geometry.

3.  A  third  point  of  resemblance  is  that  both  the  Operative  and
the  Speculative  Freemasons  cultivated  the  science  of  symbolism  as
an  important  part  of  their  systems.

There  is  no  one  of  the  resemblances  between  the  mediaeval  and
the  modern  Freemasons  which  is  so  full  of  suggestion  as  to  the  de-
scent of  the  one  from  the  other,  as  is  the  existence  of  this  fact  that
a  science  of  symbolism  was  common  to  both.

That  the  Freemasons  of  the  Middle  Ages  cultivated  with  con-
summate taste  and  skill  the  science  of  symbolism  and  infused  its  prin-
ciples in  all  their  works,  is  an  authentic  fact  of  history  which  admits
of  no  denial.  The  proofs  of  this  are  at  hand,  and  if  it  were  necessary
might  be  readily  produced.

Findel,  whose  iconoclasm  as  an  historian  never  permits  him  to
accept  conclusions  without  a  careful  investigation,  has  contributed
his  authority  to  the  statement  that  the  German  Stonemasons  made
abundant  use  of  symbols  in  the  prosecution  of  their  art.

According  to  him  the  implements,  and  especially  the  compasses,

THE   WAY   PREPARED    FOR    THE   TRANSITION      867

the  square,  the  gavel,  and  the  foot-rule,  were  peculiar  and  expressive
symbols.  Other  crafts  may  have  symbolized  the  instruments  of  their
trade,  but  the  Freemasons,  above  all  others,  "  had  special  reason  to
invest  them  with  a  far  higher  value  and  to  associate  them  with  a
spiritual  meaning  ;  for  it  was  a  holy  vocation  to  which  they  had  de-
voted themselves.  By  the  erection  of  a  house  to  God's  service,  the
Master  Mason  not  only  perpetuated  his  own  name,  but  contributed
to  the  glory  of  the  greatest  of  all  Beings  by  spreading  the  knowledge
of  Christianity  and  by  inciting  to  the  practice  of  Christian  virtue  and
piety.    *

But  it  was  not  to  the  mere  implements  of  their  work  that  they
confined  this  principle  of  symbolization.  They  extended  it  to  the
work  itself,  and  every  church  and  cathedral  erected  by  Gothic  art
is  full  of  the  symbolism  of  architecture.  "On  all  the  buildings
erected  by  them,"  says  Findel,  "are  to  be  found  intimations  of  their
secret  brotherhood  and  of  the  symbols  known  to  them."

Michelet,  the  historian  of  France,  always  eloquent  and  florid,  be-
comes especially  so  when  he  is  referring  to  the  architectural  symbol-
ism of  the  Old  Freemasons.

According  to  him  the  church,  as  erected  in  all  the  significance  of
its  architectural  symbols,  is  not  a  mere  building  of  stones,  but  the
material  presentation  of  the  Christian  drama.  "  It  is,"  he  exclaims,
in  the  fervor  of  his  admiration,  "  a  petrified  Mystery,  a  Passion  in
stone,  or  rather  the  Sufferer  himself.  The  whole  edifice,  in  the  aus-
terity of  its  geometrical  architecture,  is  a  living  body,  a  Man.  The
nave,  extending  its  two  arms,  is  the  Man  on  the  cross ;  the  crypt,  or
subterranean  church,  is  the  Man  in  the  tomb  ;  the  spire  is  still  the
same  Man,  but  above,  ascending  to  heaven  ;  while  in  the  choir  oblique-
ly inclining  in  respect  to  the  nave  you  see  his  head  bent  in  agony."  *

Now  this  science  of  symbolism  so  assiduously  and  so  gracefully
cultivated  by  the  mediaeval  Freemasons  was  handed  down,  like  an
heir-loom,  to  their  modern  successors,  who  in  slow  process  of  time
developed  it  into  the  beautiful  system  which  now  forms  the  vital
force  of  Speculative  Freemasonry.

One  of  the  legal  and  accredited  definitions  of  modern  Freema-
sonry is  that  it  is  "  a  system  of  morality  veiled  in  allegory  and  illus-

1  Findel,  "  Geschichte,"  in  Lyon's  Translation,  p.  68.

2  Michelet,  "  Histoire  de  France,"  liv.  iv.,  ch.  ix.,  p.  364.

B68  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

trated  by  symbols." 1  As  the  architecture  of  the  old  Freemasons
differed  from  all  other  architecture  in  the  symbolism  which  it  im-
pressed on  every  stone,  so  the  morality  of  the  modern  Freemasons
differs  from  every  other  code  in  the  symbolism  with  which  it  clothes
its  instructions.

But  in  all  fairness  it  must  be  confessed  that  the  mere  fact  that
the  science  of  symbolism  has  been  cultivated  both  by  the  Operative
and  Speculative  Freemasons  furnishes  no  satisfactory  evidence  that
the  one  has  been  derived  from  the  other.

Symbolism  was  the  very  earliest  method  by  which  men  sought
to  convey  religious  thought.  It  is  believed,  with  some  share  of
plausibility,  that  it  existed  even  in  pre-historic  times.  It  was  com-
mon to  all  nations,  and  exercised  its  influence  even  in  the  construc-
tion of  language,  for  words  are  merely  the  symbols  of  ideas.

The  Phallic,  supposed  to  be  the  most  ancient  of  all  worships,
was  pre-eminently  a  religion  of  symbolism.  Much  of  that  sym-
bolism has  been  retained  in  modern  customs  and  religious  observ-
ances, though  its  origin  has  been  forgotten  and  its  application  been
perverted.

Nearly  all  the  ancient  schools  were  secret,  like  that  of  Pythag-
oras, and  clothed  their  lessons  of  wisdom  with  the  covering  of
symbolism.  As  with  the  philosophical,  so  was  it  with  the  religious
sects  called  the  Mysteries.  Their  secret  dogmas  were  concealed
beneath  symbols  and  allegories.

It  is  evident,  then,  that  in  regard  to  the  single  point  of  sym-
bolism, the  modern  Freemasons  might  as  well  have  derived  their
symbolic  usages  from  the  ancient  institutions  of  philosophy  or  of
religion  as  from  the  mediaeval  builders.

But  the  symbols  which  were  adopted  by  the  modern  Free-
masons, in  the  beginning  of  the  i8th  century,  under  their  Specula-
tive system,  were  all  based  on  geometry  and  on  architecture  and  on
its  implements.

Now  the  symbols  of  the  old  Operative  Freemasons  were  of  pre-
cisely the  same  character.  Geometry  and  architecture  were  the
foundation  of  both  of  them.

But  the  hierophants  and  mystagogues  of  the  Pagan  mysteries
employed,  in  the  illustration  of  their  doctrines,  symbols,  like  the

'English  Lectures  of  Dr.  Hemming,  adopted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.

THE  WAY   PREPARED   FOR  THE  TRANSITION      869

phallus,  or  the  serpent,  that  had  no  connection  whatsoever  with  the
art  of  building  or  with  the  science  of  mathematics.  It  is  evident
that  the  Speculative  Freemasons,  when  they  were  instituting  their
new  Society  as  "  a  system  of  morality  which  was  to  be  illustrated
by  symbols,"  could  not  have  derived  any  suggestions  from  the
Pagan  mysteries.

The  winged  globe  or  the  handled  cross  of  the  Egyptians,  the
mystic  van  of  Eleusis,  and  the  bleeding  bull  of  the  rites  of  Mithras
found  no  place  as  symbols  in  the  system  of  the  first  Speculative
Masons.

It  is  true  that  at  a  later  period,  and  especially  after  the  invention
of  what  are  called  the  "  high  degrees,"  the  original  ritual  was  sup-
plemented by  the  addition  of  many  symbols  culled  from  these
ancient  sources.

Among  the  Operative  Freemasons  there  were  also  a  few  sym-
bols which  were  not  connected  with  Geometry  or  Architecture,
which  were,  it  is  supposed,  borrowed  from  the  Gnostics,  with  whom
these  old  builders  appear  to  have  had  some  intercourse.  But  these
symbols  were  chiefly  confined  to  the  proprietary  marks,  and  conse-
quently never  were  incorporated  into  the  ritual  of  the  Speculatives.

But  the  society  which  in  1716  seceded  or  separated  from  the
Operative  Lodges  of  London,  and  in  less  than  a  year  after  organ-
ized the  "  Grand  Lodge  of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons,"  when
adopting  its  unimposing  ritual,  gave  the  most  ample  testimony  in
its  construction  of  the  unmixed  influence  of  an  association  of  build-
ers. The  symbolism  employed  in  the  beginning  by  the  Speculative
Freemasons  therefore  furnished  all  the  evidence  that  is  necessary,  if
no  other  were  forthcoming,  of  their  direct  descent  from  the  Opera-
tive Freemasons  of  the  Middle  Ages.

4.  A  fourth  resemblance  between  the  two  associations  is  found
in  the  fact  that  both  were  divided  into  three  classes,  bearing  the
same  name,  namely,  Masters,  Fellows,  and  Apprentices.

In  the  Operative  system  these  were  mere  ranks  or  classes,  which
do  not  appear,  from  any  evidence  we  possess,  to  have  any  distinct
form  of  initiation  or  methods  of  recognition  by  which  the  classes
were  esoterically  separated  from  each  other.  In  other  words,  there
was  no  such  thing  as  a  series  of  degrees,  as  that  term  is  now  mason-
ically  understood,  but  only  one  degree  or  form  of  initiation  common
to  all — to  the  Apprentice  as  well  as  to  the  Master.

87o  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

This  was  precisely  the  system  adopted  by  the  Speculative  Free-
masons at  the  outspring  of  the  separation.  For  at  least  three  years
they  pursued  the  old  Operative  method,  and  had  but  one  esoteric
form  of  admission  for  all  their  members.  The  fabrication  of  the
three  degrees  was  an  afterthought,  which  did  not  take  place  until
at  least  the  year  1 720.

Bro.  W.  J.  Hughan,  who  on  this  subject  will  be  willingly  rec-
ognized  as  of  the  highest  authority,  has  made  this  positive  state-
ment  on  the  subject  :*

"  The  reference  to  Masonic  degrees  (as  we  understand  the  term
now)  never  occurs  in  the  ancient  minutes,  no  rituals  of  degrees  prior
to  1 720  are  in  existence  ;  and  whatever  esoteric  customs  may  have
been  communicated  to  craftsmen  before  the  last  century,  they  do  not
appear  to  have  necessitated  the  temporary  absence  of  either  class  of
members  from  the  lodge."

But  as  this  has  long  been,  and  even  now  is,  a  mooted  question
among  masonic  scholars,  a  very  few  inclining  to  give  to  the  series
of  Craft  degrees  a  greater  antiquity  than  they  seem  entitled  to,  the
subject  will  be  discussed  in  all  its  bearings  in  a  future  chapter  of  this
work,  when  the  judgment  expressed  by  Bro.  Hughan  will,  I  think,
be  sustained  by  the  clearest  historical  evidence.

In  respect  to  the  inquiry  which  we  are  now  pursuing,  the  decision
of  the  question  is  unimportant.  For  whether  we  consider  that  the
Masters,  Fellows,  and  Apprentices  represented  three  degrees  of
esoteric  Masonry  or  only  three  classes  of  workmen,  there  is  no  doubt
that  the  Speculative  Freemasons  derived  the  idea  of  such  a  division
from  the  Operatives.  They  could  not  have  got  it  from  any  of  the
religious  or  philosophic  systems  of  antiquity.  They  could  not  have
found  it  in  the  Mysteries  of  Osiris  nor  in  the  school  of  Pythagoras,
in  neither  of  which  does  any  such  division  occur.

Whatever  changes  the  Speculatives  may  have  made  after  their
organization  by  transmuting  what  were  classes  in  the  Operative
system  into  degrees,  the  change  could  not  obliterate  the  evidence
that  the  former  was  the  successor  of  the  latter,  and  could  have  an
origin  only  in  an  association  of  craftsmen  to  whom  such  a  division
into  classes  or  ranks  of  workmen  was  common  and  necessary.

5.  Another  resemblance  is  found  in  the  common  reference  of

1  In  a  letter  in  the  London  Freemason  for  June  27,   1874.

THE   WAY   PREPARED   FOR  THE   TRANSITION      871

both  to  the  Temple  of  Solomon  as  a  pattern  or  type  on  which  much
of  their  symbolism  has  been  founded.

It  is  not  intended  to  maintain  the  theory  that  the  Institution  of
Freemasonry  has  descended  from  the  Tyrian  and  Jewish  builders  at
the  Temple  erected  by  King  Solomon.  It  has  already  engaged  our
attention  in  a  preceding  part  of  this  work,  and  I  have  sought,  I  hope
and  think  successfully,  to  show  that  the  Solomonic  legend  as  it  has
been  formulated  in  the  third  degree  of  our  modern  Freemasonry,
though  accepted  in  the  lodge  rituals,  is  a  mere  myth  without  a  par-
ticle of  historical  authority  to  sustain  it.

Yet  as  a  part  of  the  great  Legend  of  the  Craft,  the  connection
of  King  Solomon's  Temple  with  the  supposed  history  of  Masonry
was  not  unknown  to  the  Operative  Masons  of  at  least  the  15th  and
succeeding  centuries,  since  they  were  familiar  with  the  Old  Consti-
tutions in  which  this  Legend  was  embodied.

Notwithstanding  that  the  details  of  the  construction  of  this
Temple  by  the  Jewish  and  Tyrian  Masons  contained  in  the  Legend
of  the  Craft  are  very  brief,  these  details,  unsatisfactory  as  they  are,
were  enough  to  inspire  the  Freemasons  of  the  Middle  Ages  with  the
belief  that  the  building  had  been  erected  by  the  aid  of  their  predeces-
sors. Hence  their  Master  Builders  preserved  a  reverential  reference
to  it  in  many  of  their  architectural  symbols.

But  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  Hiramic  legend,  such  as  met
with  in  the  lodges,  was  ever  known  to  the  architects  of  the  Middle
Ages.

Still,  the  history  of  the  Temple,  inaccurately  as  it  was  given  in
the  Legend,  was  accepted  by  them  as  a  part  of  the  history  of  the
Craft,  and  the  building  of  the  magnificent  structure  was  esteemed
by  them  as  one  of  the  most  glorious  works  of  the  ancient  Brother-
hood.

From  the  Operative  Freemasons  the  Temple  idea  passed  over  to
their  Speculative  successors.  From  no  other  source  could  the  latter
have  derived  it.  Its  presence  among  them,  coupled  with  the  other
resemblances,  especially  that  of  the  division  into  three  classes,  is  a
most  irrefragable  proof  of  the  intimate  connection  of  the  two  asso-
ciations.

The  founders  of  Speculative  Freemasonry  found  the  simple
Legend  of  the  Craft  ready  at  hand.  They  adopted  it — incorporated
it  into  their  new  association — and  in  a  short  time,  with  great  ingenu-

872  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

ity,  developed  it  into  the  beautiful  and  impressive  allegory  of  the
Third  degree.

6.  A  very  significant  resemblance  between  the  Operative  and  the
Speculative  Freemasons  is  shown  in  the  fact  that  all  the  written  laws
and  usages  of  the  latter  are  founded  upon  those  which  were  enacted
for  the  government  of  the  former.

The  oldest  code  of  laws  for  the  government  of  Speculative  Free-
masons is  that  contained  in  the  document  entitled  "  The  Charges  of
a  Free-Mason,"  which  were  adopted  in  1722  by  the  Grand  Lodge
and  published  in  the  first  edition  of  the  Book  of  Constitutions.  In
this  edition  it  is  said  that  they  have  been  "extracted  from  the  an-
cient records  of  lodges  beyond  sea  and  of  those  in  England,  Scot-
land, and  Ireland  for  the  use  of  the  lodges  in  London."  1

The  statutes  which  governed  the  Operative  Freemasons  are  con-
tained in  the  old  manuscript  Constitutions,  which  range  in  date  from
the  end  of  the  13th  to  the  beginning  of  the  18th  century.  The  reg-
ulations which  they  contain  are  wholly  inappropriate  to  the  govern-
ment of  a  non-Operative  society.

Still,  as  the  Speculative  was  founded  upon  the  Operative  associa-
tion, and  was  only  a  development  of  the  principles  of  the  latter  in
an  application  of  them  to  moral  and  philosophical  purposes,  the
laws  of  the  Operative  society  were  largely  made  use  of  by  the
Speculative  Fraternity  in  the  construction  of  their  new  code.

It  is  true  that  the  statutes  contained  in  the  manuscript  Constitu-
tions have  not,  with  a  few  exceptions,  been  copied  word  for  word  in
the  "  Charges"  adopted  for  the  regulation  of  the  newly  born  Brother-
hood. This  was  hardly  to  be  expected.  That  which  is  justly  appro-
priate for  a  mechanic  pursuing  a  mechanical  occupation,  would  be
very  absurd  and  incongruous  when  applied  to  a  philosopher  engaged
in  a  philosophical  inquiry.

Still,  the  spirit  of  the  old  laws  has  been  rigidly  observed.  There
is  not  a  regulation  in  the  "Charges"  adopted  in  1722  which  does
not  find  an  analogy  in  the  Constitutions  of  the  Operative  Craft  con-

1  The  "  Charges"  printed  in  the  2d  or  1738  edition  of  the  Constitutions  are  of  little
or  no  value  as  an  exponent  of  the  common  law  of  Freemasonry,  as  they  were  unauthori-
tatively  altered  in  many  important  respects  by  Dr.  Anderson.  But  as  an  historical  docu-
ment it  is  worthy  of  consideration,  as  it  shows  the  gradual  outgrowth  of  the  Speculative
from  the  Operative  system  and  indicates  the  mode  in  which  the  laws  were  modified  in
order  to  accommodate  the  application  of  the  old  laws  to  the  new  association.

THE   WAY   PREPARED   FOR  THE  TRANSITION      873

tained  in  the  old  manuscript  records,  beginning,  so  far  as  we  have
any  trace  of  them,  with  the  Constitutions  of  the  Art  of  Geometry  ac-
cording to  Euclid,  which  was  written,  it  is  supposed,  in  the  year  1399,
and  which  was  in  all  probability  a  copy  of  some  older  manuscript,
now,  perhaps,  irrecoverably  lost.  The  old  law  has  been  retained,  but
in  its  spirit  and  application  there  has  been  a  material  change.

Thus,  by  way  of  example,  we  find  in  the  "Charges"  of  1722
the  following  clause  :

"  No  Master  shall  give  more  wages  to  any  Brother  or  Appren-
tice than  he  may  deserve."

Now  this  most  certainly  could  not  have  meant  that  in  a  lodge  of
Speculative  Freemasons  the  Master  should  not  pay  more  than  a  cer-
tain justly  earned  amount  of  wages  to  an  Entered  Apprentice.  In
1722,  when  this  regulation  was  adopted,  the  Masters  of  lodges  did
not  pay  wages,  in  the  ordinary  acceptation  of  the  word,  to  any  of  the
members.

The  French  Masons  have  retained  the  use  of  this  word  in  their
technical  language,  and  show  us  very  clearly  what  meaning  was  in-
tended to  be  conveyed  by  these  "  Charges,"  when  they  spoke  of  pay-
ing a  Speculative  Freemason  his  wages.

What  the  English  and  American  Freemasons  call  "advancement
from  a  lower  to  a  higher  degree,"  the  French  Freemasons  designate
by  the  expression  "  increase  of  wages."  When  we  say  that  an  En-
tered Apprentice  has  been  advanced  to  the  degree  of  Fellow-Craft,
the  French  express  the  same  fact  by  stating  that  the  Apprentice  has
received  an  increase  of  wages.

This,  then,  is  the  idea  intended  to  be  conveyed  in  that  clause  of
the  "  Charges  "  of  1722  which  has  just  been  quoted.  Translated
into  the  language  of  the  present  day,  we  find  it  in  that  law  which
exists  in  all  Masonic  jurisdictions  and  under  the  sanction  of  all
Grand  Lodges,  that  no  Mason  shall  be  advanced  to  a  higher  degree
until  he  has  shown  suitable  proficiency  in  the  preceding  one.

Now  this  law  of  Speculative  Freemasonry  has  been  derived  from
and  finds  its  analogy  in  the  Old  Constitutions  of  the  Operative
Freemasons,  where  the  following  law  is  extant :

"  Every  Master  shall  give  pay  to  his  Fellows  and  servants  as
they  may  deserve,  so  that  he  be  not  defamed  with  false  working."  l

1  Lansdowne  MS.,  anno  1560.

874  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

It  is  very  manifest  that  here  the  literal  meaning  of  the  law  as  it
was  applicable  to  Operative  Freemasonry  has  been  abandoned,  but
the  spirit  has  been  preserved  in  a  symbolical  interpretation.

Again,  in  the  "Charges"  adopted  by  the  Speculatives  in  1722,
the  following  regulation  will  be  found  :

"  None  shall  discover  envy  at  the  prosperity  of  a  Brother  nor
supplant  him,  nor  put  him  out  of  his  work  if  he  be  capable  to  finish
the  same  ;  for  no  man  can  finish  another's  work  so  much  to  the
Lord's  profit,  unless  he  be  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  design
and  draughts  of  him  that  began  it."

No  one,  on  the  mere  reading  of  this  regulation,  can  hesitate  to
believe  that  it  must  have  been  originally  intended  for  the  govern-
ment of  working  Masons,  and  that  the  Speculative  Masons  must
have  derived  it  from  them.

Accordingly,  if  we  look  into  the  Old  Constitutions  of  the  Oper-
ative Freemasons  we  shall  find  the  same  law,  though  not  expressed
in  identical  words.  The  Operative  law  is  thus  stated  in  the  Sloane
MS.,  whose  date  is  about  1645.

"  Noe  Maister  nor  Fellowe  shall  supplant  others  of  there  worke
(that  is  to  say)  ;  if  he  have  taken  a  worke,  or  stand  Maister  of  a
Lord's  work,  you  shall  not  put  him  out  of  it ;  if  hee  bee  able  of  cun-
ning to  performe  the  same."

Now  we  can  very  easily  understand  the  meaning  of  this  last  reg-
ulation as  applied  to  an  association  or  fraternity  of  working  Masons.
It  was  intended  to  prevent  the  unfair  interference  of  one  Operative
Freemason  with  another,  by  seeking  to  wrest  employment  from  him
in  surreptitious  and  underhanded  ways.  It  is  not,  even  at  this  day,
considered  by  craftsmen  to  be  an  honorable  act,  though  not  forbid-
den, as  it  was  to  the  old  Freemasons,  by  an  express  statute.

But  what  can  be  the  meaning  of  such  a  law  when  applied,  as  it  is
in  the  "Charges"  of  1722,  to  Speculative  Freemasons?  They  have
no  "  Lord's  work  "  to  do,  in  which  they  might  be  supplanted  by  a
rival  craftsman.

If  the  literal  meaning  of  the  law  were  to  be  accepted,  we  should
verify  the  truth  of  Scripture  that  it  is  the  letter  which  killeth.  But
if  we  apply  the  symbolic  interpretation,  which  must  have  been  the
one  given  to  it  by  the  Speculative  Freemasons,  we  shall  find  that  the
spirit  of  the  old  Operative  regulations  is  still  preserved  and  obeyed
by  all  the  Grand  Lodges  in  the  world.     It  is  in  fact  the  very  law  that

THE  WAY   PREPARED   FOR  THE  TRANSITION      875

applies  to  and  is  the  foundation  of  the  well-known  and  often  dis-
cussed doctrine  of  Masonic  jurisdiction.

The  law  as  it  is  now  understood  is  that  no  lodge  shall  interfere
with  another  lodge  in  conferring  degrees  on  a  candidate  ;  that  when
he  has  received  the  First  degree  in  any  lodge,  he  becomes,  mason-
ically,  the  work  of  that  lodge  and  must  there  receive  the  rest  of  the
degrees.  No  other  lodge  shall  be  permitted  to  supplant  it,  or  to
take  the  finishing  of  that  work  out  of  its  hands.  The  Apprentice
must  be  passed  and  raised  in  the  lodge  wherein  he  was  initiated.

Thus  the  law  of  Speculative  Freemasonry  which  is  everywhere
accepted  by  the  Craft  as  the  rule  of  courtesy  for  the  government
of  lodges  in  their  relation  to  each  other,  was  evidently  founded  on
the  principles  of  Operative  Freemasonry,  taken,  in  fact,  from  the
law  of  that  older  branch  of  the  Institution  and,  as  it  were,  spiritual-
ized in  its  practical  application  to  the  government  of  the  Speculative
branch.

Viewed  in  their  literal  meaning,  it  is  very  evident  that  the  whole
of  the  "Charges"  adopted  in  the  year  1722  by  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England,  just  after  its  severance  from  the  Operative  lodges,  are
laws  which  must  have  been  intended  for  an  association  of  working
Masons.

They  were  the  statutes  of  an  Operative  guild,  and  were  adopted
in  the  bulk  by  the  Speculative  Freemasons  at  the  time  of  the  sep-
aration, to  be  subsequently  and  gradually  interpreted  in  their  mean-
ing and  modified  in  their  purpose  to  suit  the  Speculative  idea.

Other  points  of  difference  and  other  points  of  resemblance
might  be  found  on  a  more  minute  investigation,  but  the  connection
between  the  two  branches  has,  I  think,  been  sufficiently  shown.

The  differences  have  enabled  us  to  give  to  each  association  a
personality  and  an  individuality  which  manifestly  separate  the  one
from  the  other.  The  guild  of  Operative  and  the  guild  of  Specula-
tive Freemasons  were  and  are  entirely  distinct,  in  their  character
and  design.  The  parent  and  the  child  are  not  the  same,  though
there  will  be  resemblances  which  indicate  the  common  lineage.

Now  the  resemblances  which  have  been  described  as  existing
between  the  two  Fraternities,  while  they  paved  the  way  for  the  easy
outgrowth  of  the  one  from  the  other,  furnish  also  the  most  incon-
testable evidence  of  the  influence  that  was  exerted  by  the  guild  of
mediaeval  Freemasons  on  the  organization  of  the  Speculative  Free*

876  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

masons  who  sprang  into  existence  in  England  at  the  beginning  of
the  1 8th  century.  To  use  a  Darwinian  phrase,  the  change  might
be  said  to  have  been  produced  by  a  sort  of  evolution.

In  other  words,  if  there  had  been  no  guilds  of  Operative  Free-
masons, such  as  history  paints  them,  from  the  ioth  to  the  17th  cen-
turies, there  would  have  been  no  lodges  of  Speculative  Freemasons
in  the  18th  and  19th  centuries.

Thus  we  establish  the  truth  of  the  hypothesis  which  it  has  been
the  object  of  this  work  to  maintain,  that  the  Freemasonry  of  the
present  day  is  derived  solely,  in  its  primitive  organization,  from  the
Building  Corporations  of  the  Middle  Ages ;  and  that  its  rites,  its
doctrines,  and  its  laws  have  suffered  no  modification  except  that
which  naturally  resulted  from  a  change  of  character  when  the
Operative  Fraternity  became  a  Speculative  one.

This  is,  I  think,  about  the  sum  and  substance  and  the  true  solu-
tion of  the  historical  problem  which  refers  to  the  connection  of  the
Speculative  with  the  Operative  association  ;  of  the  Freemasons  of
to-day  with  the  Freemasons  who  came  from  Lombardy  and  who
flourished  in  the  Middle  Ages  ;  of  the  men  whose  lodges  have  now
passed  into  every  country  where  civilization  has  extended,  and  every-
where exerted  a  powerful  moral  influence,  with  the  men  who  erected
monuments  of  their  artistic  skill  at  Magdeburg,  and  Strasburg,  and
Cologne,  at  Canterbury  and  York,  at  Kilwinning  and  Melrose.

Our  attention  must  next  be  directed  to  the  historical  events  that
took  place  immediately  after  the  separation  in  England,  and  after-
ward in  Scotland  and  in  other  countries — events  which  make  up  the
narrative  of  the  rise  and  progress  of  Speculative  Freemasonry.

To  these  events  the  following  chapters  will  be  devoted.

^MS.

BRIGHAM  YOUNG  UNIVERSITY

3  1197  21452  8546

0N

mi

»

r*>i

mP^W^lm

1999

MAI  u  S  RHM

MAR  3  0  200
app  1 9  7000

>-sT  '  *  I

APR  21  70114

FEB  2  6  2004

II*

Brigham  Young  University

»

IHH

^i

2l

V\,^


# VOLUME IV

THE

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

ITS  LEGENDS  AND  TRADITIONS
ITS  CHRONOLOGICAL  HISTORY

By  ALBERT  GALLATIN  MACKEY,  M.D.,  33?

THE  HISTORY  OF  THE

SYMBOLISM  OF  FREEMASONRY

THE

ANCIENT  AND  ACCEPTED  SCOTTISH  RITE

AND  THE

ROYAL  ORDER  OF  SCOTLAND

BY  WILLIAM  R.  SINGLETON,  33?

WITH  AN

ADDENDA

BY  WILLIAM  JAMES  HUGHAN

P -.  S.-.  G.-.  D.-.  of  G.-.  L.-.  of  England — P.-.  S.-.  G.-.  W.-.  of  Egypt,  etc.

Volume  Four

PUBLISHED  BY

THE  MASONIC  HISTORY  COMPANY
New  York  and  London

ALL  RIGHTS  RESERVED.

CHAPTER  XXIX

ORGANIZATION  OF  THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  ENGLAND

E have  now  reached  the  most  interesting  portion
of  the  history  of  Freemasonry.  We  are  getting
away  from  the  regions  of  legend  and  tradition,
and  are  passing  into  the  realm  of  authentic
records.  And  though  at  this  early  period  there
is  a sparseness  of  these  records,  and  sometimes
a doubtfulness  about  their  meaning,  which  will
occasionally  compel  us  to  build  our  hypothesis  on  the  foundation  of
plausible  conjecture  and  reasoning,  still,  to  whatever  conclusions
we  may  come,  they  will,  of  course,  be  more  satisfactory  to  the  mind
than  if  they  were  wrought  out  of  mere  mythical  and  traditionary  nar-
ratives.

It  has  already  been  shown  that  the  Guild  or  Fraternity  of  Free-
masons from  the  earliest  period  of  its  history  had  admitted  into  its
connection  persons  of  rank  and  influence  who  were  not  workmen
of  the  Craft.

In  this  usage  it  followed  the  example  of  the  Roman  Colleges
of  Artificers,  whose  patrons  were  selected  to  secure  to  the  corpora-
tions a protection  often  needed,  from  the  oppressive  interference  of
the  government.

Thus,  when  after  the  decadence  of  the  Roman  Empire,  archi-
tecture, which  had  fallen  into  decline,  began  to  revive,  the  Masons
were  employed  in  the  construction  of  religious  edifices,  the  dignita-
ries of  the  Church  naturally  became  closely  connected  with  the
workmen,  while  many  of  the  monks  were  operative  masons.  Bish-
ops and  abbots  superintended  the  buildings,  and  were  thus  closely
connected  with  the  Guild.

This  usage  was  continued  even  after  the  Freemasons  had  with-
drawn from  all  ecclesiastical  dependence,  and  up  to  the  18th  century
non-operatives  were  admitted  into  full  membership  of  the  Fraternity,
under  the  appellation  of  Gentlemen  or  Theoretic  Masons,  or  as

877

878

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Honorary  Members.  The  title  of  Speculative  Freemasons  was  a
word  of  later  coinage,  though  it  is  met  with,  apparently  with  the
same  meaning,  in  one  of  the  oldest  Records,  the  Cooke  MS.  But
this  is  a solitary  instance,  and  the  word  never  came  into  general  use
until  some  time  after  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge  in  1717.

It  is  here  used  for  the  sake  of  convenience,  in  reference  to  the
early  period,  but  without  any  intention  to  intimate  that  it  was  then

familiar  to  the  Craft.  The  fact  existed,  however,  though  the

special  word  was  apparently  wanting.

The  natural  result  of  this  commingling  of  Operative  and  Specu-
lative Masons  in  the  same  Fraternity,  was  to  beget  a spirit  of  rivalry
between  the  two  classes.  This  eventually  culminated  in  the  disso-

lution of  the  Guild  of  Operative  Freemasons  as  distinguished  from
the  Rough  Masons  or  Rough  Layers,  and  the  establishment  on  its
ruin  of  the  Society  of  Speculative  Freemasons,  which  at  London,  in
the  year  1717,  assumed  the  title  of  "The  Grand  Lodge  of  Free  and
Accepted  Masons."

We  are  without  any  authentic  narrative  of  the  rise  and  progress
of  the  contentions  between  the  rival  classes  in  England,  because  in

that  country  the  records  of  the  Operative  Lodges  before  the  close
of  the  17th  century  have  been  lost.  But  the  sister  kingdom  of
Scotland  has  been  more  fortunate.  There  the  minutes  of  the  Lodges

of  Edinburgh  and  Kilwinning  exhibit  abundant  evidence  of  the
struggle  for  pre-eminence  which  terminated  in  the  year  1736  in  the
establishment  of  the  speculative  "Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland."

As  the  subject-matter  to  be  treated  in  this  chapter  is  the  history
of  the  establishment  at  London,  in  the  year  1717,  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England,  it  will  be  proper  as  a preliminary  step  that  some
notice  should  be  taken  of  the  condition  of  Freemasonry  during  the

first  decade  of  the  18th  century  in  the  south  of  England.

The  lodges  then  existing  in  the  kingdom  consisted,  it  is  sup-
posed, both  of  Operative  and  non-Operative  members.  We  have

positive  evidence  of  this  in  some  instances,  and  especially  as  respects

the  lodges  in  London.

Preston  gives  the  following  account  of  the  condition  of  the  insti-
tution in  the  beginning  of  the  18th  century:

"During  the  Reign  of  Queen  Anne,  masonry  made  no  consid-
erable progress.  Sir  Christopher  Wren's  age  and  infirmities  draw-
ing off  his  attention  from  the  duties  of  his  office  (that  of  Grand

ORGANIZATION  OF  THE  GRAND  LODGE

879

Master),  the  lodges  decreased,  and  the  annual  festivals  were  entirely
neglected.  The  old  Lodge  of  St.  Paul  and  a few  others  continued
to  meet  regularly,  but  consisted  of  few  members."1

Anderson,  upon  whose  authority  Preston  had  made  this  state-
ment, says  that  "in  the  South  the  lodges  were  more  and  more  dis-
used, partly  by  the  neglect  of  the  Masters  and  Wardens  and  partly
by  not  having  a noble  Grand  Master  at  London,  and  the  annual
Assembly  was  not  duly  attended."2

As  the  statement  so  often  made  by  Anderson  and  other  writers
of  his  school,  that  there  was,  anterior  to  the  seventeenth  year  of  the
18th  century,  an  annual  Assembly  of  the  Craft  in  England  over
which  a Grand  Master  presided,  has  been  proved  to  be  apocryphal,
we  must  attribute  the  decline  of  Operative  Freemasonry  to  other
causes  than  those  assigned  by  Dr.  Anderson.

I have  heretofore  attempted  to  show  that  the  decline  in  the
spirit  of  Operative  Freemasonry  was  to  be  attributed  to  the  de-
cadence of  Gothic  Architecture.  By  this  the  Freemasons  were
reduced  to  a lower  level  than  they  had  ever  before  occupied,  and
were  brought  much  nearer  to  the  "Rough  Masons"  than  was  pleas-
ing to  their  pride  of  "cunning."  They  thus  lost  the  pre-eminence
in  the  Craft  which  they  had  so  long  held  on  account  of  their
acknowledged  genius  and  the  skill  which  in  past  times  they  had
exhibited  in  the  art  of  building.

But  whatever  may  have  been  the  cause,  the  fact  is  indisputable
that  at  the  beginning  of  the  18th  century  the  Freemasons  had  lost
much  of  their  high  standing  as  practical  architects  and  had  greatly
diminished  in  numbers.

In  the  year  1716  there  were  but  four  lodges  of  Operative
Masons  in  the  city  of  London.  The  minutes  of  these  lodges  are
not  extant,  and  we  have  no  authentic  means  of  knowing  what  was
their  precise  condition.

But  we  do  know  that  among  their  members  were  many  gentle-
men of  education  who  were  not  Operative  Masons,  but  belonged
to  the  class  of  Theoretic  or  Speculative  Freemasons,  which,  as  I
have  previously  said,  it  had  long  been  the  custom  of  the  Operative
Freemasons  to  admit  into  their  Fraternity.

Preston,  in  his  Illustrations  of  Masonry,  in  a passage  already

1 "Illustrations  of  Masonry,"  Jones's  edit.,  1821,  p.  189.

2 "Constitutions,"  edit.  1738,  p.  108.

880

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

cited,  speaking  of  the  decline  of  the  lodges  in  the  first  decade  of  the
18th  century,  makes  this  statement:

"To  increase  their  numbers,  a proposition  was  made,  and  after-
wards agreed  to,  that  the  privileges  of  Masonry  should  no  longer
be  restricted  to  Operative  Masons,  but  extend  to  men  of  various
professions,  provided  they  were  regularly  approved  and  initiated
into  the  Order."

For  this  statement  he  gives  no  authority.  Anderson,  who
was  contemporary  with  the  period  of  time  when  this  regulation

is  said  to  have  been  adopted,  makes  no  allusion  to  it,  and  Preston
himself  says  on  a preceding  page  that  "at  a general  assembly  and

feast  of  the  Masons  in  1697  many  noble  and  eminent  brethren
were  present,  and  among  the  rest,  Charles,  Duke  of  Richmond
and  Lennox,  who  was  at  that  time  Master  of  the  lodge  at  Chich-
ester."1

The  statement  appears,  therefore,  to  be  apochryphal.  Such  a

proposition  would  certainly  have  been  wholly  superfluous,  as  there
is  abundant  evidence  that  in  England  in  the  17th  century  "men  of
various  professions"  had  been  "regularly  approved  and  initiated
into  the  Order."

Elias  Ashmole,  the  Antiquary,  states  in  his  Diary  that  he  and

Colonel  Mainwaring  were  initiated  in  a lodge  at  Warrington  in
1646,  and  he  records  the  admission  of  several  other  non-Operatives
in  1682  at  a lodge  held  in  London.

Dr.  Plott.  in  his  Natural  History  of  Staffordshire,  printed  in
1686,  states  that  "persons  of  the  most  eminent  quality  did  not  dis-
dain to  be  of  the  Fellowship."

In  the  first  and  second  decades  of  the  18th  century  Operative
Freemasonry  appears,  judging  from  extant  records,  to  have  been  in
the  following  condition:

In  the  northern  counties  there  were  several  lodges  of  Operative
Freemasons,  which  had  a permanent  character,  having  rules  for
their  government,  and  holding  meetings  at  which  new  members
were  admitted.

Thus  Preston  speaks  of  a lodge  which  was  at  Chichester  in  1697,
of  which  the  Duke  of  Richmond  and  Lennox  was  Master;  there
was  a lodge  at  Alnwick  in  Northumberland,  whose  records  from

1 "Illustrations  of  Masonry,"  p.  189,  Jones's  edit.

ORGANIZATION  OF  THE  GRAND  LODGE

881

1701  are  extant;1  and  there  was  at  least  one  lodge,  if  not  more,  in

the  city  of  York  whose  preserved  minutes  begin  on  March  19,
17 12. 2 We  have  every  reason  to  suppose  that  similar  lodges  were

to  be  found  in  other  parts  of  the  kingdom,  though  the  minutes  of

their  transactions  have  unfortunately  been  lost.

In  London  there  were  four  operative  lodges.  These  were  the

lodges  which  in  1717  united  in  the  formation  of  the  Speculative

Grand  Lodge  of  England,  an  act  that  has  improperly  been  called

the  "Revival."

All  the  lodges  mentioned  consisted  of  two  classes  of  mem-
bers, namely,  those  who  were  Operative  Freemasons  and  who

worked  in  the  mystery  of  the  Craft,  and  those  who  were  non-Oper-
ative,  or,  as  they  were  sometimes  called.  Gentlemen  Freemasons.

The  ceremony  of  admission  or  initiation  was  at  this  time  of  a
very  simple  and  unpretentious  character.  There  was  but  one  form

common  to  the  three  ranks  of  Apprentices,  Fellows,  and  Masters,
and  the  division  into  degrees,  as  that  word  is  now  understood,  was
utterly  unknown.3

From  the  close  of  the  17th  century  the  Operative  lodges  were
gradually  losing  their  prestige.  They  were  no  longer,  as  Lord
Lindsay  has  denominated  their  predecessors  of  the  Middle  Ages,

"parliaments  of  genius;"  their  architectural  skill  had  decayed;
their  geometrical  secrets  were  lost;  and  the  distinction  which  had
once  been  so  proudly  maintained  between  the  Freemasons  and  the
"rough  layers"  was  being  rapidly  obliterated.

Meantime  the  men  of  science  and  culture  who  had  been  admit-
ted into  their  ranks,  thought  that  they  saw  in  the  principle  of  broth-
erhood which  was  still  preserved,  and  in  the  symbolic  teachings

which  were  not  yet  altogether  lost,  a foundation  for  another  associ-
ation, in  which  the  fraternal  spirit  should  remain  as  the  bond  of
union,  and  the  doctrines  of  symbolism,  hitherto  practically  applied
to  the  art  of  architecture,  should  be  in  future  directed  to  the  illus-
tration of  the  science  of  morality.

1 Bro.  Hughan  has  published  excerpts  from  the  minutes.  See  Mackey's  "National

Freemason,"  vol,  iii.,  p.  233.

2 See  Hughan's  History  of  Freemasonry  in  York,  in  his  "Masonic  Sketches  and  Re-
prints," p.  55.  See  also  an  article  by  him  in  the  Voice  of  Masonry,  vol.  xiii.,  p.  571.

3 This  subject  will  be  fully  discussed  in  a future  chapter  on  the  history  of  the  origin  of
the  three  Craft  degrees,  and  the  statement  here  made  will  be  satisfactorily  substantiated.

882

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Long  afterward  the  successors  of  these  founders  of  Speculative
Freemasonry  defined  it  to  be  "a  system  of  morality,  veiled  in  alle-
gory and  illustrated  by  symbols."

Feeling  that  there  was  no  congenial  companionship  between
themselves  and  the  uncultured  men  who  composed  the  Operative
element  of  the  Association,  the  gentlemen  of  education  and  refine-
ment who  constituted  the  Theoretic  element  or  the  Honorary  mem-
bership of  the  four  lodges  then  existing  in  the  city  of  London,  re-
solved to  change  the  character  of  these  lodges,  and  to  withdraw  them
entirely  from  any  connection  with  Operative  or  Practical  Masonry.

It  was  in  this  way  that  Speculative  Freemasonry  found  its  origin
in  the  desire  of  a few  speculative  thinkers  who  desired,  for  the  grat-
ification of  their  own  taste,  to  transmute  what  in  the  language  of  the
times  would  have  been  called  a club  of  workmen  into  a club  of  mor-
alists.

The  events  connected  with  this  transmutation  are  fully  recorded
by  Dr.  Anderson,  in  the  second  edition  of  the  Constitutions,  and  as
this  is  really  the  official  account  of  the  transaction,  it  is  better  to
give  it  in  the  very  language  of  that  account,  than  to  offer  any  ver-
sion of  it.

The  history  of  the  formation  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Free  and
Accepted  Masons  of  England,  is  given  in  the  following  words  by
Dr.  Anderson,  who  is  said  to  have  been  one  of  the  actors  in  the
event:

"King  George  I.  entered  London  most  magnificently  on  20
Sept.,  1714,  and  after  the  rebellion  was  over,  A.D.  1716,  the  few
lodges  at  London,  finding  themselves  neglected  by  Sir  Christopher
Wren,  thought  fit  to  cement  under  a Grand  Master  as  the  centre
of  union  and  harmony,  viz.,  the  lodges  that  met.

"1.  At  the  'Goose  and  Gridiron  Ale-house'  in  St.  Paul's

Churchyard.

"2.  At  the  'Crown  Ale-house'  in  Parker's  Lane  near  Drury

Lane.

"3.  At  the  'Apple  Tree  Tavern'  in  Charles  Street,  Covent

Garden.

"4.  At  the  'Rummer  and  Grapes  Tavern'  in  Channel  Row,

Westminster.

"They  and  some  old  brothers  met  at  the  said  Apple  Tree,  and
having  put  into  the  chair  the  oldest  Master  Mason  (now  the  Master

ALBERT  PIKE

ORGANIZATION  OF  THE  GRAND  LODGE

883

of  a Lodge)  they  constituted  themselves  a Grand  Lodge,  pro  tem-
pore, in  Due  Form,  and  forthwith  revived  the  Quarterly  Communica-
tion of  the  Officers  of  Lodges  (called  the  Grand  Lodge)  resolved  to
hold  the  Annual  Feast  and  then  to  choose  a Grand  Master  from
among  themselves,  till  they  should  have  the  honor  of  a noble  brother
at  their  head.

Grand  Wardens,

"Accordingly

On  St.  John  Baptist's  day,  in  the  3d  year  of  King  George  I.,  A.D.
1717,  the  Assembly  and  Feast  of  the  Free  and  Accepted  Masons
was  held  at  the  foresaid  'Goose  and  Gridiron  Ale-house.'

"Before  dinner,  the  oldest  Master  Mason  (now  the  Master  of  a
Lodge)  in  the  Chair,  proposed  a list  of  proper  candidates,  and  the
brethren  by  a majority  of  hands  elected

"Mr.  Anthony  Sayer,  Gentleman,  Grand  Master  of  Masons,
f Capt.  Joseph  Elliott
\ Mr.  Jacob  Lamball,  CarpenterJ
who  being  forthwith  invested  with  the  badges  of  office  and  power
by  the  said  oldest  Master,  and  installed,  was  duly  congratulated  by
the  Assembly  who  paid  him  the  homage.

"Sayer,  Grand  Master,  commanded  the  Masters  and  Wardens
of  Lodges  to  meet  the  Grand  Officers  every  quarter  in  communica-
tion at  the  place  appointed  in  his  summons  sent  by  the  Tyler."1

Such  is  the  account  of  the  transmutation  of  the  four  Operative
to  four  Speculative  lodges,  given  by  Dr.  Anderson,  who  is  believed,
with  George  Payne,  Esq.,  and  Dr.  Desaguliers,  to  have  been  princi-
pally instrumental  in  effecting  the  transmutation.

Meager  as  are  the  details  of  so  important  an  event  which  Ander-
son, as  a contemporary  actor,  might  easily  have  made  more  copious,
they  suggest  several  important  points  for  our  consideration.

We  see  that  the  change  to  be  effected  by  the  establishment  of
the  Speculative  Grand  Lodge  was  not  too  hastily  accomplished.

The  first  meeting  in  which  it  was  resolved  to  organize  a Grand
Lodge  took  place  some  months  before  the  actual  organization  oc-
curred.

Anderson  says  that  the  four  lodges  met  in  1716  and  "revived
the  Quarterly  Communication  of  the  officers  of  lodges."

Preston  says  that  they  met  in  February,  1717,  and  that  at  this

'Constitutions,"  1738  edition,  pp.  109,  110.

884

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

meeting  "it  was  resolved  to  revive  the  Quarterly  Communications
of  the  Fraternity."

This  is  a more  accurate  statement  than  that  of  Anderson.  The
meeting  in  February,  1717,  was  merely  preliminary.  A resolution
was  adopted,  or  perhaps  more  correctly  speaking,  an  agreement
was  entered  into,  to  organize  a Grand  Lodge.  But  this  agreement
was  not  carried  into  execution  until  four  months  afterward.  There
could  have  been  no  Grand  Lodge  without  a Grand  Master,  and

the  Grand  Master  was  not  elected  until  the  24th  of  June  following.
The  apparent  disagreement  of  the  dates  assigned  to  the  preparatory
meeting,  Anderson  saying  it  was  in  1716,  and  Preston  that  it  was
in  February,  1717,  is  easily  reconciled.

Anderson  in  his  narrative  used  the  Old  Style,  in  which  the  year
began  on  March  25th,  consequently  February  would  fall  in  1716.
Preston  used  the  New  Style,  which  begins  the  year  on  January  1st,
and  thereby  February  fell  in  1717.  The  actual  period  of  time  re-

ferred to  by  both  authors  is  really  the  same.

In  an  anonymous  work1  published  in  1764  it  is  said  that  six
lodges  were  engaged  in  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  but
as  the  two  additional  lodges  are  not  identified,  it  is  better  to  reject
the  statement  as  untruthful,  and  to  abide  by  the  authority  of  Ander-
son, who,  as  Bro.  Hughan  says,  "clearly  wrote  at  a time  when  many
personally  knew  as  to  the  facts  narrated  and  whose  Book  of  Consti-
tutions was  really  the  official  statement  issued  by  the  Grand  Lodge."

The  fact  that  four  lodges  were  engaged  in  the  act  of  transmuting
Operative  into  Speculative  Freemasonry  by  organizing  a Grand
Lodge,  while  admitted  as  an  historical  fact  by  Lawrence  Dermott,
is  used  by  him  as  an  objection  to  the  legality  of  the  organization.

"To  form,"  he  says,  "what  Masons  mean  by  a Grand  Lodge,
there  must  have  been  the  Masters  and  Wardens  of  five  regular

lodges,  that  is  to  say,  five  Masters  and  ten  Wardens,  making  the

number  of  installed  officers  fifteen."2

But  although  Dermott  very  confidently  asserts  that  this  "is  well
known  to  every  man  conversant  with  the  ancient  laws,  usages,
customs,  and  ceremonies  of  Master  Masons,"3  there  can  be  no
doubt  that  this  point  of  law  so  dogmatically  proclaimed  was  the

1 "The  Complete  Freemason,  or  Multa  Paucis,  for  Lovers  of  Secrets."

2 "Ahiman  Rezon,"  p.  13.

3 Ibid.,  p.  14.

ORGANIZATION  OF  THE  GRAND  LODGE

885

pure  invention  of  Dermott's  brain,  and  is  entitled  to  no  weight
whatever.

As  the  Grand  Lodge  which  was  established  in  1717  was  the  first

one  ever  known,  it  was  impossible  that  there  could  be  any  "ancient

laws"  to  regulate  its  organization.

It  is  noteworthy  that  each  of  these  premier  lodges  met  at  a tav-
ern or  ale-house.  During  the  last  century  Freemasons'  lodges  in
England  almost  universally  had  their  lodge-rooms  in  the  upper  part
of  taverns.  The  custom  was  also  adopted  in  this  country,  and  all

the  early  lodges  in  America  were  held  in  the  upper  rooms  of  build-
ings occupied  as  taverns.

The  custom  of  meeting  in  taverns  was  one  that  was  not  confined
to  the  Masonic  Brotherhood.  The  early  part  of  the  18th  century

was,  in  London,  as  we  have  already  seen,  the  era  of  clubs.  These
societies,  established  some  for  literary,  some  for  social,  and  some  for
political  purposes,  always  held  their  meetings  in  taverns.  "Will's
Coffee  House"  is  made  memorable  in  the  numbers  of  the  Spectator
as  the  rendezvous  of  the  wits  of  that  day.

It  will  also  be  noticed  that  these  four  lodges  were  without  names,
such  as  are  now  borne  by  lodges,  but  that  they  were  designated  by
the  signs  of  the  taverns  in  which  they  held  their  meetings.  Half  a
century  elapsed  before  the  lodges  in  England  began  to  assume  dis-
tinctive names.  The  first  lodge  to  do  so  was  Friendship  Lodge  No.
3,  which  is  so  styled  in  Cole's  List  of  Lodges  for  1767.

No  difficulty  or  confusion,  however,  arose  from  this  custom
of  designating  lodges  by  the  signs  of  the  taverns  in  which  they
held  their  meetings,  for  it  seldom  happened  that  more  than  one
lodge  ever  met  at  any  tavern.  "The  practice,"  says  Gould,  "of
any  one  tavern  being  common  as  a place  of  meeting,  to  two
or  more  lodges,  seems  to  have  been  almost  unknown  in  the  last
century."1

Two  of  the  four  taverns  in  which  these  four  original  lodges  were
held,  and  two  of  the  lodges  themselves,  namely,  the  "Apple  Tree,"
where  the  design  of  separating  the  Speculative  from  the  Operative
element  was  inaugurated,  and  the  "Goose  and  Gridiron,"  where  that
design  was  consummated  by  the  organization  of  the  new  Grand
Lodge,  particularly  claim  our  attention.

1 "The  Four  Old  Lodges,"  by  Robert  Freke  Gould,  p.  13.

886

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

But  it  will  be  more  convenient  while  engaged  on  this  subject  to
trace  the  fate  and  fortune  of  the  whole  four.

In  this  investigation  I have  been  greatly  aided  by  the  laborious
and  accurate  treatise  of  Bro.  Robert  Freke  Gould,  of  London,  on
the  Four  Old  Lodges.  After  his  exhaustive  analysis  there  is  but
little  chance  of  unearthing  any  new  discoveries,  though  I have  been
able  to  add  from  other  sources  a few  interesting  facts.

The  lodge  first  named  on  Anderson's  list  met  at  the  "Goose  and
Gridiron  Ale-house,"  and  it  was  there  that,  on  the  24th  of  June,  1717,
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  was  established.  Elmes  says  that
"Sir  Christopher  Wren  was  Master  of  St.  Paul's  Lodge,  which
during  the  building  of  the  Cathedral  of  St.  Paul's,  met  at  the  'Goose
and  Gridiron'  in  St.  Paul's  Church-yard,  and  is  now  the  Lodge  of
Antiquity,  acting  by  immemorial  prescription;  and  he  regularly
presided  at  its  meetings  for  upward  of  eighteen  years."1

Dr.  Oliver  says  that  Dr.  Desaguliers,  who  may  be  properly  re-
puted as  the  principal  founder  of  modem  Speculative  Freemasonry,
was  initiated  into  the  ceremonies  of  the  Operative  system,  such  as

they  were,  in  the  lodge  that  met  at  the  "Goose  and  Gridiron,"  and

the  date  assigned  for  his  admission  is  the  year  1712.

Larwood  and  Hotten  in  their  History  of  Sign  Boards,  copying
from  a paper  of  the  Tatler,  say  that  the  Tavern  was  originally  a

Music  house,  with  the  sign  of  the  "Mitre."  When  it  ceased  to  be
a Music  house  the  succeeding  landlord  chose  for  his  sign  a goose
stroking  the  bars  of  a gridiron  with  his  foot  in  ridicule  of  the  "Swan
and  Harp,"  which  was  a common  sign  for  the  early  music  houses.2

I doubt  the  truth  of  this  origin,  and  think  it  more  likely  that  the

"Swan  and  Harp"  degenerated  into  the  "Goose  and  Gridiron"  by
the  same  process  of  blundering,  so  common  in  the  history  of  signs,
which  corrupted  "God  encompasseth  us"  into  the  "Goat  and  Com-
passes" or  the  "Belle  Sauvage"  into  the  "Bell  and  Savage."

In  the  list  of  lodges  for  1725  to  1730  contained  in  the  Minute

Book  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  Lodge  No.  1 is  still  recorded
as  holding  its  meetings  at  the  "Goose  and  Gridiron,"  whence,  how-

ever, it  not  very  long  after  removed,  for  in  the  next  list,  from  1730
to  1732,  it  is  recorded  as  being  held  at  the  "King's  Arms,"  in  St

Paul's  Churchyard.

1 Elmes's  "Sir  Christopher  Wren  und  his  Times,"  quoted  in  the  Keystone.

2 "History  of  Sign  Boards,"  p.  445.

ORGANIZATION  OF  THE  GRAND  LODGE

887

The  "King's  Arms"  continued  to  be  its  place  of  meeting  (ex-
cept a short  time  in  1735,  when  it  met  at  the  "Paul's  Head,"  Lud-
gate  Street)  until  1768,  when  it  removed  to  the  "Mitre."  Eight
years  before,  it  assumed  the  name  of  the  "West  India  and  Amer-
ican Lodge."  In  1770  it  became  the  "Lodge  of  Antiquity."  Of
this  lodge  the  distinguished  Masonic  writer,  William  Preston,  was
a member.  In  1779  it  temporarily  seceded  from  the  Grand  Lodge,
and  formed  a schismatic  Grand  Lodge.  The  history  of  this  schism
will  be  the  subject  of  a future  chapter.

At  the  union  of  the  two  Grand  Lodges  of  "Modems"  and
"Ancients,"  it  lost  its  number  "One"  in  drawing  lots  and  became
number  "Two,"  which  number  it  still  retains,  though  it  is  always
recognized  as  the  "premier  lodge  of  England,"  and  therefore  of  the
world.

The  "Goose  and  Gridiron  Tavern"  continued  to  be  the  place  of
meeting  of  the  Grand  Lodge  until  1721,  when  in  consequence  of
the  need  of  more  room  from  the  increase  of  lodges  the  annual  feast
was  held  at  Stationers'  Hall.1  The  Grand  Lodge  never  returned  to
the  "Goose  and  Gridiron."  It  afterward  held  its  quarterly  commu-
nications at  various  taverns,  and  the  annual  assembly  and  feast
always  at  some  one  of  the  Halls  of  the  different  Livery  Companies
of  London.  This  migratory  system  prevailed  until  the  Freemasons
were  able  to  erect  a Hall  of  their  own.

The  second  lodge  which  engaged  in  1717  in  the  organization  of
the  Grand  Lodge,  met  at  the  "Crown  Ale-house"  in  Parker's  Lane,
near  Drury  Lane.  According  to  Bro.  Gould,  it  removed  about
1723  to  the  "Queen's  Head,"  Turnstile,  Holbom;  to  the  "Green
Lettuce,"  Brownlow  Street,  in  1725;2  thence  to  the  "Rose  and
Rummer"  in  1728,  and  to  the  "Rose  and  Buffer"  in  1729.  In
1730  it  met  at  the  "Bull  and  Gate,"  Holbom,  and  appearing  for
the  last  time  in  the  list  for  1736,  was  struck  off  the  roll  in  1740.

But  it  had  ceased  to  exist  before  that  year,  for  Anderson,  in  the
list  published  by  him  in  1738,  says:  "The  Crown  in  Parker's  Lane,
the  other  of  the  four  old  Lodges,  is  now  extinct."3

The  third  lodge  engaged  in  the  Grand  Lodge  organization  was
that  which  met  at  the  "Apple  Tree  Tavern"  in  1717.  It  was  there

1 Anderson's  "Constitutions,"  2d  edit.,  p.  1 12.

2 Gould's  "Four  Old  Lodges,"  p.  6.

3 Anderson's  "Constitutions,"  2d  edit.,  p.  185.

888

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

that  in  February  of  that  year  the  Freemasons  who  were  preparing
to  sever  the  connection  between  the  Operative  and  Theoretic
Masons,  took  the  preliminary  steps  toward  effecting  that  design.
From  the  "Apple  Tree"  it  removed  about  1723  to  the  "Queen's
Head,"  Knave's  Acre;  thence  in  1740  to  the  "George  and  Drag-

on," Portland  Street,  Oxford  Market;  thence  in  1744  to  the
"Swan"  in  the  same  region.  In  the  lists  from  1768  to  1793  it  is
described  as  the  Lodge  of  Fortitude.  After  various  other  migra-
tions, it  amalgamated,  in  1818,  with  the  Old  Cumberland  Lodge,

and  is  now  the  Fortitude  and  Old  Cumberland  Lodge  No.  12  on

the  roll  of  the  United  Grand  Lodge  of  England. 1

Of  this  third  or  "Apple  Tree"  Lodge,  Anthony  Sayer,  the  first
Grand  Master  of  England,  was  a member,  and  most  probably  was

in  1717  or  had  been  previously  the  Master.  In  1723  he  is  recorded
as  the  Senior  Warden  of  the  Lodge,  which  is  certainly  an  evidence
of  his  Masonic  zeal.

The  last  of  the  four  old  Lodges  which  constituted  the  Grand
Lodge  met  in  1717  at  the  "Rummer  and  Grapes  Tavern,"  West-
minster. It  moved  thence  to  the  "Horn  Tavern,"  Westminster,  in

1723.  It  seemed  to  be  blessed  with  a spirit  of  permanency  which
did  not  appertain  to  the  three  other  lodges,  for  it  remained  at  the
"Horn"  for  forty-three  years,  not  migrating  until  1767,  when  it

went  to  the  "Fleece,"  Tothill  Street,  Westminster.  The  year  after
it  assumed  the  name  of  the  Old  Horn  Lodge.  In  1774  it  united
with  and  adopted  the  name  of  the  Somerset  House  Lodge,  and  met
at  first  at  the  "Adelphi"  and  afterward  until  1815  at  "Freemasons'
Tavern."  In  1828  it  absorbed  the  Royal  Inverness  Lodge,  and  is

now  registered  on  the  roll  of  the  United  Grand  Lodge  of  England
as  the  Royal  Somerset  House  and  Inverness  Lodge  No.  4. 2

George  Payne,  who  was  twice  Grand  Master,  in  1718  and  in

1720,  had  been  Master  of  the  original  Rummer  and  Grapes  Lodge.
He  must  have  been  so  before  his  first  election  as  Grand  Master  in
1718,  and  he  is  recorded  in  the  first  edition  of  Anderson  as  having
been  its  Master  again  in  1723.  At  one  time  the  lodge  received
an  important  benefit  from  this  circumstance,  as  is  shown  by  the
following  record  taken  by  Entick  from  the  Minutes  of  the  Grand
Lodge.

1 Gould,  "Four  Old  Lodges,"  p.  7.  2 Ibid.

ORGANIZATION  OF  THE  GRAND  LODGE

889

In  1747  the  lodge,  whose  number  had  been  changed  to  No,
2,  was  erased  from  the  Books  of  Lodges  for  not  obeying  an  order
of  the  Quarterly  Communication.  But  in  1753,  the  members
having  petitioned  the  Grand  Lodge  for  restoration,  Entick  says  in
his  edition  of  the  Constitutions  that  "after  a long  debate,  it  was
ordered  that  in  respect  to  Brother  Payne,  late  Grand  Master,  the
Lodge  No.  2 lately  held  at  the  'Horn'  in  Palace  Yard,  West-
minster, should  be  restored  and  have  its  former  rank  and  place  in
the  list  of  lodges."

Payne,  who  was  a scholar,  had  done  much  for  the  advancement
of  Speculative  Freemasonry,  and  the  Grand  Lodge  by  this  act  paid
a fitting  homage  to  his  character  and  showed  itself  not  unmindful
of  his  services  to  the  Fraternity.

Such  are  the  facts,  well  authenticated  by  unquestioned  historical
authorities,  which  are  connected  with  the  establishment  of  the  first
Grand  Lodge  of  Speculative  Freemasons,  not  only  in  England,  but
in  the  world.  Seeing  that  nothing  analogous  has  been  anywhere
found  in  the  records  of  Masonry,  irrespective  of  its  unauthenticated
legends  and  traditions,  it  is  proper,  before  proceeding  to  inquire
into  the  condition  of  the  Grand  Lodge  immediately  subsequent  to
its  organization  at  the  "Goose  and  Gridiron  Tavern,"  that  the  much
discussed  question,  whether  this  organization  was  the  invention  of
an  entirely  new  system  or  only  the  revival  of  an  old,  and  for  a short
time  discontinued,  one  should  be  fairly  considered.

To  this  important  subject  our  attention  will  be  directed  in  the
following  chapter.

CHAPTER  XXX

WAS  THE  ORGANIZATION  OF  THE  GRAND  LODGE  IN  1717  A REVIVAL?

T has  been  the  practice  of  all  Masonic  writers

from  the  earliest  period  of  its  literature  to  a very

recent  day,  to  designate  the  transaction  which
resulted  in  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England  in  the  year  1717  as  the  "Revival  of
Freemasonry."

Anderson,  writing  in  1723,  in  the  first  edi-
tion of  the  Constitutions,  says  that  "the  freeborn  British  nation
had  revived  the  drooping  Lodges  of  London,"  and  in  the  year  1738,
in  the  second  edition  of  the  same  work,  he  asserts  that  the  old
Brothers  who  met  at  the  "Apple  Tree  Tavern"  "forthwith  re-
vived the  Quarterly  Communication  of  the  Officers  of  Lodges,
called  the  Grand  Lodge."

This  statement  has  been  repeated  by  Preston,  Calcott,  Oliver,
and  all  the  older  Masonic  authors  who  have  written  upon  the  sub-
ject, until  it  has  become  an  almost  universal  belief  among  the  larger

portion  of  the  Fraternity  that  from  some  unknown  or  indefinite  era

until  the  second  decade  of  the  18th  century  the  Grand  Lodge  had
been  in  a state  of  profound  slumber,  and  that  the  Quarterly  Com-
munications, once  so  common,  had  long  been  discontinued,  through
the  inertness  and  indifference  of  the  Craft,  while  the  lodges  were
drooping  like  sickly  plants.

But  in  the  year  1717,  owing  to  the  successful  efforts  of  a few
learned  scholars,  such  as  Desaguliers,  Anderson,  and  Payne,  the,
Grand  Lodge  had  been  awakened  from  its  sleep  of  years,  the  Quar-
terly Communications  had  been  renewed  as  of  old,  and  the  lodges
had  sprung  into  fresh  and  vigorous  existence.  Such  was  for  a long
time  and  indeed  still  is,  to  a diminished  extent,  the  orthodox  Masonic
creed  respecting  the  Revival  of  Freemasonry  in  the  18th  century.

But  this  creed,  popular  as  it  is,  has  within  a few  years  past  been
ruthlessly  attacked  by  some  of  our  more  advanced  thinkers,  who  are

890

WAS  THE  ORGANIZATION  IN  1717  A REVIVAL?

891

skeptical  where  to  doubt  is  wise,  and  who  are  not  prepared  to  ac-
cept legends  as  facts,  nor  to  confound  tradition  with  history.

And  now  it  is  argued  that  before  the  year  1717  there  never  was
a Grand  Lodge  in  England,  and,  of  course,  there  could  have  been
no  Quarterly  Communications.  Therefore,  as  there  had  not  been  a
previous  life,  there  could  have  been  no  revival,  but  that  the  Grand
Lodge  established  in  June,  1717,  was  a new  invention,  and  the  in-
troduction of  a system  or  plan  of  Freemasonry  never  before  heard
of  or  seen.

Which  of  these  two  hypotheses  is  the  correct  one,  or  whether
there  is  not  a mezzo  termine — a middle  point  or  just  mean  between
the  two — are  questions  well  worthy  of  examination.

Let  us  first  inquire  what  was  the  character  of  the  four  Lodges,
and  indeed  of  all  the  lodges  in  England  which  were  in  existence  at
the  time  of  the  so-called  "Revival,"  or  had  existed  at  any  previous
time.  What  was  the  authority  under  which  they  acted,  what  was
their  character,  and  how  was  this  character  affected  by  the  establish-
ment of  a new  Grand  Lodge?

As  to  the  authority  under  which  the  four  old  lodges,  as  well  as
all  others  that  existed  in  England,  acted,  it  must  be  admitted  that
they  derived  that  authority  from  no  power  outside  of  themselves.
"The  authority,"  says  Bro.  Hughan,  "by  which  they  worked  prior
to  the  advent  of  the  Grand  Lodge  was  their  own.  We  know  of  no
other  prior  to  that  period  for  England."1

Preston  admits  that  previous  to  the  year  1717  "a  sufficient  num-
ber of  Masons  met  together  within  a certain  district,  with  the  con-
sent of  the  sheriff  or  chief  magistrate  of  the  place,  were  empowered
to  make  Masons  and  practice  the  rites  of  Masonry  without  Warrant
of  Constitution."2

Bro.  Hughan  substantially  repeats  this  statement  in  the  follow-
ing language:

"A  body  of  Masons  in  any  district  or  town  appear  usually  to
have  congregated  and  formed  lodges,  and  they  had  the  'Ancient
Charges'  or  Rolls  to  guide  them  as  to  the  rules  and  regulations  for
Masons  generally.  There  were  no  Grand  Masters  or  Grand  Lodges
before  1716-17,  and  so  there  were  no  authorities  excepting  such  as
the  annual  assemblies  and  the  'Old  Charges'  furnished  in  England."

1 See  Voice  of  Masonry,  vol.  xiii.,  p.  571.

2 Preston's  "Illustrations,"  p.  191,  note.

892

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

He  admits  that  "there  were  laws  for  the  government  of  the  lodges
apparently,  though  unwritten,  which  were  duly  observed  by  the  broth«
erhood."

This  view  is  confirmed,  impliedly,  at  least,  by  all  the  Old  Consti-
tutions in  manuscript,  from  the  most  ancient  to  the  most  recent.  In
none  of  these  (and  the  last  of  them  has  a date  which  is  only  three
years  prior  to  the  so-called  "Revival")  do  we  find  any  reference
whatever  to  a Grand  Lodge  or  to  a Grand  Master.  But  they
repeatedly  speak  of  lodges  in  which  Masons  were  to  be  "accepted,"
and  the  counsels  of  which  were  to  be  kept  secret  by  the  Fellows.

The  only  allusion  made  to  the  manner  of  organizing  a lodge  is
contained  in  the  Harleian  MS.,  which  prescribes  that  it  must  consist
of  not  less  than  five  Freemasons,  one  of  whom  must  be  a master  or
warden  of  the  limit  or  division  wherein  the  lodge  is  held.

From  this  regulation  we  are  authorized,  I think,  to  conclude,
that  in  1670,  which  is  the  date  of  the  Harleian  MS.,  nothing  more
was  necessary  in  forming  a lodge  in  which  "to  make  Masons  or
practice  the  rites  of  Masonry,"  as  Preston  gives  the  phrase,  than  that
a requisite  number  should  be  present,  with  a Master  or  Warden
working  in  that  locality.

Now  the  Master,  as  the  word  is  here  used,  meant  a Freemason  of
the  highest  rank,  who  was  engaged  in  building  with  workmen  under
him,  and  a Warden  was  one  who  having  passed  out  of  his  apprentice-
ship, had  become  a Fellow  and  was  invested  with  an  authority  over  the
other  Fellows,  inferior  only  to  that  of  the  Master.  The  word  and
the  office  are  recognized  in  the  early  English  Charters  as  pertaining
to  the  ancient  guilds.  Thus  the  Charters  granted  in  1354  by  Ed-
ward III.  gave  the  London  Companies  the  privilege  to  elect  annu-
ally for  their  government  "a  certain  number  of  Wardens."  In  1377
an  oath  was  prescribed  called  the  "Oath  of  the  Wardens  of  the
Crafts,"  which  contained  these  words:  "Ye  shall  swere  that  ye  shall

wele  and  treuly  oversee  the  Craft  of  whereof  ye  be  chosen

Wardeyns  for  the  year."  In  the  reign  of  Elizabeth  the  presiding
officer  began  to  be  called  the  Master,  and  in  the  reign  of  James  I.,
between  1603  and  1625,  the  guilds  were  generally  governed  by  a
Master  and  Wardens.  The  government  of  lodges  by  a Master  and
Wardens  must  have  been  introduced  into  the  guilds  of  Masons  in
the  17th  century,  and  this  is  rendered  probable  by  the  fact  that  in
the  Harleian  MS.  just  quoted,  and  whose  conjectural  date  is  1670,  it

WAS  THE  ORGANIZATION  IN  1717  A REVIVAL?

893

is  provided  "that  for  the  future  the  sayd  Society,  Company  and
Fraternity  of  Free  Masons  shall  be  regulated  and  governed  by  One

Master  & Assembly  & Wardens  as  the  said  Company  shall  think  to

choose,  at  every  yearely  General  Assembly."

A similar  officer  in  the  Hiltten  or  Lodges  of  the  old  German
Freemasons  was  called  the  Parlirer.

We  arrive,  then,  at  the  conclusion  that  in  the  17th  century,  while
there  were  permanent  lodges  in  various  places  which  were  presided
over  by  a Master  and  Wardens,  any  five  Freemasons  might  open
a temporary  or  "occasional"  lodge  for  the  admission  of  members

of  the  Craft,  provided  one  of  these  five  was  either  the  Master  or  a

Warden  of  a permanent  lodge  in  the  neighborhood.

I know  of  no  other  way  of  reasonably  interpreting  the  26th  ar-
ticle contained  in  the  Harleian  Constitutions.

But  nowhere,  in  any  of  the  Old  Constitutions,  before  or  after
the  Harleian,  even  as  late  as  1714,  which  is  the  date  of  the  Pap-
worth  MS.,  do  we  find  the  slightest  allusion  to  any  exterior  author-
ity which  was  required  to  constitute  either  permanent  or  temporary
lodges.

The  statement  of  Preston  is  thus  fully  sustained  by  the  concur-
rent testimony  of  the  old  manuscripts.  Therefore,  when  Anderson
in  his  first  edition  gives  the  form  of  constituting  a new  lodge  and
says  that  it  is  "according  to  the  ancient  usages  of  Masonry,"1  he
indulges  in  a rhetorical  flourish  that  has  no  foundation  in  truth.
There  is  no  evidence  of  the  slightest  historical  value  that  any  such
usage  existed  before  the  second  decade  of  the  18th  century.

But  immediately  after  what  is  called  the  Revival  the  system  of

forming  lodges  which  had  been  practiced  was  entirely  changed.
Preston  says  that  among  a variety  of  regulations  which  were  pro-

posed and  agreed  to  at  the  meeting  in  1717,  was  the  following:

"That  the  privilege  of  assembling  as  Masons,  which  had  been
hitherto  unlimited,  should  be  vested  in  certain  lodges  or  assemblies

of  Masons  convened  in  certain  places;  and  that  every  lodge  to  be
hereafter  convened,  except  the  four  old  lodges  at  this  time  existing,
should  be  legally  authorized  to  act  by  a warrant  from  the  Grand

Master  for  the  time  being  granted  to  certain  individuals  by  petition,
with  the  consent  and  approbation  of  the  Grand  Lodge  in  communi-

Anderson's  "Constitutions,"  1st  edition,  p.  71.

894

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

cation;  and  that  without  such  warrant  no  lodge  should  be  hereafter
deemed  regular  or  constitutional."1

We  have  this  regulation  on  the  evidence  of  Preston  alone,  for
according  to  the  unfortunate  usage  of  our  early  Masonic  writers,  he
cites  no  authority.  It  is  not  mentioned  by  Anderson,  and  the  pre-
served minutes  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  extend  no  farther
than  the  25th  of  November,  1723.

Still,  as  Preston  gives  it  within  quotation  marks,  and  as  it  bears
internal  evidence  in  its  phraseology  of  having  been  a formal  regula-
tion adopted  at  or  very  near  the  period  to  which  Preston  assigns  it,
we  may  accept  it  as  authentic  and  suppose  that  he  had  access  to
sources  of  information  no  longer  extant.  As  the  Grand  Lodge  was
organized  in  1717  in  the  rooms  of  the  lodge  of  which  Preston  after-
ward became  a member,  it  is  very  possible  that  that  lodge  may  have
had  in  its  possession  the  lull  records  of  that  meeting,  which  were  in
existence  when  Preston  wrote,  but  have  since  been  lost.2

At  all  events  the  "General  Regulations,"  compiled  by  Grand

Master  Payne  in  1720,  and  approved  the  next  year  by  the  Grand

Lodge,  contain  a similar  provision  in  the  following  words:

"If  any  set  or  number  of  Masons  shall  take  upon  themselves  to
form  a lodge  without  the  Grand  Master's  warrant,  the  regular
lodges  are  not  to  countenance  them,  nor  own  them  as  fair  Brethren
and  duly  formed,  nor  approve  of  their  acts  and  deeds;  but  must
treat  them  as  rebels,  until  they  humble  themselves,  as  the  Grand

Master  shall,  in  his  prudence,  direct;  and  until  he  approve  of  them
by  his  warrant."3

If  we  compare  the  usage  by  which  lodges  were  brought  into
existence  under  the  wholly  Operative  rules,  and  that  adopted  by  the
Speculative  Freemasons  after  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge

in  1717,  we  will  very  clearly  see  that  there  was  here  no  revival  of
an  old  system  which  had  fallen  into  decay  and  disuse,  but  the  inven-
tion of  one  that  was  entirely  new  and  never  before  heard  of.

The  next  point  to  be  examined  in  discussing  the  question  whether

1 Preston,  "Illustrations,"  p.  191.

2 Findel  ("History,"  p.  140),  says  the  regulation  was  adopted  at  a later  period,  in  1723.
This  he  had  no  right  to  do.  Preston  is  our  only  authority  for  the  regulation,  and  his  state-
ment must  be  taken  without  qualification  or  wholly  rejected.  Findel  was  probably  led
into  his  error  by  seeing  the  General  Regulation  above  quoted,  which  was  very  similar.
This  was  published  in  1723,  but  it  had  been  adopted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  in  1721.

3 "General  Regulations,"  art.  viii.  Anderson,  1st  edition,  p.  60.

WAS  THE  ORGANIZATION  IN  1717  A REVIVAL?

895

or  not  the  transactions  of  1717  constituted  a Revival  will  be  the
character  of  the  lodges  before  and  after  those  transactions  as  com-
pared with  each  other.

During  the  17th  century,  to  go  no  farther  back,  and  up  to  the
second  decade  of  the  18th,  all  the  lodges  of  Freemasons  in  England
were  Operative  lodges,  that  is  to  say,  the  larger  portion  of  their
members  were  working  Masons,  engaged  in  building  according  to
certain  principles  of  architecture  with  which  they  alone  were  ac-
quainted.

They  had  admitted  among  their  members  persons  of  rank  or
learning  who  were  not  Operative  Masons  or  builders  by  profession,
but  all  their  laws  and  regulations  were  applicable  to  a society  of
mechanics  or  workingmen.

There  are  no  minutes  in  England,  as  there  are  in  Scotland,  of
lodges  prior  to  the  beginning  of  the  18th  century.  They  have  all
been  lost,  and  the  only  one  remaining  is  that  of  the  Alnwick
Lodge,  the  records  of  which  begin  in  the  year  1701.

But  the  "Old  Charges"  contained  in  the  manuscript  Constitu-
tions which  extend  from  1390  to  1714,  of  which  more  than  twenty
have  been  preserved,  supply  us  (especially  the  later  ones  of  the
17th  century)  with  the  regulations  by  which  the  Craft  was  governed
during  the  ante-revival  period.

It  is  unnecessary  to  quote  in  extenso  any  one  of  these  Old  Con-
stitutions. It  is  sufficient  to  say  that  they  bear  the  strongest  inter-
nal evidence  that  they  were  compiled  for  the  use  of  purely  Oper-
ative Masons.

They  were  wholly  inapplicable  to  any  merely  moral  or  specula-
tive association.  Excepting  those  clauses  which  directed  how  the
craftsmen  were  to  conduct  themselves  both  in  the  lodge  and  out  of
it,  so  that  the  reputation  of  the  Brotherhood  should  not  be  injured,
they  were  mainly  engaged  in  prescribing  how  the  Masons  should
labor  in  their  art  of  building,  so  that  the  employer  might  be  "truly
served."  The  same  regulations  would  be  just  as  applicable,  mutatis
mutandis,  to  a Guild  of  Carpenters,  of  Smiths,  or  any  other  mechan-
ical trade,  as  to  one  of  Masons.

But  while  these  lodges  were  wholly  Operative  in  their  character
and  design,  there  is  abundant  evidence,  as  I have  heretofore  shown,
that  they  admitted  into  their  companionship  persons  who  were  not
Masons  by  profession.  The  article  in  the  Harleian  Constitutions,

896

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

to  which  reference  has  just  been  made,  while  stating  that  a lodge
called  to  make  a Mason  must  consist  of  five  Free  Masons,  adds
that  one  of  them  at  least  shall  be  "of  the  trade  of  Free  Masonry."
The  other  four,  of  course,  might  be  non-operatives,  that  is  to  say,
persons  of  rank,  wealth,  or  learning  who  were  sometimes  called

Theoretic  and  sometimes  Gentlemen  Masons.

But  in  the  laws  enacted  for  the  government  of  the  Craft,  no  ex-
ceptional provision  was  made  in  them,  by  which  any  difference  was
created  in  the  privileges  of  the  two  classes.

The  admission  of  these  Theoretic  Masons  into  the  Fraternity
did  not,  therefore,  in  the  slightest  degree  affect  the  Operative  char-
acter of  the  Craft,  except  in  so  far  as  that  the  friendly  collision  with
men  of  education  must  have  given  to  the  less  educated  members  a
portion  of  refinement  that  could  not  fail  to  elevate  them  above  the
other  Craft  Guilds.

Yet  so  intimate  was  the  connection  between  these  Operative

Freemasons  and  their  successors,  the  Speculatives,  that  the  code  of
laws  prepared  in  1721  by  Anderson  at  the  direction  of  the  Grand
Lodge,  and  published  in  1723,  under  the  title  of  The  Charges  of  a
Free-Mason,  for  the  use  of  the  Lodges  in  London,  was  a transcript
with  no  important  variations  from  these  Old  Constitutions,  or  as
Anderson  calls  them,  the  "Old  Gothic  Constitutions."

As  these  "Charges"  have  now  been  accepted  by  the  modem

Fraternity  of  English-speaking  Freemasons  as  the  basis  of  what  are

called  the  Landmarks  of  the  Order,  to  make  them  of  any  use  it  has
been  found  absolutely  necessary  to  give  them  a symbolic  or  figu-
rative sense.

Thus,  "to  work,"  which  in  the  Operative  Constitution  signifies
"to  build,"  is  interpreted  in  the  Speculative  system  as  meaning  "to
confer  degrees;"  the  clause  which  prescribes  that  "all  the  tools  used
in  working  shall  be  approved  by  the  Grand  Lodge"  is  interpreted
as  denoting  that  the  ritual,  ceremonies,  and  by-laws  of  every  lodge
must  be  subjected  to  the  supervision  of  the  Grand  Lodge.  Thus
every  regulation  which  clearly  referred  to  a fraternity  of  builders
has,  in  the  course  of  the  modifications  which  were  necessary  to  ren-
der it  applicable  to  a moral  association,  been  made  to  adopt  a figu-
rative sense.

Yet  the  significant  fact  that  while  in  the  government  of  Spec-
ulative Freemasonry  the  spirit  and  meaning  of  these  "Old  Charges"

WAS  THE  ORGANIZATION  IN  1717  A REVIVAL?

897

have  been  entirely  altered,  the  words  have  been  carefully  retained
is  an  important  and  irrefutable  proof  that  the  Speculative  system  is
the  direct  successor  of  the  Operative.

So  when  the  Theoretic  or  Gentleman  Masons  had,  in  the  close
of  the  17th  and  the  beginning  of  the  18th  century,  acquired  such  a
preponderance  in  numbers  and  in  influence  in  the  London  lodges
that  they  were  able  so  to  affect  the  character  of  those  lodges  as  to
divert  them  from  the  practice  of  an  Operative  art  to  the  pursuit  of
a Speculative  science,  such  change  could  not  be  called  a Revival,  if
we  respected  the  meaning  of  that  word.  Nothing  of  the  kind  had
been  known  before;  and  when  the  members  of  the  lodges  ceased
to  pay  any  attention  to  the  craft  or  mystery  of  practical  stone-
masonry,  and  resolved  to  treat  it  thenceforth  in  a purely  symbolic
sense,  this  act  could  be  deemed  nothing  else  but  a new  departure  in
the  career  of  Freemasonry.

The  ship  was  still  there,  but  the  object  of  the  voyage  had  been
changed.

Again:  we  find  a third  change  in  the  character  of  the  Masonic
society  when  we  compare  the  general  government  of  the  Craft  as  it
appears  before  and  after  the  year  1717.

This  change  is  particularly  striking  in  respect  to  the  way  in
which  the  Craft  were  ruled  in  their  Operative  days,  compared  with
the  system  which  was  adopted  by  the  Speculative  Freemasons.

It  has  already  been  said  that  prior  to  the  year  1717,  there  never
were  Grand  Masters  or  a Grand  Lodge  except  such  as  were  myth-
ically constructed  by  the  romantic  genius  of  Dr.  Anderson.

The  only  historical  records  that  we  have  of  the  condition  of
Freemasonry  in  England  and  of  the  usages  of  the  Craft  during  the
three  centuries  which  preceded  the  18th,  are  to  be  found  in  the
old  manuscript  Constitutions.

A thoroughly  careful  examination  of  these  documents  will  show
that  neither  in  the  Legend  of  the  Craft,  which  constitutes  the  intro-
ductory portion  of  each  Constitution,  nor  in  the  "Charges"  which
follow,  is  there  the  slightest  allusion,  either  in  direct  language  or
by  implication,  to  the  office  of  Grand  Master  or  to  the  body  now
called  a Grand  Lodge.

But  it  can  not  be  denied  that  there  was  an  annual  convocation
of  the  Craft,  which  was  called  sometimes  the  "Congregation,"
sometimes  the  "Assembly,"  and  sometimes  the  "General  Assem-

898

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

bly."  We  must  accept  this  as  an  historical  fact,  or  we  must  re-
pudiate all  the  manuscript  Constitutions  from  the  14th  to  the  18th
century.  In  all  of  them  there  is  an  unmistakable  allusion  to  this
annual  convocation  of  the  Craft,  and  regulations  are  made  concern-
ing attendance  on  it.

Thus  the  Halliwell  MS.  says  that  "every  Master  who  is  a Ma-
son must  be  present  at  the  general  congregation  if  he  is  duly  in-
formed where  the  assembly  is  to  be  holden;  and  to  that  assembly
he  must  go  unless  he  have  a reasonable  excuse."

The  precise  words  of  this  most  ancient  of  all  the  Old  Masonic
Constitutions,  dating,  as  it  does,  not  later  than  toward  the  close  of
the  14th  century,  are  as  follows:

That  every  mayster,  that  ys  a mason.

Must  ben  at  the  generate  congregracyon.

So  that  he  hyt  reasonably  y-tolde
Where  that  the  semble'  schal  be  holde;

And  to  that  semble'  he  must  nede  gon,

But  he  have  a resonabul  skwsacyon.

The  Cooke  MS.,  which  is  about  a century  later,  has  a similar
provision.  This  manuscript  is  important,  inasmuch  as  it  describes
the  character  of  the  Assembly  and  defines  the  purposes  for  which
it  was  to  be  convoked.

It  states  that  the  Assembly,  or,  as  it  is  there  called,  the  Con-
gregation, shall  assemble  once  a year,  or  at  least  once  in  three  years,
for  the  examination  of  Master  Masons,  to  see  that  they  possessed
sufficient  skill  and  knowledge  in  their  art.

An  important  admission  in  this  manuscript  is  that  the  regulation
for  the  government  of  this  Assembly  "is  written  and  taught  in  our
book  of  charges."

All  the  subsequent  Constitutions  make  a similar  statement  in
words  that  do  not  substantially  vary.

The  Harleian  MS.,  whose  date  is  about  the  last  quarter  of  the
17th  century,  says  that  Euclid  gave  the  admonition  that  the  Masons
were  to  assemble  once  a year  to  take  counsel  how  the  Craft  could
best  work  so  as  to  serve  their  Lord  and  Master  for  his  profit  and
their  credit,  and  to  correct  such  as  had  offended.  And  in  another
MS.,  much  earlier  than  the  Harleian,  it  is  said  that  the  Freemasons
should  attend  the  Assembly,  and  if  any  had  trespassed  against  the
Craft,  he  should  there  abide  the  award  of  the  Masters  and  Fellows

WAS  THE  ORGANIZATION  IN  1717  A REVIVAL?

899

This  Assembly  met  that  statutes  or  regulations  might  be  enacted
for  the  government  of  the  Craft,  and  that  controversies  between
the  craftsmen  might  be  determined

It  was  both  a legislative  and  a judicial  body,  and  in  these  re-
spects resembled  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  present  day,  but  in  no
other  way  was  there  any  similitude  between  the  two.

Now,  leaving  out  of  the  question  the  legendary  parts  which
ascribe  the  origin  of  this  annual  assembly  to  Euclid  or  Athelstan  or
Prince  Edwin,  which,  of  course,  are  of  no  historical  authority,  it  is
impossible  to  believe  that  all  these  Constitutions  should  speak  of
the  existence  of  such  an  Assembly  at  the  time  of  writing,  and  lay
down  a regulation  in  the  most  positive  terms,  that  every  Mason
should  attend  it,  if  the  whole  were  a mere  figment  of  the  imagina-
tion.

We  can  account  for  the  mythical  character  of  a legend,  but  we
cannot  for  the  mythical  character  of  a law  which  has  been  enacted
at  a specified  time  for  the  government  of  an  association,  which  law
continues  to  be  repeated  in  all  the  copies  of  the  statutes  written  or
published  for  more  than  three  centuries  continuously.

In  the  establishment  of  a Grand  Lodge  with  quarterly  meetings
and  an  annual  one  in  which  a Grand  Master  and  other  Grand  Offi-
cers were  elected  for  the  following  year,  we  find  no  analogy  to  any-
thing that  had  existed  previous  to  the  year  1717.  We  cannot,
therefore,  in  these  points  call  the  organization  which  took  place  in
that  year  a "Revival."  It  was,  rather,  a radical  change  in  the  con-
struction of  the  system.

Another  change,  and  a very  important  one,  too,  which  occurred
a short  time  after  the  establishment  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England
in  1717,  was  that  which  had  reference  to  the  ritual  or  forms  of  ini-
tiation. During  the  purely  Operative  period  of  Freemasonry  it  is
now  well  known  that  there  was  but  one  esoteric  system  of  admission
to  the  brotherhood  of  the  Craft.  This  we  also  know  was  common
to  the  three  classes  of  Masters,  Fellows,  and  Apprentices.  There
was,  in  fact,  if  we  may  use  the  technical  language  of  modem  Free-
masonry, but  one  degree  practiced  by  the  Operative  Craft.

When  the  Theoretic  members  of  the  London  lodges  dissociated
from  the  Operatives  in  the  year  1717  and  formed  the  Speculative
system,  they,  of  course,  at  first  accepted  the  old  method  of  admis-
sion. But  in  the  course  of  two  or  three  years  they  adopted  another

900

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

system  and  fabricated  what  are  now  called  the  three  degrees  of  an-
cient Craft  Masonry,  each  one  of  which  was  exclusively  appropriated
as  a form  of  initiation  to  one  of  the  three  classes  and  to  that  one
only.  What  had  formerly  been  a division  of  the  Fraternity  into
three  classes  or  ranks  became  now  a division  into  three  degrees.1

This  was  a most  important  change,  and  as  nothing  of  the  kind
was  known  to  the  Craft  in  the  years  prior  to  the  establishment  of
the  Grand  Lodge,  it  certainly  can  not  be  considered  a correct  use  of
the  word  to  call  an  entire  change  of  a system  and  the  adoption  of  a
new  one  a revival  of  the  old.

Bro.  W.  P.  Buchan,  in  numerous  articles  published  in  the  Lon-
don Freemason,  about  1870,  attacked  what  has  been  called  the
Revival  theory  with  much  vigor  but  with  exaggerated  views.  He
contends  that  "our  system  of  degrees,  words,  grips,  signs,  etc.,  was
not  in  existence  until  about  A.  D.  1717,  and  he  attributes  the  pres-
ent system  to  the  inventive  genius  of  Anderson  and  Desaguliers.
Hence  he  contends  that  modem  Freemasonry  was  simply  a recon-
struction of  an  ancient  society,  viz.,  of  some  old  Pagan  philosophy.
This  he  more  fully  explains  in  these  words:

"Before  the  18th  century  we  had  a renaissance  of  Pagan  archi-
tecture; then  to  follow  suit  in  the  18th  century  we  had  a renaissance
in  a new  dress  of  Pagan  mysticism;  but  for  neither  are  we  indebted
to  the  Operative  Masons,  although  the  Operative  Masons  were
made  use  of  in  both  cases."2

There  is  in  this  statement  a mixture  of  truth  and  error.  It  is
undoubtedly  true  that  the  three  degrees  into  which  the  system  is
now  divided  were  unknown  to  the  Freemasons  of  the  17th  century,
and  that  they  were  an  invention  of  those  scholars  who  organized
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Speculative  Freemasonry,  mainly  of  Dr.  Desa-
guliers, assisted  perhaps  by  Anderson  and  Payne.  But  there  were
signs  of  recognition,  methods  of  government,  legends,  and  some
form,  though  a simple  one  of  initiation,  which  were  in  existence
prior  to  the  18th  century,  which  formed  the  kernel  of  the  more
elaborate  system  of  the  modem  Freemasons.

Bro.  Hughan  calls  attention  to  the  fact,  if  there  were  need  of

1 It  is  not  necessary  to  enter  at  this  time  into  an  examination  and  defense  of  this
hypothesis,  as  the  history  of  the  fabrication  of  the  three  degrees  will  be  made  the  subject
of  a future  chapter.

2 London  Freemason,  September  29,  1871.

WAS  THE  ORGANIZATION  IN  1717  A REVIVAL?

901

proofs,  in  addition  to  what  has  been  found  in  the  authentic  accounts
of  the  mediaeval  Freemasons,  that  in  the  Tatler,  published  in  1709,
is  a passage  in  which  the  writer,  speaking  of  a class  of  men  called
the  "Pretty  Fellows,"  says  that  "they  have  their  signs  and  tokens
like  the  Freemasons."1

In  fact,  Bro.  Buchan  admits  that  the  "elements  or  ground
work"  of  the  system  existed  before  the  year  1717.

This  is  in  fact  the  only  hypothesis  that  can  be  successfully  main-
tained on  the  subject.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  Speculative  Freemasons,  which  was  organ-
ized at  the  "Goose  and  Gridiron  Tavern"  in  London  in  the  year
1717,  was  a new  system,  founded  on  the  older  one  which  had  exist-
ed in  England  years  before,  and  which  had  been  derived  from  the
Operative  Freemasons  of  the  Middle  Ages.

It  was  not,  as  Hyneman2  has  called  it,  a Revolution,  for  that
would  indicate  a violent  disruption,  and  a sudden  and  entire  change
of  principles.

It  was  not  a Revival,  as  most  of  the  earlier  writers  have  entitled
it,  for  we  should  thus  infer  that  the  new  system  was  only  a renewal
without  change  of  the  old  one.

But  it  was  a gradual  transition  from  an  old  into  a new  system —
of  Operative  into  Speculative  Freemasonry — in  which  Transition
the  later  system  has  been  built  upon  the  earlier,  and  the  practical
art  of  building  has  been  spiritualized  into  a theoretic  science  of
morality,  illustrated  by  a symbolism  drawn  principally  from  archi-
tecture.

We  thus  recognize  the  regular  descent  of  the  modem  Specula-
tive Freemasons  from  their  older  Operative  predecessors,  and  we
answer  the  question  which  forms  the  heading  of  the  present  chapter.

But  it  has  been  said  that  in  one  sense  at  least  we  may  with  pro-
priety apply  the  word  "Revival"  to  the  transactions  of  the  early
part  of  the  18th  century.  Operative  Freemasonry,  and  what  very
little  of  the  Speculative  element  that  had  been  engrafted  on  it,
had,  we  are  told,  begun  to  decline  in  England  in  the  latter  part  of
the  17th  century.

1 Voice  of  Masonry,  April,  1873.

2 In  a work  abounding  in  errors,  entitled  "Ancient  York  and  London  Grand  Lodges,"
by  Lem  Hyneman,  Philadelphia,  1872.  Its  fallacies  as  a contribution  to  Masonic  history
have  been  shown  by  the  incisive  but  courteous  criticism  of  Bro.  Hughan.

902

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

If  we  may  rely  on  the  authority  of  Preston,  the  fraternity  at  the
time  of  the  revolution  in  1688  was  so  much  reduced  in  the  south  of
England,  that  no  more  than  seven  regular  lodges  met  in  London
and  its  suburbs,  of  which  two  only  were  worthy  of  notice.1  Ander-
son mentions  seven  by  their  locality,  and  says  that  there  were
"some  more  that  assembled  statedly."2

These  were,  of  course,  all  purely  Operative  lodges.  Thus  one
of  them,  Anderson  tells  us,  was  called  upon  to  give  architectural
counsel  as  to  the  best  design  of  rebuilding  St.  Thomas's  Hospital,3
a clear  evidence  that  its  members  were  practical  builders.

But  this  decline  in  the  number  of  the  lodges  may  possibly  be
attributed  to  local  and  temporary  causes.  It  was  certainly  not
accompanied,  as  might  have  been  expected,  with  a corresponding
decline  in  the  popularity  of  the  institution,  for  if  we  may  believe  the
same  authority,  "at  a general  assembly  and  feast  of  the  Masons  in
1697,  many  noble  and  eminent  brethren  were  present."4

But  admitting  that  there  was  a decline,  it  was  simply  a decline
of  the  Operative  lodges.  And  the  act  of  1717  was  not  to  revive
them,  but  eventually  to  extinguish  them  and  to  establish  Specula-
tive lodges  in  their  place;  nor  was  it  to  revive  Operative  Freema-
sonry, but  to  establish  for  it  another  and  an  entirely  different  insti-

tution.

We  arrive,  therefore,  again  at  the  legitimate  conclusion  that
the  establishment  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  in  June,  1717,
was  not  a revival  of  the  old  system  of  Freemasonry,  which  soon

after  became  extinct,  but  its  change  into  a new  system.

What  remained  of  the  Operative  Freemasons  who  did  go  into

the  new  association  were  merged  in  the  Masons'  Company,  or  acted
thenceforward  as  individual  craftsmen  unconnected  with  a guild.

1 Preston,  "Illustrations."

2 Anderson,  "Constitutions,"  2d  edition,  p.  107.

3 Ibid.,  p.  106.

4 Preston,  "Illustrations,"  p.  189.

CHAPTER  XXXI

THE  EARLY  YEARS  OF  SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY  IN  ENGLAND

N the  feast  of  St.  John  the  Baptist,  the  24th  of
June,  in  the  year  1717,  the  principal  members  of
the  four  old  Operative  Lodges  in  London,  who

had  previously  met  in  February  and  agreed  to
constitute  a Grand  Lodge  of  Free  and  Accepted
Masons,  assembled  at  the  "Goose  and  Gridiron
Tavern"  in  St.  Paul's  Churchyard  with  some

other  old  Masons,  and  there  and  then  organized  the  new  Grand

Lodge.

This  was  accomplished  by  electing  a Grand  Master  and  two

Grand  Wardens,  after  which  the  Brethren  proceeded  to  partake  of
a dinner,  a custom  which  has  ever  since  been  continued  under  the

name  of  the  Grand  Feast.

As  the  written  minutes  in  the  record  book  of  the  Grand  Lodge
do  not  begin  before  November,  1723,  we  are  indebted  for  all  that

we  know  of  the  transactions  on  that  eventful  day  to  the  meager

account  contained  in  the  2d  edition  of  Dr.  Anderson's  Constitutions,
with  a few  additional  details  which  are  given  by  Preston  in  his  Illus-
trations.

Preston  cites  no  authority  for  the  facts  which  he  has  stated.
But  as  the  meeting  of  the  Grand  Lodge  was  held  in  the  room  of
the  lodge  which  afterward  became  the  Lodge  of  Antiquity,  and  of
which  Preston  was  a prominent  member,  it  is  not  improbable  that

some  draft  of  those  early  proceedings  may  have  been  contained  in
the  archives  of  that  lodge,  which  have  been  since  lost.  To  these
Preston  would  naturally,  from  his  connection  with  the  lodge,  have
had  access.  If  such  were  the  case,  it  is  very  certain  that  he  must
have  made  use  of  them  in  compiling  his  history.

I am  disposed,  therefore,  from  these  circumstances  together  with
the  consideration  of  the  character  of  Preston,  to  accept  his  state-

903

904

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

ments  as  authentic,  though  they  are  unsupported  by  any  contempo-
rary authority  now  extant. 1

The  first  indication  of  a change,  though  not  purposely  intended,
by  which  the  Operative  system  was  to  become  eventually  a Specu-
lative one,  is  seen  in  the  election  as  presiding  officers  of  three  per-
sons who  were  not  Operative  Masons.

Mr.  Anthony  Sayer,  the  first  Grand  Master,  is  described  by
Anderson  in  his  record  of  the  election  by  the  legal  title  of  "Gentle-
man," a title  which,  by  the  laws  of  honor,  was  bestowed  upon  one
who  can  live  without  manual  labor  and  can  support  himself  without
interfering  in  any  mechanical  employment.  Such  a person,  say  the
heralds,  "is  called  Mr.,  and  may  write  himself  Gentleman."2

"Anthony  Sayer,  Gentleman,"  as  he  is  described  in  the  record,
was  undoubtedly  a mere  Theoretic  member  of  the  Masonic  associa-
tion and  not  an  Operative  Mason.

Of  the  two  Grand  Wardens  who  were  elected  at  the  same  time,
one  was  Captain  Joseph  Elliot.  Of  his  social  position  we  have  no
further  knowledge  that  what  is  conveyed  by  the  title  prefixed  to  his
name,  which  would  indicate  that  he  was  of  the  military  profession,
probably  a retired  or  half-pay  officer  of  the  army.

The  other  Grand  Warden  was  Mr.  Jacob  Lamball,  who  is  desig-
nated as  being  a Carpenter.

Thus  we  see  that  the  first  three  officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge
were  not  Operative  members  of  the  Craft  of  Masonry.

The  choice,  however,  of  a Carpenter,  a profession  closely  con-
nected with  that  of  the  Masons,  affords  proof  that  it  was  not  in-
tended to  confine  the  future  Speculative  society  altogether  to  per-
sons who  were  not  mechanics.

At  the  succeeding  election  in  1718  George  Payne,  Esq.,  was
elected  Grand  Master.  He  was  an  Antiquary  and  scholar  of  con-
siderable ability,  and  was  well  calculated  to  represent  the  Speculative
character  of  the  new  association.

The  Wardens  were  Mr.  John  Cordwell  and  Mr.  Thomas  Morrice.
The  former  is  described  as  a Carpenter  and  the  latter  as  a Stonecutter.

1 Preston  is,  however,  sometimes  careless,  a charge  to  which  all  the  early  Masonic
writers  are  amenable.  Thus,  he  says  that  Sayer  appointed  his  Wardens.  But  these
officers  were,  like  the  Grand  Master,  elected  until  1721,  when,  for  the  first  time,  they
were  appointed  by  the  Grand  Master.

2 "Laws  of  Honor,"  p.  286.

SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY  IN  ENGLAND

905

While  the  choice  of  these  officers  was  an  evident  concession  to
the  old  Operative  element,  the  election  of  Payne  was  a step  forward
in  the  progressive  movement  which  a few  years  afterward  led  to
the  total  emancipation  of  Speculative  Freemasonry  from  all  con-
nection with  practical  building.  Northouck  attests  that  "to  the
active  zeal  of  Grand  Master  Payne  the  Society  are  under  a lasting
obligation  for  introducing  brethren  of  noble  rank  into  the  frater-
nity."1

From  the  very  beginning  the  Grand  Lodge  had  confined  its
selection  of  Grand  Masters  to  persons  of  good  social  position,  of
learning,  or  of  rank,  though  for  a few  years  it  occasionally  con-
ferred the  Grand  Wardenship  on  Operative  Masons  or  on  crafts-
men of  other  trades.

In  the  year  1719  Dr.  John  Theophilus  Desaguliers  was  elected
Grand  Master,  and  Anthony  Sayer  and  Thomas  Morrice  Grand
Wardens.  Desaguliers  was  a natural  philosopher  of  much  reputa-
tion and  a Fellow  of  the  Royal  Society.  Sayer  had  been  the  first
Grand  Master,  and  Morrice,  who  was  a stonecutter  or  Operative
Mason,  had  been  a Warden  the  previous  year.

In  1720  Payne  was  again  elected  Grand  Master,  and  Thomas
Hobby  and  Richard  Ware  were  chosen  as  Grand  Wardens.
Hobby,  like  his  predecessor,  Morrice,  was  an  Operative  Mason  or
stonecutter,  and  Ware  was  a mathematician.

In  1721  the  Duke  of  Montagu  was  elected  Grand  Master.  He
was  the  first  nobleman  who  had  served  in  that  capacity,  and  from
that  day  to  the  present  the  throne  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,
as  it  is  technically  styled,  has  without  a single  exception  been  oc-
cupied by  persons  of  royal  or  noble  rank.

In  this  year  the  office  of  Deputy  Grand  Master  was  created,  and
the  power  of  choosing  him  as  well  as  the  Grand  Wardens  was  taken
from  the  Grand  Lodge  and  invested  in  the  Grand  Master,  a law
which  still  continues  in  force.

Accordingly,  the  Duke  of  Montagu  appointed  John  Beal,  a
physician,  his  Deputy,  and  Josiah  Villeneau,  who  was  an  uphol-
sterer, and  again  Thomas  Morrice,  his  Wardens.

The  Duke  of  Wharton,  who  was  Grand  Master  in  1722,  ap-
pointed Dr.  Desaguliers  his  Deputy,  and  Joshua  Timson  and  James

1 Northouck's  "Constitutions  anno  1784,"  p.  207.  Entick  ("Constitutions,"  1756,  p.
190)  had  made  a similar  remark.

906

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Anderson  his  Wardens.  Timson  was  a blacksmith  and  Anderson
a clergyman,  well-known  afterward  as  the  Compiler  of  the  first  and
second  editions  of  the  Book  of  Constitutions.

In  1723  the  Earl  of  Dalkeith  was  Grand  Master,  Desaguliers
again  Deputy,  and  Francis  Sorrel,  Esq.,  and  John  Senex,  a book-

seller, Wardens.

From  1717  to  1722  the  claims  of  the  Operative  Masons  to  hold
a share  of  the  offices  had,  as  Gould1  remarks,  been  fairly  recog-
nized. The  appointment  of  Stonecutters,  Carpenters,  and  other
mechanics  as  Grand  Wardens  had  been  a concession  by  the  Specu-
lative members  to  the  old  Operative  element.

But  in  1723  the  struggle  between  the  two,  which  is  noticed  in
the  records  of  the  society  only  by  its  results,  terminated  in  the
complete  victory  of  the  former,  who  from  that  time  restricted  the

offices  to  persons  of  rank,  of  influence,  or  of  learning.  From  the
year  1723  no  Operative  Mason  or  workman  of  any  trade  was  ever
appointed  as  a Warden.  In  the  language  of  Gould,  "they  could
justly  complain  of  their  total  supercession  in  the  offices  of  the

society."

This  silent  progress  of  events  shows  very  clearly  how  the  Free-
masons who  founded  the  Speculative  Grand  Lodge  in  1717  on  the

principles  and  practices  of  Operative  Freemasonry  as  they  prevailed

in  the  four  Lodges  of  London,  gradually  worked  themselves  out

of  all  connection  with  their  Operative  brethren  and  eventually  made
Freemasonry  what  it  now  is,  a purely  Speculative,  philosophical,  and
moral  institution.

Upon  the  coalition  of  the  four  Lodges  into  one  supervising
body,  the  next  step  in  the  progress  to  pure  Speculative  Free-
masonry was  to  prevent  the  formation  of  other  lodges  which

might  be  independent  of  the  supervision  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  and
thus  present  an  obstacle  to  the  completion  of  the  reformation.

This  could  only  be  accomplished  by  a voluntary  relinquishment,
on  the  part  of  the  four  Lodges,  of  their  independency  and  an  aban-
donment of  their  privileges.

The  conference  at  the  "Apple  Tree  Tavern"  in  February,  1717,
and  that  at  the  "Goose  and  Gridiron"  in  June  of  the  same  year,
were  what,  at  the  present  day,  would  be  called  mass-meetings  of  the

1 "Four  Old  Lodges,"  p.  33.

SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY  IN  ENGLAND

907

Craft.  They  resembled  in  that  respect  the  General  Assembly
spoken  of  in  the  old  manuscript  Constitutions,  and  every  Free-
mason was  required  to  attend  if  it  were  held  within  a reasonable
distance,1  and  if  he  had  no  satisfactory  excuse  for  his  absence.

Attendance  at  these  conferences  which  resulted  in  the  establish-
ment of  the  Grand  Lodge  was  open,  not  only  to  all  the  members
of  the  four  Lodges,  but  to  other  Masons  who  were  not,  to  use  a
modem  phrase,  affiliated  with  any  one  of  them.

"The  Lodges,"  that  is,  the  members  of  them,  says  Anderson,
"with  some  old  Brothers."  Preston  calls  them  more  distinctively
"some  other  old  Brethren."  Both  of  these  phrases,  of  course,  in-
dicate that  these  "old  Brethren"  were  not  among  the  members  of
the  four  Lodges,  but  were  Freemasons  who  had  either,  on  account
of  their  age,  retired  from  active  participation  in  the  labors  of  the
Craft,  or  who  had  been  members  of  other  lodges  which  were  then
extinct.

At  the  preliminary  meeting  in  February,  they  voted,  says  Pres-
ton, "the  oldest  Master  Mason  then  present  into  the  Chair."  Ander-
son, writing  in  1738,  adds  "now  the  Master  of  a Lodge,"  by  which
I suppose  he  meant  that  the  oldest  Master  Mason  who  presided  in
1717  became  in  1738  the  Master  of  a Lodge.  I know  of  no  other
way  of  interpreting  the  significance  of  the  particle  "now."  They

then  "constituted  themselves  a Grand  Lodge  pro  tempore  in  due
form."

This  "due  form,"  I think,  could  have  amounted  to  no  more  than
a formal  declaration  of  the  intention  to  establish  a Grand  Lodge,
which  intention  was  carried  out  in  the  following  June  by  the  elec-
tion of  a Grand  Master  and  Wardens.

The  Freemasons  of  America  are  familiar  with  the  methods  pur-

sued in  the  organization  of  a Grand  Lodge  in  a territory  where  none
had  previously  existed.  Here  a certain  number  of  lodges,  not  less
than  three,  assemble  through  their  three  principal  officers  and  consti-
tute a Convention,  which  proceeds  to  the  election  of  a Grand  Mas-
ter and  other  officers,  directs  the  lodges  to  surrender  the  Warrants

under  which  they  had  been  working  to  the  Grand  Lodges  from

which  they  had  originally  received  them,  and  then  issues  new  ones.
The  new  Grand  Lodge  thus  becomes  "an  accomplished  fact."

1 In  most  of  the  Constitutions  that  distance  is  defined  to  be  not  more  than  fifty  miles.

908

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

But  this  was  not  the  method  adopted  in  the  establishment  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England  in  the  year  1717.  Instead  of  the  repre-
sentation of  the  four  Lodges  being  restricted  to  the  Masters  and
Wardens  of  each,  all  the  members,  down  to  the  youngest  Entered
Apprentice,  together  with  Masons  who  were  not  affiliated  with  any
lodge,  met  together.

The  chair,  according  to  Preston,  in  the  preliminary  meeting  in
February  had  been  taken  by  the  oldest  Master  Mason  present.  At
this  meeting  the  oldest  Master  Mason,  who  at  the  same  time  was
Master  of  one  of  the  four  Lodges,  presided.  Then  the  Grand
Lodge  was  duly  organized  by  the  election  of  its  first  three  officers.

But  now  it  became  necessary  to  secure  the  sovereignty  of  the
new  Grand  Lodge  as  the  future  supervising  body  of  the  Craft,  and
to  prevent  any  additional  lodges  being  established  without  its  au-
thority, so  that  the  system  might  be  perfected  in  the  future  accord-
ing to  the  method  which  was  originally  designed  by  its  founders.

Almost  the  first  regulation  which  was  adopted  at  the  meeting
in  June,  1717,  was  to  effect  this  object.

Hitherto,  as  we  have  already  seen,  the  Operative  Freemasons
possessed  a privilege  derived  from  the  Old  Constitutions  of  the
Guild  (and  which  is  formally  enunciated  in  the  Harleian  MS.)  of
assembling  in  lodges  for  the  purpose  of  "making  Masons"  under
very  simple  provisions.  There  was  no  necessity  for  a Warrant  or
permission  from  a superior  Masonic  body  to  make  such  an  assem-
bly legal.

But  now  it  was  resolved  that  this  privilege  should  be  abolished.
No  number  of  Masons  were  hereafter  to  assemble  as  a lodge  with-
out the  consent  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  expressed  by  the  granting
of  a Warrant  of  Constitution  or  Charter  authorizing  them  to  con-
stitute or  form  themselves  into  a lodge.  Without  such  Warrant,
says  Preston,  no  lodge  should  hereafter  be  deemed  regular  or  con-
stitutional.

From  this  regulation,  however,  the  four  Lodges  which  had  co-
operated in  the  formation  of  the  Grand  Lodge  were  excepted.
They,  so  long  as  they  existed,  were  to  be  the  only  lodges  working
without  a Warrant  and  deriving  their  authority  to  do  so  from  "im-
memorial usage."

The  effect  of  this  regulation  was  to  throw  an  insurmountable
obstacle  in  the  way  of  any  new  lodge  being  formed  which  was  not

SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY  IN  ENGLAND

909

Speculative  in  its  character  and  in  perfect  accord  with  the  new  sys-
tem, from  whose  founders  or  their  successors  it  was  to  derive  its

existence.

Hence  it  was  the  most  fatal  blow  that  had  as  yet  been  struck

against  the  continuance  of  the  Guild  of  purely  Operative  Freema-
sonry. No  purely  Operative  nor  half  Operative  and  half  Speculative

lodges,  we  may  be  sure,  would  thereafter  be  erected.

From  this  time  all  lodges  were  to  consist  of  Speculative  Free-
masons only  and  were  to  form  a part  of  the  new  non-Operative  sys-
tem, of  which  the  first  organized  Grand  Lodge  was  the  head  and
exercised  the  sovereign  power.

It  is  true  that  Preston  tells  us  that  long  before  this  period  a regu-
lation had  been  adopted  by  which  "the  privileges  of  Masonry  should
no  longer  be  restricted  to  Operative  Masons,"  but  allowed  to  men
of  various  professions;  and  it  is  also  well  known  that  there  hardly
ever  was  a time  in  the  history  of  Operative  Freemasonry  when  Theo-
retic or  non-Operative  persons  were  not  admitted  into  the  guild.

But  this  was  taking  a step  farther,  and  a very  long  step,  too.
Membership  in  the  new  society  was  no  longer  a privilege  extended
by  courtesy  to  Theoretic  Masons.  It  was  to  be  a franchise  of  which
they  alone  were  to  be  possessors.  Operative  Masons,  merely  as
such,  were  to  be  excluded.  In  other  words,  no  Operative  Mason
was  to  be  admitted  into  the  Fraternity  because  he  was  an  Operative.
He  was,  on  his  admission,  to  lay  aside  his  profession,  and  unite  with
the  others  in  the  furtherance  of  the  purely  Speculative  design  of  the
Institution.

So  it  has  continued  to  the  present  day,  and  so  it  must  continue
as  long  as  the  system  of  Speculative  Freemasonry  shall  last.  Oper-
ative Freemasonry,  "wounded  in  the  house  of  its  friends,"  has  never
recovered  from  the  blow  thus  inflicted.

Operative  Masonry,  for  building  purposes,  still  lives  and  must
always  live  to  serve  the  needs  of  man.

But  Operative  Freemasonry,  as  a Guild,  is  irrecoverably  dead.

It  is  impossible  to  say  for  how  long  a time  the  meetings  of  the
Grand  Lodge  continued  to  be  attended  by  all  the  members  of  the
particular  lodges,  or,  in  other  words,  when  these  assemblies  ceased,
like  those  of  the  old  Operative  Freemasons,  to  be  mass-meetings  of
the  Craft.

But  the  rapidly  growing  popularity  of  the  new  Order  must  have

910

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

rendered  such  meetings  very  inconvenient  from  the  increase  of
members.

Anderson  says  that  in  1718  "several  old  Brothers  that  had  neg-
lected the  Craft  visited  the  lodges;  some  noblemen  were  also  made
Brothers  and  more  new  lodges  were  constituted."1

Northouck,  writing  in  reference  to  the  same  period,  says  that  the
Free  and  Accepted  Masons  "now  began  visibly  to  gather  strength
as  a body,"2  and  we  are  told  that  at  the  annual  feast  in  1721  the
number  of  lodges  had  so  increased2  that  the  General  Assembly  re-
quired more  room,  and  therefore  the  Grand  Lodge  was  on  that  occa-
sion removed  to  Stationers'  Hall,  nor  did  it  ever  afterward  return  to
its  old  quarters  at  the  "Goose  and  Gridiron  Tavern."

This  unwieldiness  of  numbers  would  alone  be  sufficient  to  sug-
gest the  convenience  of  changing  the  constitution  of  the  Grand
Lodge  from  a mass-meeting  of  the  Fraternity  into  a representative
body.

This  was  effected  by  the  passage  of  a regulation  dispensing  with
the  attendance  of  the  whole  of  the  Craft  at  the  annual  meeting,  and
authorizing  each  lodge  to  be  represented  by  its  Master  and  two

Wardens.

We  have  no  positive  knowledge  of  the  exact  date  when  this  reg-
ulation was  adopted.  It  first  appears  in  the  "General  Regulations"
which  were  compiled  by  Grand  Master  Payne  in  1720,  and  approved
by  the  Grand  Lodge  in  1721.  The  twelfth  of  these  Regulations  is
in  these  words:

"The  Grand  Lodge  consists  of,  and  is  formed  by,  the  Masters
and  Wardens  of  all  the  regular,  particular  lodges  upon  record,  with
the  Grand  Master  at  their  head,  and  his  Deputy  on  his  left  hand,
and  the  Grand  Wardens  in  their  proper  places."

Preston  says  that  the  Grand  Lodge  having  resolved  that  the

four  old  Lodges  should  retain  every  privilege  which  they  had  col-
lectively enjoyed  by  virtue  of  their  immemorial  rights,  the  members

considered  their  attendance  on  the  future  Communications  of  the
Grand  Lodge  unnecessary.  They  "therefore,  like  the  other  lodges,
crusted  implicitly  to  their  Master  and  Wardens,  resting  satisfied

1 Anderson,  "Constitutions,"  2d  ed.,  p.  1 10.

2 Northouck,  "Constitutions,"  p.  207.

1 There  were  at  that  time  twenty  lodges,  and  the  number  of  Freemasons  who  attended
the  annual  meeting  and  feast  was  one  hundred  and  fifty.

SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY  IN  ENGLAND

911

that  no  measure  of  importance  would  be  adopted  without  their
approbation."1

But  he  adds  that  the  officers  of  the  four  old  Lodges  "soon  began
to  discover"  that  the  new  lodges  might  in  time  outnumber  the  old
ones  and  encroach  upon  their  privileges.  They  therefore  formed
a code  of  laws,  the  last  clause  of  which  provided  that  the  Grand
Lodge  in  making  any  new  regulations  should  be  bound  by  a careful
observation  of  the  old  landmarks.

It  is  unfortunate  that  in  treating  this  early  period  of  Masonic
history  Preston  should  be  so  careless  and  confused  in  his  chronology
as  to  compel  us  to  depend  very  much  upon  inference  in  settling  the
sequence  of  events.

It  may,  however,  I think,  be  inferred  from  the  remarks  of  Pres-
ton, and  from  what  little  we  can  collect  from  Anderson's  brief  notices,
that  the  Grand  Lodge  continued  to  be  a mass-meeting,  attended  by
all  the  Craft,  until  the  annual  feast  on  the  24th  of  June,  1721.
At  that  communication  Anderson  records  that  the  Grand  Lodge
was  composed  of  "Grand  Master  with  his  Wardens,  the  former
Grand  officers,  and  the  Master  and  Wardens  of  the  twelve  lodges."2
In  all  subsequent  records  he  mentions  the  number  of  lodges  which
were  represented  by  their  officers,  though  the  Grand  Feast  still  con-
tinued to  be  attended  by  as  many  Masons  as  desired  to  partake  of
the  dinner  and,  I suppose,  were  willing  to  pay  their  scot.3

It  was,  therefore,  I think,  not  till  1721  that  the  Grand  Lodge
assumed  that  form  which  made  it  a representative  body,  consisting
of  the  Masters  and  Wardens  of  the  particular  lodges,  together  with
the  officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge.

That  form  has  ever  since  been  retained  in  the  organization  of
every  Grand  Lodge  that  has  directly  or  indirectly  emanated  from
the  original  body.

This  was  another  significant  token  of  the  total  disseverance  that
was  steadily  taking  place  between  the  Operative  and  the  Speculative
systems.

Hitherto  we  have  been  occupied  with  the  consideration  of  the

1 "Illustrations,”  p.  193.

2 "Constitutions,"  2d  edition,  p.  112.

3 The  only  qualification  for  attendance  on  the  feast  was  that  the  guests  must  be
Masons:  therefore  waiting  brethren  were  appointed  to  attend  the  tables,  "for  that  no
strangers  must  be  there."  — "Constitutions,"  2d  ed.,  p.  1 12.

912

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

transactions  recorded  as  having  taken  place  at  the  annual  meetings.
We  are  now  to  inquire  when  these  meetings  began  to  be  supple,
mented  by  Quarterly  Communications.

Here  an  historical  question  presents  itself,  which,  so  far  as  1 am
aware,  has  not  been  distinctly  met  and  treated  by  any  of  our  Masonic
scholars.  They  all  seem  to  have  taken  it  for  granted  on  the  naked
authority  of  Anderson  and  Preston,  that  the  Quarterly  Communica-
tions were  coeval  with  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge  in  the
year  1717.

Is  this  an  historical  fact?  I confess  that  on  this  subject  a
shadow  of  doubt  has  been  cast  that  obscures  my  clearness  of  vision.

Anderson  says,  and  Preston  repeats  the  statement,  that  at  the  pre-
liminary meeting  in  February,  1717,  at  the  "Apple  Tree  Tavern,"
it  was  resolved  "to  revive  the  Quarterly  Communications."

But  these  two  authorities  (and  they  are  the  only  ones  that  we

have  on  the  subject)  differ  in  some  of  the  details.  And  these  differ-
ences are  important  enough  to  throw  a doubt  on  the  truth  of  the

statement.

Anderson  says  in  one  place  that  in  February,  1717,  they  "forth-

with revived  the  Quarterly  Communications  of  the  officers  of  lodges
called  the  Grand  Lodge."1

Afterward  he  says  that  at  the  meeting  in  June,  1717,  Grand  Mas-
ter Sayer  "commanded  the  Masters  and  Wardens  of  lodges  to

meet  the  Grand  officers  every  quarter  in  communication,  at  the

place  he  should  appoint  in  his  summons  sent  by  the  Tyler."2

Preston  says  that  in  February  "it  was  resolved  to  revive  the

Quarterly  Communications  of  the  Fraternity."3  Immediately  after

he  adds  that  in  June  the  Grand  Master  "commanded  the  Brethren
of  the  four  Lodges  to  meet  him  and  his  Wardens  quarterly  in  com-
munication."4

Thus,  according  to  Preston,  the  Quarterly  Communications  were
to  apply  to  the  whole  body  of  the  Fraternity;  but  Anderson  re-
stricted them  to  the  Masters  and  Wardens  of  the  lodges.

The  two  statements  are  irreconcilable.  A mass-meeting  of  the

whole  Fraternity  and  a consultation  of  the  Masters  and  Wardens  of
the  lodges  are  very  different  things.

But  both  are  in  error  in  saying  that  the  Quarterly  Communica-

Anderson,  "Constitutions,"  2d  edition,  p.  109.
3 Preston,  "Illustrations,"  p.  191.

3 Ibid.,  p.  110.

4 Ibid.

FAITH,  HOPE  AND  CHARITY

SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY  IN  ENGLAND

913

ti'ons  "were  revived,"  for  there  is  no  notice  of  or  allusion  to  Quar-
terly Communications  in  any  of  the  old  records  which  speak  only
of  an  annual  General  Assembly  of  the  Craft,  and  sometimes  perhaps
occasional  assemblies  for  special  purposes.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  such  was  the  usage  among  the  Eng-
lish mediaeval  guilds,  a usage  which  must  have  been  applicable  to  the
Freemasons  as  well  as  to  other  Crafts.  "The  distinction,"  says  J.
Toulmin  Smith,  "between  the  gatherings  (congregations)  and  general
meetings  (assemblies)  is  seen  at  a glance  in  most  of  the  ordinances.
The  guild  brethren  were  bound  to  gather  together,  at  unfixed  times,
for  special  purposes;  but  besides  these  gatherings  upon  special  sum-
mons, general  meetings  of  the  guilds  were  held  on  fixed  days  in
every  year  for  the  election  of  officers,  holding  their  feasts,  etc."1

I do  not  see  any  analogy  in  these  gatherings  of  local  guilds  to  the
Quarterly  Communications  of  the  Grand  Lodge  spoken  of  by  Ander-
son. The  analogy  is  rather  to  the  monthly  meetings  of  the  particu-
lar lodges  as  contrasted  with  the  annual  meeting  of  the  Grand  Lodge.

But  if,  as  Anderson  and  Preston  say,  the  Quarterly  Communi-
cations were  "forthwith  revived"  in  1717,  it  is  singular  that  there
is  no  record  of  any  one  having  been  held  until  December,  1720.
After  that  date  we  find  the  Quarterly  Communications  regularly
recorded  by  Anderson  as  taking  place  at  the  times  appointed  in  the
Regulations  which  were  compiled  in  1720  by  Grand  Master  Payne,
namely,  "about  Michaelmas,  Christmas,  and  Lady  Day,"  that  is,  in
September,  December,  and  March.

The  word  "about"  in  the  12th  Regulation  permitted  some  lat-
itude as  to  the  precise  day  of  meeting.

Accordingly,  we  find  that  Quarterly  Communications  were  held
in  1721  in  March,  September,  and  December;  in  1722,  in  March,
but  the  others  appeared  to  have  been  neglected,  perhaps  in  conse-
quence of  irregularities  attendant  on  the  illegal  election  of  the  Duke
of  Wharton;  in  1723  there  were  Quarterly  Communications  in
April  and  November,  and  the  December  meeting  was  postponed  to
the  following  January;  in  1724  they  occurred  in  February  and
November;  in  1725  in  May,  November,  and  December,  and  so  on,
but  with  greater  regularity,  in  all  the  subsequent  proceedings  of  the
Grand  Lodge  as  recorded  in  the  Book  of  Constitutions  by  Ander-

1 "English  Guilds,"  p.  128,  note.

914

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

son,  and  by  his  successors  Entick  and  Northouck  in  the  subsequent
editions.

Looking  at  the  silence  of  the  records  in  respect  to  Quarterly-
Communications  from  1717  to  1720;  then  to  the  regular  appear-

ance of  such  records  after  that  year,  and  seeing  that  in  the  latter
year  the  provision  for  them  was  first  inserted  in  the  General  Regu-
lations compiled  at  that  time  by  Grand  Master  Payne,  I trust  that  I
shall  not  be  deemed  too  skeptical  or  too  hypercritical,  if  I confess
my  doubt  of  the  accuracy  of  Anderson,  who  has,  whether  wilfully
or  carelessly,  I will  not  say,  attributed  the  establishment  of  these
Quarterly  Communications  to  Grand  Master  Sayer,  when  the  honor,
if  there  be  any,  properly  belongs  to  Grand  Master  Payne.

The  next  subject  that  will  attract  our  attention  in  this  sketch  of

the  early  history  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  is  the  method  in  which  the  laws

which  regulated  the  original  Operative  system  were  gradually  mod-

ified and  at  length  completely  changed  so  as  to  be  appropriate  to
the  peculiar  needs  of  a wholly  Speculative  Society.

When  the  four  old  Lodges  united,  in  the  year  1717,  in  organizing
a Grand  Lodge,  it  is  very  evident  that  the  only  laws  which  governed
them  must  have  been  the  "Charges"  contained  in  the  manuscript

Constitutions  or  such  private  regulations  adopted  by  the  lodges,  as

were  conformable  to  them.

There  was  no  other  Masonic  jurisprudence  known  to  the  Oper-
ative Freemasons  of  England,  at  the  beginning  of  the  18th  century,
than  that  which  was  embodied  in  these  old  Constitutions.  These
were  familiar  to  the  Operative  Freemasons  of  that  day,  as  they  had

been  for  centuries  before  to  their  predecessors.

Though  never  printed,  copies  of  them  in  manuscript  were  com-
mon and  were  easily  accessible.  They  were  often  copied,  one  from
another — just  as  often,  probably,  as  the  wants  of  a new  lodge  might
require.

Beginning  at  the  end  of  the  14th  century,  which  is  the  date  of
the  poetical  Constitutions,  which  were  first  published  by  Mr.  Halli-
well,  copies  continued  to  be  made  until  the  year  1714,  which  is  the
date  of  the  last  one  now  extant,  executed  before  the  organization  of
the  Grand  Lodge. 1

1 I take  no  notice  here  of  the  Krause  MS.,  which  pretends  to  contain  the  Constitu-

tions  enacted  by  Prince  Edwin,  in  926,  because  I have  not  the  least  doubt  that  it  is  a

forgery  of  comparatively  recent  times.

SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY  IN  ENGLAND

915

Now  in  all  these  written  Constitutions,  extending  through  a
period  of  more  than  three  centuries,  there  is  a very  wonderful  con-
formity of  character.

The  poetic  form  which  exists  in  the  Halliwell  MS.  was  appar-
ently never  imitated,  and  all  the  subsequent  manuscript  Constitu-
tions now  extant  are  in  prose.  But  as  Bro.  Woodford  has  justly
observed,  they  all  "seem  in  fact  to  be  clearly  derived  from  the  Ma-
sonic Poem,  though  naturally  altered  in  their  prose  form,  and  ex-

panded and  modified  through  transmission  and  oral  tradition,  as  well
as  by  the  lapse  of  time  and  the  change  of  circumstances."1

While  these  old  constitutions  contained,  with  hardly  any  apprecia-
ble variation,  the  Legend  of  the  Craft,  which  was  conscientiously  be-
lieved by  the  old  Operative  Free  Masons  as  containing  the  true
history  of  the  rise  and  progress  of  the  brotherhood,  they  embodied
also  that  code  of  laws  by  which  the  fraternity  was  governed  during
the  whole  period  of  its  existence.

Though  these  Constitutions  commenced,  so  far  as  we  have  any

knowledge  of  them  from  personal  inspection,  at  the  close  of  the  14th
century,  we  are  not  to  admit  that  there  were  no  earlier  copies.  In-
deed, I have  formerly  shown  that  the  Halliwell  Poem,  whose  con-
jectural date  is  1390,  is  evidently  a compilation  from  two  other

poems  of  an  earlier  date.

The  Freemasons  who  were  contemporary  with  the  organization
of  the  Grand  Lodge  held  those  old  manuscript  Constitutions,  as

their  predecessors  had  done  before  them,  in  the  greatest  reverence.

The  fact  that  the  laws  which  they  prescribed,  like  those  of  the  Medes

and  Persians,  had  invested  them  with  the  luster  of  antiquity,  and  as
they  had  always  remained  written,  and  had  never  been  printed,  the

Craft  looked  upon  them  as  their  peculiar  property  and  gave  to  them
much  of  an  esoteric  character.

This  false  estimate  of  the  true  nature  of  these  documents  led  to

an  inexcusable  and  irreparable  destruction  of  many  of  them.

Grand  Master  Payne  had  in  1718  desired  the  brethren  to  bring
to  the  Grand  Lodge  "any  old  writings  and  records  concerning  Ma-
sons and  Masonry  in  order  to  show  the  usages  of  ancient  times."2

These,  it  was  suspected,  were  to  be  used  in  the  preparation  and  pub-
lication of  a contemplated  Book  of  Masonic  Constitutions,  and  the

1 Preface  to  Hughan's  "Old  Charges  of  British  Freemasons,"  p.  13.

2 Anderson,  "Constitutions,"  2d  edition,  p.  no.

916

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Masons  became  alarmed  at  the  threatened  publicity  of  what  they
had  always  deemed  to  be  secret.

Accordingly,  in  1720,  "at  some  private  lodges,"  says  Anderson,
"several  valuable  manuscripts  (for  they  had  nothing  yet  in  print)
concerning  their  lodges,  Regulations,  Charges,  Secrets,  and  Usages
(particularly  one  writ  by  Mr.  Nicholas  Stone,  the  Warden  of  Inigo
Jones)  were  too  hastily  burnt  by  some  scrupulous  brothers,  that
those  papers  might  not  fall  into  strange  hands."1

Northouck,  commenting  on  this  instance  of  vandalism,  which  he
strangely  styles  an  act  of  felo  de  se,  says  that  it  surely  "could  not

proceed  from  zeal  according  to  knowledge."

Of  course,  it  was  zeal  without  knowledge  that  led  to  this  destruc-
tion, the  effects  of  which  are  felt  at  this  day  by  every  scholar  who
attempts  to  write  an  authentic  history  of  Freemasonry.

The  object  of  Grand  Master  Payne  in  attempting  to  make  a

collection  of  these  old  writings  was  undoubtedly  to  enable  him
to  frame  a code  of  laws  which  should  be  founded  on  what  Ander-
son calls  the  Gothic  Constitutions.  Several  copies  of  these  Consti-
tutions were  produced  in  the  year  1718  and  collated.

The  result  of  this  collation  was  the  production  which  under  the
title  of  "The  Charges  of  a Free-Mason"  was  appended  to  the  first

edition  of  the  Book  of  Constitutions.

This  is  the  first  code  of  laws  enacted  by  the  Speculative  Grand

Lodge  of  England,  and  thus  becomes  important  as  an  historical
document.

As  to  the  date  and  the  authorship  we  have  no  other  guide  than
that  of  inference.

There  can,  however,  be  little  hesitation  in  ascribing  the  author-
ship to  Payne  and  the  time  of  the  compilation  to  the  period  of  his

first  Grand  Mastership,  which  extended  from  June,  1718,  to  June,
1719.

In  the  title  to  these  "Charges"  it  is  said  that  they  have  been
"extracted  from  the  ancient  records  of  lodges  beyond  sea  and  of

those  in  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland,  for  the  use  of  the  lodges
in  London."

Now  this  admirably  coincides  with  the  passage  in  Anderson  in
which  it  is  said  that  at  the  request  of  Grand  Master  Payne,  in  the

1 Anderson,  "Constitutions,"  2d  edition,  p.  111.

SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY  IN  ENGLAND

917

year  1718,  "several  old  copies  of  the  Gothic  Constitutions  were
produced  and  collated."

In  fact,  we  thus  identify  the  collation  of  the  Gothic  Constitu-
tions in  1718  with  the  "Charges  of  a Free-Mason,"  published  in  the
first  edition  of  the  Book  of  Constitutions.

Nor  do  I feel  any  hesitation  in  ascribing  this  collation  of  the
old  Constitutions  and  the  compilation,  out  of  it,  of  the  "Charges"
to  Payne,  whose  genius  lay  in  that  way  and  who  again  exercised  it,
two  years  afterward,  in  the  compilation  of  the  "General  Regula-
tions," which  took  the  place  of  the  "Charges"  as  the  law  of  the
Speculative  Grand  Lodge.

The  valuable  services  of  George  Payne  in  the  incipient  era  of
Speculative  Freemasonry  have  not  received  from  our  historians  the
appreciation  which  is  their  just  due.  His  reputation  has  been  over-
shadowed by  that  of  Desaguliers.  Both  labored  much  and  success-
fully for  the  infant  institution.  But  we  should  never  forget  that
the  work  of  Payne  in  the  formation  of  its  jurisprudence  was  as  im-

portant as  was  that  of  Desaguliers  in  the  fabrication  of  its  ritual. 1

But  to  resume  the  history  of  the  progress  of  Masonic  law.

The  adoption  in  1718  of  the  "Charges  of  a Free-Mason,"  with
the  direction  that  they  shall  be  read  as  the  existing  law  of  the

fraternity  "at  the  making  of  new  brethren,"2  is  a very  significant

proof  of  what  has  before  been  suggested  that  at  the  time  of  the

so-called  "Revival"  there  was  no  positive  intention  to  wholly  dis-

sever the  Speculative  from  the  Operative  system.

These  "Charges"  are,  as  they  must  necessarily  have  been,  orig-
inating as  they  did  in  the  Old  Constitutions,  a code  of  regulations
adapted  only  to  a fraternity  of  Operative  Freemasons  and  wholly

inapplicable  to  a society  of  Speculatives,  such  as  the  institution
afterward  became.

Thus  Masters  were  not  to  receive  Apprentices  unless  they  had
sufficient  employment  for  them;  the  Master  was  to  oversee  the

1 Dr.  Oliver  very  inaccurately  says  in  his  "Revelations  of  a Square"  that  "at  the

annual  assembly  on  St.  John's  day,  1721,  Desaguliers  produced  thirty-eight  regulations,"
but  distinctly  states  that  these  regulations  were  "compiled  first  by  Mr.  George  Payne,

anno  1720,  when  he  was  Grand  Master,  and  approved  by  the  Grand  Lodge  on  St.  John
Baptist's  day,  anno  1721."  The  venerable  doctor  had  here  forgotten  the  Ciceronian
axiom — suum  cuique  tribuere.

2 See  the  title  of  the  "Charges"  in  the  first  edition  of  the  "Book  of  Constitutions,"

918

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

lord's  or  employer's  work,  and  was  to  be  chosen  from  the  most
expert  of  the  Fellow-Crafts;  the  Master  was  to  undertake  the
lord's  work  for  reasonable  pay;  no  one  was  to  receive  more  wages
than  he  deserved;  the  Master  and  the  Masons  were  to  receive  their
wages  meekly;  were  to  honestly  finish  their  work  and  not  to  put
them  to  task  which  had  been  accustomed  to  journey;  nor  was  one
Mason  to  supplant  another  in  his  work.

The  Operative  feature  is  very  plain  in  these  regulations.  They
are,  it  is  true,  supplemented  by  other  regulations  as  to  conduct  in
the  lodge,  in  the  presence  of  strangers,  and  at  home;  and  these  are
as  applicable  to  a Speculative  as  they  are  to  an  Operative  Mason.

But  the  whole  spirit,  and,  for  the  most  part,  the  very  language
of  these  "Charges,"  is  found  in  the  Old  Constitutions  of  the  Oper-
ative Masons.

They  have,  however,  been  always  accepted  as  the  foundation  of
the  law  of  Speculative  Masonry,  though  originally  adopted  at  a
time  when  the  society  had  not  yet  completely  thrown  over  its  Oper-
ative character.

But  to  apply  them  to  an  exposition  of  the  laws  of  Speculative
Freemasonry,  and  to  make  them  applicant  to  the  government  of
the  Order  in  its  purely  Speculative  condition,  modem  Masonic  jurists
have  found  it  necessary  to  give  to  the  language  of  the  "Charges"
a figurative  or  symbolic  signification,  a process  that  I suspect  was
not  contemplated  by  Payne  or  his  contemporaries.

Thus,  to  work,  is  now  interpreted  as  meaning  to  practice  the
ritual.  The  lodge  is  at  work  when  it  is  conferring  a degree.  To
receive  wages  is  to  be  advanced  from  a lower  to  a higher  degree.
To  supplant  another  in  his  work,  is  for  one  lodge  to  interfere  with
the  candidates  of  another.

In  this  way  statutes  intended  originally  for  the  government  of  a
body  of  workmen  have  by  judicial  ingenuity  been  rendered  applic-
able to  a society  of  moralists.

The  adoption  of  these  "Charges"  was  a concession  to  the  Oper-
ative element  of  the  new  society.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  1717  was
the  successor  or  the  outcome  of  an  old  and  different  association.  It
brought  into  its  organization  the  relics  of  that  old  association,  nor
was  it  prepared  in  its  inchoate  condition  to  cast  aside  all  the  usages
and  habits  of  that  ancient  body.

Hence  the  first  laws  enacted  by  the  Speculative  Grand  Lodge

SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY  IN  ENGLAND

919

were  borrowed  from  and  founded  on  the  manuscript  Constitutions
of  the  Operative  Freemasons.

But  the  inapplicability  of  such  a system  of  government  to  the
new  organization  was  very  soon  discovered.

Two  years  afterward  Payne,  untiring  in  his  efforts  to  perfect  the
institution,  which  had  honored  him  twice  with  its  highest  office,  com-
piled a new  code  which  was  perfectly  applicable  to  a Speculative  so-
ciety.

This  new  code,  under  the  title  of  the  "General  Regulations,"
was  compiled  by  Payne  in  1720,  and  having  been  approved  by  the
Grand  Lodge  in  1721,  was  inserted  in  the  first  edition  of  the  Book
of  Constitutions,  published  in  1723.

Anderson  says  that  he  "has  compared  them  with  and  reduced
them  to  the  ancient  records  and  immemorial  usages  of  the  Frater-
nity, and  digested  them  into  this  new  method  with  several  proper
explications  for  the  use  of  the  lodges  in  and  about  London  and
Westminster.1

There  certainly  is  some  evidence  of  the  handiwork  of  Anderson
in  some  interpolations  which  must  have  been  of  a later  date  than
that  of  the  original  compilation.2  But  as  a body  of  law,  it  must  be
considered  as  the  work  of  Payne.

This  code  has  ever  since  remained  as  the  groundwork  or  basis

of  the  system  of  Masonic  jurisprudence.  Very  few  modifications
have  ever  been  made  in  its  principles.  Additional  laws  have  been
since  enacted,  not  only  by  the  mother  Grand  Lodge,  but  by  those

which  have  emanated  from  it,  but  the  spirit  of  the  original  code  has
always  been  respected  and  preserved.  In  fact,  it  has  been  regarded
almost  in  the  light  of  a set  of  landmarks,  whose  sanctity  could  not
legally  be  violated.

George  Payne,  the  second  and  fourth  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England,  is  therefore  justly  entitled  to  the  distinguished

reputation  of  being  the  lawgiver  of  modem  Freemasonry.

If  we  compare  the  Charges  adopted  in  1718  with  the  Regulations
approved  in  1721,  we  will  be  struck  with  the  great  change  that

1 Title  prefixed  to  the  General  Regulations,  in  1st  edition  of  "Book  of  Constitutions,"
p.  58.

2 This  subject  will  be  more  fully  discussed,  and  some  of  these  interpolations  will  be
pointed  out,  when  we  come,  in  a future  chapter,  to  the  consideration  of  the  fabrication  of
the  degrees.

920

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

must  have  taken  place  in  the  constitution  and  character  of  a society
that  thus  necessitated  so  important  a modification  in  its  principles
of  government.

The  "Charges"  were,  as  has  already  been  shown,  applicable  to  an
association  in  which  the  Operative  element  preponderated.  The  Reg-
ulations are  appropriate  to  one  wholly  Speculative  in  its  design,  and
from  which  the  Operative  element  has  been  thoroughly  eliminated.

The  adoption  of  the  Regulations  in  1721  was  therefore  an  irre-
futable proof  that  at  that  period  the  Grand  Lodge  and  the  lodges
under  its  jurisdiction  had  entirely  severed  all  connection  with  Oper-
ative Freemasonry.

We  may,  indeed,  make  this  the  epoch  to  which  we  are  to  assign
the  real  birth  of  pure  Speculative  Freemasonry  in  England.

There  were,  however,  many  lodges  outside  of  the  London  limit
which  still  preserved  the  Operative  character,  and  many  years
elapsed  before  the  Speculative  system  was  universally  disseminated

throughout  the  kingdom.

The  minutes  of  a few  of  them  have  been  preserved  or  recovered
after  having  been  lost,  and  they  exhibit  for  the  most  part,  as  late  as
the  middle  of  the  18th  century,  the  characteristics  which  distin-

guished all  English  Masonic  lodges  before  the  establishment  of
the  Grand  Lodge.  Their  membership  consisted  of  an  admixture  of
Operative  and  Theoretic  Masons.  But  the  business  of  the  lodge

was  directed  to  the  necessities  and  inclinations  of  the  former  class.

A common  feature  in  these  minutes  is  the  record  of  the  inden-

tures of  Apprentices  for  seven  years,  to  Master  Masons  who  were
members  of  the  lodge.

Speculative  Freemasonry,  which  took  rapid  growth  in  London
after  its  severance  from  the  Operative  lodges,  made  slower  progress
in  the  provinces.

Of  the  rapidity  of  growth  in  the  city  and  its  suburbs  we  have
very  satisfactory  evidence  in  the  increase  of  lodges  as  shown  in  the
official  lists  which  were  printed  at  occasional  periods.

Thus,  in  1717,  as  we  have  seen,  there  were  but  four  Lodges  en-
gaged in  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge.

These  were  the  only  Lodges  then  in  London.  At  least  no  evi-
dence has  ever  been  produced  that  there  were  any  others.  These
Were  all  original  Operative  lodges.

Anderson  says  that  "more  new  lodges  were  constituted"  in  1719.

SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY  IN  ENGLAND

921

If  he  had  been  accurate  in  the  use  of  his  language,  the  qualifying
adverb  "more"  would  indicate  that  "new  lodges"  had  also  been
constituted  the  year  before.

In  June,  1721,  twelve  lodges  were  represented  in  the  Grand
Lodge  by  their  Masters  and  Wardens,  showing,  if  there  were  no
absentees,  that  eight  new  lodges  had  been  added  to  the  Fraternity
since  1717.

In  September  of  the  same  year  Anderson  records  the  presence
of  the  representatives  of  sixteen  lodges.  Either  four  new  lodges
had  been  added  to  the  list  between  June  and  September,  or  what  is
more  likely,  some  were  absent  in  the  meeting  of  the  former  month.

In  March,  1722,  the  officers  of  twenty-four  lodges  are  recorded
as  being  present,  and  in  April,  1723,  the  number  had  increased  to
thirty.

But  the  number  of  lodges  stated  by  Anderson  to  have  been  rep-
resented at  the  Communications  of  the  Grand  Lodge  does  not  ap-
pear to  furnish  any  absolute  criterion  of  the  number  of  lodges  in
existence.  Thus,  while  the  records  show  that  in  April,  1723,  thirty
lodges  were  represented  in  the  Grand  Lodge,  the  names  of  the
Masters  and  Wardens  of  only  twenty  lodges  are  signed  to  the  ap-
probation of  the  Book  of  Constitutions,  which  is  appended  to  the
first  edition  of  that  work  published  in  the  same  year.

Bro.  Gould  calls  this  "the  first  List  of  Lodges  ever  printed,"1
but  I deem  it  unworthy  of  that  title,  if  by  a "List  of  Lodges"  is
meant  a roll  of  all  those  actually  in  existence  at  the  time.  Now,  if
this  were  a correct  list  of  the  lodges  which  were  on  the  roll  of  the
Grand  Lodge  at  the  time,  what  has  become  of  the  ten  necessary  to
make  up  the  number  of  thirty  which  are  reported  to  have  been  rep-
resented in  April,  1723,  besides  some  others  which  we  may  suppose
to  have  been  absent?

Anderson  did  not  think  it  worth  while  to  explain  the  incongruity,
but  from  1723  onward  we  have  no  further  difficulty  in  tracing  the
numerical  progress  of  the  lodges  and  incidentally  the  increase  in  the
number  of  members  of  the  Fraternity.

Engraved  lists  of  lodges  began  in  1723  to  be  published  by  au-
thority of  the  Grand  Lodge,  and  to  the  correctness  of  these  we  may
safely  trust,  as  showing  the  general  progress  of  the  Institution.

The  "Four  Old  Lodges,"  p.  2.

922

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

The  first  of  these  lists  is  "printed  for  and  sold  by  Eman  Bowen,
Engraver,  in  Aldersgate  St."  It  purports  to  be  a list  of  lodges  in
1723,  and  the  number  of  them  amounts  to  fifty-one.  In  1725  Pine,
who  was  in  some  way  connected,  it  is  supposed,  with  Bowen,  issued
a list  for  1725,  which  contains,  not  the  names,  for  the  lodges  at  that
time  had  no  names,  but  the  taverns  or  places  of  meeting  of  sixty-
four  lodges,  fifty-six  of  which  were  in  London  or  its  vicinity.

On  November  27,  1723,  the  Grand  Lodge  commenced  in  its
minute-book  an  official  list  of  the  lodges,  which  seems,  says  Bro.
Gould,  "to  have  been  continued  until  1729."  The  lodges  are  en-
tered, says  the  same  authority,  in  ledger  form,  two  lodges  to  a page,
and  beneath  them  appear  the  names  of  members.

This  list  contains  seventy-seven  lodges.  Supposing,  as  Gould
does,  that  the  list  extended  to  1729,  it  shows  an  increase  in  twelve
years  of  seventy-three  lodges,  without  counting  the  lodges  which  had
become  extinct  or  been  merged  into  other  lodges.

In  the  next  official  list  contained  in  the  minute-book  of  the
Grand  Lodge,  and  which  extends  to  1732,  the  number  of  lodges
enumerated  is  one  hundred  and  two,  or  an  increase  in  fifteen  years
of  ninety-eight  lodges,  again  leaving  out  the  extinct  ones.

These  examples  are  sufficient  to  show  the  steady  and  rapid
growth  of  the  society  during  the  period  of  its  infancy.

There  is,  however,  another  historical  point  which  demands  con-
sideration. At  what  time  did  the  formal  constitution  of  lodges
begin?

It  is  at  this  day  a settled  law  and  practice,  that  before  a lodge  of
Masons  can  take  its  position  as  one  of  the  constituent  members  of
a Grand  Lodge,  a certain  form  or  ceremony  must  be  undergone  by
which  it  acquires  all  its  legal  rights.  This  form  or  ceremony  is
called  its  Constitution,  and  the  authority  for  this  must  emanate  from
the  Grand  Lodge,  either  directly,  as  in  America,  or  indirectly,
through  the  Grand  Master,  as  in  England,  and  is  called  the  Warrant
or  Constitution.

The  Constitutions  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  which  are
in  force  at  the  present  day,  say:  "In  order  to  avoid  irregularities,
every  new  lodge  should  be  solemnly  constituted  by  the  Grand
Master  with  his  Deputy  and  Wardens."1

1 "Constitutions  of  the  Ancient  Fraternity  of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons,"  p.  124.

SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY  IN  ENGLAND

923

This  regulation  has  been  in  force  at  least  since  January,  1723,
the  very  words  of  the  clause  above  quoted  having  been  taken  from
the  form  of  constitution  practiced  by  the  Duke  of  Wharton,  who
was  Grand  Master  in  that  year,  and  which  form  is  appended  to  the
first  edition  of  the  Book  of  Constitutions.

Anderson  says  that  in  1719  "more  new  lodges  were  constituted;"1
and  Preston  states  that  at  the  meeting  of  the  Grand  Lodge  in  1717
a regulation  was  agreed  to  that  "every  lodge,  except  the  four  old
Lodges  at  this  time  existing,  should  be  legally  authorized  to  act  by  a
warrant  from  the  Grand  Master  for  the  time  being,  granted  to  cer-
tain individuals  by  petition,  with  the  consent  and  approbation  of  the
Grand  Lodge  in  communication;  and  that  without  such  warrant  no
lodge  should  be  hereafter  deemed  regular  or  constitutional."2

Now  I think  that  on  the  establishment  of  the  new  Grand
Lodge,  when  the  only  lodge  then  existing  in  London  had  united  in
the  enterprise  of  modifying  their  old  and  decaying  system,  and  of
renovating  and  strengthening  it  by  a closer  union,  it  may  be  fairly
conceded  that  the  members  must,  at  a very  early  period,  have  come
to  the  agreement  that  no  new  members  should  be  admitted  into  the
society  unless  consent  had  been  previously  obtained  for  their  admis-
sion. This  would  naturally  be  the  course  pursued  by  any  associa-
tion for  the  purpose  of  self-preservation  from  the  annoyance  of  un-
congenial companions.

If  any  number  of  craftsmen  availing  themselves  of  the  privilege
of  assembling  as  Masons  in  a lodge,  which  privilege  had  hitherto
been  unlimited  and,  as  Preston  says,  was  inherent  in  them  as  indi-
viduals, and  which  was  guaranteed  to  them  by  the  old  Operative
Constitutions,  there  is,  I think,  no  doubt  that  such  a lodge  would
not  have  been  admitted  into  the  new  Fraternity  in  consequence  of
this  spontaneous  and  automatic  formation.

The  new  society  would  not  recognize  it  as  a part  of  its  organiza-
tion, at  least  until  it  had  made  an  application  and  been  accepted  as
a co-partner  in  the  concern.

The  primitive  lodges  which  are  said  by  Anderson  to  have  been
"constituted"  between  the  years  1717  and  1723  mayor  may  not
have  originated  in  this  way.  There  is  no  record  one  way  or  the
other.

1 Anderson,  "Constitutions,"  2d  edition,  p.  no.  2 "Illustrations,"  p.  193.

924

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

But  it  is,  I think,  very  certain  that  the  present  method  of  con-
stituting lodges  was  not  adopted  until  a regulation  to  that  effect  was
enacted  in  1721.  This  regulation  is  found  among  those  which  were
compiled  by  Payne  in  1720,  and  approved  the  following  year  by  the
Grand  Lodge.

It  is  a part  of  the  eighth  regulation,  and  it  prescribes  that  "if  any
Set  or  Number  of  Masons  shall  take  upon  themselves  to  form  a lodge
without  the  Grand  Master's  warrant,  the  regular  lodges  are  not  to
countenance  them  nor  own  them  as  fair  brethren  and  duly  formed"
until  the  Grand  Master  "approve  of  them  by  his  warrant,  which
must  be  specified  to  the  other  lodges,  as  the  custom  is  when  a new
lodge  is  to  be  registered  in  the  list  of  lodges."

This  regulation  was  followed  in  1723  by  a form  or,  "manner
of  constituting  new  lodges,"  which  was  practiced  by  the  Duke  of
Wharton  when  Grand  Master,  and  which  was  probably  composed
for  him  by  Dr.  Desaguliers,  who  was  his  Deputy.

It  would  seem,  then,  that  new  lodges  were  not  constituted  by
warrant  until  the  year  1721,  the  date  of  the  Regulation,  nor  con-
stituted in  form  until  1723,  during  the  administration  of  the  Duke
of  Wharton.  Prior  to  that  time,  if  we  may  infer  from  the  phraseol-
ogy of  the  Regulation,  lodges  when  accepted  as  regular  were  said
to  be  "formed,"  and  were  registered  in  the  "List  of  Lodges."1

This  presumption  derives  plausibility  from  the  authentic  records
of  the  period.

In  the  earlier  "Lists  of  Lodges"  authoritatively  issued,  there  is
no  mention  of  the  date  of  Constitution  of  the  lodges.  In  all  the
later  lists  the  date  of  Constitution  is  given.  In  none  of  them,  how-
ever, is  there  a record  of  any  lodge  having  been  constituted  prior  to
the  year  1721.  Thus,  in  Pine's  list  for  1740,  engraved  by  order  of
the  Grand  Officers,  and  which  contains  the  names  and  numbers  of
one  hundred  and  eighty-one  lodges,  four  are  recorded  as  having
been  constituted  in  1721,  five  in  1722,  and  fourteen  in  1723.  No
lodge  is  recorded  there  as  having  been  constituted  between  the
years  1717  and  1721.

1 In  an  article  published  in  Mackey's  National  Freemason  in  1873  (vol.  ii..  p.  288),
Bro.  Hughan  has  said  "that  it  is  a fact  that  no  constituted  lodge  dates  at  an  earlier
period  than  the  Revival  of  Masonry,  1717."  I suspect  my  learned  brother  wrote  these
lines  currente  calamo,  and  without  his  usual  caution.  It  will  be  seen  from  the  text  that
there  is  no  record  of  any  constituted  lodge  dating  prior  to  1721.

SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY  IN  ENGLAND

925

It  is,  then,  very  clear  that  the  system  of  constituting  lodges  was
not  adopted  until  the  latter  year;  that  it  was  another  result  of  the
legal  labors  of  Payne  in  legislating  for  the  new  society,  and  another
and  an  important  step  in  the  disseverance  of  Speculative  from  Opera-
tive Freemasonry.

We  next  approach  the  important  and  highly  interesting  subject
of  the  early  ritual  of  the  new  institution.  But  this  will  demand  for
its  thorough  consideration  and  full  discussion  the  employment  of  a
distinct  chapter.

CHAPTER  XXXII

THE  EARLY  RITUAL  OF  SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY

HE  ritual  is  an  important  part  of  the  organization
of  Speculative  Freemasonry.  It  is  not  a mere
garment  intended  to  cover  the  institution  and
conceal  its  body  from  unlawful  inspection.  It
is  the  body  itself  and  the  very  life  of  the  institu-
tion. Eliminate  from  Freemasonry  all  vestiges
of  a ritual  and  you  make  it  a mere  lifeless  mass.
Its  characteristic  as  a benevolent  or  as  a social  association  might
continue,  but  all  its  pretensions  as  a speculative  system  of  science
and  philosophy  would  be  lost.

As  a definition  of  this  important  and  indispensable  element  in
the  Masonic  system,  it  may  be  said  that  the  ritual  is  properly  the
prescribed  method  of  administering  the  forms  of  initiation  into
the  society,  comprising  not  only  the  ceremonies  but  also  the  ex-
planatory lectures,  the  catechismal  tests,  and  the  methods  of  recog-
nition.

Every  secret  society,  that  is  to  say,  every  society  exclusive  in  its
character,  confining  itself  to  a particular  class  of  persons,  and
isolating  itself  by  its  occult  organization  from  other  associations  and
from  mankind  in  general,  must  necessarily  have  some  formal  mode
of  admission,  some  meaning  in  that  form  which  would  need  explana-
tion, and  some  method  by  which  its  members  could  maintain  their

exclusiveness.

Every  secret  society  must,  then,  from  the  necessity  of  its  organi-
zation, be  provided  with  some  sort  of  a ritual,  whether  it  be  simple  or

complex.

The  Operative  Freemasonry  of  the  Middle  Ages  is  acknowl-
edged to  have  been  a secret  and  exclusive  society  or  guild  of  archi-
tects and  builders,  who  concealed  the  secret  processes  of  their  art

from  all  who  were  not  workers  with  them.

As  a secret  association,  the  old  Operative  Freemasons  must  have

926

RITUAL  OF  SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY

927

possessed  a ritual.  And  we  have,  to  support  this  hypothesis,  not
only  logical  inference  but  unquestionable  historical  evidence.

German  archaeologists  have  given  us  the  examination  or  cate-
chism which  formed  a part  of  the  ritual  of  the  German  Steinmetzen
or  Stonecutters.

The  Sloane  MS.  No.  3329  contains  the  catechism  used  by  the

Operative  Freemasons  of  England  in  the  17th  century.  A copy  of
this  manuscript  has  already  been  given  in  a preceding  part1  of  the

present  work,  and  it  is  therefore  unnecessary  to  reproduce  it  here.

As  the  Sloane  MS.  has  been  assigned  to  a period  between  1640
and  1700,  we  may  safely  conclude  that  it  contains  the  ritual  then  in
use  among  the  English  Operative  Freemasons.  At  a later  period  it
may  have  suffered  considerable  changes,  but  we  infer  that  the  ritual

exposed  in  that  manuscript  was  the  foundation  of  the  one  which  was
in  use  by  the  Operative  lodges  which  united  in  the  formation  of

the  Grand  Lodge  in  the  year  1717.

If  the  new  society  did  not  hesitate  to  adopt,  at  first,  the  old  laws
of  the  Operative  institution,  it  is  not  at  all  probable  that  it  would
have  rejected  the  ritual  then  in  use  and  frame  a new  one.  Until  the
Grand  Lodge  was  securely  seated  in  power,  and  the  Operative  ele-
ment entirely  eliminated,  it  would  have  been  easier  to  use  the  old
Operative  ritual.  In  time,  as  the  Operative  laws  were  replaced  by
others  more  fitting  to  the  character  of  the  new  Order,  so  the  simple,
Operative  ritual  must  have  given  way  to  the  more  ornate  one
adapted  to  the  designs  of  Speculative  Freemasonry.

But  during  the  earlier  years  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  this  old  Oper-
ative ritual  continued  to  be  used  by  the  lodges  under  its  jurisdic-
tion.

The  precise  ritual  used  at  that  time  is  perhaps  irretrievably  lost,
so  that  we  have  no  direct,  authentic  account  of  the  forms  of  initia-
tion, yet  by  a careful  collation  of  the  historical  material  now  in
possession  of  the  Fraternity,  we  may  unravel  the  web,  to  all  appear-
ance hopelessly  entangled,  and  arrive  at  something  like  historic
truth.

It  was  not  until  1721  that  by  the  approval  of  the  "Charges"
which  had  been  compiled  the  year  before  by  Grand  Master  Payne,
the  Grand  Lodge  took  the  first  bold  and  decisive  step  toward  the

See  Part  II.,  chap,  xii.,  p.  626.

928

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

total  abolishment  of  the  Operative  element,  and  the  building  upon
its  ruins  a purely  Speculative  institution.

The  ritual  used  by  the  four  old  Lodges  must  have  been  very
simple.  It  probably  consisted  of  little  more  than  a brief  and  unim-
pressive ceremony  of  admission,  the  communication  of  certain
words  and  signs,  and  instruction  in  a catechism  derived  from  that
which  is  contained  in  the  Sloane  MS.  But  I do  not  doubt  that  this
catechism,  brief  as  it  is,  was  greatly  modified  and  abridged  by  the
lapse  of  time,  the  defects  of  memory,  and  the  impossibility  of  trans-
mitting oral  teachings  for  any  considerable  length  of  time.

It  is  probable  that  Dr.  Desaguliers,  the  great  ritualist  of  the  day,
may  have  begun  to  compose  the  new  ritual  about  the  same  time  that
Payne,  the  great  lawmaker  of  the  day,  began  to  compile  his  new
laws.

What  this  ritual  was  we  can  only  judge  by  inference,  by  com-
parison, and  by  careful  analysis,  just  as  Champollion  deciphered  the
Egyptian  hieroglyphics  by  a collation  of  the  three  inscriptions  of
the  Rosetta  Stone.

For  this  purpose  we  have  a very  competent  supply  of  docu-
ments which  we  may  employ  in  a similar  comparison  and  analysis  of
the  primitive  ritual  of  the  Speculative  Freemasons.

Thus  we  have  had  the  book  called  The  Grand  Mystery >,  which
was  published  just  a year  after  the  appearance  of  the  first  edition  of
Anderson's  Book  of  Constitutions.

Dr.  Oliver,  it  is  true,  calls  this  production  a "catchpenny."1  It
would  be  great  folly  to  assert  that  it  did  not  contain  some  shadow-
ing forth  of  what  was  the  ritual  at  the  time  of  its  publication.

When,  a few  years  afterward,  Samuel  Prichard  published  his  book
entitled  Masonry  Dissected,  which  is  evidently  based  on  The  Grand
Mystery,  and  in  fact  an  enlargement  of  it,  showing  the  improve-
ments and  developments  which  had  taken  place  in  the  ritual,  Dr.

1 "Revelations  of  a Square,"  chap,  ii.,  note  6.  But  in  a posthumous  work  entitled

"The  Discrepancies  of  Freemasonry,"  published  by  Hogg  & Co.  in  1874  (page  79),  he

treats  it  with  more  respect,  and  says  that  it  was  the  examination  or  lecture  used  by  the
Craft  in  the  17th  century,  the  original  of  which,  in  the  handwriting  of  Elias  Ashmole,  was
given  to  Anderson  when  he  made  his  collections  for  the  history  contained  in  the  "Book  of
Constitutions."  All  this  is  very  possibly  correct,  but  as  Oliver  must  have  derived  his  in-
formation from  some  traditional  source  in  his  own  possession  solely,  and  as  he  has  cited
no  authentic  authority,  we  can  hardly  make  use  of  it  as  an  historical  fact.

RITUAL  OF  SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY

929

Anderson  replied  to  it  in  the  pamphlet  entitled  A Defense  of  Ma-
sonry.

In  this  work  it  will  be  remarked  that  Anderson  does  not  di-
rectly deny  the  accuracy  of  Prichard's  formulas;  but  only  attempts  to
prove,  which  he  does  very  successfully,  that  the  ceremonies  as  they
are  described  by  Prichard  were  neither  "absurd  nor  pernicious."

The  truth  is  that  Anderson's  Defense  is  a very  learned  and  in-
teresting interpretation  of  the  symbols  and  ceremonies  which  were
described  by  Prichard,  and  might  have  been  written,  just  in  the
same  way,  if  Anderson  had  selected  the  ritual  as  it  was  then  framed
on  which  to  found  his  commentaries.

Krause  accepted  both  of  these  works,  as  he  gave  them  a place  in
his  great  work  on  The  Three  Oldest  Documents  of  the  Masonic
Brotherhood.

For  myself,  I am  disposed  to  take  these  and  similar  productions
with  some  grains  of  allowance,  yet  not  altogether  rejecting  them  as
utterly  worthless.  From  such  works  we  may  obtain  many  valuable
suggestions,  when  they  are  properly  and  judiciously  analyzed.

Krause  thinks  that  The  Grand  Mystery > was  the  production  of
one  of  the  old  Masons,  who  was  an  Operative  builder  and  a man
not  without  some  learning.

This  is  probably  a correct  supposition.  At  all  events,  I am  will-
ing to  take  the  work  as  a correct  exposition,  substantially,  of  the
condition  of  the  ritual  at  the  time  when  it  was  published,  which  was
seven  years  after  what  was  called  the  "Revival"  in  London.

It  will  give  us  a very  correct  idea  of  the  earliest  ritual  accepted
by  the  Speculative  Masons  from  their  Operative  brethren,  and  used
until  the  genius  of  Desaguliers  had  invented  something  more  worthy
of  the  Speculative  science.

Adopting  it  then  as  the  very  nearest  approximation  to  the  prim-
itive ritual  of  the  Speculative  Freemasons,  it  will  not  be  an  unac-
ceptable gift,  nor  useless  in  prosecuting  the  discussion  of  the  subject
to  which  this  chapter  is  devoted.

It  has  not  often  been  reprinted,  and  the  original  edition  of  1724
is  very  scarce.  I shall  make  use  of  the  almost  fac-simile  imitation
of  that  edition  printed  in  1867  by  the  Masonic  Archaeological
Society  of  Cincinnati,  and  under  the  supervision  of  Brother  Enoch
T.  Carson,  from  whose  valuable  library  the  original  exemplar  was
obtained.

930

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

The  title  of  the  pamphlet  is  as  follows:

" The  Grand  Mystery > of  Free-Masons  Discover  d.  Wherein
are  the  several  Questions,  put  to  them  at  their  Meetings  and  In-
stallations: As  also  the  Oath,  Health,  Signs  and  Points  to  know
each  other  by.  As  they  were  found  in  the  Custody  of  a Free-Mason
who  Dyed  suddenly.  And  now  Publish'd  for  the  Information  of
the  Publick.  London:  Printed  for  T.  Payne  near  Stationer’ s-Hall
1724.  {Price  Six  Pence)."

THE  CATECHISM.1

1.  Q.  Peace  be  here.

A.  I hope  there  is.

2.  Q.  What  a-clock  is  it?

A.  It  is  going  to  Six  or  going  to  Twelve.2

3.  Q.  Are  you  very  busy?3

A.  No.

4.  Q.  Will  you  give  or  take?

A.  Both;  or  which  you  please.

5.  Q.  How  go  Squares?4

A.  Straight.

6.  Q.  Are  you  Rich  or  Poor?

A.  Neither.

7.  Q.  Change  me  that.5

A.  I will.

1 The  object  of  this  reprint  being  only  to  give  the  reader  some  idea  of  what  was  the
earliest  form  of  the  ritual  that  we  possess,  the  Preface,  the  Free-Mason's  Oath,  A Free-
Mason's  Health  and  the  signs  to  know  a Free  Mason  have  been  omitted  as  being  unnec-
essary to  that  end.  The  questions  have  been  numbered  here  only  for  facility  of  reference
in  future  remarks.

2 This  may  be  supposed  to  refer  to  the  hours  of  labor  of  Operative  Masons  who  com-
menced work  at  six  in  the  morning  and  went  to  their  noon-meal  at  twelve.  This  is  the
first  indication  that  this  was  a catechism  originally  used  by  Operative  Free  Masons.

3 Otherwise,  "Have  you  any  work?"  Krause  suggests  that  it  was  the  question  ad-
dressed to  a traveling  Fellow  who  came  to  the  lodge.  "Every  Mason,"  say  the  Old
Constitutions,  "shall  receive  or  cherish  strange  Fellows  when  they  come  over  the  Country
and  sett  them  on  work." — Landsdowne  MS.

4 Halliwell,  in  his  Dictionary,  cites  "How  gang  squares?"  as  meaning  "How  do  you
do?"  He  also  says  that  "How  go  the  squares?"  means,  how  goes  on  the  game,  as
chess  or  draughts,  the  board  being  lull  of  squares.  Krause  adopts  this  latter  interpreta-
tion of  the  phrase,  but  I prefer  the  former.

5 Here  it  is  probable  that  the  grip  was  given  and  interchanged.  The  mutilation  of
this  catechism  which  Krause  suspects  is  here,  I think,  evident.  The  answer  "I  will"  and

RITUAL  OF  SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY

931

8.  Q.  In  the  name  of,  &C,1  are  you  a Mason?

9.  Q.  What  is  a Mason?

A.  A Man  begot  of  a Man,  bom  of  a woman,  Brother  to
a king.

10.  Q.  What  is  a Fellow?

A.  A Companion  of  a Prince.

11.  Q.  How  shall  1 know  that  you  are  a Free-Mason?

A.  By  Signs,  Tokens,  and  Points  of  my  Entry.

12.  Q.  Which  is  the  Point  of  your  Entry?

A.  1 hear2  and  conceal,  under  the  penalty  of  having  my
Throat  cut,  or  my  Tongue  pull'd  out  of  my  Head.

13.  Q.  Where  was  you  made  a Free-Mason?

A.  In  a just  and  perfect  Lodge.

14.  Q.  How  many  make  a Lodge?

A.  God  and  the  Square  with  five  or  seven  right  and  perfect
Masons,  on  the  highest  Mountains,  or  the  lowest  Val-
leys in  the  world.3

15.  Q.  Why  do  Odds  make  a Lodge?

A.  Because  all  Odds  are  Men's  Advantage.4

16.  Q.  What  Lodge  are  you  of?

A.  The  Lodge  of  St.  John.4*5

the  expression  "In  the  name  of,  &c.,"  are  connected  with  the  interchange  of  the  grip.

The  answer  to  the  question  "Are  you  a Mason?"  is  omitted,  and  then  the  catechism  goes
on  with  the  question  "What  is  a Mason?"

1 The  omission  here  can  not  be  supplied.  It  was  a part  of  the  formula  of  giving  the

grip.  Krause  suggests  that  the  words  thus  omitted  by  the  editor  of  the  catechism  might

be  "In  the  name  of  the  Pretender"  or  probably  "In  the  name  of  the  King  and  the  Holy
Roman  Catholic  Church."  But  the  former  explanation  would  give  the  catechism  too
modem  an  origin  and  the  latter  would  carry  it  too  far  back.  However,  that  would  suit
the  hypothesis  of  Dr.  Krause.  I reject  both,  but  can  not  supply  a substitute  unless  it

were  "In  the  name  of  God  and  the  Holy  Saint  John."

2 The  Sloane  MS.,  in  which  the  same  answer  occurs,  says,  "I  heal  and  conceal,"
to  heal  being  old  English  for  to  hide.  It  is  very  clear  that  the  word  hear  is  a typographi-
cal error.

3 Krause  thinks  that  in  this  answer  an  old  and  a new  ritual  are  mixed.  God  and  the

Square  he  assigns  to  the  former,  the  numbers  five  and  seven  to  the  latter.  But  the  Har-

leian  MS.  requires  five  to  make  a legal  lodge.

4 We  must  not  suppose  that  this  was  derived  from  the  Kabbalists.  The  doctrine  that
God  delights  in  odd  numbers,  "numero  Deus  impare  gaudet"  (Virgil,  Ed.  viii.),  is  as  old
as  the  oldest  of  the  ancient  mythologies.  It  is  the  foundation  of  all  the  numerical  sym-
bolism of  Speculative  Freemasonry.  We  here  see  that  it  was  observed  in  the  oldest  ritual.

5 This  hieroglyphic  appears  to  have  been  the  early  sign  for  a lodge,  as  the  oblong
square!  | is  at  the  present  day.

932

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

17.  Q.  How  does  it  stand?

A.  Perfect  East  and  West,  as  all  Temples  do.

18.  Q.  Where  is  the  Mason's  Point?1

A.  At  the  East-Window,  waiting  at  the  Rising  of  the  Sun,
to  set  his  men  at  work.

19.  Q.  Where  is  the  Warden's  Point?

A.  At  the  West-Window,  waiting  at  the  Setting  of  the  Sun
to  dismiss  the  Entered  Apprentices.

20.  Q.  Who  rules  and  governs  the  Lodge,  and  is  Master  of  it?

A.  Irah,  'i

.j.  L or  the  Right  Pillar.2
Iachin  J

21.  Q.  How  is  it  govern'd?

A.  Of  Square  and  Rule.

22.  Q.  Have  you  the  Key  of  the  Lodge?

A.  Yes,  I have.

23.  Q.  What  is  its  virtue?

A.  To  open  and  shut,  and  shut  and  open.

24.  Q.  Where  do  you  keep  it?

A.  In  an  Ivory  Box,  between  my  Tongue  and  my  Teeth,
or  within  my  Heart,  where  all  my  Secrets  are  kept.

25.  Q.  Have  you  the  Chain  to  the  Key?

A.  Yes,  I have.

26.  Q.  How  long  is  it?

A.  As  long  as  from  my  Tongue  to  my  Heart.3

1 I find  this  question  thus  printed  in  all  the  copies  to  which  I have  had  access.  But
I have  not  the  slightest  doubt  that  there  has  been  a typographical  error,  which  has  been
faithfully  copied.  I should  read  it  "Where  is  the  Master's  point?"  The  next  question
confirms  my  conviction.  The  Master  sets  the  Craft  to  work,  the  Warden  dismisses
them.  This  has  been  followed  by  the  modem  rituals.

2 Various  have  been  the  conjectures  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  word  Irah.  Schneider,
looking  to  the  theory  that  modem  Freemasonry  was  instituted  to  secure  the  restoration  of
the  House  of  Stuart,  supposes  the  letters  of  the  word  to  be  the  initials  of  the  Latin  sen-
tence "Iacobus  Redibit  Ad  Hereditatem"  — James  shall  return  to  his  inheritance.
Krause  thinks  it  the  anagram  of  Hiram,  and  he  rejects  another  supposition  that  it  is  the
Hebrew  Irah,  reverence  or  holy  fear,  i.e.,  the  fear  of  God.  It  may  mean  Hiram,  but
there  is  no  need  of  an  anagram.  The  wonted  corruption  of  proper  names  in  the  old  Ma-
sonic manuscripts  makes  Irah  a sufficiently  near  approximation  to  Hiram,  who  is  called
in  the  Old  Constitutions,  Aynon,  Aman,  Amon,  Anon,  or  Ajuon.  The  German  Steinmet-
zen  called  Tubal  Cain  Walcan.

3 Speaking  of  tests  like  this,  Dr.  Oliver  very  wisely  says:  "These  questions  may  be
considered  trivial,  but  in  reality  they  were  of  great  importance  and  included  some  of  the

RITUAL  OF  SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY

933

27.  Q.  How  many  precious  Jewels?

A.  Three;  a square  Asher,  a Diamond,  and  a Square.

28.  Q.  How  many  Lights?

A.  Three;  a Right  East,  South  and  West.1

29.  Q.  What  do  they  represent?

A.  The  Three  Persons:  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost.2

30.  Q.  How  many  Pillars?

A.  Two;  Iachin  and  Boaz.

31.  Q.  What  do  they  represent?

A.  A Strength  and  Stability  of  the  Church  in  all  Ages.3

32.  Q.  How  many  Angles  in  St.  John's  Lodge?

A.  Four  bordering  on  Squares.  +

33.  Q.  How  is  the  Meridian  foundout?

A.  When  the  Sun  leaves  the  South  and  breaks  in  at  the
West-End  of  the  Lodge.

34.  Q.  In  what  part  of  the  Temple  was  the  Lodge  kept?

A.  In  Solomon's  Porch,4  at  the  West-End  of  the  Temple,
where  the  two  Pillars  were  set  up.

35.  Q.  How  many  Steps  belong  to  a right  Mason?

A.  Three.

36.  Q.  Give  me  the  Solution.

A.  I will . . . The  Right  Worshipful,  Worshipful

Master  and  Worshipful  Fellows  of  the  Right  Wor-
shipful Lodge  from  whence  I came,  greet  you  well.

That  Great  God  to  us  greeting,  be  at  this  our  meet-

profoundest  mysteries  of  the  Craft.  ...  A single  Masonic  question,  how  puerile
soever  it  may  appear,  is  frequently  in  the  hands  of  an  expert  Master  of  the  Art,  the  de-
pository of  most  important  secrets."  On  "The  Masonic  Tests  of  the  Eighteenth  Century"
in  his  "Golden  Remains,"  vol.  iv.,  pp.  14,  15.

1 The  Bauhutten  or  Operative  lodges  of  the  Germans  probably  had,  says  Krause,
only  three  windows  corresponding  to  the  cardinal  points,  and  the  three  principal  officers  of
the  lodge  had  their  seats  near  them  so  as  to  obtain  the  best  light  for  their  labors.

2 This  is  ample  proof  that  the  earliest  Freemasonry  of  the  new  Grand  Lodge  was  dis-
tinctly Christian.  The  change  of  character  did  not  occur  until  the  adoption  of  the  "Old
Charges"  as  printed  in  Anderson's  first  edition.  But  more  of  this  in  the  text.

3 There  is  an  allusion  to  strength  in  the  German  Steinmetzen's  catechism:  "What  is
the  Strength  of  our  Craft?"  Strength  continued  to  be  symbolized  as  a Masonic  attribute
in  all  subsequent  rituals  and  so  continues  to  the  present  day.

4 An  allusion  to  the  Temple  of  Solomon  is  common  in  all  the  old  Constitutions.  But
no  hypothesis  can  be  deduced  from  this  of  the  Solomonic  origin  of  Freemasonry.  The
subject  is  too  important  to  be  discussed  in  a note.

934  HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

ing,  and  with  the  Right  Worshipful  Lodge  from
whence  you  came,  and  you  are.1

37.  Q.  Give  me  the  Jerusalem  Word.2

A.  Giblin.

38.  Q.  Give  me  the  Universal  Word.

A.  Boaz.

39.  Q.  Right  Brother  of  ours,  your  Name?

A.  N.  or  M.

Welcome  Brother  M.  or  N.  to  our  Society.

40.  Q.  How  many  particular  Points  pertain  to  a Free-Mason?

A.  Three;  Fraternity,  Fidelity,  and  Tacity.

41.  Q.  What  do  they  represent?

A.  Brotherly  Love,  Relief  and  Truth  among  all  Right  Ma-
sons; for  all  Masons  were  ordain'd  at  the  Building  of
the  Tower  of  Babel  and  at  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem.2

42.  Q.  How  many  proper  Points?

A.  Five:  Foot  to  Foot,  Knee  to  Knee,  Hand  to  Hand,
Heart  to  Heart,  and  Ear  to  Ear.4

43.  Q.  Whence  is  an  Arch  derived?

A.  From  Architecture.5

1 It  is  most  probable  that  this  answer  was  given  on  the  three  steps  which  were  made
while  the  words  were  being  said.

2 The  "Jerusalem  Word"  was  probably  the  word  traditionally  confined  to  the  Craft

while  they  were  working  at  the  Temple,  and  the  "Universal  Word"  was  that  used  by
them  when  they  dispersed  and  traveled  into  foreign  countries.  The  old  "Legend  of  the

Craft"  has  a tradition  to  that  effect  which  was  finally  developed  into  the  Temple  Alle-
gory of  the  modem  rituals.

3 Of  this  answer  Krause  gives  the  following  interpretation — "Perhaps  the  Tower  of
Babel  signifies  the  revolution  under  and  after  Cromwell,  and  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem  the
restoration  of  the  Stuart  family  in  London" — which  maybe  taken  for  what  it  is  worth  and
no  more,  especially  as  the  stories  of  the  Tower  and  the  Temple  formed  prominent  points
in  the  Craft  legend  which  was  formulated  some  two  centuries  at  least  before  the  time  of
Cromwell  or  of  the  restored  Stuarts.

4 At  first  glance  this  answer  would  seem  to  be  adverse  to  the  theory  that  the  Third

was  not  known  in  the  year  1717,  unless  it  were  to  be  supposed  that  the  passage  was  an
interpolation  made  subsequent  to  the  year  1720.  But  the  fact  is  that,  as  Krause  remarks,

these  expressions  were  not  originally  a symbol  of  the  Master's  degree  (Meisterzeichen),

but  simply  a symbol  of  Fellowship,  where  heart  and  heart  and  hand  and  hand  showed
the  loving-kindness  of  each  brother.  Afterward,  under  the  title  of  "The  Five  Points  of

Fellowship,"  it  was  appropriated  to  the  Third  Degree  and  received  the  symbolic  history
which  it  still  retains.

5 Here,  say  Schneider  and  Krause,  is  a trace  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry.  Not  so.  Archi-
tecture was  the  profession  of  the  Operative  Freemasons  and  became  naturally  a point  in
the  examination  of  a craftsman.  Such  as  this  catechism  evidently  was.

RITUAL  OF  SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY

935

44.  Q.  How  many  Orders  in  Architecture?

A.  Five:  The  Tuscan,  Doric,  Ionic,  Corinthian,  and  Com-
posite.

45.  Q.  What  do  they  answer?

A.  They  answer  to  the  Base,  Perpendicular,  Diameter,  Cir-
cumference, and  Square.

46.  Q.  What  is  the  right  Word,  or  right  Point  of  a Mason?

A.  Adieu.

End  of  the  Catechism.

Such  is  this  important  document,  but  of  whose  real  value  differ-
ent opinions  have  been  expressed.  Oliver,  as  we  have  seen,  calls  it  a
"catchpenny."  This  epithet  would,  however,  refer  to  the  motives
of  the  printer  who  gave  the  public  the  work  at  sixpence  a copy  and
not  to  the  original  writer  against  whom  no  such  charge,  nor  no  such
mercenary  views  should  be  imputed.  The  Rev.  Mr.  Sidebotham,
who  reprinted  it  in  the  Freemasons  Monthly  Magazine,  for  August,
1855,  from  a copy  found  among  the  collection  of  Masonic  curiosities
deposited  in  the  Bodleian  Library,  calls  it  "only  one  of  the  many
absurd  attempts  of  ignorant  pretenders;"  but  his  attempts  to  prove
absurdities  are  themselves  absurd.

The  learned  Mossdorf  who,  in  1808,  found  a copy  of  the  second
edition1  in  the  Royal  Library  at  Leipsic,  which  Dr.  Krause  re-
printed in  his  Three  Oldest  Documents  of  the  Masonic  Fraternity,
designates  it  as  a delicately  framed  but  very  bitter  satire  against  the
old  lodges  in  London,  which  had  just  established  the  Grand  Lodge.
But  a perusal  of  the  document  will  disclose  nothing  of  a satirical
character  in  the  document  itself,  and  only  a single  paragraph  of  the
preface  in  which  the  design  of  the  institution  is  underrated,  and  the
depreciation  illustrated  by  a rather  coarse  attempt  at  a witticism.

But  the  preface  was  the  production  of  the  editor  or  printer,
and  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  catechism,  which  is  free  from
anything  of  the  kind.  The  very  title,  which  might  be  deemed  ironi-
cal, was  undoubtedly  an  assumed  one  given  to  the  original  docu-
ment by  the  same  editor  or  printer  for  the  purpose  of  attracting
purchasers.

1 It  was  the  2d  edition,  1725,  with  which  Mossdorf  was  acquainted,  and  to  this  were
annexed  "Two  Letters  to  a Friend,"  which  are  not  contained  in  the  1st  edition.  These
gave  him  the  opinion  of  the  satirical  character  of  the  work.

936

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Bro.  Steinbrenner,  of  New  York,  who  has  written  one  of  our
most  valuable  and  interesting  histories  of  Freemasonry,1  thus  de-
scribes it,  and  has  given  it  what  I think  must  have  been  its  original
title.

"The  oldest  fragment  of  a ritual  or  Masonic  lecture  in  the

English  Language2  which  we  have  met  with  is  the  'Examination
upon  Entrance  into  a Lodge,'  as  used  at  the  time  of  the  Revival."

Dr.  Krause  is  the  first  writer  who  seems  to  have  estimated  this
old  catechism  at  anything  like  its  true  value.  He  calls  it  a remark-
able document,  and  says  that  after  a careful  examination  he  has

come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was  written  by  one  of  the  old  Oper-
ative Masons,  who  was  not  without  some  scholarship,  but  who
esteemed  Masonry  as  an  art  peculiarly  appropriate  to  builders  only,

and  into  which  a few  non-Masons  were  sometimes  admitted  on
account  of  their  scientific  attainments.

He  thinks  that  this  catechism  presents  the  traces  of  a high  antiq-
uity, and  so  far  as  its  essential  constituent  parts  are  concerned,  it
might  have  derived  its  origin  from  the  oldest  York  ritual,  probably
as  early  as  the  12th  or  13th  century.

I am  not  inclined  to  accept  all  of  the  Krausean  theory  on  the

subject  of  the  origin  or  of  the  antiquity  of  this  document.  It  is  not
necessary  for  the  purpose  of  employing  it  in  the  investigation  of  the
primitive  ritual  adopted  by  the  Speculative  Freemasons  when  they
organized  their  Grand  Lodge,  to  trace  its  existence  beyond  the  first
decade  of  the  18th  century,  though  it  might  be  reasonably  extended
much  farther  back.

The  statement  in  the  preface  or  introduction,  that  the  original
manuscript  was  printed,  and  had  "been  found  in  the  custody  of  a
Freemason  who  died  suddenly,"  may  be  accepted  as  a truth.
There  is  nothing  improbable  about  it,  and  there  is  no  reason  to
doubt  the  fact.

Connecting  this  with  the  date  of  the  publication,  which  was  just
seven  years  after  the  establishment  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  and  only
four  years  after  what  is  supposed  to  be  the  date  of  the  fabrication  of

1 "The  Origin  and  Early  History  of  Masonry,"  by  G.  W.  Steinbrenner,  Past  Master.
New  York,  1864.

2 When  Steinbrenner  wrote  the  above  the  Sloane  MS.  No.  3329  had  not  been  dis-
covered. And  yet  it  is  doubtful  whether  it  and  the  original  manuscript  of  "The  Grand
Mystery"  are  not  contemporaneous.

RITUAL  OF  SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY

937

the  three  degrees;  and  comparing  it  with  the  Sloane  MS.  3329,
where  we  shall  find  many  instances  of  parallel  or  analogous  passages;
and  seeing  that  the  Sloane  MS.  was  undeniably  an  Operative  ritual,
since  its  acknowledged  date  is  somewhere  between  the  middle  and  the
close  of  the  17th  century;  considering  all  these  points,  I think  that
we  may  safely  conclude  that  the  original  manuscript  of  the  printed
document  called  The  Grand  Mystery  was  the  "Examination  upon
Entrance  into  a Lodge"  of  Operative  Freemasons.

The  following  inferences  may  then  be  deduced  in  respect  to  the
character  of  this  document  with  the  utmost  plausibility:

1.  That  it  was  a part,  and  the  most  essential  part,  of  the  ritual

used  by  the  Operative  Freemasons  about  the  close  of  the  17th  and

the  beginning  of  the  18th  century,  and  if  anything  was  wanting
toward  a complete  ritual  it  was  supplemented  by  the  Sloane  MS.
No.  3329.

2.  That  it  was  the  ritual  familiar  to  the  four  Lodges  which  in
1717  united  in  the  establishment  of  the  Speculative  Grand  lodge  of
England.

3.  That  on  the  establishment  of  that  Grand  Lodge  it  was  ac-
cepted as  the  ritual  of  the  Speculative  Freemasons  and  so  used

by  them  until  they  perfected  the  transition  from  wholly  Operative  to
wholly  Speculative  Freemasonry  by  the  fabrication  of  degrees  and
the  development  of  a more  philosophical  ritual,  composed,  as  it  has
always  been  conjectured,  by  Desaguliers  and  Anderson,  but  princi-
pally always  by  the  former.

Having  premised  these  views,  we  may  now  proceed  to  investi-
gate, with  some  prospect  of  a satisfactory  result,  the  character  and
condition  of  Speculative  Freemasonry  so  far  as  respects  a ritual  dur-
ing the  earliest  years  of  the  Grand  Lodge.

In  the  first  place,  it  may  be  remarked  that  internal  evidence  goes
to  prove  that  this  catechism  is  appropriate  solely  for  Operative  Free-
masons. It  was  undoubtedly  constructed  at  a time  when  Specula-
tive Freemasonry,  in  the  modem  sense,  was  not  in  existence,  and
when  the  lodges  which  were  to  use  it  were  composed  of  Operatives,
the  Theoretic  members  not  being  at  all  taken  into  consideration.

This  is  very  clearly  shown  by  various  passages  in  the  catechism.
Thus,  Question  2 alludes  to  the  hours  of  labor;  Question  3 is  an  in-
quiry whether  the  brother  who  is  being  examined  is  in  want  of  work,
because  the  old  Operative  Constitutions  directed  the  Craft  "to

938

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

receive  or  cherish  strange  Fellows  when  they  came  over  the  country
and  set  them  to  work."  Hence,  in  view  of  this  hospitable  duty,  the
visitor  is  asked  if  he  is  busy,  that  is  to  say,  if  he  has  work  to  occupy
and  support  him.

Questions  18  and  19  make  reference  to  the  time  and  duty  of

setting  the  men  to  work,  and  of  dismissing  them  from  labor.

Questions  14  and  21  refer  to  the  square  and  rule  as  implements
of  Operative  Masonry  employed  in  the  lodge.  Question  27  speaks
of  the  ashlar,  and  43  and  44  of  the  orders  of  architecture.  All  of

these  are  subjects  appropriate  and  familiar  to  Operative  Masons,  and
indicate  the  character  of  the  catechism.

The  next  point  that  calls  for  attention  is  that  in  this  Opera-
tive ritual  there  is  not  the  slightest  reference  to  degrees.  They  are
not  mentioned  nor  alluded  to  as  if  any  such  system  existed.  The
examination  is  that  of  a Freemason,  but  there  is  no  indication  what-
ever to  show  that  he  was  a Master,  Fellow,  or  an  Apprentice.  He

could  not  probably  have  been  the  last,  because,  as  a general  rule,  Ap-
prentices were  not  allowed  to  travel.  The  German  Steinmetzen,
however,  sometimes  made  an  exception  to  this  regulation,  and  the
Master  who  had  no  work  for  his  Apprentice  would  furnish  him  with
a mark  and  send  him  forth  in  search  of  employment.

If  a similar  custom  prevailed  among  the  English  Freemasons,  of
which  there  is  no  proof  for  or  against,  the  wandering  Apprentice
would,  on  visiting  a strange  lodge,  doubtless  make  use  of  this  cate-
chism. There  is  nothing  in  its  text  to  prevent  him  from  doing  so,
for,  as  has  already  been  said,  there  is  no  mention  in  it  of  degrees.

There  does  not  seem  to  be  any  doubt  in  the  minds  of  the  most
distinguished  Masonic  scholars,  with  perhaps  a very  few  exceptions,
that  in  the  Operative  ritual  there  were  no  degrees,  the  words  Ap-
prentice, Fellow,  and  Master  referring  only  to  gradations  of  rank.
It  is  also  believed  that  the  ceremonies  of  admission  were  exceedingly
simple,  and  that  all  these  ranks  were  permitted  to  be  present  at  a
reception.

According  to  this  catechism  a lodge  consisted  of  five  or  seven
Masons,  but  it  does  not  say  that  they  must  be  all  Master  Masons.

The  Sloane  MS.  says  that  there  should  be  in  a lodge  two  Appren-
tices, two  Fellow-Crafts,  and  two  Master  Masons.

The  Statutes  of  the  Scottish  Masons  explicitly  require  the
presence  of  two  Apprentices  at  the  reception  of  a Master.

RITUAL  OF  SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY

939

The  Old  Constitutions,  while  they  have  charges  specially  for

Masters  and  Fellows,  between  whom  they  make  no  distinction,

have  other  "charges  in  general"  which,  of  course,  must  include  Ap-
prentices, and  in  these  they  are  commanded  to  keep  secret  "the
conseils  of  the  lodge,"  from  which  it  is  to  be  inferred  that  Appren-
tices formed  a constituent  part  of  that  body.

It  has  been  usual  to  say  that  from  1717  to  1725  there  were  only
Apprentices'  lodges.  The  phraseology  is  not  correct.  They  were
lodges  of  Freemasons,  and  they  so  continued  until  the  fabrication  of
a system  of  degrees.  After  that  period  the  lodges  might  properly
be  called  Apprentice  lodges,  because  the  first  degree  only  could  be
conferred  by  them,  though  Fellow-Craft  and  Master  Masons  were

among  their  members,  these  having  until  1725  been  made  in  the
Grand  Lodge  exclusively.

The  fact  that  this  ritual,  purposely  designed  for  Operative  Free-
masons only,  and  used  in  the  Operative  lodges  of  London  at  the  be-
ginning of  the  18th  century,  was  adopted  in  1717  when  the  four

Lodges  united  in  the  organization  of  a Grand  Lodge,  is,  I think,  a
convincing  proof  that  there  was  no  expressed  intention  at  that  time
to  abandon  the  Operative  character  of  the  institution,  and  to  assume

for  it  a purely  Speculative  condition.

I use  the  word  "expressed"  advisedly,  because  I do  not  contend
that  there  was  no  such  covert  intention  floating  in  the  minds  of  some
of  the  most  cultivated  Theoretic  Freemasons  who  united  with  their
Operative  brethren  in  the  organization.

But  these  Theoretic  brethren  were  men  of  sense.  They  fully

appreciated  the  expediency  of  the  motto,  festina  lente.  They  were,

it  is  true,  anxious  to  hasten  on  the  formation  of  an  intellectual

society,  based  historically  on  an  association  of  architects,  but  ethically
on  an  exalted  system  of  moral  philosophy;  they  perfectly  appreciated,
however,  the  impolicy  of  suddenly  and  rudely  disrupting  the  ties  which
connected  them  with  the  old  Operative  Freemasons.  Hence,  they
fairly  shared  with  these  the  offices  of  the  Grand  Lodge  until  1723,
after  which,  as  has  been  shown,  no  Operative  held  a prominent
position  in  that  body.  The  first  laws  which  they  adopted,  and
which  were  announced  in  the  "Charges  of  a Free  Mason,"  compiled
by  Payne  and  Anderson  about  1719,  had  all  the  features  of  an
Operative  Code,  and  the  ritual  of  the  Operative  Freemasons  em-
bodied in  the  document  satirically  called  The  Grand  Mystery >

940

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

was  accepted  and  used  by  the  members  of  the  Speculative  Grand
Lodge  until  the  fabrication  of  degrees  made  it  necessary  to  formu-
late another  and  more  philosophical  ritual.

But  it  is  not  necessary  to  conclude  that  when  the  system  of  de-
grees was  composed,  most  probably  in  1720  and  1721,  principally
by  Dr.  Desaguliers,  the  old  Operative  ritual  was  immediately  cast

aside.  In  all  probability  it  continued  to  be  used  in  the  lodges,
where  the  Fellow-Crafts  and  Masters'  degrees  were  unknown,  until
1725,  the  conferring  of  them  having  been  confined  to  the  Grand
Lodge  until  that  year.  There  were  even  Operative  lodges  in  Eng-
land long  after  that  date,  and  the  old  ritual  would  continue  with  them
a favorite.  This  will  account  for  the  publication  in  1724,  with  so
profitable  a sale  as  to  encourage  the  printing  of  a second  edition
with  appendices  in  1725.

But  the  newer  ritual  became  common  in  1730  or  a little  before,
and  the  able  defense  of  it  by  Anderson  in  the  1738  edition  of  the
Book  of  Constitutions  shows  that  the  old  had  at  length  been  dis-
placed, though  some  of  its  tests  remained  for  a long  time  in  use

among  the  Craft,  and  are  continued,  in  a modified  form,  even  to  the
present  day.

The  early  Operative  ritual,  like  the  Operative  laws  and  usages,

has  made  an  impression  on  the  Speculative  society  which  has  never
been  and  never  will  be  obliterated  while  Freemasonry  lasts.

The  next  feature  in  this  Operative  ritual  which  attracts  our

attention  is  its  well-defined  Christian  character.  This  is  shown  in

Question  29,  where  the  three  Lights  of  the  Lodge  are  said  to  repre-

sent "The  Three  Persons,  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost."

Originating  as  it  did,  and  for  a long  time  working  under  ecclesias-
tical control,  being  closely  connected  with  the  Church,  and  engaged

exclusively  in  the  construction  of  religious  edifices,  it  must  nat-

urally have  become  sectarian.

In  the  earliest  times,  when  the  Roman  Catholic  religion  was  the
prevailing  faith  of  Christendom,  Operative  Freemasonry  was  not

only  Christian  but  Roman  Catholic  in  its  tendencies.  Hence,  the

oldest  of  the  manuscript  Constitutions  contains  an  invocation  to
the  Virgin  Mary  and  to  the  Saints.  In  Germany  the  patrons  of  the
Freemasons  were  the  Four  Crowned  Martyrs.

But  when  in  England  the  Protestant  religion  displaced  the

Roman  Catholic,  then  the  Operative  Freemasons,  following  the  sec-

RITUAL  OF  SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY

941

tarian  tendencies  of  their  countrymen,  abandoned  the  reference  to
the  Virgin  and  to  the  Saints,  whose  worship  had  been  repudiated
by  the  reformed  religion,  and  invoked  only  the  three  Persons  of  the
Trinity.  The  Harleian  MS.  commences  thus:

"The  Almighty  Father  of  Heaven  with  the  Wisdom  of  the
Glorious  Sonne,  through  the  goodness  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  three
persons  in  one  Godhead,  bee  with  our  beginning  & give  us  grace  soe
to  goveme  our  Lives  that  we  may  come  to  his  blisse  that  never  shall
have  end."

All  the  other  manuscript  Constitutions  conform  to  this  formula,
and  hence  we  find  the  same  feature  presented  in  this  catechism,  and
that  in  the  ritual  used  when  the  Grand  Lodge  was  established  the
three  Lights  represented  the  three  Persons  of  the  Trinity.

Operative  Freemasonry  never  was  tolerant  nor  cosmopolitan.  It
was  in  the  beginning  ecclesiastical,  always  Christian,  and  always  sec-
tarian.

Of  all  the  differences  that  define  the  line  of  demarcation  be-
tween Operative  and  Speculative  Freemasonry,  this  is  the  most
prominent.

The  Theoretic  Freemasons,  that  is,  those  who  were  non-Masons,
when  they  united  with  their  Operative  fellow-members  in  the  organ-
ization of  a Grand  Lodge,  did  not  reject  this  sectarian  character  any
more  than  they  did  the  ritual  and  the  laws  of  the  old  association.

But  the  non-Masonic  or  non-Operative  element  of  the  new  Soci-
ety was  composed  of  men  of  education  and  of  liberal  views.  They

were  anxious  that  in  their  meetings  a spirit  of  toleration  should  pre-
vail and  that  no  angry  discussions  should  disturb  the  hours  devoted
to  innocent  recreation.  Moreover,  they  knew  that  the  attempt  to

revive  the  decaying  popularity  of  Freemasonry  and  to  extend  its  use-
fulness would  not  be  successful  unless  the  doors  were  thrown  widely
open  to  the  admission  of  moral  and  intellectual  men  of  all  shades  of
political  and  religious  thought.  Hence,  they  strove  to  exclude  dis-
cussions which  should  involve  the  bitterness  of  partisan  politics  or

of  sectarian  religion.

Dr.  Anderson  describes  the  effect  produced  by  this  liberality  of
sentiment  when  he  says,  speaking  of  this  early  period  of  Masonic
history:

"Ingenious  men  of  all  faculties  and  stations,  being  convinced
that  the  cement  of  the  lodge  was  love  and  friendship,  earnestly  re-

942

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

quested  to  be  made  Masons,  affecting  this  amicable  fraternity  more
than  other  societies  then  often  disturbed  by  warm  disputes."1

Thus  it  was  that  the  first  change  affected  in  the  character  of
the  institution  by  which  the  ultimate  separation  of  Speculative
from  Operative  Freemasons  was  foreshadowed,  was  the  modifica-
tion of  the  sectarian  feature  which  had  always  existed  in  the  latter.

Therefore,  in  1721,  the  Grand  Lodge,  "finding  fault"  with  the
"Old  Gothic  Constitutions"  or  the  laws  of  the  Operative  Free-
masons, principally,  as  the  result  shows,  on  account  of  their  secta-
rian character,  instructed  Dr.  Anderson  "to  digest  them  in  a new
and  better  method."

This  task  was  duly  accomplished,  and  the  "Charges  of  a Freema-
son," which  were  published  in  the  first  edition  of  the  Book  of  Con-
stitutions, announce  for  the  first  time  that  cosmopolitan  feature  in
the  religious  sentiments  of  the  Order  which  it  has  ever  since  re-
tained.

"Though  in  ancient  times,"  so  runs  the  first  of  these  "Charges,"
"Masons  were  charged  in  every  Country  to  be  of  the  religion  of
that  country  or  nation,  whatever  it  was;  yet  it  is  now  thought  more
expedient  only  to  oblige  them  to  that  religion  in  which  all  men
agree,  leaving  their  particular  opinions  to  themselves."

In  consequence  of  this  declaration  of  tolerance,  the  ritual  which
was  framed  after  the  old  Operative  one,  exemplified  in  The  Grand
Mystery,  ceased  to  derive  any  of  its  symbolism  from  purely  Chris-
tian dogmas,  though  it  can  not  be  denied  that  Christian  sentiments
have  naturally  had  an  influence  upon  Speculative  Freemasonry.

But  the  institution,  in  all  the  countries  into  which  it  has  since
extended,  has  always,  with  a very  few  anomalous  exceptions,  been
true  to  the  declaration  made  in  1721  by  its  founders,  and  has
erected  its  altars,  around  which  men  of  every  faith,  if  they  have  only
a trusting  belief  in  God  as  the  Grand  Architect  of  the  universe,
may  kneel  and  worship.

But  before  this  sentiment  of  perfect  toleration  could  be  fully
developed,  it  was  necessary  that  the  tenets,  the  usages,  and  the  in-
fluence of  the  Operative  element  should  be  wholly  eliminated  from
the  new  society.  The  progress  toward  this  disruption  of  the  two
systems,  the  old  and  the  new,  would  have  to  be  slow  and  gradual.

1 "Book  of  Constitutions,"  2d  edition,  p.  1 14.

RITUAL  OF  SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY

943

Very  justly  has  Bro.  Gould  remarked  that  "Speculative  Ma-
sonry was,  so  to  speak,  only  on  its  trial  during  the  generation  which
succeeded  the  authors  of  the  Revival.  The  institution  of  a society
of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons  on  a cosmopolitan  and  unsectarian
basis  was  one  thing;  its  consolidation,  however,  opposed  as  its  prac-
tical working  showed  it  to  be  to  the  ancient  customs  and  privileges
of  the  Operatives,  was  another  and  a very  different  affair."1

Therefore,  as  a matter  of  sheer  policy,  and  also  because  it  is
probable  that  no  intention  of  effecting  such  a change  had,  in  the
beginning,  entered  into  the  minds  of  the  future  founders  of  Specu-

lative Freemasonry,  it  was  deemed  necessary  to  continue  the  use  of
the  simple  ritual  which  had  so  long  been  familiar  to  the  Operatives,
and  it  was  accordingly  so  continued  to  be  used  until,  in  a few  years,
the  opportune  time  had  arrived  for  the  fabrication  of  a more  com-
plex one,  and  one  better  adapted  to  the  objects  of  a Speculative
society.

As  it  appears,  then,  to  be  clearly  evident  that  the  Operative  rit-
ual was  practiced  by  the  Grand  Lodge  from  1717  until  1721  or

1722,  and  for  a much  longer  period  by  many  of  the  lodges  under  its
jurisdiction,  it  is  proper  that  we  should  endeavor,  so  far  as  the  ma-
terials in  our  possession  will  permit,  to  describe  the  character  of
that  ritual.

Masonic  scholars  who  have  carefully  investigated  this  subject  do
not  now  express  any  doubt  that  the  rite  practiced  by  the  mediaeval
Freemasons  of  every  country,  and  which,  under  some  modifications,
was  used  by  the  Operative  Freemasons  when  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England  was  established,  was  a very  simple  one,  consisting  of  but
one  degree.

In  fact,  as  the  word  degree  literally  denotes  a step  in  progres-
sion, and  would  import  the  possible  existence  of  a higher  step  to
which  it  is  related,  it  would  seem  to  be  more  proper  to  say  that  the

Operative  rite  was  without  degrees,  and  consisted  of  a form  of  ad-

mission with  accompanying  esoteric  instructions,  all  of  which  were
of  the  simplest  nature.

Master,  Fellow,  and  Apprentice  were  terms  intended  to  desig-
nate the  different  ranks  of  the  Craftsmen,  which  ranks  were  wholly
unconnected  with  any  gradations  of  ritualistic  knowledge.

1 "The  Four  Old  Lodges,"  p.  33.

944

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Masters  were  those  who  superintended  the  labors  of  the  Craft,
or  were,  perhaps,  in  many  instances  the  employers  of  the  workmen
engaged  on  an  edifice.  Paley  suggests  that  they  were  probably
architects,  and  he  says  that  they  must  have  been  trained  in  one  and
the  same  school,  just  as  our  clergy  are  trained  in  the  universities,
and  were  either  sent  about  to  different  stations  or  were  attached  to
some  church  or  cathedral,  or  took  up  their  permanent  residence  in
certain  localities.1

This  description  is  very  suitable  to  the  most  flourishing  period
of  Gothic  architecture,  when  such  Craftsmen  as  William  of  Sens
or  Erwin  of  Steinbach  were  the  Masters  who  directed  the  construc-
tion of  those  noble  works  of  architecture  which  were  to  win  the
admiration  of  succeeding  ages.

But  in  the  17th  and  the  beginning  of  the  18th  century,  when
there  was  a decadence  in  the  old  science  of  Gothic  architecture,
every  Fellow  who  was  appointed  by  an  employer  or  selected  by  his
brethren  to  govern  a lodge  and  to  direct  the  works  of  the  Crafts-
men, became  by  that  appointment  or  selection  a Master  Mason.

We  know  that  this  usage  was  for  some  time  observed  by  the
Speculative  Freemasons,  for  in  the  form  of  constituting  a new  lodge
as  prescribed  in  1723  by  the  Duke  of  Wharton,  who  was  then  Grand
Master,  it  is  said  that  the  Master  who  is  to  be  installed,  "being  yet
among  the  Fellow-Craft,"  must  be  taken  from  among  them,  and  be
inducted  into  office  by  the  Grand  Master;  by  which  act  he  became
a Master  Mason,  and  not  by  the  reception  of  a degree;  and  the  in-
vestiture of  certain  additional  secrets.2

The  Fellows  were  workmen  who  had  served  an  apprenticeship
of  several  years,  and  had  at  length  acquired  a knowledge  of  the
trade.  They  constituted  the  great  body  of  the  Craft,  as  is  evident
from  the  constant  reference  to  them  in  the  Old  Constitutions.

The  Apprentices,  as  the  etymology  of  the  word  imports,  were
learners.  They  were  youths  who  were  bound  to  serve  their  Masters
for  a term  of  five  or  seven  years,  on  the  condition  that  the  Master
shall  instruct  them  in  the  trade,  that  at  the  expiration  of  their  term
of  service  they  might  be  admitted  into  the  rank  or  class  of  Fellows.

As  there  was  but  one  ceremony  of  admission  common  to  all

1 "Manual  of  Gothic  Architecture,"  p.  209.

2 See  the  form  in  the  1st  edition  of  Anderson,  p.  71 .

RITUAL  OF  SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY

945

classes  of  the  Craft,  it  follows  that  there  could  be  no  secrets  of  a
ritual  character  which  belonged  exclusively  to  either  of  the  three
classes,  and  that  whatever  was  known  to  Masters  and  Fellows  must
also  have  been  communicated  to  Apprentices;  and  this  is  very  evi-
dent from  the  well-known  fact  that  the  presence  of  members  of
each  class  was  necessary  to  the  legal  communications  of  a lodge.

The  Mason  Word  is  the  only  secret  spoken  of  in  the  minutes  of
the  Scotch  lodges,  but  the  German  and  English  rituals  show  that
there  were  other  words  and  methods  of  recognition  besides  an  ex-
amination which  constituted  the  esoteric  instructions  of  Operative
Masonry.

The  most  important  of  these  points  is,  however,  the  fact  that  at
the  time  of  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge  in  1717,  and  for  a
brief  period  afterward,  there  was  but  one  degree,  as  it  is  called,
which  was  known  to  the  Operatives,  and  that  for  a brief  period  of
three  or  four  years  this  simple  system  was  accepted  and  practiced  by
the  founders  of  Speculative  Freemasonry.

But  the  discussion  of  this  fact  involves  a thorough  investigation,
and  can  not  be  treated  at  the  close  of  a chapter.

The  inquiry,  so  far  as  it  has  advanced,  has,  I think,  satisfied  us
that  the  Operative  ritual  was  that  which  was  at  first  adopted  by
the  founders  of  Speculative  Freemasonry.

When,  afterward,  they  discarded  this  ritual  as  too  simple  and  as
unsuitable  to  their  designs,  they  were  obliged,  in  the  construction
of  their  new  system,  to  develop  new  degrees.

The  task,  therefore,  to  which  our  attention  must  now  be  di-
rected, is  first  to  demonstrate  that  the  primitive  ritual  accepted  in
1717  by  the  Speculatives  consisted  of  but  one  degree,  if  for  con-
venience I may  be  allowed  to  use  a word  not  strictly  and  grammati-
cally correct;  and,  secondly,  to  point  out  the  mode  in  which  and  the
period  when  a larger  ritual,  and  a system  of  degrees,  was  invented.

And  these  must  be  the  subjects  of  the  two  following  chapters.

CHAPTER  XXXIII

ONE  DEGREE  OF  OPERATIVE  FREEMASONS

N the  articles  of  union  agreed  to  in  1813  by  the
two  Grand  Lodges  of  England,  the  "Moderns"
and  the  "Ancients"  as  they  were  called,  it  was
declared  that  "pure  Ancient  Masonry  consists  of
three  degrees  and  no  more."  If  by  Ancient
Masonry  it  was  intended  to  designate  the  system
then  existing,  and  no  other  and  earlier  one —
if  the  character  of  antiquity  was  to  be  circumscribed  within  the  one
hundred  preceding  years,  or  thereabouts — then  the  declaration  might
be  accepted  as  an  historical  truth.  But  if  it  was  designed  to  refer
by  these  words  to  the  whole  period  of  time,  within  which  included
the  era  of  Operative,  and  of  combined  Operative  and  Speculative

Freemasonry,  as  well  as  that  later  one  when  pure  Speculative
Masonry  alone  prevailed,  then  the  assertion  must  be  considered  as
apocryphal  and  as  having  no  foundation  in  authentic  history.

If  our  judgment  on  this  subject  were  to  be  formed  merely  on  the
complete  silence  of  the  Old  Records,  we  should  be  forced  to  the  con-
clusion that  until  the  close  of  the  second  decade  of  the  18th  cen-
tury, or  about  the  year  1720,  when  the  Speculative  element  was

slowly  disintegrating  itself  from  the  Operative,  there  was  only  one
degree  known  as  the  word  is  understood  in  the  present  day.

We  have  evidence  that  the  Operative  Freemasons  of  Scotland  in
the  15th  century  adopted,  to  some  extent,  the  secret  ceremonies  ob-
served by  the  mediaeval  builders  of  the  continent.1  We  may  there-
fore refer  to  the  records  of  the  Scotch  lodges  for  a correct  knowl-
edge of  what  was  the  degree  system  practiced,  not  only  in  Scotland
but  on  the  continent,  at  that  period.

1 See  Lyon,  "History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  234.  This  is  evident  from

the  charter  granted  to  the  Masons  and  Wrights  of  Edinburgh  in  1475,  copied  by  Lyon  (p.
230)  from  the  Burgh  Records  of  Edinburgh,  where  reference  is  made  for  their  govern-
ment to  the  customs  "in  the  towne  of  Bruges."

THE

946

THE  ONE  DEGREE  OF  OPERATIVE  FREEMASONS

947

Now  we  have  abundant  evidence  by  deduction  from  the  records
of  the  old  Scottish  lodges  that  there  was  in  the  15th,  16th,  and  17th
centuries  only  one  degree  known  to  the  brotherhood.

There  were,  it  is  true,  three  classes  or  ranks  of  Masons,  namely,
Masters,  men  who  made  contracts  and  undertook  the  work  of  build-
ing for  employers;  Fellow-Crafts  or  Journeymen  employed  by  these
Masters;  and  Entered  Apprentices,  who  were  received  that  they
might  be  taught  the  art  of  building.  But  this  difference  of  rank  in-
volved no  difference  of  esoteric  instruction.  There  was  but  one
ceremony  and  one  set  of  secrets  for  all,  and  common  to  and  known
by  everyone,  from  the  youngest  Apprentice  to  the  oldest  Master.
This  is  plainly  deducible  from  all  the  Old  Records.

Thus,  in  the  Schaw  statutes,  whose  date  is  December  28,  1498,  it
is  enacted  as  follows:

"Item  that  na  maister  or  fellow  of  craft  be  ressavit  nor  admittit
without  the  number  of  sex  maisters  and  twa  enterit  prenteissis  the
wardene  of  that  lodge  being  one  of  the  said  sex."

The  same  regulation,  generally,  in  very  nearly  the  same  words,  is
to  be  found  in  subsequent  records,  constitutions,  and  minutes  of  the
16th  and  17th  centuries.

Now  what  deduction  must  be  drawn  from  the  oft-repeated
language  of  this  statute?  Certainly  only  this,  that  if  two  Appren-
tices were  required  to  be  present  at  the  reception  of  a Fellow-Craft
or  a Master,  there  could  have  been  no  secrets  to  be  communicated
to  the  candidates  as  Fellow-Crafts  or  Masters  which  were  not  al-
ready known  to  the  Apprentices.  In  other  words,  that  these  three

ranks  were  not  separated  and  distinguished  from  each  other  by  any
ceremonies  or  instructions  which  would  constitute  degrees  in  the

modem  acceptation  of  the  term.  In  fact,  there  could  have  been  but
one  degree  common  to  all.

Upon  this  subject  Bro.  Lyon  says:  "It  is  upon  Schaw's  regula-

tion anent  the  reception  of  Fellows  or  Masters,  that  we  found  our
opinion  that  in  primitive  times  there  were  no  secrets  communicated
by  lodges  to  either  Fellows  of  Craft  or  Masters  that  were  not

known  to  Apprentices,  seeing  that  members  of  the  latter  grade
were  necessary  to  the  legal  constitution  of  communications  for  the
admission  of  Masters  or  Fellows."1

'History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  23.

948

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

We  are  confirmed  in  this  conclusion  by  what  is  said  in  the  same
Old  Records  of  the  "Mason  Word."

The  Mason  Word  and  what  was  connected  with  it  appeared  to
constitute  the  only  secret  known  to  the  Masons  of  the  centuries

preceding  the  18th.  It  was,  however,  not  simply  a word,  but  had

other  mysteries  connected  with  it,  as  is  apparent  from  an  expression

in  the  minutes  of  the  Lodge  of  Dunblane,  where  it  is  said  that  two

Apprentices  of  the  Lodge  of  Kilwinning  being  examined  on  their

application  for  affiliation,  were  found  to  have  "a  competent  knowl-
edge of  the  secrets  of  the  Mason  Word."1

These  secrets  consisted  also  probably  of  a sign  and  grip.  In-
deed, the  records  of  Haughfort  Lodge  in  1707  state  the  fact  that

there  was  a grip,  and  it  is  known  that  as  early  as  the  12th  century
the  German  Masons  used  all  these  modes  of  recognition.2

There  was  also  a Legend  or  Allegory,  nothing,  however,  like  the
modem  legend  of  the  Third  degree,  which  connected  the  Craft  tra-
ditionally with  the  Tower  of  Babel  and  the  Temple  of  Solomon.

This  Legend  was  contained  in  what  we  now  call  the  Legend  of  the
Craft  or  the  Legend  of  the  Guild.  This  is  contained,  with  only
verbal  variations,  in  all  the  old  manuscript  Constitutions.  That  this
Legend  was  always  deemed  a part  of  the  secrets  of  the  brotherhood,
is  very  evident  from  the  destruction  of  many  of  those  manuscripts
by  scrupulous  Masons  in  1720,  from  the  fear,  as  Anderson  expresses
it,  that  they  might  fall  into  strange  hands.

But  whatever  were  the  secrets  connected  with  the  "Mason
Word,"  there  is  abundant  evidence  that  they  were  communicated  in
full  to  the  Apprentice  on  his  initiation.

First,  we  have  the  evidence  of  the  Schaw  statutes  that  two  Ap-
prentices were  required  to  be  present  at  the  reception  of  a Mason  or
a Fellow-Craft.  Then  the  minutes  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh  for
1601,  1606,  and  1637,  referred  to  by  Bro.  Lyon,3  show  that  Ap-
prentices were  present  during  the  making  of  Fellow-Crafts.  Again,
we  find  the  following  conclusive  testimony  in  the  Laws  and  Statutes
of  the  Lodge  of  Aberdeen,  adopted  December  27,  1760:

1 "History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  417.

2 The  English  Masons  in  the  beginning  of  the  1 8th  century,  and  I suppose  before  that
penod,  had  two  words,  the  ’'Jerusalem  Word"  and  the  "Universal  Word."  See  the  Ex-
amination in  the  last  chapter.  The  German  Masons  also  had  two  words,  at  least.

3 "History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  74.

THE  ONE  DEGREE  OF  OPERATIVE  FREEMASONS

949

"Wee  Master  Masons  and  Entered  Prentises,  all  of  us  under-
seryvers,  doe  here  protest  and  vowe  as  hitherto  we  ehave  done  at  our
entrie  when  we  received  the  benefit  of  the  Mason  Word,"  &C.1

From  all  of  which  we  are  authorized  to  entertain  the  opinion,  in
the  language  of  Bro.  Lyon,  who  has  thoroughly  investigated  the  sub-
ject, so  far  at  least  as  relates  to  Scotland,  "that  'the  Word'  and
other  secrets  peculiar  to  Masons  were  communicated  to  Apprentices
on  their  admission  to  the  lodge,  and  that  the  ceremony  of  passing
was  simply  a testing  of  the  candidate's  fitness  for  employment  as  a
journeyman."2

In  the  English  lodges  of  the  same  period,  that  is,  up  to  the  be-
ginning of  the  18th  century,  we  find  no  indications  of  the  existence
of  more  than  one  degree  common  to  the  whole  Craft.  The  Ap-
prentices, however,  do  not  occupy  in  the  old  English  Constitutions
so  conspicuous  a place  as  they  do  in  the  Scotch.  We  can,  for  in-
stance, find  no  regulation  like  that  in  the  Schaw  statutes  which  re-
quires Apprentices  to  be  present  at  the  making  of  Fellow-Crafts.

But  in  the  oldest  of  the  English  Constitutions  which  have  been
unearthed  by  the  labors  of  Masonic  archaeologists — namely,  the  one
known  as  the  Halliwell  MS.,  the  date  of  which  is  supposed  to  be
not  later  than  the  middle  of  the  15th  century — we  find  indications
of  the  fact  that  the  Apprentices  were  in  possession  of  all  the  secret
knowledge  possessed  by  the  Masters  and  Fellows,  and  that  they
were  allowed  to  be  present  at  meetings  of  the  lodge.  Thus,  the
thirteenth  article  of  that  early  Constitution  says:

" — gef  that  the  mayster  a prentes  have
Enterlyche  thenne  that  he  hym  teche,

And  meserable  poyntes  that  he  hym  reche.

That  he  the  crafte  abelyche  may  conne,

Whersever  he  go  undur  the  sonne."3

That  is,  if  a Master  have  an  Apprentice,  he  shall  give  him
thorough  instruction,  and  place  him  in  the  possession  of  such  points
as  will  enable  him  to  recognize  the  members  of  the  Craft  wheresoever
he  may  go.  He  was  to  be  invested  with  the  modes  of  recognition
common  to  all,  whereby  a mutual  intercourse  might  be  held.  It

1 "History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  423.

2 Ibid.,  p.  233.

3 Halliwell  MS.,  lines  240-244.

950

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

was  not  that  he  was  to  know  just  enough  to  prove  himself  to  be  an
Apprentice,  but  he  was  to  have  such  knowledge  as  would  enable
him  to  recognize  in  a stranger  a Fellow-Craft  or  a Master — in  other
words,  he  was  to  have  all  that  they  had,  in  the  way  of  recognition.

But  a more  important  admission,  namely,  that  the  Apprentice
was  permitted  to  be  present  at  the  meetings  of  a lodge  of  Masters
and  Fellows,  and  to  participate  in,  or  at  least  be  a witness  of,  their
private  transactions,  is  found  in  the  third  point  of  this  same  Con-
stitution, which  is  in  the  following  words:

"The  thrydee  poynt  must  be  severele,

With  the  prentes  knowe  hyt  wele,

Hys  mayster  cownsel  he  kepe  and  close.

And  hys  fellowes  by  hys  goode  purpose;

The  prevystye  of  the  chamber  telle  he  no  mon,

Ny  yn  the  logge  whatsever  they  done;

Whatsever  thon  heryst  or  eyste  hem  do
Telle  hyt  no  mon,  whersever  thou  go;

The  cownsel  of  halle  and  yeke  of  boure,

Kepe  hyt  wel  to  gret  honoure.

Lest  hyt  wolde  tome  thyself  to  blame.

And  brynge  the  craft  ynto  gret  schame."1

That  is,  the  Apprentice  was  directed  to  keep  the  counsel  of
his  Master  and  Fellows,  and  to  tell  to  no  one  the  secrets  of  the

chamber  nor  what  he  should  see  or  hear  done  in  the  lodge.2

He  was  to  keep  the  counsel  of  "hall  and  bower,"  a mediaeval
phrase  denoting  all  sorts  of  secrets,  and  all  this  he  was  to  observe
lest  he  should  bring  the  Craft  into  shame.

Now  I do  not  think  we  need  anything  more  explicit  to  prove

that  Apprentices  were  admitted  to  share  the  secrets  of  the  Fellows
and  be  present  at  the  meetings  of  the  lodge,  all  of  which  is  a con-
clusive evidence  against  the  existence  of  separate  degrees,

The  same  reference  to  Apprentices  as  being  in  possession  of
the  secrets  of  the  Craft,  which  they  were  not  to  communicate  un-

lawfully, is  found  in  subsequent  Constitutions,  as  late  as  1693.  In
the  York  Constitutions,  first  published  by  Bro.  Hughan  in  his

History  of  Freemasonry’  in  York,  under  the  title  of  "The  Ap-

1 Halliwell  MS.,  lines  275-286.

2 Similar  to  this  is  "The  Apprentice  Charge"  contained  in  the  Lodge  of  Hope  MS.,
the  date  of  which  is  1680.  It  says  that  the  Apprentice  "shall  keep  counsell  in  all  things
spoken  in  lodge  or  chamber  by  fellowes  or  free  masons."

THE  ONE  DEGREE  OF  OPERATIVE  FREEMASONS

951

prentice  Charge,"  it  is  said  that  "he  shall  keepe  councell  in  all

things  spoken  in  Lodg  or  Chamber  by  any  Masons,  Fellowes  or

Fremasons."

The  Masonic  student,  while  carefully  perusing  the  Old  Records
of  the  English  Masons  and  comparing  them  with  those  of  the
Scotch,  will  be  struck  with  one  important  difference  between  them.
In  the  Scotch  Statutes,  Constitutions,  and  Minutes,  the  Apprentices

assume  a prominent  position,  and  are  always  spoken  of  as  a com-
ponent and  necessary  part  of  the  brotherhood.

Thus,  the  Schaw  statutes  prescribe  the  fee  for  the  admission
of  Fellow-Crafts,  followed  immediately  by  another  prescribing  the
fee  for  the  admission  of  Apprentices;  twice  in  the  minutes  of  the
Lodge  of  Edinburgh  (1706  and  1709)  it  is  recorded  that  a notary
who  was  appointed  for  the  purpose  of  acting  as  "clerk  to  the
brethren  masons"  was  initiated  as  "ane  entered  Apprentice  and

Fellow-Craft,"1  and  lastly,  Apprentices  were  required  to  be  present
at  the  admission  of  Fellow-Crafts  and  Masters.

I think,  therefore,  that  the  most  eminent  Masonic  historians  of

the  present  day  have  been  justified  in  the  conclusion  to  which  they
have  arrived  after  a careful  examination  of  old  documents,  that  until
a short  time  after  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge  in  the  year
1717,  there  is  no  evidence  of  the  existence  of  more  than  one  degree;
that  all  the  secrets  were  communicated  to  the  Apprentices,  and  that
the  ceremony  of  passing  to  a Fellow-Craft  was  simply  a testing  of
the  candidate's  fitness  for  employment  as  a journeyman.2

Bro.  Hughan  says  that  "no  record  prior  to  the  second  decade
of  the  last  century  ever  mentions  Masonic  degrees,  and  all  the

MSS.  preserved  decidedly  confirm  us  in  the  belief  that  in  the  mere
Operative  (although  partly  Speculative)  career  of  Freemasonry  the
ceremony  of  reception  was  of  a most  unpretentious  and  simple
character,  mainly  for  the  communication  of  certain  lyrics  and  se-

crets, and  for  the  conservation  of  ancient  customs  of  the  Craft."3

In  another  place  the  same  distinguished  writer  says:  "I  have

carefully  perused  all  the  known  Masonic  MSS.  from  the  14th  cen-
tury down  to  A.D.  1717  (of  which  I have  either  seen  the  originals  or

1 Lyon,  "History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  43.

2 Such  is  the  opinion  of  Bro.  Lyon.  See  "History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  233.

3 Voice  of  Masonry,  vol.  xii.,  June,  1874,  p.  340.

952

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

have  certified  copies),  and  have  not  been  able  to  find  any  reference
to  three  degrees."1

Bro.  Findel  says:  "Originally  it  seems  there  was  but  one  de-
gree of  initiation  in  the  year  1717;  the  degrees  or  grades  of  Ap-
prentice, Fellow,  and  Master  were  introduced  about  the  year
1720."2

Bro.  Lyon,  also,  who  has  thoroughly  investigated  the  customs
of  the  early  Scottish  lodges,  in  referring  to  the  Schaw  statute,
which  required  two  Apprentices  to  be  present  at  the  admission  of
Fellows,  says  that  in  1693  "the  lodge  recognized  'passing,'  i.e.,  a
promotion  to  the  fellowship,  simply  as  an  'honour  and  dignity.'  "
And  he  adds:

"If  the  communication  by  Mason  Lodges  of  secret  words  or
signs  constituted  a degree — a term  of  modem  application  to  the
esoteric  observances  of  the  Masonic  body — then  there  was  under
the  purely  Operative  regime  only  one  known  to  Scotch  lodges,
viz.,  that  in  which,  under  an  oath,  Apprentices  obtained  a knowl-
edge of  the  Mason  Word  and  all  that  was  implied  in  the  ex-
pression."3

Even  Dr.  Oliver,  who,  of  all  writers,  is  the  least  skeptical  in
respect  to  Masonic  traditions,  acknowledges  that  there  is  no  evi-
dence of  the  existence  of  degrees  in  Freemasonry  anterior  to  the
beginning  of  the  1 8th  century.

The  only  living  Masonic  scholar  of  any  eminence  who,  so  far
as  I am  aware,  denies  or  doubts  this  fact  is  the  Rev.  Bro.  W.  A.
Woodford,  and  he  asserts  his  opinion  rather  negatively,  as  if  he
were  unwilling  to  doubt,  than  positively  as  if  he  were  ready  to
deny  the  fact,  that  the  old  Operative  system  consisted  of  but  one
degree.

As  Bro.  Woodford  is  one  whose  learning  and  experience
entitle  his  opinion  on  any  point  of  Masonic  history  to  a defer-
ential consideration,  it  will  be  proper  to  examine  the  weight  of  his
arguments  on  this  subject.

In  the  year  1874  Bro.  Hughan  proposed,  in  the  London  Free-
mason, to  defend  in  future  communications  three  historical  state-
ments against  anyone  who  should  oppugn  them.

1 Cited  by  Lyon  in  "History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  2 1 1 .

2 "History  of  Freemasonry,"  p.  150,  Lyon's  Translation.

3 Lyon,  "History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  23.

THE  ONE  DEGREE  OF  OPERATIVE  FREEMASONS

953

One  of  these  statements  was  made  in  the  following  words:

"The  references  to  Masonic  degrees  (as  we  understand  the
term  now)  never  occur  in  the  ancient  minutes;  no  rituals  of  de-
grees prior  to  1720  are  in  existence,  and  whatever  esoteric  customs
may  have  been  communicated  to  Craftsmen  before  the  last  century,
they  do  not  appear  to  have  necessitated  the  temporary  absence  of
either  class  of  members  from  the  Lodge."1

To  this  challenge  Bro.  Woodford  responded  in  a subsequent
number  of  the  same  paper.2

The  gist  of  our  learned  Brother's  argument  in  reply  appears
to  be  that  though,  as  Hughan  asserts,  there  may  be  no  ritual  evi-
dence of  the  existence  of  the  three  degrees  before  1720,  yet  "such
a proposition  need  not  be  understood  as  asserting  that  they  did
not  exist,  but  only  that,  so  far,  we  have  no  ritual  evidence  of  their
distinct  existence  as  now."

As  a logical  conclusion,  it  appears  to  me  that  such  a disposition
of  the  question  is  wholly  untenable.  It  was  an  excellent  maxim  of
the  schools,  which  has  been  adopted  in  philosophy,  in  physical
science,  and  in  law,  that  "of  things  which  do  not  appear  and  of
things  which  do  not  exist,  the  reasoning  is  the  same."3

We  can  only  arrive  at  a correct  judgment  when  we  are  guided
by  evidence;  without  it  no  judgment  can  be  reasonably  formed.

Dr.  Hedge,  in  his  excellent  manual  of  logic,  says:  "The  proof

that  the  Romans  once  possessed  Great  Britain  is  made  up  of  a
variety  of  independent  arguments:  as  immemorial  tradition;  the
testimony  of  historians;  the  ruins  of  Roman  buildings,  camps,  and
walls;  Roman  coins,  inscriptions,  and  the  like.  These  are  independ-
ent arguments;  but  they  all  conspire  to  establish  the  fact."4

Now,  if  we  apply  this  method  of  reasoning  to  the  question  of
the  existence  of  Masonic  degrees  prior  to  the  year  1720,  we  shall
see  clearly  how  completely  the  affirmative  proposition  is  without
support.  We  have  no  immemorial  tradition,  no  historical  testimony,
no  allusion  in  old  documents,  such  as  the  manuscript  Constitutions,

the  minutes  of  the  Scottish  or  of  the  very  few  English  lodges  that

are  extant,  nor  in  the  English  or  German  Freemasons,  which  tend

1 London  Freemason,  June  27,  1874.

2 Ibid.,  July  27,  1874.

3 De  non  apparentibus  et  de  non  existentibus,  eadem  est  ratio.

4 "Elements  of  Logic,"  by  Levi  Hedge,  LL.D.,  Boston,  1827,  p.  74.

954

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

to  prove  the  existence  of  degrees  in  the  old  system  of  Operative

Freemasonry.  On  the  contrary,  we  have  abundant  evidence  in  these
Constitutions  and  minutes  that  the  secrets  of  the  Craft  were  common
to  the  three  classes,  and  that  Apprentices  were  required  to  be  present
at  the  admission  of  Masters.

The  other  argument  of  Bro.  Woodford  is,  that,  "notwithstanding

the  Scotch  lodges  had  an  open  court  for  their  members,  that  does  not
preclude  the  possibility  of  the  existence  of  other  secrets  and  separate
degrees."

It  is  possible,  but  it  does  not  thence  follow  that  it  is  true.  In
this  investigation  we  seek  not  possibilities  but  facts,  and,  as  Bro.
Woodford,  usually  so  careful  and  so  accurate  in  his  historical  and
archaeological  inquiries,  has  supplied  no  proof  of  the  hypothesis
which  he  has  advanced,  it  must  be  accepted  as  a mere  assumption,

and  may  be  fairly  met  with  a contrary  one.

But  the  remarks  of  Bro.  Hughan  himself,  in  reply  to  the  argu-
ment of  Bro.  Woodford,  are  so  conclusive  and  throw  so  much  light
upon  this  interesting  subject  that  I can  not  refrain  from  enriching
the  pages  of  this  work  with  the  very  words  of  this  eminent  authority
in  Masonic  archaeology.1

"Now  what  do  the  old  lodge  minutes  say  on  this  subject?  We
have  had  authorized  excerpts  from  these  valuable  books  published
(with  few  exceptions).  The  whole  of  the  volumes  have  been  most
diligently  and  carefully  searched,  the  result  made  known,  and  every

Masonic  student  furnished  with  the  testimony  of  these  import-
ant witnesses,  all  of  which,  from  the  16th  century  to  the  first  half  of
the  second  decade  of  the  18th  century,  unite  in  proving  that  there  is
no  register  of  any  assembly  of  Masons  working  ceremonies  or  com-
municating 'secrets'  from  which  any  portion  of  the  Fraternity  was
excluded  or  denied  participation;  neither  can  there  be  found  a single
reference  in  these  lodge  minutes  to  justify  one  in  assuming  'three
degrees'  to  be  even  known  to  the  brethren  prior  to  A.D.  1716-1717. 2
Of  course,  there  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  what  may  be  termed  grades  in
Ancient  Masonry,  Apprentices  had  to  serve  their  'regular  time'  be-
fore being  accounted  Fellow-Crafts,  and  then  subsequently  the  office

1 Contained  in  article  in  the  London  Masonic  Magazine  for  August,  1874.

2 The  learned  Brother  makes  here  a rather  too  liberal  admission.  I have  found  no
evidence  of  the  existence  of  three  degrees  in  the  year  1717,  and  it  will  be  hereafter  seen
that  their  fabrication  is  assigned  to  a later  date.

THE  ONE  DEGREE  OF  OPERATIVE  FREEMASONS

955

or  position  of  Master  Mason  was  conferred  upon  a select  few;  but
no  word  is  ever  said  about  'degrees.'  All  the  members  were  evidently
eligible  to  attend  at  the  introduction  of  Fellow-Crafts  and  Master
Masons,  as  well  as  at  the  admission  of  Apprentices;  and  so  far  as
the  records  throw  light  on  the  customs  of  our  early  brethren,  the
Apprentices  were  as  welcome  at  the  election  and  reception  of  Mas-
ters— as  the  latter  were  required  to  participate  in  the  initiation  of
the  former.

"We  are  quite  willing  to  grant,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  that  a
word  may  have  been  whispered  in  the  ear  of  the  Master  of  the

lodge  (or  of  Master  Masons)  on  their  introduction  or  constitution
in  the  lodge;  but  supposing  that  such  were  the  case  (and  we  think
the  position  is  at  least  probable),  the  'three  degrees'  are  as  far  from
being  proved  as  before,  especially  as  we  have  never  yet  traced  any
intimation,  ever  so  slight,  of  a special  ceremony  at  the  'passing'  of
Fellow-Crafts,  peculiar  to  that  grade,  and  from  which  Apprentices
were  excluded.

"If  we  have  overlooked  such  a minute,  we  shall  be  only  too

glad  to  acknowledge  the  fact;  but  at  present  we  must  reiterate  our
conviction,  that  whatever  the  ceremonies  may  have  been  at  the

introduction  of  Fellow-Crafts  and  Master  Masons  anterior  to  the

last  century,  they  were  not  such  as  to  require  the  exclusion  of
Apprentices  from  the  lodge  meetings;  and  in  the  absence  of  any
positive  information  on  the  subject,  we  are  not  justified  in  assuming
the  existence  of  'three  degrees  of  Masonry'  at  that  period;  or,  in
other  words,  we  can  only  fairly  advocate  that  two  have  existed  of

which  we  have  evidence,  and  whatever  else  we  may  fancy  was

known,  should  only  be  advocated  on  the  grounds  of  probability.  If
the  proof  of  'three  degrees'  before  1717  is  to  rest  on  the  authority
of  the  Sloane  MS.  3329,  we  shall  be  glad  to  give  our  opinion  on
the  subject.

"With  all  respect,  then,  for  our  worthy  Brother,  the  Rev.  A.  F.
A.  Woodford,  whose  exertions  and  contributions  to  Masonic  liter-
ature have  been  continuous  and  most  valuable  for  many  years,  we

feel  bound  to  state  we  do  not  believe  according  to  the  evidences  ac-
cumulated that  the  'three  degrees  were  distinct  grades  in  the  Oper-
ative Order;  but  that  the  term  Apprentice,  Fellow-Craft,  and  Master

Mason  simply  denoted  Masonic,  relative,  or  official  positions.'  "

If,  then,  there  was  originally  but  one  degree,  the  one  into  which

956

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Freemasons  of  every  class  or  rank  were  initiated,  according  to  a very
simple  form,  upon  their  admission  to  the  Craft,  it  follows  that  the
degree  Fellow-Craft  and  Master  Mason  must  be  of  comparatively
recent  origin.  This  is  legitimately  a logical  conclusion  that  can
not,  I believe,  be  avoided.

And  if  so,  then  the  next  question  that  we  have  to  meet  and  dis-
cuss is  as  to  the  time  and  the  circumstances  of  the  fabrication  of
these  degrees.

CHAPTER  XXXIV

INVENTION  OF  THE  FELLOW-CRAFT'S  DEGREE

T having  been  satisfactorily  shown,  first,  that  dur-

ing the  existence  of  pure  Operative  Freema-
sonry there  was  but  one  degree,  or  ritual,  of  ad-
mission, or  system  of  secret  working  in  a lodge,
which  was  accessible  in  common  to  all  the  mem-
bers of  the  Craft,  Apprentices  as  well  as  Fellows
and  Masters;  secondly,  that  in  the  year  1717,
when  the  Speculative  element  began  to  assume  a hitherto  unknown
prominence,  though  it  did  not  at  once  attempt  to  dissever  the  con-
nection with  the  Operative,  the  Grand  Fodge  then  formed,  accepted,

and  practiced  for  some  time  this  system  of  a single  degree;  and
thirdly,  that  in  the  year  1723  we  have  the  authentic  documentary

evidence  of  the  "General  Regulations"  published  in  that  year,  that
two  degrees  had  been  superimposed  on  this  original  one,  and  that  at
that  time  Speculative  Freemasonry  consisted  of  three  degrees;  it
follows  as  a natural  inference,  that  in  the  interval  of  six  years,  be-
tween 1717  and  1723,  the  two  supplemental  degrees  must  have  been
invented  or  fabricated.

It  must  be  here  remarked,  parenthetically,  that  the  word  degree,
in  reference  to  the  system  practiced  by  the  Operative  Freemasons,  is
used  only  in  a conventional  sense,  and  for  the  sake  of  convenience.
To  say,  as  is  sometimes  carelessly  said,  that  the  Operative  Freema-

sons possessed  only  the  Apprentice's  degree,  is  to  speak  incorrectly.
The  system  practiced  by  the  Operatives  may  be  called  a degree,  if
you  choose,  but  it  was  not  peculiar  to  Apprentices  only,  but  belonged
in  common  to  all  the  ranks  or  classes  of  the  Fraternity.

When  the  Speculative  branch  wholly  separated  from  the  Opera-
tive, and  three  divisions  of  the  Order,  then  properly  called  degrees,
were  invented,  this  ritual  of  the  latter  became  the  basis  of  them  all.
Portions  of  it  were  greatly  modified  and  much  developed,  and  be-
came what  is  now  known  as  the  First  degree,  though  it  continued

957

958

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

for  many  years  to  receive  increments  by  the  invention  of  new  sym-
bols and  new  ceremonies,  and  by  sometimes  undergoing  important
changes.  Other  portions  of  it,  but  to  a less  extent,  were  incorpor-
ated into  the  two  supplemental  degrees,  the  Second  and  the  Third.

Thus  it  was  that  by  development  of  the  old  ritual,  and  by  the
invention  of  a new  one,  the  ancient  system,  or,  conventionally  speak-
ing, the  original  degree  of  the  Operatives,  became  the  Entered  Ap-
prentice's degree  of  the  Speculatives,  and  two  new  degrees,  one  for
the  Fellow-Crafts  and  one  for  the  Master  Masons,  were  invented.

Then  the  important  and  most  interesting  question  recurs,  When
and  by  whom  were  these  two  new  degrees  invented  and  introduced
into  the  modem  system  of  Speculative  Freemasonry?

The  answer  to  this  question  which,  at  this  day,  would  probably

be  given  by  nearly  all  the  Masonic  scholars  who  have,  without  pre-
conceived prejudices,  devoted  themselves  to  the  investigation  of  the
history  of  Freemasonry,  as  it  is  founded  on  and  demonstrated  by
the  evidence  of  authentic  documents,  combined  with  natural  and
logical  inferences  and  not  traditionary  legends  and  naked  assump-

tions, is  that  they  were  the  invention  of  that  recognized  ritualist,
Dr.  John  Theophilus  Desaguliers,  with  the  co-operation  of  Dr.
James  Anderson,  and  perhaps  a few  others,  among  whom  it  would
not  be  fair  to  omit  the  name  of  George  Payne.  The  time  of  this
invention  or  fabrication  would  be  placed  after  the  formation  of  the
Grand  Lodge  in  1717,  and  before  the  publication  of  the  first  edition
of  its  Book  of  Constitutions  in  1723.

To  the  time  and  manner  of  the  fabrication  of  the  Fellow-Craft's
degree  the  writers  who  have  adopted  the  theory  here  announced
have  not  paid  so  much  attention  as  they  have  to  that  of  the  Master
Mason.  Recognizing  the  fact  that  the  two  supplementary  degrees
were  fabricated  between  the  years  1717  and  1723,  they  have  not
sought  to  define  the  precise  date,  and  seem  to  have  been  willing  to
believe  them  to  have  been  of  contemporaneous  origin.

But  after  as  careful  an  investigation  as  I was  capable  of  making,

I have  been  led  to  the  conclusion  that  the  fabrication  of  the  degree

of  Fellow-Craft  preceded  that  of  Master  Mason  by  three  or  four
years,  and  that  the  system  of  Speculative  Freemasonry  had  been
augmented  by  the  addition  of  a new  degree  to  the  original  one  in
or  about  the  year  1719.

There  is  documentary  evidence  of  an  authentic  character  which

INVENTION  OF  THE  FELLOW  - CRAFT'S  DEGREE

959

proves  the  existence  of  a "Fellow-Craft's  part"  in  the  year  1720,
while  it  is  not  until  the  year  1723  that  we  find  any  record  alluding
to  the  fact  that  there  was  a "Master's  part."

Hence,  in  a chronological  point  of  view,  it  may  be  said  that
the  single  degree  or  ritual  in  which,  and  in  the  secrets  of  which,  all
classes  of  workmen,  from  the  Apprentice  to  the  Master,  equally
participated,  constituted,  under  various  modifications,  a part  of
Operative  Freemasonry  from  the  earliest  times.  The  possession  of
those  secrets,  simple  as  they  were,  distinguished  the  Freemasons
from  the  Rough  Layers  in  England,  from  the  Cowans  in  Scotland,
and  from  the  Miirer,  or  Wall  Builders,  in  Germany.

This  degree,  in  its  English  form,  was  the  only  one  known  or  prac-
ticed in  London  in  the  year  1717,  at  the  era  which  has  incorrectly
been  called  the  "Revival."  The  degree  of  Fellow-Craft,  in  the
modem  signification  of  the  word  degree,  was  incorporated  into  the
system,  probably  a very  few  years  after  the  organization  of  the
Grand  Lodge,  and  was  fully  recognized  as  a degree  in  the  year  1719,
or  perhaps  early  in  1720.

Finally,  the  Third  or  Master's  degree  was  added,  so  as  to  make
the  full  complement  of  degrees  as  they  now  exist,  between  the  years
1720  and  1723 — certainly  not  before  the  former  nor  after  the  latter
period.

Of  this  theory  we  have,  I think,  documentary  evidence  of  so
authentic  a character,  that  we  must  be  irresistibly  led  to  the  con-
clusion that  the  theory  is  correct.

Bro.  Lyon,  in  his  History;  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,  cites  a
record  which  has  a distinct  relevancy  to  the  question  of  the  time
when  the  Second  degree  originated.  It  is  contained  in  the  minutes
of  the  Lodge  of  Dunblane,  under  the  date  of  December  27,  1720,
which  is  about  sixteen  years  prior  to  the  establishment  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Scotland.

The  minute  records  that  a lawyer,  and  therefore  a Theoretic
Mason,  who  had  formerly  been  entered,  had,  after  a due  examination,
been  "duely  passed  from  the  Squair  to  the  Compass  and  from  ane
Entered  Prentiss  to  a Fellow  of  Craft."  In  commenting  on  this
minute,  Bro.  Lyon  says:

"It  would  appear  from  this  that  what  under  the  modem  ritual
of  the  Fraternity  is  a symbol  peculiar  to  the  Second  Degree,  was,
under  the  system  which  obtained  in  Scotland  prior  to  the  introduc-

960

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

tion  of  the  Third  Degree,  the  distinctive  emblem  of  the  Entered
Apprentice  step — and  what  is  now  a leading  symbol  in  the  degree
of  Master  Mason,  was  then  indicative  of  the  Fellow-Craft,  or  high-
est grade  of  Lodge  membership."1

This  authentic  record  surely  corroborates  the  theory  just  advanced
that  the  Fellow-Craft's  degree  was  formulated  in  London  after  the
year  1717  and  before  the  close  of  the  year  1720.  Here,  I think,  we
are  warranted  in  pursuing  the  following  method  of  deduction.

If  the  first  notice  of  the  degree  of  Fellow-Craft  being  conferred
in  Scotland,  as  a degree,  occurs  in  the  record  of  a lodge  in  the  last
days  of  the  year  1720;  and  if,  as  we  know  from  other  sources,  that
Scotland  derived  the  expanded  system  of  degrees  from  the  sister
kingdom;  then  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  degree  must
have  been  given  in  Scotland  at  as  early  a period  after  its  fabrication
in  England  as  was  compatible  with  a due  allowance  of  time  for  its
transmission  from  the  lodges  of  the  latter  kingdom  to  those  of  the
former,  and  for  the  necessary  preparation  for  its  legal  adoption.

The  degree  must,  of  course,  have  been  practiced  in  London  for
some  time  before  it  would  be  transmitted  to  other  places,  and  hence
we  may  accept  the  hypothesis,  as  something  more  than  a mere
presumption,  that  the  Second  degree  had  been  invented  by  Desagu-
liers  and  his  collaborators  on  the  ritual  of  the  new  Grand  Lodge  in
the  course  of  the  year  1719,  certainly  not  later  than  the  beginning
of  the  year  1720.

Between  the  24th  of  June,  1717,  when  the  Grand  Lodge  was
established,  and  the  end  of  the  year  1718,  the  period  of  less  than
eighteen  months  which  had  elapsed  was  too  brief  to  permit  the  over-
throw of  a long-existing  system,  endeared  to  the  Craft  by  its  com-
parative antiquity.  Time  and  opportunity  were  required  for  the
removal  of  opposition,  the  conciliation  of  prejudices,  and  the  prep-
aration of  rituals,  all  of  which  would  bring  us  to  the  year  1719  as
the  conjectural  date  of  the  fabrication  of  the  Second  degree.

It  is  highly  probable  that  the  degree  was  not  thoroughly  formu-
lated and  legally  introduced  into  the  ritual  until  after  the  24th  of
June,  1719,  when  Desaguliers,  who  was  then  Grand  Master,  and  the
Proto-Grand  Master,  Sayer,  who  was  then  one  of  the  Grand  War-

1 No  reference  is  here  made  to  the  subsequent  disseverment  of  the  Third  degree
which  resulted  in  the  composition  of  the  Royal  arch  degree,  as  that  subject  will  be  here-
after fully  discussed.

INVENTION  OF  THE  FELLOW-CRAFT'S  DEGREE

961

dens,  had,  from  their  official  positions,  sufficient  influence  to  cause
the  acceptance  of  the  new  degree  by  the  Grand  Lodge.

We  can  gather  very  little,  except  inferentially,  from  the  meager
records  of  Anderson,  and  yet  he  shows  us  that  there  was  certainly
an  impetus  given  to  the  Order  in  1719,  which  might  very  well
have  been  derived  from  the  invention  of  a new  and  more  attractive
ritual.

Anderson  says,  referring  to  the  year  1719,  that  "now  several  old
brothers,  that  had  neglected  the  Craft,  visited  the  lodges;  some

noblemen  were  also  made  brothers,  and  more  new  lodges  were  con-
stituted."

The  record  of  the  preceding  year  tells  us  that  the  Grand  Master
Payne  had  desired  the  brethren  to  bring  to  the  Grand  Lodge  any
old  writings  concerning  Masonry  "in  order  to  shew  the  usages  of
ancient  times."

Northouck,  a later  but  not  a discreditable  authority,  expanding

the  language  of  his  predecessor,  says  that  "the  wish  expressed  at  the
Grand  Lodge  for  collecting  old  manuscripts,  appears  to  have  been

preparatory  to  the  compiling  and  publishing  a body  of  Masonical

Constitutions."

I can  see  in  this  act  the  suggestion  of  the  idea  then  beginning

to  be  entertained  by  the  Speculative  leaders  of  the  new  society  to

give  it  a more  elevated  character  by  the  adoption  of  new  laws  and  a
new  form  of  ceremonies.  To  guide  them  in  this  novel  attempt,  they
desired  to  obtain  all  accessible  information  as  to  old  usages.

And  now,  some  of  the  older  Operative  Craftsmen,  becoming

alarmed  at  what  they  believed  was  an  effort  to  make  public  the

secrets  which  had  been  so  scrupulously  preserved  from  the  eyes  of
the  profane  by  their  predecessors,  and  who  were  unwilling  to  aid  in
the  contemplated  attempt  to  change  the  old  ritual,  an  attempt  which
had  been  successful  in  the  fabrication  of  a Second  degree,  and  the
modification  of  the  First,  resolved  to  throw  obstructions  in  the  way
of  any  further  innovations.

This  will  account  for  the  fact  recorded  by  Anderson  that,  be-
tween June,  1719,  and  June,  1720,1  several  valuable  manuscripts
concerning  the  ancient  "regulations,  charges,  secrets,  and  usages"

1 Dr.  Anderson,  in  his  chronological  records,  counts  the  years  from  the  installation  of
one  Grand  Master  in  June  to  that  of  the  next  in  June  of  the  following  year.

962

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

were  "burnt  by  some  scrupulous  brothers,  that  those  papers  might
not  fall  into  strange  hands."

The  records  do  not  say  so,  in  as  many  words,  but  we  may  safely
infer  from  their  tenor  that  the  conflict  had  begun  between  the  old
Operative  Freemasons  who  desired  to  see  no  change  from  the  an-
cient ways,  and  the  more  liberal-minded  Theoretic  members,  who
were  anxious  to  develop  the  system  and  to  have  a more  intellectual
ritual — a conflict  which  terminated  in  1723  with  the  triumph  of  the
Theoretics  and  the  defeat  of  the  Operatives,  who  retired  from  the
field  and  left  the  institution  of  Speculative  Freemasonry  to  assume
the  form  which  it  has  ever  since  retained,  as  "a  science  of  morality
veiled  in  allegory  and  illustrated  by  symbols,"  a definition  which
would  be  wholly  inapplicable  to  the  old  Operative  system.

In  the  minute  of  the  Dunblane  Lodge  which  has  been  cited
through  Bro.  Lyon,  it  was  said  that  the  candidate  in  being  advanced
from  an  Entered  Apprentice  to  a Fellow-Craft  had  "passed  from
the  Square  to  the  Compass."

It  is  curious  and  significant  that  this  expression  was  adopted  on
the  Continent  at  a very  early  period  of  the  18th  century,  when  the
hautes  grades  or  high  degrees  began  to  be  manufactured.  With  the
inventors  of  these  new  degrees  the  Square  was  the  symbol  of  Craft
Masonry,  while  the  Compass  was  the  appropriate  emblem  of  what

they  called  their  more  elevated  system  of  instruction.  Hence,  in-

stead of  the  Square  which  is  worn  by  the  Master  of  an  Ancient  Craft
Lodge,  the  Master  of  a Lodge  of  Perfection  substitutes  the  Com-
passes as  the  appropriate  badge  of  his  office.

But  in  Ancient  Craft  Masonry,  with  whose  history  alone  we  are
now  dealing,  the  Compass  is  at  this  day  a symbol  peculiar  to  the

Third  degree,  while  it  would  seem  from  the  above-cited  minute  that

in  the  beginning  of  the  18th  century  it  was  appropriate  to  the  Fel-

low-Crafts.

In  commenting  on  this  phrase  in  the  record  of  the  Lodge  of

Dunblane,  Bro.  Lyon  makes  the  following  remarks:

"To  some  it  will  appear  to  favor  the  theory  which  attributes  the
existence  of  the  Third  degree  to  a disjunction  and  a rearrangement  of
the  parts  of  which  the  Second  was  originally  composed."

I have  no  objection  to  accept  this  theory  in  part.  I believe,  and

the  hypothesis  is  a very  tenable  one,  that  when  the  Second  degree

was  fabricated,  the  secrets,  the  ritual,  and  instructions  which  were

INVENTION  OF  THE  FELLOW-CRAFT'S  DEGREE

963

formerly  comprised  in  the  single  degree  which  was  then  given  to  the
whole  Craft,  indiscriminately,  to  Apprentices,  to  Fellows,  and  to
Masters  alike,  were  divided  between  the  two  degrees  which  were
then  formulated,  with  certain  new  additions;  and  that  subsequently,
when  the  Third  degree  was  invented,  there  was  a further  disintegra-
tion, and  a portion  of  that  which  had  constituted  the  "part  of  a
Fellow-Craft"  was,  with  many  new  points,  transferred  to  that  of  the
Master.

I have  thus,  by  what  I believe  to  be  a tenable  hypothesis,  sought
to  fix  the  time  of  the  first  expansion  of  the  old  ritual  of  the  Opera-
tives, which  was  for  a short  time  made  use  of,  in  all  its  simplicity,  by
the  Speculative  Grand  Lodge.

The  next  step  in  this  expansion  was  the  fabrication  of  the  Third
or  Master  Mason's  degree.  To  the  time  when  this  important  event
took  place  and  to  the  circumstances  attending  it  we  are  now  to  di-
rect our  attention.  This  shall  therefore  be  the  subject  to  be  treated
in  the  following  chapter.

CHAPTER  XXXV

NON-EXISTENCE  OF  A MASTER  MASON'S  DEGREE  AMONG  THE  OPERA-
TIVE FREEMASONS

| HE  history  of  the  origin  of  the  Third  or  Master's
degree — that  is,  so  much  of  it  as  refers  to  the
precise  time  of  its  invention — has,  at  this  day,
been  involved  in  much  doubt,  and  been  the
source  of  earnest  controversy  in  consequence  of
the  searching  investigations  of  recent  scholars,
whose  incisive  criticism  has  shown  many  theo-

ries to  be  untenable  which  were  once  held  to  be  plausible.

Until  within  a few  years  the  opinion  was  universally  entertained
that  the  Third  degree  must  have  been  in  existence  from  the  time
of  the  invention  of  the  Masonic  system,  and  at  whatever  period

that  event  was  placed,  the  doctrine  was  held  as  indisputable  that
the  First,  the  Second,  and  the  Third  degrees  must  have  had  a

contemporaneous  origin,  no  one  preceding  the  other  in  point  of

time,  but  all  springing  at  the  same  epoch  into  form  and  practice.

The  theory  that  Freemasonry  originated  at  the  Temple  of

Solomon  was  for  a very  long  time  a universally  accepted  propo-
sition, constituting,  in  fact,  the  orthodox  creed  of  a Freemason,
and  conscientiously  adopted,  not  merely  by  the  common  and  un-
learned masses  of  the  Fraternity,  but  even  by  Masonic  scholars  of

distinguished  reputation.

Consequent  upon  this  theory  was  another,  that  at  the  same  time
the  Master's  degree  was  invented  and  that  the  builders  of  the  Tem-
ple were  divided  into  the  same  three  classes  distinguished  as  de-

grees, which  constitute  the  present  system  of  Freemasonry.

This  theory  was  derived  from  the  esoteric  narrative  contained  in
the  modem  ritual  of  the  Third  degree.  If  this  narrative  is  ac-
cepted as  an  authentic  history  of  events  which  actually  occurred  at
that  time,  then  there  need  be  no  more  difficulty  in  tracing  the  in-
vention of  the  Third  degree  to  the  time  of  King  Solomon  than

964

NON-EXISTENCE  OF  A MASTER  MASON'S  DEGREE

965

there  can  be  in  placing  the  origin  of  Freemasonry  at  the  same  re-
mote period.

But  unfortunately  for  the  repose  of  those  who  would  be  willing
to  solve  a difficult  problem  by  the  Alexandrian  method  of  cutting
the  Gordian  knot,  rather  than  by  the  slower  process  of  analytical
investigation,  the  theory  of  the  Temple  origin  of  the  Master's  de-
gree has  now  been  repudiated  by  nearly  all  Masonic  scholars.  A
few  may  be  accepted  who,  like  Bro.  Woodford,  still  express  a
doubtful  recognition  of  the  possibility  that  the  legend  may  be  true.1

Thus  Bro.  Woodford,  referring  to  the  Temple  legend,  says:
"As  there  is  no  a priori  reason  why  an  old  Masonic  tradition
should  not  be  true  in  the  main,  we  see  no  reason  to  reject  the
world-wide  story  of  King  Solomon's  protection  of  a Masonic  as-
sociation. Indeed,  modem  discovery  seems  to  strengthen  the  real-
ity of  our  Masonic  legends,  and  we  should  always,  as  it  appears  to
us,  distinguish  between  what  is  possible  and  probable  and  what  is
actually  provable  or  proved  by  indubitable  evidence."  In  reply  to
this  it  must  be  remembered  that  of  all  the  arguments  in  favor  of

an  event,  the  possibility  of  its  occurrence  is  the  weakest  that  can
be  adduced.  In  dialectics  there  is  an  almost  illimitable  gulf  be-

tween possibility  and  actuality.  A hundred  things  may  be  possible
or  even  probable,  and  yet  not  one  of  them  may  be  actual.  With
the  highest  respect  for  the  scholarship  of  our  reverend  Brother,  I
am  compelled  to  dissent  from  the  views  he  has  here  expressed.
Nor  am  I prepared  to  accept  the  statement  that  "modem  discov-
ery seems  to  strengthen  the  reality  of  our  Masonic  legends."  A
contrary  opinion  now  generally  prevails,  though  it  must  be  admitted

that  the  modem  inteipretations  of  these  legends  have  given  them  a
value,  as  the  expression  of  symbolic  ideas,  which  does  not  pertain
to  them  when  accepted,  as  they  formerly  were,  as  truthful  narratives.

The  Temple  legend,  however,  must  be  retained  as  a part  of  the
ritual  as  long  as  the  present  system  of  Speculative  Freemasonry  ex-
ists, and  the  legendary  and  allegorical  narrative  must  be  repeated
by  the  Master  of  the  lodge  on  the  occasion  of  every  initiation  into
the  mysteries  of  the  Third  degree,  because,  though  it  is  no  longer
to  be  accepted  as  an  historical  statement,  yet  the  events  which  it
records  are  still  recognized  as  a myth  containing  within  itself,  and

1 Kenning's  "Masonic  Cyclopaedia,"  art.  Temple  of  Solomon,  p.  612.

966

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

independent  of  all  question  of  probability,  a symbolical  significance
of  the  highest  importance.

This  mythical  legend  of  the  Temple,  and  of  the  Temple  Builder,
must  ever  remain  an  inseparable  part  of  the  Masonic  ritual,  and  the
narrative  must  be  repeated  on  all  appropriate  occasions,  because,
without  this  legend.  Speculative  Masonry  would  lose  its  identity
and  would  abandon  the  very  object  of  its  original  institution.  On
this  legend,  whether  true  or  false,  whether  a history  or  a myth,  is
the  most  vital  portion  of  the  symbolism  of  Freemasonry  founded.

In  the  interpretation  of  a legendary  symbol  or  an  allegory  it  is
a matter  of  no  consequence  to  the  value  of  the  interpretation
whether  the  legend  be  true  or  false;  the  interpretation  alone  is  of
importance.  We  need  not,  for  instance,  inquire  whether  the  story
of  Hiram  Abif  is  a narrative  which  is  true  in  all  its  parts,  or
merely  a historical  myth  in  which  truth  and  fiction  are  variously
blended,  or,  in  fact,  only  the  pious  invention  of  some  legend-
maker,  to  whose  fertile  imagination  it  has  been  indebted  for  all  its
details.

It  is  sufficient  when  we  are  occupied  in  an  investigation  of  sub-
jects connected  with  the  science  of  symbolism,  that  the  symbol
which  the  legend  is  intended  to  develop  should  be  one  that  teaches
some  dogma  whose  truth  we  can  not  doubt.  The  symbologist  looks
to  the  truth  or  fitness  of  the  symbol,  not  to  that  of  the  legend  on
which  it  is  founded.  Thus  it  is  that  we  should  study  the  different
myths  and  traditions  which  are  embodied  in  the  ritual  of  Free-
masonry.

But  when  we  abandon  the  role  of  the  symbologist  or  ritualist,
and  assume  that  of  the  historian — when,  for  the  time,  we  no  longer
interest  ourselves  in  the  lessons  of  Masonic  symbolism,  but  apply
our  attention  to  the  origin  and  the  progress  of  the  institution,  then
it  really  becomes  of  importance  that  we  should  inquire  whether
the  narrative  of  certain  supposed  events  which  have  hitherto  been
accepted  as  truthful,  are  really  historical  or  merely  mythical  or
legendary.

And,  therefore,  when  the  question  is  asked  in  an  historical  sense,
at  what  time  the  Third  degree  was  invented,  and  in  the  expectation
that  the  reply  will  be  based  on  authentic  historical  authority,  we  at
once  repudiate  the  whole  story  of  its  existence  at  the  Temple  of
Solomon  as  a mere  myth,  having,  it  is  true,  its  value  as  a symbol,

NON-EXISTENCE  OF  A MASTER  MASON'S  DEGREE

967

but  being  entitled  to  no  consideration  whatever  as  an  historical
narrative.

It  is,  however,  most  unfortunate  for  the  study  of  Masonic  his-
tory that  so  many  writers  on  this  subject,  forgetting  that  all  history
must  have  its  basis  in  truth,  have  sought  rather  to  charm  their  read-
ers by  romantic  episodes  than  to  instruct  them  by  a sober  detail  of
facts.  One  instance  of  this  kind  may  be  cited  as  an  example  from
the  visionary  speculations  of  Ragon,  a French  writer  of  great  learn-
ing, but  of  still  greater  imagination.

In  his  Orthodoxie  Magonnique  he  has  attributed  the  invention
of  all  the  degrees  to  Elias  Ashmole,  near  the  end  of  the  17th  century.
He  says  that  the  degree  of  Master  Mason  was  formulated  soon  after
the  year  1648,  but  that  the  decapitation  of  King  Charles  I.,  and  the

part  taken  by  Ashmole  in  favor  of  the  House  of  Stuart,  led  to

great  modifications  in  the  ritual  of  the  degree,  and  that  the  same

epoch  saw  the  birth  of  the  degrees  of  Secret  Master,  Perfect  Mas-
ter, Elect,  and  Irish  Master,  of  all  of  which  Charles  the  First  was

the  hero,  under  the  name  of  Hiram. 1

Assertions  like  this  are  hardly  worth  the  paper  and  ink  that

would  be  consumed  in  refuting  them.  Unlike  the  so-called  histori-
cal novel  which  has  its  basis  in  a distortion  of  history,  they  resemble
rather  the  Arabian  Tales  or  the  Travels  of  Gulliver,  which  owe  their
existence  solely  to  the  imaginative  genius  of  their  authors.

Still  there  are  some  writers  of  more  temperate  judgment  who,

while  they  reject  the  Temple  theory,  still  claim  for  the  Third  degree

an  antiquity  of  no  certain  date,  but  much  anterior  to  the  time  of  the
organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge  in  the  beginning  of  the  18th  cen-

tury.

Thus,  Bro.  Hyde  Clark,  in  an  article  in  the  London  Freemasons'
Magazine,  says  that  "the  ritual  of  the  Third  degree  is  peculiar  and
suggestive  of  its  containing  matter  from  the  old  body  of  Masonry,"
whence  he  concludes  that  it  is  older  than  the  time  of  the  so-called

Revival  in  1717,  and  he  advances  a theory  that  the  First  degree  was

in  that  olden  time  conferred  on  minors,  while  the  Second  and  Third
were  restricted  to  adults.2

This  view  of  the  origin  of  the  degrees  can  only  be  received  as  a

1 "Orthodoxie  Magonnique,"  par  J.  M.  Ragon,  Paris,  1853,  p.  29.

2 "Old  Freemasonry  before  Grand  Lodges,"  by  Hyde  Clark,  in  the  London  Free-

masons'  Magazine,  No.  534.

968

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

bare  assumption,  for  there  is  not  a particle  of  authentic  evidence  to
show  that  it  has  an  historical  foundation.  No  old  document  has
been  yet  discovered  which  gives  support  to  the  hypothesis  that  there
were  ceremonies  or  esoteric  instructions  before  the  year  1719  which
were  conferred  upon  a peculiar  class.  All  the  testimony  of  the  Old
Records  and  manuscript  Constitutions  is  to  the  effect  that  there
was  but  one  reception  for  the  Craftsmen,  to  which  all,  from  the
youngest  to  the  oldest  Mason,  were  admitted.

It  is  true  that  one  of  the  Old  Records,  known  as  the  Sloane
MS.  3329,  mentions  different  modes  of  recognition,  one  of  which
was  peculiar  to  Masters,  and  is  called  in  the  manuscript  "their
Master's  gripe,"  and  another  is  called  "their  gripe  for  fellow-
crafts."

Of  the  many  Masonic  manuscripts  which,  within  the  last  few
years  have  been  discovered  and  published,  this  is  perhaps  one  of  the
most  important  and  interesting.  Findel  first  inserted  a small  portion
of  it  in  his  History > of  Freemasonry,  but  the  whole  of  it  in  an  un.
mutilated  form  was  subsequently  published  by  Bro.  Woodford  in
1872,  and  also  by  Hughan  in  the  same  year  in  the  Voice  of  Masonry.
It  was  discovered  among  the  papers  of  Sir  Hans  Sloane  which  were
deposited  in  the  British  Museum,  and  there  is  numbered  3329.  Bro.
Hughan  supposes  that  the  date  of  this  manuscript  is  between  1640
and  1700;  Messrs.  Bond  and  Sims,  of  the  British  Museum,  think
that  the  date  is  "probably  of  the  beginning  of  the  18th  century."
Findel  thinks  that  it  was  originally  in  the  possession  of  Dr.  Plot,
and  that  it  was  one  of  the  sources  whence  he  derived  his  views  on-
Freemasonry.  He  places  its  date  at  about  the  end  of  the  17th  cen-
tury. Bro.  Woodford  cites  the  authority  of  Mr.  Wallbran  for  fix-
ing its  date  in  the  early  part  of  that  century,  in  which  opinion  he
coincides.  The  paper-mark  of  the  manuscript  in  the  British  Mu-
seum appears  to  have  been  a copy  of  an  older  one,  for  Bro.  Wood-
ford states  that  though  the  paper-mark  is  of  the  early  part  of  the
18th  century,  experts  will  not  deny  that  the  language  is  that  of  the
17th.  He  believes,  and  very  reasonably,  that  it  represents  the  cere-
monial through  which  Ashmole  passed  in  1646.

As  this  is  the  only  Old  Record  in  which  a single  passage  is  to  be
found  which,  by  the  most  liberal  exegesis,  can  be  construed  even
into  an  allusion  to  the  existence  of  a Third  degree  with  a separate
ritual  before  the  end  of  the  second  decade  of  the  18th  century,  it

NON-EXISTENCE  OF  A MASTER  MASON'S  DEGREE

969

may  be  well  to  quote  such  passages  of  the  manuscript  as  appear  to
have  any  bearing  on  the  question.

The  methods  of  recognition  for  Fellow-Crafts  and  Masters  is
thus  described  in  the  Sloane  MS.:

"Their  gripe  for  fellow  craftes  is  grasping  their  right  hands  in
each  other,  thrusting  their  thumb  naile  upon  the  third  joynt  of  each
others  first  Fing'r;  their  masters  gripe  is  grasping  their  right  hands
in  each  other;  placing  their  four  fingers  nailes  hard  upon  the  caipus
or  end  of  others  wrists,  and  their  thumb  nailes  thrust  hard  directly
between  the  second  joynt  of  the  thumb  and  the  third  joynt  of  the
first  Finger;  but  some  say  the  mast'rs  grip  is  the  same  I last  de-
scribed, only  each  of  their  middle  Fing'rs  must  reach  an  inch  or
three  barley  corns  length  higher  to  touch  upon  a vein  y't  comes  from
the  heart."

No  indication  is  to  be  found  in  this  passage  of  the  existence  at
the  time  of  three  degrees  and  three  separate  rituals.  All  that  it
tells  us  is  that  the  Fellow-Crafts  were  provided  with  one  form  of
salutation  and  the  Masters  with  another,  and  we  are  left  in  uncer-
tainty whether  these  forms  used  by  one  class  were  unknown  to  the
other,  or  whether  the  forms  were  openly  used  only  to  distinguish  one
class  from  the  other,  as  the  number  of  stripes  on  the  arm  distin-
guish the  grades  of  non-commissioned  officers  in  the  army.

That  the  latter  was  the  use  would  appear  evident  from  the  fact
that  the  close  of  the  passage  leaves  it  uncertain  that  the  "gripes"
were  not  identical,  or  at  least  with  a very  minute  difference.  "Some
say,"  adds  the  writer,  "the  Master's  grip  is  the  same"  as  the  Fellow-
Craft's  — "only"  — and  then  he  gives  the  hardly  appreciable  variation.

Here  is  another  passage  which  appears  to  show  that  no  value  was
attached  to  the  use  of  the  grip  as  marking  a degree,  though  it  might
be  employed  to  distinguish  a rank  or  class.

"Another  salutation,"  says  the  manuscript,  "is  giving  the  Mast'rs
or  fellows  grip,  saying  the  right  worshipful  the  mast'rs  and  fellows
in  that  right  worshipful  lodge  from  whence  we  last  came,  greet  you,
greet  you,  greet  you  well,  then  he  will  reply,  God's  good  greeting  to
you,  dear  brother."

Here  I take  it  that  all  that  is  meant  is  that  the  Masters  saluted
with  the  grip  peculiar  to  their  class,  and  the  Fellows  that  peculiar  to
theirs.  But  what  has  become  of  the  Apprentices?  Did  they  salute
with  the  grip  of  the  Fellows  or  that  of  the  Masters?  If  so,  they

970

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

must  have  been  acquainted  with  one  or  both,  and  then  the  secret  in-
struction incidental  to  the  condition  of  degrees  and  a distinct  ritual
must  be  abandoned,  or  the  Apprentices  were  not  admitted  to  the
privileges  of  the  Craft,  and  were  debarred  from  a recognition  as
members  of  a lodge.

Let  the  following  questions  and  answers  decide  that  point.
They  are  contained  in  the  manuscript,  and  there  called  "a  private
discourse  by  way  of  question  and  answer."

"Q.  Where  were  you  made  a mason?

"A.  In  a just  and  perfect  or  just  and  lawful  lodge.

"Q.  What  is  a perfect  or  just  and  lawful  lodge?

"A.  A just  and  perfect  lodge  is  two  Interprintices  two  fellow
crafts,  and  two  Mast'rs,  more  or  fewer,  the  more  the  merrier,  the
fewer  the  better  chear,  but  if  need  require  five  will  serve,  that  is,  two
Interprintices,  two  fellow  craftes,  and  one  Mast'r  on  the  highest  hill

or  the  lowest  valley  of  the  world  without  the  crow  of  a cock  or  the
bark  of  a dog."

This  was  no  lodge  of  Master  Masons,  nor  of  Fellow-Crafts,  nor
of  Entered  Apprentices,  as  they  have  been  distinguished  since  the
establishment  of  degrees.  It  was  simply  a lodge  of  Freemasons  to

legalize  and  perfect  whose  character  it  was  necessary  that  represent-
atives of  all  the  classes  should  be  present.  The  Apprentices  form-

ing a part  of  the  lodge  must  have  been  privy  to  all  its  secrets;  and
this  idea  is  sustained  by  all  the  Old  Constitutions  and  "Charges"  in

which  the  Apprentices  are  enjoined  to  keep  the  secrets  of  the  lodge.

The  manuscript  speaks  of  two  words,  "the  Mast'r  Word"  and
"the  Mason  word."  The  latter  is  said  to  have  been  given  in  a cer-
tain form,  which  is  described.  It  is  possible  that  the  former  may
have  been  communicated  to  Masters  as  a privilege  attached  to  their
rank,  while  the  latter  was  communicated  to  the  whole  Craft.  In  a
later  ritual  it  has  been  seen  that  there  were  two  words,  "the  Jeru-
salem Word"  and  "the  universal  word,"  but  both  were  known  to  the
whole  Fraternity.  The  Sloane  MS.  does  not  positively  state  that  the
two  words  used  in  its  ritual  were  like  these  two,  or  that  the  Master's
was  confined  to  one  class.  It  is,  however,  likely  that  this  Word  was
a privileged  mark  of  distinction  to  be  used  only  by  the  Masters,
though  possibly  known  to  the  rest  of  the  Fraternity.  How  else  could
it  be  given  in  the  lodge  where  the  three  classes  were  present?  Bro.
Lyon  has  arrived  at  the  same  conclusion.  He  says:  "It  is  our  opin-

NON-EXISTENCE  OF  A MASTER  MASON'S  DEGREE

971

ion  that  in  primitive  times  there  were  no  secrets  communicated  by
Lodges  to  either  fellows  or  craft  or  master's  that  were  not  known  to
apprentices,  seeing  that  members  of  the  latter  grade  were  necessary
to  the  legal  constitution  of  communications  for  the  admission  of
masters  or  fellows."1  The  argument,  indeed,  appears  to  be  unan-
swerable.

The  Word  might,  however,  as  has  been  suggested,  have  been
whispered  by  the  Master  communicating  it  to  the  one  to  whom  it
was  communicated.  If  this  were  so,  it  supplies  us  with  the  origin

of  the  modern  Past  Master's  degree.  But  even  then  it  could  only

be  considered  as  a privileged  mark  of  a rank  or  class  of  the  Crafts-

men and  not  as  the  evidence  of  a degree.

I will  merely  suggest,  but  I will  not  press  the  argument,  that  it
is  not  impossible  that  by  a clerical  mistake,  or  through  some  confu-
sion in  the  mind  of  the  writer,  "Mast'r  Word"  may  have  been  writ-
ten for  "Mason  Word,"  an  expression  which  has  been  made  familiar
to  us  in  the  minutes  of  the  Scottish  lodges,  and  which  is  the  only
word  the  secrecy  of  which  is  required  by  the  oath  that  is  contained
in  the  manuscript.  On  the  other  hand,  "Master  Word"  is  a phrase

not  met  with  in  any  other  manuscript,  Scotch  or  English.

The  "Oath,"  which  forms  a part  of  the  Sloane  MS.,  supplies  it-
self the  strongest  proof  that,  during  the  period  in  which  it  formed
a part  of  the  ritual,  that  ritual  must  have  been  one  common  to  the
three  classes;  in  other  words,  there  could  have  been  but  one  degree,
because  there  was  but  one  obligation  of  secrecy  imposed,  and  the
secrets,  whatever  they  were,  must  have  been  known  to  all  Free-
masons, to  the  Apprentices  as  well  as  to  the  Master.  The  "Oath"
is  in  the  following  words:

"The  Mason  Word  and  everything  therein  contained  you  shall
keep  secret,  you  shall  never  put  it  in  writing  directly  or  indirectly;
you  shall  keep  all  that  we  or  your  attenders  shall  bid  you  keep  secret
from  man,  woman  or  child,  stock  or  stone,  and  never  reveal  it  but
to  a brother  or  in  a Lodge  of  Freemasons,  and  truly  observe  the
charges  in  the  Constitution;  all  this  you  promise  and  swear  faithfully
to  keep  and  observe,  without  any  manner  of  equivocation  or  mental
reservation,  directly  or  indirectly;  so  help  you  God  and  the  contents
of  this  Book."

1 "History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  23.

972

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

The  "Mason  Word,"  with  the  secrets  connected  with  it,  formed
a very  prominent  part  of  the  ritual  of  the  Scotch  Freemasons,  though
there  is  no  reference  to  it  in  any  of  the  English  manuscripts  except
in  the  Sloane.

In  fact,  so  important  was  this  word  considered  as  to  be  sometimes
figuratively  employed  to  designate  the  whole  body  of  the  Fraternity.
Thus,  in  a record  of  the  Musselburgh  Lodge,  in  December,  1700,
where  complaint  is  made  of  the  great  disorders  into  which  the  lodge
had  fallen,  it  is  said,  among  other  evils,  that  the  practice  of  Fellow
Crafts  encouraging  Apprentices  to  take  work  as  journeymen,  "at
last,  by  degrees,  will  bring  all  law  and  order  and  consequently  the
Mason  Word  to  contempt"1 — where,  evidently  by  a figure  of  speech,
it  is  meant  that  the  Fraternity  or  Craft  of  Masonry  will  be  brought
to  contempt.

In  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,  which  was  the  principal  Lodge  of
Scotland,  and  whose  records  have  been  best  preserved,  the  Masons
or  employers  were,  up  to  the  beginning  of  the  18th  century,  the
dominant  power,  and  seldom  called  the  Fellows  or  Craftsmen  of  an
inferior  class,  who  were  only  journeymen,  into  their  counsel.

The  controversy  between  the  Masters  and  journeymen,  which
led,  in  1712,  to  the  establishment  of  a new  lodge,  are  faithfully  de-
scribed by  Bro.  Lyon  from  the  original  records.2  It  is  sufficient
here  to  say  that  one  of  the  principal  grievances  complained  of  by
the  latter  was  in  respect  to  the  giving  of  the  Mason  Word,  with  the
secrets  connected  with  it  and  the  fees  arising  from  it.  The  Masters
claimed  the  right  to  confer  it  and  to  dispose  of  the  fee,  so  to  speak,
of  initiation.

Finally,  the  controversy  was  partially  ended  by  arbitration.  The
"Decreet-Arbitral,"  as  is  the  Scottish  legal  phrase,  or  award  of  the
arbitrators  made  on  January  17,  1715,  has  been  recorded,  and  has
been  published  by  Bro.  Lyon.  The  only  point  of  importance  to
the  present  subject  is  that  the  arbitrators  decreed  that  the  journey-
men Masons,  that  is,  the  Fellow-Crafts,  should  be  allowed  "to  meet
together  by  themselves,  as  a Society  for  giving  the  Mason  Word  and
to  receive  dues  therefor."

From  this  fact  it  is  clearly  evident  that  the  knowledge  of  the

1 "History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  175.

2 Ibid.,  p.  140.

NON-EXISTENCE  OF  A MASTER  MASON'S  DEGREE

973

"Mason  Word"  and  the  secrets  pertaining  to  it  formed  no  part  of  a
degree  exclusively  confined  to  the  Masters,  but  that  all  esoteric
knowledge  in  connection  with  this  subject  was  also  the  property  of

the  Fellow-Crafts,  and  of  the  Apprentices,  too,  because  it  has  been
shown  that  they  were  required  to  be  present  at  all  lodge  meetings.

The  expression,  "Mason  Word,"  which  is  common  in  the  Scot-
tish lodge  records,  has  been,  so  far,  found  only  in  one  English

manuscript,  the  Sloane  3329.  But  as  the  theory  is  now  generally
accepted  as  having  been  proved,  that  the  Scottish  Freemasons

derived  their  secrets  from  their  English  brethren,  there  can  hardly
be  a doubt  that  the  regulations  relative  to  this  Word  must  have
been  nearly  the  same  in  both  countries.

That  this  was  the  case  after  the  organization  of  the  Grand

Lodge  of  England,  there  can  be  no  doubt.  It  is  proved  by  the

visit  of  Dr.  Desaguliers  to  Edinburgh  in  1721,  and  long  before.
Bro.  Lyon  was  aware  of  that  visit.  He  had,  from  other  considera-
tions, expressed  the  opinion  "that  the  system  of  Masonic  degrees

which  for  nearly  a century  and  a half  has  been  known  in  Scotland

as  Freemasonry,  was  an  importation  from  England."1

What  this  "Mason  Word"  was,  either  in  England  or  Scotland,
we  have,  at  this  day,  no  means  of  knowing.  But  we  do  know  from
the  records  of  the  17th  century,  which  have  been  preserved,  that
it  was  the  most  important,  and  in  Scotland  perhaps  the  only,  secret
that  was  communicated  to  the  Craft.

"The  Word,"  says  Bro.  Lyon,  "is  the  only  secret  that  is  even

alluded  to  in  the  minutes  of  Mary's  Chapel,  or  in  those  of  Kilwin-
ning, Acheson's  Haven,  or  Dunblane,  or  any  other  that  we  have
examined  of  a date  prior  to  the  erection  of  the  Grand  Lodge."2

We  know  also  that  in  England,  in  Scotland,  and  in  Germany,
the  giving  of  the  Word  was  accompanied  by  a grip  and  by  the
communication  of  other  secrets.

But  we  know  also,  positively,  that  this  Word  and  these  secrets
were  bestowed  upon  Fellows  as  well  as  Masters,  and  also,  as  we
have  every  reason  to  infer,  upon  Apprentices.

Besides  the  proofs  that  we  derive  from  old  Masonic  records,  we
have  a right  to  draw  our  inferences  from  the  prevalence  of  similar
customs  among  other  crafts.

'History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  153.

2 Ibid.,  p.  22,

974

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Thus,  the  carpenters,  wrights,  joiners,  slaters,  and  other  crafts  who
were  connected  in  the  art  of  building  with  the  Masons,  were  called
in  Scotland  "Squaremen,"  and  they  had  a secret  word  which  was
called  the  "Squaremen  Word."  This  word,  with  a grip  and  sign,
was  communicated  to  both  journeymen  and  apprentices  in  a cere-
mony called  the  "brithering."  A portion  of  this  ceremony  which
was  performed  in  a closely  guarded  apartment  of  a public-house
was  the  investiture  with  a leather  apron. 1

I can  not  doubt  that  the  communication  of  the  "Mason  Word
and  the  secrets  pertaining  to  it"  was  accompanied  by  similar  cere-
monies in  Scotland,  and  by  a parity  of  reasoning  also  in  England.

The  final  conclusion  to  which  we  must  arrive  from  the  proofs
which  have  been  adduced,  is  that  as  there  was  no  such  system  as
that  of  degrees  known  to  the  mediaeval  Operative  Freemasons,
that  no  such  system  was  practiced  by  the  Speculative  Freemasons
who  in  1717  instituted  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  until  at  least
two  years  after  its  organization;  that  in  1719  the  two  degrees  of
Entered  Apprentice  and  Fellow-Craft  were  invented;  and  that
subsequently  the  present  system  of  symbolic  or  ancient  Craft  de-
grees was  perfected  by  the  fabrication  of  a new  degree,  now  recog-
nized as  the  Third  or  Master  Mason's  degree.

At  what  precise  time  and  under  what  circumstances  this  Third
degree  was  invented  and  introduced  into  the  Grand  Lodge  system
of  modem  Freemasonry,  is  the  next  subject  that  must  engage  our
attention.

Lyon's  "History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  33.

CHAPTER  XXXVI

THE  INVENTION  OF  THE  THIRD  OR  MASTER  MASON'S  DEGREE

E have  seen  that  up  to  the  year  1719  the  Masonic
ritualistic  system  consisted  of  but  one  degree,
which  was  common  to  the  whole,  and  the  secrets
of  which  were  communicated  to  the  Apprentice

at  his  initiation,  or  as  it  was,  perhaps,  more
properly  called,  in  reference  to  the  paucity  of
ceremonies,  his  admission.  At  that  time  Des-
aguliers  and  his  collaborators  originated  a Second  degree,  to  be  ap-

propriated to  the  Fellow-Crafts.  To  do  this  it  was  necessary,  or,  at
least,  it  was  deemed  expedient,  to  disintegrate  the  primitive  degree
and  out  of  it  to  make  two  degrees,  those  of  Entered  Apprentice

and  Fellow-Craft.

For  a short  time — how  long  is  to  be  hereafter  seen — the  Ma-

sonic system  consisted  of  two  degrees,  and  the  summit  of  the  system
was  the  Fellow-Craft's  degree.

From  this  time  the  Fellow-Crafts  began  to  take  a prominent
place  in  the  business  of  Masonry,  and  the  Apprentice  lost  some  of

the  importance  he  had  obtained  in  early  times  as  a component  part
of  the  Craft  and  an  equal  participant  with  Masters  and  Fellows  in
its  secrets.  He  was  permitted,  it  is  true,  to  be  present  at  the  meet-
ings of  the  lodge,  and  to  take  his  share  in  its  business  (except,  of
course,  where  candidates  were  to  be  "passed"),  and  even  to  vote  in

the  Grand  Fodge  on  the  question  of  an  alteration  of  the  "Gen-
eral Regulations,"  but  the  offices  were  to  be  held  and  the  lodge
represented  in  the  Grand  Fodge  by  Fellow-Crafts  only.  Of  this
there  is  abundant  evidence  in  contemporary  documents.

The  first  edition  of  Anderson's  Constitutions  contains  "the
Charges  of  a Free-mason,  extracted  from  the  Records  of  Fodges
beyond  Sea."  The  exact  date  when  these  "Charges"  were  compiled

is  not  known.  It  must  have  been  after  1718,  for  they  distinctly

refer  to  the  Fellow-Craft's  degree,  and  it  must  have  been  before

975

976

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

the  beginning  of  1723,  for  that  is  the  year  of  their  publication.
It  is,  however,  certain  from  their  phraseology  that  when  they  were
compiled  for  the  use  of  the  lodges,  the  Fellow-Craft's  degree  had
been  instituted,  but  the  Master's  degree  was  not  yet  known.  For
this  reason  I am  inclined  to  place  the  date  between  1718,  in  which
year  Anderson  tells  us  that  "several  old  copies  of  the  Gothic  Con-
stitutions were  produced  and  collated,"  and  1721,  when  he  sub-
mitted his  manuscript,  including  the  "Charges"  and  "Regulations"
to  the  Grand  Lodge.  There  is  no  date  prefixed  to  the  "Charges,"
but  I think  it  not  improbable  that  they  were  constructed  by  Payne  in

1720,  at  the  same  time  that  he  compiled  the  "General  Regulations."
It  is  certain  that  they  must  have  been  in  existence  on  December  27,

1721,  when  a committee  was  appointed  by  the  Grand  Lodge  to  ex-
amine them  and  the  Constitutions.  And  this  date  sufficiently  ac-
counts for  the  fact  that  there  are  no  allusions  in  them  to  the  Mas-
ter's degree.

These  "Charges,"  therefore,  give  us  a very  good  idea  of  the

status  of  Apprentices  and  Fellow-Crafts  in  English  Masonry  at  the

time  when  the  system  consisted  of  two  degrees,  and  the  "part  of
Master"  had  not  yet  been  composed.

In  Charge  IV.  it  is  said  that  if  the  Apprentice  has  learned  his

art,  he  then  may  in  due  time  be  made  a Fellow-Craft,  and  then  if

otherwise  qualified  may  become  a Warden  and  successively  Mas-
ter of  his  lodge,  the  Grand  Warden,  and  at  length  the  Grand  Master.

Here  we  see  that  at  that  time  the  Fellow-Craft  was  at  the  sum-
mit of  the  Fraternity  so  far  as  degrees  and  qualifications  for  pro-
motions in  rank  were  concerned.  Nothing  is  said  of  the  degree

of  Master;  it  was  still  simply  as  in  primitive  times — a gradation  of
rank.

In  the  same  Charge  we  are  told  that  "no  Brother  can  be  a
Warden  until  he  has  passed  the  part  of  a Fellow-Craft,  nor  a Mas-
ter1 until  he  has  acted  as  a Warden;  nor  Grand  Warden  until

he  has  been  Master  of  a lodge;  nor  Grand  Master  unless  he  has

been  a Fellow-Craft  before  his  election."

It  is  very  evident  that  at  this  time  there  could  be  no  degree

higher  than  that  of  the  Fellow-Craft.  If  there  had  been,  that
higher  degree  would  have  been  made  the  necessary  qualification

That  is,  Master  of  a Lodge,  as  the  context  shows.

WILLIAM  PRESTON

THE  INVENTION  OF  THE  THIRD  DEGREE

977

for  these  high  offices.  We  are  not  without  the  proof  of  how  these
"Charges"  would  have  been  made  to  read  had  the  degree  of  Mas-
ter Mason  been  in  existence  at  the  time  of  their  compilation.

Notwithstanding  that  Speculative  Freemasonry  owes  much  to
Dr.  Anderson,  we  are  forced  to  reluctantly  admit  that,  as  an  histo-
rian, he  was  inexact  and  inaccurate,  and  that  while  he  often  substi-
tuted the  inventions  of  tradition  for  the  facts  of  history,  he  also
often  modified  the  phraseology  of  old  documents  to  suit  his  own
views.

In  1738  he  published  a second  edition  of  the  Book  of  Consti-
tutions, a work  which,  although  at  first  perhaps  carelessly  approved,
was  subsequently  condemned  by  the  Grand  Lodge.  In  this  work
he  inserted  a copy  of  these  "Charges."  But  now  the  Master's  de-
gree had  been  long  recognized  and  practiced  by  the  lodges  as  the
summit  of  the  ritual.

Now  let  us  see  how  these  "Charges"  were  modified  by  Dr.
Anderson  in  this  second  edition,  so  as  to  meet  the  altered  condition
of  the  Masonic  system.  The  Apprentice  is  no  longer  admonished,
as  he  was  in  the  first  edition,  that  his  ambition  should  be  to  become
a Fellow-Craft  and  in  time  a Warden,  a Master  of  a Lodge,  a Grand
Warden,  and  even  a Grand  Master.  But  in  the  copy  of  1738  he  is
told  that  "when  of  age  and  expert  he  may  become  an  Entered
Prentice,  or  a Free-Mason  of  the  lowest  degree,  and  upon  his  due
improvement  a Fellow-Craft  and  a Master  Mason."

Again,  in  the  "Charges"  of  1 720, 1 it  is  said  that  "no  brother  can
be  a Warden  until  he  has  passed  the  part  of  a Fellow-Craft."

In  the  "Charges"  of  1738,  it  is  said  that  "the  Wardens  are  chosen
from  among  the  Master  Masons."

In  Charge  V.  of  1720  it  is  directed  that  "the  most  expert  of
the  Fellow-Crafts  shall  be  chosen  or  appointed  the  Master  or  Over-
seer of  the  Lord's  Work."

In  the  same  Charge,  published  in  1738,  it  is  prescribed  that
"a  Master  Mason  only  must  be  the  Surveyor  or  Master  of  Work."

Now,  what  else  can  be  inferred  from  this  collation  of  the  two
editions  (which,  if  deemed  necessary,  could  have  been  much  further
extended),  except  that  in  1720  the  Fellow-Craft  was  the  highest  de-

1 I assume  this  date  for  convenience  of  reference,  and  because,  as  I have  already
shown,  it  is  probably  correct.

978

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

gree,  and  that  after  that  year  and  long  before  1738  the  Master's
degree  had  been  invented.

But  let  us  try  to  get  a little  nearer  to  the  exact  date  of  the  in-
troduction of  the  Third  degree  into  the  Masonic  system.

The  Constitutions  of  the  Free-Masons,  commonly  called  the
Book  of  Constitutions,  was  ordered  by  the  Grand  Lodge,  on  March
25,  1722,  to  be  printed,1  and  was  actually  printed  in  that  year,  for  it
was  presented  by  Dr.  Anderson  to  the  Grand  Lodge  "in  print"  on
January  17,  1723.  So  that  although  the  work  bears  on  its  title-page
the  imprint  of  1723,  it  must  really  be  considered  as  having  been  con-
trolled in  its  composition  by  the  opinions  and  the  condition  of
things  that  existed  in  the  year  1722.

Now,  in  the  body  of  this  book  there  is  no  reference  to  the  de-
gree of  Master  Mason.  It  is  true  that  on  page  33  the  author  speaks
of  "such  as  were  admitted  Master  Masons  or  Masters  of  the  Work,"
by  which  expression  he  evidently  meant  not  those  who  had  received
a higher  degree,  but  those  who  in  the  "Charges"  contained  in  the
same  book  were  said  to  be  "chosen  or  appointed  the  Master  or
Overseer  of  the  Lord's  Work,"  and  who  the  same  Charge  declares
should  be  "the  most  expert  of  the  Fellow-Craftsmen."

On  the  contrary,  when  speaking  of  the  laws,  forms,  and  usages
practiced  in  the  early  lodges  by  the  Saxon  and  Scottish  kings,  he
says:  "Neither  what  was  conveyed  nor  the  manner  how,  can  be
communicated  by  writing;  as  no  man  can  indeed  understand  it
without  the  key  of  a Fellow-Craft."2

So  that  in  1722,  when  this  note  was  written,  there  was  no  higher
degree  than  that  of  Fellow-Craft,  because  the  Fellow-Crafts  were,
as  being  at  the  summit  of  the  ritual,  in  possession  of  the  key  to  all
the  oral  and  esoteric  instructions  of  the  Craft.

Guided  by  the  spirit  of  the  "General  Regulations,"  printed  in
the  first  edition  of  Anderson's  Constitutions,  I am  induced  to  place
the  invention  of  the  Third  degree  in  the  year  1722,  although,  as  will
be  hereafter  seen,  it  did  not  get  into  general  use  until  a later  period.
The  investigations  which  have  led  me  to  this  conviction  were  pursued
in  the  following  train,  and  I trust  that  the  reader,  if  he  will  follow

1 Its  preparation  by  Dr.  Anderson  had  been  previously  directed  on  September  29,
1721.  This  and  the  date  of  its  publication  in  January,  1723,  lead  us  irresistibly  to  the
conclusion  that  the  work  was  written  in  1722.

2 Anderson's  "Constitutions,"  2st  edition,  p.  29,  note.

THE  INVENTION  OF  THE  THIRD  DEGREE

979

the  same  train  of  investigation  with  me,  will  arrive  at  the  same  con-
clusion. In  pursuing  this  train  of  argument,  it  will  be  unavoidably
necessary  to  repeat  some  of  what  has  been  said  before.  But  the
subject  is  so  important  that  a needful  repetition  will  be  surely  ex-
cused for  the  sake  of  explicitness  in  the  reasoning.

The  "General  Regulations"  were  published  in  the  first  edition
of  the  Book  of  Constitutions,  edited  by  Anderson.  This  edition
bears  the  imprint  of  1723,  but  Anderson  himself  tells  us  that  the
work  was  "in  print"  and  produced  before  the  Grand  Lodge  on  the
17th  of  January  in  that  year.  Hence,  it  is  evident  that  although
the  work  was  published  in  1723,  it  was  actually  printed  in  1722.
Whatever,  therefore,  is  contained  in  the  body  of  that  work  must
refer  to  the  condition  of  things  in  that  year,  unless  Anderson  may  (as
I shall  endeavor  to  show  he  has  done)  have  made  some  slight  altera-
tion or  interpolation,  toward  the  end  of  1722  or  the  very  beginning
of  1723,  while  the  book  was  passing  through  the  press.

I have  shown  by  the  "Old  Charges,"  whose  assumed  date  is
1720,  that  at  that  time  the  degree  of  Fellow-Craft  was  the  highest
recognized  or  known  in  Speculative  Freemasonry,  and  I shall  now
attempt  to  prove  from  the  "General  Regulations"  that  the  same
condition  existed  in  1722,  the  year  in  which  those  "Regulations"
were  printed.

The  "General  Regulations"  consist  of  thirty-nine  articles,  and
throughout  the  whole  composition,  except  in  one  instance,  which  I
believe  to  be  an  interpolation,  there  is  not  one  word  said  of  Master
Masons,  but  the  only  words  used  are  Brethren  and  Fellow-Crafts —
Brethren  being  a generic  term  which  includes  both  Fellows  and
Apprentices.

Thus  it  is  said  (art.  vi.),  that  "no  man  can  be  entered  a Brother
in  any  particular  Lodge  or  admitted  to  be  a Member  thereof  with-
out the  unanimous  consent  of  all  the  members."

That  is,  no  man  can  be  made  an  Entered  Apprentice,  nor  having
been  made  elsewhere,  be  affiliated  in  that  particular  lodge.

Again  (art.  vii.),  "every  new  Brother,  at  his  making,  is  decently
to  cloath  the  Lodge."  That  is,  every  Apprentice  at  his  making,  etc.

The  word  "Brother,"  although  a generic  term,  has  in  these  in-
stances a specific  signification  which  is  determined  by  the  context
of  the  sentence.

The  making  of  a Brother  was  the  entering  of  an  Apprentice,  a

980

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

term  we  still  use  when  speaking  of  the  making  of  a Mason.  The
Fellow-Craft  was  admitted,  or,  as  Ashmole  says  in  his  Diary,  "ad-
mitted into  the  Fellowship  of  Freemasons."

Lyon,1  referring  to  the  nomenclature  of  the  Scottish  lodges  "of
the  olden  time,"  says,  that  the  words  "made"  and  "accepted"  were
frequently  used  as  indicating  the  admission  of  Fellow-Crafts,  but  he
adds  that  the  former  was  sometimes,  though  rarely,  used  to  denote
the  entry  of  Apprentices.  He  states,  however,  that  toward  the  end
of  the  17th  century  these  words  gave  way  to  the  expression  "passed,"

to  indicate  the  reception  of  a Fellow-Craft,  and  that  the  Lodge  of

Mary's  Chapel,  at  about  that  time,  used  the  word  "accepted"  as
equivalent  to  the  making  or  passing  of  a Fellow-Craft.  But  the
Schaw  statutes  of  1598,  which  are  among  the  very  oldest  of  the
Scottish  records  extant,  employs  the  word  "entered"  in  reference
to  the  making  of  an  Apprentice,  and  received  or  "admitted"  in

reference  to  the  making  of  a Fellow-Craft.

I think,  however,  that  in  the  English  lodges,  or  at  least  in  the
"General  Regulations"  of  1720,  the  words  "making  a Brother"
meant,  as  it  does  in  the  present  day,  the  initiation  of  an  Entered
Apprentice,  and  that  Fellow-Crafts  were  "admitted."  The  word
"passed"  soon  afterward  came  into  use.

With  this  explanation  of  certain  technical  terms  which  appeared
to  be  necessary  in  this  place,  let  us  proceed  to  examine  from  the

document  itself  what  was  the  status  of  Fellow-Crafts  at  the  time  of
the  compilation  of  the  "General  Regulations"  by  Grand  Master
Payne,  in  1720,  and  their  adoption  in  1722  by  the  Grand  Lodge.
From  this  examination  I contend  that  it  will  be  found  that  at  that
period  there  was  in  Freemasonry  only  two  degrees,  those  of  Entered
Apprentice  and  Fellow- Craft.

It  will  be  admitted  that  in  a secret  society  no  one  has  such
opportunities  of  undetected  "eavesdropping"  as  the  guardian  of
the  portal,  and  hence,  the  modem  ritual  of  Freemasonry  requires
that  the  Tiler  shall  be  in  possession  of  the  highest  degree  worked
by  the  body  which  he  tiles.

Now  the  13th  General  Regulation  prescribes  that  a Brother
"who  must  be  a Fellow-Craft  should  be  appointed  to  look  after
the  door  of  the  Grand  Lodge."

1 "History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  76.

THE  INVENTION  OF  THE  THIRD  DEGREE

981

But  it  may  be  argued  that  the  Grand  Lodge  always  met  and
worked  in  the  Entered  Apprentices'  degree,  and  that  Apprentices
as  well  as  Fellow-Crafts  were  present  at  its  communications.

I admit  the  fact,  and  acknowledge  that  from  this  point  of  view
my  argument  would  be  untenable.  But  why  was  not  the  office  of
Tiler  entrusted  to  an  Entered  Apprentice?  Because,  if  there  were
three  degrees  at  the  time,  it  would  have  been  manifestly  improper
to  have  bestowed  this  trustworthy  and  responsible  office  on  one
who  was  in  possession  of  only  the  lowest.  And  if  it  was  prudent
and  proper,  as  I suppose  will  be  admitted,  that  it  should  have  been
bestowed  on  one  of  the  highest  degree,  why  was  it  not  given  to  a
Master  Mason?  Simply,  I reply,  because  there  were  no  Master
Masons,  as  a degree  class,  from  whom  the  selection  could  be  made.
As  the  laws  of  every  lodge  at  the  present  day  prescribe  that  the
Tiler  must  be  a Master  Mason,  because  the  Third  degree  is
the  highest  one  known  to  or  practiced  in  the  lodge,  so  the  laws
of  the  Grand  Lodge  in  1723,  or  the  "General  Regulations,"
required  the  Tiler  to  be  a Fellow-Craft  because  the  Second
degree  was  the  highest  one  known  to  or  practiced  in  the

Grand  Lodge  at  that  time.  It  would  seem  hardly  to  need  an
argument  to  prove  that  if  the  Third  degree  had  been  in  practical
existence  when  these  "Regulations"  were  approved  by  the  Grand
Lodge,  they  would  have  directed  that  the  guardian  of  the  door

should  be  in  possession  of  that  degree.

Another  clause  in  this  13th  Regulation  is  very  significant.  The
Treasurer  and  Secretary  of  the  Grand  Lodge  are  permitted  to  have,

each,  a clerk,  and  it  is  directed  that  he  "must  be  a Brother  and  Fel-

low-Craft." Again,  and  for  a similar  reason,  the  officer  is  selected
from  the  highest  degree.  Had  the  Third  degree  been  known  at
that  time,  these  assistants  would  surely  have  been  chosen  from
among  the  Master  Masons;  for  if  not,  they  would  have  had  to  be
sometimes  entrusted  with  the  records  of  the  transactions  of  a degree
of  which  they  had  no  right  to  possess  a knowledge.

In  the  14th  Regulation  it  is  prescribed  that  in  the  absence  of
the  Grand  Wardens  the  Grand  Master  may  order  private  Wardens,
that  is,  the  Wardens  of  a subordinate  lodge,  to  act  as  Grand  Wardens
pro  tempore,  and  then,  that  the  representation  of  that  lodge  in  the
Grand  Lodge  may  be  preserved,  the  lodge  is  to  supply  their  place,
not  by  two  Master  Masons,  but  "by  two  Fellow-Crafts  of  the

982

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

same  lodge,  called  forth  to  act  or  sent  thither  by  the  particular

Master  thereof."

The  fact  that  the  second  was  the  highest  degree  known  in  the
early  part  of  the  year  1723  is  confirmed  by  the  formula  inserted  in
the  first  edition  of  the  Book  of  Constitutions,  and  which  is  there
entitled  "the  Manner  of  Constituting  a New  Lodge,  as  practiced

by  his  Grace  the  Duke  of  Wharton,  the  present  Right  Worshipful
Grand  Master,  according  to  the  ancient  usages  of  Masons."  It
was,  according  to  Anderson's  record  in  the  second  edition,  pre-
sented to  the  Grand  Lodge  and  approved  on  January  17,  1723.  It

is  therefore  a fair  testimony  as  to  the  condition  of  the  degree  ques-
tion at  that  date.

In  this  formula  it  is  said  that  "the  new  Master  and  Wardens

being  yet  among  the  Fellow-Craft"  the  Grand  Master  shall  ask
his  Deputy  if  he  has  examined  them  and  finds  the  Candidate

well  skilled,  etc.  And  this  being  answered  in  the  affirmative,
he  is  duly  installed,  after  which  the  new  Master,  "calling  forth

two  Fellow-Craft,  presents  them  to  the  Grand  Master  for  his
approbation,"  after  which  they  are  installed  as  Wardens  of  the

lodge.1

This,  I think,  is  conclusive  evidence  that  the  degree  of  Fellow-
Craft  was  then  the  highest  known  or  used.  In  January,  1723,  it

did  not  require  a Mason  to  be  more  than  a Fellow-Craft  to  prove

himself,  as  Wharton's  form  of  Constitution  has  it,  "well  skilled  in
the  noble  science  and  the  Royal  Art,  and  duly  instructed  in  our
mysteries,  and  competent  to  preside  as  Master  over  a lodge."

In  the  25th  of  these  "General  Regulations"  it  is  directed  that  a

committee  shall  be  formed  at  the  time  of  the  Grand  Feast,  to  ex-
amine every  person  bringing  a ticket,  "to  discourse  him,  if  they

think  fit,  in  order  to  admit  or  debar  him  as  they  shall  see  cause."  It

was,  in  fact,  an  examining  committee,  to  inquire  into  the  qualifica-

tions of  applicants  for  admission  to  the  annual  meeting  of  the
Grand  Lodge.  The  members  of  such  a committee  must  neces-
sarily have  been  in  possession  of  the  highest  degree  practiced  by
the  Grand  Lodge.  It  is  very  evident  that  a Fellow-Craft  was  not
competent  to  examine  into  the  qualifications  and  attainments  of  a
Master  Mason.  Yet  the  Regulation  prescribes  that  to  compose

1 Anderson's  "Constitutions,"  edition  of  1723,  pp.  71,  72.

THE  INVENTION  OF  THE  THIRD  DEGREE

983

Such  a committee  "the  Masters  of  lodges  shall  each  appoint  one
experienced  and  discreet  Fellow-Craft  of  his  lodge."

But  there  is  evidence  in  these  "Regulations,"  not  only  that  Fel-
low-Crafts were  in  1723  appointed  to  the  responsible  offices  of
Tilers,  Wardens,  and  Committees  of  Examination,  but  that  they
were  competent  to  fill  the  next  to  the  highest  office  in  the  Craft.
The  17th  Regulation  says  that  "if  the  Deputy  Grand  Master  be
sick,  or  necessarily  absent,  the  Grand  Master  may  chuse  any  Fel-
low-Craft he  pleases  to  be  his  Deputy  pro  tempore ."

This,  I think,  is  as  conclusive  proof  as  legitimate  logical  deduc-
tion can  produce,  that  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  1723,  which  was
the  date  of  the  publication  of  these  "Regulations"  for  the  govern-
ment of  the  Grand  Lodge,  the  degree  of  Fellow-Craft  was  the  high-
est practiced  by  the  Grand  Lodge,  and  that  the  degree  of  Master
Mason  was  not  then  known  or  recognized  in  the  system  of  Spec-
ulative Freemasonry.  A Fellow-Craft  presiding  over  Master
Masons  would  indeed  be  a Masonic  anomaly  of  which  it  would
require  something  more  than  a blind  reverence  for  the  claims  of
antiquity  to  extort  belief.

The  citations  that  I have  made  seem  to  me  to  leave  no  doubt
on  the  mind.  The  whole  spirit  and  tenor  of  these  "General
Regulations,"  as  well  as  the  "Form  of  Constituting  a new  Lodge,"
which  is  so  closely  appended  to  them  as  to  make,  as  it  were,  a
part  of  them,  go  to  prove  that  at  the  time  they  were  approved  by
the  Grand  Lodge,  which  was  on  January  17,  1723,  there  were  but
two  degrees  recognized  in  Speculative  Freemasonry,  namely,  those
of  Entered  Apprentice  and  Fellow-Craft;  and  that  at  that  time
the  degree  of  Master  Mason  constituted  no  part  of  the  system.

That  Anderson  himself  placed  the  same  interpretation  on  these
passages,  and  was  perfectly  aware  of  the  deduction  to  be  made  from
them,  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  when  he  next  published  these
"General  Regulations,"  which  was  in  the  second  edition  of  the  Book
of  Constitutions,  in  1738,  at  which  time  there  is  no  doubt  of  the
existence  of  the  Master's  degree,  he  almost  invariably  changed  the
words  "Fellow-Craft"  to  "Master  Mason."

And,  accordingly,  we  find  that  in  1738  the  Wardens,  the  Tiler,
and  the  Assistant  Treasurer  and  Secretary  were  required  to  be  Mas-
ter Masons.  The  change  had  taken  place,  and  the  Third  degree
had  been  adopted  between  the  years  1723  and  1738.

984

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

But  those  who  deny  this  theory  and  contend  that  the  Third  de-
gree is  of  greater  antiquity,  and  was  known  and  practiced  long  be-
fore the  beginning  of  the  18th  century,  would  quote  against  my
argument  the  words  contained  in  the  13th  Regulation,  which  words
are  as  follows:

"Apprentices  must  be  admitted  Masters  and  Fellow-Craft  only

here  (in  the  Grand  Lodge)  unless  by  a dispensation."

I candidly  admit  that  if  this  passage  be  proved  to  be  a genuine
part  of  the  original  "General  Regulations,"  compiled  in  1720  by
Grand  Master  Payne  and  approved  in  1723  by  the  Grand  Lodge,
the  question  would  be  decided  at  once  and  we  could  no  longer
doubt  that  the  Third  degree  was  in  existence  not  only  in  1723,  but
three  years  before,  that  is,  in  1720.

But  I do  not  hesitate  to  assert  that  this  passage  is  an  interpola-
tion by  Anderson  and  Desaguliers,  made  for  a certain  purpose,  and  I
think  that  this  assertion  is  capable  of  critical  proof.

In  criticism  there  are  two  methods  of  determining  whether  a

suspected  passage  in  an  ancient  work  or  an  old  document  is  genuine
or  spurious.

The  first  method  is  by  the  collation  of  other  editions  or  manu-
scripts. If,  in  the  examination  of  an  ancient  manuscript,  a certain
passage  is  found  which  is  not  met  with  in  any  other  manuscripts  of
an  anterior  or  a contemporary  date,  it  is  deduced  from  this  collation
that  the  passage  is  an  interpolation  by  the  writer  of  that  particular
manuscript,  because  if  it  were  genuine  and  a part  of  the  original

writing  it  would  have  been  found  in  all  the  older  manuscripts,  from
one  of  which  it  must  have  been  copied.

It  is  by  this  method  of  reasoning  that  the  most  eminent  Biblical
critics  have  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  the  celebrated  passage  in
the  First  Epistle  General  of  St.  John  (v.  7)  is  an  interpolation.

Since  it  is  not  found  in  any  of  the  earlier  Greek  manuscripts  of  the
Epistle,  it  must,  they  argue,  have  been  subsequently  inserted,  per-
haps from  a marginal  commentary,  either  carelessly  or  designedly,
by  some  later  copyist  whose  error  has  been  followed  by  all  succeed-
ing scribes.  This  is  criticism  from  external  evidence.

But  there  are  other  instances  in  which  it  is  not  possible  to  col-
late the  book  or  manuscript  which  contains  the  suspected  passage
with  others  of  an  earlier  date.  Where  there  is  but  one  copy  extant,
there  can.  of  course,  be  no  comparison.  In  such  cases  it  becomes

THE  INVENTION  OF  THE  THIRD  DEGREE

985

necessary  to  determine  whether  the  passage  be  genuine  or  spurious
by  what  the  critics  call  the  method  by  internal  evidence.

If  the  suspected  passage  is  found  to  contain  the  expression  of

opinions  which,  we  are  led  to  believe  from  the  known  character  of
the  author,  he  could  not  have  uttered;  or,  if  the  statements  which
it  sets  forth  are  plainly  in  conflict  with  other  statements  made  in  the
same  work;  or  if  it  be  found  in  a part  of  the  work  where  it  does  not
harmonize  with  the  preceding  and  following  portions  of  the  con-
text; or,  in  short,  if  the  whole  spirit  and  tenor  of  the  other  writings

of  the  same  author  are  in  unmistaken  opposition  to  the  spirit  and

tenor  of  the  passage  under  review;  and,  above  all,  if  a reasonable
motive  can  be  suggested  which  may  have  given  occasion  to  the  in-
terpolation, then  the  critic,  guided  by  all  or  most  of  these  reasons,

will  not  hesitate  to  declare  that  the  suspected  passage  is  spurious;
that  it  formed  no  part  of  the  original  book  or  manuscript,  and  that
it  is  an  interpolation  made  subsequent  to  the  original  composition.
This  is  criticism  from  internal  evidence.

It  is  by  this  method  that  the  critics  have  been  led  to  the  con-
clusion that  a certain  passage  in  the  Antiquities  of  Flavius  Jose-
phus, in  which  he  eulogizes  Jesus,  was  not  written,  and  could  not
have  been  written,  by  the  Jewish  historian.  Not  only  does  its  in-
sertion very  awkwardly  interrupt  the  continuity  of  the  narrative  in
which  the  author  was  engaged  at  the  time,  but  the  sentiments  of
the  passage  are  wholly  irreconcilable  with  the  character  of  Josephus.
As  a Pharisee,  at  least  professedly,  he  was  influenced  by  all  the
prejudices  of  his  sect  and  his  nation  against  the  new  sect  of  Chris-
tians and  its  founder.  Such  a man  never  could  have  vouched,  as
the  writer  of  this  passage  does,  for  the  Messiahship,  the  miraculous
powers,  and  the  resurrection  of  Jesus.

Hence  it  is  now  believed  by  nearly  all  scholars  that  the  pas-
sage was  interpolated  as  a "pious  fraud"  by  some  early  Christian
who  was  anxious  to  enlist  in  favor  of  his  religion  the  authority  of
one  of  the  most  eminent  of  its  adversaries.

It  is  now  my  purpose  to  apply  these  principles  to  an  investiga-
tion of  the  only  passage  in  the  "General  Regulations"  which  fur-
nishes any  evidence  of  the  existence  of  the  Third  degree  at  the  time
when  they  were  compiled.

As  the  copy  of  the  "General  Regulations"  contained  in  An-
derson's Constitutions  of  1723  is  the  first  edition;  as  the  original

986

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

manuscript  copy  is  lost;  and  as  there  were  no  previously  printed
copies,  it  is  impossible,  through  comparison  and  collation,  to  prove
from  external  evidence  that  the  passage  referring  to  the  Third  de-
gree is  spurious.

We  must  then  have  recourse  to  the  second  method  of  critical  in-
vestigation, that  is,  by  internal  evidence.

And  submitted  to  this  test,  the  suspected  passage  fails,  I think,
to  maintain  a claim  to  genuineness.

Although  the  first  edition  of  the  Constitutions  is  now  readily  ac-
cessible in  consequence  of  its  numerous  reprints,  still,  for  the  sake
of  convenience  to  the  reader,  in  the  discussion  1 shall  copy  the  whole
of  the  paragraph  in  which  the  suspected  passage  is  contained,  mark-
ing that  passage  by  italics.

The  passage  will  be  found  in  the  first  paragraph  of  Article  XIII.
of  the  "General  Regulations,"  and  is  in  these  words:

"At  the  said  Quarterly  Communications,  all  Matters  that  con-

cern the  Fraternity  in  general,  or  particular  Lodges  or  single  Broth-
ers, are  quietly,  sedately,  and  maturely  to  be  discours'd  of  and

transacted:  Apprentices  must  be  admitted  Masters  and  Fellow-
Craft  only  here  unless  by  a Dispensation.  Here  also  all  Differences
that  can  not  be  made  up  and  accommodated  privately,  nor  by  a par-
ticular Lodge,  are  to  be  seriously  considered  and  decided;  And  if
any  Brother  thinks  himself  aggrieved  by  the  decision  of  this  Board,
he  may  appeal  to  the  annual  Grand  Lodge  next  coming,  and  leave

his  Appeal  in  Writing,  with  the  Grand  Master  or  his  Deputy,  or  the

Grand  Wardens."

Anyone  not  prepossessed  with  the  theory  of  the  antiquity  of  the
Third  degree  who  will  look  at  this  paragraph  will,  I think,  be  struck
with  the  suspicious  incongruity  of  the  clause  in  italics  in  relation  to
the  parts  that  precede  and  follow  it.  I will  endeavor  to  demonstrate
this  point  as  follows:

The  13th  Article  of  the  "General  Regulations"  is  divided  into
eight  paragraphs.  Each  of  these  paragraphs  is  wholly  independent
and  homogeneous  in  respect  to  its  subject-matter.  Each  is  devoted
to  the  consideration  of  one  subject  only,  to  the  exclusion  of  all
others.

Thus  the  first  paragraph  relates  to  matters  that  concern  lodges
and  private  brethren,  such  as  differences  that  can  not  be  settled  oth-
erwise than  by  the  Grand  Lodge.  The  second  paragraph  relates  to

THE  INVENTION  OF  THE  THIRD  DEGREE

987

the  returns  of  lodges  and  the  mode  and  manner  of  making  them.
The  third  relates  to  the  charity  fund  and  the  most  effectual  method
of  collecting  and  disposing  of  money  for  that  purpose.  The  fourth
to  the  appointment  of  a Treasurer  and  a Secretary  for  the  Grand
Lodge,  and  to  their  duties.  The  fifth  to  the  appointment  of  a clerk
for  each  of  those  officers.  The  sixth  to  the  mode  of  inspecting  their
books  and  accounts.  The  seventh  to  the  appointment  of  a Tiler  to
look  after  the  door  of  the  Grand  Lodge.  And  the  eighth  provides
for  the  making  of  a new  regulation  for  the  government  of  these  offi-
cers whenever  it  may  be  deemed  expedient.

Thus  it  will  be  seen,  from  this  synopsis,  that  each  of  these  para-
graphs embraces  but  one  subject.  Whatever  is  begun  to  be  treated
at  the  opening  of  a paragraph  is  continued  without  interruption  and
without  the  admission  of  any  other  matter  to  its  close.

This  methodical  arrangement  has,  in  fact,  been  preserved  through-
out the  whole  of  the  thirty-nine  "Regulations."  No  Regulation
will  be  found  which  embodies  the  consideration  of  two  different  and
irrelevant  subjects.

So  uniformly  is  this  rule  observed  that  it  may  properly  be
called  a peculiar  characteristic  of  the  style  of  the  writer,  and  a de-
viation from  it  becomes,  according  to  the  axioms  of  criticism,  at
once  suspicious.

Now  this  deviation  occurs  only  in  the  first  paragraph  of  the  13th
Article,  the  one  which  has  been  printed  above.

That  paragraph,  as  originally  written,  related  to  the  disputes  and
difference  which  might  arise  between  particular  lodges  and  between
single  brethren,  and  prescribed  the  mode  in  which  they  should  be

settled  when  they  could  not  "be  made  up  and  accommodated  pri-
vately." Leaving  out  the  lines  which  I have  printed  in  italics,  we
will  find  that  the  paragraph  is  divided  into  three  clauses,  each  sepa-
rated from  the  other  by  a colon.

The  first  clause  directs  that  all  matters  that  concern  the  Frater-
nity in  general,  particular  lodges  or  single  brethren,  "are  quietly,

sedately,  and  maturely  to  be  discoursed  of  and  transacted"  in  the
Grand  Lodge.  It  is  to  questions  that  might  arise  between  lodges
and  brethren — questions  which  in  modern  phraseology  are  called

grievances — that  the  clause  evidently  refers.  And  in  the  Grand
Lodge  only  are  such  questions  to  be  discussed,  because  it  is  only

there  that  they  can  be  definitely  settled.

988

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

The  second  clause  continues  the  same  subject,  and  extends  it  to
those  differences  of  brethren  which  can  not  be  accommodated  pri-
vately by  the  lodges  of  which  they  are  members.

And  the  third  clause  provides  that  if  the  decision  made  by  the
Grand  Lodge  at  its  Quarterly  Communication  is  not  satisfactory  to
the  parties  interested,  it  may  be  carried  up,  by  appeal,  to  the  Grand
Lodge  in  its  Annual  Communication.

Now,  it  is  evident  that  this  whole  paragraph  is  intended  to  ex-
plain the  duties  of  the  Quarterly  Communication  as  a Board  of  In-
quiry in  respect  to  matters  in  dispute  between  lodges  and  between
the  Craft,  and  the  paragraph  itself  calls  the  decision  of  the  Grand
Lodge  on  these  occasions  the  "Decision  of  this  Board."

Viewed  in  this  way,  this  first  paragraph  of  the  13th  Article  is
entirely  congruous  in  all  its  parts,  refers  to  but  one  subject,  and  is  a
perfect  specimen  of  the  style  adopted  by  the  compiler  and  pursued
by  him  in  all  the  other  portions  of  the  "Regulations"  without  a
single  exception — a style  plain,  simple,  and  methodical,  yet  as  marked
and  isolated  from  other  styles  as  is  the  Doric  roughness  of  Carlyle
or  the  diffusiveness  of  De  Quincey  from  the  manner  of  composition
of  other  authors  in  a more  elevated  class  of  literature.

But  if  we  insert  the  passage  printed  in  italics  between  the  first
and  second  clauses,  we  will  at  once  see  the  incongruity  which  is  in-
troduced by  the  interpolation.

Placed  as  it  is  between  the  first  and  second  clauses,  it  breaks
the  continuity  of  the  subject.  A regulation  which  refers  to  the  dif-
ferences and  disputes  among  the  Craft,  and  the  mode  of  settling
them,  is  disjointed  and  interrupted  by  another  one  relating  to  an
entirely  different  subject — namely,  the  initiation  of  Master  Masons
and  Fellow-Crafts.

What  has  the  subject  of  initiation  to  do  with  that  of  fraternal
or  lodge  disputes?  Why  should  a regulation  relating  to  degrees  be
mixed  up  with  another  of  a totally  distinct  and  different  character?

Judging,  as  we  are  not  only  authorized  but  compelled,  as  critical
observers,  to  do,  from  the  style  of  the  compiler  of  the  "Regula-
tions" and  the  uniform  custom  pursued  by  him,  we  feel  certain  that
if  this  passage  formed  a genuine  part  of  the  "Regulations,"  he
would  have  placed  it  in  an  independent  paragraph.  That  this  has
not  been  done  affords  a strong  presumption  that  the  passage  is  an
interpolation,  and  that  it  formed  no  part  of  the  "Regulations"

THE  INVENTION  OF  THE  THIRD  DEGREE

989

when  compiled  about  the  year  1720,  most  probably  by  Grand  Mas-
ter Payne,  at  the  same  time  that  he  compiled  the  "Charges"
printed  in  the  same  volume.

Still  more  suspicious  is  the  fact  that  except  in  this  passage  there
is  not  in  the  "General  Regulations"  the  slightest  allusion  to  Mas-
ter Masons  or  to  the  Master's  degree.  As  has  already  been  shown,
the  whole  spirit  and  tenor  of  the  "Regulations"  is  to  the  effect  that
the  highest  grade  in  Freemasonry  at  that  time,  and  the  one  from
which  all  officers  were  to  be  selected,  was  that  of  Fellow-Craft.
It  is  impossible  to  believe  that  if,  at  the  time  of  the  preparation  of
the  "Regulations"  and  their  approval  by  the  Grand  Lodge,  the  de-
gree of  Master  Mason  was  in  existence,  it  would  have  been  passed

over  in  such  complete  silence,  and  all  important  matters  referred  to

a subordinate  degree.

Hence  I again  deduce  the  conclusion  that  at  the  time  of  the
compiling  of  these  "Regulations"  and  their  approval  by  the  Grand
Lodge,  the  Third  degree  was  not  in  existence  as  a part  of  Specula-
tive Masonry.

And  then  I assume  as  a logical  deduction  from  these  premises
that  the  clause  in  the  first  paragraph  of  the  13th  General  Regula-
tion is  an  interpolation  inserted  in  those  "Regulations"  between

the  time  of  their  being  approved  and  the  time  of  their  final  pas-

sage through  the  press.

It  is  barely  possible  that  the  suspected  clause  may  have  been

inserted  in  the  copy  presented  to  the  Grand  Lodge  on  March  25,
1722,  for  examination  and  approval,  and  have  escaped  the  attention
of  the  reviewers  from  the  fact  that  it  was  obscurely  placed  in  the

center  of  a paragraph  relating  to  an  entirely  different  subject.  Or

the  Committee  may  have  concurred  with  Desaguliers  and  Anderson
in  the  policy  of  anticipating  the  control  of  the  degree  when  it  should
be  presented  to  the  Craft,  by  an  ante  factum  regulation.

Be  that  as  it  may,  the  passage  formed  neither  then  nor  at  any
time  thereafter  a genuine  part  of  the  "General  Regulations,"

although  from  its  appearance  in  the  printed  copies  it  was  as  a mere
matter  of  course  accepted  as  a part  of  the  law.  It  was,  however,
soon  afterward  repealed  and  a regulation  was  adopted  on  November
22,  1725,  which  remitted  to  the  Master  and  Wardens,  with  a com-
petent number  of  the  lodge,  the  power  of  making  Masters  and  Fel-
lows at  discretion.

990

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

The  questions  next  arise,  by  whom,  at  what  time,  and  for  what
purpose  was  this  interpolation  inserted?

By  whom?  I answer,  by  Anderson  at  the  instigation  of
Desaguliers,  under  whose  direction  and  with  whose  assistance  the
former  had  compiled  the  first  edition  of  the  Book  of  Constitutions.1

At  what  time?  This  question  is  more  difficult  to  answer  than

the  preceding  one.  At  the  communication  of  the  Grand  Lodge,
September  29,  1721,  Anderson  was  ordered  to  prepare  the  Book  of
Constitutions.  On  December  27,  1721,  the  manuscript  was  pre-
sented to  the  Grand  Lodge  and  referred  to  a committee.  On
March  25,  1722,  the  Committee  reported  and  the  work  was  ordered
to  be  printed.  On  January  17,  1723,  Anderson  produced  the  new

Book  of  Constitutions,  which  was  again  approved,  "with  the  addi-
tion of  the  Ancient  manner  of  constituting  a lodge."

Now,  between  September,  1721,  when  the  book  was  ordered  to

be  prepared,  and  March,  1722,  when  the  work  was  approved  and

ordered  to  be  printed,  the  passage  could  not  have  existed  as  a regu-
lation, because,  in  the  first  place,  it  was  directly  antagonistic  to  the

body  of  the  work,  in  which  there  is  no  mention  of  the  Third
degree;2  but,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  distinctly  stated  that  the  Fellow-
Crafts  were  in  possession  of  all  the  secrets,  and  they  alone  could
understand  them.3  And,  secondly,  any  such  regulation  would  come

in  direct  conflict  with  the  "Manner  of  Constituting  a Lodge"
approved  at  the  same  time,  and  which,  completely  ignoring  the

Master's  degree,  directed  the  Master  and  Wardens  to  be  selected

from  among  the  Fellow-Crafts  of  the  lodge.  The  Master's  degree

could  not  have  been  known  at  that  time  as  a part  of  the  system  of

1 This  edition  is  dedicated  to  the  Duke  of  Montague,  not  by  Anderson,  but  by  De-
saguliers,  with  an  air  of  patronage  to  the  author,  as  if  it  were  a work  accomplished  by
his  direction.

2 In  describing  the  Temple  of  Solomon,  Anderson,  it  is  true,  enumerates  among  the

workmen  "3,600  Princes  or  Master  Masons,  to  conduct  the  work  according  to  Solomon's

directions."  (Page  10.)  But  it  is  very  clear  that  these  were  simply  "Masters  of  the

Work" — the  "Magistri  Operis"  of  the  old  Operative  Freemasons — skilled  Craftsmen
appointed  to  superintend  the  bands  or  lodges  of  workmen  engaged  in  the  construction  of
the  building.

3 In  a note  on  a page  of  the  "Book  of  Constitutions,"  Anderson  says:  "No  man
can  indeed  understand  it  (Masonry)  without  the  key  of  a Fellow-Craft."  Certainly,  he  at
that  time  knew  nothing  of  a higher  degree.  This  passage  was  probably  written  in  1721,
when  he  was  directed  by  the  Grand  Lodge  to  compile  a "Book  of  Constitutions."  Much
Of  the  proposed  work  was  then  in  manuscript.

THE  INVENTION  OF  THE  THIRD  DEGREE

991

Freemasonry,  and  no  regulation  in  reference  to  it  was  therefore
accessary.

Anderson  has  by  implication  admitted  the  soundness  of  this
reasoning,  because  when  he  published  the  second  edition  of  the
Constitution  in  1738,  the  Third  degree  being  then  a recognized
part  of  the  system,  he  changed  the  words  "Fellow  Crafts"  where-
ever  they  occurred  in  the  "Charges,"  as  indicating  the  highest  de-
gree in  the  "Regulations,"  and  in  the  "Manner  of  Constituting  a
Lodge,"  to  the  words  "Master  Mason."

I think,  therefore,  that  the  suspected  clause  was  inserted  in  the
13th  Regulation  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  1723,  just  before  the
work  was  issued  from  the  press.  There  was  neither  time  nor  op-
portunity to  make  any  other  changes  in  the  book  and  its  appen-
dices, and  therefore  this  clause  stands  in  reference  to  all  the  other
parts  of  the  Constitutions,  Regulations,  etc.,  in  all  the  incongruity
which  I have  endeavored  to  demonstrate.

For  what  purpose?  The  reply  to  this  question  will  involve  the
determination  of  the  time  at  which  the  Third  degree  was  introduced
into  the  ritual  of  Freemasonry.  The  theory  which  I present  on
this  subject  is  as  follows:

If  the  suspected  clause  which  has  been  under  consideration  be
admitted  to  be  no  genuine  part  of  the  Book  of  Constitutions,  then
it  must  follow  that  there  is  not  the  slightest  evidence  of  the  ex-
istence of  the  Third  degree  in  the  Ritual  of  Speculative  Masonry

up  to  the  year  1723.

It  is  now  very  generally  admitted  that  the  arrangement  of  Free-
masonry into  the  present  system  of  three  degrees  was  the  work  of
Dr.  Desaguliers,  assisted  by  Anderson,  Payne,  and  perhaps  some
other  collaborators.  The  perfecting  of  this  system  was  of  very  slow
growth.  At  first  there  was  but  the  one  degree,  which  had  been  de-

rived from  the  Operative  Masons  of  preceding  centuries.  This  was
the  degree  practiced  in  1717,  when  the  so-called  "Revival"  took  place.
It  was  no  doubt  improved  by  Desaguliers,  who  was  Grand  Master
in  1719,  and  who  probably  about  that  time  began  his  ritualistic

experiments.  The  fact  that  Payne,  in  1718,  "desired  any  brethren
to  bring  to  the  Grand  Lodge  any  old  writings  and  records  concern-
ing Masons  and  Masonry  in  order  to  shew  the  usages  of  antient
times,"1  exhibits  a disposition  and  preparation  for  improvement.

1 "Book  of  Constitutions,"  2d  edition,  1738.

992

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

The  First  and  Second  degrees  had  been  modeled  out  of  the  one
primitive  degree  about  the  year  1719.  The  "Charges"  compiled  in
1720  by  Grand  Master  Payne  recognize  the  Fellow-Craft  as  the
leading  degree  and  the  one  from  which  the  officers  of  lodges  and
of  the  Grand  Lodge  were  to  be  selected.  The  same  recognition
is  found  in  the  "General  Regulations,"  and  in  the  Constitutions
which  were  printed  in  1723.

Up  to  this  time  we  find  no  notice  of  the  Third  degree.  The
"particular  lodges"  conferred  only  the  First  degree.  Admission  or
initiation  into  the  Second  degree  was  done  in  the  Grand  Lodge.
This  was  perhaps  owing  to  the  fact  that  Desaguliers  and  the  inven-
tors of  the  new  degree  were  unwilling  to  place  it  out  of  their  imme-
diate control,  lest  improper  persons  might  be  admitted  or  the  cere-
monies be  imperfectly  performed.

In  1722  I imagine  that  Desaguliers  and  his  collaborators  had  di-
rected their  attention  to  a further  and  more  complete  organization.

The  Operative  Masons  had  always  had  three  different  ranks  or

classes  of  workmen,  but  not  degrees  in  the  modem  Masonic  sense
of  that  word.  These  were  the  Masters,  who  undertook  the  work
and  superintended  it;  the  Fellow-Crafts  or  Journeymen,  who  did
the  manual  labor;  and  the  Apprentices,  who  were  engaged  in  ac-
quiring a knowledge  of  their  handicraft.

After  the  "Revival,"  in  1717  (I  use  the  term  under  protest),
Desaguliers  had  divided  the  one  degree  which  had  been  common  to
the  three  classes  into  two,  making  the  degrees  of  Entered  Appren-
tice and  Fellow-Craft.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  this  was  a
mere  division  of  the  esoteric  instruction  into  two  parts.  All  is

here,  of  course,  mere  guess-work.  The  rituals  were  oral,  and  there
is  no  memorial  of  them  left  except  what  we  can  leam  from  The
Grand  Mystery > and  the  Sloane  MS.  3329.  But  we  may  believe
that  taking  the  primitive  degree  of  the  Operatives  as  a foundation,
there  was  built  upon  it  an  enlarged  superstructure  of  ceremonies
and  lectures.  The  catechism  of  the  degree  was  probably  changed
and  improved,  and  the  "Mason  Word,"  as  the  Operatives  had  called
it,  with  the  secrets  connected  with  it,  was  transferred  to  the  Second
degree,  to  be  afterward  again  transferred  to  the  Third  degree.

After  this,  Desaguliers  continued  to  exercise  his  inventive  genius,
and  consummated  the  series  of  degrees  by  adding  one  to  be  appro-
priated to  the  highest  class,  or  that  of  the  Masters.  But  not  having

THE  INVENTION  OF  THE  THIRD  DEGREE

993

thoroughly  perfected  the  ritual  of  the  degree  until  after  the  time  of
publication  of  the  Book  of  Constitutions,  it  was  not  probably  dissem-
inated among  the  Craft  until  the  year  1723.

The  Second  degree,  as  we  have  seen,  had  been  invented  in  the
year  1719.  Its  ritual  had  been  completed,  but  the  Masters  of  the
lodges  had  not  yet  become  so  well  acquainted  with  its  forms  and
ceremonies  as  to  be  capable  of  managing  an  initiation.

The  lodges,  therefore,  between  1719  and  1723,  did  not  confer

the  Second  degree.  They  were  not  restricted  from  so  doing  by  any
regulation,  for  there  were  no  regulations  on  the  subject  enacted  un-
til the  approval  of  the  Book  of  Constitutions  by  the  Grand  Lodge  in
January,  1723.  Besides,  if  there  had  been  any  law  restricting  the
conferring  of  the  Second  degree  to  the  Grand  Lodge,  Desaguliers
would  not  have  violated  the  law,  which  was  of  his  own  making,  by
conferring  it  in  1721  in  a lodge  in  Edinburgh.

The  fact  undoubtedly  is,  that  the  lodges  did  not  confer  the

Second  degree  in  consequence  of  a usage  derived  from  necessity.
Dr.  Desaguliers  and  his  collaborators  were  the  only  persons  in  pos-
session of  the  ritual,  and  therefore  qualified  to  confer  the  degree,

which  they  always  did  in  the  Grand  Lodge,  for  two  reasons:  first,

for  their  own  convenience,  and  secondly,  because  they  feared  that  if
the  ceremony  of  initiation  was  intrusted  to  the  officers  of  the  lodges
who  were  inexperienced  and  unskillful,  it  might  be  mutilated  or  un-
satisfactorily performed.

In  the  meantime  Desaguliers  had  extended  his  labors  as  a ritual-
maker,  and  had  invented  a supplementary  or  Third  degree.  But  as
is  said  of  a cardinal  whose  appointment  the  Pope  has  made  but  has
not  yet  announced  to  the  college  of  Cardinals,  the  degree  was  still

in  petto.  The  knowledge  of  it  was  confined  to  Dr.  Desaguliers  and

a few  of  his  friends.

It  is  absolutely  impossible  that  the  degree  could  have  been
known  generally  to  the  members  of  the  Grand  Lodge.  For  with
the  knowledge  that  the  establishment  of  such  a degree  was  even  in

contemplation,  they  would  not  have  approved  a series  of  regulations

which  recognized  throughout  the  Second  or  Fellow-Craft  as  the
highest  degree  in  Speculative  Freemasonry,  and  the  one  from  which
Grand  Masters  were  in  future  to  be  selected.

But  a code  of  laws  was  about  to  be  established  for  the  govern-
ment of  the  Craft — a code  expressly  appropriated  to  the  new  sys-

994

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

tern  of  Speculative  Freemasonry,  which  by  this  time  had  completely
dissevered  itself  from  the  Operative  institution.

This  code  was  to  be  published  for  the  information  of  the  Frater-
nity, so  that  every  Freemason  might  know  what  was  to  be  hence-
forth his  duties  and  his  rights.  Law  was  now  to  become  paramount
to  usage,  and  if  there  were  no  positive  regulation  which  restricted
the  conferring  of  the  Second  degree  to  the  Grand  Lodge,  it  would,
if  permanently  adopted  as  a part  of  the  new  system,  fall  into  the
hands  of  the  Masters  of  the  particular  lodges.

This  was  an  evil  which,  for  the  reason  already  assigned,  was,  if
possible,  to  be  avoided.  It  would  also  apply  to  the  Third  degree,
which,  though  not  yet  in  practical  existence,  was,  soon  after  the

adoption  of  the  "General  Regulations,"  to  be  presented  to  the
Grand  Lodge  and  put  in  working  order.

Therefore,  anticipating  the  dissemination  of  the  Third  degree,
and  being  desirous  to  restrict  it  as  well  as  the  Second,  by  a positive
law,  to  the  Grand  Lodge,  he,  with  Anderson,  interpolated,  at  the
last  moment,  into  the  13th  of  the  "General  Regulations"  the  words,
"Apprentices  must  be  admitted  Masters  and  Fellow-Craft  only  here,
unless  by  dispensation."

This  is  a serious  charge  to  make  against  any  writer  of  good  repu-
tation, and  it  would  be  an  act  of  great  temerity  to  do  so,  unless  there
were  ample  proof  to  sustain  it.  But  I think  the  arguments  I have
advanced,  though  only  based  on  legitimate  inferences  and  the

internal  evidence  afforded  by  the  document  itself,  have  shown  that
this  passage  could  never  have  formed  a part  of  the  "Regulations"  as
originally  compiled  by  Payne  and  afterward  approved  and  adopted
by  the  Grand  Lodge.

But  while  we  pay  all  due  respect  to  the  memory  of  Dr.  Ander-
son, and  hold  in  grateful  remembrance  his  zeal  and  devotion  in  the
foundation  and  advancement  of  Speculative  Freemasonry,  it  is  im-
possible to  concede  to  him  the  possession  of  those  virtues  of  accu-
racy and  truthfulness  which  are  essential  to  the  character  of  an

historian.

The  motive  of  Desaguliers  and  Anderson  for  inserting  the  inter-
polated clause  into  the  "General  Regulations"  was  to  prevent  the
two  new  degrees  from  falling  into  the  hands  of  unskilled  Masters  of
lodges,  until  by  future  experience  they  should  become  qualified  to
confer  them.

(Facsimile  rerrint  from  the  original  edition  of  the  “ Book  of  Constitutions.”)

THE

CONSTITUTIONS

OF  THE

FREE-MASONS.

containing  the

Hiflory, ; Charges,  Regulations , &c.
of  that  moft  Ancient  and  Right
Worfhipful  FRATERNITY.

For  the  Ufe  of  the  LODGES.

LONDON:

Printed  by  Wiliiam  Hunter,  for  John  Se^nex  at  th eGlobe,
and  John  Hooke  at  the  Flower-de-luce  over-againft  St.  Dun  flans
Cburch3  in  Fleet-flreet.

In  the  Year  of  Mafonry  57*3

aAnno  ‘Domini  *7*3

THE

CONSTITUTION,

Hiftory , Laws,  Charges,  Orders,
Regulations,  and  Ufages,

OF  THE

Right  Worfhipful  FRATERNITY-  of

Accepted  Free  MASONS ;

COLLECTED

From  their  general  RECORDS,  and
their  faithful  TRADITIONS  of
many  Ages.

TO  EE  READ

At  the  Admifiion  of  a New  Brother,  when  the
eCftiafter  or  Warden  ihall  begin,  or  order  fome
other  Brother  to  read  as  follows  ;

DAM,  our  fir  ft  Parent,  created  after  the
Image  of  God,  the  great  Architect  of  the
Vniverfe,  muft  have  had  the  Liberal
Sciences,  particularly  Geometry,  written  on  Year  oi
his  Heart ; for  even  fince  the  Fall,  we  find  the^ld
the  Principles  of  it  in  the  Hearts  of  his  Offspring,  and  b<S£I*
which,  in  procefs  of  time,  have  been  drawn  fortli  into

A a con-

( 49  )

C H A J*  G E S

FREE-MASON,

EXTRACTED  FROM

The  ancient  of  Lodges

beyond  Sea,  and  of  thofe  m England,  Scotland,
and  Ireland,  for  .die  Ufe  of  the  Lodges  in  London:

TO  BE  READ

At  the  making  of  New  Brethren,  or  when  the
MASTER  fhall  order  it.

The  General  Meatus,  viz.

F God  and  Religion.

II.  Of  die  C i v i l Magistrate  fupreme  and
fubordinate.

III.  Of  L o D g e s.

IV.  Of  Masters,  Wardens , Bellows , and
prentices.

V.  Of  the  Management  of  the  Craft  in  working.

VI.  Of  Behaviour,  viz.

1.  In  the  Lodge  while  conftituted.

2.  After  the  Lodge  is  over  and  the  Brethren  not  gone.

3.  When  Brethren  meet:  without  Strangers,  but  not  in  a
Lodge.

4.  In  Prefence  of  Strangers  not  Mafons.

5.  At  Home,  and  in  the  Neighbourhood

6.  Towards  a firange  Brother.

G I.  Con-

(*0)

I Concer  ning  God  and  Religion.

A Mafon  is  oblig’d,  by  hisTenure,  to  obey  the  moral  Law ; and  if  he
lightly  underftands  the  Art,  he  will  never  be  a ftupid  nor  an  irre-

ligious jUbfttme.  But  though  in  ancient  Times  Mafons  were  charg’d
in  every  Country  to  be  of  the  Religion  of  that  Country  or  Nation,
whatever  it  was,  yet  ’tis  now  thought  more  expedient  only  to  oblige
them  to  that  Religion  in  which  all  Men  agree,  leaving  their  particular
Opinions  to  themfelves  j that  is,  to  be  good  Men  and  true , or  Men  of
Honour  and  Honefty,  by  whatever  Denominations  or  Perfutifions  they
may  bediftinguifh’d ; whereby  Mafonry  becomes  the  Center  of  Union y
and  the  Means  of  conciliating  true  Friendlhip  among  Perfbns  that
muft  have  remain’d  at  a perpetual  Diftance.

II.  Of  the  Civil  Magistrate  [ ufreme * and

fubordinate .

A Mafon  is  as  peaceable  Subject  to  the  CivU  Powers,  wherever  he
tefides  or  works,  and  is  never  to  be  concern’d  in  Plotsand  Confpiracies
agamft  the  Peace  and  Welfare  of  the  Nation,  nor  to  behave  himfelf
undutifully  to  inferior  Magiflrates  j for  as  Mafonry  hath  been  always
injured  by  War,  Bloodfhed,  and  Gonfufion,  fo  ancient  Kangs  and
Princes  have  been  much  difpos’d  to  encourage  the  Craftfmen,  becaufe
©f  their  Peaceablenefs  and  Loyalty , whereby  they  pradically  anfwer’d
the  Cavils  of  thek  Adverfaries,  and  promoted  the  Honour  of  the
Fraternity,  who  ever  flourifh’d  in  Times  of  Peace.  So  that  if  a Bro-
ther fhould  be  a Rebel  againft  the  State,  he  is  not  to  be  countenanc’d
in  his  Rebellion,  however  he  may  be  pitied  as  an  unhappy  Man  j and,
if  convi&ed  of  no  other  Crime,  though  the  loyal  Brotherhood  muft
and  ought  to  difown  his  Rebellion,  and  give  no  Umbrage  or  Ground
of  political  Jealoufy  to  the  Government  for  the  time  being  j they
cannot  expel  him  from  the  Lodge,  and  his  Relation  to  it  remains
indefeafible.

pi.  of

C )

III.  Of  Lodges.

A Lodge  is  a Place  where  Mafons  affemble  and  work:  Hence
that  Aflembly,  or  duly  organiz’d  Society  of  Mafons,  is  call’d  a
Lo  d g e,  and  every  Brother  ought  to  belong  to  one,  and  to  be  fab-
le# to  its  By-Laws  and  the  General  Regulations.  It  is
either  particular  or  general , and  will  be  beft  underftood  by  atten*
ding  it,  and  by  the  Regulations  of  the  General  ox  Grand  Lodge
hereunto  annex’d.  In  ancient  Times,  no  Mafter  or  Fellow  could
be  abfent  from  it,  efpecially  when  warn’d  to  appear  at  it,  without  in-
curring a fevere  Cenfure,  until  it  appear’d  to  die  Mafter  and  War-
dent , that  pure  Neceffrry  hinder’d  him.

The  Perfons  admitted  Members  of  a Lodge  mud  be  good  and  true
Men,  free-born,  and  of  mature  and  difcreet  Age,  no  Bondmen,  no.
Women,  no  immoral  or  fcandalous  Men,  but  of  good  Report.

IV.  Of  Masters,  Fellows,  and  Apprentices.

All.  Preferment  among.  Mafons  is  grounded  upon  real  Worth  and
perfonal  Merit  only  j that  fo  the  Lords  may  be  well  ferved,  the  Bre-
thren not  put  to  Shame,  nor  the  Royal  Craft  defpis’d : Therefore  no
.Mafter  or  Warden  is  chofen  by  Seniority,  but  for  his  Merit.  It  is  impof-
frble  to  deferibe  thefe  things  in  writing,  and  evety  Brother  mud  attend
in  his  Place,  and  learn  them  in  a way  peculiar  to  this  Fraternity:  Only
Candidates  may  know,  that  no  Mafter  fltould  take  an  Apprentice,  tin-
lefs  he  has  fafficient  Imployment  for  him,  and  unlefs  he  be  a perfe#
Youth,  having  no  Maim  or  Defeat  in  his  Body,  that  may  render  him
uncapable  of  learning  the  Art,  of  ferving  his'M afters  ILo^U,  and  of  being
made  a Brother , and  then  a Felbw-Craft  in  due  time,  even  after  he  has
ferved  fuch  a Term  of  Years  as  the  Cuftom  of  the  Country  dire&s  j and
that  he  faould  be  defeended  of  honeft  Parents ; that  fo,  when  other-
wife  qualify ’d,  he  may  arrive  to  the  Honour  of  being  the  Warden,
and  then  the  Mafterofthe  Lodge,  the  Grand  Warden,  and  at  length
the  G R a n d-M  a s t e r of  all  the  Lodges , according  to  his  Merit.

Ga  No

C ?z  )

No  Brother  can  be  a Warden  until  he  has  pafs’d  the  part  of  a
Fellow-Craft ; nor  a Master  until  he  has  aded  as  a Warden , nor
Grand-Warden  until  he  has  been  M after  of  a Lodge nor
(55?anO  unlefs  he  has  been  a Fellow-Craft  before  his  Elec-

tion, who  is  alfo  to  be  nobly  born,  or  a Gentleman  of  the  beft  FaJhion,
or  feme  eminent  Scholar , or  fome  curious  Architects  or  other  Artift,
defcended  of  honeft  Parents,  and  who  is  of  lingular  great  Merit  in  the
Opinion  of  the  Lodges.  And  for  the  better,  and  eafiet;,  and  more  ho-
nourable Difcharge  of  his  Office,  the  Grand-Majler  has  a Power  to
chufe  his  own  Deputy  G.r an d-M aster,  who.  muft  be  then,
or  muft  have  been  formerly,  the  Majler  of  a particular  Lodge , and
has  the  Privilege  of  ading  whatever  the -Grand-Master,  his
Principal , jhould  ad,  unlefs  the  hid  Principal  be  prefent,  orinterpofe
his  Authority  by  a Letter.

Thefe  Rulers  and  Governors,  fupreme  and  fubordinatey  of  the  ancient
Lodgey  are  to  be  obey’d  in  their  refpedive  Stations  by  all  the  Brethren,
according  to  the  old  Charges  and  Regulations y with  all  Humility,  Reve-
rence, Love,  and  Alacrity.

V.  Of  the  Management  of  the  Craft  in  working.

All  Mafons  jhall  work  honeftly  on  working  Days,  that  they  may
live  creditably  on  holy  Days  ; and  the  time  appointed  by  the  Law  of
the  Land,  or  confirm’d  by  Ciiftom,  jhall  be  oblferv’d.

The  moft  expert  of  the  Fellow-Craftfsnen  jhall  be  chofen  or  ap-
pointed the  M after s or  Overfeer  of  the  Lord's  Work;  who  is  to  be
call’d  Master  by  thofe  that  work  under  him.  The  Craftfmen
are  to  avoid  all  ill  Language,  and  to  call  each  other  by  no  difoblj-
ging  Name,  but  Brother  or  Fellow ; and  to  behave,  themfelves  courv
teoufly  within  and  without  the  Lodge .

The  M after j knowing  himfelf  to  be. able  of  Gunning,  jhall  under-
rate the  Lord's  Work  as  reafonably  as  poffible,  and  truly  difpend  his
Goods  as  if  they  were  his  .own;  nor  to  give  more  Wages  to  any
Brother  or  Apprentice  than  he  really  may  deferve.

Both  the  SltJaCtec  and  the  Mafons  receiving  their  Wages  juftly,  jhall
m faithful  to  the  Lords  and  honeftly  finilh  their  Work,  whether  Task

or

( ?? )

or  Journey*,  nor  put  the  Work  to  Task  that  hath  been  accuftom’d  to
journey.

None  fhall  difcover  Envy  at  the  Profperity  of  a Brother,  nor
fopplant  him,  or  put  him  out  of  his  Work,  if  he  be  capable  to
finilh  the  fame;  for  no  Man  can  finifh  another’s  Work  fo  much
to  the  Lord's  Profit,  unlefs  he  be  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the
Defigns  and  Draughts  of  him  that  began  it.

When  a Fello w-Craftfinan  is  chofen  Warden  of  the  Work  under
the  Majier,  he  fhall  be  true  both  to  Majier  and  Fellows , fhall  careful-
ly overfee  the  Work  in  the  Majier  s Abfence  to  the  Lord's  Profit  j and
his  Brethren  fhall  obey  him.

All  Mafons  employ’d,  fhall  meekly  receive  their  Wages  without
Murmuring  or  Mutiny,  and  not  defert  the  Majier  till  the  Work
is  finifh’d.

A younger  Brother  fhall  be  inftrutfted  in  working,  fo  prevent
fpoiling  the  Materials  for  want  of  Judgment,  and  for  encreafing
and  continuing  of  Brotherly  Love.

All  the  Tools  ufed  in  working  fhall  be  approved  by  the  Grand
Lodge.

No  Labourer  fhalL  be  employ’d  in  the  proper  Work  of  Mafonry j
nor  fhall  ^afon0  work  with  thofe  that  are  not  free , without  an
urgent  Necefiity ; nor  fhall  they  teach  Labourers  and  unaccepted  Ma-
fons, as  they  fhould  teach  a Brother  or  Fellow .

VI.  Of  Behaviour,  viz*

i.  Tn  the  tLOTJffe  while  COnftftUtetr.

You  are  not  to  hold  private  Committees,  or  feparate  Converfation,
without  Leave  from  the  Majier , nor  to  talk  of  any  thing  imperti.
nent  or  unfeemly,  nor  interrupt  the  Majier  or  Wardens , or  any
Brother  fpeaking  to  the  Majier : Nor  behave  yourfelf  ludicroufly  or
ieftingty  while  the  Lodge  is  engaged  in  what  is  ferious  and  folemn ;
nor  ufe  any  unbecoming  Language  upon  any  Pretence  whatfoever  s

but

( 14  )

bat  to  pay  due  Reverence  to  your  Mafter , Warden?,  and  Fellow x,  and
put  them  to  worlhip.

If  any  Complaint  be  brought,  the  Brother  found  guilty  fhall  ftand
to  the  Award  and  Determination  of  the  Lodge , who  are  the  proper
and  competent  Judges  of  all  fuch  Controverfies,  (unlefs  you  carry  it
by  Appeal  to  the  Grand  Lodge)  and  to  whom  they  ought  to
be  referr’d,  unlefs  a Lord’s  Work  be  hinder’d  the  mean  while,  in
which  Cafe  a particular  Reference  may  be  made ; but  you  muft  never
go  to  Law  about  what  concerneth  Mafottry,  without  an  abfolute  Ne-
ceflity  apparent  to  the  Lodge ,

2,%e&atf0at  after  the  Lodge  is  over  and  the  TBtet&Ctt  not  gone .

You  may  enjoy  yourfelves  with  innocent  Mirth,  treating  one  ano-
ther according  to  Ability,  but  avoiding  all  Excefs,  or  forcing  any
Brother  to  eat  or  drink  beyond  his  Inclination,  or  hindering  him  from
going  when  his  Occafions  call  him,  or  doing  or  laying  any  thing  offen-
five,  or  that  may  forbid  an  eafy  and  free  Convention ; for  that  would
blaft-  our  Harmony,  and  defeat  our  laudable  Purpofes.  Therefore
no  private  Piques  or  Quarrels  muft  be  brought  within  the  Door  of  the
Lodge , far  lefs  any  Quarrels  about  Religion,  or  Nations , or  State  Policy ,
we  being  only,  as  Mafons , of  the  Catholick  Religion  above-mention’d  ■
we  are  alfo  of  all  Nations , Tongues , Kindreds , and  Languages , and
are  refolv’d  againft  all  politicos,  as  what  never  yet  conduc’d  to  the
Welfare  of  the  Lodge,  nor  ever  will.  This  Charge  has  been  always
ftri&ly  enjoin’d  and  obferv’d  ,•  but  efpecially  ever  fince  the  Reformation
In  ^B  r i t a i n,  or  the  Diflent  and  Secelfion  of  thefe  Nations  from  the
Communion  of  R o m e.

3-  ^eOablOUC  when  Brethren  meet  without  Strangers,  hut  not  in  a

JLtfflge  foim’O.

You  are  to  falute  one  another  in  a courteous  manner,  as  you  will
be  inftru&ed,  calling  each  other  Brother , freely  giving  mutual  Inftruc-
tion  as  lhall  be  thought  expedient,  without  being  overfeen  or  over-
t heard.

( ?? )

heard,  and  without  encroaching  upon  each  other,  or  derogating  from
that  Refpeft  which  is  due  to  any  Brother,  were  he  not  a Mafon : For
though  all  Mafons  are  as  Brethren  upon  the  fame  Level,  yet  M afonry
takes  no  Honour  from  a Man  that  he  had  before  j nay  rather  it  adds
to  his  Honour,  efpecially  if  he  has  deferv’d  well  of  the  Brotherhood*
who  muft  give  Honour  to  whom  it  is  due,  and  avoid  iU  Manners,

4. 'Bcfjabiout  in  Prefence  of  Strangers  not  ^afonsr.

You  lhall  be  cautious  in  your  Words  and  Carriage,  that  the  moil
penetrating  Stranger  lhall  not  be  able  to  difcover  or  find  out  what  is
not  proper  to  be  intimated  j and  fometimes  you  lhall  divert  a D !f*
courfe,  and  manage  it  prudently  for  the  Honour  of  the  worfhiffd
Fraternity,

5.  TiJt&flblOUt  at  H ome,  and  in  your  Neighbourhood.

You  are  to  e£k  as  becomes  a moral  and  wife  Man  s particularly,  not
to  let  your  Family,  Friends,  and  Neighbours  know  the  Concerns  of
the  Lodge,  &c.  but  wifely  to  confult  your  own.  Honour,  and  that  of
the  ancient  Brotherhood,  for  Reafons  not  to  be  mention’d  here.  You
muft  alfo  confult  your  Health,  by  not  continuing  together  too  late,
or  too  long  from  home,  after  Lodge  Hours  are  paftj  and  by  avoiding
of  Gluttony  or  Drunkennefs,  that  your  Families  be  not  negle&ed
or  injured,  nor  you  difabled  from  working.  " e

CUE  towards  a ftrange  Brother.

You  are  cautioufly  to  examine  him,  in  fuch  a Method  as  Prudence
lhall  direft  you,  that  you  may  not  be  impos’d  upon  by  an  ignorant
falfe  Pretender,  whom  you  are  to  rejed  with  Contempt  and  Derilion,
and  beware  of  giving  him  any  Hints  of  Knowledge.

But  if  you  difcover  him  to  be  a true  and  genuine  Brother , you  are
to  refpeCt  him  accordingly  $ and  if  he  is  in  want,  you  muft  relieve  him
if  you  can,  or  elfe  direft  him  how  he  may  be  reliev’d : You  muft  em-
pty.

C & )

ploy  him  fome  Days,  or  elfe  recommend  him  to  be  employ’d.  But
you  are  not  charged  to  do  beyond  your  Ability,  only  to  prefer  a poor
Brother , that  is  a good  Man  and  true,  before  any  other  poor  People  in
the  fame  Circumftances;

Finazly,  All  thefe  you  are  to  obferve,  and  alfo  thofe

that  Ihall  be  communicated  to  you  in  another  way  ; cultivating
Brotherly'- Love,  the  Foundation  and  Cape-ftone , the
Cement  and  Glory  of  this  ancient  Fraternity , avoiding  all  Wrangling
and  Quarrelling,  all  Slander  and  Backbiting,  nor  permitting  others
to  flander  any  honeft  Brother,  but  defending  his  Character,  and
doing  him  all  good  Offices , as  far  as  is  confident  with  your  Ho-
nour and  Safety , and  no  farther.  And  if  any  of  them  do  you  Injury,
you  muft  apply  to  your  own  or  his  Lodge;  and  from  thence  you
may  appeal  to  the  G r a n d L o d g e at  the  Quarterly  Communication £
and  from  thence  to  the  annual  Grand  Lodoe,  as  has  been  the
ancient  laudable  Condud:  of  our  Fore-fathers  in  every  Nation  j never
taking  a legal  Courfe  but  when  the  Cafe  cannot  be  otherwife  .decided,
and  patiently  liftning  to  the  honeft  and  friendly  Advice  of  M after  and
Fellows , when  they  would  prevent  your  going  to  Law  with  Stranger s,
or  would  excite  you  to  put  a fpeedy  Period  to  all  Law-Suits , that
fo  you  may  mind  the  Affair  of  Masonry  with  the  more  Alacrity
and  Succefs ; but  with  refped  to  Brothers  or  Fellows  at  Law,  the  M After
and  Brethren  Ihould  kindly  offer  their  Mediation,  which  ought  to  be
thankfully  fubmitted  to  by  the  contending  Brethren ; and  if  that  Sub-
miffion  is  impra&icable,  they  muft  however  carry  on  their  Procefs ,
or  Law-Suit , without  Wrath  and  Rancor  (not  in  the  common  way)
faying  or  doing  nothing  which  may  hinder  Brotherly  Love,  and  good
Offices-to  be  renew’d  and  continu’d ; that  all  may  fee  the  benign  In-
fluence of  Masonry,  as  all  true  Mafofis  have  done  from  the  Begin-
ning of  the  World,  and  will  do  to  the  End  of  Time,

amen  fo  mote  it  Sc,

POST

THE  INVENTION  OF  THE  THIRD  DEGREE

995

They  were  not  long,  it  appears,  in  becoming  qualified,  or  at  least
the  doubts  of  their  qualification  were  soon  dispelled,  for  we  find  that
on  the  22d  of  November,  1725,  less  than  three  years  after  its  ap-
pearance in  the  Book  of  Constitutions,  the  Regulation  was  rescinded,
and  it  was  ordered  by  the  Grand  Lodge  that  "the  Master  of  a lodge,
with  his  Wardens  and  a competent  number  of  the  lodge  assembled
in  due  form,  can  make  Masters  and  Fellows  at  discretion."1

It  might  be  argued  that  although  the  words  "Master  Mason"
may  be  an  interpolation,  the  rule  regulating  the  conferring  of  the
Second  degree  might  well  have  formed  a part  of  the  original  "Regu-
lations," seeing  that  they  were  not  compiled  until  after  the  invention
of  the  Second  degree.

But  the  argument  founded  on  the  incongruity  of  subjects  and
the  awkward  interruption  of  their  continuity  in  the  paragraph  occa-
sioned by  the  insertion  of  the  suspected  words,  is  applicable  to  the
whole  passage.  If  the  internal  evidence  advanced  is  effective  against  a
single  word  of  the  passage  on  these  grounds,  it  is  effective  against  all.

But  Bro.  Lyon,  in  his  History > of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh ,2  has
supplied  us  with  an  authentic  document,  which  presents  the  strong-
est presumptive  evidence  of  three  facts.  1.  That  the  Second  degree
had  been  invented  before  the  year  1721,  and  at  that  time  constituted
a part  of  the  new  Speculative  system.  2.  That  in  the  English  lodges
there  was  no  positive  law  forbidding  the  conferring  of  it  by  them,
but  only  a recognized  usage.  3.  That  in  the  year  1721  the  Third
degree  had  not  been  invented.

In  the  year  1721  Dr.  Desaguliers  paid  a visit  to  Edinburgh  and
placed  himself  -in  communication  with  the  Freemasons  of  that  city.

A record  of  the  most  important  Masonic  event  that  occurred
during  that  visit  is  preserved  in  the  minutes  of  the  Lodge  of  Edin-
burgh for  the  24th  and  25th  of  August,  1721.  This  record  has  been
published  by  Bro.  Lyon  in  his  history  of  that  lodge.  It  is  in  the
following  words:

"Att  Maries  chappell  the  24  of  August,  1721  years,  James
Wattson,  present  deacon  of  the  Masons  of  Edinbr.,  Preses.  The
which  day  Doctor  John  Theophilus  Desaguliers,  fellow  of  the  Roy-
all  Societie,  and  chaplain  in  Ordinary  to  his  Grace,  James,  Duke  of
Chandois,  late  Generali  Master  of  the  Mason  Lodges  in  England,

1 Anderson's  "Constitutions,"  2d  edition,  p.  161.

2 "History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  151.

996

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

being  in  town  and  desirous  to  have  a conference  with  the  Deacon,
Warden,  and  Master  Masons  of  Edinbr.,  which  was  accordingly
granted,  and  finding  him  duly  qualified  in  all  points  of  Masonry,
they  received  him  as  a Brother  into  their  Societie."

"Likeas,  upon  the  25th  day  of  the  sd.  moneth  the  Deacon,  War-
dens, Masters,  and  several  other  members  of  the  Societie,  together
with  the  sd.  Doctor  Desaguliers,  haveing  mett  att  Maries  Chapell,
there  was  a supplication  presented  to  them  by  John  Campbell,  Esqr.,
Lord  Provost  of  Edinbr.,  George  Preston  and  Hugh  Hathom,  Bail-
lies;  James  Nimo,  the  asurer;  William  Livingston,  Deacon-con-
vener of  the  Trades  thereof,  and  George  Irving,  Clerk  to  the  Dean
of  Guild  Court,  and  humbly  craving  to  be  admitted  members  of  the
sd.  Societie;  which  being  considered  by  them,  they  granted  the  de-
sire thereof,  and  the  saids  honourable  persons  were  admitted  and
receaved  Entered  Apprentices  and  Fellow-Crafts  accordingly."

"And  sicklike  upon  the  28th  day  of  the  said  moneth  there  was
another  petition  given  in  by  Sr.  Duncan  Campbell  of  Lochnell,

Barronet;  Robert  Wightman,  Esqr.,  present  Dean  of  Gild  of  Edr.;
George  Drummond,  Esq.,  late  Theasurer  thereof;  Archibald  M'Au-
lay,  late  Bailly  there;  and  Patrick  Lindsay,  merchant  there,  crave-

ing  the  like  benefit,  which  was  also  granted,  and  they  were  receaved

as  members  of  the  societie  as  the  other  persons  above  mentioned.

The  same  day  James  Key  and  Thomas  Aikman,  servants  to  James
Wattson,  deacon  of  the  masons,  were  admitted  and  receaved  en-
tered apprentices,  and  payed  to  James  Mack,  Warden,  the  ordinary
dues  as  such.  Ro.  Alison,  Clerk."

I agree  with  Bro.  Lyon  that  "there  can  be  but  one  opinion  as
to  the  nature  and  object  of  Dr.  Desaguliers's  visit  to  the  Lodge  of
Edinburgh."  And  that  was  the  introduction  into  Scotland  of  the
new  system  of  Masonry  recently  fabricated  by  himself  for  the  lodges
of  London.  That  he  conferred  only  the  First  and  Second  degrees  is
to  me  satisfactory  proof  that  the  Third  had  not  been  arranged.

Lyon  says  "it  is  more  than  probable  that  on  both  occasions
(the  two  meetings  of  the  Lodge  recorded  above)  the  ceremony  of
entering  and  passing  would,  as  far  as  the  circumstances  of  the  lodges
would  permit,  be  conducted  by  Desaguliers  himself  in  accordance
with  the  ritual  he  was  anxious  to  introduce."1

'History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  153.

THE  INVENTION  OF  THE  THIRD  DEGREE

997

This  is  undoubtedly  true;  but  why  did  he  not  complete  the  in-
struction by  conferring  the  Third  degree?  Bro.  Lyon's  explanation

here  is  wholly  untenable:

"It  was  not,"  he  says,  "till  1722-23  that  the  English  regulation
restricting  the  conferring  of  the  Third  Degree  to  Grand  Lodge  was

repealed.  This  may  account  for  the  Doctor  confining  himself  to

the  two  lesser  degrees."

Bro.  Lyon,  usually  so  accurate,  has  here  unaccountably  fallen

into  two  important  errors.

First,  the  regulation  alluded  to  was  not  repealed  in  1723  but
was  only  promulgated  in  that  year.  The  repeal  took  place  in  1725.

His  next  error  is  that  the  restriction  was  confined  to  the  Third
degree,  while  in  fact,  if  we  accept  the  passage  in  the  "General  Reg-
ulations" as  genuine,  it  restricted,  as  we  have  seen,  the  conferring
of  both  the  Second  and  Third  degrees  to  the  Grand  Lodge.

Therefore,  if  Desaguliers  had  considered  himself  as  governed  by
this  regulation  (which,  however,  was  impossible,  seeing  that  it  had

not  been  enacted  until  after  his  visit  to  Edinburgh),  he  would  have

been  restrained  from  conferring  the  Second  as  well  as  the  Third

degree.

That  he  conferred  the  Second  degree  in  a lodge  of  Edinburgh,
notwithstanding  the  usage  in  London  of  conferring  it  only  in  the

Grand  Lodge,  may  be  accounted  for  on  the  very  reasonable  suppo-
sition that  he  did  not  consider  that  the  English  usage  was  binding
on  Scottish  Masons.

Besides,  there  was,  at  that  time,  no  Grand  Lodge  in  Scotland,

and  if  he  had  not  conferred  the  degree  in  a lodge,  the  object  of  his
visit  would  have  been  frustrated,  and  that  was  to  introduce  into  the
sister  kingdom  the  new  system  of  Speculative  Freemasonry  which

he  had  invented  and  which  had  been  just  adopted  in  England  or
rather  in  London.

But  that  he  should  have  taken  a long  and  arduous  journey  to
Edinburgh  (a  journey  far  more  arduous  than  it  is  in  the  present  day
of  railroads)  for  the  purpose  of  introducing  into  the  Scotch  lodges
the  ritual  invented  by  him  for  English  Freemasonry,  and  yet  have
left  the  task  uncompleted  by  omitting  to  communicate  the  most
important  part  of  the  degree  which  was  at  the  summit,  is  incompre-
hensible, unless  we  suppose  that  the  Third  degree  had  not,  at  that
time,  been  invented.

998

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

For  if  the  language  of  the  "General  Regulations"  receives  the
only  interpretation  of  which  they  are  capable,  it  is  evident  that  in
the  beginning  of  the  year  1723,  when  they  were  published  in  the
Book  of  Constitutions,  the  degree  of  Fellow-Craft  was  the  highest
degree  known  to  the  Freemasons  of  London.

It  is  the  belief  of  all  Masonic  scholars,  except  a few  who  still
cling  with  more  or  less  tenacity  to  the  old  legends  and  traditions,
that  the  Third  degree  can  not  be  historically  traced  to  a period
earlier  than  the  second  decade  of  the  18th  century.  It  has  not,  how-
ever, been  hitherto  attempted  by  anyone,  so  far  as  I am  aware,  to
indicate  the  precise  time  of  its  invention.

The  general  opinion  seems  to  have  been  that  it  was  first  intro-
duced into  the  ritual  of  Speculative  Freemasonry  a very  short  time
after  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge  in  London,  in  the  year
1717.  But  I think  that  I have  conclusively  and  satisfactorily  proved
that  the  actual  period  of  its  introduction  as  a working  degree  was
not  until  six  years  afterward,  namely,  in  the  year  1723,  and  after  the
publication  of  the  first  edition  of  the  Book  of  Constitutions,  and
that  the  only  passage  referring  to  it  in  that  work  or  in  the  "General
Regulations"  appended  to  it,  was  surreptitiously  inserted  in  antici-
pation of  its  intended  introduction.

The  first  writer  who  questioned  the  antiquity  of  the  Third  de-
gree as  conferred  under  the  Grand  Lodge  was  Laurence  Dermott,
the  Grand  Secretary,  and  afterward  the  Deputy  Grand  Master  of
that  body  of  Freemasons  which,  in  the  year  1753,  seceded  from  the
legal  Grand  Lodge  of  England  and  constituted  what  is  known  in
Masonic  history  as  the  "Grand  Lodge  of  Ancients,"  the  members
thus  distinguishing  themselves  from  the  constitutional  Grand  Lodge,
which  they  stigmatized  as  "Modems."  In  the  second  edition  of
the  Ahirnan  Rezon,  published  in  1764,  he  has,  in  the  part  called  "A
Philacteria,"  the  following  statement  in  reference  to  the  Third
degree:1

"About  the  year  1717  some  joyous  companions  who  had  passed
the  degree  of  a craft  (though  very  rusty)  resolved  to  form  a lodge
for  themselves,  in  order  (by  conversation)  to  recollect  what  had
been  formerly  dictated  to  them,  or,  if  that  should  be  found  imprac-
ticable, to  substitute  something  new,  which  might  for  the  future

1 This  statement  is  not  contained  in  the  ist  edition,  published  in  1756.

THE  INVENTION  OF  THE  THIRD  DEGREE

999

pass  for  Masonry  amongst  themselves.  At  this  meeting  the  ques-
tion was  asked,  whether  any  person  in  the  assembly  knew  the  Mas-
ter's part,  and  being  answered  in  the  negative,  it  was  resolved  nem.
con.  that  the  deficiency  should  be  made  up  with  a new  composition,
and  what  fragments  of  the  old  order  found  amongst  them,  should
be  immediately  reformed  and  made  more  pliable  to  the  humours  of
the  people."

I should  be  unwilling  to  cite  the  unsupported  testimony  of  Der-
mott  for  anything  in  reference  to  the  "Modem"  because  of  his
excessive  partisan  spirit.  But  the  extract  just  given  may  be  consid-
ered simply  as  confirming  all  the  evidence  heretofore  produced,  that
after  the  year  1717  a "Master's  part"  or  Third  degree  had  been  fab-
ricated. Dermott's  details,  which  were  intended  as  a sneer  upon
the  Constitution  Grand  Lodge,  should  pass  for  nothing.

As  for  Dermott's  assertion  that  the  true  Master's  degree,  as  it
existed  before  the  Revival,  was  in  the  possession  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  the  Ancients,  as  it  was  called,  it  is  not  only  false,  but  absolutely
absurd,  for  if  the  Ancients  were  in  possession  of  a Third  degree
which  had  been  in  existence  before  the  year  1717,  and  the  Mod-
ems were  not,  where  did  the  former  get  it,  since  they  sprang  out
of  the  latter  and  carried  with  them  only  the  knowledge  which  they
possessed  as  a part  of  that  Grand  Lodge?

Dr.  Oliver,  notwithstanding  his  excessive  credulity  in  respect  to
the  myths  and  legends  of  Freemasonry,  has  from  time  to  time  in  his
various  writings  expressed  his  doubts  as  to  "the  extreme  antiquity
of  the  present  arrangement  of  the  three  degrees."1  In  one  of  his
latest  works2  he  admits  that  Desaguliers  and  Anderson  were  accused
of  the  fabrication  of  the  Hiramic  legend  and  of  the  manufacture  of
the  degree  by  their  seceding  contemporaries,  which  accusation,  he
says,  they  did  not  deny.3

Findel  says:  "Originally,  it  seems,  there  was  but  one  degree  of
initiation  in  the  year  1717.  . . . The  introduction  of  the  degrees
of  Fellow-Craft  and  Master  Mason  took  place  in  so  imperceptible

1 State  of  Freemasonry  in  the  18th  Century.  Introduction  to  his  edition  of  Hutch-
inson.

2 "The  Freemason's  Treasury,"  Spencer,  1863.

3 This  is  an  example  of  the  carelessness  with  which  Masonic  writers  were  accustomed
to  make  their  statements.  The  "seceding  contemporaries"  of  Oliver  consisted  simply
of  Laurence  Dermott,  who  first  made  the  accusation,  and  when  he  made  it,  both  Desagu-
liers and  Anderson  were  dead.

1000

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

a manner,  that  we  do  not  know  the  accurate  date.  No  mention  is
made  of  them  before  1720,  even  not  yet  in  the  Book  of  Constitutions
of  1722."1

I do  not,  however,  concur  with  this  learned  German  writer  in  his
hypothesis  that  the  Third  degree  originated  as  a reward  for  Masonic
merits,  especially  to  be  conferred  on  all  the  brethren  who  had  passed
the  chair  from  1717  to  1720.  Doubtless,  as  soon  as  it  was  invented
it  was  conferred  on  all  who  were  or  had  been  Masters  of  lodges,  but
Findel  places  too  low  an  estimate  on  the  design  of  the  degree.  I
think  rather  that  it  was  intended  by  Desaguliers  to  develop  the
religious  and  philosophic  sentiment  in  Speculative  Freemasonry
which  it  was  his  intention  to  establish.  It  is  probable  that  the
"eloquent  Oration  about  Masons  and  Masonry,"  which  Anderson
tells  us  he  delivered  before  the  Grand  Lodge  in  1721,  but  which  is
unfortunately  lost,  contained  a foreshadowing  of  his  views  on  this
subject.

Bro.  Hughan,  who  is  of  the  very  highest  authority  on  all  points
of  the  documentary  history  of  English  Masonry,  settles  the  question
in  the  following  remarks:2

"The  sublime  degree  of  a Master  Mason,  alias  the  'Third  de-
gree,' may  be  very  ancient,  but,  so  far,  the  evidence  respecting  its
history  goes  no  farther  back  than  the  early  part  of  the  last  century.
Few  writers  on  the  subject  appear  to  base  their  observations  on
facts,  but  prefer  the  'traditions'  (so  called)  derived  from  old  Ma-
sons. We,  however,  give  the  preference  to  the  minutes  and  by-
laws of  lodges,  as  all  of  which  we  have  either  seen,  traced,  or  obtained
copies  of,  unequivocally  prove  the  degree  of  Master  Mason  to  be  an
early  introduction  of  the  Revivalists  of  A.D.  1717.  No  record  prior
to  the  second  decade  of  the  last  century  ever  mentions  Masonic  de-
grees, and  all  the  MSS.  preserved  decidedly  confirm  us  in  the  belief
that  in  the  mere  Operative  (although  partly  speculative)  career  of
Freemasonry  the  ceremony  of  reception  was  of  a most  unpretentious
and  simple  character,  mainly  for  the  communication  of  certain
lyrics  and  secrets,  and  for  the  conservation  of  ancient  customs  of  the
craft."

Hughan  cites  a MS.  (No.  23,202)  in  the  British  Museum  show-
ing that  the  rules  of  a Musical  and  Architectural  Society  formed  in

1 "History  of  Freemasonry,"  Lyon's  Translation,  p.  150.

2 See  Voice  of  Masonry  for  August,  1873.

THE  INVENTION  OF  THE  THIRD  DEGREE

1001

February,  1724,  in  London,  required  its  members  to  be  Master  Ma-
sons. This  might  be,  and  yet  the  degree  not  have  been  fabricated
until  January,  1723.

He  also  cites  the  minutes  of  a lodge  held  at  Lincoln  (England).
From  these  minutes  it  appears  that  in  December,  1734,  the  body
of  the  lodge  consisted  of  Fellow-Crafts;  and  when  the  "two  new
Wardens,  as  well  as  several  other  Brothers  of  the  lodge,  well  quali-
fied and  worthy  of  the  degree  of  Master  had  not  been  called
thereto,"  the  Master  directed  a lodge  of  Masters  to  be  held  for  the
purpose  of  admitting  these  candidates  to  the  Third  degree.

Hence,  as  Bro.  Hughan  says,  the  lodge  at  that  time  worked  the
degree  only  at  intervals.  And  he  concludes,  I think,  correctly,  that
as  there  was  a rule  prescribing  the  fee  when  a "Brother  made  in
another  lodge  shall  be  passed  Master  in  this,"  that  "all  lodges  had
not  authority  or  did  not  work  the  degree  in  question."  I suppose
they  had  the  authority  but  not  the  ability.

All  this  shows  that  the  Third  degree  in  1734  was  yet  in  its
infancy.

The  provision  contained  in  the  "General  Regulations,"  which
restricted  the  conferring  of  the  Second  and  Third  degrees  to  the
Grand  Lodge  was  rescinded  on  November  22,  1725,  and  yet  we  see
that  nine  years  afterward  the  Third  degree  was  not  conferred  in  all
the  lodges.

It  is  a singular  circumstance  that  in  1731,  when  the  Duke  of
Lorraine  was  made  a Mason  in  a special  lodge  held  at  the  Hague,

notwithstanding  that  Desaguliers  presided  over  it,  he  received  only
the  First  and  Second  degrees,  and  came  afterward  to  England  to
have  the  Third  conferred  upon  him.

The  first  evidence  of  the  Third  degree  being  conferred  in  Scot-

land is  in  the  minutes  of  Canongate  Kilwinning  Lodge  in  a minute
dated  March  3 1 , 1735. 1

The  degree  is  first  referred  to  in  the  minutes  of  St.  Mary's
Chapel  Lodge  under  the  date  of  November  1,  1738,  when  George
Drummond,  Esq.,  an  Entered  Apprentice,  "was  past  a Fellow-Craft

and  also  raised  as  a Master  Mason  in  due  form."  2

According  to  Bro.  Lyon,  possession  of  the  Third  degree  was

not  at  this  period  a necessary  qualification  to  a seat  in  the  Grand

1 Lyon,  "History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  213.

2 Ibid.,  p.  212.

1002

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Lodge  of  Scotland.  For  thirty  years  after  its  introduction  into
Mary's  Chapel  it  conferred  no  rights  in  the  management  of  the
lodge  that  were  not  possessed  by  Fellow-Crafts.

It  was  not,  in  fact,  until  the  year  1765  that  Master  Masons  alone
were  qualified  to  hold  office.

Continental  Speculative  Masonry  having  derived  its  organized
existence  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  must  necessarily  have
borrowed  its  forms  and  ceremonies  and  ritual  from  the  same  source,
and  consequently  received  the  Third  degree  at  a still  later  period.

From  all  that  has  been  said,  I think  that  we  are  fairly  entitled

to  deduce  the  following  conclusions:

1.  When  the  four  old  Lodges  of  London  met  on  June  24,  1717,
at  the  "Goose  and  Gridiron  Tavern"  and  organized  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England,  there  was  but  one  degree  known  to  the  Craft,  to
the  esoteric  instructions  of  which  all  Freemasons  were  entitled.

2.  Between  1717  and  1720,  in  which  latter  year  the  "Charges"

and  probably  the  "General  Regulations"  were  compiled  by  Grand

Master  Payne,  a severance  of  this  primitive  degree  into  two  parts
was  effected,  and  the  Second  or  Fellow-Craft's  degree  was  fabricated,
the  necessary  result  being  that  what  was  left  of  the  primitive  degree,
with  doubtless  some  modifications  and  even  additions,  was  consti-
tuted as  the  Entered  Apprentice's  degree.

3.  A Third  degree,  called  that  of  the  Master  Mason,  was  subse-
quently fabricated  so  as  to  complete  the  series  of  three  degrees  of

Speculative  Masonry  as  it  now  exists.

4.  The  Third  degree,  as  an  accomplished  fact,  was  not  fabricated
before  the  close  of  the  year  1722,  and  was  not  made  known  to  the
Craft,  or  worked  as  a degree  of  the  new  system,  until  the  beginning
of  1723.

5.  The  inventor  or  fabricator  of  this  series  of  degrees  was  Dr.
John  Theophilus  Desaguliers,  assisted  by  Anderson  and  probably  a
few  other  collaborators,  among  whom  I certainly  would  not  omit  the
learned  antiquary,  George  Payne,  who  had  twice  been  Grand  Master.

In  coming  to  these  conclusions  I omit  all  reference  to  the  Le-
gend of  the  Third  Degree  as  to  the  time  or  place  when  it  was  con-
cocted, and  whether  it  was  derived  by  Desaguliers,  as  has  been
asserted,  from  certain  Jewish  rabbinical  writers,  or  whether  its  earli-
est form  is  to  be  found  in  certain  traditions  of  the  mediaeval  Stone-

masons.

CHAPTER  XXXVII

THE  DEATH  OF  OPERATIVE  AND  THE  BIRTH  OF  SPECULATIVE
FREEMASONRY

ROWTH,  says  Dr.  South,  "is  progress,  and  all
progress  designs,  and  tends  to  the  acquisition  of
something,  which  the  growing  thing  or  person
is  not  yet  possessed  of."

This  apothegm  of  the  learned  divine  is  pecul-
iarly applicable  to  the  history  of  that  system
of  Speculative  Freemasonry  which,  springing  into
existence  at  the  "Apple  Tree  tavern,"  in  London,  at  the  close  of
the  second  decade  of  the  18th  century,  made  such  progress  in  the
acquisition  of  new  knowledge  as  to  completely  change  its  character
soon  after  the  beginning  of  the  third  decade.

We  have  seen  that  it  was  derived  from  an  older  institution  whose
objects  were  altogether  practical,  and  whose  members  were  always
engaged  in  the  building  of  public  edifices.  But  there  were  other

members  of  the  guild  who  were  not  Operative  Masons,  but  who  had
been  admitted  to  the  privileges  of  membership  for  the  sake  of  the
prestige  and  influence  which  the  Fraternity  expected  to  obtain  from
their  learning,  their  wealth,  or  their  rank.

These  unprofessional  brethren,  who  were  at  first  called  Theoretic
Masons  or  Honorary  members,  but  who  afterward  assumed  the  title
of  Speculative  Freemasons,  began  even  in  the  very  outset  of  what
they  were  pleased,  most  inaccurately,  to  call  a Revival,  to  exercise

an  unexpected  and  detrimental  influence  on  the  Operative  Guild.

This  influence  was  so  exerted  that  Operative  Freemasonry  was
gradually  extruded  from  the  important  place  which  it  had  so  long

occupied,  and  finally,  in  and  after  the  year  1723,  ceased  entirely  to

exist.

The  gradual  transformation  from  Operative  to  Speculative  Free-
masonry is  one  of  the  most  interesting  points  in  the  history  of  the
institution,  and  is  well  worth  our  careful  consideration.

1003

1004

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Hardly  more  wonderful  is  the  change  from  the  insignificant  acorn
to  the  majestic  oak,  than  was  this  expansion  of  a guild  of  working-
men, limited  in  their  design  and  their  numbers,  into  a Fraternity  of
moralists  and  philosophers,  whose  object  was  the  elevation  of  their
fellow-men,  and  whose  influence  has  extended  into  every  quarter  of
the  civilized  world.

Operative  Freemasonry,  which  flourished  in  the  Middle  Ages
and  long  after  as  an  association  of  skillful  builders  who  were  in  the
possession  of  architectural  secrets  unknown  to  the  ruder  workmen
of  the  same  craft,  and  who  were  bound  to  each  other  by  a fraternal
tie,  no  longer  exists.  Like  the  massive  cathedrals  which  it  con-
structed, it  has  crumbled  into  decay.

But  Speculative  Freemasonry,  erected  on  its  ruins,  lives  and  will
always  live,  a perpetual  memorial  in  its  symbols  and  its  technical
language  of  the  source  whence  it  sprang.

Let  us  inquire  how  the  one  died  and  how  the  other  was  bom.

When  on  the  24th  day  of  June  in  the  year  1717  certain  Free-
masons of  London  met  at  the  "Goose  and  Gridiron  Tavern"  and
carried  into  effect  the  arrangement  made  in  the  previous  February,
by  organizing  a Grand  Lodge,  it  is  not  to  be  presumed  that  any
other  idea  had  at  that  time  entered  their  minds  than  that  of  consoli-
dating the  four  Operative  Lodges  of  which  they  were  members  into
one  body.  The  motives  that  actuated  them  were  to  produce  a
stronger  union  among  the  Craft  than  had  previously  existed,  each
lodge  having  hitherto  been  independent  and  isolated,  and  also  to
enlarge  their  numbers  and  to  increase  their  influence,  by  throwing
the  door  more  widely  open  to  the  admission  of  gentlemen  who  were
not  otherwise  connected  with  the  Craft.

The  fact  is  that  the  fashion  then  prevailed  to  a remarkable  ex-
tent in  London  for  men  of  like  sentiments  or  of  the  same  occupa-
tion to  form  themselves  into  clubs.  The  Freemasons,  both  Opera-
tive and  Theoretic,  in  thus  uniting,  were  doing  nothing  else  than
following  the  fashion,  and  were  really  instituting  a club  of  a more
elevated  character  and  under  a different  name.

Hence  the  consolidation  of  the  four  Lodges  was  called  a Grand
Lodge,  a title  and  an  organization  which  had  previously  been  un-
known to  English  Freemasonry. 1

1 It  is  not  worth  while  to  repeat  the  argument  so  often  advanced,  and  by  which
Masonic  scholars  have  satisfied  themselves  that  no  Grand  Lodge  ever  existed  in  England
before  the  year  1717.

THE  DEATH  OF  OPERATIVE  FREEMASONRY

1005

There  was  no  thought,  at  that  early  period,  by  those  who  were
engaged  in  the  organization,  of  changing  to  any  greater  extent  the
character  of  the  society.  It  was  still  to  be  a Guild  of  Operative

Freemasons,  but  consisting  more  largely  in  proportion  than  ever
before  of  members  who  were  not  professional  workmen.

"At  the  revival  in  1717,"  says  Dr.  Oliver,  "the  philosophy  of
the  Order  was  seldom  considered,  and  our  facetious  brethren  did
not  think  it  worth  their  while  to  raise  any  question  respecting  the

validity  of  our  legends;  nor  did  they  concern  themselves  much
about  the  truth  of  our  traditions.  Their  principal  object  was  pass  a
pleasant  hour  in  company  with  a select  assemblage  of  brethren;  and

that  purpose  being  attained,  they  waived  all  inquiry  into  the  truth

or  probability  of  either  the  one  or  the  other."1

The  scanty  records  of  the  transaction,  which  Dr.  Anderson,  our
only  authority,  has  supplied,  make  no  mention  of  those  distinguished
persons  who  afterward  took  a prominent  part  in  affecting  the  trans-

mutation of  Operative  into  Speculative  Freemasonry,  and  who  were
indeed  the  founders  of  the  latter  system.

It  is  said,  though  I know  not  on  what  authentic  authority,  that
Dr.  Desaguliers,  the  corypheus  of  the  band  of  reformers,  had  been
admitted  five  years  before  into  the  honorary  membership  of  the
Lodge  which  met  at  the  sign  of  the  "Rummer  and  Grapes,"  and

which  was  one  of  the  four  that  united  in  the  formation  of  a Grand
Lodge.

If  this  be  true,  and  there  are  good  reasons  for  believing  it,  it  can
not  be  doubted  that  he  was  present  at  the  organization  of  the  Grand
Lodge,  and  that  he  took  an  active  part  in  the  proceedings  of  the
meetings  both  in  February  and  in  June,  1717.

Neither  the  names  of  Payne  nor  of  Anderson,  who  subsequently
became  the  collaborators  of  Desaguliers  in  the  formation  of  Specu-
lative Freemasonry,  are  mentioned  in  the  brief  records  of  those
meetings.  If  they  were  present  or  connected  with  the  organization,
the  fact  is  not  recorded.  Payne  first  appears  in  June,  1718,  when
he  was  elected  Grand  Master;  Desaguliers  in  1719,  when  he  was

elected  to  the  same  office.  This  would  tend  to  show  that  both  had
been  for  some  years  in  the  Fraternity,  since  new-comers  would

hardly  have  been  chosen  for  those  positions.

1 "Discrepancies  of  Freemasonry,"  p.  13.

1006

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

It  is  not  so  certain  that  Anderson  was  a Freemason  in  1717.

It  is  not  improbable  that  he  was  soon  afterward  admitted,  for  in
September,  1721,  he  acquired  such  a reputation  in  the  society  as  to

have  been  selected  by  the  Duke  of  Montagu,  who  was  then  the
Grand  Master,  to  digest  the  old  Gothic  Constitutions,  a task  of
great  importance.

Of  one  thing,  however,  there  can  be  no  doubt,  that  no  one  of
these  three  persons,  who  were  afterward  so  distinguished  for  their
services  in  Speculative  Freemasonry,  had  in  1717  been  prominently

placed  before  the  Craft.  In  the  selection  of  an  officer  to  preside
over  the  newly  established  Grand  Lodge,  the  choice  fell,  not  on  one
of  them,  but  on  a comparatively  insignificant  person,  Mr.  Anthony
Sayer.  Of  his  subsequent  Masonic  career,  we  only  know  that  he
was  appointed  by  Desaguliers  one  of  the  Grand  Wardens.  He  is
also  recorded  as  having  been  the  Senior  Warden  at  one  of  the  four
original  Lodges  after  he  had  passed  the  Grand  Mastership.  He
afterward  fell  into  financial  difficulties,  and  having  received  relief
from  the  Grand  Lodge,  we  hear  no  more  of  him  in  the  history  of
Freemasonry.

It  is  to  Desaguliers,  to  Payne,  and  to  Anderson  that  we  are  to
attribute  the  creation  of  that  change  in  the  organization  of  the  sys-

tem of  English  Freemasonry  which  gradually  led  to  the  dissolution
of  the  Operative  element,  and  the  substitution  in  its  place  of  one

that  was  purely  Speculative.  The  three  were  members  of  the  same
lodge,  were  men  of  education,1  were  interested  in  the  institution,  as

is  shown  by  their  regular  attendance  on  the  meetings  of  the  Grand
Lodge  until  near  the  middle  of  the  century,  and  were  all  zealously

engaged  in  the  investigation  of  the  old  records  of  the  institution,  so

as  to  fit  them  for  the  prosecution  of  the  peaceful  revolution  which

they  were  seeking  to  accomplish.

Among  the  multitudinous  books  contributed  by  Dr.  Oliver  to
the  literature  of  Freemasonry,  is  one  entitled  The  Revelations  of

1 John  Robison,  a professor  of  Natural  Philosophy  in  Edinburgh,  wrote  and  pub-

lished  in  1797  an  anti-masonic  work  entitled  "Proofs  of  a Conspiracy  against  all  the
Religions  and  Government  in  Europe,"  etc.,  the  falsehoods  in  which,  unfortunately  for

the  author's  reputation,  were  extended  by  French  and  Dutch  translations.  In  this  book
he  says  of  Anderson  and  Desaguliers  that  they  were  "two  persons  of  little  education  and
of  low  manners,  who  had  aimed  at  little  more  than  making  a pretext,  not  altogether  con-
temptible, for  a convivial  meeting."  (P.  71.)  This  is  a fair  specimen  of  Robison's

knowledge  and  judgment.

THE  DEATH  OF  OPERATIVE  FREEMASONRY

1007

a Square,  which  contains  much  information  concerning  the  condi-
tion of  the  ritual  and  the  progress  of  the  institution  during  the  early
period  now  under  consideration.  Unfortunately,  there  is  such  a
blending  of  truth  and  fiction  in  this  work  that  it  is  difficult,  on  many
occasions,  to  separate  the  one  from  the  other.

It  is  but  fair,  however,  to  admit  the  author's  claim  that  his  state-
ments are  not  to  be  accounted  "fabulous  and  without  authority  be-
cause its  contents  are  communicated  through  an  imaginary  medium,"
for,  as  he  avers,  he  is  in  possession  of  authentic  vouchers  for  every
transaction.

These  vouchers  consisted  principally  of  the  contents  of  a ma-
sonic diary  kept  by  his  father,  who  had  been  initiated  in  1784,  and
was  acquainted  with  a distinguished  Freemason  who  had  been  a
contemporary  of  Desaguliers.  With  this  brother  the  elder  Oliver

had  held  many  conversations,  as  well  as  with  others  of  the  18th  cen-
tury. The  substance  of  these  conversations  he  had  committed  to
his  diary,  and  this  came  into  the  possession  of  his  son,  and  is  the
basis  on  which  he  composed  his  Revelations  of  a Square.

If  Dr.  Oliver  had  given  in  marginal  notes  or  otherwise  special
references  to  the  diary  and  to  other  sources  which  he  used  as  author-
ities for  his  statements,  I do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  The  Revelations
of  a Square  would,  by  these  proofs  of  authenticity,  be  the  most
valuable  of  all  his  historical  works.

Still,  I am  disposed  to  accept  generally  the  statements  of  the

work  as  authentic,  and  if  there  be  sometimes  an  appearance  of  the

fabulous,  it  can  not  be  doubted  that  beneath  the  fiction  there  is
always  a considerable  substratum  of  truth.

According  to  Oliver,  Desaguliers  had  at  that  early  period  deter-
mined to  renovate  the  Order,  which  was  falling  into  decay,  and  had
enlisted  several  active  and  zealous  brethren  in  the  support  of  his

plans.  Among  these  were  Sayer  and  Payne,  the  first  and  second
Grand  Masters,  and  Elliott  and  Lamball,  the  first  two  Wardens,
with  several  others  whose  names  have  not  elsewhere  been  trans-
mitted to  posterity. 1

There  is  nothing  unreasonable  nor  improbable  in  this  statement.
It  is  very  likely  that  Desaguliers  and  a few  of  his  friends  had  seen
and  deplored  the  decaying  condition  of  the  four  lodges  in  London.

1 "Revelations  of  a Square,"  ch.  i.,  p.  5.

1008

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

It  is  also  likely  that  their  first  thought  was  that  a greater  degree  of
success  and  prosperity  might  be  secured  if  the  lodges  would  abandon
to  some  extent  the  independence  and  isolation  of  their  condition,
and  would  establish  a bond  of  union  by  their  consolidation  under  a
common  head.

Whatever  views  might  have  been  secretly  entertained  by  Desa-
guliers  and  a few  friends  in  his  confidence,  he  could  not  have  openly
expressed  to  the  Craft  any  intention  to  dissolve  the  Operative  guild
and  to  establish  a Speculative  society  in  its  place.  Had  such  an
intention  been  even  suspected  by  the  purely  Operative  Freemasons
who  composed  part  of  the  membership  of  the  four  lodges,  it  can  not
well  be  doubted  that  they  would  have  declined  to  support  a scheme
which  looked  eventually  to  the  destruction  of  their  Craft,  and  con-
sequently the  organization  of  a Grand  Lodge  would  never  have
been  attempted.

But  I am  not  willing  to  charge  Desaguliers  with  such  duplicity.
He  was  honest  in  his  desire  to  renovate  the  institution  of  Operative
Freemasonry,  and  he  believed  that  the  first  step  toward  that  reno-
vation would  be  the  consolidation  of  the  lodges.  He  expected  that
an  imperfect  code  of  laws  would  be  improved,  and  perhaps  that  a
rude  and  unpolished  ritual  might  be  expanded  and  refined.

Farther,  he  was  not,  it  may  be  supposed,  prepared  at  that  time
to  go.  Whatever  modifications  he  subsequently  made  by  the  in-
vention of  degrees  which  at  once  established  a new  system  were  the
results  of  afterthoughts  suggested  to  his  mind  by  a sequence  of
circumstances.

That  the  change  from  Operative  to  Speculative  Freemasonry
was  of  gradual  growth,  we  know  from  the  authentic  records  that
are  before  us.

In  the  year  1717  we  find  an  Operative  guild  presenting  itself  in
cold  simplicity  of  organization  as  a body  of  practical  workmen  to
whom  were  joined  some  honorary  members,  who  were  not  Crafts-
men; with  an  imperfect  and  almost  obsolete  system  of  by-laws;
with  but  one  form  of  admission;  with  secrets  common  to  all  classes,
and  which  were  of  little  or  no  importance,  for  the  architectural  and
geometrical  secrets  of  the  mediaeval  Craft  had  been  lost;  and  finally
with  an  insignificant  and  unpolished  ritual,  a mere  catechism  for
wandering  brethren  to  test  their  right  to  the  privileges  and  the
hospitality  of  the  Fraternity.

COLOGNE  CATHEDRAL

THE  DEATH  OF  OPERATIVE  FREEMASONRY

1009

Six  years  after,  in  1723,  this  association  of  workmen  has  disap-
peared, and  in  its  place  we  find  a new  society  which  has  been  erected
on  the  foundations  of  that  edifice  which  has  crumbled  into  ruins;  a
society  that  has  repudiated  all  necessary  knowledge  of  the  art  of
building;  to  which  workmen  may  be  admitted,  not  because  they
are  workmen,  but  because  they  are  men  of  good  character  and  of
exemplary  conduct;  with  a well-framed  code  of  laws  for  its  govern-
ment; with  three  degrees,  with  three  forms  of  initiation,  and  with
secrets  exclusively  appropriated  to  each;  and  with  rituals  which,
produced  by  cultured  minds,  present  the  germs  of  a science  of
symbolism.

Operative  Freemasonry  no  longer  wields  the  scepter;  it  has  de-
scended from  its  throne  into  its  grave,  and  Speculative  Freemasonry,
as  a living  form,  has  assumed  the  vacant  seat.

That  the  transmutation  was  gradually  accomplished  we  know,
for  six  years  were  occupied  in  its  accomplishment,  and  the  records
of  that  period,  brief  and  scanty  as  they  are,  unerringly  indicate  the
steps  of  its  gentle  progress.

From  June,  1717,  to  June,  1718,  under  the  administration  of
Anthony  Sayer,  Gentleman,  as  Grand  Master,  there  are  no  signs  of
a contemplated  change.  He  was  not,  if  negative  evidence  may  be
accepted  as  the  index  of  his  character,  the  man  to  inaugurate  so  bold
an  enterprise.  His  efforts  seem  to  have  been  directed  solely  to  the
strengthening  and  confirming  of  the  union  of  the  Operative  lodges
by  consulting  at  stated  periods  with  their  officers.

From  June,  1718,  to  June,  1719,  George  Payne  presided  over
the  Craft.  Now  we  discover  the  first  traces  of  a sentiment  tending
toward  the  improvement  of  the  institution.  Old  manuscripts  and
records  were  anxiously  sought  for  that  the  ancient  usages  of  the
Craft  might  be  learned.  In  preparing  for  the  future  it  was  expe-
dient to  know  something  of  the  past.

The  result  of  this  collation  of  old  documents  was  the  compila-
tion of  the  "Charges  of  a Freemason,"  appended  to  the  first  edition
of  the  Book  of  Constitutions.  The  composition  of  this  code  is
generally  attributed  to  Anderson.  Without  positive  testimony  on
this  point,  I am  inclined  to  assign  the  authorship  to  Payne.  He
was  a noted  antiquary,  and  well  fitted  by  the  turn  of  his  mind  to
labors  of  that  kind.

Desaguliers  was  Grand  Master  from  June,  1719,  to  June,  1720.

1010

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

His  administration  is  made  memorable  by  the  first  great  change  in
the  system.

An  examination  of  the  old  manuscripts  which  had  been  collected
by  Payne  must  have  shown  that  the  body  of  the  Craft  had  always
been  divided  into  two  classes,  Apprentices  and  Fellows,  who  were

distinguished  by  the  possession  of  certain  privileges  as  workmen
peculiar  to  each.

In  the  lodge  they  assembled  together  and  partook  equally  of  its
counsels.  But  the  prominence  of  the  Fellows  in  rank  as  a class  of

workmen  and  in  numbers  as  constituting  the  principal  membership

of  the  four  old  Lodges,  very  probably  suggested  to  the  mind  of
Desaguliers  the  advantages  that  would  result  from  a more  distinct
separation  of  the  Fellows  from  the  Apprentices,  not  by  a recogni-

tion of  the  higher  rank  of  the  former  as  workmen,  because  if  a
Speculative  system  was  to  be  established,  a qualification  derived
from  skill  in  the  practical  labors  of  the  Craft  would  cease  to  be  of
avail;  but  a separation  by  granting  to  each  class  a peculiar  form  of
initiation,  with  its  accompanying  secrets.

The  fact,  also,  that  in  some  of  the  old  manuscripts,  which  were
then  called  the  "Gothic  Constitutions,"  copies  of  which  had  been
produced  as  the  result  of  the  call  of  Grand  Master  Payne,  there  were
two  distinct  sets  of  "Charges,"  one  for  the  Masters  and  Fellows  and
one  for  the  Apprentices,  would  have  strengthened  the  notion  that
there  should  be  a positive  and  distinct  separation  of  the  two  classes  as
the  first  preparatory  step  toward  the  development  of  the  new  system.

This  step  was  taken  by  Desaguliers  soon  after  his  installation  as
Grand  Master.  Accordingly,  in  1719,  he  modified  the  one  degree
or  form  of  initiation  or  admission  which  had  been  hitherto  common
to  all  ranks  of  Craftsmen.

One  part  of  the  degree  (but  the  word  is  not  precisely  correct)  he
confined  to  the  Apprentices,  and  made  it  the  working  degree  of  the
lodge.  Another  part  he  enlarged  and  improved,  transferred  to  it
the  most  important  secret,  the  MASON  WORD,  and  made  it  a de-
gree to  be  conferred  only  on  Fellow-Crafts  in  the  Grand  Lodge;
while  the  degree  of  the  Apprentices  thus  modified  continued  as  of
old  to  be  conferred  on  new  candidates  in  the  lodge.

Thus  it  was  that  in  the  year  1719  the  first  alteration  in  the  old
Operative  system  took  place,  and  two  degrees,  the  First  and  Second,
were  created.

THE  DEATH  OF  OPERATIVE  FREEMASONRY

1011

The  Entered  Apprentice  now  ceased  to  be  a youth  bound  for  a
certain  number  of  years  to  a Master  for  the  purpose  of  learning  the
mysteries  of  the  trade.  The  term  henceforth  denoted  one  who  had
been  initiated  into  the  secrets  of  the  First  degree  of  Speculative
Freemasonry,  a meaning  which  it  has  ever  since  retained.

In  former  times,  under  the  purely  Operative  system,  the  Masters
of  the  Work,  those  appointed  to  rule  over  the  migratory  lodges  and
to  superintend  the  Craftsmen  in  their  hours  of  labor,  were  necessa-
rily selected  from  the  Fellows,  because  of  their  greater  skill,  acquired
from  experience  and  their  freedom  from  servitude.

But  when  the  Theoretic  Freemasons,  the  Honorary  members,
began  to  be  the  dominant  party,  in  consequence  of  their  increased
number,  their  higher  social  position,  and  their  superior  education,  it
was  plainly  seen  that  any  claim  to  privileges  which  was  derived  from
greater  skill  in  the  practical  art  of  building,  from  the  expiration  of
indentures  and  from  the  acquisition  of  independence  and  the  right
to  go  and  come  at  will,  would  soon  be  abolished.

The  Operative  members  only  could  maintain  a distinction  be-
tween themselves  founded  on  such  claims.  The  Theoretic  mem-
bers were,  so  far  as  regarded  skill  in  building  or  freedom  from  the
servitude  of  indentures,  on  an  equal  footing,  everyone  with  all  the

others.

But  Desaguliers  and  his  collaborators  were  anxious  to  retain  as
many  as  they  could  of  the  old  usages  of  the  Craft.  They  were  not

prepared  nor  willing  to  obliterate  all  marks  of  identity  between  the

old  and  the  new  system.  Nor  could  they  afford,  in  the  infancy  of

their  enterprise,  to  excite  the  opposition  of  the  Operative  members
by  an  open  attack  on  the  ancient  customs  of  the  Craft.

Hence  they  determined  to  retain  the  distinction  which  had  al-

ways existed  between  Fellows  and  Apprentices,  but  to  found  that
distinction,  not  on  the  possession  of  superior  skill  in  the  art  of

building,  but  in  the  possession  of  peculiar  secrets.

The  Second  degree  having  been  thus  established,  it  became  nec-

essary to  secure  the  privileges  of  the  Fellows.  These  in  the  old
system  had  inured  to  them  by  usage  and  the  natural  workings  of  the
trade;  they  were  now  to  be  peipetuated  and  maintained  in  the  new
system  by  positive  law.

Accordingly,  in  the  following  year,  Payne  made  that  compilation
or  code  of  laws  for  the  government  of  the  new  society  which  is

1012

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

known  as  the  "General  Regulations,"  and  which  having  been  ap-
proved by  the  Grand  Lodge,  was  inserted  in  the  Book  of  Constitu-
tions.

It  has  been  already  abundantly  shown  that  the  whole  tenor  of
these  "Regulations"  was  to  make  the  Fellow-Crafts  the  possessors
of  the  highest  degree  then  known,  and  to  constitute  them  the  sole
legislators  of  the  society  (except  in  the  alteration  of  the  "Regula-
tions") and  the  body  from  which  its  officers  were  to  be  chosen.

Thus  the  first  step  in  the  separation  of  Speculative  from  Opera-
tive Freemasonry  was  accomplished  by  the  establishment  of  two  de-
grees of  initiation  instead  of  one,  and  by  making  the  Fellow-Crafts
distinct  from  and  superior  to  the  Apprentices,  not  by  a higher  skill
in  an  Operative  art,  but  by  their  attainment  to  greater  knowledge
in  a Speculative  science.

For  four  years  this  new  system  prevailed,  and  Speculative
Freemasonry  in  England  was  divided  into  two  degrees.  The  system,
in  fact,  existed  up  to  the  very  day  of  the  final  approval,  in  January,
1723,  of  the  Book  of  Constitutions.

The  First  degree  was  appropriated  to  the  initiation  of  candi-
dates in  the  particular,  or,  as  we  now  call  them,  the  subordinate
lodges.

The  Second  degree  conferred  in  the  Grand  Lodge  was  given  to
those  few  who  felt  the  aspiration  for  higher  knowledge,  or  who
had  been  elected  as  Masters  of  lodges  or  as  officers  in  the  Grand
Lodge.

The  Operative  members  submitted  to  the  change,  and  continued
to  take  an  interest  in  the  new  society,  receiving  in  proportion  to
their  numbers  a fair  share  of  the  offices  in  the  Grand  Lodge.

But  the  progress  of  change  and  innovation  was  not  to  cease  at
this  point.  The  inventive  genius  of  Desaguliers  was  not  at  rest,
and  urged  onward,  not  only  by  his  ritualistic  taste  and  his  desire  to
elevate  the  institution  into  a higher  plane  than  would  result  by  the
force  of  surrounding  circumstances,  he  contemplated  a further  ad-
vance.

"Circumstances,"  says  Goethe,  in  his  Wilhelm  Meister,  "move
backward  and  forward  before  us  and  ceaselessly  finish  the  web,
which  we  ourselves  have  in  part  spun  and  put  upon  the  loom."

Desaguliers,  with  the  co-operation  of  other  Theoretic  Freema-
sons, had  united  the  four  Operative  Lodges  into  a Grand  Lodge,  a

THE  DEATH  OF  OPERATIVE  FREEMASONRY

1013

body  until  then  unknown  to  the  Craft;  he  had  established  a form  of
government  with  which  they  were  equally  unfamiliar;  he  had  abol-
ished the  old  degree,  and  invented  two  new  ones;  and  yet  it  appears
that  he  did  not  consider  the  system  perfect.

He  contemplated  a further  development  of  the  ritual  by  the  ad-
dition of  another  degree.  In  this  design  he  was  probably,  to  some
extent,  controlled  by  surrounding  circumstances.

The  Fellow-Crafts  had  been  invested  with  important  privileges
not  granted  to  the  Entered  Apprentices,  and  the  possession  of  these
privileges  was  accompanied  by  the  acquisition  of  a higher  esoteric
knowledge.

Among  the  privileges  which  had  been  acquired  by  the  Fellow-
Crafts  were  those  of  election  to  office  in  the  Grand  Lodge  and  of
Mastership  in  a subordinate  lodge.

It  is  not  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  the  Fellows  who  had
been  elevated  to  these  positions  in  consequence  of  their  possession
of  a new  degree  were  desirous,  especially  the  Master  of  the  lodges,  to
be  farther  distinguished  from  both  the  Apprentices  and  the  Fellow-
Crafts  by  the  acquisition  of  a still  higher  grade.

Besides  this  motive,  the  existence  of  which,  though  not  attested
by  any  positive  authority,  is  nevertheless  very  presumable,  another
and  a more  philosophic  one  must  have  actuated  Desaguliers  in  the
further  development  of  his  system  of  degrees.

He  had  seen  that  the  old  Operative  Craft  was  divided  into  three
classes  or  ranks  of  workmen.  To  the  first  and  second  of  these
classes  he  had  appropriated  a degree  peculiar  to  each.  But  the  third
and  highest  class  was  still  without  one.  Thus  was  his  system  made
incongruous  and  incomplete.

To  give  it  perfection  it  was  necessary  that  a Third  degree  should
be  invented,  to  be  the  property  of  the  third  class,  or  the  Masters.

It  is  possible  that  Desaguliers  had,  in  his  original  plan,  contem-
plated the  composition  of  three  degrees,  or  it  may  have  been  that
the  willing  acceptance  of  the  First  and  Second  by  the  Craft  had
suggested  the  invention  of  a Third  degree.

Be  this  as  it  may,  for  it  is  all  a matter  of  mere  surmise  and  not
of  great  importance,  it  is  very  certain  that  the  invention  and  compo-
sition of  the  ritual  of  so  philosophic  a degree  could  not  have  been
the  labor  of  a day  or  a week  or  any  brief  period  of  time.

It  involved  much  thought,  and  months  must  have  been  occupied

1014

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

in  the  mental  labor  of  completing  it.  It  could  not  have  been
finished  before  the  close  of  the  year  1722.  If  it  had,  it  would  have
been  presented  to  the  Grand  Lodge  before  the  final  approval  of  the
Book  of  Constitutions,  and  would  then  have  received  that  prominent
place  in  Speculative  Freemasonry  which  in  that  book  and  in  the
"General  Regulations"  is  assigned  to  the  degree  of  Fellow-Craft.

But  at  that  time  the  degree  was  so  far  completed  as  to  make  it
certain  that  it  would  be  ready  for  presentation  to  the  Grand  Lodge
and  to  the  Craft  in  the  course  of  the  following  year.

But  as  the  Book  of  Constitutions  was  finally  approved  in  Janu-
ary, 1723,  and  immediately  afterward  printed  and  published,  Desa-
guliers  being  desirous  of  keeping  the  new  degree  under  his  own
control  for  a brief  period,  until  its  ritual  should  be  well  understood
and  properly  worked,  anticipated  the  enactment  of  a law  on  the
subject,  and  interpolated  the  passage  in  the  "General  Regulations"
which  required  the  Second  and  Third  degrees  to  be  conferred  in  the
Grand  Lodge  only.

Logical  inferences  and  documentary  evidence  bring  us  unavoid-
ably to  the  conclusion  that  the  following  was  the  sequence  of  events
which  led  to  the  establishment  of  the  present  ritual  of  three  degrees,

In  1717  the  Grand  Lodge,  at  its  organization,  received  the  one
comprehensive  degree  or  ritual  which  had  been  common  to  all
classes  of  the  Operative  Freemasons.

This  they  continued  to  use,  with  no  modification,  for  the  space
of  two  years.

In  1719  the  ritual  of  this  degree  was  disintegrated  and  divided
into  two  parts.  One  part  was  appropriated  to  the  Entered  Appren-
tices; the  other,  with  some  augmentations,  to  the  Fellow-Craft.

From  that  time  until  the  year  1723  the  system  of  Speculative
Freemasonry,  which  was  practiced  by  the  Grand  Lodge,  consisted
of  two  degrees.  That  of  Fellow-Craft  was  deemed  the  summit  of
Freemasonry,  and  there  was  nothing  esoteric  beyond  it.

On  this  system  of  two  degrees  the  Book  of  Constitutions,  the
"General  Regulations,"  and  the  "Manner  of  Constituting  a new
Lodge"  were  framed.  When  these  were  published  the  Craft  knew
nothing  of  a Third  degree.

In  the  year  1723  Dr.  Desaguliers  perfected  the  system  by  pre-
senting the  Grand  Lodge  with  the  Third  degree,  which  he  had  re*
cently  invented.

THE  DEATH  OF  OPERATIVE  FREEMASONRY

1015

This  degree  was  accepted  by  the  Grand  Lodge,  and  being  intro-
duced into  the  ritual,  from  that  time  forth  Ancient  Craft  Masonry,
as  it  has  since  been  called,  has  consisted  of  these  three  degrees.1

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  this  radical  change  from  the  old
system  was  not  pleasing  to  the  purely  Operative  Freemasons  who
were  members  of  the  Grand  Lodge.  Innovation  has  always  been
repugnant  to  the  Masonic  mind.  Then,  as  now,  changes  in  the
ritual  and  the  introduction  of  new  degrees  must  have  met  with  much
opposition  from  those  who  were  attached  traditionally  to  former
usages  and  were  unwilling  to  abandon  the  old  paths.

From  1717  to  1722  we  find,  by  Anderson's  records,  that  the
Operatives  must  have  taken  an  active  part  in  the  transactions  of  the
Grand  Lodge,  for  during  that  period  they  received  a fair  proportion
of  the  offices.  No  one  of  them,  however,  had  been  elected  to  the
chief  post  of  Grand  Master,  which  was  always  bestowed  upon  a
Speculative.

But  from  the  year  1723,  when,  as  it  has  been  shown,  the  Specu-
lative system  had  been  perfected,  we  lose  all  sight  of  the  Operatives
in  any  further  proceedings  of  the  society.  It  is  impossible  to  de-
termine whether  this  was  the  result  of  their  voluntary  withdrawal  or
whether  the  Speculatives  no  longer  desired  their  co-operation.  But
the  evidence  is  ample  that  from  the  year  1723  Speculative  Free-
masonry has  become  the  dominant,  and,  indeed,  the  only  feature  of
the  Grand  Lodge.

Bro.  Robert  Freeke  Gould,  who  has  written  an  elaborate  sketch
of  the  history  of  those  times,  makes  on  this  point  the  following  re-
mark, which  sustains  the  present  views:

"In  1723,  however,  a struggle  for  supremacy,  between  the
Operatives  and  the  Speculatives,  had  set  in,  and  the  former,  from
that  time,  could  justly  complain  of  their  total  supercession  in  the
offices  of  the  Society."2

It  is,  then,  in  the  year  1723  that  we  must  place  the  birth  of
Speculative  Freemasonry.  Operative  Masonry,  the  mere  art  of
building,  that  which  was  practiced  by  the  "Rough  Layers"  of  Eng-
land and  the  wall  builders  or  Murer  of  Germany,  still  remains  and
will  always  remain  as  one  of  the  useful  arts.

1 The  dismemberment  of  the  Third  degree,  which  is  said  to  have  subsequently  taken
place  to  form  a fourth  degree,  has  nothing  to  do  with  this  discussion.

2 "History  of  the  Four  Old  Lodges,"  p.  34.

1016

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

But  Operative  Freemasonry,  the  descendant  and  the  representa-
tive of  the  mediaeval  guilds,  ceased  then  and  forever  to  exist.

It  died,  but  it  left  its  sign  in  the  implements  of  the  Craft  which
were  still  preserved  in  the  new  system,  but  applied  to  spiritual  uses;
in  the  technical  terms  of  the  art  which  gave  rise  to  a symbolic
language;  and  in  the  ineffaceable  memorials  which  show  that  the
new  association  of  Speculative  Freemasonry  has  been  erected  on
the  foundations  of  a purely  Operative  Society.

CHAPTER  XXXVIII

INTRODUCTION  OF  SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY  INTO  FRANCE

ECULATIVE  Freemasonry  having  been  firmly-
established  in  London  and  its  environs  (for  it

did  not  immediately  extend  into  the  other  parts
of  England),  it  will  now  be  proper  to  direct  our
attention  to  its  progress  in  other  countries,  and
in  the  first  place  into  the  neighboring  kingdom
of  France.

The  unauthentic  and  unconfirmed  statements  of  Masonic  scholars,

until  a very  recent  period,  had  thrown  a cloud  of  uncertainty  over
the  early  history  of  Freemasonry  in  France,  which  entirely  obscured
the  true  era  of  its  introduction  into  that  country.

Moreover,  the  accounts  of  the  origin  of  Freemasonry  in  France
made  by  different  writers  are  of  so  conflicting  a nature  that  it  is

utterly  impossible  to  reconcile  them  with  historical  accuracy.  The
web  of  confusion  thus  constructed  has  only  been  recently  disen-

tangled by  the  investigations  of  some  English  writers,  conspicuous
among  whom  is  Bro.  William  James  Hughan.

Before  proceeding  to  avail  ourselves  of  the  result  of  these  inqui-
ries into  the  time  of  the  constitution  of  the  first  lodge  in  France,  it

will  be  interesting  to  present  the  views  of  the  various  authors  who

had  previously  written  on  the  subject.

In  the  year  1745  a pamphlet,  purporting  to  be  an  exposition  of
Freemasonry,  was  published  in  Paris,  entitled  Le  Sceau  Rompu,  on
la  Loge  ouverte  aux  profanes.  In  this  work  it  is  stated  that  the

earliest  introduction  of  Freemasonry  into  France  is  to  be  traced  to
the  year  1718.  This  work  is,  however,  of  no  authority,  and  it  is
only  quoted  to  show  the  recklessness  with  which  statements  of
Masonic  history  are  too  frequently  made.

The  Abbe  Robin,  who  in  1776  published  his  Researches  on  the
Ancient  and  Modern  Initiations ,’  says  that  at  the  time  of  his  writ-

1 "Recherches  sur  les  initiations  anciennes  et  modemes,"  par  l'Abbe  Rxxx.  The

work,  though  printed  anonymously,  was  openly  attributed  to  Robin,  by  the  publisher.

1017

1018

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

ing  no  memorial  of  the  origin  of  Freemasonry  in  France  remained,
and  that  all  that  has  been  found  does  not  go  farther  back  than  the
year  1720,  when  it  seems  to  have  come  from  England.  But  of  the
date  thus  ascribed  he  gives  no  authentic  evidence.  It  is  with  him
but  a surmise.

Thory,  in  1815,  in  his  Acta  Latomorum,  gives  the  story  as  fol-
lows,1 having  borrowed  it  from  Lalande,  the  great  astronomer,  who

had  previously  published  it  in  1786,  in  his  article  on  Freemasonry  in
that  immense  work,  the  Encyclopedic  Methodique.

"The  year  1725  is  indicated  as  the  epoch  of  the  introduction
of  Freemasonry  into  Paris.  Lord  Derwentwater,  the  Chevalier
Maskelyne,  M.  d'Henquelty,  and  some  other  Englishmen,  established
a lodge  at  the  house  of  Hure,  the  keeper  of  an  ordinary  in  the
Rue  des  Boucheries.  This  lodge  acquired  a great  reputation,  and
attracted  five  or  six  hundred  brethren  to  Masonry  in  the  space  of
ten  years.  It  worked  under  the  auspices  and  according  to  the
usages  of  the  Grand  Lodge  at  London.

"It  has  left  no  historical  monument  of  its  existence,  a fact
which  throws  much  confusion  over  the  first  labors  of  Freemasonry

in  Paris."

In  his  record  of  the  year  1736,  he  says  that  "four  lodges  then
existed  at  Paris,  which  united  and  elected  the  Earl  of  Hamouester,
who  thus  succeeded  Lord  Derwentwater,  whom  the  brethren  had
chosen  at  the  epoch  of  the  introduction  of  Freemasonry  into  Paris.
At  this  meeting  the  Chevalier  Ramsay  acted  as  Orator."2

T.  B.  Clavel,  in  his  Histoire  Pittoresque  de  la  Franc-Magon-
nerie ,3  says  that  according  to  certain  English  and  German  historians,
among  others  Robison  and  the  aulic  counsellor  Bode,  Freemasonry

was  introduced  into  France  by  the  Irish  followers  of  King  James  II.,
after  the  English  revolution  in  1688,  and  the  first  lodge  was  estab-
lished at  the  Chateau  de  Saint  Germain,  the  residence  of  the  de-

throned monarch,  whence  the  Masonic  association  was  propagated
in  the  rest  of  the  kingdom,  in  Germany  and  Italy.

Clavel  acknowledges  that  he  does  not  know  on  what  documentary
evidence  these  writers  support  this  opinion;  he  does  not,  however,
think  it  altogether  destitute  of  probability.

1 "Acta  Latomorum,  ou  chronologic  de  l'Histoire  de  la  Franc-Ma^onnerie  Frangaise
et  Etrangere,"  p.  21.

2 Ibid.,  p.  51.

3 Chapter  III.,  p.  107.

SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY  IN  FRANCE

1019

Robison,  to  whom  Clavel  has  referred,  says  that  when  King

James,  with  many  of  his  most  zealous  adherents,  had  fled  into  France,
"they  took  Freemasonry  with  them  to  the  continent,  where  it  was
immediately  received  by  the  French,  and  was  cultivated  with  great
zeal,  and  in  a manner  suited  to  the  tastes  and  habits  of  that  highly

polished  people."1

Leaving  this  wholly  apocryphal  statement  without  discussion,  I
proceed  to  give  Clavel's  account,  which  he  claims  to  be  historical,  of
the  introduction  of  Freemasonry  from  England  into  France.

The  first  lodge,  he  says,  whose  establishment  in  France  is  his-
torically proved,  is  the  one  which  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  in-

stituted at  Dunkirk  in  the  year  1721,  under  the  title  of  Amitie  et
Fraternite.  The  second,  the  name  of  which  has  not  been  preserved,

was  founded  at  Paris  in  1725  by  Lord  Derwentwater,  the  Chevalier

Maskelyne,  Brother  d'Heguerty,  and  some  other  followers  of  the
Pretender.  It  met  at  the  house  of  Hure,  an  English  tavern-keeper

or  restaurateur  in  the  Rue  des  Boucheries  in  the  Faubourg  Saint

Germain.  A brother  Gaustand,  an  English  lapidary,  about  the  same

time  created  a third  lodge  at  Paris.  A fourth  one  was  established

in  1726,  under  the  name  of  St.  Thomas.  The  Grand  Lodge  of
England  constituted  two  others  in  1729;  the  name  of  the  first  was

Au  Louis  d'Argent,  and  a brother  Lebreton  was  its  Master;  the
other  was  called  A Sainte  Marguerite;  of  this  lodge  we  know  noth-
ing but  its  name,  which  was  reported  in  the  Registry  of  the  year
1765.  Finally  there  was  a fourth  lodge  formed  in  Paris  in  the  year
1732,  at  the  house  of  Laudelle,  a tavern-keeper  in  the  Rue  de  Bussy.
At  first  it  took  its  name  from  that  of  the  street  in  which  it  was
situated,  afterward  it  was  called  the  Lodge  d'Aumont,  because  the
Duke  of  Aumont  had  been  initiated  in  it.2

Ragon,  in  his  Orthodoxie  Maqonnique,  asserts  that  Freemasonry

made  its  first  appearance  in  France  in  1721,  when  on  October  13th
the  Lodge  lAmitie  et  Fraternite  was  instituted  at  Dunkirk.  It
appeared  in  Paris  in  1725;  in  Bordeaux  in  1732,  by  the  estab-

lishment of  the  Lodge  TAnolaise  No.  204;  and  on  January

1 "Proofs  of  a Conspiracy,"  p.  27.

2 A review  of  the  Report  made  in  1838  and  1839  to  the  Grand  Orient  of  France  by  a
Committee,  which  is  contained  in  the  French  journal  La  Globe  (tome  I.,  p.  324),  states
that  "cette  loge  fut  regulierment  constitute  par  la  Grande  Loge  d'Angleterre,  le  7 Mai,
1729,  sous  le  titre  distinctif  de  Saint-Thomas  au  Louis  d'Argent"

1020

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

1,  1732,  the  Lodge  of  la  Parfaite  Union  was  instituted  at  Valen-
ciennes.1

Two  other  French  authorities,  not,  however,  Masonic,  have
given  similar  but  briefer  statements.

In  the  Dictionnaire  de  la  conversation  et  de  la  Lecture  it  is  said
that  Freemasonry  was  introduced  into  France  in  1720  by  Lord  Der-
wentwater  and  the  English.  The  Grand  Masters  who  succeeded
him  were  Lord  d'Amold-Esler  and  the  Due  d'Autin,  the  Comte  de
Clermont-Tonnerre  and  the  Due  d'Orleans.  In  1736  there  were  still
only  four  lodges  in  Paris;  in  1742  there  were  twenty-two,  and  two
hundred  in  the  provinces.2

Larousse,  in  his  Grand  Universal  Dictionary  of  the  Nineteenth
Century ,3  simply  repeats  this  statement  as  to  dates,  simply  stating
that  the  first  lodge  in  France  was  founded  at  Dunkirk  in  1721,  and
the  second  at  Paris  in  1725,  by  Lord  Derwentwater.

Rebold  has  written,  in  his  Histoire  des  Trois  Grandes  Loges,  a
more  detailed  statement  of  the  events  connected  with  the  introduc-
tion of  Freemasonry  into  France.  His  narrative  is  as  follows:

"It  was  not  until  1725  that  a lodge  was  for  the  first  time
founded  at  Paris  by  Lord  Derwentwater  and  two  other  Englishmen,
under  the  title  of  St.  Thomas.  It  was  constituted  by  them  in  the
name  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  London,  on  the  12th  of  June,  1720.
Its  members,  to  the  number  of  five  or  six  hundred,  met  at  the  house
of  Hure,  a tavern-keeper  in  the  Rue  des  Boucheries-Saint  Germain.
Through  the  exertions  of  the  same  English  gentlemen  a second
lodge  was  established  on  the  7th  of  June,  1729,  under  the  name  of
Louis  d'Argent.  Its  members  met  at  the  tavern  of  the  same  name,
kept  by  one  Lebreton.  On  the  nth  of  December  of  the  same
year  a third  lodge  was  instituted,  under  the  title  of  Arts  Sainte
Marguerite.  Its  meetings  were  held  at  the  house  of  an  English-
man named  Gaustand.  Linally,  on  the  29th  of  November,  1732,  a
fourth  lodge  was  founded,  which  was  called  Buci,4  from  the  name
of  the  tavern  in  which  it  held  its  meetings,  which  was  situated  in
the  Rue  de  Buci,  and  was  kept  by  one  Laudelle.  This  lodge,  after

1 "Orthodoxie  Maponnique,"  p.  35.

2 "Dictionnaire  de  la  Conversation,"  art.  Franc-Maponnerie,  vol.  xxviii.,  p.  136.

3 "Grand  Dictionnaire  Universal  du  XIXme  Siecle,"  par  M.  Pierre  Larousse.  Paris,
1872.

4 This  is  evidently  a mistake  of  Rebold  for  Bussy.

SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY  IN  FRANCE

1021

having  initiated  the  Duke  d'Aumont,  took  the  name  of  the  Lodge

d'Aumont.

"Lord  Denventwater,  who,  in  1725,  had  received  from  the

Grand  Lodge  of  London  plenary  powers  to  constitute  lodges  in

France,  was,  in  1735,  invested  by  the  same  Grand  Lodge  with  the
functions  of  Provincial  Grand  Master.  When  he  left  France  (in
1745)  to  return  to  England,  where  he  soon  after  perished  on  the
scaffold,  a victim  to  his  attachment  for  the  House  of  Stuart,  he

transferred  the  full  powers  which  he  possessed  to  his  friend  Lord
Hamouester,  who  was  empowered  to  represent  him  as  Provincial
Grand  Master  during  his  absence.

"The  four  lodges  then  existing  at  Paris  resolved  to  found  a Pro-
visional Grand  Lodge  of  England,  to  which  the  lodges  to  be  there-
after constituted  in  France  might  directly  address  themselves  as  the

representative  of  the  Grand  Lodge  at  London.  This  resolution  was

put  into  effect  after  the  departure  of  Lord  Derwentwater.  This

Grand  Lodge  was  regularly  and  legally  constituted  in  1736  under

the  Grand  Mastership  of  Lord  Hamouester."1

Such  is  the  story  of  the  introduction  of  Speculative  Freemasonry
into  France,  which,  first  published  by  the  astronomer  Lalande,  has
been  since  repeated  and  believed  by  all  French  Masonic  historians.

That  a portion  of  this  story  is  true  is  without  doubt;  but  it  is
equally  doubtless  that  a portion  of  it  is  false.  It  will  be  a task  of

some  difficulty,  but  an  absolutely  necessary  one,  to  unravel  the  web

and  to  distinguish  and  separate  what  is  true  from  what  is  false.

The  names  of  three  of  the  four  founders  of  the  first  lodge  in

Paris  present  a hitherto  insurmountable  obstacle  in  the  way  of  any
identification  of  them  with  historical  personages  of  that  period.  The

unfortunate  propensity  of  French  writers  and  printers  to  distort

English  names  in  spelling  them,  makes  it  impossible  to  trace  the
names  of  Lord  Hamouester  and  M.  Hugety  to  any  probable

source.  I have  made  the  most  diligent  researches  on  the  subject,
and  have  been  unable  to  find  either  of  them  in  any  works  relating
to  the  events  of  the  beginning  of  the  18th  century,  which  have  been
within  my  reach.

Lord  Derwent- Waters,  as  the  title  is  printed,  was  undoubtedly
Charles  Radcliffe,  the  brother  of  James,  the  third  Earl  of  Derwent-

1 "Histoire  des  Trois  Grandes  Loges,"  par  Em.  Rebold,  p.  44.

1022

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

water,  who  had  been  beheaded  in  1715  for  his  connection  with  the
rebellion  in  that  year,  excited  by  the  Old  Pretender,  or,  as  he  styled
himself,  James  III.  Charles  Radcliffe  had  also  been  convicted  of
complicity  in  the  rebellion  and  sentenced  to  be  beheaded.  He,

nowever,  made  his  escape  and  fled  to  the  continent.  At  first  he

repaired  to  Rome,  where  the  Pretender  then  held  his  court,  but
afterward  removed  to  France,  where  he  married  the  widow  of  Lord
Newburghe  and  remained  in  that  city  until  the  year  1733.  He  then
went  for  a short  time  to  England,  where  he  appeared  openly,  but
afterward  returned  to  Paris  and  continued  there  until  1745.  In

that  year  the  Young  Pretender  landed  in  Scotland  and  invaded

England  in  the  attempt,  as  Regent,  to  recover  the  throne  of  his
ancestors  and  to  place  his  father  upon  it.

Charles  Radcliffe,  who  had  assumed  the  title  of  the  Earl  of  Der-
wentwater  on  the  demise  of  his  nephew,  who  died  in  1731,  sailed  on
November  21,  1745,  for  Montrose  in  Scotland,  in  the  French  pri-
vateer Soleil,  for  the  purpose  of  joining  the  Pretender.  He  was
accompanied  by  a large  number  of  Irish,  Scotch,  and  French  offi-

ers  and  men.  On  the  passage  the  privateer  was  captured  by  the

English  ship-of-war  Sheemess,  and  carried,  with  its  crew  and  pas-
sengers, to  England.

On  December  8th  in  the  following  year  Radcliffe  was  beheaded,
in  pursuance  of  his  former  sentence,  which  had  been  suspended  for
thirty  years.

Of  Lord  Harnouester,  who  is  said  by  the  French  writers  to  have
succeeded  the  titular  Earl  of  Derwentwater  as  the  second  Grand
Master,  1 have  been  unable  to  find  a trace  in  any  of  the  genealogi-
cal, heraldic,  or  historical  works  which  I have  consulted.  The  name
is  undoubtedly  spelled  wrongly,  and  might  have  been  Arnester,
Hamester,  or  Hamevester.  The  change  made  by  the  Dictionnaire

de  la  Conversation,  which  converts  it  into  "d'Amold-Ester"  only
adds  more  confusion  to  that  which  was  already  abundantly  con-
founded.

Maskelyne  is  an  English  name.  It  was  that  of  a family  in

Wiltshire,  from  which  Nevil  Maskelyne,  the  distinguished  Astrono-
mer Royal,  bom  in  1734,  was  descended.  But  I am  unable  to
identify  the  Chevalier  Maskelyne,  of  the  French  writers,  with  any
person  of  distinction  or  of  notoriety  at  that  period.

I am  equally  at  a loss  as  to  M.  Hugetty,  a name  which  has  been

SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY  IN  FRANCE

1023

variously  spelt  as  Heguetty  and  Heguelly.  The  name  does  not,  in
either  of  these  forms,  indicate  the  nationality  of  the  owner,  and  the
probable  transformation  from  the  original  forbids  the  hope  of  a
successful  investigation.

One  fact  alone  appears  to  be  certain,  and  fortunately  that  is  of
some  importance  in  determining  the  genuineness  of  the  history.

The  titular  Earl  of  Derwentwater  was  a Jacobite,  devoted  to
the  interests  of  the  fallen  family  of  Stuart,  and  the  English,  Irish,
and  Scotch  residents  of  Paris,  with  whom  he  was  on  terms  of  inti-
macy, must  have  been  Jacobites  or  adherents  of  the  Stuarts  also.
The  political  jealousy  of  the  British  Government  at  that  time  made
it  unpleasantly  suspicious  for  any  loyal  subject  to  maintain  intimate
relations  with  the  Jacobites  who  were  living  in  exile  at  Paris  and
elsewhere.

This  fact  will  be  an  important  element  in  determining  the  genu-
ineness of  the  authority  claimed  to  have  been  given  to  Lord  Der-
wentwater by  the  Grand  Lodge  at  London.

The  German  historians  have  generally  borrowed  their  authority

from  the  French  writers,  and  on  this  occasion  have  not  shown  their
usual  thoroughness  of  investigation.

Lenning  simply  states  that  the  first  lodge  of  France  was  founded
at  Paris  in  1725,  and  that  it  was  soon  followed  by  others.1

Gadicke  had  previously  said  that  Freemasonry  was  introduced
into  France  from  England  and  Scotland  in  the  year  1660,  but
while  it  flourished  in  England  it  soon  almost  entirely  disappeared
in  France.  Afterward,  in  the  year  1725,  England  again  planted  it
in  France,  for  in  that  year  three  Englishmen  founded  a lodge  in
Paris  which  was  called  the  English  Grand  Lodge  of  France.2

Findel  is  a little  more  particular  in  his  details,  but  affords  us

nothing  new.  He  says  that  "it  is  impossible  to  determine  with  any

certainty  the  period  of  the  introduction  of  Freemasonry  into  France,
as  the  accounts  handed  down  to  us  are  very  contradictory,  varying
from  the  years  1721,  1725,  1727,  to  1732.  In  an  historical  notice  of

the  Grand  Lodge  of  France,  addressed  to  her  subordinate  lodges,
there  is  a statement  specifying  that  Lord  Derwentwater,  Squire
Maskelyne,  a lord  of  Heguerty  and  some  other  English  noblemen,
established  a lodge  in  Paris  in  1725,  at  Hure's  Tavern.  Lord  Der-

1 "Encyclopadie  der  Freimaurerei."  2 "Freimaurer-Lexicon."

1024

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

wentwater  is  supposed  to  have  been  the  first  who  received  a War-
rant from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.  It  is  recorded  that  other
lodges  were  established  by  these  same  authorities,  and  amongst
others  the  Lodge  d'Aumont  ( au  Louis  a' Argent)  in  1729,  in  la
Rue  Bussy  at  Laudelle's  tavern,  the  documents  bearing  the  date  of
1732  as  that  of  their  foundation."1

Kloss,  who  has  written  a special  work  on  the  history  of  Free-
masonry in  France,  supported  as  he  says  by  reliable  documents,2
adopts  the  statements  made  originally  by  Lalande  in  the  Ency-
clopedic Methodique,  and  which  were  repeated  by  successive  French
writers.

So,  on  the  whole,  we  get  nothing  more  from  the  German  histo-
rians than  what  we  already  had  from  the  French.

We  come  next  to  the  English  writers,  whose  information  must
have  been  better  than  that  of  either  the  French  or  German,  as  they
possessed  a written  history  of  the  contemporary  events  of  that
period.  Therefore  it  is  that  on  them  we  are  compelled  to  lean  in
any  attempt  to  solve  the  riddle  involved  in  the  introduction  of  the
Speculative  institution  into  the  neighboring  kingdom.  Still  we  are
not  to  receive  as  incontestable  all  that  has  been  said  on  this  subject
by  the  earlier  English  writers  on  Freemasonry.  Their  wonted  re-
missness here,  as  well  as  elsewhere  in  respect  to  dates  and  author-
ities, leaves  us,  at  last,  to  depend  for  a great  part  on  rational  con-
jecture and  logical  inferences.

Dr.  Oliver,  the  most  recent  author  to  whom  I shall  refer,  accepts
the  French  narrative  of  the  institution  of  a lodge  at  Paris  in  1725,
and  adds  that  it  existed  "under  the  sanction  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England  by  virtue  of  a charter  granted  to  Lord  Derwentwater,
Maskelyne,  Higuetty  and  some  other  Englishmen."3

Elsewhere  he  asserts  that  the  Freemasonry  which  was  practiced
in  France  between  1700  and  1725  was  only  by  some  English  resi-
dents, without  a charter  or  any  formal  warrant.4  In  this  opinion  he
is  sustained  by  the  Committee  of  the  Grand  Orient  already  alluded
to,  in  whose  report  it  is  stated  that  "most  impartial  historians  assert

1 "Geschichte  der  Freimaurerei,"  Lyon's  Translation,  p.  200.

2 "Geschichte  der  Freimaurerei  in  Frankreich,  aus  achten  Urkunden  dargestellt,"
von  Georg  Kloss.  Darmstadt,  1852.

3 "Historical  Landmarks,"  vol.  ii.,  p.  32.

4 "Origin  of  the  Royal  Arch,"  p.  27.

SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY  IN  FRANCE

1025

that  from  1720  to  1725  Freemasonry  was  clandestinely  introduced
into  France  by  some  English  Masons."

The  author  of  an  article  in  the  London  Freemasons  Quarterly
Review ,*  under  the  title  of  "Freemasonry  in  Europe  During  the
Past  Century,"  says  that  "the  settlement  in  France  of  the  abdicated
king  of  England,  James  II.,  in  the  Jesuitical  Convent  of  Clermont,
seems  to  have  been  the  introduction  of  Freemasonry  into  Paris,  and
here  it  was  (as  far  as  we  can  trace)  the  first  lodge  in  France  was

formed,  anno  1725."  The  writer  evidently  connects  in  his  mind  the

establishment  of  Freemasonry  in  France  with  the  Jacobites  or  party
of  the  Pretender  who  were  then  in  exile  in  that  kingdom,  a sup-
posed connection  which  will,  hereafter,  be  worth  our  consideration.

Laurie  (or  rather  Sir  David  Brewster,  who  wrote  the  book  for

him)  has,  in  his  History  of  Freemasonry,  when  referring  to  this
subject,  indulged  in  that  spirit  of  romantic  speculation  which  distin-
guishes the  earlier  portion  of  the  work  and  makes  it  an  extravagant
admixture  of  history  and  fable.

He  makes  no  allusion  to  the  events  of  the  year  1725,  or  to  the
lodge  said  to  have  been  created  by  the  titular  Earl  of  Derwentwater,
but  thinks  "it  is  almost  certain  that  the  French  borrowed  from  the

Scots  the  idea  of  their  Masonic  tribunal,  as  well  as  Freemasonry
itself."2  And  he  places  the  time  of  its  introduction  at  "about  the
middle  of  the  16th  century,  during  the  minority  of  Queen  Mary."1

After  all  that  has  hitherto  been  said  about  the  origin  of  Specu-
lative Freemasonry,  it  will  not  be  necessary  to  waste  time  in  the

refutation  of  this  untenable  theory  or  of  the  fallacious  argument  by
which  it  is  sought  to  support  it.  It  is  enough  to  say  that  the  author

entirely  confounds  Operative  and  Speculative  Freemasonry,  and
that  he  supposes  that  the  French  soldiers  who  were  sent  to  the  assist-
ance of  Scotland  were  initiated  into  the  Scotch  lodges  of  Operative
Masons,  and  then  brought  the  system  back  with  them  to  France.

Preston  passes  the  subject  with  but  few  words.  He  says  that
in  1732  Lord  Montagu,  who  was  then  Grand  Master,  "granted
a deputation  for  constituting  a lodge  at  Valenciennes  in  French
Flanders,  and  another  for  opening  a new  lodge  at  the  Hotel  de

Bussy,  in  Paris."4

New  Series,  anno  1844,  p.  156.
3 Ibid.,  p.  109.

2 "History  of  Freemasonry,"  p.  110.

4 "Illustrations,"  Jones's  edition,  p.  212.

1026

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

The  word  "new"  might  be  supposed  to  intimate  that  there  was
already  an  older  lodge  in  Paris.  But  Preston  nowhere  makes  any  ref-
erence to  the  Derwentwater  lodge  of  1725,  or  to  any  other,  except
this  of  1732.  We  learn  nothing  more  of  the  origin  of  Freemasonry
in  France  from  this  generally  reliable  author.

We  now  approach  an  earlier  class  of  authorities,  which,  however,
consists  only  of  Dr.  Anderson  and  the  contemporary  records  of  the
Grand  Lodge  at  London.

In  1738  Dr.  Anderson  published  the  second  edition  of  the  Book
of  Constitutions.  In  the  body  of  the  work,  which  contains  a record,
frequently  very  brief,  of  the  proceedings  of  the  Grand  Lodge  from
1717  to  June,  1738,  there  is  no  mention  of  the  constitution  of  a
lodge  at  Paris,  or  in  any  other  part  of  France.

In  a "List  of  the  lodges  in  and  about  London  and  Westmin-
ster," appended  to  the  work,1  he  records  that  there  was  a "French
lodge,"  which  met  at  the  "Swan  Tavern"  in  Long  Acre,  and  which
received  its  warrant  June  12,  1723.  In  the  list  its  number  is  18.

This  fact  is  only  important  as  showing  that  Frenchmen  were  at
that  early  period  taking  an  interest  in  the  new  society,  and  it  may
or  may  not  be  connected  with  the  appearance,  not  long  afterward,
of  a lodge  at  Paris.

In  the  list  of  "Deputations  sent  beyond  Sea"2  it  is  recorded  that
in  1732  Viscount  Montagu,  Grand  Master,  granted  a Deputation
for  constituting  a lodge  at  Valenciennes,  in  France,  and  another  for
constituting  a lodge  at  the  Hotel  de  Bussy,  in  Paris.

According  to  the  same  authority,  Lord  Weymouth,  Grand  Master
in  1735,  granted  a Deputation  to  the  Duke  of  Richmond  "to  hold
a lodge  at  his  castle  d'Aubigny,  in  France."3  He  adds,  referring  to
these  and  to  other  lodges  instituted  in  different  countries,  that  "all
these  foreign  lodges  are  under  the  patronage  of  our  Grand  Master
of  England."4

This  is  all  that  Anderson  says  about  the  introduction  of  Free-
masonry into  France.  It  will  be  remarked  that  he  makes  no  men-
tion of  a lodge  constituted  at  Dunkirk  in  1721,  nor  of  the  lodge  in
Paris  instituted  in  1725.  His  silence  is  significant.

Entick,  who  succeeded  Anderson  as  editor  of  the  Book  of  Con-

1 "Constitutions,"  2d  edition,  p.  186.

3 Ibid.,  p.  195.

2 Ibid.,  p.  194.
4 Ibid.,  p.  196.

SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY  IN  FRANCE

1027

stitutions,  the  third  edition  of  which  he  published  in  1756,  says  no
more  than  his  predecessor,  of  Freemasonry  in  France.  In  fact,  he
says  less,  for  in  his  lists  of  "Deputations  for  Provincial  Grand

Masters,"1  he  omits  those  granted  by  Lords  Montagu  and  Wey-
mouth. But  in  a "List  of  Regular  Lodges,  according  to  their
Seniority  and  Constitution,  by  order  of  the  Grand  Master,"2  he  in-
serts a lodge  held  at  La  Ville  de  Tonnerre,  Rue  des  Boucheries,  at
Paris,  constituted  April  3,  1732,  another  at  Valenciennes,  in  French
Flanders,  constituted  in  1733,  and  a third  at  the  Castle  of  Aubigny
in  France,  constituted  August  12,  1735.  He  thus  confirms  what

Anderson  had  previously  stated,  but,  like  him,  Entick  is  altogether
silent  in  respect  to  the  Dunkirk  lodge  of  1 72 1 , or  that  of  Paris  in

1725.

Northouck,  who  edited  the  fourth  edition  of  the  Book  of  Con-
stitutions, appears  to  have  been  as  ignorant  as  his  predecessors  of
the  existence  of  any  lodge  in  France  before  the  year  1732.  From

him,  however,  we  gather  two  facts.  The  first  of  these  is  that  in  the
year  1768  letters  were  received  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  France

expressing  a desire  to  open  a correspondence  with  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England.  The  overture  was  accepted,  and  a Book  of  Constitu-

tions, a list  of  lodges,  and  a form  of  deputation  were  presented  to  the
Grand  Lodge  of  France.

The  second  fact  is  somewhat  singular.  Notwithstanding  the
recognized  existence  of  a Grand  Lodge  of  France  it  seems  that  in

that  very  year  there  were  lodges  in  that  country  which  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England  claimed  as  constituents,  owing  it  their  allegiance;
for  Northouck  tells  us  that  in  1768  two  lodges  in  France,  "having
ceased  to  meet  or  neglected  to  conform  to  the  laws  of  this  society,

were  erazed  out  of  the  list."

It  may  be  that  these  were  among  the  lodges  which,  in  former

times,  had  been  created  in  France  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,
and  that  they  had  transferred  their  allegiance  to  the  Grand  Lodge
of  their  own  country,  but  had  omitted  to  give  due  notice  of  the  act
to  the  Grand  Lodge  which  had  originally  created  them.

Our  next  source  of  information  must  be  the  engraved  lists  of
lodges  published,  from  1723  to  1778,  by  authority  of  the  Grand

1 "Constitutions,"  by  Entick,  p.  333.

2 Ibid.,  p.  335.  This  list  bears  some  resemblance  to  Cole's  engraved  list  for  1756,
but  the  two  are  not  identical.

1028

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Lodge  of  England.  Their  history  will  be  hereafter  given.  It  is
enough  now  to  say,  that  being  official  documents,  and  taken  for  the
most  part  from  the  Minute  Book  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  they  are  in-

vested with  historical  authority.

The  earliest  of  the  engraved  lists,  that  for  1723,  contains  the

designations1  of  fifty-one  lodges.  All  of  them  were  situated  in
London  and  Westminster.  There  is  no  reference  to  any  lodge  in
France.

The  list  for  1725  contains  the  titles  of  sixty-four  lodges.  The

Society  was  extending  in  the  kingdom,  and  the  cities  of  Bath,
Bristol,  Norwich,  Chichester,  and  Chester  are  recorded  as  places
where  lodges  had  been  constituted.  But  no  lodge  is  recorded  as

having  been  created  in  France.

In  the  list  of  lodges  returned  in  1730  (in  number  one  hundred
and  two),  which  is  contained  in  the  Minute  Book  of  the  Grand
Lodge,2  a lodge  is  recorded  as  being  at  Madrid  in  Spain,  the  num-

ber 50  being  attached,  and  the  place  of  meeting  the  "French  Arms,"
which  would  seem  almost  to  imply,  but  not  certainly,  that  most  of
its  members  were  Frenchmen.3  Lodge  No.  90  is  said  to  be  held  at

the  "King's  Head,  Paris."  This  is  the  first  mention  in  any  of  the
lists  of  a lodge  in  Paris.  The  name  of  the  tavern  at  which  it  was

held  is  singular  for  a French  city.  But  as  it  is  said  by  Bro.  Gould

to  be  copied  from  "the  Minute  Book  of  the  Grand  Lodge,"  it
must  be  considered  as  authoritative.

We  next  find  an  historical  record  of  the  institution  of  lodges  in

France  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  in  Pine's  engraved  list  for
1734.4  Bro.  Hughan  has  said  that  the  first  historical  constitution

1 At  that  time  lodges  were  not  distinguished  by  names,  but  by  the  signs  of  the  taverns
at  which  they  met,  as  the  "King's  Arms,"  the  "Bull  and  Gate,"  etc.

2 The  list  is  given  in  Bro.  Gould's  "Four  Old  Lodges,"  p.  50.

3 This  lodge  met  on  Sunday,  a custom  still  practiced  by  many  French  lodges,  though

never,  as  far  as  I know,  by  English  or  American  lodges.  Le  Candeur,  an  old  lodge  of

French  members,  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  which  had  its  warrant  originally  from  the  Grand

Orient  of  France,  always  met  on  Sunday,  nor  did  it  change  the  custom  after  uniting  with
the  Grand  Lodge  of  South  Carolina.

4 A transcript  of  Pine's  list  for  1734,  copied  by  Bro.  Newton  of  Bolton  from  the

original  owned  by  Bro.  Tunneh,  Provincial  Grand  Secretary  of  East  Lancashire.  This
transcript  was  presented  by  Bro.  Newton  to  Bro.  W.  J.  Hughan,  who  published  it  in  the
"Masonic  Magazine"  for  November,  1876.  He  also  republished  it  in  pamphlet  form,  and

to  his  kindness  I am  indebted  for  a copy.  This  list  had  been  long  missing  from  the

archives  of  the  Grand  Lodge.

SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY  IN  FRANCE

1029

of  a lodge  at  Paris  is  that  referred  to  in  Pine's  list  of  1734;  but
the  lodge  No.  90  at  the  "King's  Head,"  recorded  as  has  just  been

shown  in  the  Grand  Lodge  list  of  1730,  seems  to  have  escaped  his
attention.

Pine's  list  for  1734  contains  the  names  of  two  lodges  in  France:
No.  90  at  the  Louis  d'Argent,  in  the  Rue  des  Boucheries,  at  Paris,

which  was  constituted  on  April  3,  1732,  and  No.  127  at  Valen-
ciennes in  French  Flanders,  the  date  of  whose  Warrant  of  Consti-
tution is  not  given.

In  Pine's  list  for  1736  these  lodges  are  again  inserted,  with  a
change  as  to  the  first,  which  still  numbers  as  90,  is  said  to  meet  at
the  "Hotel  de  Bussy,  Rue  de  Bussy."  The  sameness  of  the  num-

ber and  of  the  date  of  Constitution  identify  this  lodge  with  the  one
named  in  the  list  for  1734,  which  met  at  the  Louis  d'Argent,  in

the  Rue  des  Boucheries.

The  list  for  1736  contains  a third  lodge  in  France,  recorded  as

No.  133,  which  met  at  "Castle  Aubigny,"  and  was  constituted

August  22,  1735.

In  Pine's  list  for  1740  the  three  lodges  in  France  are  again  re-
corded as  before,  one  in  Paris,  one  at  Valenciennes,  and  one  at

Castle  d'Aubigny,1  but  the  first  of  them,  formerly  No.  90,  is  now

said  to  meet  as  No.  78,  at  the  Ville  de  Tonnerre,  in  the  same  Rue

des  Boucheries.  This  was  apparently  a change  of  name  and  number,
and  not  of  locality.  It  was  the  same  lodge  that  had  been  first  de-
scribed as  meeting  as  No.  90  at  the  Louis  d’Argent.

In  Benjamin  Cole's  list  for  1756  the  lodge's  number  is  changed
from  78  to  49,  but  under  the  same  old  warrant  of  April  3,  1732,  it
continues  to  meet  at  "la  Ville  de  Tonnerre"  in  the  Rue  des
Boucheries.

It  is  unnecessary  to  extend  this  investigation  to  subsequent  lists
or  to  those  to  be  found  in  various  works  which  have  been  mainly
copied  from  the  engraved  lists  of  Pine  and  Cole.  Enough  has  been
cited  to  exhibit  incontestable  evidence  of  certain  facts  respecting

the  origin  of  Speculative  Freemasonry  in  France.  This  evidence

is  incontestable,  because  it  is  derived  from  and  based  on  the  official
records  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.

1 The  date  of  the  Constitution  of  this  lodge  in  the  list  for  1736  is  August  22d.  In  the
present  and  in  subsequent  lists  the  date  is  August  12th.  The  former  date  is  undoubtedly
a typographical  error.

1030

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

It  was  the  custom  of  the  Grand  Lodge  to  issue  annually  an  en

graved  list  of  the  lodges  under  its  jurisdiction.  The  first  was  printed
by  Eman  Bowen  in  1723;  afterward  the  engraver  was  John  Pine,
who  printed  them  from  1725  to  1741,  and  perhaps  to  1743,  as  the
lists  for  that  and  the  preceding  year  are  missing.  The  list  for  1744
was  printed  by  Eman  Bowen;  from  1745  to  1766  Benjamin  Cole  was

the  printer,  who  was  followed  by  William  Cole,  until  1788,  which

is  the  date  of  the  latest  engraved  list.

"The  engraved  lists,"  says  Gould,  "were  renewed  annually,  cer-
tainly from  1738,  and  probably  from  the  commencement  of  the

series.  Latterly,  indeed,  frequent  editions  were  issued  in  a single
year,  which  are  not  always  found  to  harmonize  with  one  another."1

The  want  of  harmony  consisted  principally  in  the  change  of
numbers  and  in  the  omission  of  lodges.  This  arose  from  the  eras-
ures made  in  consequence  of  the  discontinuance  of  lodges,  or  their

failure  to  make  returns.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  in  an  official

document,  published  by  authority  and  for  the  information  of  the

Craft,  the  name  of  any  lodge  would  be  inserted  which  did  not  exist

at  the  time,  or  which  had  not  existed  at  some  previous  time.

We  can  not,  therefore,  unless  we  might  reject  the  authority  of
these  official  lists  as  authoritative  documents,  and  thus  cast  a slur
on  the  honesty  of  the  Grand  Lodge  which  issued  them,  refuse  to
accept  them  as  giving  a truthful  statement  of  what  lodges  there
were,  at  the  time  of  their  publication,  in  France,  acting  under  war-

rants from  the  Grand  Lodge  at  London.

Bro.  Hughan  asserts  that  the  first  historical  record  of  the  Con-
stitution of  a lodge  at  Paris  is  to  be  referred  to  the  one  mentioned
in  Pine's  list  for  1734,  as  having  been  held  au  Louis  d' Argent  in

the  Rue  des  Boucheries,  and  the  date  of  whose  Constitution  is  April
3,  1732.

It  is  true  that  Anderson's  first  mention  of  a deputation  to  con-
stitute a lodge  in  Paris  is  that  granted  in  1732  by  Viscount  Mon-

tagu as  Grand  Master,  and  1 presume  that  there  is  no  earlier  record
in  the  Minutes  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  for  if  there  were,  I am  very
sure  that  Bro.  Hughan  would  have  stated  it.

But  how  are  we  to  reconcile  this  view  with  the  fact  that  in  the
list  of  lodges  for  1730  a lodge  is  said  to  be  in  existence  in  that  year

'Four  Old  Lodges,"  p.  16.

SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY  IN  FRANCE

1031

in  Paris?  This  list,  as  printed  by  Bro.  Gould  in  his  interesting
work  on  the  Four  Old  Lodges ,’  is  now  lying  before  me.  It  is  taken
from  the  earliest  Minute  Book  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  and  is  thus
headed,  "List  of  the  names  of  the  Members  of  all  the  lodges  as  they
were  returned  in  the  year  1730."

Now  if  this  heading  were  absolutely  correct,  one  could  not  avoid
the  inference  that  there  was  a "regular  lodge"  in  Paris  in  the  year
1730,  two  years  before  the  Constitution  of  the  lodge  recorded  in
Pine's  list  for  1734,  for  among  the  lodges  named  in  this  1730  list  is
"90.  King's  Head  at  Paris."

For  a Parisian  hotel,  the  name  is  unusual  and  therefore  suspi-
cious. But  the  list  is  authentic  and  authoritative,  and  the  num-
ber agrees  with  that  of  the  lodge  referred  to  in  the  1734  list  as  meet-
ing at  the  Louis  d Argent,  in  the  Rue  des  Boucheries.

Indeed,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  lodge  recorded  in  the  list
for  1730  is  the  same  as  that  recorded  in  the  list  for  1734.  The

number  is  sufficient  for  identification.

Bro.  Gould  relieves  us  from  the  tangled  maze  into  which  this
difference  of  dates  had  led  us.  He  says  of  the  list,  which  in  his
book  is  No.  11,  and  which  he  calls  "List  of  lodges,  1730-32,"  that

"this  List  seems  to  have  been  continued  from  1730  to  1732."

The  list  comprises  102  lodges;  the  lodge  No.  90,  at  the  "King's
Head,  Paris,"  is  the  fifteenth  from  the  end,  and  was,  as  we  may  fairly
conclude,  inserted  in  and  upon  the  original  list  in  1732,  after  the
lodge  at  the  Rue  des  Boucheries  had  been  constituted.

So  that,  notwithstanding  the  apparent  statement  that  there  was
a regular  lodge,  that  is,  a lodge  duly  warranted  by  the  London

Grand  Lodge  in  1730,  it  is  evident  that  Bro.  Hughan  is  right  in  the
conclusion  at  which  he  has  arrived  that  the  first  lodge  constituted
by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  in  Paris,  was  that  known  as  No.
90,  and  which  at  the  time  of  its  constitution,  on  April  3,  1732,  met
at  the  Tavern  called  Louis  d'Argent,  in  the  Rue  des  Boucheries.
Its  number  was  subsequently  changed  to  78,  and  then  to  49.  It
and  the  lodge  at  Valenciennes  are  both  omitted  in  the  list  for  1770,
and  these  were  probably  the  two  lodges  in  France  recorded  by

Northouck  as  having  been  erased  from  the  roll  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England  in  1768.  With  their  erasure  passed  away  all  jurisdiction

Page  50.

1032

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

of  the  English  Grand  Lodge  over  any  of  the  lodges  in  France.  In
the  same  year  it  entered  into  fraternal  relations  with  the  Grand
Lodge  of  France.  The  lodge  at  Castle  d'Aubigny  is  also  omitted
from  the  list  of  1770,  and  if  not  erased,  had  probably  voluntarily
surrendered  its  warrant.

Thus  we  date  the  legal  introduction  of  lodges  into  France  at
the  year  1732.  But  it  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  Speculative
Freemasonry  on  the  English  plan  had  not  made  its  appearance  there
at  an  earlier  period.

The  history  of  the  origin  of  Freemasonry  in  France,  according
to  all  French  historians,  from  the  astronomer  Lalande  to  the  most
recent  writers,  is  very  different  from  that  which  it  has  been  con-
tended is  the  genuine  one,  according  to  the  English  records.

It  has  been  shown,  in  a preceding  part  of  this  chapter,  that  the
Abbe  Robin  said  that  Freemasonry  had  been  traced  in  France  as
far  back  as  1720,  and  that  it  appeared  to  have  been  brought  from
England.

Rebold  has  been  more  definite  in  his  account.  His  statement  in
substance  is  as  follows,  and  although  it  has  been  already  quoted  I
repeat  it  here,  for  the  purpose  of  comment.

Speaking  of  the  transformation  of  Freemasonry  from  a corpora-
tion of  Operatives  to  a purely  philosophic  institution,  which  took
place  in  London  in  1717,  he  proceeds  to  say,  that  the  first  cities  on
the  Continent  where  this  changed  system  had  been  carried  from
London  were  Dunkirk  and  Mons,  both  in  Flanders,  but  then  form-
ing a part  of  the  kingdom  of  France.  The  lodge  at  Mons  does
not  seem  to  have  attracted  the  attention  of  subsequent  writers,  but
Rebold  says  of  it  that  "it  was  constituted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England  on  June  4,  1721,  under  the  name  of  Parfaite  Union.  It

was,  at  a later  period,  erected  into  the  English  Grand  Lodge  of  the
Austrian  Netherlands,  and  from  1730  constituted  lodges  of  its
own."1

This  narrative  must  be  rejected  as  being  unsupported  by  the
English  records.  There  may  have  been,  as  1 shall  presently  show,
an  irregular  lodge  at  Mons,  organized  in  1721,  but  there  is  no  proof
that  it  had  any  legal  connection  with  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.

Of  the  lodge  at  Dunkirk,  Rebold  says  that  it  assumed  the  name

See  "Histoire  des  Trois  Grandes  Loges,"  p.  43.

SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY  IN  FRANCE

1033

of  Amitie  et  Fraternite,  and  that  in  1756  it  was  reconstituted  by

the  Grand  Lodge  of  France.  Of  the  constitution  of  this  lodge  by

the  Grand  Lodge  at  London,  in  1721,  we  have  no  more  proof  than

we  have  of  the  Constitution  of  that  at  Mons,  and  yet  it  has  been

accepted  as  a fact  by  Dr.  Oliver  and  some  other  English  authors.
Rebold,  however,  is  the  only  French  historian  who  positively  rec-

ognizes its  existence.

He  then  tells  us  the  story  as  it  has  been  quoted  on  a preceding

page  of  the  foundation  of  the  lodge  of  St.  Thomas  in  1725  at  Paris
by  Lord  Derwentwater  and  two  other  Englishmen,  and  of  its  con-
stitution by  the  Grand  Lodge  at  London  on  June  12,  1726.

Now  the  fact  is,  that  while  we  are  compelled  to  reject  the  state-
ment that  the  Grand  Lodge  at  London  had  constituted  this  lodge

in  the  Rue  des  Boucheries  in  1726,  because  we  have  distinct  testi-
mony in  the  records  of  the  Grand  Lodge  that  it  was  not  constituted
until  1732,  yet  we  find  it  equally  difficult  to  repudiate  the  concur-
rent authority  of  all  the  French  historians  that  there  was  in  1725  a

lodge  in  the  city  of  Paris,  established  by  Englishmen,  who  were  all
apparently  Jacobites  or  adherents  of  the  exiled  family  of  Stuart.

Paris  at  that  time  was  the  favorite  resort  of  English  subjects  who
were  disloyal  to  the  Hanoverian  dynasty,  which  was  then  reigning,
as  they  believed,  by  usurpation  in  their  native  country.

Clavel  tells  us  that  one  Hurre  or  Hure  was  an  English  tavern-
keeper,  and  that  his  tavern  was  situated  in  the  Rue  des  Boucheries.
It  is  natural  to  suppose  that  his  house  was  the  resort  of  his  exiled
countrymen.  That  Charles  Radcliffe  and  his  friends  were  among
his  guests  would  be  a strong  indication  that  he  was  also  a Jacobite.

Radcliffe,  himself,  could  not  have  been  initiated  into  the  new
system  of  Speculative  Freemasonry  in  London,  because  he  had
made  his  escape  from  England  two  years  before  the  organization  of
the  Grand  Lodge.  But  there  might  have  been,  among  the  fre-
quenters of  Hure's  tavern,  certain  Freemasons  who  had  been  Theo-
retic members  of  some  of  the  old  Operative  lodges,  or  even  taken  a
share  in  the  organization  of  the  new  Speculative  system.

There  was  nothing  to  prevent  these  Theoretic  Freemasons  from
opening  a lodge  according  to  the  old  system,  which  did  not  require
a Warrant  of  Constitution.  The  Grand  Lodge  which  had  been
organized  in  1717  did  not  claim  any  jurisdiction  beyond  London
and  its  precincts,  and  there  were  at  that  time  and  long  afterward

1034

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

many  lodges  in  England  which  paid  no  allegiance  to  the  Grand

Lodge  and  continued  to  work  under  the  old  Operative  regulations.

It  can  not  be  denied  that  the  Grand  Lodge  which  was  established
in  1717  did  not  expect  to  extend  its  jurisdiction  or  to  enforce  its

regulations  beyond  the  city  of  London  and  its  suburbs.  This  is
evident  from  a statute  enacted  November  25,  1723,  when  it  was

"agreed  that  no  new  lodge  in  or  near  London,  without  it  be  reg-
ularly constituted,  be  countenanced  by  the  Grand  Lodge  nor  the

Master  or  Wardens  admitted  to  Grand  Lodge."1

Gould,  who  quotes  this  passage,  says:  "It  admits  of  little  doubt,
that  in  its  inception,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  was  intended
merely  as  a governing  body  for  the  Masons  of  the  Metropolis."2

Even  as  late  as  1735  complaint  was  made  of  the  existence  of  irregu-
lar lodges  not  working  by  the  authority  or  dispensation  of  the  Grand

Master.3

What  was  there  then  to  prevent  the  creation  of  such  a lodge  in

Paris  by  English  Freemasons  who  had  left  their  country?  A lodge
would  not  only  be,  as  Anderson  has  called  it,  "a  safe  and  pleasant
relaxation  from  intense  study  or  the  hurry  of  business,"  but  it  would

be  to  these  exiles  for  a common  cause  a center  of  union.  Politics
and  party,  which  were  forbidden  topics  in  an  English  lodge  at  home,

would  here  constitute  important  factors  in  the  first  selection  of
members.

It  was  in  fact  a lodge  of  Jacobites.  These  men  paid  no  respect

to  acts  of  attainder,  and  to  them  Charles  Radcliffe,  as  the  heir  pre-
sumptive to  the  title  of  Earl  of  Derwentwater,  was  a prominent  per-
sonage, and  he  was,  therefore,  chosen  as  the  head  of  the  new  lodge.4

The  tavern  in  which  they  met  was  kept  by  Hure  or  Hurre,  or
some  name  like  it,  who,  according  to  the  statement  of  Clavel  and

others,  was  an  Englishman.  His  house  very  naturally  became  the

resort  of  his  countrymen  in  Paris.  As  it  was  also  the  locale  of  the
Jacobite  lodge,  it  may  be  safely  presumed  that  Hure  was  himself  a

1 From  the  Grand  Lodge  Minutes.

2 "The  Four  Old  Lodges,"  p.  19.

3 See  New  Regulations  in  Anderson,  2d  edition,  p.  156.

4 The  French  writers  and  the  English  who  have  followed  them  are  all  wrong  in  say-

ing that  Lord  Derwentwater  was  Master  of  the  lodge  in  1725.  At  that  time  Lord  Der-
wentwater, the  only  son  of  the  decapitated  Earl,  was  a youth.  On  his  death  in  1731,
without  issue,  his  uncle,  Charles  Radcliffe,  as  next  heir  assumed  the  title,  though,  of

course,  it  was  not  recognized  by  the  English  law.

SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY  IN  FRANCE

1035

Jacobite.  Thus  it  came  to  pass  that  to  signify  that  his  hostelry  was

an  English  one,  he  adopted  an  English  sign,  and  to  show  that  he  was
friendly  to  the  cause  of  the  Stuarts  he  made  that  sign  the  "King's
Head,"  meaning,  of  course,  not  the  head  of  George  I.,  who  in  1725
was  the  lawful  King  of  England,  but  of  James  HE,  whom  the

Jacobites  claimed  to  be  the  rightful  king,  and  who  had  been  recog-

nized as  such  by  the  French  monarch  and  the  French  people.

Thus  it  happens  that  we  find,  in  the  engraved  list  for  1730,  the
record  that  Lodge  No.  90  was  held  at  the  "King's  Head,  in  Paris."

It  may  be  said  that  all  this  is  mere  inference.  But  it  must  be

remembered  that  the  carelessness  or  reticence  of  our  early  Masonic
historians  compels  us,  in  a large  number  of  instances,  to  infer  cer-
tain facts  which  they  have  not  recorded  from  others  which  they  have.
And  if  we  pursue  the  true  logical  method,  and  show  the  absolutely
necessary  and  consequent  connection  of  the  one  with  the  other,  our
deduction  will  fall  very  little  short  of  a demonstration.

Thus,  we  know,  from  documentary  evidence,  that  in  a list  of
"regular  lodges"  begun  in  1730,  and  apparently  continued  until
1732,  there  was  a lodge  held  in  Paris  at  a tavern  whose  sign  was  the
"King's  Head,"  and  whose  number  was  90.  We  know  from  the
same  kind  of  evidence  that  in  1732  there  was  a lodge  bearing  the

same  number  and  held  in  the  Rue  des  Boucheries.

All  the  French  historians  tell  us  that  a lodge  was  instituted  in
that  street  in  1725,  at  a tavern  kept  by  an  Englishman,  the  founders
of  which  were  Englishmen.  The  leader  we  know  was  a Jacobite,

and  we  may  fairly  conclude  that  his  companions  were  of  the  same
political  complexion.

Now  we  need  not  accept  as  true  all  the  incidents  connected  with
this  lodge  which  are  stated  by  the  French  writers,  such  as  the  state-
ment of  Rebold  that  it  was  constituted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England  in  1726.  But  unless  we  are  ready  to  charge  all  of  these
historians,  from  Lalande  in  1786  onward  to  the  present  day,  with

historical  falsehood,  we  are  compelled  to  admit  the  naked  fact,  that
there  was  an  English  lodge  in  Paris  in  1725.  There  is  no  evidence
that  this  lodge  was  at  that  date  or  very  soon  afterward  constituted

by  the  Grand  Lodge  at  London,  and,  therefore,  I conclude,  as  a
just  inference,  that  it  was  established  as  all  lodges  previous  to  the
year  1717  had  been  established  in  London,  and  for  many  years  after-
ward in  other  places  by  the  spontaneous  action  of  its  founders.  It

1036

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

derived  its  authority  to  meet  and  "make  Masons,"  as  did  the  four
primitive  Lodges  which  united  in  forming  the  Grand  Lodge  at  Lon-
don in  1717,  from  the  "immemorial  usage"  of  the  Craft.

As  to  the  two  lodges  which  are  said  to  have  been  established  in
1721  at  Dunkirk  and  at  Mons,  the  French  generally  concur  in  the
assertion  of  their  existence.  Ragon  alone,  by  his  silence,  seems  to
refuse  or  to  withhold  his  assent.

There  is,  however,  nothing  of  impossibility  in  the  fact,  if  we  sup-
pose that  these  two  lodges  had  been  formed,  like  that  of  Paris,  by
Freemasons  coming  from  England,  who  had  availed  themselves  of
the  ancient  privilege,  and  formed  their  lodges  without  a warrant
and  according  to  "immemorial  usage."

What  has  been  said  of  the  original  institution  of  the  Paris  lodge
is  equally  applicable  to  these  two.

It  would  appear  that  a Masonic  spirit  had  arisen  in  French
Flanders,  where  both  these  lodges  were  situated,  which  was  not
readily  extinguished,  but  which  led  in  1733  to  the  Constitution  by
the  English  Grand  Lodge  of  a lodge  at  Valenciennes,  a middle  point
between  the  two,  in  the  same  part  of  France,  and  distant  not  more
than  thirty  miles  from  Mons  and  about  double  that  distance  from
Dunkirk.

Rebold  says  that  the  lodge  at  Dunkirk  was  re- constituted  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  France  in  1756,  and  he  speaks  as  if  he  were  leaning
upon  documentary  authority.  He  also  asserts  that  the  lodge  at
Mons  was,  in  1730,  erected  into  a Grand  Lodge  of  the  Australian
Netherlands.  He  does  not  support  this  statement  by  any  evidence,
beyond  his  own  assertion,  and  in  the  absence  of  proofs,  we  need  not,
when  treating  of  the  origin  of  Freemasonry  in  France,  discuss  the
question  of  the  organization  of  a Grand  Lodge  in  another  country.

Before  closing  this  discussion,  a few  words  may  be  necessary
respecting  the  connection  of  the  titular  Earl  of  Derwentwater  with
the  English  lodge.  A writer  in  the  London  Freemason  of  Febru-
ary 17,  1877,  has  said,  when  referring  to  the  statement  that  the  lodge
at  Hure's  Tavern  had  received  in  the  year  1726  a warrant  from  the
Grand  Lodge  at  London,  "of  this  statement  no  evidence  exists,  and
owing  to  the  political  questions  of  the  day  much  doubt  is  thrown
upon  it,  especially  as  to  whether  the  English  Grand  Lodge  would
have  given  a Warrant  to  no  Jacobites  and  to  a person  who  was  not
Lord  Derwentwater,  according  to  English  law."

SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY  IN  FRANCE

1037

But  there  was  no  political  reason  in  1726,  certainly  not  in  1732,
why  a Warrant  should  not  have  been  granted  by  the  English  Grand
Lodge  for  a Lodge  in  Paris  of  which  a leading  Jacobite  should  be
a member  or  even  the  head.

Toward  Charles  Radcliffe,  who,  when  he  was  quite  young,  had
been  led  into  complicity  with  the  rebellion  of  1715  by  the  influence
of  his  elder  brother,  the  Earl  of  Derwentwater,  and  who  had  been
sentenced  to  be  beheaded  therefor,  the  government  was  not  vin-
dictive.

It  is  even  said  by  contemporary  writers  that  if  he  had  not  pre-
maturely made  his  escape  from  prison,  he  would  have  been  pardoned.
After  his  retirement  to  France,  he  remained  at  least  inactive,  mar-
ried the  widow  of  a loyal  English  nobleman,  and  in  1833,  two  years
after  he  had  assumed,  when  his  nephew  died  without  issue,  the  title
of  Earl  of  Derwentwater,  he  visited  London  and  remained  there  for
some  time  unmolested  by  the  government.  It  was  not  until  1745  that
he  became  obnoxious  by  taking  a part  in  the  ill-advised  and  unsuc-
cessful invasion  of  England  by  the  Young  Pretender,  and  for  this
Radcliffe  paid  the  penalty  of  his  life.

The  Grand  Lodge  at  London  had  abjured  all  questions  of  par-

tisan politics  or  of  sectarian  religion;  some  of  its  own  members  are
supposed  to  have  secretly  entertained  proclivities  toward  the  exiled
family  of  Stuarts,  and  there  does  not  seem  to  be  really  any  serious

reason  why  a Warrant  should  not  have  been  granted  to  a lodge  in
Paris,  though  many  of  its  members  may  have  been  Jacobites.

I do  not,  however,  believe  that  a warrant  of  constitution  was
granted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  to  the  lodge  at  Paris  in
1726.  The  French  historians  have  only  mistaken  the  date,  and
confounded  the  year  1726  with  the  year  1732.  Both  Thory  and

Ragon  tell  us  that  the  lodge  has  left  no  historical  monument  of  its

existence,  and  that  thus  much  obscurity  has  been  cast  over  the  ear-
liest labors  of  Freemasonry  in  Paris.1

One  more  point  in  this  history  requires  a notice  and  an  expla-
nation.

Rebold  says  that  in  the  year  1732  there  were  four  lodges  at
Paris:  1.  The  lodge  of  St.  Thomas,  founded  in  1725  by  Lord
Derwentwater  and  held  at  Hure's  Tavern.  2.  A lodge  established

1 Thory,  in  the  "Histoire  de  la  Fondation  de  Grand  Orient  of  France,"  p.  20,  and
Ragon  in  the  "Acta  Latomorum,"  p.  22.

1038

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

in  May,  1729,  by  the  same  Englishmen  who  had  founded  the  first,

and  which  met  at  the  Louis  d'Argent,  a tavern  kept  by  one  Le-
breton.  3.  A lodge  constituted  in  December  of  the  same  year
under  the  name  of  Arts-Sainte  Marguerite.1  Its  meetings  were

held  at  the  house  of  one  Gaustand,  an  Englishman.  4.  A lodge
established  in  November,  1732,  called  de  Buci,  from  the  name  of

the  tavern  kept  by  one  Laudelle  in  the  Rue  de  Buci.  This  lodge

afterward  took  the  name  of  the  Lodge  d'Aumont,  when  the  Duke
of  Aumont  had  been  initiated  in  it.

It  will  not  be  difficult  to  reduce  these  four  lodges  to  two  by  the
assistance  of  the  English  lists.  The  first  lodge,  which  was  founded
by  Radcliffe,  improperly  called  Lord  Derwentwater,  is  undoubtedly

the  same  as  that  mentioned  in  the  1730  list  under  the  designation
of  No.  90  at  the  "King's  Head."  Rebold,  Clavel,  and  the  other
French  authorities  tell  us  that  it  was  held  in  the  Rue  des  Boucheries

Now  the  list  for  1734  gives  us  the  same  No.  90,  as  designating
a lodge  which  met  in  the  same  street  but  at  the  sign  of  the  Louis

d'Argent.  This  was  undoubtedly  the  same  lodge  which  had  for-
merly met  at  the  "King's  Head."  The  tavern  may  have  been

changed,  but  1 think  it  more  likely  that  the  change  was  only  in  the
sign,  made  by  the  new  proprietor,  for  Hure,  it  seems,  had  given

way  to  Lebreton,  who  might  have  been  less  of  a Jacobite  than  his

predecessor,  or  no  Jacobite  at  all,  and  might  have  therefore  dis-
carded the  head  of  the  putative  king,  James.  The  first  and  second

in  this  list  of  Rebold's  were  evidently  to  be  applied  to  the  same  lodge.

The  fourth  lodge  was  held  at  the  Hotel  de  Buci.  Here,  again,

Rebold  is  wrong  in  his  orthography,  He  should  have  spelt  it

Bussy.  There  was  then  a lodge  held  in  the  year  1732  at  the  Hotel

de  Bussy.  Now  Anderson  tells  us,  in  his  second  edition,  that  Vis-
count Montagu  granted  a deputation  "for  constituting  a lodge  at

the  Hotel  de  Bussy  in  Paris."  But  the  lists  for  1732,  1734,  1740,

and  1756  give  only  one  Parisian  lodge  which  was  constituted  on

April  3,  1732,  and  they  always  assign  the  same  locality  in  the  Rue

des  Boucheries,  but  change  the  number,  making,  however,  the  change
from  90  to  78,  and  then  to  49,  and  change  also  the  sign,  from  the
"King's  Head"  in  1732  to  the  Louis  d'Argent  in  1734,  and  to  the

Ville  de  Tonnerre  in  1740  and  1756.

1 Clavel  ("Histoire  Pittoresque,"  p.  108)  calls  it  A Sainte  Marguerite,  which  is  prob-
ably  the  correct  name.  The  Arts  in  Rebold  may  be  viewed  as  a typographical  error.

SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY  IN  FRANCE

1039

But  it  is  important  to  remark  that  while  the  Engraved  List  for
1734  says  that  No.  90  met  at  the  Louis  d‘ Argent  in  the  Rue  de
Boucheries,  the  list  for  1736  says  that  No.  90  met  at  the  Hotel  de
Bussy,  in  the  Rue  de  Bussy,  and  each  of  these  lists  gives  the  same
date  of  constitution,  namely,  April  3,  1732.

I am  constrained,  therefore,  to  believe  that  the  lodge  at  the
Hotel  de  Bussy  was  the  same  as  the  one  held  first  at  Hure's  Tavern
in  1725  as  an  independent  lodge  and  which,  in  1732,  was  legally
constituted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  and  which  afterward
met  either  at  the  same  tavern  with  a change  of  sign  or  at  three  dif-
ferent taverns.

The  first,  second,  and  fourth  lodges  mentioned  by  Rebold,  there-
fore, are  resolved  into  one  lodge,  the  only  one  which  the  English
records  say  was  legally  constituted  by  the  deputation  granted  in
1732  by  Lord  Montagu.

As  to  the  third  lodge  on  Rebold's  list,  which  he  calls  A rts-
Sainte  Margiterite,  but  which  Clavel  more  correctly  styles  A
Sainte  Marguerite,  there  is  no  reference  to  it,  either  in  the  English
engraved  lists  or  in  the  Book  of  Constitutions.  It  is  said  to  have

been  founded  at  the  close  of  the  year  1729  and  to  have  held  its

meetings  at  the  house  or  tavern  of  an  Englishman  named  Gaustand.

I can  not  deny  its  existence  in  the  face  of  the  positive  assertions
of  the  French  historians.  I prefer  to  believe  that  it  was  an  offshoot

of  the  lodge  instituted  in  1725  at  Hure's,  that  that  lodge  had  so

increased  in  numbers  as  to  well  afford  to  send  off  a colony,  and  that,
like  its  predecessor,  the  lodge  A Sainte  Marguerite  had  been
formed  independently  and  under  the  sanction  of  "immemorial

usage."

Hence,  I think  it  is  demonstrated  that  between  the  years  1725
and  1732  there  were  but  two  lodges  in  Paris  and  not  four,  as  some
of  the  French  writers  have  asserted.  Bro.  Hughan  is  inclined  to
hold  the  same  opinion,  and  the  writer  in  the  London  Freemason,
who  has  previously  been  referred  to,  says  that  he  thinks  it  "just
possible."  The  possibility  is,  I imagine,  now  resolved  into  some-
thing more  than  a probability.

Having  thus  reconciled,  as  I trust  I have,  the  doubts  and  con-
tradictions which  have  hitherto  given  so  fabulous  a character  to  the
history  of  the  introduction  of  Speculative  Freemasonry  into  France,
I venture  to  present  the  following  narrative  as  a consistent  and

1040

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

truthful  account  of  the  introduction  of  the  English  system  of  Specu-
lative Freemasonry  into  France.  It  is  divested  of  every  feature  of
romance  and  is  rendered  authentic,  partly  by  official  documents  of
unquestionable  character  and  partly  by  strictly  logical  conclusions,

which  can  not  fairly  be  refuted.

It  was  not  very  long  after  the  foundation  of  purely  Speculative
Freemasonry  in  London  by  the  disseverance  of  the  Theoretic  Ma-
sons from  their  Operative  associates  and  the  establishment  of  a
Grand  Lodge,  that  a similar  system  was  attempted  to  be  introduced
into  the  neighboring  kingdom  of  France.

Freemasons  coming  from  England,  either  members  of  some  of

the  old  Operative  lodges  or  who  had  taken  a part  in  the  organiza-
tion of  the  London  Grand  Lodge,  having  passed  over  into  France,
founded  in  the  year  1721  two  independent  lodges  which  adopted  the
characteristics  of  the  new  Speculative  system,  so  far  as  it  had  then
been  completed,  but  claimed  the  right,  according  to  the  ancient

usage  of  Operative  Freemasons,  to  form  lodges  spontaneously  with-
out the  authority  of  a Warrant  of  Constitution.

These  lodges  were  situated  respectively  at  Dunkirk  and  at
Mons,  two  cities  in  French  Flanders,  and  which  were  at  that  time
within  the  territory  of  the  French  Empire.

Four  years  after,  namely,  in  1725,  a similar  lodge  was  founded

in  Paris,  at  the  sign  of  the  "King's  Head,"  a tavern  which  was  kept
in  the  Rue  des  Boucheries  by  an  Englishman  named  Hure  or  Hurre,
or  some  other  name  approximating  nearly  to  it.  French  historians
inform  us  that  the  name  of  the  lodge  was  Si.  Thomas;  but  this
name  is  not  recognized  in  any  of  the  English  engraved  lists.  Then
and  for  some  time  afterward  English  lodges  were  known  only  by  the
name  or  sign  of  the  tavern  where  their  meetings  were  held.  But

there  is  no  reason  for  disbelieving  the  assertion  of  the  French  writ-
ers. The  number  and  the  place  of  meeting  were  the  only  necessary
designations  to  be  inserted  in  the  Warrant  when  it  was  granted.
Of  the  one  hundred  and  twenty-eight  lodges  recorded  in  Pine's  list
for  1734,  not  one  is  otherwise  designated  than  by  its  number  and

the  sign  of  the  tavern.  So  that  the  fact  that  the  lodge  is  not  marked

in  the  English  lists  as  "the  Lodge  of  Si.  Thomas"  is  no  proof  what-

ever that  its  founders  did  not  bestow  upon  it  that  title.

The  founders  of  this  lodge  were  Charles  Radcliffe,  the  younger
brother  of  the  former  Earl  of  Derwentwater,  whose  title  he  six

SPECULATIVE  FREEMASONRY  IN  FRANCE

1041

years  afterward  assumed,  and  three  other  Englishmen,  of  whose  pre-
vious or  subsequent  history  we  know  nothing,  but  who  are  said  by

the  French  writers  to  have  been  Lord  Hamouester,  the  Chevalier
Maskelyne,  and  Mr.  Heguetty.

These  men  were,  it  is  supposed,  Jacobites  or  adherents,  passively
at  least,  of  the  exiled  family  of  Stuarts,  represented  at  that  time  by
the  son  of  the  late  James  II.,  and  who  was  known  in  France  and  by
his  followers  as  James  III.  From  this  fact,  and  from  the  character
of  the  tavern  where  they  met,  which  was  indicated  by  its  sign,  it  is
presumed  that  the  lodge  was  originally  formed  as  a resort  for  per-

sons of  those  peculiar  political  sentiments.  .

If  so,  it  did  not  long  retain  that  feature  in  its  composition.  The
institution  of  Speculative  Freemasonry  became  in  Paris,  as  it  had

previously  become  in  London,  extremely  popular.  In  a short  time
the  lodge  received  from  French  and  English  residents  of  Paris  an

accession  of  members  which  amounted  to  several  hundreds.

In  December,  1729,  another  independent  lodge  was  formed  un-
der the  name  of  A Sainte  Marguerite,  which  was  held  at  the  tavern
of  an  Englishman  named  Gaustand.  It  was  probably  formed  by

members  of  the  other  lodge  whose  number  had,  from  the  popularity
of  the  institution,  become  unwieldy.  Of  the  subsequent  career  of

this  lodge  we  have  no  information.  The  records  do  not  show  that

it  was  ever  legally  constituted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.

In  1732  Lord  Montagu,  the  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge

at  London,  granted  a deputation  for  the  Constitution  of  the  original
lodge  in  Paris,  which  was  then  holding  its  meetings  at  the  Hotel  de
Bussy,  in  the  Rue  de  Bussy.  It  was  accordingly  constituted  on

April  3,  1732.  But  at  the  time  of  the  Constitution  it  appears  to

have  returned  to  its  old  locality,  as  it  is  recorded  in  the  first  part  of
the  lists  in  which  it  is  mentioned  as  meeting  in  the  Rue  des  Bou-

cheries  at  the  "King's  Head  Tavern,"  and  in  the  second  list  at  the

Louis  dArgent,  which,  as  I have  already  said,  I take  to  be  the
same  house  with  a change  of  sign.

Thus  the  fact  is  established  that  the  new  system  of  Speculative
Freemasonry  was  introduced  into  France  from  England,  but  not
by  authority  of  the  English  Grand  Lodge,  in  the  year  1721  by  the
founding  of  two  independent  lodges  in  French  Flanders,  and  into
Paris  by  the  founding  of  a similar  lodge  in  1725.

In  1732  the  Grand  Lodge  of  London  extended  its  jurisdiction

1042

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

over  the  French  territory  and  issued  two  deputations,  one  for  the
constitution  of  the  lodge  in  Paris,  and  the  other  for  the  constitution
of  a lodge  in  French  Flanders  at  the  city  of  Valenciennes.

The  former  was  constituted  in  1732,  in  the  month  of  April,  and
the  latter  in  the  following  year.

The  further  action  of  the  English  Grand  Lodge  in  the  constitu-
tion of  other  lodges,  and  the  future  history  of  the  institution  which
resulted  in  the  formation  of  a Grand  Lodge  in  France,  must  be  re-
served for  consideration  in  a future  chapter.

CHAPTER  XXXIX

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  ALL  ENGLAND,  OR  THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF

YORK

HE  pretension,  so  stoutly  maintained  by  many
Freemasons  who  have  not  thoroughly  investi-
gated the  subject,  that  there  was  a General  As-
sembly of  Masons  held,  and  a Grand  Lodge

established,  at  the  city  of  York  in  the  year  926,
by  Prince  Edwin,  the  brother  of  King  Athel-

stan,  is  a tradition  derived  from  the  old  Legend

of  the  Craft.  As  such  it  has  already  been  freely  discussed  in  the

preceding  division  of  this  work,  and  will  not  be  further  considered

at  this  time.

The  object  of  the  present  chapter  will  be  to  inquire  into  the  time
when,  and  the  circumstances  under  which,  the  modem  Theoretic

Freemasons  of  York  separated  from  the  Operative  association  and,
following  the  example  of  their  antecessors  in  London,  established  a
purely  Speculative  society  to  which  they,  too,  gave  the  name  of  a
Grand  Lodge.

To  distinguish  it  from  the  Grand  Lodge  which  had  been  estab-
lished eight  years  before  in  London,  they  applied  to  that  body  the

title  of  the  "Grand  Lodge  of  England,"  while  in  a somewhat  arro-

gant spirit  they  assumed  for  themselves  the  more  imposing  title  of
the  "Grand  Lodge  of  all  England,"  epithets  which  were  first  em-

ployed by  Drake  in  his  speech  at  York  in  1726.'

1 There  is  not  the  slightest  evidence  that  the  Grand  Lodge  in  London  ever  accepted

this  distinction  of  titles,  involving,  as  it  did.  an  acknowledgment  of  the  supremacy  of  its
rival.  Neither  Anderson,  Entick,  nor  Northouck  have  used  in  their  successive  editions

of  the  "Book  of  Constitutions"  these  epithets.  In  these  editions  the  body  in  London  is

always  called  simply  "the  Grand  Lodge."  It  is  not  until  1775  that  we  meet  with  a more

distinctive  name.  In  the  Latin  inscription  on  the  corner-stone  of  the  Freemasons'  Hall,

which  was  laid  in  that  year,  Lord  Petre  is  designated  as  "Summus  Latomorum  Anglia?

Magister,"  or  chief  Master  of  Masons  of  England,  while  the  Grand  Lodge  is  called

"Summus  Anglia?  Conventus,"  or  Chief  Assembly  of  England.

1043

1044

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

This  distinction  was  suggested  by  the  ecclesiastical  usage  of

the  kingdom,  which,  dividing  the  government  of  the  church  be-
tween two  Archbishops,  calls  the  Archbishop  of  York  the  "Primate
of  England,"  while  his  brother,  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  of
somewhat  more  elevated  rank  and  more  extensive  jurisdiction,  is

dignified  as  the  "Primate  of  All  England."

Anglice  and  totius  Anglice  are  the  distinctions  between  the  two

Archbishops,  and  so,  also,  they  became  the  distinctions  between  the
two  Grand  Lodges.

Operative  Freemasonry  was  established  with  great  vigor  and
maintained  with  strict  discipline  at  York  during  the  building  of  the

Cathedral  in  the  14th  century.  Of  this  fact  we  have  the  most  un-

doubted evidence  in  the  Fabric  Rolls  of  York  Minster,  which  were
published  several  years  ago  by  the  "Surtees  Society."1

These  "Rolls,"  extending  from  1350  to  1639,  were  made  up

during  the  progress  of  the  work.  They  consist  of  accounts  of  con-
tracts at  different  periods  and  regulations  adopted  from  time  to
time  for  the  government  of  the  workmen.  A fragment  remaining
of  one  of  the  Rolls,  with  the  date  of  1350,  records  that  the  Ma-

sons and  the  Carpenters  who  at  that  time  were  employed  on  the
building  were  respectively  under  the  control  of  William  de  Hoton,
as  the  Master  Mason,  and  Philip  de  Lincoln  as  the  Master  Carpen-
ter. As  Bro.  Hughan  very  correctly  remarks,  "Without  doubt  the
Master  Mason  thus  referred  to  was  simply  the  chief  among  the
Masons,  the  others  being  Apprentices  and  Craftsmen."

One  of  the  Rolls  contains  a code  of  rules  which  had  been  agreed
upon  in  1370.  It  is  entitled  Ordinacio  Cementariorum.  This  is
interesting,  as  it  shows  what  was  the  internal  government  of  the
Craft  at  that  period.

These  regulations  were  made  by  the  Chapter  of  the  Church  of
St.  Peter's  at  York,  under  whose  direction  the  Minster  was  being
built.  They  did  not  emanate  from  any  General  Assembly  or  Grand

Lodge,  nor  even  from  a private  lodge,  but  were  derived  from  the
ecclesiastical  authority  with  which  in  that  age  Freemasonry  was

1 The  existence  of  these  Rolls  was  discovered  by  Mr.  John  Browne,  who  based  upon
them  his  "History  of  the  Metropolitan  Church  of  St.  Peter,  York."  They  were  printed
at  Durham  in  1859  by  the  Surtees  Society,  and  edited  by  Mr.  James  Raine,  Jr.,  the  Sec-
retary of  the  Society,  who  has  enriched  the  work  with  valuable  notes,  an  Appendix,  and
a Glossary.

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  ALL  ENGLAND

1045

closely  connected.  Whether  these  Masons  were  acquainted  with

the  old  manuscripts  which  Anderson  called  the  Gothic  Constitu-

tions it  is  impossible  to  say.  We  have  no  copies  of  any  which  date
before  the  end  of  the  15th  century,  except  the  Halliwell  MS.,  and

the  date  of  that  is  supposed  to  be  1390,  which  is  twenty  years  after
the  adoption  of  the  regulations  by  the  Chapter  of  the  Cathedral  for
the  government  of  the  Freemasons  of  Y ork.

It  is,  however,  almost,  if  not  absolutely,  demonstrable  that  the

Halliwell  MS.  is  a copy  and  a combination  of  two  distinct  poems,

and  it  is,  therefore,  not  unlikely  that  the  York  Masons,  as  a guild,
were  familiar  with  and  even  governed  by  its  "points  and  articles."

The  rules  preserved  in  the  Fabric  Rolls  were  only  intended  for

the  direction  of  the  Masons  in  their  hours  of  labor  and  of  refresh-
ment, and  contain  no  Legend  of  the  Craft.  A faithful  copy  of  the
Ordinacio  Cementariorum,  or  Constitution  of  the  Masons,  trans-
lated into  modem  and  more  intelligible  English,1  will  be  interesting

and  useful  as  showing  the  guild  organization  of  the  Craft  at  York

in  the  14th  century.  This  Ordinacio  runs  as  follows:  "It  is  or-
dained by  the  Chapter  of  the  Church  of  Saint  Peter  of  York  that

all  the  masons  that  shall  work  in  the  works  of  the  same  Church  of

Saint  Peter  shall,  from  Michaelmas  day  to  the  first  Sunday  of  Lent,

be  each  day  in  the  morning  at  their  work  in  the  lodge,  which  is

provided  for  the  masons  at  work  within  the  enclosure  at  the  side  of
the  aforesaid  church,2  at  as  early  an  hour  as  they  can  clearly  see  by
daylight  to  work;  and  they  shall  stand  there  faithfully  working  at
their  work  all  day  after,  as  long  as  they  can  clearly  see  to  work,  if  it

be  an  all  work  day;  otherwise  until  high  noon  is  struck  by  the  clock,
when  a holiday  falls  at  noon,  except  within  the  aforesaid  time  be-
tween Michaelmas  and  Lent;  and  at  all  other  times  of  the  year  they

may  dine  before  noon  if  they  will,  and  also  eat  at  noon  where  they
like,  so  that  they  shall  not  remain  from  their  work  in  the  aforesaid
lodge,  at  no  time  of  the  year,  at  dinner  time  more  than  so  short  a

1 The  earlier  Rolls  are  written  in  the  Low  Latin  of  the  Middle  Ages.  The  later  ones

from  1544  are  in  the  vernacular  tongue  of  the  times.  The  one  about  to  be  quoted  is  in  a
northern  dialect,  and  is,  as  Mr.  Raine  observes,  remarkable  on  account  of  its  language

as  well  as  its  contents.

2 This  confirms  the  statement  made  in  the  "Parentalia"  that  the  Traveling  Free-
masons, when  about  to  commence  the  erection  of  a religious  edifice,  built  huts,  or,  as

they  were  called,  "lodges,"  in  the  vicinity  in  which  they  resided  for  the  sake  of  economy
as  well  as  convenience.

1046

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

time  that  no  reasonable  man  shall  find  fault  with  their  remaining
away;  and  in  time  of  eating  at  noon  they  shall,  at  no  time  of  the
year,  be  absent  from  the  lodges  nor  from  their  work  aforesaid  over

the  space  of  an  hour;  and  after  noon  they  may  drink  in  the  lodge,
and  for  their  drinking  time,  between  Michaelmas  and  Lent,  they
shall  not  cease  nor  leave  their  work  beyond  the  space  of  time  that

one  can  walk  half  a mile;  and  from  the  first  Sunday  of  Lent  until
Michaelmas  they  shall  be  in  the  aforesaid  lodge  at  their  work  at  sun-
rise and  remain  there  truly  and  carefully  working  upon  the  aforesaid
work  of  the  church,  all  day,  until  there  shall  be  no  more  space  than
the  time  that  one  can  walk  a mile,1  before  sunset,  if  it  be  a work
day,  otherwise  until  the  time  of  noon,  as  was  said  before;  except
that  they  shall,  between  the  first  Sunday  of  Lent  and  Michaelmas,
dine  and  eat  as  beforesaid,  after  noon  in  the  aforesaid  lodge;  nor
shall  they  cease  nor  leave  their  work  in  sleeping  time  exceeding  the
time  in  which  one  can  walk  a mile,  nor  in  drinking  time  after  noon
beyond  the  same  time.  And  they  shall  not  sleep  after  noon  at  any
time  except  between  Saint  Elemnes  and  Lammas;  and  if  any  man
remain  away  from  the  lodge  and  from  the  work  aforesaid,  or  com-
mit offence  at  any  time  of  the  year  against  this  aforesaid  ordinance,
he  shall  be  punished  by  an  abatement  of  his  wages,  upon  the  inspec-
tion and  judgment  of  the  master  mason;  and  all  their  times  and
hours  shall  be  governed  by  a bell  established  therefor.  It  is  also

ordained  that  no  mason  shall  be  received  at  work  on  the  work  of
the  aforesaid  church  unless  he  be  first  tried  for  a week  or  more  as  to
his  good  work;  and  if  after  this  he  is  found  competent  for  the  work,
he  may  be  received  by  the  common  assent  of  the  master  and  keepers
of  the  work  and  of  the  master  mason,  and  he  must  swear  upon  the
book  that  he  will  truly  and  carefully,  according  to  his  power,  with-
out any  kind  of  guile,  treachery,  or  deceit,  maintain  and  keep  holy
all  the  points  of  this  aforesaid  ordinance  in  all  things  that  affect  or
may  affect  him,  from  the  time  that  he  is  received  in  the  aforesaid
work,  as  long  as  he  shall  remain  a hired  mason  at  the  work  on  the
aforesaid  work  of  the  church  of  Saint  Peter,  and  that  he  will  not
go  away  from  that  aforesaid  work  unless  the  masters  give  him  per-

1 Time  of  a mileway.  A common  method  at  that  period  of  computing  time.  "Way.
The  time  in  which  a certain  space  can  be  passed  over.  Two  mileway,  the  time  in  which
two  miles  could  be  passed  over,  etc." — Halliwell,  "Dictionary  of  Archaic  and  Provincial
Words."  We  had  "half  a mileway"  above.

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  ALL  ENGLAND

1047

mission  to  depart  from  the  aforesaid  work;  and  let  him  whosoever
goes  against  this  ordinance  and  breaks  it  against  the  will  of  the
aforesaid  chapter  have  God's  malison  and  Saint  Peter's."

We  learn  from  this  ordinance,  and  others  of  the  same  import

contained  in  these  Fabric  Rolls,  that  the  Masons  who  wrought  at
the  building  of  the  York  Cathedral  in  the  14th  century  were  an  en-

tirely Operative  guild,  like  their  brethren  who,  at  about  the  same
time,  were  engaged  in  the  construction  of  the  Cathedrals  of  Co-

logne and  Strasburg.

They  confirm  the  statement  made  in  Wren's  Parentalia  that
the  lodge  was  a building  contiguous  to  the  edifice  they  were  con-
structing, and  that  in  it  they  not  only  worked,  cutting  and  other-
wise preparing  the  stones,  but  also  ate  and  slept  there.  Over

them  there  was  a superintendent  of  their  work  who  was  called  the
Master  Mason.

What  were  the  duties  of  the  Magister  Cementarius  or  Master

Mason  may  be  learned  from  an  indenture  between  the  Chapter  and
William  de  Hoton  in  the  year  1351,  a copy  of  which  will  be  found
at  page  166  of  the  Fabric  Rolls.

While  overlooking  other  works,  which  shows  that  he  might

have  different  contracts  at  the  same  time,  he  was  not  to  neglect  the

work  of  the  Minster.  If  he  became  affected  with  blindness  or

other  incurable  disease  so  that  he  should  be  unable  to  work,  he  was
to  employ  and  pay  an  assistant — subcementarius — who  was  to  be

the  Second  or  Deputy  Master  of  the  Masons — Magister  Secun-

darius  Cementariorum.

He  was  to  oversee  the  building  and  to  receive  a salary  of  ten
pounds  of  silver  annually,  and  to  be  furnished  with  a dwelling-house
within  the  inclosure  of  the  Cathedral. 1

But  while  the  Master  Mason  had  the  direct  supervision  of  the
workmen,  there  was  an  officer  above  him  who  was  called  the  Mag-

1 From  the  "Fabric  Rolls"  the  following  list  of  Master  Masons,  who  superintended

the  work  from  its  beginning  to  its  close,  has  been  obtained  by  Mr.  Raine:

1351,  William  de  Hoton  and  William  de  Hoton,  junior,  probably  the  son  of  the
first;  1368,  Robert  de  Patrington;  1399-1401,  Hugh  de  Hedon;  1415,  William  Colches-
ter; 1421,  John  Long;  1433,  Thomas  Pak;  1442-43,  John  Bowde;  1445-47,  John  Bar-
ton; 1456,  John  Porter;  1466,  Robert  Spyllesby;  1472,  William  Hyndeley;  1505,  Chris-
tian Homer;  1526,  John  Forman.  In  the  lists  of  workmen  many  names  foreign  to

Yorkshire  will  be  found,  and  the  names  of  foreigners  also  occur,  such  as  Begon  Baious
and  James  Dum. — Preface  to  "Fabric  Rolls,'"  xx.

1048

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

is  ter  Operis,  or  Master  of  the  Work.  This  is  shown  by  another
agreement  with  Robert  de  Patrington  in  1368,  wherein  it  is  said
that  his  salary  is  to  be  paid  to  him  "by  the  hands  of  the  Master
of  the  work  of  our  said  church" — per  maims  Magistri  operis  dicta
ecclesice  nostrce.

Now,  this  Magistri  Operis,  or  Master  of  the  Work,  sometimes
called  the  Operarius,  was  not  a member  of  the  body  of  Masons,

but,  according  to  Ducange,  an  officer  in  Monasteries  and  Chapters
of  Canons,  whose  duty  it  was  to  have  charge  over  the  public  works.

When  the  Cathedral  was  finished,  the  occupation  of  these  Oper-
ative Masons  ceased.  But  there  were  other  religious  edifices  in
the  province  on  which  they  were  subsequently  employed,  so  that
there  was  a continuous  existence  of  Operative  lodges  during  the
succeeding  centuries.

While  the  Freemasons  were  working  on  the  York  Minster,
other  guilds  of  Freemasons,  or,  rather,  branches  of  the  same  guild,
were  employed  in  the  construction  of  other  cathedrals  in  different
parts  of  England.

Thus  the  Cathedral  of  Canterbury  was  repaired  and  greatly  en-
larged about  the  year  1174;  that  of  Salisbury  was  begun  in  1220
and  finished  in  1260;  that  of  Ely  was  begun  in  1235  and  finished

in  1252,  and  Westminster  Abbey  was  begun  in  1245  and  finished

in  1285.

If  the  Fabric  Rolls  of  these  edifices  should  hereafter  be  dis-
covered, ample  evidence  will  doubtless  be  furnished  of  the  existence
of  a common  guild  of  Freemasons  everywhere  in  England,  similar
to  that  which  we  now  know  existed  at  York  during  the  same  period
of  time,  namely  from  the  middle  of  the  14th  to  the  middle  of  the

16th  century,  which  was  precisely  the  age  of  our  oldest  manuscript
Constitutions.

The  history  of  Operative  Freemasonry  at  York  and  in  the  north
of  England  was  about  the  same  as  it  was  in  London  and  in  the  south
of  the  kingdom.  There  were  times  when  it  flourished,  and  times
when  it  began  to  decay.

In  another  respect  there  was  a similarity  in  the  character  of  the
guilds  of  both  localities.

The  York  Lodge,  like  the  lodges  of  London,  and  indeed  of  every
other  country,  at  first  consisting  only  of  practical  workmen,  began
in  time  to  admit  into  its  association  men  who  were  not  craftsmen —

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  ALL  ENGLAND

1049

men  of  rank  or  wealth  or  influence,  who  became  honorary  members,
and  in  the  course  of  time  gradually  infused  a Speculative  element
into  the  lodges.

There  is  really  no  historical  evidence  whatever  that  during  the
period  in  which  the  Freemasons  were  occupied  in  the  construction
of  the  Minster  there  was  any  other  lodge  than  that  which  was  con-
nected with  the  works,  and  under  the  control  of  the  Cathedral
Chapter.  It  is,  however,  very  presumable  that  from  long  continu-
ance it  had  abandoned  the  nomadic  character  so  common  with  the
Traveling  Freemasons  of  the  Middle  Ages,  and  had  assumed  a per-
manent form,  and  thus  become  the  parent  of  that  Lodge  which  we
find  existing  in  1705  in  the  city  of  York.

Anderson  asserts  that  the  tradition  was  "firmly  believed  by  the
old  English  Masons,"  that  on  December  27,  1561, 1 Queen  Eliza-

beth sent  an  armed  force  to  break  up  the  annual  Grand  Lodge  that
was  then  meeting  at  Y ork.

"But  Sir  Thomas  Sackville,  Grand  Master,"  says  Anderson,  "took
care  to  make  some  of  the  chief  Men  sent  Freemasons,  who  then
joining  to  that  communication  made  a very  honorable  report  to  the
Queen,  and  she  never  more  attempted  to  dislodge  or  disturb  them."

This  story  has  been  repeated  by  Preston  and  by  others  after  him;
but  as  all  of  them  give  it  on  the  mere  authority  of  Anderson,  and  as
no  other  evidence  has  ever  been  adduced  of  its  truth,  we  shall  be
compelled  to  reject  it  as  historical,  and  receive  it  only  as  Anderson
has  called  it  a "tradition."  Were  it  true,  it  would  settle  the  ques-
tion that  there  was  a Grand  Lodge  at  York  in  active  existence  in  the
16th  century.

In  the  "Manifesto"  of  the  Lodge  of  Antiquity  in  1778,  it  is  as-
serted that  "in  the  year  1567  the  increase  of  lodges  in  the  south  of
England  being  so  great  ...  it  was  resolved  that  a person  under
the  title  of  Grand  Master  for  the  south,  should  be  appointed  with
the  approbation  of  the  Grand  Lodge  at  York,  to  whom  the  whole
Fraternity  at  large  were  bound  to  pay  tribute  and  acknowledge
subjection."

1 Bro.  Woodford,  in  his  very  able  article  on  "The  Connection  of  York  with  the  History
of  Freemasonry  in  England,"  appended  to  Bro.  Hughan's  "Unpublished  Records  of  the
Craft"  (p.  170),  seems  to  attribute  the  particularizing  of  this  date  to  the  unknown  author
of  "Multa  Paucis."  But  the  fact  is  that  this  date  is  first  mentioned  by  Dr.  Anderson,  in
the  2d  edition  of  the  "Book  of  Constitutions,"  p.  81.

1050

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

If  this  statement  were  authentic  it  would  not  only  confirm  the
fact  that  there  was  a Grand  Lodge  of  York  in  the  16th  century,

but  also  that  it  exercised  a supremacy  over  all  the  lodges  of  the
kingdom.

Unfortunately  for  the  interests  of  history  the  "Manifesto"  of
the  Lodge  of  Antiquity  was  written  for  a particular  object,  which
renders  it  partisan  in  character  and  suspicious  in  authority.  And
since  there  is  no  other  evidence  that  in  1567  there  was  a Grand
Lodge  at  York,  or  that  it  then  appointed  a Grand  Master  for  the
south  of  England,  we  are  forced  to  dismiss  this  narrative  of  the

Lodge  of  Antiquity  with  the  Sackville  story  to  the  realm  of  fable,
or  at  least  of  unsupported  tradition.

The  theory  of  the  existence  of  a lodge  at  the  city  of  York  at  the
beginning  of  the  17th  century  is  founded  on  the  fact  that  in  the

year  1777  there  was  in  the  possession  of  the  Lodge  of  York  a manu-

script Constitution  of  the  date  1630,  which  is  presumed  to  have  been
written  at  the  time  for  the  lodge  in  that  city.

Such  is  the  implied  reasoning  of  Bro.  Woodford,  and  although
not  absolutely  conclusive,  it  may  be  accepted  as  probable,  especially
as  Bro.  Hughan  tells  us  that  there  is  evidence  that  a lodge  existed
there  in  1643.1

But  the  authentic  history  of  that  Society  of  Freemasons  which
met  in  the  city  of  York,  really  begins  with  the  year  1706.2

In  the  Inventory  of  Regalia  and  Documents  which  were  in  the
possession  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  all  England  taken  by  a commit-
tee in  1779,  and  which  inventory  is  still  in  possession  of  the  Lodge
at  York,  one  of  the  articles  is  recorded  as  being  "A  narrow  folio
Manuscript  Book,  beginning  7th  March  1705-6,  containing  sundry
Accounts  and  Minutes  relative  to  the  Grand  Lodge."

This  manuscript  is  now  unfortunately  mislaid  or  lost,  but  the  re-
port of  the  committee  is  satisfactory  evidence  that  it  once  existed,
and  hence  we  have  a sufficient  proof  that  there  was  a lodge  in  the
year  1706  and  very  probably  long  before  in  the  city  of  York.

1 "London  Masonic  Magazine,"  vol.  iii.,  p.  259.

2 It  has  been  usual  to  quote  the  date  of  the  commencement  of  the  Minute  Book  of
old  York  Lodge  as  1705.  But  in  the  original  the  date  is  "7th  March  1705-6."  But
March  7,  1705,  of  the  old  style  is,  according  to  the  new  style,  March  18,  1706.  So  also,
some-writers  speak  of  the  first  meeting  of  the  four  lodges  in  London  as  occurring  in  1716,
because  Anderson's  date  is  February,  1716-17.  They  should  remember  that  February,
1716-17,  means  always  1717.

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  ALL  ENGLAND

1051

In  a work  entitled  the  Stream  of  English  Freemasonry,  by
Dr.  J.  P.  Bell,  a list  is  inserted  of  Grand  Masters,  as  the  author
calls  them,  from  the  year  1705.  But  as  Bro.  Hughan  observes,  the
presiding  officers  were  always  styled  Presidents  or  Masters  until

1725,  when  the  Grand  Lodge  was  organized  and  the  office  of  Grand
Master  adopted.

Now,  between  1705  or  1706,  when  we  get  the  first  authentic

records  of  the  existence  of  a lodge  of  Freemasons  in  the  city  of
York,  until  the  year  1725,  when  it  assumed  the  rank  and  title  of  a

Grand  Lodge,  the  condition  of  guild  Masonry  or  Freemasonry  ap-
pears, so  far  as  we  can  judge  from  existing  records,  to  have  been  in
about  the  same  condition  as  it  was  in  London  just  before  the  es-

tablishment of  a Grand  Lodge  in  that  city  at  nearly  the  same  period,
with  this  difference,  that  in  London  there  were  four  lodges  and  in

Y ork  only  one.

We  have  seen  that  from  a very  early  period  the  guild  of  Op-
erative Freemasons  had  existed  in  independent  lodges  established
near  the  cathedrals  or  other  public  buildings  in  the  construction  of
which  they  were  engaged.  We  have  seen  this  system  pursued  at
the  building  of  the  Cathedral  of  York,  and  the  written  Constitutions
which  governed  them  then  and  there  are  extant  in  the  Fabric  Rolls

of  the  Minster  which  have  been  published  by  the  Surtees  Society.

At  that  time  the  lodges  were  purely  operative  in  their  character.
Subsequently,  as  in  Scotland  and  in  the  south  of  England,  persons
of  distinction,  who  were  not  working  Masons,  were  admitted  among
the  Craft,  and  thus  the  system  of  Theoretic  or  Honorary  Members
of  the  lodge  was  established.

The  result  was  the  same  here  as  it  had  been  elsewhere.  The
Operative  element  gradually  yielded  to  the  Speculative,  which  at
the  beginning  of  the  18th  century  had  become  in  York  more  com-

pletely dominant  than  it  was  in  London  at  the  same  period.

The  manuscript  book  of  Minutes  beginning  in  March,  1706,  has
been  lost,  but  there  is  extant  a Roll  which  begins  March  19,  1712,
or  rather  1713,  for  it  appears  that  there  is  the  same  confusion  of
styles.  The  next  minutes  according  to  Bro.  Hughan  are  of  June,

August,  and  December,  1713,  which  clearly  shows  that  the  minutes
for  March  are  of  the  same  year,  unless  we  suppose  that  there  was  a
lapse  of  more  than  a year  in  the  meetings — a thing  not  at  all  sup-
posable.

1052

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

At  the  lodge  in  March  several  members  were  sworn  and  ad-
mitted by  Geo.  Bowes,  Esq.,  Deputy  President.  The  Master  was
at  that  time  a Speculative  Freemason.  In  December,  1713,  a
"Private  Lodge"  was  held,  at  which,  says  Hughan,  "gentlemen
were  again  admitted  members,  and  at  which  Sir  Walter  Hawks-
worth,  Knight  and  Baronet,  was  the  President."

A "General  Lodge  of  the  Honorable  Society  and  Company  of
Freemasons,"  so  ran  the  Minutes,  was  held  on  Christmas,  1716,  by
St.  John's  Lodge,  when  John  Turner,  Esq.,  was  admitted  to  the
Society.  These  Minutes  are  signed,  "Charles  Fairfax,  Esq.  Dep.
Prest."

All  of  which  prove  that  at  that  time  the  Freemasons  of  York
knew  nothing  of  a Grand  Lodge  or  a Grand  Master,  and  that  there
was,  even  then,  much  more  of  the  Speculative  than  of  the  Operative
element  in  the  Society.

From  1713  to  1725  there  appears  to  have  been  but  one  lodge  in
the  city  of  York,  which  did  not,  however,  assume  the  title  of  a
Grand  Lodge,  but  in  its  minutes  is  called  a "Private  Lodge,"  and
on  a few  occasions  a "General  Lodge."  The  presiding  officer  was
called  the  President,  who  was  assisted  by  a Deputy  President.

There  were  at  that  time  in  the  north  of  England  many  purely
Operative  lodges,  and  these  as  well  as  the  York  Lodge,  which  was
more  Speculative  than  Operative  in  its  character,  paid  little  or  no
attention  to  the  proceedings  of  the  Speculative  Masons  in  London.

They  gave  no  adherence  to  the  Grand  Lodge  established  in  1717,
and  were  for  a long  time  averse  to  the  newly  invented  system  by
which  Operative  Freemasonry  was  displaced  by  a purely  Specula-
tive organization.

Still  there  were  no  signs  of  dissension  while  they  all,  in  their  im-
plicit belief  in  the  Legend  of  the  Craft,  assigned  to  the  city  of
York  the  honor  of  being  the  birthplace  of  English  Freemasonry.
The  Mother  Lodge,  as  it  was  supposed  to  be,  beheld  without  op-
position the  organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge  at  London,  nor  did
it  resist  the  Constitution  in  1724  by  that  body  of  a lodge  at  Stock-
ton-upon-Tees,  in  the  adjoining  county  of  Durham,  nor  of  another
in  1729  at  Scarborough,  in  the  county  of  York.

The  fact  is,  that  from  1713  to  1725  the  "Old  Lodge  at  York,"
as  Anderson  calls  it,  appears  to  have  exercised  but  little  energy.
From  1713  to  1716  it  held,  says  Findel,  but  one  or  two  yearly

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  ALL  ENGLAND

1053

meetings,  and  none  at  all  from  1717  to  1721,  and  only  three  meet-
ings in  the  following  two  years.1

But  the  publication  in  1723  of  its  Book  of  Constitutions  by  the
Grand  Lodge  at  London,  appears  to  have  awakened  the  Lodge  of
Y ork  into  a new  life.

For  unless  we  suppose  an  improbable  coincidence,  it  is  very

evident  that  some  stimulus  must  have  been  applied  to  its  energies,
since  in  1725  it  met  eleven  and  in  1726  thirteen  times.2

The  year  1725  was  to  the  Lodge  at  York  what  the  year  1717

had  been  to  the  four  lodges  of  London.  The  same  result  was

achieved,  though  the  course  adopted  for  attaining  it  was  different.

The  Grand  Lodge  at  London  had  been  formed  by  the  union  of

four  lodges,  a method  that  has  ever  since  been  followed,  except  as

to  the  precise  number,  in  the  organization  of  all  modem  Grand

Lodges.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  York  was  established,  if  we  can  depend  on

the  very  meager  details  of  history  that  have  been  preserved,  by  the
simple  change  of  title  from  that  of  a Private  Lodge  to  that  of  a

Grand  Lodge.  This  change  took  place  on  December  27,  1725,  when

the  Grand  Lodge  was  formed  by  the  election  of  Charles  Bathurst  as
Grand  Master  with  a Bro.  Johnson  as  his  Deputy,  and  Bros.  Paw-

son  and  Francis  Drake  as  Wardens.  Brothers  Scourfield  and  Inigo

Russel  were  respectively  the  Treasurer  and  Clerk.3

The  Grand  Lodge  now  openly  denied  the  superior  authority  of

the  body  which  had  been  established  in  London  eight  years  before,
and  while  it  was  content  that  that  organization  should  be  known

as  the  "Grand  Lodge  of  England,"  it  assumed  for  itself  the  more
pretentious  title  of  the  "Grand  Lodge  of  all  England."

In  thus  constituting  itself  a Grand  Lodge  by  a mere  change  of
title,  and  the  assumption  of  more  extensive  prerogatives,  the  "Old
Lodge  at  York"  had  asserted  its  belief  in  its  own  interpretation  of
the  Legend  of  the  Craft.

"You  know,"  says  Bro.  Drake,  its  first  Junior  Grand  Warden,
"we  can  boast  that  the  first  Grand  Lodge  ever  held  in  England
was  held  in  this  city;  where  Edwin,  the  first  Christian  king  of  the
Northumbers,  about  the  sixth  hundredth  year  after  Christ,  and  who

1 Findel,  "History  of  Freemasonry,"  Lyon's  Translation,  p.  160.

2 Findel,  ibid.

3 Hughan,  "History  of  Freemasonry  in  York,"  p.  57,  and  Findel,  p.  61.

1054

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

laid  the  foundation  of  our  cathedral,  sat  as  Grand  Master.  This  is

sufficient  to  make  us  dispute  the  superiority  with  the  lodges  at  Lon-
don. But  as  nought  of  that  kind  ought  to  be  among  so  amicable  a

fraternity,  we  are  content  they  enjoy  the  title  of  Grand  Master  of
England;  but  the  Totius  Anglice  we  claim  as  our  undoubted

right."

Francis  Drake,  the  author  of  this  passage,  which  is  taken  from  a
speech  delivered  by  him  before  the  Grand  Lodge  at  its  session  of
December  27,  1726,  was  an  antiquary  who  is  well  known  by  a work
in  folio  published  by  him  in  1735  on  the  History  and  Antiquities

of  the  City  of  York.  He  was  in  respect  to  Freemasonry  the  Desa-
guliers  of  the  Northern  Grand  Lodge.  To  him  it  was  indebted  for
its  first  establishment  and  for  the  defense  of  its  right  to  the  position

it  had  assumed.

Though  he  had  been  initiated  only  a year  before  his  advance-
ment to  the  position  of  Grand  Warden,  he  seems  to  have  taken
at  once  a great  interest  in  the  institution  and  to  have  cultivated
its  history.

He  was  the  first  to  advance  the  theory  that  the  Edwin  who  is
said  in  the  Legend  of  the  Craft  to  have  convoked  the  General

Assembly  at  York,  was  not  the  brother  of  Athelstan,  but  the  con-
verted King  of  Northumbria,  and  that  the  date  of  the  Convocation

was  not  in  the  10th,  but  in  the  7th,  century.

This  theory  is  now  accepted  by  a great  number  of  Masonic  his-
torians as  the  most  plausible  inteipretation  of  the  Legend.

Drake  also  exhibited  in  his  speech  a very  sensible  idea  of  what
was  the  true  origin  of  Freemasonry.  He  traces  it  to  a purely
Operative  source,  an  opinion  which  is  the  favorite  one  of  the  his-

torians of  the  present  day.

The  Grand  Lodge  at  York,  thus  constructed  by  a mere  change
of  title,  had,  in  reality,  by  that  act  acquired  a more  plausible  claim
to  be  called  a "Revival"  than  the  Grand  Lodge  at  London.  It
assumed  to  be  a resumption  of  its  functions  by  a Grand  Lodge
which  had  always  been  in  existence  since  the  days  of  Edwin  of
Northumbria,  and  which  had  been  dormant  for  only  a few  years.

If  this  theory  were  sound,  most  undoubtedly  the  establishment
of  the  Grand  Lodge  in  1725  would  have  been  a real  revival.  Un-
fortunately, the  facts  are  wanting  which  could  support  such  a the-
ory. There  is  not  the  slightest  evidence,  except  that  which  is  leg-

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  ALL  ENGLAND

1055

endary,  that  there  ever  was  a Grand  Lodge  or  a Grand  Master  in
the  city  of  York  until  the  year  1725.

The  fact  is  that,  according  to  the  modem  principles  of  Ma-

sonic jurisprudence,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  all  England,  as  it  styled
itself,  was  not  legally  constituted,  unless  it  be  admitted  that  it  was
a mere  continuation  or  revival  of  a former  Grand  Lodge  at  the
same  place.  But  this  fact  has  not  been  established  by  any  histor-
ical proof.  The  Grand  Lodge  was,  therefore,  really  only  a "Mother

Lodge."

This  system,  where  a private  lodge  assumes  the  functions  and

exercises  the  prerogatives  of  a Grand  Lodge,  under  the  title  of  a
"Mother  Lodge,"  was  first  invented  by  the  French  innovators  at  a
later  period,  and  never  has  been  acknowledged  as  a legal  method
of  constitution  in  any  English-speaking  country.1

Laurence  Dermott2  has  asserted  that  to  form  a Grand  Lodge
it  was  necessary  that  the  representatives  of  five  lodges  should  be

present.  He  had  selected  this  number  designedly  to  invalidate

the  Constitution  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  which  had  been

formed  by  four  lodges.  His  authority  on  Masonic  law  is  not  con-
sidered as  good,  and  now  the  principle  appears  to  be  settled  by  the

constant  usage  of  America,  and  by  its  recognition  in  Great  Britain

and  Ireland,  that  the  requisite  number  of  constituent  lodges  shall  be

limited  to  not  less  than  three.

Some  idea  of  the  kind  seems  to  have  prevailed  at  an  early  period
among  the  Masons  of  the  south  of  England,  although  it  had  not

been  formulated  into  a statute,  for  Anderson,  in  1738,  spoke  of

the  body  which  had  been  established,  not  as  the  "Grand  Lodge,"
but  as  "the  old  Lodge  of  York  City."3

So  much  I have  deemed  it  necessary  to  say  as  a curious  point
of  history,  but  the  question  of  the  legal  constitution  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  York  is  no  longer  of  any  judicial  importance,  as  it  has

long  since  ceased  to  exist,  and  the  lodges  which  were  constituted

1 This  is  the  very  epithet  applied  by  Drake  to  the  Grand  Lodge  in  his  celebrated

speech.  He  calls  it  "the  Mother  Lodge  of  them  all."  See  the  extract  from  the  speech
farther  on  in  this  chapter.

Except  in  Scotland,  where  the  Lodge  of  Kilwinning  assumed  the  title  of  "Mother

Lodge,"  and  issued  warrants  for  Daughter  Lodges.  But  the  act  was  never  recognized  as
legal  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland.

2 "Ahiman  Rezon,"  p.  xiii.

3 "Constitutions,"  2d  edition,  p.  196.

1056

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

by  it  were,  on  its  dissolution,  legitimately  enrolled  on  the  register  of
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.

Besides  the  change  from  a Private  Lodge  to  a Grand  Lodge,

which  was  made  in  1725,  others  were  adopted  at  the  same  time,

which  are  worthy  of  notice. 1

In  1725  and  afterward  the  meetings  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  which

heretofore  had  been  held  in  private  houses,  were  transferred  to
taverns,  in  which  they  followed  the  example  of  their  southern

brethren.  The  "Star  Inn"  and  the  "White  Swan"  are  recorded  in
the  minutes  of  the  first  places  of  meeting.

In  the  earlier  minutes  we  find  the  Craft  styling  themselves  "the
Honourable  Society  and  Company  of  Freemasons."  In  1725  they
adopted  the  designation  of  the  "Worshipful  and  Ancient  Society
of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons."  The  adoption  of  the  word  "Ac-
cepted" assimilated  the  Freemasons  of  York  to  those  of  London,

from  whose  Book  of  Constitutions  the  former  evidently  borrowed  it.

The  minutes  after  1725  record  the  initiation  of  "gentlemen,"
and  the  speech  of  Junior  Warden  Drake  at  the  celebration  in  1726
refers  to  three  classes,  the  "working  Masons,"  those  who  "are  of
other  trades  and  occupations,"  and  "gentlemen."

But  there  are  many  proofs  in  the  records  of  the  lodge  that

the  second  and  third  classes  predominated,  and  that  the  Grand
Lodge  of  York  was  earnestly  striving,  by  the  admission  of  non-

Masons  as  members,  to  eliminate  the  Operative  element,  and,  like

its  predecessor  at  London,  to  assume  an  entirely  Speculative  char-
acter.

It  does  not  appear  that  at  York  there  was  that  opposition  to  the
change  which  had  existed  at  London,  where  the  Speculative  ele-
ment did  not  gain  the  control  of  the  Society  until  six  years  after
the  organization  in  1717.  The  Lodge  at  York  had  begun  to  pre-
pare for  the  change  twelve  years  before  it  assumed  the  rank  of  a
Grand  Lodge,  for,  in  1713,  at  a meeting  held  at  Bradford,  eighteen
"gentlemen"  were  admitted  into  the  Society.

1 Findel  and  Hughan  both  visited  the  city  of  York  at  different  periods  and  made  a
personal  inspection  of  the  lodge  records.  It  is  to  the  "History  of  Freemasonry,"  by  the
former,  and  to  the  "History  of  Freemasonry  in  York,"  by  the  latter,  that  I am  indebted
for  many  of  my  facts.  Preston,  though  furnishing  abundant  details,  is  neither  accurate
nor  impartial,  and  Anderson  and  his  successors,  Entick  and  Northouck,  supply  scarcely
any  information.  Some  intimation  of  the  character  of  the  Grand  Lodge  at  the  time  of
its  establishment  may  be  derived  from  the  speech  by  Bro.  Drake  in  1726.

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  ALL  ENGLAND

1057

From  the  records  we  learn  also  that  the  "Regulations"  adopted
by  the  Grand  Lodge  at  London  were  adopted  for  the  government
of  the  body  at  York.  Indeed,  it  is  very  probable  that  the  publi-
cation of  these  "Regulations"  in  1723  had  precipitated  the  design
of  the  Y ork  Freemasons  to  organize  their  Grand  Lodge.

There  is  no  doubt  that  in  the  general  details  of  their  new  system
they  followed  the  "Regulations"  of  1723.  The  titles  of  the  pre-
siding officers  were  changed  in  accordance  with  the  London  system
from  President  and  Deputy  President  to  Grand  Master  and  Deputy
Grand  Master,  and  it  is  supposable  that  other  changes  were  made  to
conform  to  the  new  "Regulations."

Indeed,  Anderson  expressly  states  that  the  lodge  at  York  had
"the  same  Constitutions,  Charges,  Regulations,  etc.,  for  substance
as  their  Brethren  of  England,"  that  is,  of  London.

But,  in  addition  to  the  London  "Regulations,"  the  lodge  at
York  had  another  set  of  rules  for  its  government,  which  are  still
extant  in  the  archives  of  the  present  York  Lodge.  They  are  con-
tained on  a sheet  of  parchment  which  is  indorsed,  "Old  Rules  of
the  Grand  Lodge  at  York,  1725,  No.  8."

These  rules  are  said  by  both  Findel  and  Hughan  to  have  been

adopted  in  1725  by  the  new  Grand  Lodge.  This  is  probable,  be-
cause they  are  signed  by  "Ed.  Bell,  Master,"  who  is  recorded  as
having  been  the  Grand  Master  in  1725;  and  they  are  subsequently
referred  to  in  the  minutes  of  July  6,  1726,  with  the  title  of  the
"Constitutions."

But  I think  it  equally  probable  that  they  were  originally  the

rules  which  were  made  for  the  regulation  of  the  lodge  long  before  it
assumed  the  rank  and  title  of  a Grand  Lodge.

As  the  Constitution  of  a Grand  Lodge,  these  rules  are  in  re-
markable contrast  with  the  "Regulations"  which  were  compiled  by

Payne  for  the  use  of  the  Grand  Lodge  at  London  and  were  pub-

lished in  the  first  edition  of  the  Book  of  Constitutions.

They  are  nineteen  in  number,  and  with  the  exception  of  a sin-
gle article — the  eighth — they  have  the  form  of  a set  of  rules  for  the
regulation  of  a social  and  drinking  club  rather  than  that  of  a code

of  laws  carefully  prepared  for  the  inauguration  of  a great  moral

and  philosophical  institution  such  as  Speculative  Freemasonry  soon
became,  and  such  as  it  was  evidently  the  design  of  Desaguliers,

Payne,  and  Anderson  to  make  it.

1058

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

But  even  as  the  rules  of  a mere  club  they  are  interesting,  inas-
much as  they  make  us  acquainted,  by  an  official  authority,  with  the
condition  of  Speculative  Freemasonry  at  York,  and  with  the  social
usages  of  the  Craft  there,  in  the  second  and  third  decades  of  the
18th  century.

As  they  have  been  published  in  full  only  by  Bro.  Hughan  in  his
History  of  Freemasonry  in  York,  a most  valuable  work  but  of
which  both  the  English  and  American  editions  were  unfortunately
too  limited  in  the  number  of  copies  to  make  it  generally  accessible,
1 have,  therefore,  thought  that  it  would  not  be  unacceptable  to  the

reader  to  find  them  reprinted  here.  A few  marginal  annotations
have  been  added  which  are  partly  intended  to  prove  the  truth  of  the

opinion  that  the  rules  were  not  framed  in  1725  after  the  Grand

Lodge  had  been  established,  but  had  been  previously  used  for  the
government  of  the  private  lodge,  and  were  only  continued  in  force

by  the  Grand  Lodge.

Rules  Agreed  to  be  Kept  and  Observed  by  the  Ancient  Society  of

Freemasons  in  the  City  of  York,  and  to  be  Subscribed  by  Every >

Member  Thereof  at  Their  Admittance  Into  the  Said  Society}

Imprimis.  1.  That  every  first  Wednesday  in  the  month  a lodge
shall  be  held,  at  the  house  of  a Brother  according  as  their  turn  shall
fallout.2

2.  All  subscribers  to  these  articles,  not  appearing  at  the  Monthly
lodge,  shall  forfeit  sixpence  each  time.

3.  If  any  Brother  appear  at  a lodge  that  is  not  a subscriber  to

these  articles,  he  shall  pay  over  and  above  his  club  the  sum  of  one

shilling.3

1 It  will  be  remarked  that  the  title  "Ancient  Society  of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons"

which  was  adopted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  is  not  here  used,  but  the  "Ancient  Society  of
Freemasons,"  which  was  the  form  employed  by  the  "Private  Lodge"  in  all  the  minutes

prior  to  1725.  This  is  a very  strong  proof  that  the  Rules  were  not  framed  after  the  Grand
Lodge  had  been  organized.

2 Monthly  meetings  at  the  houses  of  different  members  in  turn  though  appropriate
enough  for  a private  lodge,  would  scarcely  have  been  adopted  as  a regulation  by  a Grand
Lodge.  In  this  article  we  clearly  see  what  was  the  usage  of  the  old  lodge  before  it  pro-
moted itself  to  a higher  rank.

3 This  article  was  evidently  designed  not  for  a Grand  Lodge,  but  for  the  private  lodge
pursuing  the  social  usages  of  a club.  Freemasons  who  were  not  members  of  it  might  ap-
pear as  visitors,  but  every  visitor  in  addition  to  his  "club,"  or  share  of  the  expenses  of
the  evening  which  were  equally  distributed  among  all,  was  required  to  pay  an  additional
shilling  for  the  privilege  of  the  visit.

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  ALL  ENGLAND

1059

4.  The  Bowl  shall  be  filled  at  the  monthly  lodges  with  Punch

once,  Ale,  Bread,  Cheese  and  Tobacco  in  common,  but  if  anything
more  shall  be  called  for  by  any  brother,  either  for  eating  or  drink-
ing, that  Brother  so  calling  shall  pay  for  it,  himself,  besides  his

club.1

5.  The  Master  or  Deputy  shall  be  obliged  to  call  for  a Bill  ex-
actly at  ten  o'clock,  if  they  meet  in  the  evening  and  discharge  it.2

6.  None  to  be  admitted  to  the  Making  of  a Brother  but  such  as

have  subscribed  to  these  articles.3

7.  Timely  notice  shall  be  given  to  all  the  Subscribers  when  a

Brother  or  Brothers  are  to  be  made.

8.  Any  Brother  or  Brothers  presuming  to  call  a lodge  with  a

design  to  make  a Mason  or  Masons,  without  the  Master  or  Deputy,
or  one  of  them  deputed,  for  every  such  offense  shall  forfeit  Five

Pounds.4

9.  Any  Brother  that  shall  interrupt  the  Examination  of  a

Brother  shall  forfeit  one  shilling.

1 This  article  must  satisfy  us  that  the  "Old  Lodge  at  York"  had  adopted  the  usages

of  the  age,  and  while  it  cultivated  Masonry  from  its  ancient  associations,  it,  like  other

societies  of  that  period  in  England,  indulged  its  members  with  the  rational  enjoyment  of

moderate  refreshment,  but  strictly  provided,  by  regulation,  against  all  excess.  The  bowl

was  to  be  filled  with  punch  only  once.  Other  lodges  elsewhere  had  similar  regulations;

they  formed  a part  of  the  lodge  organization  in  the  beginning  of  the  last  century,  when

almost  all  associations  assumed  the  form  of  clubs.  But  this  very  fact  warrants  us  in  be-

lieving that  the  rule  was  made  for  the  government  of  the  lodge,  before  it  declared  itself
to  be  a Grand  Lodge.

2 The  calling  for  the  bill  and  the  settlement  of  the  expenses  of  the  night's  meeting  is

a rule  that  was  universally  adopted  by  all  clubs.  But  mark  the  use  of  the  word  "Master"
instead  of  "Grand  Master."  If  these  rules  had  been  framed  by  the  Grand  Lodge  in  1725,
we  may  suppose  that  the  latter  title  would  have  been  employed.

3 The  "making"  of  Masons  is  no  part  of  the  business  of  a Grand  Lodge.  The  Lon-
don "Regulations,"  it  is  true,  for  a short  time  prescribed  that  Fellow-Crafts  and  Master

Masons  should  be  made  in  the  Grand  Lodge,  but  the  "making  of  Masons,"  that  is,  the  in-
itiation of  candidates  into  the  Society,  was  always  done  in  a particular  or  subordinate
lodge.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  York  having,  when  it  was  established,  no  constituents,  since

it  was  formed  by  a self-transmutation  from  a lodge  to  a Grand  Lodge,  must,  of  course,

have  continued  to  initiate  or  make  brothers.  But  the  rule  most  probably  was  made  when

the  lodge  was  in  its  primary  condition.

4 We  must  not  suppose  that  "to  call  a lodge"  denoted  to  hold  a new  lodge  without

warrant.  If  that  were  the  meaning,  the  rule  must  have  been  enacted  by  a Grand  Lodge.

But  the  true  meaning  was  that  no  brothers  should  call  a meeting  of  the  lodge  without  the

consent  of  the  Master.  This  is  strictly  a lodge  rule.  And  here  again  we  mark  that  the
authority  for  calling  was  to  come,  not  from  the  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  but

from  the  Master  of  the  lodge.

1060

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

10.  Clerk's  Salary  for  keeping  the  Books  and  Accounts  shall  be
one  shilling,  to  be  paid  him  by  each  Brother  at  his  admittance,  and
at  each  of  the  two  Grand  days  he  shall  receive  such  gratuity  as  the
Company  shall  think  proper.

11.  A Steward  to  be  chose  for  keeping  the  Stock  at  the  Grand
Lodge,  at  Christmas  and  the  Accounts  to  be  passed  three  days  after
each  lodge.1

12.  If  any  dispute  shall  arise,  the  Master  shall  silence  them  by
a knock  of  the  Mallet;  any  Brother  that  shall  presume  to  disobey,
shall  immediately  be  obliged  to  leave  the  Company  or  forfeit  five
shillings.2

13.  A Hour  shall  be  set  apart  to  talk  Masonry.3

14.  No  person  shall  be  admitted  into  the  lodge  but  after  having
been  strictly  examined.4

15.  No  more  persons  shall  be  admitted  as  Brothers  of  this  So-
ciety that  shall  keep  a Public  House.5

16.  That  these  articles  shall  at  lodges  be  laid  upon  the  Table,  to

be  perused  by  the  Members,  and  also  when  any  new  Brothers  are

made,  the  clerk  shall  publickly  read  them.

17.  Every  new  Brother,  at  his  admittance,  shall  pay  to  the

Waits,6  as  their  Salary,  the  sum  of  two  Shillings,  the  money  to  be

1 In  the  whole  of  the  nineteen  rules  this  is  the  only  one  in  which  we  find  the  title

"Grand  Lodge."  The  epithet  "Grand,"  or  perhaps  the  entire  article  was  inserted,  it  is

to  be  supposed,  when  the  rules  of  the  Old  Lodge  were  adopted,  confirmed  or  continued
by  it,  when  it  became  a self-constituted  Grand  Lodge.  It  was  necessary  to  appoint  a

Treasurer,  here  called  a Steward,  to  take  charge  of  the  stock  or  fund  of  the  Grand  Lodge
and  to  account  for  all  expenditures.  I am  inclined  to  believe  that  the  rule,  like  the  other
eighteen,  was  originally  framed  by  the  lodge,  but  on  account  of  the  financial  importance
of  the  subject  made  more  specific  when  it  was  adopted  by  the  Grand  Lodge,  so  as  to  de-
fine precisely  what  fund  it  was,  that  had  been  entrusted  to  the  Steward.

2 Note  again  the  use  of  "Master"  and  not  "Grand  Master."

3 "But  one  half-pennyworth  of  bread  to  this  intolerable  deal  of  sack!"  An  hour

"to  talk  Masonry,"  once  a month!  Still,  thankful  for  small  favors,  we  recognize  in  this

Article  the  connection  of  the  club  with  the  ancient  Craft.

4 That  visitors  were  required  to  submit  to  an  examination  proves  that  the  ritual  prac-

ticed by  the  lodge  at  York  was  the  same  as  that  in  common  use  by  the  Craft  elsewhere.
Otherwise  there  could  be  no  satisfactory  examination  of  visiting  strangers.

5 This  was  a very  general  and  necessary  rule  with  the  clubs  of  the  18th  century.  As
they  were  almost  always  held  at  taverns,  it  was  deemed  expedient  to  avoid  any  more
friendly  relation  with  the  landlord  than  that  of  hired  host  and  guests  who  paid  their  scot
as  they  went.

6 Waits,  says  Mr.  Raine,  in  his  "Glossary  of  the  Fabric  Rolls,"  are  "musicians  who

still  (1859)  parade  the  towns  in  the  north  of  England  at  Christmas-time.  At  Durham

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  ALL  ENGLAND

1061

lodged  in  the  Steward's  hands  and  paid  to  them  at  each  of  the  Grand
days.1

18.  The  Bidder  of  the  Society  shall  receive  of  each  new  Brother,
at  his  admittance,  the  sum  of  one  shilling  as  his  Salary.2

19.  No  money  shall  be  expended  out  of  the  Stock  after  the
hour  of  ten,  as  in  the  fifth  article.

These  rules  appear  to  me  to  throw  very  considerable  light  upon
the  rather  uncertain  subject  of  the  condition  of  Freemasonry  in
the  city  of  York  before  and  at  the  time  of  the  establishment  of
what  is  known  as  the  "Grand  Lodge  of  all  England."

Whether  the  usual  theory  that  York  was  the  birthplace  of

English  Freemasonry,  and  that  it  was  founded  there  in  the  10th

century  by  Prince  Edwin,  the  brother  of  King  Athelstan,  as  the
old  manuscripts  say,  or  in  the  7th  century  by  Edwin,  King  of  Nor-
thumbria, as  was,  for  the  first  time,  advanced  by  Drake  in  his
speech  made  in  1726 — whether  this  theory  is  to  be  considered  as

an  historical  statement,  or  merely  an  unsupported  tradition,  is  a
question  that  need  not  now  be  discussed.

The  architectural  history  of  the  church,  cathedral,  or,  as  it  is

now  commonly  called,  the  Minster  of  York,  may  be  comprised  in
a few  lines.

In  627  a wooden  church  was  built  by  Edwin,  King  of  Nor-
thumbria, at  the  suggestion  of  Bishop  Paulinus,  who  had  converted

him  to  Christianity.3

they  had  a regular  livery  and  wore  a silver  badge.  Their  musical  abilities  at  the  present

time  are  not  of  the  most  striking  character,  but  formerly  they  were  deemed  worthy

enough  to  assist  the  choristers  of  the  Minster."  In  the  "Fabric  Rolls"  under  the  date

of  1602  there  is  a charge  "to  the  Waites  for  their  musicke  to  the  same  do.  Imbassia-
dor,  13s.  4d."  It  was  the  Spanish  Ambassador  who  was  thus  complimented  at  the  ex-
pense of  the  Chapter  during  his  visit  to  York.  It  is  possible  that  as  an  extraordinary

occasion  a supper  may  have  followed  the  initiation  of  a new  brother,  when  the  musical
service  of  the  Waites  would  be  required  to  give  zest  to  the  entertainment.

1 Grand  Days,  says  Brady  (Clavis,  Calendaria  I.,  164),  were  Candlemas  Day,  Ascen-
sion Day,  Midsummer  Day,  and  All  Saints'  Day.  They  were  so  called  in  the  Inns  of

Court.  The  lodge  might,  however,  have  had,  as  its  Grand  Days,  the  festivals  of  St.

John  the  Baptist  and  of  St.  John  the  Evangelist.  This  is  merely  problematical.

2 The  members  were  to  receive  "timely  notice"  when  a Brother  was  to  be  made

(Rule  7).  He  who  served  the  notices  and  summoned  the  members  was  called  the

"Bidder."

3 Bede  says  that  the  wooden  church  was  temporarily  erected  for  the  public  baptism

of  the  king,  but  that  immediately  afterward  he  began  a large  stone  edifice  which  in-
cluded the  wooden  one,  which  was  finished  by  his  successor,  Oswald.  "Hist.  Eccles.,"

ii.,  14.

1062

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

In  669  Bishop  Wilfrid,  the  successor  of  Paulinus,  made  many
important  repairs  and  furnished  the  interior  anew.

In  741,  according  to  Roger  Hovedon,  the  Minster  was  destroyed
by  fire.

In  767,  according  to  Alcuin,  who  assisted  in  the  work,  Arch-
bishop Albert  erected  a most  magnificent  basilica.  This  church,
Raine  thinks,  was  in  existence  at  the  time  of  the  Norman  Con-
quest, but  in  1 069  it  was  destroyed  by  fire.

In  1070  Bishop  Thomas,  the  Norman,  rebuilt  the  church  from
its  foundations.

This  church  remained  without  alteration  until  1171,  when  Arch-
bishop Roger  began  to  build  a new  choir.  Raine  doubts  the  story
that  the  church  of  Archbishop  Thomas  was,  in  1137,  destroyed  by
fire.

In  1240  Archbishop  Roger  built  the  south  transept,  and  imme-
diately after  commenced  the  building  of  the  north  transept.

In  1291  Archbishop  John  Romain  laid  the  first  stone  of  a new
nave,  which  was  completed  in  1340  by  Archbishop  Melton.1

It  is  at  about  this  period  that  we  become,  through  the  Fabric
Rolls,  familiarly  acquainted  with  the  usages  of  the  Freemasons  who
were  employed  from  that  time  to  its  completion  in  the  construction

of  the  Minster  under  the  direction  of  the  Chapter  of  the  church.

In  1361  the  Presbytery  was  begun  and  completed  in  1373  by
Archbishop  Thoresby.

In  1380  the  choir  was  commenced,  and  the  works  being  carried
on  without  interruption,  it  was  completed  in  1400.

In  1405  the  work  of  the  central  tower  was  begun  and  finished  at
an  uncertain  period.

In  1432  the  southwestern  tower  was  begun,  and  at  a later  date
the  northwestern  tower  was  erected,  both  being  completed  about
1470,  when  the  painted  vault  of  the  central  tower  was  set  up  and
finished.

In  1472,  the  work  having  been  completed,  the  Cathedral  was

reconsecrated.

It  is  thus  seen  that  for  the  long  period  of  eight  hundred  and

forty-five  years,  with  intervals  of  cessation,  the  great  work  of  build-

1 So  far  I have  been  indebted  for  dates  to  the  authority  of  Raine.  Preface  to  "Fabric
Rolls,"  pp.  vii.  et  seq.  What  follows  has  been  derived  from  R.  Willis,  "Architectural

History  of  York  Cathedral,"  p.  47.

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  ALL  ENGLAND

1063

ing  a cathedral  in  the  city  of  York  was  pursued  by  Masons,  most  of
whom  were  brought  from  the  continent.

Roger,  the  Prior  of  Hexham,  who  lived  in  the  12th  century,  tells
us  that  Bishop  Wilfrid,  while  building  the  first  stone  church  at  York,
brought  into  England  Masons  and  other  skillful  artisans  from

Rome,  Italy,  France,  and  other  countries  wherever  he  could  find
them. 1

Of  the  usages  and  regulations  of  these  Masons,  or  of  their  organi-
zation as  a guild  or  fraternity,  we  have  no  knowledge  except  that
which  is  derived  from  conjecture  or  analogy.

But  it  is  historically  certain  from  the  authority  of  the  Fabric

Rolls,  to  which  such  frequent  reference  has  been  made,  that  from  the

beginning  of  the  14th  century  Freemasons  were  employed  in  the
construction  of  the  cathedral  which  was  then  in  course  of  erection,
and  that  these  Freemasons  were  organized  into  a body  similar  in  its

organization  to  that  of  the  workmen  who  were  engaged  in  the  build-
ing of  the  cathedrals  of  Cologne  and  of  Strasburg.

It  is  a singular  coincidence,  if  it  be  nothing  more,  and  it  is  cer-

tainly of  great  historical  importance,  that  no  manuscript  Consti-
tution yet  discovered  is  claimed  to  have  an  older  date  than  that
of  the  14th  century,  and  about  the  time  when  the  Freemasons

of  York  were  occupied  in  the  construction  of  the  cathedral  of  that
city.

Hence  it  would  not  be  an  unreasonable  hypothesis  to  suppose
that  the  Freemasons  who  built  the  Cathedral  of  York  in  the  14th

century  were  the  original  composers  of  the  first  of  the  "Old  Con-
stitutions," and  of  the  Legend  of  the  Craft  which  they  all  contain.

This  would  rationally  account  for  the  fact  that  in  this  Legend
the  origin  of  Freemasonry  in  England,  as  a guild,  is  attributed  to
Masons  who  congregated  in  the  city  of  York,  and  there  held  a Gen-
eral Assembly.

If  the  Freemasons  of  the  southern  part  of  England  had  been  the
fabricators  of  the  first  copy  of  these  Constitutions,  they  would  have
been  more  likely  in  framing  the  Legend  to  have  selected  London
or  some  southern  city  as  the  birthplace  of  their  guild,  than  to  have
chosen  for  that  honor  a city  situated  in  the  remotest  limits  of  the

1 De  Roma,  quoque,  et  Italia,  et  Francia,  et  de  aliis  terns  ubicumque  invenire  pote-
rat,  cementarios,  et  quoslibet  alios  industrios  artifices  secum  retinuerat,  et  ad  opera  sua
facienda  secum  in  Angliam  adduxerat.  Roger,  Prior,  Hagulst.  liber  i.,  cap.  5.

1064

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

kingdom,  and  of  which,  from  the  difficulties  of  intercommunication,
they  would  have  no  familiar  knowledge.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  nothing  could  be  more  natural  than
that  the  Freemasons  who  were  living  and  working  at  York  in  the
14th  century  should  have  had  a tradition  among  themselves  that  at
some  time  in  the  remote  past  their  predecessors  had  held  a great
convocation  in  their  own  city,  and  there  and  then  framed  that  body
of  laws  which  were  to  become  the  Constitution  of  the  Craft.

It  is  a self-evident  proposition  that  there  must  have  been  a time
when,  and  a place  where,  the  first  manuscript  Constitution  was  writ-
ten, and  the  Legend  of  the  Craft  was  first  committed  to  writing.

As  to  the  time,  we  know  of  no  manuscript  that  is  older  than  the
14th  century.  The  earliest  is  the  Halliwell  poem,  and  it  has  been
assigned  by  competent  authority  to  the  year  1390.  But  there  are
good  reasons  for  believing  that  the  work  published  by  Mr.  Halli-
well is  really  a compilation  made  up  of  two  preceding  poems,  which
might  have  been  composed  a few  years  before,  and  which  would
thus  be  brought  to  the  very  period  when  the  Freemasons  were  at
work  on  the  Y ork  Cathedral.

As  to  the  place  where,  we  have  only  the  internal  evidence  of
the  Legend  of  the  Craft,  which,  as  I have  before  said,  would  indi-
cate from  the  story  of  the  Assembly  at  York  that  the  Legend  was

fabricated  by  the  Freemasons  of  that  city  out  of  a tradition  that
was  extant  among  them.

That  the  Halliwell  poem  does  not  particularize  the  city  of  York
by  name  as  the  place  where  the  General  Assembly  was  held,  is  no
proof  that  it  was  not  so  stated  in  the  unwritten  tradition  out  of

which  the  poem  was  constructed.  The  tradition  was  probably  so
well  known,  so  familiar  to  the  Masons  at  York,  that  the  writer  of
the  poem  did  not  deem  it  necessary  to  define  the  Assembly  further

than  by  the  name  of  him  who  called  it.  But  two  centuries  after,
when  the  Freemasons  of  the  south  of  England  began  to  make

copies  of  the  Legend,  they  found  it  necessary  to  follow  the  tradition
more  closely  and  to  define  York  as  the  place  where  the  Assembly
was  held.

And  then,  too,  these  southern  English  Freemasons  sought  to
impair  the  claim  of  their  northern  Brethren,  and  thus  in  the  Cooke
MS.,  written  more  than  a century  after  the  Halliwell  poem,  the
"Legend  of  St.  Alban"  is  introduced,  and  the  Masons  of  Verulam

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  ALL  ENGLAND

1065

are  said,  instead  of  those  of  York,  to  have  had  "charges  and
maners"  that  is,  Masonic  laws  and  usages,  "first  in  England."1
But  the  later  manuscripts  admit  the  decay  of  Masonry  after  the
death  of  St.  Alban,  and  its  subsequent  revival  at  Y ork.

Now,  as  the  Halliwell  poem  speaks  of  the  Assembly  as  having
been  held  at  "that  syte,"  and  as  the  subsequent  manuscripts  name
that  city  as  York,  and  retain  the  same  tradition  as  the  poem,  we
may,  as  Bro.  Woodford  justly  says,  fairly  conclude  that  the  "syte"
or  city  in  the  Halliwell  poem  refers  to  York.

We  need  not  absolutely  determine,  even  if  we  could,  whether
Freemasonry  was  first  established  in  England  as  a guild,  at  the  city
of  York,  as  the  earliest  manuscript  and  the  prototype  of  all  the
others  says;  or  whether  after  its  decadence  subsequent  to  the  rule
of  St.  Alban,  it  was  only  revived  in  that  city.  Nor  need  we  seek

to  settle  the  question  whether  the  General  Assembly  was  held  and

the  Charges  instituted  by  Edwin,  the  brother  of  Athelstan,  in  the
10th  century,  as  all  the  old  manuscripts  say,  or  by  Edwin,  King  of
Northumbria,  in  the  7th,  as  was  first  advanced  by  Mr.  Drake  in
1726  (a  theory  which  has  since  been  adopted  by  several  scholars),

or  finally  by  the  Freemasons  who  built  the  York  Cathedral  in  the

14th  century,  which  appears  to  me  to  be  the  most  plausible  of  all
the  hypotheses.

This  need  not,  however,  affect  the  probability  of  the  fact  that

similar  organizations  existed  among  the  Freemasons  who  at  the

same  time  were  employed  in  the  constructions  of  cathedrals  in  other
parts  of  England  and  Scotland,  of  whose  existence  we  have  histori-
cal certainty,  but  of  whose  customs  and  regulations  we  have  no

knowledge  because  their  Fabric  Rolls  have  been  either  irrecoverably
lost  or  have  not  yet  been  discovered.

Accepting,  then,  any  of  the  three  theories  which  have  just  been

alluded  to,  we  will  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  Freemasonry  as-

sumed at  the  city  of  York  that  form  which  was  represented  at  first
by  the  building  coiporations  or  Craft  guilds,  known  as  Operative

lodges  in  the  14th,  15th,  16th,  and  17th  centuries,  and  which  in  the
18th  underwent  a transmutation  into  that  system  of  Speculative

Freemasonry  of  which  the  Masonic  lodges  of  the  present  day  are

the  lineal  offspring.

Cooke  MS.,  line  608.

1066

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

It  is  true  that  such  an  hypothesis  is  based  on  tradition  only  and

on  a recorded  legend.  But  this  tradition  is  so  universal  and  is  sus-

tained by  so  much  of  logical  inference  and  by  so  many  collateral
authentic  circumstances,  which  can  only  be  explained  by  a reference
to  that  tradition,  that  the  tradition  itself  becomes  invested  with  an
almost  historical  character.

Resuming,  then,  the  history  of  the  rise  and  progress  of  the

Grand  Lodge  of  all  England,  we  find  its  germ  in  the  guild  of  those

Operative  Freemasons  who,  certainly  in  the  14th  and  15th  centuries,
were  employed  in  the  construction  of  the  Cathedral  of  York,  even
if  we  do  not  choose  to  trace  them  to  a remoter  period.

There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  there  was  a cessation  of  the
labors  of  the  York  Lodge  when  the  Cathedral  was  completed  in  1472. 1
We  infer  not  only  that  it  continued  to  exist,  but  that  it  extended  its
influence,  for  there  is  abundance  of  proof  that  there  were  many  lodges
in  other  parts  of  England,  and  the  old  manuscript  charges  show  that
these  lodges  were  all  regulated  by  one  common  law  and  by  similar
usages.

But  of  the  especial  history  of  the  lodge  at  York  during  the  16th
century  we  have  no  authentic  information.  We  infer,  however,  that
it  was  in  existence  early  in  the  17th,  because  a manuscript  copy  of

the  "Old  Constitutions"  and  the  "Legend"  was  prepared  for  it  in
1630.  This  manuscript  was  in  the  archives  of  the  lodge  in  1777,
but  was  afterward  lost.

There  is  also  in  the  archives  of  the  York  Lodge  another  and  a

later  manuscript  Constitution  which  is  still  extant,  and  which  bears
the  date  of  1693.  The  lodge  was,  we  may  presume,  at  that  time  in
active  operation.

We  have  next  an  authentic  record  that  the  minutes  of  the  lodge
as  early  as  1704  were  at  one  time  in  existence.  These  minutes

have  been  unfortunately  mislaid  or  lost,  and  the  earliest  records  of

the  lodge  which  have  been  preserved,  commence  with  the  year  1712.

I will  not  cite  the  unreliable  statements  of  Preston  and  some

other  writers,  that  there  was  a Grand  Lodge  and  a Grand  Master  at

York  in  the  16th  century,  because  they  are  entirely  without  proof.
We  are  studying  history,  not  amusing  ourselves  with  fiction.

1 As  the  church  had  been  in  fact  rebuilt,  it  was  reconsecrated  on  July  3,  1472,  and

that  day  was  deemed  to  be  the  feast  of  the  dedication  of  the  church  of  York  in  future.

Willis,  "Architectural  History  of  York  Cathedral,"  p.  47.

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  ALL  ENGLAND

1067

But  we  do  know  that  there  was  an  Operative  lodge  at  York
about  the  close  of  the  14th  century  and  for  many  years  pre-

vious, and  we  also  know  that  there  was  an  Operative  lodge  in  the
same  city  about  the  beginning  of  the  17th  century  which  was  con-

tinued until  the  beginning  of  the  18th,  and  with  no  evidence  to  the
contrary,  we  rightly  infer  that  the  one  was  the  descendant  or  suc-

cessor of  the  other.

Dr.  J.  P.  Bell,  in  a work  entitled  the  Stream  of  English  His-

tory, gives  a list  of  the  presiding  officers  of  the  lodge  from  1705  to
1781.  I have  not  been  able  to  get  access  to  a copy  of  this  work,
and  I am  indebted  for  what  I know  of  it  to  Bro.  Hughan,  who  re-
fers to  it  in  his  History  of  Freemasonry  in  York.

Hughan  says  that  the  List  may  be  relied  on.  The  author  is,
however,  in  error  in  assigning  the  title  of  Grand  Master  to  the
officers  who  presided  from  1705  to  1724.  They  were,  until  the  lat-
ter date,  called  "Presidents"  or  "Masters,"  and  it  was  not  until  the
lodge  assumed  the  rank  of  a Grand  Lodge  in  1725  that  the  title  of
"Grand  Master"  was  adopted.

Up  to  the  year  1725  the  lodge  at  York  was  strictly  what  it
called  itself,  a "Private  Lodge,"  and  in  its  minutes  it  bears  the  name
of  St.  John's  Lodge.  Preston  says  that  in  1705  there  were  several
lodges  in  York  and  its  neighborhood.  But  I fail  to  find  any  other
proof  of  this  fact  than  his  own  assertion.  Unfortunately,  the  dis-
putes between  the  Lodge  of  Antiquity,  of  which  Preston  was  a mem-
ber, and  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  in  which  the  Grand  Lodge
of  York  took  a part,  had  created  such  a partisan  feeling  in  Preston
and  his  friends  against  the  former  and  for  the  latter  body,  that  his
authority  on  any  subject  connected  with  York  Masonry  is  of  doubt-
ful value.  His  natural  desire  was  to  magnify  the  Grand  Lodge
which  had  taken  his  own  lodge  under  its  protection,  and  to  depre-
ciate the  one  against  which  it  had  rebelled.

Until  the  contrary  is  shown  by  competent  authority  we  must  be-
lieve that  in  1705  there  was  but  one  lodge  at  York,  the  same  which

twenty  years  afterward  assumed  the  title  and  functions  of  a Grand

Lodge.

From  its  earliest  records  we  find  that,  though  this  was  an  Oper-

ative lodge  in  name,  because  at  that  time  all  Masonic  lodges  were
of  that  character,  yet  the  Theoretic  members  greatly  predominated
in  numbers  over  the  practical  or  working  Masons.  It  was  thus

1068

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

gradually  preparing  the  way  for  that  change  into  a purely  Specula-
tive institution  which  about  the  same  time  was  taking  place  in
London.

It  appears  from  the  speech  of  the  Junior  Grand  Warden,  Drake,
delivered  before  the  Grand  Lodge  in  1726,  that  there  were  at  that

time  three  classes  of  members  in  the  York  Lodge,  namely,  "work-
ing Masons,  persons  of  other  trades  and  occupations,  and  Gentle-
men." To  the  first  of  these  classes  he  recommended  a careful  peru-
sal of  the  Constitution,  to  the  second  class  he  counselled  obedience
to  the  moral  precepts  of  the  Society,  and  attention  to  their  own
business,  without  any  expectation  of  becoming  proficients  in  Opera-
tive Masonry.  "You  cannot,"  he  says,  "be  so  absurd  as  to  think

that  a tailor,  when  admitted  a Freemason,  is  able  to  build  a church;
and  for  that  reason,  your  own  vocation  ought  to  be  your  most

important  study."  On  the  "gentlemen"  only,  did  he  impress  the

necessity  of  a knowledge  of  the  arts  and  sciences,  and  he  especially
recommended  to  them  the  study  of  geometry  and  architecture.

Francis  Drake,1  the  author  of  this  Speech,  was  a scholar  of
much  learning  and  an  antiquary.  Like  his  contemporary,  George
Payne,  of  the  London  Grand  Lodge,  whom  he  resembled  in  the
nature  of  his  literary  pursuits,  his  ambition  seems  to  have  been  to

establish  a system  of  pure  Speculative  Freemasonry,  to  be  created
by  its  total  severance  from  the  Operative  element.

Something  of  this  kind  he  distinctly  expresses  in  the  close  of

his  Speech  before  the  Grand  Lodge.

"It  is  true,"  he  says,  addressing  the  Gentlemen  or  Theoretic

members,  "by  Signs,  Words,  and  Tokens,  you  are  put  upon  a level
with  the  meanest  brother;  but  then  you  are  at  liberty  to  exceed
them  as  far  as  a superior  genius  and  education  will  conduct  you.

1 He  was  bom  in  1695,  and  in  early  life  established  himself  at  York  as  a surgeon  and
practiced,  Britton  says,  with  considerable  reputation,  but  the  investigation  of  antiquarian
researches  was  his  favorite  pursuit.  He  published  a "Parliamentary  History  of  England

to  the  Restoration"  and  many  essays  in  the  "Archeeologia"  and  in  the  "Philosophical
Transactions."  His  principal  work,  however,  and  the  one  by  which  he  is  best  remem-
bered, was  published  at  London  in  1736  under  the  title  of  "Eboracum,"  or  the  "History
and  Antiquities  of  the  City  of  York  from  its  Original  to  the  Present  Time."  From
its  title  we  learn  that  Drake  was  a Fellow  of  the  Royal  Society  and  a member  of  the  So-
ciety of  Antiquaries  of  London.  The  work  is  in  two  folio  volumes  and  illustrated  by  many
engravings,  which,  considering  the  most  of  them  were  donations  to  himself  and  his  work,
made  by  his  wealthy  patrons,  might  have  been  executed  in  a better  style  of  art.

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  ALL  ENGLAND

1069

I am  creditably  informed  that  in  most  lodges  in  London,  and
several  other  parts  of  this  kingdom,  a lecture  on  some  point  of
geometry  or  architecture  is  given  at  every  meeting.  And  why
the  Mother  Lodge  of  them  all  should  so  far  forget  her  own  in-
stitutions can  not  be  accounted  for,  but  from  her  extreme  old  age.
However,  being  now  sufficiently  awakened  and  revived  by  the  com-

fortable appearance  of  so  many  worthy  sons,  I must  tell  you  that
she  expects  that  every  Gentleman  who  is  called  a Freemason

should  not  be  startled  at  a problem  in  geometry,  a proposition  in
Euclid,  or,  at  least,  be  wanting  on  the  history  and  just  distinctions
of  the  five  orders  of  architecture."

On  December  27,  1725,  the  lodge  resolved  itself  into  a Grand
Lodge  (I  know  not  how  to  use  a better  term),  and  Charles  Bath-
urst, Esq.,  was  elected  Grand  Master,  with  Mr.  Johnson  for  his
Deputy,  and  Messrs.  Pawson  and  Drake,  both  of  whom  had  been

initiated  in  the  previous  September,  as  Grand  Wardens.1

On  the  festival  of  St.  John  the  Evangelist,  in  the  following

year,2  Bathurst  was  again  elected  Grand  Master,  and  the  Society
marched  in  procession  to  Merchants'  Hall,  where  a Speech  was
delivered  by  Bro.  Francis  Drake,  the  Junior  Grand  Warden.

Like  its  sister  of  London,  the  Grand  Lodge  at  York  was
troubled  with  schism  at  a very  early  period  of  its  existence.3
William  Sourfield  had  convened  a lodge  and  made  Masons  without
the  consent  of  the  Grand  Master  or  his  Deputy.  For  this  offense
he  was  expelled,  or  as  the  Minutes  say,  "banished  from  the  Society
for  ever."

It  was  agreed  that  John  Carpenter,  W.  Musgrave,  Th.  Alleson,
and  Th.  Preston,  who  had  assisted  Sourfield  in  his  illegal  proceed-
ings, should,  on  their  acknowledging  their  error  and  making  due
submission,  be  restored  to  favor.

Findel  gives  the  following  account  of  the  subsequent  proceed-
ings which  was  taken  by  him  from  the  Minutes  of  the  Grand  Lodge

"After  the  Minutes  of  December  22,  1726,  a considerable  space

1 Bro.  Findel,  who  had  inspected  the  Minutes  while  on  a visit  to  York,  says  these
officers  are  there  called  Wardens,  and  not  Grand  Wardens.  "History  of  Freemasonry,"

p.  161.

2 Findel  gives  this  date  as  1725,  but  he  is  clearly  in  error,  as  the  printed  title  of  the
Speech  states  that  it  was  delivered  "on  St.  John's  Day,  December  27,  1726."

3 The  reader  is  reminded  of  the  schismatic  proceedings  at  the  London  Grand  Lodge
in  1722  in  reference  to  the  election  of  the  Duke  of  Wharton  as  Grand  Master.

1070

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

is  left  in  the  page,1  and  then  follow  the  Minutes  of  June  21,  1729,
wherein  it  is  said  that  two  Gentlemen  were  received  into  the  St.
John's  Lodge  and  their  election  confirmed  by  vote:  Edw.  Thompson,
Esq.,  Grand  Master;  John  Willmers,  Deputy  Grand  Master;  G.
Rhodes,  and  Reynoldson,  Grand  Wardens.  The  Grand  Master  on  his
part  appointed  a Committee  of  seven  brothers,  amongst  whom  was
Drake,  to  assist  him  in  the  management  of  the  lodge,  and  every  now
and  then  support  his  authority  in  removing  any  abuses  which  might

have  crept  in.

"The  lodge  was,  however,  at  its  last  gasp,  and  therefore  the

Committee  seem  to  have  effected  but  little;  for  on  May  4,  1730,  it

was  found  necessary  to  exact  the  payment  of  a shilling  from  all

officers  of  the  lodge  who  did  not  make  their  appearance  and  with

this  announcement  the  Minutes  close."2

At  this  time,  according  to  Findel,  there  were  no  lodges  subor-

dinate to  the  Grand  Lodge.  His  statement,  however,  that  after
the  meeting  in  May,  1730,  it  was  inactive  until  1760,  is  shown  by

the  records  to  be  not  precisely  accurate.

The  fact  is  that  the  lodge,  or  the  Grand  Lodge,  after  1729,  must
for  some  years  have  dragged  out  a life  of  inactivity.  Bell's  list
shows  that  there  were  no  Grand  Masters  (probably  because  there
were  no  meetings)  in  1730,  1731,  and  1732.  John  Johnson,  M.D.,is
recorded  as  Grand  Master  in  1733,  and  John  Marsden,  Esq.,  in  1734.

There  are  no  records  of  Grand  Masters  or  of  Proceedings  from
1734  until  1761.  During  that  period  of  twenty  years,  while  the

Grand  Lodge  of  England  was  diffusing  the  light  of  Speculative
Freemasonry  throughout  the  world,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  all  Eng-
land was  asleep,  if  not  actually  defunct.

From  this  long  slumber  it  awoke  in  the  year  1761,  and  the
method  of  its  awaking  is  made  known  to  us  in  the  Minutes  of  the
meeting  which  have  been  preserved.

As  this  event  is  one  of  much  importance  in  the  history  of
Freemasonry  at  Y ork,  I do  not  hesitate  to  copy  the  Minute  in  full.

The  Ancient  and  Independent  Constitution  of  Free  and  Ac-
cepted Masons,  belonging  to  the  City  of  York,  was,  this  Seven-

1 In  Dr.  Bell's  List,  heretofore  cited,  there  are  no  names  of  Grand  Masters  in  1722
and  1728.

2 "History  of  Freemasonry,"  p.  164.

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  ALL  ENGLAND

1071

teenth  day  of  March,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1761,  Revived  by
Six  of  the  Surviving  Members  of  the  Fraternity  by  the  Grand
Lodge  being  opened,  and  held  at  the  House  of  Mr.  Henry  How-
ard, in  Lendall,  in  the  said  City,  by  them  and  others  hereinafter
named.

When  and  where  it  was  farther  agreed  on  that  it  should  be
continued  and  held  there  only  the  Second  and  Last  Monday  in
every  Month.

Present:

Grand  Master,  Brother  Francis  Drake,  Esq.,  F.R.S.

Deputy  G.  M.  " George  Reynoldson.

Grand  Wardens  " George  Coates  and  Thomas  Mason.

Visiting  Brethren:

Tasker,  Leng,  Swetnam,  Malby,  Beckwith,  Frodsham,  Fitz-
maurice,  Granger,  Crisp,  Oram,  Burton,  and  Howard.

Minutes  of  the  Transactions  at  the  Revival  and  Opening  of  the
said  Grand  Lodge:

Brother  John  Tasker  was,  by  the  Grand  Master  and  the  rest
of  the  Brethren,  unanimously  appointed  Grand  Secretary  and  Treas-
urer, he  having  just  petitioned  to  become  a Member  and  being

approved  and  accepted  nem.  con.

Brother  Henry  Howard  also  petitioned  to  be  admitted  a Mem-
ber, who  was  accordingly  ballotted  for  and  approved  nem.  con.

Mr.  Charles  Chaloner,  Mr.  Seth  Agar,  George  Palmes,  Esq.,

Mr.  Ambrose  Beckwith,  and  Mr.  William  Siddall  petitioned  to  be
made  Brethren  the  first  opportunity,  who,  being  severally  ballotted
for,  were  all  approved  of  nem.  con.

This  Lodge  was  closed  till  Monday,  the  23  d day  of  this  instant
Month,  unless  in  case  of  Emergency.

The  Grand  Lodge,  thus  revived,  had  at  first  and  for  some  years
but  one  constituent  lodge  under  its  obedience,  or,  to  speak  more

correctly,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  all  England  and  the  Lodge  at  York
were  really  one  and  the  same  body.  While  it  claimed  the  title  and
the  prerogatives  of  a Grand  Lodge,  it  also  performed  the  functions
of  a private  lodge  in  making  Masons.  But  it  afterward  increased
its  constituency,  and  in  the  year  1769  granted  Warrants  for  opening

lodges  at  Ripon,  at  Knaresborough,  and  at  Iniskilling.

1072

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

In  1767  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  at  London,  had  ad-

dressed a report  of  the  business  done  at  its  quarterly  communica-
tion to  a lodge  held  at  the  Punch  Bowl,  in  the  city  of  York,  and

to  which  lodge  it  had  granted  a Warrant,  as  No.  259,  on  the  12th

of January,  1761.

But  this  lodge  having  ceased  to  exist,  the  document  appears  to
have  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  Grand  Master  of  the  York  Grand
Lodge.  It  was  laid  before  the  Grand  Lodge  at  a meeting  held  on

the  14th  December,  1767,  when  it  was  resolved  that  a letter  should
be  sent  by  the  Grand  Secretary  to  the  Grand  Lodge  at  London.

In  this  letter  the  pretensions  of  the  York  Grand  Lodge  are  set
forth  in  very  emphatic  terms.  It  is  stated  that  "the  Most  Ancient
Grand  Lodge  of  all  England,  held  from  time  immemorial  in  this

city  (York),  is  the  only  Lodge  held  therein."

It  is  also  stated  that  "this  Lodge  acknowledges  no  Superior,
that  it  exists  in  its  own  Right,  that  it  grants  Constitutions  and  Cer-

tificates in  the  same  manner  as  is  done  by  the  Grand  Lodge  in  Lon-
don, and  as  it  has  from  Time  immemorial  had  a Right  and  used  to
do,  and  that  it  distributes  its  own  Charity  according  to  the  true

principles  of  Masons."

Hence  it  does  not  doubt  that  the  Grand  Lodge  at  London

will  pay  due  respect  to  it  and  to  the  Brethren  made  by  it,  professing
that  it  had  ever  had  a very  great  esteem  for  that  body  and  the

brethren  claiming  privileges  under  its  authority.

Findel  says  that  "a  correspondence  with  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England  in  London,  in  the  year  1767,  proves  that  the  York  Lodge

was  then  on  the  best  of  terms  with  the  former."1

I confess  that  I fail  to  find  the  proof  of  this  feeling  simply
because  there  is  no  proof  of  the  correspondence  of  which  Findel
speaks.  A correspondence  is  the  mutual  interchange  of  letters.
The  Grand  Lodge  in  London  had  sent  an  official  communication

to  a lodge  in  the  city  of  York,  ignoring,  in  so  doing,  the  Grand

Lodge  of  York.  This  was  itself  an  act  of  discourtesy.  The  lodge
having  been  discontinued,  this  communication  comes  into  the  pos-
session of  the  Grand  Lodge  at  York,  for  which  it  had  not  been
originally  intended.  It  sends  to  the  Grand  Lodge  at  London  a
letter  in  which  it  asserts  its  equality  with  that  Grand  Lodge  and  the

1 "History  of  Freemasonry,"  p.  166.

BENJAMIN  FRANKLIN

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  ALL  ENGLAND

1073

immemorial  right  that  it  had  to  grant  Warrants,  which  right  it
trusts  that  the  Grand  Lodge  in  London  will  respect.

It  appears  to  me  that  this  language,  if  it  means  anything,  is  a
mild  protest  against  the  further  interference  of  the  London  Grand
Lodge,  with  the  territorial  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand  Lodge  in
York.

It  is  true  that  in  the  close  of  the  letter  the  York  Grand  Lodge
expresses  its  esteem  for  the  Body  at  London  and  its  willingness  to
concur  with  it  in  anything  that  will  affect  the  general  good  of
Masonry.

The  letter  was  dignified  and  courteous.  It  asserted  rights  and
prerogatives,  which  it  need  not  have  done  if  they  had  not  been  in-
vaded, and  it  made  the  offer  of  a compact  of  friendship.

To  this  letter  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England  deigned  to  make  a reply.  It  was  treated  with  frigid
silence,  and  hence  there  was  no  correspondence  between  the  two
bodies.

Bro.  Hughan,  however,  concurs  with  Bro.  Findel,  so  far  as  to
say  that  this  letter  is  of  much  consequence  in  proving  that  the  two
Grand  Lodges  were  on  excellent  terms.1

I am  very  reluctant  to  differ  with  two  such  authorities  on  Ma-

sonic history,  but  I can  not  consider  that  the  conclusion  to  which
Bro.  Hughan  has  arrived  is  a legitimate  one.  The  letter  certainly
shows  a desire  on  the  part  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  York  to  cultivate
friendly  relations  with  that  in  London.  But  there  is  no  evidence
that  the  amicable  feeling  was  reciprocated.

On  the  contrary,  all  the  records  go  to  show  that  the  Grand
Lodge  at  London  was  aggressive  in  repeated  acts  which  demon-
strated that  it  did  not  think  it  necessary  to  respect  the  territorial

rights  of  the  Masonic  authority  at  Y ork.

In  1738  Dr.  Anderson  speaks  of  it  not  as  a Grand  Lodge,  but
as  "the  Old  Lodge  at  York"  which  he  says  "affected  indepen-
dence." It  was  evidently,  in  his  opinion,  merely  a lodge  that
was  unwilling  to  place  itself  under  obedience  to  his  own  Grand
Lodge.

That  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  refused  to  recognize  the  au-
thority of  the  lodge  at  York  in  its  sovereign  capacity  as  a Grand

1 "History  of  Freemasonry  in  York,"  p.  70.

1074

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Lodge  having  territorial  jurisdiction  over  the  north  of  England  or
even  over  the  two  Ridings  of  Yorkshire  is  shown  by  the  records.

In  1729,  four  years  only  after  the  lodge  at  York  had  assumed  the
title  of  a Grand  Lodge,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  constituted  a
lodge  at  Scarborough;  in  1738  another  at  Halifax;  in  1761,  a third
and  fourth  at  the  city  of  York,  and  at  Darlington  the  one  two
months  before  and  the  other  three  months  after  the  York  Grand

Lodge  had  been  resuscitated;  in  1762,  a fifth  at  Orley;  in  1763,  a
sixth  at  Richmond;  and  in  1766,  a seventh  at  Wakefield,  all  situ-

ated within  the  county  of  York,  and  one  in  the  very  city  where  the
Grand  Lodge  held  its  sessions.

It  is  not  surprising  that  the  York  Grand  Lodge  in  time  resorted

to  reprisals,  and  as  will  presently  be  seen,  most  decidedly  invaded
the  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand  Lodge  at  London.

Dr.  Bell,  in  his  History > of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  York}  says  that
"the  two  Grand  Lodges  continued  to  go  on  amicably  until  the  year
1734,  when  in  consequence  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  having
granted  Warrants,  out  of  its  prescribed  jurisdiction,  shyness  between
the  lodges  ensued."

Both  Bell  and  Findel,  who  make  the  same  statement  as  to  a
lodge  warranted  in  1734,  are  wrong  as  to  the  date,  for  no  lodge  was
constituted  in  York  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  in  that  year.

But  as  it  had  constituted  one  in  1729,  I am  ready  to  give  credit  to
the  account  of  the  "shyness."  The  mistake  of  a date  will  not

affect  the  existence  of  the  feeling.

Preston  commits  the  same  error  as  Bell  and  Findel  concerning
the  Constitution  of  two  lodges  in  York  in  1734.2  But  he  adds

what  is  of  importance,  considering  his  intimacy  with  the  subject,
that  the  Grand  Lodge  in  York  highly  resented  the  encroachments

1 "History  of  the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  of  North  and  East  Yorkshire,  Including
Notices  of  the  Ancient  Grand  Lodge  of  York,"  cited  by  Bro.  Hughan  in  his  "History  of
Freemasonry  in  York,"  p.  45.

2 It  is  from  Preston  that  Bell  and  Findel  have  derived  their  authority  for  the  state-

ment of  lodges  having  been  constituted  in  1734.  Bro.  Hughan  investigated  the  subject
with  his  wonted  perseverance  and  says  that  "there  is  no  register  of  any  lodge  being
warranted  or  Constituted  in  Yorkshire  or  neighborhood  in  A.D.  1734.  We  have  searched
every  List  of  Lodges  of  any  consequence  from  A.D.  1738  to  A.D.  1784,  including  the

various  editions  of  the  Constitutions,  Freemason's  Calendars,  Companions  and  Pocket
Books,  etc.,  but  can  not  find  any  "Deputation  granted  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  all  England,  during  1734  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England."  "History
of  Freemasonry  in  York,"  p.  47.

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  ALL  ENGLAND

1075

of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  on  its  jurisdiction  and  "ever  after

seems  to  have  viewed  the  proceedings  of  the  Brethren  in  the  South
with  a jealous  eye;  as  all  friendly  intercourse  ceased,  and  the  York
Masons  from  that  moment  considered  their  interests  distinct  from

the  Masons  under  the  Grand  Lodge  in  London."1

Soon  after  the  revival  of  the  Grand  Lodge  it  was  visited  by  Pres-
ton and  Calcott,  two  distinguished  Masonic  writers,  and  Hughan
supposed  that  about  this  time  the  Royal  Arch  degree  was  intro-

duced into  the  York  system  by  the  latter.  This  subject  will,  how-
ever, be  more  appropriately  considered  in  a distinct  chapter  devoted
to  the  history  of  that  degree.

From  the  time  of  its  re-opening  in  1761  until  near  the  close  of
the  18th  century  the  Grand  Lodge  appears  to  have  flourished  with

considerable  activity.2

The  festival  of  St.  John  the  Evangelist  was  celebrated  in  1770

by  a procession  to  church,  and  a sermon  on  the  appropriate  text

"God  is  love."  Representatives  from  the  three  lodges  at  Ripon,
Knaresborough,  and  Iniskilling  were  present.  Sir  Thomas  Gas-
coigne was  elected  Grand  Master.3

In  the  same  year  a Warrant  was  granted  for  the  Constitution  of
a lodge  at  Macclesfield  in  Cheshire,  so  that  there  were  now  at  least

four  subordinates  acknowledging  obedience  to  the  York  Grand
Lodge.

A controversy  having  sprung  up  between  the  Lodge  of  Antiquity
in  London  and  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  the  former  body  with-
drew from  its  allegiance  to  the  latter,  and  in  1778  received  a War-
rant from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  York,  authorizing  it  to  assemble  as  a

Grand  Lodge  for  all  that  part  of  England  situated  to  the  south  of
the  river  Trent.

This  episode  in  the  history  of  the  Freemasonry  of  England,

1 Preston,  Jones  edition,  p.  214.

2 Findel  says  that  from  1765  the  name  of  "Bro.  Drake  is  seldom  mentioned."  If  we
consider  that  at  that  date  Drake  had  reached  the  seventieth  year  of  his  age,  and  that  five
years  afterward,  in  1770,  he  died,  we  will  find  ample  cause  in  the  infirmities  of  age  for
his  withdrawal  from  participation  in  the  active  duties  of  Masonic  labor.

3 This  baronet  was  a lineal  descendant  of  Nicholas  Gascoigne,  the  brother  of  that

celebrated  Chief  Justice  who  in  the  reign  of  Henry  IV.  committed  the  heir  apparent  to
the  throne,  the  "Merry  Prince  Hal,"  to  prison  for  contempt  of  court.  He  was  a native
and  resident  of  Yorkshire,  having  seats  at  Barstow,  Lasingcroft,  and  Parlington,  all  in  the
county.  See  Kimber  and  Johnson's  "Baronetage  of  England,"  London,  1771,  vol.  iii.,
p.  352.

1076

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

which  involved  very  important  results,  demands  and  must  receive  a
more  detailed  consideration  in  a distinct  chapter.

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  pursue  the  minute  history  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  York  from  that  period  to  the  date  of  its  final  col-
lapse.

The  last  reference  in  the  minutes  of  the  lodge  at  York  to  the
Grand  Lodge  of  all  England  has  the  date  of  August  23,  1792.  It
is  a rough  minute  on  a sheet  of  paper,  which  records  the  election  of
Bro.  Wolley  as  Grand  Master,  George  Kitson  as  Grand  Treasurer,
and  Richardson  and  Williams  as  Grand  Wardens.1

We  have  no  evidence  from  any  records  that  the  Grand  Lodge
ever  met  again.  It  seems  to  have  silently  collapsed;  the  lodge  at
York  continued  its  existence  as  a private  lodge,  and  finally  came
under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.

In  fact,  as  the  Rev.  Bro.  Woodford  has  stated,  the  York  Grand
Lodge  was  never  formally  dissolved,  but  simply  was  absorbed,  so

to  say,  by  the  predominance  of  its  more  prosperous  southern  rival
of  1717.2

In  bringing  this  history  of  the  rise  and  progress  of  Speculative
Freemasonry  in  the  city  of  York  to  a close,  I am  almost  irresistibly
impressed  with  the  opinion  that  the  "Old  Lodge  at  York"  was
never,  in  the  legal  sense  of  the  word,  a Grand  Lodge.  It  was  not
formed,  like  the  Grand  Lodge  at  London,  by  the  union  and  co-op-
eration of  several  private  lodges.  It  was  never  recognized  as  such

by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  but  was  always  known  as  the
"Old  Lodge  at  York."

Anderson  so  called  it  in  1738,  and  his  successor,  Northouck,
writing  in  1784,  says  of  it  that  "the  ancient  York  Masons  were
confined  to  one  lodge,  which  is  still  extant,  but  consists  of  very  few
members,  and  will  probably  be  soon  altogether  annihilated."3

It  was  simply,  like  the  lodges  of  Kilwinning  in  Scotland  and  of

Marseilles  in  France,  a "Mother  Lodge,"  a term  which,  in  Masonic
language,  has  been  used  to  denote  a private  lodge  which,  of  its  own
motion,  has  assumed  the  prerogatives  and  functions  of  a Grand
Lodge  by  granting  Warrants.  This  title  was  applied  to  it  by  Drake,

1 Hughan,  "History  of  Freemasonry  in  York,"  p.  79.

2 The  connection  of  York  with  the  "History  of  Freemasonry  in  England,"  by  A.  F.  A.
Woodward,  A.M.,  in  Hughan's  "Unpublished  Records  of  the  Craft,"  p.  172.

3 Northouck,  "Book  of  Constitutions,"  p.  240.

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  ALL  ENGLAND

1077

its  Junior  Grand  Warden,  when  he  delivered  his  "Speech"  in  1726,

the  year  after  it  had  assumed  the  attitude  of  a Grand  Lodge.

But  it  continued  at  all  times  to  exercise  the  function  of  "mak-
ing Masons,"  a function  which  has  been  invariably  delegated  by
Grand  Lodges  to  their  subordinates.

As  late  as  the  year  1761,  when,  after  a long  slumber,  the  Grand
Lodge  was  revived,  one  of  its  first  acts  was  to  ballot  for  five  can-
didates who  were,  on  the  first  opportunity,  initiated  by  it.

In  the  rules  adopted  for  its  government  in  1725  the  title  of
"Lodge"  is  used  by  it  five  times  as  the  designation  of  the  So-
ciety, and  that  of  "Grand  Lodge"  only  once  in  reference  to  the
funds.

Their  rules  are  signed  by  Ed.  Bell,  who  calls  himself  not  "Grand
Master,"  but  simply  "Master."  In  the  vacillating  position  in  which
the  Freemasons  of  York  had  placed  themselves,  between  a desire
to  imitate  their  London  brethren  by  establishing  a Grand  Lodge
and  a reluctance  to  abandon  the  old  organization  of  a private  lodge,
they  entirely  lost  sight  of  the  true  character  of  a Grand  Lodge,  as

determined  by  the  example  of  1717.

It  is  not,  therefore,  surprising,  as  Bro.  Hughan  remarks,  that

these  rules  should  offer  a strange  contrast  to  the  Constitutions
of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  which  had  been  published  two

years  before.

There  can,  however,  be  little  or  no  doubt,  as  the  same  astute
writer  has  observed,  that  in  consequence  of  the  publication  of  the
London  Constitutions  the  Freemasons  of  York  "began  to  stir
themselves  and  to  assume  the  prerogatives  of  a Grand  Lodge."

It  is  to  be  regretted  that  in  borrowing  from  their  Brethren

the  title  of  a Grand  Lodge,  the  York  Freemasons  did  not  also

follow  their  example  by  adopting  the  same  regularity  of  organi-
zation.

In  view  of  all  these  facts  it  is  impossible  to  recognize  the  body
at  York  in  any  other  light  than  that  of  a Mother  Lodge,  a body
assuming,  without  the  essential  preliminaries,  the  prerogatives  of  a
Grand  Lodge,  while  to  the  body  established  at  London  in  1717

must  be  conceded  the  true  rank  and  title  of  the  Mother  Grand
Lodge  of  the  World,  from  which,  directly  or  indirectly,  have  pro-

ceeded as  its  legitimate  offspring  all  the  Grand  Lodges  which  have
been  organized  in  the  18th  and  19th  centuries.

1078

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Now,  what  must  we  infer  from  these  historical  facts?  This  and
no  more  nor  less:  that  there  never  was,  as  a legitimate  organiza-
tion, a Grand  Lodge  of  York  or  a Grand  Lodge  of  all  England,
but  only  a Mother  Lodge  in  the  city  of  York,  which  assumed  the
title  and  prerogatives  of  a Grand  Lodge,  but  exercised  the  func-
tions both  of  a Grand  and  a private  lodge — an  anomaly  unknown
to  and  unrecognized  by  Masonic  law.

CHAPTER  XL

ORGANIZATION  OF  THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  SCOTLAND

T is  much  easier  to  write  the  history  of  the  organ-
ization of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  than

that  of  England.  The  materials  in  the  former
case  are  far  more  abundant  and  more  authentic,
and  the  growth  of  the  organization  was  more
gradual,  and  each  step  more  carefully  recorded.
In  England  almost  the  only  authority  or
guide  that  we  have  for  the  occurrences  which  led  to  the  establish-
ment of  the  Grand  Lodge,  in  the  year  1717,  is  the  meager  history
supplied  by  Anderson  in  the  second  edition  of  the  Book  of
Constitutions.

The  four  old  Lodges  suddenly  sprung,  as  we  have  already  seen,

into  being,  with  no  notification  of  their  previous  existence,  and  no
account  of  the  mental  process  by  which  their  members  were  led  to
so  completely  change  their  character  and  constitution  from  the  Op-
erative to  a purely  Speculative  institution.

In  Scotland,  on  the  contrary,  the  processes  which  led  to  the
change  are  well  marked — the  previous  condition  of  the  lodges  is

recorded,  and  we  are  enabled  to  trace  the  distinct  steps  which  finally

led  to  the  establishment  of  the  Grand  Lodge  in  the  year  1736.

It  would  appear  from  historical  evidence  that  in  the  17th  century
there  were  three  methods  by  which  a new  lodge  could  be  formed  in
Scotland.  The  first  of  these  was  by  the  authority  of  the  King,  the
second  by  that  of  the  General  Warden,  perhaps  the  most  usual  way,
and  the  third  was  by  members  separating  from  an  old  and  already
established  lodge,  and  with  its  concurrence  forming  a new  one,  the
old  lodge  becoming,  in  technical  terms,  the  mother,  and  the  new  one
the  descendant.

All  of  these  methods  are  referred  to  in  a minute  of  the  Lodge  of
Edinburgh  in  the  year  1688.  A certain  number  of  the  members  of
that  lodge  having  left  it,  without  its  sanction  formed  a new  lodge

1079

1080

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

in  the  Cannongate  and  North  Leith.  Whereupon  the  Lodge  of

Edinburgh  declared  the  Cannongate  and  Leith  Lodge  to  have  acted
"contrary  to  all  custom,  law,  and  reason,"  inasmuch  as  it  had  been

formed  in  contempt  of  the  Edinburgh  Lodge,  and  "without  any-
Royal  or  General  Warden's  authority."  This  is  said  to  be  "Mason
Law,"  and  for  its  violation  the  lodge  was  pronounced  illegal,  all
communication  with  its  members,  or  with  those  who  were  entered
or  passed  in  it,  was  prohibited,  and  it  was  forbidden  to  employ  them

as  journeymen  under  a heavy  penalty.  In  a word,  the  lodge  was

placed  in  the  position  of  what,  in  modem  parlance,  we  should  call
"a  clandestine  lodge."

But  the  old  law  for  the  organization  of  new  lodges  seems  by  this
time  to  have  become  obsolete,  and  the  denunciation  of  the  Edin-
burgh Lodge  amounted  to  a mere  brutum  fulmen.  The  Cannon-
gate and  Leith  Lodge  continued  to  exist  and  to  nourish,  and  almost
a half  century  afterward  was  recognized,  notwithstanding  its  illegal
birth,  as  a regular  body,  and  admitted  into  the  constituency  of  the
Grand  Lodge.

We  may  therefore  presume  that  at  or  about  the  close  of  the  17th
century  the  Scottish  lodges  began  to  assume  the  privileges  which
Preston  says  at  that  time  belonged  to  the  English  Masons,  when
any  number  could  assemble  and,  with  the  consent  of  the  civil
authority,  organize  themselves  into  a lodge.

At  the  beginning  of  the  18th  century  there  were  many  lodges
of  Operative  Masons  in  Scotland,  which  had  been  formed  in  one  of

the  three  ways  already  indicated.  The  two  most  important  of  these
were  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh  and  that  of  Kilwinning.  The  latter

especially  had  chartered  several  lodges,  and  hence  was  by  its  adher-
ents called  the  Mother  Lodge  of  Scotland,  a title  which  was,  how-
ever, disputed  by  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh  and  never  was  legally
recognized.

A preliminary  step  to  the  establishment  of  a Speculative  Grand

Lodge  must  have  necessarily  been  the  admission  into  the  ranks  of
the  Operative  Craft  of  non-professional  members.  We  have  seen

the  effect  of  this  in  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng-
land. In  Scotland  the  evidences  of  the  result  of  the  admission  of

these  non-professionals  is  well  shown  in  the  minutes  of  the  Lodge

of  Edinburgh.  The  contentions  between  the  Operative  and  the

non-operative  elements  for  supremacy,  and  the  final  victory  of  the

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  SCOTLAND

1081

latter,  are  detailed  at  length.  If  such  a spirit  of  contention  existed
in  England,  as  an  episode  in  the  history  of  its  Grand  Lodge,  no
record  of  it  has  been  preserved.

The  earliest  instance  of  the  reception  of  a non-professional  mem-
ber is  that  of  Lord  Alexander,  who  was  admitted  as  a Fellow  Craft
in  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh  on  July  3,  1634.  On  the  same  day  Sir
Alexander  Strachan  was  also  admitted.

But  the  mere  fact  that  these  are  the  first  recorded  admissions  of
non-operatives  among  the  Craft  does  not  necessarily  lead  us  to  infer
that  before  that  date  non-operatives  were  not  received  into  lodge
membership.

On  the  contrary,  there  is  a minute  of  the  date  of  the  year  1600
which  records  the  fact  that  the  Laird  of  Auchinleck  was  present  at
a meeting  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,  and  as  one  of  the  members
took  part  in  its  deliberations.  William  Schaw,  who  was  recognized
as  the  General  Warden  and  Chief  Mason  of  Scotland  in  1590,  was,
most  probably,  not  an  Operative  Mason.  Indeed,  all  the  inferential
evidence  lies  the  other  way.  Yet  his  official  position  required  that
he  should  be  present  at  the  meetings  of  the  lodges,  which  would
lead  to  the  necessity  of  his  being  received  into  the  Craft.  The
same  thing  is  pertinent  to  his  predecessors,  so  that  it  is  very  evi-
dent that  the  custom  of  admitting  non-operatives  among  the  Craft
must  have  been  practiced  at  a very  early  period,  perhaps  from

the  very  introduction  of  Masonry  into  Scotland,  or  the  13th  cen-

tury.

It  will  be  seen  hereafter  how  this  non-operative  element,  as  it

grew  in  numbers  and  in  strength,  led,  finally,  to  the  establishment
of  a non-operative  or  Speculative  Grand  Lodge.

But  attention  must  now  be  directed  to  another  episode  in  the
history  of  Scottish  Masonry,  namely,  the  contests  between  the

Masters  and  the  Journeymen,  which  also  had  its  influence  in  the
final  triumph  of  Speculative  over  Operative  Masonry.

Taking  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh  as  a fair  example  of  the  condi-
tion and  character  of  the  other  lodges  of  the  kingdom,  we  may  say
that  during  all  of  the  17th  century  there  was  observed  a distinction
between  the  Master  Masons  or  employers  and  the  Fellow  Crafts  or
Journeymen  who  were  employed.

The  former  claimed  a predominant  position,  which  the  latter
from  necessity  but  with  great  reluctance  conceded.  It  was  only  on

1082

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

rare  occasions  that  the  Masters  admitted  the  Fellows  to  a participa-
tion in  the  counsels  of  the  lodge.

This  assumption  of  a superiority  of  position  and  power  by  the

Masters  was  founded,  it  must  be  admitted,  upon  the  letter  and

spirit  of  the  Schaw  Statutes  of  1598  and  1599.

In  these  Statutes  the  utmost  care  appears  to  have  been  taken  to

deprive  the  Fellows  of  all  power  in  the  Craft  and  to  bestow  it

entirely  on  the  Wardens,  Deacons,  and  Masters.

Thus  the  Warden  was  to  be  elected  annually  by  the  Masters  of

the  lodge,  all  matters  of  importance  were  to  be  considered  by  the

Wardens  and  Deacons  of  different  lodges  to  be  convened  in  an
assembly  called  by  the  Warden  and  Deacon  of  Kilwinning;  all  trials
of  members,  whether  Masters  or  Fellows,  were  to  be  determined  by

the  Warden  and  six  Masters;  all  difficulties  were  to  be  settled  in

the  same  way.  In  a word,  these  Statutes  seem  to  have  passed  over
the  Fellows  in  the  distribution  of  power  and  concentrated  it  wholly

upon  the  Masters.

But  this  evidently  very  unjust  and  unequal  distribution  of  privi-
leges appears  toward  the  middle  of  the  17th  century,  if  not  before,

to  have  excited  a rebellious  spirit  in  the  Fellows.

This  is  very  evident  from  the  fact  that  from  the  year  1681
enactments  began  to  be  passed  by  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh  against
the  encroachments  of  the  Fellows  or  Journeymen,  who  must  have
at  or  before  that  time  been  advancing  their  claim  to  the  possession

of  privileges  which  were  denied  to  them.  "Though  there  can  be
no  doubt,"  says  Lyon,  "that  all  who  belonged  to  the  lodge  were,
when  necessity  required,  participants  in  its  benefits,  the  journeymen

appear  to  have  had  the  feeling  that  it  was  not  right  that  they  should
be  entirely  dependent,  even  for  fair  treatment,  on  the  good-will  of
the  Masters."

It  was  in  fact  but  a faint  picture  of  that  contest  for  supremacy

between  capital  and  labor,  which  we  have  since  so  often  seen  painted
in  much  stronger  colors.  The  struggle  in  the  Masonry  of  Scotland

began  to  culminate  in  the  year  1708,  when  a petition  was  laid  before

the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh  from  the  Fellows,  in  which  they  com-
plained that  they  were  not  permitted  to  inspect  the  Warden's
accounts.

The  lodge  granted  the  petition,  and  agreed  that  thereafter

"six  of  the  soberest  and  discretest  Fellow-Craftsmen"  should  be

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  SCOTLAND

1083

appointed  by  the  Deacon  to  oversee  the  Warden's  accounts.  The
lodge  also  granted  further  concessions  and  permitted  the  Fellow-
Crafts  to  have  a part  in  the  distribution  of  the  charity  fund  to
widows.

But  these  concessions  do  not  appear  to  have  satisfied  the  Fel-
lows, who,  as  Lyon  supposes,  must  have  been  guilty  of  decided
demonstrations,  which  led  the  lodge  in  1712  to  revoke  the  privilege
of  inspecting  the  accounts  that  had  been  conferred  by  the  statute
of  1708.

This  seems  to  have  brought  matters  to  a climax.  At  the  same
meeting  the  Fellow-Crafts  who  were  present,  except  two,  left  the
room  and  immediately  proceeded  to  organize  a new  lodge  known
afterward  as  the  Journeymen's  Lodge.  Every  attempt  on  the  part
of  the  Masters'  Lodge  to  check  this  spirit  of  independence  and  to
dissolve  the  schismatic  lodge,  though  renewed  from  time  to  time  for
some  years,  proved  abortive.  The  Journeymen's  Lodge  continued
to  exercise  all  the  rights  of  a lodge  of  Operative  Masons,  and  to
enter  Apprentices  and  admit  Fellows  just  as  was  done  by  the  Mas-
ters' Lodge  from  which  it  had  so  irregularly  emanated.

Finally,  in  1714,  the  most  important  and  significant  privilege  of
giving  the  "Mason  Word"  was  adjudged  to  the  Lodge  of  Journey-
men by  a decree  of  Arbitration.

The  lodge,  now  perfected  in  its  form  and  privileges,  flourished,
notwithstanding  the  occasional  renewal  of  contests,  until  the  organi-
zation of  the  Grand  Lodge,  when  it  became  one  of  its  constituents.

There  can,  I think,  be  no  doubt  that  this  independent  action
of  the  Journeymen  Masons  of  Edinburgh  led  to  an  increase  of
lodges,  when  the  prestige  and  power  of  the  incorporated  Masters
had  been  once  shaken.  Twenty-four  years  after  the  establishment
of  the  Journeymen's  Lodge  we  find  no  less  than  thirty-two  lodges
uniting  to  organize  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland.

Another  event  of  great  importance  in  reference  to  the  history  of
the  Grand  Lodge  is  now  to  be  noticed.  I allude  to  the  process

through  which  the  Masons  of  Scotland  attained  to  the  adoption  of

a Grand  Master  as  the  title  of  the  head  of  their  Order.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  was
organized  upon  the  model  of  that  of  England,  which  had  sprung

into  existence  nineteen  years  previously.  As  the  English  Grand

Lodge  had  bestowed  upon  its  presiding  officer  the  title  of  Grand

1084

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Master,  it  was  very  natural  that  the  Scotch  body,  which  had  derived
from  it  its  ritual  and  most  of  its  forms,  should  also  derive  from  it

the  same  title  for  its  chief.

But  while  we  have  no  authentic  records  to  show  that  previous  to
1717  the  English  Masons  had  any  General  Superintendent,  under
any  title  whatever,  it  is  known  that  the  Scottish  Masons  had  from
an  early  period  an  officer  who,  without  the  name,  exercised  much
of  the  powers  and  prerogatives  of  a Grand  Master.

On  December  28,  1598,  William  Schaw  enacted,  or  to  use  the

expression  in  the  original  document,  "sett  down"  certain  "statutes
and  ordinances  to  be  observed  by  all  Master  Masons"  in  the  realm  of
Scotland.  In  the  heading  of  these  Statutes  he  calls  himself  "Master
of  Work  to  his  Majesty  and  General  Warden  of  the  said  Craft."
In  a minute  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,  of  the  date  of  1600,  he  is
designated  as  "Principal  Warden  and  Chief  Master  of  Masons."

Now  in  the  Statutes  and  Ordinances  just  referred  to,  as  well  as

in  a subsequent  code  of  laws,  ordained  in  the  following  year,  there
is  ample  evidence  that  this  General  Warden  exercised  prerogatives
very  similar  to  those  of  a Grand  Master  and  indeed  in  excess  of
those  exercised  by  modem  Grand  Masters,  though  Lyon  is  per-

fectly correct  in  saying  that  the  name  and  title  were  unknown  in
Scotland  until  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge  in  1736. 1

The  very  fact  that  the  Statutes  were  ordained  by  him  and  that
the  Craft  willingly  submitted  to  be  governed  by  codes  of  laws

emanating  from  his  will — that  he  required  the  election  of  Wardens

by  the  lodges  to  be  submitted  to  and  to  be  confirmed  by  him,  "that
he  assigned  their  relative  rank  to  the  lodges  of  Edinburgh,  of  Kil-

winning, and  of  Stirling,"  and  that  he  delegated  or  "gave  his  power
and  commission"  to  the  lodges  to  make  other  laws  which  should
be  in  conformity  with  his  Statutes — proves,  I think,  very  conclu-
sively that  if  he  did  not  assume  the  title  of  Grand  Master  of
Masons  of  Scotland,  he,  at  all  events,  exercised  many  of  the  pre-
rogatives of  such  an  office.

It  is  true  that  it  is  said  in  the  preamble  to  the  Statutes  of  1598
that  they  are  "sett  down"  (a  term  equivalent  to  "prescribed")  by
the  General  Warden  "with  the  consent  of  the  Masters;"  but  the

'Except  in  1731,  when  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh  elected  its  presiding  officer  under  the
title  of  Grand  Master.  This  was,  however,  entirely  local,  and  was  almost  immediately

abandoned.

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  SCOTLAND

1085

acceptance  of  such  consent  was  most  likely  a mere  concession  of
courtesy,  for  the  Statutes  of  1599  are  expressly  declared  in  many
instances  to  be  "ordained  by  the  General  Warden,"  and  in  other  in-
stances it  is  said  that  the  law  or  regulation  is  enacted  because  "it  is
thought  needful  and  expedient  by  the  General  Warden."  All  of
which  shows  that  the  Statutes  were  the  result  of  the  will  of  the  Gen-
eral Warden  and  not  of  the  Craft.  That  the  Masters  accepted  them
and  consented  to  them  afterward  was  very  natural  as  a matter  of
necessity.  There  might  have  been  a different  record  had  they  been
uncompliant  and  refused  assent  to  regulations  imposed  upon  them
by  their  superior.

Therefore,  though  the  theory  of  the  existence  of  Grand  Masters

in  Scotland  under  that  distinctive  title  at  a period  anterior  to  the
organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge  must  be  rejected  as  wholly  un-

tenable, it  can  hardly  be  denied  that  William  Schaw,  under  the
name  of  General  Warden,  did,  at  the  close  of  the  16th  century,
exercise  many  of  the  prerogatives  of  the  office  of  Grand  Master.

Schaw  died  in  1602,  and  with  him  most  probably  died  also  the
peculiar  prerogatives  of  a General  Warden,  but  the  Scottish  Craft
appear  not  to  have  been  in  consequence  without  a head.

This  leads  us  to  the  consideration  of  the  St.  Clair  Charters,  doc-
uments of  undoubted  authenticity  but  which  have  been  used  by

Brewster  in  Laurie's  History,  under  a false  interpretation  of  the

existence  of  the  office  of  Grand  Master  of  Masons  in  Scotland,  from
the  time  of  James  1L,  an  hypothesis  which  has,  however,  been

proved  to  be  fallacious  and  untenable.

There  are  two  ancient  manuscripts  in  the  repository  of  the

Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland,  which  are  known  by  the  title  of  the  St.
Clair  Charters.  The  date  of  the  first  of  these  is  supposed  to  be
about  the  year  1601,  and  is  signed  by  William  Schaw  as  Master  of
Work,  and  by  the  office-bearers  of  five  different  lodges.  The  date
of  the  other  is  placed  by  Lyon,  with  good  reason,  at  1628.  It  is

signed  by  the  office-bearers  of  five  lodges  also.

In  the  Advocates'  Library  of  Edinburgh  there  is  a small  manu-

script volume  known  as  the  "Hays  MSS."  which  contains  copies  of
these  charters,  not  materially  or  substantially  varying  from  the  orig-
inals in  the  repository  of  the  Grand  Lodge.

The  genuineness  of  these  original  manuscripts  is  undeniable.
Whatever  we  can  derive  from  them  in  relation  to  the  position  as-

1086

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

signed  by  the  Scottish  Craft  to  the  St.  Clairs  of  Roslin  in  the  be-

ginning of  the  1 7th  century  will  be  of  historical  value.

By  them  alone  we  may  decide  the  long-contested  question

whether  the  St.  Clairs  of  Roslin  were  or  were  not  Hereditary  Grand
Masters  of  the  Masons  of  Scotland.  The  Editor  of  Laurie's  His-
tory> of  Freemasonry  asserts  that  these  charters  supply  the  proof
that  the  grant  to  William  Sinclair  as  Hereditary  Grand  Master  was
made  by  James  II.  Mr.  Lyon  contends  that  the  charters  furnish  a
conclusive  refutation  of  any  such  assertion.  The  first  of  these  opin-
ions has  for  a long  time  been  the  most  popular.  The  last  has,  how-
ever, under  more  recent  researches  been  now  generally  adopted  by
Masonic  scholars.  An  examination  of  the  precise  words  of  the  two
charters  will  easily  settle  the  question.

The  first  charter,  the  date  of  which  is  1601,  states  (transmuting
the  Scottish  dialect  into  English  phrase)  that  "from  age  to  age  it

has  been  observed  among  us  that  the  Lords  of  Roslin  have  ever
been  patrons  and  protectors  of  us  and  our  privileges,  and  also  that
our  predecessors  have  obeyed  and  acknowledged  them  as  patrons
and  protectors,  which  within  these  few  years  has  through  negligence

and  slothfulness  passed  out  of  use."  It  proceeds  to  state  that  in  con-
sequence the  Lords  of  Roslin  have  been  deprived  of  their  just  rights
and  the  Craft  subjected  to  much  injury  by  being  "destitute  of  a

patron,  protector,  and  overseer."  Among  the  evils  complained  of
is  that  various  controversies  had  arisen  among  the  Craftsmen  for  the

settlement  of  which  by  the  ordinary  judges  they  were  unable  to  wait
in  consequence  of  their  poverty  and  the  long  delays  of  legal  processes.

Wherefore  the  signers  of  the  charter  for  themselves  and  in  the
name  of  all  the  Brethren  and  Craftsmen  agree  and  consent  that  Will-
iam Sinclair  of  Roslin  shall  for  himself  and  his  heirs  purchase  and  ob-
tain from  the  King  liberty,  freedom,  and  jurisdiction  upon  them  and
their  successors  in  all  time  to  come  as  patrons  and  judges  of  them
and  all  the  professors  of  their  Craft  within  the  realm  (of  Scotland)
of  whom  they  have  power  and  commission.

The  powers  thus  granted  by  the  Craft  to  the  Lord  of  Roslin  were
very  ample.  He  and  his  heirs  were  to  be  acknowledged  as  patrons
and  judges,  under  the  King,  without  appeal  from  their  judgment,

with  the  power  to  appoint  one  or  more  deputies.  In  conclusion  the
jurisdiction  of  the  Lords  of  Roslin  was  to  be  as  ample  and  large  as
the  King  might  please  to  grant  to  him  and  his  heirs.

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  SCOTLAND

1087

The  second  charter  was  issued  in  1628  by  the  Masons  and  Ham-
mermen of  Scotland.  It  repeats  almost  in  the  same  words  the  story-

contained  in  the  first  that  the  Lords  of  Roslin  had  ever  been  pa-
trons and  protectors  of  the  Scottish  Craft,  and  adds  the  statement
that  there  had  been  letters  patent  to  that  effect  issued  by  the  pro-
genitors of  the  King,  which  had  been  burnt  with  other  writings  in

a fire  which  occurred  in  a year  not  stated  within  the  Castle  of
Roslin.

The  William  Sinclair  to  whom  the  previous  charter  had  been

granted  having  gone  over  to  Ireland,  the  same  evils  complained  of
in  the  beginning  of  the  century  were  renewed,  and  the  Craft  now  in

this  second  charter  grants  to  Sir  William  Sinclair  of  Roslin  the  same

powers  and  prerogatives  that  had  been  granted  to  his  father,  as  their

"only  protector,  patron,  and  overseer."

The  contents  of  these  two  charters  supply  the  following  facts,
which  must  be  accepted  as  historical  since  there  is  no  doubt  of  the

genuineness  of  the  documents.

In  the  first  place  there  was  a tradition  in  the  beginning  of  the

17th  century,  and  most  probably  at  the  close  of  the  16th,  if  not  ear-
lier, that  the  Sinclairs  of  Roslin  had  in  times  long  passed  exercised
a superintending  care  and  authority  over  the  Craft  of  Scotland.

This  superintendence  they  exercised  as  protectors,  patrons,  and
overseers,  and  it  consisted  principally  in  settling  disputes  and  decid-
ing controversies  between  the  brethren  without  appeal,  which  dis-

putes and  controversies  would  otherwise  have  to  be  submitted  to
the  decision  of  a court  of  law.

The  tradition  implied  that  this  office  of  protectorate  of  the  Craft
was  hereditary  in  the  house  of  Roslin,  but  had  not  been  exercised
continuously  and  uninterruptedly,  but  on  the  contrary  had,  in  the
beginning  of  the  17th  century,  been  long  disused.

It  is  true  that  there  is  no  reference  in  the  first  charter  to  any

crown  grant,  at  least  in  explicit  terms,  but  it  speaks  of  the  Lord  of
Roslin  as  lying  out  of  his  "just  right"  by  the  interruption  in  the

exercise  of  the  prerogative  of  patron,  and  if  he  had  or  was  supposed
to  have  such  "just  right,"  then  the  implication  is  strong  that  it  was

founded  on  a royal  grant.  The  second  charter  is  explicit  on  this
subject  and  asserts  that  the  record  of  the  grant  had  been  destroyed  by
a conflagration.  This  statement  is  very  probably  a myth,  but  it  shows
that  a tradition  to  that  effect  must  have  existed  among  the  Craft.

1088

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

We  may  imply  also  from  the  language  of  the  first  charter  that
the  Craft  were  in  some  doubt  whether  by  this  non-user  the  hered-
itary right  had  not  been  forfeited,  since  it  is  required  by  them  that
Sinclair  should  "purchase  and  obtain"  from  the  King  permission
to  exercise  the  jurisdiction  of  a patron  and  judge.  In  fact  the  sole
object  of  the  charter  was  to  authorize  William  Sinclair  to  get  the
royal  authority  to  resume  the  prerogatives  that  had  formerly  existed
in  his  family.  Whether  the  Craft  were  correct  in  this  judgment,
and  whether  by  lying  in  abeyance  the  hereditary  right  had  lapsed
and  required  a renewal  by  the  royal  authority  are  not  material  ques-
tions. It  is  sufficient  that  such  was  the  opinion  of  the  Scottish
Masons  at  the  time.

Lastly,  the  two  charters  are  of  historical  importance  in  proving
that  at  the  time  of  their  being  issued,  the  title  of  Grand  Master  was
wholly  unknown  to  the  Craft.

The  Editor  of  Laurie's  History  is,  therefore,  entirely  unwar-
ranted in  his  theory,  which,  however,  he  presents  as  an  undoubted
historical  fact  that  the  Sinclairs  of  Roslin  were  "Hereditary  Grand
Masters  of  Scotland."

Equally  unwarranted  is  he  in  making  Kilwinning,  in  Ayrshire,
the  seat  of  his  mythical  Grand  Lodge,  not,  as  has  been  urged
by  Bro.  Lyon,  because  the  Sinclairs1  had  no  territorial  connection
with  Ayrshire,  but  simply  because  there  is  not  the  least  historical
evidence  that  Kilwinning  was  the  center  of  Scottish  Masonry,
though  the  lodge  in  that  village  had  assumed  the  character  of  a
Mother  Lodge  and  issued  charters  to  subordinates.

The  true  historical  phase  which  these  charters  seem  to  present
is  this:  In  the  17th  century,  or  during  a part  of  it,  the  Operative
Masons  of  Scotland  adopted  the  family  of  Sinclair  of  Roslin  as
their  patrons  and  protectors,  and  as  the  umpires  to  whom  they
agreed  to  refer  their  disputes,  accepting  their  decisions  without  ap-
peal, as  a much  more  convenient  and  economical  method  of  settling
disputes  than  a reference  to  a court  of  law  would  be.  Out  of  this
very  simple  fact  has  grown  the  mythical  theory,  encouraged  by  fer-
tile imaginations,  that  they  were  Grand  Masters  by  royal  grant  and
hereditary  right.

The  immediate  superintendence  of  the  Scottish  Masons  seems,

1 The  modem  spelling  of  the  name  is  St.  Clair,  but  I have  for  the  present  retained  the
form  of  Sinclair  to  be  in  conformity  with  the  orthography  of  the  charter.

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  SCOTLAND

1089

however,  to  have  continued  to  be  invested  in  a General  Warden.
In  1688,  when  there  was  a secession  of  members  from  the  Lodge
of  Edinburgh,  who  established  an  independent  lodge  in  the  Canon-
gate,  one  of  the  charges  against  them  was  that  they  had  "erected  a
lodge  among  themselves  to  the  great  contempt  of  our  society,  with-
out any  Royal  or  General  Warden's  authority."

But  the  St.  Clairs  were  the  patrons  and  the  General  Wardens
were  the  Masters  of  Work,  while  no  reference  was  made  to  nor  any
word  said  of  the  title  or  the  prerogatives  of  a Grand  Master.

The  point  is,  therefore,  historically  certain  that  there  never  was

a Grand  Master  in  Scotland  until  the  establishment  of  the  Grand
Lodge,  in  1736.

As  early  as  the  year  1600  we  find  the  record  of  the  admission  of
a non-professional  into  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh.  The  custom  of

admitting  such  persons  as  honorary  members  continued  throughout
the  whole  of  the  17th  century.  Before  the  middle  of  the  century,
noblemen,  baronets,  physicians,  and  advocates  are  recorded  in  the
minutes  as  having  been  admitted  as  Fellow-Crafts.  The  evidence
that  at  that  time  the  Speculative  element  had  begun  to  invade  the
Operative  is  not  confined  to  the  minutes  of  the  Lodge  of  Edin-
burgh. There  are  records  proving  that  the  same  custom  prevailed
in  other  lodges.

Much  importance  has  rightly  been  attached  to  the  fact  that  there
is  an  authentic  record  of  the  admission  of  two  gentlemen  into  an

English  lodge  of  Operative  Masons  in  the  year  1646.  There  are

numerous  instances  of  such  admissions  before  that  time  in  Scottish

lodges.  Indeed  it  has  been  well  proved  by  records  that  it  was  a
constant  habit,  from  about  1600,  in  the  Scottish  lodges,  to  admit
non-masons  into  the  Operative  lodges.

There  ought  not  to  be  a doubt  that  the  same  practice  prevailed

in  England  at  the  same  time.  That  there  is  no  proof  of  the  fact  is
to  be  attributed  to  the  absence  of  early  English  lodge  minutes.  The

Scottish  Masons  have  been  more  careful  than  the  English  in  pre-
serving their  records.

The  minutes  of  the  Scottish  lodges,  and  the  one  authentic  record

contained  in  Ashmole's  Diary,  furnish  sufficient  evidence  that  in  the
17th  century  the  Operative  Masons  were  admitting  into  their  society
men  of  wealth  and  rank,  scholars,  and  members  of  the  learned  pro-
fessions. This  was  undoubtedly  the  first  step  in  that  train  of  events

1090

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

which  finally  led  to  the  complete  detachment  of  the  theoretic  from
the  practical  element,  and  the  organization  of  the  present  system  of
Speculative  Freemasonry.

The  change  from  an  Operative  to  a Speculative  system  was  very
sudden  in  England.  At  least,  if  the  change  was  gradual  and  fore-
seen, we  can  not  now  trace  the  progress  of  events  because  of  the
absolute  want  of  records.

In  Scotland  the  change  was  well  marked  and  its  history  is  upon
record.  It  was  much  slower  than  that  in  England.  It  was  not
until  nineteen  years  after  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  was  organ-
ized that  a similar  organization  took  place  in  Scotland.  And  where-
as the  English  lodges  all  assumed  the  Speculative  character  at  once,
after  the  Grand  Lodge  was  established,  and  abandoned  Operative
Masonry  altogether,  some  of  the  Scottish  lodges,  for  many  years
after  their  connection  with  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Speculative  Ma-
sonry, retained  an  Operative  character,  mingled  with  the  Speculative.

The  closing  years  of  the  17th  century  were  marked  in  Scotland
by  contests  between  the  Masters  and  the  Journeymen  Masons,  the
former  having  long  secured  the  dominant  power.  These  contests
led  in  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh  to  a secession  of  the  Fellow-
Crafts,  who  having  been  denied  certain  privileges,  formed  an  inde-
pendent lodge,  which  after  some  years  of  conflict  with  the  Mother
Lodge  received  by  a decree  of  arbitration  the  power  of  admitting
Apprentices  and  Fellow-Crafts  and  what  appears  to  have  been
deemed  of  vast  importance,  the  privilege  of  communicating  the
"Mason  Word."

This  seems  to  have  been  at  that  time  the  sum  of  esoteric  in-
struction received  by  candidates  on  their  admission.

Another  cause  of  contest  in  Scottish  Masonry  at  that  period
was  the  growing  custom  of  receiving  non-professional  members  into
the  lodges  of  Operative  Masons.  This  custom  had  originated  at
least  a century  before,  and  there  are  records  in  the  17th  century
from  its  very  commencement  of  the  presence  in  the  lodges  as  mem-
bers of  persons  who  were  not  Operative  Masons.  But  in  the  early
part  of  the  18th  century  the  practice  grew  to  such  an  extent  that  at
a meeting  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh  in  the  year  1727,  out  of  six-
teen members  present  only  three  were  operative  Masons.  And  in
the  same  year  a lawyer  was  elected  as  Warden  or  presiding  officer
of  the  lodge.

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  SCOTLAND

1091

In  the  year  1700  there  were  several  lodges  in  various  parts  of
Scotland.  Although  perhaps  all  of  them  contained  among  their

members  some  persons  of  rank  or  wealth  who  were  not  Masons  by
profession,  still  the  lodges  were  all  Operative  in  their  character.

Seventeen  years  afterward  the  English  Operative  Masons  had

merged  their  society  into  a Speculative  Grand  Lodge.  The  influ-
ence of  this  act  was  not  slow  to  extend  itself  to  Scotland,  where  the
non-professionals  began  slowly  but  surely  to  dominate  over  the  pro-
fessional workmen.

In  1721  Dr.  John  Theophilus  Desaguliers,  who  was  the  principal

founder  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  paid  a visit  to  Edinburgh.

He  was  received  as  a brother  by  the  lodge,  and  at  two  meetings  held

for  the  purpose,  several  gentlemen  of  high  rank  were  admitted  into

the  fraternity.

As  the  records  of  these  meetings  are  of  historic  importance,  as
showing  the  introduction  of  the  new  English  system  of  Speculative
Masonry  into  Scotland,  I shall  not  hesitate  to  give  them  in  the
very  words  of  the  minute-book,  as  copied  from  the  original  by  Bro.
Lyon.

"Likeas  (likewise)  upon  the  25th  day  of  the  sd  moneth  (August
1721)  the  Deacons,  Warden,  Masters,  and  several  other  members  of
the  Societie,  together  with  the  sd  Doctor  Desaguliers  having  mett
att  Maries  Chapell,  there  was  a supplication  presented  to  them  by
John  Campbell  Esqr.  Lord  Provost  of  Edinbr.,  George  Preston  and
Hugh  Hathom,  Bailies;  James  Nimo,  Thesuarer,  William  Living-

ston Deacon  convener  of  the  Trades  thereof;  and  Geroge  Irving
Clerk  to  the  Dean  of  Guild  Court, — and  humbly  craving  to  be  ad-
mitted members  of  the  sd  Societie;  which  being  considered  by

them,  they  granted  the  desire  thereof,  and  the  saids  honourable  per-
sons were  admitted  and  receaved  Entered  Apprentices  and  Fellow
Crafts  accordingly.

"And  siclike  upon  the  28th  day  of  the  said  moneth  there  was
another  petition  given  in  by  Sr.  Duncan  Campbell  of  Locknell,
Barronet;  Robert  Wightman  Esqr.,  present  Dean  of  Gild  of  Edr.;

George  Drummond  Esq.,  late  Theasurer  thereof;  Archibald  Mc-
Auley,  late  Bailly  there;  and  Patrick  Lindsay,  merchant  there,

craveing  the  like  benefit,  which  was  also  granted,  and  they  receaved

as  members  of  the  societie  as  the  other  persons  above  mentioned.

The  same  day,  James  Key  and  Thomas  Aikman  servants  to  James

1092

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Wattson,  deacon  of  the  Masons,  were  admitted  and  receaved  En-

tered Apprentices  and  payed  to  James  Mack,  Warden  the  ordinary
dues  as  such."

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  object  of  Desaguliers  in  visiting

Scotland  at  that  time  was  to  introduce  into  the  Scottish  lodges  the

esoteric  ritual  so  far  as  it  had  been  perfected  by  himself  and  his

colleagues  for  the  Masons  of  England.  Bro.  Lyon  very  properly
suggests  that  the  proceedings  of  the  lodge  on  that  occasion  "render
it  probable  that  taking  advantage  of  his  social  position,  he  had  influ-
enced the  attendance  of  the  Provost  and  Magistrates  of  Edinburg

and  the  other  city  magnates  who  accompanied  them  as  applicants

for  Masonic  fellowship  in  order  to  give  a practical  illustration  of  the
system  with  which  his  name  was  so  closely  associated  with  a view
to  its  commending  itself  for  adoption  by  the  lodges  of  Scotland."1

Hence  in  these  two  meetings  we  see  that  the  ceremonies  of  enter-
ing and  passing  were  performed;  or,  in  other  words,  that  the  two
new  degrees  of  Entered  Apprentice  and  Fellow-Craft,  as  practiced
in  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  were  introduced  to  the  Scottish
Masons.  The  degree  of  Master  was  not  conferred,  and  for  this

omission  Bro.  Lyon  assigns  a reason  which  involves  an  historic
error  most  strange  to  have  been  committed  by  so  expert  and  skilled

a Masonic  scholar  as  the  historian  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh  and

the  translator  of  Findel's  work.

Bro.  Lyon's  words  are  as  follows:  "It  was  not  until  1722-23
that  the  English  regulation  restricting  the  conferring  of  the  Third

Degree  to  Grand  Lodge  was  repealed.  This  may  account  for  the
Doctor  confining  himself  to  the  two  lesser  degrees."2

But  the  facts  are  that  the  regulation  restricted  the  conferring

of  the  Second  as  well  as  the  Third  degree  to  the  Grand  Lodge;  that
this  regulation,  instead  of  being  repealed  in  1722-23,  was  not  pro-
mulgated until  1723,  being  first  published  in  the  Thirty-nine  Articles
contained  in  the  Book  of  Constitutions  of  that  date;  and  that  it
was  not  repealed  until  1725.

Now  if  it  be  said  that  the  restriction  existed  before  it  was
promulgated,  having  been  approved  June  24,  1721,  and  was  known
to  Desaguliers,  it  would  have  prevented  him  from  conferring  the

Second  as  well  as  the  Third  degree.

1 Lyon,  "History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  152.

2 Ibid.,  p.  153.

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  SCOTLAND

1093

If,  however,  the  regulation  was  in  force  in  England  in  1721,
which  I have  endeavored  heretofore1  to  prove  to  be  very  doubtful,
Desaguliers,  in  violating  it  so  far  as  respected  the  Second  degree,
showed  that  he  did  not  conceive  that  it  was  of  any  authority  in
Scotland,  a country  which  was  not  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England.

If  so,  the  question  arises,  why  did  he  not,  at  the  same  meeting,

confer  the  Third  degree?

The  answer  is  that  the  Third  degree  had  not  yet  been  fabricated.
In  the  task  of  formulating  a ritual  for  the  new  system  of  Specula-

tive Masonry,  Desaguliers,  Anderson,  and  the  others,  if  there  were
any  who  were  engaged  with  them  in  the  task,  had,  in  1721,  pro-

ceeded no  further  than  the  fabrication  of  the  ritual  of  the  First  and
Second  degrees.  These  degrees  only,  therefore,  he  communicated
to  the  Masons  of  Edinburgh2  on  his  visit  to  the  lodge  there.  Sub-

sequently, when  the  Third  degree  had  received  its  form,  it  was  im-
parted to  the  Masons  of  Scotland.  Of  the  precise  time  and  manner
of  this  communication  we  have  no  record,  but  we  know  that  it  took
place  before  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  was  organized.  Lyon
says  that  the  year  1735  is  the  date  of  "the  earliest  Scottish  record
extant  of  the  admission  of  a Master  Mason  under  the  modem  Ma-
sonic Constitution."3

The  visit  of  Desaguliers  and  the  events  connected  with  it  de-
velop at  least  two  important  points  in  the  history  of  Scottish  Ma-
sonry.

In  the  first  place,  we  notice  the  great  increase  of  non-professional
members  over  the  working  craftsmen,  so  that  in  six  or  seven  years
after  that  visit  the  Speculative  element  had  gained  the  supremacy
over  the  Operative  which  led,  in  the  second  place,  to  the  adoption  of
various  forms  indicative  of  the  growing  influence  of  Speculative
Masonry,  such  as  the  change  of  the  title  of  the  presiding  officer  from
"Warden"  to  that  of  "Master,"  and  the  substitution,  in  the  nomen-
clature of  the  Craft,  of  the  word  "Freemason"  for  the  formerly
common  one  of  "Mason."

1 When  treating  of  the  origin  of  the  three  degrees.

2 The  connection  of  this  visit  of  Desaguliers  to  Edinburgh  with  the  history  of  the  fab-
rication  of  the  three  degrees  of  Symbolic  Masonry  has  already  been  discussed  in  a previous
chapter  devoted  to  that  subject.

3 "History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  213.

1094

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

From  all  this,  and  from  certain  proceedings  in  the  years  1727,
1728,  and  1729  connected  with  the  contests  between  the  Theoretic
and  the  Operative  members  of  the  lodges,  "it  may  be  inferred,"  says
Bro.  Lyon,  "that,  departing  from  the  simplicity  of  its  primitive
ritual  and  seizing  upon  the  more  elaborate  one  of  its  Southern  con-
temporaries, and  adapting  it  to  its  circumstances,  the  ancient  lodge
of  the  Operative  Masons  of  Edinburgh  had,  in  a transition  that  was
neither  rapid  nor  violent,  yielded  up  its  dominion  to  Symbolical
Masonry  and  become  a unit  in  the  great  Mystic  Brotherhood  that
had  started  into  existence  in  1717. 1,1

The  next  step  that  was  naturally  to  be  taken  was  the  establish-
ment of  a Grand  Lodge  in  close  imitation  in  its  form  and  Constitu-
tion of  that  of  the  similar  body  which  had  been  previously  instituted
in  the  sister  kingdom.  The  record  of  the  occurrences  which  led  to
this  event  is  much  more  ample  than  the  meager  details  preserved
by  Anderson  of  the  establishment  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,
so  that  we  meet  with  no  difficulty  in  writing  the  history.

It  had  long  been  supposed,  on  the  authority  of  the  Histone  at-
tributed to  Laurie,  that  the  Scottish  Masons  had  been  prompted  to
first  think  of  the  institution  of  a Grand  Lodge  in  consequence  of  a
proposition  made  by  William  St.  Clair  of  Roslin  to  resign  his  office
of  "Hereditary  Grand  Master."  This  is  said  to  have  been  done  in
1736.  Lyon,  however,  denies  the  truth  of  this  statement,  and  says
that  more  than  a year  before  the  date  at  which  St.  Clair  is  alleged  to
have  formally  intimated  his  intention  to  resign  the  Masonic  Protec-
torate, the  creation  of  a Grand  Mastership  for  Scotland  had  been
mooted  among  the  brethren.2

The  authentic  history  is  perhaps  to  be  found  only  in  the  pages  of
Lyon's  History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,  and  from  it  I therefore
do  not  hesitate  to  draw  the  material  for  the  ensuing  narrative.

On  September  29,  1735,  at  a meeting  of  Canongate  Kilwinning
Lodge,  a committee  was  appointed  for  the  purpose  of  "framing
proposals  to  be  laid  before  the  several  lodges  in  order  to  the  choos-
ing of  a Grand  Master  for  Scotland."  At  another  meeting,  on  Oc-
tober 15th,  the  same  committee  was  instructed  to  "take  under  con-
sideration proposals  for  a Grand  Master."

On  August  4,  1736,  John  Douglas,  a surgeon  and  member  of

1 "History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  160.

2 Ibid.,  p.  167.

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  SCOTLAND

1095

the  Lodge  of  Kirkcaldy,  was  affiliated  with  the  Lodge  of  Canongate
Kilwinning  and  appointed  Secretary,  that  he  might  make  out  "a

scheme  for  bringing  about  a Grand  Master  for  Scotland."

On  September  20th  the  lodge  was  visited  by  brethren  from  the

Lodge  Kilwinning  Scots  Arms,  who  made  certain  proposals  on

the  subject.

The  matter  was  now  hastening  to  maturity,  for  on  October  6th
the  Canongate  Kilwinning  Lodge  met  for  the  purpose,  as  its  min-
utes declare,  of  "concerting  proper  measures  for  electing  a Grand
Master  for  Scotland."  Proposals  were  heard  and  agreed  to.  The

four  lodges  of  Edinburgh  were  to  hold  a preliminary  meeting,  when
proper  measures  were  to  be  taken  for  accomplishing  the  desired

object.

Accordingly  delegates  from  the  four  Edinburgh  lodges,  namely,
Mary's  Chapel,  Canongate  Kilwinning,  Kilwinning  Scots  Arms,  and

Leith  Kilwinning,  met  at  Edinburgh  on  October  15,  1736.  It  was

then  resolved  that  the  four  lodges  in  and  about  Edinburgh  should
meet  in  some  convenient  place  to  adopt  proper  regulations  for  the
government  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  which  were  to  be  sent  with  a cir-
cular letter  to  all  the  lodges  of  Scotland.  A day  was  also  to  be  de-

termined for  the  election  of  a Grand  Master,  when  all  lodges  which
accepted  the  invitation  were  to  be  represented  by  their  Masters  and
Wardens  or  their  proxies.

The  circular,  which  brought  a sufficient  number  of  lodges  together
at  the  appointed  time  to  institute  a Grand  Lodge  and  elect  a Grand
Master,  is  in  the  following  words:

"Brethren:  The  four  lodges  in  and  about  Edinburgh,  having

taken  into  their  serious  consideration  the  great  loss  that  Masonry
has  sustained  through  the  want  of  a Grand  Master,  authorized  us

to  signify  to  you,  our  good  and  worthy  brethren,  our  hearty  desire
and  firm  intention  to  choose  a Grand  Master  for  Scotland;  and  in

order  that  the  same  may  be  done  with  the  greatest  harmony,  we
hereby  invite  you  (as  we  have  done  all  the  other  regular  lodges
known  by  us)  to  concur  in  such  a great  and  good  work,  whereby  it
is  hoped  Masonry  may  be  restored  to  its  ancient  luster  in  this  king-
dom. And  for  effectuating  this  laudable  design,  we  humbly  desire
that  betwixt  this  and  Martinmas  day  next,  you  will  be  pleased  to

give  us  a brotherly  answer  in  relation  to  the  election  of  a Grand
Master,  which  we  propose  to  be  on  St.  Andrew's  day,  for  the  first

1096

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

time,  and  ever  thereafter  to  be  on  St.  John  the  Baptist's  day,  or  as
the  Grand  Lodge  shall  appoint  by  the  majority  of  voices,  which  are
to  be  collected  from  the  Masters  and  Wardens  of  all  the  regular

lodges  then  present  or  by  proxy  to  any  Master  Mason  or  Fellow-
Craft  in  any  lodge  in  Scotland;  and  the  election  is  to  be  in  St.
Mary's  Chapel.  All  that  is  hereby  proposed  is  for  the  advancement
and  prosperity  of  Masonry  in  its  greatest  and  most  charitable  per-
fection. We  hope  and  expect  a suitable  return;  wherein  if  any
lodges  are  defective,  they  have  themselves  only  to  blame.  We  heart-
ily wish  you  all  manner  of  success  and  prosperity,  and  ever  are,  with
great  respect,  your  affectionate  and  loving  brethren."

This  circular  letter  was  accompanied  by  a printed  copy  of  the
regulations  which  had  been  proposed  and  agreed  to  at  the  meeting.

By  these  regulations  the  Grand  Master  was  to  name  the  new  Grand
Wardens,  Treasurer,  and  Secretary,  but  the  nomination  was  to  be
unanimously  approved  by  the  Grand  Lodge,  and  if  it  was  not  these
officers  were  to  be  elected  by  ballot.  The  requirement  of  unanimity
would  be  very  certain  to  place  the  choice  of  most  occasions  in  the
Grand  Lodge.  The  Grand  Master  was  to  appoint  his  own  Deputy,
provided  he  was  not  a member  of  the  same  lodge.  There  were  to
be  quarterly  communications,  at  which  the  particular  lodges  were  to
be  represented  by  their  Masters  and  Wardens  with  the  Grand  Master
at  their  head.  There  was  to  be  an  annual  visitation  by  the  Grand
Master  with  his  Deputy  and  Wardens  of  all  the  lodges  in  town.
There  was  to  be  an  annual  feast  upon  St.  John's  day,  and  several

other  regulations,  all  of  which  were  evidently  copied  from  the  Ar-
ticles adopted  in  1721  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  and  pub-
lished in  1723  in  the  first  edition  of  its  Book  of  Constitutions.

There  were  several  meetings  of  the  four  Edinburgh  lodges,  and
finally,  on  November  25,  1736,  it  was  agreed  that  the  election  of

Grand  Master  should  take  place  in  Mary's  Chapel  on  Tuesday,
November  30,  1736.

But  while  these  preliminary  meetings  were  being  held  a rivalry
sprung  up  (as  might  have  been  anticipated  from  the  nature  of  human
passions)  between  two  of  the  lodges,  in  the  choice  of  the  proposed
Grand  Master.

The  Lodge  of  Edinburgh  nominated  for  that  office  the  Earl  of
Home,  who  was  one  of  its  members.  But  the  Canongate  Kilwin-
ning Lodge,  which  was  really  the  prime  instigator  of  the  movement

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  SCOTLAND

1097

for  the  institution  of  a Grand  Lodge,  was  unwilling  to  surrender  to
another  lodge  the  honor  of  providing  a ruler  of  the  Craft.

William  St.  Clair,  who,  notwithstanding  the  high  claims  advanced
for  his  family  does  not  appear  to  have  taken  any  interest  in  Masonry,
had  been  received  as  an  Apprentice  and  Fellow-Craft  only  six  months
before  (May  18,  1736)  by  the  Canongate  Kilwinning  Lodge,  and

had  been  raised  to  the  Third  degree  only  eight  days  before  the  elec-
tion, was  placed  before  the  fraternity  by  the  lodge  of  which  he  was
a recent  member,  as  a proper  candidate  for  the  Grand  Mastership.

It  will  be  seen  in  the  subsequent  details  of  the  election  that  the

Canongate  Kilwinning  Lodge  availed  itself  of  a strategy  which
might  have  been  resorted  to  by  a modem  politician.

What  Lyon  calls  "the  first  General  Assembly  of  Scotch  Sym-

bolical Masons"  was,  according  to  agreement,  convened  at  Edin-
burgh on  Tuesday,  November  30,  1736.  There  were  at  that  time
in  Scotland  about  one  hundred  particular  lodges.  All  of  them

had  been  summoned  to  attend  the  convention,  but  of  these  only
thirty-three  were  present,  each  represented  by  its  Master  and  two

Wardens.

While  in  this  scanty  representation,  only  one-third  of  the  lodges
having  responded  to  the  call,  we  see  that  the  interest  in  the  legal

organization  of  the  Speculative  system  and  the  complete  abandon-
ment of  the  Operative  had  not  been  universally  felt  by  the  Scottish
Craft,  we  find  in  the  method  of  conducting  the  meeting  that  the

spirit  and  forms  of  the  English  Constitution  had  been  freely  adopted
by  those  who  were  present.

The  list  of  the  lodges  which  united  in  the  establishment  of  a
Grand  Lodge  is  given  both  by  Laurie's  Editor  and  by  Lyon,  and  it

is  here  presented  as  an  important  part  of  the  historical  narrative.
The  lodges  present  were  as  follows:

Mary's  Chapel,

Kilwinning,

Canongate  Kilwinning,

Kilwinning  Scots  Anns,

Kilwinning  Leith,

Kilwinning  Glasgow,

Coupar  of  Fife,

Linlithgow,

Dumfermling,

Dundee,

Dalkeith,

Aitcheson's  Haven,
Selkirk,

Inverness,

Lesmahagoe,

St.  Brides  at  Douglas,

1098

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Lanark,

Strathaven,

Hamilton,

Dunse,

Kirkcaldy,

Journey  Masons  of  Edinburgh,
Kirkintilloch,

Biggar,

Sanquhar,

Peebles,

Glasgow  St.  Mungo's,
Greenock,

Falkirk,

Aberdeen,
Mariaburgh,
Canongate  and  Leith,
Leith  and  Canongate,
Montrose.

After  the  roll  had  been  called,  and  the  draft  of  the  Constitution
with  the  form  of  proceedings  had  been  submitted  and  approved,  St.
Clair  of  Roslin  tendered  a document  to  the  convention  which  was

read  as  follows:

"I,  William  St.  Clair  of  Roslin,  Esquire,  taking  into  my  con-
sideration that  the  Masons  in  Scotland,  did,  by  several  deeds,  con-

stitute and  appoint  William  and  Sir  William  St.  Clairs  of  Roslin,  my
ancestors  and  their  heirs  to  be  their  Patrons,  Protectors,  Judges  or
Masters;  and  that  my  holding  or  claiming  any  such  jurisdiction,
right  or  privilege  might  be  prejudicial  to  the  Craft  and  vocation  of

Masonry,  whereof  I am  a member,  and  I being  desirous  to  advance
and  promote  the  good  and  utility  of  the  said  Craft  of  Masonry,  to
the  utmost  of  my  power,  do  therefore  hereby,  for  me  and  my  heirs,

renounce,  quit  claim,  overgive  and  discharge  all  right,  claim  or  pre-
tence that  I or  my  heirs,  had,  have  or  anyways  may  have,  pretend  to
or  claim,  to  be  Protector,  Patron,  Judge  or  Master  of  the  Masons

in  Scotland,  in  virtue  of  any  deed  or  deeds  made  and  granted  by  the
said  Masons,  or  of  any  grant  or  charter  made  by  any  of  the  Kings

of  Scotland,  to  and  in  favour  of  the  said  William  and  Sir  William
St.  Clairs  of  Roslin,  my  predecessors;  or  any  other  manner  or  way

whatsoever,  for  now  and  ever.  And  I bind  and  oblige  me  and  my
heirs  to  warrant  this  present  renunciation  and  discharge  at  all  hands.
And  1 consent  to  the  registration  hereof  in  the  books  of  Council
and  Session  or  any  other  judges'  books  competent,  therein  to  remain
for  preservation,  and  thereto  I constitute  . . . my  procurators,

etc.  In  witness  whereof  I have  subscribed  these  presents  (written
by  David  Maul,  Writer  to  the  Signet)  at  Edinburgh,  the  twenty-
fourth  day  of  November,  one  thousand  seven  hundred  and  thirty-
six  years,  before  these  witnesses,  George  Frazer,  deputy  auditor  of

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  SCOTLAND

1099

the  excise  in  Scotland,  Master  of  the  Canongate  Lodge,  and
William  Montgomery,  Merchant  in  Leith,  Master  of  the  Leith
Lodge."

This  document  was  signed  by  W.  St.  Clair  and  attested  by  the  two
witnesses  above  mentioned.  The  reading  of  it  at  the  opportune
moment,  just  before  the  election  of  Grand  Master  was  entered
upon,  is  the  strategical  point  to  which  reference  has  already  been
made.  It  succeeded  in  securing,  as  had  been  expected  by  the  pro-
moters of  the  scheme,  the  immediate  election  of  William  St.  Clair

as  the  first  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland.

As  a legal  instrument  the  renunciation  of  his  ancestral  rights  by
St.  Clair  is  worthless.  Whatever  prerogatives  he  may  have  sup-
posed that  he  possessed  as  a Masonic  "Protector,  Patron,  Judge
and  Master,"  referred  exclusively  to  the  Guild  of  Operative  Mason-
ry, and  could  not  by  any  stretch  of  law  have  been  extended  to  a

voluntary  association  of  Speculative  Masons,  the  institution  of
which  was  expressly  intended  to  act  as  a deletion  of  the  Operative

organization  whose  design  and  character  were  entirely  cancelled  and
obliterated  by  the  change  from  a practical  art  to  a theoretical

science.  The  laws  of  Operative  Masonry  can  be  applied  to  Spec-
ulative Masonry  only  by  a symbolic  process.  If  the  Lords  of

Roslin  had  even  been  the  "Hereditary  Grand  Masters"  of  the

stonecutters  and  builders  who  were  congregated  in  a guild  spirit  in

the  Operative  lodges  of  Scotland,  it  did  not  follow  that  they  were

by  such  hereditary  right  the  Grand  Masters  of  the  scholars  and  men
of  rank,  the  clergymen,  physicians,  lawyers,  and  merchants  who,
having  no  connection  or  knowledge  of  the  Craft  of  Masonry,  had
united  to  establish  a society  of  an  entirely  different  character.

But  in  a critical  point  of  view  in  reference  to  the  traditional
claims  of  the  St.  Clairs  to  the  Hereditary  Grand  Mastership,  this

instrument  of  renunciation  is  of  great  value.

It  is  but  recently  that  the  historians  of  Freemasonry  have  be-
gun to  doubt  the  statement  that  James  II.  of  Scotland  had  conferred
by  patent  the  office  of  Grand  Master  on  the  Earl  of  Orkney,  the

ancestor  of  the  St.  Clairs  and  on  his  heirs.  Brewster  had  boldly
asserted  it  in  the  beginning  of  the  present  century,  and  although  it

has  been  more  recently  doubted  whether  such  patent  was  issued,  the

statement  continues  to  be  repeated  by  careless  writers  and  to  be  be-
lieved by  credulous  readers.

1100

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Now  the  language  used  by  St.  Clair  in  his  renunciation  before
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  must  set  this  question  at  rest.  He
refers  not  to  any  patent  granted  to  his  original  ancestors  the  Earls
of  Orkney,  but  to  the  two  charters  issued  in  1601  and  1628  in  which
not  the  king  but  the  Masons  themselves  had  bestowed  the  office  of
patrons  and  protectors,  first  on  William  St.  Clair  and  afterward  on

his  son.

James  Maidment,  Advocate,  the  learned  Editor  of  Father  Hay's
Genealogie  of  the  Saint  Claires  of  Roslyn,  comes  to  this  conclusion
in  the  following  words:

"Thus  the  granter  of  the  deed,  who  it  must  be  presumed  was
better  acquainted  with  the  nature  of  his  rights  than  any  one  else
could  be,  derives  his  title  from  the  very  persons  to  whom  the  two
modem  charters  were  granted  by  the  Masons;  and  in  the  resigna-

tion of  his  claim  as  patron,  etc.,  exclusively  refers  to  these  two
deeds  or  any  'grant  or  charter  made  by  the  Crown,'  not  in  favor  of
William  Earl  of  Orkney,  but  of  William  and  Sir  William  St.  Clair,
the  identical  individuals  in  whose  persons  the  Masons  had  created
the  office  of  patron."

But  in  the  excitement  of  the  moment  the  representatives  of

the  lodges  were  not  prepared  to  enter  into  any  such  nice  distinc-

tions.

The  apparent  magnanimity  of  Mr.  St.  Clair  in  thus  voluntarily

resigning  his  hereditary  claims  had  so  fascinating  an  influence  that
though  many  of  them  had  been  instructed  by  their  lodges  to  vote
for  another  candidate,  St.  Clair  was  immediately  elected  Grand

Master  with  great  unanimity.

The  remaining  offices  were  filled  by  the  election  of  Capt.  John
Young  as  Deputy  Grand  Master;  Sir  William  Baillie  as  Senior

Grand  Warden;  Sir  Alexander  Hope  as  Junior  Grand  Warden;

Dr.  John  Moncrief  as  Grand  Treasurer;  John  Macdougal,  Esq.,

as  Grand  Secretary;  and  Mr.  Robert  Alison,  Writer,  as  Grand

Clerk.

Upon  the  institution  of  the  Grand  Lodge  nearly  all  the  lodges

of  the  kingdom  applied  for  Warrants  of  Constitution  and  re-
nounced their  former  rights  as  Operative  lodges,  acknowledging

thereby  the  supreme  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand  Lodge  as  the  Head

of  Speculative  Masonry  in  Scotland.

In  a review  of  the  proceedings  which  finally  led  to  the  estab-

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  SCOTLAND

1101

lishment  of  a Speculative  Grand  Lodge  in  Scotland,  several  cir-
cumstances are  especially  worthy  of  remark.

It  has  been  seen  that  from  a very  early  period,  as  far  back  as

the  close  of  the  16th  century,  theoretical  Masons,  or  persons  who
were  a part  of  the  working  Craft,  had  been  admitted  as  members
of  the  Operative  lodges.  The  custom  of  receiving  non-profes-
sionals among  the  brethren  was  gradually  extended,  so  that  in  the
early  years  of  the  18th  century  the  non-professional  members  in

some  of  the  lodges  greatly  exceeded  the  professional.

In  this  way  the  transition  from  Operative  to  Speculative  Masonry

was  made  of  easy  accomplishment,  so  that  when  the  Grand  Lodge
was  established,  several  of  the  leading  lodges  which  were  engaged  in
the  act  of  organization  were  already  Speculative  lodges  in  every-
thing but  the  name.

Another  event,  which  exerted  a great  influence  in  hastening  the

change  in  Scotland,  was  the  visit  of  Desaguliers  in  the  year  1721

to  Edinburgh.  He  brought  with  him  the  ritual  of  Speculative

Masonry,  so  far  as  it  had  then  been  formulated  in  England,  and
introduced  it  and  the  newly  adopted  English  lodges  into  Scotland.
Lyon  refers  to  the  formation  of  the  Lodge  Kilwinning  Scots  Arms
in  February,  1729,  as  one  of  the  results  of  the  Masonic  communica-
tion between  the  northern  and  the  southern  capitals,  which  had  been
opened  by  this  visit  of  Desaguliers.  It  was  from  the  beginning  a

purely  Speculative  lodge,  all  of  its  original  members  having  been

theoretical  Masons,  chiefly  lawyers  and  merchants.  It  was  one  of

the  four  Edinburgh  lodges  which  were  engaged  in  the  preliminary

steps  for  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge.

As  an  evidence  of  how  extensively  the  theoretical  principle  had
spread,  so  that  the  scheme  of  abandoning  the  Operative  character  of
the  institution  must  have  been  easily  effected,  it  may  be  stated  that
of  the  twelve  hundred  brethren  returned  to  the  Grand  Lodge  as

members  of  the  several  lodges  represented  at  the  first  election  of
officers  in  that  body,  one  half  were  persons  not  engaged  in  mechani-
cal pursuits.1

The  influence  of  English  Masonry  is  also  seen  in  the  fact  that  in
the  middle  of  the  17th  century  the  English  Legend  of  the  Craft

was  known  to  and  used  by  the  Aitcheson's  Haven  Lodge  of  Mussel-

1 Lyon,  "History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  176.

1102

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

burg  and  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh  as  well  as  other  Scottish  lodges
and  was  in  all  probability  used  in  the  initiation  of  candidates.  As

the  two  manuscripts  which  still  remain  in  Scotland  are  known  from

their  form  and  language  to  have  been  copies  of  some  of  the  old
English  Records  of  the  "Legend"  and  "Charges,"  no  better  evi-
dence than  the  use  of  them  by  Scottish  lodges  could  be  needed  to
prove  that  the  English  Masonry  had  been  constantly  from  the  17th
century  exerting  a dominating  influence  upon  the  Craft  in  Scot-
land which  finally  culminated  in  the  organization  of  the  Grand
Lodge.

Finally,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  presents  an  important  and
marked  peculiarity  in  the  cause  and  manner  of  its  institution.

The  first  Grand  Lodge  of  Speculative  Masons  ever  established
was  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  organized  in  the  year  1717  at

London.  From  this  Grand  Lodge  every  other  Grand  Lodge  in
the  world,  with  one  exception,  has  directly  or  indirectly  proceeded.
That  is  to  say,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  established  in  foreign

countries  either  lodges  which  afterward  uniting,  became  Grand
Lodges,  or  it  constituted  Provincial  Grand  Lodges  which,  in  the
course  of  time  and  through  political  changes,  assumed  independence
and  became  national  supreme  bodies  in  Masonry.

But  however  instituted  as  Grand  Lodges,  they  derived,  remotely,
the  authority  for  their  legal  existence  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England,  so  that  that  venerable  body  has  very  properly  been  called
the  "Mother  Grand  Lodge  of  the  World."

The  single  exception  to  this  otherwise  universal  rule  is  found  in
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland.  Of  all  Grand  Lodges  it  alone  has
derived  no  authority  for  its  constitution  from  the  English  body.
The  Scottish  lodges  existed  contemporaneously  with  the  English;
at  a very  early  period  they  admitted  non-professional  members  and
they  began  at  the  beginning  of  the  18th  century  to  take  the  prelimi-
nary steps  for  their  conversion  from  an  Operative  to  a Speculative
character.  In  this  they  were  undoubtedly  influenced  by  the  English
Masons,  who  about  the  same  time  had  begun  to  contemplate  the
expediency  of  a similar  conversion.

But  although  while  the  Scottish  lodges,  in  organizing  their  Grand
Lodge,  were  undoubtedly  led  to  take  the  necessary  steps  by  the
previous  action  of  the  English  lodges,  and  while  they  borrowed
much  of  the  forms  and  imitated  the  example  of  their  English

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  SCOTLAND

1103

brethren,  they  derived  from  them  no  authority  or  warrant  of
Constitution.

The  Masonry  of  Scotland  produced  from  its  own  Operative
lodges  its  Speculative  Grand  Lodge,  precisely  as  was  the  case  with
the  Masonry  of  England.  And  in  this  respect  it  has  differed  from
the  Masonry  of  every  other  country  where  the  Operative  element
never  merged  into  the  Speculative,  but  where  the  latter  was  a direct
and  independent  importation  from  the  Speculative  Grand  Lodge  of
England,  wholly  distinct  from  the  Operative  Masonry  which  existed
at  the  same  time.

CHAPTER  XLI

THE  ATHOLL  GRAND  LODGE,  OR  THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  ENGLAND
ACCORDING  TO  THE  OLD  INSTITUTIONS

HE  first  important  event  in  the  history  of  English
Freemasonry  which  seriously  affected  the  har-
mony of  the  Fraternity,  was  the  schism  which
occurred  in  the  year  1753.  The  inteiposition  of
a new  and  rival  authority  in  the  north  of  Eng-
land by  the  self-constitution  of  a Grand  Lodge
at  the  city  of  York  in  the  year  1725,  seems  to
have  created  no  embarrassment,  save  in  its  immediate  locality,  to
the  Grand  Lodge  at  London.

The  sphere  of  its  operations  was  limited  to  its  own  narrow

vicinity,  nor,  until  nearly  half  a century  after  its  organization,  did  it
seek,  by  traveling  beyond  those  meager  limits,  to  antagonize,  in  the
south  of  the  kingdom,  the  jurisdiction  of  the  body  at  London.

But  the  schism  which  commenced  at  London  and  in  the  very

bosom  of  the  Grand  Lodge  in  the  year  1753,  and  to  the  history  of
which  this  chapter  shall  be  dedicated,  was  far  more  important  in  its
effects,  not  only  on  the  progress  of  Speculative  Masonry  in  Eng-
land, but  also  in  other  countries.

The  Grand  Lodge,  which  in  the  above-mentioned  year  was
organized  as  a successful  rival  and  antagonist  of  the  regular  Grand
Lodge,  has  received  in  the  course  of  its  career  various  names.  Styl-
ing itself  officially  the  "Grand  Lodge  of  England  according  to  the
Old  Institutions,"  it  was  also  called,  colloquially,  the  "Grand  Lodge
of  Ancients,"  both  designations  being  intended  to  convey  the  vain-

glorious boast  that  it  was  the  exponent  of  a more  ancient  system  of
Freemasonry  than  that  which  was  practiced  by  the  regular  Grand
Lodge,  which  had  been  in  existence  only  since  1717.  Upon  that

later  system,  as  it  was  asserted  to  be,  the  Schismatics  bestowed  the
derogatory  designation  of  the  "Grand  Lodge  of  Modems."  And
so  the  schismatic  body  having  been  formed  by  a secession  from  the

1104

THE  ATHOLL  GRAND  LODGE

1105

regular  and  constitutional  Grand  Lodge,  its  members  were  often

called  the  "Seceders."  Subsequent  writers  have  been  accustomed
to  briefly  distinguish  the  two  rival  bodies  as  the  "Modems"  and  the
"Ancients;"  without  however  any  admission  on  the  part  of  the
former  of  the  legal  fitness  of  the  terms,  but  simply  for  the  sake  of
avoiding  tedious  circumlocutions.

Another  and  a very  common  title  bestowed  upon  the  schismatic
body  was  that  of  the  "Atholl  Grand  Lodge,"  because  the  Dukes  of
Atholl,  father  and  son,  presided  over  it  for  many  successive  years,
and  it  has  also  been  sometimes  called  the  "Dermott  Grand  Lodge,"

in  allusion  to  Laurence  Dermott,  who  was  once  its  Deputy  Grand

Master,  and  for  a long  time  its  Grand  Secretary,  and  who  was  one
of  its  founders,  its  most  able  defender,  and  the  compiler  of  its

Ahirnan  Rezon,  or  Book  of  Constitutions.

In  the  present  sketch  this  body  will,  for  convenience,  be  dis-
tinguished as  the  "Atholl  Grand  Lodge,"  and  its  members  as  the

"Ancients,"  without,  however,  the  remotest  idea  of  conceding  to
them  or  to  their  Grand  Lodge  the  correctness  of  their  claim  for  a
greater  antiquity  than  that  which  rightly  belongs  to  the  Constitu-

tional Grand  Lodge,  established  in  1717.

The  progress  of  the  schism  which  culminated  in  the  organiza-
tion of  the  Atholl  Grand  Lodge  was  not  very  rapid.  As  far  back

as  1739,  complaints  were  made  in  the  Grand  Lodge  against  certain

brethren,  who,  as  Entick  euphemistically  phrases  it,  were  "suspected
of  being  concerned  in  an  irregular  making  of  Masons."1

But  the  inquiry  into  this  matter  was  postponed.

At  a subsequent  quarterly  Communication  held  in  the  same  year

the  inquiry  was  resumed,  and  the  offending  brethren  having  made

submission  and  promised  good  behavior,  they  were  pardoned,  but  it
was  ordered  by  the  Grand  Lodge  that  the  laws  should  be  strictly

enforced  against  any  brethren  who  should  for  the  future  counte-
nance or  assist  at  any  irregular  makings.2

The  language  of  Entick  is  not  explicit,  and  it  authorizes  us  to
suppose  either  that  the  pardon  granted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  was
consequent  on  the  submission  of  the  offenders  which  had  been  made
before  the  pardon  was  given,  or  that  it  was  only  promissory  and

depended  on  their  making  that  submission.

1 Entick,  "Book  of  Constitutions,"  p.  228.  2 Ibid.,  p.  229.

1106

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Some  may  have  made  the  submission  and  received  the  pardon,
but  the  reconciliation  was  by  no  means  complete,  for  Northouck1
tells  us  that  the  censure  of  the  Grand  Lodge  irritated  the  brethren
who  had  incurred  it,  and  who,  instead  of  returning  to  their  duty  and
renouncing  their  error,  persisted  in  their  contumacy  and  openly

refused  to  pay  allegiance  to  the  Grand  Master  or  obedience  to  the

mandates  of  the  Grand  Lodge.

"In  contempt  of  the  ancient  and  established  laws  of  the  Order,"
says  Northouck,  "they  set  up  a power  independent,  and  taking  ad-
vantage of  the  inexperience  of  their  associates,  insisted  that  they  had
an  equal  authority  with  the  Grand  Lodge  to  make,  pass,  and  raise
Masons."

In  the  note,  whence  this  passage  is  taken,  and  in  which  North-

ouck has  committed  several  errors,  he  has  evidently  anticipated  the
course  of  events  and  confounded  the  "irregular  makings"  by  private

lodges  which  began  about  the  year  1739,  with  the  establishment  of

the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ancients,  which  did  not  take  place  until  about

1753.

This  body  of  disaffected  Masons  appears,  however,  to  have  been
the  original  source  whence,  in  the  course  of  subsequent  years,  sprang
the  organized  Grand  Lodge  of  the  Ancients.

The  process  of  organization  was,  however,  slow.  For  some  time
the  contumacious  brethren  continued  to  hold  their  lodges  independ-
ently of  any  supreme  authority.  Nor  is  it  possible,  from  any
records  now  existing,  to  determine  the  exact  year  in  which  the

Grand  Lodge  of  the  Ancients  assumed  a positive  existence.

Preston  tells  us  that  the  brethren  who  had  repudiated  the  au-
thority of  the  Constitutional  Grand  Lodge  held  meetings  in  various

places  for  the  purpose  of  initiating  persons  into  Masonry  contrary  to

the  laws  of  the  Grand  Lodge.2

Preston  also  says  that  they  took  advantage  of  the  breach  which
had  been  made  between  the  Grand  Lodges  of  London  and  York,
and  assumed  the  title  of  "York  Masons."  In  this  statement  he  is,
however,  incorrect.  There  was  never  any  recognition  by  the  Lon-
don Grand  Lodge  of  the  body  calling  itself  the  Grand  Lodge  of
York,  nor  was  that  Grand  Lodge  in  active  existence  at  the  time,
having  suspended  its  labors  from  1734  to  1761.

1 Northouck,  "Book  of  Constitutions,"  p.  240,  note.

- Preston,  "Illustrations,"  p.  210,  Oliver's  edition.

THE  ATHOLL  GRAND  LODGE

1107

The  name  of  "York  Masons,"  adopted  by  these  seceders,  was
derived  from  the  old  tradition  contained  in  the  Legend  of  the

Craft,  that  the  first  Grand  Lodge  in  England  was  established  by

Prince  Edwin  in  926  at  the  city  of  York.

Northouck  assigns  this  reason  for  the  title  when  he  says  that

"under  a fictitious  sanction  of  the  Ancient  York  constitutions,

which  was  dropped  at  the  revival  of  the  Grand  Lodge  in  1717,  they

presumed  to  claim  the  right  of  constituting  Lodges."1

The  Grand  Lodge  at  London  now  committed  an  act  of  folly,

the  effects  of  which  remain  to  the  present  day.  Being  desirous  to

exclude  the  seceding  Masons  from  visiting  the  regular  lodges,  it

made  a few  changes  in  the  ritual  by  transposing  certain  signifi-
cant words  in  the  lower  degrees,  and  inventing  a new  one  in  the

Third.

The  opportunity  of  raising  the  cry  of  innovation  (a  phrase  that

has  always  been  abhorrent  to  the  Masonic  mind)  was  not  lost.  But

availing  themselves  of  it,  the  seceders  began  to  call  themselves

"Ancient  Masons,"  and  stigmatize  the  members  of  the  regular

lodges  as  "Modem  Masons,"  thus  proclaiming  that  they  alone  had

preserved  the  old  usages  of  the  Craft,  while  the  regulars  had  invented
and  adopted  new  ones.

At  this  day,  when  the  turbulence  of  passion  has  long  ceased  to

exist,  and  when  the  whole  fraternity  of  English  Masons  is  united
under  one  system,  it  is  impossible  duly  to  estimate  the  evil  conse-
quences which  arose  from  this  measure  of  innovation  adopted  by  the
Grand  Lodge.

If  it  had  made  no  change  in  its  ritual,  but  confined  itself  to  the
exercise  of  discipline  according  to  constitutional  methods,  provided
by  its  own  laws,  it  is  probable  that  the  irregular  lodges  would  have
received  little  countenance  from  the  great  body  of  the  Craft,  and
as  they  would  have  had  no  defense  for  their  contumacy,  except  their
objection  to  the  stringency  of  the  Grand  Lodge  regulations,  that
objection  could  have  been  easily  met  by  showing  that  the  regula-
tions were  stringent  only  because  stringency  was  necessary  to  the
very  existence  of  the  institution.

Unsustained  by  any  justification  of  their  rebellion,  they  would,
under  the  general  condemnation  of  the  wiser  portion  of  the  Fra-

Northouck,  "Constitutions,"  p.  240,  note.

1108

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

temity,  have  been  compelled  in  the  course  of  time  to  abandon  their
independent  and  irregular  lodges  and  once  more  to  come  under
obedience  to  their  lawful  superior,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.

But  the  charge  that  the  landmarks  had  been  invaded  and  that  in-
novations on  the  ancient  usages  had  been  introduced,  had  a wonder-
ful effect  in  giving  strength  to  the  cause  of  those  who  thus  seemed
in  their  rebellion  to  be  only  defenders  of  the  old  ways.

"Antiquity,"  says  one  who  was  himself  an  Ancient  York  Ma-
son, "is  dear  to  a Mason's  heart;  innovation  is  treason,  and  saps
the  venerable  fabric  of  the  Order."1

And  so  the  seceders,  instead  of  returning  to  their  allegiance  to

the  legitimate  Grand  Lodge,  persisted  in  their  irregularities,  and
making  new  converts,  sometimes  of  individuals  and  sometimes  of
entire  lodges,  which  were  attracted  by  their  claim  of  antiquity,  at
length  resolved  to  acquire  permanent  life  and  authority  by  the
establishment  of  a Grand  Lodge  to  which  they  gave  the  imposing

name  of  "The  Grand  Lodge  of  England  according  to  the  Old
Institutions."

But  the  seceders  themselves  were  not  less  obnoxious  to  the  charge
of  innovating  on  the  landmarks.  One  change  in  the  existing  ritual

introduced  by  them  was  far  more  important  than  any  mere  trans-
position of  passwords.  This  innovation  having  been  extended  by
them  into  all  the  foreign  countries  where  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the
Ancients  subsequently  established  lodges  or  Provincial  Grand
Lodges,  and  afterward  compulsorily  accepted  by  the  Grand  Lodge
of  the  Moderns,  at  the  union  of  the  Grand  Lodges  at  London  in
1813,  has  entirely  changed  the  whole  system  of  Freemasonry  from
that  which  existed  in  the  constitutional  Grand  Lodge  of  England
during  the  1 8th  century.

This  innovation  consisted  in  a mutilation  of  the  Third  degree

or  "Master's  Part,"  and  the  fabrication  of  a Fourth  degree,  now
known  to  the  Fraternity  as  the  Royal  Arch  degree.

"The  chief  feature  in  the  new  ritual,"  says  Brother  Hughan,
"consisted  in  a division  of  the  Third  degree  into  two  sections,  the
second  of  which  was  restricted  to  a few  Master  Masons  who  were
approved  as  candidates  and  to  whom  the  peculiar  secrets  were  alone
communicated."2

1 Dalcho,  "Ahiman  Rezon  of  South  Carolina,"  second  edition,  p.  191.

2 "Memorials  of  the  Masonic  Union,"  p.  5.

THE  ATHOLL  GRAND  LODGE

1109

From  the  year  1723  and  onward  throughout  the  18th  century
and  the  early  portion  of  the  19th  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Modems

practiced  only  three  degrees.  The  adoption  of  a Fourth  degree  by
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ancients  gave  to  that  body  a popularity  which
it  probably  would  not  otherwise  have  obtained.  "Many  gentle-
men," says  Hughan,  in  the  work  just  cited,  "preferred  joining  the
'Grand  Lodge  of  Four  Degrees,'  to  associating  with  the  society
which  worked  only  three."  And  hence  when,  in  1813,  the  two  rival
bodies  entered  into  a union  which  produced  the  present  Grand

Lodge  of  England,  the  Moderns  were  forced  to  abandon  their
ritual  of  three  degrees,  and  to  accept  that  of  the  Ancients.  So  in

the  second  article  of  the  Compact,  it  was  declared  "that  pure  An-
cient Masonry  consists  of  three  degrees  and  no  more;  viz.,  those  of

the  Entered  Apprentice,  the  Fellow-Craft,  and  the  Master  Mason,
including  the  Supreme  Order  of  the  Holy  Royal  Arch."

This  was  evidently  a compromise,  and  compromises  always  in-
dicate some  previous  attempt  at  compulsion.  The  constitutional
Grand  Lodge  sought  to  preserve  its  consistency  by  recognizing  only
three  degrees,  while  it  immediately  afterward,  and  in  the  same
sentence,  sacrificed  that  consistency  by  admitting  that  there  was  a
Fourth,  called  the  Royal  Arch.

The  Ancients  had  clearly  gained  a victory,  but  without  this
victory  the  union  could  never  have  been  accomplished.  But  this
subject  of  the  Royal  Arch  will  be  more  fully  discussed  when  we

come  to  the  consideration  of  the  origin  and  history  of  that  degree.

I have  already  said  that  it  is  impossible  to  determine  the  precise
year  in  which  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ancients  was  established.
Before  its  actual  organization  the  brethren  of  the  different  lodges

appear  to  have  combined  under  the  title  of  the  "Grand  Commit-
tee." This  body,  it  would  seem,  subsequently  became  the  Grand

Lodge.

The  earliest  preserved  record  of  the  transactions  of  this  Commit-
tee has  the  date  of  July  17,  1 75 1 . 1 On  that  day  there  was  an  As-
sembly of  Ancient  Masons  at  the  "Turk's  Head  Tavern,"  in  Greek

Street,  Soho,  when  the  Masters  of  the  seven  lodges  which  recognized

1 Cited  by  Bro.  Robert  Freke  Gould  in  his  work  on  "The  Atholl  Lodges"  (p.  2),  to
which  work  I am  also  indebted  for  valuable  information  in  the  way  of  quotations  from  the
"Atholl  Records."  This  is  the  earliest  date  cited  in  the  "Atholl  Records."

1110

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

the  Grand  Committee  as  their  head,1  namely,  lodges  Nos.  2,  3,  4,  5,
6,  and  7,  "were  authorized  to  grant  Dispensations  and  Warrants  and
to  act  as  Grand  Master."

The  first  result  of  this  unusual  and  certainly  very  irregular  au-
thority conferred  upon  all  the  Masters  of  private  lodges  to  act  as
Grand  Master  was  the  Constitution  in  the  same  year  of  a lodge  at
the  "Temple  and  Sun,"  Shire  Lane,  Temple  Bar,  which  took  the

number  8,  and  this  appears  to  have  been  the  first  Warrant  issued  by
the  Ancients.

The  Warrant,  which  is  in  favor  of  James  Bradshaw,  Master,  and
Thomas  Blower  and  R.  D.  Guest,  as  Wardens,  is  signed  by  the
Masters  of  lodges  Nos.  3,  4,  5,  and  6.  This  would  imply  that  the
authority  and  prerogatives  of  a Grand  Master  were  conferred  not
upon  each  Master,  individually,  but  upon  the  whole  of  them,  col-
lectively, or  at  least  upon  a majority  of  them.  These  Masters  con-
stituted a body  which  in  its  exercise  of  the  prerogatives  of  a Grand
Master  has  since  found  its  analogue  in  the  "Council  of  the  Order  "
into  which  the  Grand  Orient  of  France  has  for  some  years  merged

its  Grand  Mastership,  though  the  mode  of  organization  of  the  latter
body  materially  differs  from  that  of  the  former.

This  "Grand  Committee,"  whose  presiding  officer  was  called
the  "President,"  exercised  the  functions  of  a Grand  Lodge  without
the  name  until  the  close  of  the  year  1752.  In  1751  it  granted  War-

rants for  two  other  lodges,  numbered  respectively  9 and  10;  in  1752
it  constituted  five  more,  respectively  numbered  as  11,  12,  13,  14,
and  15.

It  will  be  seen  that  in  its  legislation  the  Grand  Committee  refers
only  to  No.  2 as  its  oldest  lodge.  No.  1 must,  however,  have  ex-

isted, though  not  named  as  such  in  the  records.  But  in  the  list  of
Atholl  Lodges  given  by  Bro.  Gould,  No.  1 is  stated  to  have  been

called  the  "Grand  Master's  Lodge,"  and  its  Warrant  is  dated  Au-
gust 13,  1759.  In  1751  and  1752  it  could  not,  however,  have  borne

this  title,  because  during  those  years  there  was  no  Grand  Master

recognized  by  the  Ancients.

It  was  probably  the  senior  lodge,  the  first  which  seceded  from

1 Bro.  Gould  thinks  that  this  "Grand  Committee,"  which  subsequently  was  developed
into  a Grand  Lodge,  was  no  doubt  originally  the  senior  private  lodge  of  the  Ancients.
Ibid.,  Preface,  p.  ix.

THE  ATHOLL  GRAND  LODGE

1111

the  legitimate  Grand  Lodge,  and  with  which  Nos.  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  and
7 subsequently  united.

These  were  lodges  which  on  account  of  their  irregularities  and
schismatic  proceedings  had  been  stricken  from  the  roll  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England,  and  having  assumed  the  name  of  Ancient
Masons,  had  enrolled  themselves  under  the  lead  of  the  oldest  of
their  companions  in  secession.

This  older  lodge  appears  to  have  been  the  body  known  at  first
as  the  Grand  Committee  and  which,  some  time  after  the  organiza-
tion of  a Grand  Lodge,  received  the  title  of  "The  Grand  Master's
Lodge"  and  the  precedence  of  lodges  as  No.  1.

It  is  only  in  this  way  that  we  can  reasonably  explain  the  appar-
ent anomaly  that  of  the  seven  lodges  which  must  have  been  engaged
in  1751  in  the  work  of  the  Ancients,  no  mention  is  made  of  No.  1,
but  that  upon  No.  2,  with  the  five  other  lodges  of  later  numbers,
was  conferred  the  functions  of  a Grand  Master  and  the  power  of
warranting  lodges,  while  no  mention  is  made  of  No.  1,  the  oldest
of  the  seven.  The  fact  was  that  No.  1 constituted  the  really  gov-
erning body,  known  until  a Grand  Lodge  was  established  as  the
Grand  Committee.  Bro.  Gould,  who  has  very  carefully  investi-
gated the  history  of  the  Atholl  lodges,  entertains  the  same  opinion.

He  says:  "The  'Grand  Committee'  of  the  'Ancients,'  which
subsequently  developed  into  their  'Grand  Lodge,'  was,  no  doubt,
originally  their  senior  private  lodge,  whose  growth,  in  this  respect,
is  akin  to  that  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  the  'Modems,'  which,  com-
mencing in  1765  as  a private  Chapter,  within  a few  years  assumed
the  general  direction  of  the  R.  A.  Masonry,  and  issued  Warrants  of
constitution."1

Of  this  Grand  Committee  John  Morgan  was,  in  1751,  the  Sec-
retary. He  appears  to  have  been  very  remiss  in  the  performance  of
his  duties.  His  successor,  Laurence  Dermott,  who  was  elected
Secretary  or  Grand  Secretary  of  the  Committee  Lebruary  5,  1752,
reported  that  he  had  received  "no  copy  or  manuscript  of  the  Trans-
actions" from  Morgan,  and  did  not  believe  that  that  officer  had
ever  kept  a book  of  records.  This  neglect  has  thrown  much  ob-
scurity on  the  early  periods  of  the  history  of  the  Ancients.

The  "Grand  Lodge  of  England,  according  to  the  old  Institu-

'The  Atholl  Lodges,"  Preface,  p.  ix.

1112

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

tions,"  appears  to  have  been  organized  as  a Grand  Lodge  on  De«

cember  5,  1753,  for  on  that  day  Robert  Turner,  the  Master  of

Lodge  No.  15,  was  elected  the  first  Grand  Master.  Laurence

Dermott,  who  was  at  that  time  the  Secretary  of  the  Grand  Com-
mittee, became  the  Grand  Secretary  of  the  new  Grand  Lodge,

and  continued  in  that  office  until  the  year  1770.

In  writing  a sketch  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  "Ancients,"  it  would
not  be  fitting  to  the  prominent  position  he  occupied  in  its  history
to  give  to  Dermott  only  an  incidental  notice.  First  as  its  Grand
Secretary,  and  afterward  as  Grand  Master,  he  gave  to  the  scheme

of  organizing  a body  rivaling  that  of  the  Constitutional  Masons,  a
factitious  luster  which  secured  it  an  extraordinary  share  of  popular-

ity. It  must  be  admitted  that  this  was,  in  great  part,  accomplished
by  scandalous  statements,  devoid  of  truth;  while  such  a course
must  detract  from  his  moral  character,  we  can  not  deny  to  him  the

reputation  of  being  the  best  informed  and  the  most  energetic
worker  of  all  the  disciples  and  adherents  of  the  so-called  "Ancient
Masonry."  In  the  early  years  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  "Ancients"
we  look  in  vain  for  the  name  of  any  officer  or  member  distin-
guished for  social  rank  or  literary  reputation.  We  look  in  vain,
among  those  who  were  prominent  in  its  history,  for  such  scholars  as
Anderson  or  Payne  or  Desaguliers.  The  name  of  Dermott  shows

the  only  star  in  its  firmament,  not  indeed  peculiarly  effulgent  in
itself,  but  whose  brilliance  is  owing  to  contrast  with  the  obscurity
of  those  which  surround  it.

In  some  well  written  "Studies  of  Masonic  History,"  published

in  Mackey's  National  Freemason,  Bro.  J.  F.  Brennan  has  thus

described  the  successful  efforts  of  Dermott  to  establish  the  popu-
larity of  his  Grand  Lodge.

"The  history  of  that  period,  so  far  as  concerns  Laurence  Der-
mott's  strenuous  and  persistent  determination  to  establish  upon  a
firm  foundation  his  Grand  Lodge,  has,  except  in  slight  degree,

never  been  published,  if  it  has  ever  been  written.  Enough  to  say,

that  notwithstanding  the  most  earnest  antagonism  manifested

towards  him  by  the  1717  organization,  or  its  then  succession,  he
triumphantly  did  succeed,  and  not  only  divided  the  profits  of  Grand

Lodgeism  with  the  earlier  organization  in  London,  but  as  well  led
the  Grand  Lodges  of  Ireland  and  Scotland  to  believe  that  the  1717
organization  was  a spurious  body  and  therefore  unworthy  of  recog-

THE  ATHOLL  GRAND  LODGE

1113

nition  by  those  Grand  Lodges  while  his  Grand  Lodge  was  really
and  properly  the  true  Grand  Lodge  of  English  Lreemasons.  And
not  only  did  he  thus  succeed,  but  he  also  induced  Lreemasons  in
the  then  British  American  Colonies,  which  subsequently  became
the  United  States,  particularly  in  Pennsylvania,  Massachusetts,
New  York,  North  Carolina,  Virginia  and  South  Carolina  to  believe
that  in  his  Grand  Lodge  of  Ancient  York  Masons,  alone  was  true

Lreemasonry  extant;  and  so  well  did  he  succeed  that  while  in
several  of  those  colonies  he  established  under  his  Charter  lodges
assuming  to  be  Grand  Lodges,  in  Pennsylvania,  notably,  he  induced
all  the  lodges  there  already  and  for  several  years  established  to  sur-
render their  Charters  and  accept  from  him  Charters  preferably,  and

as  authority  for  their  practice  of  what  he  designated  the  real  An-
cient York  and  only  true  Masonry  recognized  or  properly  recogniz-
able, and  his  Ahiman  Rezon,  a plagiaristic  adaptation  of  the  1 723 1
publication  of  Anderson,  the  only  correct  'Book  of  Masonic  Con-
stitutions.' "2

Of  a man  so  successful  in  intrigue  we  know  but  little,  save

what  we  derive  from  his  connection  with  the  body  which  he  served
so  faithfully.  Unlike  Anderson  and  Desaguliers  and  Payne  and
Lolkes  and  other  lights  of  the  legitimate  Grand  Lodge,  he  wrote
nothing  and  did  nothing,  outside  of  Masonry,  which  could  secure
his  memory  from  oblivion.

Laurence  Dermott  was  bom  in  Ireland  in  the  year  1720.  In

1740  he  was  initiated  into  Lreemasonry  in  a Modem  lodge  at  Dub-
lin, and  on  June  24,  1746,  was  installed  as  Master  of  Lodge  No.  26
in  that  city.

It  is  undeniable  that  Dermott  was  a man  of  some  education.
Brother  Gould  says3  that  "besides  English  and  his  native  Irish,  Der-
mott seems  to  have  been  conversant  with  the  Jewish  tongue.  All
the  books  kept  by  him  as  Grand  Secretary  are  plastered  over  with
Hebrew  characters,  and  the  proceedings  of  the  Stewards'  lodge
record,  under  date  of  March  21,  1764,  'Heard  the  petition  of  G.  J.
Strange,  an  Arabian  Mason,  with  whom  the  Grand  Secretary  con-
versed in  the  Hebrew  language.'  " The  Ahiman  Rezon,  while  the

1 Brennan  is  here  in  error;  the  plagiarism,  of  which  there  is  no  doubt,  is  of  the  1738
and  not  the  1723  edition  of  Anderson's  "Constitutions."

2 Mackey's  "National  Freemason,"  Washington,  1872,  vol.  i.,  p.  302.

3 Cited  in  the  "Keystone,"  November  6,  1880.

1114

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

title  indicates  a smattering  at  least  of  Hebrew,  gives  several  proofs

that  Dermott  was  a man  of  some  reading.  He  was  not  a profound
scholar,  but  he  was  far  from  being  illiterate.

In  what  year  he  removed  to  England  is  not  known,  but  he  after-
ward joined  a lodge  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Constitutional

Grand  Lodge.  In  1751  he  removed  his  membership  to  Lodge  No.

1,  on  the  registry  of  the  "Ancients,"  and  was  a member  of  it  when

on  February  5,  1752,  he  was  elected  Grand  Secretary  of  the  seced-

ers'  Grand  Lodge.  From  that  time  he  devoted  all  his  energies  and

what  abilities  he  possessed  to  the  advancement  of  the  cause  of  the

"Ancients,"  with  what  success  has  already  been  seen.

He  was  appointed  Deputy  Grand  Master  on  March  2,  1771,  by

the  third  Duke  of  Atholl,  who  had  just  been  elected  Grand  Master.

On  December  27,  1777,  he  resigned  that  position,  and  at  his  request

W.  Dickey  was  appointed  as  his  successor  by  the  fourth  Duke  of

Atholl.  He  was  again  appointed  Deputy  on  December  27,  1783,

and  was,  at  his  own  request,  succeeded,  on  December  27,  1787,  by

James  Perry,  who  was  appointed  by  the  Earl  of  Antrim,  Grand

Master  at  that  time.  Dermott's  last  appearance  in  the  Grand  Lodge

was  on  June  3,  1789,  after  which  period  he  is  lost  sight  of.

During  this  long  period  of  thirty-seven  years  Laurence  Dermott
was  untiring  in  his  devotion  to  the  interests  of  the  "Grand  Lodge

of  England  according  to  the  Old  Institutions,"  and  to  the  propaga-

tion of  what  was  called  "Ancient  York  Masonry."

Six  years  after  its  organization  the  legitimate  Grand  Lodge,

established  in  1717,  had  prepared  and  published  a Book  of  Constitu-
tions. Dermott  felt  it  necessary  that  his  own  Grand  Lodge  should

also  have  a code  of  laws  for  its  government.

Accordingly,  in  1756  he  published  the  Constitutions  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  which  he  was  the  Grand  Secretary,  under  the  following  title:

Ahiman  Rezon:  or  a Help  to  a Brother,  showing  the  Excellency

of  Secrecy  and  the  first  cause  or  motive  of  the  Institution  of  Free-

masonry;  the  Principles  of  the  Craft  and  the  Benefits  from  a Strict

Obsen’ance  thereof  etc.,  also  the  Old  and  New  Regulations,  etc.

To  which  is  added  the  greatest  collection  of  Masons  Songs,  etc.  By

Laurence  Dermott,  Secretary >.

Other  editions,  with  the  title  much  abbreviated,  were  published
subsequently,  the  last,  by  Thomas  Harper,  in  1813,  the  year  before
the  union  of  the  two  Grand  Lodges.

THE  ATHOLL  GRAND  LODGE

1115

The  third  edition,  published  in  1778,  has  a much  briefer  title.
It  is  the  Ahiman  Rezon:  or  a Help  to  all  that  are,  or  would  be  Free
and  Accepted  Masons,  with  many  Additions.  By  Lau.  Dermott,
D.  G.  M.

In  this  work,  partly  in  an  address  "To  the  Reader"  (pages  i-
xxi),  and  in  what  he  calls  "A  Phylacterlal1  for  such  Gentlemen  as
may  be  inclined  to  become  Free-Masons"  (pages  xxii  to  xxviii),  he
gives  a confused  history  of  the  origin  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Mod-

ems and  of  his  own  Grand  Lodge,  claiming,  of  course,  for  the  latter
a priority  of  date,  and  decrying  the  former  as  a spurious  innovation
on  genuine  Freemasonry.

His  attempted  history  is,  on  account  of  its  meager  details  and  its

assumptions,  unsupported  by  any  authority,  utterly  without  value.
As  a specimen  of  its  worthlessness  as  an  historical  document,  the
following  narrative  of  the  Grand  Lodge  at  London  in  1717  affords
a fair  sample:

"About  the  year  1717,"  he  writes,  "some  joyous  companions
who  had  passed  the  degree  of  a craft  (though  very  rusty)  resolved
to  form  a lodge  for  themselves  in  order  (by  conversation)  to  recol-
lect what  had  been  formerly  dictated  to  them,  or  if  that  should  be
found  impracticable,  to  substitute  something  new,  which  might  for
the  future  pass  for  masonry  amongst  themselves.  At  this  meeting
the  question  was  asked  whether  any  person  in  the  assembly  knew

the  Master's  part,  and  being  answered  in  the  negative,  it  was  re-
solved, nem.  con.,  that  the  deficiency  should  be  made  up,  with  a new
composition,  and  what  fragments  of  the  old  order  found  amongst

them  should  be  immediately  reformed,  and  made  more  pliable  to  the
humors  of  the  people."2

In  this  absurd  way  he  proceeds  to  account  for  the  invention  of  a
ritual  by  the  "Modems,"  which  they  adopted  as  a substitute  for  the

genuine  possessed  by  the  "Ancients."

1 This  is  a Greek  word,  but  improperly  spelt  by  Dermott,  and  signifies  a precaution

or  warning.  Dermott  appears  to  have  been,  like  most  smatterers,  fond  of  using  words
borrowed  from  the  dead  languages,  and  incomprehensible  or  puzzling  to  plain  readers.
Witness  his  "Ahiman  Rezon,"  the  name  which  he  gives  to  his  Book  of  Constitutions,

the  prayer  which  he  calls  "Ahabath  Olam,"  and  this  "Philacteria."  "A  little  learn-
ing," says  Pope,  "is  a dangerous  thing,"  and  that  seems  to  have  been  Dermotfs  in-

firmity.

2 Dermotfs  "Ahiman  Rezon,"  third  edition,  p.  35.

1116

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Recent  researches  into  the  history  of  the  ritual  and  the  formation
of  the  three  degrees  which,  with  the  addition  of  the  Royal  Arch,
constitute  what  is  called  "Ancient  Craft  Masonry,"  make  it  un-
necessary to  prove  by  an  argument  that  all  of  Dermott's  statements
on  this  subject  are  utterly  false  and  the  mere  figment  of  his  own
invention.

It  is  indeed  extraordinary  that  this  unscrupulous  writer  should
have  had  the  audacity  to  assert  that  he  and  his  followers  were  in
possession  of  a system  of  Speculative  Freemasonry  much  older  than
that  which  was  practiced  by  the  Grand  Lodge,  organized  in  1717,
and  that  they  derived  their  authority  to  open  and  hold  their  lodges
from  this  more  ancient  system.

The  fact  is  that  Dermott  himself,  like  every  one  of  those  who

before  his  appearance  on  the  stage  had  separated  from  the  Consti-
tutional Grand  Lodge  and  established  what  they  called  "Lodges
of  Ancient  Masons,"  was  originally  made  in  a lodge  of  Moderns.
Whatever  he  knew  of  Speculative  Freemasonry  was  derived  from  a
lodge  in  Ireland  which  had  derived  its  authority  and  learned  its  les-
sons from  the  1717  Grand  Lodge  at  London.

The  first  schism,  which  took  place  in  1738,  was  not  pretended

to  be  based  on  the  fact  that  the  seceders  were  desirous  of  practicing
an  older  and  purer  Masonry  than  that  professed  by  the  Grand
Lodge  at  London.  It  was  because  they  were  unwilling  to  submit
to  the  constitutional  regulations  which  had  been  established  by  the

Grand  Lodge  and  because  their  irregular  proceedings,  in  violation
of  those  regulations,  had  met  with  necessary  censure  and  deserved
punishment.

It  is  true  that  after  the  secession  and  consequent  erasure  from
the  roll  of  these  contumacious  lodges,  the  Constitutional  Grand
Lodge,  to  prevent  the  visits  of  irregular  Masons,  had  most  unwisely
made  a few  alterations  in  the  modes  of  recognition.

These  alterations  were  not  adopted  by  the  seceders,  but  retaining
the  old  methods  which  had  been  in  use,  certainly  as  far  back  as  1723,
some  of  them  still  earlier,  they  claimed  to  be  "Ancient  Masons,"

because  they  adhered  to  the  old  forms,  while  they  stigmatized  the
Masons  who  still  maintained  their  allegiance  to  the  Constitution-
al Grand  Lodge  as  "Modems,"  because  they  practiced  the  new
methods.

And  this  is  in  fact  all  there  really  is  about  this  dispute  concern-

THE  ATHOLL  GRAND  LODGE

1117

ing  "Ancients"  and  "Modems,"  which  for  so  many  years  distracted
the  English  Craft,  and  the  remembrance  of  which  is  to  this  day  pre-
served and  perpetuated  in  America,  where  Dermott  Masonry  at  one
time  prevailed  to  a very  great  extent,  by  the  title  assumed  by  several
Grand  Lodges  of  "Ancient  Y ork  Masons."

The  hypothesis  that  there  was  any  Speculative  Freemasonry  dis-
tinct from  Operative  Freemasonry  that  can  be  traced  to  an  earlier
origin  than  that  of  the  Grand  Lodge  established  in  1717,  was  a fic-
tion invented  by  its  propagators  under  the  influence  of  interested
motives  and  ignorantly  accepted  by  their  successors  as  an  historical
fact.

We  know  from  documents  now  extant  that  Laurence  Dermott,
who  was  entered,  passed,  and  raised  in  a lodge  of  what  he  after-
ward called  a lodge  of  "Modems,"  who  afterward  presided  over  a
lodge  of  the  same  character  in  Ireland,  and  on  his  removal  to  Eng-
land renewed  his  connection  with  a Modem  lodge,  and  so  remained
until  he  was  elected  the  Grand  Secretary  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
"Ancients."

It  is  almost  impossible  to  believe,  that  with  the  knowledge  which
he  must  have  had  of  current  events,  he  could  have  honestly  been  of
the  opinion  that  there  was  any  Speculative  Freemasonry,  or  any
Grand  Lodge  of  Speculative  Freemasonry,  older  than  that  estab-
lished in  1717.

He  must  have  known,  too,  while  he  was  stigmatizing  this  body
as  illegal  and  sarcastically  styling  the  system  which  it  practiced
"the  memorable  invention  of  modem  masonry,"  that  from  it,  and
from  it  alone,  every  lodge  of  Speculative  Masons,  his  own  lodges
included,  either  directly  or  indirectly  had  derived  the  authority  for
their  existence.

Nothing  more  clearly  shows  the  insincerity  of  Dermott's  denun-
ciation of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  "Modems"  than  his  conduct  in
reference  to  the  Regulations.  It  is  known  that  in  1721  the  Grand
Lodge  approved  the  "General  Regulations  of  the  Free  and  Ac-
cepted Masons,"  which  had  been  compiled  the  year  before  by  Grand
Master  Payne.  In  1723  these  were  published  by  authority  of  the
Grand  Lodge,  together  with  the  "Old  Charges,"  which  had  been
"collected  from  the  old  Records"  and  "the  manner  of  Constituting
a New  Lodge"  as  practiced  by  Grand  Master  the  Duke  of  Wharton.

In  1738,  by  authority  of  the  same  Grand  Lodge,  a second  edition

1118

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

of  the  Book  of  Constitutions  was  published  under  the  editorship  of
Dr.  Anderson.  In  this  edition  Anderson  made  some  material
changes  in  the  language  of  the  "Old  Charges,"  and  in  "the  manner

of  Constituting  a New  Lodge,"  so  as  to  adapt  them  to  the  changes

in  the  Ritual  by  which  the  Master  Mason  superseded  the  Fellow-
Craft  as  the  crowning  degree  of  Speculative  Freemasonry.  He  also
published  the  "General  Regulations"  in  two  columns;  in  the  first
were  the  "Old  Regulations,"  printed  without  change,  and  in  the

other  column,  opposite  to  them,  were  "the  New  Regulations,  or
the  Alterations,  Improvements  or  Explications  of  the  Old,  made  by
several  Grand  Lodges  since  the  first  edition."

Now  this  second  edition,  having  after  inspection  of  the  manu-
script been  "approved  and  recommended"  by  the  Grand  Lodge,

"as  the  only  Book  of  Constitutions  for  the  use  of  the  lodges,"1  be-
came the  law  for  the  government  of  those  whom  Dermott  had  called
the  "Modem  Masons,"  and  the  organization  of  which  he  had  de-
clared to  be  "defective  in  number  and  consequently  defective  in
form  and  capacity."2

If  such  were  his  honest  opinion,  then  he  must  have  believed

that  the  Grand  Lodge  of  1717,  so  constituted,  was  an  illegal  body,
and  consequently  incapable  of  enacting  any  laws  or  regulations
or  instituting  any  ceremonies  which  could  be  of  binding  force
upon  the  Fraternity  which  derived  its  existence  from  an  older  insti-
tution.

But  we  find  that  so  far  from  repudiating  the  laws  enacted  by  this
illegal  and  defective  organization,  he  adopted  them  in  full  for  the
government  of  his  own  Grand  Lodge,  which  he  had  claimed  to  be
the  only  perfect  and  legal  one.

Therefore,  when  he  compiled  his  Ahiman  Rezon  and  bestowed
it  upon  the  "Ancients"  as  their  Book  of  Constitutions,  Dermott,
instead  of  seeking  laws  for  its  government  in  that  older  system,  whose
parentage  he  claimed,  deliberately  appropriated  from  the  1738  Book
of  Constitutions,  without  a change,  except  here  and  there  a brief
marginal  comment,  the  whole  of  the  "Old  Charges,"  the  "Old  and

1 Anderson's  "Constitutions,"  edition  of  1738,  p.  199.  In  the  next  edition  the  editor,

Entick,  restored  the  original  phraseology  of  1723,  but  the  "Charges"  and  "Regulations"

in  the  edition  of  1738  continued  to  be  the  law  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for  eighteen  years,  and
were  so  when  Dermott  adopted  them  for  the  government  of  his  Grand  Lodge.

2 Dermott's  "Ahiman  Rezon,"  p.  xiv.

THE  ATHOLL  GRAND  LODGE

1119

New  Regulations,"  and  "the  manner  of  Constituting  a New

Lodge."

The  irresistible  conclusion  from  this  is  that  while  pretending  to
believe  that  the  organization  of  1717  was  invalid  and  an  innovation
on  an  older  system  from  which  he  and  his  adherents  denied  their
existence,  Dermott  actually  knew  and  felt  that  the  organization  was
valid  and  legitimate,  that  the  Grand  Lodge  then  formed  was  reg-
ular and  constitutional,  and  that  the  laws  and  regulations  adopted

by  it  were  the  only  constitutional  authority  for  the  government  of

the  Craft.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Dermott  was  insincere  in  his  pro-
fessions and  consciously  untruthful  in  his  statements,  and  that  while
the  Masonic  schism  was  made  by  him  the  instrument  for  advancing

his  own  interests,  he  was  well  aware  that  all  his  pretensions  as  to  the

superior  antiquity  of  his  own  Grand  Lodge,  and  his  denunciations  of

the  Grand  Lodge  of  1717  as  a modem  and  illegal  organization,  were

false.

But  che  rapid  progress  made  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  "Ancients"
in  the  popular  regard,  which,  in  the  beginning  was  mainly  attributa-
ble to  the  untruthful  statements  and  the  specious  arguments  of

Dermott,  for  many  years  threw  a veil  over  the  defects  of  his  char-
acter.

"Throughout  his  eventful  career,"  says  Hughan,  "he  always
managed  to  secure  a good  working  majority  in  his  favor,  and  the
extraordinary  success  of  the  schism  was  an  argument  in  confirmation

of  his  views,  which  the  most  of  his  followers  acknowledged."1

Success,  says  Seneca,  makes  some  crimes  honorable,  and  Der-
mott, the  falsifier  of  history,  had  for  a long  time  an  honorable  name
in  England  and  America  among  the  adherents  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  which  he  was,  if  not  the  founder,  certainly  the  chief  supporter.

It  is  here  proper  to  say  a few  words  in  relation  to  Dermott's  con-
nection with  the  fabrication  of  the  Royal  Arch  degree.  This  degree,
which  Dermott  enthusiastically  calls  "the  root,  heart,  and  marrow  of
masonry,"2  was,  undoubtedly,  one  of  the  most  efficient  elements  in
giving  popularity  to  the  lodges  of  the  "Ancients,"  because  it  present-
ed as  an  additional  and  much  extolled  degree,  an  incentive  to  candi-
dates which  was  wanting  in  the  lodges  of  the  "Moderns."

1 Hughan,  "Memorials  of  the  Masonic  Union,"  p.  8.

2 Dermott,  "Ahiman  Rezon,"  second  edition,  1764,  p.  46.

1120

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

It  is,  however,  incorrect  to  credit  Dermott  (as  has  been  done  by
many  writers)  with  its  invention  or  even  its  introduction  into  the
system  of  the  "Ancients."  It  was  known  to  and  practiced  by  the

schismatic  lodges,  who  were  censured  for  their  "irregular  makings"
as  early  as  1738,  by  the  Constitutional  Grand  Lodge.  Dermott,  as
we  have  seen,  was  made  in  a "Modem"  lodge  in  Ireland,  became

affiliated  with  a Modem  lodge  in  London  when  he  removed  to  Eng-
land, and  could  have  known  nothing  of  the  Royal  Arch  degree  until
he  joined  No.  9,  an  "Ancient,"  in  1751.

That  he  afterward  cultivated  and  perhaps  enlarged  or  improved
the  degree,  and  gave  to  it  a prominence  which  it  did  not  at  first  pos-
sess, is  not  improbable.  But  it  is  an  error  to  attribute  to  him  its
invention.

But  this  subject  will  be  more  appropriately  and  more  fully  treated
in  the  Chapter  to  be  devoted  to  the  History  of  the  Origin  of  the

Royal  Arch  degree.

The  third  and  fourth  Dukes  of  Atholl  played  so  prominent  a
part  in  the  history  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  "Ancients"  as  to  give  to
that  body,  as  has  already  been  said,  the  distinctive  title  of  the

"Atholl  Grand  Lodge."  It  is  indeed  to  the  social  influence  of
these  noblemen,  combined  with  the  shrewdness  and  indomitable
energy  of  Laurence  Dermott,  that  the  Grand  Lodge  was  indebted
for  the  remarkable  success  which  it  achieved.

The  Grand  Lodge  at  the  date  of  its  organization  out  of  the

"Grand  Committee"  had  elected,  on  December  5,  1753,  Robert

Turner,  who  was  the  Worshipful  Master  of  Lodge  No.  15,  as  Grand
Master.  In  1754  Edward  Vaughan  was  elected  to  that  office.  In

1756  the  Earl  of  Blessington  received  the  Grand  Mastership,  and

was  succeeded  in  1760  by  the  Earl  of  Kelly,  who,  after  five  years  of
service,  was  followed  in  1766  by  the  Hon.  Thomas  Mathew,  who

served  until  1771.

In  1771  John,  the  third  Duke  of  Atholl,  was  elected  Grand  Mas-
ter. The  Duke  was  a member  of  the  Scottish  Craft,  and  in  the  follow-
ing year  was  elected  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland,
so  that,  as  he  continued  in  his  English  office  until  his  death,  in  1774,
he  was  at  the  same  time  Grand  Master  both  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Scotland  and  of  the  "Ancient"  Grand  Lodge  of  England.  The
effect  of  this  unusual  concurrence  of  two  offices,  whereby  the  leader-
ship of  the  Craft  in  two  countries  was  vested  in  the  same  person,

THE  ATHOLL  GRAND  LODGE

1121

was  seen  in  a close  union  which  about  that  time  was  cemented
between  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  and  that  of  the  "Ancients"

in  England.

In  1782  the  Earl  of  Antrim  was  elected  Grand  Master,  and

served  until  1790.  From  1773  to  1779  the  Earl  had  been  Grand

Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ireland.

This  shrewd  policy  of  electing  leading  Masons  in  the  two  sister
kingdoms  to  the  highest  position  in  the  "Ancient"  Grand  Lodge
of  England,  very  soon  displayed  the  effect  which  Dermott  had

wisely  expected  to  be  produced.

On  September  2,  1771,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  "Ancients,"  meet-
ing at  the  "Half  Moon  Tavern"  in  Cheapside,1  Laurence  Der-

mott being  in  the  chair  as  Deputy  Grand  Master,  adopted  the
following  resolution,  which  the  Grand  Secretary  was  ordered  to
transmit  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ireland:

"It  is  the  opinion  of  this  Grand  Lodge  that  a brotherly  con-
nection and  correspondence  with  the  Right  Worshipful  Grand
Lodge  of  Ireland  has  been  and  will  always  be  found  productive  of
honor  and  advantage  to  the  Craft  in  both  kingdoms."

At  the  same  time  it  was  ordered  that  the  Grand  Secretary  should
annually  transmit  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ireland  the  names  of
officers  elected  and  any  other  information  that  might  be  of  interest
to  the  Craft.

It  was  further  ordered  that  no  Mason  made  under  the  sanction
of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ireland  should  be  admitted  as  a member  nor
partake  of  the  General  Charity  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England
unless  he  produced  a certificate  from  the  Irish  Grand  Secretary.2

At  the  same  meeting,  on  the  proposition  of  Dermott,  a corre-
spondence was  ordered  to  be  opened  with  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scot-
land.

The  response  from  both  the  Grand  Lodges  of  Ireland  and  of
Scotland  was  very  satisfactory  to  the  "Ancients."

On  November  5,  1772,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ireland,  Viscount

1 The  Half  Moon  in  Cheapside  was,  during  the  17th  and  18th  centuries,  a tavern  of

some  notoriety.  Ashmole  records  in  his  Diary,  under  date  of  March  11,  1682,  that  he

was  at  "a  noble  dinner  given  at  the  Half  Moon  Tavern  in  'Cheapside.' " The  Grand
Lodge  of  Ancients  met  there,  but  subsequently  removed  to  the  Crown  and  Anchor.

2 Dermott  had  previously  opened  a correspondence  with  Thomas  Corker,  the  Deputy
Grand  Secretary  of  Ireland,  to  prepare  the  way  for  this  action.  See  "Ahiman  Rezon,"
edition  of  1778,  p.  lvi.

1122

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Dunluce  being  Grand  Master,  adopted  a resolution  which  declared
that  it  entirely  agreed  with  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  that  a
brotherly  connection  and  correspondence  between  the  two  Grand
Lodges  had  been  and  always  would  be  found  of  honor  and  advan-
tage to  the  Craft  in  both  kingdoms.1

It  was  also  ordered  that  the  particular  occurrences  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Ireland  should  from  time  to  time  be  continued  to  be
transmitted  to  the  Grand  Secretary  of  England,  and  that  "here-
after no  English  Mason  shall  be  considered  worthy  of  their  charity
without  producing  a certificate  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England."

The  letter  suggested  by  Dermott  was  sent  to  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Scotland.  It  was  of  the  same  purport  and  almost  in  the  same
language  as  that  transmitted  to  Ireland,  except  that  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England  expressed  the  opinion  that  a brotherly  connec-
tion and  correspondence  with  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  "will
be  found  productive  of  honor  and  advantage  to  the  fraternity  in
general."

There  is  no  reference,  as  I have  stated  in  the  preceding  note,  to
any  former  correspondence,  but  only  the  proposal  for  a future  one.

On  November  30,  1772,  the  Earl  of  Dumfries  being  Grand  Mas-
ter, and  the  Duke  of  Atholl  being  present  as  Grand  Master  elect,
the  letter  and  resolution  of  the  "Grand  Lodge  of  England  accord-
ing to  the  Old  Institutions"  being  read  (so  says  the  record),  "the
Grand  Lodge  were  of  opinion  that  the  brotherly  love  and  inter-
course which  the  Right  Worshipful  Grand  Lodge  of  England  were
desirous  to  establish  would  be  serviceable  to  both  Grand  Lodges
and  productive  of  honor  and  advantage  to  the  fraternity."2

The  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  accordingly  commenced  the  cor-
respondence by  transmitting  the  names  of  the  officers  that  day
elected,  and  ordered  the  same  to  be  done  yearly,  together  with  any
other  information  that  might  be  of  honor  and  advantage  to  the
Craft.

It  also  ordered  "that  no  Mason,  made  under  the  sanction  of  the

1 The  use  of  the  word  "continued"  and  the  phraseology  in  the  resolution  of  both
bodies  that  a brotherly  connection  and  correspondence  "have  been  and  always  will  be"
would  indicate  that  such  a connection  and  correspondence  had  previously  existed  between
the  two  Grand  Lodges.  This  phraseology  is  not  used  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England
in  the  resolution  sent  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland,  nor  is  it  employed  by  that  body  in
its  responsive  resolution.  In  both,  the  reference  is  only  to  a future  correspondence.

2 Laurie,  "History  of  Freemasonry,"  p.  208.  Dermott,  "Ahiman  Rezon,"  p.  lx.

THE  ATHOLL  GRAND  LODGE

1123

'Grand  Lodge  of  England  according  to  the  Old  Institutions,'  shall
be  admitted  a member  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland,  nor  partake
of  the  general  charity  without  having  first  produced  a certificate  of
his  good  behavior  from  the  Secretary  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng-
land."1

The  reader  will  notice  a very  important  difference  in  the  phrase-
ology of  the  orders  of  the  two  Grand  Lodges  of  Ireland  and  Scot-

land, which  if  intentionally  made  would  indicate  the  feelings  of  each
to  the  Constitutional  Grand  Lodge  of  England.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  Ireland,  addressing  the  Grand  Lodge  of
"Ancients,"  calls  it  "the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,"  and  refuses

recognition  to  any  "English  Mason"  who  does  not  produce  a cer-
tificate from  it.

The  necessary  effect  of  this  order  would  be  to  repudiate  the
Grand  Lodge  of  "Modems"  and  to  place  all  its  members  under  the

ban  as  illegal  Masons.  It  is  very  evident  that  no  member  of  a lodge

of  "Modems"  would  seek  or  obtain  a certificate  from  the  Grand
Lodge  of  "Ancients,"  and  without  this,  if  he  visited  Ireland,  he
would  be  debarred  by  the  terms  of  the  Order  from  all  his  Masonic
rights  and  privileges.  Such  an  order  would,  according  to  the  views
of  the  present  day,  be  considered  as  a recognition  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  "Ancients"  as  the  only  regular  Masonic  authority  in  England.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  was  more  prudent  in  its  choice
of  language.  It  specifically  designated  the  body  in  England  with

which  it  was  about  to  establish  a brotherly  correspondence  as  "the

Grand  Lodge  of  England  according  to  the  Old  Institutions,"  and
required  only  Masons  made  under  its  sanction  to  present  its  certifi-

cates. Thus  we  may  justly  infer  that  Masons  made  under  the  sanc-
tion of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  "Modems"  were  not  excluded  from  Ma-
sonic visitation  if  they  had  the  certificate  of  their  own  Grand  Lodge.

The  Grand  Lodges  of  Ireland  and  Scotland,  however,  subse-
quently reconsidered  their  action  and  eventually  assumed  the  posi-
tion of  neutrality  or  indifference  in  the  contest,  but,  says  Hughan,
"during  the  period  that  they  especially  countenanced  the  refrac-
tory brethren,  the  latter  made  considerable  out  of  the  fact,  and  pro-

claimed their  alliance  with  these  two  Grand  Lodges  far  and  near."2

1 Laurie,  "History  of  Freemasonry,"  p.  208.  Dermott,  "Ahiman  Rezon,"  p.  lx.

2 Hughan,  "Masonic  Memorials,"  p.  14.

1124

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Looking  at  the  subject  from  the  legal  stand-point  of  the  present
day,  one  can  not  but  be  greatly  surprised  at  the  action  taken  by  the
Irish  and  Scottish  Masons.

Here  are  two  Grand  Lodges,  the  former  of  which  was  indebted
to  the  legitimate  Grand  Lodge  of  England  for  its  organization  and
the  latter  for  its  ritual,  deliberately  ignoring  that  body  and  acknowl-
edging as  legitimate  a schismatic  association  which  their  ancient
ally  had  declared  to  be  irregular.

Evidently  Masonic  jurisprudence  had  not  then  assumed  those
formal  principles  by  which  it  is  now  distinguished  and  by  which  it
governs  the  institution.

Scarcely  less  surprising  is  it  that  the  Constitutional  Grand  Lodge
of  England  appears  to  have  taken  no  notice  of  these  proceedings,
nor  entered  any  protest  against  their  want  of  comity.  Neither
Preston  nor  Northouck,  in  their  chronicle  of  the  times,  make  any
reference  to  this  manifest  invasion  of  legitimate  authority.  It  is
passed  over  by  both  in  silence  as  something  which  they  either
deemed  inexplicable  or  not  worthy  of  mention.

The  Grand  Lodge  itself,  when  four  or  five  years  after  it  repeated
its  denunciation  of  the  "Ancients,"  treated  the  two  Grand  Lodges
which  had  sustained  its  rival  with  a courtesy  which  under  similar
circumstances  at  this  day  it  would  hardly  repeat.

On  April  7,  1777,  the  Constitutional  Grand  Lodge  held  an

"extraordinary"  communication  to  take  into  consideration  "the
proper  means  of  discouraging  the  irregular  assemblies  of  persons
calling  themselves  ancient  masons,"  when  the  following  resolution
was  passed:

"It  is  the  opinion  of  this  Grand  Lodge,  that  the  persons  calling

themselves  ancient  masons,  and  now  assembling  in  England  or  else-
where, under  the  patronage  of  the  Duke  of  Atholl  are  not  to  be
considered  as  masons,  nor  are  their  meetings  to  be  countenanced  or

acknowledged  by  any  lodge  or  mason  acting  under  our  authority.

But  this  censure  shall  not  extend  to  any  mason  who  shall  produce  a

certificate  or  give  other  satisfactory  proof  of  his  having  been  made
a mason  in  a regular  lodge  under  the  Constitution  of  Scotland,  Ire-
land, or  any  foreign  Grand  Lodge  in  alliance  with  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England."1

Northouck,  "Constitutions,"  p.  323.

THE  ATHOLL  GRAND  LODGE

1125

So  the  Grand  Lodges  of  Ireland  and  Scotland  were  recognized

by  the  Constitutional  Grand  Lodge  as  in  friendly  alliance  with  it,
notwithstanding  that  the  one  had  repudiated  all  English  Masons
who  were  not  "Ancients,"  and  the  other  had  acknowledged  the

Grand  Lodge  of  "Ancients"  as  a regular  and  legally  constituted

organization.

The  comparison  which  is  thus  afforded  of  the  energy  of  the
"Ancients"  and  the  apathy  of  the  "Modems"  would  alone  suffi-
ciently account  for  the  rapid  success  and  growing  popularity  of  the
former  body,  were  there  no  other  causes  existing  to  produce  the
same  result.

It  was  very  natural  that  the  "Ancient"  Grand  Lodge,  elated  by

this  success  and  popularity,  should  in  an  official  document  issued  in
1802  have  declared  that  its  members  "can  not  and  must  not  receive
into  the  body  of  a just  and  perfect  lodge,  nor  treat  as  a Brother  any
person  who  has  not  received  the  obligations  of  Masonry  according
to  the  "Ancient"  Constitutions  as  practiced  by  the  United  Grand
Lodges  of  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland,  and  the  regular  branches
that  have  sprung  from  their  sanction."1

The  schismatics  had  now  claimed  to  be  regular,  and  the  regular
Masons  were  relegated  by  them  to  the  realms  of  schism.  It  is  the
nature  of  men,  says  the  Italian  historian  Guicciardini,  when  they
leave  one  extreme  in  which  they  have  been  forcibly  held  to  rush
speedily  to  the  opposite.  Just  before  the  middle  of  the  18th  cen-
tury the  "Ancient"  Masons,  who  were  embraced  in  only  a few
lodges,  were  accepting  the  censures  of  the  Constitutional  Grand
Lodge  for  their  irregularities,  and  were  humbly  but  not  sincerely
making  promises  of  reformation.  At  its  close  they  were  denounc-
ing their  old  masters  as  irregular  and  proclaiming  themselves  to  be
the  only  true  Masons  in  England.

Mention  has  been  frequently  made  of  the  successful  progress  of
the  "Ancients"  in  the  propagation  of  their  system.  The  authentic
records  of  the  time  afford  the  most  satisfactory  evidence  of  this  fact.

Commencing  its  organized  opposition  to  the  regular  Grand
Lodge  in  1751,  under  a superintending  head  styled  the  "Grand
Committee,"  which  was  in  fact  the  premier  lodge,  and  six  others,  it
constituted  in  1751  and  1752  seven  others.  In  1753  these  lodges

1 See  the  edition  of  the  "Ahiman  Rezon,"  1804,  p.  130.

1126

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

organized  the  "Grand  Lodge  of  England  according  to  the  Old  In-
stitutions." In  the  course  of  the  next  four  years  it  constituted  thirty
additional  lodges  in  London  and  ten  more  in  various  parts  of  the
kingdom,  namely,  two  at  Bristol,  three  at  Liverpool,  and  one  each
at  Manchester,  Warrington,  Coventry,  Worcester,  and  Deptford,  so
that  at  the  end  of  the  year  1757  there  were  or  had  been  fifty-four
lodges  in  England  acknowledging  allegiance  to  the  "Ancient"
Grand  Lodge.

But  its  operations  were  not  confined  to  the  narrow  limits  of  the
kingdom.  Lodges  and  a Provincial  Grand  Lodge  were  established
in  Nova  Scotia  as  early  as  1757,  and  in  a few  years  there  were  lodges
and  Provincial  Grand  Lodges  in  Canada,  in  the  American  colonies,
in  the  West,  at  Minorca  in  the  Mediterranean,  in  the  distant  island
of  St.  Helena,  and  in  the  East  Indies.

In  1774  the  third  Duke  of  Atholl  died,  being  at  the  time,  as  he
had  been  since  1771,  the  Grand  Master  of  the  "Ancients."

His  son  and  the  successor  to  his  title,  John  the  fourth  Duke,
was  not  a Mason  at  the  time  of  his  father's  death.  On  February
25,  1775,  as  we  learn  from  the  Minutes  of  the  Grand  Committee,1
he  received  the  first  three  degrees  in  the  Grand  Master's  Lodge  of
Ancient  Masons,  and  was  immediately  chosen  as  Master  of  that
lodge.  On  March  1st,  in  the  same  year,  only  four  days  after  his
initiation,  he  was  unanimously  elected  to  succeed  his  father  as

Grand  Master.

The  object  of  Dermott  and  his  companions  in  thus  elevating  a
mere  tyro  to  the  magistral  chair  was  simply  to  retain  for  their

Grand  Lodge  the  great  influence  and  patronage  of  the  Scottish

House  of  Atholl.  In  1782  the  Duke  was  succeeded  by  the  Earl,
afterward  the  Marquis,  of  Antrim,  an  Irish  nobleman,  who  held

the  office  of  Grand  Master  until  1791.

The  Duke  of  Atholl  was  then  re-elected,  and  continued  to  pre-
side over  the  Grand  Lodge  until  the  year  1813,  when  he  resigned
and  was  succeeded  by  the  Duke  of  Kent,  who  assumed  the  office  as
a preliminary  step  toward  the  union  of  the  two  Grand  Lodges,  which
was  consummated  in  that  year.

The  following  is  a correct  list  of  the  Grand  Masters  of  the
"Grand  Lodge  of  England  according  to  the  Old  Institutions,"  or

Cited  by  Bro.  Gould  in  his  "Atholl  Lodges,"  p.  i.

THE  ATHOLL  GRAND  LODGE

1127

more  familiarly  speaking,  the  "Grand  Lodge  of  Ancients,"  or  the
"Atholl  Grand  Lodge,"  from  its  birth  to  its  death.  It  was  first
compiled  by  Bro.  W.  J.  Hughan,  and  published  in  his  Masonic
Memorials.  I have  verified  it  (though  verification  was  hardly  neces-
sary of  so  accurate  an  historian)  by  collation  with  other  authorities.

1753,

Robert  Turner,

1754-55,

Edward  Vaughan,

1756-59,

Earl  of  Blessington,

1760-65,

Earl  of  Kellie,

1766-70,

Hon.  Thomas  Mathew,

1771-74,

John,  third  Duke  of  Atholl,

1775-81,

John,  fourth  Duke  of  Atholl,

1782-90,

Earl  of  Antrim,

1791-1813,

John,  fourth  Duke  of  Atholl,

1813,

Duke  of  Kent.

The  following  is  a list  of  the  Grand  Secretaries  who  served  dur-

ing  the  same  period:

1752,

John  Morgan,

1752-70,

Laurence  Dermott,

1771-76,

William  Dickey,

1777-78,

James  Jones,

1779-82,

Charles  Bearblock,

1783-84,

Robert  Leslie,

1785-89,

John  McCormick,

1790-1813,

Robert  Leslie,

It  is  inconceivable  how  Preston  could  have  committed  so  grave
an  historical  error  as  to  say,  "the  fact  is,  that  the  'Ancients'  after
their  secession  continued  to  hold  their  meetings  without  acknowl-
edging a superior  till  1772,  when  they  chose  for  their  grand  master
the  Duke  of  Atholl."1  He  was  apparently  utterly  ignorant  of  the
fact,  here  shown,  that  their  first  Grand  Master  was  elected  in  1753,
and  that  from  that  time  until  the  dissolution  of  their  Grand  Lodge
in  1813  the  office  was  filled  by  an  uninterrupted  succession  of  Grand
Masters.  Voila  justement  comme  on  ecrit  I'histoire.2

In  conclusion  it  is  necessary  to  say  something  of  the  character

1 "Illustrations  of  Masonry,"  p.  358.  2 Voltaire,  "Chariot,"  I.  p.  7.

1128

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

and  pretensions  of  the  Grand  Lodge  which  created  a Masonic  schism
that  lasted  in  an  organized  form  for  sixty  years,  and  which  extended
its  influence  into  every  part  of  the  civilized  world  where  the  English
language  was  spoken.

The  Freemasons,  who  about  1738  seceded  from  the  Constitu-
tional Grand  Lodge  of  England,  and  soon  after  began  to  call  them-
selves "Ancient  Masons,"  and  who  stigmatized  the  regular  members
of  the  Craft  as  "Modems,"  were  not  incited  to  the  secession  in  con-
sequence of  any  innovations  that  had  been  made  upon  the  ritual  by
the  Grand  Lodge  from  which  they  separated.

Those  innovations  were  the  consequence  and  not  the  cause  of
their  secession.  They  were  made  by  the  Grand  Lodge,  so  as  to  pro-
duce a change  in  the  working  that  would  exclude  the  visits  of  the
seceders  to  the  regular  lodges.  They  were  indeed  not  very  impor-
tant and  did  not  at  all  affect  the  traditional  history  or  the  symbolic
system  of  Speculative  Freemasonry.  The  adoption  of  them  was
certainly,  however,  a very  great  error,  and  the  seceders  were  not  slow
to  avail  themselves  of  the  charge  of  innovation,  so  distasteful  to  the
Masonic  mind,  to  produce  a feeling  of  sympathy  in  their  behalf.

But  the  truth  is  that  the  first  innovation,  and  this,  too,  a very
important  one,  was  made  by  the  "Ancients"  themselves,  and  the
practice  of  it  was  the  cause  of  the  censures  passed  by  the  regular
Grand  Lodge,  which  was  the  first  step  that  led  to  the  final  separa-
tion.

It  is  important  to  settle  the  nature  of  this  innovation,  because  it
is  really  the  "chief  corner-stone"  on  which  the  schism  of  the  "An-
cients" was  founded,  and  because  one  of  the  almost  contemporary
historians  of  the  Regular  Grand  Lodge  has  committed  a grave  error
in  respect  to  it.

Northouck,  who  in  1784  gave  us  the  best  edited  edition  of  the
Book  of  Constitutions,  in  speaking  of  the  conduct  of  the  Masons

engaged  in  the  "irregular  makings"  which  in  1739  elicited  the  cen-
sures of  the  Grand  Lodge,  has  the  following  passage:

"In  contempt  of  the  ancient  and  established  laws  of  the  Order,
they  set  up  a power  independent,  and  taking  advantage  of  the  inex-
perience of  their  associates,  insisted  that  they  had  an  equal  authority

with  the  Grand  Lodge  to  make,  pass,  and  raise  masons.  At  this

time  no  private  lodge  had  the  power  of  passing  or  raising  masons;

nor  could  any  brother  be  advanced  to  either  of  these  degrees  but  in

THEATHOLL  GRAND  LODGE

1129

the  Grand  Lodge,  with  the  unanimous  consent  and  approbation  of
all  the  brethren  in  communication  assembled."1

It  is  unaccountable  that  Northouck  should  ignorantly  or  design-
edly have  made  an  assertion  so  entirely  untruthful  as  that  which  is
contained  in  the  last  clause  of  the  above-cited  paragraph.

It  is  true  that  in  1723,  at  about  the  time  of  the  fabrication  of
the  Second  and  Third  degrees  a clause  was  inserted  in  the  13th  of
the  Thirty-nine  Regulations  which  declared  that  "Apprentices
must  be  admitted  Masters  and  Fellow  Crafts  only  here  (in  the
Grand  Lodge)  unless  by  dispensation."  This  was  done,  in  all  prob-
ability, to  secure  the  proper  conferring  of  the  newly  fabricated
degrees  in  the  hands  of  their  inventors  and  of  experienced  Masons,

instead  of  entrusting  them  to  Masters  of  lodges  who  might  be
incompetent  to  preserve  the  purity  of  the  ritual.

But  this  objection  was  soon  obviated  as  the  degrees  became

more  common,  and  the  inconvenience  of  the  Regulation  being
recognized,  it  was  repealed  in  1725.

On  November  22,  1725,  they  adopted  a new  regulation  that

"The  Master  of  a lodge  with  its  Wardens  and  a competent  number
of  the  lodge  assembled  in  due  form  can  make  Masters  and  Fellows

at  discretion."2

Seeing  that  this  new  regulation  was  published  both  by  Ander-
son in  1738  and  by  Entick  in  1756  in  their  respective  editions

of  the  Book  of  Constitutions,  with  which  Northouck  must  have
been  familiar,  especially  with  the  latter,  and  seeing  also  that  there  is

no  provision  restraining  the  passing  and  raising  of  Candidates  by

private  lodges  contained  in  the  code  of  Regulations  published  by

Northouck  in  his  edition,  but  on  the  contrary,  one  which  expressly
recognizes  that  right,3  it  is,  as  I have  said,  unaccountable  that  he

should  have  ignorantly  committed  the  error  of  which  he  has  been
guilty,  nor  is  it  to  be  believed  that  he  would  have  done  so  designedly.

The  truth  is  that  the  act  which  called  down  upon  certain

Masons  the  censures  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  and  which  finally  pro-

1 Northouck's  edition  of  "Book  of  Constitutions,"  note  on  p.  240.

2 See  Anderson,  edition  of  1738,  p.  160,  and  Entick,  edition  of  1756,  p.  280,  where
this  new  Regulation  will  be  found.

3 "Nor  shall  any  Lodge  be  permitted  to  make  and  raise  a brother  at  the  same  meet-
ing, without  a dispensation  from  the  Grand  Master  or  his  Deputy,  on  very  particular

occasions."  Regulations  published  by  Northouck  in  his  editions  of  the  "Constitutions,"
p.  392.

1130

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

duced  the  separation,  was  not  the  conferring  of  the  Second  and  Third
degrees  in  their  lodges,  for  this  was  a prerogative  that  had  long
before  been  conceded  to  them,  but  it  was  the  conferring  of  the
Master's  degree  in  a form  unknown  to  the  existing  ritual  of  the
Grand  Lodge,  and  the  supplementing  it  with  an  entirely  new  and
Fourth  degree.

The  "irregular  making  of  Masons,"  which  according  to  Entick1
was  complained  of  in  1739,  was  the  mutilation  of  the  Third  degree
and  the  transferring  of  its  concluding  part  to  another  degree  called
the  "Royal  Arch."

The  Chevalier  Ramsey,  a Freemason  of  much  learning,  was  the
inventor  of  a series  of  degrees  supplementary  to  the  system  of  Craft
Masonry,  which  have  furnished  the  substratum  for  most  if  not  all  of
the  Modem  Rites.  Among  these  was  one  now  known  to  ritualists
as  the  "Royal  Arch  of  Solomon."

Ramsey  went  to  England  in  the  year  1728,  where  he  received
from  the  University  of  Oxford  the  degree  of  Doctor  of  the  Laws.
He  sought,  it  is  said,  to  induce  the  Grand  Lodge  to  adopt  his
system  of  high  degrees.  But  the  leading  members  of  that  body
were  extremely  conservative  and  refused  to  make  any  change  in  the
ritual.

But  there  were  some  of  the  Fraternity  with  whom  he  was  more
successful.  It  is  not  by  any  means  intended  to  affirm  that  the
Royal  Arch  degree  of  Ramsey  was  accepted  in  the  form  or  even
with  the  legend  which  he  had  invented.

This  would  not  be  hue.  But  the  theory  advanced  by  Ramsey

doubtless  awakened  in  their  minds  new  views  and  suggested  ideas
which  were  novel,  but  which  were  believed  to  be  essential  to  the

perfection  of  Masonic  symbolism.

From  the  earliest  times  of  Speculative  Masonry  the  "Word,"  or,
as  it  was  called  by  the  Masons  of  Scotland,  the  "Mason  Word,"
had  always  held  a prominent  place  in  the  Masonic  ritual,  and  was,
we  have  every  reason  to  believe,  one  of  the  few  symbols  retained  by
the  Speculative  out  of  the  Operative  system.  The  triangle,  it  will

be  remembered,  always  in  Christian  Iconography  an  emblem  of  the

Godhead,  was  a favorite  architectural  ornament  used  by  the  Stone-
masons of  the  Middle  Ages.

1 Entick,  "Constitutions,"  p.  228.

THE  ATHOLL  GRAND  LODGE

1131

Adopted  by  the  Speculative  Freemasons,  it  was  placed  by  them,
when  they  fabricated  their  ritual,  as  a prominent  symbol  in  the  Mas-
ter's degree,  to  which  it  had  been  transferred  from  the  original
degree  or  ritual  common  to  all  the  Craft. 1

But  the  Master's  degree  as  it  was  constructed  by  Dr.  Desaguliers
and  his  collaborators  was  as  to  the  history  of  this  "Word"  imper-
fect. The  legend  detailing  the  method  by  which  it  had  been  lost  to
the  Craft  was  preserved,  but  no  provision  had  been  made  to  ac-
count for  its  recovery.

The  legend  was  not  carried  out  to  its  denouement.  The  story
was  left  unfinished,  and  although  the  "Word"  was  there  and  was
communicated  to  the  Master,  no  one  could  tell,  for  he  was  not  in-
formed, how  it  got  there.

Now  Ramsey,  who  was  a thinker  and  a man  of  much  learning,
had  seen  this  defect  in  the  Masonic  scheme  and  had  supplied  the  de-
ficiency by  the  invention  of  his  "Royal  Arch  of  Solomon."  He  thus
perfected  what  he  had  found  unfinished,  and  gave  completeness  and
connection  to  all  the  details  of  the  allegory.

Some  of  the  English  Masons  had  doubtless  seen  the  fault  in  the
system  of  Desaguliers  which  had  been  adopted  and  sanctioned  by
the  Grand  Lodge.  When  Ramsey  arrived  in  England  and  pro-
posed his  new  arrangement  by  which  that  fault  was  to  be  amended,
though  the  Grand  Lodge,  as  the  representative  of  the  Fraternity,
refused  to  accept  his  system,  and  preferred  to  "stand  on  the  old
ways,"  imperfect  as  they  were,  there  were  brethren  not  so  strictly
conservative  in  their  views  who  were  impressed  with  the  advantage
of  accepting  the  suggestions  of  Ramsey.  These  brethren  were  the
seceders  who,  about  the  year  1738,  were  concerned  in  "irregular
makings,"  that  is,  who  undertook  to  confer  the  Master's  degree  in
a form  different  from  that  which  was  sanctioned  by  the  Grand
Lodge.

At  this  distance  of  time  it  is  impossible  to  know,  with  anything
like  precision,  what  were  the  precise  changes  made  by  the  "An-
cients" in  the  old  and  accepted  ritual  of  the  "Modems."  It  is,
however,  very  satisfactorily  evident,  from  the  course  of  contempo-

1 In  primitive  lodges  of  Scotland,  and  the  practice  prevailed  in  England  and  else-
where,  the  Mason  Word  was  communicated  to  Apprentices.  Lyon  says  "this  was  the
germ  whence  has  sprung  Symbolical  Masonry."  "History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"

1132

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

raneous  history  and  from  the  succession  of  events,  that  that  change,
whatever  it  was,  finally  led  to  the  development  of  the  Royal  Arch
degree,  such  as  it  is  now  practiced,  as  a necessary  completion  of  the
Master's  part,  and  therefore  as  a recognized  section  of  Ancient
Craft  Masonry.

In  so  far,  then,  the  secession  of  the  "Ancients,"  however  un-
justifiable it  was  in  its  inception  as  a violation  of  Masonic  law,  was
in  its  subsequent  results  of  great  advantage  to  the  system  of  Specu-
lative Freemasonry.  It  gave  to  Masonic  symbolism  a completeness
and  perfection  that  was  altogether  wanting  under  the  old  arrange-
ment of  only  three  degrees,  and  supplied  a break  in  the  history  of
the  "Word"  which  it  is  strange  that  the  ritualists  of  the  earlier
period  of  the  1 8th  century  had  not  perceived  nor  appreciated.

The  introduction  of  this  degree  was  for  a long  time  vehemently
opposed  by  the  regular  Grand  Lodge  as  an  innovation  on  the  land-
marks. They  even  treated  it  with  contempt.

To  a petitioner  from  Ireland  applying  for  relief  the  Grand  Sec-

retary of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  "Modems"  replied:  "Our  Society  is
neither  Arch,  Royal  Arch,  nor  Ancient,  so  that  you  have  no  right  to
partake  of  our  charity."1

But  the  innovation  was  advocated  with  such  ability  and  became
so  popular  that  the  regular  Grand  Lodge  was  compelled  to  succumb
to  what  was  evidently  the  wish  of  the  Fraternity,  and  at  length  to
adopt  what  they  had  so  persistently  condemned.2

On  June  12,  1765,  a Royal  Arch  Chapter  was  formed  in  connec-
tion with  the  "Modems,"  which  was  in  the  subsequent  year  con-

verted into  a Grand  Chapter.  Hughan  says  it  "was  virtually,
though  not  actually,  countenanced  by  the  Grand  Lodge.  It  was
purely  a defensive  organization  to  meet  the  wants  of  the  regular

brethren,  and  prevent  their  joining  the  Ancients  for  exaltation."3

In  1813,  at  the  union  of  the  Grand  Lodges,  the  "Holy  Royal
Arch"  was  legally  recognized  as  a constituent  part  of  Ancient  Craft
Masonry.

A doubt  is,  however,  cast  over  the  accuracy  of  Bro.  Hughan's
assertion  that  in  1766  the  Grand  Chapter  was  even  virtually  counte-

1 I give  this  anecdote  on  the  authority  of  Dermott  ("Ahiman  Rezon,"  p.  xvi.),  but
there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  its  truth.

2 "Masonic  Memorials,"  p.  8,  note.

3 Ibid.

THE  ATHOLL  GRAND  LODGE

1133

nanced  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  "Modems"  by  two  contemporane-

ous records.

The  first  is  the  declaration  already  given  of  the  Grand  Secretary
of  the  "Modem"  Grand  Lodge,  made  about  that  time,  that  they
were  "neither  Arch,  Royal  Arch,  nor  Ancients;"  and  the  other  a
letter  written  on  June  7,  1766,  by  the  same  Grand  Secretary  to  the
Provincial  Lodge  of  Lrankfort-on-the-Main,  in  which  he  declares
that  the  Royal  Arch  is  "a  Society  which  we  do  not  acknowledge
and  which  we  regard  as  an  invention  designed  for  the  purpose  of

introducing  innovations  amongst  the  Brotherhood  and  diverting
them  from  the  fundamental  rules  which  our  ancestors  laid  down  for

us."1

In  this  conflict  of  authority  there  appears  to  be  but  one  reason-
able explanation.  It  is  probable  that  some  of  the  "Modern"
Masons,  tempted  by  the  success  and  popularity  of  the  Arch  degree
among  the  "Ancients,"  had  independently  formed  a chapter  of  their

own,  and  soon  converted  it  into  a self-created  Grand  Chapter,  just  as
the  lodge  at  York,  forty  years  before,  had  resolved  itself  into  a Grand
Lodge.

Although  this  was  done  without  the  sanction  of  the  Grand
Lodge,  and  though  it  was  precisely  the  same  innovation  which  in
1738  had  met  with  the  severe  censure  of  that  body,  it  is  to  be  pre
sumed  that  no  notice  was  taken  of  the  act,  because  experience  had
taught  the  Grand  Lodge  that  the  best  policy  would  be  not  to  en-
danger by  opposition  a second  rebellion  from  its  authority.

So  Royal  Arch  Masonry  was  permitted  to  exist  by  sufferance.
But  the  victory  of  the  "Ancients"  was  fully  accomplished  in  1813,
when  the  Grand  Lodge  of  "Modems"  was  compelled  to  recognize
that  which  they  had  at  first  styled  an  innovation  and  to  acknowledge
the  Royal  Arch  to  be  a component  part  of  Ancient  Craft  Masonry.

Thus  the  two  Grand  Lodges  continued  to  move  in  parallel  but
not  amicable  lines,  both  indulging  at  times  in  mutual  recriminations
and  each  denouncing  the  other  as  irregular.  The  "Ancients,"  as
well  as  the  "Moderns,"  extended  their  jurisdiction  beyond  the  limits
of  England  into  foreign  countries.  They  exercised  this  power,  how-
ever, in  a different  manner.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  "Modems"  usually  appointed  Deputations

Findel  cites  this  in  his  "History  of  Freemasonry,"  p.  184.

1134

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

or  Provincial  Grand  Masters  in  various  countries,  by  whom  lodges

were  organized,  and  afterward  Provincial  Grand  Lodges.

The  "Ancients"  never  practiced  this  method.  It  was  their
usage  to  grant  Warrants,  directly,  for  the  establishment  of  lodges,
and  these,  as  soon  as  there  were  a sufficient  number,  proceeded  to
organize  Grand  Lodges,  under  the  incorrect  title  of  "Ancient  York
Masons."

Such  was  the  universal  practice  on  the  American  Continent,

where  the  Grand  Lodges  established  under  the  obedience  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  "Modems"  and  those  organized  by  the  York  or

Ancient  Lodges  preserved  the  distinctive  principles  of  their  parents
and  inherited  their  angry  passions.

But  such  a condition  of  things  was  too  alien  to  the  benign  and
fraternal  sentiments  of  Freemasonry  to  be  perpetuated.  Move-
ments toward  a reconciliation  were  inaugurated  toward  the  close
of  the  18th  century,  and  finally,  in  1813,  the  Atholl  Grand  Lodge
was  forever  dissolved  by  a fusion  of  the  two  contending  bodies  in
England  into  the  now  existing  body  under  the  title  of  the  "United
Grand  Lodge  of  England."  This  excellent  example  was  speedily

followed  by  similar  amalgamations  in  all  the  States  where  the  rivalry
had  prevailed.

But  the  fusion  in  England,  which  closes  the  history  of  the  Atholl
Grand  Lodge,  is  too  important  an  event  to  be  treated  otherwise
than  in  a separate  chapter.

CHAPTER  XLII

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  ENGLAND,  SOUTH  OF  THE  TRENT;  OR  THE
SCHISM  OF  THE  LODGE  OF  ANTIQUITY

F the  four  old  Lodges  of  London  which  united  in
the  formation  of  a Grand  Lodge  in  the  year
1717,  the  one  which  at  that  time  met  at  the

"Goose  and  Gridiron  Ale-house"  in  St.  Paul's
Churchyard,  assumed  the  precedency  as  No.  1,
and  under  all  its  changes  of  name  and  locality

retained  that  precedency  until  the  union  of  the
two  Grand  Lodges  in  1813,  when,  in  casting  lots,  it  lost  its  primi-
tive rank  and  became  No.  2,  a number  which  it  has  ever  since
retained.  Anderson  calls  it  "the  Senor  Lodge  whose  Constitution

is  immemorial."1

About  the  year  1729  it  removed  from  the  "Goose  and  Grid-
iron," to  the  "King's  Arms  Tavern,"  also  in  St.  Paul's  Churchyard.
Here  it  remained,  except  for  a brief  interval  in  1735  until  1768,
having  taken  in  1760  the  name  of  the  "West  India  and  American
Lodge."  In  1768  it  removed  to  the  "Mitre,"  in  Fleet  Street,  and
in  1770  adopted  the  title  of  the  "Lodge  of  Antiquity,"  which  it  has
ever  since  continued  to  use.2

These  four  Lodges  had  been  established  previous  to  the  forma-
tion of  the  Grand  Lodge,  under  the  old  system  which  permitted  a

sufficient  number  of  Masons  to  meet  together  and  form  a lodge,
the  only  authority  required  being  the  consent  of  the  chief  magis-
trate of  the  place.3

This  privilege,  which  they  called  immemorial  usage,  they  claimed
and  received  from  the  new  Grand  Lodge,  which  required  all  other
lodges  which  should  be  constituted  to  previously  obtain  a Warrant

1 In  the  List  of  lodges  in  the  1738  "Book  of  Constitutions,"  p.  184.

2 Gould's  "Four  Old  Lodges,"  note  9,  p.  6.

3 Preston,  "Illustrations,"  Oliver's  edition,  p.  182.

1135

1136

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

from  the  Grand  Master,  but  permitted  the  four  original  Lodges  to
act  as  they  always  had  done  without  such  authority.

The  history  of  these  four  Lodges  may  be  thus  briefly  told:

Lodge  No.  2,  which  originally  met  at  the  "Crown"  in  Parker's

Lane,  became  extinct  in  1730.

Lodge  No.  3,  which  met  at  the  "Apple  Tree  Tavern,"  memor-

able as  the  place  where  the  preliminary  meeting  for  the  organization
of  a Grand  Lodge  was  held,  in  1723,  on  account  of  some  difference
among  its  members,  renounced  its  immemorial  privileges  and
accepted  a Warrant  of  Constitution  from  the  Grand  Lodge  as
No.  10.

Lodge  No.  4,  afterward  No.  2,  first  held  at  the  "Rummer  and

Grapes,"  afterward  removed  to  the  "Horn  Tavern."  In  1747  it

was,  for  non-attendance  of  its  representative  at  the  Quarterly  Com-
munications, erased  from  the  roll  of  lodges,1  but  reinstated  in  1751.

In  1774  it  united  with  the  Somerset  Lodge,  which  had  been  war-
ranted in  1762  as  No.  269.

Preston,  in  a passage  of  his  1781  edition,  asserted  that  by  this

act  "the  members  of  the  lodge  tacitly  agreed  to  a renunciation  of

their  rights  as  one  of  the  four  original  Lodges,  put  themselves
entirely  under  the  authority  of  the  Grand  Lodge  and  claimed  no

distinct  privilege  by  virtue  of  an  immemorial  Constitution."

This  is  not  an  accurate  statement,  and  Preston  did  well  to  erase

it  from  the  subsequent  editions  of  his  book.  The  act  of  incorpora-
tion with  the  Somerset  Lodge  was  really  an  absoiption  of  that

lodge  into  the  Horn  Lodge,  whose  number  remained  unchanged,
and  at  the  union  of  1813  it  was  admitted  on  the  Register  without
a Warrant  of  Constitution  and  as  acting  from  "Time  Immemorial."

There  is  not  the  least  doubt  cast  upon  the  record  of  Lodge  No.  1,
which  met  at  the  "Goose  and  Gridiron,"  and  which  has  for  more
than  a century  been  known  as  the  "Lodge  of  Antiquity."  It  never

at  any  time  abandoned  its  claim  to  all  the  privileges  of  a lodge  dat-
ing from  time  immemorial  and  vigorously  though  perhaps  errone-
ously asserted  them  when  an  attempt  was  made  to  violate  them,  and
the  "Lodge  of  Antiquity"  has  remained  to  the  present  day  without
a Warrant.

In  Pine's  List  of  lodges  for  1729  it  is  stated  that  the  lodge  was

1 Entick,  "Book  of  Constitutions,"  p.  248.

SCHISM  OF  THE  LODGE  OF  ANTIQUITY

1137

established  in  1691,  but  Hughan  believes  it  to  have  been  much  older.
It  is  said  that  the  celebrated  architect,  Sir  Christopher  Wren,  was

made  a Freemason  in  this  lodge.  Aubrey,  the  antiquary,  in  his

Natural  History’  of  Wiltshire,  says  that  on  May  19,  1691,  there  was
"a  great  convention  at  St.  Paul's  Church  of  the  fraternity  of
Adopted  Masons  where  Sir  Christopher  Wren  is  to  be  adopted  a

brother,  and  Sir  Henry  Goodrie  of  the  Tower  and  divers  others."
It  is  probable  that  this  passage  suggested  to  the  maker  of  Pine's

List  the  notion  of  giving  to  the  lodge  the  date  of  1691  as  the  time
of  its  establishment.

Supposing  that  the  lodge,  which  in  1717  met  at  the  "Goose  and
Gridiron,"  was  the  one  that  in  1691  admitted  Wren  to  the  Frater-

nity, the  roll  of  distinguished  members  will  be  confined  to  the  ar-
chitect of  St.  Paul's  and  to  William  Preston,  the  celebrated  Masonic

historian.  The  statement  that  Dr.  Desaguliers  was  initiated  in  it  has

been  proved  to  be  incorrect.

The  fourth  lodge,  the  one  that  met  at  the  "Rummer  and  Grapes,"
and  afterward  at  the  "Horn  Tavern,"  can  boast  a much  larger  list

of  Masonic  worthies.  Among  them  at  the  earliest  stage  of  its  ex-
istence are  the  names  of  Desaguliers,  Payne,  and  Anderson,  all  of
whom  were  probably  made  in  it,  either  just  before  or  immediately
after  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge.  Desaguliers  is  said  to
have  been  made  in  1712,  and  I am  disposed  to  believe  that  both  Payne
and  Anderson,  as  well  as  he,  were  Freemasons  in  1717  and  were  per-
sonally engaged  in  the  formation  of  the  Grand  Lodge.  Between
1723  and  1738  a great  many  noblemen,  both  English  and  foreign,
were  admitted  to  its  membership,  while  the  roll  of  Nos.  1 and  2 con-
tain no  brethren  of  Masonic  or  social  rank,  and  that  of  No.  3 claims
only  the  name  of  Anthony  Sayer,  the  first  Grand  Master. 1

Bro.  Gould  thinks  that  in  the  earliest  years  of  the  Grand  Lodge,
Nos.  1,  2,  and  3 represented  the  Operative  and  No.  4 the  Speculative
elements  of  the  Society.2  This  is  probably  true.  We  know  that
the  first  three  lodges  were  not  distinguished  in  their  membership  by
the  name  of  a single  personage  of  rank  or  learning,  and  that  in  1723
the  Master  of  No.  1 was  a stonecutter.  On  the  other  hand,  Desagu-
liers, Payne,  and  Anderson,  the  prime  instigators  of  the  change  from
purely  Operative  to  purely  Speculative  Freemasonry,  were  all  mem-
bers of  No.  4.

Gould,  "Four  Old  Lodges,"  p.  9.

2 Gould,  ibid.

1138

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

In  after  times,  Lodges  Nos.  2 and  3 became  extinct,  and  No.  4
continued  to  exist  in  placid  obscurity,  while  No.  1,  having  become
the  "Lodge  of  Antiquity,"  played  a prominent  part  in  the  history
of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  and  under  the  leadership  of  Will-
iam Preston  was  the  cause  of  a schism,  which  at  one  time  threatened
to  be  very  disastrous  to  the  cause  of  Freemasonry,  though  happily  it
proved  to  be  temporary  in  its  duration.

It  is  because  of  the  part  taken  by  the  "Lodge  of  Antiquity"  in
this  schismatic  proceeding,  in  which  it  sought  to  defend  itself  on  the
ground  that  it,  as  one  of  the  four  old  Lodges,  was  entitled  to  cer-
tain privileges  and  exemptions  from  the  authority  of  the  Grand  Lodge,
which  did  not  appertain  to  the  younger  lodges,  that  I have  deemed
it  necessary  to  take  a glance  at  the  condition  of  these  four  primary
lodges,  as  preliminary  to  the  history  of  the  contest  in  which  one  of
them  was  engaged.

In  this  contest  No.  1,  or  the  "Lodge  of  Antiquity,"  alone  was
prominent.  Nos.  2 and  3 had  become  extinct,  and  No.  4 took  no
other  part  in  the  dispute  than  that  of  remaining  loyal  to  the  Grand
Lodge.

The  history  of  the  dissensions  between  the  "Lodge  of  Antiq-
uity" and  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  which  terminated  in  the
establishment  of  a fourth  Grand  Lodge  within  the  jurisdiction  of
England,  may  be  briefly  related  as  follows:

In  the  year  1777,  during  the  Grand  Mastership  of  the  Duke  of
Manchester,  the  Master,  Wardens,  and  a part  of  the  members  of  the
"Lodge  of  Antiquity,"  under  a resolution  of  the  lodge,  celebrated
the  festival  of  St.  John  the  Evangelist  by  attending  divine  service  at
St.  Dunstan's  Church,  in  Fleet  Street,  walking  there  and  returning
to  the  "Mitre  Tavern"  in  the  clothing  of  the  Order,  and  this  without
having  obtained  a Dispensation  for  the  procession  from  the  Grand
Master  or  his  Deputy.

This  was  a flagrant  violation  of  the  law  of  the  Grand  Lodge
which  prescribed  that  no  Mason  should  attend  any  public  procession
clothed  with  the  badges  and  ensigns  of  the  Order,  unless  a dispensa-
tion for  that  purpose  was  obtained  from  the  Grand  Master  or  his
Deputy;  and  the  penalty  for  a violation  of  this  law  was  a forfeiture
of  all  the  rights  and  privileges  of  the  Society  and  a deprivation  of
the  benefits  of  the  general  fund  of  charity.

This  law,  which  had  been  enacted  in  1754,  must  have  been  well

SCHISM  OF  THE  LODGE  OF  ANTIQUITY

1139

known  to  the  Master  and  the  members  of  the  lodge,  and  its  open
violation  by  them  in  the  face  of  that  knowledge  would  lead  us  to  as-
sent to  the  statement  of  Findel  that  they  wished  to  come  to  an  open
rupture  with  the  authority  to  whom  they  owed  allegiance. 1

This  act  was  very  properly  condemned  by  the  Grand  Lodge.
"Various  opinions,"  says  Preston,  "were  formed  on  the  subject,  and
several  brethren  were  highly  disgusted."

It  is  surprising  that  there  should  be  more  than  one  opinion  of
the  unlawfulness  of  an  act  which  palpably  violates  a written  statute;
but  it  is  very  natural  that  the  perpetrators  of  an  offence,  if  they
are  not  penitent,  should  be  "disgusted"  with  the  punishment  which
has  followed.

Another  circumstance  soon  followed  which,  according  to  Preston,
tended  still  further  to  widen  the  breach.

For  some  alleged  misconduct  the  lodge  had  expelled  three  of  its
members.  The  Grand  Lodge,  deeming,  as  we  may  fairly  suppose,
that  some  injustice  had  been  done,  ordered  them  to  be  reinstated.

Preston  says  that  the  Grand  Lodge  interfered  without  proper
investigation.  But  it  can  not  be  presumed  upon  the  authority  of  a

partisan  that  the  Grand  Lodge  would  have  exercised  this  high  prero-
gative of  reinstatement  without  a fair  investigation  of  all  the  circum-
stances connected  with  the  original  expulsion.  The  good  old  prin-
ciple must  here  prevail  that  in  respect  to  all  acts  of  an  official  nature,
the  presumption  is  that  they  have  been  fairly  executed,  and  that  all
has  been  rightly  and  duly  performed  until  the  contrary  is  shown.2

Unfortunately,  it  is  almost  wholly  upon  Preston,  in  his  edition  of
1781,  that  we  must  depend  for  our  authority  in  the  recital  of  this

history.  But  this  statement  must  be  taken  with  all  the  allowance

due  to  an  active  partisan.  Preston  was  a prominent  actor  and  in-

deed a leader  in  this  contest,  and  in  telling  his  story  might  have  re-
peated the  words  of  Pater  TEneas  to  the  Queen  of  Carthage:

" . . . . quoque  ipse  miserrima  vide,

Et  quorum  pars  magna  fui."

The  lodge  vainly  resisted  this  act  of  the  Grand  Lodge  and  to
re-admit  the  expelled  members  "Matters,"  says  Preston,  "were  agi-
tated to  the  extreme  on  both  sides;  resolutions  were  precipitately

1 "History  of  Freemasonry,"  Lyon's  Translation,  p.  181.

2 "Omnia  presumuntur  legitime  facta  donee  probetur  in  contrium."

1140

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

entered  into,  and  edicts  inadvertently  issued;  memorials  and  remon-
strances were  presented."

Finally  an  open  rupture  ensued.  The  lodge  withdrew  the  at-
tendance of  its  Master  and  Wardens  as  representatives  from  the
Quarterly  communications,  but  continued  to  exercise  its  functions
as  a lodge,  independently  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand  Lodge.
It  issued  a Manifesto  in  which  it  detailed  its  grievances  and  asserted
its  rights  and  appealed  for  sympathy  and  support  to  the  Grand  Lodges
of  Scotland,  Ireland,  and  York.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  on  its  part,  was  not  less  resolute.
It  expelled  the  rebellious  members  of  the  lodge,  extended  its  protec-
tion to  the  three  members  whose  expulsion  had  been  ostensibly  the
original  cause  of  all  the  difficulties,  and  recognizing  them  as  the  only
legitimate  representatives  of  the  "Lodge  of  Antiquity,"  ordered,  but
of  course  in  vain,  a surrender  to  them  of  the  property  of  the  lodge.

The  position  which  was  now  assumed  by  the  "Lodge  of  An-
tiquity" was  precisely  that  which  it  had  occupied  before  its  union  in
1717  with  the  three  other  lodges  in  the  establishment  of  a Grand
Lodge,  namely,  that  of  a lodge,  instituted  without  a Warrant,  and
by  the  mere  consent  of  its  founders,  as  all  the  Operative  lodges  had
been  instituted  prior  to  the  formation  of  a Grand  Lodge.

As  the  Manifesto  of  the  "Lodge  of  Antiquity"  which  was  issued
on  December  16,  1778,  is  a full  exposition  of  the  grounds  on  which
the  lodge  based  its  right  to  assume  independency  and  eventually  to
accept  from  the  Grand  Lodge  at  York  the  rank  and  title  of  "The
Grand  Lodge  of  England  south  of  the  Trent,"  it  is  very  necessary,
to  a correct  understanding  of  these  important  transactions,  that  the
reader  should  be  placed  in  possession  of  a copy  of  the  document.

It  is  accordingly  here  printed,  as  follows:1

TO  ALL  REGULAR,  FREE  AND  ACCEPTED  MASONS.

Whereas,  the  Society  of  Free  Masons  is  universally  acknowl-
edged to  be  of  ancient  standing  and  great  repute  in  this  kingdom,

as  by  our  Records  and  Printed  Constitutions,  it  appears  that  the

first  Grand  Lodge  in  England  was  held  at  York,  in  the  year  926,

1 The  copy  here  printed  is  from  Bro.  Hughan's  "History  of  Freemasonry  in  York"

(American  edition,  p.  117),  and  is  one  of  the  most  interesting  documents  in  that  valuable
work.

SCHISM  OF  THE  LODGE  OF  ANTIQUITY

1141

by  virtue  of  a Royal  Charter  granted  by  King  Athelstan,  and  under
the  patronage  and  government  of  this  Grand  Lodge,  the  Society
considerably  increased;  and  the  ancient  charges  and  regulations  of
the  Order  so  far  obtained  the  sanction  of  Kings  and  Princes,  and
other  eminent  persons,  that  they  always  paid  due  allegiance  to  the
said  Grand  Assembly.

And  WHEREAS,  it  appears,  by  our  Records,  that  in  the  year
1567,  the  increase  of  lodges  in  the  South  of  England,  being  so  great
as  to  require  some  Nominal  Patron  to  superintend  their  govern-
ment, it  was  resolved  that  a person  under  the  title  of  Grand  Master
for  the  South  should  be  appointed  for  that  purpose,  with  the  appro-
bation of  the  Grand  Lodge  at  York,  to  whom  the  whole  Fraternity
at  large  were  bound  to  pay  tribute  and  acknowledge  subjection.

And  after  the  appointment  of  such  Patron,  Masonry  nourished

under  the  guardianship  of  him  and  his  successors  in  the  South,  un-
til the  Civil  Wars  and  other  intestine  commotions  interrupted  the
assemblies  of  the  Brethren.

And  WHEREAS,  it  also  appears  that  in  the  year  1693,  the  Meet-
ings of  the  Fraternity  in  their  regular  lodges  in  the  South  became
less  frequent  and  chiefly  occasional,  except  in  or  near  places  where
great  works  were  carried  on.  At  which  time  the  "Lodge  of  Antiq-

uity" or  (as  it  was  then  called)  the  Old  Lodge  of  St.  Paul,  with  a
few  others  of  small  note,  continued  to  meet  under  the  patronage  of
Sir  Christopher  Wren,  and  assisting  him  in  rearing  that  Superb
Structure  from  which  this  respectable  lodge  derived  its  Title.  But

on  completing  this  Edifice  in  1710,  and  Sir  Christopher  Wren's

retiring  into  the  country,  the  few  remaining  lodges  in  London  and

its  suburbs,  continued  without  any  nominal  Patron,  in  a declining
state  for  about  the  space  of  seven  years.

And  WHEREAS,  in  the  year  1717,  the  Fraternity  in  London
agreed  to  cement  under  a new  Grand  Master,  and  with  that  view
the  Old  Lodge  of  St.  Paul,  jointly  with  three  other  lodges,  assem-

bled in  form,  constituted  themselves  a nominal  Grand  Lodge  pro
tempore  and  elected  a Grand  Master  to  preside  over  their  future
general  meetings,  whom  they  afterwards  invested  with  a power  to
constitute  subordinate  lodges,  and  to  convene  the  Fraternity  at
stated  periods  in  Grand  Lodge,  in  order  to  make  Laws,  with  their
consent  and  approbation,  for  the  good  government  of  the  Society

at  large.

1142

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

BUT  SUBJECT  to  certain  conditions  and  restrictions  then  ex-
pressly stipulated,  and  which  are  more  fully  set  forth  in  the  39th
article  of  the  General  Regulations  in  the  first  Book  of  Constitutions,
this  article  with  thirty-eight  others,  was  afterwards  at  a meeting  of
the  Brethren  in  and  about  the  cities  of  "London  and  Westminster,
in  the  year  1721,  solemnly  approved  of,  ratified  and  confirmed  by
them,  and  signed  in  their  presence  by  the  Master  and  Wardens  of
the  Four  old  Lodges  on  the  one  part,  and  Philip,  Duke  of  Whar-
ton, then  Grand  Master,  Dr.  Desaguliers,  D.G.M.,  Joshua  Timson
and  William  Hawkins,  Grand  Wardens,  and  the  Masters  and  War-
dens of  sixteen  lodges  which  had  been  constituted  by  the  Fraternity,
betwixt  1717  and  1721,  on  the  other  part.  And  these  articles  the
Grand  Master  engaged  for  himself  and  his  successors,  in  all  time
coming,  to  observe  and  keep  sacred  and  inviolable.  By  these  pru-
dent precautions  the  ancient  Land-marks  (as  they  are  properly
styled)  of  the  four  old  Lodges  were  intended  to  be  secured  against
any  encroachments  on  their  Masonic  Rights  and  Privileges.

And  WHEREAS,  of  late  years,  notwithstanding  the  said  solemn
engagement  in  the  year  1721,  sundry  innovations  and  encroach-
ments have  been  made,  and  are  still  making  on  the  original  plan

and  government  of  Masonry,  by  the  present  nominal  Grand  Lodge
in  London,  highly  injurious  to  the  institution  itself,  and  tending  to
subvert  and  destroy  the  ancient  rights  and  privileges  of  the  Society,
more  particularly  of  those  members  of  it  under  whose  sanction,  and
by  whose  authority,  the  said  Grand  Lodge  was  first  established  and
now  exists.

And  WHEREAS,  at  the  present  time  there  only  remains  one  of
the  said  four  original  ancient  Lodges — The  Old  Lodge  of  St.  Paul,
or  as  it  is  now  emphatically  styled.  The  "Lodge  of  Antiquity."
Two  of  the  said  four  ancient  lodges  having  been  extinct  many  years,
and  the  Master  of  the  other  of  them  having  on  the  part  of  his
lodge,  in  open  Grand  Lodge,  relinquished  all  such  inherent  rights
and  privileges  which,  as  a private  lodge,  acting  by  an  immemorial
Constitution  it  enjoyed.  But  the  "Lodge  of  Antiquity,"  conscious

of  its  own  dignity,  which  the  Members  thereof  are  resolutely  deter-
mined to  support,  and  justly  incensed  at  the  violent  measures  and

proceedings  which  have  been  lately  adopted  and  pursued  by  the

said  nominal  Grand  Lodge,  wherein  they  have  assumed  an  unlawful
prerogative  over  the  "Lodge  of  Antiquity,"  in  manifest  breach  of

SCHISM  OF  THE  LODGE  OF  ANTIQUITY

1143

the  aforesaid  39th  article,  by  which  means  the  peaceful  government
of  that  respectable  lodge  has  been  repeatedly  interrupted,  and  even
the  original  independent  power  thereof,  in  respect  to  its  own  Inter-
nal Government,  disputed.

THEREFORE,  and  on  account  of  the  Arbitrary  Edicts  and  Laws
which  the  said  nominal  Grand  Lodge  has,  from  time  to
time,  presumed  to  issue  and  attempted  to  enforce,  repug-
nant to  the  ancient  Laws  and  principles  of  Free  Masonry,
and  highly  injurious  to  the  "Lodge  of  Antiquity,"

WE,  the  Master,  Wardens  and  Members  of  the  "Lodge  of
Antiquity,"  considering  ourselves  bound  in  duty,  as  well  as  honour,
to  preserve  inviolable  the  ancient  rights  and  privileges  of  the  Order,
and  as  far  as  in  our  power,  to  hand  them  down  to  posterity  in  their
native  purity  and  excellence,  do  hereby,  for  ourselves  and  our  suc-
cessors, solemnly  disavow  and  discountenance  such  unlawful  meas-
ures and  proceedings  of  the  said  nominal  Grand  Lodge;  and  do
hereby  declare  and  announce  to  all  our  Masonic  Brethren  through-
out the  Globe.  That  the  said  Grand  Lodge,  has  by  such  arbitrary
conduct,  evidently  violated  the  conditions  expressed  in  the  aforesaid
39th  article  of  the  General  Regulations,  in  the  observance  of  which
article  the  permanency  of  their  authority  solely  depended.

And  in  consequence  thereof,  We,  do  by  these  presents  retract
from  and  recall  all  such  rights  and  powers  as  We  or  our  predeces-
sors, did  conditionally  give  to  the  said  nominal  Grand  Lodge  in  Lon-
don; and  do  hereby  disannul  and  make  void  all  future  Edicts  and
Laws,  which  the  said  Grand  Lodge  may  presume  to  issue  and  en-
force, by  virtue  of  such  sanction,  as  representatives  of  the  ancient
and  honorable  Society  of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons.

And  WHEREAS  we  have,  on  full  enquiry  and  due  examination,
happily  discovered,  that  the  aforesaid  truly  ancient  Grand  Lodge  at
York  does  still  exist,  and  have  authentic  Records  to  produce  of

their  antiquity,  long  before  the  establishment  of  the  nominal  Grand

Lodge  in  London  in  the  year  1717;  We  do,  therefore,  hereby

solemnly  avow,  acknowledge  and  admit  the  Authority  of  the  said

Most  Worshipful  Grand  Lodge  at  York,  as  the  truly  ancient  and

only  regular  governing  Grand  Lodge  of  Masons  in  England,  to

whom  the  Fraternity  all  owe  and  are  rightfully  bound  to  pay  alle-

giance.

And  WHEREAS,  the  present  members  of  the  said  Grand  Lodge

1144

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

at  York  have  acknowledged  the  ancient  power  and  authority  or  the
"Lodge  of  Antiquity"  in  London  as  a private  lodge  and  have  pro-
posed to  form  an  alliance  with  the  said  lodge,  on  the  most  generous
and  disinterested  principles, — We  do  hereby  acknowledge  this  gen-
erous mark  of  their  friendship  towards  us,  and  gratefully  accept
their  liberal,  candid  and  ingenuous  offers  of  alliance: — And  do
hereby,  from  a firm  persuasion  of  the  justice  of  our  cause,  announce
a general  union  with  all  Regular  Masons  throughout  the  world,  who
shall  join  us  in  supporting  the  original  principles  of  Free  Masonry,
in  promoting  and  extending  the  authority  of  the  said  truely  ancient
Grand  Lodge  at  York,  and  under  such  respectable  auspices  in  prop-
agating Masonry  on  its  pure,  genuine  and  original  plan.

And  LASTLY,  we  do  earnestly  solicit  the  hearty  concurrence  of
all  regular  lodges  of  the  Fraternity  in  all  places  where  Free  Masonry
is  legally  established  to  enable  us  to  carry  into  execution  the  afore-
said plan,  which  is  so  apparently  beneficial  to  our  most  excellent
institution,  and  at  the  present  critical  juncture,  so  essentially  neces-
sary to  curb  the  arbitrary  power  which  has  been  already  exerted,  or
which,  hereafter,  may  be  illegally  assumed,  by  the  nominal  Grand
Lodge  in  London,  and  so  timely  prevent  such  unmasonic  proceed-
ings from  becoming  a disgrace  to  the  Society  at  large.

By  Order  of  the  Right  Worshipful  Lodge  of  Antiquity,

in  open  Lodge  assembled,  this  16th  day  of  Decem-
ber A.D.,  1778,  A.  L.  5782.

J.  SEALY,  Secretary.

Before  proceeding  to  the  arguments  adduced  in  this  manifesto
by  the  "Lodge  of  Antiquity,"  to  defend  its  action  in  withdrawing
from  the  Grand  Lodge,  it  will  be  proper  to  say,  that  as  an  histori-
cal document  it  is  utterly  worthless.

The  statement  that  the  first  Grand  Lodge  was  held  at  York
under  a Charter  granted  by  King  Athelstan  in  the  10th  century,  is

founded  on  the  mere  tradition  contained  in  the  Legend  of  the

Craft;  it  was  denied  by  the  Masons  of  York,  who  attributed  the
origin  of  their  society  to  a much  earlier  period;  it  has  been  doubted
or  disbelieved  by  some  of  the  most  eminent  Masonic  scholars  of

the  present  day;  and  finally  there  is  not  the  slightest  historical
proof  that  there  was  ever  a Grand  Lodge  or  Grand  Master  in  Eng-
land prior  to  the  second  decade  of  the  1 8th  century.

SCHISM  OF  THE  LODGE  OF  ANTIQUITY

1145

Again:  The  assertion  that  in  1567  the  Grand  Lodge  at  York  ap-
pointed a Grand  Master  for  the  south  of  England,  and  that  he  and
the  Fraternity  under  him  "were  bound  to  pay  tribute  and  acknowl-
edge subjection"  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  York,  is  wholly  unsup-
ported by  historical  evidence.  Anderson,  who  was  ever  ready  to
frame  history  out  of  legends,  does  indeed  record  the  existence  of  a
Grand  Lodge,  holding  annual  communications  at  York,1  and  tells  us
the  apocryphal  story  of  Queen  Elizabeth  and  Grand  Master  Sack-
ville.  He  also  states  that  it  was  a tradition  of  the  old  Masons
that  in  1567,  on  the  demission  of  Sir  Thomas  Sackville,  two  Grand
Masters  were  chosen,  one  for  the  north  and  one  for  the  south,  but
he  makes  no  allusion  to  the  position  of  the  latter  as  subordinate  to
the  former.  He  makes  no  further  mention  of  the  Grand  Lodge
at  York  in  the  subsequent  pages  of  the  Book  of  Constitutions,  but
always  speaks  of  the  Grand  Master  and  the  Grand  Lodge  at  Lon-
don as  the  sole  Masonic  authority  in  England.  Thus,  unhistorical

and  merely  traditionary  as  is  the  authority  of  Anderson  on  this  sub-
ject, it  completely  fails  to  give  any  support  to  the  assertion  of  the
writer  of  the  Manifesto,  that  in  the  16th  century  the  Grand  Lodge
at  York  was  the  supreme  Masonic  power  of  all  England,  and  that

it  delegated  a subordinate  rank  and  position  to  a "nominal  Grand

Master"  for  the  south  of  the  kingdom.

From  this  Manifesto  it  will  be  seen  that  the  "Lodge  of  An-
tiquity" withdrew  its  allegiance  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  in
consequence  of  the  wrong  it  supposed  that  body  had  inflicted  upon

it,  by  the  reinstatement  of  certain  members  whom  it  had  expelled.
It  then  asserted  its  independence  and  attempted  to  resume  the  posi-
tion which  it  had  occupied  before  the  organization  of  the  Grand

Lodge,  as  a lodge  working  without  a Warrant.

In  defense  of  its  action,  the  lodge  refers  in  the  Manifesto  to  the
39th  General  Regulation,  which  it  says  had  been  violated  by  the
Grand  Lodge  in  its  treatment  of  the  "Lodge  of  Antiquity."

But  the  most  liberal  construction  of  that  Regulation  will  fail

to  support  any  such  theory.

The  39th  Regulation  simply  recognizes  the  inherent  power  of

1 When  Bro.  Woodford  in  his  Essay  on  the  "Connection  of  York  with  the  History  of

Freemasonry  in  England,"  asserted  that  the  statement  in  the  Manifesto  was  "the  only  ex-
isting evidence  that  in  1567  there  was  a Grand  Lodge  at  York,"  this  passage  in  Anderson
must  have  escaped  his  attention.

1146

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

the  Grand  Lodge  to  make  new  regulations  or  to  alter  the  old  ones,
provided  that  the  landmarks  be  preserved,  and  that  the  new  regula-
tion be  adopted  at  a stated  communication  by  a majority  of  the
brethren  present.

Now  there  is  no  distinct  charge  of  the  violation  of  a landmark
by  the  Grand  Lodge,  and  if  there  was  there  is  no  provision  in  the
Regulations  for  its  redress  by  the  secession  of  a lodge.

The  whole  tenor  of  the  Thirty-nine  Regulations  adopted  in  1721,
is  to  make  the  Grand  Lodge  a supreme  Masonic  power.  It  is,  more-
over, provided  in  the  8th  Regulation  that  no  number  of  Brethren
shall  withdraw  from  the  lodge  in  which  they  were  made  and  form  a
new  lodge  without  the  consent  of  the  Grand  Master.

The  facts  are  briefly  these.  The  Grand  Lodge  having  reinstated
three  members  who  we  are  bound  to  presume  had  been  wrongly  ex-
pelled, the  lodge  refused  to  recognize  the  act  of  reinstatement,  and
withdrew  from  its  allegiance  to  the  Grand  Lodge,  and  assuming  in-
dependence, proceeded  to  work  out  a Warrant,  under  its  old  Opera-
tive Constitution  and  without  the  consent  or  approval  of  the  Grand
Lodge.

The  Grand  Lodge  refused  to  admit  the  legality  of  this  act.  It
continued  to  recognize  the  three  members  and  any  others  who  ad-
hered to  them  as  the  true  "Lodge  of  Antiquity,"  and  viewed  the  re-
cusant members  as  Masons  who  had  violated  the  8th  Regulation,
by  withdrawing  from  their  lodge  and  joining  a new  lodge  without
the  Grand  Master's  Warrant.

Bro.  Robert  Freke  Gould,  in  his  Histoiy  of  the  Four  Old
Lodges ,’  has  advanced  the  doctrine  that  the  "Lodge  of  Antiquity"
had  a legal  right  to  secede  from  the  Grand  Lodge,  and  he  supports
his  opinion  by  the  very  extraordinary  argument  that  if  the  Grand
Lodge  had  a right  to  expel  a lodge  from  the  Union,  that  is,  to  erase
it  from  the  roll  of  lodges,  this  would  imply  a correlative  right  in  a
subordinate  lodge  to  withdraw  or  secede  from  the  Union  of  lodges
or  the  Grand  Lodge.  The  adoption  of  such  a doctrine  would  make
every  Grand  Lodge  a merely  temporary  organization,  subject  at  any
moment  to  be  impaired  by  the  arbitrary  withdrawal  of  as  many
lodges  as  thought  proper  to  exercise  this  privilege  of  secession.  This
would  inevitably  be  a termination  to  all  power  of  discipline  and  of

1 "Four  Old  Lodges,"  p.  28.

SCHISM  OF  THE  LODGE  OF  ANTIQUITY

1147

coercive  government.  He  has  unfortunately  sought  to  illustrate  his
views  by  a reference  to  the  American  Constitution  which  he  supposes
to  have  conceded  to  any  one  or  more  of  the  States  the  right  of  se.
cession.  He  does  not  seem  to  be  aware  that  this  doctrine,  generally
called  a "political  heresy,"  though  at  one  time  maintained  by  most
Southern  Statesmen,  was  always  disavowed  by  the  people  of  the
North,  and  finally  forever  obliterated  by  the  severe  arbitrament  of
a four  years'  intestine  war.

The  fact  is  that  the  four  old  Lodges  entered  voluntarily  into  the
compact  which  resulted  in  the  establishment  of  a Grand  Lodge  in
London  in  the  year  1717.  The  Regulations  adopted  by  the  Grand
Lodge  four  years  afterward,  for  its  government  and  that  of  its  sub-
ordinates, was  approved  and  accepted  by  all  the  lodges  then  existing,
among  which  were  the  four  Lodges,  and  the  names  of  the  Master
and  Wardens  of  the  "Lodge  of  Antiquity"  head  the  list  of  the  sign-
ers of  the  Act  of  Approbation.  The  "Lodge  of  Antiquity"  was,
therefore,  forever  bound  by  the  compact,  and  by  regulations  enacted
under  its  authority.

By  the  compact  made  prior  to  the  enactment  of  the  Thirty-nine
Regulations,  and  which  was  entered  into  by  the  four  old  Lodges,  it
was  agreed  that  in  future  every  lodge  should  owe  its  existence  to  the
consent  of  the  Grand  Master  expressed  by  his  Warrant  of  Constitu-
tion, and  such  has  been  the  invariable  practice,  not  only  in  England
but  in  every  country  into  which  Freemasonry  had  penetrated.

As  an  act  of  courtesy,  the  four  Lodges  were  exempted  from  the
duty  of  applying  for  Warrants,  and  were  permitted  to  continue  their
labors  under  the  old  system  of  Operative  Freemasonry  by  authority
of  a self-constitution  through  which  they  had  been  established  under
the  old  system  of  Operative  Freemasonry  which  had  existed  prior  to
the  organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge.

But  this  was  the  only  distinct  privilege  which  they  possessed.
In  all  other  matters,  every  lodge  was  alike  subjected  to  the  control  of
the  Grand  Lodge,  and  to  the  constant  supervision  of  the  Grand
Master.  This  system  of  government,  so  different  from  that  of  the
Operative  Freemasonry  which  had  previously  prevailed,  had  been  ac-
cepted by  the  four  original  Lodges.  They  themselves  had  inaugu-
rated it;  they  had  accepted  all  the  consequences  of  the  great  change,
and  it  was  no  longer  in  the  power  of  any  one  of  them,  at  any  future
period,  to  annul  the  contract  into  which  they  had  entered.

1148

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

All  the  regulations  adopted  after  their  compact  refer  in  general
terms  to  the  collective  body  of  lodges  without  making  any  exception

in  favor  of  the  four  original  Lodges.  Especially  was  this  the  fact
with  respect  to  the  Thirty-nine  Regulations  adopted  in  1721.  The
laws  therein  enacted  were  just  as  applicable  to  Lodge  No.  1 as  to
Lodge  No.  20,  for  the  former  lodge  had,  as  well  as  the  latter,  and  all
the  intermediate  ones,  formerly  accepted  them  and  declared  that  they
and  the  Charges,  as  published  by  Anderson,  should  be  received  in
every  lodge  "as  the  only  Constitutions  of  Free  and  Accepted
Masons."1

Hence  it  follows,  that  in  withdrawing  from  the  Grand  Lodge
and  establishing  a lodge,  independent  of  its  authority,  the  contu-
macious members  of  the  "Lodge  of  Antiquity"  acted  illegally,  and
violated  the  Constitutions  which  the  Freemasons  of  England  had
accepted  for  half  a century  as  the  fundamental  law  of  the  Order.

On  second  sober  thought,  Preston  himself,  who  had  undoubtedly

been  the  ringleader  in  this  schism,  when  he  was  restored  to  the

privileges  of  Masonry,  in  1789,  expressed  his  regret  for  what  he  had
done  in  the  past,  and  his  wish  to  conform  in  future  to  the  laws  of
the  Grand  Lodge.2  As  the  Grand  Lodge  had  made  no  concessions,
Preston  thus  admitted  the  constitutionality  of  the  law,  against  which
as  being  unconstitutional,  he  and  his  colleagues  had  been  contend-
ing for  eleven  years.

The  recusant  members  of  the  "Lodge  of  Antiquity"  having  de-
clared their  independence  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  and  continued  after
their  expulsion  from  the  Society  to  hold  their  lodge  and  to  per-
form the  work  of  Masonry,  the  Grand  Lodge  permitted  those  mem-
bers who  had  maintained  their  obedience  to  assemble  as  the  real

"Lodge  of  Antiquity,"  still  without  a Warrant,  and  to  appear  by

their  Master  and  Wardens  at  the  Grand  Communications  as  the

representatives  of  the  lodge.

There  were  thus  two  lodges  of  Antiquity  in  the  field — the  lodge

recognized  by  the  Grand  Lodge,  consisting  of  the  members  who  had
refused  to  take  part  in  the  schismatic  proceedings;  and  the  lodge

1 See  the  act  of  Approbation  in  Anderson's  1723  edition  of  the  "Constitutions,"  p.  74.

2 The  official  record  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for  November  25,  1789,  says  that  Preston

and  seven  other  members  of  the  "Lodge  of  Antiquity,"  who  had  been  expelled  in  1779,
had  "signified  their  concern  that  through  misrepresentation,  as  they  conceived,  they
should  have  incurred  the  displeasure  of  that  Assembly,  and  their  wish  to  be  restored  to
the  privileges  of  the  Society,  to  the  laws  of  which  they  were  ready  to  conform."

SCHISM  OF  THE  LODGE  OF  ANTIQUITY

1149

consisting  of  the  members  who  had  withdrawn  from  their  allegiance,
and  had  established  themselves  as  an  independent  body,  working
under  the  old  Operative  system.

Of  the  former  lodge,  it  is  unnecessary  and  irrelevant  to  the  pres-
ent history  to  take  any  further  notice.  It  probably  pursued  "the
even  tenor  of  its  way"  quietly  and  unobtrusively.  In  the  lists  of
lodges  made  during  the  period  of  the  schism,  its  name  and  number

are  retained  without  alteration  as  the  "Lodge  of  Antiquity  No.  1,

Freemasons'  Tavern,  Great  Queen  Street,  formerly  the  'Goose  and

Gridiron,'  St.  Paul's  Church  Yard."  1

The  latter  lodge,  the  one  whose  existence  I have  sought  to
prove  was  illegal,  very  soon  proceeded  to  adopt  measures  still  more
offensive  in  their  character.

It  has  been  commonly  stated  that  it  applied  to  the  Grand  Lodge
at  York  for  a sanction  of  its  acts,  and  for  authority  to  continue  its

existence  as  a lodge.

This  is  not  correct.  The  true  statement  of  the  relative  positions

of  the  Grand  Lodge  at  York  and  the  independent  Grand  Lodge  of

Antiquity  is  fully  set  forth  in  a correspondence  between  certain

members  of  the  two  bodies  which  is  still  extant.2

From  this  correspondence  it  appears  that  Bro.  Jacob  Bussey,  the
Grand  Secretary  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  York,  while  in  London  had

an  interview  with  some  of  the  members  of  the  "Lodge  of  Antiq-
uity." Under  a misapprehension  of  the  views  of  these  Brethren,

on  his  return  home  he  stated  that  it  was  their  desire  to  obtain  a
Warrant  of  Constitution  as  a lodge  from  the  York  Grand  Lodge.

Having  learned  the  fact  of  this  misapprehension  from  a communica-
tion, made  on  August  29th,  by  Bussey,  after  his  return  to  York,  to
Bro.  Bradley,  the  Junior  Warden  of  the  "Lodge  of  Antiquity,"
the  officers  of  that  lodge  addressed  a letter  on  September  16,  1778,
to  the  Grand  Master  and  Brethren  of  the  Grand  Lodge  at  York.
In  this  letter  is  the  following  explicit  statement  of  their  views:

"Though  we  should  be  happy  to  promote  Masonry  under  the

Banners  of  the  Grand  Lodge  at  York,  an  application  by  petition

for  a Warrant  for  a Constitution  to  act  as  a private  lodge  here  was
never  our  intention,  as  we  considered  ourselves  sufficiently  empow-

1 List  of  Lodges,  in  1781,  taken  from  the  Calendar  for  1788.  See  Gould,  p.  68.

2 See  this  correspondence  in  Bro.  Hughan's  "History  of  Freemasonry  in  York,
pp.  74-76.

1150

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

ered  by  the  Immemorial  Constitution  of  our  lodge,  to  execute
every  duty  we  can  wish  as  a private  lodge  of  Masons."

They  were,  however,  ready,  they  go  on  to  say,  if  satisfied  by
proofs  of  the  existence  of  the  Grand  Lodge  at  York  before  the
year  1717,  to  accept  from  it  a Constitutional  authority  to  act  in
London  as  a Grand  Lodge  for  that  part  of  England  which  is  south

of  the  river  Trent.

The  Grand  Secretary,  however,  in  his  August  letter,  appears  to
have  furnished  the  required  proofs,  and  consequently  Bradley,  the
Junior  Warden  of  the  "Lodge  of  Antiquity,"  wrote  to  him  on  Sep-
tember 22,  1778. 1 In  this  letter  he  again  disclaimed  any  desire  on
the  part  of  the  "Lodge  of  Antiquity"  to  receive  a Warrant  as  a
private  lodge,  but  expressed  its  willingness  to  accept  "a  Warrant
or  Deputation  to  a few  members  of  the  'Lodge  of  Antiquity'  to

act  as  a Grand  Lodge  for  that  part  of  England,  south  of  the  Trent,
with  a power  to  constitute  lodges  in  that  division  when  properly
applied  for,  and  a regular  correspondence  to  be  kept  up  and  some
token  of  allegiance  to  be  annually  given  on  the  part  of  the  brethren
thus  authorized  to  act."

The  same  letter  contained  a list  of  the  names  of  the  brethren  of

the  "Lodge  of  Antiquity"  as  the  persons  suggested  to  be  placed  in
the  Warrant  or  Deputation,  should  it  be  granted.  These  were  as
follows,  and  though  at  this  distant  time  and  place  I am  unable  to

verify  the  fact,  it  may  be  fairly  presumed  that  the  suggestion  was
accepted,  and  that  when  the  Deputation  was  accepted,  the  following
Brethren  constituted  the  first  officers  of  the  new  Grand  Lodge:

JOHN  Wilson,  Esq.,  Master  of  the  Lodge  of  Antiquity,  as
Grand  Master.

William  Preston,  Past  Master  of  the  same  Lodge,  as  Deputy
Grand  Master.

BENJAMIN  Bradley,  Junior  Warden  of  the  same,  as  Senior
Grand  Warden.

GILBERT  Buchanan,  Secretary  of  the  same,  as  Junior  Grand
Warden.

JOHN  Seaby,  Senior  Steward  of  the  same,  as  Grand  Secretary.

Further  correspondence,  protracted  for  more  than  a year,  fol-
lowed, but  finally  the  "Warrant  of  Confirmation"  was  sent,  and  on

1 Benjamin  Bradley's  Letter  of  September  22d.  See  Hughan's  "History,"  p.  76.

SCHISM  OF  THE  LODGE  OF  ANTIQUITY

1151

April  19th  the  "Grand  Lodge  of  England  South  of  the  Trent
was  inaugurated,  the  Grand  Master  installed,  and  the  other  officers
appointed.

There  are  two  things  which  are  here  worthy  of  notice  as  histori-
cal facts.

In  the  first  place,  the  body  thus  erected  was  in  no  proper  sense
a sovereign  and  independent  Grand  Lodge,  as  Grand  Lodges  are
known  to  be  at  this  day  and  as  was  at  the  time  the  Grand  Lodge  at
London.  It  was  rather,  though  not  so  called  by  name,  a sort  of
Provincial  Grand  Lodge,  erected  by  a Grand  Lodge,  to  which  it

acknowledged  that  it  owed  allegiance  and  to  which  it  paid  an  annual
contribution  in  money  and  a fee  of  two  guineas  for  every  Warrant
of  Constitution  that  it  granted.

In  the  second  place,  it  was  not  to  the  "Lodge  of  Antiquity"

that  the  Deputation  was  granted,  as  it  never  changed  its  condition

or  its  title  as  a private  lodge.  The  Deputation  was  given,  it  is  true,
to  certain  of  its  officers,  and  its  Master  was  most  probably  the  first
Grand  Master,  as  there  was  no  other  source  whence  the  officers

could  be  drawn.

As  soon  as  the  new  Grand  Lodge  was  inaugurated,  the  "Lodge
of  Antiquity"  became  subordinate  to  it,  and  a return  made  in

March,  1789,  the  lodges  then  under  the  Grand  Lodge  South  of  the

Trent,  are  said  to  be,  exclusive  of  the  "Lodge  of  Antiquity,"  No.  1,
or  the  Lodge  of  Perfect  Observance,  and  No.  2,  or  the  Lodge  of
Perseverance  and  Triumph.  These  lodges  were  respectively  War-
ranted on  August  9th,  and  November  15,  1779.

The  "Lodge  of  Antiquity,"  like  the  Grand  Steward's  Lodge  in

the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  seems  to  have  assumed  precedency

without  a number.  It  was  a right  which  it  claimed  from  its  "im-
memorial Constitution."

Preston  says,  in  his  1 78 1 1 edition,  that  "a  Grand  Lodge,  under

the  banner  of  the  Grand  Lodge  in  York,  is  established  in  London,
and  several  lodges  are  already  constituted  under  that  banner,  while
the  'Lodge  of  Antiquity'  acts  independent  by  virtue  of  its  own

authority."

If  the  word  "several"  is  here  properly  applied,  other  Warrants
must  have  been  issued  between  July  1,  1780,  when  the  two  lodges

1 "Illustrations  of  Masonry,"  edition  of  1781,  p.  295.  In  the  subsequent  editions,

published  after  the  reconciliation,  these  statements  are  omitted.

1152

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

mentioned  above  were  said  to  be  "the  only  lodges"  which  had  been
constituted,  and  the  time  when  Preston  made  his  statement.  But
of  this  we  have  no  other  evidence.

The  "Grand  Lodge  of  England  South  of  the  Trent"  does  not
appear  to  have  made  any  especial  mark  in  Masonic  history.  It
originated  in  a mistaken  view,  assumed  by  its  founders,  of  their
rights  and  privileges.  These  views  were  strenuously  opposed  by  all
the  other  lodges  which  composed  the  Mother  Grand  Lodge  and

were  finally  abandoned  by  themselves.

At  the  Grand  Feast  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  held  in

1790,  a reconciliation  was  effected  principally  through  the  media-
tion of  Bro.  William  Birch,  a Past  Master  of  the  "Lodge  of
Antiquity."  Unanimity  was  happily  restored;  the  Manifesto  of  the
"Lodge  of  Antiquity,"  in  which  it  had  asserted  its  claims  and  de-
fended its  conduct,  was  revoked;  the  Master  and  Wardens  of  the

lodge  resumed,  as  heretofore,  their  seats  in  the  Grand  Lodge  whence
they  had  seceded  in  1778;  the  Brethren  of  the  lodge  who  had  re-
tained their  loyalty  were  reunited  with  the  original  members;  and  the

"Grand  Lodge  of  England,  South  of  the  Trent,"  after  an  ephemeral
career  of  little  more  than  ten  years,  ceased  to  exist.1

But  this  episode  in  the  history  of  English  Freemasonry,  bitter  as
were  the  feelings  which  the  separation  engendered,  has  not  been
without  compensating  advantages  in  its  results.

It  has  permanently  settled  the  important  principle  of  Masonic
jurisprudence,  that  the  old  Operative  law  or  usage  which  recognized
the  right  of  a competent  number  of  Freemasons  to  establish  a lodge
without  the  authority  of  a Warrant,  has  been  forever  abrogated  by
the  transformation  of  the  Operative  Art  into  a Speculative  Science,
and  that  henceforth,  in  all  time  to  come,  the  supreme  authority  to
grant  Warrants  and  to  constitute  lodges  is  vested  solely  in  Grand
Lodges.

This  principle,  so  essential  to  the  harmony  and  the  perpetuity  of
Speculative  Freemasonry,  was  almost  worth  a ten  years'  struggle  to
secure  its  permanent  maintenance.

It  has  thus  been  seen  that  in  the  year  1780  there  were  in  Eng-
land four  bodies  claiming  to  be  Grand  Lodges.

1.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  established  in  London  in  the
year  1717.

1 See  Preston,  Oliver's  edition,  p.  249.

SCHISM  OF  THE  LODGE  OF  ANTIQUITY

1153

2.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  all  England,  established  at  York  in  the

year  1725.

3.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  according  to  the  Old  Insti-

tutions, established  at  London  in  the  year  1753,  and

4.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  England  South  of  the  Trent,  estab-

lished also  at  London  in  the  year  1780.

It  has  been  heretofore  shown  that  the  second  of  these  self-styled
Grand  Lodges  was  really  a Mother  Lodge,  and  that  its  pretended
organization  as  a Grand  Lodge  was  in  violation  of  the  law  and

precedent  established  eight  years  before  by  the  Grand  Lodge  at
London.

It  has  also  been  shown  that  the  third  and  fourth  of  these  pre-
tended Grand  Lodges  were  illegal  secessions  from  the  primitive

Grand  Lodge,  and  that  their  assumption  of  authority  was  in  viola-
tion of  the  compact  of  1721,  and  was  unsupported  by  any  principle

of  Masonic  law  which  then  prevailed  and  was  recognized  by  the

Craft.

It  follows  then,  as  has  hitherto  been  said,  that  the  first  of  these
bodies,  the  one  established  at  London  in  1717,  is  the  only  really

legal  and  regular  Grand  Lodge  that  ever  existed  in  England,  and

that  it  is,  as  it  has  always  claimed  to  be,  the  Premier  and  Mother
Grand  Lodge  of  the  World.

Of  the  three  irregular  bodies,  the  Grand  Lodge  at  York  and  the
Grand  Lodge  South  of  the  Trent  were  both,  in  the  course  of  time,

quietly  absorbed  into  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  and  thus  ob-

scurely ceased  to  exist.

The  Grand  Lodge  according  to  the  Old  Institutions,  more  com-
monly known  as  the  Atholl  Grand  Lodge,  or  the  Grand  Lodge  of

Ancients,  had  a higher  vitality,  lived  for  a longer  period,  became

prominent  as  a successful  rival  of  the  regular  and  older  body,  and
with  it  was  eventually  merged  in  1813  to  the  United  Grand  Lodge
of  England.

But  a future  chapter  must  be  devoted  to  the  history  of  this  im-

portant and  interesting  event


# VOLUME V

^..Maffiffi

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2010  with  funding  from

University  of  Toronto

http://www.archive.org/details/historyoffreemas05mack

KNIGHTS  TEMPLARS

THE

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

ITS  LEGENDS  AND  TRADITIONS
ITS  CHRONOLOGICAL  HISTORY

By  ALBERT  GALLATIN  MACKEY,  M.D.,  33°

THE  HISTORY  OF  THE

SYMBOLISM  OF  FREEMASONRY

THE

ANCIENT  AND  ACCEPTED  SCOTTISH  RITE

AND  THt

ROYAL  ORDER  OF  SCOTLAND

By  WILLIAM  R.  SINGLETON,  33?.

WITH  AN

ADDENDA

By  WILLIAM  JAMES  HUGHAN

p.'.  S.'.  G.".  D.'.  OF  G.'.  L.'.  OF  England— P.".  S.".  G.".  W.".  of  Egypt,  etc.

Volume  Five

PUBLISHED  BY

THE  MASONIC  HISTORY  COMPANY

New  York  and  London

/tue  masonic  history©'^

gf)  cAlll^ghlsHeseTyieJ  (^

T  ^amtfactured  in  the  "United  Slates  ofzAmenca  by

RRDoNNEixEY  er  Sons  Company

y^^    Cllt  latoBitt  Prt»»

^C£(^       Cou>«  Rlpkoouctions  By

^American  Lhiiocraphic  Coji

\J  '6"

CHAPTER  XLIII

THE  UNION  OF  THE  TWO  GRAND  LODGES  OF  ENGLAND

IHE  fusion  of  the  two  rival  Grand  Lodges — the
"  Ancients  "  and  the  "  Moderns  " — was  the  most
important  event  that  has  occurred  in  the  history
of  Speculative  Freemasonry  since  the  organiza-
tion of  1 717.

The  mutual  denunciations  of  two  bodies,
each  practicing  almost  the  same  rites  and  cere-
monies, each  professing  to  be  actuated  by  the  same  principles,  and
each  tending  to  the  accomplishment  of  the  same  objects,  and  each
claiming  to  be  the  supreme  Head  of  the  Masonic  Institution  while
it  accused  its  antagonist  of  being  irregular  in  its  organization  and  a
usurper  of  authority,  could  not  have  failed  eventually  to  impair  the
purity  and  detract  from  the  usefulness  of  the  Institution.

The  sentiment  of  active  opposition  on  the  part  of  the  "  Modems '"
had  grown  with  the  increasing  success  of  their  rivals.  In  1777  the
constitutional  Grand  Lodge  had  declared  "that  the  persons  who
assemble  in  London  and  elsewhere  in  the  character  of  Masons,  call-
ing  themselves  Ancient  Masons,  and  at  present  said  to  be  under  the
patronage  of  the  Duke  of  Atholl,  are  not  to  be  countenanced  or
acknowledged  by  any  regular  lodge  or  Mason  under  the  constitution
of  England ;  nor  shall  any  regular  Mason  be  present  at  any  of  their
conventions  to  give  a  sanction  to  their  proceedings,  under  the  pen-
alty of  forfeiting  the  privileges  of  the  Society,  nor  shall  any  per-
son initiated  at  any  of  their  irregular  meetings  be  admitted  into  any
lodge  without  being  re-made."'

This  anathema  was  followed  at  different  periods  during  the  rest
of  the  century  by  others  of  equal  severity.  The  "  Modern  Masons,"
knowing  the  legality  of  their  own  organization  and  the  false  preten-
sions of  the  "Ancients," are  to  be  excused  and  even  justified  for  the

'  Preston  gives  this  degree  in  full ;  Northouck  only  summarizes  it.  See  Preston.  "  Il-
lustrations," Oliver's  edition,  p.  242,  and  Northouck,  "  Constitutions,"  p.  323.

"55

1156  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

intensity  of  their  opposition  and  even  for  the  harshness  of  their
language.  Feeling  assured,  from  all  the  historical  documents  with
which  they  were  familiar,  that  the  Grand  Lodge  organized  in  1717
was  the  only  legitimate  authority  in  English  Masoniy,  it  was  natural
that  they  should  denounce  any  pretension  to  the  possession  of  that
authority  by  others  as  an  imposture.

The  "Ancients,"  who,  notwithstanding  the  positiveness  with
which  they  asserted  their  claim  to  a  superior  antiquity,  must,  un-
consciously at  times,  have  felt  their  weakness,  never  displayed  so  ac-
rimonious a  spirit.  On  the  contrary,  they  were  unwilling  to  enter
into  discussions  which  might  elicit  facts  detrimental  to  the  solidity
of  their  pretensions.

Hence,  we  find  Dermott  saying:  "  I  have  not  the  least  antipa-
thy against  the  gentlemen  of  the  modern  society  ;  but,  on  the  con-
trary, love  and  respect  them;"  ^  and  though  in  a  subsequent  edition  he
complains  that  this  amicable  sentiment  was  not  reciprocated,  he  ad-
mits the  equal  right  of  each  society  to  choose  a  Grand  Master,  and
expresses  the  hope  to  see  in  his  life-time  a  unity  between  the  two.*

In  1801  the  Grand  Lodge  of  "Ancients,"  in  a  circular  addressed
to  the  Craft,  made  the  following  declaration :

"We  have  too  much  respect  for  every  Society  that  acts  under
the  Masonic  name,  however  imperfect  the  imitation,  to  enter  into  a
war  of  reproaches;  and,  therefore,  we  will  not  retort  on  an  Institu-
tion, established  in  London,  for  some  years,  under  high  auspices,  the
unfounded  aspersions  into  which  a  part  of  their  bodv  have  suffered
themselves  to  be  surprised."^

About  the  beginning  of  the  19th  century  many  leading  Ma-
sons among  the  "Moderns"  began  to  recognize  the  necessity  of  a
union  of  the  two  Societies.  I  am  compelled  to  believe,  or  at  least
to  suspect,  that  at  first  the  success  of  the  "  Ancients  "  was  a  controU--
ing  motive  in  this  desire  for  a  fusion  of  the  two  Grand  Lodges.

At  this  time  there  were  Grand  Lodges  of  "  Ancients,"  or  as  they
styled  themselves,  "Grand  Lodges  of  Ancient  York  Masons,"  whicn
had  emanated  frorr^  the  London  body,  in  Canada,  Pennsylvania,
Maryland,  South  Carolina,  New  York,  Massachusetts,  Nova  Scotia
Gibraltar,  and  most  of  the  provinces  and  islands  of  the  East  and

*"  Ahiman  Rezon,"  edition  of  1764,  p.  24.
*Ibid.,  edition  of  1778,  pp.  43-44.
■*Ibid.,  edition  of  1807,  p.  134..

THE   UNION   OF  THE   TWO   QRAND    LODGES       1157

West  Indies,  and  a  recognition  by  the  Grand  Lodges  of  Ireland  and
Scotland.'

Elated  with  this  success  and  with  the  diffusion  of  their  authority,
the  "Ancients"  did  not  at  first  incline  favorably  to  the  idea  of  a
union  of  the  Craft.  They  were  willing  to  accept  such  a  union,  but
it  must  be  without  the  slightest  compromise  or  concession  on  their
parL

Long  before  the  close  of  the  i8th  century  the  "Ancients"  had
made  an  important  change  in  the  character  of  the  claim  for  regularity
which  they  had  advanced  in  the  beginning  of  the  contest.

Some  time  after  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  according  to  the
"Old  Institutions,"  was  organized  by  a  secession  of  several  lodges
from  the  Constitutional  Grand  Lodge,  Lawrence  Dermott,  writing
in  its  defense,  sought  to  attribute  to  it  an  origin  older  than  that
claimed  by  the  Grand  Lodge  which  had  been  instituted  in  171 7,  and
asserted  that  that  organization  "  was  defective  in  number  and  conse-
quently defective  in  form  and  capacity."*

Again  he  declares  that  when  this  Grand  Lodge  was  about  to  be
established,  "some  joyous  companions,"  who  were  only  Fellow-Crafts,
met  together,  and  being  entirely  ignorant  of  the  "  Master's  part "  had
invented  a  "  new  composition  "  which  they  called  the  third  degree.'

At  a  later  period  the  "Ancients"  appear  to  have  abandoned,  or
at  least  to  have  ceased  to  have  pressed  this  claim  to  a  priority  of  ex-
istence and  to  a  greater  regularity  of  organization.  More  mature
reflection  and  the  force  of  historical  evidence  led  their  leaders  to  the
conviction  that  both  of  these  claims  were  wholly  untenable.

After  the  death  of  Laurence  Dermott  they  began  to  confine
their  claim  to  legality,  and  their  defense  of  the  secession  from  the
Constitutional  Grand  Lodge  upon  the  single  ground  that  the  latter
had  made  innovations  upon  the  ancient  landmarks,  and  by  their
change  of  words  and  ceremonies  had  ceased  any  longer  to  maintain
the  pure  system  of  Speculative  Freemasonry.

While  these  "variations  in  the  established  forms"  were  main-
tained by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  "Moderns,"  the  Grand  Lodge  of

'"  Ahiman  Rezon,"  edition  of  1807,  p.  117.

'Ibid.,  edition  of  1778,  p.  14.

*Ibid.,  p.  35.  It  will  be  noted  that  Dermott  did  not  make  these  grave  accusations
in  his  previous  editions  of  the  "  Ahiman  Rezon."  They  are  first  advanced  in  the  edition
published  in  1778.

1158  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

"  Ancients "  declared  it  to  be  impossible  to  hold  Masonic  inter-
course with  those  who  thus  deviated  from  the  legitimate  work  of  tne
Order.

Hence,  though,  as  has  been  seen,  the  Ancients  were  less  agress-
ive  in  their  language  toward  their  rivals  and  did  not  indulge  in  the
harsh  censures  which  characterized  the  Constitutional  Grand  Lodge,
they  were,  until  after  the  commencement  of  the  19th  century,  more
averse  than  that  body  to  a  union  of  the  two  divisions  of  the  Frater-
nity, and  met  all  advances  toward  that  object  with  something  more
than  indifference.

The  evidence  of  this  fact  is  abundantly  shown  in  the  transactions
of  both  bodies.

We  learn,  on  the  authority  of  Pres*^on,  that  in  November,  1801,
a  charge  was  presented  to  the  Constitutional  Grand  Lodge  against
some  of  its  members  for  patronizing  and  officially  acting  as  princi-
pal officers  in  a  lodge  of  "Ancients."  The  charge  being  proved,  it
was  determined  that  the  laws  should  be  enforced  against  them  unless
they  immediately  seceded  from  such  irregular  meetings.  They  so-
licited the  indulgence  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for  three  months,  hoping
that  they  might  be  enabled  in  that  time  to  effect  a  union  between  the
two  societies.  This  indulgence  was  granted,  and  that  no  impedi-
ment might  prevent  the  accomplishment  of  so  desirable  an  object,
the  charges  against  the  offending  brethren  w^ere  for  the  time  with-
drawn. A  committee  of  distinguished  Masons,  among  whom  was
the  Earl  of  Moira,  who  was  very  popular  with  the  Craft  of  "  Mod-
ems," was  appointed  to  pave  the  way  for  the  intended  union,  and
every  means  were  ordered  to  be  used  to  effect  that  object.

Lord  Moira  declared,  on  accepting  the  appointment  as  a  mem-
ber of  the  Committee,  that  he  should  consider  the  day  on  which
such  a  coalition  should  be  formed  as  one  of  the  happiest  days  of
his  life,  and  that  he  was  empowered  by  the  Prince  of  Wales,  then
Grand  Master  of  the  "  Modems,"  to  say  that  his  arms  would  be
ever  open  to  all  the  Masons  in  the  kingdom,  indiscriminately.'

This  was  the  first  open  and  avowed  proposition  for  a  union  of
the  two  Grand  Lodges.  It  emanated  from  the  "  Moderns,"  and
up  to  that  date  none  had  ever  been  offered  by  the  "  Ancients,"
who  were  silently  dnd  successfully  pursuing   their   career — in  ex-

'  Preston.  "  Illustrations,"  old  edition,  p.  329.

THE   UNION   OF   THE   TWO   GRAND   LODGES      1159

tending  their  influence,  making  lodges  at  home  and  abroad,  and
securing  the  popular  favor  of  the  Craft.^

The  effort,  however,  was  not  successful.  After  suspending  all
active  opposition,  the  Constitutional  Grand  Lodge  learned  in  Feb-
ruary, 1803,  that  no  measures  had  been  taken  to  effect  a  union  ;  it
resumed  its  antagonistic  position,  punished  the  brethren  who  had
been  charged  with  holding  a  connection  with  the  "  Ancients,"  and
unanimously  resolved  that  "  whenever  it  shall  appear  that  any
Masons  under  the  English  Constitution  shall  in  future  attend  or
countenance  any  lodge  or  meeting  of  persons  calling  themselves
Ancient  Masons  under  the  sanction  of  any  person  claiming  the
title  of  Grand  Master  of  England,  who  shall  not  have  been  duly
elected  in  the  Grand  Lodge,  the  laws  of  the  Society  shall  not  only
be  strictly  enforced  against  them,  but  their  names  shall  be  erased
from  the  list  and  transmitted  to  all  the  regular  Lodges  under  the
Constitution  of  England."''

What  were  the  means  adopted  by  the  Constitutional  Grand
Lodge  to  accomplish  the  much-desired  object  are  not  now  exactly
known.  But  that  they  were  highly  distasteful  to  the  "  Ancients  "
is  very  clear  from  the  action  of  their  Grand  Lodge  adopted  on
March  2,  1802.

This  action  was  evidently  intended  as  a  reply  to  the  proposi-
tion of  the  rival  body  of  "  Moderns,"  tendered  in  the  preceding
November.  The  declaration  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  "Ancients"
is  printed  in  Harper's  edition  of  the  Ahiinan  Rezon,  published  in
1807.^  As  this  work  is  not  generally  accessible  to  the  Fraternity,
and  as  the  document  presents  a  very  full  and  fair  expression  of  the
position  assumed  by  the  "  Ancients  "  at  that  advanced  period  in  the
history  of  their  career,  I  shall  copy  it  without  abbreviation.

"  It  was  represented  to  this  Grand  Lodge,  that  notwithstanding
the  very  temperate  notice  which  was  taken  in  the  last  Quarterly  Com-
munication, of  certain  unprovoked  expressions  used  toward  the  Fra-
ternity of  Ancient  Masons,  by  a  Society  generally  known  by  the
appellation  of  the  Modern  Masons  of  England,  that  body  has  been

'There  is  no  doubt  that  at  that  day,  in  America  certainly,  the  "  Ancients"  were
more  popular  than  the  "  Moderns."  Hence  there  appears  to  have  been  a  settlement  oi
expedience  exhibited  in  the  desire  of  the  latter  to  effect  a  coalition.

'^  Preston,  "  Illustrations,"  old  edition,  p.  330.

*  Pages  125-131.

ii6o  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

further  prevailed  on  to  make  declarations  and  to  proceed  to  acts  at
once  illiberal  and  unfounded  with  respect  to  the  character,  preten-
sions, and  antiquity  of  this  institution.  It  was  not  a  matter  of  sur-
prise that  from  the  transcendant  influence  of  the  pure  and  unchanged
system  of  Ancient  Masonry,  practiced  in  our  regular  lodges,  the
solidity  of  our  establishment,  the  progressive  increase  of  our  funded
capital,  the  frequency  and  extent  of  our  benevolence,  and,  above  all,
from  the  avowed  and  unalterable  bond  of  union,  which  has  so  long
and  so  happily  subsisted  between  us  and  the  Ancient  Grand  Lodges
of  Scotland,  Ireland,  America,  and  the  East  and  West  Indies,  it
should  be  a  most  desirable  object  to  the  body  of  Modern  Masons  to
enrol  the  two  societies  under  one  banner  by  an  act  of  incorporation  ;
but  we  did  not  expect  that  they  would  have  made  use  of  the  means
which  have  been  attempted  to  gain  the  end.  Bearing,  as  they  do,
the  Masonic  name,  and  patronized  by  many  most  illustrious  persons,
we  have  ever  shown  a  disposition  to  treat  them  with  respect,  and  we
cannot  suppress  our  feelings  of  regret,  that  unmindful  of  the  high
auspices  by  which  they  are,  for  the  time,  distinguished,  they  should
here  condescend  to  the  use  or  language  which  reflects  discredit  on
their  cause.  Truth  requires  no  acrimony,  and  brotherhood  dis-
claims it.  It  is  a  species  of  warfare  so  inconsistent  with  the  genuine
principles  of  Masonry,  that  they  may  wage  it  without  the  fear  of  a
retort.  Actuated  by  the  benignity  which  these  principles  inspire,
we  shall  content  ourselves  with  a  tranquil  appeal  to  written  record.
It  is  not  for  two  equal,  independent  and  contending  institutions  to
expect  that  the  world  will  acquiesce  in  the  ipse  dixit  of  either  party.
We  shall  not  rest  our  pretensions,  therefore,  on  extracts  from  our
own  books,  or  on  documents  in  our  own  possession — but  out  of
their  own  mouths  shall  we  judge  them."

In  their  Book  of  Constitutions,  quarto  edition,  anno  1784,  p.  240,
they  make  this  frank  confession  :  "  Some  variations  were  made  in  the
established  forms."  This  is  their  own  declaration,  and  they  say  that
these  were  made  "  more  effectually  to  debar  them  and  their  abettors
(that  is,  us,  the  ancient  masons)  from  their  lodges."  Now  what  was
the  nature  of  these  changes  ?  Fortunately,  the  dispute  did  not  rest
between  the  two  rival  bodies ;  it  was  not  for  either  to  decide  which
had  the  claim  of  regular  descent  from  the  ancient  stock  of  the
"York  Masons."  There  was  a  competent  tribunal.  The  Masonic
world  alone  could  exercise  the  jurisdiction  and  pronounce  a  verdict

THE   UNION   OF   THE  TWO   GRAND   LODGES       1161

on  the  case.  Accordingly,  after  frequent  visitations  made  to  our
lodges  by  the  brethren  from  Scotland  and  Ireland,  who  repaired  to
England,  the  two  Grand  Lodges  of  these  parts  of  the  united  em-
pire pronounced  in  our  favor  and  declared  that  in  the  Ancient
Grand  Lodge  of  England  the  pure,  unmixed  principles  of  Masonry
— the  original  and  holy  obligations— the  discipline  and  the  pure
science,  were  preserved.  It  was  not  in  the  forms  alone  that  varia-
tions had  been  made  by  the  modern  order.  They  had  innovated  on
the  essential  principles,  and  consequently  the  Masonic  world  could
not  recognize  them  as  brothers.

"In  the  strict  and  rigorous,  but  beautiful,  scheme  of  Ancient
Masonry,  every  part  of  which  was  founded  on  the  immutable  laws
of  truth,  nothing  was  left  for  future  ages  to  correct.  There  can  be
no  reforms  in  the  cardinal  virtues  ;  that  which  was  pure,  just,  and  true
as  received  from  the  eternal  ordinance  of  the  divine  Author  of  all
good,  must  continue  the  same  to  all  eternity.  In  this  grand  mystery,
every  part  of  which  contributes  to  a  sacred  end,  even  the  exteriors
of  the  science  were  wisely  contrived  as  the  fit  emblems  of  the  white
and  spotless  lamb,  which  is  the  type  of  Masonic  benignity.

"The  Grand  Lodge  can  not  be  more  explicit.  They  will  not
follow  the  blameable  practice  of  entering  into  a  public  discussion  of
what  ought  to  be  confined  to  the  sanctuary  of  a  regular  lodge.
Suffice  it  to  say,  that  after  mature  investigation  by  the  only  persons
who  were  authorized  to  pronounce  a  judgment  on  the  subject,  reso-
lutions of  correspondence  were  passed  by  the  Ancient  Grand  Lodges
of  England,  Ireland,  and  Scotland,  which  were  entered  in  their
respective  archives,  and  which  the  Fraternity  will  find  in  our  Book
of  Constiiuiions.

"  These  resolutions  have  been  constantly  acted  upon  from  that
time  to  the  present  day.  We  have  since  been  further  strengthened
bv  the  formal  accession  of  the  Grand  Lodges  of  America  and  of  the
East  and  West  Indies  to  the  Union.  And  it  may  now  be  said,
without  any  impeachment  of  the  modernized  order,  that  the  phalanx
of  Ancient  Masonry  is  now  established  to  an  extent  of  communica-
rion  that  bids  defiance  to  all  malice,  however  keen,  and  to  all  mis-
representation, however  specious,  to  break  asunder.  May  the
Eternal  Architect  of  the  World  preserve  the  Edifice  entire  to  the
latest  posterity  ;  for  it  is  the  asylum  of  feeble  man  against  the  shafts
of  adversity,  against  the  perils  of  strife,  and  what  is  his  own  enemy.

,i62  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

against  the  conflict  of  his  own  passions.  It  draws  more  close  the
ties  of  consanguinity  where  they  are,  and  creates  them  where  they
are  not ;  it  inculcates  this  great  maxim  as  the  means  of  social  hap-
piness, that,  however  separated  by  seas  and  distances,  distinguished
by  national  character  or  divided  into  sects,  the  whole  community  of
man  ought  to  act  toward  one  another,  in  all  the  relations  of  life,  like
brothers  of  the  same  family,  for  they  are  children  of  the  same  Eter-
nal Father,  and  Masonry  teaches  them  to  seek,  by  amendment  of
their  lives,  the  same  place  of  rest.

"  The  Ancient  Grand  Lodge  of  England  has  thought  it  due  to
its  character  to  make  this  short  and  decisive  declaration,  on  the  un-
authorized attempts  that  have  recently  been  made  to  bring  about
a  union  with  a  body  of  persons  who  have  not  entered  into  the  obli-
gations by  which  we  are  bound,  and  who  have  descended  to  calum-
nies and  acts  of  the  most  unjustifiable  kind.

"They  desire  it  therefore  to  be  known  to  the  Masonic  world
and  they  call  upon  their  regular  lodges,  their  Past  and  Present
Grand  Officers,  and  their  Royal  Arches  and  Masters,  their  Wardens
and  Brethren  throughout  the  whole  extent  of  the  Masonic  com-
munion, to  take  notice,  that  they  can  not  and  must  not  receive  into
the  body  of  a  just  and  perfect  lodge,  nor  treat  as  a  Brother,  any
person  who  has  not  receiv^ed  the  obligations  of  Masonry  according
to  the  Ancient  Constitutions,  as  practiced  by  the  United  Grand
Lodges  of  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland,  and  the  regular  branches
that  have  sprung  from  their  sanction.  And  this  our  unalterable
decree.

'  By  Order  of  the  Grand  Lodge."

A  careful  perusal  of  this  document  will  show  that  the  position
which  had  been  assumed  by  the  "  Ancients  "  at  the  middle  of  the
1 8th  century,  when  they  organized  their  Grand  Lodge,  was  aban-
doned by  them  at  its  close.  Dermott  maintained  that  his  Grand
Lodge  was  regular  in  its  organization  on  the  ground  that  the  organ-
ization of  the  other  body  was  irregular  and  illegal,  and  illegitimate.
One  of  the  reasons  he  assigned  for  this  illegality  was  that  it  had
been  formed  by  a  less  than  lawful  number  of  lodges.  There  were
but  four  If^dges  engaged  in  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge  at
London  in  the  year  171 7.  But,  says  Dermott,  with  the  utmost
•effrontery,  knowing,  as  he  must  have  known,  that  there  was  no  such

THE   UNION   OF   THE   TWO   GRAND    LODGES       1163

law  or  usage  in  existence  nor  ever  had  been,  "  to  form  a  Grand
Lodge  tiiere  must  have  been  the  Masters  and  Wardens  of  five  regu-
lar lodges;"  and  he  adds  that  "this  is  so  well  known  to  every  man
conversant  with  the  ancient  laws,  usages,  customs,  and  ceremonies
of  Master  Masons,  that  it  is  needless  to  say  more."^  Hence  the
Grand  Lodge  of  171 7  "was  defective  in  number  and  consequently
defective  in  form  and  capacity."

Another  charge  made  by  Dermott  against  the  "  Moderns  "  was
that  they  were  ignorant  of  the  true  Third  degree  and  had  fabricated
a  mere  imitation  of  it,  a  "new  composition  "  as  he  contemptuously
calls  it.

But  at  the  close  of  the  century  both  these  charges  were  aban-
doned and  a  new  issue  was  joined.  The  ground  on  which  the
"Ancients"  rested  the  defense  of  their  secession  in  1738  from  the
Constitutional  Grand  Lodge  was  that  that  body  had  made  "  varia-
tions in  the  established  forms  ; "  in  other  words,  that  it  had  intro-
duced innovations  into  the  ritual.

Now  this  would  seem  to  be  a  singularly  surprising  instance  of
mental  aberration,  if  we  did  not  know  the  perversity  of  human
nature.  When  charging  the  "Moderns  "with  the  introduction  of
innovations,  the  "  Ancients "  appear  to  have  completely  forgotten
that  far  more  serious  innovations  had  been  previously  introduced
by  themselves.

The  "Moderns"  had  only  made  a  transposition  of  a  couple  of
words  of  recognition;  the  "Ancients"  had  mutilated  the  Third
degree  and  fabricated  out  of  it  a  Fourth,  hitherto  unknown  to  the
Craft.  It  ill  became  these  bold  innovators  to  condemn  others  for
the  very  fault  they  themselves  had  committed  to  a  far  greater
extent.

We  are  ready  to  exclaim  with  the  Roman  satirist :  "  Quis  tu-
lerit  Gracchos  de  scditio7ic  quercntes?"^  "Who  could  endure  the
Gracchi  when  they  complained  of  sedition  ?"

Having  thus,  by  implication,  at  least,  admitted  the  legality  of  the
original  organization  of  the  Constitutional  Grand  Lodge  and  the  cor-
rectness of  its  primitive  work,  and  restricting  their  charge  of  irregu-
larity to  the  single  fact  of  the  existence  of  innovations,  the  "  An-
cients," notwithstanding  the  emphatic  language  in  their  address  of

*  "  Ahiman  Rezon,"  edition  of  1778,  p.  13.  'Juvenal,  Satire  il.f  24

ri64  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

1802,  in  which  they  had  declared  the  impossibility  of  recognizing
their  rivals,  had  certainly  made  the  way  more  easy  for  future  recon-
ciliation  and  union.

Had  they  continued  to  maintain  the  theory  of  Dermott  that
the  Grand  Lodge  of  "Moderns"  was  an  illegal  and  un-Masonic
body,  which  had  never  known  or  had  the  Master's  part,  I  do  not  see
how  the  "  Moderns"  could,  with  consistency  and  self-respect,  have
tendered,  or  the  "  Ancients  "  listened  to,  any  offer  of  union  and  a
consolidation.

But  about  the  beginning  of  the  19th  century  there  were  many
Masons,  especially  among  the  "  Moderns,"  who  felt  the  necessity  of
a  reconciliation,  since  the  protracted  dissension  was  destructive  of
that  harmony  and  fellowship  which  should  properly  characterize  the
institution.  We  have  seen  that  the  Prince  of  Wales  had  in  1801,
when  he  was  Grind  Master  of  the  "  Moderns,"  expressed  his  will-
ingness for  a  union  of  all  English  Masons.  This  sentiment  was
shared  at  a  later  period  by  his  brothers,  the  Dukes  of  Kent  and
Sussex.

But  of  all  the  distinguished  members  of  the  Constitutional
Grand  Lodge,  none  was  so  zealous  and  indefatigable  in  the  effort
to  accomplish  a  reconciliation  as  the  Earl  of  Moira,  who  in  T795
had  been  Acting  Grand  Master  under  the  Grand  Mastership  of  the
Prince  of  Wales.'

In  1801  he  had  been  appointed  one  of  a  committee  to  attempt
to  effect  a  union  of  the  two  Grand  Lodges — a  mission  which  was
unsuccessful  in  its  results.  But  he  was  more  felicitous  two  years
afterward  in  his  efforts  to  induce  a  good  understanding  between  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  and  the  Constitutional  Grand  Lodge  of
England.

It  has  been  heretofore  seen  that  at  an  early  period  in  the  career
of  the  Atholl  Grand  Lodge,  the  Grand  Lodges  of  Ireland  and  Scot-
land  had   been  induced,  through  the  influence  and  misrepresenta-

•To  ho  person,  says  Preston,  had  Masonry  for  many  years  been  more  indebted  than
to  the  Earl  of  Moira  (now  Marquis  of  Hastings).  Toward  the  end  of  the  year  1 812  his
Lordship  was  appointed  Governor-General  of  India  ;  and  it  was  considered  by  the  Fra-
ternity as  only  a  just  mark  of  respect  to  invite  his  Lordship  to  a  farewell  banquet  previous
to  his  departure  from  England,  and  to  present  him  with  a  valuable  Masonic  Jewel,  as
a  memorial  of  their  gratitude  for  his  eminent  services.  Preston,  "  Illustrations  of  Ma;
sonry,"  old  edition,  p.  346.

THE    UNION   OF   THE   TWO   GRAND    LODGES      1165

.ions  of  Dci  mott,  to  take  the  part  of  the  "  Ancients  "  and  to  recog-
nize them  as  the  only  legal  Masonic  authority  in  England.

In  1782  the  Constitutional  Grand  Lodge,  supposing,  it  seem?,
fallaciously,  that  there  was  some  prospect  of  establishing  a  friendly
correspondence  with  the  sister  kingdoms,  concurred  in  a  resolution
recommending  the  Grand  Master  to  use  every  means  which  in  his
wisdom  he  might  think  proper,  for  promoting  a  correspondence  with
the  Grand  Lodges  of  Scotland  and  Ireland,  so  far  as  should  be  con-
sistent with  the  laws  of  the  Society.'

As  this  last  provision  necessarily  required,  on  the  part  of  the
Irish  and  Scottish  brethren,  a  denunciation  of  their  friends  the
"  iVncient  Masons,"  we  may  infer  this  to  have  been  the  cause  of
the  unsuccessful  result  of  the  negotiation.  Notwithstanding  this
resolution,  says  Preston,  the  wished-for  union  was  not  then  fullv
accomplished."'

But  twenty  years  had  to  elapse  before  a  spirit  of  conciliation
was  shown  bv  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland,  and  eight  more  before
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ireland  exhibited  a  similar  s[)irit.

At  the  annual  session  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  in
November,  1S03,  the  Earl  of  Moira  being  present,  addressed  the
Grand  Lodge  in  what  Laurie  calls  an  impressive  speech,  equally
remarkable  for  the  eloquence  of  its  :  ontiments  and  the  energv  of
its  enunciation.

As  the  account  contained  in  Lauru's  llistory'x^  a  contemporarv
one,  it  may  be  considered  as  reliable  and  is  worth  giving  in  the
very  words  of  the  author  of  his  work."

"The  Earl  of  Moira  stated  that  the  hearts  and  arms  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England  had  ever  been  open  for  the  reception
of  their  seceding  brethren,  who  had  obstinately  refused  to  acknowl-
edge their  faults  and  return  to  the  bosom  of  their  Lodge;  and
that  though  the  Grand  Lodge  of  luigland  dilTered  in  a  few  trifling
observances  from  that  of  Scotland  tl\ev  had  ever  entertained  for
Scottish  Masons  that  affection  and  regard  which  it  is  the  object
of  Freemasonry  to  cherish  and  the  duty  of  Freemasons  to  feel.
His  Lordship's  speech  was  received  by  the  brethren  with  loud  and

'Northouck,  "  Constitutions,"  p.  340.
•*'  lIlustMtions,"  old  edition,  p.  357.

•l.adrieS  "  History  of  l-'rcf  in.is(ii\ry  "  vtm  published  at  Edinburgh  in  1..V.4— the  last
entry  in  tlie  book  is  llir  accoiiiU  of  tliis  speech.

1166  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

reiterated  applause — the  most  unequivocal  mark  of  their  approba^
tion  of  its  sentiments.'

It  was  afterward  stated  by  the  Earl  of  Moira,  that  at  that  com-
munication the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  had  expressed  its  concern
that  any  difference  should  subsist  among  the  Masons  of  England
and  that  the  lodges  meeting  under  the  sanction  of  the  Duke  of
Atholl  should  have  withdrawn  themselves  from  the  protection  of
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  but  hoped  that  measures  might  be
adopted  to  produce  a  reconciliation,  and  that  the  lodges  now  hold-
ing irregular  meetings  would  return  to  their  duty  and  again  be
received  into  the  bosom  of  the  Fraternity.'^

This  was  certainly  an  unqualified  admission  by  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Scotland  that  in  its  previous  action  in  respect  to  the  contending
bodies  in  England  it  had  been  in  error.  It  did  not  now  hesitate
to  style  the  "  Ancients "  whom  it  had  formerly  recognized  irregular
Masons,  and  to  acknowledge  that  their  organization  was  illegal.

The  inevitable  result  was  soon  apparent.  The  Grand  Lodge
of  Scotland  entered  into  fraternal  correspondence  with  the  Con-
stitutional Grand  Lodge  of  England  and  recognized  it  as  the
Supreme  Authority  of  English  Masonry.  This  good  feeling  was
still  further  augmented  by  the  election  in  1805  of  the  Prince  of
Wales  as  Patron  and  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scot-
land and  the  appointment  of  the  Earl  of  Moira  as  Actii  g  Grand
Master,  both  of  which  high  offices  were  respectively  held  at  the
same  time  by  the  same  persons  in  the  Constitutional  Grand  Lodge
of  England.

Here  then  was  a  thorough  reversal  of  the  conditions  which  had
previously  existed.  In  the  year  1772  the  office  of  Grand  Master,
both  in  England  and  in  Scotland,  had  been  filled  by  the  same  per-
son, the  Duke  of  Atholl.  But  it  was  over  the  irregular  and  illegal
English  body  that  he  presided.  The  result  was  a  close  and  friendly
alliance  between  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  and  the  schismatic
Grand  Lodge  in  England.

Again  in  the  year  1805  we  see  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England
and  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  united  under  one  and  the  same
Grand  Master,  the  Prince  of  Wales.  But  now  it  was  the  regular
Grand  Lodge  of  England  that  shared  the  honor  oi  this  royal  head

'  Laurie's  "  Histoiy,"  p.  295.  *  Preston,  "  Illustrations,"  old  editioc,  p    s.^S

-H>i  iHiW-^*"-**'

WILLIAM    R.   vSINGLETON

THE   UNION   OF  THE  TWO   GRAND   LODGES      1167

ship  with  the  Scottish  Grand  Lodge.  The  result  in  this  latter  case
was  of  course  exactly  contrary  to  that  which  had  ensued  in  the
former.

From  this  time  there  was  no  question  as  to  the  relations  existing
between  the  two  Grand  Lodges.

Still  further  to  strengthen  the  cement  of  this  union,  if  such
strengthening  were  necessary,  was  the  occurrence  soon  after  of  an
event  in  Scottish  Masonry.

Schism,  which  had  wrought  so  much  evil  in  English  Masonry,
at  length  made  its  appearance  among  the  Scottish  lodges.

In  the  year  1808  several  lodges  had  seceded,  from  political
motives,  it  is  believed,  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland.  They
had  organized  an  independent  body  with  the  title  of  "  The  Associ-
ated lodges  seceding  from  the  present  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  "
and  on  July  4th  had  met  in  the  Cannongate  Kilwinning  Lodge
room,  and  elected  a  Grand  Master.'

The  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  announced  this  rebellious  action
to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  which  expressed  its  fullest  sym-
pathy with  the  Grand  Lodge,  approved  of  the  methods  it  pursued
to  punish  the  seceders  and  to  check  the  secession,  and  proclaimed
the  doctrine  now  universally  accepted  in  Masonic  law,  that  a  Grand
Lodge,  as  the  representative  of  the  whole  Craft,  is  the  sole  de-
pository of  supreme  power.

Thus  was  the  union  of  the  two  Grand  Lodges  still  more  closely
cemented,  and  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  became  an  earnest
advocate  and  collaborator  in  the  effort  to  extinguish  the  English
schism.

In  the  same  year  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ireland  addressed  a  com-
munication  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  in  which  it  took  occa-
sion to  applaud  the  principles  of  Masonic  law  enunciated  by  that
Grand  Lodge  in  its  reply  to  its  Scottish  sister.  The  Grand  Lodge
of  Ireland  also  expressed  its  deshe  to  co-operate  with  that  of  Eng-
land in  maintaining  the  supremacy  of  Grand  Lodges  over  individual
lodges.  It  also  pledged  itself  not  to  countenance  or  receive  as  a
Brother  any  person  standing  under  the  interdict  of  the  Grand  Lodge

*  It  is  unnecessary  and  irrelevant  to  erter  here  into  the  history  of  this  secession.
The  details  will  be  found  at  full  length  in  Bro.  Lyon's  "  History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edin«
burgh,"  pp.  264-281.  We  are  here  interested  only  in  its  supposed  influence  upon  the
relations  of  the  Grand  Lodges  of  Scotland  and  Eneland.

ii68  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

of  England  for  Masonic  transgression.  It  thus  cut  itself  aloof
from  its  former  recognition  of  the  AthoU  Grand  Lodge.'

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  say  that  this  act  was  received  by  the
Constitutional  Grand  Lodge  with  a  reciprocal  feeling  of  fraternity.

Thus  from  the  year  1808  the  three  regular  and  legitimate  Grand
Lodges  of  Great  Britain  were  united  in  an  alliance,  the  prominent
object  of  which  was  the  extinction  of  the  schism  which  had  pre-
vailed in  England  for  three-quarters  of  a  century  and  the  consolida-
tion of  all  the  jarring  elements  of  English  Freemasonry  under  one
head.

With  such  powerful  influences  at  work,  it  is  not  surprising  that
the  happy  and  "devoutly  wished-for  consummation"  was  soon
effected.

The  leading  Freemasons  of  England,  on  both  sides  of  the  con-
test, readily  lent  their  aid  to  the  accomplishment  of  this  result.

The  Prince  of  Wales  having  been  called,  in  consequence  of  the
King's  mental  infirmity,  to  the  Regency,  the  established  etiquette
required  that  he  should  resign  the  Grand  Maste-.ship,  a  position
which  he  had  occupied  for  twenty-one  years.

On  his  retirement  the  Duke  of  Sussex  was  elected  Grand  Mas-
ter of  the  Constitutional  Grand  Lodge.  He  was  recognized  as  an
ardent  friend  of  the  proposed  union.  Through  his  influence,  as
Preston  supposes,^  the  Duke  of  Atholl,  who  was  Grand  Master  of
the  "  Ancients,"  had  been  led  to  see  the  desirableness  of  a  union  of
the  two  societies  under  one  head.

A  similar  desire  for  union  began  now  to  prevail  among  the  Free-
masons of  both  sides,  especially  among  the  "  Ancients,"  who  had
hitherto  rejected  all  proposals  for  a  compromise  of  any  kind  that
did  not  include  the  concession  of  everything  on  the  part  of  the
•'  Moderns."

In  1809  a  motion  looking  to  a  union  was  submitted  to  the
Grand  Lodge  of  "Ancients,"  but  ruled  out  by  the  presiding  officer,
who  refused  to  put  the  question.*

Nevertheless,  the  right  spirit  prevailed,  and  in  1810  a  "Union
Committee  "  was  appointed  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  "  Ancients,''
which  held  a  joint  meeting  with  a  similar  committee  of  the  Grand

•  Preston,  "  Illustrations,"  old  edition,  p.  340.

2  Ibid,  p.  358.

'  Hughan's  "  Memorials,"  p.  14.

THE   UNION   OF  THE  TWO   GRAND    LODGES      1169

Lodge  of  "Moderns,"  on  July  21,  1810,  on  which  occasion  the  Earl
of  Moira,  Acting  Grand  Master  of  the  Constitutional  Grand  Lodge,
presided.

At  a  meeting  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  "  Moderns"  on  April  12,
1809,  that  body  rescinded  all  its  former  resolutions  which  forbade
the  admission  of  the  "Ancients"  into  their  regular  lodges,^  and  thus
really  took  the  first  step  toward  a  formal  recognition  of  the  seced-
crs.

In  1 8 ID  the  "Ancients"  began  to  make  concessions.  They  di-
rected all  resolutions  relating  to  the  union  to  be  published  and  sub-
mitted to  the  Craft  for  their  consideration.  They  also  made  altera-
tions in  their  regulations  to  conform  to  those  of  the  "  Modern."  '

But  the  time  had  now  arrived  when  the  necessities  of  concord
and  harmony  imperatively  demanded  a  cessation  of  the  antagonism
which  had  so  long  existed  between  the  two  rival  Grand  Lodges  and
their  consolidation  under  a  common  head,  so  that  Speculative  Free-
masonry in  England  should  thereafter  remain  "  one  and  indivisible."

The  "  Moderns  "  had  long  been  desirous  of  a  union,  which,  on
the  other  hand,  the  "Ancients"  had  always  strenuously  opposed.
"It  is,"  says  Bro.  Hughan,  "to  the  credit  of  the  'Moderns'  that
they  were  the  firm  supporters  of  the  Union,  even  when  the  '  An-
cients'  refused  the  right  hand  of  fellowship."*

It  is  not  to  be  denied  that  the  success  of  the  "  Ancients"  in  win-
ning popularity  among  the  Craft,  especially  in  America,  where  they
had  largely  extended  they  influence,  was  a  principal  reason  for  their
rooted  aversion  to  any  sort  of  compromise,  which  would  necessarily
result  in  the  extinction  of  their  power  and  their  independent  posi-
tion.

But  many  events  had  recently  begun  to  create  a  change  in  their
views  and  greatly  to  weaken  their  opposition  to  a  union  of  the  two
Grand  Lodges.

In  the  first  place,  the  charge  that  the  "Moderns"  had  made  in-
novations on  the  landmarks  was  losing  the  importance  which  had
been  given  to  it  in  the  days  of  Laurence  Dermott.  It  was  still  main-
tained, but  no  longer  urged  with  pertinacious  vigor.     History  was

'  Hughan's  "Memorials,"  p.  15.

'Their  regulations,  says  Hughan,  were  also  altered  so  as  to  conform  as  much  as  pes*
♦ible  to  those  of  the  regular  Grand  Lodge.     "  Memorials  of  the  Masonic  Union,"  p.  15.
'  Ibid.

74

II70  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

beginning  to  vindicate  truth,  and  those  "Ancients"  who  thought  at
all  upon  the  subject,  must  have  seen  that  their  secession  from  the
reo-ular  Grand  Lodge  had  preceded  the  innovations  of  that  body,
and  that  they  themselves  had  been  guilty  of  far  greater  innovations
by  the  disruption  of  the  Third  degree  and  the  fabrication  of  a  Fourth
one.

In  the  second  place,  the  theory  maintained  by  Dermott  and  ac-
cepted by  his  followers,  that  the  regular  Grand  Lodge  of  England,
mstituted  at  London  in  the  year  17 17,  was  an  illegal  body,  defective
in  numbers  at  its  organization  and  without  the  true  degrees,  had  long
been  abandoned  as  wholly  untenable.  History  was  again  exercising
its  functions  of  vindicating  truth.  It  is  very  evident,  and  the  "  An-
cients" knew  it,  that  if  the  Grand  Lodge  organization  of  171 7  was
illegal,  their  own  of  1753  must  have  been  equally  so,  for  the  latter
had  sprung  out  of  the  former.  It  was  felt  to  be  dangerous,  when
men  began  to  investigate  the  records,  to  advance  a  doctrine  which
logically  led  to  such  a  conclusion.

A  third  reason,  and  a  very  strong  one,  vrhich  must  have  con-
trolled the  "  Ancients  "  in  arriving  at  a  change  of  views,  must  have
been  the  defection  of  the  Grand  Lodges  of  Scotland  and  Ireland.
These  two  bodies  which  had  at  first  entered  into  an  alliance  with
the  AthoU  Grand  Lodge  at  the  expense  of  the  Constitutional  Gri^nd
Lodge,  had  changed  sides,  and  had  now  recognized  the  latter  body
as  the  only  legal  head  of  Freemasonry  in  England,  had  admitted  that
the  "Ancients"  were  irregular,  and  had  refused  to  give  them  recog-
nition as  Masons.

A  fourth  reason  was  that  the  Duke  of  AthoU,  who  had  long
been  at  the  head  of  the  Grand  Lodge  which  bore  his  name  and  that
of  his  father,  and  who  for  two  generations  had  been  identified  with
its  existence,  had  been  won  by  the  arguments  or  influenced  by  the
friendship  of  the  Duke  of  Sussex,  the  Grand  Master  of  the  Con-
stitutional Grand  Lodge,  and  had  resolved  to  resign  his  Grand  Mas-
tership in  favor  of  the  Duke  of  Kent,  for  the  avowed  purpose  of
preparing  for  a  union  of  the  Craft.

Yielding  to  these  various  influences  and  perhaps  to  some  others
of  less  note,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  "Ancients"  in  the  year  181 3
abandoned  its  opposition  to  a  union,  and  accepted  the  preliminar)/
measures  which  had  been  adopted  by  the  friends  of  that  union.

At  a  special  meeting  of  the   "  Grand  Lodge  of  Free  and  A&

THE   UNION   OF  THE   TWO   GRAND    LODGES       1171

cepted  Masons  of  England,  according  to  the  Old  Institutions"  held
on  November  8,  18 13,  at  the  "  Crown  and  Anchor  Tavern,"  in  the
Strand,  a  letter  was  read  from  the  Duke  of  Atholl  intimating  his
desire  of  resigning  the  office  of  Grand  Master  in  favor  of  his  Royal
Highness,  the  Duke  of  Kent.*

At  the  same  meeting  the  resignation  of  the  Duke  of  Atholl  was
•accepted  and  the  Duke  of  Kent  was  unanimously  elected  to  succeed
him  as  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  "  Ancients."

Edward,  Duke  of  Kent  and  Strathcarne,  the  fourth  son  of  George
the  Third,  was  then  forty-six  years  of  age.  He  was  initiated  into
Freemasonry  in  a  lodge  at  Geneva,  in  Switzerland.  At  the  time  of
this  election  he  was  and  had  long  been  the  Grand  Master  of  the
"Ancient  Masons"  of  Canada.  He  was,  therefore,  identified  with
the  cause  of  the  "Ancients,"  but  like  his  brothers,  the  Prince  of  Wales
and  the  Duke  of  Sussex,  he  was  greatly  desirous  of  a  consolidation
of  the  two  Grand  Lodges.  At  as  early  a  period  as  January,  1 794,
he  had  expressed  this  sentiment  in  his  reply  to  an  address  from  the
Masons  of  Canada,  when  he  said  :  "  You  may  trust  that  my  utmost
efforts  shall  be  exerted,  that  the  much-wished  for  union  of  the  whole
Fraternity  of  Masons  may  be  effected."*

On  December  i,  1S13,  the  Duke  of  Kent  was  installed  as  Grand-
Master  of  the  "Ancients."  On  this  occasion  the  Duke  of  Sussex,
as  Grand  Master  of  the  Constitutional  Grand  Lodge,  was  present
with  several  of  his  Grand  Officers.  To  qualify  them  for  visitation
they  were  previously  "  made  Ancient  Masons  in  the  Grand  Master's
Lodge  No.  I,  in  a  room  adjoining."

The  transactions  on  that  day  must  be  considered  as  a  conclusive
settlement  of  the  vexed  question  of  legality.  The  fact  that  the
Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  "  Moderns  "  was  present,  and
by  his  presence  sanctioned  the  installation  of  the  Grand  Master  of
the  Grand  Lodge  of  "Ancients,"  and  that  to  qualify  himself  to  do
so  had  submitted  to  an  initiation  in  the  system  of  the  "Ancients,"
forever  precluded  the  "Moderns"  from  making  a  charge  of  irregu-
larity against  their  rivals ;  these  in  turn  were  equally  precluded  from
denying  the  Masonic  legality  of  a  body  whose  Grand  Master  had

'  The  minutes  of  this  meeting  will  be  found  in  Hughan's  "  Memorials  of  the  Union,"
p.  16.

'^  Freemasons^  Maeazhu,  vol  iii.,  July,  1794,  p.  14.

1 172  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

been  made  participant  in  their  mysteries,  and  had  taken  a  part  in  Jie
solemn  ceremonies  of  installation  of  their  presiding  officer.

Indeed,  the  union  had  already  been  virtually  accomplished,  and
all  that  was  now  needed  was  its  formal  ratification  by  the  two  Grand
Lodges.

On  September  ist  the  Duke  of  Kent,  not  then  Grand  Master,  had
been  associated  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  "Ancients"  with  Deputy
Grand  Master  Harper  and  Past  Deputy  Grand  Masters  Perry  and
Agar  as  a  Committee  to  take  the  preliminary  steps  for  effecting  a
union  of  the  two  fraternities.

This  Committee  had  held  several  conferences  with  the  Duke  of
Sussex,  who  was  assisted  by  three  of  his  Grand  Officers,  Bro.  Wright,
Provincial  Grand  Master  of  the  Ionian  Isles,  and  Past  Grard  War-
dens Tegart  and  Deans.

The  joint  committee  had  drawn  up  articles  of  union  between  the
two  Grand  Lodges  which  had  been  signed  and  sealed  in  duplicate  at
Kensington  Palace,  the  residence  of  the  Duke  of  Sussex.

Early  in  December,  at  the  Quarterly  Communications,  these  Arti-
cles had  been  submitted  to  both  Grand  Lodges  and  solemnly  rati-
fied, and  the  following  Festival  of  St.  John  the  Evangelist  had  been
appointed  for  the  Assembly  of  the  Grand  Lodges  in  joint  communi-
cation to  carry  out  the  provisions  which  had  been  agreed  upon.

Each  Grand  Master  had  appointed  "  nine  worthy  and  expert
Master  Masons  or  Past  Masters,"  to  whom  were  assigned  by  the
Articles  of  Union  the  following  important  duties.

Under  the  Warrant  of  their  respective  Grand  Lodges  they  were
to  meet  together  in  some  convenient  central  place  in  London,  when
each  party  having  opened  a  lodge  according  to  the  peculiar  forms
and  regulations  of  each,  they  were  reciprocally  and  mutually  to  give
and  receive  the  obligations  of  both  Fraternities,  deciding  by  lot
which  should  take  priority  in  the  giving  and  receiving.  They  were
then  to  hold  a  lodge  under  dispensation,  to  be  styled  the  "  Lodge  of
Reconciliation,"  or  they  were  then  to  visit  the  different  lodges  and
having  obligated  their  officers  and  members  to  instruct  them  in  the
forms  of  both  the  systems.*

These  and  other  preliminary  arrangements  having  been  complied
with,  the  two  Fraternities,  with  their  Grand  Lodges,  met  on  Decem-

'  See  "  Articles  of  Union,"  Article  V.

THE   UNION   OF  THE   TWO   GRAND   LODGES      1173

ber  27,  1813,  at  Freemasons'  Hall,  which  had  been  fitted  up  agree-
ably to  a  previously  devised  plan,  and  the  whole  house  tiled  from
the  outer  porch. ^

On  each  side  of  the  room  the  Masters,  Wardens,  and  Past  Mas-
ters of  the  several  lodges  were  arranged  on  benches,  and  so  disposed
that  the  two  Fraternities  were  completely  intermixed.

The  two  Grand  Lodges  were  opened  in  two  adjoining  rooms,
each  according  to  its  peculiar  ceremonies,  and  a  Grand  Procession
being  formed,  the  two  bodies  entered  side  by  side  the  Hall  of  As-
sembly, the  Duke  of  Sussex  closing  one  procession  and  the  Duke  of
Kent  the  other.

On  entering  the  Hall  the  procession  advanced  to  the  Throne,  and
opening  inward  the  two  Grand  Masters  proceeded  up  the  center
and  took  seats  on  each  side  of  the  Throne.

The  Past  Grand  officerb  and  illustrious  visitors  occupied  the
platform,  and  the  two  Senior  Grand  Wardens,  the  two  Junior  Grand
Wardens,  and  the  two  Grand  Secretaries  and  Grand  Treasurers  occu-
pied the  usual  stations  in  the  West,  South,  and  North.

Silence  having  been  proclaimed,  the  services  began  with  prayer,
offered  up  by  Rev.  Dr.  Barry,  the  Grand  Chaplain  of  the  "  An-
cients."

After  the  act  of  union  had  been  read  by  Sir  George  Nayloi,
Grand  Director  of  Ceremonies,  the  following  proclamation  was
made  by  the  Rev.  Dr.  Coghlan,  Grand  Chaplain  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  "  Moderns."

"  Hear  ye  :  This  is  the  Act  of  Union  engrossed  in  confirmation
of  Articles  solemnly  concluded  between  the  two  Grand  Lodges  of
Free  and  Accepted  Masons  of  England,  signed,  sealed,  and  ratified
by  the  two  Grand  Lodges  respectively :  by  which  they  are  hereafter
and  forever  to  be  known  and  acknowledged  by  the  style  and  title
of  The  United  Grand  Lodge  of  Ancient  Freemasons  of  Eng-
land. How  say  you,  Brothers,  Representatives  of  the  two  Frater-
nities ?     Do  you  accept  of,  ratify  and  confirm  the  same?"

To  which  the  whole  Assembly  answered  :  "  We  do  accept,  ratify
and  confirm  the  same."

'  This  account  is  condensed  from  Oliver's  edition  of  Preston,  pp.  368-373.  Tfce
"  Order  of  Proceedings  "  to  be  observed  on  the  occasion  are  given  by  Bro.  Hughan  in  his
Metnorials.  They  do  not  essentially  differ  from  the  details  by  Preston,  and  the  latter
has  the  advantage  of  being  in  the  past  tense.

1 174  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

The  Grand  Chaplain  then  said  :  "And  may  the  Great  Architect
of  the  Universe  make  the  Union  perpetual."  To  which  all  the
Brethren  replied  :     "  So  mote  it  be."

The  Articles  of  Union  were  then  signed  by  the  two  Grand  Mas-
ters and  six  Commissioners,  and  the  seals  of  both  Grand  Lodges
were  affixed  to  the  same.

Proclamation  was  then  made  by  Rev.  Dr.  Barry  in  the  following
words :

"  Be  it  known  to  all  men  that  the  Act  of  Union  between  the
two  Grand  Lodges  of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons  of  England  is
solemnly  signed,  sealed,  ratified  and  confirmed,  and  the  two  Frater-
nities are  one,  to  be  henceforth  known  and  acknowledged  by  the
style  and  title  of  "  The  United  Grand  Lodge  of  Ancient  Free-
masons of  England  :  and  may  the  Great  Architect  of  the  Universe
make  their  Union  perpetual."

The  Brethren  all  responded  "Amen,"  and  a  symphony  was
played  by  the  Grand  Organist,  Bro.  Samuel  Wesley.

The  Ark  of  the  Masonic  Covenant,  which  had  been  placed  in
front  of  the  Throne,  was  then  approached  by  the  two  Grand  Mas-
ters, their  Deputies  and  Wardens.

The  Grand  Masters  standing  in  the  East,  the  Deputies  on  their
right  and  left,  and  the  Grand  Wardens  in  the  West  and  South,  the
square,  level,  plumb,  and  mallet  were  successively  delivered  to  the
Deputy  Grand  Masters  and  by  them  presented  to  the  two  Grand
Masters,  who  having  applied  the  square,  level,  and  plumb  to  the
Ark  and  struck  it  thrice  with  the  mallet,  they  made  the  following
invocation  :

"  May  the  Great  Architect  of  the  Universe  enable  us  to  uphold
the  grand  edifice  of  union,  of  which  this  Ark  of  the  Covenant  is
the  symbol,  which  shall  contain  within  it  the  instruments  of  our
brotherly  love  and  bear  upon  it  the  Holy  Bible,  Square,  and  Com-
passes, as  the  light  of  our  faith  and  the  rule  of  our  works.  May
He  dispose  our  hearts  to  make  it  perpetual."

And  the  Brethren  all  responded,  "  So  mote  it  be."

The  Masonic  elements  of  consecration,  corn,  wine,  and  oil,  were
then  poured  upon  the  Ark,  according  to  the  ancient  Rite,  by  the
two  Grand  Masters,  accompanying  the  act  with  the  usual  invocation.

This  constituted  the  impressive  ceremony  by  which  the  union  of
the  hitherto  rival  Fraternities  was  consecrated.

THE    UNION    OF   THE   TWO   GRAND    LODGES       1175

The  Grand  Lodges  of  Scotland  and  Ireland  were  not  repre-
sented, in  consequence  of  the  shortness  of  the  notice,  but  letters  of
congratulation  were  received  from  each,  with  copies  of  resolutions
which  had  been  passed  by  both.

As  the  two  Fraternities  differed  in  their  forms  and  ceremonies,
it  was  necessary  that  some  compromise  should  be  effected  so  that
a  universal  system  might  be  adopted  by  the  united  Grand  Lodge.
The  determination  of  what  that  system  of  forms  should  be,  had
been  entrusted  to  the  "Lodge  of  Reconciliation"  as  its  most  impor-
tant, and  doubtless  its  most  difficult  duty.

This  duty  was  accomplished  in  the  following  manner :  After
the  ceremonies  of  ratification  had  been  performed,  the  "  Lodge  of
Reconciliation"  retired  to  another  apartment,  accompanied  by  the
Count  Lagardje,  Past  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Swe-
den, Dr.  Van  Hess  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Hamburgh,  and  other
distinguished  Masons,  when  the  forms  and  ceremonies  which  had
been  previously  determined  upon  by  the  "Lodge  of  Reconciliation"
were  made  known.

On  their  return  to  the  Assembly-room,  Grand  Master  the  Count
Lagardje  announced  that  the  forms  which  had  been  settled  and
agreed  on  by  the  "  Lodge  of  Reconciliation  "  were  "  pure  and  correct."

They  were  then  recognized  as  the  only  forms  to  be  thereafter
observed  and  practiced  in  the  United  Grand  Lodge  and  by  the
lodges  under  its  obedience.

The  recognized  obligation  was  then  administered  by  the  Rev.
Dr.  Hemming,  standing  before  the  Bible,  Square  and  Compasses
lying  on  the  Ark,  and  repeated  by  all  the  Brethren,  who  solemnly
vowed,  with  joined  hands,  to  abide  by  the  same.

The  next  step  was  the  organization  of  the  new  Grand  Lodge  by
the  election  of  its  officers.

For  this  purpose  the  Officers  of  the  two  Grand  Lodges  divested
themselves  of  their  insignia,  and  the  chairs  were  taken  by  Past  Grand
Officers  of  the  two  Fraternities.

The  Duke  of  Kent  addressed  the  assembly.  He  stated  that  th&
great  object  for  which  he  had  taken  upon  himself  the  office  of
Grand  Master  of  the  Ancient  Fraternity,  as  declared  at  the  time,
was  to  facilitate  the  accomplishment  of  the  union.  He  then  nomi-
nated the  Duke  of  Sussex  as  Grand  Master  of  the  united  Grand
Lodge.

1 176  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

The  Duke  of  Sussex  was  unanimously  elected  and  placed  upon
the  throne  by  the  Duke  of  Kent  and  Count  Lagardje.

The  Grand  Master  nominated  the  Grand  officers  for  the  year
ensuing.  The  Grand  Lodge  was  then  called  to  refreshment,  and  on
returning,  some  necessary  business  having  been  transacted,  the  Grand
Lodge  was  closed  in  ample  form.

It  is  impossible  to  arrive  at  any  absolutely  accurate  knowledge
of  the  numerical  strength  of  the  two  Fraternities  at  the  time  of  the
union.  This  arises  from  the  fact  that  the  lists  made  by  both  Grand
Lodges  at  that  date  contained  the  names  of  many  lodges  which  were
either  extinct  or  had  passed  over  to  other  jurisdiction.

Thus  in  the  list  of  the  "  Moderns"  ending  in  1812,  as  given  by
Bro.  Gould  in  his  Four  Old  Lodges,  the  number  of  lodges  runs  up
to  640 ;  but  of  these  many,  as  the  list  commences  with  the  year
1 72 1,  must  have  long  ceased  to  exist,  and  several  are  recorded  as
being  in  Germany  and  France,  where  the  English  Grand  Lodge
had  no  longer  any  jurisdiction,  and  nineteen  are  credited  to  the
United  States  of  America,  where  independent  Grand  Lodges  had
long  been  established.

In  .he  same  inaccurate  way  we  find  that  the  list  of  the  "  An-
cients," published  in  1813  in  their  Ahiinan  Rezon,  records  354
lodges  as  being  under  its  jurisdiction.

Many  of  these,  however,  had  passed  from  its  jurisdiction  or  must
have  ceased  to  exist.  Ten  lodges,  for  instance,  are  credited  to  the
United  States,  and  some  to  other  foreign  countries  where  the
Grand  Lodge  no  longer  possessed  any  authority.

We  may,  however,  estimate  the  comparative  strength  of  the
two  Fraternities  at  the  union  by  the  registry  of  lodges  made  at  that
time,  when  the  members  were  assigned  by  lot.

In  that  list,  which  is  given  by  Bro.  Hughan  in  his  Memorials
of  the  Union,  636  lodges  are  enrolled.  Of  these,  385  were  "  Mod<
erns,"  and  251  "Ancients."  If,  however,  it  be  considered  that  the
former  had  been  in  existence  for  ninety-six  years  and  the  latter  only
sixty,*  it  will  be  seen  that  the  relative  proportion  of  successful
growth  was  greatly  in  favor  of  the  "  Ancients."

Notwithstanding  that  the  Constitutional  Grand  Lodge  had  se-
cured the  adhesion  of  a  much  higher  class  in  the  social  element,

'  The  Grand  Lodge  of  "  Moderns  "  was  instituted  in  1717,  that  of  the  "  Ancients  "
in  T7C-?.     The  former  commenced  with  four  Lodges,  the  latter  with  seven.

THE   UNION   OF   THE   TWO   GRAND   LODGES       1177

that  from  the  fifth  year  of  its  existence  it  had  been  presided  over
by  an  uninterrupted  succession  of  Peers  of  the  realm,  and  that  at
the  very  period  of  the  Union  its  Grand  Master  was  a  son  of  the
reigning  monarch,  and  that  its  acknowledged  Patron  was  the  heir-
apparent  of  the  Crown, ^  the  AthoU  Grand  Lodge  without  these
advantages  enjoyed  a  much  greater  share  of  popularity  among  the
masses  of  the  Craft.

This  popularity  can  properly  be  attributed  only  to  that  innova-
tion on  the  accepted  ritual  of  the  Constitutional  Grand  Lodge
which  produced  the  secession.  The  dismemberment  of  the  Mas-
ter's degree  and  the  fabrication  of  a  Fourth  degree  called  the  Royal
Arch,  gave  to  the  seceders  a  prestige  not  enjo3'ed  by  their  rivals.
Candidates  eagerly  repaired  for  initiation  to  the  body,  which  prom-
ised them  a  participation  in  a  larger  amount  of  mystical  knowledge.

The  "  Moderns  "  soon  became  aware  of  this  fact,  and  it  was  not
very  long  before,  notwithstanding  their  outcry  against  innovation,
they  adopted  the  same  degree  or  at  least  quietly  suffered  its  intru-
sion into  their  own  system.  A  Royal  Arch  Chapter  and  then  a
Grand  Chapter  was  established  by  some  "  Moderns  "  about  the  year
1 766,  and  though  it  was  not  actually  countenanced,  it  was  not  de-
nounced by  the  Constitutional  Grand  Lodge.

It  has  been  supposed  by  some  writers  that  the  "  Ancients  "  were
sustained  by  and  indeed  represented  the  Operative  element  of  the
Craft  in  opposition  to  the  purely  Speculative,  which  was  represented
by  the  "  Moderns."

But  of  this  there  is  no  satisfactory  historical  evidence.  In  1723
the  Operative  Freemasons  who,  in  171 7,  had  taken  a  part  in  the
organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  had  been  laid  upon  the  shelf  by
that  body,  nor  is  it  likely  that  at  a  long  interval  they  would  renew
the  contest  in  which  they  had  been  so  signally  defeated.

The  excellent  results  which  followed  from  the  union  of  the  two
Fraternities,  in  the  restoration  of  peace  and  concord,  and  the  con-
sequent strengthening  of  the  Institution,  have  preserved  the  method
in  which  this  union  was  effected  from  adverse  criticism.

The  urion  was  a  compromise,  and  in  all  compromises  there  are

'  Whatever  influence  these  circumstances  must  have  naturally  exerted  in  a  monarchy,
its  importance  will  hardly  be  appreciated  at  its  full  value  by  the  citizens  of  a  republic.
Anderson  says  that  at  first  the  Freemasons  were  content  "  to  choose  a  Grand  Master  from
among  themselves,  till  they  should  have  the  honor  of  a  Noble  Brother  at  their  head."

1 178  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

necessarily  mutual  concessions.  But  it  is  a  question  whether  these
concessions  by  both  parties  did  not  involve  the  sacrifice  of  certain
principles  which  both  had  hitherto  deemed  important.

The  "  Articles  of  Union  "  which  constituted  the  groundwork
on  which  the  consolidation  of  the  two  Grand  Lodges  was  framed,
are  twenty-one  in  number.  Most  of  these  relate  to  local  regula-
tions made  necessary  by  the  circumstances.  Only  three — the  sec-
ond, third,  and  fourth — have  reference  to  the  concessions  made  in
the  ritual  and  in  the  system  of  Speculative  Freemasonry.  These
articles  are  in  the  following  words  :

"  II.  It  is  declared  and  pronounced  that  pure  Ancient  Masonry
consists  of  three  degrees,  and  no  more,  viz.  :  those  of  the  Entered
Apprentice,  the  Fellow-Craft,  and  the  Master  Mason,  including  the
Supreme  Order  of  the  Holy  Royal  Arch.  But  this  article  is  not
intended  to  prevent  any  lodge  or  Chapter  from  holding  a  meeting
in  any  of  the  degrees  of  the  Orders  of  Chivalry,  according  to  the
Constitutions  of  the  said  Orders.

"III.  There  shall  be  the  most  perfect  unity  of  obligation,  of  dis-
cipline, of  working  the  lodges,  of  making,  passing  and  raising,  in-
structing and  clothing  the  Brothers  ;  so  that  one  pure,  unsullied  sys-
tem, according  to  the  genuine  landmarks,  laws  and  traditions  of  the
Craft  shall  be  maintained,  upheld  and  practiced,  throughout  the
Masonic  World,  from  the  day  and  date  of  the  said  union  until  time
shall  be  no  more.

"  IV.  To  prevent  all  controversy  or  dispute  as  to  the  genuine  and
pure  obligations,  forms,  rules  and  ancient  traditions  of  Masonry  and
further  to  unite  and  bind  the  whole  Fraternity  of  Masons  in  one  in-
dissoluble bond,  it  is  agreed  that  the  obligations  and  forms  that  have,
from  time  immemorial,  been  established,  used  and  practiced  in  the
Craft,  shall  be  recognized,  accepted  and  taken,  by  the  members  of
both  Fraternities,  as  the  pure  and  genuine  obligations  and  forms  by
which  the  incorporated  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  and  its  dependent
lodges  in  every  part  of  the  World  shall  be  bound  :  and  for  the  pur-
pose of  receiving  and  communicating  due  light  and  settling  this  uni-
formity of  regulation  and  instruction  (and  particularly  in  matters
which  can  neither  be  expressed  nor  described  in  writing),  it  is  further
agreed  that  brotherly  application  be  made  to  the  Grand  Lodges  of
Scotland  and  Ireland,  to  authorize,  delegate  and  appoint,  any  two  or
more  of  their  enlightened  members,  to  be  present  at  the  Grand  As-

THE   UNION   OF   THE   TWO   GRAND   LODGES       1179

sembly  on  the  solemn  occasion  of  uniting  the  said  Fraternities  ;  and
that  the  respective  Grand  Masters,  Grand  Officers,  Masters,  Past
Masters,  Wardens  and  Brothers,  then  and  there  present,  shall  sol-
emnly engage  to  abide  by  the  true  forms  and  obligations  (partic-
ularly in  matters  which  can  neither  be  described  nor  written),  in
the  presence  of  the  said  Members  of  the  Grand  Lodges  of  Scotland
and  Ireland,  that  it  may  be  declared,  recognized  and  known,  that
they  are  all  bound  by  the  same  solemn  pledge,  and  work  under  the
same  law."

An  examination  of  these  three  articles  will  clearly  demonstrate
that  both  Grand  Lodges  made  concessions  to  each  other,  which  in-
volved the  sacrifice  in  turn  of  the  very  points  of  ritualism  on  which
each  had,  for  nearly  three-fourths  of  a  century,  maintained  its  right
to  supremacy.

In  Article  II.  the  Royal  Arch  is  recognized  as  an  inherent
portion  of  "Ancient  Craft  Masonry."  Yet  when  about  1738
the  Freemasons  began  soon  after  to  call  themselves  "Ancient
Masons,"  their  lodges  were  erased  from  the  roll  and  their  members
expelled  because  they  had  practiced  this  same  degree.  Nothing
then  and  long  after  so  much  incensed  the  "  Moderns  "  as  this  in-
novation, as  they  called  it,  of  a  new  degree.  "  Our  society,"  said
their  Grand  Secretary,  Spencer,  "  is  neither  Arch,  Royal  Arch,  nor
Ancient."

On  this  point  the  "  Ancients "  certainly  achieved  a  victory.
The  attempted  qualification  in  the  declaration  that  Ancient  Craft
Masonry  consisted  of  only  three  degrees,  which  was  a  concession  to
preserve  the  consistency  of  the  "  Modems,"  was  without  meaning,
since  it  was  immediately  followed  by  the  admission  that  there  was  a
Fourth  degree.

In  Article  III.  it  is  declared  that  the  methods  of  initiation  and
instruction  should  be  according  to  the  genuine  landmarks,  laws,  and
traditions  of  the  Craft.  But  the  United  Grand  Lodge  adopted  the
changes  in  the  words  of  the  degrees,  which  had  been  introduced  by  the
Constitutional  Grand  Lodge,  to  prevent  the  intrusion  of  the  seced-
ers  into  th^>  regular  lodges.  The  preservation  of  these  words  and
certain  other  changes  was  certainly  not  in  accordance  with  the
"  landmarks,"  supposing  these  landmarks  to  be  the  usages  of  the
Craft,  adopted  at  or  soon  after  the  organization  in  the  year  1717.
The  result  has  been  to  create  in  these  respects  a  difference  between

ii80  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

the  Continental  and  the  English-speaking  Masons,  the  former  ad-
hering to  the  original  forms.'

This  would  be  a  victory  for  the  "  Moderns,"  but  not  one  of  so
nuch  importance  as  that  achieved  by  the  "  Ancients"  in  the  recog-
nition of  the  Royal  Arch  degree.

The  assertion  in  Article  IV.  that  the  obligations  and  forms
vhich  were  agreed  upon  at  the  Union  were  those  which  "  from  time
immemorial  have  been  established,  used  and  practiced  by  the  Craft,"
is  thus  found  to  be  merely  a  '' fafon  de parler"  too  much  in  vogue
even  at  the  present  day,  when  referring  to  the  antiquity  of  usages.
The  "  time  immemorial "  thus  vaunted,  dwindles  down,  in  fact,  to  the
date  of  the  organization  of  the  "  Lodge  of  Reconciliation,"  to  which
the  regulation  of  these  "obligations  and  forms"  had  been  entrusted.

The  confirmation  of  this  new  system  by  the  Grand  Lodges  of  Scot-
land and  Ireland,  which  was  provided  for  in  the  same  article,  was  not
carried  into  effect,  for  no  representatives  of  these  bodies  were  present.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  Ireland,  it  may  be  presumed,  as  the  Irish
Masons  had  long  favored  the  high  degrees,  would  give  its  implicit
assent  to  the  First  Article  in  which  even  the  degrees  of  Chivalry
were  recognized  by  sufferance.

But  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  had  always  contended  that
Ancient  Craft  Masonry,  or  as  ^.t  was  styled,  "  St.  John's  Masonry,"
consisted  of  only  three  degrees.*  In  1800  it  had  prohibited  its
lodges  from  holding  any  meetings  above  the  degree  of  Master  Ma-
son under  penalty  of  the  forfeiture  of  their  charter.*  And  only  four
years  after  the  United  Grand  Lodge  of  England  had  recognized
the  Royal  Arch  as  a  part  of  Ancient  Craft  Masonry,  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Scotland  resolved  that  no  person  holding  official  position
in  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter  should  be  admitted  to  membership  in  the
Grand  Lodge.*

But  in  fact  we  must  look  for  a  defense  of  these  compromises
by  the  two  Grand  Lodges  of  England  to  the  peculiar  and  threat-
ening condition  in  which  they  were  placed.     Without  compromise

1  The  Gordian  knot  presented  by  the  change  in  the  Master's  Word  made  by  the
"  Moderns  "  was  cut,  by  the  adoption  or  sanction  of  both  words,  and  they  are  still  so
used  in  EngUsh  lodges.  In  the  United  States  of  America  the  word  of  the  "  Moderns  "
has  long  since  passed  out  of  the  memory  and  the  knowledge  of  the  Craft,  and  the  origi-
nal word  of  Desaguliers  and  his  collaborators  alone  is  used.

2"  The  Constitution  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland."

^Lyon,  "  History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  293.  ^  Ibid.,  p.  295.

THE   UNION   OF  THE  TWO   GRAND   LODGES       1181

and  mutual  concession  of  many  things  the  m.aintenance  of  which
both  had  once  deemed  essential,  no  union  could  have  been  effected,
and  without  a  Union  the  success  and  permanency  of  one,  if  not  of
both  bodies,  would  be  seriously  endangered.

It  must  therefore  be  acknowledged,  notwithstanding  any  criti-
cism on  the  methods  pursued,  which  were  demanded  by  the  claims
of  historic  truth  that,  here  at  least,  the  generally  to  be  condemned
maxim  of  the  Jesuits,  which  justifies  the  means  by  the  end  accom-
plished, may  find  some  excuse.

Looking  back,  at  this  distant  period,  upon  the  histor}^  of  the  Craft
from  the  middle  of  the  i8th  to  the  beginning  of  the  19th  century,
when  the  passions  and  prejudices  which  distracted  the  Fraternity  have
ceased  to  exist,  we  recognize  the  fact  that  the  rivalry  of  the  two  fac-
tions was  destined  to  be  ultimately  of  advantage  to  the  institution.

Oliver,  speaking  of  this  and  other  secessions  which  occurred  in
the  1 8th  century,  says:  "I  am  persuaded  that  these  schisms,  by  their
general  operation,  rather  accelerated  than  retarded  the  outward  prog-
ress of  Masonry ;  for  at  the  precise  time  when  they  were  most
active,  we  find  the  science  spreading  over  all  the  European  nations
and  exciting  the  attention  of  all  ranks  and  classes  of  mankind."  *

Antagonism,  in  the  long  run,  leads  to  development.  The  pro-
tracted struggle  which  finally  terminated  in  the  recognition  of  the
Ro3'al  Arch,  not  only  gave  to  the  Master's  degree  a  completeness
which  it  had  before  wanted,  but  by  the  establishment  of  a  new  ritual,
which  more  nearly  approached  perfection  than  the  old  one,  tended
to  develop  a  more  philosophic  spirit  in  the  system  of  Speculative
Freemasonry.  Of  this  fact  ample  evidence  is  given  in  the  lectures
of  Dr.  Hemming  which  were  adopted  by  the  United  Grand  Lodge,
and  which  are  much  more  intellectual  than  any  that  preceded  them.'

The  old  and  comparatively  meager  ritual  of  Desaguliers,  and
Anderson,  with  the  slight  additions  of  Martin  Clare,  of  Dunckerley
and  Preston,  presenting  only  an  imperfect  system,  would,  but  for
the  Union,  have  been  continued  to  the  present  day,  if  Speculative
Freemasonry  had  not  long  before  died  of  inanition.

'"  Historical  Landmarks,"  ii.,  p.  313.

^  It  is  to  Heinming  that  we  are  indebted  for  that  sentence  which  defines  Freemasonry
as  "a  system  of  morahty,  veiled  in  allegory  and  illustrated  by  symbols."  It  must  be  con-
fessed, however,  that  he  made  some  omissions  and  alterations  in  the  old  lectures,  which
had  better  been  spared.     But  "  nihil  est  ab  omni  parte  beatum."

Ii82  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

The  rivalry  of  the  two  bodies  gave  an  active  expansion  of  that
spirit  of  charity  which  is  incidental  to  every  Brotherhood.  Neither
could  afford  to  be  less  kindly  disposed  to  the  distressed  of  their  fold
than  the  other.  And  this  spirit  of  charity,  thus  developed  during
the  struggle,  was  vastly  strengthened  and  made  of  more  practical
utility  by  the  consolidation  of  the  Fraternity.

But  the  most  important  advantage  derived  from  the  long  an-
tagonism was  the  development  of  the  science  of  symbolism,  which
has  given  to  the  Institution  a  just  claim  to  the  title  of  Speculative
Masonry,  which  it  had  long  before  assumed,  and  elevated  it  to  the
rank  of  a  system  of  moral  philosophy.

Now,  for  the  first  time  since  the  disseverance,  in  the  beginning  of
the  1 8th  century,  of  the  Speculative  from  the  Operative  element  was
it  announced  as  the  accepted  definition  of  Freemasonry  that  it  was
"a  system  of  morality,  veiled  in  allegory  and  illustrated  by  symbols."

It  was  Hemming  who  proclaimed  this  sublime  definition  in  the
Union  lectures  which  he  framed  and  which  has  awakened  the
thoughts  and  directed  the  Speculations  of  all  Masonic  scholars  who
have  written  since  his  day.

There  are,  it  is  true,  some  few  defects  in  the  lectures  of  Dr.
Hemming,  but  they  are  on  the  whole  superior  to  those  of  Preston
— superior  because  more  philosophic  and  more  symbolical.  Pres-
ton's system  was  the  germ,  Hemming's  the  fruit,  and  the  fruit  always
is  better  than  the  germ.

In  conclusion  it  may  be  said  that  the  rivalry  of  the  two  factions
was  productive  of  this  good,  that  it  stimulated  each  to  seek  for  a
higher  plane  of  action  and  of  character ;  and  the  union  which  finally
took  place,  no  matter  what  was  the  actuating  motive,  was  the  most
fortunate  event  that  had  ever  occurred  in  the  Masonic  Society,  since
it  developed  a  higher  plane  for  its  action,  and  secured  it  a  long  and
prosperous  continuance  of  life  which  one  or  both  of  the  antagoniz-
ing parties  must  have  long  since  forfeited  had  there  been  no  Union
effected.

Peace,  harmoviy,  and  concord  firmly  established,  a  consolidation
of  interests — a  more  enlarged  practice  of  charity  and  brotherly  re-
lief, and  a  more  elevated  character  of  Speculative  Freemasonry —
these  were  the  results  of  the  Union  in  1813  in  England,  which  was
speedily  imitated  in  all  other  countries  where  the  rivalry  had  pre-
viously existed.

CHAPTER  XLIV

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  FRANCE

jjT  has,  I  think,  been  conclusively  shown  in  a  pre«
ceding  chapter  that  in  the  year  1732  there  were
but  two  lodges  in  the  city  of  Paris,  one  of  which
had  received  a  Warrant  from  the  Grand  Master
of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  and  the  other
had  been  formed,  we  may  suppose,  by  a  seces-
sion or,  as  we  should  now  say,  a  demission  of  a
portion  of  the  members  of  the  first  lodge,  grown,  numerically,
too  large.

There  is  no  authentic  record  that  the  Grand  Master  or  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England  ever  granted  a  Deputation  for  the  establishment
of  a  Provincial  Grand  Master  or  a  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  in
France.  Indeed,  it  has  been  very  plausibly  urged  that  the  granting
of  such  a  Deputation  to  the  titular  Earl  of  Derwentwater,  a  con^.
victed  traitor  to  the  English  Government,  whose  execution  had  only
been  averted  in  171 5  by  his  escape  from  prison,  would  have  been  a
political  impossibility.

Kloss,  in  his  History  of  Freemasonry  hi  France,  says  that  "the
unfortunate  international  political  relations  which  existed  between
England,  the  mother-country,  and  France,  the  daughter,  prevented
that  free  intercourse  and  development  which  might  have  been  looked
for."»

And  yet  the  French  authorities  claim  that  to  him  such  a  Depu-
tation had  been  granted.

Thus,  we  are  met,  on  the  very  incipience  of  our  investigation  oi
the  history  of  the  institution  of  a  Grand  Lodge  in  France,  by  con-
tradictory statements  from  the  English  and  French  authorities.

There  is  no  way  of  reconciling  these  contradictory  statements.
We  must  utterly  reject  the  impossible  or  the  improbable,  and  accept

'  "  Geschichte  der  Freimaurerei  in  Frankreich  aus  achten  urkenden  dargestellt,"  von
Georg  Kloss,  I.,  336.

1183

1184  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

only  that  which  has  the  support  of  reliable  authority  and  as  to  wMch
there  is  no  conflict  between  the  writers  on  both  sides  of  the  channel.

But  the  adoption  of  this  rule  will  not  always  save  us  from  the
pressure  of  critical  difficulties.  The  authority  of  the  English  writers
is  generally  of  a  merely  negative  character.  With  the  exception  of
the  statement  of  Anderson,  that  Viscount  Montagu  granted  two
Warrants  for  lodges — one  at  Paris  and  one  at  Valenciennes,  in  the
year  1732 — there  is,  in  the  contemporary  English  records,  an  abso-
lute silence  in  reference  to  all  Masonic  affairs  in  France.

The  French  writers  are  more  communicative,  but  they  have  so
often  mistaken  fable  for  fact,  and  tradition  for  history,  that  we  sel-
dom find  satisfaction  in  receiving  their  statements.  One  of  them
admits  that  the  absence  of  any  historical  monuments  of  the  first
lodge  has  cast  some  obscurity  over  the  early  operations  of  Freema-
sonry in  Paris.*

In  fact,  the  history  of  Speculative  Freemasonry  in  France,  until
the  year  1 736,  may  be  considered  as  almost  hypothetical  and  tradi-
tionary. It  is  said  that  there  was  a  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  and
a  Provincial  Grand  Master,  but  the  evidence  on  this  subject  is
altogether  wanting — at  least  such  evidence  as  a  faithful  historian
would  require.

In  the  "Historical  Instruction"  sent  in  1783  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  France  to  its  constituent  lodges,  it  is  said  that  Lord  Der-
wentwater  was  considered  as  the  first  Grand  Master  of  the  Order  in
France.*

Rebold  is  more  circumstantial  in  his  details  than  any  other
French  writer.  He  says  that  "  Lord  Derwentwater,  who  in  1725
received  from  the  Grand  Lodge  at  London  plenary  powers  to  con-
stitute lodges  in  France,  was,  in  1 735,  invested  by  the  same  Grand
Lodge  with  the  functions  of  Provincial  Grand  Master,  and  when  he
quitted  France  to  return  to  England,  where  soon  after  he  perished
on  the  scaffold,  a  victim  to  his  attachment  to  the  Stuarts,  he  trans-
ferred the  plenary  powers  which  he  possessed  to  his  friend  Lord
Harnouester,  whom  he  appointed  as  th-^  representative,  during  his
absence,  of  his  office  of  Provincial  Grand  Master." '

'  Ragon,  "  Acta  Latomorum,"  I.,  p.  22.

*  Thory,  "  Histoire  de  la  Fondation  du  Grand  Orient,"  p.  12.     Findel.
^"  Histoire  des  Trois  Grandes  Loges,"  p.  44.     Ragon,  who  is  less  imaginative  or  in-
ventive than  Rebold,  though  he,  also,  too  often  omits  or  is  unable  to  give  his  authorities^

THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  FRANCE       ii8;

Considering  the  political  condition  of  England,  which  had  only
a  few  years  before  been  the  scene  of  a  rebellion  in  which  the  family
of  Charles  Radcliffe,  the  titular  Earl  of  Derwentwater,  played  an  im-
portant part — considering  that  he  himself  was  nothing  more  nor
less  than  an  escaped  convict,  liable  at  any  moment  when  appre-
hended to  undergo  the  sentence  of  death  which  had  been  adjudged
against  him  by  the  law,  and  considering  the  existence  of  a  party  of
Jacobites  who  still  secretly  wished  for  the  downfall  of  the  House  of
Hanover,  and  the  restoration  of  the  family  of  Stuart  to  the  throne,
it  is  really  absurd  to  suppose  that  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,
which  claimed  at  least  to  be  loyal,  could  have  selected  such  a  person
as  its  representativ^e  among  the  Freemasons  of  France.

We  may,  therefore,  1  think,  unhesitatingly  look  upon  this  story
of  the  premier  Grand  Mastership  of  the  titular  Earl  of  Derwentwa-
ter as  a  myth,  with  no  other  foundation  than  the  mere  fact,  which
will  be  admitted,  that  he  was  a  chief  instrument  in  establishing,  with-
out Warrant,  the  first  lodge  in  Paris,  and  that  by  his  family  re-
lations he  possessed  much  influence  among  the  English  Free-
masons in  Paris,  who  were  for  the  most  part  Jacobites  or  adherents
of  the  House  of  Stuart.

Rebold,  who  has  accepted  every  tradition  of  those  days  of  myths
as  an  historical  fact,  proceeds  to  tell  us  that  the  four  lodges  which
were  then  in  Paris  determined  to  establish  a  Provincial  Grand
Lodge  of  England,  to  which,  as  the  representative  of  the  Grand
Lodge  at  London,  the  lodges  which  might  in  future  be  constituted
should  directly  address  themselves.  This  resolution,  he  says,  was
put  into  execution  after  the  departure  of  Lord  Derwentwater,  and
thi<^  Grand  Lodge  was  regularly  and  legally  constituted  in  i  736  un-
der the  presidency  of  Lord  Harnouester.^

The  hypothesis,  universally  advanced  by  the  French  writers,  that
Charles  Radcliffe,  commonly  called  Lord  Derwentwater,  was  Grand
Master  from  1725  to  1736,  therefore  is  not  tenable.     There  is  no

merely  says  that  Derwentwater  was  chosen  as  their  Grand  Master  by  the  brethren  at  the
time  of  the  introduction  of  Freemasonry  into  Paris.

"  Acta  Latomorum,"  p.  52.  Lalande,  in  his  article  on  Freemasonry  in  the  "  Encyclo-
pedic," places  the  affair  of  Derwentwater's  Grand  Mastership  in  the  true  light,  when  he
says  that  as  the  first  Paris  lodge  had  been  opened  by  Lord  Derwentwater,  he  was  regarded
as  the  Grand  Master  of  the  French  Masons,  and  so  continued  until  his  return  to  England,
without  any  formal  recognition  on  the  part  of  the  brethren.

» Ibid.

75

ii86  HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

testimony,  such  as  is  worth  accepting  in  an  historical  inquiry,  to
support  it.  That  he  was  not  so  appointed  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England  can  not  be  denied.  The  existing  political  condition  of  the
country  would  make  such  an  appointment  most  improbable  if  not
impossible,  and,  besides,  there  is  no  reference  in  the  records  of  the
Grand  Lodge  to  an  act,  which  would  have  been  too  important  to
have  been  passed  over  in  silence.

The  condition  of  French  Freemasonry  was  such  as  to  render  it
extremely  difficult,  indeed  almost  impossible,  to  attain  any  accurate
or  reliable  account  of  its  history.

French  historians  do  not  deny  this.  Thory,  who  had  the  best
opportunities  as  an  historical  investigator,  and  who  was  more  famil-
iar than  any  of  his  contemporaries  with  Masonic  documents,  does
not  hesitate,  when  referring  to  a  period  even  a  little  later,  to  give
this  opinion  of  the  chaotic  condition  of  French  Masonry  in  the
earlier  part  of  the  i8th  century.

"  Masonry  was  then  in  such  a  disordered  condition  that  we
have  no  register  or  official  report  of  its  assemblies.  There  did  not
exist  any  bodies  organized  in  the  nature  of  Grand  Lodges,  such  as
were  known  in  England  and  Scotland.  Each  lodge  in  Paris  or  in
the  kingdom  was  the  property  of  an  individual  who  was  called  the
Master  of  the  lodge.  He  governed  the  body  over  which  he  presided
according  to  his  own  will  and  pleasure.  These  Masters  of  lodges
were  independent  of  each  other,  and  recognized  no  other  authority
than  their  owner.  They  granted  to  all  who  applied  the  power  to
hold  lodges,  and  thus  added  new  Masters  to  the  old  ones.  In
fact,  it  may  be  said  that  up  to  1743  Masonry  presented  in  France
under  the  Grand  Masterships  of  Derwentwater,  Lord  Harnou-
ester,  and  the  Duke  d'Antin  the  spectacle  of  the  most  revolting
anarchy."  '

Such  a  description,  whose  accuracy,  considering  the  impartial
authority  whence  it  is  derived,  can  not  be  doubted,  must  render  it
utterly  useless  to  look  for  anything  like  a  constitutional  or  legal
authority,  in  the  English  meaning  of  the  term,  for  the  administra-

'  "  Histoire  de  !a  Fondation  du  Grand  Orient,"  p.  13.  Clavel  confirms  this  testimony.
He  says  that  "  all  the  lodges  which  were  afterwards  established  in  Paris  and  the  rest  of
France  owed  their  constitution  to  the  societies  (the  primitive  lodges)  of  which  we  have
just  spoken.  Most  of  them  assumed  the  powers  of  Grand  Lodges  and  granted  Letters  of
Constitution  to  new  lodges." — "  Histoire  Pittoresque  de  la  Franc-Magonnerie,"  p.  108.

THE   GRAND    LODGE   OF   FRANCE  1187

tion  of  the  Masonic  government  during  the  time  in  which  Derwent-
water  played  an  important  part  in  its  affairs.

Until  1732  there  was  no  lodge  in  France  which  derived  its
authority  to  act  from  the  warrant  of  a  Grand  Lodge.  The  one
formed  in  1725,  by  Derwentwater,  Harnouester,  Maskelyne,  and
Heguetty,  and  those  which  had  been  previously  founded  in  other
parts  of  France — at  Dunkirk  and  at  Mons — must  have  been  insti-
tuted under  the  old  principle  of  the  Operative  Freemasons,  which
ceased  to  be  recognized  in  England,  in  the  year  171 7,  that  a  suf-
ficient number  of  brethren  might  assemble  for  Masonic  work,  with-
out the  authority  of  any  superintending  power.  Warrants  were  not
known  or  recognized  in  England  until  that  year.  They  had  not
yet  been  extended  into  France.  The  first  Warrant  known  in
France  was  that  which  was  granted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  at  Lon-
don to  the  lodge  in  the  Rue  de  Bussy  at  Paris,  and  numbered  in
the  English  list  as  No  90.

But  for  years  afterward  lodges  continued  to  be  organized,  as  we
have  just  seen,  in  France  under  the  old  Operative  system  of  lodge
independence.

During  all  this  period  there  was  no  Grand  or  Provincial  Grand
Master  in  France.  But  Charles  Radcliffe,  who  had,  it  seems,  been
the  introducer  of  Speculative  Freemasonry  into  Paris,  must  have
been  very  popular  with  his  English  companions,  who,  like  himself,
were  adherents  of  the  exiled  House  of  Stuart.  After  the  death  of
his  nephew  he  assumed  the  title  of  Earl  of  Derwentwater,  and  as
such  was  recognized  by  the  French  king  and  the  Pretender.  He
was  a  leader  of  the  Jacobite  party,  and  it  is  very  generally  supposed
that  it  was  in  the  interests  of  that  party  that  he  organized  his  lodge
at  Paris,  the  first  prominent  members  of  which  belonged  to  the
same  political  party.

It  is  not,  therefore,  astonishing  that  his  connection  with  Free-
masonry, as  the  founder  of  the  first  Parisian  lodge,  has  led  to  the
traditional  error  of  supposing  him  to  have  been  the  first  Grand
Master  of  the  French  Freemasons.  In  his  day  there  was  no  Grand
Lodge  nor  Grand  Master  in  that  kingdom.

The  astronomer  Lalande,  who  wrote  a  very  sensible  history  of
Freemasonry  for  the  French  Encyclopgcdia,  recognizes  this  fact,
when  he  says  that  Lord  Harnouester  was  the  first  regularly  chosen
Grand  Master.

II88  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

The  tradition  that  when  Derwentwater  left  France  for  EiiglanG
in.  1 733  (not  as  Thory  erroneously  states  in  1735),  he  appointed
Lord  Harnouester  as  his  Deputy  and  Representative  during  his
absence,  is  therefore  a  mere  fiction.  He  could  not  delegate  a
position  and  powers  which  he  did  not  possess.  But  it  is  reason
able  to  suppose  that  on  the  departure  of  Derwentwater,  Lord  Har-
nouester as  of  high  rank,  influence,  and  popularity  among  the  Eng-
lish exiles  who  were  Masons,  assumed  the  position  of  a  leader,
which  Derwentwater  had  previously  occupied.

After  a  temporary  absence  in  England,  where,  notwithstanding
the  sentei.ceof  death  which  had  been  adjudged  against  him  in  171 5,
he  was  not  arrested,  the  government  exercising  a  merciful  forbear-
ance, he  returned  to  the  Continent,  but  we  find  no  evidence  of  hi^
having  taken  any  further  active  interest  m  Masonic  affairs.

The  French  writers  all  agree  in  saying  that  in  1 736  Loro
Harnouester  was  elected  Grand  Master.  But  we  have  no  recorc
of  the  circumstances  attending  his  election.  Rebold's  statement
that  he  was  elected  by  the  lodges  then  existing  in  Paris,  may  or
may  not  be  truth.  There  is  not  sufficient  historical  testimony  of
the  fact  to  remove  it  out  of  the  realm  of  tradition.

Thory  simply  says,  "  Lord  Harnouester  was  elected  Grand
Master,  after  Lord  Derwentwater,  in  1736."^  Of  Harnouester  we
know  so  little  that  we  have  not  been  able  to  identify  him  with  any
of  the  public  personages  of  the  period,  or  to  find  any  record  of  him
in  the  contemporary  lists  of  the  English  peerage.

If,  however,  we  accept,  on  the  mere  dictum  of  the  French  histo-
rians, the  truth  of  the  statement  that  Harnouester  was  the  first
Grand  Master  of  Masons  in  France,  we  must  also  accept  the  state-
ment, equally  authentic  or  unauthentic,  that  his  Grand  Mastership
was  a  brief  one  and  unattended  with  any  events  that  it  has  been
deemed  worthy  to  record.

Thory  merely  says  that  the  Duke  d'Antin  succeeded  Harnoues-
ter in  1738.^

Rebold  indulges  in  more  details,  which,  however,  we  must  take
on  his  sole  authority.  He  says  that  "in  1737  Lord  Harnouester,
the  second  Provincial  Grand  Master  of  France,  wishing  to  return
to  England,  requested  that  his  successor  should  be  appointed,  and

*  "  Histoire  de  la  Fondation  du  Grand  Orient,"  p.  14.  *  Ibid.

THE   GRAND   LODGE   OF   FRANCE  1189

having  expressed  the  desire  that  he  should  be  a  Frenchman,  the
Duke  d'Antin,  a  zealous  Mason,  was  chosen  to  succeed  him  in  the
month  of  June,  1738."  ^

The  account  given  by  French  writers  of  the  character  of  the
Duke  is  a  very  favorable  one.  It  is  said  that  he  was  selected  by  the
Freemasons  for  their  presiding  officer  from  among  those  of  the  no-
bility who  had  shown  the  most  zeal  for  the  Order.

Of  his  own  attachment  to  it,  he  had  shown  a  striking  proof  by
disobeying  the  express  command  of  the  King,  Louis  XV.,  who  had
forbidden  his  courtiers  to  unite  with  the  society,  and  especially  in
daring  to  accept  the  Grand  Mastership,  notwithstanding  that  the
monarch  had  declared,  when  he  was  informed  that  the  Masons  were
about  to  elect  such  an  officer,  that  if  the  choice  fell  on  a  Frenchman
who  should  consent  to  serve  he  would  immediately  send  him,  by  a
lettre  de  cachet,  to  the  Bastille.  But  the  threat  was  not  carried  into
execution.*

We  are  now  about  to  pass  out  of  the  realm  of  what,  borrowing  a
term  of  science  from  the  anthropologists,  may  be  called  the  pre-his-
toric  age  of  French  Freemasonry.  Henceforth  we  shall  have  some-
thing authentic  from  contemporary  authorities  on  which  to  lean:
The  myths  and  mere  traditions  which  mark  the  story  of  the  second
decade  of  the  i8th  century  will  be  succeeded  by  historical  facts,
though  we  must  still  be  guarded  in  accepting  all  the  speculations
which  the  writers  of  France  have  been  prone  to  blend  with  them  so
as  in  many  instances  to  give  us  a  mingled  web  of  romance  and  his-
tory.

Before  continuing  the  history  of  the  Grand  Lodge  from  the  ac-
cession of  the  Duke  d'Antin,  it  will  not  be  uninteresting  nor  unprofit-
able to  suspend  the  narrative  and  to  take  a  view  of  the  condition  of
Freemasonry  in  France,  and  especially  in  Paris,  at  the  period  of
time  embracing  a  few  years  before  and  a  few  years  after  his  accession
to  the  Masonic  throne.

At  so  early  a  period  as  1737,  the  institution,  though  apparently
very  popular  among  the  noblesse  and  the  bourgeoisie — the  lords  and
the  citizens — had  become  distasteful  to  the  King,  Louis  XV.,  whom
we  have  already  seen  threatening  to  imprison  its  Grand  Master  if
he  was  a  Frenchman.

'  "  Histoire  des  Trois  Grandes  Loges,"  p.  45.  'Ibid.,  d.  49i  note.

1 190  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

This  fact  is  confirmed  by  a  statement  made  in  the  Gentleman  s
Magazine  for  March,  1737.  The  statement  is  in  a  letter  from  Paris
and  is  in  the  following  words  :

"  The  sudden  increase  of  the  Society  of  Free  Masons  in  France
had  given  such  offense  that  the  King  forbid  their  meetings  at  any
of  their  lodges."

This  was  the  cause  of  an  apologetic  letter  which  was  published
in  Paris  and  a  part  of  it  copied  into  the  Gentleman  s  Magazine  for
the  following  month.^

Portions  of  this  letter  are  worth  copying,  because  of  the  princi-
ples which  the  French  Masons,  at  least,  professed  at  the  time.

"  The  views  the  Free  Masons  propose  to  themselves,"  says  this
apology,  "  are  the  most  pure  and  inoffensive  and  tend  to  promote
such  qualities  in  them  as  may  form  good  citizens  and  zealous  sub-
jects ;  faithful  to  their  prince,  to  their  country  and  to  their  friends.
.  The  duty  it  prescribes  to  those  who  bear  it  is  to  endeavor
to  erect  temples  for  virtue  and  dungeons  for  vice.  .  .  .  Their
principal  design  is  to  restore  to  the  earth  the  reign  of  Astrea  and  to
revive  the  time  of  Rhea."

From  Kloss  and  from  all  the  French  writers  we  have  the  record
of  other  instances  of  the  persecution  to  which  the  Freemasons  in
Paris  were  subjected  at  this  period  by  the  municipal  authorities,
whose  actions  were  undoubtedly  in  accord  with  the  sentiments  of  the
king.     One  of  these  is  worth  a  relation.

On  the  loth  of  September,  1787,  the  police  surprised  a  lodge  of
Freemasons  which  was  being  held  in  the  house  of  one  Chapelot.
He  had  for  safety  bricked  up  the  door  of  his  public  and  secretly
opened  another  to  the  room  of  meeting.  Notwithstanding  these
precautions,  the  police  obtained  an  entrance  and  dispersed  the  assem-
bly. Chapelot  was  condemned  to  pay  a  fine  of  a  thousand  livres
and  was  deprived  of  his  license  as  a  tavern-keeper  for  six  months.

'  This  expression  is  found  in  some  of  the  early  French  rituals  as  a  definition  of  t^
object  of  Freemasonry.  The  English  Masonic  borrowed  and  made  use  of  it.  In  a  Pro-
logue  spoken  at  Exeter,  in  1771,  are  the  following  lines  :

"  The  Lodge,  the  social  virtues  fondly  love  :
There  Wisdom's  rules  we  trace  and  so  improve  :
There  we  (in  moral  architecture  skill'd)
Dungeons  for  Vice — for  Virtue  temples  build."

See  lones's  Masonic  Miscellanies,  p.  164.

THE   GRAND    LODGE   OF    FRANCE  1191

On  April  27,  1738,  Pope  Clement  XII.  fulminated  ^is  cele-
brated bull  in  eminenti,  in  which  all  the  faithful  were  forbidden  to
attend  the  meetings  of  the  Masonic  lodges,  or  in  any  way  to  consort
with  the  Freemasons  under  the  penalty  of  ipso  facto  excommunica-
tion, absolution  from  which,  except  at  the  point  of  death,  was  re-
served to  the  Supreme  Pontiff.

This  condemnation  by  the  Church  gave  an  increased  vigor  and
vigilance  to  the  attacks  of  the  police.  On  St.  John  the  Evangelist's
day,  1738,  the  Freemasons  having  assembled  at  the  room  of  the
lodge  in  the  Rue  des  Deux-Ecus  to  celebrate  the  feast  of  the  Order,
were  arrested  and  several  of  them  imprisoned.

But  notwithstanding  these  efforts  to  suppress  the  Order  in
France,  it  grew  apace,  and  was  not  without  an  acknowledged  stand-
ing outside  of  the  Order,  and  of  a  recognition  of  its  independence
and  regularity  by  the  Grand  Lodge  at  London.

This  we  learn  from  Anderson,  who,  in  his  second  edition  of  the
Book  of  Constitutions,  published  by  authority  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England,  in  i  738,  says  :

"  But  the  old  lodge  at  York  City  and  the  lodges  of  Scotland,
Ireland,  France,  and  Italy,  affecting  independence,  are  under  their
own  Grand  Masters,  though  they  have  the  same  Constitutions,
Charges,  Regulations,  etc.,  in  substance,  with  their  brethren  of  Eng-
land and  are  equally  zealous  for  the  Augustan  style,  and  the  secrets
of  the  ancient  and  honorable  fraternity."  *

Anderson  was  right  in  his  statement  that  the  usages  of  the
Craft  in  the  two  countries  were  similar.  The  ritual  of  the  French
Freemasons,  at  that  early  period,  has  not  been  altogether  lost.  An
interesting  description  of  it  was  published  in  a  contemporary  journal
of  London,  and  as  the  volume  which  contains  it  is  not  generally  ac-
cessible except  in  large  public  libraries,  it  is  here  copied  in  full.
The  reader  will  be  pleased  to  compare  the  ceremonies  of  admission
to  the  Society,  as  practiced  in  the  year  1737,  in  Paris,  with  those  of
the  London  Masons  at  about  the  same  period,  which  appear  in  a
preceding  part  of  this  work.

In  the  Gentleman's  Magazine,  published  at  London,  in  March,
1737,  is  the  following  letter,  which  bears  the  date  of  "  Paris,  Jan-
uary 13:"

•  Anderson's  "  Constitutions,"  second  edition,  1738,  p.  196.

1192  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

"  The  Secret  of  the  Order  of  Free  Masons  and  the  Cerb
monies  observed  at  the  reception  of  members  into  it.

"  First  of  all,  persons  must  be  proposed  in  one  of  the  Lodges  by
a  Brother  of  the  Society  as  a  good  Subject ;  and  when  the  latter
obtains  his  request,  the  Recipiendary  is  conducted  by  the  Proposer,
who  becomes  his  Godfather,  into  one  of  the  Chambers  of  the  lodge
where  there  is  no  light,  and  there  they  ask  him  whether  he  has  a
calling  to  be  received  :  He  answers.  Yes.  After  which  they  ask
him  his  Name,  Sirname,  and  Quality,  take  from  him  all  Metals  or
Jewels  which  he  may  have  about  him,  as  Buckles,  Buttons,  Rings,
Boxes,  etc.,  his  Right  knee  is  uncovered,  he  wears  his  left  shoe  as  a
slipper,  then  they  blindfold  him  and  keep  him  in  that  condition
about  an  hour  delivered  up  to  his  reflections  ;  after  this  the  God-
father goes  and  knocks  three  times  at  the  Door  of  the  Reception
room,  in  which  the  venerable  Grand  Master  of  the  Lodge  ^  is,  who
answers  by  three  knocks  from  within  and  orders  the  door  to  be
opened  ;  then  the  Godfather  says  that  a  Gentleman  by  name  .  .  .
presents  himself  in  order  to  be  received.  (Note,  That  both  on
the  outside  and  within  this  chamber  several  Brothers  stand  with
their  swords  drawn  in  order  to  keep  off  profane  people.)  The
Grand  Master  who  has  about  his  neck  a  blue  ribband  cut  in  a  tri-
angle says.  Ask  him  whether  he  has  the  calling  ?  The  Godfather
puts  him  the  question  and  the  Recipiendary,  having  answered  in  the
affirmative,  the  Grand  Master  orders  him  to  be  brought  in  :  Then
they  introduce  him  and  make  him  take  three  turns  in  the  room
round  a  sort  of  ring  on  the  floor  in  which  they  draw  with  a  pencil
upon  two  Columns  a  sort  of  representation  of  the  ruins  of  Solomon's
Temple,  on  each  side  of  that  space,  they  also  make  with  the  pencil
a  great  I  and  a  great  B,  which  they  don't  explain  till  after  the
Reception.  In  the  middle  there  are  three  lighted  wax  candles  laid
in  a  Triangle  upon  which  they  throw  gunpowder  and  rosin  at  the
Novice's  arrival,  in  order  to  frighten  him  by  the  effect  of  these  mat-
ters.     The  three  turns  being   made,  the  Recipiendary  is  brought

'  Kloss,  in  his  Geschichte,  infers  from  a  contemporary  document  which  he  quotes  that
at  this  time  the  title  of  Grand  Master  was  equivalent  in  France  to  that  of  Worshipful
Master  of  a  lodge.  The  use  of  the  title  in  this  account  of  the  ritual  leaves  no  doubt  of
the  truth  of  that  fact.  To  this  undiscriminating  use  of  the  two  titles  are  we  to  attribute
much  of  the  confusion  and  uncertainty  that  exists  in  reference  to  the  leadership  in  French
Freemasonry,  at  this  early  period  of  its  history.

THE   GRAND   LODGE  OF   FRANCE  1193

into  the  middle  of  the  writing  above  mentioned  in  three  pauses  over
against  the  Grand  Master,  who  is  at  the  upper  end  behind  an  arm-
chair on  which  is  the  Book  of  St.  John's  Gospel  and  asks  him  :  Do
you  feel  a  Calling?  Upon  his  answering,  Yes,  the  Grand  Master
says.  Shew  him  the  Light,  he  has  been  long  enough  deprived  of  it.
In  that  instant  they  take  off  the  cloth  from  before  his  eyes  and  all
the  Brothers  standing  in  a  circle,  draw  their  swords ;  they  cause  the
Recipiendary  to  advance  on  three  pauses  up  to  a  stool  which  is  at
the  foot  of  the  arm-chair ;  The  Brother  Orator  addresses  him  in
these  terms  :  You  are  going  to  embrace  a  respectable  Order  which
is  more  serious  than  you  imagine  ;  there  is  nothing  in  it  against  the
Law,  against  Religion,  against  the  State,  against  the  King,  nor
against  Manners  :

"  The  venerable  Grand  Master  will  tell  you  the  rest.  At  the  same
time  they  make  him  kneel  on  the  stool  with  his  Right  knee  which
is  bare  and  hold  his  Left  Foot  in  the  air  :  Then  the  Grand  Master
says  to  him,  '  You  promise  never  to  trace,  write,  or  reveal  the  secrets
of  Free  Masons  or  Free  Masonry  but  to  a  Brother  in  the  lodge  or
in  the  Grand  Master's  presence.'  Then  they  uncover  his  Breast  to
see  if  he  is  not  a  Woman  and  put  a  pair  of  Compasses  on  his  left
pap,  which  he  holds  himself  ;  he  puts  his  Right  Hand  on  the  Gospel
and  pronounces  his  Oath  in  these  terms  :  '  I  consent  that  my
Tongue  may  be  pulled  out,  my  heart  torn  to  pieces,  my  Body  burnt,
and  my  Ashes  scattered,  that  there  may  be  no  more  mention  made
of  me  amongst  mankind  if,  etc.,'  after  which  he  kisses  the  Book.
Then  the  Grand  Master  makes  him  stand  by  him  ;  they  give  the
Free  Mason's  Apron  which  is  a  white  skin,  a  pair  of  men's  gloves  for
himself  and  a  pair  of  women's  gloves  for  the  person  of  that  sex,  for
whom  he  has  the  most  esteem.  They  also  explain  to  him  the  I  and
B  traced  on  the  floor  which  are  the  type  of  the  Sign  by  which
Brothers  know  one  another.  The  I  signifies  Jahkin  and  the  B,
Boiaes.  In  the  Signs  which  the  Free  Masons  make  amongst  one
another  they  represent  these  two  words  by  putting  the  Right  Hand
to  the  Left  side  of  the  Chin,  from  whence  they  draw  it  back  upon
the  same  line  to  the  Right  Side  ;  then  they  strike  the  skirt  of  their
coat  on  the  Right  Side  and  also  stretch  out  their  hands  to  each
other,  laying  the  Right  Thumb  upon  the  great  joint  of  his  com-
rade's first  finger  which  is  accompanied  with  the  word  Jahkin,  they
strike  their  breasts  with  the  Right  Hand  and  take  each  other  by  the

JI94  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

hand  again  by  reciprocally  touching  with  the  Right  Thumb  the  first
and  great  joint  of  the  middle  finger  which  is  accompanied  with  the
word.  Boiaes.  This  ceremony  being  performed  and  explained,  the
Recipiendary  is  called  Brother,  after  which  they  sit  down  and,
with  the  Grand  Master's  leave,  drink  the  new  Brother's  health.
Every  body  has  his  bottle.  When  they  have  a  mind  to  drink  they
say,  Give  some  powder,  viz :  Fill  your  glass.  The  Grand  Master
says,  Lay  your  hands  to  your  firelocks  ;  then  they  drink  the  Broth-
er's health  and  the  glass  is  carried  in  three  different  motions  to  the
mouth  ;  before  they  set  it  down  on  the  table  they  lay  it  to  their  Left
pap,  then  to  the  Right  and  then  forwards  and  in  three  other  pauses
they  lay  the  glass  perpendicular  upon  the  table,  clap  their  hands
three  times  and  cry  three  times  Vivat.  They  observe  to  have
three  wax  candles  disposed  in  a  triangle  on  the  table.  If  they
perceive  or  suspect  that  some  suspicious  person  has  introduced
himself  amongst  them,  they  declare  it  by  saying  it  rains,  which
signifies  that  they  must  say  nothing.  As  some  people  might  have
discovered  the  Signs  which  denote  the  terms  Jahkin  and  Boiaes,
a  Free  Mason  may  be  known  by  taking  him  by  the  hand  as  above
mentioned  and  pronouncing  I,  to  which  the  other  answers  A,  the
first  says  K,  the  second  replies  H,  the  first  ends  with  I,  and  the
other  with  N,  which  makes  Jahkin  :  It  is  the  same  in  regard  to
Boiaes."

The  administration  of  the  Duke  d'Antin  was  not,  so  far  as  re-
spects the  institution  and  the  successful  carrying  out  of  reforms,  a
success.  The  anarch}^  and  independence  of  the  lodges  which  had
hitherto  prevailed  did  not  altogether  cease.  The  claim  of  a  personal
possession  and  an  immovable  tenure  of  office  made  by  many  Mas-
ters, especially  tavern-keepers,  who  had  organized  lodges  at  their
places  of  public  entertainment,  was  not  altogether  abandoned.
Warrants  of  Constitution  were  frequently  issued  by  private  lodges,
which  should  have  emanated  from  the  Grand  Lodge,  had  there
really  been  such  a  body  in  existence,  of  which  fact  there  is  much
doubt.  Thory  admits  that  there  was  in  1 742,  the  year  before
d'Antin's  death,  no  Grand  Lodge  organized  like  that  of  England,
and  an  English  writer  having  stated  that  in  the  year  mentioned
there  were  twenty-two  lodges  in  Paris  and  more  than  two  hundred
in  all  France,  he  confesses  his  inability  to  verify  the  statement
because  French  Freemasonry  was  at  that  time  in  such  a  disordered

THE   GRAND   LODGE   OF   FRANCE  1195

condition  that  there  were  no  registers  or  official  reports  of  lodge
meetings.'

The  persecutions  of  the  Church,  of  the  Court,  and  the  police
were  unabated,  and  if  the  Masonic  reign  of  the  Duke  d'Antin  was
eventful  in  nothing  else,  it  certainly  was  in  the  continual  contests  of
the  enemies  and  the  friends  of  Masonry,  the  one  seeking  to  crush
and  the  other  to  sustain  it.  Th&t  the  latter  often  were  placed  in
danger,  and  sometimes  endured  a  sort  of  martyrdom  when  their
meetings  were  detected,  is  well  known.  And  for  their  zeal  and
their  perseverance  under  all  these  difficulties  and  dangers  in  preserv-
ing the  existence,  however  feeble,  of  the  institution  and  in  deliver-
ing to  their  successors  for  better  growth  and  greater  strength,  the
Freemasons  owe  them  a  debt  of  gratitude.

The  ritual,  too,  of  the  order  in  France  was,  as  we  have  seen,
derived  from  that  of  the  English  system,  though  changes  and  inno-
vations were  already  beginning  to  appear.  The  extract  given  above
shows  that  the  ceremony  of  the  table  lodge  and  the  peculiar  lan-
guage accompanying  it  were  the  pure  invention  of  French  ingenuity,
wholly  unknown  then  and  since  to  English-speaking  Masons.

In  1743  the  Duke  d'Antin  died  and  he  was  succeeded  in  the
Grand  Mastership  by  the  Count  of  Clermont.  There  were  other
candidates,  and  the  Prince  of  Conti  and  Marshal  Saxe  received
some  votes  during  the  election.  This  shows  that  French  Masonry,
whatever  were  its  faults  of  irregularity,  had  not  fallen  in  the  social
scale.

The  Count  of  Clermont  was  higher  in  rank  than  the  Duke
d'Antin.  He  belonged  to  the  royal  family  of  Orleans  and  was  the
uncle  of  the  infamous  Duke  of  Chartres,  afterward  Duke  of  Orleans
(who  succeeded  him  in  the  Grand  Mastership),  and  was  the  father
of  Louis  Philippe,  subsequently  the  popular  King  of  France.

But  the  French  Masons  were  disappointed  in  the  advantageous
results  which  they  anticipated  would  follow  the  choice  of  one  so
illustrious  in  rank  as  their  leader.     This  will  be  seen  hereafter.

His  election,  if  we  may  believe  the  French  authorities  on  the
subject,  was  accomplished  by  forms  that  made  it  regular  and  legal,
the  Masters  of  the  Parisian  lodges  having  for  that  purpose  united
in  a  General  Assembly  on  December  11,  1743.

'  "  Fondation  du  Grand  Orient,"  p.  13.

1 196  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Hence  Thory^  says  that  it  is  from  this  epoch  that  we  are  to
regard  the  existence  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  France  as  legal  and
authentic,  because  it  was  founded  at  Paris  with  the  consent  of  the
Masters  of  the  lodges  in  the  Provinces.

He  savs  that  it  assumed  the  title  of  the  "English  Grand  Lodge
of  France."  Whether  it  did  so  at  the  time  of  its  organization  or  at
a  subsequent  period  is  uncertain,  but  it  is  proved  that  it  bore  that
title  in  1754,  for  Thory  says  that  he  had  seen  a  print  engraved  in
that  year  by  Jean  de  la  Cruz  on  which  were  the  words — "  Grande
Loge  Anglaise  de  France."

But  the  assertion  made  by  some  writers  that  the  use  of  the  title
was  authorized  by  the  Grand  Lodge  at  London,  with  whom  the
Freemasons  of  Paris  had,  about  that  time,  been  in  successful  negotia-
tion for  recognition  and  patronage,  is  undoubtedly  a  fiction.  There
is  not  a  particle  of  evidence  in  the  contemporary  records  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England  that  any  such  negotiations  had  taken
place.  It  has,  however,  been  seen  heretofore  that  Anderson,  in
1 738,  acknowledged  that  the  independent  authority  of  the  Grand
Master  of  the  French  Masons  was  recognized  in  England,  and  that
the  brethren  in  Scotland,  Ireland,  and  France  were  placed  upon  the
same  footing  of  autonomy.

Very  soon  after  his  election  as  Grand  Master  the  Count  of  Cler-
mont ceased  to  pay  much  attention  to  the  administration  of  the  af-
fairs of  the  Fraternity,  whose  interests  were  thus  materially  affected
by  his  indifference.

One  of  the  greatest  difficulties  with  which  the  Grand  Lodge  had
to  contend  in  its  efforts  to  secure  harmony  and  to  preserve  discipline
arose  from  the  practice  which  it  pursued  of  granting  Charters  to
lodges,  the  Masters  of  which  held  their  offices  for  life.  They  were
called  ''  Mailres  inamovibles" — unremovable  or  perpetual  Masters.
A  great  many  of  these  were  already  in  existence,  having  been  cre-
ated under  the  irregular  system  of  the  preceding  times,  and  the  new
Grand  Lodge  unfortunately  increased  the  number.

Then  "unremovable  Masters"  organized  local  administrations
under  the  denomination  of  "  Provincial  Grand  Lodges,"  which  were
governed  by  the  presiding  officers  of  the  lodges  which  had  created
them.

1  ''Histoire  de  la  Fondation  du  Grand  Orient,"  p.  14.

THE   GRAND    LODGE   OF   FRANCE  1197

Thory  speaks  of  these  early  days  of  the  English  Grand  Lodge  of
France  as  the  period  of  illegal  constitutions,  of  false  titles,  of  ante-
dated charters  delivered  by  pretended  Masters  of  lodges  or  fabri-
cated by  the  lodges  themselves,  some  of  which  claimed  a  fictitious
origin  which  went  back  to  the  year  1500.^

Another  evil  to  which  French  Freemasonry  was  subjected  at  the
beginning  of  its  legal  and  constitutional  career  was  the  inundation
of  high  degrees  and  the  establishment  of  Chapters  and  Councils
which  became  the  rivals  of  the  Grand  Lodge.

It  is  to  the  Chevalier  Ramsay  that  the  Order  is  indebted  for  the
doubtful  gift  of  these  high  degrees  which  began  to  overshadow
primitive,  symbolic  Freemasonry,  and  for  the  invention  of  new
theories  as  to  the  origin  of  the  Institution,  which  wholly  rejecting
the  Operative  element,  on  which  the  true  symbolism  of  Freema-
sonry so  much  depends,  sought  to  trace  its  existence  as  a  Specula-
tive Organization  to  the  era  of  the  Crusades  and  to  the  work  of  the
Christian  Knights.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  France,  like  that  of  England,  recognized
and  practiced  only  the  three  symbolic  degrees.  Its  charters  to  the
lodges  which  it  instituted  authorized  them  to  confer  only  these
three  degrees.  It  claimed  that  the  complete  cycle  of  Speculative
Freemasonry  was  embraced  within  these  prescribed  limits.  They
denied  that  there  was  or  could  be  any  mystical  knowledge  above
and  beyond  that  which  was  taught  in  the  Master's  initiation.  And
it  emphatically  refused  to  concede  that  there  existed  any  higher
authority  than  itself  from  which  the  power  to  impart  this  knowl-
edge could  be  derived.

Now  when  Ramsay's  Rite  of  six  or  seven  degrees  was  rapidly  de-
veloped into  other  Rites  professing  a  still  greater  number — when
both  at  Paris  and  in  the  Provinces,  other  bodies  began  to  be  estab-
lished by  the  illegal  acts  of  some  of  the  lodges,  which,  with  the  lofty
titles  of  Colleges,  Chapters,  Councils  and  Tribunals,  assumed  an
authority  equal  to  that  of  the  Grand  Lodge  in  respect  to  the  primi-
tive degrees  and  one  superior  to  it  in  respect  to  the  new  systems —
when  these  self-constituted  or  illegally  constituted  bodies,  looked
with  contempt  on  the  meager  initiations  and  the  scanty  instructions
of  the  simple  system  of  the  lodges,  and  claimed  a  more  elevated,

'"Acta  Latomorum,"  Tome  i.,  p.  56.

1 198  HISTORY    OF   FREEiMASONRY

more  philosophic,  more  splendid  system  of  their  own — it  is  not  sur-
prising that  hundreds  should  have  been  attracted  by  their  false  theo-
ries, their  grandiloquent  pretensions,  and  the  glamour  which  they
created  by  their  high  titles,  their  glittering  jewels,  and  their  splendid
decorations,  so  that  pure  and  simple  Masonry  was  beginning  to
lose  its  attractions  and  the  Grand  Lodge  its  prestige.

Nor  is  it  less  surprising  that,  as  Thory  has  said,  the  result  of  all
these  disorders  was  such  a  complication,  that  at  that  epoch  and  for
a  long  time  afterward  a  stranger  and  even  a  Frenchman  could  not
positively  determine  which  was  the  true  constitutional  authority  of
Freemasonry  in  the  kingdom,  in  what  body  it  was  vested  or  by
what  it  was  justly  exercised.

Harassed  by  these  conflicts  for  authority,  these  incessant  assump-
tions of  jurisdiction,  which  were  debasing  its  position,  the  Grand
Lodge  resolved  to  take  a  higher  stand,  which  it  was  supposed,  or
hoped,  would  secure  for  it  a  stronger  hold  upon  the  obedience  of
the  Fraternity.

In  1 743  it  had  adopted,  as  has  been  shown,  the  title  of  "  The
English  Grand  Lodge  of  France."  This  title  had  been  assumed,
not  with  the  authority  of  the  Grand  Lodge  at  London,  nor  because
there  was  any  official  connection  with  the  two  organizations,  for
there  is  not  the  slightest  evidence  of  any  historical  value  to  that
effect,  but  rather  as  an  indication,  as  we  may  suppose,  that  the  Free-
masonry of  France  had  originally  come  from  England.

But  there  must  have  prevailed  an  idea  that  the  English  Grand
Lodge  of  France  was  in  some  way  a  dependence  on  the  London
body,  which  would  of  course  impair  its  claim  to  absolute  sov-
ereignty.

Accordingly,  the  French  Grand  Lodge  asserted  its  thorough  in-
dependence in  the  year  1756  b}^  omitting  the  word  English  from  its
title  and  assuming  the  name  of  "  The  National  Grand  Lodge  of
France."

Thory,  and  all  the  other  French  writers  who  followed  him,  has
said  that  "  it  shook  off  the  yoke  of  the  Grand  Lodge  at  London,"  a
phrase  that  is  altogether  inaccurate,  as  no  such  "  yoke "  had  ever
existed.

The  effect,  however,  of  this  apparent  declaration  of  independence
was  not  such  as  had  been  expected.  Chapters  of  High  Degrees
persisted  in  their  rivalry  of  jurisdiction,  and  irregular  and  illegal

THE   GRAND    LODGE   OF   FRANCE  1199

chapters  were  still  issued  by  the  perpetual  or  irremovable  Masters
of  many  of  the  lodges.  French  Freemasonry  was  yet  in  a  sort  of
chaotic  condition.

To  add  to  these  annoyances  and  to  still  further  embarrass  the
eflforts  for  the  establishment  of  a  constitutional  authority,  the  Count
of  Clermont  withdrew  from  all  participation  in  the  administration
of  affairs  as  Grand  Master,  and  confided  the  discharge  of  his  func-
tions to  a  substitute  or  Deputy,  in  the  selection  of  whom  he  was  b)-
no  means  judicious.

The  first  appointment  of  a  Substitute  was  one  Baure,  a  banker.
This  selection  was  a  most  unfortunate  one  for  the  Craft.  Baure,
instead  of  devoting  himself  to  the  affairs  of  the  Order,  neglected  to
assemble  the  Grand  Lodge.  This  inactivity  was  very  disastrous,
inasmuch  as  it  encouraged  the  continuance  of  old  irregularities  and
the  introduction  of  many  new  ones.

A  contemporary  writer  mentions  among  these  that  certain
tavern-keepers  who  had  on  former  occasions  prepared  their  houses
for  the  meetings  of  lodges  to  which  they  had  been  admitted  as  serv-
ing brothers,  wishing  to  revive  the  banquets  from  which  they  had
derived  so  much  profit,  now  assumed  the  functions  of  Masters  and.
conferred  the  degrees  on  candidates  regardless  of  their  proper  quali-
fications. Warrants  became,  like  the  initiations,  objects  of  traffic,
and  lodges  whose  constitutions  were  purchased,  opened  their  doors
to  the  lowest  classes,  and  celebrated  their  indecent  orgies  in  disrep-
utable eating  houses.^  Freemasonry  under  this  Baure  was  falling
into  a  deplorable  condition.

At  last,  but  by  no  means  too  soon,  he  was  dismissed  by  the
Grand  Master,  whose  next  selection  was  one  Lacorne,  a  dancing-
master.  His  social  position  was  inferior  to  that  of  his  predecessor,
and  his  character  not  as  good.  In  vain  the  old  and  respectable
members  of  the  Fraternity  protested  against  the  appointment  of
Lacorne,  who  had  by  some  services  to  the  Grand  Master  secured
his  favor,  and  in  reward  he  received  the  title  of  Particular  Substi-
tute, with  a  power  to  execute  all  the  functions  of  his  superior.

If  the  fault  of  Baure  had  been  a  supine  inactivity,  that  of  La-
come  was  too  much  activity  employed  in  a  wrong  direction.     The

'La  Chaussie,  in  a  Memoire  Justicatif,  quoted  by  Thory,  "  Fondation  du  Grand
Orient,"  p.  20.

I200  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

Craft  had  exchanged  King  Log  for  King  Stork.  The  history  of
the  Grand  Lodge  for  many  succeeding  years  is  a  history  of  agita-
tions, dissensions,  and  schisms  fomented  by  Lacorne  to  suit  his  own
private  ends.

Lacorne  hastened  to  hold  a  meeting  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  which
was  followed  by  several  others,  in  the  course  of  which  he  succeeded
in  effecting  a  reorganization  of  the  body,  which  had  almost  ceased
to  exist  under  the  indifference  of  his  predecessor.  He  admitted  a
great  many  Masons  of  all  conditions  and  professions,  and  consulted
his  own  caprice  in  the  selection  of  officers.'

The  first  signs  of  a  coming  schism  began  now  to  make  their  ap-
pearance. The  old  members  of  the  Fraternity,  who  had  refused  to
recognize  the  new  Substitute,  refrained  from  any  participation  in
these  acts,  more  especially  as,  in  the  appointment  of  his  officers,  he
had  selected  illiterate  men.

The  Grand  Lodge  was  soon  divided  into  two  factions,  the  one
the  adherents,  the  other  the  opponents,  of  Lacorne.  Both  claimed
to  represent  the  constitutional  authority,  and  each  arrogated  the
titles  and  the  functions  of  a  Grand  Lodge,  so  that  two  pretended
Grand  Lodges  were  in  active  existence  at  the  same  time.

These  dissensions  lasted  for  several  years.  Finally  some  zealous
brethren,  who  foresaw  the  threatened  destruction  of  the  Order,  or  at
least  its  reduction  to  a  state  of  anarchy,  offered  their  services  to
effect  a  reconciliation.  The  offer  v/as  accepted.  Representations
were  made  to  the  Count  of  Clermont,  who  was  prevailed  upon  to
divest  Lacorne  of  the  powers  which  he  had  so  much  abused,  and  to
appoint  as  his  successor  M.  Chaillon  de  Joinville.

Peace  and  harmony  seemed  to  be  about  to  be  restored.  The
two  contending  parties  came  together.  All  the  Masters  in  Paris
hastened  to  assist  in  the  reconciliation.  The  Grand  Lodge  was  re-
established and  a  circular  was  issued  on  June  24,  1762,  which  an-
nounced the  auspicious  event  to  the  Freemasons  of  France.^

But  the  promise  of  peace  proved  too  soon  to  be  fallacious.  The
two  rival  Grand  Lodges,  which  had  existed  under  the  administration
of  Lacorne,  were  apparently  dissolved  and  a  United  Grand  Lodge
was  organized  ;  but  the  elements  which  composed  it  were  so  dif-
ferent in  character  that  it  is  not  surprising  that  new  and  still  more

'Thory,  "  Fondation  de  la  Grand  Orient,"  p.  21.  ^  Ibid,

THE   GRAND   LODGE   OF   FRANCE  1201

bitter  factions  arose  in  a  short  time  to  disturb  its  harmonv  and  to
seriously  affect  its  usefuhiess.

The  cause  which  led  to  the  birth  of  these  new  factions  was  a
very  natural  one,  and  is  to  be  found  in  the  uncongeniality  of  the
two  parties  who  had  united  in  the  re-establishment  of  the  Grand
Lodge,  arising  from  the  great  difference  in  the  character,  habits  of
life,  and  social  condition  of  the  individuals.

The  old  Masters  and  Past  Masters  who  had  contributed  to  the
support  of  the  institution  in  the  earlier  years  of  the  Grand  Master-
ship of  the  Count  de  Clermont,  were  members  of  the  nobility,  the
bar,  and  the  better  class  of  citizens.  They  mingled  with  reluctance
with  the  new-comers  and  the  partisans  of  Lacorne,  who  for  the
most  part  were  workmen  without  education  or  men  of  bad  reputa-
tions, wholly  incapable,  from  their  want  of  culture  and  refinement,
to  conduct  the  labors  of  the  Grand  Lodge.^

The  old  Masters  would  willingly  have  expelled  them,  and  in  so
doing  they  would  undoubtedly  have  improved  the  moral  and  intel-
lectual tone  of  the  Grand  Lodge  ;  but  the  objectionable  members
had  legal  and  Masonic  rights,  which  made  them  in  one  sense  the
equals  of  their  adversaries,  and  it  was  well  considered  by  the  latter
that  any  violent  coercive  measures  would  expose  the  Order  to  the
danger  of  new  and  perhaps  fatal  convulsions.

Accordingly,  the  old  brethren  resolved  to  temporize.  The  regu-
lations of  the  Grand  Lodge  prescribed  a  triennial  election  of  officers.
The  time  having  arrived,  very  few  of  the  new  members  and  the  par-
tisans of  Lacorne  were  elected  to  any  of  the  offices.  These,  feeling
assured  that  this  act  had  been  preconcerted,  declared  the  election  to
be  illegal  and  protested  against  it.

They  caused  defamatory  libels  to  be  printed,  and  scattered  them
with  profusion  among  the  Fraternity.  In  these  the  Grand  Lodge
and  its  officers  were  bitterly  abused.

Under  these  circumstances,  the  older  brethren  who  formed  the
most  numerous  as  well  as  the  most  respectable  part  of  the  Grand
Lodge,  could  do  no  less  than  vindicate  its  authority  by  expelling
the  malcontents  from  it  and  from  all  their  Masonic  rights  and  privi-
leges.

The  expelled  members  encountered  the  decree  of  expulsion  with

'  Thory,  "  Fondation  de  la  Grand  Orient,"  p.  22.

1202  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

renewed  libels,  insults,  and  personalities,  to  which  the  other  side  re.
sponded  by  publications  of  a  similar  character.  The  war  of  words
became  so  vigorous  and  offensive  even  to  public  decency  that
the  government  thought  it  necessary  to  interfere  and  to  issue,
in  1767,  an  order  prohibiting  any  further  assemblies  of  the  Grand
Lodge.

It  must  have  been  previous  to  this  suspension  of  its  meetings  by
the  government  and  when  the  Grand  Lodge  had  hoped  that  its
union  of  the  discordant  elements  would  effect  a  permanent  and  a
happy  reconciliation,  that  it  announced  its  existence  to  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England  and  sought  to  establish  a  fraternal  interchange
of  courtesies  between  the  two  bodies.

Northouck  tells  us  that  on  January  27,  1768,  the  Grand  Master
of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  informed  the  brethren  that  he  had
received  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  France  letters  expressing  a  de-
sire of  opening  a  regular  correspondence  with  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England.  These  letters  having  been  read,  it  >vas  resolved  "  that  a
mutual  correspondence  be  kept  up,  and  that  diBook  of  Constittctions,
a  list  of  lodges,  and  a  form  of  a  deputation,  bound  in  an  elegant
manner,  be  presented  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  France."^

This,  it  must  be  remarked,  is  the  first  official  recognition,  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England,  of  the  existence  and  legality  of  such  a
body  in  France.  But  the  ready  willingness  of  the  English  Masons
to  cement  a  union  with  their  brethren  of  the  neighboring  Grand
Lodge  appears  to  have  led  to  no  active  results.

At  the  very  time  that  this  friendly  act  of  the  English  Grand
Lodge  was  recorded  the  Grand  Lodge  of  France  had  suspended  its
labors.  The  body  was  temporarily  dissolved  and  its  members  dis-
persed.

The  expelled  members  availed  themselves  of  this  favorable  op-
portunity to  renew  their  efforts  to  obtain  a  supremacy  of  the  Order.
They  held  clandestine  meetings  in  the  faubourg  St.  Antoine,  and
notwithstanding  the  vigilance  of  the  magistrates,  they  resumed  the
ordinary  labors  of  Freemasonry,  and  even  went  so  far  as  to  grant
several  charters  to  new  lodges.  They  sent  to  the  lodges  in  the
country  circulars  in  which  they  stated  that  the  Grand  Lodge  having,
in  obedience  to  superior  authority,  ceased  its  labors,  had  delegated  to

'  Northouck,  "  Book  of  Constitutions,"  p.  291.

THE   GRAND    LODGE   OF   FRANCE  1203

three  Brethren,  Peny,  Duret.  and  L'Eveille,  the  exercise,  during  the
continuance  of  the  persecution,  of  all  its  rights  and  powers.

But  they  did  not  succeed  in  this  bold  effort  at  deception.  The
provincial  lodges  on  examining  the  lists  of  expelled  Masons  which
had  long  before  been  sent  to  them  by  the  Grand  Lodge,  saw  that
among  them  were  the  names  of  those  persons  who  had  signed  the
circular  as  well  as  of  those  who  were  said  to  have  been  appointed  as
commissioners  to  exercise  the  functions  of  the  Grand  Lodge  during
its  enforced  abeyance.  They  therefore  wrote  to  the  Substitute  of
the  Grand  Master,  M.  Chaillon  de  Joinville,  for  an  explanation,
which  was  readily  given.  He  denounced  the  encyclical  letter  as  a
false  document  and  declared  its  signers  to  be  rebels.  In  conse-
quence the  provincial  lodges  declined  the  correspondence  which  had
been  offered  to  them  and  refused  to  take  a  part  in  the  conspiracy
against  the  Grand  Lodge.

This  illegal  faction  was  led  by  Lacorne,  who  had  been  deposed
from  his  office  as  Substitute  of  the  Grand  Master.  The  legal  fac-
tion, for  the  Grand  Lodge  was  thus  divided,  was  headed  by  Chaillon
de  Joinville,  the  successor  of  Lacorne  in  the  office  of  Substitute
General.

This  body  also  held  its  secret  meetings  and  also  issued  Charters,
which,  however,  to  avoid  the  appearance  of  violating  the  suspensory
decree  of  the  Magistrates,  were  all  dated  anterior  to  the  issuing  of
that  decree.

The  object  of  the  Lacorne  faction  was  to  abolish  the  Grand
Lodge  and  to  replace  it  by  a  new  power  from  which  all  the  respect-
able members  should  be  removed  and  all  authority  be  vested  in  the
hands  of  the  conspirators.  As  a  preliminary  step,  they  sought,  but
without  success,  to  obtain  from  the  lieutenant  of  police  a  revocation
of  the  edict  of  suspension.

At  length  the  death  of  the  Grand  Master,  the  Count  of  Cler-
mont, which  event  occurred  in  1771,  gave  a  renewal  of  their  hopes
of  seizing  the  supreme  power.  France  presented,  at  this  time,  the
spectacle  of  two  Grand  Lodges,  or  rather  of  two  discordant  and
rival  factions,  each  pretending  to  represent  a  Grand  Lodge  and  each
exercising  the  functions  of  a  Supreme  authority.

One  of  these  was  the  National  Grand  Lodge,  which  had  existed
under  the  Count  of  Clermont  and  which,  though  interdicted  by  the
government  in   1767,  still   continued,  though  it  held  no  meetings

I204  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

openl)  to  exercise  its  prerogatives  through  its  acknowledged
officers.

The  other  body  was  a  fragment,  consisting  of  the  adherents  of
Lacorne,  all  of  whom  had  been  expelled  by  the  legal  Grand  Lodge,
but  who  in  violation  both  of  the  law  of  Masonry  and  the  Municipal
decree  of  interdiction,  persisted  in  holding  clandestine  meetings,
granting  constitutions  to  new  lodges,  and  in  short  exercising,  with-
out the  least  semblance  of  legal  authority,  all  tlie  functions  of  a
Grand  Lodge.

It  is  ver}^  clear  that  on  the  death  of  the  Count  of  Clermont  the
National  Grand  Lodge,  the  only  body  in  which  the  supreme  au-
thority of  Freemasonry  was  at  the  time  vested,  had  but  one  course
to  adopt.  It  should  have  assembled  in  open  session,  and  duly
elected  a  successor.

Unfortunately  for  its  own  interests  and  for  those  of  the  institu-
tion over  which  it  held  so  loose  a  control,  it  did  no  such  thing.

Discouraged  by  the  useless  efforts  it  had  made  to  obtain,  from
the  government,  a  revocation  of  the  decree  of  suspension,  it  sup-
posed that  the  time  was  not  propitious  for  an  attempt  to  revive  its
dormant  existence.  Its  hesitancy  and  its  timidity  were  eventually
the  causes  of  its  destruction.

On  the  contrary,  the  Lacorne  faction,  consisting,  as  has  been
said,  wholly  of  expelled  Masons,  who  had  previously  formed  the
disreputable  part  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  were  more  politic  and  more
bold.

Proclaiming  themselves  as  the  nucleus  of  the  old  Grand  Lodge,
the  labors  of  which  had  been  suspended  in  1767,  they  approached
the  Duke  of  Luxembourg,  with  the  design  of  securing  his  influence
in  getting  the  Duke  of  Chartres  to  accept  the  Grand  Mastership  as
the  successor  of  the  Count  of  Clermont.

Their  application  was  successful.  The  Duke  of  Chartres  con-
sented to  accept  the  position.

The  expelled  faction,  elated  with  the  success  of  their  plan,  con-
voked a  general  assembly  of  all  the  Masters  in  Paris,  including  even
the  members  of  the  Grand  Lodge  which  had  formerly  expelled
them.

The  acceptance  of  the  Grand  Mastership  by  one  who  was  closely
related  to  the  sovereign,  but  whose  infamous  character  had  not  yet
been  developed,  had  produced  much  enthusiasm  among  the  Craft

THE   GRAND   LODGE   OF   FRANCE  1205

The  Grand  Lodge  was  willing  to  be  indulgent.  The  expelled  mem-
bers were  restored  to  all  their  Masonic  rights.  On  June  24,  1771,
the  nomination  of  the  Duke  of  Chartres  as  Grand  Master  was  con-
firmed and  announced  to  all  the  lodges  of  Paris  and  the  provinces.

The  submission  of  the  Grand  Lodge  to  what  it  supposed  to  be
the  inevitable  force  of  events,  did  not  have  the  effect  it  had  hoped
of  securing  harmony  in  the  Craft.  The  expelled  members,  though
now  restored,  do  not  appear  to  have  forgotten  or  forgiven  the
wrongs  which  they  thought  had  been  inflicted  on  them.  The  old
members  were  still  in  their  view  their  enemies.  They  resolved  to
maintain  a  factious  rivalry,  with  the  ulterior  purpose  of  abolishing
the  old  Grand  Lodge  and  establishing  a  new  body  on  its  ruin —
"Carthage  must  be  destroyed."

A  new  element  of  discord  was  now  introduced,  the  tendency  of
which  was  favorable  to  the  execution  of  these  views — an  element
not  new  in  French  Masonry,  but  which  had  not  before  been  intro-
duced into  the  internal  government  of  the  Order.  This  element  was
found  in  the  cultivation  of  the  Hatites grades,  or  High  Degrees.

It  is  well  known  that  we  are  to  attribute  this  innovation,  wholly
unknown  to  the  ancient  Operative  or  to  the  modern  Speculative
system,  to  the  inventive  genius  of  the  Chevalier  Ramsay.  He  was
the  first  to  devise  these  supplements  to  Craft  Masonry  and  to  en-
deavor to  develop  the  instructions  of  the  Third  degree  by  the  estab-
lishment of  higher  initiations,  to  which  the  initiation  of  the  Master
Mason  was  to  be  deemed  subordinate.  Ramsay's  system  of  seven
degrees  was,  however,  simple  in  comparison  with  those  subsequently
introduced  into  France  by  his  followers  and  disciples.

France  was  soon  inundated  by  these  "  high  degrees,"  combined
in  various  series  forming  what  were  called  "  Rites,"  and  thrusting
themselves  into  rivalry  and  competition  with  the  legal  authorities
which  professed  to  know  nothing  about  them.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  France,  like  its  sister  of  England,  had
always  remained  true  to  the  simplicity  of  the  Speculative  system,
founded  as  it  was  on  the  traditions  of  the  old  Operative  Craft,  who
had  recognized  only  three  classes  of  workmen.  It  had  more  than
once  authoritatively  declared  that  Ancient  Craft  or  Speculative  Free-
masonry consisted  only  of  three  degrees.  This  was  a  fundamental
point  in  its  organic  law,  and  it  had  never  as  a  body  violated  it.

Not  so,  however,  was  it  with  its  leaders,  many  of  whom  had

I206  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

been  attracted  by  the  glimmer  of  imposing  titles  and  brilliant  dec-
orations.  Chaillon  de  Joinville,  who  was  then  the  Substitute  Grand
Master  under  the  Count  of  Clermont,  had,  as  far  back  as  1761,  pro-
claimed himself  the  "  chief  of  the  high  degrees  and  a  Sublime
Prince  of  the  Royal  Secret."  As  such  he  had  issued  a  commission
authorizing  Stephen  Morin  to  disseminate  these  high  degrees  in
America.

That  fact  is,  itself,  enough  to  show  how  far  the  influence  of  this
advanced  Masonry  had  already  extended  when  it  had  been  enabled
to  secure  as  its  chief  the  actual  head  of  the  legitimate  Grand  Lodge.
But  we  also  find  that,  from  an  early  date,  there  existed  at  Paris  and
in  other  places  in  France,  Colleges,  Councils,  and  Chapters  which
were  engaged  in  the  cultivation  and  in  the  conferring  of  these  high
degrees,  but  which  were  always  without  the  official  recognition  of
the  Grand  Lodge.

But  this  recognition  they  greatly  desired,  and  when  the  dissi-
dents began  to  conspire  for  the  abolition  of  the  Grand  Lodge  and
the  establishment  of  a  new  body,  they  readily  lent  their  assistance,
because  they  anticipated,  as  was  really  the  case,  that  these  high  de-
grees would  receive  some  sort  of  recognition  from  it.

And  in  this  hope  they  were  encouraged  by  the  fact  that  on  June
24,  1 771,  when  the  Duke  of  Chartres  was  elected  and  proclaimed  as
"  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge,"  he  was  also  proclaimed  by
the  additional  title  of  "  Sovereign  Grand  Master  of  all  Scottish
Councils,  Chapters,  and  Lodges  of  France."^

Thus,  for  the  first  time  the  symbolic  Freemasonry  of  the  prim-
itive Speculative  lodges  and  the  Scottish  Masonry  of  the  High
Degrees  were  reunited  under  one  Grand  Master  by  those  who  had
formerly  opposed  the  fusion  of  the  two  systems,  and  now  accepted  it
virithout  opposition  but  not  without  regret.  The  presence  of  the
Duke  of  Luxembourg,  who  presided  over  the  meeting  in  which
the  Grand  Master  was  proclaimed,  was  an  influence  which  closed
the  mouths  of  the  discontented,  who  might  under  more  auspicious
circumstances  have  been  less  reticent,  and  less  complaisant.

We  can  not  doubt  that  the  object  of  the  dissidents  or  schismatics
(which  are  the  titles  bestowed  by  Thory  on  the  Lacorne  or  less
reputable  faction  of  the  Grand  Lodge)  was  to  entirely  change  the

*  See  Thory,  "  Histoire  de  la  Fondation  du  Grand  Orient,"  p.  27.

THE   GRAND    LODGE   OF   FRANCE  1207

features  of  the  system  of  Freemasonry  which  had  existed  in  France
since  the  establishment  of  the  first  lodge  and  to  substitute  for  it
another  less  primitive  and  more  complicated  one.  This  they
could  only  expect  to  do  by  the  total  dissolution  of  the  old  Grand
Lodge  and  the  organization  of  some  other  Masonic  authority  on
its  ruins.

Hence,  Thory  is  led  to  say  that  at  this  meeting  when  the  Duke
of  Chartres  was  elected,  there  was  the  first  appearance  of  the  symp-
toms which  threatened  the  destruction  of  the  Grand  Lodge.  The
assembly  was  entirely  influenced  by  the  dissident  brethren.  The
old  controversy  as  to  amendments  of  the  statutes  was  revived,  the
necessity  of  correcting  existing  abuses  was  vehemently  insisted  on
and  the  old  members  saw  too  late  to  successfully  oppose  them  the
aims  of  their  rivals.  Eight  commissioners  were  appointed  to  report
to  the  Grand  Master  some  method  for  effecting  the  proposed  re-
forms.

The  history  of  the  proceedings  of  these  eight  commissioners,  in
carrying  out  the  reforms  contemplated  by  the  dissidents,  has  been
given  by  a  contemporary  writer,*  and  it  proves  that  they  arrogated
powers  which  the  Grand  Lodge  had  never  intended  to  entrust  to
them,  and  exercised  them  with  an  energy  that  crushed  by  its  own
force  all  opposition.

Encouraged  by  the  protection  of  the  Duke  of  Luxembourg,  who
had  been  appointed  by  the  Duke  of  Chartres  as  his  Substitute,  they
held  meetings  at  the  Hotel  de  Chaulnes,  where  they  exercised  the
functions  of  a  General  Assembly  or  Grand  Lodge.  They  were
joined  by  several  Masters  of  the  Parisian  lodges  and  deputies  from
some  of  the  lodges  in  the  Provinces,  their  professed  design  being
to  abolish  the  old  Grand  Lodge.  Some  of  the  changes  which  were
calculated  to  produce  that  effect  were  opposed  by  a  few  of  the  Mas-
ters and  delegates.  But  their  opposition  was  overruled  and  they
were  compelled  to  withdraw  from  the  future  meetings  of  the  com-
missioners.

After  much  noisy  discussion  a  plan  was  at  length  presented  of  a
new  constitution.     This  was  adopted  by  the  eight  commissioners,

'  Le  Fr^re  de  la  Chaussee,  a  man  of  letters,  who  took  an  active  part  in  the  Masonic
discussions  of  the  day,  was  a  member  of  the  old  Grand  Lodge  and  wrote  a  "  Memoire
justificatif,"  whence  Thory  has  derived  many  of  the  facts  on  which  he  has  based  his  "  His-
tory of  llie  Grand  Orient."

i2o8  HISTORY    OF   FREEiMASONRY

without  having  submitted  it  to  the  Grand  Lodge  for  its  approval  or
even  for  its  consideration.

On  December  24,  1772,  the  old  Grand  Lodge  of  France  was
declared  to  have  ceased  to  exist,  and  for  it  was  substituted  a  National
Grand  Lodge,  which  was  to  constitute  an  integral  part  of  a  new
power  which  should  administer  the  affairs  of  the  Order  under  the
title  of  the  Grand  Orient  of  France.

The  progress  of  this  body,  its  controversies  with  the  old  Grand
Lodge,  whose  members  would  not  consent  that  it  should  be  thus
summarily  abolished,  and  its  final  triumph  and  recognition  as  the
head  of  Freemasonry  in  France,  a  position  which  it  holds  at  the
present  day,  must  be  the  subject  of  another  chapter.

CHAPTER  XLV

ORIGIN    OF    THE    GRAND    ORIENT    OF    FRANCE

HE  truth  of  history  compels  us  to  acknowledge
the  fact  that  the  Grand  Orient,  now  and  for  a
century  past  the  supreme  Masonic  authority  in
France,  was,  in  its  inception,  a  schismatic  body.
Those  principles  of  law,  then  recognized,  as  they
still  are,  as  directing  the  organization  of  Grand
Lodges,  appear  to  have  been  violated  in  almost
every  point  by  the  dissidents  who  broke  off  from  the  old  Grand
Lodge  and  conspired  to  establish  its  rival.

The  Grand  Lodge  was  still  in  existence  ;  it  is  true  it  was  not
energetic  in  action,  but  it  was  not  asleep  ;  its  consent  had  neither
been  asked  nor  obtained  for  this  radical  change  in  its  constitution  ;
the  lodges  had  not  been  invited  to  meet  in  general  assembly  nor  to
give  their  sanction  to  the  dissolution  of  the  old  body  and  to  the  crea-
tion of  the  new  one;  everything  had  been  done  by  the  irresponsible
authority  of  the  eight  commissioners,  who  were  merely  a  committee
appointed  to  make  a  report  on  the  condition  of  the  Order  and  to
suggest  reforms  to  the  Grand  Lodge.  But  they  exceeded  their
powers ;  made  no  report,  and  proceeded  in  secret  sessions,  to  which
none  but  their  friends  and  co-conspirators  were  admitted,  to  the  in-
auguration of  a  new  system,  the  adoption  of  which  was  to  result  in
the  abolition  of  the  body  which  had  appointed  them  and  the  crea-
tion of  a  new  one,  of  which  not  the  remotest  idea  was  entertained
by  the  authority  from  which  they  derived  their  powers.

But  if  ever  a  violation  of  law  could  be  defended  by  the  necessity
of  a  reform  of  abuses,  which  could  not  be  effected  in  a  more  legal
manner,  such  defense  might  surely  be  found  in  the  corrupt  condition
to  which  Freemasonry  had  been  reduced  by  the  mal-administration
of  affairs  throiurh  the  neglect  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  the  indifference
of  the  Grand  Masters,  and  the  usurpations  of  their  Substitutes.

1209

I2IO  HISTORY    OF    FREEiMASONRY

Under  the  constitution  of  the  old  Grand  Lodge  it  will  be  shown
that  there  were  many  abuses  and  corruptions  of  the  pure  and  primi-
cive  principles  on  which  Speculative  Freemasonry  had  been  founded
at  the  beginning  of  the  century.  A  reformation  of  these  abuses  was
undoubtedly  necessary,  if  the  existence  of  the  Order  was  to  be  pre-
served. There  ought  not  to  have  been  any  objection  to  the  reform,
it  is  only  the  method  in  which  it  was  effected  that  is  to  be  con-
demned.

A  comparison  of  the  old  constitution  of  the  Grand  Lodge  with
that  of  the  Grand  Orient  presents  us  with  the  abuses  of  the  one  and
the  reforms  proposed  by  the  other.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  France  was  composed  only  of  the  Masters
of  the  lodges  of  Paris.  Hence  the  Masons  and  the  lodges  of  the
Provinces  had  no  voice  in  the  government  of  the  Order,  though  they
were  required  to  contribute  to  the  revenues  of  the  Grand  Lodge  and
pay  implicit  obedience  to  its  decree.  It  was  simply  the  old  tyran-
nic principle  of  taxation  without  representation,  and  was  in  direct
violation  of  the  organic  law  on  which  the  Mother  Grand  Lodge  at
London  had  been  instituted.

The  Quarterly  Communications,  on  which  the  supreme  author-
ity rested,  was  composed  of  thirty  officers  who  were  elected  trien-
nially.

There  was  also  a  Council  consisting  of  nine  officers  and  nine
Masters  of  Paris  lodges,  whose  decisions  were,  however,  only  pro-
visionary  and  required  to  be  confirmed  by  the  Quarterly  Communi-
cation to  which  they  were  reported.

The  power  of  punishing  offending  members  was  vested  in  the
Masters  of  lodges,  but  there  lay  an  appeal  to  the  Grand  Lodge.

The  Masters  of  lodges  were  in  general  chosen  for  life,  and  were
not  removable  by  the  lodges  over  which  they  presided,  and  which
in  fact  were  merely,  in  many  instances,  instruments  provided  for  the
pecuniary  interests  of  their  Masters.

Thory,  very  strangely,  calls  the  constitution  of  which  these  are
the  principal  points  "  simple,  uncomplicated,  and  conformable  to  the
regulations  of  foreign  Grand  Lodges."  The  reader  will  be  able  to
give  to  these  two  favorable  views  their  proper  value.

He  admits  that  there  were  abuses,  but  he  attributes  them  to  the
factions  which  agitated  the  Grand  Lodge  after  the  death  of  the  Duke
d'Antin,  and  to  the  state  of  anarchy  which  supervened  on  the  sus-

ORIGIN    OF   THE   GRAND   ORIENT   OF   FRANCE     1211

pension  of  the  labors  of  the  Grand  Lodge  by  the  order  of  govern-
ment.

Doubtless,  these  circumstances  exerted  an  unfavorable  influence
on  the  purity  of  the  administration  of  the  law,  but  whatev^er  were
the  causes,  the  abuses  existed,  and,  of  course,  their  reformation  was
urgently  demanded.

In  all  these  points  the  new  constitution  of  the  Grand  Orient  pro-
vided a  remedy  and  presented  the  desired  reform,  as  may  be  seen
from  the  following  brief  \new  of  its  principal  features.

"The  Statutes  of  the  Royal  Order  of  Freemasonry  in  France,"
for  such  was  the  imposing  title  of  the  new  constitution,  provided  in
the  initial  article  that  the  "  Masonic  Body  of  France,"  that  is,  the
Grand  Orient,  should  be  composed,  as  its  only  members,  of  regular
Masons,  meaning  thereby  the  members  of  lodges  which  had  received
Warrants  from  or  had  them  renewed  by  the  Grand  Orient.

In  this  way,  while  all  regular  Masons  were  recognized  as  consti-
tuting a  part  of  the  great  Masonic  family  of  France,  those  who  still
retained  their  allegiance  to  the  old  and  rival  Grand  Lodge  were  ex-
cluded from  recognition.

This  was  a  defensive  act,  the  necessity  of  which  excused  its
severity.

Again  :  It  was  declared  that  the  Grand  Orient  should  be  com-
posed of  all  the  actual  Masters  or  the  deputies  of  lodges  not  only  of
Paris  but  also  of  the  Provinces.

The  Grand  Lodge  had  never  recognized  the  Provincial  lodges
as  forming  any  part  of  its  constituency.  Their  recognition  by  the
Grand  Orient  as  entitled  to  participate  in  its  labors  was  the  removal
of  a  very  flagrant  abuse  of  the  Masonic  law  of  equality.

Again  :  All  the  Warrants  of  constitution  which  had  been
granted  by  the  old  Grand  Lodge  to  irremovable  Masters,  that  is,  to
Masters  elected  for  life,  were  suppressed  by  the  Grand  Orient,
which  recognized  as  Masters  only  those  who  were  elected  from  time
to  time. by  the  lodges.

These  were  the  most  important  points  of  difference  between  the
Grand  Lodge  and  the  Grand  Orient  ;  but  they  were  so  important  as
to  make  the  old  Masonic  form  of  government,  as  Thory  expresses
it,  an  oligarchical  government  by  an  irresponsible  few,  while  that  of
the  new  one  was  representative,  the  only  form  that  was  recognized
by  the  founders  of  the  Speculative  system  of  Freemasonry.

J2I2  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

In  a  Society  based  on  the  principle  of  equality  it  is  very  evident
rhat  the  administration  of  affairs  should  not  be  confided  to  a  priv-
:leged  class,  to  the  exclusion  of  many  of  its  members.

Hence,  though  the  Grand  Orient  of  France  originated  in  a
schismatic  usurpation  of  power,  and  was  therefore  irregular  and  ille-
gal in  its  methods  of  organization,  the  end  would  seem  to  have  justi-
fied the  means.  It  can  not  be  doubted  that  at  that  important  epoch,
the  Masonic  Order  in  France  was  indebted  for  its  salvation  from
impending  dissolution  to  the  establishment  of  the  Grand  Orient.

The  "  Grand  Orient "  was,  as  it  were,  the  generic  title  assumed
for  the  whole  Masonic  Order ;  within  its  bosom  was  the  body  called
"The  National  Grand  Lodge."  The  distinctive  titles  were,  how-
ever, more  shadowy  than  real.  The  "  Grand  Orient "  is  the  name
by  which  the  Supreme  authority  of  Freemasonry  is  always  described
by  French  as  well  as  other  writers.

The  title  was  a  novel  one,  first  invented  in  France  at  that  time.
It  had  never  before  been  heard  of  in  Masonic  language,  though  it
has  long  since  become  quite  common  on  the  Continent  of  Europe
and  in  South  America.  It  has,  however,  never  been  adopted  by
the  Freemasons  of  any  of  the  English-speaking  nations,  who  adhere
to  the  primitive  and  better  phrase,  "  Grand  Lodge,"  as  the  title  of
the  Supreme  Masonic  authority

The  first  meeting  of  the  Grand  Orient  as  a  National  Grand
Lodge  was  held  on  March  5,  1773.  Other  meetings  succeeded,
until  June  24th,  when  the  new  Constitution  was  adopted,  and  the
nomination  of  the  Duke  of  Chartres  as  Grand  Master,  which  had  been
made  by  the  old  Grand  Lodge,  was  confirmed.  The  amovability
of  the  Masters  of  lodges,  and  the  right  of  the  Provincial  lodges  to
b^  represented  in  the  Grand  Orient  were  again  proclaimed,  and  the
choice  of  fifteen  officers  of  honor  as  well  as  the  nomination  of  the
ordinary  officers  was  referred  to  the  Duke  of  Luxembourg.

But  though  the  Duke  of  Chartres  had  been  nominated  as  Grand
Master,  he  had  not  yet  formally  accepted  the  nomination,  an  act
which  the  members  of  the  new  Grand  Orient  felt  to  be  imperatively
necessary  to  the  success  of  their  designs.  Having  been  previously
elected  to  the  same  office  by  the  old  Grand  Lodge,  the  founders  of
the  Grand  Orient  recognized  the  policy  of  withdrawing  him  from
all  connection  with  the  rival  organization  and  of  securing  the  ad-
hesion to  their  cause  of  a  prince  of  the  royal  blood.

ORIGIN   OF   THE   GRAND   ORIENT   OF  FRANCE     i2n

Morally  considered,  no  man  in  France  was  more  unfit  to  be
called  to  the  head  of  the  Masonic  institution  than  the  Duke  of
Chartres.  From  his  early  youth  he  had  exhibited  a  depraved  dis-
position, and  passed  amid  companions,  almost  as  wicked  as  himself,
a  life  of  vice  and  in  the  indulgence  of  the  most  licentious  practices.
When  on  the  death  of  his  father  he  became  the  Duke  of  Orleans,
he  developed  a  hatred  for  the  king,  who  had  refused  to  elevate  him
to  posts  to  which  his  high  birth  entitled  him  to  aspire,  but  from
which  he  was  excluded  by  his  blackened  reputation.  Inspired  with
his  hatred  for  the  king,  and  the  court,  and  moved  by  his  personal  am-
bition, he  fomented  the  discontents  which  were  already  springing
up  among  the  people.  On  the  breaking  out  of  the  revolution  he
became  a  seeker  for  popular  favor ;  rivalled  the  bitterness  of  the
most  fanatical  Jacobins,  renounced  his  rank  and  title  and  assumed
as  a  French  citizen  the  name  of  Philip  Egalit^,  repudiated  Free-
masonry as  opposed  to  republican  ideas,  such  as  were  then  the
fashion,  threw  up  his  office  as  Grand  Master,  was  elected  to  the
National  Assembly,  voted  for  the  death  of  his  cousin  Louis  the
Sixteenth,  and  finally,  as  a  fitting  close  to  his  life  of  infamy,  expired
on  the  guillotine,  one  of  the  many  victims  of  the  reign  of  terror.

At  the  period  of  his  election  as  Grand  Master,  the  Duke  of
Chartres  had,  though  very  young,^  already  exhibited  a  foreshadow-
ing of  his  future  career  of  infamy.  Enough  certainly  was  known  of
his  vicious  character  to  have  made  him  an  unfit  leader  of  a  virtuous
society.     But  motives  of  policy  overcame  all  other  considerations.

The  Duke  himself  was  reluctant  to  accept  the  position  which
was  tendered  to  him.  Some  jests  made  by  the  wits  of  the  court,
who  perhaps  saw  the  unfitness  of  the  appointment,  are  said  to  have
been  the  cause  of  the  coldness  with  which  he  viewed  the  dignity
tendered  to  him.'

A  deputation  consisting  of  four  members  of  the  Grand  Orient,
all  men  of  rank,  waited  on  the  Duke  to  obtain  his  consent  to  the
adoption  of  the  new  constitution,  which  would  of  course  have  been
the  recognition  of  the  new  body  which  had  enacted  it.  But  he
refused  to  see  the  deputation.

'  He  was  born  in  1747,  and  was  therefore  only  twenty-six  when  elected  Grand  Master.
^  This  was  the  cause  assigned  by  contemporary  writers  for  the  reluctance  with  which
he  gave  his  consent.     See  Thory,  "  Fondation  de  la  Grand  Orient,"  p.  39.

12  14  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

The  joyful  event  of  the  birth  of  a  son '  and  heir  presented  it  was
supposed  a  more  favorable  opportunity  for  obtaining  his  consent  to
their  proceedings.  The  expectation  was  gratified.  The  Duke  of
Luxembourg,  who  took  an  earnest  interest  in  the  success  of  the
Grand  Orient  and  who  exercised  much  influence  over  the  mind  of
the  prince,  repaired  to  his  residence  long  before  the  appearance  of
the  deputation  and  succeeded  in  obtaining  his  consent  to  grant  an
interview.

Having  been  admitted  to  his  presence,  his  approval  of  the  pro-
ceedings by  which  the  Grand  Orient  was  organized  was  obtained,
and  he  consented  that  his  installation  as  Grand  Master  should  take
place  soon  after  his  return  from  a  visit  to  Fontainebleau  which  he
was  obliged  to  make.

Accordingly,  he  was  installed  in  his  own  house,  called  la  Folie
Titon,  in  the  Rue  de  Montreuil,  on  October  28,  1773.  The  Grand
Orient  was  thus  legalized,  so  far  as  his  patronage  could  make  it  so,
as  the  supreme  legislative  authority  of  the  Masonic  Order  in  France.
Hence,  this  installation  by  its  rival  of  the  same  Grand  Master  whom
it  had  itself  elected  in  1771,  and  who  still  retained  that  position,  was
a  cause  of  great  annoyance  to  the  old  Grand  Lodge.  The  old
Grand  Lodge  did  not,  however,  cease  at  once  to  exist,  but  continued
its  labors,  exercising  a  warfare  with  the  Grand  Orient  for  several
years.

It  held  a  session  on  June  17,  1773,  at  which  were  present  those
Masters  of  the  Paris  lodges  who  were  still  faithful  to  it  and  some
deserters  from  the  Grand  Orient,  who  had  abandoned  that  body
when  it  suppressed  the  law  of  immovability.

At  this  session  the  Grand  Lodge  fulminated  its  decrees  against
the  Grand  Orient,  which  it  declared  to  be  a  schismatic  body,  surrep-
titiously formed — a  mere  faction.

On  September  loth  it  declared  the  eight  commissioners  deprived
of  all  Masonic  rights,  and  forbade  their  admission  to  any  of  the
lodges. .

Though  fully  recognizing  the  embarrassment  which  resulted  from
the  installation  of  the  Duke  of  Chartres,  it  determined  to  maintain
its  independence  and  to  continue  its  labors  with  the  assistance  of  the
few  lodges  which  still  adhered  to  it.     For  this  purpose  it  continued

'  This  was  the  Duke  of  Valois,  afterward  Duke  of  Chartres,  then  Duke  of  Orleans,
and  finally  King  Louis  Philippe  of  France.

ORIGIN  OF  THE  GRAND   ORIENT   OF  FRANCE     1215

its  denunciations  of  the  Grand  Orient  and  revoked  all  its  decrees  as
fast  as  they  were  passed.  It  had  among  its  adherents  some  able
men,  who  employed  their  talents  in  the  composition  and  publication
of  circulars  and  even  books  in  which  the  Grand  Orient  and  all  its
proceedings  were  denounced.

Responses  were  not  wanting  on  the  part  of  the  Grand  Orient,
among  whose  most  able  and  energetic  defenders  was  the  Duke  of
Luxembourg,  while  M.  Gouilliard,  a  Doctor  of  Laws  and  the  Grand
Orator  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  was  the  most  conspicuous  writer  on  be-
half of  that  body.

It  would  be  tedious  to  follow  in  all  its  details  this  internecine
war  of  "  paper  pellets,"  which  lasted  with  equal  acrimony  on  either
side  for  many  years.  It  will  be  sufficient  to  pursue,  with  rapid
sketch,  the  progress  of  each  of  the  rival  bodies  until  the  close  of  the
century,  when  a  union  was  finally  accomplished.

In  1 774  the  Grand  Lodge  assumed  the  title  of  the  "  Sole  and  only
Grand  Orient  of  France,"*  and  proceeded  to  the  election  of  its
Grand  Officers  under  the  auspices  of  the  Duke  of  Chartres,  whom
it  recognized  as  "Grand  Master  of  all  the  lodges  of  France."  It
again  decreed  that  the  so-called  Grand  Orient  of  France  was  irreg-
ular, and  its  members  and  partisans  were  clandestine  Masons ;  it
forbade  its  lodges  to  admit  them  as  visitors  unless  they  abjured  their
errors  and  promised  submission  to  the  Graad  Lodge  ;  it  also  inter-
dicted the  members  of  its  own  lodges  from  visiting  the  Grand
Orient

In  1775  the  Grand  Lodge  granted  Warrants  to  eight  lodges  in
Paris  and  to  still  more  in  the  Provinces,  and  continued  to  increase
the  number  of  lodges  under  its  obedience  for  many  successive  years,
so  that  its  existence  was  not  merely  a  formal  one.  On  the  contrary,
it  appears  to  have  been  a  troublesome  though  not  eventually  a  suc-
cessful rival  of  the  Grand  Orient.

In  1780  it  must  at  last  have  felt  the  inconvenience  of  having  a
Grand  Master  only  in  name,  for  there  is  nc  record  that  the  Duke  of
Chartres,  or  his  Substitute,  the  Duke  of  Luxembourg,  ever  attended
its  communications.  To  remedy  this  evil,  the  Grand  Lodge  in  1780
appointed  three  Honorary  Presidents,  who  were  to  supply  the  place
of  the  Grand  Master  in  his  absence  from  the  meetings.

•  Seul  et  Unique  Grand  Orient  de  France.

i2ib  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

That  the  old  Grand  Lodge  was  not  yet  moribund  notwithstand
ing  the  greater  activity  of  its  rival,  the  Grand  Orient,  is  evident
from  the  fact  that  in  its  Tableau  issued  in  1783,  it  reports  the  num-
ber of  lodges  under  its  jurisdiction  in  Paris  as  well  as  the  Province?
as  amounting  to  the  respectable  number  of  352.  In  the  same  yeai
the  English  printed  lists  enumerate  453  lodges,  but  many  of  these
were  extinct  and  123  were  situated  in  foreign  countries,  so  that
there  were  actually  at  that  time  more  lodges  in  France  under  obedi-
ence to  the  old  Grand  Lodge  than  there  were  in  England  under  the
jurisdiction  of  the  constitutional  Grand  Lodge.'

But  in  1 789  the  political  troubles  which  then  began  to  agitate
the  kingdom,  and  which  soon  after  resulted  in  the  French  Revolu-
tion, had  a  very  serious  effect  on  the  condition  of  Freemasonry.
The  attendance  on  the  lodges  was  very  infrequent,  and  finally,  in
1792,  the  Grand  Lodge  suspended  its  labors  and  the  members  were
dispersed.

From  the  time  of  its  organization  in  1773,  the  Grand  Orient  had
maintained  a  successful  existence ;  it  was  patronized  by  a  better
class  of  Masons  than  that  of  which  the  Grand  Lodge  was  composed,
and  had  the  support  of  the  Grand  Master  of  both  bodies,  his  substi
tute,  the  Duke  of  Luxembourg,  showing  a  very  evident  partiality
for  the  Grand  Orient,  and  not  only  never  attending  the  meetings
but  actually  denouncing  the  authority  of  the  Grand  Lodge.

The  record  of  its  transactions  for  these  sixteen  years  supply
us  with  more  interesting  incidents  than  those  which  marked  the
quiet  progress  of  the  Grand  Lodge  during  the  same  period.

Its  contests  with  the  Grand  Lodge  for  supremacy  were  unremit-
tingly maintained.  The  mutual  recriminations  of  both  bodies  did
not  tend  to  cultivate  a  spirit  of  fraternity.  Finding  itself  embar-
rassed for  the  want  of  the  registers  and  other  archives  which  were
retained  by  the  Grand  Lodge,  the  Grand  Orient  went  so  far  as  to
apply  to  the  Lieutenant  of  Police  and  cause  the  arrest  and  imprison-
ment of  the  keeper  of  the  Seals  and  some  other  members  of  the
Grand  Lodge.  But  the  effort  to  obtain  possession  of  the  docu-
ments, even  by  this  harsh  means,  was  unsuccessful.

It  was  found  impossible  for  want  of  the  registers  to  discover  the
number  and  names  of  the  country  lodges,  most  of  which,  !;;ivmg

•  See  List  No.  i6  in  Gould's  "  Four  Old  Lodges,"  p.  68.

ORIGIN    OF  THE   GRAND   ORIENT   OF   FRANCE     I2i'j

been  established  under  the  old,  corrupt  system  of  immovable  Masters
or  Masters  for  life,  retained  their  allegiance  to  the  Grand  Lodge,
which  still  preserved  the  usage.

The  Grand  Orient,  therefore,  that  the  knowledge  of  its  existence
and  its  authority  might  be  brought  nearer  these  country  lodges,
established  Provincial  Grand  Lodges,  as  another  of  the  important
changes  which  it  was  making  in  the  usages  of  French  Freemasonry.

These  Provincial  Grand  Lodges  were  not,  however,  established
on  the  same  plan  as  those  of  England.  Their  design  was,  as  has
been  said,  to  relieve  the  Grand  Orient  of  the  embarrassment  of
governing  lodges  at  a  distance.  A  provincial  Grand  Lodge  was  to
be  established  not  in  a  Province  only,  but  in  any  town  or  place
where  there  were  not  less  than  three  lodges ;  it  was  to  have  a  super-
intendence over  them  ;  its  decrees  were  to  be  subject  only  to  appeal
to  the  Grand  Orient,  it  was  to  collect  and  transmit  all  dues  ;  and
was  to  be  the  medium  of  all  correspondence  between  the  lodges  and
the  Grand  Orient.

The  Grand  Orient  became  rather  aristocratic  in  its  ideas  and
refused  to  recognize  as  members  of  the  Order  persons  who  were
attached  to  the  public  theatres  and  to  all  artisans  who  were  not
Master  workmen  in  their  trades.  Subsequently  it  forbade  the
lodges  to  meet  in  public  taverns,  a  reformation  which  their  English
brethren  had  not  yet  reached.

In  1 774  the  title  of  "Royal  Order,"  by  which  Freemasonry  had
hitherto  been  designated  in  France,  was  exchanged  for  that  of  the
"  Masonic  Order,"  certainly  a  more  appropriate  name.

In  1775  the  Grand  Orient  was  occupied  in  determining  the  form
of  the  Masonic  government  in  the  kingdom,  and  several  decrees
were  made  for  the  regulation  of  the  deputies  and  representatives  of
lodges.  It  expressed  its  intention  to  purify  the  Order  and  tlie
lodges  which  were  profaned  by  the  presence  of  corrupt  men,  and  a
commission  was  appointed  to  carry  these  views  into  effect.

The  Duke  of  Chartres  presided  at  a  meeting  of  the  Grand  Orient
in  July,  1776,  being  the  first  time  that  he  had  been  present  since  his
installation  in  1773.

The  prevalence  of  "high  degrees"  and  of  Councils  and  Chapters
which  conferred  them  independently  of  the  Grand  Orient,  had  led
the  members  of  that  body  to  take  into  consideration  the  expediency
of  following  what  had  now  become  the  fashion  on  the  Continent

i2iS  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRV

and  more  especially  in  France,  and  of  developing  within  its  own
bosom  a  rite  which  should  be  founded  on  the  three  symbolic  degrees
which  had  hitherto  been  practiced  by  it  and  by  the  Grand  Lodge.
A  chamber  of  degrees  or  committee  to  regulate  this  matter  was
accordingly  appointed  in  1782.  Two  years  after  this  chamber  re-
ported four  degrees,  which,  with  the  three  symbolic  as  a  founda-
tion, were  to  constitute  the  "  Rite  Franfaise."

These  degrees  were  entitled  Ehi,  Ecossais,  Chevalier  d  Orient,
and  Chevalier  Rose  Croix,  or,  as  they  may  be  translated,  Elect  Mason,
Scottish  Mason,  Knight  of  the  East  and  Knight  Rose  Croix.
Though  there  were  some  modifications  of  the  rituals,  the  degrees
were  not  an  original  conception  of  the  Committee,  but  were  bor-
rowed substantially  from  those  systems  which  had  been  practiced  in
France  since  the  time  of  the  Chevalier  Ramsay.

The  degrees  having  been  adopted  by  the  Grand  Orient,  it  decreed
that  they  should  henceforth  be  the  only  ones  recognized  and  prac-
ticed in  the  several  chapters  which  were  attached  to  the  lodges
under  its  jurisdiction.

Undoubtedly  the  adoption  of  these  new  degrees  was  a  manifest
innovation  on  the  pure  system  of  primitive  Speculative  Free-
masonry, an  innovation  which  the  more  conservative  spirits  of  the
English-speaking  Grand  Lodges  had  always  resisted.

But  under  the  peculiar  character  which  Continental  Masonry
had  long  assumed,  it  was  far  better  that  the  Grand  Orient  should
adopt  a  system  of  development  comparatively  simple  and  consisting
of  only  four  additional  degrees,  and  confine  its  lodges  within  those
limits,  than  to  permit  them  to  become  the  victims  of  the  numerous
and  extravagant  systems  by  which  they  were  surrounded  and  which
were  practiced  by  irresponsible  Chapters  and  Councils.

The  French  lodges  of  the  Grand  Orient  were  thus  provided
with  a  uniform  system  of  their  own,  far  better  than  the  many  di-
verse ones,  which  bid  defiance  to  all  homogeneity  of  Speculative
Freemasonry.

In  1 791  the  lodges  under  the  Grand  Orient,  like  those  undei
the  Grand  Lodge,  suspended  their  labors  and  closed  their  doors  in
consequence  of  the  existing  political  agitations.  Still  the  Grand
Orient,  even  in  that  year,  constituted  two  or  three  lodges,  but  Free-
masonry had  really  assumed  a  dormant  condition  throughout  the
kingdom.

ORIGIN   OF   THE   GRAND   ORIENT   OF   FRANCE     1213

But  notwithstanding  the  dissolution  of  the  lodges,  several  of
the  officers  of  the  Grand  Orient  boldly  sustained  its  activity  so
far  as  circumstances  would  permit.  In  France,  in  this  day  ot  trial,
there  were,  as  there  were  in  America  in  a  long  subsequent  period
of  persecution,  some  Masons  who  were  willing  to  become  Martyrs
to  their  convictions  of  the  purity  of  the  Institution,  and  to  the
love  which  they  bore  for  it.

But  no  such  sentiments  animated  the  bosom  of  the  recreant
Grand  Master,  the  Duke  of  Chartres,  who  by  the  death  of  his  father
had  become  Duke  of  Orleans,  and  who,  having  abandoned  his  family
and  his  class,  had  repudiated  his  hereditary  title  and  assumed,  ac-
cording to  the  fashion  of  the  sa7is  culottes,  the  name  of  Citizen
Equality — le  citoyen  EgaliiL

The  Secretary  of  the  Grand  Orient  having  in  December,  1792,
addressed  him  an  official  note  relative  to  the  labors  of  the  Grand
Orient,  the  Duke  made  a  reply  in  the  following  words,  on  May  15,

1793  ••

"  As  I  do  not  know  how  the  Grand  Orient  is  constituted,  and  as
I  moreover,  do  not  think  that  there  should  be  any  mystery  or  secret
society  in  a  republic,  especially  at  the  beginning  of  its  establish-
ment, I  no  longer  wish  to  have  anything  to  do  with  the  Grand
Orient  or  with  the  meetings  of  Masons."

This  peremptory,  and  in  its  terms  insulting,  withdrawal  was  re-
ccived,  as  it  may  be  supposed,  by  the  members  of  the  Grand  Orient
with  expressions  of  the  utmost  indignation.  It  is  said  that  the
sword  of  the  Order,  one  of  the  insignia  of  the  Grand  Master,  was
broken  by  the  presiding  officer  and  cast  into  the  midst  of  the  As-
sembly, and  the  Grand  Mastership  was  declared  vacant.

In  1795  a  few  of  the  lodges  resumed  their  labors,  and  M.  Ro-
tiers  de  Montaleau  was  elected  Grand  Master.  He,  however,  re-
fused to  take  the  title,  and  assumed  that  of  "Grand  Venerable,"
with,  however,  all  the  prerogatives  and  functions  of  a  Grand
Master.

The  progress  of  Masonic  restoration  to  activity  was,  however,
very  slow.     In  1796  there  were  but  eighteen  lodges  in  active  opera-
tion in  the  whole  of  France,  namely,  three  at  Paris,  and  the  remain
ing  fifteen  in  the  Provinces.

In  May,  1799,  commissioners  who  had  been  appointed  by  the
^rand  Lodge  and  the  Grand  Orient  concluded  a  treatv  of  union  be-

:220  HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

tween  the  two  rival  bodies.  The  Grand  Lodge  in  this  treaty  agreed
CO  the  abolition  of  the  usage  it  had  always  hitherto  maintained  of
the  irremovability  of  Masters,  and  accepted  the  doctrine  of  the
Grand  Orient,  that  they  should  hereafter  be  elected  by  the  mem-
bers of  the  lodges.

On  June  22,  1799,  the  two  hitherto  rivals  met  in  a  United  As-
sembly, and  the  union  of  all  the  Freemasons  of  France  was  con-
summated, the  title  of  Grand  Orient  being  continued,  to  designate
the  supreme  Masonic  authority,  and  the  Grand  Lodge  ceased  to  exist

Thus  the  rivalry  which  had  existed  in  France  for  twenty-six
years  between  two  bodies,  each  claiming  to  be  the  head  of  the  Order,
was  terminated  by  an  amicable  union.

In  England  the  same  sort  of  rivalry  had  existed  between  the
Grand  Lodge  of  the  "Moderns"  and  that  of  the  "Ancients"  for  a
much  longer  time,  and  was  terminated  at  a  later  period  by  a  similar
union.

But  in  the  circumstances  connected  with  this  internecine  war
there  were  some  singular  coincidences  which  are  worthy  of  remark.

In  the  first  place,  the  original  disruption  was  based  in  each  king-
dom on  a  single  fundamental  point  of  difference.

In  England  it  was  on  the  recognition  of  a  Fourth  degree  in  the
ritual.  The  "  Moderns  "  contended  that  there  were  in  Speculative
Freemasonry  no  more  than  the  three  primitive  degrees  of  Ap-
prentice, Fellow-Craft,  and  Master.  The  "Ancients"  affirmed  that
for  the  completion  of  the  ritual  a  Fourth  degree,  which  they  called
the  "  Royal  Arch,"  was  essentially  necessary,  and  that  without  it  as
a  development  of  the  Third  degree,  the  system  of  Speculative  Ma-
sonry was  imperfect  and  worthless.

In  France  the  single  point  of  difference  between  the  two  bodies
was  that  of  the  irremovability  of  the  Masters,  of  lodges.  The  Grand
Lodge  had  from  the  very  beginning  of  its  authentic  history  granted
constitutions  to  certain  Masters  for  the  establishment  of  lodges
over  which  they  were  to  preside  by  a  perpetual  tenure  of  office,
that  is,  they  were  Masters  for  life.  Now  as  these  "  irremovable
Masters"  were  often,  nay  almost  always,  appointed  through  corrupt
motives,  and  as  the  lodges  thus  became,  in  a  way,  their  personal
property,  the  attempt  was  made  to  abolish  them  and  to  make  the
presidency  of  the  lodges  elective.

This  reform,  for  it  was  evidently  a  reform,  was  opposed  by  tlie

ORIGIN   OF  THE   GRAND   ORIENT   OF   FRANCE     1221

Grand  Lodge,  and  hence  those  who  were  in  favor  of  it  estabhshed
the  Grand  Orient,  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  out  their  views,  and
hence  one  of  its  first  acts  was  to  pass  a  decree  abolishing  the  usage
and  suppressing  the  irremovable  Masters.

There  were,  of  course,  supplementary  motives  for  the  schism,
but  this  was  undoubtedly  the  leading  one.

So  in  England  and  in  France  there  was  a  schism  founded  on  a
single  difference  of  opinion,  but  this  difference  as  it  existed  in  each
country  never  extended  into  the  other.  The  English  lodges  never
entertained  the  question  of  Masters  for  life,  because  from  the  organi-
zation of  the  Grand  Lodge  at  London,  those  officers  had  always  been
annually  elected,  and  this  doctrine  was  held  by  both  Grand  Lodges.

The  French  lodges  were  never  embarrassed  by  the  question  of  a
Fourth  degree,  which  was  the  bone  of  contention  in  England,
Though  there  were  Chapters  and  Councils  in  which  a  Royal  Arch
degree  under  various  modifications  had  existed  from  the  time  of  the
Chevalier  Ramsay,  these  bodies  had  no  legal  connection  with  or
recognition  by  either  the  Grand  Lodge  or  the  Grand  Orient,  both
of  which  maintained  the  doctrine  that  pure  Freemasonry  consisted
of  only  three  degrees.

Another  point  of  very  interesting  coincidence  in  the  contention
in  the  two  countries  was  the  following.

As  both  in  England  and  France  there  were,  during  the  contest,
two  bodies,  each  claiming  Masonic  sovereignty,  it  is  evident  that  iu
each,  one  of  the  bodies  must  have  been  irregular,  illegal,  and  schis-
matic, for  it  is  the  law  of  Freemasonry  that  the  sovereignty  can  not
be  divided.

In  England  the  schismatic  and  illegal  body  was  the  Grand
Lodge  of  the  "  Ancients,"  the  legal  and  constitutional  one  was  the
Grand  Lodge  of  the  "  Moderns."

In  France  the  schismatic  and  illegal  body  was  the  Grand  Orient,
which  had  been  surreptitiously  and  irregularly  formed  ;  the  legal  and
constitutional  body  was  the  Grand  Lodge.  Now  it  is  very  remark-
able that  when  in  each  country  the  dissensions  which  had  so  long
existed  were  brought  to  an  amicable  end  and  a  union  effected  in
the  settlement  of  the  principal  question  upon  which  the  schism  had
been  founded,  the  irregular  and  schismatic  gained  the  victory,  and  the
regular  body  was  compelled  to  accept  the  doctrine  which  it  had  so
long  and  so  pertmaciously  resisted.

1222  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Thus  in  England  the  Grand  Lodge  of  "Moderns"  recognized
the  Royal  Arch,  which  it  had  always  repudiated  as  an  innovation,
as  one  of  the  regular  degrees  of  ancient  Craft  Masonry.

In  France  the  Grand  Lodge  abandoned  the  doctrine  of  the
irremovability  of  Masters,  for  which  it  had  always  strenuously  con-
tended, and  accepted  the  theory  and  usage  of  the  Grand  Orient  that
the  office  of  Master  should  be  elective.

But  though  the  Grand  Lodge  and  the  Grand  Orient  had  been
merged  into  one  governing  body  of  the  French  Masons,  there  were
still  difficulties  presenting  themselves  in  the  effort  to  establish  a
unification  of  the  Masonic  system  in  the  kingdom.

The  abundance  of  high  degrees,  which  from  a  very  early  period
had  been  introduced  into  France,  had  been  conferred  in  Councils
and  Chapters,  which  had  never  been  recognized  by  either  the  Grand
Lodge  or  the  Grand  Orient,  but  which  had  always  acted  indepen-
dently of  either  authority.

Such  were  the  Council  of  Emperors  of  the  East  and  West,  the
General  Grand  Chapter,  and  finally  the  Supreme  Council  which
had  been  organized  by  Count  de  Grasse  Tily  in  1804,  under  the
authority  of  the  Supreme  Council  at  Charleston  in  the  State  of
South  Carolina.

In  1802  the  Grand  Orient  had  forbidden  its  lodges  to  confer
any  degrees  which  were  not  recognized  by  it.  This  caused  the
Scottish  lodges,  or  those  conferring  these  degrees,  to  establish  a  sep-
arate locality  in  the  boulevard  Poissonni^re.  Here  they  continued
in  defiance  of  the  decree  of  the  Grand  Orient  to  practice  the  Scot-
tish Rite.  Finally,  they  established  the  "  General  Scottish  Grand
Lodge  of  France."  The  existence  of  this  body  was  but  an  ephem-
eral one,  for  in  two  years  it  united  with  the  Grand  Orient.

Seeing  the  infatuation  of  the  French  Masons  for  the  decorations
and  the  mysteries  of  these  high  degrees,  the  Grand  Orient,  through
the  prudent  counsels  of  Rotiers  de  Montaleau,  the  Grand  Master,
that  it  might  put  an  end  to  all  divisions  in  reference  to  Masonic
Rites,  declared  that  it  would  unite  in  its  own  bosom  and  recognize
all  Rites  and  Degrees  whose  dogmas  and  principles  were  in  har-
mony with  the  general  system  of  the  Order.

Hence,  at  the  present  day  the  Grand  Orient  assumes  jurisdiction
over  all  the  degrees  of  Freemasonry  from  the  First  to  the  Thirty
third.

ORIGIN   OF   THE   GRAND   ORIENT   OF   FRANCE     1223

After  an  abortiv'e  attempt  to  effect  a  union  between  the  Grand
Orient  and  the  Supreme  Council  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Rite,  the  latter  body  assumed  and  still  maintains  jurisdiction  over
the  Rite  on  which  it  is  founded,  and  grants  constitutions  to  lodges
of  the  Symbolic  degrees.

Hence,  at  the  present  day  there  are  in  France  two  independent
authorities  in  Freemasonry — the  Grand  Orient,  which  claims  jurisdic-
tion over  all  Rites,  and  the  Supreme  Council,  which  confines  its
jurisdiction  to  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite.

Very^  recently  out  of  this  body  has  sprung  an  independent
Scottish  Grand  Lodge,  whose  existence  as  permanent  or  ephemeral
is  yet  to  be  determined.

But  these  matters  belong  to  the  contemporary  history  of  the
present  day,  and  as  our  investigations  are  properly  restricted  to  the
Origin  of  the  Grand  Orient,  which  subject  has  been  fully  discussed,
an  end  may  now  properly  be  given  to  the  present  chapter.

CHAPTER  XLVI

INTRODUCTION    OF    FREEMASONRY    INTO    THE    NORTH    AMERICAN
COLONIES

HE  intercourse  of  the  English  colonies  with  the
mother  country  was  continuous,  and,  considering
the  condition  of  navigation,  conducted  entirely
by  sailing-vessels,  was  frequent.  The  colonists
brought  with  them,  in  their  immigration  to  the
new  country,  the  language,  the  laws,  and  the
customs  of  their  ancestors.  The  pc-sonal  and
political  relations  existing  between  the  people  on  either  side  of  the
Atlantic  were  very  intimate,  and  the  wide  ocean  formed  no  sufficient
barrier  to  the  introduction  among  the  Americans  of  new  discoveries
and  inventions,  of  new  styles  of  living  or  of  new  trains  of  thought,
which,  springing  up  in  England,  were  in  a  brief  course  of  time
brought  over  by  visitors  or  by  new  settlers  to  the  growing  colonies.
It  is  not,  therefore,  to  be  doubted  that  very  soon  after  the  estab-
lishment of  Speculative  Freemasonry  in  London,  by  the  organization
of  a  Grand  Lodge,  in  171 7,  persons  who  had  been  initiated  in  the
London  lodges  came  over  to  America  and  brought  with  them  the
principles  of  the  new  system  as  it  was  just  beginning  to  be  taught
at  home.

At  whatever  precise  date  we  may  place  the  legal  establishment
of  the  first  lodge  in  America,  it  is  very  certain,  from  the  testimony
of  authentic  public  documents,  that  there  was  no  lack  of  Freema-
sons in  America  not  very  long  after  the  establishment  of  the  system
in  England  and  anterior  to  the  known  legal  organization  of  any
lodge  in  the  country.

Of  course,  it  is  understood  that  many  of  these  Freemasons  had

been  initiated  in  England,  either  while  on  a  temporary  visit  to  that

country,  if  they  were  residents  of  the  colonies,  or,  if  they  were  recent

immigrants,  then  before  they  left  their  old  home  for  their  new  one.

This  is  very  plain ;  nothing  could  be  more  natural  than  that  \

FREEMASONRY   IN   NORTH   AMERICAN   COLONIES  122J

colonist  going  "  home,"  as  England  was  affectionately  styled,  should
nave  availed  himself  of  the  opportunity  afforded  by  his  visit,  to  unite
with  a  society  enticing  by  its  mystic  character  and  its  great  pop-
ularity, and  that  among  the  emigrants  who  were  daily  crossing  the
ocean,  to  make  their  homes  in  the  new  country,  there  should  have
oeen  many  who  were  members  of  that  society.

But  the  question  has  never  yet  been  mooted  whether  some  per-
sons had  not  been  initiated  in  America  before  any  deputation  had
oeen  issued  by  a  Grand  Master  of  England  for  the  organization  of
a  regular  lodge,  under  the  constitutions  adopted  at  London  in  1723.

Yet  this  is  a  very  interesting  question,  and  the  fact  that  it  is  a
novel  one  never  having  before  been  entertained,  makes  it  still  more
interesting.

I  may  premise  the  investigation  into  which  I  am  about  to  enter,
by  saying  that  whether  the  fact  be  proved  or  not,  its  occurrence  is
by  no  means  impossible.

We  have  seen  that  lodges  were  established  in  France  as  early  as
1 72 1,  eleven  years  before  the  constitution  of  a  regular  lodge  by  the
Grand  Lodge  at  London.  I  have  already  said  that  these  lodges
were  organized  without  a  Warrant,  by  certain  Freemasons  from
England,  who  had  exercised  the  ancient  privilege  of  the  Operatives
to  open  lodges  and  make  Masons  without  a  Warrant,  whenever  a
competent  number  were  present.  This  privilege  had  been  surren-
dered in  1 71 7  by  the  four  London  Lodges  to  the  newly  erected
Grand  Lodge,  but  it  was  for  some  time  after  asserted  occasionally.
It  was  in  France,  may  it  not  also  have  been  in  America  ?

The  first  Deputation  granted  from  England  for  the  colonies  was
granted  by  the  Duke  of  Norfolk  to  Daniel  Co.xe,  Esq.,  of  New
Jersey.  The  date  of  this  Deputation  is  June  5,  1730.  It  appoints
him  Provincial  Grand  Master  of  New  York,  New  Jersey,  and
Pennsylvania,  and  it  empowers  him  to  constitute  lodges.

While  there  is  the  indisputable  evidence  of  the  original  Deputa-
tion still  preserved  in  the  Archives  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,
as  well  as  the  printed  List  of  Deputations  published  by  Anderson  in
the  Second  edition  of  the  Book  of  Constitutions,  and  many  other
irrefragable  proofs  that  the  Deputation  was  granted  to  Coxe  in
June,  1730,  there  is  not  the  slightest  testimony  of  any  kind,  even
traditional,  that  any  similar  Deputation  can  have  been  previousiy
granted  to  any  person  residing  in  the  American  Colonies.

X226  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

In  other  words,  the  proof  is  very  satisfactory  that  previous  to
the  latter  half  of  the  year  1 730'  there  was  no  legal  authority  in  thi
colonies  to  constitute  lodges  according  to  the  English  regulation
adopted  in  171 7.

If,  then,  there  were  any  lodges  which  met  in  the  colonies  pre-
vious to  that  date,  they  must  have  been  lodges  which  derived  their
authority  for  meeting  from  the  old  Operative  usage,  which  was
that  a  sufficient  number  of  Masons  met  together  were  empowered
to  make  Masons  and  to  practice  the  rites  of  Masonry  without  a
Warrant  of  Constitution.

It  has  now  been  conceded  that  the  first  constitutional  lodge  of
Freemasons  acting  under  the  authority  of  a  Warrant  was  established
in  Philadelphia  in  the  latter  part  of  the  year  1730.  The  evidence
of  this  will  be  hereafter  given  in  its  proper  place.

But  there  are  also  proofs  that  one  or  more  lodges  were  in  eX'
istence  in  Philadelphia  before  the  time  of  the  reception  by  Coxe  of
the  Deputation  which  had  been  granted  to  him  by  the  Duke  of
Norfolk.

The  first  of  these  proofs  is  furnished  by  the  celebrated  Dr.  Ben-
jamin Franklin,  who  was  in  1 730  the  Printer  and  also  the  Editor  of
a  paper  published  in  Philadelphia  with  the  title  of  the  Pennsylvania
Gazette.

In  No.  108  of  that  paper,  published  on  Decembers,  1730,  is  the
following  article  :  "  As  there  are  several  lodges  of  Free  Masons
erected  in  this  Province,  and  people  have  lately  been  much  amused
with  conjectures  concerning  them,  we  think  the  following  account
of  Free  Masonr}^  from  London,  will  not  be  unacceptable  to  our
readers."

Now  Coxe's  Deputation  was  only  issued  in  June  of  that  year.
It  could  hardly  have  taken  less  than  two  or  three  months  for  it  to
pass  from  the  Grand  Secretary's  office  in  London  into  the  hands  of
Bro.  Coxe  in  New  Jersey.  Between  the  time  of  his  receiving  it  and
the  publication  of  the  article  just  cited  from  Franklin's  Gazette^
the  interv^al  would  be  hardly  long  enough  to  enable  Coxe  to  organ-
ize and  constitute  several  lodges.

'  The  Deputation  having  been  issued  at  London,  June  5,  1730,  allowing  for  necessary
delays  and  the  length  of  the  passage  across  the  ocean  at  that  time,  it  could  hardly  have
reached  Philadelphia  before  the  end  of  August  or  more  probably  September  in  the  samfc
year.

FREEMASONRY   IN   NORTH   AMERICAN   COLONIES   1227

We  know  from  the  records  that  there  was  one  lodge  constituted
in  1730,  but  we  have  no  evidence  of  the  constitution  in  that  year  of
any  others,  either  by  Coxe  as  Provincial  Grand  Master  or  by  any
brother  appointed  by  him  as  his  Deputy.

And  yet  Franklin  says  (and  he  was  neither  a  truthless  nor
a  careless  writer)  that  there  were  several  lodges  at  that  time  in  the
Province  of  Pennsylvania.

But  as  several  includes  more  than  one,  where  did  the  additional
lodges  come  from  ?  They  were  not  constituted  by  Co.xe  nor  by
his  authority,  at  least  we  have  no  knowledge  of  any  such  constitu-
tion.

It  is  therefore  not  unlikely  that  these  lodges  were  like  the  first
lodges  in  France,  formed  by  what  the  Freemasons  had  been  taught
was  their  prescriptive  right,  and  who,  without  a  Warrant,  had  before
the  coming  of  the  Deputation  assembled  together  in  competent
number  and  practiced  the  rites  of  Masonry.

But  there  is  something  more  than  probable  conjecture  to  sup-
port this  theory.  A  letter  was  written  in  1754  by  Henry  Bell,
at  that  time  residing  in  the  town  of  Lancaster  (Pennsylvania),  to
Dr.  Thomas  Cadwallader  of  Philadelphia,  in  which  he  makes  the
positive  statement  from  his  own  knowledge  and  participation  in  the
circumstance  that  there  actually  was  in  1730,  perhaps  before,  at
least  one  lodge  formed  by  prescriptive  right  without  a  Warrant.

Bro.  Bell's  letter,  containing  this  important  historical  statement,
was  exhibited  in  the  office  of  the  Grand  Secretary  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Pennsylvania  in  the  year  1772,  A  copy  of  it  made  at
that  time  was  published  in  the  Early  History  and  Constitutions  of
the  Grand  Lodge  and  is  as  follows  :

"As  you  well  know,  I  was  one  of  the  originators  of  the  first  Ma-
sonic lodge  in  Philadelphia.  A  party  of  us  used  to  meet  at  the  Tun
Tavern,  in  Water  street,  and  sometimes  opened  a  lodge  there.  Once
in  the  fall  of  1 730  we  formed  a  design  of  obtaining  a  charter  for  a
regular  lodge,  and  made  application  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng«
land  for  one,  but  before  receiving  it,  we  heard  that  Daniel  Coxe  of
New  Jersey  had  been  appointed  by  that  Grand  Lodge  as  Provincial
Grand  Master  of  New  York,  New  Jersey,  and  Pennsylvania.  We
therefore  made  application  to  him,  and  our  request  was  granted."

It  thus  appears  from  the  testimony  of  one  engaged  in  the  trans-
action, that  for  some  time  previous  to  any  authority  existing   id

,22«  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

America  for  granting  Warrants,  a  lodge  had  been  opened  in  Phila-
delphia, without  the  sanction  of  such  Warrant  and  of  course  by  the
old  prescriptive  right,  which  had  always  prevailed  as  the  law  of
Freemasonry,  until  the  right  was  surrendered  in  171 7  by  the  four
Lodges  which  united  in  forming  the  Grand  Lodge  at  London.

Bro.  Clifford  P.  MacCalla,  who  has  been  a  most  indefatigable
and  successful  explorer  of  old  documents  connected  with  the  early
history  of  Freemasonry  in  Pennsylvania,  published  in  his  valuable
paper,  the  Key  Stone  (December  22,  1877),  an  important  and  in-
teresting letter  which  furnishes  the  evidence  that  there  were  Free-
masons in  Philadelphia  one  year  at  least  before  the  severance  of  the
Speculative  from  the  Operative  element,  and  the  organization  of  the
Grand  Lodge  at  London.

This  letter  is  dated  "  March  10,  171 5,"'  and  was  written  by  John
Moore,  the  King's  collector  at  the  port  of  Philadelphia,  and  ad-
dressed to  James  Sandilands,  Esq.,  of  Chester,  Penn.

The  letter  is  an  official  one,  communicating  the  fact  that  he
had  received  from  England  a  bell  and  some  altar  furniture,  intended
for  a  church  at  Chester,  and  requesting  to  know  how  they  were  to
be  delivered.  But  this  business  matter  having  been  dismissed,  the
letter  concludes  with  the  following  remarkable  passage :

"  Ye  winter  has  been  very  long  and  dull,  and  we  have  had  no
mirth  or  pleasure  except  a  few  evenings  spent  in  festivity  with  my
Masonic  Brethren."

Since  the  authenticity  of  this  letter  is  indisputable,*  it  is  of  great
historical  importance.  It  shows  without  a  doubt  that  in  America,
as  in  England  and  in  Scotland,  there  were  Freemasons,  who  lived
under  the  old  partly  Operative  and  partly  Speculative  regime  an-
terior to  what  has  been  called  the  "  Revival,"  which  took  pla^-e  in

•Although  the  double  reference,  as  1715-16,  was  generally  affixed  to  dates  in  the
first  three  months  of  the  year,  to  indicate  the  old  and  the  new  styles,  it  is  very  probable
that  by  "March  10,  1715,"  the  writer  meant  what  we  should  now  write  as  "  March  10,
1716."

*Bro.  MacCalla  states  that  at  the  time  of  publication  the  letter  was  in  the  possession
of  Bro.  Horace  W.  Smith,  the  great-grandson  of  the  Rev.  Dr.  William  Smith,  the  Secre-
tary of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania;  the  grandson  of  Bro.  William  Moore  Smith,
Grand  Master  of  Pennsylvania,  and  the  son  of  Richard  Penn  Smith  of  Lodge  No.  72  in
Philadelphia,  and  that  the  granddaughter  of  John  Moore,  the  writer  of  the  latter,  inter-
married with  the  Rev.  Dr.  Smith,  the  great-grandfather  of  its  present  custodian.  The
letter  is  thus  traced  through  a  reputable  descent,  which  gives  it  all  needful  color  ol
authenticity.

FREEMASONRY    IN    NORTH   AMERICAN  COLONIES   1229

London  in  1 71 7,  when  the  Speculative  began  to  be  wholly  dissevered
from  the  Operative  system.

In  England  and  Scotland  we  know  that  these  Freemasons  were
united  in  lodges,  which  worked  without  the  sanction  of  a  Warrant
of  Constitution,  which  was  a  new  regulation  adopted  for  the  first
time  at  the  time  of  the  so-called  Revival.  They  were  organized,  as
has  been  already  said,  by  a  prescriptive  right  by  which  a  competent
number  of  Freemasons  were  always  authorized  to  assemble  and  per-
form the  rites  of  Masonry.

There  is,  it  is  true,  no  direct  evidence  that  the  Freemasons  re-
ferred to  in  the  letter  of  Bro.  Moore  pursued  the  same  plan  in
1 715,  and  "spent  their  evenings  in  festivity"  in  an  organized
lodge.  But  it  is  very  probable  that  such  was  the  fact.  There  is
no  reason  why,  if  there  were  a  sufficient  number  of  Freemasons
then  living  in  Philadelphia,  and  who  were  in  the  habit,  as  the  letter
indicates,  of  meeting  for  festive  purposes,  they  should  not  have  fol-
lowed the  custom  which  prevailed  "  at  home,"  and  for  better  regu-
larity and  discipline  in  their  meetings  have  formed  themselves  into  a
lodge.

At  all  events,  we  have  the  positive  proof  that  fifteen  years  later
there  was  a  lodge  which  met  in  Philadelphia  in  1 730  and  for  some
time  before,  which  acted  without  a  Warrant,  until  the  latter  part  of
that  year,  when  it  asked  for  and  received  one  from  Coxe,  the  Pro-
vincial Grand  Master.

We  have  no  such  direct  proof  of  the  existence  in  other  parts  of
the  continent  of  lodges  held  by  "  prescriptive  right,"  but  there  are
some  circumstances  that  lead  us  to  believe  that  such  was  sometimes
the  case.

In  1736  the  brethren  of  Portsmouth  in  New  Hampshire  applied
to  Henry  Price  for  a  charter.  The  petition  is  at  least  singular  in  its
phraseology.  It  is  subscribed  by  "persons  of  the  holy  and  exqui-
site Lodge  of  St.  John,"  as  if  there  were  already  a  lodge  existing
under  that  title,  and  in  asking  for  a  "  Deputation  and  power  to  hold
a  lodge  according  to  order  as  is  and  has  been  granted  to  faithful
Brothers  in  all  parts  of  the  World  ; "  and  in  asking  for  the  Deputa-
tion, they  say,  "  we  have  our  constitutions,  both  in  print  and  manu-
script, as  good  and  as  ancient  as  any  that  England  can  afford."*

*  See  the  petition  in  Bro.  Gardiner's  able  report  in  the  "  Transactions  of  the  Crrand

Lodge  of  Massachusetts,"  anno  1 871,  p.  307.

I230  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Now,  this  may  mean  either  that  the  Portsmouth  brethren  were
in  possession  of  rituals  and  other  necessary  books  to  use  in  forming
a  lodge  ;  or  it  may  mean  that  they  were  already  working  and  had
been  working  as  a  lodge  by  prescriptive  right  and  now  wanted  to
be  duly  regularized  under  the  new  system  which  Price  had  just  re-
ceived from  England.     It  is  an  open  question.

The  colonies  into  which  Freemasonry  under  the  new  system  of
the  Revival  was  first  introduced  were  Pennsylvania,  Massachusetts,
South  Carolina,  and  Georgia.

There  is  no  positive  evidence  that  any  lodges  existed  under  the
old  Operative  System,  in  either  Massachusetts  or  South  Carolina.
In  the  former  Price  opened  his  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  in  1733,
and  in  such  of  the  records  as  have  come  to  light  there  is  no  refer-
ence to  any  previous  meeting  of  the  Masons.

In  South  Carolina  Hammerton  opened  a  lodge  at  Charleston  in
October,  1736,  under  a  Warrant  granted  by  the  Grand  Master,  Lord
Weymouth.  There  is  no  traditional  or  other  evidence  that  any
lodge  of  Masons  had  ever  met  in  the  Province  before  that  date.

In  Georgia  regular  Freemasonry  under  the  Grand  Lodge  of
1 71 7  was  introduced  in  1736  when  Solomon's  Lodge  at  Savannah
was  opened  under  sanction  of  a  Warrant  from  Lord  Weymouth.
But  the  late  Bro.  W.  S.  Rockwell,  in  his  Ahiman  Rezon  of  Georgia,
published  in  1859,  says  that  "  many  still  living  in  Savannah  have
heard  from  older  Brethren  who  have  passed  to  that  'undiscovered
country  from  whose  bourne  no  traveller  returns,'  that  a  Lodge  was
at  work  in  that  city  before  Solomon's  Lodge  No.  i  had  an  ex-
istence." ^

If  there  were  any  such  lodge,  it  must  have  been  one  which
worked  under  the  "  prescriptive  right  "  or  "  immemorial  usage  "  of
the  olden  time.

In  Pennsylvania  we  have  already  seen  that  at  least  one  such
lodge  was  in  existence  in  1730  before  Coxe  had  received  his  au-
thority as  Provincial  Grand  Master.  And  there  is  also  evidence
that  Freemasons  were  in  the  habit  of  meeting  in  Philadelphia  for
convivial  purposes  at  least  two  years  before  the  organization  of  the
Grand  Lodge  at  London.

Now  u  is  true  that  we  have  no  evidence  of  the  existence  of  these

'  Rockwell,  "  Ahiman  Rezon  oT  Georgia,"  1859,  4th  edition,  p.  323.

NEW  LODGE  ^:

THE    MOTIIICR    L()D(iE    OF   KILWINNING

FREEMASONRY    IN   NORTH   AMERICAN   COLONIES  1231

independent  lodges  anywhere  in  the  colonies  outside  of  Pennsyl-
vania, nor  any  intimation  of  their  existence,  except  the  traditional  re-
port, mentioned  by  Rockwell,  that  a  lodge  had  been  in  operation  in
Savannah  before  the  Constitution  of  Solomon's  Lodge  and  the  sus-
picious phraseology  of  the  petition  for  a  lodge  at  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,
which  might  have  emanated  from  a  number  of  Masons  who  either
were  desirous  of  forming  a  new  lodge,  or  who  already  working  as  a
lodge  by  the  old  prescriptive  right,  wished  to  be  regularized  under
the  new  system.

But  notwithstanding  this  deficiency  of  positive  evidence,  does
not  all  this  show  that  there  were  lodges  of  this  character  in  various
parts  of  the  colonies  long  before  the  issuing  of  Warrants  by  the
London  Grand  Lodge  ?  That  is  to  say,  we  have  a  right  to  suppose
that  Freemasonry  was  first  established  in  this  country  by  the  volun-
tary association  of  a  certain  number  of  Masons  together  without  the
sanction  of  a  Warrant.  This  was  the  rule  in  England  previous  to
the  year  171 7,  when  this  right  of  meeting  by  what  was  termed  "  im-
memorial usage  "  was  surrendered  to  the  Grand  Lodge  by  the  four
Lodges  in  London.

But  the  right  and  the  practice  was  not  at  once  abandoned  every-
where. Some  lodges  in  the  rural  districts  of  England  continued  to
act  without  Warrants  for  a  few  years,  and  lodges  under  the  old  priv-
ileges were  established  in  France,  apparently  by  the  Jacobites  or
adherents  of  the  House  of  Stuart.

There  is  no  reason  therefore  to  doubt  that  the  same  custom  pre-
vailed to  some  extent  in  the  American  Colonies.  During  the  constant
intercourse  which  was  maintained  between  the  Mother-country  and
its  colonies,  many  Freemasons  would  be  constantly  repairing  to
them,  either  as  visitors,  as  emigrants,  or  as  officers  of  the  parent
government.

The  Freemasonry  that  they  brought  with  them  they  would  nat-
urally desire  to  practice  in  the  new  country  into  which  they  had
come.  Hence  it  is  probable  that  they  voluntarily  associated  in
lodges  anc'  practiced  the  rites  of  the  Institution  in  other  parts  of  the
colonies,  as  we  now  know  that  they  did  in  Philadelphia  in  1715.

The  negative  evidence  that  there  are  no  minutes  or  records  ex-
tant of  the  meetings  of  such  lodges  is  not  of  the  least  value.  It  is
not  certain  that  they  kept  any  records,  or  if  they  did,  it  is  natural
that  in  the  lapse  of  time  and  with  the  intervention  of  so  many  stir-

1232

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

ring  events,  these  records  may  have  been  lost.  There  are  very  ievr
lodges  of  any  antiquity,  now  existing  in  this  country,  whose  earliest
records  have  been  preserved.

So  the  absence  of  records  is  no  proof  that  such  unwarranted
lodges  did  not  exist  at  an  early  period  in  this  country,  and  the  in-
disputable fact  attested  by  documentary  proof  that  one  or  more  did
exist  at  that  early  period  in  Penns3dvania,  gives  strong  presumption
to  the  hypothesis  that  similar  lodges  existed  in  some  of  the  other
colonies.

I  advance  therefore  the  following  theory  in  reference  to  the
introduction  of  Freemasonry  into  the  American  Colonies.  I  do  not
deny  that  it  is,  with  the  exception  of  the  colony  of  Pennsylvania,  a
mere  hypothesis,  but  an  hypothesis  is  not  necessarily  false  nor  un-
tenable because  the  proofs  of  it  are  not  as  strong  as  the  enquirer
might  desire.

It  can  not  be  doubted  or  denied  that  the  Masonic  spirit  which
was  prevailing  in  England  in  the  early  part  of  the  i8th  century,  and
which  led  in  171 7  to  the  establishment  of  a  Speculative  Grand
Lodge  in  London  was  carried  into  the  remotest  part  of  the  British
empire  by  emigrants  and  settlers  in  the  colonies  who  preserved  in
their  new  home  the  manners  and  customs,  the  habits  and  associa-
tions, which  had  distinguished  them  in  their  old  one.

Now  as  lodges  existed  in  London  and  other  parts  of  England
and  had  long  existed,  organized  under  the  old  law  of  the  Craft
ivhich  authorized  the  congregation  of  Masons  for  Masonic  purposes,
ivithout  the  sanction  of  a  Warrant,  we  may  reasonably  suppose  that
Freemasons  coming  from  England  into  the  colonies,  some  of  whom
had  probably  been  members  of  such  lodges  at  home,  would  con-
tinue the  custom  in  the  new  country  into  which  they  had  come
ind  there  institute  similar  lodges.

At  first  the  brethren  may  have  met  together  for  the  purpose  of
preserving  their  Masonic  recollections  and  of  renewing  the  pleasures
of  their  Masonic  re-unions  at  home.  Such  appears  to  have  been
the  case  with  the  brethren  referred  to  by  Bro.  Moore,  who  met  in
Philadelphia  in  171 5.  As  the  Speculative  Grand  Lodge  was  not
organized  in  London  until  two  years  afterward,  these  Masons  must
have  come  out  of  the  old  Operative  lodges.

At  first,  these  Masons  may  have  been  content  to  meet  together
without  proceeding  to  make  initiations.      But  there  was  no  law  to

FREEMASONRY    IN   AMERICAN   COLONIES  1233

prevent  their  doing  so,  and  I  see  no  reason  why  they  should  not
have  proceeded  to  secure  the  prosperity  of  the  Institution  by  an  in-
crease of  its  numbers.

Hence,  I  think  that  lodges  must  have  been  in  existence  in  the
colonies  long  before  the  granting  of  a  Deputation  to  Coxe.  There
are  no  records  now  extant  of  the  meetings  of  any  such  lodges,  but
as  I  have  already  said,  this  was  not  to  be  expected,  and  the  fact
that  no  such  records  can  now  be  found,  is  not  the  slightest  evidence
that  they  never  existed.

Certainly  we  know  from  authentic  testimony,  which  has  already
been  cited,  that  such  a  lodge  was  in  existence  and  in  operation  in
Philadelphia  in  1730,  and  we  know  not  how  many  years  before,
which  applied  to  Daniel  Coxe,  when  his  Deputation  as  Provincial
Grand  Master  arrived,  and  received  from  him  authority  to  continue
their  labors  as  a  regular  lodge.

If  this  occurred  in  Pennsylvania,  why  should  not  the  like  have
occurred  in  other  colonies  ?  Why  should  not  there  have  been
lodges  thus  voluntarily  formed,  in  Massachusetts  before  the  Depu-
tation of  Price,  in  South  Carolina  before  that  of  Hammerton,  or  in
Georgia  before  that  of  Lacy  ?

To  say  that  there  are  no  records  of  any  such  lodges  is  no
answer  to  the  question.  The  early  records  of  Freemasonry,  ever}'-
where,  have  been  too  poorly  kept  and  too  illy  preserved  to  author-
ize us  to  found  any  argument  on  their  absence.  Horace  wisely
tells  us  that  many  heroes  perished  before  Agamemnon,  unwept  and
unsung,  because  there  was  no  poet  to  record  their  deeds.

The  conclusion  to  which  I  arrive  by  this  course  of  reasoning  is,
then,  that  Freemasonry  was  introduced  into  the  colonies  of  North
America  at  a  very  early  period  in  the  i8th  century,  by  means  of
officers  of  the  parent  government,  or  emigrants  intending  to  be
future  permanent  residents.   '

These  Freemasons  soon  established  lodges  in  various  places,
which  thev  worked  without  the  sanction  of  Warrants,  and  under  the
regulation  which  existed  in  England  at  the  time  when  they  left  it
At  this  period  Warrants  were  unknown  and  lodges  met  whenevei
and  wherever  a  competent  number  of  brethren  thought  projK'r  to
establish  one.

It  was  in  this  way  that  the  love  of  Freemasonry  was  preserved
*«  these  distant  regions,  and  when    at  length  the  new  system   of

1234  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

warranting  lodges  which  had  been  inaugurated  in  171 7  by  the  foui
old  Lodges  in  London  began  to  be  understood  and  Deputations
for  Provincial  Grand  Lodges  and  Provincial  Grand  Masterships  be-
gan to  be  sent  over  from  the  parent  country,  these  primitive,  unwar-
ranted lodges  ceased  to  exist  and  their  members  took  out  Warrants
which  regularized  them.

They  had  performed  their  mission.  They  had  introduced  Free-
masonry into  America.  They  had  fostered  it,  with  the  best  of  their
feeble  means.  They  had  planted  the  seed,  and  the  nursing  of  the
plant  and  the  gathering  of  the  crop  they  were  willing  should  be  left
to  those  who  came  after  them.

The  new  system  brought  by  the  various  Deputations  from  Eng-
land resulted  in  the  introduction  of  the  regulations  which  had  been
adopted  by  the  English  Grand  Lodge.  Provincial  Grand  Lodges
were  organized  and  no  lodge  was  instituted  except  under  the  sanc-
tion of  a  Warrant.

From  this  tim.e  Freemasonry  in  the  colonies  begins  to  be
purely  historical,  and  in  that  light  its  early  history  is  now  to  be
considered.

CHAPTER  XLVII

THE    EARLY    GRAND    LODGE   WARRANTS

m^^^^

3d

If  ^lil

ROM  what  has  been  said  in  the  immediately  pre»
ceding  chapter  it  appears  that  we  may  divide
the  narrative  of  the  introduction  of  Freemasonry
into  the  Colonies  of  North  America  into  two
distinct  eras,  which,  in  imitation  of  the  archaeol-
ogists, we  might  almost  call  the  pre-historic  and
the  post-historic  eras  of  American  Speculative
Freemasonry.  The  pre-historic  era  embraces  that  period  of  time
which  is  included  between  the  first  immigration  of  settlers  from
Britain  into  the  colonies  and  the  granting  of  the  first  Deputation
for  a  Provincial  Grand  Lodge.  More  strictly,  it  would  be  confinea
to  the  first  thirty  years  of  the  i8th  century.

Freemasonry  was  not,  I  think,  in  a  condition,  before  the  opening
of  the  1 8th  century,  to  inspire  its  disciples  with  an  enthusiasm  which
would  lead  to  the  propagation  of  the  Order  and  the  establishment
of  lodges  in  a  new  country.

Under  the  slow  but  persevering  efforts  of  Speculative  members
of  the  Operative  lodges,  Freemasonry  was  gradually  assuming  a
new  character.  The  old  Operative  element  was  beginning  to  die
off.  It  finally  "gave  up  the  ghost"  about  the  year  1723,  when  the
purely  Speculative  became  not  only  the  predominating  but  actually
the  sole  element  of  the  Institution.

It  was  while  this  transition  was  going  on  that  many  Freemasons,
who  were  initiated  under  the  old  system  before  171 7,  and  under  the
new  one  after  that  date,  emigrated  into  the  American  Colonies  and
carried  with  them  their  attachment  for  the  Institution  which  they
had  acquired  at  home.

If  any  lodges  were  established  before  171 7,  the  act  must  have
been  a  spontaneous  one  under  the  usage,  which  is  described  by  Pres-
ton, by  which  a  competent  number  of  Masons  were  permitted  to
assemble  for  Masonic  work  without  the  sanction  of  a  Warrant  ot

123s

1230  HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Constitution,  a  thing  which  was  unknown  to  the  Craft  until  after
the  adoption  of  a  special  regulation  in  171 7.

After  that  year  it  is  true  that  ever}''  regular  lodge  was  required
to  be  sanctioned  and  authorized  by  a  Warrant  from  the  Grand
Lodge,  and  this  regulation,  which  ought  rather  to  be  called  a  com-
promise between  the  four  old  Lodges,  and  the  new  Grand  Lodge
was  generally  obeyed  in  London,  where  we  have  no  evidence  that
any  lodges  were  formed  after  1717  without  the  sanction  of  a  War-
rant of  Constitution.

But  such  was  not  the  case  at  that  early  period  in  other  countries
where  the  principles  of  English  Speculative  Freemasonry  were
carried  by  immigrants.  W^e  know  that  English  lodges  were  formed
in  France  before  1712  in  the  old,  which  had  now  become  an  irregu-
lar, manner.

The  same  thing  occurred  in  the  American  Colonies  before  1 730.
Mention  has  been  already  made,  in  the  preceding  chapter,  of  an  as-
sembly of  Masons  in  Philadelphia  in  1716,  and  it  has  also  been
stated  in  that  chapter,  that  a  lodge  without  a  Warrant  was  held  in
the  same  city  in  1 730  and  probably  for  some  years  previously.

There  is  an  excuse  for  this,  if  an  excuse  be  needed,  in  the  diffi-
culty there  was  of  obtaining  a  Warrant  from  England.  Again  the
old  regulation  or  custom  was  abrogated,  only  for  those  lodges  within
the  •*  bills  of  mortality,"  that  is  to  say,  in  the  city  of  London  and  its
purlieus.

"  It  admits  of  little  doubt,"  says  Bro.  Gould,  "  that  in  its  incep-
tion the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  was  intended  merely  as  a  govern-
ing body  for  the  Masons  of  the  Metropolis."'

Hence  we  find  in  the  Minutes  of  the  Grand  Lodge  under  the
date  of  November  25,  1723,  the  declaration  or  agreement,  "That
no  new  lodge  in  or  near  London,  without  it  be  regularly  consti-
tuted, be  countenanced  by  the  Grand  Lodge,  or  the  Master  or  War-
dens admitted  to  the  Grand  Lodge."

The  earlier  records  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  contained  in  Anderson's
setond  edition,  show  in  other  places  very  plain  indications  that  the
regulation  which  required  a  Warrant  of  Constitution  was  not  in-
tended to  apply  to  lodges  outside  of  London.

But  the  fact  is,  that  even  in  England,  the  regulations  were  not

»  "  Four  Old  Lodges,"  p.  19.

THE   EARLY   GRAND   LODGE    WARRANTS  1237

at  that  period  strictly  enforced.  "The  general  laws  of  Masonry,
however,"  says  Dr.  Oliver,  "  were  but  loosely  administered."  It  is
not  to  be  supposed  that  a  more  implicit  obedience  to  them  was  paid
in  distant  parts  of  the  empire.

The  Grand  Lodge  was  too  young  and  too  weak  to  extend  the
influence  of  its  newly  created  authority  bevcud  the  narrow  limits  of
its  domestic  territory.

CriAFTER  XLVIII

ORIGIN   OF   THE    ROYAL    ARCH

O  event  in  the  history  of  Speculative  Freemasonry
has  had  so  important  an  influence  upon  its  de-
velopment, as  a  system  of  symbolism,  as  the
invention  of  the  Royal  Arch  degree  and  its  in-
troduction into  the  Masonic  ritual.

It  is  evident  that  the  limitation  of  tne  sys-
tem to  three  degrees,  terminating  in  the  "  Mas-
ter's part,"  left  the  cycle  of  symbolism  in  as  incomplete  a  condition
as  would  be  a  novel  with  the  last  chapter  unwritten.

The  ritual,  as  it  was  devised  and  presented  to  the  Craft  in  the
beginning  of  the  i8th  century,  when  the  Speculative  element  was
wholly  dissevered  from  the  Operative,  was  an  immature  conception
of  its  inventors,  and  was  marked  by  the  imperfections  and  deficicp  ■
cies  which  are  always  attendant  on  immaturity.

Accepting  the  meagre  ritual,  principally  intended  to  embody
merely  methods  of  recognition,  Desaguliers  and  his  collaborators
had  gradually  extended  it,  first  by  the  development  of  the  one  sim-
ple degree,  which  had  been  common  to  the  whole  body  of  the  Craft,
into  two  and  finally  into  three  degrees.

Here,  unfortunately,  they  desisted  from  further  labors  in  the
construction  of  a  ritual.  The  experiment  had  so  far  been  success-
ful. It  had  given  renewed  vitality  to  an  institution  which  had  long
languished ;  it  had  excited  the  curiosity  and  gained  the  support  of
many  who  had  hitherto  felt  no  interest  in  the  ruder  system  of  the
Operative  lodges ;  and  it  had  placed  the  society  upon  a  much  higher
plane  than  that  which  it  formerly  occupied  before  the  absolute  dis-
severance of  the  two  elements  of  which  it  was  composed.

It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  the  experiment  of  fabricating  a
ritual  so  prudently  begun,  and  which  was  so  successful  in  its  results,
had  not  been  continued,  and  the  Third  degree  been  supplemented  by
a  Fourth  that  should  have  given  perfection  to  the  symbolic  scheme.

1333

ORIGIN   OF   THE   ROYAL  ARCH  1239

What  was  precisely  the  ritual  of  the  Master's  degree  as  fabricated
by  Desaguliers,  Payne,  Anderson,  and  their  contemporaries,  it  is  im-
possible for  us  to  know.  The  knowledge  of  facts  which  has  been
only  orally  transmitted  are  often  lost  in  the  lapse  of  time  ;  tradition
is  scarcely  ever  unchanged  ;  and  when  there  is  no  written  record  to
guide  our  inquiries,  we  necessarily  grope  in  the  dark.

The  Masonic  system  of  symbolism  as  now  constituted  presents
us  with  a  triple  series  of  antagonisms — that  of  ignorance  and
knowledge ;  that  of  darkness  and  light ;  and  that  of  loss  and  re-
covery.

With  the  first  and  second  of  these  antagonisms  we  have  nothing
here  to  do.  It  is  the  last  only  that  interests  us  in  the  present
connection.

The  antagonism  of  loss  and  recovery,  when  it  is  symbolized  by
death  and  resurrection — by  the  ending  of  the  present  and  the  begin-
ning of  the  future  life,  is  perfectly  represented  in  the  Master's  de-
gree. But  when  it  refers  to  the  doctrine  of  Divine  Truth  symbol-
ized by  the  Word,  which  being  lost  for  a  time  is  ultimately  re-
covered, the  Third  degree,  as  now  constructed,  and  as  it  probably
always  was,  fails  completely  to  carry  out  the  symbolism.

Everyone  who  has  devoted  full  attention  to  the  study  of  the
ritual  of  Speculative  Freemasonry  must  admit  that  the  Word  con-
stitutes the  central  point  around  which  the  whole  system  of  Masonic
symbolism  revolves.  Its  possession  is  the  consummation  of  all
Masonic  knowledge  when  lost,  its  recovery  is  the  sole  object  of  all
symbolic.  Masonic  labor.

These  are  not  mere  truisms,  having  only  a  general  bearing  upon
the  subject  of  symbolism  ;  they  are  important  axioms,  indispensably
connected  with  the  history  of  the  origin  of  the  Royal  Arch  degree,
and  with  the  primary  cause  of  its  invention.

Even  in  the  time  of  pure,  unadulterated  Operative  Freemasonry,
the  Word  was  an  important  secret  of  the  institution.  The  Ger-
man Stonemasons  had,  at  a  very  early  period,  a  word,  sign,  and
grip,  and  in  the  1 7th  century,  if  not  before,  the  Operative  Masons
of  Scotland  attached  much  importance  to  the  secrets  of  the  Mason
Word.  Analogically  we  may  infer  that  the  English  Operative
Masons  were  also  in  possession  of  it,  though  no  reference  is  made
♦:o  it  in  the  Old  Constitutions  or  in  the  Legend  0/  the  Craft.

Whether  this  was  or  was  not  the  same  Word  as  that  which  after-

I240  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

ward  became  the  nucleus  of  the  Royal  Arch  degree,  it  is  impossible
to  determine.  Most  probably  it  was  not.  The  Word  given  in  the
Catechism  of  the  German  Steinmetzen,  which  is  to  be  found  in
Findel  and  that  contained  in  the  catechism  of  the  Sloane  MS.,  are
different  from  each  other  and  neither  of  them  is  the  Word  now
used.  There  may,  however,  have  been  another  Word,  communi-
cated only  to  a  select  few,  which  for  obvious  reasons  has  not  been
referred  to,  in  either  of  these  records.  But  this  is  merely  conject-
ural, and  I  confess  is  hardly  probable.

The  Word  as  we  now  have  it  is  indicative  of  a  more  ele-
vated character  of  religious  symbolism,  to  which  the  purely  Opera-
tive Freemasons  never  apparently  attained.

On  the  other  hand,  it  can  not  be  denied  that  the  Freemasons  of
the  Middle  Ages  indulged  to  a  great  extent  in  a  species  of  religious
symbolism.  Christian  iconography  abounds  in  their  architectural
decorations,  among  which  we  find  the  triangle  in  its  various  modifi-
cations.

The  question  is  therefore  by  no  means  settled  by  the  reticence  of
the  old  catechisms  on  the  subject.  Happily,  its  settlement  is  not  a
matter  of  vital  importance  in  the  discussion  of  the  Origin  of  the
Royal  Arch  degree.  Its  decision  would  only  determine  whether
the  fabricators  of  the  high  degrees  of  which  the  Royal  Arch  was  the
earliest  were  original  inventors  of  the  Word,  or  only  the  followers
of  the  older  Freemasons  and  the  resuscitators  of  their  ideas.

Leaving  the  settlement  of  this  question  in  abeyance,  let  us  pur-
sue our  historical  investigations  of  the  origin  and  growth  of  the
Royal  Arch  degree.

It  is  the  opinion  of  many  eminent  Masonic  scholars  that  the
origmal  Third  or  Master's  degree  of  Desagulier's,  which,  with  some
modifications  made  from  time  to  time  by  successive  ritualists,  con-
tinued to  be  recognized  by  the  Constitutional  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng-
land until  the  Union  in  1813,  contained  the  true  Master's  or  Royal
Arch  Word.

Dr.  Oliver  has  furnished,  I  think,  a  very  convincing  proof  that
the  Trzte  Word  was  communicated  in  the  original  ritual  of  the
Third  degree,  as  practiced  from  1723  onward.  In  his  Origin  0/
the  English  Royal  Arch,  he  makes  the  following  statement  :

"I  have  now  before  me  an  old  Master  Mason's  tracing-board  or
floor-cloth,  which  was  published  on  the  continent  almost  immediately

ORIGIN   OF  THE  ROYAL  ARCH  1241

after  symbolical  Masonry  had  been  received  in  France  as  a  branch
from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  in  1725,  which  furnished  the
French  Masons  with  a  written  copy  of  the  lectures  then  in  use  ;  and
it  contains  the  true  Master's  Word  in  a  very  promment  situation."*

It  can  not  be  denied  that  his  deductions  from  this  circumstance
are  very  legitimate.     He  goes  on  to  say  :

"  This  forms  an  important  link  in  the  chain  of  presumptive
evidence,  that  the  Word,  at  that  time,  had  not  been  dissevered
from  the  Third  degree  and  transferred  to  another.  If  this  be  true,
as  there  is  every  reason  to  believe,  the  alteration  must  have  been  ef-
fected by  some  extraordinary  innovation  and  change  of  landmarks.
And  I  am  persuaded,  for  reasons,  which  will  be  speedily  given,  that
the  ancients  are  chargeable  with  originating  these  mnovations,  for
the  division  of  the  Third  degree  and  the  fabncation  of  the  Eng-
lish Royal  Arch  appear,  on  their  own  showing,  to  have  been  their
work."

A  future  proof  of  the  fact  that  the  true  Word  was  contained  in
the  original  Third  degree  may  be  found  in  Wilkenson's  edition  of
the  Book  of  Constitutions.  That  work  was  published  at  Dublin
in  1 769  and  in  front  of  the  first  page  is  a  tracing-board,  purporting
to  be  the  delineation  of  "A  lodge  fitted  up  for  the  reception  of  the
most  respectable  Master."  Among  the  emblems  depicted  are  the
hillock,  the  sprig  of  Acacia  and  the  coffin  surrounded  by  the  heraldic
guites  de  lar>?tcs,  or  drops  of  tears,  symbolic  of  grief,  all  of  which
refer  to  the  Hiramic  Legend  of  the  Master's  degree,  while,  in  a
prominent  place  and  in  conspicuous  letters,  is  the  true  Master's
Word

In  another  work  Dr.  Oliver  says  that  the  "  Royal  Arch  Word
was  anciently  the  true  Word  of  the  Third  degree,"  *  and  he  refers
to  a  French  writer  of  1745  ^^  stating  that  "the  Master's  PFord  was
originally  .  .  .  but  that  it  was  changed  after  the  death  of
Adoniram."

The  writer  here  referred  to  is,  I  think,  Guillemam  de  Sl  Victor,
who,  however,  published  the  first  edition  of  his  Recueil  Prccietcx  de
la  Mafotmerie  Adoiihiramite,  not  in   1745,  but  in  1 781.      Guille-

•  "  Origin  of  the  Royal  Arch,"  p.  20.

'"Discrepancies  of  Freemasonry,"  p.  75.  In  this  posthumous  work  Dr.  Olivcf
has  evidently  made  the  personages  of  his  interesting  dialogues  merely  the  media  fa
<:ommunicating  his  own  opinions.

1242  HISTORY  OF   FREEMASONRY

main  gives  the  Word  in  full,  which  is  precisely  the  Royal  Arch
Word  oi  the  present  day.  It  was  engraved  on  the  tomb  of  Hiram
upon  a  triangular  plate  of  gold,  and  it  was,  he  says,  I'a^icien  mot  de
maitre."  *

Now,  what  Guillemain  knew  of  the  Third  degree  had  for  its
basis  the  primitive  ritual  of  the  Constitutional  Grand  Lodge  of
England,  for  this  had  passed  over  into  France  and  been  adopted  on
the  Continent  long  before  that  Grand  Lodge  made  the  changes  so
much  objected  to  by  the  seceding  Masons  of  1740.  His  authority
may  therefore  be  accepted  as  confirmatory  of  Oliver's  statement  that
the  Third  degree  originally  contained  the  True  Word.

But  though  it  should  be  admitted  that  the  Master's  degree  was
known  to  the  framers  of  the  ritual  of  that  degree,  as  it  was  fabri-
cated soon  after  the  organization  of  171 7,  and  was  communicated  in
the  last  part  of  the  degree,  it  will  not  follow  that  there  was  anything
more  than  a  mere  communication  of  it,  without  ';omment  or  ex-
planation.

Something  in  the  teachings  of  the  ritual  must  have  been  want-
ing ;  else  why  should  there  have  been  a  secession  of  a  part  of  the
Craft,  who  sought  professedly  to  supply  a  defect  which  they  felt  by
supplementing  a  Fourth  degree.

The  loss  and  the  recovery  of  the  Word  cov^'i'aX.xxtQ  the  foundation
on  which  the  entire  system  of  Masonic  symbolism  is  built.  With-
out these  important  points.  Speculative  Freemasonry  as  "  a  science
of  morality,  veiled  in  allegory  and  illustrated  by  symbols  "  would  be
a  total  failure.  As  a  moral  and  social  institution  inculcating  the
practice  of  virtue  and  cultivating  the  principle  of  brotherhood,  it
might  remain.  But  it  would  in  no  respect  differ  from  hundreds  of
other  societies  professing  the  same  objects,  which  have  sprung  into
existence,  and  wanting  the  vitality  which  a  deep,  religious  symbolism
has  given  to  Freemasonry,  have  all  passed  through  only  an  epheme-
ral existence.

Hence,  the  invention  about  the  middle  of  the  i8th  century  of  a
Fourth  degree  which  should  supply  the  deficiency  of  the  original
"  Master's  part,"  gave  an  impetus  to  the  institution,  which  history
records  in  the  successful  progress  of  the  seceders  who  had  adopted
the  invention.

'  "  Recueil  Preceiux  de  la  Ma^onnerie  Adonhiramite,"  p.  105,  edition  of  1787.

ORIGIN   OF  THE  ROYAL  ARCH  1243

The  interpretation  of  the  loss  and  the  recovery  of  the  Word,  lie,
as  has  already  been  said,  at  the  very  foundation  of  all  Masonic  sym-
bolism.

Now,  it  is  more  than  probable  that  the  fabricators  of  the  orig-
inal Third  degree  were  acquainted  with  and  communicated  to  their
initiates  the  history  of  the  loss.  We  know  that  the  Hiramic  legend
constituted  an  important  part  of  the  ritual,  and  the  loss  of  the  Word
must  have  been  included  in  the  allegory  which  forms  the  substance
of  that  legend.

But  as  the  history  of  the  recovery  of  the  Word  is  not  included
in  the  legend,  it  is  evident  that  the  original  Third  degree  could  have
made  no  reference  to  il,  and  the  dual  symbolism  of  a  loss  and  a  re-
covery could  not  have  been  perfect.

The  degree,  as  originally  intended,  being  founded  on  the  Hira-
mic legend,  gave,  of  course,  a  history  of  the  way  in  which  the  Word
was  lost.  But  though  afterward  it  was  communicated,  as  it  is  said,
to  a  select  few,  we  do  not  learn  from  its  ritual  in  what  way  it  was
restored  to  the  Craft.  There  was,  therefore,  an  important  defect
in  the  symbolism  of  the  system.

Now,  this  defect  must  have  at  length  attracted  the  attention  of
some  of  the  students  of  the  ritual  who  were  looking  at  Speculative
Freemasonry  as  something  more  than  a  mere  social  organization,  and
who  were  desirous  to  lift  it  to  a  more  elevated  plane  of  intellect-
uality.

It  was  on  the  continent  that  the  disposition  to  expand  the  ritual
first  displayed  itself.  It  was  this  disposition  which,  in  time,  passed
out  of  the  limits  of  propriety  and  gave  rise  to  the  almost  innumer-
able hatc(s  grades,  which  have  rather  overclouded  than  purified  the
atmosphere  of  Masonic  symbolism.

At  first,  however,  the  attempt  at  expansion  was  conducted  with
moderation,  and  was  confined  to  only  two  points — to  supplying  the
deficiency  in  the  history  and  symbolism  of  the  Word,  and  to  invent-
ing a  new  account  of  the  origin  of  the  institution.

With  the  latter  of  these  expansions,  the  present  subject  has  no
connection.  It  is  only  to  the  former  that  we  must  direct  our  at-
tention.

The  first  innovator  on  the  original  ritual  of  Desaguliers  and  his
collaborators  was  the  noted  Chevalier  Ramsay,  and  it  is  to  him  that
we  have  to  trace  the  first  addition  to  that  ritual  which  was  to  sup

1244  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

plement  the  Third  degree  with  another,  which  has  since  under
great  modifications  been  known  to  English-speaking  Freemasons  as
the  Royal  Arch.

The  Masonic  labors  of  Ramsay  entitle  him  to,  at  least,  a  brief
sketch  of  his  life  and  character.'

Andrew  Michael  Ramsay,  commonly  known  as  the  Chevalier
Ramsay,  was  born  at  Ayr,  in  Scotland,  on  June  9,  1668.  Having
completed  his  education  at  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  where  he
was  distinguished  for  ability  and  diligence,  he  became,  in  1 709.  the
tutor  of  the  two  sons  of  the  Earl  of  Wemyss.

Subsequently,  he  left  his  native  country  and  retired  to  Holland.
There  he  became  acquainted  with  Peter  Poiret,  a  learned  and  philo-
sophical disciple  of  the  celebrated  Quietist  Antoinette  Bourignon.
Poiret  was  a  prominent  teacher  of  the  mystic  theology  which  then
prevailed  on  the  continent.

To  his  intimacy  with  this  pious  mystic,  Ramsay  was  very  prob-
ably indebted  for  that  love  of  mystical  speculation  which  he  sub-
sequently developed  as  the  inventor  of  high  degrees  in  Freemasonry,
and  as  the  author  of  a  Masonic  rite.

In  1 710  Ramsay  visited  F^n^lon,  Archbishop  of  Cambray,  be-
came his  guest  and  pupil,  and  six  months  afterward  a  proselyte  to
Romanism.*

Through  the  influence  of  the  Archbishop  he  received  the  ap-
pointment of  preceptor  to  the  young  Duke  de  Chateau-Thierry  and
the  Prince  de  Turenne.

As  a  reward  for  his  services  in  that  capacity  he  was  created  a
Knight  of  the  Order  of  St.  Lazarus,  whence  he  derived  the  title  of
"  Chevalier,"  by  which  he  is  always  designated.^

In  1724  Ramsay  went  to  Rome  and  was  appointed  tutor  to  the
two  sons  of  the  titular  James  III.,  who,  as  the  son  and  heir  of  James
II.,  the  exiled  King  of  England,  still  claimed  the  throne  of  his  an-

'Ssea  biography  of  Ramsay  in  Mackey's  "Encyclopaedia  of  Freemasonry,"  from
which  the  present  sketch  is  condensed.

2  In  his  "Life  of  Fenelon,"  Ramsay  gives  the  full  details  of  the  intellectual  process
and  the  arguments  of  the  prelate  through  which  his  conversion  was  effected.  "Life,"
pp.  189-247.

'  The  Order  of  St.  Lazarus  was  first  instituted  in  Palestine  and  the  knights  were  de-
voted to  the  care  of  persons  infected.  They  afterward  united  with  the  other  Orders  in  the
war  against  the  Saracens.  We  may  presume  that  Ramsay's  connection  with  this  Order
first  suggested  to  him  the  idea  of  tracing  Freemasonry  to  the  Crusades  and  ascribing
its  origin  to  a  system  of  knighthood,  which  he  embraced  in  his  high  degrees.

ORIGIN   OF   THE   ROYAL  ARCH  1245

cestors.  He  is  known  in  history  generally  by  the  more  appropriate
title  of  the  "  Old  Pretender."

Ramsay's  close  connection  with  the  exiled  family  of  Stuart,  and
with  their  adherents,  the  Jacobites,  undoubtedly  exerted  much  in-
fluence in  the  shaping  of  certain  high  degrees  and  in  the  modified
interpretation  of  certain  legends,  so  as  to  give  a  coloring  to  the
preposterous  theory  that  Speculative  Freemasonry  was  invented  or
at  least  used  as  a  political  means  of  promoting  the  restoration  of  the
House  of  Stuart  to  the  English  throne.  Ramsay,  himself,  is  not
clear  from  the  suspicion  of  having  sown  the  germs  of  this  theory.
He  was  a  firm  believer  in  hereditary  right,  and,  being  an  aristocrat
at  heart,  he  spurned  the  idea  that  Freemasonry  could  have  had  an
Operative  origin.

In  the  year  1728  he  visited  England  and  became  an  inmate  of
the  family  of  the  Duke  of  Argyle.  While  in  England  the  Univer-
sity of  Oxford  conferred  upon  him  the  degree  of  Doctor  of  Laws,
a  tolerable  evidence  of  his  reputation  as  a  man  of  letters.

On  his  return  to  France  he  took  up  his  residence  at  Pointoise,  a
seat  of  the  Prince  of  Turenne,  and  spent  the  remainder  of  his  life
as  Intendant  in  the  Prince's  family,  dying  on  May  6,  1743,  in  the
seventy-fifth  year  of  his  life.

The  literary  career  of  Ramsay  was  marked  by  the  production  of
only  a  few  works,  but  each  of  these  give  evident  proofs  of  his  learn-
ing and  of  his  skill  as  a  writer.  His  first  work  appears  to  have  been
The  Life  of  Franfois  de  Salignac  de  la  Motte  F^nilon,  Archbishop
and  Duke  of  Cainbray.  This  was  published  at  London  in  1 723,
and  gave  rise  to  a  severe  criticism  by  "  Britannicus  "  in  several  con-
secutive numbers  of  the  London  Jonrnal  oi  that  year.

In  1727  he  published  The  Travels.  This  work,  composed  after
the  style  of  F^n^lon's  Telemaque,  was  enriched  by  a  learned  "  Dis-
course on  the  Theology  and  Mythology  of  the  Persians."  The
book  was  so  favorably  received  as  to  be  speedily  translated  into  the
French,  the  Dutch,  the  German,  and  the  Danish  languages.  A
much  altered  and  improved  edition  was  subsequently  published  by
the  author  at  Glasgow  in  Scotland.'

'  The  copy  in  my  possession  bears  the  imprint  of  James  Knox,  Glasgow,  but  without
a  date.  Kloss  registers  several  London  and  I'aris  editions  of  the  work  varying  from  1760
to  1829,  but  omits  any  mention  of  this  Glasgow  edition.  See  Kloss,  "  Bibliography,"  No.
3936.

1246  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

In  the  latter  years  of  his  hfe  he  wrote  as  a  tribute  of  friendship
a  History  of  the  Viscount  Tttrenne,  After  his  death  his  greatest
work  appeared,  namely,  The  Philosophical  Principles  of  Natural
and  Revealed  Religion,  Unfolded  in  a  Geometrical  Order.  This
work,  published  in  two  quarto  volumes  at  Glasgow  in  1748,  stamps
Its  author  not  only  as  a  man  of  varied  learning  but  as  a  profound
metaphysician  and  an  astute  logician.  Of  all  the  adversaries  of
Spinoza,  none  has  so  adroitly  and  successfully  attacked  the  errors
of  that  mcredulous  philosopher  as  Ramsay.

His  contributions  of  published  works  to  the  literature  of
Speculative  Freemasonry  are  still  fewer.  They  consist  of  only
two  productions,  and  the  authorship  of  one  of  these  is  only  con-
jectural.

In  1738  there  was  published  at  Dublin,  Ireland,  a  work,  reprinted
at  London  in  1 749,  with  the  title  of  Relation  apologetiqtie  et  historique
de  la  Society  des  Francs-Mafons,par  J.  G.  D.  M.  F.  MI.  Kloss,  who
styles  It  a  comprehensive  and  fundamental  apology  for  the  Institu-
tion of  Freemasonry,  and  attributes  its  authorship  without  doubt  to
Ramsay.  By  order  of  the  Sacred  Congregation  it  was  burnt  in  the
following  year,  at  Rome,  by  the  public  executioner,  for  containing
'*  impious  propositions  and  principles,"  and  "  the  faithful "  were
prohibited  from  reading  it.  This  act  of  literary  cremation  was  the
first  instance  of  the  impotent  persecution  of  the  Order  by  the  Roman
Church  after  the  publication  of  the  celebrated  Bull  in  eminenti  of
Pope  Clement  XII.

In  1 740,  when  Ramsay  was  Grand  Orator  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  France,  he  pronounced  a  discourse  before  that  body.  It  was
first  published  in  1741  in  the  Almanac h  des  Cocus,  under  the  er-
roneous title  of  Discours  cTun  Grand  Mattre.  Ramsay  never  at-
tained to  that  official  dignity.

This  Discourse  and  the  Apologetic  Relation,  conjecturally  at>
tributed  to  him,  are  the  only  published  writings  of  Ramsay  on
Masonic  subjects  that  have  come  down  to  us.  It  is  not  known
indeed  that  he  ever  published  any  others.

But  this  Discourse  is  of  great  importance,  inasmuch  as  in  it  he
develops  in  explicit  terms  his  theory  of  the  origin  of  Freemasonry
It  is  sufficient  here  to  say  that  that  theory  repudiated  the  idea  of  its
connection  with  an  Operative  art  and  traces  its  birth  to  Palestine
and  to  the  time  of  the  Crusaders.     He  thus  gave  to  Freemasonry

ORIGIN   OF  THE   ROYAL  ARCH  1247

not  an  architectural  but  a  religious  and  military  character  which
connected  it  with  the  Orders  of  Knighthood.

It  is  to  the  influence  of  this  theory  on  the  Masonic  mind  that
we  are  to  attribute  the  subsequent  incorporation  of  Templarism  into
the  system  of  Freemasonry,  a  thought  that  never  suggested  itself
to  the  original  founders  of  the  Society.

But  though  Ramsay  wrote  but  little  on  Freemasonry  for  the
public  eye,  no  one  during  the  i8th  century  exerted  a  greater  influ-
ence over  continental  Masonry,  and  that  influence,  as  it  will  here-
after be  seen,  extended,  in  some  degree,  even  into  England.

He  was  an  assiduous  and  enthusiastic  ritualist,  and  sought  to  de-
velop the  Masonic  system  by  the  invention  of  new  degrees.

To  him  we  are  indebted  (though  the  value  of  the  debt  is  ques-
tionable) for  the  invention  of  the  system  of  Rites,  wherein  the
science  of  Speculative  Freemasonry  is  expanded  by  a  superstruct-
ure of  "  high  degrees,"  based  upon  the  primitive  three.

At  that  time  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  recognized  and  prac-
ticed only  the  three  degrees  of  Apprentice,  Fellow-Craft,  and  Master
Mason.  The  same  system  was  pursued  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of
France.^

This  simple  system  had  no  congruity  with  the  theor)'^  of  Ramsay.
It  made  no  reference  to  the  Orders  of  Chivalry  and  bore  no  ap-
pearance of  a  relationship  to  anything  but  an  Operative  art.

Ramsay,  therefore,  found  it  necessary  to  construct  a  new  system,
which  should  bear  the  evidence  not  of  an  Operative,  but  of  a  Chiv-
alric  origin.

If  in  carrying  out  these  views  he  had  rejected  the  primitive  de-
grees, his  new  system  would  have  had  no  pretensions  to  be  a  Ma-
sonic one.

He  was  unwilling  to  attempt  such  a  revolution,  which  would,
most  probably,  have  been  unsuccessful  in  its  results.

Speculativ^e  Freemasonry  had  by  that  time  become  a  popular  m-
stitution — it  possessed  wealth  and  influence,  and  men  of  rank  and
learning  eagerly  sought  admission  into  the  society.  Ramsay,  him-
self, was  undoubtedly  attached  to  it,  though  his  aristocratic  tenden-
cies induced  him  to  seek  for  it  a  more  elevated  sphere.

•  La  Grande  Loge  de  France  ne  reconnaissait  que  les  trois  grades  symboliques  ;  ses
constitutions  ne  s'  etendaient  pas  au  deli.  Thory,  "  Fondation  de  la  G.  L.  de  France."
p.  15.

1248  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Besides,  he  must  have  seen  that  it  furnished,  even  in  what  he
deemed  its  imperfect  state,  a  firm  foundation  on  which  to  erect  the
edifice  of  his  "  high  grades."

Ramsay,  therefore,  constructed  a  new  system,  which  has  since
been  called  a  Rite.  His  example  was  afterward  imitated,  but  with
less  moderation  as  to  the  number  of  degrees,  by  ritualists  who  inun-
dated Freemasonry  with  their  new  inventions.  But  of  all  the  suc-
ceeding rites,  though  some  of  them  extended  to  nearly  a  hundred
degrees,  only  one  of  the  original  ideas  of  Ramsay,  that,  namely,  of
perfecting  the  Master's  part,  by  the  symbolism  of  a  recovery  of  the
Word,  was  sedulously  preserved.

This  first  Masonic  Rite,  which  has  since  been  known  by  the
title  of  "  The  Rite  of  Ramsay,"  consisted  of  six  degrees,  designated
as  follows  :

1.  Entered  Apprentice.

2.  Fellow-Craft.

3.  Master  Mason.

4.  Ecossais  or  Scottish  Master.

5.  Novice.

6.  Knight  of  the  Temple  or  Templar,

Rhigellini  adds  a  seventh  degree,  which  he  says  was  the  Royal
Arch ;  but  I  find  no  evidence  elsewhere  of  this  fact,  and  Rhigellini,
I  am  sorry  to  say,  is  worse  than  useless  as  an  historical  authority.'

The  fifth  and  sixth  of  these  degrees  embodied  his  ideas  of  the
chivalric  or  Templar  origin  of  the  Institution.  Their  consideration
would  throw  no  light  upon  the  investigation  of  the  Royal  Arch
which  we  are  now  pursuing.

It  is  the  Fourth  only  in  which  we  are  interested — the  Ecossais
— from  which  it  is  supposed  that  the  suggestions  were  derived
which  gave  origin  to  the  invention  of  the  Royal  Arch  degree  in
England  and  to  the  great  Masonic  schism  which  followed.

Ramsay  went  to  England  in  1728.  How  long  he  remained
there  is  uncertain,  but  it  was  long  enough  to  win  the  favor  of  the
University  of  Oxford,  and  to  obtain  from  that  body  one  of  its  high-
est literary  favors.      He  had  also  gained  warm  friends  in  that  coun-

'  Rhigellini,  "  La  Magonnerie,  etc.,"  tome  ii.,  p.  125.  It  was  a  part  of  Ramsay's  sys-
tem to  ascribe  the  invention  of  these  degrees  to  Godfrey  of  Boulogne,  in  the  days  of  the
Crusaders.  It  was  Ramsay's  legend  with  less  foundation  in  truth  than  legends  usually
Dossess.

ORIGIN   OF   THE   ROYAL  ARCH  1249

try,  among  whom  may  be  named  the  Duke  of  Argyle,  in  whose
family  he  resided,  and  Lord  Landsdowne,  to  whom  he  dedicated  his
Travels  of  Cyrus,  and  of  whose  "singular  friendship"  he  boasts.

It  is  not,  therefore,  improbable  that  he  possessed  some  influence
with  the  Freemasons  of  England,  among  whom  it  is  said  he  sought
to  introduce  his  new  ritual.*  But  he  failed  in  his  effort  to  get  it
adopted  by  the  Grand  Lodge,  which  was  then,  as  it  still  is  and  always
has  been,  extremely  conservative  in  its  views.

But  though  unsuccessful  with  the  Grand  Lodge,  his  Royal
Arch  seems  to  have  excited  an  interest  in  some  of  the  Fraternity.
His  method  of  supplying  the  allegorical  symbol  of  a  recovery  of  the
lost  Word  had  awakened  them  to  the  fact  that  this  symbolism,  so
necessary  to  perfect  the  circle  of  Masonic  symbology,  was  wanting
in  the  old  system  of  three  degrees  as  then  practiced  by  the  Grand
Lodge.

For  some  few  years  no  effort  was  made  to  incorporate  the  new
system  into  the  then  accepted  ritual.  But  the  thought  did  not  die.
It  continued  to  grow,  and  at  last  was  given  actual  life  when,  about
1 738  or  perhaps  a  few  years  earlier,*  certain  of  the  brethren  began
to  manipulate  the  Master's  degree,  and  to  add  to  the  story  of  the
loss  of  the  Word  the  new  legend  of  its  recovery.

This  tampering  with  the  Third  degree  was  met  by  the  Grand
Lodge  first  with  grave  censure,  and  then,  as  the  participants  in  the
scheme  continued  to  be  refractory,  with  their  expulsion.

This  led,  as  we  have  already  seen,  to  the  schism  which  divided
the  Masons  of  England  into  two  parties,  distinguished  by  the  titles
of  the  "Moderns"  and  the  "Ancients."

The  latter  having  organized  a  Grand  Lodge,  adopted  a  new
ritual  of  four  degrees,  and  called  the  last  the  Royal  Arch.

It  has  been  said  that  Ramsay  invented  the  Royal  Arch  degree.
He  did  no  such  thing.  He  did  not  even  invent  the  name.  But  he
did  the  symbolism  which  referred  to  the  recovery  of  a  Word  that
had  been  once  lost  and  afterward  recovered.  And  this  constitutes
the  whole  essential  sum  and  substance  of  all  Royal  Arch  Masonry,
no  matter  under  what  name  and  in  what  Rite  it  is  to  be  found.

•  II  voulut  introducerie  a  Londres,  en  1728,  un  nouveau  Rite  ;  mais  il  echoua  dans  ce

projet.     Thory,  "Acta  Latomorum,"  tome  ii.,  p.  568.

*The  Grand  Lodge  first  officially  noticed  the  "irregular  makings"  in   1738;    but  U
does  not  follow  that  they  had  not  been  occurring  for  some  time  before  attention  was
called  to  them.
79

I250  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

We  may  suppose,  and  the  supposition  is  a  very  tenable  one,
that  he  said  to  his  disciples  in  England,  "  Your  ritual  gives  you  a
recital  of  how  the  True  Word  of  a  Master  was  lost,  but  it  does  not
tell  you  how  it  was  afterwards  restored  to  the  Craft ;  and  in  this
respect  your  system  is  perfect.  The  discovery  of  a  lost  Word  con-
stitutes a  most  important  part  of  the  symbolism  of  Speculative  Free-
masonry. This  symbolism  and  the  Legend  which  refers  to  it,  I  offer
you  as  necessary  development  and  improvement  of  your  system."

His  disciples  accepted  the  idea  of  the  symbolism,  but  they
rejected  his  Legend,  and  invented  one  of  their  own.

Neither  the  Legend  of  what  has  been  called  Dermott's  Royal
Arch,  though  he  was  not  its  author,  nor  Dunckerley's,  nor  that  which
has  been  in  existence  in  England  certainly  since  the  Union  of  1813,
has  any  similitude  to  that  of  Ramsay's  Ecossais  degree.

So  then,  the  correct  historical  statement  would  be  that  Ramsay
suggested  to  the  English  Masonic  mind  the  symbolism  of  a  Re-
covered  Word,  for  which  Speculative  Freemasoniy  was  indebted  to
his  inventive  genius.

In  this  guarded  sense  of  the  expression  it  may  be  permitted  to  be
said,  that  he  introduced  the  doctrine  of  the  Royal  Arch  into  English
Freemasonry.  Without  the  suggestive  influence  of  his  ideas,  Royai
Arch  Masonry  would  have  been  unknown  to  the  Masonic  system.

This  theory,  which  is,  I  think,  generally  accepted  as  correct  by
Masonic  scholars,  has  met  with,  so  far  as  I  know,  only  one  oppO'
nent.

The  late  Bro.  Charles  W.  Moore,  the  learned  editor  for  many
years  of  the  Freemasons  Mo7ithly  Magazine,  published  at  Boston,
Mass.,  in  an  article '  "  On  the  Origin  of  Royal  Arch  Chapters,  at
Home  and  Abroad,"  says,  "  it  is  not  true  that  Ramsay  had  anything
to  do  with  the  Royal  Arch  degree."  His  grounds  for  this  unbelief
are  thus  stated  :

"  Ramsay's  system  consisted  of  the  three  degrees  of  Ecossais,
Novice,  and  Knight  Templar  only.  If  he  ever  invented  a  Royal
Arch  degree,  which  is  very  doubtful,  no  traces  of  it  now  remain."'

Now  the  error  of  Bro.  Moore  consisted  in  his  confounding  the
doctrine  and  symbolism  of  the  Royal  Arch  degree  with  the  specific
name  adopted  in  England.     He  could  find  no  such  title  as  Royal

'••Moore's  Magazine,"  voL  xii.,  April,  1853,  p.  160.  "Ibid.,  p.  163,  note.

ORIGIN   OF  THE  ROYAL  ARCH  1251

Arch  among  tne  aegrees  of  Ramsay's  Rite,  and  he  rashly  concluded
that  he  had  nothing  to  do  with  it.

It  did  not  occur  to  him  to  look  in  Ramsay's  system  for  the  doc-
trine of  the  Royal  Arch,  under  another  name.  Had  he  done  so,  he
would  have  found  it  in  the  Fourth  degree,  or  Ecossais,  of  that
system.

The  word  Ecossais,  which  may  be  correctly  translated  as  Scot-
tish Master  or  Scottish  Mason,  was  invented  and  first  used  by  the
Chevalier  Ramsay  as  the  name  of  a  grade  in  the  Masonic  ritual
which  he  had  constructed.  In  pure  French  the  word  signifies
Scottish  or  Scotsman,  and  is  said  to  have  been  adopted  by  Ramsay,
because  it  was  a  part  of  his  Legend,  that  though  the  degree,  like  the
rest  of  Freemasonry,  was  originally  fabricated  by  the  Crusaders,  it
passed  over  from  the  Holy  Land  into  Scotland,  where  at  Kilwin*
ning  it  found  for  a  long  period  an  abiding  place,  until  it  was  dissemi-
nated over  Europe.

From  this  as  the  original  degree  has  sprung  up  numerous  others
having  the  same  name  and  the  same  design.

That  design  is  to  detail  the  method  in  which  the  Lost  Word
was  recovered,  so  that  the  true  symbolism  of  the  Word  may  be
preserved.

This  symbolism,  which  gave  perfection  to  that  of  the  hitherto
incomplete  Third  degree,  was  so  acceptable  to  the  Fraternity  every-
where, that  in  all  the  Rites  subsequently  established  over  the  conti-
nent, the  Ecossais  of  Ramsay  was  adopted  with  certain  modifica-
tions.

The  extent  to  which  this  cultivation  of  Ecossaism,  or  the  doc-
trine of  the  True  Word,  was  carried  by  the  ritualists  who  succeeded
Ramsay  may  be  shown  from  the  fact  that  Ragon,  in  his  almost
exhaustive  Nomenclature  of  the  degrees,  enumerates  no  less  than
eighty-three  which  bear  the  name  of  Ecossais.

In  every  legitimate  Ecossais  degree  we  meet  with  these  two  es
sential  characteristics :  first,  there  is  a  communication  of  the  True
Word  which  had  been  lost ;  and  secondly  there  is  a  Legend  which
details  the  mode  by  which  it  was  recovered  and  restored  to  the
Craft.

In  all  these  degrees  the  Word  is  substantially  the  same  ;  in  most
of  the  Continental  Rites  the  Legend  of  Ramsay,  which  accompanieo
t  has  been  oreserved.  with  but  little  or  no  alteration

1252  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

rhe  English  Masons  accepted  the  suggestions  of  Ramsay  as  to
the  necessity  of  expanding  the  Third  degree  or  Master's  part
They  adopted  the  Word  which  indeed  it  is  said  had  always  existed
rn  the  original  ritual  of  the  Third  degree ;  but  they  transferred  its
collocation  from  the  Third  to  a  Fourth  degree  ;  and  they  wholly  re-
jected  Ramsay's  Legend,  fabricating  a  new  one  for  themselves,  for
which  there  is  some  reason  for  believing  that  they  were  partly  in-
debted to  a  talmudic  or  rabbinical  tradition.  They  also  declined  to
adopt  Ramsay's  nomenclature,  and  having  perhaps  no  liking  for  a
name  which,  by  implication  at  least,  gave  a  Scottish  origin  to  the
Institution,  they  abandoned  the  title  oi  Ecossazs  and  took  instead  of
it  that  of  Royal  Arch.

If  the  details  of  this  narrative  and  the  conclusions  drawn  from  it
are  correct,  then  the  theory  has  been  established  that  the  brethren
who  seceded  about  1 738  from  the  Constitutional  Grand  Lodge  of
England,  with  its  three  primitive  degrees,  and  afterward  organized
a  schismatic  Grand  Lodge  of  their  own  with  an  additional  or  Fourth
degree,  were  indebted  to  Ramsay  for  the  idea  which  led  to  the  inno-
vation.

Ramsay  introduced  the  doctrine  of  the  Royal  Arch  into  English
Masonry,  but  he  did  not  succeed  in  introducing  his  degree.

Having  thus  settled  the  question  of  the  origin  of  English  Royal
Arch  Masonry,  we  are  next  to  inquire  at  what  time  it  was  introduced
Into  England  and  incorporated  in  the  ritual  of  English  Speculative
Freemasonry.

There  is  no  authority  anywhere  to  be  found  which  traces  the
existence  of  a  Royal  Arch  degree  in  England  anterior  to  the  ye^J

1738.

The  earliest  printed  work  which  makes  any  reference  to  the
degree  is  a  book  entitled  A  Serious  and  Impartial  Enqtciry  into
the  Cati.se  of  the  Present  Decay  0/  Free-masonry  in  the  Kingdom  of
Ireland,    by   Fifield    Dassigny,    M.D.,    published    in    London    in

1 744-'

The  references  of  the  author  of  this  work  to  the  subject  of  Royal
Arch  Masonry,  are,  viewing  the  time  when  they  were  printed,  of

•  The  book  is  very  scarce,  there  not  being  a  copy  in  the  British  Museum.  There  is
none  to  be  found  in  any  library  in  Ireland,  and  only  one  in  America,  which  is  in  possession
of  Bro.  Carson  of  Cincinnati,  O.  Bro.  Hughan  having  obtained  a  copy,  republished  it  in  his
"  Memorials  of  the  Union."     The  passage  here  quoted  is  from  p.  96  of  his  republication

ORIGIN  OF  THE  ROYAL  ARCH  1253

great  interest,  and  may  throw  some  light  on  a  contested  point  of
history.     They  are,  therefore,  here  quoted  in  full,  as  follows :

"  Now  as  the  landmarks  of  the  constitution  of  Free-Masonry
are  universally  the  same,  throughout  all  kingdoms,  and  are  so  well
fixt  that  they  will  not  admit  of  removal,  how  comes  it  to  pass  th.it
some  have  been  led  away  with  ridiculous  innovations,  an  example
of  which  I  shall  prove  by  a  certain  propagator  of  a  false  system
some  few  years  ago,  who  imposed  upon  several  worthy  men  under  a
pretense  of  being  Master  of  a  Royal  Arch,  which  he  asserted  he
had  brought  with  him  from  the  city  of  York ;  and  that  the  beauties
of  the  Craft  did  principally  consist  in  the  knowledge  of  this  valuable
piece  of  Masonry.  However,  he  carried  on  his  scheme  for  several
months,  and  many  of  the  learned  and  wise  were  his  followers,  till
at  length  his  fallacious  art  was  discovered  by  a  Brother  of  probity
and  wisdom,  who  had  some  small  time  before  attained  that  excellent
part  of  Masonry  in  London  and  plainly  proved  that  his  doctrine
was  false  ;  whereupon  the  Brethren  justly  dispised  him  and  ordered
him  to  be  excluded  from  all  benefits  of  the  Craft,  and  altho'  some
of  the  fraternity  had  expressed  an  uneasiness  at  this  matter  being
kept  a  secret  from  them  (since  they  had  already  passed  thro'  the
usual  degrees  of  probation)  I  cannot  help  being  of  opinion  that  they
have  no  right  to  any  such  benefits  until  they  make  a  proper  applica-
tion, and  are  received  with  due  formality,  and  as  it  is  an  organized
body  of  men  who  have  passed  the  chair,  and  given  undeniable
proofs  of  their  skill  in  Architecture,  it  can  not  be  treated  with  too
much  reverence,  and  more  especially  since  the  character  of  the
present  members  of  that  particular  lodge  are  untainted  and  their
behaviour  judicious  and  unexceptionable  ;  so  that  there  can  not  be
the  least  hinge  to  hang  a  doubt  on,  but  that  they  are  most  excellent
Masons."

As  Dassigny's  book  was  published  in  1 744,  the  phrase  "  a  few
years  ago  "  may  be  interpreted  as  applying  to  about  the  year  1741,
or  perhaps  even  1740.  With  this  explanation  as  to  time,  we  may
infer  several  facts  from  this  passage.

In  the  first  place,  it  appears  that  an  adventurer  coming  to  Dub
lin  to  propagate  the  Royal  Arch  thought  it  favorable  to  his  in-
terests to  claim  that  he  had  brought  the  degree  from  the  city  of
York.  From  this  we  may  infer  that  it  was  a  belief  among  the
Freemasons  of  Ireland  as  well  as  elsewhere,  that  there  was  a  Royal

1254  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Arch  organization  then  existing  at  York.  This  is  not  an  abso-
lutely essential  inference,  because  he  may  have  depended  for  its
success  on  the  prestige  given  to  that  city  in  the  Masonic  mind  by
the  traditional  belief  that  it  was  the  cradle  of  Masonry.

But  the  inference  gains  some  strength  from  what  Dassigny
says  in  a  foot-note  :  "  I  am  informed  in  that  city  (York)  is  held
an  assembly  of  Master  Masons  under  the  title  of  Royal  Arch
Masons,  who  as  their  qualifications  and  excellencies  are  superior  to
others,  they  receive  a  larger  pay  than  working  Masons."

Here  we  have  the  explicit  statement  of  a  contemporaiy  writer
that  such  a  belief  was  in  existence.  Whether  it  was  founded  in
fact  or  in  fiction  is  another  question.  Yet  it  is  a  proverbial
dogma  that  there  is  no  rumor  without  some  foundation.  "  Flame,"
says  Plautus,  "is  very  close  to  smoke."  *

However.  Bro.  Hughan,  whose  authority  as  a  Masonic  historian
demands  great  respect,  says  it  is  doubtful  whether  an  Assembly  of
Royal  Arch  Masons  ever  met  in  York  so  early  as  1 744,  for  there  is
no  trace  of  such  a  degree  until  many  years  later  in  any  of  the
Records  preserved.*

But  the  absence  of  any  records  of  a  Royal  Arch  degree  among
the  papers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  York,  which  have  been  pre-
served, is  no  sufficient  evidence  of  the  non-existence  of  that  de-
gree between  1 740  and  1 744.  These  wanted  records  may  have
been  among  those  which  have  been  lost  or  destroyed.  Against  this
explainable  deficiency  of  evidence  by  official  records,  which  it  is
admitted  are  not  complete,  we  have  the  testimony  of  a  contempo-
rary writer  of  repute  and  intelligence  who  says  that  there  was  in
1 744  a  rumor  that  the  Royal  Arch  degree  vi^as  conferred  in  York  at
that  time.

The  question  therefore  of  this  early  existence  of  Royal  Arch
Masonry  in  York  must  still  remain  in  abeyance;  it  is  sub  judice,
nor  can  it  ever  be  decided,  until  further  testimony  is  produced.  But
notwithstanding  the  high  authority  of  Bro.  Hughan,  I  am  disposed
to  think  that  in  1 744  and  a  few  years  before,  the  Royal  Arch  de-
gree was  conferred  in  the  city  of  York,  having  of  course  been
brought  there  from  London,  where  it  originated.

It  does  not  follow  that  at  that  time  there  was  any  regular  organi-

'  Flamma  fiemo  est  proxima.     Plautus,  "  Curculio,"  i.,  53.
*  "  Memorials  of  the  Union,"  p.  6.

ORIGIN   OF  THE   ROYAL  ARCH  1255

zation  connected  with  the  Grand  Lodge  (which,  by  the  way,  was  at
that  time  dormant,  or  of  which  we  have  no  records)  or  with  the
lodge  which  was  still  in  existence.  The  degree  was  about  that  time
just  beginning,  even  in  London,  to  assume  an  official  shape,  and
irregularities  must  have  prevailed.  Bro.  Hughan  tells  us  that  Bro.
William  Cowling,  an  officer  of  the  present  York  Lodge,  is  of  opin-
ion in  reference  to  the  later  and  undisputed  organization  of  a
Chapter  in  1 780,  that  "  the  Royal  Arch  Degree  was  kept  distinct
from  the  Craft  at  York,  but  th^.t  there  was  a  very  intimate  connec-
tion between  them."^

What  is  here  said  of  the  later  organization  may  probably
be  applied  to  an  earlier  one.  If  so,  it  would  be  vain  to  look
in  the  missing  records  of  the  York  Grand  Lodge  from  1735  to
1760,  if  they  are  ever  found,  for  any  reference  to  Royal  Arch
Masonry.

Returning  to  the  extract  from  Dr.  Dassigny's  Enqiciry  we  infer,
in  the  second  place,  that  in  the  year  1 744  there  were  Royal  Arch
Masons  in  Dublin  who  appreciated  the  degree  as  a  valuable  ad-
dition to  the  Masonic  system.

We  infer,  thirdly,  that  at  that  time  there  was  an  organized  body
of  Past  Masters  there  who  regularly  conferred  the  degree,  restrict-
ing it,  however,  to  those  Masons  who  had  passed  the  chair.  As
this  was  the  regulation  which  existed  in  London,  it  is  evident,  if
other  proof  were  wanting,  that  the  degree  given  in  Ireland  was
originally  derived  from  London  and  from  the  "  Ancients."

After  this  digression  for  the  purpose  of  demonstrating  the  time
of  the  first  appearance  of  the  degree  at  the  cities  of  York  and  Dublin,
we  may  return  to  our  investigation  of  the  history  of  its  origin  in
England.

We  have  seen  that  in  1728,  soon  after  the  Chevalier  Ramsay
had  fabricated  hi?  systein  of  high  degrees,  among  which  was  one
that,  under  the  title  of  Ecossais  or  "Scottish  Master"  developed
his  doctrine  of  the  Royal  Arch  or  the  recovery  of  the  true  Word,
he  came  to  England.

There  he  had  personal  intercourse  with  many  Freemasons  and
communicated  to  them  his  views,  and  demonstrated  to  them  the
incompleteness  of  the  established  ritual,  which,  terminating  in   the

•  HMehan,  "  Memorials  of  the  Union,"  p.  82.

1256  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Master's  part,  and  the  loss  of  the  Word,  made  no  provision  for  its
recovery.

To  the  greater  part  of  the  English  Freemasons  his  theory  was
either  unintelligible  as  a  doctrine  or  offensive  as  an  innovation.
Hence,  the  efforts  he  is  said  to  have  made  for  its  adoption  by  the
Grand  Lodge  proved  unsuccessful.

But,  happily  for  the  progress  of  Masonic  light,  there  were  some
thinkers  of  more  enlarged  views.  They  saw  the  deficiency  in  the
old  ritual,  and  were  ready  to  accept  any  modification  that  would
improve  it.

With  this  party,  small  at  first  but  gradually  increasing  in  num-
bers, the  ideas  of  Ramsay  became  popular.

But  while  they  adopted  his  doctrine  concerning  the  recovery  of
the  true  Word  as  the  basis  of  a  new  degree  to  be  added  to  the
ritual  of  three  degrees,  they  refused  in  the  end  to  adopt  his  legend.

It  is  not  unlikely  that  the  first  English  Freem?3ons  who  were
engaged  in  1738  in  the  "irregular  makings"  which  were  censured
by  the  Grand  Lodge  may  have  used  Ramsay's  legend  for  a  time.

This  is  mere  guess-work.  Still,  it  is  very  supposable  that  Ram-
say taught  his  whole  system  to  a  few  disciples  who  naturally  would
seek  to  propagate.

Dassigny,  in  his  Enquiry,  throws  some  gleams  of  light  on  this
obscure  subject  in  the  following  passage :

"  I  can  not  help  informing  the  Brethren  that  there  is  lately  ar-
rived in  this  city  a  certain  itinerant  Mason  whose  judgment  (as  he
declares)  is  so  far  illumined,  and  whose  optics  are  so  strong  that
they  can  bear  the  view  of  the  most  lurid  rays  of  the  sun  at  noon
day,  and  altho'  we  have  contented  ourselves  with  three  material
steps  to  approach  our  Summum  Bommi,  the  immortal  God,  yet  he
presumes  to  acquaint  us  that  he  can  add  three  more,  which,  when
properly  placed,  may  advance  us  to  the  highest  heavens."^

Now,  it  is  at  least  a  coincidence  that  Ramsay'"?  newly  invented
Rite  added  just  three  degrees  to  the  three  of  the  original  ritual.
May  not  this  "itinerant  Mason"  referred  to  by  Dassigny  have  been
a  disciple  of  Ramsay,  who  was  seeking  to  introduce  his  ritual  into
Dublin  ?

But  as  I  have  said   before,  this  is  mere  guess-work.     It  only

'  Dassigny's  "  Enquiry,"  in  Hughan's  republication  in  the  "  Memorials,"  p.  97.

ORIGIN   OF  THE   ROYAL  ARCH  1257

gives  a  sort  of  probability  to  the  hypothesis  that  Ramsay  had  suc-
ceeded in  imbuing  the  minds  of  certain  English  Freemasons  with
the  principles  of  his  system,  so  that  they  were  prepared  to  formulate
out  of  it  a  degree,  which,  though  differing  in  name  and  differing  in
legend,  retained  its  doctrine.

And  so  out  of  this  system  of  Ramsay  the  seceding  Masons  of
England  formulated  a  Fourth  degree,  which  they  called  the  "  Royal
Arch,"  and  which,  though  owing  its  origin  to  Ramsay's  Ecossais,
resembled  it  only  in  the  doctrine  of  a  lost  Word,  recovered,  which
is  the  true  and  only  doctrine  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry,  under  what-
soever name  it  may  be  known.

It  may  be  considered  as  a  well-settled  fact  in  history  that  the
Royal  Arch  degree  was  not  known  in  England  before  the  year
1738,^  at  which  time  it  was  practiced  by  certain  brethren  who  after-
ward assumed  the  name  of  "  Ancient  Masons,"  and  finally  seceded
from  the  Constitutional  Grand  Lodge.''  The  degree  then  conferred
was  suggested  by  and  founded  on  the  Ecossais  degree  of  Chevalier
Ramsay.

"  If  the  Royal  Arch  degree,"  says  Brother  Hughan,^  "in  its  sep-
arate and  distinct  form,  existed  prior  to  1 738,  and  indeed,  was  as  old
as  the  Third  degree,  how  comes  it  that  the  regular  Grand  Lodge  of
England  persistently  refused  to  recognize  it  until  18 13,  but  the  body
of  Masons  which  seceded  from  this  original  and  premier  Grand
Lodge,  made  much  of  the  degree,  and  by  it,  we  may  truly  say,  suc-
ceeded in  making  their  numerical  position  in  a  few  years  almost
equal  to  the  regular  Grand  Lodge  itself  ?  "

The  degree  as  practiced  by  the  seceding  Masons  was,  as  Dr.
Oliver  *  remarks,  "  imperfect  in  its  construction,"  and  its  rude  and
unfinished  state  betrayed  its  recent  origin.

Its  form  was,  however,  gradually  improved.  When  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Ancients  was  organized  in  1753,  that  body  adopted  it  as  one
of  its  series  of  degrees,  making  it  the  Fourth  in  order  of  precedence.

At  first,  the  degree  was  conferred  in  the  lodges  and  as  a  supple-
ment to  the  Third  degree.

'  Hugh.in,  "  History  of  Freemasonry  in  York,"  p.  38.

'^  See  Northouck's  "  Book  of  Constitutions."  where,  in  a  note  to  p.  239,  a  full  but  not
altogether  impartial  account  of  the  secession  is  given.

"  In  a  Review  of  Higgins's  "  Anacalypsis,"  in  the  "  Voice  of  Masonry,"  vol.  xiii.,  p
887.

'  "  Origin  of  the  Royal  Arch,"  o.  21.

1258  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Dr.  Oliver  describes  it  as  having  at  tiiat  early  period  "  jumbled
together,  in  a  state  of  inextricable  confusion,  the  events  commemo-
rated in  Ramsay's  Royal  Arch,  the  Knights  of  the  Ninth  Arch,  of
the  Burning  Bush,  of  the  East  or  Sword,  of  the  Red  Cross,  the
Scotch  Fellow-Craft,  the  Select  Master,  the  Red  Cross  of  Babylon,
the  Rose  Croix,"  etc.^

I  know  not  whence  Oliver  derived  his  authority  for  this  state-
ment. But  as  none  of  the  degrees  which  he  mentions  were  then
fabricated,  it  is  impossible  that  he  can  be  correct.

It  is  very  probable  that  the  Legend  of  Enoch  which  was  em-
bodied in  Ramsay's  Ecossais,  and  which  was  afterward  adopted
in  the  degree  of  Knights  of  the  Ninth  Arch,  was  at  first  used  by
the  seceders  in  conferring  their  Fourth  degree.  But  it  was  after-
ward changed  for  the  very  different  Legend  which  is  still  taught  in
the  English  Royal  Arch.

After  a  short  time,  when  the  degree  had  been  nu:sed  into  a  bet-
ter shape  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ancients,  it  was  conferred  into  a
body  called  a  "  chapter,"  but  still  constituting  a  part  of  a  Warranted
lodge.

The  regulations  "  for  the  Instruction  and  Government  of  the
Holy  Royal  Arch  Chapter,"  adopted  by  the  Atholl  Grand  Lodge,  de-
clare that  "every  regular  and  warranted  lodge  possesses  the  power
of  forming  and  holding  meetings  in  each  of  these  several  degrees,  the
last  of  which  from  its  pre-eminence  is  denominated  among  Masons
a  chapter."  And  this  regulation  continued  in  force  until  the  Union
of  1813.^

The  earliest  official  minute  of  the  Royal  Arch  degree  among  the
"Ancients  "  bears  the  date  of  1752.^  At  that  time  the  "Ancients"
were  organized  in  a  General  Assembly,  which  bore  the  name  of  a
"Grand  Committee."

The  degree  was  then  conferred  in  the  lodges  but  only  on  those
who  had  passed  the  chair.  We  have  seen  that  this  right  of  the
lodges  to  confer  the  Royal  Arch  was  always  recognized  by  the
Atholl  Grand  Lodge.

But  a  Grand  Chapter  was  subsequently  established,  at  what  pre-
cise date  is  not  accurately  known.

'  "  Origin  of  the  Royal  Arch,"  p.  21.

2  See  the  "  Ahiman  Rezon  "  published  in  1807,  p.  107.

^  Hughan,  "  Memorials  of  the  Union,"  p.  6.

ORIGIN   OF   THE   ROYAL  ARCH  1259

On  April  6,  1791,  the  "  Ancients"  published  "  Laws  and  Regu-
lations for  the  Instruction  and  Government  of  the  Holy  Royal
Arch  Chapters,  under  the  sanction  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,
according  to  the  Old  Constitutions."  These  Regulations  were  sub-
sequently revised,  amended,  and  approved  *'  in  a  General  Grand
Chapter  "  held  at  the  "Crown  and  Anchor  Tavern,"  in  the  Strand,  on
April  I,  1807,  and  are  contained  in  the  Ahiman  Rezott  of  that  year.

The  first  of  these  Regulations  that,  "  There  shall  be  a  General
Grand  Chapter  of  the  Holy  Royal  Arch  held  half  yearly  at  the
'  Crown  and  Anchor,'  Strand,  on  the  first  Wednesday  in  the  months
of  April  and  October.  That  agreeably  to  established  custom  the
officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  for  the  time  being,  are  considered  as
the  Grand  Chiefs,  and  are  to  preside  at  all  Grand  Chapters,  accord-
ing to  seniority ;  they  usually  appoint  the  most  expert  R.  A.  com-
panions to  the  other  Offices ;  and  none  but  Excellent  Masons,  being
members  of  warranted  lodges,  in  and  near  the  Metropolis,  shall  be
members  thereof.  Certified  sojourners  may  be  admitted  as  visitors
only."  ^

It  will  be  perceived  that  the  organization  of  this  Grand  Chapter
of  the  "  Ancients,"  though  not  recognized  as  legal,  prepared  the
model  on  which  the  subsequent  Grand  Chapter  of  England  has  been
founded.  The  government  by  three  Chiefs  has  also  been  adopted
in  America,  though  they  are  no  longer  made  identical,  as  they  still
are  in  England,  with  the  three  principal  officers  of  the  Grand
Lodge.

Warrants  were  granted  by  the  Grand  Chapter  for  the  formation
of  chapters,  but  only  where  the  parties  composing  such  chapter
possessed  a  regular  Warrant  granted  by  the  Grand  Lodge.*  Hence,
every  chapter  under  the  system  of  the  "  Ancients  "  was,  though  in-
dependent as  to  the  degree,  an  appanage  of  a  warranted  lodge.  An
application  for  initiation  to  the  Royal  Arch  degree  was  to  be  di-
rected "  to  the  presiding  chiefs  of  the  chapter  of  Excellent  Royal
Arch  Masons,  under  sanction  of  lodge  number ."  ^

This  usage  prevailed  in  America  as  long  as  lodges  of  "  Ancient
Masons  "  existed  there.  I  have  in  the  early  part  of  my  life  person-
ally known  several  old  Royal  Arch  Masons  who  received  the  degree
in  lodges  attached  to  chapters.

•"Ahiman  Rezon,"  1807,  p.  108.

•'•  "  Laws  and  Regulations  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,"  No.  iv.       ^  Ibid.,  No.  vi.

i26o  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

The  chapters,  though  thus  closely  connected  with  the  lodges,  were
so  far  under  a  separate  jurisdiction  as  to  be  required  to  make  returns
of  their  exaltations  and  payment  of  fees  to  the  Grand  Chapter.*

Another  regulation  required  that  none  should  receive  the  Royal
Arch  degree  but  those  who  had  "  passed  the  chair."  *  The  earliest
custom  was  to  confer  it  only  on  those  who  had  been  Masters  of
lodges.  But  this  practice  having  been  found  inconvenient,  as  it  too
greatly  restricted  the  number  of  candidates,  the  law  was  subse-
quently violated,  and  a  fictitious  degree  of  Past  Master  was  insti-
tuted, brethren  being  permitted  by  a  mere  ceremony  to  "  pass  the
chair"  without  having  ever  been  elected  Masters  of  lodges.  Thus
the  distinction  of  achial  and  virtual  Past  Masters  came  in  vogue,
the  degree  or  rank  of  Past  Master  being  thus  virtually  conferred  as
a  prerequisite  to  exaltation.

In  1813  the  United  Grand  Lodge  of  England  abolished  this
practice  and  it  now  admits  Master  Masons  to  be  exalted.  But  the
practice  still  prevails  in  the  chapters  of  the  United  States,  though
efforts  have  at  times  been  unsuccessfully  made  to  abandon  it.

The  "Moderns"  had  seen  with  some  envy,  as  we  may  suppose,
the  success  which  the  "  Ancients "  were  securing,  and  they  very
properly  attributed  it  to  the  prestige  given  to  the  seceders  by  their
fabrication  of  a  Fourth  degree.

It  was  therefore  a  very  judicious  movement  on  their  part  to
avail  themselves  of  a  like  prestige  by  the  extension  of  their  ritual
and  the  adoption  also  of  an  additional  degree.

Hence  we  find  that  some  of  the  "Modems"  formed  a  chapter
for  conferring  the  Royal  Arch  degree  on  June  12,  1765.^  It  has
been  believed  that  Thomas  Dunkerley  was  the  founder  of  this  chap-
ter, but  Bro.  Gould  denies  this,  because  the  minutes  show  that  he
did  not  become  a  member  of  it  until  January  8,  1766.

But  I  am  unwilling  to  reject  the  almost  universally  accepted
tradition  that  to  him  we  owe  the  fabrication  of  the  Royal  Arch  of
the  "Moderns" — a  degree  which  is  said  to  have  differed  in  many
points  from  that  of  the  "  Ancients."

Dunkerley,  who  was  an  illegitimate  son  of  George  the  Second,
and  whose  claims  to  that  paternity  received  a  sort  of  quiet  recog-
nition from  the  royal  family,  was  a  man  of  excellent  character  and

'  "  Laws  and  Regulations  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,"  No.  xiL       'Ibid.,  No.  viii.
^  Gould,  "  Atholl  Lodges,"  p.  38.

ORIGIN   OF  THE   ROYAL  ARCH  i20t

of  considerable  talents.  He  was  very  popular  with  the  Craft  and
tvas  the  author  of  a  new  system  of  lectures,  or  an  improv^ement  of
the  old,  which  had  been  sanctioned  by  the  Grand  Lodge.

In  the  course  of  his  Masonic  studies  he  appears  to  have  been
convinced  of  the  policy,  under  existing  circumstances,  of  supple-
menting the  deficiencies  of  the  original  Third  degree.  We  may
indeed  attribute  to  him  a  higher  motive  than  that  of  policy,  and  be-
lieve that  as  a  Masonic  scholar  he  saw  the  necessity  of  completing
the  system  by  the  fabrication  of  a  Royal  Arch  degree.

It  does  not  therefore  follow  that  because  Dunkerley's  name  does
not  appear  as  a  member  of  the  new  chapter  until  six  months  after  its
formation,  he  may  not  have  had  an  important  part  in  its  organization.
If  he  was,  as  there  can  be  no  valid  doubt,  the  original  fabricator
of  the  Royal  Arch  of  the  "  Moderns,"  from  whom,  except  from  him,
could  the  original  members  of  the  new  chapter  have  received  the  de-
gree which  qualified  them  to  enter  upon  its  organization  ?

That  he  appeared  later  on  the  scene  does  not  militate  against
fiis  influence  and  his  quiet  work  in  its  formation.  There  are  no
records  extant  to  show  what  he  was  doing  between  the  time  when
he  invented  the  degree  and  that  when  it  was  first  put  into  practice
by  the  foundation  of  a  chapter.  The  leading  character  in  a  drama
does  not  always  make  his  appearance  in  the  first  act,  nor  the  hero
of  a  novel  in  the  first  chapter.

It  is  more  logical  to  suppose  that  the  inventor  of  the  Royal
Arch  of  the  "Moderns"  was  the  founder  of  the  chapter  in  1765.
But  if  Dunkerley  was  not  the  inventor,  who  was?  History  upon
the  best  grounds  assigns  the  invention  to  him,  and  to  him  also  I  am
willing  to  ascribe  the  foundation  of  the  chapter,  though  his  name
does  not  appear  on  its  records  until  six  months  after  its  formation.

The  chapter  did  not  long  continue  to  hold  the  position  of  a
private  body.  In  i  766,  according  to  Bro.  Hughan,'  it  assumed  the
rank  of  a  Grand  Chapter.  This  it  must  have  done,  just  as  the
lodge  at  York  in  1725  resolved  itself  into  a  Grand  Lodge  There
were  no  other  chapters  to  unite  with  it,  as  the  four  Lodges  did  in
171 7  to  form  a  Grand  Lodge.  It  simply  changed  its  title  and  en-
larged its  functions.

Dr.  Oliver  places  the  date  of  the  formation  of  the  Grand  Chap-

'  "Memorials  of  the  Union,"  p.  8,  note.

1262  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

ter  at  a  later  date,  that  of  1779.'  This  is,  however,  only  an  assump-
tion,  as  he  gives  no  proof  of  the  correctness  of  his  statement,  and
on  a  point  of  Masonic  history  dependent  on  the  authority  of  old
documents  and  the  correctness  of  a  deduction  from  them  I  am  com-
pelled to  prefer  the  accuracy  and  the  judgment  of  Bro.  Hughan  to
those  of  even  the  venerable  Oliver.

Notwithstanding  that  the  Grand  Chapter  counted  some  of  the
most  distinguished  "  Modern  "  Masons  among  its  members,  it  was
never  officially  recognized  as  a  Masonic  organization  by  the  Grand
Lodge.  In  1792  it  was  resolved  that  the  Grand  Lodge  has  nothing
to  do  with  the  proceedings  of  the  Society  of  Royal  Arch  Masons.  *

Still,  it  met  with  marked  success.  In  1 796  it  had  one  hundred
and  four  chapters  under  its  obedience  and  to  which  it  had  granted
warrants.

Unlike  the  Grand  Chapter  of  the  "  Ancients,"  it  was  indepen-
dent in  its  jurisdiction,  being,  as  has  been  seen,  whollv  unconnected
with  the  Grand  Lodge.  Its  presiding  officers  were  called  the  three
Principals,  and  bore  respectively  as  titles  the  initials  of  the  names
Zerubbabel,  Haggai,  and  Joshua.  Thus  there  was  Principal  Z.,  Prin-
cipal H.,  and  Principal  J.  This  usage  has  been  preserved  in  the
present  Grand  Chapter  of  England.  It  had  for  its  chief  Principal
Thomas  Dunkerley  as  long  as  he  lived,  and  for  its  first  Patron,  the
Duke  of  Cumberland,  who  on  his  demise  was  succeeded  by  the
Duke  of  Clarence.

In  1813,  on  the  union  of  the  two  Grand  Lodges  of  the  "An-
cients" and  the  "  Moderns,"  the  Royal  Arch  degree  was  recognized
as  a  component  part  of  Ancient  Craft  Masonry,  and  the  Supreme
Grand  Chapter  was  established  as  one  of  the  powers  of  English
Freemasonry.

Of  the  two  rituals  then  in  use  that  invented  by  Dunkerley,
which  had  been  practiced  by  the  "Moderns,"  was  preferred,^  but  the
regulation  of  the  "  Ancients,"  which  closely  united  the  Grand  Lodge

'  "  Origin  of  ihe  Royal  Arch,"  p.  38.

*  Hughan  presents  this  fact  in  his  "  Memorials,"  p.  8.  The  Grand  Chapter,  he  says,
was  purely  a  defensive  organization  to  meet  the  wants  of  the  regular  brethren  and  to  pre-
vent their  joining  the  "  Ancients."

^Dunkerley's  ritual  was  Christian  in  its  character,  and  his  principal  symbol,  ihefoun-
dation  stone,  was  made  to  allude  to  the  Saviour.  In  1834  this  ritual  was  abolished  by  the
Grand  Chapter,  and  a  new  one,  less  sectarian  in  its  interpretation  of  the  symbols,  was
adopted,  which  still  continues  in  England  and  in  English  chapters.

J.   i\I.    RAGON

ORIGIN   OF  THE   ROYAL  ARCH  1263

and  the  Grand  Chapter  and  vested  the  presiding  officers  of  both
bodies  in  the  same  persons,  was  adopted.  Hence,  the  Duke  of  Sussex,
who  had  been  elected  the  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  became,
by  virtue  of  his  office,  the  chief  Principal  of  the  Grand  Chapter.

Lyon  says  that  the  Royal  Arch  degree  was  introduced  into
Scotland  about  the  middle  of  the  last  century,  through  the  medium
of  military  lodges  whose  members  had  received  it  in  Ireland.*  The
statement  that  the  degree  was  first  worked  in  Scotland  by  the  "  An-
cient Lodge  of  Stirling "  in  1 743  in  connection  with  the  Knight
Templar  and  other  high  degrees,  is  said  by  Bro.  Lyon  to  be  without
authentic  evidence.  But  the  writer  of  the  introduction  to  the  Gen-
eral Regulations  for  tlie  Goveriinient  of  the  Order  of  Royal  Arch
Masons  of  Scotland  asserts  that  the  Minute  Took  of  the  Chapter
from  1 743  is  still  extant.*

About  1800  several  Templar  Encampments  were  founded  in
Scotland  by  charters  granted  by  a  body  assuming  that  prerogative  in
Ireland.  These  charters  authorized  the  conferring  of  the  Royal
Arch  degree.  There  were  other  chapters  which  at  that  time  prac
ticed  the  degree  without  a  charter.'  The  establishment  of  a  Grand
Encampment  in  181 1  by  a  charter  granted  by  the  Duke  of  Kent,
the  head  of  Templarism  in  England,  put  a  stop  to  the  practice  of
Royal  Arch  Masonry  in  Encampments,  and  that  branch  of  the  in-
stitution was  for  some  time  in  a  very  irregular  position,  though  there
were  many  working  chapters.

But  on  August  28,  181 7,  the  Supreme  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chap-
ter of  Scotland  was  established  by  the  representatives  of  thirty-four
chapters  at  a  General  convocation  of  the  Order  held  at  Edinburgh.*

The  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland,  persistently  wedded  to  the  idea
that  Speculative  Freemasonry  consists  of  only  three  degrees,  has
always  refused  to  recognize  the  Royal  Arch  as  a  part  of  the  system.
At  first  it  prohibited  its  members  from  receiving  the  degree,  but  as
that  extreme  of  opposition  has  long  since  ceased,  the  antagonism
now  reaches  only  a  quiet,  official  non-recognition.

The  introduction  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry  into  the  continent  of
America,  and  especially  into  the  United  States,  will  occupy  our  at-
tention in  the  following  chapter.

'  "  History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  291.

'*  •'  General  Regulations  of  the  Grind  Cliapter  of  Scotlnnd,"  Introduction,  p.  vii.

8  ibid.  *Lyon'i  "  History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,"  p.  290.

CHAPTER   XLIX

THE    INTRODUCTION    OF    ROYAL   ARCH    MASONRY    INTO    AMERICA

jHE  Royal  Arch  degree  was  introduced  into  the
North  American  Colonies  not  very  long  after
its  invention  or  adoption  in  England.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  Ancients  granted  its
first  Warrant  for  a  lodge  in  the  colonies  in  the
year  1758.*  In  the  same  year,  as  will  be  seen
hereafter,  a  chapter  connected  with  an  Atholl
lodge  was  established.  This  alone  would  prove,  if  such  proof  were
necessary,  that  the  Royal  Arch  Masonry  of  Pennsylvania,  where  it
first  appeared  on  this  continent,  was  derived  from  the  "  Grand  Lodge
of  England,  according  to  the  Old  Institutions,"  and  that  the  degree
which  was  then  worked  was  what  is  commonly  known  as  Dermott's
Royal  Arch.

Of  course,  the  degree  must  have  been  conferred  in  a  chapter
working  under  a  Master's  Warrant,  as  at  that  time  no  Grand  Chap-
ter had  been  organized.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  Ancients  had  always  granted  this  privilege
to  its  lodges,  and  it  was  maintained  up  to  the  early  years  of  the
present  century  by  several  of  the  American  lodges.  Thus  as  late  as
January,  1803,  Orange  Lodge  of  Ancient  York  Masons,  an  Atholl
lodge  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  granted  the  privilege  of  its  Warrant
"  for  the  use  of  the  Royal  Arch  Chapter  of  South  Carolina."  *

The  first  Royal  Arch  Chapter  in  America  of  which  we  can  find
any  account,  was  held  in  Philadelphia  in  the  year  1758.  The  author
of  the  Historical  View  prefixed  to  Pennsylvania  Ahima?i  Rezon,
says  that  it  was  held  "  anterior  "  to  that  year.  This  is  manifestly  an
error,  as  the  date  of  the  Warrant  of  the  first  lodge  of  the  "Ancients"

'  It  is  so  stated  in  Gould's  "  Register  of  the  Atholl  Lodges,"  p.  l6,  and  the  fact  is
confirmed  by  the  recent  researches  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania.

2  "  Historical  Sketch  of  Orange  Lodge."  See  Mackey's  "  History  of  Freemasonry
in  South  Carolina,"  p.  47 1.

1264

ROYAL  ARCH    MASONRY    IN  AMERICA  1205

in  that  city,  and  indeed  in  the  country,  was  June  7,  1758,  and  it  is
evident  that  no  chapter  could  have  preceded  the  lodge  in  date  of
birth,  as  the  former  derived  its  authority  from  the  latter,  and  worked
under  its  Warrant.

The  author  of  the  Historical  View,  which  has  just  been  referred
to,  stated  that  it  worked  under  the  Master's  Warrant  of  Lodge
number  3,  and  that  it  was  recognized  by  and  had  communion  with
a  military  Chapter  working  under  a  Warrant  number  351  granted
by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  meaning,  as  the  context  clearly
shows,  the  Atholl  Grand  Lodge  or  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  An-
cients.^

There  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  truth  of  the  statement  that  a  chap-
ter of  Royal  Arch  Masons  was  established  in  Philadelphia  about  the
year  1758  and  that  it  worked  under  the  Master's  Warrant  of  Lodge
number  3.  Bro.  Clifford  MacCalla,  who  is  the  very  best  authority
on  the  early  history  of  Freemasonry  in  Pennsylvania,  says  that  the
minutes  of  this  Chapter,  which  he  designates  as  Jerusalem  Chapter
number  3,  are  in  existence  as  far  back  as  1767,  and  that  they  men-
tion prior  minutes."

But  it  is  not  easy  to  reconcile  the  statement  that  it  held  com-
munion with  a  military  lodge,  numbered  351,  granted  by  the  Atholl
Grand  Lodge,  with  the  facts  of  history.

Up  to  the  year  1 756  the  Atholl  Grand  Lodge  had  granted  only
two  military  Warrants,  numbers  41  and  52,  one  in  1755  and  the
other  in  1756.  In  fact,  at  the  end  of  the  year  1757  the  numbers  on
the  roll  of  that  Grand  Lodge  as  accurately  arranged  by  Bro.  Gould
amounted  to  only  68.'

There  was  a  military  Warrant  numbered  351,  but  it  was  not
granted  until  October,  18 10.*

Indeed,  number  351  is  too  high  for  the  year  1758  roll  of  either
of  the  Grand  Lodges  of  England,  or  of  those  of  Ireland  or  Scotland.
Even  in  England,  the  oldest  of  the  four  bodies,  the  numbers  had
not  at  that  early  period  gone  far  into  the  two  hundreds.

What  then  was  this  military  Lodge,  numbered  as  351,  at  a  time

* "  Ahiman  Rezon  of  Pennsylvania,"  edition  of  1825,  p.  79.
'  "  Philadelphia,  the  Mother  City  of  Freemasonry  in  America,*'  p.  99.
'Gould's  "Atholl  Lodges,"  p.  16.

*Ibid.,  p.  102.     By  a  typographical  error  the  number  is  printed  361   instead  of  351,
dsit  should  evidently  have  been.
80

<266  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

when  no  such  numbers  could  have  been  reached  by  the  existing
registrations,  and  what  was  this  Lodge  number  3  on  the  Pennsylvania
roll  which  held  communion  with  it,  and  both  of  which  were  thus
engaged  in  the  propagation  of  the  Rcval  Arch  degree  in  America  ?
Bro.  MacCalla,  referring  to  the  military  lodges  in  Pennsylvania,
during  and  before  the  war  of  the  Revolution,  says  that  "  Lodge  num
beriSwasin  the  17th  Regiment  British  army."  Now  in  the  first
official  list  of  the  Atholl  lodges  given  in  the  Ahimaii  Rezon  for
1807,  we  find  "  18,  17th  Regiment  of  foot,"  as  the  third  of  the  mili-
tary lodges.  No  date  is  given  for  its  Warrant,  but  from  its  position
in  the  list  we  may  presume  that  it  was  one  of  the  oldest  lodges.
Gould  says  it  was  originally  warranted  as  number  237,  and  he
gives  the  original  18  as  having  been  constituted  as  a  civil  lodge  at
London  in  1753.  This  lodge  becoming  extinct,  the  number  seems
by  a  system  of  registration  peculiar  to  the  Atholl  Masons  to  have
been  taken  up  by  the  military  lodge  instead  of  its  original  number,

237-

Again  this  military  Lodge  number  18  makes  its  appearance  in
another  official  quarter.

C.  Downes,  Past  Master  of  Lodge  number  141,  on  the  registry  of
Ireland,  published  at  Dublin  in  1804,  Lists  of  lodges  "  according  to
the  '  Old  Constitutions '  of  the  kingdom  of  Great  Britain,  and  also
of  America,  the  East  and  the  West  Indias,  &c."  Downes  was  the
printer  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ireland  and  with  its  permission  had
edited  the  Irish  Ahiman  Rezon.  His  Lists  are  therefore  possessed
of  some  official  authority.

In  his  List  of  military  lodges  he  also  gives  Lodge  number  18,  in
the  17th  Regiment,  as  third  lodge  in  order  of  sequence  as  having
been  warranted  by  the  Atholl  Grand  Lodge  of  England.

But  he  also  gives  a  list  of  the  lodges  which  had  been  warranted
up  to  the  year  1804,  amounting  to  65.  How  many  of  these  had
been  discontinued,  and  what  was  the  date  of  any  of  their  warrants,
we  can  not  learn  from  the  List,  which  gives  only  the  numbers  and
places  and  times  of  meeting.'

The  8th  Pennsylvania  lodge   in  Downes's   List  is.  marked  as

*  In  an  article  on  "  Military  Lodges,"  published  by  Bro.  Gould  in  the  "  Freemasons'
Qironicle,"  and  copied  into  the  "Keystone"  (July  31,  1880),  he  finds,  after  much  ri
search,  much  difficulty  in  "disentangling  the  history  of  Lodge  number  l8."  The  ouif
explanation  at  all  satisfactory,  and  that  not  altogether  so,  is  the  one  given  in  the  text

ROYAL  ARCH   MASONRY    IN   AMERICA  120/

•"number  i8,  British  17th  Regiment  of  Foot."  The  coincidence
here  apparent  would  indicate  that  this  was  the  same  lodge  as  that
marked  in  Downes's,  Harper's,  and  Gould's  list  of  military  lodges
warranted  by  the  AthoU  Grand  Lodge  of  England.  By  what  proc-
ess it  changed  its  obedience  from  its  Mother  Grand  Lodge  to  the
Grand  Lodge  ot  Pennsylvania,  Downes  does  not  inform  us.

We  have  an  authentic  record  that  in  1767  there  had  been  and
was  a  military  lodge  in  an  Irish  regiment  stationed  at  Philadelphia.

The  records  of  Lodge  number  3,  which  have  been  copied  in  the
Early  History  and  Constitution  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsyl'
va)iia,^  contained  the  following  item  :

"Dec.  9,  1767.  The  rriajority  of  (the)  Body  was  of  opinion
that  it  would  not  be  proper  to  admit  Bro.  Hoodless  a  member  of
this  or  to  enter,  pass,  or  raise  any  person  belonging  to  the  army,
in  this  lodge,  as  there  is  a  lawfull  warranted  Body  of  good  and
able  Masons  in  the  Royal  Irish  regiment."  *

So  much  for  the  military  lodge  which  is  said  to  have  introduced
Royal  Arch  Masonry  into  the  American  Colonies,  and  through
whose  instrumentality  the  degree  was  first  conferred  in  Lodge
number  3.

Our  next  inquiry  must  be  directed  to  the  character  and  position
of  this  lodge,  which,  without  rhetorical  exaggeration,  may  be  well
called  the  Mother  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry  in  America.

The  Lists  of  the  Atholl  lodges  show  that  the  Grand  Lodge  of
the  Ancients  granted  a  Warrant  for  a  lodge  at  Philadelphia  in
the  year  1758.  On  the  Pennsylvania  roll  this  lodge  was  known  as
number  2,  but  in  Gould's  List  it  is  marked  as  "  No.  69,  Philadel-
phia, 7  June  1758."  On  June  13,  1761,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  An-
cients granted  a  Warrant  for  another  lodge,  which  Gould  records
as  •'  89,  number  i  Philadelphia."  This  Wairant  was,  however,  lost
and  another  one  was  issued  on  June  20,  1764.

It  is  from  the  date  of  this  Warrant  that  the  organization  of  th(
Provincial  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania  is  reckoned.

Why  the  lodge  warranted  in  1 758  should  be  designated  as  num-
ber 2,  wnile  that  warranted  three  years  afterward  should  be  desig

'Compiled  and  published  by  authority  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  1777.

*"  Early  History,"  etc.,  p.  ii.  The  "  Royal  Irish  Regiment"  afterward  became  tht;
18-h  on  the  Muster  roll  of  the  British  army.  See  Debrett's  "  British  Imperial  Calendar
for  1819,"  p.  137.

1268  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

nated  as  number  i,  can  be  accounted  for  in  only  one  way.  There
was  most  probably  a  deputation  accompanying  the  Warrant  for
number  2,  which  deputation  must  have  organized  a  Provincial
Grand  Lodge  which  took  the  number  i.  The  Ahiman  Rezon  of
Pennsylvania,  for  1825,  referring  to  Lodge  number  2,  says  that  "  the
patents  to  Provincial  Grand  Masters  were  usually  in  force  for  one
year,  at  the  expiration  of  which,  if  a  Grand  Lodge  was  formed,  it
elected  its  Grand  Master,  Wardens,  Secretary  and  Treasurer.  .
If  no  Grand  Lodge  was  constituted  upon  a  patent,  it  expired,  and
another  patent  was  issued  as  occasion  required."  *

The  writer  then  concludes  that  "it  is  probable  that  no  Grand
Lodge  had  been  organized  upon  the  first  patent  issued  for  Penn-
sylvania since  a  second  was  issued  on  June  20,  1764,  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England  to  William  Ball,  Esqr.,  and  others  authorizing
them  to  form  and  hold  a  Grand  Lodge  for  the  then  province."  ^

This  conjecture  is  very  plausible.  The  deputation  which  ac-
companied the  Warrant  for  number  69  in  Philadelphia  may  have
been  intended  for  a  Provincial  body,  which  was  not,  however,  com-
pletely organized,  but  which  nevertheless  took  the  number  i,
while  the  lodge  which  on  the  registry  of  the  Atholl  Grand  Lodge
of  England  bore  the  number  69  was  changed  on  the  Pennsylvania
roll  to  number  2.  The  Provincial  deputation  which  had  been  ap-
pointed in  1758  not  having  completely  fulfilled  its  functions  by  the
permanent  establishment  of  a  Provincial  Grand  Lodge,  another
Warrant  for  that  purpose  was  issued  in  1761,  and  that  having  been
lost  on  the  way,  a  second  was  issued  in  1 764,  and  the  Provincial
Grand  Lodge  was  formed.  In  fact  this  must  have  been  merel)^  a
continuation  of  the  first  lodge  or  deputation,  and  the  Lodge  number
69,  which  had  been  originally  transmuted  into  number  2,  retained
that  number,  and,  excepting  the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge,  we  find
no  number  i  on  the  registry  of  Pennsylvania.

But  though  this  deputation  of  1758  did  not  formally  and  per-
manently organize  a  Provincial  Grand  Lodge,  or  if  it  did,  has  left
no  record  of  the  transaction,  it  performed  the  functions  of  one  by
warranting  another  lodge,  which  received  the  number  3.

Of  this  fact  we  have  the  following  evidence.  When  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Ancients  granted  its  warrant  for  a  lodge  in  1 758,  no  furthei

*  "  Ahiman  Rezon  of  Pennsvlvania."  for  1825,  p.  67.  '  Ibid.,  p.  68.

ROYAL  ARCH   MASONRY    IN   AMERICA  1269

notice  of  Pennsylvania  was  taken  by  it  until  it  granted  the  Warrant
numbered  89  on  its  register  in  1761,  which  being  lost  was  replaced
by  another  of  the  same  tenor  issued  in  1 764,  and  which  Gould  calls
number  i,  at  Philadelphia.

Between  1758  and  1764  it  granted  no  more  Warrants  for  the  es-
tablishment of  lodges  in  Pennsylvania,  nor  did  it  ever  afterward
do  so.  With  the  exception  of  the  Warrant  issued  at  first  in  1 761  and
renewed  or  rather  replaced  in  1764,  Freemasonry  in  Pennsylva-
nia appears,  from  the  year  1758,  to  have  been  controlled  solely  by
some  authority  within  the  Province,  and  from  that  authority  Lodge
number  3  must  have  received  its  Warrant.

The  first  act  of  the  Provincial  Deputation,  or  Provincial  Grand
Lodge,  or  whatever  may  have  been  the  character  and  designation  of
the  authority  existing  in  Philadelphia  in  the  year  1758  was  to  grant  a
Warrant  for  the  establishment  of  another  lodge  as  number  3.

There  is  no  record  extant  of  this  Warrant,  but  the  author  of
the  Early  History  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvatna  says  that
"  Lodge  number  3  of  Philadelphia  by  tradition  dates  its  warrant
about  the  same  time  as  number  2."'

This  Lodge  number  3  is  the  one  which  in  1758,  with  the  concur-
rence and  under  the  instruction  of  the  military  lodge  in  the  1 7th
Royal  Irish  Regiment,  introduced  the  Royal  Arch  degree  into  Penn-
sylvania and  worked  it,  as  all  "Ancient"  lodges  at  that  time  did,
under  the  authority  of  its  Master's  Warrant.

The  absence  of  the  records  of  early  Freemasonry  in  Pennsyl-
vania, which  were  lost  or  destroyed  during  the  revolution,  forces  us  to
trust,  more  than  is  desirable  in  writing  history,  to  conclusions  mainly
based  on  conjectures  ;  but  the  conjectures  are  reasonable,  sustained
by  the  strongest  evidence  and  entirely  consistent  with  facts  derived
from  the  very  few  authentic  documents  that  remain.

We  are  told  in  the  Pennsylvania  Ahiman  Rczon  that  other
Chapters  were  afterward  established  "upon  like  principles."  That
is,  they  were  established  under  the  shadow  of  Master's  Warrants.

The  writer  of  the  Historical  View  of  Masomy,  contained  in
the  1825  edition  of  the  Pennsylvania  Ahiman  Rezon,  tells  the  stor>'
of  the  further  progress  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry  in  that  State  in  the
following  words :

'  "  Earlv  History  and  Constitution  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania,"  p.  35

I270  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

••In  November,  1795,  an  irregular  attempt  was  made,  at  the  in-
stance of  one  Molan,  to  introduce  innovations  in  the  Arch  degree
and  to  form  an  independent  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter,  under  the
Warrants  of  numbers  19,  52,  and  67,  held  in  the  city  of  Philadelphia,
and  a  lodge  constituted  by  authority  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Mary-
land, and  another  holding  under  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Georgia,
Chapter  number  3  instituted  an  enquiry  into  these  proceedings,
which  they  declared,  after  investigation,  to  be  contrar)'^  to  the  es-
tablished uniformity  of  the  Craft.  The  Grand  Lodge,  upon  com-
plaint made,  unhesitatingly  suspended  the  Warrants  of  numbers  19,
52,  and  67,  and  having  received  the  report  of  the  committee  raised
for  that  purpose,  resolved  that  Molan  ought  not  to  be  received  as  a
mason  by  the  lodges  or  brethren  under  its  jurisdiction.  The  offend-
ing lodges,  by  the  mild  and  firm  course  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  were
convinced  of  their  errors,  and  were  received  into  favor,  having  their
Warrants  restored  to  them.

"  Throughout  this  controversy,  the  Grand  Lodge  acknowledged
the  right  of  all  regular  warranted  lodges,  so  far  as  they  have  abilii;/
and  number,  to  make  masons  in  the  higher  degrees,  but  lest  differ-
ences might  exist,  or  innovations  be  attempted  in  such  higher
degrees,  which  for  want  of  some  proper  place  to  appeal,  might
create  schism  among  the  brethren,  they  resolved  that  a  Grand  Royal
Arch  Chapter  should  be  opened,  under  the  immediate  sanction  ot
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania  ;  and  that  all  past  and  present
officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  having  duly  obtained  the  degree  of
Royal  Arch,  and  all  past  and  existing  officers  of  Chapters  of  Royal
Arch  masons,  duly  and  regularly  convened  under  the  sanction  of  a
warrant  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania,  to  be  considered
as  members  of  the  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter ;  and  that  all
members  of  the  regular  Chapters  shall  be  admitted  to  their
meetings,  but  without  the  right  to  vote  or  speak  therein,  unless
requested."  ^

It  has,  from  this  record,  been  maintain-jd  that  this  was  the  first
Grand  Chapter  established  in  America,  and  that  Webb  was  mistaken
in  giving  the  priority  to  that  organized  at  Hartford  in  1798.

But  the  truth  is  that  the  Grand  Chapter  established  at  Philadel-
phia in  1 795  was  not  a  Grand  Chapter  in  the  sense  attached  to  such

'■"Ahiman  Rezon  of  Pennsylvania,"  edition  of  1825,  p.  79.

ROYAL  ARCH    MASONRY   IN    AMERICA  1271

a  body  by  those  who  organized  at  Hartford  the  Grand  Chapter  of
the  Northern  States.

The  Grand  Chapter  of  Pennsylvania  was  merely  an  instrument
of  the  Grand  Lodge.  That  body  alone  could  grant  permission  to
hold  a  Chapter,  and  no  Chapter  could  be  held  unless  with  the  sanc-
:ion  of  the  Warrant  of  a  lodge,  and  it  was  expressly  declared  that  the
Grand  Chapter  was  to  be  opened  "  under  the  immediate  sanction  of
the  Grand  Lodge."

Now  all  these  principles  of  dependence  were  repudiated  by
Webb  and  his  associates.  They  expressly  declared  in  the  very  out-
set of  their  labors  of  organization — no  matter  whether  the  state-
ment was  historically  accurate  or  not — that  no  Grand  Lodge  could
"claim  or  exercise  authority  over  any  convention  or  Chapter  of
Royal  Arch  masons."  In  the  first  constitution  which  they  formed
they  placed  Chapters  exclusively  under  the  control  of  Grand  Chap-
ters, and  by  implication  abolished  all  authority  of  Grand  Lodges
over  them  and  at  the  same  time  denied  the  right  of  any  Chapter  to
work  under  the  Warrant  of  a  Master's  lodge.

This  system  has  ever  since  prevailed  in  the  United  States.  It
was  subsequently  adopted  by  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Pennsylvania
itself.

The  Grand  Chapter  established  at  Philadelphia  in  1795  was
only  an  organization  for  the  more  convenient  administration  of
Royal  Arch  Masonry  in  the  bosom  and  under  the  superintendence
of  the  Grand  Lodge,

The  Grand  Chapter  established  in  1798  at  Hartford  was,  as  has
been  shown,  of  a  very  different  construction,  and  based  on  very
different  principles  of  Masonic  law.

To  the  Grand  Chapter  formed  at  Hartford  in  1798  must  there-
fore in  all  fairness  be  given  the  precedency  of  date  as  being  the
first  independent  Grand  Chapter  established  in  the  United  States —
indeed  we  may  say  it  was  the  first  in  the  world,  as  the  Grand  Chap-
ters previously  established  in  England  were  like  that  of  Pennsyl-
vania, dependent  instruments  of  the  Grand  Lodge.

The  credit,  however,  must  be  given  to  Philadelphia  of  having
introduced  Royal  Arch  Masonry  into  the  British  Colonies.  We
have  no  record  of  the  establishment  of  a  Chapter  in  any  other  of
the  Provinces  before  the  year  1758,  at  which  time,  as  we  have  seen,
the  degree  was  conferred  in  a  Chapter  attached  to  Lodge  number  3,

1272  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRV

But  during  the  succeeding  years  of  tlie  i8th  century  the  degree,
under  various  modifications,  was  introduced  into  other  States,  prin-
cipally by  Atholl,  or  as  they  were  pleased  most  incorrectly  to  style
themselves,  "Ancient  York  Masons."

The  original  system  inaugurated  by  the  "  Ancients  "  was  strictly
followed,  and  as  Thomas  Smith  Webb,  the  founder  of  the  American
system,  has  said,  during  all  that  period  "  a  competent  number  of
companions,  possessed  of  sufficient  abilities,  under  the  sanction  of  a
Master's  Warrant,  proceeded  to  exercise  the  rights  and  privileges
of  Royal  Arch  Chapters,  whenever  they  thought  it  expedient  and
proper,  although  in  most  cases  the  approbation  of  a  neighboring
Chapter  was  deemed  useful  if  not  proper."'

The  degree  practiced  was  that  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ancients
from  whom  it  was  derived.  Virginia  was,  however,  an  exception.
Whether  the  English  Royal  Arch  was  worked  in  the  early  period  of
Freemasonry  in  that  State  is  not  known.  Dr.  Dovfi,  the  author  of
the  Virginia  Text  Book  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry,  our  best  authority
on  the  subject,  does  not  inform  us.

Joseph  Myers  was  one  of  the  deputies  of  M.  M.  Hayes,  who  had,
under  the  authority  of  Stephen  Morin,  been  engaged  in  the  dissem-
ination of  the  twenty-five  degrees  of  the  Rite  of  Perfection,  which
was  afterward  developed  into  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite
of  thirty-three  degrees.

Soon  after  1783  Myers  removed  to  Richmond,  Va.,  where,  says
Bro.  Dove,  he  imparted  the  degrees  of  the  Rite  Ecossais  to  many
Master  Masons.*

Among  these  degrees  was  the  Arch  of  Enoch,  which  was  really
Ramsay's  Royal  Arch.  This  degree.  Dove  says,  was  taught  in  Vir-
ginia until  the  year  1820,  when  it  was  abandoned  and  Webb's  degree,
which  was  the  modification  of  the  English  system,  and  which  is  now
universally  practiced  in  the  United  States,  was  adopted.

During  the  latter  part  of  the  i8th  century  several  Chapters  were
organized-  in  Virginia,  each  of  which  worked  under  the  authority  of
Master's  Warrant.  Such  were  the  Chapters  at  Norfolk,  Richmond,
Staunton,  and  Dumfries.  In  the  year  1808  the  first  three  united  in
the  organization  of  a  "  Supreme  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter,"  which
immediately  assumed  jurisdiction  over  the  degree  in  the  State.

•  "  Freemason's  Monitor,"  p.  155.  '  "  Virginia  Text  Book,"  p.  91.

ROYAL  ARCH    MASONRY  IN   AMERICA  1273

The  Royal  Arch  degree  was  introduced  into  New  York  not
long  after  its  introduction  into  Pennsylvania,  and  most  probably  by
some  of  the  English  military  lodges,  many  of  which  were  at  that
time  in  the  Province.'

Independent  Royal  Arch  Lodge  was  warranted  in  December,
1760.  Bro.  John  G.  Barker,  the  author  of  the  Early  History  of
Masonry  hi  New  York,  says  "  that  the  history  of  this  lodge,  prior
to  the  year  1 784,  is  involved  in  obscurity,  as  is  also  the  derivation  of
its  name."  *

But  it  is  evident  that  the  peculiarity  of  the  name  refers  to  the
fact  of  its  having  been  engaged  in  working  the  Royal  Arch  degree.
I  do  not  therefore  hesitate  to  place,  conjecturally,  the  introdua^jon
of  that  degree  into  the  Province  at  a  time  contemporaneous  with  the
organization  of  the  lodge.

From  New  York,  Royal  Arch  Masonry  extended  into  other
Northern  Provinces,  and  independent  Chapters  were  established
which  eventually  gave  birth  to  the  General  Grand  Chapter.

Chapters  were  successively  formed  in  different  parts  of  the
Province,  each  acting  under  the  authority  of  a  Master's  Warrant.
One  of  the  most  important  of  these  was  Washington  Chapter  in  the
City  of  New  York,  which,  as  it  will  hereafter  appear,  granted  War-
rants for  the  establishment  of  other  Chapters.

In  1798  a  Deputy  Grand  Chapter  was  formed  under  the  newly
adopted  constitution  of  the  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter  of  the
Northern  States,  and  when  in  1799  that  body  changed  its  title  to
that  of  the  "  General  Grand  Chapter,"  the  Deputy  Grand  Chapter
of  New  York  assumed  rank  and  name  as  a  "  Grand  Chapter."

In  the  Province  of  Massachusetts,  Royal  Arch  Masonry  was  in-
troduced about  the  year  1 769,  probably  a  year  or  two  later.

In  that  year  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  granted  a  Warrant
for  a  lodge  under  the  title  of  "  St.  Andrew's  Lodge  number  82."
In  the  same  year,  if  we  may  credit  the  statement  of  Bro.  C.  W.
Moore,' "the  degree  was  conferred  in  Boston  in  a  "Royal  Arch

'Of  the  nine  lodges  engaged  in  1782  in  the  organization  of  the  Provincial  Grand
Lodge  of  New  York,  six  were  military  lodges,  attached  to  different  regiments  in  the  Brit-
ish Army.

^"  Early  History  and  Transactions  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  State  of  New  Vork,*
published  by  Kane  Lodge,  1876,  p.  17.

*"  Freemasons'  Monthly  Magazine,"  vol.  xii.,  p.  165.

(274  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Lodge,"  which  he  "thinks"  was  attached  to  St.  Andrew's  Lodge;
Subsequent  researches  have  removed  all  uncertainty  on  that  point.

There  is  no  positive  information  as  to  the  original  source  whence
the  ritual  of  the  degree  as  it  was  practiced  by  the  St.  Andrew's
Chapter  was  derived.  Its  introduction  has  been  attributed  to  Moses
Michael  Hayes,  who  is  said  to  have  introduced  it  from  France,
under  the  authority  of  a  patent  dated  December  6,  1 778.  This  state-
ment Bro.  Moore  declares  to  be  not  true,^  and  his  close  official  con-
nection for  a  long  series  of  years  with  the  Masonry  of  Massachusetts,
certainly  makes  him  a  competent  judge.

But  besides  Hayes  was  one  of  the  Inspectors  appointed  by  Stephen
Morin  for  the  propagation  of  the  Rite  of  Perfection  which  subse-
quently became  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite,  and  if  the  degree
had  been  instituted  by  him,  it  would  have  assumed,  which  it  did  not,
the  form  of  Ramsay's  Royal  Arch,  or  the  thirteenth  degree  of  that
Rite,  as  it  did  in  Virginia,  where  Royal  Arch  Masonry  was  intro-
duced by  Myers,  who  was  one  of  the  collaborators  of  Hayes.

But  according  to  Moore,  the  degrees  conferred  by  the  St.
Andrew's  Chapter  corresponded  in  number  and  name  with  the  de-
grees which  were  then  conferred  in  Scotland,  and  hence  he  asserts
with  great  plausibility  that  the  system  was  brought  over  from  Scot
land,  perhaps  at  the  same  time  that  the  Warrant  for  St.  Andrew's
Lodge  was  issued.

The  degree  had  no  rapid  growth  in  Massachusetts.  In  1798
there  were  but  two  Chapters  in  the  State.  St.  Andrew's  at  Boston,
and  King  Cyrus's  at  Newburyport.  These  two  united  to  form  a
Deputy  Grand  Chapter,  and  in  1 799  became  the  Grand  Chapter  of
Massachusetts,  under  the  new  Constitution  of  the  General  Grand
Chapter.

The  history  of  the  introduction  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry  into
Rhode  Island  p'^esents  some  interesting  facts  in  reference  to  the
degrees  which  v.  ere  at  that  time  conferred  preparatory  to  the  Royal
Arch.'

In  tiie  year  1 793  a  number  of  the  members  of  St.  John's  Lodge
number  i,  in  the  city  of  Providence,  met  to  consult  upon  the  prop-

'"  Freemasons'  Monthly  Magazine,"  vol.  xii.,  p.  165.

^The  facts  stated  in  this  narrative  are  derived  from  the  Records  of  St.  John's  Lodge,
sxtracts  from  which  were  published  in  "  The  Warden,"  a  Masonic  magazine,  printed  at
Providence.  No.  IV..  September,  1879,  p.  23  et  sea.

ROYAL  ARCH    MASONRY    IN   AMERICA  1275

er  steps  to  be  taken  for  the  establishment  of  a  Royal  Arch  Chap-
ter, after  consulting  with  those  brethren  who  were  already  in  pos-
session of  the  degree.

An  agent  was  accordingly  sent  to  New  York,  who,  on  October
5,  1793,  returned  with  a  Dispensation  issued  by  Washington  Chap-
ter in  the  city  of  New  York.

Though  called  in  the  official  records  a  Dispensation,  the  words
of  the  instrument  show  that  it  was  really  a  Warrant  of  Constitution,
Its  date  is  September  3,  1 793.

The  brethren  proceeded  under  this  Warrant  to  organize  P.rov-
idence  Chapter  number  2.  This  was  done  on  November  23,  1793,
with  the  assistance  of  certain  Royal  Arch  Masons  who  had  been  in-
vited from  Newport,  and  who  were  members  of  a  Chapter.

As  we  learn  from  the  records  of  this  Chapter,  the  essential  offi-
cers were,  a  High  Priest,  King,  Scribe,  Royal  Arch  Captain,  and
Zerubbabel,  the  latter  officer  evidently  being  the  one  now  known  as
Principal  Sojourner.  The  fact  that  an  inferior  office  was  attributed
to  Zerubbabel  instead  of  the  more  exalted  station  of  King,  as  is  now
the  case,  shows  that  the  ritual  used  in  New  York  and  in  Rhode
Island  was  different  from  the  present  one.

Such  a  position  for  the  "  Prince  of  the  Captivity  "  is  more  con-
formable to  the  ritual  of  the  Sixteenth  degree  or  Prince  of  Jerusa-
lem, in  the  Rite  of  Perfection  which  afterward  became  the  Scottish
Rite,  but  altogether  incompatible  with  the  functions  ascribed  to  him
in  the  Royal  Arch  of  the  present  day.

This  circumstance  would  indicate  that  there  is  some  foundation
for  the  hypothesis  that  in  its  early  introduction  into  the  American
Colonies,  Royal  Arch  Masonry  was  to  a  considerable  extent  affected
by  the  rituals  of  the  Haiites  Grades  or  High  Degrees,  which  were
brought  over  from  France  in  1761  by  Stephen  Morin  as  the  Agent
of  the  "  Deputies  General  of  the  Royal  Art,"  for  the  purpose  of
"  rnultiplying  the  sublime  degrees  of  High  Perfection."*

Morin  appointed  his  Deputies,  who  spread  over  the  West  India
islands  and  the  continent  of  North  America,  and  there  is  very  strong
evidence  that  they  or  some  of  them  exercised  an  influence  in  the
organization  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry  in  several  parts  of  the  country.
Charters  for  Mark  Lodges  were  originally  issued  by  Grand  Councils

'  The  language  of  the  Patent  issued  to  Morin.

1276  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

of  the  Prince  of  Jerusalem.  The  Select  degree  was  one  of  the  hon
orary  degrees  conferred  by  the  Inspectors — we  nave  seen  that  Myers,
one  of  Morin's  Inspectors,  organized  the  Royal  Arch  Masonry  ol
Virginia  according  to  the  ritual  of  the  Thirteenth  degree — Moses
Michael  Hayes,  who  was  also  an  Inspector  of  the  new  Rite,  was  at
one  time  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts,  and
as  he  was  a  very  zealous  Mason  and  a  very  energetic  officer,  it  can
scarcely  be  doubted  that  he  exercised  an  influential  connection  with
St.  Andrew's  Chapter,  the  first  Chapter  established  in  that  State —
and  finally  we  have  a  significant  fact  stated  in  the  records  of  the  or-
ganization of  the  chapter  at  Providence,  which  shows  the  intimate
relation  which  existed  at  that  time  between  the  Royal  Arch  Masons
who  founded  the  Chapter  and  certain  possessors  of  the  High  De-
grees imported  into  this  country  by  the  deputies  and  agents  of
Stephen  Morin.

When  the  Dispensation  or  Warrant  had  been  issued  by  Wash-
ington Chapter  for  the  holding  of  a  Chapter  at  Providence,  the
brethren  to  whom  it  had  been  granted,  feeling  perhaps  incompetent,
from  their  want  of  skill  and  experience  to  undertake  unaided  the
task  of  organization,  invited  the  assistance  of  the  Royal  Arch  Masons
who  resided  at  Newport  to  give  their  assistance  in  the  ceremony.
The  invitation  having  been  accepted,  the  lodge  met  on  Tuesday
evening,  October  29th.  But  "  unavoidable  necessity  having  pre-
vented the  attendance  of  the  brethren  from  Newport,  the  brethren
who  had  met,  agreed  to  postpone  any  further  meeting  until  they
should  arrive."  Nearly  a  month  passed  before  any  further  steps
were  taken  toward  the  organization,  and  it  was  not  until  Novem-
ber 23d  that  the  Newport  Royal  Arch  Masons  having  then  made
their  appearance,  the  organization  was  completed.

The  evidence  of  the  connection  of  these  Newport  brethren  with
the  "  High  Degrees"  is  to  be  found  in  the  following  extract  from
the  record  of  the  proceedings  •

"  Our  worthy  and  respectable  Brethren  from  Newport,  viz.  i
R.  W.  Moses  Seixas,  45th  Degree  or  Deputy  Inspector  General  of
Masonry  in  and  thro'out  the  State,  and  Master  of  St.  John's  Lodge
number  i,  in  Newport,  the  W.  Peleg  Clark  28th  Degree  or  Knight
of  the  Sun,  and  Senior  Warden  of  the  Grand  Lodge  in  this  State,
and  the  Hon.  Thomas  W.  Moore  28th  Degree  or  Knight  of  the
Sun  and  Consul  of  his  Britannic  Majesty  in  this  State,  having  this

ROYAL  ARCH    MASONRY   IN   AMERICA  1277

Day  cheerfully  attended  at  the  Council  chamber  in  this  Town,
agreeably  to  invitation,  for  the  express  Purpose  of  assisting  in  the
Formation  of  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter,  the  Brethren  of  the  Royal
Arch  here,  with  the  brethren  aforesaid  and  our  worthy  Brother,
Samuel  Stearns,  7th  Degree,  R.  A.  (who  also  attended  by  Invitation),
proceeded  agreeably  to  the  Directions  in  that  case  provided  to  open
and  consecrate  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter,  by  the  name  of  '  Providence
Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons'  under  the  Dispensation  from
the  M.  W.  Washington  Chapter  of  R  A.  Masons  of  New  York,
etc."*

The  figure  "45  "  is  evidently  either  an  error  of  the  pen  in  the
manuscript  record  or  of  the  press  in  the  printed  copy  in  The  Warden.
It  should  be  "  43."  In  David  Vinton's  Slioi-t  Historical  Account
of  Masonry  appended  to  his  Masonic  Minstrel,  which  was  pub-
lished at  Dedham,  in  Massachusetts,  in  the  year  18 16,  will  be  found
a  list  of  the  degrees  said  to  be  conferred  in  Charleston,  New  York,
and  Newport.  The  number  is  43,  and  the  last,  or  43d,  is  Sovereign
Grand  Inspector-General.  The  number  is  made  up  by  adding  to
the  thirty-three  degrees  of  the  Scottish  Rite  ten  others,  embracing
the  degrees  of  the  American  Rite  and  several  Orders  of  Knight-
hood. In  this  enumeration  the  Knight  of  the  Sun  is  made  the  38th,
and  therefore  I  suppose  that  the  number  "  28"  prefixed  to  that  de-
gree in  the  extract  above  quoted  is  also  an  error.  This  enumeration
of  43  degrees  was  never  accepted  nor  used  by  the  legitimate  bodies
of  the  Scottish  Rite,  but  only  by  some  spurious  associations  which
then  existed.  Newport  was  the  locality  of  one  of  these  associations,
and  Moses  Seixas  was  its  chief.  This  does  not,  however,  affect  the
truth  of  the  statement  that  the  possessors  of  the  "  High  Degrees,"
whether  legally  or  illegally  obtained,  sought,  in  the  infancy  of
Royal  Arch  Masonry  in  this  country,  to  take  a  part  in  its  institu-
tion and  in  giving  complexion  to  its  ritual.

There  is  another  record  in  these  minutes  of  the  proceedings  of
Providence  Chapter  which  is  of  far  greater  importance,  as  it  shows,
officially,  the  number,  names,  and  sequence  of  the  degrees  which  in
the  year  1 793  and  for  some  time  before  were  considered  as  essen-
tially preliminary  to  the  reception  of  the  Royal  Arch.

At  the  meeting  on  October  5,  1 793.  when  the  Dispensation  was

•  Proceedings  of  Providence  Chapter,  published  in  "  The  Warden,"  No.  iv.,  p.  34.

1278  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

received  from  New  York,  we  find  the  following  proceedings  re.
corded :

"  Our  M.  W.  having  suggested  that  in  order  to  confer  the  R.
A.  Degree  it  would  be  necessary  that  the  Brethren  who  were  Can-
didates for  the  same  should  previously  be  initiated  in  Three  De-
grees which  were  between  that  of  Master  Mason  and  the  R.  A.,
and  to  accomplish  the  business  as  soon  as  possible,  proposed  the
immediate  opening  of  a  lodge  for  that  purpose,  which  was  done
accordingly.

"  Present,  M.  W.  Daniel  Stillwell,   M.

W.  JONA.   DONNISON,  S.  W.

W.  Jacob  Smith,  J.  W.
Br.  William  Magee.
•  And  the  Brethren  whose  names  here  follow  after  due  prepa-
ration were  regularly  initiated  in  the  degrees  of  Master  Mark,  Past
Master,  and  Most  Excellent  Master."

This  record  conclusively  proves  that  Thomas  Smith  Webb  was
not  the  inventor  of  the  Mark  and  Most  Excellent  degrees,  an
opinion  that  has  been  entertained  by  several  Masonic  writers.
Webb  was  not  initiated  into  the  symbolic  degrees  until  about  the
year  1792  ;  certainly  not  before,  for  having  been  born  in  October,
1 77 1,  he  was  not  qualified  by  age  to  receive  those  degrees  at  an
earlier  period.  The  Royal  Arch  degree  he  of  course  obtained  at  a
still  later  date,  and  it  is  certain  that  in  October,  1 793,  he  could  not
have  been  competent  by  skill  or  experience  to  invent  a  ritual,  nor
could  he  have  had  influence  enough  to  establish  it.

All  that  can  justly  be  ascribed  to  him  is  that  in  1 798,  and  in  the
subsequent  years  in  which  he  was  engaged  in  teaching  a  ritual,  he
modified  the  degrees  of  the  Chapter,  as  well  as  those  of  the  lodge,
so  as  to  give  them  that  permanent  form  which  they  have  ever  since
retained.

But  though  it  appears  very  satisfactorily  from  this  record  that
about  the  year  1793  the  system  of  degrees  given  in  a  Royal  Arch
Chapter  was  well  settled  in  the  Northern  States,  at  least  in  New
York  and  in  New  England,  yet  in  other  parts  of  the  United  States
and  in  Canada  there  remained  for  a  long  time,  even  to  the  early
years  of  the  19th  century,  a  great  diversity  in  the  names  and  number
of  the  preparatory  degrees.

In  Philadelphia,  where  Royal  Arch  Masonry  made  its  first  ap"

ROYAL  ARCH   MASONRY    IN   AMERICA  1279

pearance,  having  been  deriv^ed  from  England  through  a  military
lodge,  warranted  by  the  Ancient  Masons,  the  system  pursued  by
the  Atholl  Grand  Lodge  appears  to  have  adopted,  and  the  Royal
Arch  immediately  followed  the  Master's  degree.  Such  was  the
case  in  Royal  Arch  Lodge  number  3,  whose  minutes,  as  far  back  as
1767,  have  been  preserved.'

This  lodge  was  so  styled  because  it  conferred  the  Royal  Arch
degree  as  well  as  the  three  symbolic  degrees.  In  its  minutes,  so  far
as  they  have  been  published,  we  shall  find  no  allusion  to  any  pre-
paratory steps.  Indeed,  the  only  reference  to  the  degree  in  the
earlier  minutes  is  on  December  3,  1767,  when  the  important  ad-
mission is  made  that  the  initiation  into  the  symbolic  degrees  of  a
candidate  who  had  been  Entered,  Passed,  and  Raised  by  three
Royal  Arch  Masons  acting  without  a  Warrant  was  lawful.'  There
h  no  evidence  elsewhere,  either  in  England  or  America,  that  this
prerogative  was  ever  claimed  or  admitted  for  the  possessors  of  the
Royal  Arch  degree.

It  was,  however,  from  the  earliest  period  made  the  qualification
of  the  Royal  Arch  degree  that  the  candidate  should  have  passed
the  chair  either  by  election  or  by  a  dispensation  from  the  Grand
Master.

We  learn  from  the  minutes  of  Jerusalem  Chapter  number  3  that
in  1 783  the  Royal  Arch  as  given  in  Pennsylvania  differed  so  much
from  that  conferred  in  Scotland  that  Bro.  George  Read,  coming
from  the  latter  country,  u^here  he  had  been  made  a  Royal  Arch
Mason,  "  not  being  able  to  make  himself  known  in  some  of  the
most  interesting  points,  he  was  (in  consequence  of  his  certificate)
granted  the  privilege  of  a  second  initiation."  Bro.  Charles  E.
Meyer,  when  quoting  this  extract  from  the  Minutes,  in  his  History
of  Royal  Arch  JMasonry  and  of  Jerusalem  Chapter  number  j,  as  a
proof  that  the  rituals  of  Scotland  and  Pennsylvania  were  not  alike,
says:  "It  would  be  interesting  to  know  what  these  points  wer?
that  Bro.  Read  did  not  possess."

' "  See  Early  History  and  Constitutions  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania,"  Part
I.,  p.  II.

^  "  It  appearing  by  good  authority  that  Bro.  John  Hoodless  has  been  duly  and  lawjidly
entered,  passed  and  raised  at  Fort  Pitt  in  the  year  1759  by  our  brethren,  John  Maine,
James  Woodward  and  Richard  Sully,  all  Royal  Arch  Masons." — Minutes  of  Royal  Arch
Lodge,  No.  3.

I280  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

I  think  it  very  probable  that  there  was  a  difference  in  the  rituals
of  the  two  countries  at  that  time,  as  there  is  at  the  present  day.
But  the  proof  of  it  from  this  record  is  not  positive,  since  the  ques-
tion may  very  naturally  arise,  whether  the  difficulty  in  this  case
arose  from  the  difference  of  ritual  or  from  the  ignorance  or  forget-
fulness  of  the  candidate,  who  had  possibly  not  retained  in  full  the
lesson  which  he  had  been  taught.

In  May,  1795,  we  have  the  first  record  of  the  adoption  of  the
Mark  as  a  preparatory  degree,  though  Bro.  Myers  thinks  it  was
doubtless  previously  conferred  as  a  side  degree.

The  first  record  of  the  Most  Excellent  Master's  degree  in  the
minutes  of  Jerusalem  Chapters  is  on  November  5,  1796,  and  from
that  time  the  three  preparatory  degrees  have  been  conferred  in
Pennsylvania  as  they  are  in  the  other  States.

In  Virginia,  the  Royal  Arch  was  introduced  as  we  have  already
seen  by  Myers,  and  was  not  the  degree  practiced  either  by  the
Ancient  Masons  of  England  or  by  the  Chapters  of  ihis  country.  It
was  the  Thirteenth  degree  or  Royal  Arch  of  Solomon,  contamed  in
the  series  of  degrees  of  the  Rite  of  Perfection.  Dislocated  from  its
proper  place  in  the  original  Rite  to  which  it  belonged,  it  was  made
to  follow  the  Third  degree,  without  the  interpolation  of  any  pre-
paratory step.

Subsequently  the  Virginia  Chapters  introduced  preliminary  de-
grees, derived  from  other  sources.  In  the  minutes  of  the  Grand
Chapter,  as  late  as  1808,  we  find  references  to  the  degrees  of  "  Most
Excellent  Master,"  and  of  "  Arch  and  Royal  Arch  Excellent  and
Super-Excellent  Masons."'

In  Connecticut  all  the  Chapters  except  one  had  derived  their
Warrants  from  Washington  Chapter  of  New  York,  and  necessarily
adopted  the  system  of  degrees  which  was  practiced  by  it  and  by  the
Chapters  which  it  established.  These  degrees,  as  we  have  already
seen  in  the  instance  of  Providence  Chapter  in  Rhode  Island,  were
the  Master  Mark,  Past  and  Most  Excellent  Master  as  prehminary
to  the  Royal  Arch.^

•  Dove,  "  Royal  Arch  Text  Book,"  p.  132.

^  There  was  not,  however,  absolute  uniformity.  According  to  Wheeler  ("  Records  of
Capitular  Masonry  in  Connecticut,"  p.  21),  the  minutes  of  Solomon  Chapter  No.  5  at
Derby  contain  no  notice  of  the  Past  Master's  degree  until  January,  1796,  and  the  Mark
and  Most  Excellent  Master  are  not  mentioned  until  a  later  period.

ROYAL   ARCH    MASONRY   IN    AMERICA  1281

But  in  Vanden  Broeck  Chapter,  at  Colchester,  which  was  war-
ranted in  1 796  by  the  Grand  Chapter  of  New  York,  the  names  and
sequence  of  the  preparatory  degrees  was  as  follows  :  Mark  Master,
Excellent  Master,  and  Super-Excellent  Master.  In  1800  it  con-
formed to  the  system  which  has  been  established  by  the  General
Grand  Chapter.  Excellent  Master  was  exchanged  for  Past  Master,
and  Super-Excellent  for  Most  Excellent.'  It  is  probable  that  the
change  was  rather  in  the  nomenclature  than  in  the  ritual.

We  have  already  seen  that  the  names  and  ranks  of  the  officers
of  Chapters  in  the  i8th  century  differed  from  those  now  used.  For
instance,  Zerubbabel,  who  now  occupies  one  of  the  prominent  places
in  our  modern  ritual,  was  formerly  placed  at  the  bottom  of  the  list.

The  by-laws  of  Hiram  Chapter,  at  Newtown,  which  were  adopted
March  3,  1792,  give  the  following  succinct  account  of  the  duties  of
these  officers,  and  throw  considerable  light  upon  the  ritualistic  his-
tory of  the  time  :

"  It  shall  be  the  duty  of  the  High  Priest  to  preside  at  every
meeting,  to  direct  the  business  and  to  give  occasionally  a  lecture  ;
of  the  King  to  preside  in  the  absence  of  the  High  Priest,  and  to
assist  him  in  his  duty  ;  of  the  Scribe,  to  preside  in  the  absence  of
both,  to  cause  the  Secretary  to  enter  in  a  fair  and  regular  man-
ner the  proceedings  of  the  Chapter  in  a  book  provided  for  that
purpose,  to  summons  the  members  for  attendance  at  ever}'^  regular
and  special  meeting  and  also  to  administer  the  obligation  ;  of  Zerub-
babel, to  superintend  the  arrangements  of  the  Chapter  ;  of  the  Royal
Arch  Captain,  to  keep  watch  at  the  Sanctuary  ;  of  the  three  Grand
Masters,  to  watch  the  vails  ;  of  the  Treasurer,  to  receive  the  monies,
to  keep  an  account  thereof  and  to  pay  none  but  on  the  warrant  of
the  High  Priest,  and  to  render  an  account  at  the  meeting  previous  to
the  annual  election  ;  of  the  Secretary,  to  keep  the  minutes  under  the
direction  of  the  Scribe,  to  receive  the  fees  for  admission,  and  to  pay
the  same  to  the  Treasurer  ;  of  the  Clothier,  to  provide  and  to  take
care  of  the  clothing ;  of  the  Architect,  to  provide  and  take  care  of
the  furniture."*

The  Royal  Arch  was  probably  introduced  into  many  of  the
Southern  States,  as  it  had  been  into  the  Northern,  either  by  pos-
sessors of  the  degree  coming  direct  from  England,  or  by  military

'"Records  of  Capitular  Masonry  in  Connecticut,"  p.  24.

*By-laws  of  Hiram  Chapter,  Article  VIII.     See  Wheeler's  "  Early  Records,"  p.  10.

t282  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

lodges  in  the  British  army,  and  which  held  their  Warrants  from  the
Grand  Lodge  of  the  Ancients.

Chapters  were,  however,  not  organized  as  independent  bodies,
but  the  degree  was,  until  some  time  after  the  beginning  of  the  19th
century,  conferred  both  in  South  Carolina  and  Georgia,  and,  I  think,
also  in  North  Carolina,'  in  Chapters  dependent  on  and  deriving  their
authority  from  Master's  Warrants.

Many  years  ago,  while  investigating  the  history  of  Royal  Arch
Masonry  in  South  Carolina,  I  was  led  to  make  the  following  state-
ments, the  correctness  of  which  I  have  since  had  no  reason  to  doubt.*

I  have  in  years  past  made  the  acquaintance  of  several  Royal
Arch  Masons  in  the  upper  part  of  South  Carolina,  who  had  received
their  degrees  in  Master's  lodges.  The  long  period  which  had  elapsed
since  their  withdrawal  from  the  active  pursuits  of  Freemasonry,  and
the  imperfection  of  memory  attendant  on  their  extreme  age,  pre-
vented them  from  furnishing  me  with  all  the  particular  information  in
reference  to  the  ritual  which  I  desired,  but  I  learned  enough  from  my
frequent  conversations  with  these  Patriarchs  of  the  Order  (all  of
whom  must  long  since  have  succeeded  to  their  heritage  in  the  Celes-
tial Lodge)  to  enable  me  to  state,  positively,  that  in  the  upper
counties  of  the  State,  at  as  late  a  period  as  the  year  181 3,  the  Royal
Arch  degree  was  conferred  in  Master's  lodges.  The  same  condi-
tion  of  things  existed  in  the  neighboring  State  of  Georgia.

The  manuscript  "  Minutes  of  Royal  Arch  Chapter  number  i,
under  the  sanction  of  Forsyth's  Lodge  number  14,"  are  now,  or  were,
some  years  ago,  in  the  Archives  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Georgia.
For  an  examination  of  these  interesting  records  I  was  indebted  to
the  kindness  of  the  Grand  Secretary,  Comp.  B.  B.  Russell.

The  Chapter  met  in  the  City  of  Augusta,  and  the  Minutes,  to
which  I  shall  have  occasion  again  to  refer,  are  restricted  to  the  year
1796.

These  records  state  that  the  chapter  at  Savannah,  having  an-
nounced, its  intention  to  apply  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Georgia  for

*  The  first  warrant  for  an  independent  chapter  in  North  Carolina  was  granted  in  1808
by  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Virginia  to  "  sundry  Royal  Arch  Masons  "  in  Bertie  County.
But  the  petition  was  recommended  by  the  Lodge  at  Windsor,  and  by  the  Master  of  the
Lodge  at  Winston.  The  Royal  Arch  Masons  who  signed  the  petition  had,  it  is  to  be  sup-
posed, previously  received  the  degree  in  these  Lodges.  Dove,  "  Royal  Arch  Text  Book,"
p.  122.

*  Mackey's  "  History  of  Freemasonry  in  South  Carolina,"  1861,  p.  A^T-

ROYAL  ARCH   MASONRY   IN   AMERICA  1283

a  dispensation  or  warrant,  a  letter  was  written  to  the  brethren  at
Savannah  by  the  chapter  at  Augusta  on  May  27,  1796,  in  which  the
following  declaration  appears  :

"  If  there  is  any  rule  or  by-law  that  requires  a  Royal  Arch  Chap-
ter to  apply  for  a  special  dispensation  or  Warrant,  it  is  unknown  to
us.  We  conceive  that  the  Warrant  given  to  Forsyth's  Lodge  was
sufficient  for  the  members  thereof  to  confer  any  degree  in  Masonry
agreeable  to  the  ancient  usages  and  customs."*

The  same  usage  was  pursued  at  the  same  time  in  South  Carolina,
where,  as  has  been  previously  stated,  Orange  Lodge  number  14  in
1796  adopted  a  resolution  to  "sanction  the  opening  of  a  Royal
Arch  Chapter  under  its  jurisdiction,  and  again  in  January,  1803,  re-
solved "  that  the  privilege  of  the  Warrant  of  this  lodge  be  granted  for
the  use  of  the  Royal  Arch  Chapter  of  Charleston."*

That  this  usage  was  not  confined  to  the  Atholl  lodges  is  seen
from  the  fact  that  while  Orange  Lodge  in  South  Carolina  was  a
lodge  of  "  Ancient  Masons,"  all  the  lodges  in  Georgia  were  "  Mod-
erns," the  Atholl  Grand  Lodge  of  England  never  having  extended
its  jurisdiction  over  that  State  nor  organized  any  lodges  in  it.

The  first  Chapters  in  these  States,  under  the  constitution  of  the
General  Grand  Chapter,  were  established  in  1805  at  Beaufort  in
South  Carolina  and  at  Savannah  in  Georgia.

The  Grand  Chapter  of  the  former  State  was  formed  in  181 2  ;
that  of  the  latter  in  1816.

But  reverting  to  the  subject  of  the  early  ritual  of  Royal  Arch
Masonry  and  to  the  differences  which  prevailed  toward  the  end  of
the  1 8th  century  in  the  names  and  character  of  the  degrees,  we  shall
meet  with  some  interesting  information  in  these  Minutes  of  the
Royal  Arch  Chapter  at  Augusta.

The  business  of  electing  candidates  for  the  Royal  Arch  having
been  accomplished  in  an  informal  meeting  of  Royal  Arch  Masons.
a  Master  Mason  lodge  was  opened,  when,  the  qualification  for  exal
tation  being  to  "  pass  the  chair,"  they  were  made  what  are  now  called
"Virtual  Past  Masters."

We  find  this  in  the  lecords  of  the  first  meeting  of  the  Chapter
of  which  the  following  is  an  exact  transcript  made  by  me  from  the
original  manuscript.

'  "MS.  Minutes  of  Forsyth's  Royal  Arch  Chapter."

•  "  Historical  Sketch  "  appended  to  By-laws  of  Orange  Lodge,  p  A,

I2«4  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

"At  a  meeting  of  the  subscribers,  Royal  Arch  Masons  at  For>
syth's  Lodge  room  the  29th  February,  1 796.

"  Read  a  petition  from  Brothers  Joseph  Hutchinson,  William
Dcarmond,  and  John  McGowan,  Master  Masons  of  Forsyth's  Lodge,
praying  to  become  Royal  Arch  companions  ;  and  the  same  being
agreed  to,  a  Master's  lodge  was  then  opened.

"  Present :  Thomas  Bray,  Master ;  Thomas  Davis,  S.  VV.  ;  D.  B.
Butler,  J.  W. ;  Joseph  Hutch'.nson,  Tyler  ;  William  Dearmond,
John  McGowan.

"  Brothers  Hutchinson,  Dearmond,  and  McGowan  were  regu-
larly passed  the  chair  and  obtained  the  degree  of  Past  Master,  and
returned  thanks  for  the  same.     The  lodge  was  then  closed.

"  A  Royal  Arch  Chapter  was  then  opened  in  ancient  form.

"  Present  :  Thomas  Bray,  H.  P.  ;  Thomas  Davis,  C.  S.  ;  D.  B.
Butler,  K.

"  Bro.  Hutchinson  (attending)  received  the  preparatory  degrees  ;
also  Brothers  Past  Masters  Dearmond  and  McGowan.  They  were
then  in  rotation  raised  to  the  super-excellent  degree  of  Royal  Arch
Masons,  and  returned  thanks  for  the  same."

Subsequent  minutes  are  of  the  same  character,  except  that  the
election  of  the  candidates  took  place  in  a  Master's  lodge  and  not  as
in  the  first  in  an  informal  meeting  of  Royal  Arch  Masons.  But,  of
course,  we  are  to  suppose  that  all  the  Master  Masons  present  were
not  only  Past  Masters  but  also  Royal  Arch  Masons.

But  what  were  the  preparatory  degrees  ?  That  question  is  an-
swered by  the  Minutes  of  November  29,  1796,  where  the  names  of
these  degrees  are  for  the  first  time  given.     The  record  is  as  follows  :

"  At  an  extra  meeting  of  Forsyth's  Lodge,  convened  by  the  order
of  the  W.  M.  and  held  at  the  court-house  on  Tuesday  29th  Novem-
ber, I  796.

"  Present :  Thomas  Bray,  Master ;  Thomas  Davis,  S.  W. ;
William  Dearmond,  J.  W.  pro  tern.

"  A  Master's  Mark  lodge  was  opened  for  the  purpose  of  confer-
ring the  degrees  of  Fellow-Craft  Mark  and  Master  Mark  on  Broth-
ers John  McGowan,  Lawrence  Trotti,  and  John  B.  Wilkinson,  when
they,  attending,  received  the  same  and  returned  thanks  to  the  lodge;
which  was  then  closed.     A  Past  Master's  lodge  was  then  opened.

"  Present  :  Thomas  Bray,  M.  ;  Thomas  Davis,  S.  W.  ;  William
Dearmond,  J.  W.  pro  tern.  ;  John  McGowan.

ROYAL  ARCH   MASONRY    IN   AMERICA  1285

"The  lodge  was  opened  for  the  purpose  of  conferring  the  degree
of  Past  Master  on  Brothers  Lawrence  Trotti  and  John  B.  Wilkinson,
when,  they  attending,  were  regularly  passed  the  chair  and  obtained
the  degree  of  Past  Master,  and  gave  thanks  for  the  same.  The  lodge
was  then  closed  in  ancient  form.  The  Royal  Arch  Chapter  was
then  opened.

"  Present :  Thomas  Bray,  H.  P. ;  Thomas  Davis,  C.  S.  ;  John
McGowan,  K.  ;  William  Dearmond,  R.  A.  C.

"The  minutes  of  the  last  Chapter  were  read.  The  M.  E.  H.  P.
informed  the  companions  present  that  the  Chapter  was  called  for
the  purpose  of  conferring  the  Super-excellent  degree  on  Brothers
Lawrence  Trotti  and  John  B.  Wilkinson,  who  were  then  attending.
Bro.  Trotti  was  then  duly  prepared  and  received  the  preparatory
degree  of  R.  M.  and  R.  A.,  also  Brother  Wilkinson.  They  were
then  raised  to  the  super-excellent  degree  of  Royal  Arch  Mason,
and  returned  thanks.  The  Chapter  was  then  closed  by  order  of
the  M.  E.  H.  P."

These  records  supply  us  with  several  interesting  and  important
facts  relating  to  the  ritual  and  the  organization  of  Royal  Arch
Masonry  in  America  about  the  close  of  the  i8th  century.

The  Chapter  degrees  were  then,  as  has  been  already  shown  from
other  sources,  conferred  under  the  sanction  of  the  Warrant  of  a
Master's  lodge,  but  the  body  in  which  the  Royal  Arch  degree  was
given  was  called  a  Chapter.

Nine  Royal  Arch  Masons  were  not  then  deemed  necessary  to
the  opening  of  a  Chapter  or  the  conferring  of  the  degree.

The  only  oflficers  mentioned  are  a  High- Priest,  Chief  Scribe,
King,  Royal  Arch  Captain,  Treasurer  and  Secretary,  and  the  Scribe
appears  to  have  taken  precedence  of  the  King.  The  officer  called
"Zerubbabel "  in  the  Northern  Chapters,  is  not  mentioned  in  the
Southern.  In  the  latter  it  is  probable  that  the  same  officer  was
called  the  "  Royal  Arch."  The  Royal  Arch  Captain  could  not  have
supplied  his  place,  for  both  officers  are  recorded  in  the  Minutes  of
the  Providence  Chapter  in  Rhode  Island.  The  absence  of  an  officer
called  "Zerubbabel"  in  the  Southern  Chapters,  while  it  is  found  in
all  Northern  ones,  would  evidently  indicate  some  difference  in  the
rituals  of  the  two  sections  of  the  country.  It  is  also  significant  on
this  point,  that  in  the  records  of  the  Chapters  at  Augusta,  no  men-
tion is  made  of  the  three  Grand  Masters  of  the  Vails.     They  are  it>

t286  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

eluded  in  the  list  of  officers  of  all  the  Chapters  in  Connecticut  which
derived  their  Warrants  and,  we  may  suppose,  their  rituals  from  the
Washington  Chapter  in  New  York.

It  was  always  deemed  an  indispensable  qualification  for  the  re-
ception of  the  Royal  Arch  degree  that  the  candidate  should  be  a
Past  Master.  This  practice,  established  in  England  at  the  origin  of
the  degree,  was  followed  by  all  the  Chapters  in  America.  As  the
restriction  of  the  degree  to  those  only  who  had  presided  for  twelve
months  over  a  Symbolic  lodge  and  thus  become  "  Actual  Past  Mas-
ters" would  have  circumscribed  the  number  of  candidates  within  a
very  narrow  and  inconvenient  limit,  the  ceremony  of  passing  the  chair
was  invented,  by  which  the  candidate  became  a  "  Virtual  Past  Mas-
ter." This  usage,  which  was  the  real  origin  of  what  is  now  called  the
Past  Master's  degree,  was  adopted  by  all  the  American  Chapters,  and
thus  the  earliest  records  of  the  Augusta  Chapter  show  that  each
person  before  being  raised  to  the  degree  of  Royal  Arch  was  made
CO  "  pass  the  chair."

At  first,  as  is  shown  by  the  minutes  of  February  29,  1 796,  the
ceremony  was  performed  in  a  Master's  lodge.  The  same  usage  was
observed  at  several  subsequent  meetings,  but  on  December  26,  1 796,
for  the  first  time  it  is  recorded  that  the  Master's  lodge  was  closed
and  a  Past  Master's  was  opened  for  the  purpose  of  conferring
what  had  then  become,  not  a  mere  qualification,  but  a  preparatory
degree.

Other  preparatory  degrees  are  mentioned  in  the  earliest  Minutes,
but  their  names  are  not  given  until  a  later  period.  From  the  later
minutes  we  learn  what  these  degrees  were.  They  are  recorded  in  the
November  minutes  as  having  the  following  names  and  being  given
in  the  following  order  :

Past  Master,  Fellow-Craft  Mark,  Master  Mark,  R.M.,  and  R.A.
These  last  two  degrees  are  never  recorded  otherwise  than  by  their
initials,  but  we  have  every  reason  to  believe,  from  other  authorities,
that  they  were  Royal  Master  and  Royal  Ark,  or  Royal  Ark
Master.

Samuel  Cole,  writing  in  1826,  says  of  these  two  degrees  that
"they  are  considered  as  merely  preparatory  and  are  usually  con-
ferred immediately  before  the  solemn  ceremony  of  exaltation."
Cole's  work  received  the  sanction  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Maryland,
and  k  is  hence  evident  that  these  two  degrees  were  at  one  time

ROYAL  ARCH  MASONRY  IN  AMERICA      128;

conferred  in  the  Chapters  of  the  State.  They  were  not  known  to
or  practiced  in  the  chapters  of  the  Northern  States.

It  will  be  noticed  also,  as  a  further  evidence  of  the  want  of  uni-
formity in  the  rituals  of  the  i8th  century,  that  the  Minutes  of  the
Chapter  at  Augusta  make  no  reference  to  the  Most  Excellent  Mas-
ter's degree,  which  from  an  early  period  was  always  conferred  as  a
preparatory  step  to  the  Royal  Arch  in  the  Northern  States.

Passing  over  from  the  United  States  to  Canada,  we  shall  find
the  Royal  Arch  ritual  at  the  close  of  the  1 8th  century  in  another  but
still  confused  condition.

In  the  year  1856  the  members  of  Ancient  Frontenac  Chapter,
attached  to  the  St.  John's  Lodge  number  491,  English  Register,
situated  at  Kingston  in  Canada,  published  a  history  of  the  Chapter
from  its  organization.  From  this  little  but  interesting  work  may  be
gleaned  a  very  satisfactory  statement  of  the  character  and  condition
of  Royal  Arch  Masonry  at  the  end  of  the  iSth  and  the  beginning
of  the  19th  century.

Ancient  Frontenac  Chapter,  which  is  or  was  the  old  Chapter  in
Canada  West,  was  established  at  Freemasons'  Tavern,  in  the  town
of  Kingston,  on  June  7,  1797,  under  the  sanction  of  a  Warrant
which  had  been  granted  to  Lodge  number  6  on  November  20,
1795,  by  R.  W.  William  Jarvis,  at  that  time  Provincial  Grand  Mas-
ter of  Canada,  under  the  AthoU  Grand  Lodge  of  England.

Master's  lodges  in  Canada,  as  in  the  neighboring  United  States,
assumed  the  right  to  hold  Chapters  for  conferring  the  Royal  Arch
degree.  It  was  a  right  always  sanctioned  by  the  usages  of  the  "  An-
cients" and  tolerated  by  the  "  Moderns,"  nor  ever  denied  until  after
the  organization  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  at  Hartford.  As
late  as  February,  1806,  at  a  convocation  held  in  Kingston  a  charge
was  preferred  against  a  member  of  Frontenac  Chapter  of  "  unma-
sonic  conduct  in  striving  to  separate  the  Holy  Royal  Arch  Chapter
from  the  body  of  number  6."

Until  the  year  1809,  the  three  principal  officers  of  the  Chapter
were  designated  as  "  i,  High-Priest;  2,  Solomon,  King  of  Israel;
and  3,  Hiram,  King  of  Tyre."  Judging  by  this,  we  must  conclude
that  the  ntual  used  in  Frontenac  Chapter  differed  very  materially
from  all  the  various  systems  which  prevailed  at  the  time  in  other
parts  of  America.

The  earliest  records  of  the  Chapter  do  not  show  any  recognition

1288  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

of  preparatory  degrees.  The  "  Most  Excellent "  was  first  conferred
on  April  17,  1807,  and  the  "Mark"  on  July  20,  1818.  These  de-
grees were  not,  however,  even  then  obligatory,  but  appear  to  have
been  taken  or  not,  at  the  action  of  the  candidate  ;  and  as  there  was
an  attendant  expense,  few  of  the  brethren  availed  themselves  of  the
opportunity  of  receiving  them.  The  Past  Master's  was,  however,
a  prerequisite  qualification  toward  exaltation,  and,  as  elsewhere,  it
was  always  conferred  in  the  Master's  lodge  to  which  the  Chapter
was  attached.

Up  to  the  end  of  the  last  century,  many  candidates  were  exalted
when  only  seven  Royal  Arch  Masons  were  present,  the  mystical
number  nine  not  being  then  required  to  constitute  a  quorum  for
conferring  the  degree.

Capitular  Masonry  seems  to  have  been  separated  in  Canada
from  Lodge  Masonry  in  1806,  for  on  January  i8th  in  that  year  a
decision  was  received  from  the  Provincial  Grand  Master  for  holding
a  Chapter  at  Kingston,  which,  says  the  pamphlet  from  which  I  have
been  quoting,  was  "  the  first  step  towards  this  Chapter  working  un-
der a  warrant  separate  from  that  of  the  Craft  lodge."

On  February  10,  1818,  the  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter  of  Upper
Canada  was  established,  and  on  March  25th  of  the  following  year
Frontenac  Chapter  number  i  received  its  Charter  as  one  of  its  con-
stituents.

The  extracts  given  in  the  preceding  pages,  from  the  records  of
Chapters  working  at  the  close  of  the  last  and  the  beginning  of  the
present  century,  have  been  sufficient  to  show  that  there  prevailed  at
that  time,  in  the  different  parts  of  the  American  Continent,  a  very
confusing  variety  in  the  ritual  of  the  Royal  Arch  and  in  the  number
of  preparatory  degrees,  which  clearly  demonstrates  that  the  conflict-
ing systems  must  have  been  derived  from  different  sources.

What  these  sources  were  it  is  impossible  to  precisely  say,  at
least  in  every  instance,  in  consequence  of  the  unavoidable  scantiness
of  the  records.  The  general  drift  of  history  leads  us  to  believe  that
among  these  sources  were  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ancients,  in  Eng-
land, and  at  a  later  period  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Moderns,  both  of
whom  disseminated  the  degree  through  their  military  lodges,  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland,  or  rather  the  Royal  Arch  Masons  of  that
kingdom,  who  practiced  the  degree  without  the  recognition  of  their
Grand  Lodge,  and  as  in  Virginia  and  the  Southern  States  the  pos-

ROYAL  ARCH   MASONRY   IN   AMERICA  1289

sessors  of  the  "  Sublime  degrees,"  as  they  were  called,  which  had
been  introduced  into  this  country  from  France  by  Stephen  Morin
and  his  emissaries  or  deputies.

The  result  of  borrowing  rituals  from  so  many  different  sources
inevitably  led  to  a  deplorable  diversity  in  the  ceremonies,  which  led
the  Royal  Arch  Masons  in  some  of  the  Northern  States  to  attempt
the  laying  of  a  firm  foundation  on  which  a  uniform  system  might
be  established,  and  the  constitution  of  a  superintending  authority
which  should  maintain  that  uniformity,  and  give  to  Capitular  Ma-
sonry a  symmetry  and  shapeliness  which  should  secure  to  it  a  per-
manence and  success  such  as  had  been  previously  given  to  Craft
Masonry  by  the  ritualistic  labors  of  Desaguliers  and  his  associates
in  the  second  and  third  decades  of  the  i8th  century.

This  work  of  reformation  and  of  purification,  in  which  the  dross
was  rejected  and  the  pure  ore  only  retained,  was  finally  accomplished
by  the  institution  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  of  the  United
States,  which  was  one  of  the  most  important  events  in  the  Masonic
history  of  the  United  States.

To  this  event  we  must  therefore  next  direct  our  attention.  But
the  extent  and  interest  of  the  subject  demand  a  separate  chapter  for
its  consideration.

CHAPTER  L

THE  GENERAL  GRAND  CHAPTER  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES

'S  the  system  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry  which  is
practiced  in  the  United  States  of  America  is
really  indebted  to  the  organization  of  the  Gen-
eral Grand  Chapter  for  its  existence  and  popu-
larity, no  history  of  that  body  could  be  complete
without  some  account  of  the  Masonic  Hfe  of
Thomas  Smith  Webb,  who  was  the  founder  of
both  the  system  and  the  General  Grand  Chapter.

I  shall  therefore  precede  the  history  of  the  origin  of  the  General
Grand  Chapter  by  a  brief  sketch  of  the  Masonic  services  of  that
distinguished  ritualist'

Thomas  Smith  Webb  was  the  son  of  English  parents  who  had
emigrated  to  this  country  a  few  years  before  his  birth,  and  settled  at
Boston,  in  the  State  of  Massachusetts,  where  he  was  born,  on  October

Having  received  an  elementary  education  in  the  public  schools,
he  was  bound  as  an  apprentice  to  the  art  of  printing,  or  perhaps  of
book-binding.  There  is  some  uncertainty  about  this  question,  but
the  testimony  preponderates  in  favor  of  the  former.  It  is,  however,
not  material  as,  in  after  life,  he  did  not  pursue  either  calling.

Having  soon  after  removed  to  Keene,  in  New  Hampshire,  he
there  married,  and  about  the  year  1 792  was  initiated  in  the  primary
degrees  of  Freemasonry.

Subsequently  he  removed  to  Albany  in  New  York.  It  is  prob-
able that  he  there  received  the  higher  degrees,  as  we  find  him,  while
residing  there,  engaged  in  the  establishment  of  a  Chapter  of  Royal
Arch  Masons  and  a  Commandery  of  Templars.     We  may  also  sup-

'  In  "  Mackey's  Encyclopaedia  of  Freemasonry  "  will  be  found  a  copious  memoir  ol
Webb,  from  which,  as  the  creation  of  my  own  pen,  I  have  not  hesitated  to  borrow  the
materials  and  indeed  much  of  the  language  of  the  present  sketch.

THE  GENERAL  GRAND   CHAPTER  1291

pose  that  while  living  in  Albany  he  became  acquainted  with  the
Ineffable  degrees  of  which  Albany  was  an  early  seat.

It  was  about  this  time  that  Webb  commenced  his  career  as  a
Masonic  ritualist  and  teacher.  In  1 797  he  published  the  first  edition
of  his  Freemasons  Monitor  ;  or  Illustrations  of  Masonry}  In  the
Preface  to  this  work  he  acknowledges  his  indebtedness  to  Preston
for  the  observations  on  the  first  three  degrees.  But  he  states  in  his
Preface  that  he  has  made  an  arrangement  of  the  lectures  which  differs
from  that  of  Preston,  because  the  latter's  distribution  of  the  sections
is  not  "  agreeable  to  the  present  mode  of  working."  '  If  other  proof
were  wanting  this  would  be  enough  to  show  that  the  "  Prestonian
work,"  as  it  has  been  called,  differed  from  that  then  practiced  in  the
United  States,  and  ought  to  be  an  answer  to  those  who  at  a  later
period  have  attempted  to  claim  an  identity  between  the  ritual  and
lectures  of  Webb  and  those  of  Preston.

About  1 801  he  removed  to  Providence,  R.  I.,  and  commenced
the  manufacture  of  wall-paper  on  an  extensive  scale.  But  he  did
not  abandon  his  labors  in  the  field  of  Speculative  Masonry.  By  in-
vitation he  became  a  member  of  St.  John's  Lodge  number  2,  of  Prov-
idence. He  passed  through  the  various  grades  of  office  and  was
elected  in  18 13  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Rhode  Island.

His  labors  in  the  constitution  of  a  Grand,  and  afterward  a
General  Grand  Chapter,  will  be  hereafter  referred  to.

While  continuing  his  interest  in  the  manufacture  in  which  he  was
engaged  he  did  not  neglect  his  Masonic  labors,  but  in  1816  visited
the  Western  part  of  the  United  States  and  appeared  to  have  been  ac-
tively employed  in  the  organization  of  Chapters  and  Encampments.

He  died  at  Cleveland,  O.,  where  he  was  on  a  visit  on  July  6,
1 8 19,  and  was  buried  with  Masonic  honors.  The  body  was  subse-
quently disinterred  and  carried  to  Providence,  where  it  was  rein-
terred  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Rhode  Island.

'  This  edition  is  very  rare.  The  title-page,  in  a  copy  now  lying  before  me.  is  as
follows  :  "The  Freemasons  Monitor;  or  Illustrations  of  Masonry:  In  two  Parts.  By  a
Royal  Arch  Mason,  K.  T. —  K,  of  M. — &c.,  &c.  Printed  at  Albany,  for  Spencer  and
Webb,  Market  street,  1797,"  p.  284.

'  "  The  observations  upon  the  first  three  degrees  are  principally  taken  from  Preston's
'  Illustrations  of  Masonry,'  with  some  necessary  alterations.  Mr.  Preston's  distribution  0/
the  first  lecture  into  six,  the  second  into  four,  and  the  third  into  twelve  sections,  not  being
agreeable  to  the  present  mode  oi  working,  they  are  arranged  in  this  work  according  to  the
general  practice."     First  edition.     Preface.

1292  HISTORY    OF    FREEMASONR\

As  to  Webb's  Masonic  character  and  services,  I  see  no  reason  to
say  otherwise  than  what  I  have  already  said  on  a  former  occasion.

His  influence  over  the  Freemasons  of  this  country  is  to  be  as-
cribed almost  wholly  to  his  personal  communication  with  them  and
to  his  oral  teachings.  He  has  made  no  mark  in  Masonic  literature
of  any  importance.  His  labors  and  his  reputation  as  an  author  are
confined  to  a  single  work,  and  that  one  of  but  little  pretension.  It
is,  indeed,  only  a  meager  syllabus  of  his  Lectures.  He  seems,
though  the  author  of  a  Masonic  system  now  universally  practiced
in  the  United  States,  to  have  been  but  very  inadequately  imoucu
with  the  true  philosophical  spirit  of  symbolism.  He  was  an  able
workman  of  the  ritual  which  he  had  invented,  and  an  effective
teacher,  and  to  this  he  owed  his  popularity.  The  deficiencies  of  his
system  are  to  be  regretted,  but  Webb  undoubtedly  deserves  com-
mendation for  his  devotion  and  perseverance  in  the  establishment  of  a
system  of  ritualism  which  has  been  productive  of  such  abundant  fruit.

The  Freemasons  of  America  have  generally  attributed  to  him
the  invention  of  the  preliminary  degrees  of  the  Chapter.  But  of  this
fact  we  have  no  satisfactory  evidence,  while  there  is  much  to  the
contrary.  It  has  been  seen  in  a  preceding  chapter  that  the  Mark
and  Past  degrees,  as  well  as  the  Most  Excellent,  though  probably
under  a  different  name,  had  been  conferred  in  Chapters  before  Webb
had  been  exalted  in  Albany  to  the  Royal  Arch.

But  what  Webb  really  did,  was  to  change  the  rituals  of  these
degrees  and  to  give  to  them  the  form  which  is  now  universally
adopted  in  the  Chapters  of  this  country.

For  instance,  the  Mark  Master's  and  the  Most  Excellent  Master's
songs,  which  now  constitute  essential  parts  of  the  working  of  those
degrees,  and  are  indispensably  connected  with  their  most  important
ceremonies,  were  composed  by  him  and  first  published  in  his  Fi-ee-
Masotts  Monitor.  They  could  therefore  have  been  introduced  into
the  work  only  after  his  composition  of  them.

In  short,  Webb  can  be  deemed  the  founder  of  what  is  now  called
the  "  American  Rite"  only  in  so  far  that  he  modified  the  degrees
vhich  had  previously  existed,  and  gave  to  them  not  only  a  new  and
improved  form,  but  established  them  in  a  legitimate  sequence  which
has  ever  since  been  recognized  by  the  constituted  authorities.

Previous  to  his  teaching,  there  was  no  regularity  in  the  manage-
ment of  the  preliminary  degrees.      In  some  Chapters  they  were  con

THE   GENERAL  GRAND   CHAPTER  1293

ferred  as  preparatory  to  the  Royal  Arch  ;  in  others  they  were  omitted,
and  the  Royal  Arch  immediately  followed  the  Third  degree.  For
the  permanent  regularity  now  existing,  we  are  certainly  indebted  to
Thomas  Smith  Webb.

With  this  brief  sketch  of  the  Masonic  life  of  this  popular  ritual-
ist, we  are  now  prepared  to  direct  our  attention  to  that  portion  of
his  labors  which  were  especially  given  to  the  establishment  of  Royal
Arch  Masonry  on  a  plan  peculiar  to  this  country.

The  supplement  of  the  Master's  degree,  which  had  been  intro-
duced by  the  Seceders  into  the  English  system,  about  the  middle
of  the  last  century,  was  not  long  after  imported  into  this  country.
This  importation  has  been  generally  attributed  to  the  military  lodges
which  worked  under  the  rigime  of  the  AthoU  Grand  Lodge,  and
which  had  received,  at  the  time  of  their  constitution,  the  instruc-
tions and  the  privileges  of  the  Royal  Arch.

It  has  been  seen  that  the  first  American  Chapter  was  instituted
at  Philadelphia  in  1758,  and  that  the  degree  had  been  received
from  an  English  military  lodge,  at  that  time  stationed  in  that  city.

At  a  somewhat  later  period  in  the  century  the  Royal  Arch  degree
was  conferred  in  many  lodges  in  the  United  States,  under  a  Master's
Warrant.  This  custom  continued  for  several  years  to  be  observed
in  the  Southern  States,  where  distinct  Chapters  were  unknown  until
the  19th  century.

But  in  the  Northern  States,  the  control  of  the  Royal  Arch  was
assumed  by  independent  Chapters  at  an  earlier  period.

From  the  records  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  it  appears  that
St.  Andrew's  Chapter  was  instituted  at  Boston,  in  1769  ;  King  Cyrus
Chapter  at  Newburyport,  Mass.,  in  1790;  Providence  Chapter  at
Providence,  R.  I.,  in  1793;  Solomon  Chapter  at  Derby,  Conn.,  in
1794  ;  Franklin  Chapter  at  Norwich,  another  of  the  same  name  at
New  Haven,  Conn.,  and  Hudson  Chapter  at  Hudson,  N.  Y.,  in  i  796.^

Temple  Chapter  at  Albany,  N.  Y.,  is  mentioned  in  the  Proceed-
ings of  a  convention  held  in  i  797,  and  was  probably  instituted  at
an  earlier  period.

On  October  24,  1797,  a  convention  of  Royal  Arch  Masons  was
held  in  Boston,  for  the  purpose  of  forming  a  Grand  Chapter.

At  this  convention  delegates  from  three  Chapters  were  present:

'  "  Compendium  of  Proceedinj^s  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  from  1797  to  1856,"  p.  8.

1294  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

St.  Andrew's,  of  Boston  ;  Temple,  of  Albany,  and  King  Cyrus,  of
Newburyport.

This  convention,  probably  in  consequence  of  the  small  number
of  Chapters  represented,  did  no  more  than  issue  a  circular  addressed
to  the  various  Chapters  in  the  Northern  States,  recommending  a
future  meeting  to  be  held  at  Hartford.

In  this  circular  the  delegates  at  Boston  enunciated  the  principle
which  has  since  been  universally  accepted  as  the  law  of  Royal  Arch
Masonry  in  the  United  States ;  namely,  that  "  no  Grand  Lodge  of
Master  Masons  can  claim  or  exercise  authority  over  any  convention
or  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons,  nor  can  any  Chapter,  although  of
standing  immemorial,  exercise  the  authority  of  a  Grand  Chapter."^

On  January  24,  1 798,  a  convention  of  delegates  from  seven
Chapters  assembled  at  Hartford,  in  the  State  of  Connecticut.

At  this  convention  the  following  Chapters  were  represented  :  St.
Andrew's,  of  Boston  ;  King  Cyrus,  of  Newburyport ;  Providence,
of  Providence  ;  Solomon,  of  Derby  ;  Franklin,  of  Norwich  ;  Frank-
lin, of  New  Haven  ;  and  Hudson,  of  Hudson.

The  States  represented  were,  therefore,  Massachusetts,  Rhode
Island,  Connecticut,  and  New  York.

It  was  then  unanimously  resolved  that  the  delegates  should  es-
tablish a  Grand  Chapter  for  the  States  of  New  Hampshire,  Massa-
chusetts, Rhode  Island,  Connecticut,  Vermont,  and  New  York,  to
be  denominated  "The  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter  of  the  Northern
States  of  America."*

On  the  next  day,  delegates  from  Temple  and  from  Horeb  Chap-
ter, both  of  New  York,  presented  their  credentials.  These  nine
Chapters  then  proceeded  to  the  organization  of  a  Grand  Chapter,

On  January  26,  1 798,  a  constitution  was  adopted  and  imme-
diately afterward  the  officers  were  elected.

The  preamble  to  this  constitution  ordains  and  establishes  the
body  as  "  The  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter  for  the  Northern  States
of  America,"  a  title  under  which  jurisdiction  was  assumed  over  the
States  of  New  Hampshire,  Massachusetts,  Rhode  Island,  Connecti-
cut, Vermont,  and  New  York.

In  each  of  these  States  there  was  to  be  under  the  jurisdiction  of
the  Grand  Chapter  a  Deputy  Grand  Chapter,  over  which  a  Deputy

'  "  Compendium  of  Proceedings,"  p.  6.  *  Ibid.,  p.  9.

THE  GENERAL  GRAND  CHAPTER  3295

Grand  High-Priest  was  to  preside,  assisted  by  a  Deputy  Grand
King  and  a  Deputy  Grand  Scribe.

The  Grand  Chapter  was  to  be  composed  of  its  officers  elected
for  the  time,  of  the  Past  Grand  High- Priests,  Kings,  and  Scribes,
and  of  the  first  three  officers  of  the  Deputy  Grand  Chapters.

The  Deputy  Grand  Chapters  were  to  be  composed  of  the
elected  officers,  of  the  Past  Deputy  Grand  High-Priests,  Kings,
and  Scribes,  and  of  the  High-Priests,  Kings,  and  Scribes  of  the
subordinate  Chapters.

The  Grand  Chapter  was  to  meet  biennially  and  the  Deputy
Grand  Chapters  annually,  and  the  first  meeting  of  the  former  body
was  to  be  held  at  Middletown,  Conn.,  on  the  following  September.

In  this  Constitution  the  nomenclature  and  precedency  of  the
Capitular  degrees,  which  had  hitherto  been  somewhat  unsettled,  was
finally  determined,  so  that  the  names  and  order  of  sequence  should
remain  forever  thereafter  as  they  were  then  established.

This  arrangement  has  ever  since  remained  unchanged  and  makes
the  Mark  Master,  Past  Master,  and  Most  Excellent  Master  essen-
tially preliminary  degrees,  to  be  followed  by  the  Royal  Arch  degree
as  the  consummation  of  the  system.

This  constitution  gave  to  the  Grand  Chapter  an  exclusive  power
to  hear  and  determine  all  controversies  between  Chapters  within  its
jurisdiction,  and  an  appellate  jurisdiction  over  all  the  proceedings  of
the  Deputy  Grand  Chapters.

As  far  as  regards  the  States  of  Massachusetts,  Rhode  Island,
Connecticut,  and  New  York,  which  States  were  represented  in  the
convention,  the  Constitution  was  definitely  adopted.  But  the  Chap-
ters in  Vermont  and  New  Hampshire,  not  having  sent  delegates,  a
committee  was  appointed  to  solicit  their  concurrence  in  the  organi-
zation.

The  convention  then  proceeded  to  the  first  election  on  the  newly
adopted  constitution,  which  resulted  in  the  following  choice  of
officers  :

Ephra'm  Kirby,  of  Connecticut,  Grand  High-Priest ;  Benjamin
Hurd,  Jr.,  of  Massachusetts,  Grand  King ;  Thomas  Smith  Webb,
of  New  York,  Grand  Scribe;  William  Woart,  of  Massachusetts,
Grand  Secretary  ;  Rev.  Abraham  Lynsen  Clarke,  of  Rhode  Island,
Grand  Chaplain  ;  Stephen  Titus  Hosmer,  of  Connecticut,  Grand
Treasurer,  and  Gurdon  Lathroo.  of  Connecticut.  Grand  Marshal.

,296  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

It  will  be  seen  that  the  meeting  here  described  was  only  that  o(
a  convention  to  take  the  preliminary  steps  for  the  organization  of  a
Grand  Chapter.  The  first  meeting  of  the  "  Grand  Chapter  of  the
Northern  States,"  after  that  organization,  was  holden  on  October  19.
1798,  at  the  city  of  Middletown  in  Connecticut  The  object  of  the
meeting,  as  expressed  in  the  Proceedings,  was  "for  the  choice  of
officers."  Although  these  had  already  been  elected,  at  the  meeting
of  the  convention  in  January  preceding,  that  election  was  not  by  the
Grand  Chapter,  which  was  at  that  time  inchoate,  and  could  hardly
have  been  considered  as  regular.  It  was  therefore  legalized  by  the
subsequent  action  on  October  i,  179S,  which  was  in  fact  the  first
meeting  of  the  Grand  Chapter.

"Agreeably  to  the  Constitution,"  says  the  compendium,  "the
Grand  Chapter  proceeded  to  the  choice  of  officers,  when  on  sorting
and  counting  the  votes  the  old  officers  were  all  declared  re-elected." '

No  other  business  was  transacted,  and  the  Grand  Chapter  ad-
journed to  hold  its  second  meeting  on  the  second  Wednesday  of
January,  1799,  at  Providence,  in  the  State  of  Rhode  Island.

The  Grand  Chapter  accordingly  convened  at  Providence  on  Jan-
uary  9,  1799,  when  the  representatives  of  the  Deputy  Grand  Chaf>-
ters  of  Massachusetts,  Rhode  Island,  and  New  York  were  present.

At  this  Convocation  some  important  changes  in  the  regulations
were  made,  and  the  constitution  was  revised.

The  title  of  the  Grand  Chapter  was  altered  to  that  of  the  "  Gen-
eral Grand  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons  for  the  six  Northern
States  of  America,"  and  its  meetings  were  changed  from  a  biennial
to  a  septennial  period.  The  Deputy  Grand  Chapters  were  in  future
to  be  styled  "  State  Grand  Chapters."  The  powers  of  the  General
Grand  Chapter  were  much  abridged.  The  section  giving  it  appel-
late jurisdiction  over  the  State  Grand  Chapters  was  omitted  from  the
new  Constitution,  and  has  never  again  been  re-asserted.  Its  powers
were  confined  to  a  control  of  the  ritual  and  to  the  establishment  of
Chapters  in  States  where  there  were  no  Grand  Chapters.  It  con-
tinued, however,  to  maintain  the  prerogative  of  defining  the  powers
and  functions  of  State  Grand  Chapters.  This  prerogative  has  nevei
been  denied,  and  the  law  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry,  as  it  now  exists
and  has  ever  since  the  close  of  the  last  century  existed  in  this  coun
iry,  is  dependent  on  the  Constitution  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter

'  "Compendium  of  Proceedings,"  D.  18.

THE  GENERAL  GRAND  CHAPTER       129;

Thus,  the  internal  regulations  of  the  State  Grand  Chapters  and
their  subordinates  are  all  directed  by  this  Constitution.  It  pre-
scribed the  method  of  granting  charters,  the  number  of  petitioners,
the  fee  to  be  paid,  the  titles  of  the  officers,  the  time  of  election,  the
price  of  the  degrees,  and  the  rule  for  receiving  candidates,  with
several  other  points,  all  of  which  have  always  been  implicitly  obeyed.

In  a  word,  the  Constitution  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  has
been  received  as,  in  some  sort,  the  common  law  of  Royal  Arch  Ma-
sonry in  this  country.  This  law,  derived  from  and  formulated  by
that  body,  has  universally  been  accepted,  and  it  is  admitted  that  it
cannot  be  repealed  or  rescinded  in  any  of  its  parts  by  any  inferior
body.

If  the  General  Grand  Chapter  had  accomplished  no  other  good
result  by  its  organization,  this  alone  would  furnish  a  sufficient  de-
fense of  its  institution,  and  an  answer  to  those  discontented  spirits
who  from  time  to  time  have  sought  for  its  dissolution.

The  third  convocation  was  holden  at  Middletown,  Conn.,  on
January  9,  1806.  Representatives  from  only  four  States  were  pres-
ent. The  Constitution  was  again  revised,  and  some  important
changes  were  made.  Hitherto  the  General  Chapter  had  claimed
jurisdiction  over  only  the  six  Northern  States.  But  it  now  sought
to  extend  its  territorial  limits  over  the  whole  country  and  assumed
the  more  pretentious  title  of  "  The  General  Grana  Chapter  of  Royal
Arch  Masons  for  the  United  States  of  America."  This  title  it  has
ever  since  retained.

An  oath  of  allegiance  was  also  for  the  first  time  prepared,  and
every  officer  of  a  lodge  or  Chapter  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Gen-
eral Body  was  required,  on  assuming  office,  to  swear  that  he  would
support  and  maintain  the  General  Grand  Royal  Arch  Constitution

The  exclusive  right  of  issuing  charters  to  subordinate  Chapters,
in  States  where  there  were  Grand  Chapters,  was  conferred  by  this
constitution  on  those  bodies,  while  the  General  Grand  Chapter  re-
served to  itself  the  right  of  issuing  warrants  for  Chapters  which
were  to  be  established  in  States  where  no  Grand  Chapters  existed.

The  next  septennial  convocation  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter
should  have  taken  place  in  181 3.  But  at  that  time  the  United
States  were  engaged  in  a  war  with  Great  Britain,  and  the  situation
of  the  country  incidental  to  such  a  cause  was  such  as  to  prevent  the
General  Grand  Chapter  from  convening.

8a

1298  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

A  special  session  was  called  in  1816  at  the  city  of  New  York.
But  no  business  of  any  especial  importance  was  transacted,  except
the  admission  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Maryland  and  the  District  of
Columbia,  under  a  provision  which  permitted  it  to  confer  the  de-
grees of  Royal  and  Select  Master  as  preliminary  to  the  Royal  Arch.
This  permission  has  always  been  refused  to  other  Grand  Chapters,  as
being  in  positive  contradiction  of  the  terms  of  the  constitution,
which  recognizes  only  three  preparatory  degrees  in  the  Chapter.  In
the  subsequent  history  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  this  too  liberal
action  has  been  found  to  be  productive  of  some  trouble.

Indeed,  in  the  very  inception  of  this  proceeding  there  was  an
evident  irregularity.  The  Grand  Chapter  of  Maryland  proposed  to
enter  the  Union  of  the  Grand  Chapters  and  to  support  the  Const!
tution  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  but  "  requests  that  it  shall  not
be  forced  to  alter  its  mode  of  working."

This  was  reported  to  the  General  Grand  Chapter  by  the  Com-
mittee of  conference,  which  recommended  the  admission  of  the
Grand  Chapter  of  Maryland,  "under  a  consideration  of  all  the  cir-
cumstances," which  of  course  must  have  referred  to  its  request  to
continue  its  peculiar  mode  of  working.  The  terms  of  the  report
were  agreed  to  by  the  Maryland  delegates,  and  accepted  by  the
General  Grand  Chapter,  which  immediately  afterward  resolved  that
the  Grand  Chapter  of  Maryland  and  the  District  of  Columbia  be
admitted  under  its  jurisdiction,  "  subject  to  the  Constitution  and
Regulations  of  the  said  General  Grand  Chapter."

It  is  very  difficult  to  discover  the  real  meaning  and  result  of  this
action.  The  acceptance  of  the  report  permitted  the  Maryland  body
to  confer  its  two  additional  preliminary  degrees.  The  adoption  of
the  subsequent  resolution  prohibited  it  from  so  doing,  because  the
Constitution  to  which  it  was  made  subject  as  a  condition  of  admis-
sion, recognized  only  three  preliminary  degrees,  and  excluded  the
two  conferred  in  Maryland.

The  Maryland  companions  selected  the  explanation  which  was
most  agreeable  to  their  own  views.  They  entered  the  Union  of
Grand  Chapters,  and  continued,  for  a  time,  to  confer  the  Royal  and
Select  Master's  degrees  as  preliminary  to  exaltation  to  the  Royal  Arch.
Subsequently  they  dropped  the  Council  Degrees  and  confined  them-
selves to  the  usual  four  degrees.

In   1829  the  General  Grand  Chapter  recommended  that  these

THE   GENERAL  GRAND   CHAPTER  1299

degrees,  which  have  always  been  under  the  control  of  independent
organizations,  known  as  Grand  Councils,  should  be  conferred  in
Royal  Arch  Chapters,  but  in  1853  it  retraced  its  steps  and  declared
that  the  Mark,  Past,  and  Most  Excellent  Master  were  the  only  cap-
itular degrees,  thus  returning  to  the  original  arrangement  of  Webb.

In  1870  another  attempt  was  made  by  several  of  the  Grand
Chapters  to  get  the  two  degrees  of  Royal  and  Select  Master  incor-
porated as  preparatory  steps  in  the  Capitular  system,  but  it  did  not
succeed,  and  most  probably  never  will.

According  to  adjournment  another  session  of  the  General  Grand
Chapter  was  holden  in  the  city  of  New  York  on  September  9,  181 9.
No  business  of  great  importance  was  transacted  and  it  was  ordered
that  the  next  convocation  should  be  held  at  the  city  of  Washington
in  February,  1823.     No  such  meeting  was  held.

The  sixth  session  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  was  holden  at
the  city  of  New  York  on  September  14,  1826,  which  was  the  regular
septennial  convocation.  The  Grand  Chapters  were  largely  repre-
sented, delegates  from  no  less  than  fifteen  of  them  being  present.

The  Constitution  was  again  revised,  and  among  other  amend-
ments the  word  "  triennial "  was  substituted  for  "  septennial,"  so
that  the  Convocations  were  thenceforth  to  be  holden  every  three
years.     This  regulation  has  ever  since  been  continued.

Probably  the  most  important  event  that  occurred  at  this  meet-
ing was  an  attempt  made  to  dissolve  the  General  Grand  Chapter.
This  was  the  first  effort  at  a  suicidal  policy  which  has  since  been
several  times  repeated,  but  always  without  success.

The  attack  was  made  by  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Kentucky,  which
presented  a  memorial,  copies  of  which  had  previously  been  trans-
mitted to  the  different  Grand  Chapters  with  the  hope  that  they
would  unite  in  the  action.

In  this  memorial  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Kentucky  set  forth  at
great  length  its  reasons  for  desiring  a  dissolution  of  the  organization.
They  are  the  same  arguments  which  have  since  been  advanced  at
different  times.

The  objections  urged  against  the  General  Grand  Chapter  were  its
nationality,  the  danger  of  its  usurping  the  functions  and  destroying
the  sovereignty  of  the  State  Grand  Chapters,  the  existence  in  it  of
life  members,  whose  voice  and  numbers  might  become  more  poten-
tial  tlian  the  votes  of  the  elected  delegates  who  would  soon  be  in  a

I3CX3  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

minority,  and,  finally,  the  great  expense  of  supporting  such  an
organizition.

But  the  arguments,  plausible  as  they  might  have  appeared,  had
no  weight  with  the  Grand  Chapters,  nearly  all  of  which  expressed
their  opposition  to  any  such  movement.  When  the  question  was
submitted  to  the  convocation,  only  two  votes,  those  of  the  delegates
from  Kentucky,  were  found  in  its  favor.  Every  other  officer  and
member  voted  against  a  dissolution.

It  is  "  passing  strange  "  that  an  institution  whose  utility  has  been
proved  by  ample  experience,  should  ever  have  met  with  opposition
to  its  existence.  We  have  already  seen  that  to  it  we  are  indebted
for  that  common  and  universal  law,  which  has  done  so  much  good
in  the  establishment  of  an  organized  system.

W^hen  we  remember  the  discordant  condition  of  Royal  Arch
Masonry  at  the  close  of  the  last  century,  when  the  number  of  the
degrees,  their  names  and  the  order  of  their  sequence,  which  varied
in  every  State  and  sometimes  even  in  adjacent  Chapters,  when  there
was  no  positive  and  generally  recognized  principles  of  Masonic  law,
and  no  authority  to  which  to  appeal  for  the  settlement  of  contro-
versies in  ritual  or  in  custom,  and  when  we  view  the  uniformity
which  now  prevails  in  all  parts  of  the  country,  which  is  undoubtedly
owing  to  the  weight  and  influence  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  as
a  well-organized  head,  it  can  not  be  denied  that  all  American  Royal
Arch  Masons  owe  a  debt  of  gratitude  to  the  founders  of  that  institu.
tion  which  thus  wisely  brought  order  out  of  chaos.

It  is  not  worth  while  to  extend  this  history  beyond  the  period
at  which  we  have  arrived.  From  the  year  1826  the  General  Grand
Chapter,  now  placed  on  a  stable  foundation,  has  continued  to  meet
triennially  at  different  cities  of  the  United  States.  There  has  been
but  one  interruption  to  this  continuity.  In  1862  a  civil  war  then
dividing  the  country  into  two  hostile  sections  so  that  there  was  a
military  impossibility  for  the  convocation  to  be  held  at  the  appointed
place,  which  was  Memphis  in  Tennessee,  the  General  Grand  High-
Priest,  Albert  G.  Mackey,  suspended  the  meeting  until  the  restora-
tion of  peace,  and  by  his  proclamation  the  session  was  held  at  Colum-
bus, O.,  in  1865.  The  session  lasted  but  one  day,  when  it  adjourned
to  meet  in  the  same  place  and  on  the  next  day  in  a  new  triennial
session.

Its  jurisdiction  now  extends  over  the  whole  of  the  United  States

THE  GENERAL  GRAND   CHAPTER  1301

embracing  all  the  Grand  Chapters  except  those  of  Pennsylvania  and
Virginia,  which  have  never  entered  into  the  confederation,  and
Texas,  which  withdrew  during  the  war,  1861-65,  and  has  nevci
reunited.

The  following  list  of  all  the  Presiding  officers  of  the  body  since
its  organization  will  be  of  interest  as  an  historical  document  It  will
be  seen  to  embrace  the  names  of  some  who  have  been  distinguished
in  Freemasonry  or  in  political  life  :

1798,  Ephraim  Kirby,  of  Connecticut

1799,  Ephraim  Kirby.

1806,  Benjamin  Hurd,  of  Massachusetts;

18 1 6,  DeWitt  Clinton,  of  New  York.

18 1 9,  DeVVitt  Clinton.

1826,  DeWitt  Clinton.

1829,  Edward  Livingston,  of  Louisiana.

1832,  Edward  Livingston.

1835,  Rev.  Paul  Dean,  of  Massachusetts.

1838,  Rev.  Paul  Dean.

184 1,  Rev.  Paul  Dean.

1844,  Rev.  Paul  D^an.

1847,  Robert  P.  Dunlap,  of  Maine.

1850,  Robert  P.  Dunlap.

1853,  Robert  P.  Dunlap.

1856,  Charles  Oilman,  of  Maryland.

1859,  Albert  G.  Mackey,  of  South  Carolina.

1865,  John  L.  Lewis,  of  New  York.

1868,  James  M.  Austin,  of  New  York.

1871,  JosiAH  H.  Drummond,  of  Main&

1874,  Elbert  H.  English,  of  Arkansas.

1877,  John  Fkizzell,  of  Tennessee.

1880,  Rubicut  F.  Bower,  of  Iowa.

I302

HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

188",  Alfred  F.  Chapman,  of  Massachusetts.

1886,  Noble  D.  Larner,  of  District  of  Columbia.

1889,  David  F.  Day,  of  New  York.

1 89 1,  Joseph  P.  Hornor,  of  Louisiana.

1894,  George  L.  McCahan,  of  Maryland.

1897,  Reuben  C.  Lemmon,  of  Ohio.

1900,  James  W.  Taylor,  of  Georsfia.

1903,  Arthur  G.  Pollard,  of  Massachusetts.

1906,  Joseph  E.  Dyas,  of  Illinois.

1909,  Nathan  Kingsley,  of  Mmnesota.

THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  INTRODUCTION  AND  PROGRESS
OF  FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

THE   HISTORY  OF  THE

SYMBOLS  OF   FREEMASONRY

AND  THE

HISTORY  OF  THE  A.-.  A.-.  SCOTTISH  RITE

By
WILLIAM  R.  SINGLETON,  33D

SALUTATORY

HE  death  of  Dr.  Albert  Gallatin  Mackey,  June
21,  1881,  prevented  the  completion  of  his  great
work  on  the  "  History  of  Freemasonry."  The
preceding  chapters,  ending  on  page  1302,  were
all  written  by  him,  and,  as  he  had  contemplated
continuing  his  labors  until  the  whole  history
of  the  Masonic  Orders  and  Degrees  should  have
been  completed,  his  publishers  have  complimented  the  present  writer
by  selecting  him  to  do,  imperfectly  as  it  will  appear,  what  so  able  a
writer  as  Dr.  Mackey  would  have  done,  had  his  life  been  spared  a
little  longer.  Dr.  Mackey 's  long  and  useful  career  as  a  Masonic
savant  and  writer  had  endeared  him  to  all  Masonic  students  over  the
wide  world  of  Masonry.  Wherever  the  English  language  is  spoken
may  be  found  the  Masonic  works  of  our  distinguished  brother.  In
the  conclusion  of  the  admirable  "  Historical  Sketch  of  the  Order  of
Knights  Templar,"  by  Theodore  S.  Gourdin,  of  Charleston,  S.  C,
1855,  he  says  :  "The  history  of  our  Order  remains  yet  to  be  writ-
ten. It  can  not  be  attempted  by  an  American,  alone  and  unaided.
In  fact,  it  can  not  be  written  at  all  in  this  country ;  for  we  have  not
the  materials.  But  this  great  work  can  and  ought  to  be  undertaken
by  the  Templars  of  the  United  States.  .  .  .  Let  them  select  a
Brother,  who,  from  his  great  learning  and  his  thorough  knowledge  of
the  principal  modern  languages,  as  well  as  the  dead,  is  fully  qualified
for  the  work.  I  know  but  two  brethren  in  the  United  States  who
are  qualified  to  execute  the  work  proposed  :  Bro.  Albert  G.  Mackey,
of  Charleston,  S.  C.  ;  and  Bro.  William  S.  Rockwell,  of  Milledge-
i^illc,  Ga."

We  thus  see  that,  at  as  early  a  date  as  1855,  Bro.  Mackey  shared,
with  that  other  eminent  and  distinguished  Brother,  Rockwell,  the
highest  reputation  for  scholarship  among  all  the  Masons  of  the
United  States.  He  then  continues:  "Then  would  a  history  be
written  worthy  of  our  illustrious  Order,  and  of  the  distinguished

1305

I306  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

body  which  governs  it  in  this  country  !  The  author  of  such  a  work
would  earn,  for  himself,  an  immortal  reputation,  and  each  individual
brother  who  contributed  his  mite  would  enjoy  the  delightful  con-
sciousness that  the  Masonic  world  was,  in  a  measure,  indebted  to
him  for  a  work  which  would  prove  the  great  desideratum  of  the  age."

The  rapid  and  continued  increase  of  the  membership  of  the  Tem-
plar Order  has  kept  pace  with  the  growth  of  the  population  of  the
United  States,  and  the  progress  in  all  branches  of  human  knowledge,
in  science,  and  arts,  as  we  shall  demonstrate  when  we  give  a  history
of  the  Order  and  show  in  each  particular  State,  what  is  the  present
membership,  and  the  great  field  for  usefulness  laid  open  and  the
prospect  before  us,  for  the  great  battles  which  are  yet  to  come,  be-
tween truth  and  error,  light  and  darkness,  ignorance  and  enlighten-
ment, crime  and  obedience  to  lawful  authority,  fanaticism,  bigotry,  and
persecution  against  toleration,  liberality  and  freedom  of  thought.

The  Templars,  in  the  Crusades,  for  two  hundred  years  fought
with  material  armor  against  the  Infidels  and  Turks  of  Syria,  but  our
modern  Templars  are  engaged  against  more  powerful  and  insidious
foes,  scattered  everywhere  in  our  midst.  The  Templars  of  the  Cru-
sades were  carried  from  the  West  to  the  East,  to  fight  for  the  Chris-
tianity as  then  known  and  practiced,  a  system  of  ignorance,  the  great
parent  of  superstition,  bigotry,  fanaticism,  intolerance,  and  perse-
cution ;  these  are  the  elements  which  finally  culminated  in  the
Middle  Ages,  in  the  Inquisition  ;  and  by  which  the  Templar  Order,
for  so  many  centuries  the  instrument  of  the  Church  of  Christ  in
oppressing  mankind,  was  totally  destroyed,  and  the  leaders  burned
at  the  stake  by  Clement  V.  and  Philip  the  Fair,  after  they  had  no
further  use  for  them.

"  God  works  in  a  mysterious  way  His  purpose  to  fulfil! ! "

The  Templars,  now  only  such  in  name,  may  be  the  instruments
of  God,  in  turn,  in  the  next  century,  to  deliver  His  true  children  from
the  fangs  of  the  monster  who  for  so  many  ages  has  kept  mankind,
so  far  as  they  could  be,  within  his  power,  in  total  ignorance  of  the
Truth  as  it  was,  and  is  yet,  in  Christ  the  Lord,  for  whose  sake  and
in  whose  name  the  original  Templars  fought,  bled,  and  died  upon  so
many  nard-fought  battle-fields  of  Syria.  Let  this  thought  be  in  the
mind  of  every  Knight  Templar  of  the  present  day  and  in  the  future,
wl;ose  eyes  may  see  these  words,  written  in   the  year  1899:     That

SALUTATORY  1307

this  great  country,  beginning  witli  a  few  emigrants  from  several
European  nations,  bringing  with  them  to  Virginia,  first,  at  James-
town, the  descendants  of  the  pride  and  chivalry  of  Old  England ;
then  the  Puritans  in  New  England — while  these  differed  greatly  in
their  method  of  interpreting  the  Scriptures,  they  were  yet  agreed  in
the  great  principles  therein  inculcated,  viz.  :  Equality,  Frater-
nity, AND  Liberty.

These,  the  descendants  of  the  Reformation,  have  grown  from
the  original  Thirteen  Colonies,  despised  and  looked  down  upon  by
the  great  monarchies  of  Europe  and  Asia,  with  scorn  and  sometimes
with  contempt.  Now  these  scornful  peoples  begin  to  appreciate
what  is  before  them  in  the  future.

We  therefore  say  to  the  Commanderies,  Preceptories,  and  En-
campments, and  also  to  each  private  member  of  the  Knightly  Order
of  the  Temple,  remember  your  vows  of  obedience  to  the  Grand
Master  of  all  Temples.  The  sword  which  you  wield  is  not  a  weapon
of  carnal  warfare,  but  a  symbol,  whose  significance  you  have  learned,
and  should  ever  put  in  practice  in  the  defence  of  Trtitk,  not  as  ex-
plained by  the  Mother  Church  of  the  Middle  Ages,  for  the  purpose
of  propagating  error,  but  the  truth  as  so  well  understood  by  ev^eiy
Templar,  and  in  whose  cause  he  should  be  prepared  to  make  every
sacrifice,  and  perform  his  pilgrimage  even  to  the  loss  of  life  while
engaged  therein,  and  remember  that  you  shall  reap  your  reward  if
ye  faint  not.

"  Magna  est  Veritas,  et  prevalebit."

WILLIAM    R    SINGLETON.

CHAPTER  LI

GENERAL    HISTORY    OF   CHRISTIAN    KNIGHTHOOD

N  our  examination  of  various  authors  who  have
written  on  Templarism,  we  have  found  it  very
difficult,  if  at  all  possible,  to  determine,  categori-
cally, when  the  American  Rite  of  the  "  Com-
mandery  "  was  really  formulated.  We  learn  from
ancient  as  well  as  recent  writers  that  the  Knights
of  the  Red  Cross  of  Rome  and  Constantine,
Knights  of  the  Holy  Sepulcher,  Knights  of  St.  John  the  Evangelist,
and  Knights  of  the  Grand  Cross  were  of  a  much  earlier  date  than
the  Knights  of  the  Templar  Order.  The  Knights  of  the  Red  Cross
of  Rome  and  Constantine  was  the  first  Order  of  Christian  Knights.
The  Knights  of  the  Red  Cross,  which  is  the  first  degree  conferred  in
the  Commandery  of  Knight  Templars  in  the  United  States,  has  no
connection  whatever  with  the  Templar  Order  of  the  Crusades,  noi
the  events  in  the  history  of  the  other  Knightly  Order  of  the  Red
Cross  of  Rome  and  Constantine  first  above  mentioned.

The  real  history  of  the  present  American  degree  of  the  Red
Cross  is,  that  it  is  composed  of  the  15th  and  i6th  degrees  of  the  A.*.
A.:  S.".  R*.  ;  and  the  incidents  commemorated  therein  are  located  at
the  time  of  the  captivity  of  the  Jews,  after  the  destruction  of  King
Solomon's  Temple,  and  the  return  of  the  Jews  to  Palestine  by  direc-
tion of  Cyrus,  and  after  him  by  Darius  the  Persian  monarch.

The  original  symbol  of  the  red  cross,  which  is  a  Christian  sym-
bol, has  no  place  in  the  Ritual  of  the  Commandery  degree  of  Red
Cross,  which  relates  to  the  Jews  in  captivity  and  the  Persian  Court
of  that  date.  The  first  red  cross  of  Constantine,  with  its  motto,
" /n  hoc  signo  vinces,"  was  adopted  by  Constantine  the  Great  as  the
"  Labarum  "  from  the  following  circumstance,  according  to  tradition  :
The  night  before  the  battle  between  himself  and  Augustus  Maxen-
tius  the  sign  of  the  cross  appeared  to  him  in  the  heavens,  with  the
inscription  "  hi  hoc  signo  vinces."     This  battle  has  been  called  "  oj

1300

I310  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

Saxa  Rubra,"  which  was  an  ancient  station  on  the  "  Flaminian
Way,"  eight  miles  north  of  Rome,  which  meant  "  red  stones."

Having  been  successful  in  defeating  his  opponent,  Constantine,
on  December  25,  a.d.  312,  instituted  a  new  order  of  knights,  of  the
"Red  Cross  of  Rome  and  Constantine."  The  red  cross  became  a
badge,  and  was  worn  on  the  right  arm  of  each  knight  or  on  his
shield,  this  insignia  thereafter  being  the  highest  honor  of  knight-
hood.

The  Order  of  the  Knights  of  the  Holy  Sepulcher,  some  writers
say,  "was  instituted  by  Constantine,  at  the  prayer  of  his  mother
Helena,  for  the  avowed  purpose  of  protecting  the  Holy  Sepulcher,
and  defending  it  from  the  enemies  of  the  Christian  faith.  Only
Knights  of  the  Red  Cross,  by  royal  decree,  were  eligible  for  the
Order."  It  is  also  said  that  Constantine  "  instituted  the  Order  of
Knight  of  the  Grand  Cross,  which  he  conferred  (in  326)  on  several
of  his  generals  and  ministers,  as  a  special  mark  of  merit  and  dis-
tinction."

The  same  writers  say:  "After  the  death  of  Constantine  (337)
the  popes  of  Rome  claimed,  and  exercised,  sovereign  authority  over
the  Order  throughout  Christendom,  delegating  to  the  Papal  Nuncios
and  Cardinal  Princes,  at  the  various  Catholic  Courts,  the  right  to
nominate  candidates  foi  the  Order  of  Knights  of  the  Red  Cross  of
Rome  and  Constantine.  Samuel  Cole,  in  the  Freemason  s  Library^
gives  a  list  of  the  various  Masonic  degrees  and  says  :

"  In  a  later  publication,  1816,  we  find  the  following  list  of  Masonic
degrees,  which  the  author  states  are  conferred  on  the  Sublime  Grand
Lodges  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  in  the  city  of  New  York  and  in  New-
port, R.  I.  :  No.  9  is  Knight  of  the  Red  Cross  ;  No.  10,  Knight  of
Malta;  No.  11,  Knight  of  the  Holy  Sepulcher;  No.  12,  Knight  of
the  Christian  Mark;  No.  13,  Knight  Templar.  The  degrees  enu-
merated amount  to  forty-three.  Besides  these  degrees  there  were  ten
others  which  were  in  the  possession  of  most  of  the  Inspectors  given
in  different  parts  of  the  world,  and  which  they  generally  communi-
cate, free  of  expense,  to  those  brethren  who  are  high  enough  to  un-
derstand them — such  as  Select  Masons  of  27,  and  the  Royal  Arch,
as  given  under  the  Constitution  of  Dublin ;  six  degrees  of  Macon-
nerie  d'Adoption,  Compagnon  Ecossais,  le  Maitre  Ecossais,  et  le

Freemason's  Library"  and  General  Ahiman  Rezon.     Baltimore,  Md.,  1826.

HISTORY   OF   CHRISTIAN   KNIGHTHOOD  1311

Grand  Master  Ecossais,  etc.,  making,  with  the  regular  number  of
forty-three,  in  the  aggregate  fifty-three  degrees.

"  It  will  be  well  here  to  notice  that  the  Select  Masons  of  27,
which  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Virginia  alone  retains  in  her  curriculum
and  confers  prior  to  the  Royal  Arch,  was  designed,  by  the  Consis-
tories of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite  of  the  last  century,  and  by
the  Supreme  Council  of  the  A.-.  A.-.  A.-.  S.-.  Rite  of  1802,  to  follow
the  Royal  Arch.  A  great  many  of  our  distinguished  Masons  think
that  the  Select  of  27  should  precede  the  Royal  Arch,  as,  by  its
chronology,  it  does ;  but  they  forget  that  the  same  chronological  cir
cumstances  occur  in  the  present  arrangement  of  the  Mark  degree,
which  not  only  follows  the  Fellow-Craft  but  also  the  Master's  degree,
while  chronologically  the  events  of  the  first  section  were  prior  to  the
completion  of  the  Temple."

Cole  thus  refers  to  the  Knight  of  the  Red  Cross  :  "  After  having,
as  we  had  supposed,  satisfactorily  shown  that  the  Order  of  Knights
Hospitalers  of  the  Order  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem,  who  were  after-
wards called  Knights  of  Rhodes,  and  now  Knights  Templars  and
Knights  of  Malta,  is  indisputably  the  oldest  order  of  knighthood  in
the  world,  we  are  suddenly  transported  into  the  distant  regions  of
Persia,  and  instructed  to  believe  that  the  Order  of  the  Cross  was  in-
stituted 520  years  before  the  birth  of  Christ,  namely  during  the  reign
of  Darius."*  This  was  written  prior  to  1826,  and  he  continues:
"  This  Order  has  not,  until  late  years,  been  practiced  in  America.  I
have,  indeed,  conversed  with  well-informed  knights,  who  received
the  degree  in  Ireland  ;  perhaps  it  may  have  originated  there — be  that
as  it  may,  it  has  found  its  way  into  our  books,  and  is  practiced,
though  very  imperfectly,  in  some  of  our  encampments,  usually  pre-
ceding the  degrees  of  Knights  Templars  and  Knights  of  Malta.  A
reference  to  the  foregoing  list  will  show  us  that  the  author  has  given
us  two  other  degrees,  which  are  intended  to  precede  the  two  last
mentioned,  namely,  Knights  of  the  Holy  Sepulcher  and  Knights  of
the  Christian  Mark.  Nor  shall  we  have  cause  to  wonder,  if,  in  the
process  of  time,  an  attempt  should  be  made  to  precede  the  important
Degree  of  Knights  Templars,  etc.,  with  that  of  Knight  of  the  Golden
Spur,  Knight  of  the  White  Elephant,  or  of  the  Golden  Fleece."

Cole  does  not  seem  to  have  been  aware  that  the  15th  and  i6th

'  Samuel  Cole  :  "  Freemason's  Library,"  p.  321,  1826.  Note. — Cole  refers,  of  course,.
to  the  Red  Cross  of  Rome  and  Constantine. — Editor.

I3I2  HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

degrees  of  the  A.'.  A.'.  S.*.  R.:  were  the  materials  for  the  so-called
Red  Cross,  which  has  no  connection  historically  with  the  Templarism
of  Christianity.

The  Caleph  Muez  destroyed  the  church  of  the  Holy  Sepulcher,
which  was  rebuilt  by  the  Red  Cross  Knights  and  Knights  of  the
Holy  Sepulcher,  in  969.  In  1093  Philip  I.,  King  of  France,  re-
vived the  Order  of  Knights  of  the  Holy  Sepulcher,  and  nominated
his  son,  the  Dauphin  of  France,  as  Grand  Marshal.  After  the
return  of  the  Crusaders  from  the  Holy  Land,  the  Knights  of  the  two
Orders  were  called  the  first  and  second  grades  of  the  *'  Knight  of  the
Red  Cross  of  Rome  and  Constantine."

From  A.D.  337  to  1094  the  Popes  exercised  sovereign  authority
ever  the  Orders.  In  1099  there  was  held  a  Grand  Conclave  of  the
Orders  of  the  "  Knights  of  the  Red  Cross  and  Knights  of  the  Holy
Sepulcher."

Addison  says :  "  The  Holy  Sepulcher  presented  itself  to  the
eyes  of  the  pilgrims,  surrounded  by  a  magnificence  which  redoubled
their  veneration.

"  An  obscure  cavern  had  become  a  marble  temple  paved  with
precious  stones  and  decorated  with  splendid  colonnades.  To  the
east  of  the  Holy  Sepulcher  appeared  the  Church  of  the  Resurrec-
tion, in  which  they  could  admire  the  riches  of  Asia,  mingled  with
the  arts  of  Greece  and  Rome.  Constantine  celebrated  the  twenty-
first  year  of  his  reign,  a.d.  2i33,  by  the  inauguration  of  this  church,
whose  corner-stone  had  been  planted  under  the  auspices  of  his
sainted  mother,  and  thousands  of  Christians  came,  on  occasion  of
this  solemnity,  to  listen  to  the  panegyric  of  Christ  from  the  lips  of
the  learned  and  holy  Bishop  Eusebius.  St.  Jerome,  who,  toward
the  end  of  the  4th  century,  had  retired  to  Bethlehem  for  literary
labors  and  religious  solitude,  informs  us,  in  one  of  his  letters,  that
pilgrims  arrive  in  crowds  in  Judea,  and  that  around  the  holy  tomb
the  praises  of  the  Son  of  God  were  to  be  heard  uttered  in  many
languages.  From  this  period  pilgrimages  to  the  Holy  Land  were
so  numerous  that  several  doctors  and  fathers  of  the  Church  thought
it  their  duty  to  point  out  the  abuses  and  dangers  of  the  practice.
They  told  Christians  that  long  voyages  might  turn  them  aside  from
the  path  of  salvation  ;  that  their  God  was  not  confined  to  one  city;
that  Jesus  Christ  was  everywhere  where  faith  and  good  works  were
;o  be  found.     But  such  was  the  blind  zeal  which  then  drew  Chris-

HISTORY  OF  CHRISTIAN   KNIGHTHOOD  131s

tians  toward  Jerusalem  that  the  voices  of  the  holy  doctors  were
scarcely  heard.  The  councils  of  enlightened  piety  were  not  able  to
abate  the  ardor  of  the  pilgrims,  who  believed  they  should  be  wanting
in  faith  and  zeal  if  they  did  not  adore  Jesus  Christ  in  the  very  places
where,  according  to  the  expression  of  St.  Jerome,  '  the  light  of  the
Gospel  first  shone  from  the  top  of  the  Holy  Cross.'

"  As  soon  as  the  people  of  the  West  became  converted  to  Chris-
tianity, they  turned  their  eyes  to  the  East.  From  the  oepths  of
France,  from  the  forests  of  Germany,  from  all  the  countries  of
Europe,  new  Christians  were  to  be  seen  hastening  to  visit  the  cradle
of  the  faith  they  had  embraced.  An  itinerary  for  the  use  of  pilgrims
served  them  as  a  guide  from  the  banks  of  the  Rhone  and  the  Dor-
dogne  to  the  shores  of  the  Jordan,  and  conducted  them  on  their
return  from  Jerusalem  to  the  principal  cities  of  Italy.  When  the
world  was  ravaged  by  the  Goths,  the  Huns,  and  the  Vandals,
pilgnmages  to  the  Holy  Land  were  not  at  all  interrupted.  Pious
travelers  were  protected  by  the  hospitable  virtues  of  the  barbarians,
who  began  to  respect  the  Cross  of  Christ,  and  sometimes  even
followed  the  pilgrims  to  Jerusalem.  In  these  times  of  trouble  and
desolation  a  poor  pilgrim  who  bore  his  scrip  and  staff  often  passed
through  fields  of  carnage  and  traveled  without  fear  amidst  armies
which  threatened  the  empires  of  the  East  and  the  West

"Illustrious  families  of  Rome  came  to  seek  an  asylum  at  Jerusa-
lem and  by  the  tomb  of  Christ.  Christians  then  found,  on  the
banks  of  the  Jordan,  that  peace  which  seemed  banished  from  the
rest  of  the  world.  This  peace,  which  lasted  several  centuries,  was
not  troubled  before  the  reign  ot  Heraclius,  a.d.  610-641.  Under
this  reign  the  armies  of  Chosroes,  King  of  Persia,  invaded  Syria,
Palestine,  and  Egypt  The  Holy  City  icll  into  the  hands  of  the
worshipers  of  fire.  The  conquerors  bore  away  into  captivity  vast
numbers  of  Christians  and  profaned  the  churches  of  Jesus  Christ
All  the  faithful  deplored  the  misfortunes  of  Jerusalem,  and  shed
tears  when  they  learned  that  the  King  of  Persia  had  carried  off,
among  the  spoil  of  the  vanquished,  the  Cross  of  the  Saviour,  which
bad  been  preserved  in  the  Churches  of  the  Resurrection."*

At  the  Council  of  Clermont  in  Auvergne,  November,  1095.
Pope  Urban  addressed   himself  to  all   the  nations  represented  at

"  'Addison,"  p.  66k
•3

T314  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

the  council,  and  particularly  to  the  French,  who  formec  the
majority  ;

"  Nation  beloved  by  God,"  said  he,  "  it  is  in  your  courage  that
the  Christian  Church  has  placed  its  hope.  It  is  because  I  am  well
acquainted  with  your  piety  and  your  bravery  that  I  have  crossed  the
Alps  and  am  come  to  preach  the  word  of  God  in  these  countries.
You  have  not  forgotten  that  the  land  which  you  inhabit  has  been
invaded  by  the  Saracens,  and  but  for  the  exploits  of  Charles  Martel
(a.d.  732)  and  Charlemagne  (a.d.  768-800),  France  would  have
received  the  laws  of  Mohammed.  Recall  v/ithout  ceasing,  to  your
minds,  the  dangers  and  glory  of  your  fathers.  Led  by  heroes,
whose  names  shall  never  die,  they  delivered  your  country,  they
saved  the  West  from  shameful  slavery.  More  noble  triumphs  await
you  under  the  guidance  of  the  God  of  armies.  You  will  deliver
Europe  and  Asia;  you  will  save  the  city  of  Jesus  Christ — that
Jerusalem  which  was  chosen  by  the  Lord,  and  from  whence  the  law
is  to  come  to  us."

As  Urban  proceeded,  the  sentiments  by  which  he  was  animated
penetrated  to  the  very  souls  of  his  auditors.  When  he  spoke  of  the
captivity  and  misfortunes  of  Jerusalem,  the  whole  assembly  was  dis-
solved in  tears ;  when  he  described  the  tyranny  and  the  perfidy  of
the  Infidels,  the  warriors  who  listened  to  him  clutched  their  swords
and  swore  in  their  hearts  to  avenge  the  cause  of  the  Christians.

"  When  Jesus  Christ  summons  you  to  his  defense,  let  no  base
affections  detain  you  in  your  homes.  See  nothing  but  the  shame
and  the  evils  of  the  Christians  ;  listen  to  nothing  but  the  groans  of
Jerusalem,  and  remember  well  what  the  Lord  has  said  to  you  :  He
who  loves  his  father  or  his  mother  more  than  Me  is  not  worthy  of
Me ;  whoever  will  abandon  his  house,  or  his  father,  or  his  mother,
or  his  wife,  or  his  children,  or  his  inheritance,  for  the  sake  of  My
name,  shall  be  recompensed  a  hundred-fold,  and  possess  life  eter-
nal."

At  these  words  the  auditors  of  Urban  displayed  an  enthusiasm
that  human  eloquence  had  rarely  before  inspired.  The  assembly
arose  in  one  mass  as  one  man  and  answered  him  with  the  unani-
mous cry,  "  Dieu  le  veut !  Dieu  le  veut ! "  "  It  is  the  will  of  God  I
It  is  the  will  of  God  f "  •*  Yes,  without  doubt,  it  is  the  will  of
God,"  continued  the  eloquent  Urban  ;  "  you  to-day  see  the  accom-
plishment of  the  word  of  our  Saviour,  who  promised  to  be  in  tne

HISTORY   OF   CHRISTIAN   KNIGHTHOOD  1315

midst  of  the  faithful  when  assembled  in  His  name.  It  is  He  who
has  dictated  to  you  the  words  that  I  have  heard.  Let  them  be  your
war-cr}^  and  let  them  announce  everywhere  the  presence  of  the
God  of  armies."  On  finishing  these  words,  the  Pontiff  exhibited
to  the  assembled  Christians  the  sign  of  their  redemption.  "  It  is
Christ  himself,"  said  he  to  them,  "who  issues  from  His  tomb,  and
presents  to  you  His  Cross.  It  will  be  the  sign  raised  among  the
nations,  which  is  to  gather  together  again  the  dispersed  Children  of
Israel.  Wear  it  upon  your  shoulders  and  upon  your  breasts.  Let
it  shine  upon  your  arms  and  upon  your  standards.  It  will  be  to
you  the  surety  of  victory  or  the  palm  of  martyrdom.  It  will  un-
ceasingly remind  you  that  Christ  died  for  you,  and  that  it  is  your
duty  to  die  for  him."

When  Urban  had  ceased  to  speak,  loud  acclamations  burst  from
the  multitude.  Pity,  indignation,  despair  at  the  same  time  agitated
the  tumultuous  assembly  of  the  faithful.  Some  shed  tears  over
Jerusalem  and  the  fate  of  the  Christians.  Others  swore  to  exter-
minate the  race  of  the  Mussulmans.  But  all  at  once,  at  a  signal
from  the  Sovereign  Pontiff,  the  most  profound  silence  prevailed-
Cardinal  Gregory,  afterward  St.  Innocent  II.,  pronouncing,  in  a
loud  voice,  a  form  of  General  Confession,  the  assembly  all  fell  upon
their  knees,  beat  their  breasts,  and  received  absolution  for  their
sins.'

Joseph  Francois  Michaud,  in  \\\s  History  of  the  Crusades,  states:
"To  the  feudal  Princes,  assembled  in  the  Holy  Land  in  a.d.  1099,
belongs  the  glory  and  honor  of  reviving  the  Order  of  the  '  Knights
of  the  Holy  Sepulcher.'  The  Order  was  conferred  on  the  Knights
of  the  Red  Cross  for  rare  personal  valor  and  courage.  Every  re-
cruit receiving  the  Order  of  '  Knight  of  the  Holy  Sepulcher,'  or
that  of  '  Knight  of  St.  John,'  was  required  to  wear  a  Red  Cross  on
his  arm  or  shield."

In  i  100  the  Crusaders  of  every  country  carried  the  banner  of  the
Order  of  Knights  of  the  Red  Cross  of  Rome  and  Constantine,

A  Grand  Conclave  of  that  Order  assembled  in  Rome,  May,
1 1 19.  Emperor  Michael  Angelo  Comnenus  was  chosen  Sovereign
Grand  Master.  The  Sovereign  Grand  Council  issued  an  edict  limit-
ing the  active  membership  of  Knights  of  the  Grand  Cross  to  fifty

>  McCoy's  "  Addison,"  pp.  87,  8S.

I3i6  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Sir  Knights  in  each  kingdom  or  independent  country,  and  that  a
Grand  Cross  Knight  shall  have  precedence,  in  all  assemblies  of  Sii
Knights  of  the  Red  Cross,  immediately  after  the  Sovereign  Grand
Master.

Pope  Innocent  III.  urged  the  Knights  of  the  Red  Cross,  Knights
of  the  Holy  Sepulcher,  and  Knights  of  St.  John  to  overthrow  the
Infidels  in  Constantinople  in  1193.  Richard  of  England  in  1195
was  proclaimed  Sovereign  Grand  Master  of  the  Knights  of  Rome
and  Constantine,  and  Senior  Knight  of  the  Grand  Cross,  by  the
Duke  of  Burgundy,  for  valorous  services  in  front  of  Jerusalem.
After  the  return  of  the  Crusaders  (1200),  to  about  1654,  the  history
of  the  Order  of  Knights  of  Rome  and  Constantine  is  somewhat
uncertain.  No  General  Assembly  was  held.  The  Kings  of  Spain
and  France  and  the  Emperor  of  Germany  asserting  sovereignty  bj
Divine  authority  in  their  respective  countries.  In  1270  the  Knights
of  the  Red  Cross  of  Rome  and  Constantine,  under  the  leadership
of  the  monarch  of  France,  a  Knight  of  the  Grand  Cross  of  the  Order,
drove  the  Mohammedans  out  of  Carthage.  In  1460  the  germs  of
a  new  civilization  had  been  scattered  over  Europe  by  this  Order.
They  opened  up  the  East  to  the  nations  of  Europe  and  brought
Asia  and  Europe  in  closer  relations.  In  1550  Father  Boniface,  a
Prior  of  the  Order,  was  appointed  Warden  of  the  Holy  Sepulcher,
by  Pope  Julius  III.  The  Orders  of  Red  Cross,  Holy  Sepulcher,
and  St.  John  were  resuscitated  in  England,  the  first  conclave
being  instituted  by  the  German  embassador  to  the  Court  of  St.
James,  February,  1688.  The  Abbe  Guistiniani,  a  Venetian  priest
of  great  learning,  while  visiting  England,  May,  1692,  conferred  these
three  Orders,  of  Red  Cross,  Holy  Sepulcher,  and  of  St.  John,  on
several  of  the  attaches  of  the  English  Court.  The  Abb^  was  the
first  writer  to  gather,  prepare,  and  preserve  the  traditions  and  rituals
of  the  Order  as  now  existing.  Sir  Bernard  Burke  says  :  "  Duke
Francis  /.,  of  Parma,  of  the  house  of  Farnese,  was  installed  (Sep
tember,  1699)  Grand  Master  of  the  Knights  of  the  Red  Cross  of
Rome  and  Constantine  with  much  pomp."

Baron  Hunde  states:  "The  great  and  rapid  progress  of  Free-
masonry on  the  European  Continent  is  largely  due  to  the  eflforts  of
the  Knights  of  the  Red  Cross  of  Rome  and  Constantine."  He  also
credits  the  Knights  of  the  Red  Cross  as  being  the  true  Templars  and
as  the  only  Order  of  Christian  Knighthood  that  has  had  a  regular

HISTORY   OF  CHRISTIAN   KNIGHTHOOD  1317

succession  since  it  was  instituted  in  312.  After  the  Royal  Arch
degree  was  introduced  into  English  Freemasonry  prior  to  1760.
Many  companies  of  the  Royal  Arch,  in  England,  petitioned  the
local  conclaves  to  modify  the  ancient  Imidmar ks  of  the  Order,  in  the
interest  and  welfare  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry,  by  changing  the
qualifications  of  membership  in  the  Knights  of  the  Red  Cross  of
"Rome  and  Constantine  and  the  Appendant  Orders,  from  a  Master
Mason  to  Royal  Arch  Mason.  From  time  immemorial  a  Master
Mason,  if  a  believer  in  the  Christian  religion,  has  been  the  qualifica-
tion necessary  for  membership.  In  January,  1760,  the  Grand
Masters  of  the  English  and  Scottish  Knights  of  the  Red  Cross  of
Rome  and  Constantine  assembled  in  London,  and  adopted  as  a  re-
quirement for  Knighthood  in  the  Order  that  the  applicant  be  a
Royal  Arch  Mason  and  a  believer  in  the  Christian  religion.

At  Charleston,  S.  C,  Nov-ember  12,  1783,  in  St.  Andrew's  F,
&  A.  M.  Lodge,  the  Order  of  Knight  of  the  Red  Cross  of  Rome
and  Constantine  was  conferred  on  a  class  of  eight,  a  dispensation
having  been  obtained  in  England  by  a  retired  British  officer,  then
residing  in  Charleston.  This  is  the  second  authentic  account  of  the
conferring  of  the  Order  in  America.

The  history  of  the  Order  of  the  Red  Cross  of  Rome  and  Constan-
tine and  also  of  Masonry  being  both  silent  as  to  the  first  connection
of  these  two,  there  is  some  authority  in  the  statement  of  the  Qrand
Secretary  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Masons  of  England,  that  (in  1788)
all  the  Grand  Officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  and  Scotland
received  the  Order  of  Knight  of  the  Red  Cross  of  Rome  and  Con-
stantine on  their  election,  and  before  being  installed  as  a  Grand
Officer.  The  retiring  Grand  Master,  if  he  served  tw'o  or  more  terms,
receiving  the  Order  of  Knight  of  the  Grand  Cross  on  retiring  from
the  Grand  East.  Masonry  and  Knights  of  the  Red  Cross  evidently
became  closely  allied  early  in  the  17th  century.  All  of  the  above
extracts,  referring  to  the  Knights  of  the  Red  Cross  of  Rome  and
Constantine,  Knights  of  the  Holy  Sepulcher,  and  Knights  of  St.
John,  have  been  taken,  with  some  slight  alterations  of  language,
from  a  small  pamphlet,  issued  by  C.  L.  Stowell,  K.  T.  i"^.  Sovereign
Grand  Master  of  the  Knights  "  of  the  Red  Cross  of  Rome  and  Con-
stantine," and  Thos.  Leahy,  K.  T.  32°,  Grand  Registrar  General —
which  pamphlet  is  an  addition  to  the  literature  on  the  subject  of  the
Knightly    "  Appendant  Orders,"  and  shows  the  chronological   se-

I3I8  HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

quence  of  those  degrees  from  their  origin  and  present  connection
with  Freemasonry,  through  the  degree  of  Knights  of  Malta — which
at  present  is  conferred  after  the  degree  of  Knight  Templar.  ^

ORDERS   OF    KNIGHTHOOD.

Peter  Heylin,  in  his  Cosmography  of  the  World  {i6(io\  sa5rs  :

"The  Chief  Orders  of  Knighthood  in  this  Kingdom  (Jerusa-
lem), after  the  recovery  from  the  power  of  the  Turks,  were :

"  I.  Of  the  Sepiilcher,  said  to  be  instituted  originally  (a.d.  314)
by  Queen  Helena,  the  Mother  of  Constantine  the  Great,  by  whom
the  Temple  of  the  Sepulcher  was  indeed  first  built ;  but  more  truly
by  Philip,  King  of  France,  Anno  1099,  at  such  time  as  that  Tem-
ple was  regained  from  the  Turks.  The  Arms,  the  same  with  that
of  the  Kings  (the  Arms  of  the  Christian  Kings  in  Hier^isaletn  was
Luna,  a  cross  Crosset,  crossed,  Sol,  which  was  commonly  called  the
Hierusalem  Cross),  representing  the  five  wounds  of  our  Saviour
Christ.  At  the  first,  conferred  on  none  but  Gentlemen  of  blood
and  fortunes,  now  (a.d.  1660)  salable  to  any  that  will  buy  it  of  the
Patcr-Guardian  who  with  a  Convent  of  Franciscans  doth  reside
near  that  Temple.

"  2.  Of  ^■2iv!\X.  John  of  Hieriisalem,  begun  by  one  Gerrard,  Anno
1 1 14,  and  confirmed  hy  Pope  Paschalis  the  second.  Their  Badge
or  Cognizance  is  a  White  Cross  of  eight  points.  Their  duty  to  de-
fend the  Holy  Land,  relieve  Pilgrims,  and  succor  Christiaji  Princes
against  the  Infidels.  They  were  to  be  of  Noble  Parentage  and  Ex-
traction ;  and  grew  in  time  to  such  infinite  riches,  especially  after
the  suppression  of  the  Templars  (most  of  whose  lands  were  after
given  to  the  Order),  that  they  had  at  one  time  in  the  several  parts
of  Christendom  no  fewer  than  20,000  Mannors  ;  and  of  such  repu-
tation in  all  Christian  Kingdoms,  that  in  England  the  Lord  Prior
of  this  Order  was  accounted  the  prime  Baron  in  the  Reah?t.  But
now  (1660)  their  Revenue  is  not  a  little  diminished,  by  the  with-
drawing of  the  Kings  of  England,  and  other  Protestant  Princes,
from  the  Church  of  Rome ;  who  on  that  change  seized  on  all  the
Lands  of  that  Order  in  their  several  Countries,  and  either  kept  thetn
to  themselves,  or  disposed  them  to  others,  as  they  pleased.

•  See  Mackey  in  chapters  xxviii.-xxix.,  ante.

HISTORY   OF  CHRISTIAN   KNIGHTHOOD  1319

"Their  first  Great  Master  was  that  Gerrard  by  whom  they
srere  founded ;  the  last  that  had  his  residence  in  the  Holy  Land
was  one  John  D.  Villers,  in  whose  time,  being  driven  out  of  Pales-
fine,  they  removed  unto  Cyprus,  and  in  the  time  of  Fiilk  de  Villa-
ret.  A}i?w  1309,  to  the  Isle  of  Rhodes.  Outed  of  which  by  Solo*
tnon  the  Magnificent,  Anno  1522,  they  removed  from  one  place  to
another,  till  at  last  by  the  magnificence  of  Charles  V.,  Anno  1530,
^hey  were  settled  in  Malta;  and  there  we  shall  speak  further  of
them.

"  3.  Of  the  Te7nplars,  instituted  by  Hngh  of  Pagennes,  Anno
1113,  and  confirmed  by  Pope  Eugeniiis.  Their  ensign  was  a  red
cross,  in  token  that  they  should  shed  their  blood  to  defend  Christ's
Temple.  They  were  buried  cross-legged,  and  wore  on  their  backs
the  figure  of  a  Cross  ;  for  which  they  were  by  the  common  people
called  Cross-backs,  and  by  corruption  crook-backs.  Edmund,  Earl
of  Lancaster,  second  son  to  Henry  the  Third,  being  of  this  Order,
was  vulgarly  called  Edmund  Crook-back ;  which  gave  Henry  the
Fourth  a  foolish  occasion  to  feign  that  this  Edmund  (from  whom
he  was  descended)  was  indeed  the  eldest  son  of  King  Henry  the
Third,  but  for  his  crookedness  and  deformity,  his  younger  brother
was  preferred  to  the  Crown  before  him.  These  knights  had  in  all
Provinces  of  Europe  their  subordinate  Governors,  in  which  they
possessed  no  less  than  1 6000  Lordships  ;  the  greatness  of  which
revenue  was  not  the  least  cause  of  dissolving  the  Order.  For  Philip
the  Fair,  King  of  France,  had  a  plot  to  invest  one  of  his  sons  with
the  Title  of  King  of  Hierusalem,  and  hoped  to  procure  of  the  Pope
the  revenue  of  this  Order  to  be  laid  unto  that  Kingdome,  for  sup-
port of  the  Title:  which  he  thought  he  might  the  better  do,  because
Clement  the  V.,  then  Pope,  for  the  love  he  bore  to  France,  had
transferred  his  seat  from  Rome  to  Avignon.  But  herein  his  hopes
deceived  him  ;  for  this  Order  being  dissolved,  the  lands  thereunto
belonging  were  given  to  the  Knights  Hospitallers  or  of  St.  John.
The  crimes  objected  against  this  Order  were — first,  their  revolt  from
their  professed  obedience  unto  the  Patriarch  oi  Jerusalem,  who  was
their  Visitor.  Secondly,  their  unspeakable  pride ;  and,  Thirdly,
their  sins  against  Nature.  The  House  of  our  Law-Students  in  Lon-
don called  the  Temple  was  the  chief  house  of  the  Knights  of  this
Order  in  England ;  and  was,  by  the  Knights  of  St.  John,  whose
principle  Mansion  was  in  Smithficld,  sold  unto  the  Students  of  the

I320  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

Laws,  for  the  yearly  rent  of  lo/..  about  the  Middle  of  the  reign  of
Edward  III.  These  three  Orders  M.  Selden  (and  deservedly)  put
not  in  his  Title  of  /lonour,  in  that  they  were  prohibited  to  kiss  a
woman  ;  honorary  Knighthood  and  the  love  of  Ladies  going  to-
gether, like  Virtue  and  Reward."

KNIGHTS   TEMPLARS    DURING    THE    SEVEN    CRUSADES    FROM    III8    TO

I29I.

Hugo  de  Paganis,  after  arriving  in  Palestine,  as  a  Crusader  and
pilgrim,  finding  that  the  Moslem  inhabitants  infested  the  approaches
to  Jerusalem  and  other  sacred  places,  and  persecuted  such  pilgrims
as  were  not  in  sufficient  numbers  to  protect  themselves,  gathered
with  him  eight  other  companions,  viz.  :  Godefroi  de  St.  Aldemar,
Roral,  Gundemar,  Godefroi  Bisol,  de  Montdidier,  Archibald  de
St.  Aman,  Andrew  de  Montbar,  and  the  Count  of  Provence,  and
bound  themselves  to  the  Patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  in  a.d.  1118,  "to
guard  the  approaches  to  the  Holy  City,  so  that  pilgrims  to  the
sacred  places  might  have  easy  access  ;  to  live  as  regular  Canons
of  the  Church,  under  the  Benedictine  rule  ;  and  to  fight  for  the
King  of  Heaven  and  the  Bride  of  Christ,  in  chastity,  obedience,
and  self-denial.  In  1 1 19  Hugo  de  Paganis  became  the  first  Master.
The  palace  of  the  Latin  Kings  of  Jerusalem,  which  had  been  a
Mosque  on  Mount  Moriah — which  Mount  constitutes  now  the
Haram  Es  Sheriff — and  then  was  known  as  "  Solomon's  Temple,"
was  assigned  to  them  as  their  quarters.^  This  Mosque,  after  many
vicissitudes  from  the  time  of  its  first  erection,  is  at  the  present  day
called  the  "  Mosque  of  Omar,"  because  at  one  time  in  its  history  he
was  supposed  to  have  been  its  builder,  but  it  has  been  well  deter-
mined by  good  authority  that  he  was  not ;  but  when  he  conquered
Jerusalem,  between  a.d.  640  and  644,  he  put  it  in  thorough  repair.*

'  In  consequence  of  the  services  to  the  Christians  performed  by  the  "  Poor  Fellow
Soldiers,"  Baldwin  II.,  King  of  Jerusalem,  gave  them  for  a  habitation,  for  hitherto  they
seem  to  have  had  no  fixed  place  of  abode,  "  the  palace  or  royal  house  to  the  South  of  the
Temple  of  the  Lord,  vulgarly  called  the  Temple  of  Solomon  "  (Addison).  There  seems  to
be  confusion  in  this  locality,  by  different  writers,  owing  to  the  ignorance  concerning  the
various  buildings  on  this  site. — Editor.

^  Mosque  of  Omar  or  Kubbet  es  Sakra  (Dome  of  the  Rock).  This  building,  which  is
on  the  Platform  or  Original   Site  of  Solomon's  Temple,  is  an  Octagon  of  66  feet  to  eacl.

HISTORY   OF  CHRISTIAN   KNIGHTHOOD  1321

From  this  palace,  or  "  Solomon's  Temple,"  these  Knights  took
the  name  of  "  Templars,"  and  were  also  called  "  poor  fellow  soldiers
of  Christ  and  the  Temple  of  Solomon."  They  had  every  one  of
them  seen  hard  service  under  the  leadership  of  Godefroi  de  Bouillon,
and  were  well  qualified  to  render  efficient  service  in  aid  of  pilgrims
and  all  others  requiring  their  assistance.

Their  fame  and  valuable  services  soon  spread  over  all  Europe,
and  many  of  the  sons  of  noble  houses  were  induced  to  enter  into
this  body,  so  distinguished  by  its  acts  of  benevolence  and  charity.
The  Order  was  brought  prominently  to  the  especial  notice  of  St.
Bernard,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  by  whom  a  pastoral  was  issued  prais-
ing the  valor  and  extolling  the  merits  of  the  Templars.  At  the
Council  of  Troyes,  in  11 28,  statutes  were  formulated  for  the  new
Order.  Seventy-two  rules  of  discipline  were  adopted,  which  met
the  concurrence  of  Pope  Honorius  II.  and  the  Patriarch  of  Jerusa-
lem. So  rapid  was  the  growth  of  this  Order  that  they  had  been
established  in  every  kingdom  of  Latin  Christendom.  Domains  in
Normandy  were  granted  to  them  by  Henry  I.  of  France.  In  11 29
they  were  established  in  Castile,  in  1131  in  Rochelle,  in  Langue-
doc  in  1 136,  in  Rome  in  1138,  in  Brittany  in  1141.  The  White
Mantle  was  chosen  to  be  worn  to  distinguish  them  from  the  Hospi-
talers, who  wore  a  robe  of  black.  The  Red  Cross  was  added  in  1146
by  Pope  Eugenius  III.,  to  be  placed  on  the  breast  as  a  symbol  that
the  Order  was  expected  to  invite  martyrdom.

Hugo  de  Paganis,  the  first  Master  of  the  Templars,  visited  Eng-
land, and  many  English  knights  followed  him  to  Palestine  as  Mem-
bers of  the  Order.  Among  these  was  Fulk,  Count  of  Anjou,  who
afterward  was  King  of  Jerusalem,  in  1131.  Hugo  de  Paganis  died
in  1 136.

side,  having  four  porticoes  and  a  range  of  pointed  windows  incrusted  with  beautifully  col-
ored Persian  tiles.  Within  are  two  concentric  ranges  of  columns  and  square  pillars — the
interior  range  supporting  the  drum  of  the  magnificent  dome,  which  is  nearly  loo  feet  in
height  and  over  60  feet  in  diameter.  Within  the  central  range  is  a  rock  60  x  50  feet  ris-
ing seven  feet  above  the  pavement — tradition  saying  that  it  was  upon  this  rock  Abraham
was  about  to  sacrifice  his  son  Isaac.  Underneath  this  rock  is  a  cave — a  chamber  14  x  16
feet,  in  which  the  Mohammedans  now  worship.  The  walls  and  the  drum  are  covered
with  beautiful  Byzantine  Mosaics  of  different  dates,  and  the  windows  are  filled  with  splen-
did sixteenth  century  colored  glass.  It  is  supposed  that  this  Mosque  was  originally  a  very
early  Byzantine  church.  It  was  no  doubt  greatly  improved  by  Omar,  when  the  Moham-
medans occupied  Jerusalem.  Some  writers  say,  by  Abd-el-Malek  Ibn  Marwan,  before
»he  time  of  Omar.

1322  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

Robert  de  Craou,  a  nephew  of  Anselm,  Archbishop  of  Canter-
bur)^  succeeded  Paganis  as  Grand  Master  of  the  Order.

The  Second  Crusade  was  excited  by  the  troubles  and  dangers  to
which  the  Christians  of  Syria  were  exposed  from  the  conquering
arms  of  the  Turks,  who  defeated  the  Franks  at  Antioch,  and  had
taken  Edessa,  and  threatened  the  destruction  of  all  the  Christian
kingdoms  of  Syria.  In  this  crusade  Everard  de  Baris,  the  third
Master  of  the  Templars,  was  greatly  renowned  for  his  deeds  of
valor.  This  crusade,  as  before  stated,  was  incited  by  St.  Bernard,
Abbot  of  Clairvaux  in  Champagne,  who  was  distinguished  for  his
learning  and  devotion.  Under  Louis  VII.,  King  of  France,  and
Conrad  III.,  Emperor  of  Germany,  two  immense  armies  marched
for  the  Holy  Land — this  was  in  1147.  Manuel  Comnenus,  the
Greek  Emperor,  through  whose  country  the  armies  marched,  by  his
treacherous  conduct,  caused  great  and  a  long  series  of  disasters.  A
fruitless  attempt  was  made  to  take  Damascus,  and  the  expedition
was  finally  abandoned  ;  only  a  small  remnant  of  this  vast  host  re-
turned to  Europe.  Saladin,  the  Sultan  of  Egypt,  in  1187  caused  a
Third  Crusade  to  be  started.  Frederick  Barbarossa,  Emperor  of  Ger-
many ;  Philip  Augustus,  King  of  France  ;  and  Richard  I.  of  Eng-
land, were  the  Leaders  of  this  crusade.  In  11 89  the  Emperor  of
Germany  set  out  first,  but  unfortunately  died  of  a  fever  caused  by
imprudently  bathing  in  the  Orontes  River,  the  modern  Nahr-el-Asi,
the  chief  river  in  Northern  Syria  ;  it  flows  past  Antioch,  and  emp-
ties into  the  Mediterranean  Sea.  His  army  was  then  joined  to  the
forces  of  the  other  two  monarchs  at  Acre.  Nearly  two  years  were
passed  by  these  armies  in  the  siege  of  Acre  before  it  was  surren-
dered, although  Saladin  made  every  effort  to  relieve  the  defenders.
Nine  battles  were  fought,  and  over  100,000  Christians  perished  dur-
ing the  siege.  Unfortunately,  from  the  peculiar  temperaments  of
Philip  of  France  and  Richard  of  England,  they  could  not  agree  ;  and
Philip  returned  to  Europe.  Richard  led  his  army  to  Ascalon  and
defeated  Saladin  ;  but  was  finally  driven  from  Jerusalem.  Richard
performed  prodigies  of  valor  during  this  crusade,  by  which  the  ad-
miration of  the  Saracens  was  excited,  and  from  which  he  derived  his
name  of  "Coeur  de  Lion."  He  made  a  treaty  with  Saladin,  by
which  the  pilgrims  were  protected  from  injury  and  oppression  ;  he
then  returned  to  Europe,  in  1192.  Saladin  died  in  1193  ;  the  unity
of  his  empire  was  destroyed.     The  Sultans  of   Damascus,  Egypt,

HISTORY   OF   CHRISTIAN    KNIGHTHOOD  1323

and  Aleppo  became  hostile  to  each  other,  and  the  Christians  of
Syria  were  not  molested  for  many  years.  Pope  Innocent  III.,
in  1203,  promoted  the  Fourth  Crusade.  At  Venice  an  extensive
armament  was  fitted  out.  The  expedition,  however,  was  diverted
from  its  true  mission  against  the  Mohammedans,  and,  led  by  Bald-
win, Count  of  Flanders,  proceeded  against  Constantinople.  In
1204  the  Crusaders  took  this  city,  and  then  founded  there  the  Latin
dynasty  of  emperors  who  continued  to  fill  the  throne  for  fifty-six
years.

Frederick  II.,  Emperor  of  Germany,  in  1228  led  the  Fifth  Cru-
sade, and  it  was  ended  by  a  treaty  which  he  made  with  the  Sultan  of
Egypt,  according  to  which  Palestine  was  ceded  to  Frederick,  and
free  toleration  granted  to  the  two  faiths  of  Christianity  and  Moham-
medanism. By  this  arrangement  the  Christians  lived  in  Jerusalem
in  peace  and  prosperity,  until  the  Mongols,  in  the  middle  of  the  13th
century,  disturbed  this  harmony.

Louis  IX.  (St.  Louis)  of  France,  in  consequence  of  the  capture
and  pillage  of  Jerusalem  by  the  barbarous  Mongols,  in  1249,  under-
took the  Sixth  Crusade.  After  he  had  taken  Damietta  he  was  com-
pletely defeated  by  the  Sultan  of  Egy^pt  and  taken  prisoner ;  but
was,  in  1250,  ransomed  by  his  subjects.  In  alliance  with  Prince
Edward  (afterward  Edward  I.),  son  of  Henry  III.  of  England,  St.
Louis  undertook  the  Seventh  and  last  Crusade,  in  1 269,  because  of
the  capture  of  Antioch  by  the  Mame-luke  ^  Sultan  of  Egypt.  Louis
went  to  Africa,  expecting  to  receive  the  King  of  Tunis  as  a  convert
to  Christianity  ;  he,  however,  found  him  to  be  a  determined  enemy.
A  pestilence  having  seized  upon  the  French  camp,  they  perished  by
thousands  upon  the  burning  sands.  St.  Louis  died  in  his  tent ;  and
his  son,  after  making  a  treaty  with  the  King  of  Tunis,  retarned  to
France.  Prince  Edward,  who  at  the  age  of  fifteen  had  been  married
(August  5,  1254)  to  Eleanora  of  Castile  (infanta  donna),  not  ten
years  of  age,  sistei  of  King  Alphonso,  surnamed  the  "Astronomer,"
proceeded  to  Palestine,  accompanied  by  his  wife,  who,  leaving  her
three  infants  in  England  at  Windsor,  met  her  lord  at  Bordeaux,  and
from  thence  they  sailed  to  Ptolomais,  and  in  that  campaign  he  won
a  great  battle  and  stormed  Nazareth.  Embarking  at  Cyprus  he  won
another  victory,  June,  1271,  at  Cahow.

'  Mame-luke,  meaning  in  Arabic  slave.

1324  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

The  Saracens  became  greatly  alarmed,  and  an  attempt  was  made
against  Edward  by  the  prince  of  the  Assassins,  called  the  "  Old  Man
of  the  Mountains."  He  employed  a  fanatic,  who,  pretending  to  be  a
Christian  convert,  was  admitted  to  the  presence  of  Edward,  aimed  a
dagger  at  his  side,  but  stabbed  him  in  the  arm.  Although  wounded
as  he  was,  he  overcame  and  killed  the  assassin  before  his  attendants
reached  him.  Being  fearful  that  the  weapon  had  been  poisoned,  for
the  wound  turned  black,  when  the  Master  of  the  Temple  and  the
doctors  recommended  incision,  the  Princess  Eleanora,  agonized  at
what  her  lord  had  to  suffer,  cried  and  lamented,  until  his  brother
Edmund  said  :  "  My  sister,  it  is  better  you  should  cry  than  all  Eng-
land weep."  Edward,  holding  out  his  arm,  bade  his  surgeons  "cut
away  and  spare  not,  he  would  bear  it,"  and  told  his  favorite  knight,
John  de  Vesci,  to  "carry  the  Princess  away  from  a  sight  not  fit  for
her  to  witness."  Sir  John  carried  her  away  to  her  ladies,  she  shriek-
ing and  struggling  all  the  time.  The  surgical  operation  was  effectual,
and,  owing  to  Edward's  virtue  of  temperance  and  Eleanora's  tender
care  of  him,  he  was  convalescent  in  fifteen  days.'

The  forces  of  Edward,  having  been  greatly  reduced  by  sickness
and  want,  prepared  to  leave  the  Holy  Land,  where  his  wife  had  given
birth  to  a  daughter,  celebrated  under  the  name  of  "  Joanna  of  Acre,"
in  which  city  she  was  born,  and  who  afterward  married  Gilbert  de
Clare,  the  first  nobleman  of  England.  On  their  arrival  in  Sicily  sad
news  met  them — that  their  heir.  Prince  John,  had  died  suddenly,
and  his  brother  Henrj^  also.  A  messenger  arrived  on  the  third  day,
announcing  that  Edward's  royal  sire,  Henry  HI.,  had  expired,  and
Edward  was  now  King  of  England.  He  had  borne  the  loss  of  his
sons  with  firmness,  but  was  thrown  into  agonies  upon  the  news  of
his  father's  death.  When  surprise  was  expressed  at  this  he  replied,
"  Eleanora  may  bring  me  more  sons,  but  the  loss  of  a  father  can
never  be  replaced."

This  closed  the  era  of  the  Crusades.  Antioch  had  fallen  by  the
hands  of  the  Sultan  of  Egypt,  and  the  inhabitants  were  slaughtered
or  carried  into  slavery  in  1 268.  All  the  other  towns  in  Syria,  success-
ively, were  reduced  and  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Mohammedans
excepting  Acre,  which  for  some  time  was  the  seat  of  the  Christians.
It  was  captured  by  the  Sultan  in  1291,  and  60,000  of  its  inhabitants

•Agnes  Strickland,  "  Queens  of  England,"  1S71,  p.  97.

HISTORY   OF  CHRISTIAN   KNIGHTHOOD  1325

were  massacred  or  sent  into  slavery.  Soon  afterward  all  the
churches  and  fortifications  of  the  Latin  Christians  throughout  Syria
were  destroyed.

We  might  with  some  profit  here  pause,  and  reflect  upon  the  won^
derful  effect  that  resulted  from  these  vast  and  religious  wars,  be-
tween the  Western  Christian  nations  and  the  hordes  of  ignorant
and  benighted  Mohammedan  believers  of  the  East,  which  success-
ively followed  from  the  First  Crusade  in  1096.  No  less  than  275,-
000  men,  mostly  the  dregs  of  the  population  of  the  various  nations
of  Europe,  were  commanded  by  a  religious  fanatic,  Peter  the  Hermit.
The  first  detachment,  under  Walter  the  Penniless,  was  destroyed  by
the  Bulgarians,  a  few  only  succeeding  in  reaching  Constantinople,
where  those  led  by  Peter  himself  joined  with  them.  After  many
difficulties  a  part  of  these  succeeded  in  reaching  Asia  Minor,  oppo-
site Constantinople,  where,  upon  the  plains  of  Nice,  they  were
defeated  with  great  slaughter  by  the  Turkish  Sultan.  A  third  and
fourth  expedition  met  with  similar  misfortune.  However,  the  real
Crusaders  very  soon  thereafter  arrived  at  Constantinople,  who  con-
sisted of  six  armies  of  veteran  soldiers,  who  were  commanded  by
the  most  skillful  and  experienced  commanders  of  that  age  :  God-
frey of  Bouillon  ;  Duke  of  Lorrain  ;  Hugh  the  Great,  brother  of
Philip  I.,  King  of  France  ;  Robert,  son  of  William  the  Conqueror
of  England ;  Count  Robert  of  Flanders ;  Bo'he-Mond,  Count  of
Tarentum,  with  his  cousin,  the  noble  and  illustrious  Tancred ;
and  Count  Raymond  of  Toulouse  ;  amounting  to  nearly  600,000
men.

This  force,  under  these  noble  leaders,  defeated  Sultan  Sol'i-man,
and  took  possession  of  his  capital,  Nice,  in  1097,  and  afterward
marched  on  to  Syria,  and  besieged  and  took  Antioch,  in  1098,
after  seven  months'  siege  ;  during  which  time  Peter  the  Hermit,
with  multitudes  of  others,  deserted  the  Crusaders.  The  Persian
Sultan,  having  sent  an  immense  army  of  Mohammedans  to  aid  the
others,  they  were  also  defeated  and  routed.  The  Crusaders  then
marched  to  Jerusalem,  and  found  their  numbers  reduced  to  40,000.
This  city  surrendered  to  the  Crusaders  in  1099,  ^^^^^  ^  short  siege  ;
and  Godfrey  de  Bouillon  was  unanimously  chosen  King.  Soon
thereafter  he  met  the  Sultan  of  Egypt,  with  an  immense  army,  at
Ascalon,  and  there  defeated  him.

The  Kingdom  of  Jerusalem,  in  a  short  time,  was  extended,  until

1326  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

it  embraced  the  whole  of  Palestine  ;  nearly  all  or  the  best  parts  of
Asia  Minor  were  restored  to  the  Eastern  Empire;  Bohemond  was
made  Prince  of  Antioch.  At  this  time  the  two  Orders  of  Knights
Hospitalers  of  St.  John  and  Knights  Templars  above  referred  to
were  founded,  "  and  for  nearly  fifty  years  the  three  Latin  principal-
ities or  Kingdoms  of  the  East — viz.  :  Edessa,  Antioch,  and  Jerusa-
lem— maintained  themselves  against  the  Mohammedans,  and  in-
creased in  power  and  wealth."

Then  a  Turkish  Emir,  who,  having  been  made  Governor  of
Aleppo,  had  defeated  the  Franks  at  Antioch,  had  taken  Edessa,
and  threatened  the  destruction  of  all  the  Christian  Kingdoms  in
Syria.

The  influence  of  these  crusades,  extending  from  1090  to  1291,
a  period  of  two  hundred  years,  was  very  evident  upon  the  European
nations  who  had  so  repeatedly  furnished  their  contingents  to  supply
the  armies  who  fought  so  hard  and  through  so  many  difficulties  in
that  unfavorable  climate  of  Syria.  In  reading  the  accounts  of  these
various  crusades  we  are  constantly  reminded  that  in  nearly  every
successful  battle  the  conduct  of  the  brave  and  gallant  Knights
Templars  insured  a  complete  victory.

The  great  reputation  which  they  gained  caused  a  constant  in-
crease of  their  numbers  from  the  very  best  elements  of  the  higher
classes  in  Europe — and  a  constant  increase  of  lands  and  monasteries
and  other  estates.  The  political  and  social  improvement  of  the
nations  of  Europe  followed.  They  tended  to  break  up  the  feudal
system,  and  the  great  barons  were  compelled  to  sell  their  exten-
sive estates,  in  order  to  get  the  means  of  paying  for  the  equip-
ments of  their  armies ;  and  their  estates  were  divided  up  among
the  people  generally.  Popular  freedom  was  given  to  towns  and
cities,  with  political  privileges,  in  return  for  contributions  of  money
to  pay  for  troops  and  equipments.  Commerce  was  encouraged
by  the  demand  for  so  many  ships  to  transport  such  immense
amounts  of  supplies  and  men — and  every  branch  of  trade  was  great-
ly stimulated  and  increased  to  furnish  arms,  equipments,  and  food
supplies.  Knowledge  was  diffused  among  the  people,  who  former-
ly were  almost  as  ignorant  of  the  outer  world  as  their  domestic
animals.  There  was  in  those  two  centuries  a  wonderful  advance
in  science,  art,  and  literature.  The  Greek  and  Saracenic  civiliza-
tion was  soon  imbibed  by  those  who  visited  the  East,  and  on  their

HISTORY   OF   CHRISTIAN   KNIGHTHOOD  1327

return  to  Europe,  their  own  countries  soon  felt  the  influence  in
every  branch  of  human  knowledge.

Among  those  who  returned,  and  thus  impressed  at  home  the
great  improvement  in  manners  and  customs,  none  were  more  influ-
ential than  the  Knights  of  the  several  Orders.  Their  influence  was
greater  by  far  than  any  others  who  were  fortunate  to  return  ;  and
consequently,  according  to  human  nature  everywhere,  these  Orders
became  distasteful  to  all  classes  by  their  arrogant  and  tyrannical  con-
duct, both  to  high  and  low ;  until  the  King  of  France,  Philip  the
Fair,  and  Pope  Clement  V.,  for  their  own  selfish  purposes,  and  to
gain  the  wealth  of  these  Orders,  determined  to  suppress  them,  which
resulted  in,  first,  their  imprisonment  for  several  years,  until  the  plot
was  ripe  ;  then  by  their  execution,  after  the  minds  of  the  people
had  become  sufficiently  reconciled  to  their  suppression.

During  a.d.  1118,  some  writers  say  1188,  according  to  a  Swed-
ish Legend,  "the  Rose  Croix  came  from  the  East  into  Europe,
to  propagate  the  doctrine  of  Jesus.  Three  of  them  founded  in
Europe  the  Order  of  Masons  of  the  East  [some  writers  say
that  our  Kitight  of  the  Red  Cross  may  probably  have  been  derived
from  this  degree],  to  serve  as  a  preparatory  seminary  for  those
pupils  whom  they  intended  to  instruct  in  the  most  sublime
sciences."^

To  Ormesius,  a  priest  of  Alexandria  in  Egypt,  is  attributed  the
origin  of  the  Order  of  Rose  Croix.  He  with  six  others  embraced
Christianity  at  the  solicitation  of  St.  Mark  the  Evangelist,  a.d.  46.*
This  tradition  may  be  reconciled  with  the  tradition  of  the  formation
of  the  Order  of  the  Temple  in  Paris,  which  declares  that  the  "Order
of  the  East  gave  birth  to  the  Order  of  the  Temple  ;  that,  in  Ancient
Egypt,  we  find  the  cradle  of  the  Order  of  the  East."  Also,  "  the
Swedish  brethren,"  as  Reghellini  observes,  "  have  always  enjoyed  in
the  Order  a  very  brilliant  reputation  for  their  learning  ;  the  proof  of
which  is  that  all  nations  have  adopted,  in  the  Master's  degree,  the
distress  sign  as  it  was  established  in  the  catechism  of  their  symbolic
degrees." '  This,  however,  can  not  be  reconciled  with  that,  which  gives
the  origin  of  the  Rose  Croix,  by  the  admission  of  the  Order  of  St.
John  of  Jerusalem  of  27,000  Scottish  Masons,  who  had  given  their

•  "  La  Magonnerie,"  tome  ii.,  p.  431.

'Ibid.,  tome  ii. ,  p.  431.  "Acta.  Lat.,"  tome  i.,p.  336.

8"  La  Magonnerie,"  tome  ii.,  p.  430.

1328  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

aid  to  the  Christian  Princes  during  the  wars  of  the  First  Crusade,  as
given  by  Oliver  ^  and  several  others.''  Addison  says':  "That  the
first  authentic  notice  of  an  intention  on  the  part  of  the  Hospitalers
to  occupy  themselves  with  military  matters  occurs  in  the  bull  of
Pope  Innocent  the  Second,  a.d.  1130."  It  is  very  probable  that  the
latter  Order  was  not  of  a  military  character  at  this  time.

The  Order  of  the  Templars,  by  the  exertions  of  Baldwin,  King  of
Jerusalem,  was  greatly  extended  throughout  Europe.  The  church,
through  the  Pope  and  clergy,  was  enlisted  in  their  favor.  A  code
or  set  of  rules  was  given  them,  afterward  confirmed  by  a  Papal  Bull.
Large  grants  of  land,  and  also  money,  were  made  to  the  Templars,
after  the  visit  of  Hugode  Payens.to  Normandy,  England,  and  Scot-
land, as  before  mentioned  (a.d.  1128).  According  to  Reghellini,
"  Eighty-one  Masons,  under  the  conduct  of  Garimont,  Patriarch  of
Jerusalem,  crossed  into  Europe,  in  11 50"  (date  probably  erroneous).
"  They  went  to  the  Bishop  of  Upsala,  in  Eastern  Sweden,  who  received
them  very  favorably,  and  by  this  means  the  Bishop  was  initiated
into  the  mysteries  brought  from  the  Copts;  afterward  they  in-
trusted to  him  the  sacred  depot  of  these  doctrines,  rites,  and  mysteries.
The  Bishop  of  Upsala  took  care  to  conceal  them  in  the  subterranean
vault  of  the  tower  of  the  four  crowns,  which  at  that  time  was  the
treasure-house  of  the  King  of  Sweden.  Nine  of  these  Masons,
among  whom  was  Hugo  de  Payens,  established  in  Europe  the
Order  of  the  Templars,  who  subsequently  received  the  depot,  which
had  been  given  to  the  Bishop  of  Upsala,  which  held  the  doctrines,
d(Dgmas,  and  mysteries  of  the  Coptic  Priests.  Reghellini  adds  :  "  It
was  by  this  action  that  the  Templars  became  the  conservators  and
guardians  of  the  mysteries,  rites,  and  ceremonies  brought  from  the
East  by  the  Masons  and  the  Levites  of  the  true  light."  *  Hugo  of
the  Temple,  as  he  is  sometimes  called,  before  he  left  England,  ap-
pointed a  Prior  to  govern  ^  the  Order  in  England.

The  enthusiasm  which  prevailed  in  favor  of  the  Templars  was  so
great  over  Europe  at  this  time  that  the  King  of  Navarre  bequeathed
his  kingdom  to  the  Order.  Most  of  the  Barons  of  Navarre  and
Aragon  ratified  the  act ;  notwithstanding  which,  the  claims  of  the
Templars  were  afterward   successfully  resisted.     After  Hugo- had

*"  Historical  Landmarks,"  vol.  ii.,  p.  135,  note  40.

2  "  Dalcho's  Oration,"  Appendix,  note  A,  p.  66,  Lexicon.      ' "  Addison,"  p.  55.

*  "  La  Magonnerie,"  tome  i.,  p.  437.  ''"  Addison,"  p.  27.

HISTORY   OF  CHRISTIAN   KNIGHIHOOD  1389

laid  the  foundations  of  the  Order,  he  returned  to  Jerusalem  and  was
greeted  with  great  distinction  (a.d.  1129),  and  a  grand  Council  of
War  was  called ;  soon  after  which  he  died.

Hugo  de  Payens  was  succeeded  by  Robert  de  Craou,  sumamed
the  Burgundian,  son-in-law  of  Anselm,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,
in  1 136,  who  became  a  Templar  after  the  death  of  his  wife.  The
Templars  were  defeated  in  several  battles  by  Zenghis  and  Noureddin,
and  lost  several  towns,  the  principal  one  being  Edessa.  In  conse-
quence of  these  defeats  application  was  made  to  the  Pope  for  assist-
ance by  the  clergy  of  the  Eastern  Churches,  and  he  commissioned  SL
Bernard  to  preach  the  Second  Crusade.  In  1146  Everard  des  Barres,
or  de  Barri,  succeeded  ;  Lord  Robert  convened  a  general  chapter  at
Paris,  where  the  Second  Crusade  was  arranged.  The  Red  Cross  was
permitted  to  be  worn  by  the  Templars  by  Eugenius  III.  In  1 148
the  red  cross  banner  was  first  unfurled  in  battle,  it  is  supposed,  at  Da-
mascus. It  was  a  white  standard,  having  in  the  center  the  blood-red
::ross,  the  symbol  of  martyrdom.  Reghellini  supposes  the  origin
of  this  symbol  to  be  of  the  highest  antiquity.  The  Second  Crusade
having  been  a  failure,  the  Master  returned  with  King  Louis  to  Paris.
The  Templars  could  only  collect  one  hundred  and  twenty  knights
and  one  thousand  serving  brethren  to  recover  the  province  of  An
tioch,  which  had  been  invaded  by  the  enemy.  The  Master  abdi-
cated, and  spent  the  rest  of  his  life  in  the  Monastery  of  Clairvaux.

He  was  succeeded  by  a  nobleman  of  illustrious  family  of  Bur-
gundy, in  France,  Bernard  de  Tremelay,  a  valiant  and  experienced
soldier,  who  was  chosen  Master  in  1 15 1.  The  Infidels  were  defeated
near  Jerusalem  (1152)  in  a  night  attack,  and  driven  to  the  Jordan,
five  thousand  being  left  dead  on  the  plain  near  the  ford.  Against
this  victory  a  disastrous  defeat  was  encountered  by  the  Templars,
who  in  1153  attempted  to  take  the  city  of  Ascalon.  "They  pene-
trated, at  dawn  of  day,  through  a  breach  in  the  wall,  reached  the
center  of  the  town,  were  surrounded  by  the  Infidels,  and  '  slain  to  a
man.'     Their  bodies  were  exposed  in  triumph  from  the  walls."

Bertrand  de  Blanquefort,  of  a  noble  family  of  Guienne,  a  pious
and  God-fearing  man,  succeeded  to  the  Mastership  in  11 54.  The
enemy  captured  him,  with  Otho,  the  Marshal,  and  eighty-five  others
in  an  ambuscade  near  Tiberias  in  1156.  Shortly  thereafter, /^zVifj'
Knights  Templars  put  to  flight,  slaughtered,  and  captured  two  hun-
dred Infidels.  At  the  instance  of  Manuel  Comnenus,  Emperor  of
8a

;33o  HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Constantinople,  the  Master  was  liberated  (1158).  In  1167  "Philip
of  Naplous  became  Master;  he  was  the  first  Master  who  had  been
born  in  Palestine.  He  had  been  lord  of  the  fortresses  of  Krak  and
Montreal  in  Arabia  Petraea ;  having  assumed  the  habit  and  taken
che  vows  of  the  Order  of  the  Temple,  after  the  death  of  his  wife."
Philip  resigned  his  office  in  1 1 70,  and  Odo  de  St.  Amand,  of  un*
doubted  courage  and  resolution,  succeeded  as  Master  of  the  Temple,
according  to  William,  Archbishop  of  Tyre,  "  having  the  fear  neither
of  God  or  man  before  his  eyes."  In  1168,  because  the  Master  of
the  Temple  refused  to  mvade  Egypt,  in  violation  of  certain  treaties,
Gilbert  d'Assalit,  the  Guardian  of  the  Hospitalers,  the  friend  and
confident  of  Almaric,  King  of  Jerusalem,  armed  the  Hospitalers  as
a  great  Military  Society,  in  imitation  of  the  Templars.

Egypt  having  been  unjustifiably  invaded  by  the  Christian
Knights,  without  the  Templars,  Saladin  crossed  the  desert  with
40,000  horse  and  foot,  and  after  ravaging  the  borders  of  Palestine,
advanced  to  and  laid  siege  to  Gaza,  but  was  forcid  to  retire  again
into  Egypt  by  the  Templars.

After  this  the  Templars  and  Hospitalers  became  the  guardians
of  the  true  cross — the  former  marched  on  the  right,  and  the  latter
on  the  left  of  the  sacred  emblem.

The  Templars  conquered  the  Assassins  in  1 172,  and  their  chiefj
"the  Old  Man  of  the  Mountains,"  was  forced  to  sue  for  peace.
Near  Ascalon,  in  a  battle  (November  i,  1177),  "the  Infidels  were
defeated.  Odo  with  eighty  Knights  broke  through  the  famous  guard
of  Mamelooks,  slew  their  commander,  and  forced  Saladin  to  fly,
almost  naked,  on  a  fleet  dromedary."  At  the  battle  of  Jacob's  Ford,
"  where  there  was  much  hard  fighting,  the  Master  of  the  Hospital,
covered  with  wounds,  having  fled,  and  the  Count  of  Tripoli  also^
the  Templars  were  all  killed  or  taken  prisoners  and  the  Master  Odo
de  St,  Amand  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  The  fortress  was
burned  down,  and  all  the  Templars  taken  in  the  place  were  sawn  ic
two  except  the  most  distinguished."

HISTORY   OF  CHRISTIAN   KNIGHTHOOD  1331

THE  CAUSES  WHICH    LED  TO    THE    MARTYRDOM    OF    DE   MOLAV    AND

OTHERS.

During  the  difficulties  between  Philip,  King  of  France,  and
Boniface  VIII.,  the  Templars  coincided  with  the  Pope.  The  King
had  issued  coin  below  the  proper  standard,  which  caused  a  rebellion,
and  as  the  rents  of  the  Templars  were  very  great,  they  were  thought
by  the  King  to  be  the  instigators  of  the  disaflfection.  The  King
determined  to  be  revenged,  and  was  not  long  in  finding  someone
suited  to  his  purpose.  The  evidence  of  the  party  who,  to  obtain
the  royal  pardon,  gave  his  testimony,  was  merely  "  hearsay,"  but
two  apostates  from  the  Order,  who  were  expelled  and  condemned
to  imprisonment  for  their  crimes,  corroborated  this  testimony.  This
information  was  treasured  up  by  the  King,  to  be  made  use  of  at  the
right  time.  Clement,  an  unprincipled  man,  in  order  to  gain  the
summit  of  his  ambition,  had  pledged  himself  on  the  holy  sacrament
to  comply  with  a  condition  of  which  he  was  then  ignorant.  He
became  the  instrument  of  the  vindictive  and  wily  monarch.  This
Order,  which  had  been  for  one  hundred  and  seventy  years  the
admiration  of  all  Christendom,  its  members  having  shed  freely  their
blood,  and  given  thousands  of  lives  to  defend  Christianity,  and
lavished  their  treasures  in  defense  of  the  Cross  against  the  Infidels,
were  declared  to  be  heretics  and  apostates ;  they  were  accused  of
the  blackest  crimes,  all  of  which  were  impossible.  All  the  Templars
in  French  dominions  were  simultaneously  arrested  and  cast  into
prison.  Tortures  of  every  kind  were  unsparingly  applied.  Some,
to  escape  these  horrible  pains,  confessed  these  crimes  and  absurdi-
ties imputed  to  them,  in  hopes  of  obtaining  pardon.  Most  of  these,
after  being  restored  to  liberty,  renounced  their  confessions  and
solemnly  declared  thai  the  excessive  torments  to  which  they  had
been. put  alone  induced  them  to  confess  that  which  they  knew  to  be
false.  They  were  then  treated  as  relapsed  heretics  and  cast  into  the
flames.  Neither  age  nor  rank  could  escape  of  those  who  persisted  in
denying  ihe  guilt  of  the  Order.  Some  languished  in  loathsome
dungeons  for  years  and  perished  from  neglect,  disease,  and  starva-
tion. Others,  more  robust,  were  in  time  restored  to  liberty,  to
wander  about  the  world  with  mutilated  limbs,  to  gain  a  living  as
best  thev  could.

IJ32  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

It  would  seem  that  these  events,  so  well  known  to  the  nations  of
Europe,  would  have  taught  them  all  along  the  ages,  from  the  Cru-
sades to  the  19th  century,  the  humanitarian  principles  inculcated  in
their  religion.  Unfortunately,  cruelty  of  every  kind  was  so  deep  set
in  the  very  nature  of  all  the  Latin  races,  that  where  the  religious
sentiment  was  prevalent  it  was  utterly  impossible  for  the  Roman
Church  ever  to  forgive  any  individual,  high  or  low,  who  dared  to
controvert  in  the  least  manner  any  dogmatic  utterance  which  might
be  promulgated  from  the  Church  authorities.  Total  obedience,
the  most  abject  and  servile,  was  exacted  from  every  individual
The  history  of  every  nation  upon  the  continent  of  Europe,  and  where
the  Pope  of  Rome  had  authority  elsewhere,  shows  that  cruelties  of
the  worst  description  were  visited  upon  all  who  would  not  conform  to
the  exactions  of  the  Church  of  Rome.  Such  were  the  influences  of
that 'V?^r^^  of  the  world  "  which  followed  upon  the  suppression  of
the  Templars  by  that  "  Curse  of  France  " — as  Philip  the  Fair  was
styled  by  Dante — that  cruelties  for  differences  in  religious  matters
have  been  continued  to  the  present  day  where  any  particular  church
is  sustained  by  secular  authority.  The  conduct  of  Spain  in  her
treatment  of  her  West  and  East  Indian  colonies  in  political  matters
is  but  the  continuation  of  the  old  religious  persecutions  of  the  "  In-
quisition," "which  caused  countless  millions  to  mourn."  The  perse-
cutions of  the  Spanish  governors  in  Cuba,  Porto  Rico,  and  Philip-
pines, are  the  latest  phases  of  the  Spanish  "  Inquisition  "  and  the
"  French  Bastile  " — The  Devil's  Island  being  but  an  outgrowth  of
that  famous  fortress  destroyed  in  Paris  during  the  Revolution

EXECUTION    OF   DE    MOLAY.

Let  us  now  complete  the  history  of  the  Templars  of  the  Crusades.
One  recent  author  says :  "  The  last  scene  of  this  dreadful  tragedy
was  yet  to  be  enacted.  The  four  most  noble  victims  were  reserved
for  the  last.  James  de  Molay,  the  Grand  Master ;  Guy,  the  Grand
Preceptor ;  Hugo  de  Paralt  or  Peraldes,  the  Visitor  General ;
and  Theodore  Bazile  de  Merioncourt,  who  had  returned  from  the
East  (1307),  when  summoned  by  the  Pope,  and  who  had  lan-
guished in  prison  for  five  years  and  a  half,  were  (March  11,  1313)
led  out  to  a  scaffold  which  had  been  erected  in  front  of  Notre-

HISTORY    OF  CHRISTIAN   KNIGHTHOOD  1333

Dame,  publicly  to  avow  confessions  which  the  Grand  Master  had
aeciared  were  forged.  The  confessions  were  read,  their  assent  was
required.  Two  were  silent,  and  were  condemned  to  be  incarcerated
for  life,  "  But  the  Grand  Master  raising  his  arms,  bound  with
chains,  toward  heaven,  and  advancing  toward  the  edge  of  the  scaf-
fold, declared,  in  a  loud  voice,  that  to  say  that  which  was  untrue
was  a  crime,  both  in  the  sight  of  God  and  man.  '  I  do,'  said  he,
'  confess  my  guilt,  which  consists  in  having  to  my  shame  and  dis-
honor suffered  myself,  through  the  pain  of  torture  and  the  fear  of
death,  to  give  utterance  to  falsehoods,  imputing  scandalous  sins  and
iniquities  to  an  illustrious  Order,  which  hath  nobly  served  the  cause
of  Christianity.  I  disdain  to  seek  a  wretched  and  disgraceful  exist
ence  by  engrafting  a  naked  lie  upon  the  original  falsehood.'  He
was  here  interrupted  by  the  Probo  and  his  officers,  and  Guy,  the
Grand  Preceptor,  having  commenced  with  strong  asseverations  of
his  innocence,  they  were  both  hurried  back  to  prison." '

King  Philip  was  then  informed  of  the  occurrence,  and  in  his
blind  fury  ordered  them  to  be  immediately  executed.  This  took
place  at  four  o'clock  the  same  day,  Addison  says  at  dusk.  There  is
no  apparent  discrepancy  in  this,  as  in  March  it  often  occurs  that  it
is  dusky  soon  after  4  p.m.  They  were  conducted  to  the  "  Isle
de  la  Citd,"  a  funeral  pile  having  been  erected,  and  not  yet  com.
pleted,  near  where  now  stands  the  equestrian  statue  of  Henry  IV.

While  the  work  of  completion  was  going  on,  the  Grand  Master
solemnly  declared  the  innocence  of  his  brethren,  and  then  prayed  as
follows:  "Permit  us,  O  God!  to  remember  the  torments  which
Jesus  Christ  suffered  to  ransom  us,  and  to  imitate  the  example  which
he  set  us  in  enduring,  without  a  murmur,  the  persecutions  and  tort-
ures which  injustice  and  blindness  prepared  for  him.  Pardon,  O
my  God !  the  false  accusations  which  have  caused  the  total  destruc-
tion of  the  Order  of  which  Providence  appointed  me  the  head.
And  if.  thou  wilt  deign  to  hear  the  supplication  which  we  now  offer
thee,  grant  that  the  deceived  world  may,  at  some  future  day,  better
know  those  who  have  endeavored  to  live  for  thee.  We  hope  to
receive,  from  thy  goodness  and  mercy,  the  reward  for  the  torments
and  death  which  we  are  about  to  suffer — to  enjoy  thy  divine  pres-
ence in  the  realms  of  bliss."

'  "  Addison,"  p.  279.  Vertot  gives  this  speech  in  different  words,  though  alike  in
substance,  vol.  i,,p.  219.

1.^34  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

They  were  then  hurried  off  to  the  stake,  the  executioners  of  the
King  being  fearful  of  an  insurrection  of  the  people.  Small  fires  were
kindled  under  their  feet.  *'  This  hellish  torture  was  borne  with  for-
titude and  resignation,  without  cries  or  groans,  imploring  the  mercy
of  God  and  maintaining  the  innocence  and  purity  of  their  beloved
Order  to  the  last.  At  length  De  Molay,  when  his  body  was  almost
consumed,  having  yet  command  of  his  tongue,  looking  at  the  crowd
before  him,  exclaimed :

"  You  who  behold  us  perishing  in  the  flames  shall  decide  our
innocence  !  I  summon  Pope  Clement  V.  to  appear  in  forty  days,
and  Philip  the  Fair  in  twelve  months,  before  the  just  and  terrible
throne  of  the  ever-living  God,  to  render  an  account  of  the  blood
which  they  have  unjustly  and  wickedly  shed  !  "  *

The  fires  burned  lower  and  lower,  and  in  time  became  extin-
guished !  The  mortal  parts  of  James  de  Molay  and  Guy  had  been
reduced  to  ashes — their  spirits  had  returned  to  their  creator  !

Vertot  and  L'Histoire  de  I'ab.  de  I'Ord.  both  doubt  the  truth
of  this  tradition.  The  manuscript  of  Knights  Hospitalers,  the
manuscript  of  Knights  Hospitalers  of  de  la  Hogue,  and  the  degree
of  Novice  of  the  Order  of  Unknown  Phil.  Judges  state  that  De
Molay  made  this  prediction  yz^i^^  before  he  was  placed  on  the  funertd
pile.**

'Vertot,  vol.  i.,  p.  219.  "'  Orthodoxie  Magonnerie,"  p.  393.

*  Vertot,  in  his  account  of  the  origin  of  the  Order  of  Knights  Templars,  states  that  "  A
Templar  and  a  citizen  of  Breziers,  having  been  apprehended  for  some  crime,  were  com-
mitted together  to  a  dungeon  ;  for  want  of  a  priest,  they  confessed  each  other  ;  that  the
citizen,  having  heard  the  Templar's  confession,  in  order  to  save  his  own  life,  accused  the
Order  to  Philip,  King  of  France  ;  charging  them,  on  the  authority  of  what  his  fellow-pris-
oner had  told  him,  with  idolatry,  sodomy,  robbery,  and  murder  ;  adding  that  the  Knights
Templars  being  secretly  Mahomedan,  each  Knight,  at  his  admission  into  the  Order,  was
obliged  to  denounce  Jesus  Christ,  and  to  spit  on  the  Cross,  in  token  of  his  abhorrence  of
it.  Philip,  on  hearing  these  accusations,  pardoned  the  citizen,  and  disclosed  to  the  Pope
this  extraordinary  confession,  with  a  request  that  their  Order  should  be  suppressed." —
Cole,  "  Masonic  Library,"  p.  286.

Vertot  says  that  "  In  Germany  the  historians  of  that  nation  relate  that  Pope  Clem-
ent having  sent  his  bull  for  abolishing  the  Order  to  the  Archbishop  of  Metey,  for  him  to
enforce,  that  prelate  summoned  all  his  clergy  together,  that  the  publication  might  be
made  with  greater  solemnity  ;  and  that  they  were  suddenly  surprised  by  the  entry  of
Wallgruffer,  Count  Sauvage,  one  of  the  principals  of  the  Order,  attended  by  twenty  other
Templars  armed  and  in  their  regular  habits.  The  Count  declared  that  he  was  not  come  to  do
violence  to  any  body,  but,  having  heard  of  the  bull  against  his  Order,  came  to  insist  that  the
appeal  which  they  made  from  that  decree  to  the  next  Council  and  successor  of  Clement
should  be  received  and  published.     This  he  pressed  so  warmly  that  the  Archbishop,  not

HISTORY   OF  CHRISTIAN   KNIGHTHOOD  1335

"The  fate  of  the  persecutors  of  the  Order  is  not  unworthy  of
notice.  A  year  and  a  month  after  the  horrid  execution,  the  Pope,
Clement  V.,  was  attacked  by  a  dysentery,  and  speedily  hurried  to  his
grave.  His  dead  body  was  transported  to  Carpentras,  where  the
Court  of  Rome  then  resided.  It  was  placed  at  night  in  a  church
which  caught  fire,  and  the  mortal  remains  of  the  Holy  Pontiff  were
almost  entirely  consumed.  His  relations  quarreled  over  the  immense
treasures  he  left  behind  him,  and  a  vast  sum  of  money,  which  had
been  deposited  for  safety  in  a  church  at  Lucca,  was  stolen  by  a  dar-
ing band  of  German  and  Italian  freebooters.  Before  the  close  of
the  same  year.  King  Philip  IV.  died  of  a  lingering  disease  which  had
baffled  all  the  art  of  his  medical  attendants,  and  the  condemned
criminal,  upon  the  strength  of  whose  information  the  Templars  were
originally  arrested,  was  hanged  for  fresh  crimes.  "  History  attests,"
says  Raynouard,  "  that  all  those  who  were  foremost  in  the  persecu-
tion of  the  Templars  came  to  an  untimely  and  miserable  death.
The  last  days  of  Philip  IV.  were  embittered  by  misfortune.  His
nobles  and  clergy  leagued  against  him  to  resist  his  exactions.  The
wives  of  his  three  sons  were  accused  of  adultery,  and  two  of  them
were  publicly  convicted  of  that  crime."

"  The  chief  cause  of  the  ruin  of  the  Templars,"  justly  remarks
Fuller,  "was  their  extraordinary  wealth.  As  Naboth's  vineyard  was
the  chiefest  ground  of  his  blasphemy,  and  as  in  England  Sir  John
Cornwall,  Lord  Fanhope,  said  merrily,  not  he,  but  his  stately  house
at  Ampthill,  in  Bedfordshire,  was  guilty  of  high  treason,  so  certainly
iheir  wealth  was  the  principal  cause  of  their  overthrow.  We  may
believe  that  Philip  IV.  would  never  have  taken  away  their  lives,  if  he
might  have  taken  their  lands  without  putting  them  to  death,  but  the
mischief  was,  he  could  not  get  the  honey  unless  he  burnt  the  bees."

chinking  it  proper  to  refuse  men  whom  he  saw  armed,  complied.  He  sent  the  appeal
afterward  to  the  Pope,  who  ordered  him  to  have  it  examined  in  a  Council  of  his  province.
'Accordingly  a  synod  was  called,  and  after  a  lengthy  trial,  and  various  formalities  which
//ere  then  observed,  the  Templars  of  that  province  were  declared  innocent  of  the  crimes
;harged  upon  them. — Cole,  "  Masonic  Library,"  pp.  288,  289.

Notwiths  anding  this  verdict  of  innocence  it  does  not  appear  that  either  their  govern-
Tient  or  their  possessions  were  restored  to  them  as  a  distinct  order.  Their  estates  in  the
German  Empire  were  divided  between  the  Knights  of  Malta  and  the  Teutonic  Knights.
Many  of  the  Templars  joined  themselves  to  the  Knights  of  Malta  ;  and  some  writers  hold
-.his  to  be  probable,  for  prior  to  this  time  the  habit  of  the  Knight  Templar  was  originally
white  ;  but  they  now  distinguish  themselves  by  the  same  color  as  the  Knighf  of  Malta,
/iz.,  black.

IJ36  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

King  Philip  IV.,  i'nK,  Pope,  and  the  European  sovereigns  appear  to
have  disposed  of  all  the  personalty  of  the  Templars,  the  ornaments,
jewels,  and  treasures  of  their  churches  and  chapels,  and  during  the
period  of  live  years  over  which  the  proceedings  against  the  Order
extended  they  remained  in  the  actual  receipt  of  the  vast  rents  and
revenues  of  the  Fraternity.  King  Philip  IV.  put  forward  a  claim
upon  their  lands  in  France,  to  the  extent  of  a  million  dollars,  for  the
expenses  of  the  prosecution,  and  Louis,  his  son,  claimed  a  further
sum  of  $300,000.  "  I  do  not  know,"  says  the  celebrated  Voltaire,
"  how  much  went  to  the  Pope,  but  evidently,  the  share  of  the  Car-
dinals, the  Inquisitors  delegated  to  make  the  process  good,  amounted
to  immense  sums."  The  Pope,  according  to  his  own  account,  re-
ceived only  a  small  portion  of  the  personalty  of  the  Order,  but  others
make  him  a  large  participator  in  the  good  things  of  the  Fraternity.

ERA    SUBSEQUENT    TO   THE   DISPERSION    OF    THE    KNIGHTS    TEMPLARS.

Extracts  from  writings  of  Edward  Manning,  Cardinal  Arch-
bishop of  Westminster :

"The  south  of  France,  where  a  large  Jewish  and  Saracenic  ele-
ment remained,  was  a  hotbed  of  heresies,  and  that  region  was  also
a  favorite  one  with  the  guild  of  Masons.  It  is  asserted  too  that,  as
far  back  as  the  12th  century,  the  lodges  of  the  guild  enjoyed  the
special  protection  of  the  Knights  Templars.  It  is  easy  in  this  way
to  understand  how  the  symbolical  allusion  to  Solomon  and  his
Temple  might  have  passed  from  the  Knights  into  the  Masonic
formulary.  In  this  way  too  might  be  explained  how,  after  the  sup-
pression of  the  Order  of  the  Temple,  some  of  the  recalcitrant,  main-
taining their  influence  over  the  Freemasons,  would  be  able  to  pre-
vent what  had  been  hitherto  a  harmless  ceremony  into  an  elaborate
ritual  that  should  impart  some  of  the  errors  of  the  Templars  to  the
initiated.  A  document  was  long  ago  published,  which  purports  to
be  a  charter  granted  to  a  lodge  of  Freemasons  in  England,  in  the
time  of  Henry  VII.,  and  it  bears  the  marks  in  its  religious  indiffer-
ence of  a  suspicious  likeness  between  Freemasons  of  then  and  now.
In  Germany  the  guild  was  numerous,  and  was  formally  recognized
by  a  diploma  granted  in  1489  by  the  Emperor  Maximilian.  But
this  sanction  was  finally  revoked  by  the  Imperial  Diet  in  1707.

HISTORY    OF   CHRISTIAN   KNIGHTHOOD  1337

"  So  far,  however,  the  Freemasons  were  really  working  stone-
masons ;  but  the  so-called  Cologne  Charter  (the  genuineness  seems
certain),  drawn  up  in  1535  at  a  reunion  of  Freemasons  gathered  at
Cologne  to  celebrate  the  opening  of  the  Cathedral  Edifice,  is  signed
by  Melanchthon,  Coligny,  and  other  ill-omened.  Nothing  certain
is  known  of  the  Freemasons — now  evidently  become  a  sect  during
the  17th  century,  except  that  in  1646  Elias  Ashmole,  an  English-
man, founded  the  Order  of  Rose  Croix,  Rosicrucians,  or  Her-
metic Freemasonry,  a  society  which  mingled  in  a  fantastic  manner
the  jargon  of  alchemy  and  other  occult  sciences  with  Pantheism.
This  Order  soon  became  affiliated  to  some  of  the  Masonic  lodges  in
Germany,  where  from  the  time  of  the  Reformation  there  was  a
constant  founding  of  societies,  secret  or  open,  which  undertook  to
formulate  a  philosophy  or  religion  of  their  own,

"  As  we  know  it  now,  however,  Freemasonry  first  appeared  in
1725,  when  Lord  Derwentwater,  a  supporter  of  the  expelled  Stuart
Dynasty,  introduced  the  order  into  France,  professing  to  have  his
authority  from  a  lodge  at  Kilwinning,  Scotland.  This  formed  the
basis  of  that  variety  of  Freemasonry  called  the  Scotch  Rite.  Rival
organizations  soon  sprang  up.  Charters  were  obtained  from  a  lodge
at  York,  which  was  said  to  have  been  of  a  very  ancient  foundation."'

From  this  extract  some  of  our  recent  writers  have  thought  that
"this  connection  exists  just  so  far  as  the  Templary  of  our  own  day
clings  to  its  knightly  practices,  and  is  true  to  its  Templar  Dogmas
of  the  Christian  faith  and  teaching."

The  same  spirit  of  Clement  V.  is  here  shown  by  this  famous
Manning.

From  the  various  high-grade  systems  which  sprang  into  ex-
istence in  Europe  durin;.  the  middle  and  latter  part  of  the  i8th
century  came  the  Templary  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  for  in  each
system  there  was  to  be  found  the  Knight  Templar  degree.  The
Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite  of  Twenty-five  degrees,  and  its  suc-
cessor, the  "  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite,"  formulated  at  the
close  of  the  last  century,  are  permeated  with  the  Templar  spirit.

The  principles  in  all  of  the  several  rites  wherein  is  to  be  found

'  A  Catholic  Dictionary  containing  some  "  Account  of  the  Doctrine,  Discipline,  Rites,
Ceremonies,  Councils,  and  Religious  Orders  of  the  Catholic  Church."  By  William  E,
Addis,  Secular  Priest,  sometime  Fellow  of  the  University  of  Ireland,  and  Thomas  Arnold,
M-A.,  Fellow  of  the  same  university.  Second  Edition,  London.  Large  8vo,  1884.    In  loco.

1338  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

the  Templar  degree,  are  dogmatic  utterances,  and  "  squared  wurt
the  words  of  that  Ancient  Landmark,  God's  Holy  Word."  The
lessons  of  duty  found  in  our  modern  Templarism  are  to  be  applied
and  practiced  in  our  daily  life,  and  he  who  follows  faithfully  all  the
teaching  of  our  Order  will  be  a  "  Christian  in  deed  and  in  truth,  and
in  whom  there  is  no  guile."

History  says  Philip  died  a  few  weeks  after  the  martyrdom  of
De  Molay,  and  Addison  fixes  the  period  of  the  death  of  the  Pope
a  year  and  one  month  afterward,  and  he  also  says,  "  Histoiy  attests
that  all  those  who  were  foremost  in  the  persecution  of  the  Tem-
plars came  to  an  untimely  and  miserable  death."  ^

By  the  execution  of  the  principal  officers  of  the  Templar  organi-
zation their  enemies  supposed  that  the  Order  was  destroyed  for  all
time  ;  "  but  the  Eagle  of  St.  John  was  merely  scorched — not  killed.
From  the  ashes  of  the  old  Phcenix  has  arisen  another  Order,  more
glorious  in  all  its  aspects  than  the  original ;  and  in  the  latter  part  of
the  19th  century,  the  Knightly  Order  of  the  Templars,  clad  in  the
Armor  of  Integrity,  and  armed  with  the  sword  of  knowledge,  have
waged,  are  still  waging,  and  will  ever  wage  eternal  war  against  the
three  ancient  enemies  of  the  human  race — Falsehood,  Fanaticism,
Superstition  !     Dieu  le  vetit — 'The  will  of  God.'"

After  the  execution  of  De  Molay  and  the  dispersion  of  the
Templars,  in  all  the  nations  of  Europe,  their  possessions  were  con-
fiscated and  divided  among  various  other  Orders ;  the  survivors  were
compelled  to  leave  their  homes,  discard  their  garb  of  Templars,  and
mingle  again  with  the  world.

If  traditions  can  be  relied  upon,  some  preserved  their  "  Order  of
the  Temple  at  Paris ; "  and  some  the  "Templars  in  Scotland,"  of  whom
Charles  Edward  Stuart  was  chosen  Grand  Master.  Some,  it  is  said
sought  refuge  in  the  Society  of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons,  in  order
"  that  they  might  there  enjoy  with  impunity  the  religious  dogmas
which  they  had  brought  with  them  from  the  East — the  liberal  senti-
ments of  the  Johannite  Christians^the  pure  doctrines  of  the  primi-
tive Christian  Church.  Many  entered  the  preceptories  of  the
Knights  Hospitalers,  after  a  part  of  their  lands  had  been  granted  to
them."  From  this  circumstance  no  doubt  the  modern  degree  of
Knights  of  Malta  has  been  incorporated  into  the  Encampments  of

'  "  Addison,"  p.  280.

HISTORY   OF  CHRISTIAN   KNIGHTHOOD  1339

Knights  Templars.  The  Knights  of  Malta  were  never  anciently
claimed  to  have  been  Freemasons.  "In  1740  the  Grand  Master
of  the  Order  of  Malta  caused  the  bull  of  Clement  XII.  to  be  pub-
lished in  the  Island  of  Malta,  and  forbade  the  meetings  of  Free-
masons. On  this  occasion  several  Knights  and  many  citizens  left
the  Island."  "In  1741  the  Inquisition  pursued  the  Freemasons  at
Malta,  The  Grand  Master  proscribed  their  assemblies  under  severe
penalties,  and  six  knights  were  banished  from  the  Island,  in  perpe-
tuity, for  having  assisted  at  a  meeting."

From  tradition,  after  the  death  of  De  Molay.  in  13 13,  the  Tern,
plars  were  divided  into  four  parties,  viz.:

1.  The  Templars  in  Portugal  and  Italy — known  since  as  Knights
of  the  "  Order  of  Christ."

2.  Those  who  accepted  Peter  d'Aumont  as  the  successor  of  De
Molay.

3.  Those  who  asserted  that  John  Marc  Larmenius  was  his  suc-
cessor.

4.  Those  who  refused  to  accept  either  Larmenius  or  D'Au-
mont.

Passing  by  the  first,  second,  and  third  classes,  our  sketch  need
only  to  refer  to  the  fourth — as  Modern  Templarism  is  supposed  to
be  derived  from  the  fourth  class,  which  may  be  divided  into  two
classes — the  Scotch  and  English.

Edward  having  debarred  the  Templars  from  taking  refuge
either  in  England  or  Ireland,  and  who  attempted  to  force  them,  as
he  had  done  their  brethren,  in  those  countries  to  enter  the  precep-
tories  of  the  Knights  of  St.  John,  they  were  forced  to  join  Bruce,
who  gave  them  ample  protection ;  and  it  is  said  by  their  assistance
he  was  enabled  to  defeat  the  forces  sent  against  him  by  Edward  at
the  battle  of  Bannockbum.  He  is  said  to  have  created,  on  June
24,  1 3 14,  the  Order  of  St.  Andrew  du  Chardin,^  to  which  was  after-
ward united  that  of  Heredom  (H.  D.  M.).  He  reserved  to  himself
and  to  his  successors  forever  the  title  of  Grand  Master  ;  and  founded
the  Royal  Grand  Lodge  of  the  Order  of  H.  D.  M.  at  Kilwinning.
As  our  object  is.  if  possible,  to  trace  the  origin  of  our  Templar
Orders,  we  must  here  drop  the  history  of  the  Royal  Order  and  refer
to  the  General  History  preceding — Chapter  XXIX. — where  a  full

'  This  order  was  most  probably  created  by  James  II.  in  1440.— Mackey,  in  this  work,
chapter  xxix. ,  p.  259  et  seq.

I340  HISTORY    OF    FREEMASONRY

Statement  is  made,  according  to  all  tiie  light  which  could  possibly
be  thrown  on  this  difficult  problem.

By  the  death  of  De  Molay,  the  Order  of  the  Temple  was  broken
up,  and  the  members  scattered  in  all  directions,  as  they  had  no  com-
mon head.  Those  of  them  who  had  been  leaders  in  each  country
were  mostly  imprisoned  for  life,  or  executed,  the  brethren,  perse-
cuted in  all  directions,  and  for  concealment,  wandered  about  and
cast  off  the  clothing  of  the  Order,  and  again  mingled  with  other
men.  Addison  says  :  "  Papers  and  certificates  were  granted  to  men
with  long  beards,  to  prevent  them  from  being  molested  by  the  offi-
cers of  justice  as  suspected  Templars."

Their  assemblies  were  forbidden  under  severe  penalties,  and  at
one  time  six  Knights  were  banished  from  the  island  for  having  been
at  one  of  the  meetings.  There  was  no  ritual  of  the  Order,  hence
the  ritual  now  used,  which  is  a  very  beautiful  and  impressive  one,  is
entirely  modem.  Gourdin  says  :  "  From  ignorance  of  the  true
causes  which  forced  some  of  the  Templars  to  enter  the  Order  of
Malta  has  arisen  the  highly  reprehensible  practice  of  dubbing  the
candidate  '  a  Knight  of  the  most  valiant  and  magnanimous  Order  of
Knights  Templars  and  Knights  of  Malta  of  the  Order  of  St.  John
af  Jerusalem.*  This  ritual  was  once  in  force  in  the  United  States,
and  was  incorporated  in  the  diploma  or  patent."

1.  The  Order  of  Christ.  When  the  Templars  were  suppressed
in  Portugal,  their  property,  of  all  kinds,  was  assigned  over  to  the
Order  of  Christ,  the  equestrian  militia,  the  latter  name  having  been
changed  to  the  former.  This  Order,  since  its  foundation  in  131  7,  has
been  always  protected  by  the  Kings  of  Portugal,  and  also  by  the
Popes.  They  wear  "a  long  and  loose  black  mantle,  turned  up  with
ermine  and  thereupon  the  Crosses."  They  are  called  "  Christian
Militia,"  which  is  their  motto.  Thory  says  that  "A  Portuguese
Mason  founded  at  Paris,  in  1807,  in  a  Lodge,  a  chapter  of  this
Order ;  he  applied  the  formulas  of  reception  to  those  of  Freema-
sonry. It  was  the  Templar  system.  He  p'-etended  to  have  received
from  Portugal  the  power  to  create  Knights."'  The  same  Order
was  in  Italy.  Pope  John  XXII.  reserved  the  right  of  nominating
those  members  called  Pontifical  Knights.*

2.  The  D'Aumont  Templars.      They  professed  the   system  of

•■"  Acta  Latomorum,"  tome  i.,  p.  299.         *  "  Encyclopedia  of  Heraldry,"  vol.  i.

HISTORY   OF  CHRISTIAN   KNIGHTHOOD  1341

"  Strict  Observance,"  which  its  opponents  declare  to  have  been  organ-
ized in  Prussia  by  Baron  Hund,  who  derived  his  knowledge  of  the
doctrines  in  the  Chapter  of  Clermont,  in  Paris,  he  being  a  member  in
1 754.*  This  system  is  exclusively  used  in  Germany  and  Sweden.
A  long  list  of  Grand  Masters  is  produced  who  succeeded  De  Molay,
the  first  being  D'Aumont,  who  is  said  to  have  been  elected  on  an
island  of  Scotland,  December  27,  1313.^  In  Sweden  it  is  said  that
the  Grand  Chapter  of  Stockholm  has  the  last  will  and  testament
of  De  Molay,  and  that  Beaujeau,  his  nephew,  collected  his  ashes,
interred  them,  and  erected  his  monument  with  suitable  inscrip-
tions.^

3.  The  Larmenius  Templars.  James  de  Molay,  foreseeing  the
evils  by  which  the  Order  was  threatened,  nominated  as  his  successor
John  Mark  Larmenius,  of  Jerusalem,  and  invested  him  with  the
Patriarchal  and  Apostolic  power.  Larmenius  transmitted  this  power
to  Brother  Thibault  of  Alexandria  in  1324.^  The  Order  of  Paris
claim  to  have  the  Charter  of  transmission  signed  by  Laminius  and
also  the  others  who  succeeded  him  in  Office,  down  to  the  present
time.  They  claim  also  to  have  the  original  statutes  of  the  year  587
in  manuscript,  and  several  relics  which  formerly  belonged  to  the
martyrs.  Some  of  the  Templars  were  sent  out  in  1826  to  Greece,
to  fight  the  Turks.^

There  has  been  a  difference  of  opinion  among  the  brethren  as
to  the  authenticity  of  these  legends  relative  to  D'Aumont,  Beaujeau,
and  Larmenius,  and  the  relics.  Some  writers  have  asserted  that  De
T^'Iolay  had  appointed  four  Grand  Chiefs  of  the  Order  in  Europe  :
at  Edinburgh  in  the  north  ;  Paris  in  the  west  ;  Naples  in  the
south,  and  Stockholm  in  the  east.®  According  to  the  rules  of  the
Order  at  that  time  it  is  very  doubtful  if  De  Molay  appointed  any-
one as  his  successor,  as  the  office  had,  up  to  that  time,  been  elec-
tive, and  no  one  appointed  by  De  Molay  or  anyone  else  would  have
been  recognized  by  the  Order  at  large  unless  he  had  been  regularly
elected ;  hence  we  may  be  sure  that  De  Molay  had  no  successors.

4.  The  fourth  were  the  Templars,  who  did  not  recognize  either  of

>  "  Acta  Latomorum,"  tome  i.,  pp.  68,  328.  "  Historical  Landmarks,"  vol.  ii.,  p.  45.
The  system  of  Ramsay  was  known  in  Germany  before  the  Chapter  of  Clermont.  "  Or-
thodoxie  Magonnerie,"  p.  222.

'  "  Acta  Latomorum,"  tome  i.,  p.  329.    "  Historical  Landmarks,"  vol.  ii.,  p.  13,  note  2&

8  "  Acta  Latomorum,"  p.  339.  *  "  Manuel,"  p.  8.

*  "  Freemasons  Magazine,"  vol.  i.,  p.  170.        •  "  La  Magonnerie,"  tome  i.,  p.  466.

1342  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

the  three  above  mentioned  who  assumed  the  authority  of  a  Grand
Master.  Those  may  be  divided  into  two  classes:  ist  The  Scotch
Templars.  These  may  be  sub-divided  into  two  sections  :  a.  Those
who  fought  with  Robert  Bruce  ;  b.  Those  who  entered  the  Order
of  Knights  Hospitalers.

I.  The  Templars  in  Scotland,  in  consequence  of  the  hostility  of
Edward  III.,  King  of  England,  were  forced  to  join  with  Bruce,  as  he
had  refused  to  let  them  take  refuge  either  in  England  or  Ireland,
and  had  endeavored  to  force  them,  as  he  had  their  brethren  in  those
countries,  to  enter  the  preceptories  of  the  Knights  of  St.  John.
These  Knights  having  joined  Bruce  and  aided  in  the  victory  at
Bannockburn,  he  created,  June  24,  13 14,  the  Order  of  St.  Andrew
du  Chardon,  to  which  was  afterward  united  that  of  Heredom
(H.  D.  M.).*  He  raised  the  Lodge  of  Kilwinning  in  Scotland,
founded  at  the  time  of  the  constitution  of  the  abbey  of  that  name,
in  1 1 50,  to  the  rank  of  Royal  Grand  Lodge  of  Heredom.  These
Scotch  Templars  are  reported  to  have  been  expelleJin  1324  by  Lar-
menius,  who  had  invented  different  signs  and  words  to  exclude  them
from  the  Order  of  which  he  was  chief,  because  they  had  assisted
Bruce,  and  of  having  joined  the  order  of  H.  R.  D.  M.  Some  writers
have  conjectured  that  from  this  Royal  Order  had  sprung  the  An-
cient and  Accepted  Rite.  The  present  writer  feels  confident  that
the  third  degree  of  Symbolic  Masonry  was  originally  derived  from
the  H.  R.  D.  M.

"  From  the  General  Regulations  of  Royal  Arch  Masons  of
Scotland,  it  may  be  inferred  that  the  preservation  of  a  remnant  of
the  Templars  in  Scotland  is  chiefly  to  be  attributed  to  the  wars  be-
tween Robert  Bruce  and  Edward  HI.  of  England."  It  is  confi-
dently said  that  "the  25  degrees  of  Heredom  were  practiced  at
York,  in  1784,  by  the  College  of  Heredom  Templars,  being  No.  i
under  the  Constitution  of  the  Ancient  Lodge  at  York,  south  of  the
river  Trent,  sitting  at  York."

In  1785  the  Order  of  H.  R.  D.  M.  resumed  its  functions  at  Edin-
burgh, the  presiding  officer  being  styled  Wisdom?  The  body  at
Edinburgh  established  a  Chapter  at  Rouen  in  1786.'  On  January
4,  1787,  a  Chapter  of  Harodim  was  opened  in  London,*  but  it  is
act  known  whether  this  was  a  branch  of  the  Royal  Order.     About

^Chanter  xix.,  ante.  *"  Historical  Landmarks,"  vol.  ii.,  p.  86.

^"  Acta  Latomorum,"  tome  i.,  p.  169.    *"  Historical  Landmarks,"  vol.  ii.,  p.  86.

DREAM   OF  CONSTANTINE

HISTORY   OF   CHRISTIAN   KNIGHTHOOD  1343

the  beginning  of  the  present  century  there  was  a  consistory  at  Hull
and  one  at  Grimsby.'

Rebold  has  it  that  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Heredom  of  Kilwinning
united  together  with  all  the  subordinates  to  the  St.  John  Grand
Lodge  of  Edinburgh.^

2.  Those  who  entered  the  Order  of  Knights  Hospitalers.  In
Scotland,  in  England  and  Ireland,  many  of  the  Templars  joined
the  Order  of  the  Knights  of  St.  John.  They  resided  amicably  in
the  same  preceptories  at  the  end  of  the  14th  and  beginning  of  the
15th  centuries,  and  continued  thus  until  the  Reformation.*  But
they  did  not,  however,  hold  all  their  lands  in  common.*  Many  of
these  Knights  of  both  Orders  embraced  Protestantism,  and  frater-
nized with  the  Freemasons.  The  Preceptor  in  Scotland,  having  be-
come a  Protestant,  resigned  the  whole  prosessions  of  the  Preceptory,
of  the  Hospitalers  and  Templars,  received  the  same,  as  Lord  Tor-
phichen,  from  the  Crown.  Those  Knights  who  remained  Roman
Catholics  united  with  David  Seaton.  The  Grand  Master,  Viscount
Dundee,  was  slain  at  Killiekrankie.  Charles  Edward  Stuart,  who
had  been  admitted,  September  24,  1745,  at  Holyrood,  became  the
Grand  Master.^  Mr.  Oliphant,  of  Bachiltar,  succeeded  him.  He
died  in  1745."  From  the  General  Regulations  of  Royal  Arch  Ma-
sons of  Scotland  it  may  be  inferred  that  the  Masonic  branch  of
the  Order  preserved  the  ceremonies  which  are  used  at  a  reception.
The  Sterling  Ancient  Lodge  conferred  the  degree  of  Royal  Arch,
Red  Cross,  or  Ark,  the  Sepulcher,  Knights  of  Malta  and  Knights
Templars,  until  the  beginning  of  the  last  century,  when  two  lodges
were  formed.  The  Ancient  Lodge  joined  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Scotland  in  1 736,  and  the  new  one,  called  the  Royal  Arch,  in  1 759,
when  another  division  took  place.  And  these  degrees  were  con-
ferred in  an  encampment  until  181 1,  when  the  supreme  encamp-
ment of  Masonic  Knights  Templars  was  formed  in  Scotland.''     Sev-

'"  Historical  Landmarks,"  vol.  ii.,  p.  671,  note  16.

'  "  Histoire  Generale  de  la  Frangois  Magonnerie,"  p.  151.  Oliver,  "  Historical  Land-
marks," vol.  ii.,  p.  16.

*  "  General  Regulations  of  Royal  Arch  Masons  of  Scotland,"  Introduction,  p.  iiL

*  "  Historical  Landmarks,"  vol.  ii.,p.  20,  note  46.
'  Gourdin,  p.  25.

*  "  Historical  Landmarks,"  vol.  ii..  p.  20,  note  46.  It  is  presumed  that  this  portion  of
ibe  Order  is  not  connected  with  Freemasonry.

'  "  General  Regulations  of  Royal  Arch  Masons  of  Scotland,"  Introduction,  pp.  ii.,  iii.

1344  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

eral  encampments  in  Scotland,  however,  obtained,  about  1795,
charters  from  Ireland  with  the  privilege  of  conferring  the  Royal
Arch  degrees,  though  the  encampments  in  the  latter  country  were
merely  private  bodies.^

3.  The  English  Templars.  It  is  supposed,  that  with  the  excep-
tion of  the  Encampment  of  Observance,  all  the  encampments  in  the
United  States  and  England  owe  their  origin  to  the  three  original
"Encampments  of  Baldwin,"  established  at  Bristol,  Bath,  and  York."
Oliver  says :  "  In  England  and  Ireland,  as  the  Conciliae  Magnse-
Britannicce  show,  the  Templars  were  put  down,  and  the  Knights
compelled  to  enter  the  preceptories  of  their  opponents,  the  Knights
of  St.  John,  as  dependants."^  "Their  lands  were  confiscated  and
given  to  the  latter  Order.  But  in  treating  of  the  manner  in  which
a  remnant  of  the  Order  was  preserved  in  England,  I  must  avail  my-
self of  information  kindly  furnished  me  by  an  eminent  Brother  who
resides  in  Bristol."

"  The  Order  of  Knights  Templars  has  existed  in  Bristol  from
time  immemorial.  The  Templars  held  large  possessions  in  this  an-
cient city,  and,  with  their  House  or  Preceptory,  and  the  Men  of  the
Temple,  are  mentioned  in  many  old  charters  and  documents.  The
Temple  Church  and  Parish  of  Temple  point  out  the  locality  of  their
residence.  About  fifty  years  ago  an  active  and  respected  member
of  the  Craft,  Brother  Henry  Smith,  now  deceased,  introduced  from
France  three  degrees  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite,  which,
with  the  degree  of  R.  C,  long  before  that  time  connected  with  the
Knights  Templars,  were  united  into  an  Order  or  Community,  called
the  Royal  Orders  of  Knighthood.  These  were  the  degrees  of  the
Nine  Elect,  the  gth  degree  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite,  the
Knights  Grand  Architects  of  Kilwinning,  the  14th  degree  of  that
Rite,  and  the  Knights  of  the  East,  the  Sword  and  Eagle,  answering
to  the  1 6th  degree,  and  the  Knights  R.  C.  or  i8th  degree,  were,
together  with  the  order  of  the  Knights  Templars,  held  and  practiced
under  one  authority.  In  our  oldest  records  the  style  or  title  of
Knights  Templars  is  given  with  the  addition  of  K.-H.,  but  that
degree  was,  as  far  as  I  know,  never  given,  and  even  the  meaning  of
the  title  has  fallen  into  oblivion."

•  "  General  Regulations  of  Royal  Arch  Masons  of  Scotland,"  Introduction,  p.  vii.
'"  Lexicon,"  p.  265.     Temp,  chart,  p.  47,  by  J.  L.  Cross.
'"Historical  Landmarks,"  vol.  ii.,  p.  20,  note  46.

HISTORY   OF  CHRISTIAN   KNIGHTHOOD  1345

"  A  candidate  for  admission  into  any  one  of  the  five  degrees
before  mentioned  must  be  a  Royal  Arch  Mason,  He  may,  how-
ever, take  any  one  of  the  five  degrees  first,  which  may  happen  to  be
about  to  be  given,  at  the  time  he  seeks  admission,  as  one  general
payment  to  the  fund  of  the  United  Orders  entitles  him  to  admission
to  all.  An  attempt  was  made  to  enforce  the  proper  progression
through  the  five  degrees,  but  failed.

"  Nothing  is  known  here  of  the  Order  of  the  Temple  of  Paris,
but  that  is  the  real  source  of  the  present  Grand  Conclave  of  Eng-
land, the  late  Grand  Master,  the  Duke  of  Sussex,  having  been  cre-
ated at  Paris  in  that  body.

"  I  will  shortly  endeavor  to  explain  the  difference  between  the
Encampment  of  Baldwyn  and  the  Grand  Conclave.

"  The  Duke  of  Sussex,  having  been  installed  as  Knight  Templar
at  Paris,  I  believe  by  Sir  Sidney  Smith,  then  Grand  Master,  was  cre-
ated Grand  Master  of  the  Knights  Templars  in  England.  From
some  cause  or  other,  he  never  would  countenance  the  Christian
degrees  connected  with  Masonry,  and  would  not  permit  a  badge  of
one  of  these  degrees  to  be  worn  in  a  Craft  Lodge.  In  London,  of
course,  he  ruled  Supreme,  and  the  meetings  of  Knights  Templars
there,  if  they  continued  at  all,  were  degraded  to  the  mere  level  of
public-house  meetings.  A  true  descendant  of  the  Knights  of  St.
John  of  the  Hospital  was  held,  with  all  circumstances  of  ribaldry,
at  St.  John's  Gate,  Clerkenwell,  and  the  degrees  conferred  at  a
weekly  convivial  meeting  for  the  sum  of  5^-.  On  the  death  of  the
Duke  of  Sussex  it  was  resolved  to  rescue  the  Order  from  its  degraded
position,  and  the  Grand  Conclave  of  England  was  formed,  some  of
the  officers  of  the  Duke  of  Sussex's  original  Encampment,  which
he  held  once,  and  I  believe  once  only,  being  then  alive.

"  In  the  mean  time,  of  the  three  Original  Encampments  of  Eng-
land, the gemiine  representatives  of  the  Old  Knights  of  the  Temple,
two  had  expired,  those  of  Bath  and  York,  leaving  Bristol  the  sole
relic  of  the  Order  with  the  exception  of  those  encampments  which
had  been  created  in  various  parts  of  the  country,  not  holding
under  any  legitimate  authority,  but  raised  by  Knights  who  had,
I  believe,  without  exception,  been  created  in  the  Encampmefit  oj
Baldwyn  at  Bristol.

"  Under  these  circumstances,  the  Knights  of  Baldwin  felt  that
♦heir  place  was  at  the  head  of  the  Order,  and  though  willing,  for  the

8c

1346  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

common  good,  to  submit  to  the  authority  of  Colonel  Tynte,  or  any
duly  elected  Grand  Master,  they  could  not  yield  precedence  to  the
Encampment  of  Observance  (the  Original  Encampment  of  the
Duke  of  Sussex)  derived  from  a  foreign  and  spurious  source,  the  so-
called  Order  of  the  Temple  in  Paris,  nor  could  they  consent  to  forego
the  privileges  which  they  held  from  an  immemorial  period,  or  to
permit  their  ancient  and  well-established  ceremonies,  costume,  and
laws  to  be  revised  by  persons  for  whose  knowledge  and  judgment
they  entertained  a  very  reasonable  and  well  grounded  want  of  respect.
The  Encampment  of  Baldwyn,  therefore,  refused  to  send  representa-
tives to  the  Grand  Conclave  of  England,  or  to  acknowledge  its
authority  in  Bristol,  until  such  time  as  its  claims  should  be  treated
with  the  consideration  it  is  believed  they  deserve.  I  am,  however,
in  hope  that  an  arrangement  will  shortly  be  effected,  and  all  the
Templars  in  England  united  under  one  head."'

Gourdin,  from  whose  admirable  Historical  Sketch  of  Knights
Templars  we  have  made  many  extracts,  says,  in  continuation  of  the
matters  referred  to  in  the  above  letter :  "  While  we  approve  of  the
noble  conduct  of  the  Encampment  of  Baldwin,  and  trust  that  it  may
soon  attain  the  eminent  position  to  which  it  is  entitled  as  the  sole
surviving  preserver  of  our  Ancient  Mysteries  in  England,  during
many  centuries  of  trial "

Some  writers  have  contended  that  the  Masonry  of  modern  times
"originated  in  the  Holy  Land  during  the  Crusades,  and  was  insti-
tuted by  the  Knights  Templars."  Laurie,  or  Brewster,  who  it  is
said  wrote  the  work  which  bears  Laurie's  name,  embodies  the  tra-
dition as  follows :

"  Almost  all  the  secret  associations  of  the  Ancients  either  flour-
ished or  originated  in  Syria  and  the  adjacent  countries.  It  was  here
that  the  Dionysian  Artists,  the  Essenes,  and  the  Kassideans  arose.
From  this  country  also  come  several  members  of  that  trading  asso-
ciation of  Masons  which  appeared  in  Europe  during  the  dark  ages  ;
and  we  are  assured  that,  notwithstanding  the  unfavorable  condition
of  that  Province,  there  exists  at  this  day,  on  Mount  Libanus,  one
of  these  Syrian  Fraternities.  As  the  Order  of  the  Templars,  there-
fore, was  originally  formed  in  Syria,  and  existed  there  for  a  consid-
erable time,  it  would  be  no  improbable  supposition  that  they  received

'  Letter  of  David  W.  Nash,  September  29,  1853,  to  Theo.  S.  Gourdin,  Charleston,
^  C,  in  his  "  Historical  Sketch,"  1855.

HISTORY   OF  CHRISTIAN   KNIGHTHOOD  134?

ineir  Masonic  knowledge  from  the  Lodges  in  that  quarter.  But  we
are  fortunately,  in  this  case,  not  left  to  conjecture,  for  we  are  ex
pressly  informed  by  a  foreign  author  [Adler,  de  Drusis],  who  was
well  acquainted  with  the  history  and  customs  of  Syria,  that  the
Knights  Templars  were  actually  members  of  the  Syriac  fraternities.'
There  is  no  evidence  of  Freemasonry  in  Syria  at  that  period.

It  is  very  certain,  from  the  best  histories  of  the  Templar  Order,
that,  in  addition  to  the  open  ritual  for  the  reception  of  a  candidate
for  the  Order,  there  was  a  secret  ritual,  and  no  one  was  admitted
within  their  quarters  during  the  ceremony  of  reception.  This  does
not,  however,  prove  that,  whatever  secret  ceremonies  were  used,  they
were  in  any  manner  connected  with  the  Freemasons.  Recent  exam-
inations by  our  most  advanced  Masonic  scholars,  such  as  VVm.  James
Hughan,  Robert  Freck  Gould,  and  others  too  numerous  to  men-
tion who  are  members  of  the  Lodge  Quartuor-Coronati  in  England,
and  the  Grand  Secretary  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland,  D.  Murray
Lyon,  that,  prior  to  the  formation  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England
in  1 71 7,  there  was  no  ritualistic  observance  in  the  reception  to  Ma-
sonry. Nor  have  any  indications  been  found  anywhere  in  the  world,
that  our  modern  rituals  of  the  various  degrees  of  the  Lodge,  Chap-
ter, Council,  and  Templar  Order,  had  any  ancient  formulas  what-
ever. To  the  careful  student,  every  one  of  these  ritualistic  formulas
bears  intrinsic  evidence  of  the  modern  era  in  Masonry.  In  the  three
degrees  of  the  Blue  Lodge,  the  want  of  congruity  and  manifest
errors  as  to  the  facts  at  the  building  of  King  Solomon's  Temple,  the
topography  itself  of  the  site  of  the  Temple,  and  the  situation  of  the
City  of  Jerusalem — all  concur  in  the  conclusion  that  the  ceremonies
are  all  symbolic  and  allegorical,  and  consequently  so  much  the  more
valuable  to  tne  student  of  symbolism  and  the  philosophy  contained
in  these  degrees — and  this  can  be  said  also  of  all  the  other  degrees.

The  Knights  of  Malta  being  at  the  present  day  incorporated  in
the  Order  of  Knip^hts  Templars,  we  deem  it  necessary  that  this
sketch  should  include  some  important  matters  connected  with  that
Order,  which,  from  our  preceding  notices  of  them,  it  will  be  seen
succeeded  the  Knights  Hospitalers,  01  Knights  of  St.  John,  and  so
called  Knights  of  Rhodes.

Pilgrims  and  traders  from  the  West  to  Palestine  were  sc
numerous  and  constant,  it  became   requisite  to  build  in  the  citv  ol

1348  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Jerusalem  hospitals  or  places  of  entertainment  during  their  stay  in
Jerusalem.  In  870  Bernard,  a  monk,  founded  in  the  valley  of  Jehos-
haphat,  close  to  the  Church  of  the  Virgin,  a  hospital,  consisting  of
twelve  houses  for  pilgrims  from  the  West,  which  held  possession  of
gardens,  vineyards,  and  fields  for  grain.  There  was  a  collection  of
books  given  by  Charlemagne  (in  768  to  800).  A  market  was  held
in  front  of  this  place.  When,  in  the  nth  century,  pilgrimage  was
greatly  increased,  a  hospital  was  established  in  the  city  of  Jerusalem,
for  the  Latin  pilgrims,  which  was  erected  by  Amalfi  and  the  Latin
traders,  about  a.d,  1050.  They  also  erected  a  church  to  the  Holy
Virgin,  called  St.  Mary  of  the  Latins.  This  hospital  was  the  resi-
dence of  the  Benedictines,  who  devoted  themselves  to  the  necessities
of  the  pilgrims,  and  contributed  to  the  wants  of  those  who  were
poor,  or  had  been  robbed  by  the  banditti  who  infested  all  the  roads
leading  to  Jerusalem,  and  also  aided  them  to  pay  the  taxes  required
by  the  Moslems  for  permits  to  visit  the  Holy  Places.

The  great  increase  of  pilgrims  required  another  hospital  which
was  raised  near  their  church,  having  a  chapel  dedicated  to  St.  John
Eleemon  (Almoner),  a  canonized  Patriarch  of  Alexandria,  who  was
the  son  of  the  King  of  Cyprus  in  the  6th  century.  He  was  elected
Patriarch  and  founded  a  Fraternity  in  Jerusalem,  whose  object  was
to  attend  upon  the  sick  and  wounded  Christian  pilgrims  to  the
Sacred  Land.  The  Greek  and  also  Roman  Churches  canonized  this
Archprelate  by  the  name  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem.

Gerard,  as  before  mentioned,  presided  over  the  Hospital  of  St.
John  at  the  time  the  Crusaders  appeared  at  Jerusalem.  When
the  city  was  taken  (July  15,  1099),  the  wounded  pilgrims  were  re-
ceived, and  "  Duke  Godfrey  de  Bouillon,  some  days  afterward,
visited  them,  to  whom  he  personally  administered  aid  and  consola-
tion, and,  to  mark  his  sense  of  the  humane  services  rendered  by  the
brethren,  he  endowed  the  hospital  with  his  own  Lordship  of  Mcnt-
boire,  in  Brabant,  and  all  its  dependencies.  Having  enjoyed  uni-
versal favor,  Gerard  and  his  brethren  desired  to  be  separated  from
the  Monastery  of  St.  Mary  de  Latina  and  become  indepenaent.
There  was  no  opposition  to  this,  and  they  made  a  rule  for  them-
selves, to  which  they  vowed  obedience  in  the  presence  of  the  Patri-
arch, and  assumed  a  black  mantle  with  a  white  cross  on  the  breast.

In  1 130,  from  the  Bull  of  Pope  Innocent  II.,  we  have  the  first
authentic  notice  of  an  intention  of  the  Hospitalers  to  have  anv  con-

HISTORY   OF  CHRISTIAN   KNIGHTHOOD  1349

nection  with  military  affairs.  This  Bull  gives  information  that  the
Hospitalers  retained,  at  their  own  expense,  a  body  of  foot-soldiers
and  horsemen  to  defend  the  pilgrims  in  going  to  and  returning
from  the  Holy  Places.  The  Hospitalers  had  resolved  to  add  the
protecting  to  the  task  of  relieving  pilgrims.

In  1 1 68,  the  first  year  of  Philip  of  Nablous  as  Grand  Master
of  the  Templars,  the  King  of  Jerusalem  and  Knights  Hospitalers
went  forth  on  their  memorable  and  unfortunate  expedition  to  in-
vade Egypt  The  Templars  refused  to  join  this  expedition,  as  it
was  in  violation  of  all  treaties.

From  this  period  there  was  an  entire  change  in  the  Order  of  the
Hospital  of  St.  John,  and  they  became  a  great  military  body  ;  their
Superior  was  styled  Grand  Master,  and  he  led  in  person  the  brethren
into  the  field  of  battle.  They,  however,  still  continued  their  duties
as  attendants  upon  the  sick  and  to  relieve  the  indigent.

The  Order  of  the  Holy  Sepulcher  was  instituted  at  the  same
period  as  the  Knights  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem,  and  for  the  same
causes.

The  following  is  a  list  of  the  Patriarchs  of  Jerusalem,  a.d.  1099
to  1 187,  from  De  Vogu6  :

Diambert   ^  Etienne  (Stephen). ..  .1128  to  1130

Arnulphe    ^ 1099101107  Guillaume  (William). .  1 130  to  1 146

Ebremard  )  Foulcher 1146101157

Gibelin tio;  to  iiii  Amanry 1157  to  11 80

Arnulphe iiiitoiiiS  Eraclius  (Heraclius).  .1180  to  11 90

Gormond 1118  to  1128

In  1847  the  Pope  re-established  the  Patriarchate  of  Jerusalem
in  the  person  of  Bishop  Velerga.  He  only  had  authority  to  con-
fer the  Order  of  Knights  of  the  Holy  Sepulcher.  This  was  done
in  the  apartment  styled  the  Chapel  of  the  Apparition,  where  Jesus
is  said  to  have  appeared  to  Mary  after  his  resurrection.  The  Candi-
date, kneeling  before  the  Patriarch,  is  asked  the  traditional  questions,
and  is  then  girded  with  the  sword  and  spur  of  King  Godfrey.  We
have  in  a  former  part  of  this  sketch  explained  the  union  of  the
Knights  of  the  Red  Cross  of  Rome  and  Constantine  with  the
Knights  Hospitalers  and  Knights  of  the  Holy  Sepulcher,  so  that,
when  these  Orders,  after  the  Crusades  had  ceased,  had  been  driven

1350  HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

successively  from  Cyprus  and  Rhodes  and  found  refuge  inttie  iSland
of  Malta,  ,vhich  was  tendered  to  them  by  Charles  V.,  King  of
Spain,  and  when  the  Order  of  the  Templars  was  suppressed  and
many  of  them  found  a  home  with  the  Order  of  Malta,  the  junction
of  the  two  Orders  was  formed.  We  presume  that  when  the  modern
Order  of  Knights  Templars  was  formulated,  the  ritual  ^f  Malta
was  added  to  that  of  Knight  Templar,  and  we  consider  the  asso-
ciation much  more  consonant  with  the  history  of  these  two  Orders
than  the  degree  of  Knight  of  the  Red  Cross  of  Persia  and  Syria,
which  has  "jvidently  been  mistaken  for  the  Red  Cross  of  Rome  and
Constantme,  as  before  explained.

ORDER    OF    KNIGHTS  OF   MALTA.

This  Order  has  been  known  at  different  periods  by  the  title  ot
the  Knights  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem,  Hospitalers  d  St.  John,
Knights  of  St.  John  D'Acre,  Knights  of  Rhodes,  and  finally  Knights
of  Malta.

In  the  year  1048  some  pious  merchant  from  Amalfi,  in  the
kingdom  of  Naples,  built  a  church  and  monastery  at  Jerusalem,  which
they  dedicated  to  St.  John  the  Almoner.  The  monks  were  hence
called  Brothers  of  St.  John,  or  Hospitalers,  and  it  was  their  duty  to
assist  those  sick  and  needy  pilgrims  whom  a  spirit  of  piety  had  led
to  the  Holy  Land.  They  assumed  the  black  habit  of  the  hermits  of
St.  Augustine,  distinguished  only  by  a  white  cross  of  eight  points
on  the  left  breast.  They  rapidly  increased  in  numbers  and  in  wealth,
and  at  the  beginnmg  of  the  12th  century  were  organized  as  a  mili=
tary  order  by  Raymond  du  Puy,  who  added  to  their  original  vow
of  chastity,  obedience,  and  poverty,  the  obligation  of  defending  the
Church  against  Infidels.  Raymond  then  divided  them  into  three
classes  :  Knights,  who  alone  bore  arms  ;  Chaplains,  who  were  regu-
lar ecclesiastics ;  and  Servitors,  who  attended  to  the  sick.  After
long  and  bloody  contests  with  the  Turks  and  Saracens,  they  were
finally  driven  from  Palestine  in  the  year  1191.  Upon  this  they
attacked  and  conquered  Cyprus,  which,  however,  they  lost  after
eighteen  years'  occupation.  They  then  established  themselves  at  the
island  of  Rhodes,  under  the  Grand  Mastership  of  Fulk  de  Villaretf
and  assumed  the  title  of  the  Knights  of  Rhodes.

HISTORY   OF   CHRISTIAN    KNIGHTHOOD  1351

It  was  here  that  the  illustrious  Villars  died  in  the  seventieth  year
of  his  age  and  the  fourteenth  of  his  Grand  Mastership.  In  justice
to  his  distinguished  merit,  the  following  epitaph  was  inscribed  on
his  tombstone  :     "  Here  lies  Virtue  victorious  over  Fortune."

On  December  15,  1542,  after  a  tranquil  occupation  of  this  island
for  more  than  two  hundred  years,  they  were  finally  ejected  from  all
their  possessions  by  the  Sultan  Soliman  the  Second.

After  this  disaster  they  successively  retired  to  Castro,  Messina,
and  Rome,  until  the  Emperor  Charles  V.,  in  1530,  bestowed  upon
them  the  island  of  Malta,  upon  the  condition  of  their  defending  it
from  the  depredations  of  the  Turks  and  the  Corsairs  of  Barbary,
and  of  restoring  it  to  Naples,  should  they  ever  succeed  in  recovering
Rhodes.

This  island  was  formerly  called  Melita,  from  the  vast  quantities
of  honey  which  it  produced.  The  Romans  gained  possession  of  it
when  they  conquered  Sicily ;  they  were  deprived  of  it  by  the  Arabs
in  828,  who  were  expelled  by  Roger  the  Norman  in  11 90.  From
that  period  it  continued  under  the  dominion  of  the  Kings  of  Sicily,
till  it  fell,  by  the  conquest  of  that  island,  into  the  hands  of  the  em
peror,  Charles  V.

The  Order  now  took  the  name  of  the  Knights  of  Malta,  by  which
title  they  have  ever  since  been  designated.  Here  the  organization
of  the  Order  was  as  follows  :  The  chief  of  the  Order  was  called
"  Grand  Master  of  the  Holy  Hospital  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem  and
Guardian  of  the  army  of  Jesus  Christ."  He  was  elected  for  life,
and  resided  at  the  city  of  Valette.  He  was  addressed  by  foreign
powers  with  the  title  of  "altezza  eminentissima,"  and  enjoyed  an
annual  revenue  of  about  one  million  guilders.  The  Knights  were
divided  into  eight  languages,  according  to  their  respective  nations.
The  languages  were  those  of  Provence,  Auvergne,  France,  Italy,
Aragon,  Germany,  Castile,  and  England.  Upon  the  extinction  of
the  language  of  England,  that  of  Anglo-Bavaria  was  substituted.
The  Grand  Officers  were  also  eight  in  number,  and  consisted  of  the
chiefs  of  the  different  languages,  as  follows  :

1.  The  Chief  of  the  language  of  Provence  was  Grand  Commander

2.  "  "  Auvergne  was  Marshal.

3.  "  "  France  was  Hospitaler.

4.  "  "  Italy  was  Grand  Admiral.

1352  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

5.  The  Chief  of  the  language  of  Aragon  was  Grand  Conservator,

6.  "  "  Germany  was  Grand  Bailiff.

7.  "  "  Castile  was  Grand  Chancellor.

8.  •'  "  England  was  Turcopolier,  or

Captain-General  of  the  Cavalry.

The  Knights,  in  time  of  war,  wore  over  their  usual  garments  a
scarlet  surcoat,  embellished  before  and  behind  with  a  broad  white
cross  of  eight  points.  In  time  of  peace,  the  dress  of  ceremony  was
a  long  black  mantle,  upon  which  the  same  cross  of  white  linen  was
sewed.

From  the  time  that  the  island  of  Malta  was  bestowed  upon  the
Order,  until  the  year  1 724,  the  Knights  were  continually  at  war  with
the  Turks  ;  during  which  time  the  latter  had  expended  vast  quanti-
ties of  blood  and  treasure,  and  the  former  had  exhibited  the  most
magnanimous  examples  of  patience  and  undaunted  heroism.  A
peace  was  at  length  concluded  for  twenty  years,  tJ  be  renewed  at
the  expiration  of  that  period,  if  the  parties  could  agree.

In  1565  the  island  of  Malta  was  beleaguered  by  Soliman  II.,  on
which  occasion  the  Knights  suffered  immense  loss,  from  which  they
never  entirely  recovered.  Of  the  eight  languages,  the  English  be-
came extinct  in  the  i6th  century;  those  of  France,  Auvergne,  and
Provence  perished  in  the  anarchy  of  the  French  Revolution  ;  Cas-
tile and  Aragon  were  separated  at  the  peace  of  Amiens  ;  and  the
remaining  two  have  been  since  abolished.  The  Order,  therefore,  as
respects  its  ancient  constitution,  has  now  ceased  to  exist.

On  June  9,  1798,  the  island  of  Malta  was  taken  by  the  French
under  Bonaparte.  In  the  same  year  the  Knights  chose  Paul  I.,  Em-
peror of  Russia,  as  their  Grand  Master,  who  took  them  under  his
protection.  Upon  his  death  they  elected  Prince  Carriciolo.  Upon
the  reduction  of  the  island  by  the  English  in  1800,  the  chief  seat  of
the  Order  was  transferred  to  Catanea  in  Sicily,  whence,  in  1826,  it
was  removed,  by  the  authority  of  the  Pope,  to  Ferrara.  The  last
public  reception  of  the  Order  took  place  at  Sonneburg  in  1800,
when  Leopold,  the  present  King  of  Belgium,  and  Prince  Ernest,  of
Hesse  Philippsthal  Barchfeld,  with  several  other  Knights,  were
created.

In  1 84 1  Ferdinand  I.,  Emperor  of  Austria,  issued  a  decree  re-
storing the  Order  in  Italy,  and  endowing  it  with  a  moderate  rev-

HISTORY    OF   CHRISTIAN    KNIGHTHOOD  1353

enue.  But  the  wealth,  the  power,  and  the  magnificence  of  the
Order  have  passed  away  with  the  age  and  the  spirit  of  chivalry
which  gave  it  birth.

COMMENTARY    REMARKS.

in  Chapter  XXIX.  of  this  work,  p.  258  et  seq.,  Bro.  Mackey
reviews  the  history  of  the  Templars  in  Scotland,  and  emphatically
denies  any  claims  of  the  Scottish  Modern  Templars  to  be  the
successors  of  the  Templars  who  were  dispersed  after  the  death  of
De  Molay.  We  shall  not,  in  this  sketch,  attempt  any  defense  of
their  claims  or  those  of  the  Templars  of  the  present  day  as  to  the
legitimate  succession.  However,  we  must  give  our  readers  some
extracts  from  Addison  which  will  demonstrate  that  there  were  some
reasons  why  such  claims  have  been  set  up.

Lawrie,  in  his  History  of  Freemasonry  in  Scotland,  says  that
before  1153  King  David  I.  introduced  the  Knights  of  the  Temple
into  Scotland  and  established  them  at  the  Temple  on  the  Southesk,
and  was  greatly  attached  to  them.

Little  is  known  of  the  history  of  the  Knights  Templars  frpm
the  time  of  Alexander  II.  until  the  14th  century,  except  that  all
their  privileges  (which  we  have  omitted)  were  continued  to  them
by  succeeding  kings,  who  directed  their  piety  and  their  bounties
toward  the  religious  Orders.  The  possessions  of  the  Fraternity  were
so  extensive  that  their  lands  were  scattered  "over  the  whole  king-
dom of  Scotland  toward  England  and  over  the  whole  kingdom  to
the  Orchardis."

At  the  time  of  the  persecution  of  the  Order  in  other  countries
correspondently  the  Templars  of  Scotland  suffered  spoliation,  but  it
is  to  be  remarked,  to  the  credit  of  the  people  of  Scotland,  that  there
is  no  account  of  any  single  member  having  suffered  any  personal
torture.  Their  estates  were  transferred  to  their  rivals  the  Hos-
pitalers, and  like  their  brethren  in  England  a  number  very  prob-
ably entered  into  that  Order.

The  Knights  of  St.  John  had  also  been  introduced  by  David  I.
into  Scotland,  and  Alexander  II.  had  granted  a  charter  to  them  soon
after  that  granted  to  the  Knights  Templars.  Their  first  Preceptory
was  at  Torphicen,  in  West  Lothian,  which  continued  to  be  their
principal  residence,    and  after  the  acquisitions  of  the  lands  of  the

J354  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

Templars  and  some  others,  their  possessions  came  to  be  immense  ai
the  date  of  the  Reformation.

A  union  was  effected,  at  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  James
i  v.,  between  the  Knights  Templars  and  the  Knights  of  St.  John,  and
their  lands  were  consolidated.  The  precise  period  of  this  union  is  not
known,  but  the  fact  is  established  by  the  charter  of  King  James,  Octo-
ber 19,1488.  confirming  the  grants  of  lands  made  by  his  predecessors
to  these  two  Orders  in  Latin,  which  is  thus  translated :  "  To  God  and
the  Holy  Hospitalers  of  Jerusalem  and  to  their  brethren  of  the
Soldiers  of  the  Temple  of  Solomon."  Both  Orders  were  then
united  and  placed  under  the  charge  of  the  Preceptor  of  St  John,
and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  such  an  arrangement  was  political
and  natural.

It  was  in  Scotland  alone  that  the  Knights  Templars  owned
independent  property.  The  ban  against  them  being  yet  in  force
throughout  Europe,  necessarily  contracted  their  sphere  of  action.
The  Knights  of  the  Hospital,  however,  being  entirely  free  of  any
obstruction,  had  great  wealth  and  influence,  and  stood  high  in  the
favor  of  the  sovereigns  of  Europe.  Both  Orders  were  represented
by  the  Preceptor  of  St.  John  in  the  Parliament  of  Scotland,  and  the
union  continued  down  to  the  Reformation.

From  the  era  of  the  Reformation  these  two  Orders,  combined,
appear  in  Scotland  only  as  a  Masonic  body ;  but  the  late  Mr.  Deu-
cher  averred  that  so  early  as  1 590  a  few  of  the  brethren  had  become
mingled  with  the  Architectural  Fraternity,  and  that  a  Lodge  at
Stirling,  patronized  by  King  James,  had  a  Chapter  of  Templars  at«
tached  to  it,  who  were  termed  cross-legged  Masons,  and  whose  ini»
tiatory  ceremonies  were  performed,  not  in  a  room,  but  in  the  old
Abbey,  the  ruins  of  which  are  still  to  be  seen  in  the  neighborhood.
The  first  authentic  notice  we  can  find  on  the  subject  is  in  M.  Thory's
excellent  Chronology  of  Masonry^  wherein  it  is  recorded  that  about
1728  Sir  John  Mitchell  Ramsay,  the  well-known  author  of  Cyrus,
appeared  in  London  with  a  system  of  Scottish  Masonry,  up  to  that
date  perfectly  unknown  in  the  Metropolis,  tracing  its  origin  from
the  Crusades,  and  consisting  of  thiee  degrees,  the  Ecossais,  the
Novice,  and  the  Knight  Templar.  For  further  notice  of  this  sub-
ject we  refer  our  readers  to  Chapter  XXIX.,  ante.

During  the  i8th  century  the  Scottish  Order  can  be  but  faintly
traced:  though  Mr.  Deucher  had.  in  1836,  the  assurance  of  well-in

HISTORY    OF   CHRISTIAN    KNIGHTHOOD  1355

formed  Masons  that,  thirty  or  forty  years  previously,  they  knew  old
men  who  had  been  members  of  it  for  sixty  years,  and  it  had  sunk  so
low  at  the  time  of  the  French  Revolution  that  the  sentence  which  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  fulminated  in  1 792  against  all  degrees  of
Masonry  except  those  of  St.  John,  was  expected  to  put  a  period  to  its
existence.  Soon  after  this,  however,  some  active  individuals  revived
it,  and  with  the  view  to  obtaining  documentary  authority  for  their
chapters,  as  well  as  avoiding  any  infringement  of  the  Statutes  then
recently  enacted  against  secret  societies,  adopted  the  precaution  of
accepting  Charters  of  Constitution  from  a  body  of  Masonic  Tem-
plars, named  the  Early  Grand  Encampment,  in  Dublin,  of  whose
origin  we  can  find  no  account,  and  whose  legitimacy,  to  say  the  least,
was  quite  as  questionable  as  their  own.  Several  charters  of  this  de-
scription were  granted  to  different  Encampments  of  Templars  in
Scotland  about  the  beginning  of  the  present  century ;  but  these  bodies
maintained  little  concert  or  intercourse  with  each  other,  and  certainly
were  not  esteemed  in  the  country.  Affairs  were  in  this  state  when,
about  1808,  Mr.  Alexander  Deucher  was  elected  Commander  or
Chief  of  the  Edinburgh  Encampment  of  Templars  ;  and  his  brother.
Major  David  Deucher,  along  with  other  Officers  of  the  Royal  Reg-
iment, was  initiated  into  the  Order.  A  General  Convocation  of  all
the  Templars  of  Scotland,  by  representatives,  having  taken  place  in
Edinburgh,  they  unanimously  resolved  to  discard  the  Irish  Char-
ters, and  to  rest  their  claims,  as  the  representatives  of  the  ancient
Knights,  on  the  general  belief  and  traditions  of  the  country.

They  further  determined  to  entreat  the  Duke  of  Kent,  the  Chief
of  the  Masonic  Templars  in  England,  to  become  the  patron  pro-
tector of  the  Order  in  North  Britain,  offering  to  submit  themselves
to  his  Royal  Highness  in  that  capacity  and  to  accept  from  him  a
formal  Charter  of  Constitution.  The  Duke  of  Kent  lost  no  time
in  complying  with  their  request,  and  his  Charter  erecting  them  into
a  Conclave  of  "  Knights  of  the  Holy  Temple  and  Sepulcher,  and
of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem.  H.  R.  D.  M.  4-  K.  D.  S.  M."  bears  date
June  19,  181 1.'

By  a  provision  in  it  Mr.  Deucher,  who  had  been  nominated  by
the  brethren,  was  appointed  Grand  Master  for  life.'

Mills,  Southerland,  De  Magny,  Dumas,   Burnes,  Gregoire,  and

'"Addison,"  p.  548.  'Ibid.,  p.  549.

1356  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

others  show  that  the  Order  of  Knights  Templars,   although  sup
pressed,  was  never  dissolved  in  France.

The  persecution  of  the  Templars  in  the  14th  century  does  not
close  the  history  of  the  Order  ;  for  though  the  Knights  were  spoli-
ated, the  Order  was  not  annihilated.  In  truth,  the  Cavaliers  were  not
guilty,  the  brotherhood  was  not  suppressed,  and,  startling  as  is  the
assertion,  there  has  been  a  succession  of  Knights  Templars  from  the
1 2th  century  even  down  to  these  days;  the  chain  of  transmission  is
perfect  in  all  its  links.  James  de  Molay,  the  Grand  Master,  at  the
time  of  the  persecution,  anticipating  his  own  martyrdom,  appointed,
as  his  successor  in  power  and  dignity,  Johannes  Marcus  Larmenius
of  Jerusalem,  and  from  time  to  time  to  the  present  there  has  been  a
regular,  uninterrupted  line  of  Grand  Masters.  The  Charter  of  trans-
mission, with  the  signatures  of  the  various  chiefs  of  the  Temple,  is
preserved  at  Paris,  with  the  ancient  statutes  of  the  Order,  the  rituals,
the  records,  the  seals,  the  standards,  and  the  early  memorials  of  the
early  Templars.'

The  brotherhood  has  been  headed  by  the  bravest  Cavaliers  in
France ;  by  men  who,  jealous  of  the  dignities  of  knighthood,  would
admit  no  corruption,  no  base  copies  of  the  Orders  of  Chivalry,  and
who  thought  that  the  shield  of  their  nobility  was  enriched  by  the
impress  of  the  Templars'  Red  Cross.  Bertrand  du  Guesclin  was  the
Grand  Master  from  1357  till  his  death,  1380,  and  he  was  the  only
French  commander  who  prevailed  over  the  Chivalry  of  Edward  III.
of  England.  From  1478  to  1497  we  may  mark  Robert  Lenoncourt.
a  Cavalier  of  one  of  the  most  ancient  and  valiant  families  of  Lor-
rame.  Philippe  Chabot,  a  renowned  Captain  in  the  reign  of  Francis
I.,  wielded  the  staff  of  power  from  15 16  to  1543.  The  illustrious
family  of  Montmorency  appears  as  Knights  Templars,  and  Henry,
the  first  Duke,  was  chief  of  the  Order  from  1574  to  1614.  At  the
close  of  the  17th  century,  James  Henry  de  Duras,  a  Marshal  of
France,  the  nephew  of  Turenne,  and  one  of  the  most  skillful  of  the
soldiers  of  Louis  XIV.,  was  Grand  Master.  From  1724  to  1770,
three  princes  of  the  Bourbon  family  were  Grand  Masters,  viz.
Louis  Augustus,  Duke  of  Maine,  1724-1737;  Louis  Henry  Bour
bon  Cond^,  1737-1741  ;  and  Louis  Francis  Bourbon  Conde,  1741-
1746.     Louis  Hercules  Timoleon,  Duke  de  Cosse  Brissac,  accepted

' "  Addison,"  p.  550.

HISTORY   OF   CHRISTIAN   KNIGHTHOOD  1357

the  office  of  Grand  Master  in  1776  and  remained  in  office  until  he
died  in  the  cause  of  royalty  at  the  commencement  of  the  French
Revolution.  The  Grand  Master  at  that  time  was  Bernardus  Fabre
Palaprat.  There  are  Colleges  in  England  and  in  many  of  the  chief
cities  in  Europe.*

Grand  Master  Bernard  Raymond  died  in  1838  ;  he  was  suc-
ceeded in  the  regency  of  the  Order  by  Admiral  Sir  William  Sidney
Smith,  until  his  death  in  1840.  At  that  time,  among  the  subjects
of  Great  Britain  who  were  office-bearers  were  the  names  of  the
Duke  of  Sussex,  Grand  Prior  of  England  ;  the  Duke  of  Leinster,
Grand  Prior  of  Ireland ;  the  Earl  of  Durham,  Grand  Prior  of  Scot-
land ;  the  Chevalier  Barnes  (Grand  Master  of  Scottish  Free-
masons in  India),  Grand  Preceptor  of  Southern  Asia  ;  the  Cheva-
lier Tennyson  D'Eyncourt,  Grand  Prior  of  Italy  ;  General  George
Wright,  Grand  Prior  of  India,  etc.  Among  the  functionaries  of
France  were  Prince  Alexander  de  Wirtemberg,  Dukes  de  Choiseul
and  Montmorency,  and  Counts  Le  Peletier,  D'Aunay,  De  Lanjuinais.
De  Brack,  De  Chabrillan,  De  Magny,  De  Dienne,  and  others  equally
distinguished.*  In  consequence  of  the  political  changes  in  France,
an  institution  so  much  identified  with  ancient  nobility  and  tradition
naturally  fell  into  abeyance  ;  it,  however,  in  1S74,  is  said  by  McCoy's
Addison  to  number  about  thirty  British  Ministers,  most  of  whom
are  in  the  Public  Service  in  India,  received  by  the  Grand  Preceptor
of  Southern  Asia,  under  legative  powers  from  the  Grand  Master,
Bernard  Raymond,  sanctioned  b)'^  the  Duke  of  Sussex,  without
ivhose  approval  no  British  subject  was  admissible.  ^

The  history  of  Sir  William  Sidney  Smith's  connection  with  the
Order  of  Knights  Templars  is  well  substantiated,  and  is  brought
very  near  to  our  period,  as  will  appear  in  the  following  extracts  from
John  Barrow's  Life  and  Corj-espondence  of  Admiral  Sir  W.Sid-
ney Smith.*

From  the  end  of  181 5,  Sir  Sidney  mostly  made  his  residence  in
Paris,  France.  It  was  here,  in  fact,  that  he  carried  on  the  vast  cor-
respondence with  the  Knights  Liberators,  and  also  with  another
Order  of  Knighthood,  of  which  he  became  a  member,  invested  at
the  fountain-head,  in  a  curious  and  romantic  manner.

The   following  is  Sir  Sidney's  own  account  of  his  obtaining  this

'■' Addison,"  p  251.  '  Ibid,  p.  551.  "  Ibid.,  p.  552.  *  London,  1848.

,358  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

cross,  which  he  wore  during  his  life,  and  which  is  now  in  possession
of  the  Convent  of  the  Order  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem  at  Paris.  The
paper  is  in  Sir  Sidney's  own  handwriting,  but  has  no  address,
though,  judging  by  the  appeal  made  on  a  point  of  conscience  and
religion,  it  was  probably  meant  for  the  English  Bishop  resident  in
Paris  at  that  time,  viz.,  Dr.  Luscomb.

Sir  Sidney  wrote  a  letter  to  a  friend  from  Paris,  dated  Octobei
28,  1839,  saying:

"  I  am  most  anxious  to  leave  Paris  before  another  insurrection ;
though  as  Regent  of  the  '  Order  of  the  Orient '  and  the  '  Milice  du
Temple^  denominated  the  Order  of  the  Temple,  I  must  always  have
a  pied  a  terre  (foot  of  ground)  here,  a  residence  magistral.

"  In  the  exercise  of  my  duty,  representing  the  King  in  his  dig-
nity, as  his  Minister  Plenipotentiary  at  the  Ottoman  Porte,  and
being  decorated  by  Sultan  Selim  with  his  imperial  Aigrette,  and
with  a  commission  to  command  his  forces  by  sea  and  land,  on  the
coast  of  Syria  and  Egypt,  consequently  representing  that  Sovereign
in  his  authority,  in  the  absence  of  the  Grand  Vizier  (his  highness
being  the  one  to  exert  it,  when  present),  and  as  the  Captain  Pasha
was  expressly  put  personally  under  my  Orders,  I  thought  it  my  duty
to  land  at  Cyprus,  for  the  purpose  of  restoring  subordination  and
the  hierarchy  of  authority,  on  a  sudden  emergency,  which  arose
from  the  bursting  out  of  an  insurrection  of  Janissaries,  Arnants,
and  Albanians,  in  the  year  1799,  ^^^er  the  raising  of  the  siege  of
Acre.

"  On  visiting  the  Venerable  Greek  Archbishop  afterward  at  the
capital  (Nicosia),  to  prevent  him  from  disgracing  himself  by  a  visit
to  me,  which  I  understood  was  his  intention,  his  grace  met  me  out-
side the  city  gates.  1,  of  course,  dismounted  to  receive  his  welcome
and  animated  harangue,  at  the  termination  of  which  he  embraced
me  paternally,  and  at  the  same  moment  adroitly  threw  the  Templar's
cross,  which  he  wore  as  an  Episcopal  decoration  on  his  breast,
around  the  neck  of  Ins  English  guest,  saying,  'This  belonged  to  an
Englishman  formerly,  and  I  now  restore  it.  It  belonged  to  Sr.
Richard  (Agio  Ricardo),  sumamed  "  Coeur-de-Lion,"  who  left  it  in
this  church  at  his  departure,  and  it  has  been  preserved  in  our  treas-
ury ever  since.  Eighteen  archbishops,  my  predecessors,  have  signed
the  receipt  thereof,  in  succession.      I  now  make  it  over  to  you,  in

HISTORY  OF  CHRISTIAN  KNIGHTHOOD  1339

token  of  our  gratitude  for   saving  a!!  our  lives,  the  archbishopa
ecclesiastics,  laymen,  citizens,  and  peasantr)'."  ^

CONCLUSION.

In  ail  writings,  sketches,  and  theses  upon  any  particularly  im-
portant subject,  jt  is  eminently  proper  to  draw  conclusions  there*
upon,  that  those  who  read  may  learn  and  duly  appreciate  the  value
of  such  examinations  upon  the  subject-matter  under  consideration.

The  old  philosophers  suggested  that  upon  all  valuable  questions
or  propositions,  there  should  be,  first,  the  affirmation ;  second,  the
denial ;  third,  the  discussion  ;  fourth,  the  conclusion.  We  have,  in
preceding  pages,  endeavored,  hy  quotations  and  deductions  from  the
most  approved  authors,  shov/n,  we  think,  the  true  history  of  the
Organization,  the  progress,  triumphal  success,  decline,  and  final
destruction  of  the  most  glorious,  chivalric,  and  magnanimous  Order
of  Knights  which  the  world  has  ever  witnessed.

In  the  day  of  their  successful  and  triumphant  battles  of  Truth
against  Error  over  their  Saracen  and  Turkish  opponents,  they
excited  the  wonder  of  their  friends  in  the  West  and  the  highest  ad-
miration of  their  enemies.  They  were  enthused  by  their  zeal  for  the
cause  of  Christ,  as  were  also  the  Crusaders  of  every  rank  who  suffered
every  inconvenience,  toil,  dangers,  from  their  human  foes,  and  the
more  insidious  foes  found  in  the  climatic  conditions  of  the  countries
through  which  they  passed  and  were  more  than  decimated  by  the
peculiar  local  circumstances  which  accompanied  and  surrounded
them,  in  their  journeys,  marches,  and  camping-grounds ;  yet  they
faltered  not,  nor  ever  ceased  in  their  persistent  efforts,  which  many
times  were  so  eminently  successful  in  repelling  all  attacks,  and  in
the  forward  movements  to  conquer  and  possess  the  strongholds  of
the  Infidels.  In  the  First  Crusade,  after  untold  misfortunes  due  to
the  special  conditions  of  the  country,  diseases  of  the  climate,  and
attacks  of  their  foes,  they,  with  a  mere  handful  compared  with  the
vast  numoers  with  which  they  crossed  the  Hellespont,  at  length  con-
quered and  took  Jerusalem,  and  finally,  with  the  aid  of  the  Templars
and  Hospitalers,  succeeded  in  extending  the  Kingdom  of  Jerusalem

'"Addison,"  o.  554.

i36o  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

over  the  whole  country  of  Palestine.  Their  success,  as  is  often  the
case. in  human  affairs,  caused  their  rulers  to  forget  the  circumstances
of  the  *'  Crusade,"  and,  exalting  themselves  above  the  great  Cause
for  which  they  should  be  fighting,  strove  for  dominion  and  empire
for  themselves,  each  individual  claiming  rank  and  power,  for  human
glory,  and  not  for  Clirisfs  sake.  Human  history  from  time  imme-
morial teaches  the  scholar  this  great  lesson,  that  all  things  are  by  the
direction  of  a  Divine  Providence.  This  is  the  true  philosophy  of  all
history  ;  without  that  Providence  we  are  driven  to  the  evident  con-
clusion of  Fatalism  of  the  Mohammedan,  or  Fortuity  of  the  Infidel.
These  three  conditions  are  alone  possible.  Which  shall  we  choose  ?
The  vast  majority  of  the  world  in  all  ages  have  chosen  and  acted
under  the  "  Faith"  in  a

"  Divinity  above  who  shapes  our  ends,  rough  hew  them  as  we  may."

Does  history  repeat  itself  ?  What  shall  we  say  of  the  events  at
the  close  of  the  19th  century,  as  to  the  war  between  Spain  and  the
"Young  giant  of  the  West?"  Can  we  perceive  any  parallel  be-
tween the  nth,  1 2th,  and  13th  century  Crusades  and  that  of  the
19th  ?  Both  have  been  impelled  by  a  force  beyond  human  concep-
tion. History  has  told  us  why  the  Old  Crusades  were  undertaken —
viz.,  for  the  Salvation,  the  conservation  of  the  doctrines  of  Christ,
which  was  for  Humanity's  sake.  Can  any  deny  that  the  United
States,  almost  unanimously,  entered  into  the  War  for  "  Humanity's"
sake  and  not  for  conquest  or  aggrandizement  ?

Our  limits  will  not  admit  of  the  many  extracts  from  various
writers,  in  continuation  of  the  history  of  the  Knight  Templar
Order  in  France,  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland,  which  could  be
made  to  show  that,  up  to  the  close  of  the  i8th  century,  and  some
years  in  the  present  century,  the  Order  was  in  a  measure  intact  in
Europe,  and  consequently,  when  Masonry  was  introduced  into  the
United  States,  very  many  of  the  brethren  belonged  to  the  Templar
Order,  and  from  them  we  may  surmise  that  the  several  encamp-
ments which  are  mentioned  in  the  history  of  Masonry  in  this  coun-
try can  trace  their  origin.  This  particular  matter  will  engage  our
attention  when  we  write  the  history  of  the  Knights  Templars  in  the
United  States  in  the  appropriate  chapter.

LIST   OF   GRAND    MASTERS   OF   KNIGHTS    TEMPLARS

1.  Hugho  de  Payens,  1118.

2.  Robert  de  Craon,  1136.

3.  Everard  des  Barres  or  Barri,  1146.

4.  Bernard  de  Trenielay,  1151.

5.  Bertrand  de  Blanquefort,  1154.

6.  Philip  of  Naplous  (Native),  1167  to  1170.

7.  Odo  de  St.  Amand,  11 70.

8.  Arnold  de  Torroge  or  de   Troy,  1180,  Chief  Preceptor;  while  St.  Amand

was  a  prisoner  the  Chief  Preceptor  died  at  Verona,  1185.

9.  Gerard  de  Riderfort,  1185.     Taken  captive  near  Brook  Kishon,  1187  ;  sur-

rendered October  2,  1187  ;  seat  removed  to  ancient  Tyre,  successfully
defended  against  Saladin  ;  Grand  Master  released,  1188  ;  eleven  cities
given  up  as  a  ransom  ;  Grand  Master  fell  at  siege  of  Acre,  October  4,
1189.

10.  Brother  Walter,  1189.     During  four  years  of  siege  of  Acre,  100,000  Chris-

tians perished,  among  them  Patriarch  Heraclius.  Third  Crusade,
preached  by  William,  Archbishop  of  Tyre,  Richard  Cceur  de  Lion,  and
Philip  Augustus,  King  of  France,  arrived  in  Palestine,  1191.

11.  Robert  de  Sable  or  Sabloil,  1191.     Great  battle  of  Ramlah  was  gained  and

city  of  Gaza  taken  by  Templars,  1191.  About  this  time  three  encamp-
ments were  established  in  England,  at  Bristol,  Bath,  and  York.'  Those
in  Bath  and  York  were  in  existence  in  the  early  part  of  the  present
century,  the  one  in  Bristol  in  active  operation  in  1855,  King  Rich-
ard, in  the  guise  of  a  Templar,  left  Palestine  October  25,  1192.  Bro.
Richard  John  Bridges  was  the  Eminent  Commander  of  this  Ancient
and  Venerable  body,  probably  the  oldest  Encampment  of  Knights
Templars  in  the  world.

12.  Gilbert  Horal,  or  Erail,  1195.     Many  strong  fortifications  were  built;  most

celebrated  was  Pilgrims'  Castle,  which  would  hold  a  garrison  of  four
thousand  men.

13.  Philio  Duplesseis,  1201.     King  John  of  England  frequently  resided  at  the

Temple  in  London.  He  was  there  when  he  resigned  England  and  Ire-
land "to  his  lord  Pope  Innocent  the  Third  "  and  signed  the  "  Magna
Charta."

'  Letter  of  D.  W.  Nash,  Secretary  General  H.  E.  for  England  and  Wales,  Septembei
29,  1853.     MS.

86  1361

1302  HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

14.  William  de  Charters  became  Grand  Master.  The  Grand  Master  died  at  siege

of  Damietta,  1218.

15.  Peter  de  Montague,  Grand  Preceptor  of  Spain,  the  Veteran  Warrior,  1218

Damietta  was  surrendered  to  the  Infidels,  together  with  the  prisoners
of  Tyre  and  Acre,  and  he  obtained  in  return  "the  wood  of  the  true
Cross "  and  the  prisoners  at  Cairo  and  Damascus ;  and  the  Sultan
granted  a  truce  for  eight  years.

i6.  Herman  de  Perigord,  1236.  In  this  time  a  treaty  was  made  with  the  Infidels
to  surrender  again  the  Holy  City  to  the  Christians,  1242.  In  1243  the
Templars  rebuilt  the  "  formidable  Castle  of  Saphet."  In  a  great  battle
in  1243,  near  Gaza,  with  the  Carizmians,  a  pastoral  tribe  of  Tartars,
which  continued  two  days,  the  Grand  Master  was  slain.  Thirty-three
Templars  and  twenty-six  Hospitalers  alone  escaped.  Pope  Innocent
IV.  ordered  a  new  crusade  to  be  preached,  byt  very  little  assistance
was  obtained,

17.  William  de  Sonnaa,  "  A  Veteran  Warrior/'  1245.  The  brethren  in  the  West-
ern Preceptories  were  summoned  to  Palestine,  The  Carizmians,  in
1247,  were  annihilated.  The  Grand  Master  presented  to  Henry  III.  "  a
magnificent  crystal  vase,  containing  a  portion  of  the  blood  of  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ."'  The  Templars,  with  Louis  IX.  of  Fi-ance,  took  Dami-
etta m  1249.  Louis  was  taken  captive;  afterward  released  by  paying
ransom.  In  1250,  in  a  battle  near  the  Tanitic  branch  of  the  Nile,  the
Grand  Master  lost  one  eye,  but  was  enabled  to  cut  his  way  through  the
lines  of  the  enemy  with  only  two  knights  :  however,  soon  after,  on  the
first  Friday  in  Lent,  he  lost  the  other  eye  and  was  killed.

i8.  Reginald  de  Vichier,  Grand  Marshal,  115 2.  King  Louis,  after  his  release
from  captivity,  aided  in  placing  Palestine  in  a  defensible  condition.

19.  Thomas  Berard,  1256.     The  country  was  in  a   miserable  condition.     The

Bibars  or  Benocdar,  the  Sultan  of  Egypt,  with  30,000  cavalry,  had  in^
vaded  Palestine  (1262).  The  Infidels  took  all  the  strongholds  with  the
exception  of  Pilgrims'  Castle  and  Acre.  When  the  Castle  of  Saphet
capitulated  (1266),  Benocdar  put  the  whole  garrison  to  death,  because
of  their  refusal  to  become  Mahomedans.  Edward,  afterward  Edward
I.  of  England,  drove  the  enemy  back  to  Egypt ;  a  truce  lasting  ten
years  was  made.

20.  William  de  Beaujeu  was  elected.  May  13,  1273.     Lists  of  Strict  Observance

give  Robert ,  who  died  in  1277,  and  then  Pierre  de  Beaujeu.

This  closed  the  Seventh  and  last  Crusade.  An  effort  was  made  by  the  Pope
to  raise  another  crusade  ;  having,  however,  died  in  the  meantime,  with  him  all
hopes  of  assistance  from  Europe  died  also.  In  1291  the  city  of  TripoH  and  for-
tress of  Margat  were  taken  by  the  Infidels,  and  very  soon  thereafter,  in  the
third  year  from  recommencement  of  hostilities,  Acre  and  the  Pilgrims'  Castle
were  all  that  were  left  to  the  Christians.

'Gourdin.  Hist  Sketch,  p.  12.

GRAND  MASTERS  OF  KNIGHTS  TEMPLARS        1363

Acre  wras  besieged  on  April  4th  of  the  same  year  by  Sultan  Kahlil  with  60,
000  horse  and  140,000  foot,  and  Acre  had  only  12,000  men  under  the  Grand
Master,  "exclusive  of  the  forces  of  the  Templars  and  Hospitalers,  with  500
foot  soldiers  and  200  cavalry  commanded  by  the  King  of  Cyprus."

Addison  says  :  "  So  the  garrison,  which  plainly  saw  they  could  not  hold  out
long  without  a  commander  that  was  skilled  in  the  art  of  war,  elected  Brother
Peter  Beaujeu,  Grand  Master  of  the  Templars,  a  general  of  great  experience,
who  had  grown  eld  in  the  command  of  armies,  to  be  Governor  of  the  place.
Necessity  of  State,  the  truest  interpreter  of  merit,  made  them  offer  the  command
to  him,  and  it  was  done  even  with  the  consent  of  the  King  of  Cyprus  himself,
who  on  a  juncture  of  such  importance  and  so  full  of  danger  was  well  contented
to  forget  the  title,  which  he  had  always  affected,  of  King  of  Jerusalem." »

Beaujeu  was  killed  on  May  18,  1291,  and  the  three  hundred  knights  who  had
fought  their  way  to  the  Temple  appointad  Theobald  de  Gaudini  Grand  Master
(Addison  fails  to  give  his  first  name ;  the  Manual  calls  him  Theobaldus  Gaudi-
nius).*

The  Grand  Master,  however,  and  a  few  companions,  with  the  treasure  of  the
Order  and  ornaments  of  the  Church,  May  19th,  at  night,  made  their  escape
through  a  secret  postern,  and  safely  reached  Cyprus.'  The  rest  of  the  Knights
were  buried  beneath  the  ruins  of  "  the  Tower  of  the  Master  *  when  it  fell,  vic-
tims to  their  resolution  to  protect,  at  all  hazards,  the  Christian  women  from
msult  and  violation  by  the  ruthless  Infidels,  and  to  their  jealous  devotion  to  the
religion  of  the  Cross.  The  power  of  the  Latin  Church  in  the  East  was  extin-
guished by  the  destruction  of  the  city  of  Acre.  Limisso,  in  Cyprus,  became  the
chief  scat  of  the  Order.  However,  from  Vertot,  we  learn  that  an  anony-
mous writer  says  that  Knight  Roger  succeeded  Beaujeu  as  Grand  Master,  and
ihat  he  established  the  seat  of  the  Order  at  Ninove,  a  town  of  Cyprus,  which
belonged  to  the  Order.  He  also  says  that  Jean  de  Gaudin  succeeded  Brother
Roger.  •

James  de  Molay,  Preceptor  of  England,  was  elected  Grand  Master  by  a  gen-
era; Chapter  of  the  Order  in  1297.  He  is  thus  described  by  an  enemy  of  the
Order,  a  French  writer  :  "  Molay  was  the  younger  brother  of  one  of  the  most
distinguished  houses  of  the  *  Comte  '  of  Burgundy.  His  eider  brother  possessed,
in  that  country,  a  large  property,  and  had  a  higher  position.  From  his  youth,
Molay  had  been  a  member  of  the  Order ;  in  it  he  had  acquired  a  great  reputa-
tion.    He  had  passed  through  all  the  degrees,  and  had  become  a  Grand  Prior.

'  Vertot,  vol.  I. ,  p.  171,  says;  "The  Sultan  tempted  the  Grand  Master  with  offers
of  immense  sums,  to  which  the  Templar  made  no  answer  but  by  showing  a  just  indigna
tion  at  the  S  iltan's  fancying  hiin  capable  of  listening  to  him."

**'  Manual,"  p.  252,  and  Lists  of  Strict  Observances.

»"  Addison,"  p.  395.  Vertot  (vol.  i.,  p.  173)  says  :  "  Out  of  five  hundred  Tenjplars
that  behaved  themselves  so  bravely  in  the  defense  of  Acre,  only  two  escaped,  who,  get-
ting into  a  boat,  landed  happily  on  the  coast  of  Cyprus."

'  Vertot,  vol.  i.,  p.  174.  "  Histoire  de  lab.  de  I'ord.  des  Templiers,"  p.  5.  In  another
place  he  calls  Gaudin,  Monaqui  dc  Gaudin,  p.  34.

1364  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

He  was  a  lord  of  true  merit ;  brave,  of  high  intellect,  of  a  mild  and  amiable
character  :  his  morals  were  pure,  and  his  character  without  a  reproach.  He  had
always  appeared  with  distinction  at  the  Cojrt  of  France,  and  had  been  fortunate
enough  to  merit  the  favor  of  the  King,  who,  in  1297,  had  selected  him  to  hold,
at  the  baptismal  font,  M.  P.obert,  his  fourth  son.  He  was  st:II  held  in  such  high
esteem,  when  all  the  lords  of  the  Court,  who  were  yet  ignorant  of  the  hatred  of
the  King  and  his  fatal  determination  against  the  Order,  concerning  which  he
preserved  the  most  profound  secrecy,  viided  in  the  election  of  Moiay,  even  be-
lieving that  they  were  affording  a  pleasure  to  that  prince."

An  endeavor  was  made  by  the  Grand  Master  to  recover  Palestine  in  1302,
which  the  Sultan  of  Egypt  defeated,  with  a  loss  to  the  Knights  of  one  hundred  and
twenty.  This  closed  the  efforts  for  the  recovery  of  the  Holy  Land,  and  the
usefulness  of  the  Knightly  Orders  as  military  organizations  ceased.  No  longer
did  the  people  of  the  several  nations  in  Europe  manifest  any  zeal  in  the  Cru-
sades. The  Templars,  by  many  grants,  from  time  to  time,  had  become  possessed
of  large  estates,  and  they  were  very  rich,  and  consequently  very  powerful,
instead  of  Christendom  having  now  any  use  for  these  military  Orders,  who  were
so  prosperous  from  the  donations  of  the  lords  and  princes,  they  were  jealous
of  them.

The  clergy  were  also  in  constant  dispute  with  them,  a  id  the  Pope  had  been
compelled  to  intervene.  By  some  means  Philip  had  become  manifestly  dis-
pleased with  the  Templars,  and  it  is  asserted  that  his  need  of  money,  and  his
own  avarice,  prompted  him  to  suppress  the  Order,  that  he  might  enjoy  the  ben-
efits to  be  derived  from  the  confiscation  of  their  riches  and  estate.

GRAND     MASTERS   OF    THE   ORDER   OF     ST.    JOHN,  RHODES,    AND    MALTA,   A.R    tOQ^

TO    1799.

1.  Gerard  Tunc,  installed,  1099;  died,  1118.

2.  Raymond  du  Puys,  installed,  11 18,  died,  1160.

3.  Otteger  Balben,  installed,  January,  1160.

4.  Amaud  de  Comps,  installed,  1162.

5.  Gilbert  d'Ossaly  (De  Sailly),  installed,  1:63;  drowned,  1170

6.  Castus,  installed,  11 70.

7.  Joubert  (De  Osbert),  Installed,  1171;  ;  died,  11 77.

8.  Du  Moulin  (Roger  de  Moulin),  installed,  1177  ;  killed.  May  1,  itS^

9.  N.  Gardiner,  mstalled.  1187  ;  died  at  Askalon,  1187.

10.  Godfrey  de  Duison,  installed,  1192  ;  died.  laor.

11.  Alphonso  installed,  1202  ;  abdicated.

12.  Godfrey  Lo  Rath,  installed,  1205  ;  died,  i?o8.

13.  Gawen  de  Montacute,  installed,  1208  ;  died,  1231.

14.  Bernard  de  Texis,  installed,  1231.

15.  Girino,  installed,  1232;  died,  1236.

46.  Bertrand  de  Comps,  installed,  1236  ;  slain  in  battle,  1241.
17.  Peter  de  Villebride,  installed,  1241  ;  slain  in  battle,  1243,
t8.  William  de  Chateau-neuf,  installed,  1243  ;  died,  1259.

GRAND  MASTERS  OF  ST.  JOHN.  RHODES,  AND  MALTA  1355

19.  Hugh  de  Revel,  ia'talled,  1259;  died,  1278.

20.  Nicholas  de  Lorgne,  installed,  1278,  died  broken-hearted,  12&^

21.  John  de  Villiers,  installed,  1289;  died,  1297.

22.  Otho  de  Pins,  installed,  1298.

23.  William  Viilaret,  installed,  1300  ;  died,  1306.

24.  Fulk  de  Viilaret,  installed,  1307  ;  deposed,  1319.

25.  Helion  de  Villannoba,  installed,  1319  ;  died,  1346.

16.  Deodate  de  Gozon,  installed,  1346  ;  died,  December,  1353.

27.  Peter  de  Cornillan,  installed,  1354;  died,  1355.

28.  Roger  de  Pins,  installed,    1355.

29.  Raymond  de  Berenger,  installed,  1365  ;  died,  1374.

30.  Robert  de  Julliac,  installed,  1374  ;  died,  1377.

31.  Heredia  Castellan  d'Eraposta,  installed,  1377.

32.  Richard  Caraccioio,  installed,  1383  ;  died,  1395.

33.  Philip  de  Naillac,  installed,  1396  ;  died,  June,  142 1.

34.  Antony  Fluvian,  installed,  142 1  ;  died,  October  26,  143?.

35.  John  de  Lastic,  installed,  1437  ;  died,  May  19,  1454.

36.  James  de  Milly,  installed,  1454  ;  died,  August  17,  1461.

37.  Peter  Raymond  Zacosta,  installed,  1461  ;  died  February  14,  146?.

38.  John  Orsini,  installed,  1467  ;  died,  1476.

39.  Peter  D'Aubusson,  installed,  1476  ;  died,  June  30,  1503.

40.  Almeric  Amboise,  installed,  1503  ;  died,  Norember  8,  1512.

41.  Guido  de  Bianchefort,  installed,  1512  ;  died,  1512.

42.  Fabricius  Carretto,  installed,  1512  ;  died,  January,  1521.

43.  Philip  Villers  de  I'lsle  Adam,  installed,  1521  ;  died,  August  22,  i5J/^\,

44.  A.  del  Ponte,  installed,  1534;  died,  November,  1535.

45.  Desiderio  di  s.  Jalla,  installed,  1536  ;  died,  September  26,  1536.

46.  Homedcz,  installed,  1536  ;  died,  September  6,  1553.

47.  Claudius  de  la  Scngle.  ir^stalled,  1553  ;  died,  August,  1557.

48.  John  de  Valetta,  installed,  1557  ;  died,  August  21,  1568.

49.  Peter  dei  Moate,  installed,  1568  ;  died,  January  20,  1572.
50W  Cassiere,  installed,  1572.

51.  Vcrdale,  died,  1595.

52.  Garzcs,  installed,  1595  ;  died,  February,  i6or.

53.  Wignacourt,  installed,  1601  ;  died,  1622.

54.  Vasconcellos,  installed,  1622.

55.  De  Paul,  installed,  1622  ;  died,  1636.

56.  Paul  de  Lascaris  Castellar,  installed,  1636  ;  died  August  14,  1657.

57.  Rcdin,  installed,  1657  ;  died,  February  6,  1660.

58.  Clermont  de  Chattes  Gessan,  installed,  1660  ;  died,  June  ?,  1660,

59.  Raph:el  Cotoner,  installed,  1660;  died,  1663.

60.  Nicholas  Cotoner,  mstalled,  1663  ;  died,  April  29,  1680.

61.  Caratia,  installed,  1680.

62.  Wignacourt.  installed,  1690  ;  died,  September  4,  1697.

63.  Perrellas,  insralled,  1697  ;  died,  February,  1720.

64.  Zondadari,  installed,  1720;  died,  1722.

6^.  Anthony  Manoel  de  Vilhcna,  installed,  1722  ;  died,  174a.

1366  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

66.  Pinto  de  Fcnseca,  installed,  1742.

67.  Ximenes,  installed,  1773;  died,  November,  17761

68.  Rohan,  installed,  1776,  died,  1797.

69.  Hompesch,  installed,  1797.

LIST   OF   RULERS  OF   THS  LATIN   RINGOOU  Of  FALESTIlfZ,    A.D     t-3<i^iiO$.

I.  Godfrey  de  Bouillon,  crowned,  1099  ;  died,  Joly  si,  iicc
II.  Baldwin  I^  crowned,  noi  i  died.  r:i8
III.  Baldwin  II.,  crowneo,  1:18;  died,  1131.
IV.  Foulques  (Fuik)>  Count  Anjou,  crowned,  ieji  ;  died,  1144.
V.  Baldwin  III.,  crowned,  1144;  died,  1162.
VI.  Almeric,  crowned,  February  18,  1162  ;  died,  1174.
VII.  Baldwin  IV.,  crowned,  ;  abdicated,  it 84.

VIII.  Baldwin  V.,  crowned,  1184;  died,  ii86.

IX.  Sibylla  and  her  husband,  Guy  de  Lusignan.  crowned,  11S6 ,  Sibylla  iiefl,
1191  ;  Guy  abdicated,  1193
X.  Henry,  Count  of  Champagne,  crowned,  1192  .  kiKed  ty  accident,  l'.o:^.
XI.  Amauri,  King  of  Cyprus,  crowned,  1594;  died,  1201^.

The  following  lists  of  Popes  ot  Rome  a.d.  1088  to  A.D.  1316.  will  be  Icand
useful  for  reference.     The  authority  is  Haydn's  DicHonary  of  Datez.

Urban  II.,  1088.     Promoted  the  First  Crusade  from  1096-1099.

Pascal  11.,  1090.     Council  of  Clermont,  1055,

Gelasius  II.,  iiiS.

Calixtus  II.,  1119.

Honorius  II.,  1125.

Innocent  II.,  1130.

Celestine  II.,  1143.

Lucius  II.,  1 144.

Eugenius  III.,  1145.     Promoted  the  Second  Crusade,  \.\^

Anastasius  IV.,  1153.

Adrian  IV.,  1154.

Alexander  III.,  1159.

Lucius  III.,  1181.

Urban  III.,  1185.

Gregory  VIIL,  1187.

Clement  III.,  1188.     Promoted  the  Third  Crusade,  .ti88.

Celestine  III.,  1191.     Promoted  the  Fourth  Crusade,  1195-119^

Innocent  III.,  1198.     Promoted  the  Fifth  Crusade,  1198.

Honorius  III.,  1216.

Gregory  IX.,  1227.     Promoted  the  Sixth  Crusade.

Celestine  IV.,  1241.

Innocent  IV.,  1243.     Promoted  the  Seventh  Crusade

Alexander  IV.,  1254.

POPES  OF  ROME  ^&>i

Urban  IV.,  1261.

Clement  IV.,  1265.    The  Eighth  and  last  Crusade,'

Gregory  X.,  127s.

Innocent  V.,  1275.

Adrian  V.,  1276,

Vicedominus,

John  XXI.,

Nicholas  111.,  1277.

Martin  IV.,  laSr.

Honorius  IV.,  1285.

Nicholas  IV.,  1288.

Celestine  V.,      >

Boniface  VIII.,  J  "^

Benedict  XI,,  1303.

Clement  V.,  1305.

John  XXIL,  1316.

As  a  comment  upon  the  chronological  confusion  of  the  times  we  append
from  Dr.  Barclay's  Ci(y  of  tkt  Great  King,  a  second  Table  of  the  Crusades  :

Crusade  I.,  1096-^099,    Capture  of  Jerusalem.

Crusade  II.,  1147.

Crusade  III.,  11 89.

Crusade  IV.,  1202.

Crusade  V.,  1217,

Crusade  VL,  1238.

Crusade  VII.,  1245.

Crusade  VIIL, 127a

Dr.  Barclay  wisely  adds  :  "  The  cessation  of  the  Crusades  was  not  produced

by  any  abatement  of  the  love  of  arms,  or  of  the  thirst  of  glory  to  the  chivalry
of  Europe.  But  the  union  with  these  martial  qualities,  of  that  fanatical  enthu-
siasm which  inspired  the  Christian  warriors  of  the  nth  century,  had  been  slowly
but  almost  thoroughly  dissolved."

'  After  the  Seventh  Crusade  and  the  surrender  of  all  the  places  in  Syria,  there  were
leveral  expeditions  inaugurated,  but  the  seventh  was  the  last  crusade.

CHAPTER  LII

THE   INTRODUCTION    OF    KNIGHT   TEMPLARISM   INTO   AMERICA

AVING  given  in  Chapter  LI.  a  short  history  of
the  Knights  Templars  during  the  Crusades,  and
the  suppression  of  that  magnanimous  and  Chris-
tian Order  by  the  Church  of  Rome,  aided  by
its  wretched  and  villanous  adherents,  the  various
sovereigns  of  Europe ;  and  having  also  shown
the  remnants  of  the  Order  down  to  recent  times,
in  England  and  France,  it  becomes  a  pleasing  task  to  trace,  as
nearly  as  possible,  the  connection  between  those  noble  spirits,  who
gave  their  fortunes  and  their  lives  for  the  cause  of  Christianity
against  the  Infidels  and  Mohammedans  of  Asia,  and  our  modern
Templars,  who  do  not  use  the  material  implements  of  a  carnal
u^arfare,  but  employ  the  legitimate  symbols  of  the  Knightly  Armor,
to  contend  against  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil.

All  of  our  recent  writers  on  the  Order  of  the  Temple  agree,  that
there  can  not  be  found  any  direct  connection  between  the  ancient
and  present  Templar  systems ;  yet,  like  the  sunken  rivers  found  in
many  parts  of  the  world,  where  we  can  trace  the  waters  thereof,
after  they  disappear  on  one  side  of  a  mountain,  and  discover  where
these  same  waters  again  appear,  and  proceed  onward  to  the  sea;
the  same  flowing  spirit  which  was  manifested  in  the  lives  of  the
original  Templars,  from  their  origin  in  the  12th  century  until  they
disappeared  beneath  the  obstructions  placed  in  their  path  by  the
monarchies  of  Europe,  and  the  succeeding  prejudices  of  the  peoples  of
each,  we  can  now  clearly  trace  in  the  Templar  rituals  of  England  and
the  United  States  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  ancient  Order,
of  "  Fidelity,  Zeal,  and  Obedience,"  without  those  superstitions
which  always  have  been  the  accompaniments  of  the  Priestly  Orders
of  the  Romish  Church.  Those  superstitions  of  the  early  Templars
were  abolished  by  them  after  the  close  of  the  Crusades.     Ttie  Tern

1168

KNIGHT   TEMPLARISM   IN   AMERICA  1369

plars,  very  soon  thereafter  having  learned  the  deceptions  of  priestcraft,
failed  to  pay  the  required  respect  and  obedience  to  the  hierarchy ;
and,  consequently,  were  antagonized  by  the  Church,  and  their  ex-
istence as  an  Order  soon  thereafter  terminated.  The  modern  Tem-
plars pay  due  allegiance  to,  and  worship,  the  risen  Saviour,  in  spirit
and  in  truth,  with  no  unmeaning  ceremonies.

We  learn  from  various  writers  that,  in  the  progress  of  Free-
masonry in  the  American  Colonies,  somewhere  about  the  latter  half
of  the  i8th  century,  some  officers  of  an  Irish  regiment  claimed  to  be
possessed  of  the  Knight  Templar  Order,  and  through  them,  several
of  our  own  Masons  received  the  several  appendant  degrees  and  the
Order  of  Knight  Templar.  Patents  issued  to  such  Knights,  bearing
dates  as  early  as  1783,  are  now  extant,  notably  one  from  Charles-
ton, South  Carolina.  Toward  the  close  of  that  century  there  ap-
peared several  appendant  degrees,  unknown  to  earlier  times,  such
as  Excellent,  Superexcellent,  Royal  Arch  Masons.  In  some  of  the
New  England  States  these  degrees  were  promulgated  and  conferred
under  the  charters  of  Blue  Lodges  ;  such  as  the  body  in  the  City  of
Washington  in  1 794 — two  record  books  of  which  the  present  writer
had  the  honor  of  discovering  among  the  old  papers  in  the  office  of
the  Grand  Secretary  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  District  of  Colum-
bia in  1875,  which  no  living  Mason  in  the  District  could  give  an
account  of.  This  body  was  called  the  "  Excellent,  Superexcellent,
Royal  Arch  Encampment."  The  first  book  ran  from  i  795  to  1 799 ;
and  then  the  body  closed  its  labors  and  divided  their  funds.  The
second  book  was  commenced  in  1804  when  the  same  body,  under
the  charge  of  Companion  Philip  P.  Eckles,  of  Baltimore,  resumed
its  labors  and  continued  until  August  21,  1808,  when  the  book  ends
abruptly  after  the  annual  election  of  officers.

A  book  was  published  by  Companion  Joseph  K.  Wheeler,  of  Con-
necticut, which  gave  an  account  of  similar  bodies,  bearing  the  same
title,  in  the  State  of  Connecticut.  From  these  came  the  first  inde-
pendent particular  Royal  Arch  Chapters,  and  from  which  Thos.  Smith
Webb  rnd  John  Hanmer,  both  from  Temple  Chapter  of  Albany,
New  York,  formed  the  first  Grand  Chapter  of  New  England  and
New  York  in  i  798,  the  history  of  which  will  be  found  under  Capit-
ular Masonry  (Chapter  XLIX.).  Also  under  the  chapter  relating
to  the  history  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite  will  be

I370  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

found  the  writer's  views  as  to  what  was  the  reason  for  these  degrees
being  brought  into  the  Masonry  of  the  Blue  Lodge,  which  we  here
casually  mention  as  having  been  part  and  parcel  of  the  very  many
appendant  degrees  communicated  to  the  Brethren  who  had  passed
through  the  curriculum  of  the  twenty-five  degrees  of  the  Rite  of
Perfection,  or  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite  of  1 762-65,  which
was,  in  1802,  at  Charleston,  enlarged  into  thirty-three  degrees  of  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite  by  the  Mother  Council.  It  is
well  known  to  all  well-read  and  advanced  Masonic  scholars,  that
all  degrees  of  Masonry  above  the  third  degree,  or  so-called  Mas-
ter Mason's  degree,  are  the  outcome  of  the  "  thousand  and  one
degrees "  promulgated  and  sometimes  worked  in  France  and  Ger-
many from  the  middle  to  the  close  of  the  i8th  century.  Until  the
emperors  of  the  East  and  West  formulated  the  regular  twenty-five
degrees  of  the  A.'.A.".A.-.R.'.  in  1762,  those  various  degrees  were
communicated  to  all  who  desired,  and  were  willing  to  pay  for  them.
Within  the  regular  twenty-five  degrees  were  found  the  Arch  and
Templar  degrees.  Also  from  two  of  them  the  present  Red  Cross
of  the  Commandery  was  formulated,  which  degree  has  no  connec-
tion with  the  primitive  Red  Cross  of  "  Rome  and  Constantine,"  at-
tributed to  Constantine  the  Great.

As  to  the  Templar  degree  ritual,  it  is  entirely  different  from  the
English  ritual,  as  the  latter,  at  the  present  day,  is  different  from  the
ritual  of  the  last  century  at  its  close  and  the  commencement  of  the
present.  We  have  a  certified  copy  of  that  ritual  made  as  early  as
1 80 1  from  an  older  ritual,  which  is  also  a  copy  from  a  much  older
one,  which  was  sent  to  Brother  General  Albert  Pike,  and  by  him
given  to  the  present  writer.

The  first  authentic  information  that  we  have  of  the  Templar
Order  in  the  United  States,  is  found  in  the  history  of  St.  Andrew's
Royal  Arch  Chapter,  which  held  its  first  recorded  meeting,  August
28,  1769,  in  the  Mason's  Hall  in  Boston,  under  the  charter  of  St
Andrew's  Royal  Arch  Lodge,  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland,
and  the  record  of  that  date  shows  that  the  degree  of  Knight  Tem-
plar was  conferred.*  At  that  time,  and  somewhat  later,  the  bodies
were   termed   "  Excellent,    Superexcellent,    Royal   Arch    Encamp-

'  Oration  of  Companion  W.  Sewall  Gardner,  at  Centennial  of  St.  Andrew's  Chap'
ter.pp.  42,  43.

KNIGHT  TEMPLARISM    IN   AMERICA  1371

ments,"  as  before  stated.  The  records  of  that  Chapter  show  that
"  Brother  William  Davis  came  before  the  Lodge,  begging  to  have
and  receive  the  parts  belonging  to  the  Royal  Arch  Masons,  which
being  read,  was  received,  and  he  unanimously  voted  in,  and  was  ac-
cordingly made  by  receiving  the  four  steps,  that  of  Excellent,  Super-
excellent,  Royal  Arch,  and  Knight  Templar."*  In  all  the  histories
of  the  chapters  in  the  New  England  States,  the  above  titles  were
first  used ;  as  also  in  the  Chapter  organized  in  the  City  of  Washing-
ton, under  the  Charter  of  Federal  Lodge.  The  Red  Cross  does  not
appear  in  any  of  those  old  bodies.  It  has  occurred  to  the  writer
that  after  the  Templar  degree  had  been  dropped  by  Thos.  Smith
Webb,  when  in  1 796  the  movement  had  been  inaugurated  to  insti-
tute the  General  Grand  Chapter  of  New  England  and  New  York,
that  some  of  the  Brethren  formed  a  separate  body  for  the  Templar
Order  ;  and  wishing  to  have  the  •'  Red  Cross  of  Constantine  "  united
with  the  Templar  degree,  as  was  the  case  after  the  Crusades,  they
must  have  mistaken  the  united  degrees  of  the  15th  and  16th  for  the
"Constantine  Red  Cross."  At  all  events,  there  is  considerable  diffi-
culty in  accounting  for  the  curious  mixture  of  the  Persian  Myster-
ies with  the  solemn  ceremonies  of  the  Christian  Order  of  the  Tem-
ple. Some  writers  say  that  "  the  records  of  Kilwinning  Lodge,  of
Ireland,  warranted  8,  in  1779,  show  that  its  Charter  was  used  as  the
authority  for  conferring  the  Royal  Arch,  Knight  Templar,  and  Rose
Croix  degrees  as  early  as  1782  ;  but  the  Red  Cross  and  the  Rose
Croix  are  two  different  degrees,  and  should  not  be  confounded.  It
is  thought  possible  ^hat  the  Irish  lodges,  having  the  High  Knight
Templar  degree,  communicated  it  to  their  American  Brothers  prior
to  the  Revolution,  though  there  is  no  evidence  of  it ;  on  the  con-
trary, the  records  show  that  it  was  conferred  first  (i  769)  in  America,
and  afterward  in  Ireland,  1779."'

Bro.  Theo.  S.  Parvin  says:  "In  1 766  there  were  two  Military
Lodges  stationed  at  Boston  :  No.  58  on  the  register  of  England,
connected  with  the  Fourteenth  Regiment,  and  No.  322,  register  of
Ireland,  attached  to  the  Twenty-ninth  Regiment.  As  early  as
1762  St.  Andrew's  Lodge,  of  Boston,  applied  to  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Scotland,  from  which  it  had  received  its  Warrant,  for  leave  to

•  Oration  of  Companion  W.  Sewall  Gardner,  at  Centennial  of  St.  Andrew's  Chap-
ter, pp.  42,  4'?.

'Bro.  Fred.  Speed  in  "  History  of  Freemasonry,"  p.  704.

1372  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

confer  the  Royal  Arch  degree ;  and  subsequently,  under  this  War
rant,  it  conferred  both  the  degrees  of  Royal  Arch  and  Knight  Tem  •
plan  Even  prior  to  this,  as  early  as  1758,  Lodge  No.  3,  at  Phila-
delphia,  working  under  Warrant  as  No.  359,  granted  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  All  England,  also  worked  as  a  chapter,  and  conferred  the
Royal  Arch  degree  ;  but,  as  previously  stated,  we  do  not  find  that
this  Chapter  ever  conferred  the  degree  of  Knight  Templar." '

Some  writers  suppose  that  it  was  possible  "  that  the  degree  of
Knight  Templar  was  conferred  in  Military  Lodges  and  perhaps  in
other  Lodges  prior  to  the  Revolutionary  War."*

From  about  the  years  1776  to  1783,  during  the  War  of  Indepen-
dence, but  little  attention  was  given  to  Masonic  organization,  ex-
cept in  the  military  lodges.  After  peace  had  assumed  her  sway  and
the  country  began  to  thrive  in  all  material  interests,  and  the  various
Grand  Lodges  of  the  separate  States  were  organized,  what  were
termed  the  "  higher  degrees,"  which  had  been,  up  to  that  period,
always  conferred  in  the  lodges  under  the  sanction  of  their  Warrants,
became  the  subject  of  a  more  independent  character.  We  find  from
the  various  histories  of  the  Royal  Arch  Chapters,  especially  in  the
New  England  States,  that  in  various  towns  and  cities  independent
bodies  were  organized,  wherein  the  degrees  of  Royal  Arch,  Excel-
lent, and  Superexceilent  Masters  were  attached  to  the  Templar  de-
gree ;  and  in  some  instances,  the  Red  Cross,  whatever  ritual  of  that
degree  may  have  been  used  in  its  conference,  was  given.

"  Few  of  these  organizations  have  continued  until  the  present
time,  and  still  fewer  have  left  any  records  of  the  earlier  years  of  theii
existence.  An  occasional  discovery  of  an  ancient  diploma,  or  other
fragment,  has  revived  previously  formed  opinions  as  to  which  is  the
elder  organization  ;  but  for  the  reason  that  bodies  were  self-consti
tuted,  and  consisted  of  individuals  who,  being  in  possession  of  a
degree,  called  to  their  assistance  the  requisite  number  of  other  quali-
fied brethren,  and  gave  the  degrees  to  certain  chosen  spirits,  and
then  dissolved  never  to  meet  again,  it  is  manifest  that  there  can  be
no  gathering  together  of  the  facts ;  and  that  beyond  an  occasional
hint,  received  from  the  meager  record  of  some  old  lodge-book,  as  it
may  be  unearthed  from  its  hiding-place,  nothing  further  is  to  be
looked  for.  As  time  passed  on,  and  these  occasional  gatherings
became  more  frequent,  when  the  number  of  Templars  had  increased

'  Bro.  Fred.  Speed  in  "  History  of  Freemasonry,"  p    703.  *  Ibid.

KNIGHT   TEMPLARISM    IN    AMERICA  1373

sufficiently,  and  more  permanent  organizations  began  to  be  made,
out  of  these  emergency  bodies  grew  permanent  ones.''  ^

There  has  been  much  discussion  in  the  various  older  jurisdictions
as  to  the  first  duly  organized  encampment  (commandery).  and  we  do
not  know  if  the  question  has  been  finally  settled.  From  the  Pro-
ceedings of  the  Grand  Encampment  of  1883  we  learn  from  the  Ad-
dress of  Grand  Master  Dean  that  there  was  "  Indisputable  evidence
that  the  degrees  of  Knight  of  the  Red  Cross  and  Knight  Templar
were  conferred  in  Charleston,  South  Carolina,  in  a  regularly
organized  body  as  far  back  as  the  year  1782."'

"The  South  Carolina  Encampment,  No.  i,  of  Knights  Templars
and  the  Appendant  Orders  was  established  in  1780,  as  is  evident
from  the  old  seal  in  our  archives.  But  it  does  not  appear  from
what  source  our  ancestors  derived  their  first  Charter,  all  of  our  rec-
ords previous  to  November  7,  1823,  having  been  lost  or  consumed
by  fire.  It  is  clear,  however,  that  this  encampment  was  in  active
operation  in  1803,  and  continued  so  until  long  after  the  date  of  our
oldest  record,  for,  on  December  29,  1824,  it  was  "  Resolved  that,  in
consideration  of  the  long  and  faithful  services  of  our  Most  Eminent
Past  Commander,  Francis  Sylvester  Curtis,  who  regularly  paid  his
arrears  to  this  Eiicatnpment  for  tuore  than  twenty  years,  he  is  con-
sidered a  life-member  of  this  Encampment,  and  that  his  life-mem-
bership take  date  from  November,  1823,"'  In  a  "list  of  various
Masonic  degrees,"  in  Cole's  Ahijnan  Rezon,  extracted  from  a  pub-
lication in  18 16,  the  Knight  of  the  Red  Cross  is  termed  the  ninth
degree,  the  Knight  0/  Malta  the  tenth,  and  the  Ktiight  Templar
the  thirteenth ;  and  they  are  said  to  be  conferred  in  the  Sublime
Grand  Lodges  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  in  the  City  of  New  York,  and
in  Newport,  R  1.*  On  November  7,  1823,  that  encampment,  which
was  then  regularly  working  at  Sir  Knight  Roche's  Asylum,  under
the  command  of  the  M.  E.  Sir  Moses  Holbrook,  M.D.,  Grand
Commander,  received  "the  authority  from  the  G.  G.  B."  to  work.
At  the  following  meeting  (November  15th)  Moses  Holbrook  was
re-elected  to  the  office  which  he  then  held.     John  Barker  was  elected

•  Fred.  Speed,  "  History  of  Freemasonry,"  etc.,  pp.  703,  704.

'  Proceedings  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States,  1883,  p.  59,  Grand  Mas-
ter Dean's  Address.

•Gourdin  (MS.  Records  of  South  Carolina  Encampment,  No.  1),  pp.  29,  30.

*  "  Freemason's  Library,"  p.  317.

1374  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

an  honorary  member,  January  i6,  1824.  It  was,  at  this  time,  the
practice  to  introduce  the  candidates  separately  in  both  degrees.  On
January  18,  1824,  James  Eyland  was  created  a  Templar.  The  en-
campment met  January  30,  1824,  at  Sir  Knight  H.  G.  Street's  Asy-
lum, and  the  meetings,  which  had  hitherto  taken  place  on  every
Friday  evening,  were  changed,  February  15,  1824,  to  the  last  Wed-
nesday in  each  month,  and  the  last  Wednesday  in  November  was
fixed  for  the  annual  election.  March  31,  1824,  Sir  John  Barker  was
voted  to  be  recommended  to  be  Grand  Visitor  for  the  Southern
States.*

June  24,  1824,  M.  E.  and  M.  W.  Henry  Fowle,  Deputy  Gen
eral  Grand  Master  of  the  G.  G.  Encampment  of  the  United  States
of  America,  granted  a  Charter  at  Boston  (S.  C.),  countersigned  by
John  G.  Loring,  G.  G.  Recorder,  to  Benjamin  Thomas  Elmore,  and
eleven  others,  to  form,  open,  and  hold  Columbia  Encampment,  No.
2.  Brother  Elmore  was  appointed  the  first  Grand  Commander,  E.
H.  Miixey,  Generalissimo,  and  John  Bryce,  Captain  General.  The
Charter  is  in  the  Archives  of  Richland  Lodge,  No.  39,  A.*.  F. •.  M.'.
at  Columbia,  S.  C,  with  some  "  rough  sketches  of  their  meetings,"
which  were  held  in  the  hall  of  that  lodge.'

The  number  of  members  increased  to  thirty  or  more,  their
meetings  continued  about  four  years,  and  from  some  cause  ceased
to  exist.'

There  was  at  that  time  no  Grand  Encampment  in  South  Caro-
lina, as  we  find  from  the  following  :

"February  23d,  1825,  the  Encampment  was  informed  that  the
three  first  officers  had,  in  accordance  with  a  previous  resolution
giving  them  discretionary  power  in  the  matter,  recommended
Georgetown  Encampment  to  the  G.  G.  Encampment  for  a  charter."^

As  an  interesting  incident  in  the  history  of  this  encampment,  we
make  the  following  extract :

"  La  Fayette.

"The  members  of  South  Carolina  Encampment,  No.  1,  were
summoned  to  meet  at  Sir  H.  G.  Street's,  on  the  i6th  of  March,
1825,  to   wait   on    General    La   Fayette   agreeably  to   a  previous

'MS.  Records  of  South  Carolina  Encampment,  No.  i.        'Gourdin,  p.  30.
»Ibid.  Mbid.,  p.  31.

KNIGHT   TEMPLARISM    IN   AMERICA  1375

arrangement  with  him.  The  following  Officers  and  Members
attended  precisely  at  half-past  2  o'clock."  *

In  consequence  of  a  gap  in  the  minutes  from  this  time  until
January  26,  1827,  no  further  information  could  be  obtained  con-
cerning this  very  interesting  occasion.

September  18,  1826,  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  State  of
South  Carolina  was  represented  in  the  G.  G.  Encampment  at  New
York  by  Sir  John  Barker,  proxy  for  M.  E.  Moses  Holbrook,
Grand  Master,  and  Sir  William  H.  Jones,  proxy  for  the  M.  E.
Sir  William  E.  Lathrop,  G.  Capt.  Gen'ls,  and  the  Committee,  to
whom  were  "referred  the  proceedings  of  the  Officers  of  the  G.  G.
Encampment  since  the  last  Meeting"  (September  16,  1819),  re-
ported. "  That  these  have  been  established,  with  the  approbation  of
the  G.  G.  Officers,  Grand  Encampments  in  the  following  States ;
to  wit :  New  Hampshire,  Vermont,  Virginia,  North  Carolina,  South
Carolina,  and  Georgia."  *

During  the  year  18 19,  Beaufort  Encampment  of  South  Caro«
lina,  at  Beaufort,  was  established,  which  continued  about  four  or
five  years.     The  records  were  burned  up.*

Jos.  M'Cosh,  who  was  afterward  an  Ins.  Genl.  of  the  thirty-third
degree,  resigned  November  28,  1827.  He  was  the  Recorder,  No-
vember 7,  1823.  During  the  year  1828,  Sir  James  Eyland  was
Grand  Commander.     Many  resignations  took  place.

In  1829,  Sir  James  Eyland,  G.  Master,  represented  the  Grand
Commandery  in  the  G.  G.  Encampment  He  was  elected  that  year
G.  G.  Capt.  General,  and  in  1832  was  elected  G.  G.  Generalissimo.*

About  this  time  the  meetings  of  the  S.  C.  Encampment  were
very  poorly  attended.  May  12,  1830,  there  was  not  a  quorum,  nor
in  October  11,  1830.  The  encampment  was  adjourned  to  the  stated
meeting  of  December.     The  following  note  appears  :

I  certify  that  no  quorum  ever  after  assembled.  I  met  one  or
two  only  after  the  above  note  of  an  attempted  meeting.  Sir  J.  W.
Rouse  handed  me  over  the  books  and  papers  all  for  me  to  deliver
up  to  this  Encampment,  some  time  in  1832,  with  a  letter  of  resigna-

'  MS.  Records  of  South  Carolina  Encampment,  No.  i,  Gourdin,  p.  31.

'  B.  B.  French.  "The  Grand  Encampment  of  Knights  Templars,  and  the  Ap-
pendant Orders,  in  the  State  of  South  Carolina,"  was  incorporated  for  fourteen  years,  by
A. A.  of  20th  December,  1826,  viii  Stats,  p.  350.

'  J.  M.  Barker.

*B.  B.  French.

1376  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

tion  at  the  same  time.  The  books  and  papers  of  Grand  Encamj>
ment  of  S.  C.  and  all  were  flooded  when  Sir  John  May's  work-
shop was  burned.     I  received  the  remains  in  1840.

(Signed)  Moses  Holbrook,

P.  Gr.   Commander.

I.W.  Rouse  died  23  April,  1834  Past  Gr.  Master  of  Gr.  En-
campment of  South  Carolina.  The  record  of  the  G.  G.  Encamp-
ment does  not  show  any  representation  from  the  G.  Encampment
of  South  Carolina  subsequent  to  1829.*

October  14,  1841,  seven  of  the  former  members  of  South
Carolina  Encampment,  among  them  the  Grand  Commander  J.  S.
Burges,  met  at  Rame's  Hall,  in  Meeting  Street,  for  the  purpose  of
reviving  it,  after  its  long  nap  of  eleven  years  and  more.*

January  27,  1842,  it  was  Resolved  that  the  degree  of  Red  Cross
should  be  conferred  upon  Sr.  Knight  Benjamin  Greer,  on  his  pay-
ing $5,  with  the  condition  of  his  becoming  a  member  of  this  en-
campment, he  having  received  the  other  degrees  before  in  Europe.'

A  dispensation  was  issued  to  the  encampment  by  Sir  Jos.  K.
Stapleton,  D.  G.  G.  Master,  May  17,  1843,  to  continue  their  labors,
the  Warrant  having  been  burned  up.  This  dispensation  was
brought  to  the  notice  of  the  encampment  only  on  October  19,  1843,
by  Rev.  A.  Case,  the  G.  Chaplain.  In  1844,  the  G.  C,  Sir  A.  Case,
represented  South  Carolina  Encampment  in  the  G.  G.  Encamp-
ment, and  during  this  session  a  charter  was  ordered  to  that  en-
campment free  of  charge,  z'«  consequence  of  the  loss  by  fire  of  a
former  one.  This  charter  was  reported  to  the  meeting,  March  15,
1845,  as  having  been  received.

February  9,  1853,  Joseph  Hunter,  P.  D.  G.  M.  of  Savannah,  Ga.,
was  made  a  K.  R.  C.  and  K.  T.,  and  hi  token  of  respect  his  fees  were
returned  to  him,  and  he  was  elected  a  life  member.

In  1853.  M.-.E.*.  A.  G.  Mackey  represented  the  encampment  in
the  G.  G.  Encampment,  and  was  elected  G.  G.  Warden.*

December  27  1854,  the  encampment  acted  as  an  escort  to  the
Grand  Lodge  of  South  Carolina  at  the  celebration  of  the  Centennial
Anniversary  of  the  formation  of  a  Provisional  Grand  Lodge.*

1  B.  B.  French.

2  MS.  Records  of  South  Carolina  Encampment,  No.  i.  The  last  meeting  held  was
March  9,  1830.

"  Ibid.         *  B.  B.  French.  ^  MS.  Records  of  South  Carolina  Encampment,  No.  I.

KNIGHT   TEMPLARISM   IN   AMERICA  1377

In  1855,  South  Carolina  Encampment  was  the  only  one  in
existence  in  the  State.^

Continuing  the  interesting  history  of  this,  one  of  the  oldest  or-
ganizations of  Knights  Templars,  we  refer  to  the  Proceedings  of  the
Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States  for  1883  :

The  Grand  Master  states  in  his  address  that  "  on  8th  of  De-
cember, 1880,  I  issued  a  dispensation  to  South  Carolina  Com-
mandery.  No.  i,  to  appear  in  public  in  full  Templar  costume  on
the  twenty-ninth  day  of  December,  1880,  for  the  purpose  of  cele-
brating the  one  hundredth  anniversary  of  its  organization.  I  also
issued  dispensations  for  a  like  appearance  in  public,  to  join  in  the
celebration  to  Columbia  Commandery,  No.  2,  Georgia  Commandery,
No.  I,  and  Palestine  Commandery,  No.  7."  *

As  the  question  of  when  the  first  encampment  in  the  United
States  was  regularly  organized  is  of  great  interest,  we  continue  our
notice  of  the  introduction  of  the  Templar  Order  of  Knighthood
into  South  Carolina,  and  show  what  Brother  A.  G.  Mackey
says  of  it  in  his  History  of  Freemasonry  in  South  Carolina?
He  quotes  from  Gourdin  what  we  have  already  copied,  and
then  continues :  "  I  have  been  unable  to  find  any  reference  in  the
cotemporary  journals  of  the  day  to  the  existence  of  South  Carolina
Encampment,  No.  i,  at  that  early  period.  I  have,  however,  been
more  successful  in  obtaining  indisputable  evidence  that  the  degrees
of  Knight  of  the  Red  Cross  and  Knight  Templar  were  conferred  in
Charleston,  in  a  regularly  organized  body,  as  far  back  as  the  year
1783,  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  seal  with  the  date  1780,  to  which
Gourdin  refers,  belonged  to  that  body  and  afterward  came  into  the
possession  of  South  Carolina  Encampmenf*

"The  proofs  of  what  I  have  stated  is  contained  in  a  small  com-
pass but  the  testimony  is  irrefutable.  I  have  in  my  possession
a  diploma,  written  in  a  very  neat  chirography  on  parchment,  with
two  seals  in  wax  attached,  one  in  red,  of  the  Royal  Arch,  and  the
other  in  black,  of  the  Knights  Templar.  The  upper  part  of  the
diploma  contains  four  devices  within  four  circles,  all  skillfully
executed  with  the  pen.  The  first  device,  beginning  on  the  left
hand,  is  a   star  ot    seven  points,  with   the  ineffable    name    in    the

•Gourdin,  p.  33.

*  Proceedings  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States,  1883,  p.  58.
•Ibid.,  p.  58.  Mbid.,  p.  59.

87

137?  HISTORY  OF   FREEMASONRY

center,  and  the  motto,  'Memento  Mori ;  '  the  second  is  an  arch  on
two  pillars,  the  all-seeing  eye  on  the  Key-stone,  and  a  sun  beneath
the  arch,  and  *  Holiness  to  the  Lord'  for  the  motto;  the  third
is  the  cross  and  brazen  serpent,  erected  on  a  bridge,  and  '  Jesus
Salvator  Hominum  '  for  the  motto  ;  and  the  fourth  is  the  skull
and  cross-bones,  surmounted  by  a  cross,  with  the  motto,  '/«  hoc
signo  vitices.'  The  reference  of  the  three  last  devices  is  ev-
idently to  the  Royal  Arch,  the  Red  Cross,  and  Templar  degrees.
The  first  is  certainly  a  symbol  of  the  Lodge  of  Perfection,  and
hence,  connectedly,  they  show  the  dependence  of  the  Order  of
Templarism  in  the  State  at  that  time  upon  the  Ancient  and  Ac-
cepted Rite."  In  the  Proceedings  is  a  heliotyped  copy  of  the
diploma,  which  is  here  shown.  The  original  was  placed  in  the  pos-
session of  the  Grand  Master,  Benjamin  Dean,  by  the  son  of  Bro.
A.  G.  Mackey,  the  Hon.  Edw.  Mackey,  to  be  presented,  in  his
name,  to  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States.  The  ex-
pense of  this  and  other  plates  in  the  volume  was  paid  for  by  the
Grand  Master.  As  a  matter  of  considerable  interest,  we  subjoin
further  remarks  of  the  Grand  Master  in  connection  with  the  subject.

"On  the  6th  of  May,  1881,  Sir  Knight  W.  J.  Pollard,  because
of  a  conversation  with  him  in  Boston,  wrote  me  a  long  and  interest-
ing letter  on  the  history  of  Freemasonry  in  South  Carolina  and
Georgia,  in  which  he  says :  *  I  find  in  Charleston,  from  the  South
Carolina  Gazette,  that  at  some  period,  not  clearly  defined,  there  was
a  Lodge  established  in  West  Florida  called  St.  Andrew's  Lodge,
No.  40,  and  that  it  was  moved  to  Charleston  about  1 783,  and  was
Chartered  as  a  York  Lodge  in  the  city  of  Charleston  July,  i  783.,
by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania.'"

"  He  also  called  my  attention  to  the  recovery  by  Sir  Knight  Jen-
nison  of  valuable  papers  relating  to  the  Encampment.  Sir  Knight
Jennison  also  sent  me  copies  of  the  papers.  ...  A  careful  ex-
amination of  the  old  diploma  discovered  on  the  Seal  the  words
*  Lodge  No.  40.'  These  words  and  figures  were  not  so  prominent
as  the  other  legends  on  the  Seal,  and  seemed  to  have  escaped  the
attention  of  Brother  Albert  G.  Mackey.

"  A  careful  examination  disclosed  the  remains  of  two  ribbons,
under  those  in  sight,  showing  that  there  were  originally  four  seals
attached  to  the  diploma ;  one  of  these  ribbons  is  quite  rotten."

From  an  address  delivered  December  10,  1878,  before  the  Grand

C>7Y\  ■''  •.^5.!:{.■ti•'|,■

>">

",v  ■      ,„..v,.,,/;4 1^7 '',;/- /,,..,   •.■■.•,-.- -/"jv uuy\to' iJ'cnv

./  />:r  fU'Jl    „/u^.-ltt.'  •  --'-■-

C///'<->r>K  ......,..,„,    /y^^_^^  .,

KNIGHT   TEMPLARISM   IN   AMERICA  1379

Lodge  of  South  Carolina  by  M.  W.  Wilmot  G.  De  Saussure,  P.  G-
M.  of  South  Carolina,  we  quote  "that  the  Warrant  for  No.  40  was
granted  to  Brethren  formerly  of  St.  Andrew's  Lodge  No.  i,  West
Florida,  and  then  of  Charleston,  on  the  12th  of  July,  1783."
Brother  Frederick  Speed  says  :

In  summing  up  the  evidence,  this  writer  is  compelled  to  regret  the  conciu
sions  of  Fratres  Dean  and  Mackey,  that  there  is  "  Indisputable  evidence  that  the
degrees  of  Knight  of  the  Red  Cross  and  Knight  Templar  were  conferred  in
Charleston  in  a  regularly  organized  body  as  far  back  as  the  year  1783."  He
then  continues  :  "  St.  Andrew's  Lodge  No.  i  was  not  a  Templar  body  at  any
time  m  its  history.  Like  St.  Andrew's  Lodge  of  Boston,  it  was  a  Master's  Lodge
and  the  degrees  were  conferred,  as  evidenced  from  the  diploma,  under  the  sane*
tion  of  its  warrant  as  a  Blue  Lodge  ;  but  it  seems  to  be  established  beyond  a
reasonable  doubt,  by  the  resolution  relating  to  the  membership  of  Francis  Syl-
vester Curtis,  that  South  Carolina  Encampment  No.  i  was  a  regularly  organ-
ized Templar  body  as  far  back  as  the  year  1804,  and  probably  earlier.  It  was,
like  all  older  encampments,  self-created,  and  worked  without  a  charter,  until  the
year  1823,  when  it  was  "reopened  in  conformity  with  the  Constitution"  of  the
General  Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States,  at  which  time,  it  appears
from  the  petition — and  resolution  of  the  encampment  embraced  therein —

"  That  on  diligent  search  being  made  in  the  archives,  it  clearly  appears  that
this  encampment  was  in  full  operation  under  the  sanction  of  a  warrant  of  '  Blue'
Lodge,  No.  40,  upwards  of  thirty  years  ago,  and  continued  in  operation  many
years  subsequent;  and  has,  time  out  of  mind,  caused  to  be  made  and  used  a
common  seal.  It  also  further  appears  that  the  said  encampment  has  lain  dor-
mant for  several  years  past.     .     .     .

''Resolved,  That  the  M.'.  E.-.  Sir  James  C.  Winters,  together  with  the  Re
corder,  be  authorized  to  forward  the  necessary  documents  to  prove  the  exist-
ence of  this  encampment  prior  to  the  year  1816,  and  obtain  the  desired  recog-
nition."

Extract  from  the  minutes.  (Signed)         Joseph  McCosh,

Recorder  pro  tern}

The  question  of  "  Regularity "  here  presents  itself  as  to  the
"  Validity  "  of  the  Templar  organizations  as  it  does  as  to  the  "  Va-
lidity "  of  the  Capitular  degrees,  not  only  in  the  United  States,  but
originally  in  Europe.

From  the  very  first  organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng-
land in  1 71 7,  all  Masons  agree  that  no  single  individual  has  any
prescriptive  right  or  prerogative  to  communicate  any  knowledge  of
a  "  Rite  "  or  any  part  of  its  ritual,  unless  so  authorized  by  the  "  Con-

'Grand  Encampment  Proceedings,  1883,  p.  172.

fiso  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

stitution  "  under  which  said  ritual  is  promulgated.  The  Altar  ob-
ligations,  of  all  the  Rites,  provide  against  any  such  violation  of  the
"Constitution."  In  the  Section  VIII.  of  the  New  Regulations  of
1738  we  find  the  following  as  an  amendment  to  the  Section  VIII.
of  1723,  viz.  :

"VIII.  Every  Brother  concerned  in  Making  Masons  clandes-
tinely shall  not  be  allowed  to  visit  any  Lodge  till  he  has  made  due
submission,  even  though  the  Brother  so  admitted  may  be  allowed.

"  None  who  make  a  stated  Lodge  without  the  Grand-Master's
Warrant  shall  be  admitted  into  regular  Lodges,  till  they  make  due
submission  and  obtain  Grace.

"  If  any  Brethren  form  a  Lodge  without  leave,  and  shall  irregu-
larly make  Brothers,  they  shall  not  be  admitted  into  any  regular
Lodge,  no  not  as  Visitors,  till  they  render  a  good  Reason  or  make
due  submission.

"  Seeing  that  some  extraneous  Brothers  have  been  lately  made
in  a  clandestine  manner ;  that  is,  in  no  regular  Lodge,  or  by  any
authority  or  Dispensation  from  the  Grand  Master,  and  upon  small
and  unworthy  considerations  to  the  Dishonour  of  the  Craft  :

"The  Grand  Lodge  decreed,  that  no  person  so  made,  nor  any
conceined  in  making  him,  shall  be  a  Grand  Officer,  nor  an  officer  of
any  particular  Lodge ;  nor  shall  any  such  partake  of  the  General
Charity,  if  they  should  come  to  want."

We  have  here  the  general  principles  upon  which  to  base  a  judg-
ment as  to  all  legitimacy  of  Masonic  work.  The  ittnoccnt  parties,
upon  whom  Masonic  work  has  been  commenced,  are  to  be  held
blameless,  and  are  to  be  admitted  to  fellowship,  and  those  only  are
to  be  punished  who  were  guilty  of  the  irregular  and  clandestine  work.

In  the  matter  of  the  various  parties,  who  without  competent  au-
thority attempted  to  confer  the  degrees  of  the  Commandery  upon
innocent  Brethren,  it  appears,  from  all  that  we  can  learn  from  recent
writers,  that  the  several  degrees  of  Red  Cross,  Knight  Templar,  and
Knight  of  Malta  were  conferred,  whatever  may  have  been  the  several
rituals,  at  that  early  period,  and  they  were  assumed  to  be  correct.
These  germs,  however  obtained,  came  in  time  to  be  the  veritable
means  for  establishing  the  bodies,  by  which  finally,  and  however  irreg-
ularly conducted,  the  several  State  Grand  Commanderies  were  organ-
ized. We  have  seen  that  from  these  have  grown  up,  in  the  United
States,  a  system  of  Masonic  Templarism  which  is  the  most  exten-

KNIGHT   TEMhLARISM    IN    AMERICA  1381

sive  and  influential  body  of  men  anywhere  in  the  world,  as  we  shall
be  able  to  demonstrate  in  the  conclusion  of  this  sketch.

We  have  carefully  read  and  pondered  over  nearly  all,  if  not
quite  all,  the  writings  of  reliable  authors  who  have,  as  far  as  possible,
culled  from  authentic  documents  and  every  source  of  legitimate  in-
formation every  item  which  could  add  to  our  knowledge  of  the  in-
troduction of  the  Templar  and  appendant  orders  into  the  United
States  ;  and  we  must  deal  with  the  subject  as  we  have  found  it.  It
is  barely  possible  that  the  fountain  was  impure  at  the  beginning  ;  but
taking  the  system,  as  it  is  at  the  very  close  of  the  19th  centurv,  where
else  in  the  world  can  we  find  such  a  body  of  United  Praters,  Ma-
sons, distinguished  gentlemen,  of  all  the  useful  professions,  arts,  sci-
ences, and  trades,  as  compose  the  Officers,  Constituencies,  and  Mem-
bers, scattered  as  they  are,  in  all  the  States,  Territories,  cities,
towns,  and  hamlets  of  this  vast  country?  What  is  now  the  true
status  of  Masonic  Templary  in  the  United  States — with  its  total
membership  of  114,540  at  the  close  of  1898  ?

In  the  admirable  history  of  the  Order  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  W.
J.  B.  MacLeod  Moore,  he  is  very  persistent  in  challenging  the
Masonic  Templary  of  the  United  States.  He  says  :  "  I  may  appear
to  have  frequently  indulged  in  fault-finding  with  the  system  oi purely
Masonic  Templary  practiced  in  the  United  States  of  America,  and
am  fully  alive  to  the  fact  that  the  popularity  of  the  degrees  there
among  its  most  enlightened  members  is  an  argument  stronger  than
all  the  criticism  that  can  be  brought  against  it ;  but  in  order  to
explain  my  objections,  it  was  necessary  to  refer  to  the  glaring  dis-
crepancies and  inconsistencies  existing,  which  prove  the  system  to
be  not  only  false,  but  a  perversion  of  the  principles  of  the  true
Templar  Order,  from  which  it  derives  its  name — merely  an  imita
tion  Military  Masonic  degree — a  parody  upon  the  pure  doctrines  ot
the  Ancient  Templars."

Several  pages  are  devoted  to  his  view  of  these  inconsistencies
and  discrepancies — too  lengthy  for  our  columns — and  hence  must
refer  our  readers  to  his  sketch.*

In  many  things  we  must,  of  course,  concur  with  him  ;  but  suppose
we  apply  his  method  of  criticism  to  our  Modern  Masonry,  beginning
with  the  early  rituals  of  1725  by  Anderson  and   Desaguliers,  all  the

'  "  History  of  Masonry  and  Concordant  Orders,"  p.  742  et  sea.

1382  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

way  through  the  various  Modifications  of  Martin  Clare,  Hutchin-
son, Dunckerley,  and  Preston,  to  the  very  last  formed  by  the
union  in  1813  of  the  Modern  and  Ancient  work  of  Hemmingway
wrhich  is  the  present  ritual  of  the  United  Grand  Lodge  of  England.
— and  compare  all  of  the  various  forms  with  well-known  facts  as
we  have  them  in  the  sacred  writings  and  history — and  where  will  ihe
ritualism  of  the  three  degrees  of  the  Blue  Lodge  stand  ?  where  the
ritualism  of  the  Mark  degree,  where  that  of  the  R.  A.  Chapter  ?

We  say,  let  the  question,  as  to  Orthodoxy  of  American  Tem»
plarism,  settle  itself ,  all  in  good  time ,  very,  very  few  Templars  in
the  United  States  know  anything  whatever  of  this  controversy  and

Where  ignorance  is  bliss,  twere  folly  to  be  wise

We  have  among  our  Members  distinguished  Clergymen  of  all  our
Christian  denominations,  but  we  are  not  aware  of  a  single  de=
scendant  of  Jacob  who  is  a  Knight  Templar,  Our  ceremonies  all
conduce  to  the  idea  of  a  pure  Christianity.  Let  us  therefore  be
content  to  let  matters  remain  as  they  are ;  that  each  individual
Member  shall  for  himself  interpret  the  ceremonies,  and  apply  him^
self  to  the  consideration  of  Christianity  as  his  instructions  in
Christianity  have  dictated,  according  to  his  "Faith."

It  appears  from  all  accounts  of  the  introduction  of  the  Order  of
Knights  Templars  into  the  United  States,  prior  to  the  period  of
the  War  of  Independence,  that  where  there  was  any  attempt  to
confer  the  Order,  the  same  was  mingled  with  the  "  Excellent;
Superexcellent,  and  Royal  Arch,"  the  Templar  degree  following
the  Royal  Arch.  We  have  concluded  that  the  Templar  Order
with  appendant  degrees  of  Red  Cross,  St.  John's  of  Jerusalem,
and  Knights  of  Malta,  were  as  legitimately  conferred,  and  by  the
same  authority,  as  were  the  degrees  now  constituting  "  Capitular "
Masonry.

We  will  endeavor,  in  cur  list  of  Commanderies,  which  were
subsequently  organized  as  such  in  the  different  jurisdictions,  to
give  authentically  the  first  efforts  to  establish  the  Encampment
degrees  chronologically,  until  the  firm  establishment  of  State
Grand  Commanderies  (Encampments)  and  the  General  Grand
Encampment  in  1816.  We  may  make  some  errors,  but  trust  that
in  the  main  we  shall  be  found  quite  accurate  in  dates.     In  the  pre

K.NIGHT   TEMPLARISiM    IN    AMERICA  1383

ceding  pages  of  this  chapter,  we  have  quoted  various  writers  as
to  the  workings  of  the  Order  in  the  different  States,  but  there
have  been  vagueness  and  uncertainty  as  to  the  dates  given.

M,  E.  William  B.  Hubbard,  General  Grand  Master  of  the
General  Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States,  said :

"It  is  to  be  regretted  that  we  have  no  authentic  and  reliable
history  of  the  first  formation  of  the  first  Encampments,  with  the
governmental  rituals,  as  we  now  have  them.  For  these,  if  I  may
be  allowed  the  expression,  are  somewhat  Americanized.  I  sup-
pose that  we  owe  the  origin  of  the  introduction  of  Templar
Masonry  into  the  United  States  to  a  distinguished  Sov.-.Ins.-,  of
the  Scottish  Rite."  *

The  first  notice  of  the  Templar  degree  being  conferred  is  found
in  the  history  of  St  Andrew's  Chapter  of  Boston,  and  the  dates
given  are  August  28th  and  September  17th,  1769,  by  the  Grand
Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts,  Wm.  Sewall  Gardner,
in  his  oration  at  the  centennial  celebration  of  that  chapter,  Septem-
ber 29th,  A.  L.  5869.

We  will  now  give  the  dates  referred  to  in  the  preceding  pages,
m  Chapters  LI.  and  LI  I.,  and  the  States  wherein  the  Templar
degree  was  conferred.

\  769.       Massachusetts — authority,  Wm.  Sewall  Gardner.

lo  '  {    South  Carolina,  Patent.

1 785.  New  York,  McCoy.

1 790.  Marj'land.

1793.  Pennsylvania,  Creigh.

1794.  District  of  Columbia.    Ceased  in   1799,  renewed  ^^   1804,

ceased  in  1898.

1 796.  Connecticut.

1797.  Pennsylvania  first  Grand  Encampment.
1802.       Pennsylvania.

1802,       Rhode  Island,  St.  John's  Encampment,  No.  i.

1812.  )      r)  1         •

o        \    Pennsylvania.
1814.  [  •'

18 16.       Organization  of  General  Grand  Encampment  at  New  York

'  MS.  Letter.  March  16,  1855  (from  Gourdin,  p.  29,  Note  Al.

CHAPTER  LIII

THE    GENERAL   GRAND    ENCAMPMENT    OF    KNIGHTS   TEMPLARS   IN    THE

UNITED    STATES

IHE  true  origin  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of
Knights  Templars  of  the  United  States  is  in-
volved in  some  uncertainty.  In  the  first  volume
of  the  "  Proceedings  "  of  the  Grand  Encamp-
ment of  the  United  States,  from  the  Preface  we
learn  that  from  its  formation  in  1816  the  pro<
ceedings,  and  also  those  of  the  Second  Con-
clave in  1S19,  were  not  printed  until  1859  ;  and  at  that  session  the
Grand  Recorder,  Sir  Knight  Benj.  B.  French,  presented  the  follow-
ing paper :

"  I  have  found  it  impossible  to  obtain  a  single  set  of  the  printed
proceedings  of  this  Grand  Body  from  its  origin.  By  the  aid  of  our
respected  and  distinguished  former  General  Grand  Recorder,  Sir
Charles  Gilman,  I  succeeded  in  obtaining  two  printed  copies  of
the  proceedings  of  1826,  and  more  or  less  of  these  of  each  year  up
to  1847.  By  writing  out  from  the  original  records  the  proceedings
of  1816  and  1819,  I  succeeded  in  making  two  perfect  copies  of
the  proceedings  up  to  and  including  those  of  1856.  One  of  these
1  sent  to  our  M.  E.  Grand  Master  and  the  other  I  retained  myself.
These  are,  probably,  the  only  perfect  copies  of  our  proceedings
in  existence,  except  the  original  written  records  in  the  office  of
the  Grand  Recorder.  I  respectfully  suggest  the  propriety  of
having  the  proceedings  up  to  and  including  1856  reprinted.  There
are  now  no  copies  of  the  proceedings  in  my  office  anterior  to
1847  ;  only  two  of  1847,  twenty-six  copies  of  1850,  one  hundred
and  four  copies  of  1853,  and  one  hundred  and  thirty  copies  of
1856."

In  pursuance  of  instructions  given  to  the   General  Grand  Re'

1384

JjENERAL   ENCAMPMENT   OF  KNIGHTS  TEMPLARS     1385

corder,  "  What  purport  to  be  the  Minutes  of  the  'Formation  of  the
General  Grand  Encampment  of  Knights  Templars  of  the  Unitea
States,'  was  printed  and  distributed  among  the  members  of  the
Grand  Body."  The  statements  published  were  accepted  as  authen-
tic,  until  within  very  recent  years,  when  great  doubts  arose  as  to  the
correctness  of  the  statements  made  as  to  those  who  constituted  the
membership  of  the  Conv^ention  in  1816.

At  the  conclave  in  1889,  Past  Grand  Master  James  H.  Hopkins
presented  a  paper,  showing  the  result  of  his  examination  as  to  the
origin  of  the  General  Grand  Encampment.  This  paper  was
ordered  to  be  printed  in  the  "  Proceedings,"  and  that,  in  a  reprint
of  the  older  "  Proceedings,"  the  history  of  the  formation  should  be
corrected,  in  accordance  with  his  statement.  The  committee,  how-
ever, who  had  charge  of  the  reprint,  deemed  it  advisable  to  print
the  "  Formation,"  as  it  was  first  printed,  and  as  it  appears  in
manuscript  in  the  Minute  Book  of  the  General  Grand  Recorder,
and  to  publish  in  the  Preface  the  facts  as  discovered  in  the  papei
referred  to.  This  report  was  signed  by  James  H.  Hopkins,  Vv.
P.  Innis,  and  Wm.  B.  Isaacs,  names  well  known  and  highly
honored,  as  worthy  of  all  credence,  by  every  true  and  valiant  Knighi
Templar.

We  subjoin  a  few  extracts  from  Knight  Hopkins's  paper,  fo.
a  better  understanding  of  the  "  Formation  of  the  General  Grana
Encampment."  That  record  states  that  "at  a  convention  holder,
at  Mason's  Hall  in  the  City  of  New  York  on  the  20th  and  21st
June,  18 1 6,  consisting  of  Delegates  or  Knights  Companions  from
eight  Councils  and  Encampments  of  Knights  Templars  and  Ap-
pendant Orders,  viz.  : '

"  Boston  Encampment,  Boston  ;  St.  John's  Encampment,  Prov-
idence ;  Ancient  Encampment,  New  York  ;  Temple  Encampment,
Albany ;  Montgomery  Encampment,  Newport ;  Darius  Council,
Portland,  the  following  Constitution  was  formed,  adopted,  and
ratified."

"  Anyone  investigating  the  history  of  the  Order  in  this  country,
without  any  other  information  than  this,  would  be  bound  to  believe
that  this  official  record  was  entirely  accurate  and  to  be  accepted  as
absolute  verity.     It  can   scarcely  be  doubted  that  those  who,  in

»  Proceedings  of  the  General  Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States,  1891,  Preface,
pp.  1.  A.

1386  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

1859,  caused  the  first  'proceeding'  to  be  disseminated,  had  implicit
faith  in  the  correctness  of  the  statements."

"I  have  recently  had  occasion  to  look  more  fully  and  deeply
into  the  facts  connected  with  the  early  histor}^  of  the  Order  in  this
country,  and  with  the  formation  of  the  Grand  Encampment,  and
I  submit  some  of  the  results  of  that  investigation.  None  but  the
weak,  or  worse,  will  hesitate  to  make  a  frank  admission  of  error  of
opinion,  when  discovered,  rather  than  obstinately  adhere  to  a  posi-
tion proved  to  be  untenable."

"  The  Minutes  of  the  Convention  which  formed  this  Grand  En-
campment, as  first  published  in  1859,  are  a  correct  transcript  from
the  manuscript  on  file  in  the  Office  of  our  Grand  Recorder.  How
or  why  this  entry  was  made,  no  living  man  can  tell.  That  it  is
wholly  inaccurate  is  perfectly  demonstrable.

"The  Official  Minutes  declare  that  the  delegates  from  eight
different  Councils  and  Encampments,  therein  specified,  met  in  New
York  on  June  20  and  21.  18 16.  and  formed  the  Grand  Encamp-
ment.

"  I  have  caused  diligent  search  to  be  made  for  the  records  of
the  different  subordinates  mentioned.  Some  of  them  can  not  be
found  of  a  date  early  enough  to  throw  any  light  on  the  subject ;
and  of  those  still  preserv^ed  there  is  no  mention  of  any  appointment
of  any  delegates  for  the  purpose  named,  nor  any  action  indicating
that  the  Council  or  Encampment  had  any  part  in  the  Work.  The
absence  of  any  positive,  affirmative  Minute  in  matter  of  such  im-
portance is  strong  evidence  that  no  such  participation  was  had.
But  there  exists  not  only  negative  proof  that  the  subordinate  sent
no  delegates  to  the  Convention,  but  direct  evidence  that  they  did
not.

"The  Minutes  of  the  Boston  Encampment  (Commandery),
show  that  on  May  28,  18 16,  the  Treasurer  was  authorized  to  lend
to  the  Grand  Encampment  (Commandery),  the  money  in  his  hands
to  pay  the  expenses  of  the  delegates  from  said  Grand  Encampment
(Commandery)  to  the  Convention  referred  to.  Saint  John's  En-
campment (Commandery),  of  Providence,  by  a  vote,  declined  to
make  a  loan  to  the  Grand  Encampment  for  the  same  purpose.
Here  is  evidence  on  the  records  of  two  of  the  Commmanderies  that
they  did  not,  but  that  the  Grand  Commandery  of  that  jurisdiction

GENERAL   ENCAMPMENT    OF   KNIGHTS   TEMPLARS     1387

did,  send  delegates  to  the  Convention.  Of  the  other  Subordinates
of  Massachusetts  and  Rhode  Island  mentioned  as  participating,
the  Minutes  of  the  one  at  Newburyport  can  not  be  found ;  those  of
Newport  and  Portland  are  silent.

"  Then  we  have  the  positive  testimony  of  the  Minutes  of  the
Grand  Commandery  of  Massachusetts  and  Rhode  Island,  wherein
it  appears  that  on  May  15,  1816,  three  delegates  were  appointed  to
confer  with  delegates  from  other  Grand  Encampments  (Com-
manderies)  upon  the  subject  of  a  general  Union  of  all  under  one
head.  On  June  25,  1816,  there  is  the  report  of  these  delegates
and  the  action  of  the  Grand  Encampment  (Commandery)  of
Massachusetts  and  Rhode  Island  approving  of  their  action  and
changing  the  local  Constitution  so  as  to  bring  it  into  harmony  with
that  of  the  General  Grand  Body.

"  Although  this  official  record  is  of  no  greater  weight  than  that
of  our  Grand  Encampment,  the  corroborating  and  circumstantial
evidence  renders  it  conclusive  that  our  record  is  wrong  and  that
of  Massachusetts  and  Rhode  Island  is  correct.

"In  addition  to  the  Minutes  referred  to,  more  conclusiv^e  evi-
dence has  been  discovered  amongst  the  papers  of  Thomas  Smith
Webb.  These  papers  were  examined  by  our  late  Grand  Master,
W.  Sewell  Gardner,  and  by  him  vouched  for  as  authentic  and  in
Webb's  handwriting.  They  consist  of  the  Credentials  of  the  dele-
gates appointed  by  the  Grand  Bodies  of  Massachusetts  and  Rhode
Island,  New  York  and  Pennsylvania,  to  represent  them  at  a  Con-
vention in  Philadelphia,  a  Minute  of  adjournment  to  New  York
with  a  copy  of  the  Constitution  there  adopted.

"  The  Encampments  (Commanderies)  of  New  York  which  are
reported  to  have  had  representatives  in  the  Convention  which
formed  this  Grand  Encampment  were  Ancient  Encampment,  New
York  ;  Temple  Encampment,  Albany  ;  Montgomery  Encampment,
Stillwater.

"  None  of  the  early  records  of  these  bodies  can  be  found,  and
the  history  of  two  of  them  is  mainly  traditional.  It  is  quite  certain,
however,  that  neither  of  them  belonged  to  the  Grand  Commandeiy
of  New  York  in  18 16."

The  truth  of  history  requires  of  us  to  mention  some  things
which  may  prove  of  interest,  yet  it  will  be  found  not  to  be  very
agreeable  ;  yet  like  very  much  of  the  Ancient  history  of  Masonry

1388  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

in  all  its  branches,  we  will  find  great  irregularities,  according  to  oui
present  ideas  of  how  Masonic  bodies  should  be  organized.

"In  1802,  Boston  Encampment  was  organized  by  ten  Knights
of  the  Red  Cross  without  a  Warrant  from  any  competent  power.

"  In  the  same  year  St.  John's  Encampment,  of  Providence
was  formed  without  authority  from  any  source  by  six  Sir  Knights.

'*  Darius  Council  of  Portland  was  organized  by  three  Knights
of  the  Red  Cross  in  1805,  when  after  admitting  two  more  members,
they  applied  to  Massachusetts  for  recognition."

In  1795  at  Newburyport  an  Encampment  was  Organized  with-
out any  authority.  In  Newport,  several  Royal  Arch  Masons
deputed  Companion  Shaw  to  visit  New  York,  where  the  Orders  of
Knighthood  with  other  degrees  were  conferred  upon  him.  The
Consistory  there  gave  him  a  Warrant  authorizing  him  to  confer  the
Orders.  Joseph  Cerneau  presided  over  the  Consistory  which  he  had
organized  in  1807,  without  any  authority  whatev^er.  The  only
authority  ever  produced  to  show  that  he  was  rrore  than  a  Master
Mason  is  the  following  well-authenticated  patent  from  Mathew
Dupotet,  which,  it  will  be  perceived,  emanated  from  an  Inspector-
General  of  the  A.*.A.*.A.'.R,'.  on  the  Island  of  Cuba,  viz.  :

[translation.]

TO  THE  GLORY  OF  THE  GR  :  ARCH  :  OF  THE  UNIV  :

Lux  ex  Tenebris.

From  the  Orient  of  the  Very  Great  and  Very  Puissant  Council  of  the  Fub-
Hme  Princes  (of  the  Royal  Secret),  Chiefs  of  Masonry,  under  the  C  :  C  :  of  the
Zenith  (which  responds)  to  the  20°  25'  N  :  Lat  :

To  our  111  :  and  Very  Valiant  Knights  and  Princes,  Masons  of  all  the  Degrees,
over  the  surface  of  the  two  Hemispheres  :

Health  !

We,  Antoine  Mathieu  Dupotet,  Grand  Master  of  all  the  Lodges,  Colleges
Chapters,  Councils,  Chapters  and  Consistories,  of  the  higher  degrees  of  Masonry,
Deputy  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Orient  of  Pennsylvania,  in  the  United
States  of  America  ;  and  of  the  Grand  Lodge  and  Sovereign  Provincial  Grand
Chapter  of  Heredom  of  Kilwinning,  of  Edinburgh,  for  America,  under  the  dis-
tinctive  title  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  Grand  Provincial  of  San  Domingo  in  the:  Ancient

GENERAL   ENCAMPMENT   OF   KNIGHTS  TEMPLARS     1389

Rite,  Grand  Commander  or  Sovereign  President  of  the  Th  :  Puissant  Grand
Council  of  the  Sublime  Princes  of  the  Royal  Secret,  established  at  Port  au
Prince,  Island  of  San  Domingo,  by  constitutive  patent  of  16  January  and  19
April,  1801,  under  the  distinctive  title  of  The  Triple  Unity  ;  transferred  to  Bara-
coa.  Island  of  Cuba,  on  account  of  the  events  of  war.

Do  declare,  in  the  name  of  the  Sublime  and  Th  ;  Puissant  Grand  Council,  do
certify  and  attest,  that  the  Very  Resp  :  Gr  :  Elect  Knight  of  the  White  and
Black  Eagle,  Joseph  Cerneau.  Ancient  Dignitary  of  the  Lodge  No.  47,  Orient
of  Port  au  Prince  Grand  Warden  of  the  Provincial  Lodge,  same  Orient,  Vener-
able founder  of  the  Lodge  of  the  Ancient  Constitution  of  York,  No.  103,  under
the  distinctive  title  of  the  Theological  Virtues,  Orient  of  the  Habana,  Island  of
Cuba,  has  been  regularly  initiated  in  all  the  Degrees  of  the  Sublime  Masonry,
from  that  of  Secret  Master  to,  and  including  that  of  Grand  Elect  Knight  of  the
White  and  Black  Eagle  ;  and  wishing  to  give  the  strongest  proofs  of  our  sincere
friendship  for  our  said  Very  Dear  Bro  :  Joseph  Cerneau,  in  recognition  of  the
services  which  he  has  rendered  to  the  Royal  Art,  and  which  he  is  rendering
daily,  we  have  initiated  him  in  the  highest,  in  the  most  eminent  and  final  Degree
of  Masonry  ;  we  create  him  our  Deputy  Grand  Inspector,  for  the  Northern  part
of  the  Island  of  Cuba,  with  ail  the  powers  that  are  attached  thereto,  giving  him
full  and  entire  power  to  initiate  the  Bros  :  Masons,  whom  he  may  judge  (Wor-
thy ?),  to  promote  them  to  the  Sublime  Degrees,  from  the  4th  up  to  and  includ-
ing the  24th  ;  provided  however,  that  these  Masons  shall  have  been  officers  of
a  Lodge  regularly  constituted  and  recognized,  and  in  place  only,  where  there
may  not  be  found  Sacred  and  Sublime  and  regularly  constituted  Asyla ;  from
which  Bros  :  he  will  receive  the  obligation  required  and  the  authentic  submis-
sion to  the  Degrees  of  the  Sublime  Princes  ;  consulting,  however,  and  calling
to  his  aid  the  B  :  B  :  whom  he  shall  know  to  be  decorated  with  the  Sublime  De-
grees ;  we  give  him  full  and  entire  power  to  confer  in  the  name  of  our  aforesaid
Grand  Council,  the  highest  Degree  of  Masonry  on  a  Kt  :  Prince  Mason,  one
only  each  year,  whose  virtues  he  shall  recognize,  and  the  qualities  required  to
deserve  this  favor  ;  and  to  the  end  that  our  dear  Bro  :  Joseph  Cerneau,  so  dec-
orated, may  enjoy,  in  this  quality,  the  honours,  rights  and  prerogatives,  which
he  has  justly  deserved,  by  his  arduous  labors  in  the  Royal  Art,  we  have  delivered
to  him  these  presents,  in  the  margin  whereof  he  has  placed  his  signature,  that
it  may  avail  him  everywhere,  and  be  useful  to  him  alone.

We  pray  our  Resp  :  BB  :  regularly  constituted,  spread  over  the  two  Hemi-
spheres, with  whatever  Degree  they  may  be  decorated,  whether  in  Lodge,  Ch  :,

Col :,  Sovereign  Count,!! Sublime,  to  recognize  and  receive

our  dear  Bro  :,  the  Very  Illustrious  Sov  :  and  Subl  :  Prince,  Joseph  Cerneau,  in
all  the  Degrees  above  mentioned  ;  promising  to  pay  the  same  attention  to  those
who,  in  oui  Orients  shall  present  themselves  at  the  doors  of  our  Sacred  Asyla,
furnished  with  like  authentic  titles.

Given  by  us,  S  :  Sublime  Princes,  G  :  C  :  G  :  I  :  G'al  :  of  our  aforesaid  Grand
and  Perfect  Council,  under  our  Mysterious  Seal,  and  the  Grand  Seal  of  the  Princes
of  Masonry,  in  a  place  where  are  deposited  the  greatest  treasures,  the  sight
whereof  fills  us  with  consolation,  joy  and  gratitude  for  all  that  is  great  and
good.

I390  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

At  Baracoa,  Island  of  Cuba  anno  5806,  under  the  sign  of  the  Lion,  the  15th
day  of  the  5th  month  called  Ab,  7806,  of  the  Creation  55^66,  and  according  to
the  Common  Style  the  15th  July,  1806.

Signed,  Mathieu  Dupotet,

President,  Sov: G'al :

[A  true  copy  :]  Signed  Mathieu  Dupotet,

F resident,  S:  G  :  I :  G'al  :

I  certify  that  what  is  transmitted  above  and  the  other  portions  are  conform-
able to  my  Register.

TiPHAINE,

S:  P :  R:  S :,  D:  I :  G'al :  G  :  Cemm  :

The  foregoing  translation  of  the  ancient  copy  in  French  has  been  correctly
and  faithfully  made  by  me.

Albert  Pike.
March  20,  1882.

The  Grand  Commandery  of  New  York  war;  organized  in  the
following  manner,  as  ascertained  from  the  Official  Proceedings.
On  January  22,  18 14,  the  Sovereign  Grand  Consistory,  Joseph  Cer-
neau's  body,  decreed  the  establishment  of  a  Grand  Encampment  of
Sir  Knights  Templars  and  appendant  Orders  for  the  State  of  New
York,  and  immediately  proceeded  to  its  formation  by  choosing  the
Grand  Officers  thereof  who  were  all  members  of  said  Consistory.
This  was  done  solely  by  the  action  of  the  Consistory,  without  the
concurrence  of  any  Commandery,  nor  of  any  Knights  Templars.
This  body,  which  it  has  often  since  been  proved  to  have  had  no
legal  Masonic  authority  for  its  existence,  as  a  Consistory,  having
been  established  by  Joseph  Cerneau  alone,  in  1807,  a  few  months
only  after  his  patent  from  Mathieu  Dupotet  had  been  issued  to  him
which  gave  him  permission  to  confer  one  degree,  the  25th  of  the
A.\  A.'.  A.'.  R.'.  upon  one  person  only  each  year,  who  was  qualified
by  having  received  all  the  lower  degrees  of  that  Rite,  in  Cuba  only,
made  his  appearance  in  New  York,  and  finding  a  total  ignorance  on
the  part  of  all  Masons  in  New  York  as  to  the  "  Rite  of  Perfection,"
induced  a  large  number  to  receive,  at  his  hands,  degrees  which  he
had  no  authority  to  give.     From  this  beginning,  he  organized  his

'  Proceedings  of  the  Grand  Commandery  of  New  York,  i860,  pp.  c,  6,  from  the  papei
by  Sir  Knight  James  H.  Hopkins.

GENERAL   ENCAMPMENT    OF   KNIGHTS   TEMPLARS      1391

Consistory.  In  181 6,  Columbian  Commandery  in  New  York
received  a  Warrant ;  and  a  Warrant  on  the  same  day  was  issued
to  a  new  commandery  in  New  Orleans.  These  two  were  the  only
Commanderies  who  recognized  the  Grand  Encampment  of  New
York.  All  the  other  encampments  in  the  State  refused  to
recog^nize  the  Grand  Body,  and  remained  independent  for  many
years.

It  is  not  certain  that  any  of  those  members,  who  formed  this
Grand  Commandery  of  New  York,  had  ever  received  the  degrees  of
the  Commandery  in  a  regular  body  of  Knights  Templars,  but  that
they  assumed  the  degrees  of  the  Consistory  as  being  the  same  as
those  in  the  Commandery.  There  is  no  evidence  whatever  that
Cerneau,  who  went  from  Port  Republican  in  San  Domingo  to
Cuba,  and  from  Cuba  to  New  York,  in  1807,  ever  saw  a  regular
Knight  Templar  Mason,  or  ever  was  anywhere  in  the  vicinity  of  a
Commandery  ;  hence  we  draw  a  fair  inference,  that  the  Knight  of
the  Red  Cross,  and  also  of  the  Temple,  were  derived  from  the  rituals
of  the  15th  and  i6th  and  24th  degrees  of  the  A.*.  A.*.  A.-.  R,*.  The
ritual  of  the  Templar  degree  in  the  United  States  differs  so  essen-
tially from  the  old  ritual  of  England  of  1801,  now  in  the  possession
of  the  writer,  and  also  from  the  present  English  one,  that  we  can
presume  that  it  was  invented  in  the  United  States  by  those  who
took  the  degree  from  the  possession  of  the  Lodges  and  constituted
the  semblance  of  Commanderies  (Encampments).

A  Grand  Convention  of  Knights  Templars  was  held  in  the
Masonic  Hall  in  the  city  of  Philadelphia,  Tuesday,  February  15,
1 8 14,  for  the  purpose  of  forming  a  Grand  Encampment  of  Knights
Templars  in  Pennsylvania,  with  jurisdiction  belonging  thereto,  and
also  over  all  such  Encampments  in  other  States  as  may  agree
to  come  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  same.  Sir  Knight  John
Sellers,  of  Wilmington,  Del.,  was  called  to  the  Chair,  and  Sil
Knigkt  Henry  G.  Keatinge,  of  Baltimore,  Md.,  was  appointed
Secretary.

It  was  "Resolved,  That  the  Delegates  and  Proxies  from  the
Several  Encampments  to  be  represented  in  the  Convention  from
the  respective  States  be  called  over.  The  following  named  Sir
Knights  produced  their  Credentials  under  Seals  of  their  respective
Encampments  as  Delegates  and  Proxies,  and  were  admitted  to  take
their  seats  in  the  Convention  :  Encampment  No.    i,   Philadelphia,

I3Q2  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRl

Delegates,  Sir  William  M.  Coxkill,  Sir  Alphonso  C.   ireiand,   Sh
Nathaniel  Dilhorn.

■    "  Encampment,  City  of  New  York,  Proxies,  Sir  Thomas  Black,
Sir  James  Humes.

"  Rising-Sun  Encampment,  City  of  New  York,  Delegate,  Sir
James  M' Donald  ;  Proxies  from  same.  Sir  Thomas  Armstrong,
Sir  Anthony  Fannen.

"Encampment  No.  i,  Wilmington,  Del.,  Delegates,  Sir  John
Sellers,  Sir  Archibald  Hamilton,  Sir  John  Patterson.

"Encampment  No.  t,  Baltimore,  Md.,  Delegate,  Sir  Henry  G
Keatinge.  The  Grand  Convention  being  duly  organized,  proceeded
to  form  a  Constitution  which  was  agreed  to  February  i6,  1S14,  and
signed  by  *he  Delegates  and  Proxies  as  above  named.  Also
the  Grand  Officers  were  elected  and  installed.

"The  Most  Eminent  Sir  William  McCorkle,  of  Philadelphia,
General  Grand  Master.

'*  Most  Eminent  Sir  Archibald  Hamilton,  of  Wilmington,  Del,
Grand  Generalissimo.

"  Most  Eminent  Sir  Peter  Dobb,  of  New  York,  Grand  Captain-
General  Right  Eminent  George  A.  Baker,  of  Philadelphia,
Grand  Recorder^

The  foregoing  account  of  the  formation  of  this  Freemasons
Grand  Encampment  in  Philadelphia  is  taken  from  The  Frecmasoii  s
Library  and  General  AJiiman  Rezon,  by  Samuel  Cole,  P.M.,  Edi-
tion of  1826,  and  we  do  not  find  any  notice  whatever  of  the  Con-
vention held  in  June,  1816,  by  those  celebrities,  viz. :  Thomas  Smith
Webb,  Henry  Fowle,  and  John  Snowe,  who  went  to  Philadelphia
to  confer  with  the  above-mentioned  Grand  Encampment  of  Penn-
sylvania, "  upon  the  subject  of  a  general  Union  of  all  the  Encamp-
ments in  the  United  States  under  one  head  and  general  form  of
government,"  pursuant  to  the  resolution  of  the  "  Grand  Encamp-
ment of  the  United  States,"  Massachusetts  and  Rhode  Island  En-
campment being  known  as  such.  Having  failed  in  their  mission
to  Philadelphia,  they  repaired  to  New  York  and  being  there  joined
by  Thomas  Lowndes,  who  had  been  appointed  by  the  Grand  En-
campment of  New  York  as  its  delegate  to  represent  that  body  at  a
Convention  of  Knights  Templars  from  different  States  of  the  UnioM,
to  be  held  in  the  City  of  Philadelphia,  on  Tuesday,  June  nth,  on
the  20th  and  21st  of  June,  at  Masons'  Hall,  held  "a  Convention."

GENERAL  ENCAMPMENT  OF   KNIGHTS  TEMPLARS       1393

The  records  of  this  quartette's  proceedings  describe  them  as  "dele-
gates from  eight  Councils  and  Encampments,"  all  of  which  we  have
mentioned  on  page  1386  of  this  chapter.

Grand  Masters.

CONCLAVE.         ^

KAE.

I.

816.

II.

SI9.

III.

S26.

IV.

829

V.

832.

VI.     ]

835-

VII.     ]

838.

VIII.

841.

IX.

844.

X.

S47.

XI.

1850

XII.

1853-

XIII.

1856.

XIV.

859.

XV.

862.

XVI.

865.

XVII.

868.

XVIII.     1

871.

XIX.

874.

XX.

877

XXI.

880.

XXII.

883

XXIII.     I

886.

XXIV.     I

889

XXV.     1

892

XXVI.

895.

X.XVII.     I

898

XXVIII.

901

XXIX.

904.

XXX.     I

907.

XXXI.

910.

NAME.  WHERE  FROM.

.  De  Witt  Clinton,  New  York,  N.  Y.
.  De  Witt  Clinton,  New  York,  N.  Y.
.De  Witt  Clinton,  New  York,  N.  Y.
.  Rev.  Jonathan  Nye,  Claremont,  N.  H.
.  Rev.  Jonathan  Nye,  Claremont,  N.  H.
.James  Madison  Allen,  Cayuga,  N.  Y.
.James  Madison  Allen,  Cayuga,  N.  Y.
.James  Madison  Allen,  Cayuga,  N.  Y.
, .  Archibald  Bull,  Troy,  N.  Y.
,  .Wm.  Blackstone  Hubbard,  Columbus,  Ohio.
.  .Wm.  Blackstone  Hubbard,  Columbus,  Ohio.
.  .Wm.  Blackstone  Hubbard,  Columbus,  Ohio.
.  .Wm.  Blackstone  Hubbard,  Columbus,  Ohio.
, .  Benj.  Brown  French,  Washington,  D.  C.
.  Benj.  Brown  French,  Washington,  D.  C.
.Henry  L.  Palmer,  MiKvaukee,  Wis.
.  Wm.  Sewall  Gardner,  Newton,  Mass.
.J.  Q.  A.  Fellows,  New  Orleans,  La.
.James  Herron  Hopkins,  Washington,  D.  C.
.Vincent  Lombard  Hurlbut,  Chicago,  111.
.Benjamin  Dean,  Boston,  Mass.
.Robert  Enoch  Withers,  Wytheville,  Va.
.Charles  Roonie,  New  York,  N.  Y.
.John  P.  S.  Cobin,  Lebanon.  Pa.
.  Hugh  McCurdy,  Corunna,  Mich.
.  Warren  L;^  Rue  Thomas,  Baltimore,  Md.
.  Reuben  Hedley  Lloyd.  San  Francfsco,  Cal.
.  Henry  Bates  Stoddard.  Bryan,  Texas.
.  George  M.  Moulton,  Chicago,  111.
.  Henry  Warren  Rugg,  Providence,  R.  I.
.  William  B.  Melish,  Cincinnati,  O.

Died  in  office  February
II,  1828.

Died  April  i,  1843.

Died  unknown  (?)
Died  December  22,  1865.

Died  January  5,  1866.

Died  August  12,  1870.
Died  .May  7,  1909.
Died  April  14,  iSSS.
Died  November  28,  1887.
Died  June  18,  1904.
Died  July  24.  1S96.
Died  April  9,  1897.
Died  September  21,  1907.
Died  June  28,  1890.
Died  May  i,  1910.
Died  July  16,  1908.

Died  March  10,  1909.

Died  July  21,  191c.

CHAPTER   LIV.

HISTORY  OF  THE  INTRODUCTION    OF    FREEMASONRY    INTO    EACH    STATE
AND    TERRITORY    OF    THE    UNITED    STATES

The  First  Lodges  and  the   Grand  Lodges.

HE  Institution,  in  its  modern  system  of  Specu-
lative Masonry,  having  been  established  in  Great
Britain  first,  and  then  upon  the  Continent  of
Europe,  early  in  the  i8th  century,  we  may  well
assume  that  among  the  various  colonists  from
Europe  who  made  their  homes  in  the  Western
Hemisphere,  there  must  have  been  many  Op-
erative Masons  who  had  been  initiated  prior  to  their  emigration.

From  the  various  writers  on  this  subject  which  we  have  con-
sulted, we  learn  it  is  recorded  that  as  early  as  1680  there  came  to
South  Carolina  one  John  Moore,  a  native  of  England,  who  before
the  close  of  the  century  removed  to  Philadelphia  and  in  1 703  was
commissioned  by  the  King  as  Collector  of  the  Port.  In  a  letter
written  by  him  in  171 5  he  mentions  having  spent  "a  few  evenings
in  festivity  with  my  Masonic  Brethien."  This  is  perhaps  the  earliest
mention  we  have  of  there  being  members  of  the  Craft  residing  in
Pennsylvania  or  elsewhere  in  the  Colonies.

We  must  bear  in  mind  that  this  was  several  years  prior  to  the
organization  of  the  Mother  Grand  Lodge  of  Speculative  Masonry,
which  occurred  June  24,  171 7.

Roger  Lacy's  deputation  of  1735,  given  by  Lord  Weymouth,
Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  was  the  second
American  lodge  on  the  English  Roll.

Gould's  History  of  Freemasonry'^  says  of  this  lodge:  "The
Charity  of  the  Society  was  solicited  in  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng-
land, December  31,  1733,  to  enable  the  trustees  of  the  new  Colony
to  send  distressed  Brethren  to  Georgia,  where  they  may  be  com-
fortably provided  for."     In  1735  a  Deputation  to  Mr.  Roger  Lacy

1  Gould,  vol.  vi.,  p.  456.
1394

Facsimile    page    from    Led(i;er    of   St.  Jolin's    Lodge,

••^:>1<Y>

Free    and    Accepted    Masons,    Philadelphia,    173 1

riT'

'■■A

r^x^K  JS^

4i  <:^c^c?^ic><c-^;

,  r-i  fv,  >  '  >^»  >^

"^

c^ct ;

t^

4U

■r

<  (

'  »

4  ^

i

i  t

I  i

il

^  ^  "^   '  ^^  ^'

mAku

•5

— .1. . i^^^_^ ___

FREEMASONRY   IN   THE    UNITED   STATES  1395

for  constituting  a  lodge  (No.  139)  at  Savannah  was  granted  by
Lord  Weymouth.  It  was  doubtless  the  body  referred  to  by  Whit-
Seld  in  his  diary,  where  he  records,  "June  24,  1738  (Savannah),  was
enabled  to  read  prayer  and  preach  with  power  before  the  Free-
masons, with  whom  I  afterwards  dined."

Brother  Wm.  S.  Rockwell,  of  Georgia,  has  said  that  a  lodge
organized  by  Roger  Lacy  existed  earlier  than  1735,  possibly  1730.
No  certain  evidence  has  been  discovered  confirming  this  statement.

Hayden,  in  his  Washington  and  His  Masonic  Compeers,  says .
"  King  Solomon's  Lodge  at  Savannah,  which  had  commenced  its
work  under  an  old  oak  tree  in  1733,  when  the  first  settlement  in
Georgia  began,  had  belonged  to  the  branch  of  Masons  denominated
Moderns,  but  in  February,  1785,  it  was  proposed  by  Major  Jack-
son, who  was  then  one  of  its  members,  that  they  form  themselves
into  a  Lodge  of  Ancients.  The  proposition  was  referred  to  a
Committee,  and  was  subsequently  agreed  to,  and  the  brethren  were
duly  constituted,  by  the  usual  ceremonies,  a  Lodge  of  Ancient  York
Masons."  '  The  Grand  Lodge  of  the  "  Ancients  "  never  warranted
any  lodges  in  the  State  of  Georgia.

There  was  a  tradition  that  this  old  lodge  was  instituted  by
General  James  E.  Oglethorpe.

With  this  short  introduction  we  shall  now  proceed  to  present
the  histories  of  the  first  Lodges  and  of  the  Grand  Lodges  in  the
sfeveral  States  and  Territories  of  the  United  States.  We  commence
with  Pennsylvania  for  the  reason  that  the  evidence  is  conclusive
that  St.  John's  Lodge  in  Philadelphia  was  the  first  lodge  duly  or-
ganized of  which  there  is  any  record,  and  we  may,  with  some  de-
gree of  assurance,  say  that  Masonry  in  an  organized  form  existed
in  Pennsylvania  some  time  prior  to  1730,  because,  as  shown  in  the
plate  opposite  this  page,  the  fac-simile  copy  of  "  Liber  B  "  indi-
cates very  conclusively  that  there  must  have  been  a  prior  Liber  A.

Pennsylvania.

Up  to  the  discovery  of  "  Liber  B,"  by  Bro.  Clifford  P.  McCalla,  in
1884,  of  this  original  lodge,  dated  June,  1731,  everyone  had  ac-
cepted as  a  fact  that  Henry  Price,  of  Boston,  was  the  first  com-
missioned officer  in  charge  of  Freemasonry  in  the  Colonics,  and  that
St.  John's  Lodge,  in  Boston,  was  the  first  regularly  constituted  lodge

'  Hayden,  p.  348.

1396  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

in  any  of  the  Colonies.  Our  Brethren  of  Massachusetts  yet  con-
tend that  the  lodge  in  Boston  was  the  first  duly  constituted  lodge
by  the  authority  of  the  deputation  to  Henry  Price  (and  they  refes
with  much  force  to  the  correspondence  which  occurred  between
Benjamin  Franklin  and  Henry  Price).

Bro.  John  Dove,  in  his  reprint  of  the  proceedings  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Virginia,  in  his  "  Introduction  "  claims  the  first  lodge
"  derived  directly  from  the  Mother  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  was
No.  1 72,  the  Royal  Exchange  in  the  Borough  of  Norfolk,  Virginia,
Dec.  1733."     He  also  says:

"During  the  above  period,  dating  from  1733  and  extending  to
1792,  the  Masons  of  Massachusetts  worked  under  the  authority  of
Provincial  Grand  Masters  appointed  by,  and  deriving  their  au-
thority from,  the  Grand  Lodges  of  England  and  Scotland  in  1733.
at  which  period  Henry  Price  was  first  appointed,  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England,  Grand  Master  of  the  St.  John's  Grand  Lodge  of
Massachusetts,  in  1 734,  and  upon  petition,  his  authority  was  extended
to  all  North  America,  and  under  his  power,  thus  extended,  Benj.
Franklin  applied  for  and  obtained  a  Charter  for  a  Lodge  at  Phila-
delphia, Pennsylvania."

From  all  that  we  can  gather  in  the  various  sketches  of  this  for-
mation period  in  the  history  of  Freemasonry  in  the  Colonies,  it  ap-
pears to  us  that  the  weight  of  testimony  is  in  favor  of  the  working
of  Masonry,  first  in  Philadelphia,  secondly  in  Massachusetts  by
secondary  constituted  authority,  and  thirdly  in  Norfolk,  Va.,  by
direct  charter,  emanating  from  the  Grand  Lodge  itself.

At  the  period  of  the  working  of  St.  John's  Lodge  in  Phila-
delphia, the  Brethren  exercised  their  prescriptive  privilege  to  open
a  lodge  without  a  charter,  because  there  was  no  Grand  Lodge  to
issue  one  so  far  as  they  knew.  The  lodge  may  have  existed  some
considerable  time  prior  to  1731,  which  latter  date,  it  must  be  re-
membered, was  only  eight  years  after  the  publication  of  the  Ander-
son Book  of  ConstiHitions,  and  eight  years  was  a  short  period  m
which  to  fill  up  a  "  Liber  A."

From  all  the  historical  data  now  available  our  conclusion  is  that
we  must  give  Pennsylvania  the  preference,  by  placing  that  colony
foremost,  as  having  started  Freemasonry  in  an  original  prescriptive,
organic  form  ;  followed  by  Massachusetts,  as  second,  in  a  lodge,
chartered  by  constituted  authority  of  a    Provincial  Grand  Master;

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE   UNITED  STATES         i397

and  thirdly,  by  giving  ta  Virginia  tlie  first  lodge  chartered  by
the  Grand  Lodge  itself ;  each  of  these  being  authoritative,  accord-
ing to  the  circumstances  governing  those  who  instituted  the  pro-
ceedings.

Thus,  in  Pennsylvania,  Freemasonry  is  presented  as  having  been
organized  .n  an  original  prescriptive  lodge,  with  proper  officers,
working  for  some  indefinite  time  prior  to  June.  1731.  as  shown  by
their  ledger.

The  present  records  of  the  Grand  Lodge  commence  July  29,
1779,  and  have  continued  up  to  the  present  time.  It  is  thought  that
during  the  Revolutionary  War,  as  Philadelphia  was  a  great  center  of
the  troubles  during  that  war,  all  the  records  and  papers  of  the  Grand
Lodge  were  either  lost  or  destroyed,  and  tradition  only  gives  any
idea  of  the  transactions  up  to  the  above  date.  The  oldest  minute-
book  now  known  is  of  Lodge  No.  3,  which  goes  back  to  November
19,  1767,  and  comes  up  to  the  present  time;  and  it  refers  to  an
older  book.

December  28,  1778,  the  Grand  Lodge,  with  the  Brethren,  about
three  hundred,  celebrated  St.  John's  Day,  and  Brother  William
Smith,  D.D.,  preached  a  sermon.  General  Washington  was  pres-
ent on  that  occasion.  Bro.  Rev.  Wm.  Smith,  having  abridged  and
digested  the  Ahiman  Rezon,  it  was  adopted  by  the  Grand  Lodge,
November  22,  1781.  At  the  quarterly  Communication  of  Grand
Lodge,  September  25,  1786,  steps  were  taken  to  sever  the  official
relations  between  the  Grand  Lodge  and  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng-
land, by  the  following  :

Resolved,  That  this  Grand  Lodge  is  and  ought  to  be,  a  Grand  Lodge
independent  of  Great  Britain  or  any  other  authority  wliatever,  and  that  they  are
not  under  any  ties  to  any  Grand  Lodge  except  those  of  brotherly  love  and  affec-
tion, which  they  will  always  be  happy  to  cultivate  and  preserve  with  all  lodges
throughout  the  globe.

The  Grand  Lodge  having,  up  to  this  time,  been  under  a  War-
rant from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  was  closed  finally.  A
convention  was  held  the  next  day,  September  26,  1786.  Thirteen
different  lodges  under  warrants  of  the  preceding  Grand  Lodge  of
Pennsylvania  havmg  full  power  from  their  constituent  members,
therefor  •

Resolved,  That  the  Lodges  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Pennsylvania,  lately  held  under  the  authority  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,

139«  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

Will,  and  do  now,  form  themselves  into  a  Grand  Lodge,  to  be  called  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Pennsylvania  and  Masonic  jurisdiction  thereunto  belonging,  to  be  held
in  Philadelphia ;  and  that  the  late  Grand  Officers  continue  to  be  the  Grand
Officers  of  Pennsylvania,  invested  with  all  the  powers,  jurisdictions,  preeminence^
and  authority  thereunto  belonging,  till  the  usual  time  of  the  next  election ;  and
that  the  Grand  Lodge  and  particular  Lodges  govern  themselves  by  the  Rules
and  Regulations  heretofore  established,  till  other  rules  and  regulations  shall  be
Adopted.

June  24,  1834,  the  Grand  Lodge  celebrated  "  the  Centennial  an.

niversary  of  the  establishment  of  the  first  lodge  in  Pennsylvania,  of
which  Lodge  Brother  Benjamin  Franklin  was  the  first  Master."  This
antedated  the  claim  made  by  Massachusetts  of  the  first  lodge  having
been  established  by  Price  in  1733.  The  date  was  evidently  mis-
taken, as  the  "Liber  B,"  since  having  been  discovered,  shows  the
date  of  June,  1731.

On  June  24,  1734,  Franklin  was  elected  Grand  Master  and  it
was  in  November  of  that  year  his  letter  to  Price  was  written,  asking
for  a  copy  of  his  deputation  as  Provincial  Grand  Master,  etc.

December  4,  1843,  the  change  was  permanently  made  whereby
all  the  business  of  the  lodge,  also  the  opening  and  closing  of  the
lodge,  must  be  in  the  Master's  degree.  It  was  at  this  time  also  thatv
unaer  the  lodge  Warrant,  those  possessing  the  higher  degrees  could
confer  them.  Several  of  the  lodges,  as  many  as  four,  worked  the
Royal  Arch  degree.  In  1849,  Franklin  Lodge.  No.  134,  was  au-
thorized  to  loan  its  Warrant  to  confer  the  Order  of  the  Temple  on
Encampment  No.  2,  in  Philadelphia.  Also  Union  Lodge,  No.  12I;
was  authorized  to  loan  its  Warrant  to  organize  Union  Encampment,
No.  6.  This  resolution  of  the  Grand  Lodge  was  rescinded  on  Feb-
ruary 15,  1857

Massac//,  use  its.

In  consequence  of  an  application  from  several  Brethren,  rcbiding
in  New  England,  Free  and  Accepted  Masons,  to  the  Right  Honor-
able and  Most  Worshipful  Anthony,  Lord  Viscount  Montague
Grand  Master  of  Masons  in  England,  he  was  pleased,  in  the  year
1733,  ^o  constitute  and  appoint  Right  Worshipful  Henry  Price
Provincial  Grand  Master  of  New  England  aforesaid.

Upon  the  receipt  of  this  commission,  the  Brethren  assembled
July  30th ,  and  the  Charter  of  Constitution  being  read,  and  the
Right  Worshipful  Grand  Master  duly  invested  and  congratulated,  a

FREEMASONRY   IN   THE  UNITED   STATES         i399

Grand  Lodge  was  formed  under  the  title  and  designation  of  "  St.
Jofin's  Grand  Lodge,"  and  the  following  officers  chosen  and  in-
stalled :

Right  Worshipful  Andrew  Belcher,  Deputy  Grand  Master ;
Right  Worshipful  Thomas  Kennelly,  Senior  Grand  Warden  ;  Right
Worshipful  John  Quann,  Junior  Grand  Warden  pro  tempore.

A  petition  was  then  presented  by  several  worthy  Brethren  re-
siding in  Boston,  praying  to  be  constituted  into  a  regular  lodge,  and
it  was  voted  that  the  same  be  granted.

Thus  was  Masonry  founded  in  Massachusetts.

The  anniversary  of  St.  John  the  Baptist  was  celebrated  June  24,
1 734,  in  ample  form.

A  petition  being  presented  from  Benjamin  Franklin  and  several
Brethren  residing  in  Philadelphia  for  a  constitution  holding  a  lodge
there,  the  Right  Worshipful  Grand  Master,  having  this  year  received
orders  from  the  Grand  Lodge  in  England  to  establish  Masonry  in
all  North  America,  was  pleased  to  grant  the  prayer  of  the  petition-
ers, and  to  send  them  a  deputation  appointing  the  Right  Worshipful
Benj.  Franklin  their  first  Master.

A  petition  from  the  Brethren  resident  in  Portsmouth,  in  New
Hampshire,  for  the  erection  of  a  lodge  there  was  also  granted.

At  the  usual  celebration  of  the  festival  of  Sl  John  the  Evangel-
ist, December  27,  1735,  the  Right  Worshipful  Grand  Master  ap-
pointed the  Right  Worshipful  James  Gordon  his  Deputy.

About  this  time  sundry  Brethren  going  hence  to  South  Carolina,
and  meeting  with  Masons  there,  formed  a  lodge  at  Charleston ;
from  whence  sprung  Masonry  in  those  parts,  December  27,  1736.
At  the  celebration  usual  on  this  day,  the  Right  Worshipful  Robert
Tomlinson  was  appointed  Deputy  Grand  Master  ;  all  the  other  offi-
cers were  continued  in  their  respective  trusts.'

The  Right  Worshipful  Robert  Tomlinson  having  received  a
commission  from  the  Right  Honorable  and  Right  W^orshipful  John
Earl  of  Loudon,  Grand  Master  of  England,  appointing  him  Pro-
vincial Grand  Master  of  North  America  in  the  stead  of  the  Right
Worshipful  Grand  Master  Henry  Price,  resigned,  he  was  properly
installed  and  invested,  and  duly  congratulated,  April  20,  1737.

At  the  usual  celebration,  on  June  24th  following,  he  was  pleased

'  "  Constitutions,  History,  and  General  Regulations  of  Massachusetts,"  by  Rev.  T
Mason  Harris,  1798.

3400  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

to  nominate  and  appoint  the  Right  Worshipful  Hugh  McDaniel  his
Deputy.  On  the  next  December  festival,  the  Right  Worshipful
James  Gordon  was  re-chosen  Deputy  Grand  Master.

In  the  year  1738  the  Right  Worshipful  Grand  Master  went  to
England  via  Antigua,  where,  finding  some  old  Boston  Masons,  he
formed  them  into  a  lodge,  giving  them  a  Charter  of  incorporation  ;
and  initiated  the  Governor,  and  several  gentlemen  of  distinction  there.
into  the  Society,

The  Right  Worshipful  Lodge  of  Masters,  in  Boston,  was  founded
January  2,  1739.  In  the  year  1740,  the  Right  Worshipful  Grand
Master  granted  a  deputation,  at  the  petition  of  several  Brethren,  for
holding  a  lodge  at  Annapolis  in  Nova  Scotia;  and  appointed  the
Right  Worshipful  Erasmus  James  Phillips  Deputy  Grand  Master
there,  who  afterward  erected  a  lodge  at  Halifax,  and  appointed  his
Excellency  Edward  Cornwallis  their  first  Master.

The  Right  Worshipful  Thomas  Oxnard  having  received  a  de|>
utation  dated  London, September  23,  1 743,  from  ♦he  Right  Honorable
and  Most  Worshipful  John,  Lord  Ward,  Baron  of  Birmingham  in
the  County  of  Warwick,  and  Grand  Master  of  Masons  in  England,
appointing  him  Provincial  Grand  Master  in  the  room  of  the  Right
Worshipful  Grand  Master  Tomlinson,  deceased  ;  which  being  com-
municated March  6,  1744,  he  was  properly  acknowledged,  invested,
installed,  and  congratulated.  He  then  proceeded  to  nominate  and
appoint :

The  Right  Worshipful  Hugh  McDaniel,  Deputy  Grand  Master;
Right  Worshipful  Thomas  Kelby,  Senior  Grand  Warden  ;  Right
Worshipful  John  Box,  Junior  Grand  Warden ;  Charles  Pelham,
Grand  Secretary.

The  following  Grand  Officers  were  chosen  and  installed  at  the
festival  of  St.  John  the  Evangelist,  holden  December  27,  1744 :

Right  Worshipful  Hugh  McDaniel,  Deputy  Grand  Master;
Right  Worshipful  Benj.  Hallowell,  Senior  Grand  Warden  ;  Right
Worshipful  John  Box,  Junior  Grand  Warden ;  Charles  Pelham,
Grand  Secretary.

The  petition  of  several  Brethren  in  Newfoundland,  for  consti-
tuting a  lodge  there,  was  granted  December  24,  1 746,  and  a  Charter
transmitted.

December  27,  1749,  a  Charter  was  granted  to  a  lodge  in  New-
port, R.  I.     The  Right  Worshipful  Grand  Master,  assisted  by  his

FREEMASONRY    IN    THE   UNITED    STATES  1401

Grand  Officers,  February  15,  1750,  constituted  and  consecrated  "A
Second  Lodge  "  in  Boston  ;  March  ytli  following,  he  also  consti-
tuted and  consecrated  "The  Third  Lodge  in  Boston."

At  the  Quarterly  Communication  in  August,  1750,  he  granted  ?
Charter  for  a  lodge  at  Annapolis,  Md.,  and  also  a  Charter  for  "  Hiram
Lodge  "  at  New  Haven,  Conn.

At  the  festival  of  St.  John  the  Evangelist,  December  27,  1750,
the  Brethren  attended  divine  service  in  Christ's  Church,  Boston,
where  Rev.  Brother  Charles  Brockwell  delivered  a  sermon,  which
was  afterward  printed  in  Boston  and  reprinted  and  passed  through
several  editions  in  Elngland,  and  was  added  to  the  Pocket  Cotnpan-
ion  and  History  of  Freemasonry,  London,  1754.

Lord  Colvill  having  been  appointed  Deputy  Grand  Master,
summoned  the  Brethren  to  attend  him  at  the  Grey  Hound  Tavern
in  Roxbury,  Januarv  24,  1752,  where  he  held  a  Grand  Lodge  in  due
form,  and  the  day  was  celebrated  as  usual,  and  Grand  Officers  were
duly  chosen.^

Lord  Colvill  having  returned  to  England,  October  30th,  R.  W.
Hugh  McDaniel  was  again  appointed  Deputy  Grand  Master.

A  dispensation  was  granted  to  erect  a  lodge  at  New  London,  in
Connecticut,  January  12,  1753.

A  Grand  Lodge  was  held  at  Graton's.  in  Roxbury,  June  26,
1754,  "but  by  reason  of  the  death  of  Worshipful  Grand  Master
Thomas  Oxnard,  this  morning  at  1 1  o'clock,  the  celebration  was
rather  sorrowful  than  joyous."

••  In  honor  of  their  Right  Worshipful  Grand  Master,  w.iose  loss
was  sincerely  lamented  by  all  who  had  the  pleasure  and  honor  of  his
acquaintance,  and  more  especially  by  the  Society  ove:  .\  hich  he  had
for  eleven  years  presided  with  dignity,  they  voted  to  attend  his
funeral,  in  mourning,  with  the  honors  of  Masonry  ;  and  to  invite
the  several  Lodges  in  Boston  to  assist  on  this  mournful  occasion."

October  11,  1754,  at  the  Quarterly  Communication,  the  Breth-
ren petitioned  the  Right  Honorable  and  Right  Worshipful  Grand

'A  yea-  or  two  since,  a  clergyman  of  the  Church  of  England,  who  is  probably  more
conversant  with  that  church  in  America  than  any  other  individual  living,  politely  furnished
us  with  a  document  wherein  it  appeared  that  the  first  regular  Lodge  of  Freemasons  \t;
America  was  holden  in  King's  Chapel,  Boston,  by  a  dispensation  from  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England,  somewhere  about  the  year  1720.  It  produced  great  excitement  at  the  time,
and  the  Brethren  considered  it  prudent  to  discontinue  these  meetings. — "  Masonic  M  r-
-"r  and  Mechanics'  Intelligencer,"  by  Bro.  Chas.  VV.  Moore,  January  27.  J827.

I402  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Master  of  Masons  in  England,  for  a  new  deputation  to  fill  King
Solomon's  Chair,  vacant  by  the  death  of  their  late  Grand  Master ;
and  recommended  the  Right  Worshipful  Jeremy  Gridley  to  him  for
that  important  and  honorable  trust.

June  24,  1755,  the  Right  Worshipful  Deputy  Grand  Master
summoned  the  Brethren  to  attend  him  at  Graton's  Tavern,  in  Rox-
bur)^,  to  observe  the  Festival  of  St.  John  the  Baptist.  The  Grand
Officers  were  chosen  and  present  August  21st.  At  a  special  meet-
ing the  Right  Worshipful  Jeremy  Gridley  informed  the  Brethren
that  the  Right  Honorable  and  Right  Worshipful  Grand  Master
James  Brydges,  Marquis  of  Caernavon,  Grand  Master  of  Masons
in  England,  had  sent  a  deputation  appointing  him  Provincial  Grand
Master  of  North  America,  where  no  Grand  Master  is  appointed.

In  1767,  Jeremy  Gridley,  the  Provincial  Grand  Master  of  North
America,  died  on  September  loth  ;  his  funeral  took  place  on  the
1 2th,  and  the  members  of  St.  Andrew's  Lodge,  sixty-four  in  num-
ber (Joseph  Warren  being  the  Senior  Warden),  walked  in  the  pro-
cession. After  this,  however,  when  every  generous  effort  on  the
part  of  St.  Andrew's  had  completely  failed,  and  when  it  became
evident  that  no  "  Union  of  Love  and  Friendship  could  be  effected,"
the  members  of  that  lodge  changed  their  ground.  Men  like  War-
ren, Revere,  Hancock,  and  others  of  illustrious  name,  felt  their
patience  exhausted,  and  determined  not  to  quietly  submit  to  be  any
longer  denounced  as  clandestine  Masons  and  imposters.  The  early
proceedings  of  St.  Andrew's  were  indeed  as  irregular  as  it  is  pos-
sible to  conceive.  Originating  in  the  Association  of  Nine  Masons
who  had  been  made  clandestinely,  it  was  chartered  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Scotland  in  1756,  and  then  numbered  twenty-one  mem-
bers, exclusive  of  the  original  nine,  who  had  left  Boston  in  the  in-
terval. Its  Charter  did  not  arrive  until  1 760,  at  which  time  the
lodge  had  been  increased  by  eighteen  additional  members,  so  that
in  all  thirty-one  candidates  were  initiated  before  the  lodge  received
its  Charter.

At  a  conference  held  April  28,  1 766,  between  committees  of
St.  John's  Grand  Lodge  and  St.  Andrew's  Lodge  (Richard  Gridley
being  a  member  of  one  and  Joseph  Warren  of  the  other),  the  repre-
sentatives of  the  latter  fully  admitted  the  illegality  of  their  early
proceedings,  but  contended  that  it  was  in  the  power  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Scotland  to  "make  irregular  Masons  regular."     Against

FREEMASONRY    IN   THE    UNITED   STATES         1403

this  the  other  committee  formulated  their  belief  "that  the  language
of  the  Constitution  for  irregularities  was  submission."

We  have  quoted  this  circumstance  to  show  the  fallacy  of  those
who  refer  to  the  facts  connected  with  the  irregularity  of  the  forma-
tion of  St.  Andrew's  Lodge.

We  have  brought  the  history  of  Masonry  in  Massachusetts
from  its  commencement  in  1733  to  the  beginning  of  the  political
troubles  which  finally  ended  in  the  independence  of  the  Colonies.
Soon  thereafter  Masonry  resumed  its  wonted  character,  and  after
some  years  of  struggle  the  various  warring  interests  of  the  Brethren
of  the  different  constitutions  on  March  5,  1792,  were  united  by  the
organization  of  but  one  Grand  Lodge,  which  has  continued  with
prosperity  and  wonderful  success  until  the  present  time.

The  following  copies  of  two  letters  from  Benjamin  Franklin  to
Henry  Price,  in  which  we  find  acknowledgments  of  the  relative
Masonic  positions  of  Massachusetts  and  Pennsylvania,  will  be  found
interesting.

Right  Worshipful  Grand  Master  and  Most  Worthy  and  Dear  Brethren,
We  acknowledge  your  favor  of  the  23d  of  October  past,  and  rejoice  that  the
Grand  Master  (whom  God  bless)  hath  so  happily  recovered  from  his  late  indis-
position ;  and  we  now,  glass  in  hand,  drink  to  the  establishment  of  his  health,
and  the  prosperity  of  your  whole  Lodge.

We  have  seen  in  the  Boston  prints  an  article  of  news  from  London  import-
ing that  at  a  Grand  Lodge  held  there  in  August  last,  Mr.  Price's  deputation  and
power  was  extended  over  all  America,  which  advice  we  hope  is  true,  and  we
heartily  congratulate  him  thereupon,  and  though  this  has  not  been  as  yet  regu-
larly signified  to  us  by  you  yet,  giving  credit  thereto,  we  think  it  our  duty  to
lay  before  your  Lodge  what  we  apprehend  needful  to  be  done  for  us,  in  order
to  promote  and  strengthen  the  interest  of  Masonry  in  this  Province  (which
seems  to  want  the  sanction  of  some  authority  derived  from  home,  to  give  the
proceedings  and  determinations  of  our  Lodge  their  due  weight),  to  wit,  a  Depu-
tation or  Charter  granted  by  the  Right  Worshipful  Mr.  Price,  by  virtue  of  his
Commission  from  Britain,  confirming  the  Brethren  of  Pennsylvania  in  the  privi-
leges they  at  present  enjoy  of  holding  annually  their  Grand  Lodge,  choosing
their  Grand  Master,  Wardens  and  other  officers,  who  may  manage  all  affairs  re-
lating to  the  Brethren  here  with  full  power  and  authority,  according  to  the  cus-
toms and  usages  of  Masons,  the  said  Grand  Master  of  Pennsylvania  only  yield-
ing his  chair  when  the  Grand  Master  of  all  America  shall  be  in  place.  This,  if
it  seems  good  and  reasonable  to  you  to  grant,  will  not  only  be  extremely  agree-
able to  us,  but  will  also,  we  are  confident,  conduce  much  to  the  welfare,  estab-
lishment, and  reputation  of  Masonry  in  these  parts.  We  therefore  submit  it
for  vour  consideration,  and  we  hope  our  request  will  be  complied  with  :  we  desire

:i404  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

that  it  may  be  done  as  soon  as  possible,  and  also  accompanied  with  a.  copy  ot
the  Right  Worshipful  Grand  Master's  first  Deputation,  and  of  the  instrument
by.  which  it  appears  to  be  enlarged  as  above  mentioned,  witnessed  by  your  Ward-
ens and  signed  by  the  Secretary  ;  for  which  favors  this  Lodge  doubt  not  of  be«
ing  able  to  behave  as  not  to  be  thought  ungrateful.

We  are,  Right  Worshipful  Grand  Master  and  Most  Worthy  Brethren,
Your  affectionate  Brethren  and  obliged  humble  Serv'ts,
Signed  at  the  request  of  the  Lodge,
Philadelphia,  Nov.  28,  1734.  ^-   Fj^ANKLIN,  G.  M

Dear  Brother  Price  :  I  am  glad  to  hear  of  your  recovery.  I  hoped  to
have  seen  you  this  fall,  agreeable  to  the  expectation  you  were  so  good  as  to
give  me  ;  but  since  siclcness  has  prevented  your  coming,  while  the  weather  was
moderate,  I  have  no  room  to  flatter  myself  with  a  visit  from  you  before  the
spring,  when  a  deputation  of  the  Brethren  here  will  have  an  opportunity  of
shewing  how  much  they  esteem  you.  I  beg  leave  to  recommend  their  req<iest
to  you,  and  to  inform  you  that  some  false  and  rebel  Brethren,  who  are  fore'gn-
ers,  being  about  to  set  up  a  distinct  Lodge  in  opposition  to  the  old  and  true
Brethren  here,  pretending  to  make  Masons  for  a  bow!  of  punch,  and  the  Ci^aft
is  like  to  come  into  disesteem  among  us,  unless  the  true  Brethren  are  coun-
tenanced and  distinguished  by  some  such  special  authority  as  herein  Jesi>^ed.
I  entreat,  therefore,  that  whatever  you  shall  think  proper  to  do  thereip  maj*  "ae
sent  by  the  next  post,  if  possible,  or  the  next  following.

I  am  Your  Affectionate  Brother  &  humble  Serv't,

B    Franklin,  G.  M.
Philadelphia.  Nov.  2%,  1^34  Penmy^nia

P.  S.  If  more  of  the  Constitutions  are  wanted  among  you  p;ease  (linf  \«
to  me.

These  letteis  v/ere  addressed  as  follows  ;

To  Mr.  Henrv  Price.

At  the  Brazen  Head,  fiostovi   W.  fe.

Georgia.

Solomon's  Lodge,  No.  i,  received  a  Warrant  for  Savannah  t?
1735  ;  a  Warrant  for  Unity  Lodge,  No.  2,  was  issued  in  1774.  ano
a  Warrant  was  issued  for  Grenadier's,  No.  386,  in  1775.  Ail  oJ
these  were  granted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.

Roger  Lacy's  deputation  of  1 735,  given  by  Lord  Weymouth,
Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  was  the  second
lodge  on  the  English  Roll  for  America.  On  October  29,  1 784,  a  lodge
was  chartered  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania  for  Savannah.

On  December  16,  1786,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Georgia  was  or-
ganized in  that  city,  when  the  permanent  appointments  made  by  the

FREEMASONRY   IN   THE   UNITED   STATES         1405

Grand  Master  of  England  were  solemnly  relinquished  by  the  Right
Worshipful  Samuel  Elbert,  Grand  Master,  and  the  other  officeis  of
the  Grand  Lodge  ;  and  regulations  were  adopted  by  which  the  Grand
Officers  were  to  be  elected  annually.  Then  the  last  Provincial
Grand  Master  resigned  his  position,  and  William  Stephens  was
elected  the  first  Grand  Master  under  the  new  and  present  forma-
tion. A  notable  event  occurred  March  21,  1824.  The  comer-
stone  of  the  monuments  to  Greene  and  Pulaski  were  laid,  General
Lafayette  acting  as  Grand  Master  for  the  occasion.

As  there  are  those  still  interested  in  the  search  for  the  origin  of
Masonry  in  Georgia,  and  who  believe  that  a  lodge  existed  there
prior  to  1735,  the  date  of  the  Warrant  of  Solomon's  Lodge,  which
has  been  lost,  it  is  well  to  note  the  following,  for  reference,  as
coming  from  the  records :  In  England  a  Grand  Lodge  was  hoiden
"by  virtue  and  in  pursuance  of  the  right  of  succession  legally
derived  from  the  most  noble  and  Most  Worshipful  Thomas
Thyne,  Lord  Viscount  Weymouth,  Grand  Master  of  England,
1735.  by  his  Warrant  directed  to  the  Right  Worshipful  Roger
Lacy ;  and  by  the  renewal  of  the  said  power  by  Sholto  Charles
Douglas.  Lord  Aberdour,  Grand  Master  of  Scotland  for  the  year
1755-56  and  Grand  Master  of  England  for  the  years  1757-58;  as
m\\  aopear  in  his  VV arrant  directed  to  the  Right  Worshipful  Grey
Elliot'-'

Masonry  was  somewhat  prosperous  in  Savannah,  yet  in  the
countv  outside  of  the  city  generally,  Masonry  had  nearly  disap-
peared by  the  year  iSaa  The  Grand  Lodge  in  that  year  adopted
a  new  constitution  ;  and  the  quarterly  meetings  of  March  and  June
were  to  be  held  in  Savannah,  and  those  of  September  and  De-
cember were  to  be  held  at  Milledgeville,  the  State  Capital.  This
change  was  designed  to  accommodate  the  wishes  of  the  conflicting
parties  of  the  two  parts  of  the  State,  North  and  South.

In  December,  1826.  a  convention  was  held  which  adopted  a  new
constitution  dispensing  with  the  quarteriy  meetings,  and  made  Mil-
Ledgeville  the  permanent   place  of  meeting.     The  Grand   Lodge,

'The  lodges  which  formed  ».he  Grand  Lodge  were  Solomon's,  No.  139  (1735'.  ^'•
Savannah;  Unity,  No.  2  (1774),  Savannah  {371,  English  Register)  ;  Grenadier's.  No.  386
(English  Register),  (1775).  Savannah.  Solomon's  Lodge  was  reorganized  Octobe"  39
'y&i,  Savannah.

Grenad'er'p  Lodge  and  Solomon's  Lodge  ceased  working,  leavini:  no  record.

I406  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

however,  which  met  at  Savannah  at  the  usual  time,  March,  1827
refused  to  concur  with  the  alteration  and  chose  their  Grand  Officers,
■  The  Milledgeville  body  met  on  December  3,  1827,  and  elected
their  Grand  Officers.  As  this  was  a  very  interesting  period  in  the
history  of  Masonry  in  Georgia,  we  must  give  the  final  result  >  f  this
division.  The  New  Grand  Lodge  appointed  committees  to  possess
themselves  of  the  property  of  the  Savannah  or  old  bod}^  and  they
declared  the  election  held  in  March  of  no  effect  ;  and  all  the
members  of  the  lodges  adhering  to  the  Old  Grand  Lodge  were
expelled.  Lodge  No.  8,  one  of  the  Savannah  lodges,  held  to  the
Milledgeville  body;  all  the  others  in  Savannah  held  to  that  body.
Union  No.  3  of  these  lodges  was  the  first  lodge  which  adopted
Royal  Arch  Masonry.  In  the  hall  of  this  lodge,  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Savannah  met.  Finally,  all  the  lodges  in  Savannah  left  the
Grand  Lodge  except  Solomon's  Lodge,  and  united  with  the  new
body  at  Milledgeville.  January  5,  1837,  efforts  were  made  for  a
reconciliation,  which  ended  at  the  Grand  Conmunication  held
November  6,  1839.  Solomon's  Lodge  was  admitted  to  the  Grand
Lodge  by  her  representatives,  and  Masonry  resumed  a  united  front.
Prosperity  followed,  which  was  only  checked  by  the  Civil  War
from  1 86 1  to  1865.  Since  1866  prosperity  has  again  visited  that
jurisdiction,  and  no  Grand  Lodge  in  the  country  can  boast  of  a
greater  increase  proportionally  than  Georgia.

New  Hampihire.

On  February  5,  1 736,  a  petition  (the  original  of  which  has  been
preserved)  was  addressed  by  six  Brethren  at  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  to
Henry  Price,  whom  they  styled  "Grand  Master  of  Free  and  Ac-
cepted Masons  held  in  Boston."  The  petitioners  described  them-
selves as  "of  the  holy  and  exquisite  Lodge  of  St.  John,"  and  for
power  to  form  a  lodge  "  According  to  order  as  is  and  has  been
granted  to  faithful  Brothers  in  all  parts  of  the  World,"  and  they
declared  that  they  had  their  "  Constitution  both  in  print  and  Manu-
script as  good  and  ancient  as  any  that  England  can  afford."  The
favor  was  asked  because  they  had  heard  there  is  a  "  Superiour
Lodge  held  in  Boston."  Be  it  noted  this  was  early  in  1736,  when
no  lodge  had  been  warranted  in  Portsmouth  ;  and  as  the  Brethren
stated  they  possessed  "  Constitutions  "  in  manuscript — which  it  is
hardly  possible  could  have  been  anything  else  than  a  copy  of  the

FREEMASONRY    IN   THE   UNITED   STATES         1407

•*  Old  Charges  " — as  well  as  in  print,  the  evidence  is  consistent  with
the  supposition  that,  while  at  the  date  named  the  lodge  must  have
been  some  years  in  existence,  its  origin  may  have  reached  back  even
to  the  17th  century,

I  am  anxious  not  to  lay  too  much  stress  on  the  precise  meaning
attached  by  me  to  the  mention  of  manuscript  constitution  ;  never-
theless, I  think  the  petition  may  be  taken  as  fair  evidence  that  in
1736  there  were  Brethren  in  New  Hampshire  (meeting  as  Masons
in  a  lodge)  who  possessed  a  copy  (or  print)  of  the  English  Consti-
tutions published  in  1723,  as  well  as  a  version  of  an  older  set  of
laws  in  MS.,  thus  pointing  to  the  possible  existence  of  the  lodge  at
ev^en  an  earlier  period  than  the  Grand  Lodge  era  of  1 716-17.

The  granting  of  the  authority,  which  was  a  written  instrument,
was,  in  connection  with  that  granted  to  Philadelphia,  the  first
written  Masonic  authority  known  to  have  been  issued  by  a  Provin-
cial Grand  Lodge.^

It  will  be  observed  that,  in  like  manner,  as  Grand  Master,
Henry  Price  issued  authority  to  warrant  a  lodge  to  the  eighteen
Masons  in  Boston  who  petitioned  in  behalf  of  themselves  and
"  other  Brethren  ; "  therefore  the  Brethren  had  been  meeting  as  a
lodge  anterior  thereto  and  discharging  Masonic  duties :  convening
and  working  as  Masons  without  other  authority  than  that  of  ancient
immemorial  right,  which  the  Craft  had  many  decades  before
exercised,  of  meeting  when  and  where  circumstances  permitted  or
required,  and  choosing  their  own  temporar)^  Master ;  it  is  probable
that  thus  many  of  the  old  Masons  in  America  had  been  admitted  to
the  Mystic  Rites.

Portsmouth  was  the  first  settlement  by  Europeans  in  New
Hampshire  (1623).  Several  lodges  were  many  years  afterward
constituted  within  that  territory  by  authority  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of   Massachusetts.

In  a  letter  from  Joseph  Webb,  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Massachusetts,  in  reply  to  one  received  from  William  Smith,
Grand  Secretary  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania,  dated  Boston,
September  4,  1 780,  occurs  this  paragraph  :

'•  I  have  granted  a  dispensation  to  New  Hampshire,  till  they
shall  appoint  a  Grand  Master  of  their  own,  which  I  suppose  will
not  be  very  soon,  as  there  is  but  one  Lodge  in  that  State."

•  C.  McCIenachar.

1408  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

A  "  convention "  of  delegates  from  two  or  more  lodges  was
called  at  Dartmouth  in  1787,  but  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New  Hamp-
shire was  not  organized  until  July  8,  1789.  It  was  in  the  last  of  the
three  years'  service  of  General  John  Sullivan  as  Governor  of  the
State  that  he  was  elected  the  first  Grand  Master  of  the  independent
Grand  Lodge.  It  is  true  there  were  but  five  lodges  in  the  State,
and  but  one,  St.  John's  of  Portsmouth,  that  antedated  the  Revolu-
tion;  of  this  General  Sullivan  was  the  Master.  In  October,  1790,
the  Grand  Master,  from  ill  health,  was  compelled  to  decline  re-elec-
tion, and  Dr.  Hall  Jackson  was  elected  Grand  Master  in  his  stead.

The  title  assumed  by  the  Grand  Body  is  "  The  Most  Worshipful
Grand  Lodge  of  the  Ancient  and  Honorable  Fraternity  of  Free  and
Accepted  Masons  of  the  State  of  New  Hampshire  '

South  Carolina.

A  Warrant  was  granted  in  1735  by  Lord  Weymouth,  Grand
Master  of  England,  for  the  establishment  of  a  lodge  in  the  city  of
Charleston,  which  was  organized  on  October  28,  1736,  by  the  name
of  Solomon's  Lodge.

Brother  Sidney  Hayden,  in  Washington  and  his  Masonic  Com-
peers^ states  that  Grand  Master  Henry  Price  of  Massachusetts,  hav-
ing received  an  extension  of  his  authority  in  1734,  from  the  Grand
Master  of  England,  giving  him  jurisdiction  over  all  North  America,
granted  a  Warrant  on  December  27,  1735,  for  a  lodge  at  Charleston,
S.  C.

The  St.  John's  Grand  Lodge  of  Boston.  Mass.,  warranted  a  lodge
in  Charleston,  S.  C,  in  1 738  ;  this  was  followed  by  a  grant  from  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England  establishing  Prince  George's  Lodge  at
Winyaw,  in  1743  ;  and  Union  Lodge,  by  the  same  authority,  at
Charleston,  May  3,  1755,  and,  again,  a  "Master's  Lodge  "at  the
same  place,  on  March  22,  1756,  and  a  lodge  at  Beaufort  on  Sep-
tember 15th  of  the  same  year.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  then  appeared  in  the  Province,
and  warranted  Union  Lodge,  No,  98,  in  1760.

St.  Mark's  Lodge  was  warranted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng-
{and  in  1 763.

With  regard  to  powers  delegated  to  Provincial  Grand  Masteri,

'  Hayden.,  b.  240.

FREEMASONRY    IN   THE   UNITED   STATES  1409

we  have  first  of  record,  John  Hammerton,  appointed  by  the  Earl  of
Loudoun  in  1736.

A  second  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  was  established  by  a  deputa-
tion of  the  Marquis  of  Carnarvon  to  Chief  Justice  Leigh  in  1754.
Dr.  Mackey,  in  his  Encyclopaedia,  says  upon  this  subject  that,  in
1777,  this  Grand  Lodge,  deputized  by  the  Marquis  of  Carnarvon
assumed  independence  and  became  the  "Grand  Lodge  of  Free  and
Accepted  Masons,"  Barnard  Elliott  being  the  first  Grand  Master.
As  early  as  1783  the  Athol  or  "Ancient  "  Masons  invaded  the  juris-
diction of  South  Carolina,  and  in  1787  there  being  then  five  lodges
of  the  Ancients  in  the  State,  they  held  a  convention,  and  on  March
24th  organized  the  "  Grand  Lodge  of  Ancient  York  Masons."  Be-
tween the  Moderns  and  the  Ancient  Grand  Lodges  there  was  always
a  very  hostile  feeling  until  the  year  1808,  when  a  union  was  effected,
which  was  but  temporary,  for  a  disruption  took  place  in  the  follow-
ing year.  However,  the  Union  was  permanently  established  in
181 7,  when  the  two  Grand  Lodges  were  merged  into  one,  under  the
name  of  the  "  Grand  Lodge  of  Ancient  Freemasons"

New  York.

From  the  quotations  of  authorities  herein  following,  it  will  be
evident  that  Freemasonry  must  have  existed  in  the  Province  of
New  York  prior  to  the  year  1737.  The  advertising  notices  and
newspaper  squibs  are  convincing  that  secret  communications  were
being  held  either  among  the  residents  or  the  sojourning  soldiery.
By  what  authority  these  assemblies  were  held  we  are  not  yet  able  to
disclose ;  whether  under  powers  granted  by  Daniel  Coxe,  by  reason
of  the  deputation  held  by  him  from  June  5,  1730,  until  the  expira-
tion of  his  personal  investment,  to  wit,  until  June  24,  1732,  or
those  of  his  successors,  who  were  to  be  elected  every  other  year  on
the  feast  of  St.  John  the  Baptist,  when  the  Provincial  Grand  Master
was  to  be  installed.  No  testimony  has  been  found  of  the  exercise
by  Bro.  Daniel  Coxe  of  his  delegated  powers ;  perhaps  no  action
was  had  by  him  ;  yet  "  it  was  a  rare  thing  for  any  reports  to  be  made
by  the  Provincial  Grand  Masters  abroad  of  their  doings."  We  in-
cline to  the  belief  that  no  power  was  exercised  by  Brother  Coxe
pending  the  period  during  which  he  was  deputized.

It  is  not  impossible  that  warranted  power  existed  among  the
soldiery  who  were  or  had  been  stationed  in  the  Province ;  nor  is  it

I4IO  HISTORY    OF    FREEMASONRY

an  impossibility  that  there  was  an  immemorial  Charter,  or  even  an
inherent  or  self-born  power  of  constitution  the  exercise  of  which
would  not  have  been  masonically  illegal  when  we  consider  the  con-
dition of  the  Society,  the  period,  the  locality,  and  Masonic  custom,
or  at  least  in  following  the  precedent  in  other  lands  and  of  former
days.

The  Five  Masonic  Deputations  Granted  to  Provincial  Grand  Masters
FOR  New  York  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.

1.  Colonel  Daniel  Coxe,  ]une  5,  1730.  Time  of  service,  2  years.

2.  Captain  Richard  Riggs,  November  15,  1737.  "  14       "

3.  Francis  Goelet,  i75i-  **  2        "

4.  George  Harrison,  June  9,  1753.  "  18        "

5.  Sir  John  Johnson,  1781.  "  10       "

The  date  of  transition  of  the  Grand  Lodge  from  a  Provincial  to
an  independent  State  Masonic  organization  might  be  a  subject  of
difference  of  opinion  :  herein  the  date  of  the  summary  retirement  of
the  Grand  Master  and  most  of  the  other  Grand  Officers  with  the
King's  troops  is  assured  as  a  data,  to  wit,  September  19  and  Octo-
ber I,  1783.  It  might  be  urged  with  considerable  force  that  as  a
definite  date,  June  6,  1787,  should  be  given,  inasmuch  as  on  that
date  the  Grand  Lodge  accepted  and  confirmed  the  Athol  Warrant,
and  declared  its  establishment  under  it.

Ratification  of  the  Grand  Warrant,  September  5,    1781.

The  Grand  Lodge  "  Resolved,  that  next  Grand  Lodge  be
appointed  for  all  the  Lodges  in  the  State  to  give  in  their  Re-
spective Warrants  or  Constitutions,  or  copies  of  them  properly
authenticated,  that  the  Rank  and  Precedency  of  the  whole  may  be
then  determined."

A  more  direct  resolution  from  St.  John's  Lodge,  No.  2,  pro-
ceeded further  to  question  the  Grand  Warrant  under  which  the
Grand  Lodge  existed.     This  was  referred  to  next  Grand  Lodge.

Accordingly,  on  March  7,  1787,  "The  Resolution  of  St.  John's
Lodge,  No.  2,  referred  for  consideration  to  this  evening,  was  read,
and  debates  arising,  it  was  resolved,  on  motion  of  Worshipful
Brother  Malcom,  that  a  Committee  be  appointed  to  consider  the
propriety  of  holding  the  Grand  Lodge  under  the  present  Warrant ,

FREEMASONRY    IN   THE   UNITED   STATES         1411

and  the  proper  measures  to  effect  a  change  if  it  should  be  thought
constitutional  and  expedient,  and  report  their  opinion,  with  the
reasons  on  which  it  is  founded,  to  the  Grand  Lodge,  at  their  next
Quarterly  Communication."

The  committee  on  June  6,  1787,  reported  their  consideration  ot
the  propriety  of  holding  the  Grand  Lodge  under  the  present
Warrant.     The  report  was  read,  accepted,  and  confirmed.

The  subject  of  the  Grand  Warrant  being  disposed  of,  the  Grand
Lodge,  on  the  following  September  5,  1787,  adopted  this  recom-
mendation :

"That  as  soon  as  the  Committee  appointed  to  establish  the
precedency  of  Rank  of  the  Lodges  of  this  City  do  report,  that
then  all  the  Lodges  in  the  State  be  required  to  take  out  new  war-
rants and  deliver  up  the  old  ones,  the  dues  to  the  Grand  Lodge
being  previously  paid."

The  report  on  lodge  precedency  and  the  determination  of  this
subject  was  finally  made  June  3,  1789.'

Rhode  Island.

In  Rhode  Island,  as  in  other  localities,  we  find  traces  of  a  pre
historic  age  of  Freemasonry.  The  earliest  date  when,  according  to
tradition,  the  Masonic  system  was  known  and  practiced  within  the
limits  of  Rhode  Island  and  Providence  plantations  goes  far  back  of
authentic  records.  There  are  hints  and  intimations,  with  plenty  oi
unverified  legends,  pointing  to  a  17th  century  expression  of  Free-
masonry in  Newport,  R.  I.  ;  but  the  documents  and  records  which
ardent  explorers  have  searched  for,  to  support  the  theory  that  Free-
masonry was  planted  in  Rhode  Island  before  the  Institution  was
known  either  in  Philadelphia  or  Boston,  have  not  been  found.  As
the  case  now  stands,  there  is  only  a  supposition  that  such  may  have
been  the  fact.**

The  organic  life  of  Freemasonry  in  Rhode  Island,  as  we  trace  it?
existence  by  historic  records,  goes  back  to  the  warranting  o^  St.
John's  Lodge,  Newport,  December  27,  1749.  This  lodge  was
authorized  by  St.  John's  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  of  Boston,  Mass.,

•  At  the  meeting  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  held  June  3,  1789,  this  subject  was  duly  taken
'ip  and  the  several  lodges  presented  their  warrants,  and  were  duly  assigned  their  num-
bers, according  to  dates  of  charters.     .<^t.  John's  Lodge  (1757^  No.  2,  was  given  No.  i.

'  Msniorial    by  Henry  W.  Rugg.  O.D.

I4I2  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONKy:

Thomas   Oxnard,    Grand    Master.     Caleb    Phillips   was   the    first

Master  of  the  lodge  thus  authorized.  Some  unpleasantness  having
been  caused  by  the  Master's  withholding  from  the  lodge  the  dispensa-
tion thus  granted,  a  second  Warrant  was  issued  dated  May  14,  1753.
Under  these  warrants  the  Newport  Brethren  were  only  authorized
to  confer  the  first  two  degrees  of  Masonry.  They  did  not  recog-
nize the  limitation,  however,  and  proceeded  to  confer  the  Mas-
ter's degree  as  supplementing  the  degrees  of  Entered  Apprentice
and  Fellow-craft.  On  being  called  to  account  for  thus  extending
the  authority  granted  them,  they  made  so  good  an  explanation  of
the  causes  that  had  led  them  to  transcend  their  powers,  that  the
Grand  Lodge  confirmed  them  in  the  exercise  of  such  powers  by
granting  them  a  Charter  to  hold  a  Master's  Lodge.

This  lodge — the  first  organized  in  Rhode  Island — was  given
additional  powers,  and  we  may  assume  that  the  ordinary  lodge,  hav-
ing control  over  the  degrees  of  Entered  Apprentice  and  Fellow-
craft,  was  united  with  or  merged  into  the  Master's  Lodge,  so  that
two  separate  organizations  were  not  maintained.

As  throwing  some  light  upon  the  misapprehension  pertaining  to
the  conferring  of  degrees  by  St.  John's  Lodge  of  Newport,  during
this  first  period  of  its  history,  it  is  important  to  keep  in  mind  the
fact  that  the  third  degree  was  not  then,  as  now,  closely  united  with
a  id  expected  to  follow  the  two  preceding  degrees.  Candidates  for
Freemasonry  often  went  no  further  than  the  degree  of  Fellow-
craft  ;  those  who  did  advance  to  the  Master's  grade  were  required
to  pay  an  additional  fee.

A  little  more  than  two  years  before  the  granting  of  the  confirma-
tion Charter  to  the  Brethren  of  Newport,  a  Masonic  lodge  had  been
organized  in  Providence,  also  taking  the  name  of  St.  John's.  A
Warrant  for  this  lodge  was  issued  by  the  same  authority  that  created
the  body  established  at  Newport.

By  the  terms  of  this  Charter  the  Providence  Brethren  were
required  to  observe  the  constitution,  make  returns  to  the  Grand
Lodge,- and  annually  keep  or  cause  to  be  kept  the  feast  of  St.  John
the  Baptist,  and  to  dine  together  on  that  day,  or  as  near  that  day  as
shall  be  most  convenient,  and  that  they  send  to  the  Grand  Lodge  in
Boston  contributions  for  poor  Brethren.

The  Charter  of  St.  John's  Lodge  in  Providence  was  one  of  six-
teen similar  authorizations  which,  up  to  that  time,  had  been  granted

FREEMASONRY    IN   THE   UNITED   STATES  i4»3

by  the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts  to  sixteen  lodges
in  eleven  different  provinces  or  colonies.

The  Charter  was  issued  by  the  direct  authority  of  the  eminent
and  patriotic  Jeremy  Gridley,  then  Provincial  Grand  Master  of
North  America.  He  was  a  lawyer  of  excellent  reputation  and  a
devoted  member  of  the  Masonic  Fraternity.

Freemasonry  in  Rhode  Island  at  the  close  of  the  War  of  the
Revolution  was  represented  by  St.  John's  Lodge  in  Providence  and
King  David's  Lodge  in  Newport.  The  first  lodge  (St.  John's)  in
Newport  was  inactive,  as  it  had  been  for  a  long  time.  The  lodge
in  Providence,  after  its  revival,  had  greatly  prospered  under  the
efficient  leadership  of  Bro.  Jabez  Bowen,  its  Worshipful  Master
from  1778  to  1790,  and  had  receiv^ed  among  its  new  members  a
hrge  accession  of  influential  citizens.  One  of  these,  William  Barton,
initiated  in  1779,  is  deservedly  remembered  and  honored  for  his  he-
roic exploit  in  making  a  prisoner  of  the  British  General,  William
Prescott,  on  the  island  of  Rhode  Island,  and  for  other  patriotic  ser-
vices. Another,  John  Carlile,  initiated  in  1 783,  served  the  Craft  with
exceptional  skill  in  many  important  offices  for  a  long  term  of  years.

On  Monday,  June  27,  1791,  "being  the  day  affixed  on  for  the
celebration  of  the  Feast  of  St.  John  the  Baptist "  (St.  John's  Day
having  occurred  on  the  previous  Friday),  a  number  of  Brethren  rep-
resenting the  two  lodges  met  in  the  State  House  at  Newport  and  pro-
ceeded to  organize  a  Grand  Lodge  in  accordance  with  the  plan  that
had  been  approved.  The  Right  Worshipful  Moses  Seixas  presided
and  installed  the  officers  who  had  been  previously  designated  for  the
several  stations.  When  the  organization  had  been  completed,  the
newly  installed  officers,  with  members  of  Grand  Lodge  and  visiting
Brethren,  marched  in  procession  to  Trinity  Church,  where  a  dis-
course, having  appropriateness  to  the  occasion,  was  delivered  by  the
Rector,  Rev.  Wm.  Smith,  and  a  collection  was  taken  amounting  to
jCi\  9s.  4d.,  which  sum  it  was  ordered  "should  be  invested  in  wood
and  distributed  to  the  poor  of  this  town  during  the  ensuing  winter."

By  attending  as  a  body  on  divine  service,  and  making  their  offer-
mg  in  the  house  of  worship  for  a  benevolent  purpose,  the  Brethren
who  formed  the  Grand  Lodge  of  this  State,  and  those  masonically
associated  with  them  at  that  time,  plainly  signified  their  respect  for
religion  and  for  that  practical  charity  so  much  emphasized  by  the
teachings  of  Freemasonry.

I4I4  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

Maryland.

Masonry  was  introduced  into  Maryland,  during  the  Colonial
period,  from  three  sources,  viz.  :  by  the  Grand  Lodge  (Moderns)
of  Massachusetts,  Grand  Lodge  (Moderns)  of  England,  and  the
Grand  Lodge  (Ancients)  of  Pennsylvania.  Traditions  indicate  that
it  was  also  introduced  here  from  Scotland  and  Germany.

The  earliest  lodge  of  which  we  have  any  reliable  evidence  in
Maryland,  was  held  at  Annapolis.  It  was  chartered  by  Thomas
Oxnard,  Provincial  Grand  Master  of  the  St.  John's  Grand  Lodge  of
Massachusetts,  and  Provincial  Grand  Master  of  North  America.
There  are  no  records  of  this  lodge  known  to  be  in  existence,  and
the  only  reference  to  it,  on  the  records  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Mas-
sachusetts, is  the  following,  courteously  furnished  by  Brother  Sereno
D.  Nickerson,  Grand  Secretary  ■}

"  1750,  Aug.  12.  At  the  Petition  of  sundry  Brethren  at  Annapo-
lis in  Maryland,  Our  Rt.  Wors'l  Grand  Master,  Bro.  Thos.  Oxnard,
Esqr.  Granted  a  Constitution  for  a  Lodge  to  be  held  there,  and  ap-
pointed The  Rt.  Wors'l first  Mas'r.

"  Fryday,  July  the  13th,  1750.  For  the  Lodge  at  Maryland,
Bro.  McDaniel,  D.  G.  M.  app'd  &  pd.  for  their  Constit'n  ^13.9.

"  In  the  lists,  the  Lodge  is  sometimes  described  as  '  Maryland
Lodge'  and  sometimes  as  '  the  Lodge  at  Annapolis.'  "

Among  the  archives  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Maryland,  fortu-
nately preserved,  are  the  books  of  three  of  the  old  Colonial  lodges,
viz.  :  one  located  at  "  Leonardtown,  St.  Mary's  County,"  in  1759;
one  at  "  Joppa,  Harford,  then  Baltimore  County,"  in  1765,  and  at
"  Queenstown,  Queen  Anne's  County."

The  records  of  the  Leonardtown  Lodge  extend  over  a  period  of
three  years,  and  although  they  appear  to  be  the  full  and  complete
minutes  of  the  lodge  for  that  period,  there  is  not  the  slightest  men-
tion by  which  can  be  discovered  the  authority  under  which  it  was
held,  or  from  whence  it  emanated.

Upon  one  of  the  calendars  of  the  "  Modern  "  Grand  Lodge  of
England,  there  is  the  following  entry  :  "Lodge  No.  198,  Chartered
in  foreign  parts,  June  6th,  1759."     As  this  date  corresponds  exactly

'  From  History  of  Maryland,  by  E.  T.  Schultz.  We  are  indebted  to  Bro.  Schultz  for
all  the  information  we  have  in  that  jurisdiction.

FREEMASONRY    IN   THE   UNITED   STATES         1415

with  the  date  of  the  first  meeting  of  the  Leonardtown  Lodge,  it  is
probable  that  the  entry  refers  to  it.  It  may,  however,  have  been  a
branch  of  the  lodge  at  Annapolis.  It  was  not  an  unusual  thing  in
this  country  in  the  early  days  for  one  lodge  to  have  branch  lodges  in
other  towns  or  districts.  Forty  years  subsequently  a  branch  lodge
was  held  at  this  same  town.

The  records  of  the  Leonardtown  Lodge,  with  one  exception,
those  of  the  St.  John's  Lodge,  Boston,  are  the  oldest  original  lodge
proceedings  discovered  in  this  country,  the  old  ledger  of  St.  John's
Lodge,  Philadelphia,  recently  discovered,  being  simply  the  secre-
tary's account  with  the  members.

On  June  17,  1783,  two  months  after  Congress  had  issued  the
peace  proclamation,  we  find  the  lodges  on  the  "  Eastern  Shore  "
convened  at  Talbot  Court-house,  for  the  purpose  of  organizing  a
Grand  Lodge  of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons  for  the  State  of  Mary-
land. There  were  five  lodges  represented  by  deputies,  one  lodge
more  than  participated  in  the  formation  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England  in  171 7.

There  were  present  at  this  convention,  as  a  deputy  from  Lodge
No.  7,  of  Chestertown,  the  Rev.  William  Smith,  who  was  at  the
time  Grand  Secretary  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania,  al-
Jihough  residing  in  this  State  ;  and  Bro.  Dr.  John  Coates,  Past
Deputy  Grand  Master  of  Pennsylvania,  a  member  of  Lodge  No.  3
of  Philadelphia,  but  then  a  resident  of  the  Eastern  Shore  of  Mary-
land. It  was  unanimously  Resolved,  "That  the  several  Lodges  on
the  Eastern  Shore  of  Maryland  consider  it  is  a  matter  of  right,  and
that  they  ought  to  form  a  Grand  Lodge  independent  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Philadelphia."  When  the  convention  prepared  to  go
into  an  election  of  officers  for  a  Grand  Lodge,  Bro.  Smith,  Dep-
uty from  No.  7,  stated  that  "  he  was  not  authorized  to  elect  such
officers."  Whereupon  the  convention  adjourned  until  the  31st  day
of  July  following.  "The  Rev.  Bro.  Smith  was  asked  and  promised
to  prepare  a  sermon  against  their  ne.xt  meeting."

It  was  determined  to  petition  the  Grand  Lodge  in  Philadelphia
for  a  Warrant  for  a  Grand  Lodge  to  be  held  on  the  Eastern  Shore  of
Maryland.

The  convention  re-assembled  at  Talbot  Court-house  on  July  31,
1783,  agreeablv  to  adjournment,  the  Rev.  Dr.  Smith,  being  a  Grand
Officer,  took  the  Chair.     The  same  lodges  were  in  attendance  as  at

I4i6  HY3TOKY  OF  FREEMASONRY

the  former  session,  with  the  exception  of  No.  37  of  Somerset
County,  which  was  not  represented,  but  No.  6  of  Georgetown
(Eastern  Shore)  was  in  attendance,  and  was  represented,  as  were  ail
the  other  lodges,  by  their  Masters  and  Wardens,  and  not  by  deputies,
as  at  the  former  session.

The  resolution  adopted  at  the  previous  session,  regarding  the
right  to  form  a  Grand  Lodge,  independent  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Pennsylvania,  was  unanimously  reaffirmed.  It  was  further  de-
termined that  the  Grand  Lodge  should  be  a  moving  lodge :  "  that  is
to  say,  it  shall  sit  at  different  places  at  different  times  ;  also  that  said
Grand  Lodge  shall  have  quarterly  communications."

A  vote  of  thanks  was  then  given  to  Bro.  Dr.  Smith  "  for  the
Sermon  preached  this  day,"  and  a  copy  asked  for  publication.  They
then  proceeded  to  ballot  for  Grand  Officers,  when  Bro.  Coates  was
elected  Grand  Master,  and  Charles  Gardner,  Grand  Secretary.
Other  officers  were  elected,  and  the  convention  adjourned,  to  assem-
ble again  at  Chestertown,  on  December  i8th  following,  (1783).

The  Grand  Lodge  assembled  according  to  adjournment,  De-
cember 1 8th,  but  on  account  of  the  severe  weather  a  number  of  the
Brethren  were  prevented  from  attending,  and  the  meeting  was  not
organized  until  next  day.

"  From  accident  and  other  causes  "  there  was  no  meeting  on  that,
day,  nor  was  there  any  meeting  held,  as  far  as  the  records  show,  until
nearly  three  years  subsequent.  The  subordinate  lodges,  however,
maintained  their  organization,  and  doubtless  considered  their  al'
iegiance  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania  severed,  as  they  were
ROt  thenceforth  represented  in  that  body.

Connecticut.

Masonry  in  Connecticut  derived  its  organic  life  from  the  Grand
Lodge  in  Massachusetts,  the  St.  John's  of  which  Paul  Revere  was
subsequently  Grand  Master,  but  also  Massachusetts  Grand  Lodge,

The  charters  granted  by  St  John's  were  :

August  12,  1750,  Hiram,  at  New  Haven,  David  Wooster  as
Master.

January  12,  1753.  ^^  New  London,  ceased  before  \i^

February  4,  1 754,  St  John's,  Middletown

April  28,  1762,  St  John's,  Hartford.

April  28   170Q,  Compass,  Walimgford.

FREEMASONRY    IN   THE   UNITED   STATES         1417

July  10,  1 771,  St  Alban's,  Guilford;  became  dormant  in  1776,

revived  May  17,  1787.

March  23,  1 780,  Union,  Danbury.

Provincial  Grand  Master  of  New  York  (Geo.)  Harrison,  unGer
Grand  Lodge  of  England,  granted  a  Charter  to  "  St.  John's,"  in
Fairfield,  and  afterward  Bridgeport,  in  1762;  "St.  John's,"  in
Norvvalk,  May  23,  1765;  "  Union,"  at  Greenwich,  November  18
1764;  and  "St.  John's,"  at  Stratford,  April  22,  1766.

The  Massachusetts  Grand  Lodge  (Scotland)  granted  a  Charter
to  "Wooster,"  in  Colchester,  January  12,  1781;  "St.  Paul's,"  at
Litchfield,  May  27,  1781 ;  the  Charter  dated  June  21,  1781  ;  "  King
Hiram,"  at  Derby,  January  3,  1781  ;  "  Montgomery,"  at  Salisbury,
March  5,  1783  (no  record  of  the  Charter  to  this  lodge  being
granted).

"  Columbia,"  at  Norwich,  June  24,  1785;  and  "  Frelleich,"  at
Farmington,  September  18,  1787 — seventeen  lodges.

The  Army  Lodge,  "  American  Union,"  chartered  by  St.  John's
Grand  Lodge  at  Boston,  February  13,  1776,  and  attached  to  a  Con-
necticut regiment,  frequently  met  in  the  State.

It  is  said  that  these  lodges,  chartered  by  different  Grand  Lodges,
continued  to  be  harmonious  as  far  as  was  possible.

A  convention  of  lodges  met  April  29,  1783,  in  pursuance  to  the
action  of  a  convention  held  March  13th  preceding;  thirteen  lodges
were  represented ;  the  formation  of  a  Grand  Lodge  was  duly  dis
cussed,  and  on  January  14,  1784,  a  Grand  Master  and  other  officers
were  chosen,  but  no  progress  was  made  until  May  14,  1789,  when
another  convention  was  called,  and  this  adjourned  until  July  8,
1 789 ;  a  constitution  was  then  adopted,  officers  elected,  and  the
present  Grand  Lodge  of  Connecticut  was  duly  organized.

Twelve  lodges  were  then  represented,  which  are  all  existing  at
the  present  date  and  were  at  the  centennial  of  the  Grand  Lodge,
1889.

When  the  Grand  Lodge  was  organized,  Stamford,  Norwalk,
Derby,  New  London.  Guilford,  and  Waterbury  were  not  represented;
Norwalk.  Derby,  and  Stamford,  however,  were  subsequently  con
nected  with  the  Grand  Lodge.

The  new  Grand  Lodge  chartered  the  first  lodge  at  Windham
viz.  •  Norwich,  No.  13,  October  18,  1790,  which  is  at  work  at  the
oresent  time

I4r8  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

The  growth  of  the  Fraternity  and  its  popularity  are  shown  in
the  fact  that  to  the  year  1800  the  lodges  had  increased  to  forty-
four,  with  three  thousand  members.  About  this  time  one  Joash
Hall  established  clandestine  lodges,  one  in  Middletown,  one  in  New
London,  and  one  in  Wallingford.     These,  however,  soon  died  out.

When  the  proposition  to  establish  a  Supreme  Grand  Lodge  was
started  among  the  various  Grand  Lodges,  Connecticut  deemed  the
project  inexpedient.

This  Grand  Lodge  granted  two  charters  to  form  new  lodges  in
Ohio,  viz.  :  "  Erie,"  No.  47,  now  "  Old  Erie,"  No.  3,  at  Warren ;  the
other  "  New  England,"  No.  45,  afterward  New  England,  No.  4,  at
Worthington,  and  now  belonging  to  the  spurious  and  clandestine
body  calling  itself  a  Grand  Lodge  in  Ohio,  and  the  names  of  all  the
bodies  which  constituted  that  affair  have  been  published  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Ohio  in  1898.  The  above  two  lodges,  with
"  American  Union,"  the  Army  Ledge,  mentioned  above,  assisted  in
forming  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ohio  in  1808.  Jeremy  L.  Cross  was
appointed  Grand  Lecturer  in  18 16  for  the  State  of  Connecticut

In  182 1  an  act  of  incorporation  was  passed  by  the  Legislature.
In  1823  the  Grand  Lodge  refused  to  divide  the  State  into  Masonic
districts.  The  Grand  Lodge  made  an  appropriation,  in  1826,  of
$500  for  a  monument  to  Brother  George  Washington.

At  this  period  the  anti-Masonic  movements  had  reached  Con-
necticut, the  Brethren  generally  neglected  to  attend  their  lodges,
and  many  charters  were  surrendered  and  revoked  ;  and  such  was
the  condition  of  the  Craft  at  the  annual  session  of  1831,  that  all  the
officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  except  the  Grand  Treasurer,  resigned
their  offices,  and  new  officers,  except  the  Grand  Treasurer,  were
chosen.  Yet  at  the  next  annual  session  only  the  Grand  Master  and
Grand  Treasurer  were  present ;  at  that  time  they  adopted  the  "  Dec-
laration of  Masonic  Principles,"  and  this,  in  some  measure,  allayed
the  anti-Masonic  sentiments.  Twenty-five  lodges  were  represented
at  the  session  in  1841.  There  was  an  improvement  up  to  1845,
and  to  the  present  time  Masonry,  in  that  jurisdiction,  has  kept  even
pace  with  all  the  other  States  in  New  England.

The  Civil  War  was  the  cause  of  several  applications  for  army
lodges.  June  6,  1861,  a  dispensation  was  issued  to  twelve  Brethren
of  the  4th  Connecticut  Regiment  for  a  lodge  to  be  named  "  Con-
necticut Union."  No.  qo.

FREEMASONRY   IN  THE   UNITED   STATES         1419

Another  dispensation  was  asked  for  "Ensign"  Lodge,  No.  91,
in  the  5th  Connecticut  Regiment,  but  was  refused.

Several  years  since  (1887)  quite  a  difficulty  occurred  between
Hiram  Lodge,  No.  i,  and  the  Grand  Lodge,  in  consequence  of
the  Grand  Lodge  having  by  statute  changed  the  mode  of  giving  the
due-guard  of  the  third  degree,  which  resulted  in  the  arrest  of  the
Charter  of  the  lodge  and  expulsion  of  several  of  the  officers.  After
some  time  better  counsel  prevailed,  and  the  members,  being  satisfied
that  they  were  wrong  in  their  action,  they  made  all  proper  ac-
knowledgments, and  matters  were  duly  arranged  and  the  Charter
was  restored,  and  the  utmost  harmony  has  prevailed  ever  since.

Virginia.

From  the  Freejtiasons  Pocket  Companion,  by  Auld  and  Smellie,
published  in  Edinburgh,  Scotland,  in  1765,  appears  "An  Exact
List  of  Regular  English  Lodges;"  therein  we  find  "No.  172,  The
Royal  Exchange  in  the  Borough  of  Norfolk,  in  Virginia ;  ist
Thursday  Dec,  1733;"  "No.  204  in  York-Town,  Virginia;  ist
and  3d  Wednesday,  Aug.  i,  1755."  This  is  corroborated  by  the
Pocket  Companion  published  in  London,  England,  in  1759,  by
John  Scott,  under  the  head  of  "  Lodges  in  Foreign  Parts  ;  "  "  Nor-
folk, in  Virginia,  ist  Thursday  ;  York-Town,  Virginia,  ist  and  3d
Wednesday." '

The  date  of  i  ^n  is  challenged  by  several  of  our  recent  writers
as  being  a  misprint,  and  they  say  it  should  have  been  1753.  We
have  seen  no  cogent  reason  for  this  correction,  but  must  submit  to
the  weight  of  authority  as  we  have  no  corroborative  evidence  to  sus-
tain the  earlier  date  of  Bro.  John  Dove,  the  Grand  Secretary  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Virginia,  who  was  very  sure  that  it  was  correct,
and  in  the  first  volume  of  his  History  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Vir-
ginia says  :  "  Thus  it  will  be  seen  from  reliable  data,  that  Masonry
was  practised  in  Virginia  under  chartered  privileges  in  1733,  de-
rived from  the  Mother  Grand  Lodge  of  England."  Very  soon
after  these  two  lodges  v/ere  chartered,  eight  other  charters  were
applied  for  and  obtained  from  the  several  Grand  Lodges  existing
in  Great  Britain  in  the  following  localities:  Norfolk  Lodge,  No.  i,
in  the  Borough  of  Norfolk  ;  Port  Royal,  No.  2,  in  Caroline  County ;
Biandford,  No.  3,  Petersburg ;  Fredericksburg,  No.  4,  Fredericks

'  John  Dove's  "  History  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Virginia."

I420

HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

burg ;  St.  Tammany,  No.  5,  Hampton  ;  Williamsburg,  No.  6,  Will-
iamsburg ;  Botetourt,  No.  7,  Gloucester  Court-house  ;  Cabin  Point,
No.  8,  Prince  George  Court-house  ;  York  Town,  No.  9,  York  Town.

The  work  of  these  lodges  was  continued  legally  and  masonically
under  their  independent  charters,  until  the  course  of  time  and  the
eventful  period  of  the  Revolutionary  War  caused  them  to  organize
a  convention,  which  was  called  to  meet  at  the  request  of  Williams-
burg Lodge,  No.  6,  at  Williamsburg,  May  6,  1777,  and  which  re-
sulted in  the  establishment  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Virginia,  Oc-
tober 13,  1778,  at  Williamsburg,  by  the  election  of  John  Blair  as
the  first  Most  Worshipful  Grand  Master  of  Ancient  York  Masons
in  America.  He  was  at  that  time  Past  Master  of  Williamsburg
Lodge,  No.  6.  This  Grand  Lodge  was  held  in  W^illiamsburg  until
1784,  when  it  was  removed  to  Richmond.'

Charters  were  continuously  granted  to  new  lodges,  until  their
numerical  denomination,  being  derived  from  various  sources,  had
become  too  complicated  for  discrimination ;  at  the  meeting  in
October,  1 786,  a  resolution  was  adopted  that  a  committee  be  ap-
pointed to  regulate  the  rank  of  the  several  lodges  then  under  the
jurisdiction  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Virginia.  We  make  the  fol-
lowing table  for  future  reference  :

Name  of  Lodge.

Royal  Exchange  172  1

Norfolk  (old  number  I42)  j

Kilwinning  Cross

Blanford

Fredericksburg

Tammany

Williamsburg ,

Botetourt

Cabin  Point  Royal  Arch  .

Swan  ( 204)

Richmond

Northampton

Kempsville ,

Staunton

Manchester

Petersburg

Portsmouth  Wisdom '
La  Sagasse

Charlotte

Smithfield  Union

Richmond  Randolph  .  ,

Constitution
under  which
Chartered.

Date  of  Charter.

England

Scotland
Scotland

Scotland

G.  Orient,

France
Virginia.
Virginia.
Virginia.

i  5733  I

I  June  I,  5741  f
December  i,  5755- ••
.September  9,  5757  ..

1757   I
July  21,  5758    J  •••■
February  2,  5759...  •
November  6,  5773  . .
November  6,  5773  .  .

April  15,  5775

jjuly  I,  1755

I  February  22,  5780

December  28,  5780. .

July  8,  5785

October  i,  5785.  . . .
February  6,  5786 . . . .
February  28,  5786...
May  6,  5786

I  June  15,  5876

July  6,  5786

October  29,  5787.. . .
October  29,  5787   . .  .

Norfolk.

Caroline  County.
Petersburg.

Fredericksburg.

Hampton.
Williamsburg.
Gloucester  Court-house.
Prince  George  Court-house,

York  Town.

Richmond.
EastviUe,  N.  H.  Co.
Princess  Ann  Co.
Staunton.
Manchester.
Petersburg.

Portsmouth.

Charlotte.

Richmond.

Richmond.

'  Removed  from  Port  Republican,  Island  of  San  Domingo,  when

of  blacks  occurred.

'  The  capital  of  the  State  having  been  changed  from  Williamsburg  to  Richmond.

FREEMASONRY    IN    THE   UNITED    STATES  1421

By  reference  to  the  Pocket  Co^npanion  before  mentioned,  it  will
be  seen  that  York  Lodge,  No.  204,  was  chartered  for  York  Town,
Va.,  August  I,  1755.  The  conclusion  is  that  it  became  dormant
(and  was  revived  in  1780),  as  was  probably  the  case  with  Royal
Exchange,  No.  172  of  date  December,  1733,  which  became  No.  i
of  June,  1 741.  Although  it  is  evident  from  authentic  history  that
the  Masons  of  Virginia  had  the  right  to  open  and  hold  a  Provin-
cial Grand  Lodge  under  and  by  authority  of  Cornelius  Harnett  as
Provincial  Grand  Master  by  right  of  his  deputation  as  such,  yet  it
was  deemed  by  them  more  in  accordance  with  Masonic  law  to  ob-
tain their  charters  from  the  Grand  Lodge  itself.  The  Masons  of
Norfolk  petitioned  for  and  obtained  the  Charter  for  the  Royal  Ex-
change, as  we  firmly  believe  with  Brother  Dove,  in  1 733.  The
records  of  V-^irginia  show  that  a  second  lodge  was  chartered  for  the
same  place  as  Norfolk  Lodge  June  i,  1741,  and  held  their  meetings
the  same  night  every  month  ;  we  therefore  think  that  Royal  Ex-
change had  ceased  to  exist,  and  Norfolk  Lodge  took  its  place  and
was  represented  in  Williamsburg  at  the  conventions  held  May  6,
1777,  and  October  13,  1778.

In  the  autumn  of  1784,  Lafayette  came  to  America,  and  visited
Washington  at  Mount  Vernon.  Of  all  the  generals  of  the  Revo-
lution he  had  been  the  most  beloved  by  Washington  ;  and  both  to
him  and  to  his  wife  in  France  had  the  hospitalities  of  Mount  Ver-
non been  often  tendered  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Washington.  Madame
Lafayette  had  wrought  with  her  own  hands  in  France  a  beautiful
Masonic  apron  of  white  satin  groundwork,  with  the  emblems  of
Masonry  delicately  delineated  with  needle-work  of  colored  silk  ;
and  this,  with  some  other  Masonic  ornaments,  was  placed  in  a  high-
ly finished  rosewood  box,  also  beautified  with  Masonic  emblems,
and  brought  to  Washington  on  this  occasion  as  a  present  by  La-
fayette. It  was  a  compliment  to  Washington  and  to  Masonry  del-
icately paid,  and  remained  among  the  treasures  of  Mount  Vernon
till  long  after  its  recipient's  death,  when  the  apron  was  presented
by  his  legatees  to  the  Washington  Benevolent  Society  and  by
them  to  tne  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania,  in  whose  possession  the
apron  now  is,  while  the  box  that  contained  it  is  in  possession  of  the
lodge  at  Alexandria.  The  apron  presented  to  Washington  by
Messrs.  Watson  &  Cassoul  two  years  before,  and  which  is  still  in
oossession  of  Lodge  No.  22  at  Alexandria,  has  been  often  mistaken

1422  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

for  this ;  but  the  two  aprons  may  be  easily  identified,  by  the  Wat-
son &  Cassoul  apron  being  wrought  with  gold  and  silver  tissue,
with  the  American  and  French  flags  combined  upon  it,  while  the
Lafayette  apron  is  wrought  with  silk,  and  has  for  its  design  on  the
frontlet  the  Mark  Master's  circle,  and  mystic  letters,  with  a  bee-
hive as  its  mark  in  the  center.  The  same  device  is  beautifully  in-
laid on  the  lid  of  the  box  in  which  it  was  originally  presented  to
Washington  ;  and  as  this  box  is  also  in  possession  of  Lodge  No.
22  at  Alexandria,  and  kept  with  the  Watson  &  Cassoul  apron,  it
has  by  many  been  supposed  that  this  was  the  apron  presented  in
1784  by  Lafayette.  This  mistake  has  also,  perhaps,  been  perpetu-
ated by  a  statement,  that  when  Lafayette  visited  this  lodge  during
his  visit  to  America  in  1824,  he  was  furnished  with  the  apron  now
in  possession  of  Lodge  No.  22,  and  in  the  box  in  which  he  had  in
1 784  presented  one  to  Washington,  to  wear  on  the  occasion  ;  and
that  he  there  alluded  to  it  as  the  one  he  had  in  former  years  pre-
sented to  his  distinguished  American  Brother.  Even  were  this
statement  true,  a  lapse  of  forty  years  might  have  misled  him  in  the
identity  of  the  apron,  particularly  as  it  was  handed  to  him  for  the
occasion  in  the  well-remembered  box  in  which  he  had,  in  his  early
Masonic  life,  presented  one  to  Washington.  The  historic  descrip-
tions  of  the  aprons  leave  no  doubt  as  to  the  identity  of  each,  and
both  are  among  the  valued  memorials  of  Washington's  Masonic
history.  The  Watson  &  Cassoul  sash  and  apron,  and  also  the  Ma-
sonic box  in  which  the  Lafayette  apron  was  presented  to  Wash-
ington,  were  presented  to  Lodge  No,  22  at  Alexandria,  June  3,
181 2,  by  Major  Lawrence  Lewis,  a  nephew  of  Washington,  in  be-
half of  his  son,  Master  Lorenzo  Lewis.'

North    Carolina.

The  first  organization  of  Masons  in  this  colony  was  a  lodge
warranted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  (Moderns)  '•  at  Wil
mington,  in  Cape  Fear  River,  in  the  Province  of  North  Carolinji,
March,  1754  (Calendar  says  1755)  ;  but  was  not  Listed  until  1756,
although  the  Constitution  was  paid  for  June  27,  1754."*

The  Royal  White  Hart  Lodge,  No.  338,  English  Register,  was
warranted  for  Halifax,  N.  C,  August  21,   1767.     It  was  retained

'  Hayden's  Washington,  etc.  *  John  Lane's  "  Masonic  Records,"  p.  67

Ti[i:  OLD  TUX  ■r.wi:k.\,  Piiii..\i)i:i.iMtfA

Tlio  earliest  known  meeting  place  of  Freemasons  in  Pennsylvania

FREEMASONRY    IN    THE   UNITED   STATES         1426

on  the  register  until  18 13.  The  first  is  known  as  St.  John's,  No.  i,
and  the  second  retains  its  original  name  of  Royal  White  Hart
Lodge,  No.  2.^

In  the  transaction  of  the  St.  John's  Grand  Lodge  of  Massa-
chusetts a  record  states  that  on  October  2,  1767,  that  body  granted
a  deputation  to  Thomas  Cooper,  Master  of  Pitt  County  Lodge,  as
Deputy  Grand  Master  of  the  Province.

In  1771,  a  lodge  now  known  as  St.  John's,  No.  3,  was  estab-
lished at  New  Berne.

Judge  Martin,  in  a  discourse  delivered  on  June  24,  1789,  says
that  Joseph  Montford  was  appointed,  toward  the  year  1769,  as
Provincial  Grand  Master  by  the  Duke  of  Beaufort,  and  in  1771  he
constituted  St.  John's  Lodge,  above  mentioned  as  No.  3  ;  that  this
was  probably  the  true  date  of  the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  of  North
Carolina,  for  on  December  16,  1787,  we  find  nine  lodges  in  the
territory ;  and  that  a  convention  was  held  at  Tarborough  and  or-
ganized "The  Most  Worshipful  Grand  Lodge  of  Ancient  Free  and
Accepted  Masons  of  North  Carolina."*

In  1 771,  a  Grand  Lodge  was  organized,  which  met  at  Newbern
and  Edenton.  The  records  were  destroyed  by  the  English  during
the  War  of  the  Revolution.

December  9,  1787,  an  effort  was  made  to  reorganize  the  Grand
Lodge  by  the  representatives  of  the  following  lodges :  Unanimity  ;
St.  John's,  No.  2  ;  Royal  Edwin,  No.  4 ;  Royal  White  Hart,  No.
403  ;  Royal  William,  No.  8  ;  Union  at  Fayetteville,  Blandford,
Bute,  and  Old  Cone.

At  a  meeting  of  the  Grand  Lodge  held  June  25,  1791,  the
lodges  were  all  renumbered  and  new  charters  were  issued  to  them.

The  General  Assembly  of  North  Carolina  incorporated  the
Grand  Lodge  in  1797.     Some  of  the  lodges  were  also  incorporated.

In  1856,  St.  John's  College  was  established  at  Oxford,  the  pres-
ent writer  having  furnished  a  design  for  the  building.  During  the
war,  from  1861  to  1865,  the  college  was  vacated  by  the  students.
After  the  war  the  Grand  Lodge  converted  the  building  and  grounds
into  an  orphans'  home,  and  with  varied  success  it  has  at  last  become
permanently  one  of  the  best  orphans'  homes  in  the  country.  Sever-
al additions  have  been  made  to  the  original  buildings.     This  Grand

'  John  Lane's  "  Masonic  Records,"  p.  Io8.
'  Mackey's  "  Encyclopajdia,"  p.  516.

1424  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Lodge  stands  among  the  first  of  the  Southern  States  for  its  pros-
perity in  all  essential  features.

Maine.

The  first  Masonic  lodge  organized  in  Maine  was  located  at
Falmouth,  which  was  subsequently  called  Portland.

Jeremy  Gridley,  Provincial  Grand  Master  for  Massachusetts
(St.  John's  Grand  Lodge),  granted  authority  to  Alexander  Ross  to
constitute  this  lodge.  We  learn  that  this  "  Constitution  "  was  not
acted  upon.  Ross  died  November  24,  1768,  and  a  petition  was
signed  by  eleven  Brethren,  and  sent  to  John  Rowe,  who  succeeded
Gridley,  and  on  March  30,  1 769,  he  granted  a  new  Charter,  deputiz-
ing William  Tyng  to  act  as  Master.  The  first  meeting  was  held
May  8th  of  that  year.  It  seems  that  the  two  rituals,  viz.,  the
"  Modern  "  and  "  Ancient,"  were  in  conflict  in  this  lodge,  and  in
1772  the  lodge  resolved  for  harmony's  sake  to  use  these  rituals  on
alternate  evenings.

June  5,  1778,  an  application,  which  did  not  have  a  sufficient
number  of  signers,  was  made  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts
(acting  under  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland),  to  be  called  Warren
Lodge,  to  be  located  at  Machias.  This  petition  was  returned,  and
when  properly  signed,  September  4,  1778,  the  Grand  Lodge  granted
a  Warrant,  September  10,  1778.

A  lodge  was  warranted  by  the  United  Grand  Lodge  of  Mas-
sachusetts, June  I,  1792,  to  be  named  Lincoln  Lodge.  The  same
Grand  Lodge  issued  a  Warrant  for  another  lodge  in  Portland  in
1806.

Maine  was  admitted  into  the  Union  of  the  States  in  1819,  where-
upon Simon  Greenleaf  issued  a  call  for  a  convention  to  be  held
October  14,  1819,  for  the  purpose  of  organizing  a  Grand  Lodge  for
that  State.  There  were  then  thirty  one  lodges  in  that  State  all
warranted  by  Grand  Lodges  in  Massachusetts.  Twenty-nine  of
these  unanimously  agreed  to  constitute  a  Grand  Lodge  in  Maine.

The  committee  appointed  by  this  convention,  in  consequence  of
the  determination  of  the  late  "Massachusetts  Grand  Lodge,  in
1781,"  that  all  charters  granted  without  the  limits  of  this  (Massa-
chusetts) State  shall  be  understood  to  remain  in  force  until  a  Grand
Lodge  is  formed  in  the  government  where  such  lodges  are  held  ; "
requested  that   the  connection   with  the  Grand   Lodge  of  Massa-

FREEMASONRY    IN   THE   UNITED    STATES  1425

chusetts  should  be  dissolved,  etc.,  which  was  finally  granted,  donating
$1,000  as  a  foundation  for  a  charity  fund,  and  the  District  Deputy
Grand  Masters  in  Maine  were  directed  to  pay  what  funds  thev
might  have  in  hand  belonging  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Massa-
chusetts  to  the  new  Grand  Lodge.

What  a  commentary  this  is  upon  the  conduct  of  very  many
Grand  Lodges,  who  fought  frightfully  against  the  organization  of
new  Grand  Lodges  in  territory  where  they  held  lodges  under  their
obedience.  The  generosity  and  Masonic  bearing  of  this  grand  old
Commonwealth  commend  the  Brethren  thereof  to  our  praise  and
admiration.  We  have  had  occasion  in  another  place  to  mention
this  historical  circumstance.

June  I,  1820,  twenty-four  bodies  were  represented  and  chose
their  Grand  Officers.  William  King,  the  Governor  of  the  State,
was  elected  the  first  Grand  Master.

The  Grand  Lodge,  through  the  Grand  Officers,  was  incorporated
by  the  Legislature  of  Maine,  June  24,  1824,  The  Grand  Officers
were  installed,  at  the  meeting-house  of  Rev.  Mr.  Payson,  by  the
Grand  Master  of  New  Hampshire.

Simon  Greenleaf  succeeded  William  King  as  Grand  Master.

At  a  meeting  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  July  10,  1820,  the  following
was  proposed :

"  To  consider  whether  a  person,  who  is  conscientiously  scru-
pulous against  taking  an  oath,  can  be  admitted  to  the  benefits  of
Masonry  by  solemn  affirmation."

This  was  fully  considered,  and  on  January  8,  1S24,  the  toiiow-
ing  report  of  the  committee  was  received  and  adopted  by  the  Grand
Lodge :

"  Your  committee  deem  this  a  question  of  no  little  importance
as  it  bears  on  the  interests  of  the  Craft.  On  the  one  hand,  if
decided  in  the  negative,  there  will  be  necessarily  excluded  iium  a
participation  of  all  the  Mysteries,  and  very  many  of  the  benefits
and  advantages  of  Masonry  a  large  class  of  Men,  among  the  most
respectable  of  our  citizens,  on  account  of  their  integrity,  their  con-
scientious regard  for  all  those  great  moral  principles  which  dignify
human  nature,  and  certainly  not  among  the  most  backward  in  deeds
of  mercy  and  charity.  On  the  other  hand,  if  decided  m  the
affirmative,  it  would  seem  at  last  to  sanction  a  departure  from  what,
for  ages,  has  been  deemed  a  form  of  sacred  words,  and  what  has

1426  HISTORY    OF    FREEMASONRY

not  hitherto  failed  to  bind  the  consciences  of  otherwise  the  most
hardened  offenders.  It  is  impossible  that  your  committee  should
not  examine  with  mistrust  a  principle  which  should  shut  out  from
the  Masonic  Fraternity  such  men  as  Clarkson  ;  and  they  can  not
close  their  eyes  to  the  bad  effect  which  sanctioning  such  principles
must  have  on  the  moral  sense  of  the  Community.  On  the  whole,
your  Committee  conceive  that  no  Masonic  principle  is  violated  in
adapting  the  form  of  the  Obligations  to  consciences  of  Men  equally
good  and  true,  but  on  the  contrary,  that  serious  hurt  would  grow  to
the  Institution  of  Masonry,  by  an  adherence  to  the  technical  form
of  words,  heretofore  used,  for  the  purpose  of  securing  that  fidelity
on  the  Crafts  Men  which  have  never  yet  been  violated,  even  when
all  other  principles  have  been  wrecked,  in  the  vortex  of  unhallowed
appetites,  or  the  whirlwind  of  ungoverned  passions."

The  Grand  Lodges  of  the  United  States  commented  upon  this
action.  Missouri,  Tennessee,  Kentucky,  Delaware,  Virginia,  and
Pennsylvania  protested,  and  the  last  passed  the  following  resolu-
tions :

"  That  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Maine  be  respectfully  requested  to
reconsider  the  resolution  adopted  by  them  on  the  8th  January,
1834,  proposing  a  new  mode  in  which  the  degrees  of  Masonry  can
be  conferred.

"  That  this  Grand  Lodge  feel  themselves  bound  to  refuse  to
recognize  any  person,  as  a  Mason,  known  to  be  initiated  in  the
Mode  proposed  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Maine."

Soon  after  this  the  so-called  "  Morgan  excitement "  prevailed  to
such  an  extent  over  all  the  Northeastern  States,  that  it  had  the
same  depressing  effect  as  in  New  York  and  Pennsylvania.

In  1829  there  were  fifty-eight  lodges.  A  large  number  of  these
suspended  their  labors.

At  the  annual  meeting  of  the  Grand  Lodge  in  1837,  the  oldest
lodge  at  Portland  was  the  only  one  represented.  In  1844,  sixteen
lodges  were  represented.  In  1849,  Mount  Hope  was  organized,  the
only  one  in  twenty  years.  In  i860,  there  were  ninety -six  lodges,
having  four  thousand  three  hundred  and  nineteen  members.  In
cen  years  (1870)  there  were  one  hundred  and  fifty-four  lodges  with
fourteen  thousand  seven  hundred  and  twenty-six  members.

FREEMASONRY   IN   THE   UNITED   STATES         1427

New  Jersey.

This  colony  was  the  home  of  the  first  Provincial  Grand  Master
appointed  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  for  any  Province  in
America,  to  wit,  that  of  Daniel  Coxe,  who  received  a  deputation  in
1729.  Anderson  mentions  the  issuing  of  this  Masonic  instrument
in  his  History  of  Masonry.  It  was  dated  contemporaneously  with
one  to  Lower  Saxony,  and  one  to  Bengal,  India.  Daniel  Coxe  ap-
pears never  to  have  exercised  any  Masonic  power  in  New  Jersey.
He  was  a  resident  of  Burlington,  and  represented  Gloucester  County,
N.  J.,  in  the  Assembly  of  1716,  at  which  he  was  elected  Speaker.

On  May  13,  1761,  a  constitutional  number  of  Master  Masons  in
and  about  the  town  of  Newark  petitioned  for  and  received  from
the  hands  of  George  Harrison,  Provincial  Grand  Master  of  the
Province  of  New  York,  a  Warrant  of  Dispensation,  Directed  to  Will-
iam Tukey  as  Master,  and  others  as  officers,  to  meet  and  operate  as
a  lodge,  the  first  meeting-place  being  Rising  Sun  Tavern  ;  after  that
t!ie  communications  were  held  at  the  residences  of  the  respective
members.  The  lodge  was  called  St.  John's  Lodge,  No.  i,  and  pre-
serves its  original  minutes  to  the  present  day.

"  This  Lodge  observed  Washington's  Birthday  as  a  Masonic  Fes-
tival as  early  as  1792  ;  and  that  venerable  Lodge  has,  from  that  time
to  the  present,  yearly  convened  on  that  festive  day  to  commemorate
the  Masonic  Virtues  of  Washington."*

On  June  24,  1762,  Jeremy  Gridley,  Grand  Master  of  Masons  of
the  Province  of  Massachusetts,  granted  a  deputation  to  Jonathan
Hampton,  Esq.,  to  constitute  a  lodge  by  the  name  of  Temple
Lodge,  No.  I,  to  be  located  in  Elizabethtown,  N.  J.

On  June  20,  1764,  as  set  forth  in  an  original  document  in  the
Archives  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania,  the  Grand  Lodge  of
London  (Ancients),  Thomas  Erskine,  Grand  Master,  appointed
Wm.  Ball,  Esq.,  Grand  Master  of  Masons  for  the  Province  of  Penn-
sylvania  and  the  territories  thereunto  belonging :  by  virtue  of  this
authority,  three  lodges  were  instituted  in  New  Jersey,  in  the  years
1767,  1779,  and  1781.

In  1779  the  headquarters  of  General  George  Washington  were
at  Morristown,  N.  J.  Numerous  military  lodges  were  organized  in
the  American  Army  ;  and  on  December  27th  of  that  year  a  festival

»  Sidney  Hayden's  "  Washington."  etc

J428  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

was  held  by  the  "  American  Union  Lodge  "  at  Morristown,  at  which
Bro.  George  Washington  was  present.  The  Minutes  of  the  Pro-
ceedings of  American  Union  Lodge  are  at  the  present  time  in  the
possession  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Connecticut.

On  February  7.  1 780,  a  convention  lodge  held  at  Morristown.
in  accordance  with  a  previous  understanding,  December  27,  1779,
favored  a  Grand  Lodge  of  America.  This  movement,  Pennsyl-
vania also  endorsed  in  1780.  New  Jersey  subsequently  withdrew
its  assent.

A  convention  of  Master  Masons  was  held  on   December,   18,

1786,  for  the  preparatory  consideration  of,  and  to  m.ark  out  the
course  to  be  adopted  for,  the  formation  of  a  Grand  Lodge  for  the
State.     This  resulted  in  the  adoption  of  the  constitution  on  A^v^  ?^

1787,  from  which  period  the  Grand  Lodge  dates.

Mz'c/izgan.

No  written  history  of  Masonic  events  prior  to  1826  have  as  yet
been  discovered.  From  the  "  Historical  Sketch,"  by  Brother  Foster
Pratt,  M.D.,  Past  Grand  Secretary  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  Free  and
Accepted  Masons,  of  Michigan,  we  are  enabled  to  glean  all  the  well-
established  facts  as  to  the  early  introduction  of  Masonry  into  that
State  :  "  From  1764  to  1844,  historical  material  accumulated  around
our  Mystic  Temple,  not  in  consecutive  records,  nor  in  permanent
forms,  but  in  fragmentary  papers,  and  varying  traditions  ;  and  it  has
required  no  little  research  and  labor  to  dig  up  from  '  the  rubbish '
and  to  establish  beyond  question,  exact  dates,  historical  landmarks,
and  the  true  order  of  Masonic  events."

There  has  been  no  written  history  of  Masonry  in  Michigan  prior
to  1844.  Three  Grand  Lodges  have  been  organized  in  that  State.
The  first  was  in  1826.  The  first  lodge,  "  named  Zion,"  was  formed
by  a  Wa:-ant  from  Provincial  Grand  Master  George  Harrison,  of
Nsw  York,  under  the  date  of  April  27,  a.d.  1764,  which  was  No.
448  Register  of  England,  and  No.  i  of  Detroit.  It  is  most  likely
that  the  military  and  citizens  of  Detroit  were  combined  in  this
lodge.

When  the  British  troops  at  a  later  date  were  serving  in  Michi-
gan, there  were  probably  three  military  lodges — which  were  noticed
in  an  English  Masonic  Register  as  No,  289  at  Detroit  in  1773  ;
No.   320  at  Detroit  in   1783;  and  St.  John's  Lodge,  No.   373,  at

FREEMASONRY    IN   THE    UNITED   STATES         1429

Mackinaw  in  1785.     Tiiese  were  undoubtedly  military  lodges.     The
registry  shows  that  their  warrants  came  direct  from  England.

These  lodges  left  no  trace  in  Michigan,  but  they  all  went  with
their  respective  regiments,  in  i  796,  when  Michigan  was  surrendered
to  the  United  States.

The  Second  Masonic  Period  commenced  in  1794.  From  the
peculiar  conditions  of  the  country  and  the  times  it  seems  no  records
were  preserved  ;  yet  there  was  some  evidence  that  during  a  por-
tion of  that  time,  for  thirty  years,  Zion  Lodge  maintained  life  and
performed  some  labor.  So  long  as  Great  Britain  claimed  Michi-
gan as  a  part  of  Upper  Canada,  which  was  until  1796,  the  Ma-
sonic jurisdiction  was  therefore  in  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Canada,
which  had  already  been  organized.  On  September  7,  1 794,  a  War-
rant was  issued  to  Brethren  in  Detroit  from  the  Provincial  Grand
Lodge  of  Canada,  called  Zion  Lodge,  No.  10.  This  lodge  was  in-
stituted December  19,  1794,  James  Donaldson,  Worshipful  Master.
In  1796  American  troops  planted  the  flag  and  institutions  of  the
United  States  at  Detroit.

The  Third  Masonic  Period,  a.d.  1806,  New  York  jurisdic-
tion.— The  records  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New  York  show  that
September  3,  1806,  a  Charter  was  granted  by  DeWitt  Clinton,
Grand  Master,  to  the  Brethren  of  Detroit,  by  which  Zion  Lodge
was  reformed  and  recorded  as  "  No.  i  at  Detroit."  With  their  pe-
tition they  surrendered  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New  York  the  orig-
inal Warrant  of  1764.  This  lodge  was  "  installed  "  July  6,  1807.
We  find  no  other  records  of  interest.

The  Fourth  Masonic  Period,  a.d.  1812-20,  second  war  with
England. — Until  October  5,  18 13,  when  the  battle  of  the  Thames
occurred,  there  were  no  meetings,  as  the  country  was  occupied  by  the
British  forces.  In  October,  General  Lewis  Cass  became  Governor,
and  the  American  flag  again  waved  at  Detroit,  the  lodge  having
forfeited  its  Charter  by  the  events  of  the  war.  Upon  petition  of  its
members  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New  York,  March  14,  1816,  granted
a  Charter  to  Zion  Lodge,  No.  62.  instead  of  former  No.  i.  By  a
new  arrangement  of  numbers  in  1819,  according  to  the  originai
charters,  this  lodge  became  No.  3.

The  Fifth  Masonic  Period,  First  Grand  Lodge. — A  dispensa-
tion was  granted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New  York  in  1 821,  and  in-
stituted December  26,  182 1,  by  the  name  of  Detroit  Lodge,  No.  337.

I430  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

March  7,  1822,  in  the  town  of  Pontiac,  County  of  Oakland,  by
the  name  and  style  of  Oakland  Lodge,  No.  343,  which  had  been
previously  organized  under  dispensation.

A  Warrant  was  issued  September  i,  1824,  a  dispensation  having
been  issued  on  June  12,  1824,  to  form  a  lodge  in  Green  Bay,  in  the
county  of  Brown,  by  the  name  of  Minomanie,  No.  374,  which  is  in
Wisconsin  at  this  time,  as  then  it  was  in  the  territory  of  Michigan.
December  i,  1824,  at  the  town  of  Monroe,  in  the  county  of  Mon-
roe, territory  of  Michigan,  by  the  name  of  Monroe  Lodge,  No.  375.

The  Grand  Lodge  was  Organized  in  1826. — The  convention
met  June  24,  1826.  Were  present  by  their  representatives  Lodges
No.  3,  No.  337,  No.  374,  and  No.  375,  all  chartered  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  New  York.  No.  343  of  Pontiac  was  not  present  at
this  meeting,  but  appeared  later  and  joined  in  its  action.  June
28th  a  constitution  was  adopted.  July  31st  Grand  Officers  were
elected  and  installed.  This  new  Grand  Lodge  was  duly  recognized
by  the  Mother  Grand  Lodge  of  New  York  by  suitable  and  frater-
nal resolutions,  June  11,  1827.  At  the  Institution  of  the  Grand
Lodge,  General  Lewis  Cass  was  installed  Grand  Master.  Four
lodges  were  soon  thereafter  organized,  viz.  :  Stony  Creek,  Wes-
tern Star,  St.  Cloud,  and  Friendship.  These  made  nine  lodges  in
its  jurisdiction.  The  meager  official  records  of  its  proceedings
have  been  published,  yet  all  that  the  Grand  Lodge  accomplished
soon  came  to  naught.

The  principal  importance  that  attaches  to  the  matter  arises
from  the  fact  that  it  became  the  cause  of  four  years  of  Masonic
confusion,  after  eleven  years  of  silence.  The  exact  date  of  the  sus-
pension of  life  is  not  known,  and  the  manner  of  it  was  unique ;
"  and  when  dead  it  did  not  rest  in  peace."

As  a  Masonic  curiosity,  the  dispensation  granted  by  Grand  Mas-
ter Lewis  Cass  to  Stony  Creek  Lodge,  January  9,  1828,  is  yet  in
existence,  which  is  the  only  lodge  which  maintained  its  existence
during  the  dark  days  of  the  anti-Masonic  excitement.

The  Sixth  Masonic  Period,  a.d.  1840-44,  Reconstruction.
— Michigan  attained  to  Statehood  in  1837.  The  population  in-
creased from  1829,  when  Masonic  labor  ceased,  with  only  about
30,000,  to  nearly  250,000  in  1840.  The  increase  of  population  be-
ing mainly  from  States  where  Masonry  had  resumed  its  labors  after
the  recent  anti-Masonic  crusade,  the   Institution  began   to    revivft

FREEMASONRY  IN   THE   UNITED    STATES  1431

in  1840,  and  on  November  15th  of  that  year  a  convention  was  held
at  Mt.  Clemens.  Nothing  definite  was  accomplished  and  it  ad-
journed to  May  5,  1841.  The  history  of  the  proceedings  of  the
Brethren  during  the  four  years  between  1840  and  1844  is  very  in-
teresting but  entirely  too  lengthy  for  our  limits,  and  we  refer  our
readers  to  the  local  history  of  the  Grand  Lodges  of  Michigan.*

On  September  17,  1844,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Michigan  was
constitutionally  organized  and  elected  the  Grand  Officers — which
Grand  Lodge  continues  to  the  present  time  and  has  grown  and
prospered  and  is  among  the  leading  Grand  Lodges  of  the  United
States.

Delaware.

There  appears  to  be  some  uncertainty  concerning  the  first  lodge
instituted  in  Delaware.  It  is  said  that  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scot-
land in  1764  warranted  Union  Lodge  No.  121,  at  Middletown,  for
General  Majoribank's  Regiment.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsyl-
vania granted  warrants  to  Lodge  No.  5,  at  Cantwell's  Bridge  on
June  24,  1765,  and  renewed  March  5,  1798,  and  was  surrendered,
January  30,  ^815,  in  order  to  unite  in  forming  the  Grand  Lodge  pf
Delaware.  Hyneman's  World's  Masonic  Register  says:  "The
Grand  Lodge  of  Delaware  was  organized  June  6,  1806."  Here  is  a
difference  of  ten  years  in  the  date  of  organization  of  the  Grand
Lodge.

A  Charter  to  Lodge  No.  13,  at  Christiana  Ferry,  afterward
Wilmington,  was  granted,  December  27,  1769;  surrendered  and
renewed,  January  22,  1789;  was  vacated,  September  15,  1806,  for
un-Masonic  proceedings  in  the  establishment  of  the  pretended
Grand  Lodge  of  Delaware  (Hyneman,  ante')  ;  to  Lodge  No.  18  at
Dover,  Kent  County,  granted,  August  26,  1775;  surrendered  and
renewed.  May  31,  1787  ;  to  Lodge  No.  33,  at  New  Castle  and  at
Christiana  Bridge,  one  year  at  one  place  and  the  ensuing  year  at
the  other,  granted,  April  3,  1780  ;  surrendered  and  renewed,
March  i,  1790;  vacated,  September  15,  1806,  for  un-Masonic
conduct  in  the  formation  of  the  pretended  Grand  Lodge  of  Mary-
land ;  to  Lodge  No.  44,  at  Duck  Creek  Cross  Roads ;  granted,
June  24,  1785;  surrendered  and  renewed,  September  6,  1790;  has
ceased  long  since  ;  to  Lodge  No.  63,  at  Lewistown ;  granted.  May

'  "  Historical  Sketch  of  Early  Masonry  in  Michigan,"  bv  Foster  Pratt,  p.  42  et  seq.

1432  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

28,  1794',  vacated,  April  7,  1806;  to  Lodge  No.  96,  the  Del
aware  Hiram  Lodge  at  Newark  ;  granted,  December  6,  1802  ;
vacated,  September  15,  1806,  for  un-Masonic  conduct  in  the  forma-
tion of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Delaware.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  Maryland  granted  a  Warrant  to  St.  John's
Lodge  in  Laureltown,  Sussex  County,  on  September  18,  1792.  It  be-
came delinquent  to  the  Grand  Lodge  and  its  Warrant  was  forfeited,
June  13,  1800.  June  6,  1806,  it  petitioned  to  be  revised  but  was  re-
fused. Grand  Lodge  warranted  a  new  lodge  named  "  Hope  "  at  the
same  time  and  place.  Nine  Brethren,  said  to  represent  Lodge  No.
31,  Grand  Lodge  of  Maryland,  Nos.  ^T)^  96,  and  14,  Grand  Lodge
of  Pennsylvania,  met  at  the  town  hall  in  Wilmington,  and  resolved
that,  as  a  matter  of  right,  and  for  the  general  benefit  of  Masonry,
they  ought  to  form  a  Grand  Lodge  within  said  State,  and  did  then
proceed  to  form  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Delaware.  A  committee  of
live  was  appointed  to  prepare  a  set  of  regulations.  The  meeting
adjourned  to  June  7,  1806,  when  twelve  Brethren  were  present.
They  proceeded  to  the  appointment  of  Grand  Officers,  pro  tempore,
and  thereupon,  without  any  previous  installation,  opened  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Delaware.  Warrants  were  granted  without  any  charge
except  the  secretary's  fees  for  executing  them,  etc.  The  Grand
Lodge  of  Pennsylvania,  to  whom  the  proceedings  had  been  re-
ferred, refused  to  recognize  them,  that  five  lodges  at  least  were
indispensably  necessary  to  form  a  Grand  Lodge  (there  were  only
five  lodges  at  the  formation  of  the  pretended  Grand  Lodge),  and
that  three  of  the  lodges  were  indebted  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Pennsylvania  for  fees  and  dues.  Accordingly,  these  warrants  were
vacated.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  Maryland  also  refused  to  recognize
the  new  Grand  Lodge,  and  in  1808,  the  Charter  of  Hope  was
annulled.  The  action  taken  by  Pennsylvania  and  Maryland  did
not  seem  to  affect  the  new  Grand  Lodge,  and  in  18 16  the  Lodge
No.  5,  Cantvvell's  Bridge,  under  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania,
joined  the  new  Grand  Lodge  by  permission  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Pennsylvania,  thus  making  five.

Vermont.

In  1778,  some  of  the  towns  in  New  Hampshire,  near  the  Con-
necticut River,  put  themselves  under  the  control  of  Vermont.
The  attention  of  the  citizens  was  directed  to  this  circumstance,  and

FREEMASONRY    IN   THE   UNITED   STATES  1433

a  petition  from  sixteen  towns,  including  Hanover  and  some  others,
east  of  Connecticut  River,  was  presented  to  the  Legislature  of
Vermont,  at  the  first  session  in  March,  1778,  with  the  request  to
receive  them  into  Union  and  Confederation.  At  the  next  session
of  the  Legislature  an  act  was  passed  to  authorize  these  towns  to
elect  and  send  members  to  the  Legislature  at  their  next  session.
At  the  session  of  the  General  Assembly,  in  October,  1778,  delegates
from  at  least  eight  towns  of  New  Hampshire  took  their  seats  in  the
Assembly.*

We  have  stated  this  much  of  the  political  history  of  :;hat  early
period,  to  account  for  circumstances  in  the  Masonic  history,  which
would  not  be  otherwise  understood,  viz.:  that  the  original  petition
for  a  Charter  for  a  Vermont  lodge  was  dated  at  "  Cornish,  Vermont,"
and  why  the  lodge  met  at  Charlestown,  N.  H.,  in  place  of  Spring-
field, Vt.,  which  town  was  named  in  the  Charter.  Again :  Ira
Allen's  History  says  that,  "On  the  meeting  of  the  Legislature  of
Vermont  at  Windsor,  February  12,  1779,  to  get  rid  of  a  connection
which  had  occasioned  so  much  trouble  and  danger,  the  Assembly
passed  an  Act  dissolving  the  Union  of  the  sixteen  towns  in  New
Hampshire."  '

For  a  period  of  four  years  ending  February,  1782,  both  sides  of
the  Connecticut  River  were  to  some  extent  common  territory.^

November  8,  1781,  a  petition  from  Cornish,  Vt,  was  pre-
sented to  St.  Andrew's  Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts,  and  a
Charter  was  ordered  to  be  issued  November  10,  1781,  the  lodge  to
be  located  at  Springfield,  Vt.

This  lodge,  instead  of  meeting  at  Springfield,  Vt.,  held  the
meetings  in  Charlestown,  N.  H.  May  17,  1787,  the  lodge  was  in
some  doubt  as  to  the  propriety*  of  their  meeting  in  Charlestown,
N.  H.

A  Charter  was  applied  for,  to  St.  Andrew's  Grand  Lodge,  for  a
lodge  at  Charlestown,  named  Faithful,  which  was  granted,  F"ebruary
2,  1788.  The  Vermont  lodge  was  removed  to  its  proper  place  at
Springfield.  On  May  14,  1 795,  upon  petition  to  the  Grand  Lodge,  the
said  lodge  was  moved  to  Windsor,  Vt.,  and  the  lodge  met  there  until
September  19,  183 1,  when  it  suspended  its  meetings,  in  consequence
of  the  anti-Masonic  or  Morgan  excitement.     On  January  10,  1850.

'  Ira  Allen's  History,  in  Ceorge  F.  Koon's  "  Freemasonry  in  Vermont."
'  Ibid.  3  Ibid.

1434  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

upon  petition,  the  present  Charter  was  granted  by  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Vermont.  The  second  lodge  established  in  Vermont  was
chartered  by  St.  Andrew's  Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts,  January
20,  1785,  and  was  named  North  Star,  in  Manchester,  Bennington
County,  and  was  constituted,  February  3,  1785.

Dorchester  Lodge  was  the  third  lodge  constituted  in  Vermont
previous  to  the  formation  of  a  Grand  Lodge  in  Vermont.  This
lodge  was  chartered  by  Sir  John  Johnson,  May  5,  1791,  Grand
Master  of  the  Province  of  Quebec.

Temple  Lodge,  at  Bennington,  was  chartered  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Connecticut,  May  18,  1793.

Union  Lodge,  at  Middlebury,  was  the  last  lodge  chartered  prior
to  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Vermont.  The  Charter
was  issued  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Connecticut,  May  15,  1794.

A  convention  was  held  at  Manchester,  August  5,  1794,  and  the
following  lodges  were  represented,  viz.:  North  Star,  Dorchester,
and  Temple.  After  appointing  committees  for  several  purposes,
preliminary  to  a  permanent  establishment  of  a  Grand  Lodge,  the
convention  adjourned,  to  meet  at  Rutland,  October  14,  1794,  at
which  time  the  Grand  Lodge  adopted  the  constitution.  There
were  present,  by  representatives,  the  following  lodges,  viz.  :  North
Star,  Vermont  Lodge,  Dorchester,  Temple,  and  Union.  The
Grand  Officers  were  elected.  Brother  Noah  Smith  being  Grand
Master.

The  Grand  Lodge  continued  to  hold  the  annual  communica-
tions until  during  the  anti-Masonic  excitement  in  1826.  From
1828  to  1836  many  of  the  lodges  failed  to  be  represented,  and  to
pay  their  annual  dues  to  the  Grand  Lodge.  At  the  Annual  Com-
munication, October  11,  1831,  a  resolution,  recommending  an  un-
qualified surrender  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  charters  of  the
several  secular  lodges  was  dismissed  by  a  vote  of  ayes  99  to  noes  19.

Without  dwelling  upon  the  history  of  that  time,  which  tried
the  souls  and  patience  of  all  good  Masons,  we  extract  from  the
proceedings  of  the  Grand  Lodge  held  October  7,  1834.

At  the  session  of  October  7,  1834,  the  following  transaction
took  place  :

On  motion  of  Bro.  Joel  Winch,  a  committee  of  three  was  ap-
pointed to  examine  the  communications  received  from  secular
lodges  and  present  the  views  of  the  Grand  Lodge  at  this  time.     N

FREEMASONRY   IN   THE   UNITED   STATES  1435

B.  Haswell,  Joel  Winch,  and  Solomon  Mason  were  appointed,  who
made  the  following  report :

Whereas,  The  Grand  Lodge  of  the  State  of  Vermont  has  witnessed  with  re-
grets the  assembling  in  different  counties  of  the  State  of  Masons  called  together
by  a  notice  or  authority  new  and  unknown  to  the  usages  of  the  craft  and  in  op-
position to  the  constitution  of  the  order  ;  therefore

Resolved,  That  the  Grand  Lodge  deem  the  assemblage  of  Masons  in  the
manner  above  alluded  to  to  be  unmasonic  and  unconstitutional.

Resolved,  That  the  resolution  adopted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  at  its  last  session
(whereby  permission  was  given  to  the  secular  Lodges  to  surrender  their  charters
and  records,  giving  to  said  Lodges  authority  to  retain  and  dispose  of  their  prop-
erty and  funds  as  they  see  fit)  was  a  measure  calculated  to  relieve  [all]  who
wished  to  retire  from  Masonry.

Resolved,  That  the  Grand  Lodge  do  hereby  receive,  and  they  instruct  their
Secretary  to  receive  hereafter,  such  charters  and  records  as  may  be  surrendered
by  virtue  of  the  resolution  aforesaid,  and  they  order  the  same  whenever  surren-
dered to  be  deposited  among  its  archives.

Resolved,  That  this  Grand  Lodge  feel  it  a  duty  they  owe  themselves  as  well
as  the  whole  Masonic  fraternity  to  declare,  that  while  its  individual  members  are
left  to  the  free  and  unmolested  enjoyment  of  their  sentiments  upon  the  various
subjects  connected  with  religion  and  politics,  and  the  right  to  judge  of  men  an^
their  actions,  they  hereby  most  solemnly  declare  that  Masonic  bodies  have  not
the  right  to  connect  the  institution  with  the  sectarian  or  party  views  of  either ;
that  any  attempt  thereat  is  a  gross  innovation  upon  those  principles  which  among
good  and  correct  Masons  are  universally  acknowledged,  and  should  be  univer-
sally practised  upon.

Resolved,  That  the  Grand  Lodge  do  at  this  time  as  they  have  hitherto  done,
declare  to  the  world  that  the  object  of  their  association,  and  motives  for  continu-
ing therein,  are  founded  upon  the  principles  of  brotherly  love,  relief,  and  truth.
They  disclaim  the  right  of  Masons  to  inflict  corporeal  punishment  and  acknowl-
edge no  other  right  to  enforce  obedience  from  its  members  but  reprimand,  sus-
pension and  expulsion.

Resolved,  That  the  Grand  Lodge  recommend  to  those  brethren  who  incline
still  to  adhere  to  the  institution  of  Masonry,  to  continue  to  cultivate  a  spirit  of
good  will  towards  those  who  may  differ  from  them  respecting  the  origin  and  con-
tinuance of  Free  Masonry  ;  and  while  we  are  ready  to  forgive  those  whose  fidelity
has  been  shaken  by  one  of  those  popular  commotions  incident  to  our  free  insti-
tutions, we  are  also  ready  to  judge  with  candor  the  motives  by  which  they  have
been  governed.

In  presenting  the  foregoing  resolutions,  your  committee  will  close  their  re-
port in  the  language  of  one  of  the  late  officers  of  this  Grand  Lodge  whose  labors
on  earth  are  finished  ;  we  ask  you  to  gaze  with  us  upon  the  ominous  gathering,
which  to  no  eye  can  be  viewless  ;  we  ask  you  to  contemplate  its  swelling  aspect,
its  various  phases,  and  its  multiform  ramifications  ;  listen  to  its  busy  notes  of
preparation  and  anticipate  its  maturity  of  strength,  and  then  imagine  its  con-

1436  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

summation  to  have  taken  place  ;  then  cast  your  eye  around  and  see  how  many
have  quaked  and  quailed,  how  many  have  failed,  how  many  have  surrendered  at
discretion,  and  how  many  have  renounced  their  faith  and  armed  to  batter  us
down  ;  then  complete  the  picture,  and  when  you  find  the  smoke  and  din  of  the
conflict  is  passed,  and  the  light  streaming  in  upon  us  once  more,  not  a  heart
flinching,  not  a  hand  palsied,  but  each  and  every  one  still  invincible  in  defence
of  the  mighty  truth.

If  Free  Masonry  falls,  her  monument  will  not  crumble,  nor  her  epitaph  fade.
It  is  erected  upon  the  everlasting  hills,  it  is  firmly  planted  in  the  deepest  vallies.
The  widow's  prayer  of  joy,  the  orphan's  tear  of  gratitude  as  they  ascend,  like
the  dew  before  the  solar  influence,  bear  with  them  its  eulogy  and  its  praise.  So
long  as  there  remains  a  fragment  of  the  temples  of  antiquity  ;  so  long  as  one
stone  of  the  edifices  it  has  consecrated  shall  rest  upon  another  ;  so  long  as  broth-
erly love,  relief,  and  truth  obtain  among  men,  so  long  will  its  mausoleum  endure.
The  waves  of  popular  prejudice  may  beat  against  it,  the  shouts  of  popular  clamor
may  be  thrown  back  in  echoes  from  its  base,  the  winds  and  weathers  of  time  may
press  upon  it,  but  still  it  will  endure,  glory  will  encircle  it,  honor  will  be  yielded
to  it,  and  veneration  will  be  felt  for  the  hallowed  recollections  it  quickens  into
action  ;  and  hereafter  when  he  casts  his  eyes  over  the  galaxy  of  social  institu-
tions among  men,  the  philanthropist  will  involuntarily  associate  with  his  subject
that  other  and  celestial  galaxy,  and  realize  as  now  from  the  fiat  that  has  effected
the  one,  so  then  from  the  economy  that  controlled  the  other,  that  he  will  soon
have  to  mourn  for  a  lost  Pleiad  which  can  never  more  be  visible  in  the  moral
constellation.

NATHAN  B,  HASWELL,

For  Committee.

Note. — When  we  see  the  present  status  of  Masonry  at  the  end  of  the  19th  century,
how  true  a  prophet  was  Brother  Haswell !

The  few  faithful  Brethren  in  Vermont  never  surrendered  their
Masonry,  but  continued  to  hold  their  communications  of  the  Grand
Lodge,  and  adjourned  from  year  to  year,  until  all  the  excitement
had  died  out,  when  the  politicians  discovered  that  they  could  no
longer  impose  upon  the  people.

Many  of  the  Brethren  wished  again  to  resume  the  work  of
Masonry  in  Vermont,  and  thought  it  desirable  that  it  should  be
done  under  the  old  organization,  as  they  had  made  provision  for
keeping  it  up  to  the  then  present  date.  Bro.  Grand  Master
Nathan  B.  Haswell,  who  had  held  the  Grand  Lodge  together  for
so  many  years  (blessed  be  his  memory),  called  a  meeting  of  the
Officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  to  be  held  at  Mason's  Hall,  in  Burling-
ton, January  14,  1846,  at  which  time  and  place  the  Grand  Officers
met    and    the    Grand    Lodge  of  Vermont  resumed    its    legitimate

FREEMASONRY   IN   THE   UNITED   STATES  1437

functions  and  prestige,  and  has  continued  to  do  so  ever  since ;  and,
notwithstanding  the  great  trials  and  persecutions  inflicted  upon
Masonry  as  an  institution,  and  upon  individuals,  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Vermont  stands  to-day  upon  a  higher  pinnacle  than  ever
before.

The  "  Green  Mountain  Boys"  will  ever  maintain  ihe  honor  and
glory  of  their  great  antecedents.

Florida.

Originally,  after  the  discovery  by  Ponce  de  Leon  in  1513,
Florida  belonged  to  the  Kingdom  of  Spain.  The  country  was
settled  by  Huguenots  in  1562,  and  permanently  occupied  by
Spaniards  in  1565,  at  St.  Augustine.  It  was  ceded  to  Great
Britain  in  1763,  again  to  Spain  in  1783,  and  finally  to  the  United
States  in  1819,  and  admitted  to  the  Union  in  1845.

The  origin  of  Masonry  in  Florida  is  somewhat  vague,  and  the
writers  on  the  history  of  Masonry  do  not  agree  as  to  when  it  was
first  introduced  into  that  country.  In  1768,  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Scotland  erected  a  lodge,  No.  143,  at  East  Florida  and  appointed
Governor  James  Grant  Prov.  G.  M.  for  North  America,  southern
district.*

A  "  memorial  from  the  Brethren  of  St.  Andrew's  Lodge,  No.
I,  late  of  West  Florida,  now  of  Charlestown,  South  Carolina,  with
sundry  papers  relative  thereto,"  was  presented  to  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Pennsylvania,  July  8,  1783.  Of  this  lodge  nothing  more  is
known.  When  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania  responded  to
the  memorial  and  a  Charter  was  issued,  it  was  forwarded  to  the
W.  Master  of  another  lodge  with  instructions  to  ascertain  if  the
W.  Master  and  members  of  the  said  lodge  were  of  the  Ancient
and  Honorable  Fraternity,  and  consented  to  be  under  that  juris-
diction. In  1768,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  granted  a  Charter
to  a  lodge  in  East  Florida.

There  is  no  trace  whatever  of  such  a  lodge.

Brother  Mackey  indicates  that  Lodge  No.  30,  chartered  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  South  Carolina  (Ancients),  at  St.  Augustine,
East  Florida,  became  "  e.xtinct  in  consequence  cf  a  decree  of  the
King  of  Spain."     No.  56,  at  Pensacola,  was  chartered  by  the  Grand

'  Gould,  vol.  vi.,  p.  403.

1438  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Lodge  of  South  Carolina  (date  is  unknown).  It  also  became
extinct.  The  same  Grand  Lodge,  June  30,  1820,  chartered  Florid-
ian  Virtues  Lodge,  at  St.  Augustine,  in  place  of  No.  30,  and  which
also  ceased  to  work  in  1827.  June  29,  182 1,  that  Grand  Lodge
revived  No.  56  at  Pensacola,  by  the  name  of  Good  Intention
Lodge,  No.  17,  which  became  extinct  in  1825.  January  3,  1824,
that  Grand  Lodge  issued  a  Charter  to  La  Esperanza  Lodge,
No.  47,  at  St.  Augustine,  which  is  supposed  to  be  a  revival  of
No.  30.

From  the  reprint  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Florida,  the  committee  on  the  reprint  say  that  the  first  lodge  in
East  Florida  was  St.  Fernando,  at  St.  Augustine,  warranted  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Georgia,  about  1806.  As  South  Carolina  had
issued  a  Charter  as  early  as  1804,  consequently  this  one  could  not
have  been  the  first.

Jackson  Lodge,  at  Tallahassee,  was  chartered  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Alabama,  December  19,  1825.  On  December  15,  1827,
it  was  suspended  and  the  Charter  was  forfeited,  December  8,  1829;
it  was,  however,  placed  in  good  standing  on  the  payment  of  its
arrearages  of  dues.

Washington  Lodge,  at  Quincy,  was  chartered  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Georgia,  December  2,  1828  ;  also  the  same  Grand  Lodge
chartered  Harmony  Lodge,  at  Marianna,  December  8,  1829.  July
5,  1830,  these  three  lodges  met  and  framed  and  adopted  a  constitu-
tion, July  6th,  and  the  Grand  Officers  were  elected  and  installed.
With  the  exception  of  the  Territory  of  Michigan,  this  was  the  first
Territorial  Grand  Lodge ;  and  as  the  first  one  in  Michigan  did  not
continue  very  long,  Florida  Grand  Lodge,  now  existing,  may  claim
to  be  the  first  formed  in  a  Territory.

Kentucky.

Kentucky  being  originally  a  part  of  Virginia,  up  to  1 792,  juris-
diction over  it  was  exercised  by  that  State.

November  17,  1788,  Lexington  Lodge  was  chartered  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Virginia.  The  following  lodges  also  derived  their
authority  from  the  same  Grand  Lodge,  viz.:  November  25,  1791,
Paris  Lodge  was  chartered  ;  Georgetown  Lodge  received  a  dispen-
sation, January  9,  1796,  and  a  Charter,  November  29,  1796  ;  a  dis-
pensation was  issued  to  Hiram  Lodge,  September  20,  1799,  and  a

FREEMASONRY    IN    THE    L'NITED   STATES  1439

Charter  was  granted,  December  ii,  1799  ;  a  dispensation  was  issued
to  Abraham's  Lodge,  at  Shelby ville,  in  the  latter  part  of  1799  or
commencement  of  1800.

Representatives  from  these  five  lodges  met  September  8,  i8oc
at  Lexington,  and  determined  that  it  was  expedient,  necessary,  and
agreeable  to  Masonic  constitution,  that  a  Grand  Lodge  should  be
established  for  that  State.  The  convention  then  issued  a  call  for  a
second  convention  for  October  16,  1800.

This  convention,  composed  of  the  above  five  lodges  by  their
representatives,  met,  and  after  organization,  elected  their  Grand
Officers,  who  were  then  installed.

District  of  Cohimbia.

This  district,  containing  originally  one  hundred  square  miles,  was
set  apart  by  Act  of  Congress,  approved  July  16,  1790,  for  the  capi-
tal of  the  United  States  :  being  partly  in  the  State  of  Maryland,  on
the  north  and  east  side  of  the  Potomac  River,  and  on  the  south  and
west  side  of  that  river,  in  the  State  of  Virginia.

Prior  to  that  date  a  lodge  had  been  organized  by  the  Grand.
Lodge  of  Maryland,  in  the  town  of  Georgetown,  situated  on  the
west  bank  of  Rock  Creek,  April  12,  1789,  by  the  name  of  Potomac
Lodge,  No.  9.  For  some  reasons,  now  unknown,  this  lodge  ceased
to  work.  October  23,  1795,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Maryland  granted
a  Warrant  to  another  body  of  Masons  (probably  many  of  them  had
been  members  of  No.  9),  which  was  named  Columbia,  No.  19.
This  lodge  also  ceased  its  labors,  and  another  lodge  was  warranted
by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Maryland,  by  the  name  of  Potomac  Lodge,
No.  43,  which  last  lodge  continued  with  the  name  and  number  as
stated,  until  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  District  of  Columbia  was  con-
stituted, February  11,  181 1,  when  the  same  name  being  continued,
the  number  was  changed  to  5,  and  is  the  same  at  the  present  time.

Federal  Lodge,  No.  15,  was  chartered  by  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Maryland,  September  12,  1793.  By  Act  of  Congress,  the  Dis-
trict of  Columbia  having  been  laid  out  and  the  public  buildings  for
the  several  departments  being  under  construction,  especially  the
Capitol  of  the  United  States,  the  city  of  Washington  having  also
been  laid  out,  many  private  residences  were  being  constructed,  and
the  population  was  greatly  increased.

I440  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

Episode.

The  corner-stone  of  the  Capitol  was  laid  September  i8,  lyg^y
with  Masonic  ceremonies,  conducted  by  the  President,  Brother
George  Washington,  who  came  up  from  Alexandria,  accompanied
by  Alexandria  Lodge,  No.  39,  and  was  joined  by  Potomac  Lodge,
No.  9.  Federal  Lodge,  No.  15,  although  its  Warrant  had  been
issued  a  few  days  previous  to  this  occasion,  and  in  consequence  of
its  not  having  been  duly  instituted,  could  not  join  in  the  cere-
monies, although  the  Brethren  were  present  as  spectators.  The
gavel  used  on  that  occasion,  made  by  one  of  the  workmen,  of  a
piece  of  marble  similar  to  that  used  in  the  building,  was  presented
to  General  Washington  ;  after  the  ceremonies  it  was  given  by  him
to  the  Worshipful  Master  of  Potomac  Lodge,  No.  9,  and  is  in  the
possession  of  that  lodge  at  the  present  time.

Brooke  Lodge,  No.  47,  being  located  in  Alexandria,  Va.,  after
the  formation  of  the  Federal  District,  was  char<^ered  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Virginia.

Alexandria  Lodge,  No.  29,  also  located  in  the  city  of  Alex-
andria, was  originally  chartered  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsyl-
vania, February  23,  1783,  but  soon  after  the  institution  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Virginia,  October  13,  1778,  this  lodge  withdrew
from  her  allegiance  to  the  Mother  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania,
by  her  consent,  and  received  a  Warrant  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Virginia,  under  the  name  of  Alexandria  Lodge,  No.  22,  dated
April  28,  1788,  with  George  Washington,  Esquire,  late  Commander-
in-Chief  of  the  forces  of  the  United  States  of  America,  as  Worship-
ful Master.

Columbia  Lodge,  No.  35,  in  Washington  City,  was  chartered  by
tlie  Grand  Lodge  of  Maryland,  November  8,  1803;  Washington
Naval  Lodge,  No.  40,  also  in  Washington  City,  was  also  chartered
by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Maryland,  May  14,  1805.

December  11,  1810,  a  convention  was  held  by  the  five  lodges
above  mentioned,  viz.  :  Federal,  No.  15  ;  Brooke,  No.  47 ;  Columbia,
No.  35  ;  Washington  Naval,  No.  40  ,  and  Potomac,  No.  43.  Alex-
andria Lodge,  No.  22,  declined  to  join  in  this  movement  and  was  sus-
tained by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Virginia,  and  quietly  acquiesced  in  by
the  Brethren  in  the  District  of  Columbia.  This  convention  adjourned
to  January  8th,  and  again  to  February  11,  181 1,  when  the  organiza-

FREEMASONRY    IN   THE    UNITED   STATES  1441

tion  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  District  of  Columbia  was  fully
completed.  The  several  lodges  surrendered  their  charters  to  their
Mother  Grand  Lodges,  and  charters  were  issued  to  them  by  theii
own  Grand  Lodge,  their  numbers  being  changed  to  1,2,  3,  4,  and
5,  according  to  original  dates.  Of  these  five  lodges,  all  are  in
existence  and  are  in  a  flourishing  condition,  except  Brooke  Lodge,
No.  2,  of  Alexandria,  which  returned  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Vir-
ginia when  that  part  of  the  District  of  Columbia  was  retrocedeO
to  tne  State  of  Virginia,  and  soon  thereafter  ceased  to  labon

PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SUPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY

HS       Mackey,  Albert  Gallatin

'^'^3        The  history  of  freemasonry

M26  ^

1906

V.5


# VOLUME VI

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2008  with  funding  from
Microsoft  Corporation

http://www.archive.org/details/historyoffreemas06mackuoft

THE

HISTORY  of  FREEMASONRY

ITS  LEGENDS  AND  TRADITIONS
ITS  CHRONOLOGICAL  HISTORY

By  ALBERT  GALLATIN  MACKEY,  M.D.,

THE  HISTORY  OF  THE

SYMBOLISM  OF  FREEMASONRY

THE

ANCIENT  AND  ACCEPTED  SCOTTISH  RITE

AND  THE

ROYAL  ORDER  OF  SCOTLAND

Bv  WILLIAM  R.  SINGLETON,  33?

WITH  AN

ADDENDA

By  WILLIAM  JAMES  HUGHAN

P.\  S.'.  G.\  D.\  of  G.\  L.\  of  England—  P.\  S.\  G.\  W.\  of  Egypt,  etc.

Volume  Six

PUBLISHED  BY

THE  MASONIC  HISTORY  COMPANY
New  York  and  London

fTHE  MASONIC  HISTORY  G>.  v

a All  lights  Reserved  _

f ^Manufactured  in  the  tinited  States  of  c America  l

RRDonnelley  er  Sons  Company

at

Z\ )t  tabfoi&e  press

■f?  Colo*  Reproductions  By
^\American  Lithographic

"&T"

t (

CHAPTER  LV

HISTORY  OF  THE  INTRODUCTION  OF  FREEMASONRY  INTO  EACH  STATE
AND  TERRITORY  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES

The  First  Lodges  and  the  Grand  Lodges  ( Continued

Ohio.

HE  introduction  of  Masonry  into  Ohio  is  due  to
the  fact  that  soon  after  the  close  of  the  War  of
the  Revolution,  the  Master,  Jonathan  Heart,  and
some  of  the  members  of  American  Union  Lodge
settled  near  Marietta.  The  Charter  of  that
lodge,  which  had  been  granted  by  the  St.  John’s
Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts,  February  15,
1776,  by  John  Rowe,  Grand  Master  (in  the  Connecticut  Line  of  the
Army),1  was  held  by  the  Master,  and  he  claimed  that  it  was  a lodge
at  large  and  not  under  the  jurisdiction  of  any  Grand  Lodge,  and  in
fact  “ it  was  invested  with  every  power  necessary  to  constitute,  rule,
and  govern  ” Masonry  in  the  Territories.  It  had  been  recognized
“by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts,  Pennsylvania,  and  New
York,  as  a constituent  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts."  This
lodge  worked  for  several  years  until  its  Charter  was  burned  ; a revival
of  it  was  asked  for  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania,  which
was  declined,  “ except  as  one  of  its  constituent.”  Application  to
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts  was  made,  which  authorized  the
lodge  to  resume  work  under  a copy  of  the  original  Charter,  “ with
the  express  provision  that  the  charter  should  be  of  force  only  until
a Grand  Lodge  should  be  formed  in  the  territory  in  which  it  was
located.”

The  Grand  Lodge  of  Ohio  was  organized  January  7,  1808.

1 Shortly  after,  the  lodge  having  removed  to  New  York,  asked  for  a Confirmation  of
their  Charter,  from  the  D.  G.  M.,  Dr.  Middleton;  but  a new  Warrant  was  granted  under
the  name  of  Military  Union,  No.  i.— Gould’s  “ History,”  vol.  vi.,  p.  415.

1443

1444

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

The  lodges  represented  were  American  Union,  No.  i,  at  Marietta;
Cincinnati,  No.  13,  warranted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New  Jersey
as  Nova  Cesaraea,  No.  10,  now  known  as  N.  C.  Harmony,  No.  21  ;
Sciota,  No.  2,  and  Chillicothe,  warranted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Massachusetts  in  1805,  now  known  as  No.  6 ; Erie,  No.  47,  at
Warren,  warranted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Connecticut,  March  16,
1804,  now  known  as  Old  Erie,  No.  3 ; and  Amity,  No.  105,  at
Zanesville,  warranted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania  in  1804,
now  No.  5.

January  4,  1808,  a preliminary  convention  of  the  delegates  from
all  the  lodges  then  in  Ohio — six  in  number — was  held  in  Chillicothe
to  deliberate  upon  the  propriety  of  forming  a Grand  Lodge,  and  to
inaugurate  measures  for  the  organization  of  such  a body.  The  con-
vention continued  its  deliberations  four  consecutive  days,  which
resulted  in  the  unanimous  adoption  of  a resolution  proposed  by
Brother  Lewis  Cass,  viz.  : “ that  it  is  expedient  to  form  a Grand
Lodge  of  the  State  of  Ohio.” 1

A few  rules,  couched  as  resolutions,  were  adopted  for  the  forma-
tion of  a Grand  Lodge,  and  appointed  the  first  Monday  in  January,
1809,  as  the  time,  and  Chillicothe  as  the  place  for  holding  the  first
Grand  Communication  of  said  Grand  Lodge.  The  Grand  Lodge
met  at  Chillicothe,  January  2,  1809,  an^  duly  organized  with  repre-
sentatives from  four  lodges.

In  consequence  of  the  absence  of  the  representatives  of  American
Union  Lodge,  No.  1,  there  being  but  four  lodges  represented,  it  was
thought  that  a Grand  Lodge  could  not  be  legally  organized.  The
Grand  Lodge  adjourned  from  day  to  day,  and,  finally,  on  January
5th,  it  adopted  pro  tempore  the  Constitution  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Kentucky,  having  decided  that  under  their  peculiar  circumstances
it  would  be  right  and  proper  to  organize  a Grand  Lodge  with  only
four  lodges  represented.

Brother  Rufus  Putnam,  who  had  been  chosen  Grand  Master  at
the  convention  held  in  1808,  wrote  a letter  to  the  Grand  Lodge  de-
clining the  office,  on  account  of  his  great  age,  which  was  accepted,
and  Bro.  Samuel  Huntington  was  duly  elected  Grand  Master.

Previous  to  the  reception  of  this  letter  all  the  other  Grand  Offi-
cers elected  the  last  year  had  been  installed,  and  upon  the  election
of  the  Grand  Master  he  also  was  immediately  installed,  and  all  the

1 Proceedings  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ohio.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1445

other  Grand  Officers  .who  had  just  been  elected  at  the  same  time
with  the  Grand  Master.

The  Grand  Lodge  closed  its  sessions  on  January  7,  1709,  having
completed  all  things  necessary  to  its  proper  work  in  Masonry.

Louisiana.

The  introduction  of  Freemasonry  in  the  Territory  of  Louisiana
is  principally  due  to  the  political  condition  of  that  Territory  and
the  circumstances  connected  with  the  affairs  in  San  Domingo,  both
countries  at  that  period  being  somewhat,  if  not  exclusively,  settled
by  the  Latin  race  and  their  negro  slaves.  Masonry  had  been  intro-
duced upon  the  Island  of  San  Domingo  from  the  Grand  Orient  of
France,  also  by  charters  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania.
When  the  insurrection  occurred  in  San  Domingo,  in  1791,  the
white  refugees  spread  themselves  in  many  of  the  cities  in  the  United
States  ; a very  large  number  settled  in  New  Orleans,  and  among  them
were  many  Masons,  and  in  1793  several  of  these  residing  in  New
Orleans  organized  into  a lodge  and  received  a Charter  from  the
Grand  Lodge  of  South  Carolina  by  the  name  of  “ Parfaite  Union,
No.  29,”  the  officers  being  installed  in  the  York  Rite  on  March  30,
1794.  In  the  same  year  several  Brethren  of  the  French,  or
Modern  Rite,  formed  themselves  into  a lodge  called  “ Etoile  Po-
laire  ” (Polar  Star),  and  applied  for  a Charter  from  the  Grand
Orient  of  France.  The  Grand  Orient  having  suspended  its  labors,
in  consequence  of  the  political  condition  of  France,  could  not  issue
a Charter.  The  Brethren,  however,  obtained  a provisional  Charter  or
dispensation  from  the  Provincial  Lodge  La  Parfaite  Sincerite  at
Marseilles  in  1796,  and  intrusted  the  same  to  Dominique  Mayronne,
with  authority  to  constitute  the  new  lodge  and  install  the  officers,
which  was  done  under  the  French  Rite,  December  27,  1798.

When  the  Grand  Orient  resumed  labor  in  1803,  a Charter  was
issued  to  Polar  Star  Lodge,  No.  4263,  in  1804,  and  Ch.  Tessier  was
deputed  to  deliver  the  Charter  and  heal  their  work,  which  was  done,
and  officers  were  installed,  November  1 1 , 1804,  by  A.  Pinard  and
A.  Marmillion.

The  early  records  of  “ Perfect  Union  ” and  “ Polar  Star”  can  not
be  found,  but  the  above  information  has  been  obtained  by  Brother
James  H.  Scot,  the  historian  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Louisiana,
from  the  “ Manuel  Maijonnique,”  a very  rare  work,  published  in

1446

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

New  Orleans  in  1828.  It  is  very  probable  that  these  lodges  were
formed  about  the  same  time,  “ but  in  the  absence  of  the  original
records  it  is  impossible  to  decide  the  question.”  1

It  is  thought  that  the  Brethren  who  formed  these  two  lodges  were
from  the  Island  of  Guadaloupe,  which  was  involved  in  the  horrors  of
the  negro  insurrection  of  1791.  In  consequence  of  political  differ-
ences among  the  French  inhabitants  in  Louisiana,  growing  out  of
the  French  Revolution,  difficulties  arose  which  resulted  in  the  re-
fusal of  the  members  of  these  two  lodges  to  hold  any  Masonic  inter-
course with  each  other.

Some  of  the  former  members  of  “Candor  Lodge,  No.  12,”  in
Charleston,  S.  C.,  which  was  extinct,  having  settled  in  New  Orleans,
applied  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania  and  obtained  a Charter,
dated  May  18,  1801,  as  Candor  Lodge,  No.  90.  It  is  possible  that
this  lodge  did  not  survive  very  long,  if  it  ever  was  duly  constituted,
as  on  March  1,  1802,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania  granted  a
Charter  to  Charity  Lodge,  No.  93,  having  the  name  of  N.  Definieto,
W.  M.,  who  was  the  W.  M.  of  Candor,  No.  90.  This  Charter  was
not  received  until  1804,  and  on  May  13th  of  that  year  the  lodge  was
duly  constituted  and  the  officer's  were  installed  in  the  York  Rite.
On  October  1,  1800,  by  treaty,  Spain  retroceded  the  whole  of  the
territory  of  Louisiana  to  France,  which  held  an  actual  possession  of
only  twenty  days,  as  on  December  20,  1803,  the  United  States  flag
was  raised  in  New  Orleans,  France  having  sold  the  whole  territory
to  the  United  States.  This  change  in  the  political  condition  made
equally  a change  in  Masonic  affairs,  and  from  that  date  on,  viz.,
1804,  Masonry  assumed  quite  a different  attitude  in  Louisiana.

A change  also  in  the  Island  of  San  Domingo  caused  a very
large  number  of  the  refugees  of  1791  to  return  to  their  old
homes,  and  the  French  contingent  among  the  Masons  in  New
Orleans  was  greatly  reduced.  The  American  element,  which  had  in
Masonic  matters  been  much  in  the  minority,  began  to  increase
and  soon  prevailed.

A duplicate  Charter  from  the  Grand  Orient  of  France  was
received,  July  20,  1807,  bearing  date  of  February  17,  1806,  by  the
Lodge  “ La  Union  Desirbe,”  No.  3013,  which  had  been  under  the
auspices  of  the  Grand  Orient  of  France,  at  Port  au  Prince,
April  16,  1783.  During  the  revolution  of  1791  the  Charter,

1 James  H.  Scot,  “ History  of  Masonry  in  Louisiana.”

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1447

archives,  etc.,  had  been  destroyed.  The  members  who  had  fled
to  New  Orleans  in  1791,  and  had  returned  to  San  Domingo  in
1802,  had  been  again  compelled  to  flee  to  New  Orleans  the
second  time.  In  1806  Masons  from  the  Northern  part  of  the
United  States  applied  for  and  obtained  a Charter  from  the  Grand
Lodge  of  New  York,  on  September  2,  1807,  now  Louisiana  Lodge,
No.  2.  In  the  “Manuel  Ma^nnique  ” it  is  No.  101,  which  is
an  error  of  the  author.  This  was  the  first  lodge  in  New  Orleans
that  worked  in  the  English  language,  and  its  first  W.  M.  was  the
celebrated  jurist  Edward  Livingstone.

Polar  Star  Lodge,  No.  4263,  applied  to  the  Grand  Orient  of
France  and  obtained  a Charter  to  hold  a Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,
which  was  constituted  and  officers  installed,  May  24,  1807,  as  “ La
Vertu  Recompense,  No.  5001.”

On  September  15,  1808,  a York  Rite  Charter  was  issued  to
some  of  the  members  of  Lodge  La  Reunion  Desiree,  No.  3829,  by
the  same  name  but  numbered  112,  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Penn-
sylvania. This  lodge  dissolved  March  23,  1812.

This  much  of  the  early  history  in  Louisiana  must  suffice,  as  to
continue  a specific  notice  of  all  the  lodges  chartered  and  the  various
contests  which  grew  out  of  the  various  rites  in  use,  and  the  “ Cumu-
lation ” thereof,  would  utilize  our  entire  remaining  pages  of  this  chap-
ter, hence  must  proceed  to  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge.

It  appears  from  the  records  that  twelve  lodges  had  received
charters  in  New  Orleans  prior  to  the  organization  of  a Grand
Lodge,  as  will  appear  in  the  following  table  :

Name  of  Lodge.

No.

By  Whom  Chartered.

Date  of  Charter.

Perfect  Union

Polar  Star

Candor

Charity

Reunion  Desire'e ....

Louisiana

Reunion  Desiree

Concord

Perseverance

Harmony

Polar  Star

Bienfaisance

29

4263

90

93

3829

1

112

117

118
122
129

1

Grand  Lodge  of  South  Carolina

( Pro.  Lodge  Sincerite,  Marseilles

\ Reconstructed  by  Grand  Oriental  of  France.

Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania

Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania

Grand  Orient  of  France

Grand  Lodge  of  New  York

Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania

Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania

Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania

Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania

Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania

Grand  Consistory  of  Jamaica

March  30,  1794.
December  27,  1798.
November  11,  1804.
May  18,  1801.

March  1,  1802.
February  17,  1807.
September  2,  1807.
September  15,  1808.
October  7,  1810.
October  7,  1810.
November  19,  1810.
June  3,  1811.

June  22,  1811.

Of  these  lodges,  Candor,  No.  90,  York  Rite,  was  perhaps  never  organized;  Reunion  Desiree,
No.  3829,  French  Rite,  ceased  to  work,  November  27.  1808;  Polar  Star,  No.  4293,  French  Rite,
adjourned  sirte  die,  October  13,  1811  ; Reunion  Desiree,  No.  112,  York  Rite,  dissolved,  March  23,
1812;  and  Bienfaisance,  No.  1,  Scottish  Rite,  affiliated  with  Concord,  No.  117,  May  27,  1812,
leaving  seven  lodges  in  full  activity  and  all  working  the  York  Rite,  viz.  : Numbers  1,  4,  6,  8,  9,  10,
\t,  and  12,  in  the  above  tabic

1448

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONR\

Louisiana  was  admitted  as  a State  by  Act  of  Congress,  April  8,
1812,  to  take  effect  after  April  30th.  This  change  politically  had  a
corresponding  result  masonically.

Perfect  Union  Lodge,  No.  29,  had  the  honor  of  taking  initiatory
steps  toward  the  organization  of  a Grand  Lodge,  which  resulted  in
a meeting,  April  18,  1812,  of  the  delegates  of  Perfect  Union  Lodge,
No.  29  ; Charity  Lodge,  No.  93  ; Louisiana  Lodge,  No.  1 ; Con-
cord Lodge,  No.  1 17;  Perseverance  Lodge,  No.  118;  Harmony
Lodge,  No.  122  ; and  Polar  Star  Lodge,  No.  129.  These  delegates
organized  themselves  into  a “ General  Committee  of  the  State  of
Louisiana  to  provide  for  the  establishment  of  a Grand  Lodge  in  the
City  of  New  Orleans.”  P.  F.  Dubourg  was  the  first  President.

On  May  16th  following  a second  meeting  was  held,  Charity
Lodge,  No.  93,  not  being  represented  ; and  a communication  was
received  from  Louisiana  Lodge,  No.  1,  saying  that  in  their  opinion
“ it  would  be  inexpedient  at  present  ” to  join  in  the  proposed  forma-
tion of  a Grand  Lodge;  whereupon  a resolution  was  passed  request-
ing the  W.  Master  of  the  Senior  of  the  regular  lodges  in  the  State,
Perfect  Union,  No.  29,  to  issue  his  summons1  to  the  Masters,
Past  Masters,  and  Officers  of  the  several  Ancient  and  regularly  con-
stituted lodges  in  the  State  to  meet  in  convention  to  take  into
consideration  the  interests  of  the  true  Craft,  and  to  deliberate  on  the
necessity  of  establishing  a Grand  Lodge  in  the  State,  which  was  ac-
cordingly done,  and  the  convention  met  June  13,  1812,  and  the  fol-
lowing representatives  were  present,  viz.  : Perfect  Union,  No.  29 ;
Charity,  No.  93;  Concord,  No.  117;  Perseverance,  No.  118  ; Polar
Star,  No.  129.  As  soon  as  the  convention  was  organized  the  Presi-
dent, Brother  Dubourg,  stated  that  he  had  received  a communica-
tion from  Harmony  Lodge,  No.  122,  which  had  withdrawn  from
the  convention.  The  convention  adjourned  to  meet  June  20th  next.
June  20,  1812,  the  Grand  Convention  then  met  and  elected  the
Grand  Officers  ; P.  F.  Dubourg  being  elected  Grand  Master,  who
was  duly  installed  after  the  election  of  the  Grand  Officers,  and  by  a
resolution  adopted,  the  Grand  Master  installed  all  the  other  Grand
Officers  on  July  nth  following.

At  a communication  held  August  15,  1812,  the  committee  ap-
pointed for  that  purpose  reported  a draft  of  a Constitution  which
was  adopted.

1 Ancient  term  for  Notification «

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1449

At  a quarterly  communication  held  March  27,  1813,  the  Grand
Master  announced  that  a Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter  had  been  or-
ganized and  attached  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Louisiana.  The  Grand
Chapter  had  been  organized,  March  8,  1813,  by  Concord  and  Per-
severance R.\  A.'.  Chapter,  working  under  charters  from  the  Grand
Chapter  of  Pennsylvania  and  attached  to  the  lodges  of  the  same
name.  On  March  13th  the  Grand  Officers  were  elected  and  in-
stalled.

To  follow  the  history  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Louisiana  would
require  more  space  than  can  be  permitted  ; here  we  must  close  with
the  date  of  March,  1813.

Tennessee.

Warrants  to  organize  lodges  had  been  issued  from  the  Grand
Lodge  of  North  Carolina  as  early  as  1796  and  one  from  Kentucky.

These  lodges  held  a convention  at  Knoxville  in  December,  1811,
and  adopted  the  following :

“ Resolved,  That  in  the  opinion  of  this  Convention  the  number
of  Ancient  York  Masons  in  this  State  as  well  as  the  state  of  society,
require  the  formation  of  a Grand  Lodge  within  the  same  for  the
better  regulation  and  extension  of  the  Craft.

“ Resolved , That  a Committee  be  appointed  for  the  purpose  of
drawing  up  an  address  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  North  Carolina,  so-
liciting their  assent  to  the  establishment  of  a Grand  Lodge  in  the
State  of  Tennessee.”

The  Grand  Lodge  of  North  Carolina  granted  this  request ; and
the  convention  again  met  October  14,  1813,  and  the  Grand  Lodge
was  constitutionally  established  and  the  Grand  Officers  were  elected
and  installed.

Mississippi.

The  first  lodge  in  Mississippi  which  received  a Warrant  from
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Kentucky  was  Harmony,  No.  33  ; originally
No.  7,  by  a Charter  October  16,  1801.  Two  other  lodges,  viz. :
Andrew  Jackson,  No.  15,  and  Washington,  No.  17,  received  their
warrants  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Tennessee  July  27,  1818.  A
convention  was  held  in  the  city  of  Natchez,  when  it  was  resolved
that  it  was  necessary  and  expedient  to  form  a Grand  Lodge  for  the
State  of  Mississippi.  On  August  25th  following,  the  convention

r45°

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

again  met,  and  the  Grand  Lodge  was  regularly  constituted.  Henry
Toohey  was  elected  Grand  Master.

Illinois.

The  Grand  Master  of  Pennsylvania,  Israel  Israel,  issued  a dis-
pensation for  six  months  to  Western  Star  Lodge,  No.  107,  to  be
located  at  Kaskaskia,  situated  near  the  mouth  of  the  Okaw  (now
Kaskaskia)  River,  where  it  empties  into  the  Mississippi  River,  Sep-
tember 24,  1805.  At  that  period  Illinois  was  in  the  Indian  Terri-
tory. This  lodge  received  its  Charter,  which  was  granted  June  2,
1806,  and  on  September  13th  following,  the  lodge  was  regularly  con-
stituted. This  lodge  was  doubtless  the  first  one  established  in  that
Territory — now  comprising  the  States  of  Wisconsin  and  Illinois  and
a part  of  Minnesota.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  Kentucky  issued  a Charter,  August  28,
1815,  to  Lawrence  Lodge,  to  be  located  at  Shawneetown  ; the
Grand  Lodge  of  Tennessee  issued  a Charter,  October  6,  1819,  to
Libanus  Lodge,  at  Edwardsville ; June  20,  1820,  the  Grand  Master
of  Tennessee  issued  a dispensation  to  Temple  Lodge,  at  Belleville,
St.  Clair  County,  which  was  surrendered  in  1821.

From  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Missouri  at  various  dates  in  1822  the
following  warrants  were  granted:  October  3,  1822,  Olive  Branch,
No.  5,  at  Alton,  111. ; October  8,  1822,  Vandalia,  No.  8,  at  Van-
dalia  ; October  9,  1822,  Sangamon,  No.  9,  at  Springfield;  October
24,  1822,  Union,  No.  10,  at  Jonesborough  ; October  8,  1822,  Eden,
No.  11,  at  Covington.

The  Grand  Master  of  Indiana  issued  a dispensation,  March  1 2,
1822,  to  Albion  Lodge,  at  Albion.

All  the  above  lodges  except  Sangamon  sent  delegates  to  a con-
vention at  Vandalia  which  met  December  9,  1822.  They  adopted
a constitution,  which  was  sent  to  the  lodges  for  their  consideration.
Eight  of  these  lodges  were  represented  at  a convention  held  Decem-
ber 1,  1823,  and  a Grand  Lodge  was  duly  organized.  The  Grand
Master  was  installed  by  Dr.  Hardage  Lane,  of  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  the
Deputy  Grand  Masier  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Missouri.

In  1827  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Illinois  went  out  of  existence,  and
after  June  24,  1827,  “every  Lodge  in  the  State  was  so  effectually
blotted  out  that  no  trace  of  any  of  them  has  been  found.”

It  is  supposed  that  as  the  anti-Masonic  excitement  had,  about

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1451

that  time,  begun  to  work  its  way  to  the  West,  the  Masons  were
more  or  less  lukewarm  in  the  cause,  and  politics  being  some-
what mixed  up  in  the  affair,  the  Brethren  let  the  matter  drop  for
a while.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  Kentucky  issued  a dispensation  to  Bod-
ley  Lodge,  No.  97,  at  Quincy,  111.,  there  being  at  that  time  no  work-
ing lodge  in  the  State.  That  lodge  was  warranted  August  30,  1838.
That  Grand  Lodge  likewise  warranted  Equality  Lodge,  No.  102,  at
Equality,  in  Gallatin  County,  August  29,  1837  ; and  Ottawa,  No.
1 1 4,  at  Ottawa  County,  of  Lasalle,  September  1,  1740.  The  Grand
Master  of  Kentucky  issued  a dispensation  to  Friendship  Lodge  at
Dixon  in  1840.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  Missouri  warranted :

Franklin  Lodge,  at  Alton,  in

«,  1827

Harmony  Lodge,  at  Jacksonville,  in

1838

Springfield  Lodge,  at  Springfield,  in  .

1839

Temperance  Lodge,  at  Vandalia,  in

ON

00

*

Far  West  Lodge,  at  Galena,  in  .

!839

Mount  Moriah  Lodge,  at  Hillsboro,  in

. 1840

Clinton  Lodge,  at  Carlisle,  in

1840

A dispensation  to  Columbus  Lodge,  No.  20,

at  Columbus,  in

1839-

Delegates  from  several  of  the  subordinate  lodges  on  January  30,
1840,  held  a convention  in  Jacksonville,  when  it  was  resolved  to
form  a Grand  Lodge.  A committee  was  appointed  to  correspond
with  the  iodges  in  the  State  and  ask  their  assistance,  and  to  send
delegates  to  a convention  to  be  held  at  Jacksonville,  April  6,  1840,
which  convention  was  held  on  that  date  and  six  of  the  eight  char-
tered lodges  and  one  under  dispensation  were  represented,  and  the
Grand  Lodge  was  then  organized.

At  the  meeting  held  April  28th,  the  Grand  Master,  Abraham
Jonas,  was  installed  by  proxy.1  Warrants  were  issued  to  the  lodges
represented  and  numbered  according  to  their  dates  of  constitution — •

1 The  “Reprint  of  the  Proceedings  for  1840  to  i860,”  published  1874,  shows  : April  6,
1840,  at  Jacksonville,  “ M.  W.  Abraham  Jonas  was  elected  G.  M.”  April  28th,  “ called
from  refreshment  to  labor.”  The  name  of  Abraham  Jonas  does  not  appear  as  being
present.  James  Adams,  D.  G.  M.,  presided.  The  minutes  say:  “ On  motion  all  but
* Past  Masters  having  retired  a convocation  of  Past  Masters  was  declared  open,  and  the
M.  W.  Grand  Master  was  installed  by  proxy,  and  the  grand  honors  paid  him  agreeable  to
ancient  form  and  usage.”

i4S2  HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

some  of  them,  however,  did  not  get  their  new  warrants  until  some-
time in  1844.

In  consequence  of  the  business  relations  existing  between  many
of  the  towns  in  Illinois  and  the  city  of  St.  Louis  in  Missouri,
some  of  the  lodges  in  those  towns  much  preferred  to  hold  their
warrants  from  Missouri  Grand  Lodge,  as  the  representatives  could
attend  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Missouri  in  St.  Louis,  and  at  the  same
time  transact  their  commercial  business  in  that  city.  The  writer
was  an  officer  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Missouri  in  1841-42-43
and  well  remembers  that  those  Brethren  from  Illinois  were  urged
to  withdraw  from  our  Grand  Lodge  and  unite  with  the  Grand
Lodge  in  their  own  State.  They,  however,  declined  for  the  reason
above  stated.  We  can  bear  witness  to  this  as  a justification  of  the
conduct  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Missouri,  for  they  could  not  drive
away  their  Brethren  of  Illinois.

Finally,  however,  those  lodges  did  withdraw  and  unite  with  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Illinois,  as  also  did  several  of  the  lodges  in  Iowa,
about  that  time,  which  had  been  chartered  by  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Missouri,  and  they  formed  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Iowa.

On  February  10,  1850,  a fire  occurred  in  Peoria  by  which  was
destroyed,  in  the  office  of  the  Grand  Secretary,  all  the  books,
papers,  and  records  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Illinois.  To  remedy
the  loss  as  far  as  possible,  the  Grand  Lodge  was  convened  in
Springfield,  April  8,  1850.

Of  the  lodges  aiding  in  the  organization  of  the  second  Grand
Lodge,  four  are  now  alive,  viz. : Bodley,  No.  1 ; Equality,  No.  2 ;
Harmony,  No.  3 ; and  Springfield,  No.  4.

In  1889,  October  1st  and  2d,  the  fiftieth  anniversary  was  cele-
brated.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  Illinois,  in  her  growth  since  its  organiza-
tion in  1839,  has  kept  even  pace  with  the  increase  of  population,  and
now  stands  in  membership  among  the  first  in  the  United  States,
in  1897  the  membership  number  being  53,452,  number  of  lodges,
722.  In  her  influence  for  good  and  the  reputation  of  her  personnel
she  is  primus  inter  pares  (first  among  her  equals).

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

•453

Missouri.

The  first  settlers  of  Upper  Louisiana,  as  the  now  State  of  Mis-
souri was  originally  called,  were  French,  who  came  by  the  way  of
Canada,  and  were  companions  of  Cartier,  La  Salle,  and  Father
Hennepin,  who  traversed  the  vast  wilderness  that  extended  between
the  boundaries  of  Canada  and  the  settlements  of  the  French  on  the
Lower  Mississippi.

In  November,  1763,  Pierre  Liguiste  Laclede  arrived  at  St.
Genevieve,  and  finding  no  place  suitable  for  the  storage  of  his
goods,  he  proceeded  up  the  Mississippi  River;  and  on  February  15,
1764,  he  and  his  party  landed  where  the  city  of  St.  Louis  now
stands,  which  he  named  in  honor  of  Louis  XV.  of  France.

In  that  early  day  the  merchants  who  were  in  St.  Louis  and  St.
Genevieve  procured  their  goods  in  Philadelphia,  where  they  went
once  every  year.  Many  of  these  merchants  became  Masons  and
were  made  in  the  French  Lodge,  No.  73,  in  Philadelphia.

As  the  Masons  in  the  Territory  increased  in  numbers,  they  re-
solved to  organize  a lodge,  and  in  1807-8  having  applied  for,  they
received  a Warrant  of  Constitution  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Penn-
sylvania for  a lodge  in  the  town  of  St.  Genevieve,  as  Louisiana
Lodge,  No.  109.  Otho  Strader  was  the  first  Master.  Among  its
members  were  many  of  those  who  afterward  became  prominent
merchants  of  St.  Louis,  as  Pierre  Chouteau  and  Bartholomew
Berthold,  who  became  the  founders  of  the  great  Fur  Company.1

This  was  the  first  lodge  established  in  Missouri.

In  1811-12  Gen.  H.  Dodge  presided  over  this  lodge  as  W.  Mas-
ter, but  owing  to  the  unsettled  condition  of  the  Territory  in  con-
sequence of  the  late  war  with  Great  Britain,  the  lodge  ceased  to
work  about  1825.

In  1809-10  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania  granted  a War-
rant to  a lodge  in  St.  Louis  as  No.  11 1.  There  is  no  record  what-
ever of  this  lodge  remaining.  A dispensation  was  issued  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Indiana  in  1820  for  a lodge  in  Jackson,  now  in
Cape  Gerardeau  County.  This  lodge  was  subsequently  chartered
by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Missouri.

October  18,  1816,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Tennessee  granted  a

1 Geo.  F.  Gouley,  u History  of  Grand  Lodge  of  Missouri.

1454

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Charter  to  a lodge  in  St.  Louis  as  Missouri  Lodge,  No.  12,  which
is  still  in  existence  as  No.  1.

That  Grand  Lodge  also  granted  charters  to  the  following  lodges,
viz.  : October  6,  1S19,  to  Joachim  Lodge,  No.  25,  at  Herculaneum,
and  on  same  date  to  St.  Charles  Lodge,  No.  28,  at  St.  Charles  on
the  Missouri  River.

February  23,  1821,  by  an  invitation  sent  by  Missouri  Lodge,  No.
12,  to  the  several  lodges  in  the  State,  the  following  lodges,  by  their
representatives,  met  in  St.  Louis,  and  a committee  having  been
appointed  to  draft  a constitution  and  code  of  by-laws,  they  ad-
journed until  April  23d  following,  to  meet  at  the  same  place  to
organize  a Grand  Lodge.

Prior  to  this  date  (April  23,  1821),  a convention  of  Masons  met,
pursuant  to  previous  notice  given  by  the  convention  of  delegates,
at  the  lodge-room  of  Missouri  Lodge,  No.  12,  April  23d,  Anno
Lucis,  Year  of  Light,  5821,  for  the  purpose  of  organizing  the  Grand
Lodge  of  the  State  of  Missouri.

Opened  in  the  third  degree  in  due  form,  with  Wor.  Edward
Bates,1  Master,  and  others.  After  reading  the  proceedings  of  the
convention  held  February  2 2d  last,  adjourned  until  24th  inst.

April  24,  A.  L.  5821.  Present  as  before.  An  election  for  the
officers  for  the  ensuing  year  was  held  and  resulted  as  follows  :

Brother  Thos.  F.  Riddick,  M.  W.  G.  M.

James  Kennerly,  S.  G.  W.

“ William  Bates,  J.  G.  W.

“ Archibald  Gamble,  G.  Treasurer.

“ William  Renshaw,  G.  Secretary.

Adjourned  to  May  4th  next.

May  4th  A.  L.  5821,  Semi-Annual  Convocation  was  held,  a
procession  was  formed  and  proceeded  to  the  Baptist  Church,  where
the  solemn  ceremony  of  consecration  and  installation  was  performed,
in  conformity  with  the  ancient  landmarks  and  customs  of  the
Fraternity.  The  Grand  Lodge  then  returned  to  the  lodge-room
and  adjourned  until  next  day.2

The  first  annual  communication  was  held  October  1,  1821.

1 Hon.  Edward  Bates  was  Attorney-General  in  Mr.  Lincoln’s  Cabinet,  1861-64.  Nearly
every  member  of  this  Grand  Lodge  was>personally  known  to  the  present  writer  in  1837.

2 Geo.  F.  Gouley,  “ History  of  Grand  Lodge  of  Missouri.”

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1455

At  this  communication  Brother  Frederick  Bates  was  elected
Grand  Master,  who,  not  being  present,  was  notified  by  a committee,
but  declined  accepting  the  office.  Grand  Lodge  adjourned  until
October  io,  1821,  at  which  time  the  Grand  Lodge  resumed  labor
and  elected  Brother  N.  B.  Tucker  M.  W.  Grand  Master,  and
Edward  Bates  G.  S.  W.

The  Grand  Lodge  then  adjourned  until  7 p.m.,  when  at  the  re-
quest of  Bro.  Thos.  F.  Riddick,  Brother  Douglass  took  the  Chair
and  installed  Brother  Nathaniel  B.  Tucker  Most  Worshipful
Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Missouri  in  ample  form,  and
the  Past  Master’s  Lodge  was  closed,  and  the  other  Grand  Officers
were  duly  installed  into  their  respective  offices.

Thus  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Missouri  was  constituted  and  has  con-
tinued to  the  present  day,  and  the  writer,  who  the  commencement
of  his  own  Masonic  career,  January  18,  1840,  could  personally
testify  to  the  character  and  standing,  in  the  community  of  the  State
of  Missouri,  to  nearly  every  member  of  that  distinguished  body  of
men  and  Masons,  upon  whose  shoulders  the  interests  of  our  noble
institution,  at  that  time,  were  placed  by  the  Grand  Lodge.  In  the
year  1841  the  writer  was  appointed  the  Senior  Grand  Deacon  of  the
Grand  Lodge  by  Hon.  Priestly  H.  McBride,  Grand  Master,  and
was  reappointed  in  1842  and  1843.  A very  large  proportion  of
those  who  organized  the  first  Grand  Lodge  continued  as  members
and  officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  up  to  the  year  1844,  when  by  ac-
cessions of  lodges  which  had  been  chartered  from  1821  to  1840,  the
number  had  increased  from  four  to  twenty-five,  which  was  Naphtali,
and  in  which  we  received  the  three  degrees.  In  1841-42  several
lodges  had  been  chartered  in  Iowa,  and  among  them  was  Iowa  Lodge,
No.  42,  of  which  our  very  distinguished  Brother  Theodore  S.  Parvin
was  Wor.  Master,  and  we  mention  this  circumstance  to  state  that
he  and  the  writer  are  the  only  surviving  members  of  that  Grand
Lodge  of  1841  to  1844.

Indiana.

As  early  as  1795  members  of  the  Fraternity  who  had  been  con-
nected with  lodges  in  the  army  on  the  northwest  frontier,  in-
troduced Free  Masonry  into  the  Territory.  The  first  lodge,  how-
ever, was  organized  by  a dispensation  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of

1456

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Kentucky,  August  31,  1808,  at  Vincennes,  by  the  name  of  Vin
cennes  Lodge,  No.  15.

The  following  lodges  were  also  granted  warrants  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Kentucky:  At  Madison,  Union  Lodge,  No.  29,  August
31,  1815  ; at  Charlestown,  Blazing  Star,  No.  36,  August  25,  1816;
at  Salem,  Melchizedeck,  No.  43 ; Lawrenceburg,  Lawrenceburg,
No.  44;  and  at  Corydon,  Pisgah,  No.  45,  all  August  25,  1817.

The  Grand  Master  of  Kentucky,  after  the  annual  meeting  of
the  Grand  Lodge,  issued  a dispensation  for  the  Lodge  at  Switzer-
land, and  one  for  Rising  Sun  Lodge,  at  Rising  Sun.

A dispensation  for  lodge  Brookville  Harmony,  No.  41,  at
Brookville,  was  issued  by  the  Grand  Master  of  Ohio  in  18x6  or
1817.

A general  convention  of  the  representatives  of  the  following
lodges  of  Ancient  York  Masons  of  the  State  of  Indiana  was  held
at  Corydon  on  December  3,  18x7,  viz. :

Name  of  Lodge.

No.

Location.

Representative.

Vincennes

Vincennes

G.  W.  Johnston.
James  Dill.
Hezekiah  B.  Hull.
A.  C.  Pepper.

H.  P.  Thornton.
Jos.  Bartholomew.
John  Miller.

Stephen  C.  Stevens.
Christ.  Harrison.
Davis  Floyd.

Lawrenceburg

Switzerland

Rising  Sun

Madison  Union

44

U.  D.  of  Ky...
U.  D.  of  Ky...

Lawrenceburg. .

Vevay

Rising  Sun

Madison

Blazing  Star

Brookville  Harmony

Salem

36

41  U.  D.  Ohio.

AT.

Charlestown  . |

Brookville

Salem. .

Pisgah

Corydon...

*

Brother  Alexander  Buckner  was  unanimously  chosen  President,
and  Davis  Floyd  unanimously  elected  Secretary.

The  convention  then  adopted  the  following  :

“ Resolved , That  it  is  expected  and  advisable  that  a Grand
Lodge  should  be  at  this  time  formed  in  the  State  of  Indiana.”

All  the  above  representatives  voted  in  the  affirmative  except
those  of  Harmony  and  Pisgah.

The  convention  then  adopted  the  following :

“ Resolved , That  a committee  of  four  members  be  appointed
to  inform  the  M.  W.  Grand  Masters  of  Kentucky  and  Ohio  that

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1457

a constitutional  number  of  chartered  lodges  have  determined  in
general  convention  to  form  a Grand  Lodge  in  this  State,  and
consequently  will  secede  from  their  Mother  Lodge  so  soon  as  a
Grand  Lodge  is  organized.”

The  convention  also

“ Resolved,  That  the  several  subordinate  lodges  here  rep-
resented do  appoint  one  or  more  delegates  to  meet  at  Madison  on
the  second  Monday  in  January  next,  for  the  purpose  of  opening  a
Grand  Lodge  for  the  State  of  Indiana;  and  that  a Communication
be  forwarded  to  the  rest  of  the  lodges  in  this  State  unrepresented
in  this  convention,  of  the  above  determination.”

This  resolution  was  adopted  :

Harmony,  No.  41  ; Lawrenceburg,  No.  44 ; Switzerland,  U.  D. ;
Rising  Sun,  U.  D.  ; and  Madison,  No.  29,  voted  in  the  affirmative,
five.  Vincennes,  No.  15  ; Salem,  No.  43  ; Pisgah,  No.  45 ; and  Blaz-
ing Star,  No.  36,  voted  in  the  negative,  four.

A Grand  Communication  of  the  subordinate  lodges  of  the  State
of  Indiana  was  held  Monday,  January  12,  a.l.  5818.  Representatives
of  the  following  lodges  were  present : Rising  Sun,  U.  D.  ; Union,
No.  29 ; Switzerland,  U.  D. ; Blazing  Star,  No.  36.  Delegates  were
reported  by  the  Committee  on  Credentials,  and  admitted  as  being
duly  appointed  by  their  respective  lodges,  viz.  : Harmony  Lodge,
Brookville,  U.  D.,  from  Grand  Lodge  of  Ohio ; Lawrenceburg,  No.
44;  Vincennes,  No.  15;  Melchizedeck,  No.  43;  Pisgah,  No.  45.

The  following  resolution  was  adopted  : “ Resolved,  That  the
chartered  lodges  here  represented  do  now  separate  for  a time  from
the  lodges  under  dispensation,  and  proceed  immediately  to  organize
a Grand  Lodge  for  the  State  of  Indiana.”

Brother  Alexander  A.  Meek,  being  the  oldest  Past  Master  pres-
ent, was  called  to  the  Chair.  Melchizedeck  Lodge  surrendered  her
Charter  but  declined  having  a new  one.

January  13th  the  Grand  Officers  were  duly  elected,  M.  W.
Alexander  Buckner,  Grand  Master.

The  representatives  from  lodges  Nos.  15,  29,  36,  43,  44,  45,  hold-
ing charters  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Kentucky,  surrendered  the
same,  and  asked  to  have  charters  granted  to  their  respective  lodges
by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Indiana,  which  was  accordingly  done  on  the
14th,  viz. :

Vincennes  Lodge,  No.  1,  Vincennes;  Union  Lodge,  No.  2,

92

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

1458

Madison  : Blazing  Star  Lodge,  No.  3,  Charlestown  ; Lawrenceburg
Lodge,  No.  4,  Lawrenceburg;  Melchizedeck  Lodge,  No.  5;  Pis-
gah  Lodge,  No.  6,  Corydon  ; which  lodges  received  their  charters
at  this  communication.

The  Grand  Constitution  was  adopted  January  15th.  The  illus-
trations of  Masonry  of  Thomas  Smith  Webb  were  adopted  for  the
government  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  and  were  recommended  to  be
adopted  by  all  the  subordinate  lodges  of  the  State  for  the  govern-
ment of  the  same.

Charlestown  was  selected  as  the  site  for  the  meeting  of  the
Grand  Lodge  for  the  present.

The  Junior  Grand  Warden  being  a member  of  Melchizedeck
Lodge,  which  declined  a Charter,  the  office  became  vacant  and  an
election  was  held  to  fill  the  same,  and  Brother  Benjamin  V.  Becks
was  duly  elected.

The  Grand  Lodge  met  in  various  towns  and  cities  until  1828,
when  it  removed  to  Indianapolis,  and  has  continued  to  do  so  ever
since.

Alabama.

The  first  lodge  in  Alabama  was  Madison,  No.  21,  at  Huntsville,
which  was  chartered  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Kentucky,  August  28,
1812.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  Tennessee  granted  a Charter  to  Ala-
bama Lodge,  No.  21,  at  Huntsville,  October  6,  1818.  The  Grand
Lodge  of  South  Carolina  granted  a Charter  to  Alabama  Lodge,  No.
51,  at  Clairborne,  in  1819  ; the  Grand  Lodge  of  Tennessee  granted
a Warrant  to  Rising  Virtue  Lodge,  No.  , at  Tuskaloosa,  October
5,  1818  ; and  the  Grand  Master  of  Tennessee  issued  a dispensation
to  Halo  Lodge,  at  Cahawba,  April  4,  1820,  and  which  continued
until  October,  1821  ; but  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Georgia  issued  a
Warrant  to  Halo  Lodge,  No.  21,  January  24,  1821 ; the  Grand  Lodge
of  Tennessee  issued  a Charter  to  Moulton  Lodge,  at  Moulton,  Octo-
ber 3,  1820  ; the  Grand  Lodge  of  Tennessee  granted  a dispensation
to  Russellville  Lodge,  October  3,  1820;  a dispensation  from  the
Grand  Master  of  Tennessee  was  issued  to  Farrar  Lodge,  at  Elyton.
March  5,  1821  ; the  Grand  Lodge  of  North  Carolina  granted  a
Charter  to  St.  Stephen’s  Lodge,  at  St.  Stephen’s,  December  14,  1816;
Washington  Lodge  and  Tuscumbia  Lodge  were  granted  charters
by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Tennessee.  Tuscumbia  had  never  reported

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1459

its  work,  and  soon  went  out  of  existence.  Washington  very  soon
gave  up  her  Charter.  The  name  of  Madison  Lodge,  No.  21,  was
changed  to  Helion  ; Alabama  Lodge,  No.  21,  at  Huntsville,  was
changed  to  Bethsaida  ; soon  afterward  a consolidation  took  place
and  these  two  and  Helion  and  Bethsaida  became  Helion,  No.  1.  Of
all  the  above  lodges  there  only  remain  at  the  present  time  Rising
Virtue,  No.  4 ; Moulton,  No.  6 ; and  Farrar,  No.  8.

The  Grand  Lodge  was  organized  by  the  above-mentioned  lodges
and  a constitution  was  adopted  and  signed  June  15,  1821.

December  6,  1836,  a quorum  was  not  present;  and  after  waiting
for  three  days,  those  who  were  present  declared  the  Grand  Lodge
extinct.

The  representatives  of  che  lodges  present  reorganized  a Grand
Lodge,  a new  constitution  was  adopted,  new  Grand  Officers  were
elected,  and  the  old  warrants  were  re-granted.

A rkansas.

November  29,  1819,  a dispensation  for  Arkansas  Lodge,  located
at  the  Port  of  Arkansas,  was  issued  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ken-
tucky. A Charter  was  granted,  August  29,  1820,  Robert  Johnson
being  W.  Master.  This  lodge  surrendered  her  Charter,  August  28,
1822.

A dispensation  to  organize  Washington  Lodge  at  Fayetteville
was  issued  by  the  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Tennessee,
December  24,  1835  ; and  it  was  renewed,  November  12,  1836.  Oc-
tober 3,  1837,  a Charter  was  granted,  and  the  lodge  received  as  a
present  a set  of  jewels.  A dispensation  was  granted  from  the  same
Grand  Lodge  for  a lodge  at  Clarksville,  October  5,  1838,  to  which
a Charter  was  issued,  October  12,  1839.  The  dispensation  of  Clarks-
ville Lodge  was  received  prior  to  the  organization  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Arkansas,  but  the  Charter  was  issued  after  that  event.
This  lodge  continued  under  the  constitution  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Tennessee  until  1843,  when  it  came  under  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Arkansas  as  No.  5.  In  1845  it  ceased  to  work  and  surrendered  the
Charter.

January  6,  1837,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Louisiana  issued  warrants
to  two  lodges  in  Arkansas,  viz.  : Morning  Star,  at  Arkansas  Post,
and  'Western  Star,  at  Little  Rock.  The  seat  of  State  Government

14C0  HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

having  been  changed  to  Little  Rock,  Morning  Star  Lodge  gave  up
the  Charter.

A dispensation  was  issued  by  the  Grand  Master  of  Alabama  in
1838  to  Mount  Horeb  Lodge  in  Washington.

November  21,  1838,  a convention  was  held  and  representatives
from  Washington,  Morning  Star,  Western  Star,  and  Mount  Horeb,
U.  D.,  were  present  at  which  a constitution  was  adopted  and  officers
were  elected  and  the  Grand  Lodge  was  duly  constituted.

Wisconsin.

The  history  of  Freemasonry  in  the  territory  now  embraced  in  the
State  of  Wisconsin  dates  from  December  27,  1823.

The  only  known  record  of  the  first  lodge  in  what  is  now  Wiscon-
sin is  founded  in  an  address  delivered  at  Green  Bay,  December  1 7,
1854,  by  P.  G.  M.  Henry  S.  Baird.  He  says:

The  first  action  had  with  a view  to  organize  a lodge  of  Masons
at  Green  Bay  is  found  in  proceedings  of  a meeting  of  the  members
of  the  Fraternity,  held  on  the  evening  of  the  27th  day  of  December,
A.D.  1823.

A committee  was  appointed  to  draft  a petition  to  the  Grand
Lodge  of  the  State  of  New  York,  praying  for  a dispensation  to  open
and  hold  a Lodge  of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons  at  Green  Bay,
then  in  the  Territory  of  Michigan.  In  due  time  the  prayer  of  the
petitioners  was  responded  to,  and  a dispensation  granted.

On  September  2,  1824,  the  first  regular  Lodge  of  Free  and  Ac-
cepted Masons  was  opened  and  organized  at  Fort  Howard,  directly
opposite  to  the  city,  under  a dispensation  from  the  M.  W.  Grand
Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  State  of  New  York.

The  officers  named  in  the  dispensation  were :

Robert  Irwin,  Sr.,W.  Master.

Benjamin  Watson,  S.  Warden.

W.  V.  Wheaton,  J.  Warden.

On  December  3,  1824,  a regular  Charter  was  granted  by  the  M.
W.  Grand  Lodge  of  New  York.

Mineral  Point  Lodge,  No.  1,  was  organized  July  27,  1841,  from
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Missouri,  under  dispensation  dated  October  8,

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1840,  named  “Melody”  (for  Bro.  George  H.  C.  Melody,  P.  Dep.
Grand  Master  of  Missouri)  Lodge,  No.  65  (now  No.  2).

A dispensation  was  issued  by  Brother  Joab1  T.  Bernard,  Dep
Grand  Master,  January  10,  1843.

A Charter  was  granted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Missouri,  Octo-
ber 13,  1843.2

A preliminary  meeting,  having  in  contemplation  the  formation
of  a Masonic  lodge,  was  held  at  the  house  of  John  Beavans,  in  the
town  of  Platteville,  in  the  month  of  January,  a.d.  1843.

MILWAUKEE  LODGE,  NO.  22  (NOW  KILBOURN  LODGE,  NO.  3).

The  first  meeting  of  this  lodge  was  held  July  5,  a.  l.  5843,  a.d.

1843.

Bro.  Normand  Hawley,  representing  the  Grand  Master  ol
Illinois,  presented  the  dispensation  which  he  had  been  deputed  to
bring  to  them.

The  exact  date  of  the  Charter  of  this  lodge  does  not  appear  from
the  minutes.  In  the  proceedings  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Illinois,
October  2,  1843,  the  committee  on  Returns  and  Work  recom-
mended granting  a Charter  to  Milwaukee  Lodge,  No.  22,  “when
dues  are  paid  ; ” and  on  the  first  day  of  November,  1843,  the  elec-
tion of  officers  was  held  under  the  Charter,  1843.

ACTION  RELATIVE  TO  THE  FORMATION  OF  A GRAND  LODGE,  NOVEM-
BER 22,  1843.

The  worshipful  Master,  Bro.  Abram  D.  Smith,  presented  a com-
munication from  Melody  Lodge,  at  Platteville,  upon  the  subject  of
establishing  a Grand  Lodge  in  the  Territory  of  Wisconsin,  which
was  read,  and  the  Master  and  Wardens  were  appointed  a committee
to  correspond  with  Platteville  and  Mineral  Point  lodges  upon  the
subject.

The  Charter  of  Milwaukee  Lodge,  No.  3,  is  dated  January  17,

1844.

1 Incorrectly  called  in  the  record  John.

2 The  present  writer  was  S.  G.  D.  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Missouri  at  that  time.

1462

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

MASONIC  CONVENTION  HELD  AT  MADISON  ON  THE  i8tH  DAY  OF

DECEMBER,  A.D.  1 843.

The  following  lodges  were  represented  :

Milwaukee  Lodge,  at  Milwaukee.

Mineral  Lodge,  at  Mineral  Point.

Melody  Lodge,  at  Platteville.

Bro.  Moses  Meeker  was  called  to  the  Chair,  and  Bro.  Geo.  W.
Lakin  was  appointed  Secretary.

On  motion  of  Bro.  Ben.  C.  Eastman,  it  was

Ordered , That  a committee  consisting  of  two  be  appointed  to
receive  and  examine  the  credentials  of  the  members  of  the  conven-
tion.

The  committee  appointed  to  receive  and  examine  the  credentials
of  the  members  of  the  convention,  being  the  legal  representatives
of  the  regularly  constituted  lodges  of  the  Territory  of  Wisconsin,
to  take  into  consideration  and  determine  upon  the  expediency  of
forming  a Grand  Lodge  within  the  said  Territory,  have  attended  to
the  duty  assigned  them,  and  submit  the  following :

Your  committee  find  that  there  are  seven  members  of  said  con-
vention representatives  of  the  lodges  aforesaid,  to  wit :

From  Milwaukee,  Mineral  Point,  and  Melody  lodges.

On  motion  of  Bro.  Ben.  C.  Eastman,  it  was

Ordered , That  a committee  of  three  be  appointed  to  take  into
consideration  the  expediency  of  forming  a Grand  Lodge  in  the
Territory  of  Wisconsin.

The  Chair  appointed  Bros.  Ben.  C.  Eastman,  Dwight  F.  Lawton,
and  Geo.  H.  Walker  said  committee.

Bro.  Ben.  C.  Eastman,  from  said  committee,  submitted  the  fol-
lowing

REPORT.

The  committee  appointed  to  take  into  consideration  the  expediency  of  form-
ing a Grand  Lodge  in  the  Territory,  have  attended  to  their  duty,  and  ask  leave
to  report  the  following  preamble  and  resolutions  :

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1463

Whereas,  There  are  now,  within  the  Territory  of  Wisconsin,  three  chartered
lodges,  all  of  which  are  in  a prosperous  and  happy  condition  ; and

Whereas , It  is  competent  for  that  number  of  lodges  to  emerge  from  a state
of  dependency,  become  legally  organized,  and  be  hereafter  established  and
known  as  a separate,  distinct,  and  independent  body,  having  its  own  jurisdiction  ;
and

Whereas , In  the  rapidly  increasing  population  of  our  Territory,  it  is  be-
lieved many  more  lodges  will  immediately  spring  into  existence  whereby  the
great  principles  of  Masonry  will  be  promulgated,  if  the  facilities  for  obtaining
dispensations  and  charters  are  increased  as  they  will  be  by  the  organization  of
a Grand  Lodge  in  Wisconsin  ; and

Whereas , The  Great  Lights  of  Masonry  should  not  be  hidden  under  a bush-
el, but  should  shine  in  the  fullness  of  their  strength,  that  none  may  want  a guide
for  their  faith  and  practice,  and  that  their  acts  be  squared  by  the  precepts  of  the
Great  Architect  of  the  Universe,  and  their  desire  be  circumscribed  by  the  prin-
ciples of  morality  and  their  passions  restrained  in  due  bounds.  Therefore,  be  it

Resolved,  That  it  is  expedient  to  form  a Grand  Lodge  in  the  Territory  of
Wisconsin.

On  motion  of  Bro.  John  H.  Rountree,  the  report  of  the  com-
mittee was  accepted,  the  preamble  and  resolutions  adopted,  and  the
committee  discharged.

On  motion  of  Bro.  Dwight  F.  Lawton,  it  was

Ordered , That  a committee  of  three  be  appointed  to  draft  a
constitution  for  a Grand  Lodge,  and  that  said  committee  be  in-
structed to  report  at  as  early  an  hour  as  possible.

The  Chair  appointed  Bros.  Lawton,  Meeker,  and  Lakin  said
committee.  The  convention  adjourned  till  6 p.m.

Evening  at  6 p.m.  convention  met.

Bro.  Lawton,  from  the  committee  appointed  to  draft  a constitu-
tion for  a Grand  Lodge,  reported  the  draft  of  a constitution,  which
report  was  accepted  and  committee  discharged.

On  motion,  the  convention  adjourned  sine  die.

The  M.  W.  Grand  Lodge  of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons  met
in  annual  communication  in  the  city  of  Madison,  on  Monday,
December  1 8,  a.d.  1843,  a.l.  5843.

The  Grand  Lodge  was  opened  in  the  third  degree,  in  due  and
ancient  form.

On  motion  of  Bro.  Meeker,  the  constitution  reported  in  the
convention  was  taken  up,  read,  and  adopted.

1 464

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Bro.  Merrill,  from  said  committee,  made  the  following

REPORT.

The  committee  appointed  to  nominate  officers  for  the  Grand  Lodge  have
attended  to  the  duty  assigned  them,  and  report  that  they  have  nominated  the
following  :

Benjamin  T.  Kavanaugh,  G.  Master.

Abram  D.  Smith,  D.  G.  Master.

Moses  Meeker,  S.  G.  Warden.

David  Merrilly,  J.  G.  Warden.

Thomas  P.  Burnett,  Grand  Treasurer.

Ben.  C.  Eastman,  Grand  Secretary.

Dwight  F.  Lawton,  Grand  Lecturer.

Which  report  was  accepted,  and  the  committee  discharged.

On  motion  of  Bro.  Rountree,  it  was

Resolved , That  the  Grand  Lodge  do  now  proceed  to  the  elec-
tion of  officers,  and  all  the  above-named  Brethren  were  elected  and
installed.

Texas.

During  the  very  first  effort  to  establish  a lodge  in  Texas,  that
country  was  a dependency  of  Mexico,  and  the  Roman  Catholic
priesthood  controlled  the  most  of  the  population  and  were  the  open
enemies  of  Freemasonry,  and  the  American  settlers  were  objects  of
suspicion.

In  the  winter  of  1834-35  five  Master  Masons  having  made
themselves  known  to  each  other  as  such,  after  many  conferences
and  much  deliberation,  concluded  to  establish  a lodge  in  Texas.
These  were  John  H.  Wharton,  Asa  Brigham,  James  A.  E.  Phelps,
Alexander  Russell,  and  Anson  Jones;  they  fixed  upon  time  and
locality  for  their  meeting  to  accomplish  their  desire.  Brother  J.
P.  Caldwell  subsequently  joined  them.  The  town  of  Brazoria  was
selected  for  their  meeting,  and  in  a small  grove  of  wild  peach  and
laurel  in  a family  burial-ground  of  General  John  Austin.

Here  in  a day  of  March,  1835,  10  a.m.,  “was  held  the  first
formal  meeting  of  Masons  in  Texas.”  These  six  Brethren  made
arrangements  to  apply  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Louisiana  for  a
dispensation  to  form  and  open  a lodge  to  be  called  Holland
Lodge.  A petition  was  drawn  up  and  another  Master  Mason,
Brother  W.  D.  C.  Hall,  having  signed  it  with  the  other  six,  it  was

FREEMaSONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1465

forwarded  to  New  Orleans.  The  officers  named  were:  Anson
Jones,  W.  Master;  Asa  Brigham,  Senior  Warden,  and  J.  P.  Cald-
well, Junior  Warden.  This  dispensation  was  granted,  and  Holland
Lodge,  No.  36,  was  started  at  Brazoria  on  December  27,  1835.
In  the  second  story  of  the  old  court-house  was  where  the  Com-
munications were  held.

In  consequence  of  the  difficulties  with  Mexico,  which  finally
resulted  in  open  hostilities,  the  succeeding  war,  and  independence
of  the  Republic  of  Texas,  the  lodge  struggled  on  until  February,
1836,  the  last  communication  being  held  that  month.  In  March
Brazoria  was  abandoned,  and  the  dispensation  was  captured  by
Urrea,  and  with  records,  books,  jewels,  etc.,  was  destroyed.

In  October,  1837,  the  lodge  was  reopened  in  the  city  of  Houston,
a Warrant  for  it  having  been  granted  in  the  meantime,  and  the
lodge  is  yet  in  existence.

Two  other  lodges,  viz.  : Milam,  No.  40,  at  Nacogdoches,  and
McFarland,  No.  41,  at  San  Augustine,  were  warranted  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Louisiana.

These  lodges,  as  also  Holland  Lodge,  No.  36,  sent  delegates  to
a convention  which  met  in  Houston,  and  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the
Republic  at  Texas  was  organized,  December  20,  1837.  Brother
Anson  Jones  was  elected  Grand  Master.

The  three  lodges  surrendered  their  charters  to  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Louisiana,  and  received  new  charters  from  their  own  Grand
Lodge.

Iowa.

The  first  dispensation  for  the  organization  of  a lodge  in  the  Ter-
ritory of  Iowa  was  issued  November  20,  1840,  to  Des  Moines
Lodge,  at  Burlington,  which  was  chartered  October  20,  1841.  The
second  dispensation  for  a lodge  was  issued  February"  4,  1841,  to
Iowa  Lodge,  at  Bloomington,  Muscatine  County,  constituted  Feb-
ruary 4,  1841,  and  chartered  October  20,  1841,  as  No.  42.  The
third  dispensation  was  dated  October  10,  1842,  to  Dubuque  Lodge,
at  Dubuque,  and  was  chartered  October  10,  1843.  The  fourth  was
Iowa  City  Lodge,  at  Iowa  City,  County  of  Johnson,  which  was
constituted  October  10,  1842,  by  dispensation,  and  chartered  Octo-
ber 10,  1843.

These  lodges  all  derived  their  warrants  from  the  Grand  Lodge

1466

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

of  Missouri,  and  the  present  writer,  as  an  officer  in  that  Giand
Lodge,  voted  for  all  but  the  first  one,  but  was  a visitor  in  the
Grand  Lodge  when  the  first  one  was  chartered.  He  made  the
personal  acquaintance  of  Brother  Theodore  S.  Parvin  and  the
other  representatives  of  those  lodges  at  that  time,  and  Brother
Parvin  and  the  writer  are  the  only  surviving  members  of  that  Grand
Lodge  since  October,  1897.

These  four  lodges,  by  agreement,  at  a preliminary  convention  of
their  delegates,  held  at  the  communication  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Missouri,  at  St.  Louis,  October  n,  1843,  met  in  convention  at
Iowa  City,  in  Iowa  Territory,  January  2,  1844,  and  then  and  there
organized  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Iowa.

Delegates  were  present  from  the  following  other  lodges  in  Iowa
working  under  authority  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Illinois,  viz.  :
Rising  Sun,  No.  12,  at  Montrose,  Keokuk  Lodge,  at  Keokuk,  and
Clinton  Lodge,  at  Davenport.  The  first  under  a Charter  and  the
other  two  under  dispensations.  These  lodges  were  finally  admitted
to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Iowa.

January  3,  1844,  the  Grand  Officers  were  elected.  Brother
Oliver  Cock  was  unanimously  elected  on  the  second  ballot  the
Grand  Master,  and  Brother  Theodore  Sutton  Parvin  unanimously
elected  Grand  Secretary,  which  office  he  has  filled,  except  when  he
was  chosen  Grand  Master,  ever  since,  now  fifty-five  years.  No
Mason  has  a more  extended  reputation  for  abilities,  so  essential  in
the  management  of  Masonic  affairs,  than  has  our  illustrious  Brother,
who  is  so  favorably  known  throughout  the  world  of  Masonry.

Oregon.

After  the  organization  of  Multnomah  Lodge  at  Oregon  City,  a
little  more  than  two  years  elapsed  before  any  additional  lodges  were
established  in  Oregon.  Following  the  planting  of  this  lodge,  the
Grand  Lodge  of  California,  on  November  27,  1850,  granted  a Char-
ter to  Willamette  Lodge,  No.  11,  at  Portland.  This  lodge  was
opened  and  constituted  January  4,  1851.  The  Grand  Lodge  of
California  granted  a Charter  to  Lafayette  Lodge,  of  Oregon.  This
lodge  was  constituted  and  began  work  July  30,  185 1.  The  establish-
ment of  this  lodge  gave  to  the  Territory  of  Oregon  the  requisite
number  of  lodges,  under  the  common  law  of  Masonry,  to  organize

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1467

an  independent  Grand  Lodge  for  the  jurisdiction.  The  opportunity
was  at  once  improved.

“ The  important  question,”  says  a distinguished  Brother,  recently
deceased,  “of  having  a Grand  Lodge  was  agitated.  Consequently,
on  the  16th  of  August,  a.l.  5851,  a.d.  1851,  a convention  of  F.  & A.
Masons  of  the  Territory  of  Oregon  was  held  at  Oregon  City  to
form  a Grand  Lodge.  Brother  Berryman  Jennings  was  elected
Chairman  and  Bro.  Benjamin  Stark  Secretary.”  The  convention,
after  due  consideration,  resolved  upon  the  wisdom  and  expediency
of  the  “ formation  of  a Grand  Lodge.”  In  pursuance  of  this  action
an  address,  giving  official  notice  of  the  purpose  in  view,  was  pre-
pared and  sent  out  to  the  several  lodges,  requesting  them  to  meet
again  in  convention  on  the  second  Saturday  in  September  following,
to  perfect  the  Grand  Lodge  organization.

In  pursuance  of  this  call,  delegates  from  the  several  lodges  assem-
bled at  Oregon  City  on  September  13,  1851,  and  proceeded  to  the
work  in  hand  by  the  election  of  Bro.  John  Elliott  Chairman,  and
Bro.  W.  S.  Caldwell  Secretary.  The  three  lodges,  viz.  : Multono-
mah,  Willamette,  and  La  Fayette,  were  duly  represented.  Among
the  delegates  present  were  those  who  were  otherwise  admitted  to
seats  in  the  convention,  viz.  : Bros.  J.  C.  Ainsworth,  R.  R.  Thomp-
son, Forbes  Barclay,  John  Elliott,  Lewis  May,  Benj.  Stark,  Wm.
M.  Berry,  D.  D.  Garrett,  G.  B.  Coudy,  B.  Jennings,  Robert  Thomp-
son, Amory  Holbrook,  and  W.  S.  Caldwell.  On  Monday,  Sep-
tember 15th  following,  a constitution,  through  a committee,  was
reported  and  adopted,  and  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Oregon  duly  or-
ganized. Bro.  Berryman  Jennings  was  elected  and  installed  Grand
Master,  and  Bro.  Benj.  Stark  Grand  Secretary.

The  first  lodge  established  under  authority  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Oregon  was  organized  at  Salem,  under  the  name  of  Salem  Lodge,
No.  4.  The  dispensation  of  this  lodge  was  issued  by  the  Deputy
Grand  Master,  R.  W.  Bro.  John  Elliott,  on  October  4,  1851.

California.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  California  was  organized  in  the  city  of
Sacramento,  April  18,  1850.  The  constituent  lodges  were  Cali-
fornia Lodge,  No.  13,  chartered  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  District
of  Columbia,  located  in  San  Francisco,  November  9,  1848;  Con-

1468

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

necticut  Lodge,  No.  75,  Sacramento  City,  chartered  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Connecticut,  January  31,  1849  ; and  Western  Star  Lodge
No.  98,  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Missouri,  May  10,  1848  ; Benton
City,  Upper  California.

Delegates  were  present  from  New  Jersey  Lodge,  under  dispen-
sation from  the  Deputy  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New
Jersey,  dated  March  1,  1849.  This  lodge  was  opened  in  Sacramento
City,  December  4,  1849.

Credentials  were  presented  by  B.  D.  Hyam,  from  Benicia
Lodge,  at  Benicia,  but  there  being  no  dispensation  or  Charter  or  any
other  information  of  the  existence  of  such  a lodge,  it  was  not  recog-
nized.

A constitution  was  adopted  April  19th,  and  the  Grand  Officers
were  elected  and  duly  installed.

Minnesota.

The  first  lodge  organized  in  Minnesota  was  St.  Paul’s,  No.  1,
constituted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ohio,  August  4,  1849  ; the
second  lodge  was  St.  John’s,  No.  1,  warranted  October  12,  1850,  by
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Wisconsin  ; and  the  third  was  Cataract  Lodge,
No.  168,  founded  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Illinois,  1852.

These  three  lodges,  by  delegates,  met  in  convention  at  the  city  of
St.  Paul,  February  23,  1853,  and  constituted  the  Grand  Lodge  of
the  State  of  Minnesota.

New  Mexico.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  Missouri  issued  warrants  to  the  following
lodges  in  New  Mexico,  viz.  : Aztec  Lodge,  No.  108;  Chapman
Lodge,  No.  95  ; and  Montezuma  Lodge,  No.  109.

These  lodges  met  in  convention,  August  6,  1 877,  at  Santa  Fd,
for  the  purpose  of  discussing  the  question  of  forming  a Grand
Lodge.  Brother  Simon  B.  Newcomb  presided.  The  committee
on  credentials  found  the  representatives  of  the  three  above-men-
tioned lodges  to  be  present.

The  next  day  a constitution  and  by-laws  were  adopted,  the
Grand  Officers  were  elected  and  installed,  Brother  Wm.  W.  Griffin
being  M.  W.  Grand  Master,  and  David  J.  Miller  R.  W.  Grand
Secretary.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1469

Washington.

The  first  steps  of  initiatory  efforts  toward  Masonic  organization
and  the  formation  of  a Masonic  lodge  on  the  Pacific  Coast,  so  far
as  any  record  has  been  shown  or  it  is  believed  to  exist,  were  taken
jointly  by  three  brother  Master  Masons,  namely:  Bros.  Joseph
Hull,  William  P.  Dougherty,  and  Peter  G.  Stewart.

A petition  was  prepared  and  addressed  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Missouri  praying  that  a Charter  be  granted  to  the  petitioners,  under
the  name  of  Multnomah  Lodge.

The  record  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Missouri  reads  as  follows  :
“ A charter  was  granted  to  Multnomah  Lodge,  No.  84,  on  the  19th
day  of  October,  1846,  locating  the  Lodge  at  Oregon  City,  Oregon
Territory.”

In  his  annual  address  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Oregon,  held  June
13,  1853,  M.  W.  Bro.  Berryman  Jennings,  Grand  Master,  says:

“ On  the  25th  day  of  November  (1852)  last,  I granted  a dispensa-
tion to  sundry  brethren  residing  at  Olympia,  Puget  Sound,  to  open
a Lodge  under  the  name  of  Olympia  Lodge,  returnable  at  this
Grand  Communication,  which  return  has  been  promptly  made,
through  their  Worshipful  Master,  Brother  T.  F.  McElroy.”  Wash-
ington Territory  was  not  organized  until  after  this  dispensation  was
issued  and  the  lodge  began  work.

On  Saturday  evening,  December  11,  1852,  Olympia  Lodge,
U.  D.,  held  its  first  communication  by  virtue  of  Grand  Lodge
authority,  and  was  thereunder  duly  organized,  the  following
officers,  members  and  Brethren  being  present,  viz. : Bros.  Thornton
F.  McElroy,  W.  M.,  James  W.  Wiley,  S.  W.,  and  Michael  T.
Simmons,  S.  W.  ; also  Bros.  Smith  Hays  and  Nicholas  Delin  of
the  original  petitioners  (Bros.  Ira  Ward  and  A.  K.  Skidmore  of
said  petitioners  being  absent) ; Bros.  Fred  A.  Clark  and  Calvin  H.
Hale,  visitors,  were  also  present.

The  Charter  was  granted  to  Olympia  Lodge  of  Oregon,  June
13th,  and  bears  date  June  15,  1853,  and  was  designated  as  Olympia
Lodge  of  Oregon,  No.  5,  of  that  grand  jurisdiction.  The  first
meeting  under  the  Charter  was  held  on  Saturday  evening,  July  24,
1853,  at  which  time  we  may  infer  the  lodge  was  regularly  consti-
tuted, although  the  record  is  silent  in  this  particular.  An  election,
however,  was  held  that  evening  for  new  officers  under  the  Charter,

147°

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

with  the  following  result  : Bros.  T.  F.  McElroy,  W.  M.  ; B.  F.
Yantis,  S.  W.  ; M.  T.  Simmons,  J.  W.  ; B.  Close,  Sec.;  Ira  Ward,
Treas.,  and  Smith  Hays,  Tyler.

This  was  the  first  lodge  established  and  constituted  north  of  the
Columbia  River  and  west  of  the  Rocky  Mountains.

The  records  of  Multnomah  Lodge  from  its  institution  until  1868
were  destroyed  by  fire,  and  the  oldest  record  is  the  ledger  dating
from  the  year  1854.

Steilacoom  Lodge,  the  second  lodge  established  within  the
present  jurisdictional  limits  of  Washington,  was  organized  U.  D.  in
the  year  1854.  Since  it  first  began  work  it  has  passed  through
several  trying  ordeals,  some  of  which  were  of  so  serious  a nature
that  its  existence  might  well  have  been  regarded  as  hopeless  but  for
the  pluck  and  Masonic  energy  of  its  membership.

The  records  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Oregon,  session  of  June,
1854,  show  that  R.  W.  Dep.  Grand  Master  J.  C.  Ainsworth,  acting
Grand  Master,  “ granted  a Dispensation  to  Brother  W.  H.  Wallace
and  others  to  open  a Lodge  at  Steilacoom,  Washington  Territory,
under  the  name  of  Steilacoom  Lodge.”

The  dispensation  must  have  been  granted  during  the  latter  part
of  January  or  some  time  in  February,  1855.

During  the  summer  or  fall  of  1857,  probably  about  September
1st,  M.  W.  Bro.  Ben.  J.  Stark,  G.  M.  of  Masons  of  Oregon,  issued
a dispensation  for  a new  lodge  at  Grand  Mound,  Thurston  County,
Washington,  named  Grand  Mound  Lodge.

This  lodge  was  chartered  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Oregon,  July
12,  or  15,  1858,  under  the  name  of  Grand  Mound  Lodge,  No.  21.
On  August  2i,  1858,  at  its  hall  on  Grand  Mound  Prairie,  the  lodge
was  duly  constituted  and  its  officers  installed.

On  September  19,  1868,  after  eleven  years  of  hard  struggling,  in
earnest  and  zealous  efforts  to  build  up  and  sustain  the  lodge,  the
Brethren  reluctantly  felt  it  a duty  to  themselves  and  the  Fraternity
to  surrender  the  Charter  to  the  Grand  Lodge.

In  the  annual  address  of  M.  W.  Grand  Master  Benjamin  J.
Stark  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Oregon,  July  13,  1858,  among  the
seven  dispensations  he  reported  having  granted  during  the  year
for  the  formation  of  new  lodges  is  one  “for  Washington  Terri-
tory.”

On  July  13,  1858,  a Charter  was  granted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

< 47'

Oregon  to  Washington  Lodge,  No.  22.  The  Charter  bears  date  the
same  as  that  of  Grand  Mound  Lodge,  namely,  July  15,  1858.

In  the  foregoing  references  to  the  organization,  severally,  of
Olympia,  Steilacoom,  Grand  Mound,  and  Washington  lodges,  \vc
find  that  they  were  the  first  organized  Masonic  bodies  north  of
Columbia  River.

On  Monday,  December  6,  1858,  a little  band  of  Freemasons,
about  one  dozen  in  number,  met  at  the  Masonic  hall,  in  the  city
of  Olympia,  Washington  Territory.  Their  declaration  of  purpose
was  to  consider  “ the  propriety  of  establishing  a Grand  Lodge  of
Free  and  Accepted  Masons  for  said  Territory.”

This  little  band  of  Brethren  in  convention  assembled  resolved
to  proceed  to  the  formation  and  organization  of  a Grand  Lodge  of
Free  and  Accepted  Masons  for  the  Territory  of  Washington.

The  convention  was  composed  of  delegates  representing  the
four  existing  lodges  in  the  Territory,  viz.  : Olympia  Lodge,  No.  5 ;
Steilacoom  Lodge,  No.  8;  Grand  Mound  Lodge,  No.  21,  and
Washington  Lodge,  No.  22,  together  with  all  Past  Masters  by
service,  who  were  members  of  these  lodges,  and  present  during  the
sessions  of  the  convention.

On  the  evening  of  December  8,  1858,  a constitution,  having
been  prepared  by  a committee  appointed  for  that  purpose,  was
submitted,  duly  considered  and  adopted,  after  which  the  Grand
Officers  were  elected.

The  convention,  having  completed  its  labors,  was  adjourned,
sine  die , on  the  morning  of  December  9th,  whereupon  the  Most
Worshipful  Grand  Lodge  of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons  of  the
Territory  of  Washington  was  opened  in  ample  form,  and  was  thus
launched  upon  the  sea  of  its  sovereign  existence.

The  business  transacted  at  this  first  session,  though  compar-
atively brief,  was  most  important  to  the  future  interest  and  zeal  of
the  Grand  Lodge.  It  related  chiefly  to  formulating  plans  and
adopting  methods  for  placing  the  “ machinery  of  Grand  Lodge  in
Order,”  in  furtherance  of  the  important  work  before  it.

We  are  indebted  to  the  history  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Wash-
ington, by  Bro.  Grand  Secretary  Thomas  M.  Read,  for  the  above
sketch.

1472  HISTORY  CF  FREEMASONRY

Kansas.

By  reference  to  the  proceedings  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Mis-
souri the  record  will  be  found  of  the  organization  of  the  first  three
lodges  in  Kansas.

Dispensations  for  the  formation  of  new  lodges  were  issued  :

August  4,  1854,  to  John  W.  Chivington  and  others,  to  open  a
lodge  at  the  house  of  Mathew  R.  Walker,  in  Wyandotte  Territory,
to  be  called  Kansas  Lodge,  by  order  of  Most  Worshipful  Grand
Master  L.  S.  Cornwell.

October  6,  1854,  to  John  W.  Smith  and  others,  to  open  a lodge
at  the  town  of  Smithfield,  Kansas  Territory,  to  be  called  Smithfield
Lodge,  by  order  of  R.  W.  N.  B.  Giddings,  D.  D.  G.  Master  First
Masonic  District  of  Missouri.

December  30,  1854,  to  Richard  R.  Rees  and  others,  to  open  a
lodge  at  the  town  of  Leavenworth,  Kansas  Territory,  by  order  of

R.  W.  D.  P.  Wallingford,  D.  G.  Master  of  Missouri.1

At  a meeting  of  delegates  from  several  Masonic  lodges  in  the
Territory  of  Kansas,  at  the  city  of  Leavenworth,  on  November
14,  a.d.  1855,  a.l.  5855.  Present : Bro.  William  P.  Richardson  of
Smithton  Lodge,  No.  140,  as  proxy  for  W.  M.  Richard  R.  Rees,
W.  M.  of  Leavenworth  Lodge,  No.  150,  and  Bro.  A.  Payney,

S.  W.  of  Leavenworth  Lodge,  No.  150.

On  motion  of  Bro.  Rees,  Bro.  William  P.  Richardson  was  called
to  the  Chair,  and  on  motion,  Bro.  R.  R.  Rees  acted  as  Secretary.

Bro.  Rees  moved,  that  as  Wyandotte  Lodge  was  not  represented
in  this  convention,  that  the  convention  adjourn  until  December
27th  next,  with  a request  that  all  the  chartered  lodges  be  rep-
resented ; which  motion  was  carried,  and  the  convention  ad-
journed.

The  convention  met  in  the  office  of  A.  and  R.  R.  Rees,  in  the
city  of  Leavenworth,  pursuant  to  adjournment,  December  27,  1855.

Present:  Bro.  John  W.  Smith,  W.  M.  of  Smithton  Lodge,  No.
140;  Bro.  R.  R.  Rees,  W.  M.  of  Leavenworth  Lodge,  No.  150;
and  Bros.  C.  T.  Harrison,  L.  J.  Eastin,  J.  J.  Clarkson,  G.  W.  Per-
kins, I.  B.  Donaldson,  and  Brother  Kohn,  Master  Masons.

Bro.  J.  W.  Smith  was  called  to  the  Chair,  Bro.  Rees  acting  as
Secretary.

^Proceedings  of  Grand  Lodge  of  Missouri,  1855,  pp.  64,  65.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1473

Bro.  Rees  offered  the  following  resolution,  which  was  unani-
mously adopted :

Resolved , That  we  do  proceed  to  organize  a Grand  Lodge  for  the  Territory
of  Kansas,  and  that  a copy  of  the  proceedings  of  this  convention  be  forwarded
to  Wyandotte  Lodge  with  a request  that  they  co-operate  with  us,  and  ap-
prove the  proceedings  of  this  convention  ; and  that  so  soon  as  Wyandotte
shall  inform  the  Grand  Master  elect  of  their  approval,  and  co-operation  in  the
proceedings  of  this  convention,  that  then,  the  Grand  Master  elect  shall  be  in-
stalled as  Grand  Master  and  immediately  issue  a proclamation  declaring  this
Grand  Lodge  fully  organized.

On  motion  of  Bro.  Rees,  the  Chair  appointed  a committee  of
three  to  report  a constitution  and  by-laws  for  the  government
of  this  Grand  Lodge,  which  committee  consisted  of  Bros.  Rees,
Eastin,  and  Harrison.

The  committee  appointed  to  report  a constitution  and  code  of
by-laws  made  their  report,  which  was  adopted.

On  motion  of  Bro.  Rees,  the  convention  adjourned,  to  meet  at
Masonic  hall  at  early  candle-light.

On  motion  of  Bro.  Rees,  the  constitution  and  by-laws  adopted
in  convention  are  unanimously  adopted  as  the  constitution  and
by-laws  of  this  Grand  Lodge.

The  Grand  Lodge  thereupon  proceeded  to  the  election  of
Grand  Officers,  which  resulted  in  the  election  of  Bro.  Richard  R.
Rees  as  M.  W.  G.  M.

On  motion  of  Bro.  Vanderslice,  a committee  consisting  of  Bros.
Vanderslice,  Walker,  and  Smith  was  appointed  to  report  a con-
stitution and  code  of  by-laws  for  the  government  of  this  Grand
Lodge.

The  Grand  Lodge  was  called  from  labor  to  refreshments
until  7.30  p.m.

A committee  appointed  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Kansas,  at  their
convention  held  at  Leavenworth  City,  on  Monday,  March  17,  1856,
reported  a constitution  and  by-laws  for  the  government  of  said
Grand  Lodge  which  was  adopted.

The  Grand  Lodge  then  proceeded  to  the  election  of  Grand
Officers  for  the  ensuing  year,  which  resulted  in  the  election  of  Bro.
Richard  R.  Rees,  Grand  Master,  who  was  then  installed  and  who
then  installed  all  the  other  officers.

93

1474

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Nebraska.

The  first  lodge  in  the  State  of  Nebraska  was  Nebraska  Lodge,
No.  184,  at  Belleville,  Sarpy  County,  chartered  by  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Illinois,  October  3,  1855.

The  second  lodge  was  Giddings  Lodge,  No.  156,  at  Nebraska
City,  Otoe  County,  chartered  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Missouri,
May  28,  1856.  The  third  lodge  was  Capitol  Lodge,  No.  101,  at
Omaha  City,  Douglas  County,  chartered  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Iowa,  June  3,  1857.

These  three  lodges,  by  their  delegates,  held  a convention  at
Omaha  City,  September  23,  1857,  and  resolved  to  organize  a Grand
Lodge  for  the  Territory  of  Nebraska.

The  Grand  Officers  were  elected,  Bro.  Robert  C.  Jordan  being
chosen  Grand  Master,  who  held  that  station  until  i860.  We  regret
to  record  here  that  this  “father  of  Nebraska  Masonry”  died  Jan-
uary 9,  1 899,  aged  seventy-four  years.

Before  closing  this  history  of  Nebraska,  intelligence  was  received
of  the  sad  ending  of  the  life  of  another  distinguished  brother,  Will-
iam R.  Bowen,  the  Grand  Secretary  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  Grand
Chapter,  and  Grand  Recorder  of  the  Grand  Commandery,  who,  like
Brother  Jordan,  had  been  called  the  father  of  Nebraska  Masonry.
These  remarks  are  due,  because  of  the  writer’s  personal  knowledge
of,  and  intimate  association  with,  both  of  these  Brethren,  not  only
in  the  above  grand  bodies,  but  also  in  the  Supreme  Council  of  the
A.\A.\A.\S.\Rite,  of  which  Bro. '.Jordan  was  the  Active  Member
for  Nebraska  up  to  the  date  of  his  death,  and  Bro.'. Bowen  was  an
Emeritus,  having  retired  from  the  Active  list  several  years  since.

Indian  Territory.

The  first  lodge  organized  in  the  Indian  Territory  was  Flint
Lodge,  in  the  “Cherokee  Nation,”  which  received  a Charter  from
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Arkansas,  dated  November  9,  1853.  The
second  lodge  was  called  Muskogee,  and  subsequently  named
Eufala,  in  the  “Creek  Nation,”  and  received  a dispensation,  sup-
posedly, from  the  Grand  Master  of  Arkansas  in  1855  ; and  a
Charter  was  granted,  November  7,  1855.  During  the  war  of
1861-65  it  ceased  its  labors,  and  its  Charter  was  arrested  Novem-

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

*475

ber  6,  1867.  Early  in  1874  the  Grand  Master  of  Arkansas  revived
the  lodge ; it  remained  on  the  registry  of  that  Grand  Lodge  nearly
two  years,  until  that  Grand  Lodge  recognized  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Indian  Territory.  Doaksville  Lodge  received  a dispensation  from
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Arkansas,  December  23,  1870,  and  was
chartered  November  8,  1871.  Caddo  Lodge  received  a dispensa-
tion, August  26,  1873,  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Arkansas,  and  was
chartered  October  14,  1873.  These  two  were  in  the  “Choctaw
Nation.”

Muskogee,  Doaksville,  and  Caddo  lodges  met  in  convention,  by
their  delegates,  October  5,  1874,  and  decided  to  form  a Grand
Lodge  for  the  Indian  Territory.  A constitution  was  adopted,
Grand  Officers  were  chosen  and  installed,  and  the  Grand  Lodge  was
constituted,  October  6,  187^..

Three  other  lodges  were  in  existence  when  the  Grand  Lodge
was  constituted,  viz.  : Oklahoma,  in  the  “ Choctaw  Nation,”  which
had  been  chartered  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Arkansas,  November
18,  1868.  This  lodge,  as  soon  as  the  Grand  Lodge  was  started,
sent  in  her  Charter  and  had  it  endorsed  ; it  then  came  under  that  con-
stitution. Flint  Lodge,  already  described,  and  Alpha  Lodge,  also
in  the  “Cherokee  Nation,”  which  had  received  a dispensation  from
Kansas,  May  18,  1872,  and  a Charter,  October  17,  1872,  declined
joining  the  New  Grand  Lodge,  and  adhered  to  the  Grand  Lodges
from  which  they  had  received  their  warrants.  The  Grand  Lodges
of  Arkansas  and  Kansas  for  some  time  refused  to  recognize  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Indian  Territory.  In  1876  the  latter  Grand  Lodge
arrested  the  charters  of  the  two  delinquent  lodges.  The  Grand
Lodge  of  Kansas  sustained  her  daughter  lodge  and  still  refused  to
acknowledge  the  New  Grand  Lodge.  The  issue  continued  until  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Indian  Territory  rescinded  her  action  of  1876.
Soon  thereafter  Flint  Lodge  surrendered,  and  Alpha  Lodge  fol-
lowed her  in  October,  1878,  after  the  desired  action  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Kansas  had  been  obtained.

Other  lodges  subsequently  had  been  chartered  by  the  New
Grand  Lodge — two  in  the  Cherokee,  two  in  the  Choctaw,  and  two
in.  the  Chickasaw  nations.

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

1476

Colorado.

The  first  lodges  in  Colorado  were  Golden  City  Lodge,  at  Golden
City,  chartered  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Kansas,  October  17,  i860;
Summit  Lodge,  at  Parkville,  chartered  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ne-
braska, June  5,  1861  ; and  Rocky  Mountain  Lodge,  at  Gold  Hill,
June  5,  1861,  by  the  same  Grand  Lodge.

August  2,  1861,  the  above-mentioned  lodges  met,  by  their  dele-
gates, in  convention  at  Golden  City.  They  elected  and  installed
their  Grand  Officers  and  constituted  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Colorado,
and  declared  it  to  be  regularly  organized.  A constitution  was
adopted.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  Kansas,  October  15,  1867,  chartered
Nevada  Lodge,  in  Colorado,  it  seems  without  the  knowledge  of
the  formation  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Colorado.  (How  this  could
have  occurred  we  can  scarcely  conceive,  as  six  years  had  elapsed.)
This  lodge,  not  having  done  any  Masonic  work  under  the  Charter,
was  permitted  to  surrender  the  Charter  and  take  a new  one  from  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Colorado.

Nevada.

Carson  Lodge,  at  Carson  City,  was  chartered  May  15,  1862;
Washoe  Lodge,  at  Washoe  City,  and  Virginia  City  Lodge,  at  Vir-
ginia City,  both  chartered  May  14,  1863  ; Silver  City  Lodge,  changed
afterward  to  Amity,  at  Silver  City,  chartered  May  15,  1863  ; Silver
Star  Lodge,  at  Gold  Hill,  Esmeralda  Lodge,  at  Aurora,  and  Escurial
Lodge,  at  Virginia,  all  three  chartered  October  13,  1864;  and  Lan-
der Lodge,  at  Austin,  chartered  October  14,  1864.  All  of  these
eight  lodges  received  their  charters  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Cali-
fornia.

A convention  was  called  to  meet  January  16,  1865,  which  was
accordingly  done  and  six  lodges  were  represented  the  first  day  ; the
next  day  another  lodge  was  represented.  Lander  Lodge,  of  the
above  list,  was  the  only  lodge  which  did  not  appear  in  the  conven-
tion.

A constitution  was  adopted.  The  Grand  Officers  were  elected
and  installed  January  17,  1865.  The  old  charters  were  endorsed
for  present  use.  Lander  Lodge,  although  unrepresented  in  the  con-
vention and  organization,  presumed  herself  to  be  a part  of  the  Grand

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1477

Lodge,  and  under  its  jurisdiction  made  the  returns  to  the  Grand
Lodge  with  the  other  lodges.

The  first  annual  grand  communication  was  held  October  10,
1865.

Dakota.

The  first  lodge  organized  in  Dakota  was  St.  John’s  Lodge,  at
Yankton,  which  received  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Iowa,  Decem-
ber 5,  1862,  a dispensation,  and  afterward  a Charter,  dated  June  3,
1863;  Incense  Lodge,  at  Vermillion,  received  a dispensation,  Jan-
uary 14,  1869,  and  a Charter,  June  2,  1869  ; Elk  Point  Lodge,  at
Elk  Point,  received  a dispensation,  March  23,  1870,  and  a Charter,
June  8,  1871  ; Minnehaha  Lodge,  at  Sioux  Falls,  received  a dispen-
sation, July  13,  1873,  and  a Charter,  June  3,  1874;  Silver  Star
Lodge,  at  Canton,  received  a dispensation,  February  6,  1875,  and  a
Charter,  June  2,  1875  ; and  Mount  Zion  Lodge,  at  Springfield,  re-
ceived a dispensation,  February  16,  1875,  and  a Charter,  June  2,
1875.  All  of  the  above  warrants  were  granted  by  authority  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Iowa.  A dispensation  was  issued  by  the  Grand
Master  of  Minnesota,  November  22,  1872,  for  Shiloh  Lodge,  at
Fargo,  and  a Charter  was  issued  January  14,  1874.  He  also  issued  a
dispensation  to  Bismarck  Lodge  in  1874,  and  again  in  1875,  and  on
January  12,  1876,  the  lodge  received  a Charter.

June  21,  1875,  a convention  was  held  of  the  representatives  of
St.  John’s,  Incense,  Elk  Point,  Minnehaha,  and  Silver  Star  lodges.
Those  of  Mt.  Zion  Lodge,  U.  D.,  were  present  but  did  not  partici-
pate in  the  proceedings,  the  lodge  not  having  a Charter.  A consti-
tution was  adopted  and  they  elected  their  Grand  Officers.

July  21,  1875,  convention  met  again  and  the  Grand  Officers
were  installed  in  public,  by  Illustrious  Brother  Theodore  S.  Parvin,
P.  G.  Master  and  Grand  Secretary  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Iowa.

This  Grand  Lodge  continued  until  the  session  of  June  11-13,
1889,  when  by  Act  of  Congress,  approved  February  22,  1889,  the
division  of  the  Territory  of  Dakota  into  North  and  South  Dakota
was  likely  to  be  accomplished  within  a few  months.  The  report  of
a committee  on  division  of  the  Grand  Lodge  was  adopted,  and  cer-
tain lodges  located  in  North  Dakota  were  permitted  to  organize  a
Grand  Lodge  of  North  Dakota,  which  will  be  stated  under  that
designation.

1478

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

The  name  of  “ Dakota  ” was  changed  to  “ South  Dakota  ” at  the
sixteenth  communication  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  held  June  10,  1890,
in  Madison.

South  Dakota  is  the  designation  of  the  original  Grand  Lodge  of
Dakota.

North  Dakota.

So  soon  as  it  was  determined  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Dakota,  at
its  session,  held  June  11-13,  1889,  that  there  should  be  a division  of
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Dakota  to  correspond  with  the  political  division
of  the  Territory  into  North  and  South  Dakota,  a convention  was
held,  June  12,  1889,  at  the  city  of  Mitchell,  where  the  Grand  Lodge
was  in  session,  and  the  following  lodges  of  North  Dakota  were  rep-
resented, viz.  :

Shiloh,  No.  8;  Pembina,  No.  10;  Casselton,  No.  12;  Acacia,
No.  15  ; Bismarck,  No.  16  ; Jamestown,  No.  19  ; Valley  City,  No.
21  ; Mandan,  No.  23  ; Cereal,  No.  29;  Hillsboro,  No.  32  ; Cres-
cent, No.  36 ; Cheyenne  Valley,  No.  41  ; Ellendale,  No.  49  ; San-
born, No.  51;  Wahpeton,  No.  58;  North  Star,  No.  59;  Minto,
No.  60  ; Mackey,  No.  63  ; Goase  River,  No.  64 ; Hiram,  No.  74  ;
Minnewaukan,  No.  75  ; Tongue  River,  No.  78;  Bathgate,  No.  80;
Euclid,  No.  84;  Anchor,  No.  88;  Golden  Valley,  No.  90;  Occi-
dental, No.  99.

The  convention  resolved  that  it  was  expedient  to  organize  a
Grand  Lodge  for  North  Dakota.  A constitution  and  by-laws  were
adopted.

June  13th,  the  first  session  of  the  Grand  Lodge  was  held  in  the
city  of  Mitchell.  The  elected  and  appointed  officers  were  present
and  representatives  of  the  above  twenty  lodges.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  North  Dakota  has  continued  to  keep  pace
with  the  other  Western  Grand  Lodges.

Idaho.

In  1863  a meeting  of  Masons  was  held  in'  Idaho  City,  Boise
County,  and  it  was  resolved  to  apply  to  the  Grand  Master  of  Oregon
for  a dispensation  to  organize  a lodge,  which  was  granted  July  7,
1863,  and  on  June  21,  1864,  a Charter  was  granted  to  Idaho  Lodge,
No.  35.  The  next  lodge  was  in  Boise  City,  No.  37,  April  1,  1865,

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1479

under  dispensation  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Oregon.  At  a com-
munication held  in  June,  1865,  it  was  resolved  to  apply  for  a Char-
ter, which  was  granted  to  Boise  City  Lodge,  No.  37,  June  20,  1865.
Placer  Lodge,  No.  38,  was  the  third  lodge  organized  under  Warrant
from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Oregon,  June  20,  1865.  Pioneer  Lodge,
No.  12,  received  her  Warrant  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  Ter-
ritory of  Washington,  June  7,  1867.  Owyhee  Lodge  received  a
dispensation  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Oregon,  July  21,  1866.

The  above  four  chartered  lodges  held  a Convention  in  Idaho
City,  December  16,  1867.  Owyhee  Lodge,  U.  D.,  from  courtesy,
was  admitted  and  permitted  to  vote.  The  convention  decided  to
organize  a Grand  Lodge.

December  17,  1867,  a full  corps  of  Grand  Officers  was  elected
and  installed.  Constitution  of  Grand  Lodge  of  Oregon  was  adopt-
ed temporarily.

December  17th,  Grand  Lodge  was  opened  in  ample  form  and
so  has  continued  to  present  time.1

Montana.

At  the  burial  of  a Mason  in  the  Territory  of  Montana  was  the
first  gathering  of  Masons,  which  led  to  an  effort  to  organize  a lodge
by  an  application  to  the  Grand  Master  of  Nebraska,  who  issued  a
dispensation,  April  27,  1863,  to  form  a lodge  at  Bannock,  which
was  in  Dakota,  but  supposed  to  be  in  Idaho.  This  dispensation  was
renewed  on  June  24,  1863,  and  authorized  again  on  June  24,  1864,
and  finally,  when  it  arrived  at  the  place,  the  members  had  been  dis-
persed by  removal  of  residence  and  no  lodge  was  ever  opened.

The  lodge  Virginia  City,  No.  43,  received  a Charter  dated
December  26,  1864,  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Kansas.  A dis-
pensation was  received  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Colorado  dated
April  4,  1865,  for  Montana  Lodge,  No.  9,  at  Virginia  City.  Helena
Lodge,  No.  10,  received  a dispensation  from  the  same  Grand  Lodge
and  was  organized  August  17,  1865.  Both  of  these  lodges  re-
ceived charters  granted  November  7,  1865,  from  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Colorado.

A convention  of  the  representatives  of  the  above  lodges  was
held  January  24,  1866.  After  proper  investigation  as  to  the  mem-

1 From  proceedings  of  Grand  Lodge  of  Idaho,  September,  1883.

1480

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

bership  of  the  convention,  it  was  decided  to  form  a Grand  Lodge
and  the  convention  closed.

The  officers  of  the  three  lodges  then  opened  a Grand  Lodge  in
due  form.  A constitution  was  adopted  and  the  Grand  Officers  were
elected.  January  26,  1866,  the  Grand  Officers  were  regularly  in-
stalled and  at  the  same  time  charters  were  issued  to  the  lodges  and
returns  were  made  of  one  hundred  and  five  members.

West  Virginia.

In  consequence  of  the  Civil  War,  from  1861  to  1865  the  affairs
of  Masonry,  in  common  with  all  civil  matters  in  Virginia  and  West
Virginia,  which  latter  had  been  separated  from  the  parent  State,
were  in  utter  confusion.  Many  of  the  lodges  in  West  Virginia  had
ceased  to  meet,  some  had  lost  their  charters  and  other  properties.
After  due  consideration  of  the  condition  of  things,  in  response  to  a
circular  from  Fairmont  Lodge,  No.  9,  which  had  been  sent  through-
out the  State,  a convention  was  held,  December  28,  1863,  at  Grafton,
which  was  held  during  a period  of  great  excitement,  in  consequence
of  some  of  the  delegates  having  been  prevented  from  attending,  by
the  movements  of  the  war  having  again  disturbed  the  condition  of
the  State.  After  two  adjournments  the  convention  finally  met,
June  24,  1864,  in  Fairmont.  Eight  of  the  working  lodges  out  of
thirteen  in  the  State  were  represented.  Grand  Officers  were  elected
and  a day  selected  for  their  installation,  but  as  the  convention  ad-
journed sine  die  the  Grand  Officers  decided  that  no  further  action
could  be  had  under  a misapprehension  of  an  informality  in  their
proceedings.

A new  convention  was  called  to  meet  April  12,  1865.  The
lodges  represented  were  those  at  the  prior  convention,  and  were
as  follows,  viz. : Wellsburg,  No.  108;  Wheeling,  No.  128;  Ohio,
No.  101  ; Marshall  Union,  No.  37;  Cameron,  No.  180;  Morgan-
town, No.  93;  Fairmont,  No.  9;  Fetterman,  No.  170.  Grand
Officers  were  again  elected,  and  May  10th1  selected  for  their  installa-
tion. The  convention  met  on  that  day.  One.  other  lodge,  Mt.
Olivet,  No.  1 13,  in  addition  to  the  eight,  was  represented.  The
convention  closed  and  a Grand  Lodge  was  opened.  The  Grand
Officers  were  installed.  The  old  charters  were  ordered  to  be  en-

1 The  record,  page  13,  says  nth,  which  is  an  error.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1481

dorsed  under  the  seal  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  and  to  be  retained  until
new  ones  could  be  prepared  and  issued.

Utah.

“ Through  much  tribulation  ye  shall  enter  into  ” — Masonry.
A dispensation  was  issued,  February  4,  1866,  by  the  Grand  Master
of  Nevada  for  the  organization  of  Mt.  Moriah  Lodge  at  Salt  Lake
City.  The  lodge  duly  organized,  but  very  soon  the  treatment  by
one  of  the  lodges  of  Masons  of  the  Mormon  faith  became  an  issue,
which  was  submitted  to  the  Grand  Master  of  Nevada,  who  according-
ly issued  an  edict  forbidding  the  admission,  as  visitors  and  the  affilia-
tion, of  Mormons  claiming  to  be  Masons ; and  also  the  reception  of
their  petitions  for  the  degrees.  The  lodge  demurred  to  this  decree,
but  submitted  to  the  order  of  the  Grand  Master.  A petition,
however,  was  sent  to  the  Grand  Master  to  modify  the  decree,  so
that  Mormons  not  polygamists  would  be  exempted  from  the
decree.  The  dispensation  of  the  lodge  was  returned,  and  a Charter
asked  for.  The  Grand  Lodge  approved  of  the  edict  of  the  Grand
Master,  and,  declining  to  grant  a Charter,  renewed  the  dispensation.
The  lodge,  although  “ worse  than  sorrow-stricken,”  still  continued
to  work  for  another  year.  The  lodge  then  petitioned  for  a Charter,
with  the  condition  that  if  they  could  not  have  a Charter  unrestricted
by  the  edict,  they  declined  having  a Charter.  The  surrender  of  the
dispensation  was  promptly  accepted  by  the  Grand  Lodge.  The
members  then  presented  their  petition  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Montana,  October  8,  1887,  with  a statement  of  the  circumstances
of  their  relation  with  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Nevada.  The  Grand
Lodge  of  Montana  declared,  that  the  assumption  of  the  petitions
that  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Nevada  did  not  possess  the  power  to
decide  who  are  not  proper  persons  to  be  admitted  into  its  sub-
ordinate lodges,  was  “subversive  of  the  principles  of  Masonry.”
The  petition  for  a Charter  was  rejected,  and  they  were  referred  to
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Nevada  for  a redress  of  their  alleged  grievances.
The  lodge  applied  then  to  the  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Kansas,  who  issued  a dispensation,  November  25,  1867,  and  on
October  21,  1868,  a Charter  was  granted  by  the  Grand  Lodge.

A convention  was  held  at  Salt  Lake  City,  January  16,  1872,  by
the  representatives  of  the  three  lodges  located  in  that  city,  viz.:

1482

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONR\

Wasatch  Lodge,  chartered  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Montana,
October  7,  1867  ; Mount  Moriah  Lodge,  chartered  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Kansas,  October  21,  1868;  Argenta  Lodge,  chartered  by
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Colorado,  September  26,  1871.

It  was  decided,  by  unanimous  vote,  to  organize  a Grand  Lodge
for  Utah.  The  Grand  Officers  were  chosen  and  installed,  and  the
Grand  Lodge  was  duly  constituted.

In  consequence  of  the  Mormon  Church  being  in  their  midst,
difficulties  at  once  arose  in  one  of  the  lodges.  A member  joined
the  Mormons,  and  upon  trial  by  regular  process  he  was  expelled,
and  the  Grand  Lodge  affirmed  the  expulsion.  This  matter  drew
the  attention  of  other  Grand  Lodges,  who  took  formal  action  upon
it ; and  the  course  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Utah  was  nearly,  if  not
unanimously,  sustained.

A rizona.

Aztlan  Lodge,  at  Prescott,  was  chartered  by  the  Grand  Lodge
of  California,  October  11,  1866;  which  also  chartered  Arizona
Lodge,  No.  257,  at  Phoenix,  October  16,  1879,  an<^  Tucson  Lodge,
No.  263,  at  Tucson,  October  15,  1881.  A dispensation  was  issued
to  Solomon  Lodge,  at  Tombstone,  June  4,  1881,  which  was  con-
tinued at  the  next  communication  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Califor-
nia, October  1,  1882.  White  Mountain  Lodge,  No.  5,  at  Globe,  re-
ceived a Charter  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New  Mexico  dated
January  18,  1881.

The  representatives  of  Arizona  Lodge,  No.  257,  Tucson  Lodge,
No.  263,  and  White  Mountain  Lodge,  No.  5,  held  a convention,
March  23,  1882,  at  Tucson,  and  the  representatives  of  Solomon
Lodge,  U.  D.,  were  invited  “to  take  part  in  the  deliberations  of
the  Convention.”  The  convention  adopted  a constitution.  A
lodge  of  Master  Masons  was  then  opened,  and  the  Grand  Officers
were  elected.  On  March  25th  the  Grand  Officers  were  installed  and
the  convention  closed,  and  the  Grand  Lodge  was  duly  opened.
The  charters  of  the  lodges  were  properly  endorsed  and  returned  to
them  as  the  authority  under  which  they  continued  their  existence.
Solomon  Lodge,  U.  D.,  received  her  Charter  under  the  name  of
King  Solomon,  No.  5.  Aztlan  Lodge  had  her  Charter  endorsed,
and  she  made  her  returns.  These  five  lodges  had  a membership
of  two  hundred  and  seventy-four.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1483

Wyoming.

Cheyenne  Lodge,  No.  16,  at  Cheyenne,  was  chartered  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Colorado,  October  7,  1868.

Laramie  Lodge,  No.  18,  at  Laramie  City,  received  a dispensa-
tion from  the  same  Grand  Lodge,  January  31,  1870,  and  a Charter,
September  28,  1870.

Evanston  Lodge,  No.  24,  at  Evanston,  received  a dispensation
from  the  same  Grand  Lodge,  September  8,  1873,  and  a Charter,
September  30,  1874.

Wyoming  Lodge,  No.  28,  at  South  Pass  City,  had  a dispen
sation  issued  to  her  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Nebraska,  November
20,  1869,  and  a Charter,  June  23,  1870.

The  representatives  of  these  four  lodges  met  in  convention
December  15,  1874,  at  Laramie  City,  and  proceeded  to  organize  a
Grand  Lodge  for  Wyoming  by  adopting  a constitution,  electing
and  installing  their  Grand  Officers  on  the  16th.  The  four  lodges
then  had  a membership  of  two  hundred  and  fifty.

The  first  annual  communication  was  held  October  12,  1875,
and  the  Grand  Lodge  has  continued  to  hold  its  annual  commu-
nications, and  from  the  tabular  statement  at  the  conclusion  of  this
chapter  will  be  found  the  number  of  members.

Oklahoma.

At  the  eighteenth  annual  communication  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Indian  Territory,  under  which  Grand  Lodge  all  the  then  existing
lodges  in  Oklahoma  Territory  held  their  lodge  warrants,  a papei
was  presented  to  the  Grand  Lodge  from  the  “ members  and  repre-
sentatives of  the  various  Lodges  of  Masons  in  the  Territory  of
Oklahoma  organized  and  being  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Indian  Territory,  respectfully  ask  your  consent  and  the
consent  of  said  Grand  Lodge  to  the  formation  and  organization  by
the  said  Oklahoma  Lodges  of  a separate  and  independent  Grand
Lodge  within  and  for  said  Oklahoma  Territory  to  be  known  as  the
‘ Grand  Lodge  of  Oklahoma  ’ and  to  have  and  possess  hereafter
exclusive  Masonic  jurisdiction  and  authority  as  the  Grand  Lodge
within  and  for  the  said  Territory  of  Oklahoma.

“ Dated  at  Tahlequah,  I.  T.,  August  16,  1892.”

1484

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

This  was  signed  by  the  representatives  of  the  following  lodges :
Guthrie  Lodge,  No.  35;  North  Canadian  Lodge,  No.  36;  Ed-
mond Lodge,  No.  37.

This  was  referred  to  a committee,  and  upon  a favorable  report,
the  petition  was  granted  and  suitable  arrangements  were  made  for
holding  a convention  of  all  the  lodges  in  the  new  Territory,  at
which  the  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  was  to  preside  and
install  the  newly  elected  Grand  Officers  and  formally  proclaim  by
authority  of  that  Grand  Lodge  “ that  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Okla-
homa is  legally  organized,”  etc.

On  motion  of  Rev.  Bro.  R.  W.  Hill  the  Grand  Lodge  unani-
mously voted  a set  of  Grand  Lodge  jewels  to  the  new  Grand  Lodge.
We  have  not  been  able  to  get  a copy  of  the  proceedings  of  the
convention  which  was  held  November  10,  1892,  but  have  before  us
the  proceedings  of  the  first  annual  communication  held  at  El
Reno,  Oklahoma  Territory,  February  14,  1893,  when  there  were
represented  the  following  lodges,  viz.  :

Anadarko,  No.  1,  at  Oklahoma  City  ; Guthrie,  No.  2,  at  Guth-
rie; Oklahoma,  No.  3,  at  Oklahoma  City;  Edmond  No.  4,  at
Edmond;  Norman,  No.  5,  at  Norman;  Frontier,  No.  6,  at  Still-
water; El  Reno,  No.  7,  at  El  Reno;  Kingfisher,  No.  8,  at  King-
fisher; Coronado,  No.  9,  at  Hennessy ; Chandler,  No.  ro,  at
Chandler;  Crescent,  No.  11,  at  Crescent  City;  Mulhall,  U.  D.,
at  Mulhall.

A laska.

We  have  received  the  information  that  the  Grand  Master  of
Washington  Territory  issued  a dispensation  for  a lodge  to  be
organized  in  Sitka,  Alaska,  April  14,  1868.  This  dispensation  was
continued  September  17,  1868,  and  finally  revoked  October  18,
1872.  We  have  no  further  information  as  to  any  lodges  since
that  time.  There  is  no  doubt  that  very  soon  lodges  will  be  formed
in  several  of  the  new  towns  which  have  sprung  up  in  tht-  gold
regions,  so  soon  as  the  population  shall  have  become  more  stable
and  permanently  settled.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1485

Table  Showing  the  Number  of  Grand  Lodges  in  the  United  States;  and
Number  of  Members  in  Each,  for  the  Year  1910.

No.

Names  of  Grand  Lodges.

Date  of  Formation.

Membership.

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

Alabama

Arizona

Arkansas

California

Colorado

Connecticut

Delaware

District  of  Columbia

Florida

Georgia

Idaho

Illinois

Indiana

Indian  Territory

Iowa

Kansas

Kentucky

Louisiana

Maine

Maryland

Massachusetts

Michigan

Minnesota

Mississippi

Missouri

Montana

Nebraska

Nevada

New  Hampshire ....

New  Jersey

New  Mexico

New  York

North  Carolina

North  Dakota

Ohio

Oklahoma

Oregon

Pennsylvania

Rhode  Island

South  Carolina

South  Dakota

Tennessee

Texas

Utah

June  14,  1821

March  25,  1882 . . .
February  22,  1832.
April  18,  1850.  . . .
August  2,  1861 . . . .

July  8,  1789

June  6,  1806

December  11,  1810

July  6,  1830

December  16,  1786
December  17,  1867

April  6,  1840

January  13,  1818.  .
October  6,  1874 . . .
January  2,  1844. . .
March  17 , 1856.  . .
October  16,  1800.  .

July  11,  1812

June  1,  1820

April  17,  1787 ....

July  30,  1733

June  24,  1826

February  23,  1853.

July  27,  1818

April  23,  1821

January  26,  1866.  .
September  23,  1857
January  17,  1865.  .

July  8,  1789

December  18,  1786,
August  7,  1877
September  5,  1781. .
December  9,  1787 .

June  13,  1889

January  5,  1809. . .

October,  1892

August  16,  1851 . . .
September  26,  1786,

June  21,  1791

February  5,  1787.  . .

June  21,  1875

December  27 , 1813.
December  20,  1837.
January  1,  1872. . . .

23,319

21,388

1,661

41,007

13,546

22,108

3,049

8.740
9,083

32,708

2.741
95,629

52,515

9,103

41,075

32,072

32,770

12,414

27,864

12,838

52,260

60,699

22,987

16,449

49,088

5,091

17,119

U573

10,058

29,927

2,127

163,341

18,141

7,i37

75,976

9,455

9,232

88,126

7,H9

10,802

7,635

22,828

47,7oi

1,525

i486

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

No.

Names  of  Grand  Lodges.

Date  of  Formation.

Membership.

45

46

47

48

49
5°

Vermont

Virginia

Washington.  .
West  Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming.  . . .

October  15,  1794.  .
October  13,  1777 . .
December  8,  1858.

May  11,  1865

December  18,  1843
December  15,  1874

12,382

*9.749

13.405

13.185

24,946

2,400

Total

1.317.123

CHAPTER  LVI

HISTORY  OF  THE  INTRODUCTION  OF  FREEMASONRY  INTO  EACH  STATE
AND  TERRITORY  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES

Royal  Arch  Masonry.

N Chapter  XLIX.,  Dr.  A.  G.  Mackey,  having,  in
a very  elaborate  and  satisfactory  manner,  given
the  history  of  the  introduction  of  Royal  Arch
Masonry  into  America ; and  in  Chapter  L.,  the
organization  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  in
the  United  States,  it  is  quite  unnecessary  for
the  present  writer  to  make  any  preface  to  the
details  of  the  organization  of  the  particular  Chapters  and  the  Grand
Chapters  in  the  several  Grand  Jurisdictions.  We  shall,  therefore,
proceed  at  once  to  that  work,  and  in  an  alphabetical  arrangement,
for  a better  reference  to  any  special  jurisdiction  when  required.

Alabama.

Prior  to  May,  1823,  there  were  four  chapters  in  Alabama  having
been  chartered  by  the  General  Grand  Chapter.  A convention  of  the
delegates  of  these  chapters  was  held  in  Mobile  in  May  and  June,
1823,  and  it  was  decided  to  form  a Grand  Chapter  for  the  State.
The  Junior  Chapter,  Monroe,  having  taken  exceptions,  referred  the
matter  to  the  General  Grand  Chapter  at  its  session,  September  16,
1826,  when  the  following  was  adopted  :

“ Resolved , That  the  formation  of  a Grand  Chapter  for  the  State
of  Alabama,  in  May,  1823,”  prior  to  the  expiration  of  one  year
from  the  establishment  of  the  junior  chapter  in  such  State,  “was
prohibited  by  the  nth  section  of  the  2d  Article  of  the  General
Grand  Constitution,  and  that  therefore  this  General  Grand  Chapter
cannot  ratify  or  approve  of  the  proceedings  of  the  convention  held
at  Mobile  on  the  third  Monday  of  May,  1823,  or  recognize  the  body
claiming  to  be  considered  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Alabama.”

1487

1488

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

A recommendation  was,  however,  made  to  the  four  chapters  to
proceed  to  form  a Grand  Chapter.  On  June  2,  1827,  the  Grand
Chapter  was  reorganized,  and  met  in  December  following,  and  an-
nually until  1830,  when  it  ceased  to  meet.

December,  1837,  the  delegates  from  the  several  chapters  met
and  reorganized  the  Grand  Chapter,  and  it  has  continued  as  a con-
stituent of  the  General  Grand  Chapter.

A rizona.

Pursuant  to  an  invitation  from  Companion  Past  High-Priest
George  J.  Roskruge  of  Tucson  Chapter,  No.  3,  a convention  of
Royal  Arch  Masons  met  in  the  hall  of  Tucson  Lodge,  No.  4,  F.  &
A.  M.,  in  Tucson,  County  of  Pima,  for  the  purpose  of  taking  steps
to  organize  a Grand  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons  for  the  Ter-
ritory of  Arizona,  November  13,  1889.

The  convention  was  called  to  order  by  Companion  Past  High-
Priest  Martin  W.  Kales  of  Arizona  Chapter,  No.  1.  Companion
George  J.  Roskruge  of  Tucson  Chapter  3 was  chosen  Chairman  of
the  convention  and  Companion  Frank  Baxter  was  elected  Secretary.

A committee  on  credentials  was  appointed  and  reported  the
following  chapters  as  being  represented,  viz. :

Date  of  Charter
August  24,  1880.

August  15,
1883.

Nov.  22,  1889.

Arizona  Chapter,  No.  1,  located  at  Phoenix,  Maricopa  County.
Prescott  Chapter,  No.  2,  located  at  Prescott,  Yarapai  County.
Tucson  Chapter,  No.  3,  located  at  Tucson,  Pima  County.
Cochise  Chapter,  No.  4,  located  at  Tombstone,  Cochise  County.
Flagstaff  Chapter,  No.  5,  located  at  Flagstaff,  Coconino  County.

A committee  was  appointed  on  Constitution  and  By-Laws,  and
the  convention  took  a recess;  and  on  resuming  labor  the  committee
reported  a Constitution  and  By-Laws,  which  were  adopted.  The
convention  then  elected  their  officers;  Martin  W.  Kales  was  chosen
Grand  High-Priest,  and  George  J.  Roskruge  Grand  Secretary.

The  convention  then  adjourned  subject  to  a call  from  the
Grand  Secretary.

November  12,  1890,  the  convention  met  and  Companion  George
J.  Roskruge  presided.  The  same  chapters,  as  before,  were  rep-
resented, and  there  were  also  present  a number  of  Past  High-Priests
and  Past  Grand  High-Priests,  and  Companion  Titus  of  California,
all  of  whom  were  invited  to  seats  (without  votes).

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1489

The  President  stated  the  object  of  the  convention  and  read  his
Warrant  as  Deputy  of  the  General  Grand  High-Priest  of  the  Gen-
eral Grand  Chapter  of  the  United  States,  dated  November  1,  1890.
On  motion,  the  constitution,  as  adopted  at  the  former  convention,
was  amended,  to  conform  to  the  recommendation  of  the  General
Grand  High-Priest.

The  convention  then  adjourned,  that  the  Grand  Chapter  of
Royal  Arch  Masons  of  Arizona  might  be  opened  in  ample  form.

The  first  annual  convocation  was  then  opened  (November  12,
1890)  at  8 p.m.,  George  J.  Roskruge,  Grand  High-Priest,  presiding,
and  Morris  Gold  water,  Grand  Secretary.  The  convention  then
proceeded  to  elect  the  Grand  Officers,  and  Martin  W.  Kales  was
elected  Grand  High-Priest,  and  George  James  Roskruge  was  elected
Grand  Secretary.

Companion  Roskruge  acting  as  Deputy  General  Grand  High-
Priest  of  the  United  States  constituted  the  Grand  Chapter  of
Arizona  and  installed  the  officers  in  accordance  with  the  dispensa-
tion granted  by  the  General  Grand  High-Priest,  David  F.  Day.

On  the  following  day  (November  13,  1890)  a convention  of
Anointed  High-Priests  was  organized  and  officers  were  elected.
Eight  Past  High-Priests  were  anointed.

Arkansas.

Charters  were  granted  by  the  General  Grand  Chapter  of  the
United  States  to  three  chapters  in  Arkansas,  the  first  being  under
date  of  September  17,  1841.

The  Grand  Chapter  was  organized  at  a convention  held  April
28,  1851,  and  Companion  Elbert  H.  English  was  the  first  Grand
High-Priest.  When  the  General  Grand  Chapter  of  the  United
States  held  its  convocation  at  Nashville,  Tenn.,  on  November  24,
1874,  Companion  English  was  elected  General  Grand  High-Priest.
His  death  occurred  September  1,  1884.

In  the  years  1853  and  1854,  Companion  Albert  Pike  was  the
Grand  High-Priest.

California.

The  first  dispensation  to  organize  a chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Ma-
sons in  California  was  issued  May  9,  1850,  to  San  Francisco  Chapter,
No.  1,  and  a Charter  was  granted  September  13th.  Charters  were
issued  to  Sonora,  No.  2,  and  Sacramento,  No.  3,  September  17,  1853.

94

1490

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

These  three  chapters  sent  delegates  to  a convention  held  May  o,
1854,  at  Sacramento,  where  measures  were  taken  to  organize  a
Grand  Chapter,  and  after  three  days’  session  adjourned  to  meet  at
San  Francisco,  July  18,  1854,  where  the  organization  and  constitu-
tion were  fully  completed  by  the  installation  of  the  Grand  Officers.

Colorado.

Central  City  Chapter,  No.  1,  in  Central  City,  was  the  first  chap-
ter to  which  a dispensation,  dated  March  23,  1863,  was  issued  in
Colorado,  which  was  granted  by  the  General  Grand  King.  The
Deputy  General  Grand  High-Priest  granted  a dispensation  to  Den-
ver Chapter,  No.  2,  April,  1863.  These  two  chapters  had  their
charters  granted  at  the  following  session  of  the  General  Grand
Chapter,  September,  1865.  A dispensation  was  issued  to  organize
Pueblo  Chapter,  No.  , at  Pueblo,  May  24,  1871,  and  a Charter
for  the  same  was  issued  September  20,  1871.  November  25,  1874,
charters  were  issued  to  Georgetown,  No.  4,  and  Golden,  No.  5.

A convention  was  held  at  Denver  City  by  the  authority  of  Elbert
H.  English,  M.  E.  General  Grand  High-Priest,  May  11,  1875,  an^
the  Grand  Chapter  of  Colorado  was  regularly  constituted.

Connecticut.

Six  members  of  Saint  John’s  Lodge,  No.  2,  located  in  the  town
of  Middletown,  Conn.,  having  received  and  been  “duly  initiated  into
the  most  sublime  degree  of  an  Excellent,  Superexcellent,  and  Royal
Arch  Mason  in  regular  constituted  Royal  Arch  Chapters,”  and  prov-
ing each  other,  they  “ duly  opened  and  held  the  first  regular  Grand
Royal  Arch  Chapter.”1  They  elected  their  officers.  Their  first
meeting  was  held  September  12,  1783.

The  “Mother-Chapter,”  or  Washington  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch
Masons  of  the  City  of  New  York,  granted  the  following  charters
in  Connecticut:  Hiram,  No.  1,  in  Newtown,  April  29,  1791;
Franklin,  No.  2,  New  Haven,  May  20,  1795;  Franklin,  No.  4,
Norwich,  March  15,  1796,  and  Solomon,  No.  5,  Derby,  March  15,
1796.  Vanden  Broeck,  also  No.  5,  received  its'  Charter  from  the
Grand  Chapter  of  New  York,  dated  April  6,  1796 ; it  is  said,  how
ever,  that  the  first  record  was  dated  December  24,  1 795.

1 At  that  day  the  word  “Grand”  was  taken  from  the  A.  A.  A.  R»,  where  all  the
bodies  were  termed  Grand.0 — Editor-

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1491

A convention  was  held  by  the  delegates  of  these  six  chapters,
in  Hartford,  May  17,  1798,  which  organized  the  Grand  Chapter  of
Connecticut.  Half-yearly  convocations  were  held  until  May,  1819,
when  the  constitution  was  changed  to  annual  convocations,  and
specials  when  required.

When  the  convention  to  form  a Grand  Chapter  met  in  Hartford,
Conn.,  January  24,  A.  L.  5798,  “agreeable  to  the  recommendation
of  a Convention  of  Committees  assembled  at  Boston,  in  the  State
of  Massachusetts,  in  October,.  1797,”  there  were  present : from  Con-
necticut, representatives  of  Solomon  Chapter  of  Derby,  instituted
5794;  Franklin  Chapter,  No.  4,  Norwich,  and  Franklin  Chapter,
No.  5,  New  Haven.1 2  Ephraim  Kirby,  of  Litchfield,  was  chosen  the
first  General  Grand  High-Priest.  In  examining  the  records  of  the
first  chapters  prior  to  the  organization  of  the  General  Grand  Chap-
ter of  179 7,  we  notice  the  designation  of  the  officers  as  being  some-
what different  from  the  same  officers  at  a more  recent  date.  In
Hiram  Chapter  of  Connecticut  the  officers  were  “ High-Priest,
King,  Scribe,  Zerubbabel,  a Royal  Arch  Captain,  three  Grand
Masters,  a Treasurer,  a Secretary,  an  Architect,  a Clothier,  and  a
Tyler.”  It  was  required  that  the  “ High-Priest  should  preside,  direct
the  business,  and  occasionally  to  give  a lecture.”  Now  it  is  “ to
read  and  expound  the  law.”  The  Scribe’s  duty  was  to  “cause  the
Secretary  to  enter,  in  a fair  and  regular  manner,  the  proceedings  of
the  chapter,”  and  “to  summons  the  members  for  attendance  at  every
regular  and  special  meeting,  . . . and  also  to  administer  the

obligation.”  It  was  the  duty  of  Zerubbabel  “to  superintend  the  ar-
rangements of  the  Chapter”;  of  the  Royal  Arch  Captain,  “to  keep
watch  at  the  Sanctuary”  ; of  the  three  Grand  Masters,  “to  watch
the  Veils”;  of  the  Clothier,  “to  provide  and  take  care  of  the  Cloth-
ing” ; of  the  Architect,  “to  provide  and  take  care  of  the  furniture.”0

In  the  English  Royal  Arch,  Zerubbabel  is  the  first  Principal;
and  in  the  present  American  Royal  Arch,  Zerubbabel  is  the  Second
Principal,  and  designated  King,  which  designation,  in  our  judgment,
is  a misnomer,  as  he  never  was  a King,  but  was  called  “ Tirshatha,”
which  was  an  office  of  Governor  under  the  King  of  Persia,  and
was,  in  reality,  in  the  construction  of  the  second  Temple,  subordi-
nate to  the  High-Priest,  who  had  entire  management  of  that  work.

1 Compendium,  Genl.  Gr.  Ch.,  p.  8.

2 Capitular  Degrees,  “ Hist.  Masonry  and  Con.  Orders,”  p.  606.

1492  HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Zerubbabel  soon  retired  and  returned  to  Babylon,  and  the  Temple
was  finally  completed  by  a High- Priest.

Dakota.

In  1883  eight  chapters  had,  at  different  times,  been  chartered  by
the  General  Grand  Chapter  of  the  United  States,  viz.  :

Yankton,  No.  1,  at  Yankton ; dispensation,  April  15,  1876  ;
chartered,  August  24,  1880.

Sioux  Falls,  No.  2,  at  Sioux  Falls;  chartered,  August  27,  1880.

Dakota,  No.  3,  at  Deadwood;  chartered,  August  27,  1880.

Siroc,  No.  4,  at  Canton  ; chartered,  August  15,  1883.

Pembina,  No.  5,  at  Pembina.

Missouri,  No.  6,  at  Bismarck.

Casselton,  No.  7,  at  Casselton.

Corinthian,  No.  8,  at  Grand  Forks.

A convention  was  held  at  Aberdeen,  June  10,  1884,  at  which
the  following  chapters  were  represented  : Nos.  1,  2,  3,  4,  6,  and  7
of  the  above  list.  When  it  was  agreed  to  petition  the  General
Grand  High-Priest  to  grant  a Warrant  to  organize  a Grand  Chapter
for  Dakota,  five  chapters  voted  for  it  and  No.  7 against,  and  finally
agreed,  as  also  did  Keystone  chapter,  No.  11,  under  dispensation.

A convention  met  February  25,  1885,  pursuant  to  a call  made
January  8,  1885,  at  Sioux  Falls.  Companion  William  Blatt  was
chosen  Chairman,  and  the  following  chapters  were  reported  as  being
duly  represented,  viz.  : Nos.  1,  2,  3,  4,  and  7 of  the  above  list,  and
Cheyenne,  No.  9,  U.  D.,  at  Valley  City  ; Huron,  No.  10,  U.  D.,  at
Huron;  Keystone,  No.  11,  U.  D.,  at  Fargo;  Watertown,  No.  12,
U.  D.,  at  Watertown;  Jamestown,  No.  13,  U.  D.,  at  Jamestown;
Aberdeen,  No.  14,  U.  D.,  at  Aberdeen.

The  first  annual  convocation  was  held  June  8,  1885.  Charters
were  granted  to  Corinthian,  No.  8;  Huron,  No.  10;  Watertown,
No.  12;  Jamestown,  No.  13;  Aberdeen,  No.  14;  Millbank,  No.
15;  and  dispensations  were  issued  to  Denver,  Brookings;  Flan-
dreau  ; Redfield.  Chapters  which  were  not  represented  were  : Pem-
bina, No.  5,  at  Pembina  ; Missouri,  No.  6,  at  Bismarck,  and  Mill-
bank,  U.  D.,  at  Millbank.

The  Grand  Chapter  of  Dakota  continued  to  prosper  until  the
division  of  the  State,  by  Act  of  Congress,  February  22,  1889,  into
North  and  South  Dakota.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1493

When,  on  January  6,  1890,  a convention  was  held  in  Yankton,
S.  D.,  and  the  representatives  of  the  chapters  located  in  South  Dakota
held  a convention,  and  by  the  consent  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of
Dakota  they  organized  the  Grand  Chapter  of  South  Dakota,  Janu-
ary 6,  1890,  under  the  constitution  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter.

Delaware.

The  early  history  of  the  introduction  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry
into  the  State  of  Delaware  is  very  uncertain.  We  have  no  records
to  refer  to.  It  is  said  that  a Grand  Chapter  was  formed  on  June
19,  1818.  By  what  authority  we  can  not  ascertain  ; the  “compen-
dium ” is  silent  upon  Delaware.  In  the  Proceedings  of  the  General
Grand  Chapter  of  the  Twenty-first  Triennial  Convocation,  held  in
Baltimore,  September  19,  1871,  we  find  the  General  Grand  High-
Priest’s  reference  to  the  State  of  Delaware,1  as  follows  :

“ Among  the  first  to  demand  my  attention  was  to  examine  into
the  condition  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Delaware,  and  if  found  to
be  a legal  Grand  Chapter,  to  have  the  same  enrolled  under  the  juris-
diction of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  as  requested  by  the  com-
panions in  Delaware.  Having  been  solicited  to  visit  Wilmington,
for  the  purpose  of  instituting  St.  John’s  Chapter,  which  had  been
chartered  by  this  Body  at  its  last  convocation  (1868),  I did  so  on
the  19th  of  October,  1868,  and  having  instituted  said  chapter,  em-
braced that  opportunity  to  fully  investigate  the  condition  of  Royal
Arch  Masonry  in  the  State,  and  for  that  purpose  I held  interviews
with  some  of  the  most  prominent  Royal  Arch  Masons  in  the  jurisdic-
tion. From  those  companions,  and  from  the  records,  I ascertained
that  there  had  existed  in  Delaware  no  regular  Grand  Chapter  since
the  year  1856,  at  which  time  the  original  Grand  Chapter  ceased  to
meet  and  elect  Grand  Officers.  I ascertained  that  there  had  been
a ‘ Convocation  of  Royal  Arch  Masons’  at  Dover  in  1859,  at  which
meeting  but  one  chapter,  of  the  three  then  existing  in  that  State,
was  legally  represented.  At  that  irregular  ‘ Convocation  ’ an  election
was  had,  Companion  Geo.  W.  Chaytor  being  elected  Grand  High
Priest.

“No  other  convocation  of  the  (so-called)  Grand  Chapter  was
held  until  January,  1868,  a period  of  nine  years.  During  this  time,
Companion  Chaytor  claimed  to  be  the  Grand  High-Priest,  but  he

1 Proceedings  Genl.  Gr.  Ch.  U.  S.,  1871,  p.  10.

T494

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

refused  persistently  to  assemble  the  Craft  in  Grand  Convocation.
Some  three  or  four  years  subsequent  to  the  meeting  of  1859,  a diffi-
culty having  arisen  between  Companion  Chaytor  and  the  other
members  of  Washington  and  Lafayette  Chapter,  No.  1,  of  which  he
was  then  High-Priest,  he,  in  his  capacity  of  Grand  High-Priest,  de-
clared the  said  chapter  suspended,  thereby  placing  himself  in  the
anomalous  position  of  a self-suspended  Royal  Arch  Mason  ; that  is,
provided  he  possessed  any  powers  as  Grand  High-Priest.

“At  the  meeting  in  January,  1868,  there  was  simply  an  assem-
blage of  Royal  Arch  Masons,  no  one  of  whom  claimed  to  act  in  a
representative  capacity.  Companion  Chaytor  was  present,  but  he
refused  to  open  a Grand  Chapter,  giving  as  a reason,  that  his  chap-
ter was  under  a suspension,  and  therefore  there  were  but  two  chap-
ters left  in  the  State.  Thereupon  the  assemblage  resolved  itself  into
a ‘ Royal  Arch  Convention,’  and  proceeded  to  elect  Grand  Officers
and  to  adopt  a constitution.  And  this  was  the  body  which  made
application  to  the  last  Convocation  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,
to  be  recognized  as  the  Grand  Chapter  of  the  State  of  Delaware.

“ With  these  facts  before  me,  there  was  but  one  conclusion  to
which  I could  legitimately  arrive.  Accordingly,  on  the  20th  of
October,  1868,  I issued  an  edict,  declaring  that  any  legal  existence
heretofore  attaching  to  a Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter  of  the  State  of
Delaware  had  ceased  ; that  said  State  Grand  Chapter  no  longer  ex-
isted ; and  that  the  several  chapters  heretofore  holding  under  it  had
become  dormant  for  non-use  and  for  other  reasons.  And  that,  by
the  fact  of  the  cessation  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  the  State  of  Del-
aware, all  semblance  of  lawful  governmental  authority  in  that  State
had  ceased,  and  the  territory  had  become  masonically  vacant ; and
therefore  the  authority  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  of  the  United
States  did,  of  right,  obtain,  and  was  in  full  force  and  effect,  in
said  State  of  Delaware.  Thereupon,  I did  order  and  direct,  that
the  three  Chapters  which  had  formerly  held  under  the  Grand  Chap-
ter of  Delaware,  should  be  received  and  recognized  as  lawful  Royal
Arch  Chapters,  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  General  Grand  Chap-
ter, and  with  authority  to  resume  and  continue  work  under  the
warrants  then  held  by  them,  until  the  pleasure  of  the  General  Grand
Chapter  was  made  known,  or  a State  Grand  Chapter  was  formed.

“ On  the  9th  day  of  January,  1869,  upon  application  duly  made,
and  under  the  power  and  authority  vested  in  me  by  the  Constitu-

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STAiES

'495

tion  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  I issued  an  edict  granting  per-
mission for  the  formation  of  a Grand  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons
of  the  State  of  Delaware.”

January  20,  1869,  the  legal  representatives  of  four  chapters  in
Delaware  met  in  convention  at  Dover  and  organized  a Grand  Chap-
ter for  the  State  and  adopted  their  constitution.  The  General
Grand  High-Priest,  Dr.  James  M.  Austin,  was  present  and  installed
the  Grand  Officers ; and  he  officially  received  and  welcomed  the
said  Grand  Body  into  the  family  of  Grand  Chapters  ; and  on  Janu-
ary 30,  1869,  by  special  edict,  he  ordered  and  directed  that  Grand
Chapter  to  be  enrolled  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  General  Grand
Chapter  of  the  United  States.

District  of  Columbia.

The  very  first  intimation  we  have  of  the  Royal  Arch  degree  in
the  District  of  Columbia,  we  find  in  the  old  record-book  of  the
“ Excellent,  Superexcellent,  Royal  Arch  Encampment,”  under  the
Charter  of  Federal  Lodge,  No.  15,  F.  A.  A.  M.,  under  the  jurisdic-
tion of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Maryland,  which  is  referred  to  in  Chap-
ter LIT,  page  1369.

We  make  the  following  extracts  from  that  first  “Encampment  ” :

“ At  a meeting  of  the  Royal  Arch  Encampment,  held  in  the
Lodge,  No.  15  (Federal  Lodge),  on  Monday,  December  14th,  A.  L.
5795.  Present  :

Rev.  George  Ralph,
John  Bradford,

Robert  Brown,

C.  Worthy  Stephenson,

Dennis  Dulaney,
Thomas  Wilson,

David  Cummings,
James  Sweeney.

“ Whereas,  It  appears  to  be  the  desire  of  several  Brethren  of  this
Lodge  that  a Royal  Arch  Encampment  should  be  established  in
this  city,  therefore,

“ Resolved , That  a committee  be  appointed  of  the  following
Brethren,  viz.  : Brothers  Ralph,  Wilson,  and  Dulaney,  to  procure
every  necessary  apparatus,  and  to  adjust  the  necessary  fees  and  ex-
penses of  admission  to  this  Degree.1

“ Resolved , That  the  Brethren  who  wish  to  join  this  Encampment
be  requested  to  subscribe  to  a paper  instrument,  handed  to  them  by

1 It  will  be  observed  chat  there  was  but  one  degree. — Editor.

149®

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Bro.  Sweeney  previous  to  the  foregoing  Committee  proceeding  in
the  calculation  in  the  expenses  of  our  Robes,  Veils,1  Furniture,  &c.
The  Committee  to  meet  on  Wednesday  evening,  at  4 o’clock  p.m.
and  general  meeting  of  the  Royal  Arch  Masons  to  meet  at  6 o’clock
previously  the  same  evening.”  The  meeting  then  adjourned.

December  16,  1795.  Present  as  at  last  meeting  except  Bro.
Stephenson.  The  Committee  appointed  at  the  last  meeting  made
their  report : which  was  that  twenty-three  pounds  and  one  shil-
ling is  indispensably  necessary  to  provide  the  materials  to  prepare
them  and  to  arrange  the  Lodge  room  previous  to  the  formation  of
a Royal  Arch  Encampment,  &c.,  &c.,  which  was  agreed  to.

At  a meeting  held  June  17,  5797,  it  was  announced  by  a letter
from  Comp.  Sweeney  that  a Royal  Arch  Grand  Lodge  is  about  to
be  formed  for  the  State  of  Maryland  to  meet  at  Baltimore  June
24th.  A circular  letter  was  received  from  George  L.  Gray,  No.  5
Market  St.,  Baltimore,  giving  information  of  the  establishment  of  a
Grand  Chapter  in  the  city  of  Baltimore.

This  chapter  or  encampment  held  its  meetings  until  February,
5799,  when  it  “ resolved  that  the  Royal  Arch  Encampment  be
broke  up,”  and  a committee  was  appointed  to  settle  up  its  affairs
and  everyone  to  receive  his  dividend.

To  show  who  were  the  officers  and  their  titles  we  give  the  fol-
lowing list  :

M.  W.  James  Hoban,  High-Priest.

R.  W.  John  Carter,  Captain-General.

R.  W.  Robert  Brown,  1st  Grand  Master.

R.  W.  Redmond  Purcell,  2d  Grand  Master.

R.  W.  Peter  Lenox,  3d  Grand  Master.

John  Hanley,  Treasurer.

Patrick  Hearly,  Secretary.

John  Lenox,  Tyler.

The  second  record-book  begins  as  follows  :

At  a meeting  of  the  Royal  Arch  Chapter  at  their  Lodge  room
on  Saturday  evening,  December  1,  1804,  the  following  Companions
present :

Phil  P.  Eckel,  High-Priest,  p.  t.2

Charles  Jones,  Captain-General.

1 Robes  and  Veils  are  here  specified  for  the  first  time,  we  believe. — Editor.

2 Philip  P.  Eckel  was  a distinguished  member  of  a chapter  in  Baltimore. — Editor.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1497

Benj.  King,  1st  Grand  Master.

C.  M.  Laughlan,  2d  Grand  Master.

Bern’d  Doland,  3d  Grand  Master.

John  Davis,  Grand  Scribe.1

Visitors,  John  Scott,  John  Carter.

The  degree  of  Excellent,  Superexcellent,  Royal  Arch  was  con*
ferred  upon  several  Brethren,  ten  dollars  being  the  fee.

On  Sunday,  December  14,  1806,  a meeting  is  recorded,  and
they  adopted  the  following  :

“ Resolved , That  this  Chapter  concur  with  the  resolution  passed
by  Concordia  R.  A.  Chapter  as  far  as  respects  a Grand  Royal  Arch
Chapter  and  that  a Committee  be  appointed  to  meet  in  Grand  Con-
vention at  the  City  of  Washington  on  the  third  Wednesday  in  Janu-
ary next  (1807)  any  Committees  which  may  be  appointed  for  the
purpose  aforesaid.

“February  14,  1807.  Ordered  that  this  Chapter  be  represented
at  the  next  Royal  Arch  Chapter  to  be  held  at  Baltimore,  in  the
State  of  Maryland,  on  the  second  Thursday  of  May  next,  by  the
Officers  fixed  on  by  the  Constitution  of  the  Grand  Chapter.

“ Resolved , That  that  part  of  the  Constitution  which  states  that
the  High-Priest  and  King  are  the  proper  representatives  be  altered
so  as  to  add,  ‘unless  ordered  by  the  Chapter.’

“ Resolved , That  the  Treasurer  do  pay  into  the  hands  of  the
Treasurer  of  the  Grand  R.  A.  Chapter  $10,  for  the  purpose  of
obtaining  our  Warrant2  and  also  other  Contingent  expenses  relative
thereto.”

February  7,  1807,  was  adopted  the  following:

“ Resolved,  That  in  future  the  following  sums  shall  be  paid  by
Candidates  for  the  following  degrees,  namely,  for  Past  Master
$2,  for  Mark  Master  $3,  and  for  the  degree  of  Excellent,  Super-
excellent,  Royal  Arch  $10.”

At  this  time  it  was

“ Resolved , That  this  Chapter  shall  hereafter  be  entitled  and
known  by  the  name  of  the  Royal  Arch  Union  Chapter.”

This  record-book  terminates  August  20,  5808,  giving  no  intima-
tion of  any  cause  whatever  why  the  chapter  should  not  have  con

1 Title  of  Grand  Scribe  unknown  in  the  first  Encampment. — Editor.

2 This  seems  to  indicate  that  there  was  no  Warrant  prior  to  this  date.

1498

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

tinued  its  sessions.  At  the  meeting  previous  to  the  above  date  all
the  officers  had  been  elected  and  installed.

A dispensation  had  been  issued  by  the  General  Grand  High-
Priest  to  the  several  chapters  in  the  District  of  Columbia  to  organ-
ize a Grand  Chapter  August  30,  1822,  and  the  report  of  the  com-
mittee was  adopted  recommending  the  adoption  of  the  resolution
above  quoted.1

This  Grand  Chapter  continued  in  existence  from  February  10,
1824,  to  January  8th,  1833,  being  composed  of  the  following  chap-
ters, viz.  : Federal  Chapter,  No.  3 ; Union  Chapter,  No.  4 ;
Potomac  Chapter,  No.  8.

Several  conventions  were  held  from  time  to  time,  however,
between  May  11,  1822,  and  February  10,  1824,  at  which  latter
date  the  delegates  of  the  several  chapters  of  Royal  Arch  Masons
of  the  District  of  Columbia  met  in  General  Convention  and  the
following  chapters  were  properly  represented  : Federal  Chapter,
No.  3;  Union  Chapter,  No.  4;  Brooke  Chapter,  No.  6,  of  Alex-
andria, Va.,  and  Potomac  Chapter,  No.  8,  of  Georgetown.

The  convention  was  duly  organized,  and  the  Grand  Officers  were
elected  and  a constitution  which  had  been  regularly  formulated
and  adopted  at  a former  convention  was  adopted.  In  the  evening
of  the  same  day  (Tuesday,  February  10,  1824)  the  Grand  Royal
Arch  Chapter  for  the  District  of  Columbia  was  opened  in  ample
form,  and  the  convention  was  accordingly  dissolved.

The  Grand  Officers  were  duly  installed  by  Comp’n  John  B.
Hammett,  a Past  Grand  High-Priest.

At  a meeting  of  the  Grand  Chapter  held  March  9,  1824,  the
following  communication  was  received  and  read  and  laid  on  the
table  :

“Georgetown,  February  11,  1824,
Potomac  Royal  Arch  Chapter,  No.  8.

“ Resolved  Unanimously , That  we  deem  it  inexpedient  to  separate
from  the  Grand  Chapter  of  the  State  of  Maryland  and  District  of
Columbia  and  that  we  will  not  avail  ourselves  of  the  permission  and
authority  granted  by  a resolution  past  said  Grand  Chapter  at  their
last  Communication.  (Extracts  from  the  Minute.)

Edw.  Deeble,  Scribe.”

1 Pro.  Gen.  Gr.  Ch.,  1826,  p.  77.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1499

Previous  to  the  closing  of  the  convention  the  numbers  of  the
chapters  were  arranged  as  follows  : Federal,  No.  1 ; Union,  No.  2 ;
Brooke,  No.  3;  Potomac,  No.  4,  and  that  charters  to  these  should
be  made  accordingly.

At  the  semi-annual  meeting  we  find  No.  1 to  be  designated  as
“ Washington  Royal  Arch  Chapter,  No.  1.”  This  change  was
made  by  that  chapter  at  a meeting  held  February  23,  1824.

The  Grand  Chapter  continued  to  exist  until  its  annual  communi-
cation, held  January  8,  1833,  which  is  the  last  record  in  the  book.

Potomac  Chapter,  No.  4,  never  united  with  this  Grand  Chapter,
but  held  under  her  old  Charter.

At  the  annual  meeting  of  the  Grand  Chapter,  held  January  9,
1827,  a petition  was  received  from  Comp.  P.  Mauro,  on  behalf  of
himself  and  thirteen  other  Companions  requesting  a dispensation
or  Charter  be  granted  to  them  for  a chapter  under  the  title  of  Tem-
ple Chapter,  No.  4,  which  was  unanimously  granted.

At  an  adjourned  convocation,  held  March  14,  1827,  after  instal-
lation of  the  Grand  Officers,  the  officers  elect  of  Temple  Chapter,
No.  4,  were  installed  by  the  Grand  High-Priest.

This  Grand  Chapter  closed  its  existence  after  the  annual  con-
vocation January  8,  1833,  as  no  meeting  was  recorded  in  the  old
book  after  that  date,  if  any  were  held  at  all.  We  must  now  refer  to
the  proceedings  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  and  at  the  eleventh
meeting,  held  September  14,  1841,  we  find  that  a resolution  was
adopted  authorizing  the  Deputy  General  Grand  High- Priest  to
take  the  necessary  steps  to  place  all  chapters  of  Royal  Arch  Ma-
sons in  that  part  of  the  District  of  Columbia,  formerly  belonging  to
the  State  of  Maryland,  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand  Chapter
of  Maryland.1  At  the  next  meeting,  held  September  10,  1844,  that
officer  reported  that  the  resolution  above  referred  to  had  been  duly
enforced  and  confirmed  by  the  Grand  Chapter  of  the  State  of  Mary-
land ; and  that  Grand  Chapter  has  assumed  and  now  holds  jurisdic-
tion over  that  portion  of  the  District  of  Columbia  lying  within  the
limits  of  the  State,  that  at  present  Maryland  has  two  chapters  at
work  therein.3  These  two  chapters  were,  Columbia  No.  15,  and
Washington  No.  16.

The  chapters  in  the  District  of  Columbia  remained  attached  to
and  under  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Maryland  which  on  September  10,

1 1841,  p.  165.

2 1844,  p.  181.

1500

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

1844,  was  changed  to  Maryland  and  District  of  Columbia,  until  the
year  1867,  when  steps  were  taken  by  the  four  chapters  in  the  District
of  Columbia  to  reorganize  a Grand  Chapter.  These  were  : Columbia,
No.  15  ; Washington,  No.  16  ; Mount  Vernon,  No.  20  ; and  Poto-
mac, No.  8.  After  many  preliminary  conventions,  and  surmounting
technical  difficulties  and  bitter  hostilities  to  their  efforts,  the  General
Grand  High-Priest,  John  L.  Lewis,  gave  his  consent  by  telegram  first,
which  was  followed  by  his  official  letter.  Companion  Albert  G.
Mackey,  Past  General  Grand  High-Priest,  was  invited  to  come  from
Charleston,  S.  C.,  to  constitute  the  Grand  Chapter  and  install  the
Grand  Officers,  which  ceremonies  took  place  in  Washington  at  the
Opera-house,  May  23,  1867.  The  Grand  Chapter  was  successfully
launched,  but  soon  encountered  quicksand  and  shoals.  The  en-
emies of  the  Grand  Chapter  did  not  hesitate  to  take  the  most  un-
masonic  measures  to  stop  the  progress  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry  in
the  District  of  Columbia ; a self-constituted  committee  of  four  vis-
ited the  General  Grand  High-Priest  at  his  home  in  New  York  and
by  a tissue  of  falsehoods  and  a well-concocted  false  statement,  in-
duced that  officer  to  recall  his  permission,  long  after  the  Grand  Chap-
ter had  successfully  entered  upon  a very  prosperous  course.  Two
constituent  chapters  had  been  chartered  to  take  the  place  of  Potomac
Chapter,  which  withdrew  from  the  Grand  Chapter  and,  as  in  1824,
decided  to  remain  with  the  Grand  Chapter  in  Maryland.  The  Gen-
eral Grand  High-Priest  issued  his  edict,  requiring  the  chapters  in  the
District  of  Columbia  to  disband  the  new  Grand  Chapter,  and  return
to  their  allegiance  to  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Maryland  and  District
of  Columbia.  This  not  being  complied  with,  he  at  once  issued
another  edict,  and  expelled  every  Royal  Mason  belonging  to  the
chapters  in  the  District  except  those  fair  and  the  members  of
Potomac  Chapter.  Thus  matters  remained.  The  Companions  in
Washington  went  along  about  their  business  of  Masonry  and  a
wonderful  prosperity  followed  them.  When  the  General  Grand
Chapter  met  in  St.  Louis  in  1868,  the  Grand  Chapter  of  the  District
was  sustained  in  her  action  and  admitted  to  the  General  Grand
Chapter.

We  have  kindly  omitted  all  personalities  in  this  veritable  his
tory,  because  nearly  every  prominent  Companion  in  this  contest
has  gone  to  his  reward,  and  we  say,  as  all  interested  should,  Pax
Vobiscum.  The  General  Grand  Chapter  permitted  Potomac  Chap-

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1501

ter,  No.  8,  to  retain  her  place  under  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Mary-
land, hut  decided  that  the  whole  territory  of  the  District  was  in  the
jurisdiction  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  the  District  of  Columbia,  and
she  could  not  receive  any  petitions  for  the  degrees.  This  continued
for  a few  months,  when  Potomac  finally  asked  to  be  admitted
among  the  faithful,  which  was  readily  granted,  and  since  that
time  there  has  been  no  more  faithful  members  of  the  Grand
Chapter  than  the  Companions  of  Old  Potomac,  No.  8,  and  uni-
versally esteemed  and  beloved.

The  Grand  Chapter  of  the  District  of  Columbia  has  increased
since  May  7,  1867,  from  three  chapters  with  498  members,  to  eleven
chapters  and  2,204  members  in  1898.

Florida.

In  the  “ Compendium  ” giving  the  proceedings  of  the  General
Grand  Chapter  for  the  sixth  meeting  of  that  body,  September  14,
1826,  the  General  Grand  High-Priest,  DeWitt  Clinton,  reported
that  he  had  granted  dispensations  for  a Mark  Lodge  in  St.  Augus-
tine and  also  one  in  St.  Francisville  in  Florida.1

The  Grand  Chapter  of  Virginia  had  chartered  two  chapters  in
Florida,  viz.  : Magnolia,  No.  16,  at  Appalachicola,  and  Florida,  No.
32,  at  Tallahassee.  There  was  a chapter  at  St.  Augustine  chartered
by  the  Grand  Chapter  of  South  Carolina.

We  find  in  the  “ Compendium  ” in  the  proceedings  for  the  thir-
teenth meeting  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  held  September  14,
1847,  the  following  in  the  report  of  the  General  Grand  Secretary  : 2

“On  the  nth  day  of  January  last  (1847),  three  chapters  of
Royal  Arch  Masons  in  the  State  of  Florida,  by  their  delegates,  met
in  Convention  and  resolved  to  form  a Grand  Chapter  for  that  State.
They  therefore  proceeded  to  frame  a Constitution  and  enact  by-
laws; and  on  the  21st  of  the  same  month  they  elected  officers  and
organized  a Grand  Chapter ; and  among  their  proceedings  it  will
be  found  that  they  desire  to  place  their  Grand  Chapter  under  your
jurisdiction.  On  receipt  of  the  copy  of  their  Constitution  and  let-
ter accompanying  it,  I immediately  acknowledged  the  same,  and
requested  their  Grand  Secretary  to  inform  me  from  what  Grand

1 “ Compendium,”  1826,  p.  73.

2 Ibid.,  1847,  p.  140.

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

1502

Chapter  the  several  Chapters  in  the  State  received  their  respective
charters,  and  the  time  when  each  was  issued.  To  this  letter,  as  yet,
I have  received  no  answer.”

The  next  notice  of  Florida  we  find  in  the  proceedings  of  the
same  meeting,1  where  a committee  on  General  Grand  Secretary’s  re-
port say  :

“ That  it  appears  from  documents  referred  to  your  committee,
a Convention  of  delegates  from  the  Royal  Arch  Chapters  in  the
State  of  Florida,  assembled  in  Tallahassee,  in  the  month  of  January,
1847,  at  which  time  the  following  preamble  and  resolutions  were
adopted  ” (which  we  omit).  The  committee  say  :

“ In  the  published  proceedings  of  said  Grand  Chapter  we  find
the  adopted  Constitution,  and  the  following  resolutions  :

“ Resolved , That  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Florida,  duly  appreciat-
ing the  advantages  of  a Masonic  head  and  paramount  authority,  are
disposed  to  come  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  General  Grand  Chap-
ter of  the  United  States.

“ Resolved , That  the  Grand  Secretary  communicate  the  same  to
the  General  Grand  Secretary  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter.”

Among  the  comments  of  the  committee  they  say  : “ It  is  to  be
regretted  that  the  Grand  Secretary  did  not  furnish  that  precise  in-
formation of  the  origin  of  the  several  chapters  which  composed  the
convention  as  would  have  enabled  your  committee  to  report  in
such  a manner  as  to  recommend  to  this  General  Grand  Chapter  the
incorporation  of  that  Grand  Chapter  under  your  jurisdiction  at  the
present  time,”  etc.  Some  objections  were  also  made  to  several  sec-
tions of  their  constitution  ; they  recommended  certain  resolutions
aiming  to  overcome  the  objections,  and  thereby  to  admit  the  Grand
Chapter  to  her  proper  place  as  a constituent  of  this  General  Grand
Chapter.  The  Grand  Chapter  of  Florida  did  not  understand  the
motive  of  the  action  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  and  did  not
comply  with  the  request  for  explanations.  At  the  sixteenth  meet-
ing of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  held  in  1856  the  General  Grand
High-Priest  was  authorized  to  recognize  the  Grand  Chapter  of
Florida  and  place  it  in  the  same  position  as  the  other  Grand  Chap-
ters, at  its  request.

The  war  period  of  1861  to  1865  prevented  the  accomplishment

1 “ Compendium/’  pp.  158,  159,  161,  171.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1503

of  this  arrangement  until  January  13,  1869,  when  the  Grand  Chap-
ter of  Florida  accepted  the  invitation  by  passing  the  following :

“ Resolved , That  this  Grand  Chapter  accept  such  invitation  in  a
true  Masonic  spirit  and  will  hereafter  bear  allegiance  and  support  to
the  said  General  Grand  Chapter.”

Georgia.

The  office  of  the  Grand  Secretary  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Geor-
gia can  not  furnish  any  information  as  to  when  Royal  Arch  Masonry
was  introduced  into  that  jurisdiction.

The  first  notice  of  Georgia  in  the  proceedings  of  the  General
Grand  Chapter  is  at  the  third  septennial  meeting,  January  9,  1806,
and  is  a Warrant  to  Georgia  Chapter  at  Savannah.  At  the  fourth
meeting,  held  June  6,  1816  (special),  Union  Chapter,  at  Louisville,
received  a Warrant.  At  the  fifth  regular  meeting,  Augusta  Chapter
received  a Warrant.1  At  the  tenth  meeting,  held  September  n,
1838,  a dispensation  was  granted  to  a chapter  at  Macon.2

The  next  notice  of  Georgia  in  the  proceedings  of  the  General
Grand  Chapter  is  at  the  sixth  meeting,  in  1826.  “That  charters
have  been  granted  to  Mechanic’s  Chapter,  at  Lexington,  Georgia,
on  the  10th  June,  1820  ; to  Webb  Chapter,  at  Sparta,  Georgia,  on
1 6th  November,  1821  ; by  the  Deputy  General  Grand  High-Priest,
Henry  Fowle.”3  At  the  same  meeting  we  find  the  following:
“ That  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapters  have  been  legally  and  constitu-
tionally formed,  since  the  last  meeting  of  this  Body,  within  and  for
the  States  of  Maine,  New  Hampshire,  New  Jersey,  Georgia , and
Tennessee,  with  the  consent  of  one  of  the  General  Grand  Officers.”4

At  the  thirteenth  meeting  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  held
September  14,  1847,  the  General  Grand  Secretary  reports  as  fol-
lows : 5

“ Within  the  last  few  days,  however,  on  examination  of  the  old
files  of  papers,  I found  a printed  paper,  to  which  the  name  of  one
of  the  General  Grand  Secretaries  is  affixed,  giving  a list  of  the  Grand
Chapters  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  and
therein  appears  the  name  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Georgia.

“ It  would  seem  that  this  is  a good  evidence  of  that  Grand

! 11  Compendium,”  pp.  36,  46,  56.
s Ibid.,  p.  72.  4 Ibid.,  p.  76.

2 Ibid.,  pp.  103,  106.
5 Ibid.,  pp.  140,  141.

1504

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Chapter  having  been  recognized,  and  that  if  so,  it  should  be,  in
some  way,  made  to  appear  upon  the  record.”

The  report  of  the  committee  on  the  last  item  as  found  at  the
same  meeting,  was  that  they  did  find  documentary  evidence  in  the
hands  of  the  General  Grand  Secretary  sufficient  to  prove  that  the
Grand  Chapter  of  Georgia  was  a constituent  of  the  General  Grand
Chapter,  although  said  Grand  Chapter  had  not  been  represented,  or
made  returns  to  that  body  since  1822.

The  above  statement  of  facts  is  not  very  flattering  to  the  officers
of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  whose  duty  it  evidently  was  to  know
from  the  records  and  registers  who  were  the  constituents  of  that
Grand  Body.  Such  remissness  and  want  of  knowledge  in  regard
to  the  very  vital  affairs  show  gross  neglect  of  duty  and  want  of
care  in  the  management  of  so  important  a body  of  Masons  as  the
General  Grand  Chapter.

Idaho.

The  Grand  Chapter  of  Oregon  granted  a Charter  to  Idaho
Chapter,  in  Idaho  City,  June  18,  1867,  being  under  the  impression
that  the  General  Grand  Chapter  had  ceased  to  exist.  This  chapter
was  constituted  August  18,  1867.  At  the  twentieth  session  of  the
General  Grand  Chapter,  held  September  18,  1868,  the  General
Grand  Chapter  adopted  a report,  which  included  “good  faith”  of
the  petitioners,  healing  all  those  who  had  been  exalted  in  the  chap-
ter, and  granting  a Charter  to  Idaho  Chapter,  No.  1,  Idaho  City,
on  September  18,  1868.  The  General  Grand  Chapter  issued  war-
rants to  other  chapters  in  Idaho,  viz.  : February  14,  1870,  a dispen-
sation to  Cyrus,  No.  2,  at  Silver  City,  then  in  Dakota ; March  30,
1870,  a dispensation  to  Boise,  No.  3,  at  Boise  City;  charters  were
issued  to  these  two  September  20,  1871.1

In  the  proceedings  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  for  August
25,  1880,  on  petition  of  Comp.  C.  P.  Coburn  and  others  of  Lewis-
ton, Nez  Perce  County,  Idaho,  a Charter  was  granted,  August  27,
1880,  to  Lewiston  Chapter,  No.  4.®

At  the  twenty-sixth  triennial,  held  October  1,  1886,  Alturas
Chapter,  No.  5,  at  Harley,  Dak.,  was  granted  a Charter.3

Pocatello,  No.  6,  at  Pocatello,  received  a dispensation  dated  May

1 “ Pro.  Gen.  Gr.  Ch.  for  1871,”  p.  33.

2 Ibid.,  p.  81.

3 Ibid.,  p.  125.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1505

28.  1889,  and  a Charter  November  22,  1889  ; Moscow  Chapter,  at
Moscow,  received  a Charter  July  23,  1891  ; Fayette  Chapter.  No.
8,  at  Fayette,  received  a Charter  August  24,  1894.

Illinois.

The  Deputy  General  Grand  High-Priest,  Joseph  K.  Stapleton,
gave  a dispensation  to  Springfield  Chapter,  in  Springfield,  July  19,
1841  and  at  the  eleventh  triennial  meeting  of  the  General  Grand
Chapter,  held  September  14,  1841,  a Charter  was  granted  on  the
17th.3

At  the  twelfth  triennial  session,  September  10,  1844,  the  Deputy
General  Grand  High- Priest  reported  having  issued  a dispensation
for  Lafayette  Chapter,  in  Chicago,  dated  July  2,  1844. 3

At  the  thirteenth  triennial  session,  September  14,  1847,  he  re-
ported having  issued  dispensations  to  Jacksonville  Chapter,  No.  3,
at  Jacksonville,  and  Shawneetown  Chapter,  No.  6,  at  Shawnee-
town,  since  the  session  of  1844,  and  a Charter  to  Lafayette  Chap-
ter, in  Chicago.4

The  General  Grand  Scribe  Ezra  S.  Barnum  reported  having
issued  dispensations  on  March  10,  1846,  to  open  Horeb  Chapter,
No.  4,  at  Henderson,  and  April  1,  1846,  to  open  Quincy  Chapter,
No.  5,  at  Quincy.

At  the  fourteenth  triennial  session,  September  10,  1850,  several
of  the  chapters  working  under  dispensations  having  applied  for
charters  were  refused  because  they  had  failed  to  send  up  the  records
of  their  proceedings,  and  therefore  the  committee  was  unable  to  say
whether  their  doings  had  been  regular  or  not.  Among  these  were
the  chapters  Reynolds,  Stapleton,  Springfield,  and  Quincy,  and
recommended  that  their  dispensations  be  continued  in  force  until
next  triennial  meeting.5

At  the  same  session  (fourteenth)  the  Deputy  General  Grand
High-Priest  reported  having  issued  dispensations  for  the  formation
of  Howard  Chapter,  on  July  28,  1848,  and  Stapleton  Chapter,  June
28,  1849.  The  General  Grand  King  reported  that  since  the  last
triennial  he  had  granted  a dispensation  to  a chapter  to  be  held  in
Cambridge  in  the  County  of  Henry,  111.,  to  be  called  Reynolds

1 “ Compendium,”  p.  no.  2 Ibid.,  p.  hi.  3 Ibid.,  p.  122.

4 Ibid.,  p.  145.  5 Ibid.,  p.  201.

95

1506

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Chapter,  No. — /dated  March  2,  1850.  The  General  Grand  Scribe
reported  that  since  the  last  triennial  he  had  granted  a dispensation
to  open  a chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons  at  Rock  Island,  111.,  Au-
gust 1,  1849/ to  cahed  Barrett.

At  the  thirteenth  triennial  meeting  the  General  Grand  King
reported  that  he  had  granted  authority  to  seven  chapters  in  Illinois
to  organize  a Grand  Chapter.

April  10,  1850,  a convention  of  the  representatives  of  six  of  these
chapters  was  held,  and  having  the  authority  of  the  General  Grand
King,  a Grand  Chapter  for  the  State  of  Illinois  was  organized.8

Indian  Territory.

A convention  of  three  chartered  chapters,  Indian,  No.  1 ; Okla-
homa, No.  2,  and  Muskogee,  No.  3,  was  held  by  their  represen-
tatives, October  15,  [889;  organized  and  made  application  to  the
General  Grand  High-Priest  for  authority  to  constitute  a Grand
Chapter  for  Indian  Territory,  which  was  refused.  Subsequently
the  succeeding  General  Grand  High-Priest,  David  F.  Day,  at  the
general  grand  convocation,  held  at  Atlanta,  Ga.,  November  22,  1889,
granted  their  request,  and  on  February  15,  1890,  the  Grand  Chap-
ter was  constitutionally  instituted.  At  the  second  annual  convoca-
tion, held  at  Oklahoma,  August  20,  1891,  seven  chapters  were  repre-
sented.

Indiana.

The  first  record  evidence  of  the  establishment  of  Royal  Arch
Masonry  in  the  State  of  Indiana  is  found  in  the  proceedings  of  the
General  Grand  Chapter  at  the  sixth  meeting,  held  September  14,
1826,  where  under  the  report  of  a committee  on  the  papers  and  pro-
ceedings of  the  General  Grand  Officers  they  say : “ That  a Charter
had  been  granted  to  Vincennes  Chapter,  at  Vincennes.  State  of  In-
diana, on  13th  May,  1820;  to  Jennings  Mark  Lodge,  at  Vevay,  In-
diana, on  4th  May,  1821,  by  the  General  Grand  King,  John  Snow.”4

September  14,  1838,  the  committee  on  the  doings  of  General
Grand  Officers  reported  a dispensation  having  been  granted  by  M.
E.  Companion  Stapleton  for  a chapter  at  Richmond,  Ind.,  and  recom-
mended a Charter  for  that  chapter  (September  14,  1838).  This

1 “ Compendium  ” p.  182.  2 Ibid.,  p.  184.  s Ibid.,  p.  183.  4 Ibid.,  p.  73.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1507

chapter  was  named  King  Solomon.  At  the  eleventh  meeting,  held
September  14,  1841,  the  Committee  on  Warrants  recommended  a
Charter  to  be  issued  to  Logan  Chapter,  Logansport ; the  dispensa-
tion of  this  chapter  was  dated  March  12,  1839.

At  the  twelfth  meeting,  held  September  10,  1844,  the  following
statements  were  made  by  the  General  Grand  Secretary  : 1 “ By  the
records  of  the  proceedings  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  in  1819,  it
appears  that  the  Committee  to  whom  was  referred  the  subject  mat-
ter of  dispensations  granted  by  the  General  Grand  Officers  during
the  previous  recess  had  heard  that  the  then  late  Deputy  General
Grand  High-Priest  had  granted  dispensations  for  charters  at  Mad-
ison, and  at  Brookville,  in  Indiana  ; but  there  being  no  further  evi-
dence of  their  existence  before  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  no  rati-
fication of  these  acts  was  passed,  nor  were  their  charters  ordered ;
although  several  charters  were  at  that  time  ordered  for  other  chap-
ters holding  dispensations  under  authority  of  other  General  Grand
Officers.  Consequently,  Madison  and  Brookville  Chapters  ceased
to  exist  as  legally  constituted  Masonic  Bodies  at  that  time.  It  ap-
pears, however,  from  the  herewith  accompanying  papers,  that  Mad-
ison Chapter  continued  its  labors  for  many  years  ; and  there  having
been  another  chapter  established  at  Vincennes,  in  that  State,  in
1823,  it  is  said  a Grand  Chapter  was  organized  with  the  approbation
of  M.  E.  Comp.  John  Snow,  General  Grand  King.  No  documen-
tary evidence  of  that  authority,  however,  or  even  records  of  the  pro-
ceedings of  that  Grand  Chapter  are  known  to  exist.  Nor  does  it
appear  of  record  that  the  General  Grand  Chapter  was  ever  advised
of  the  existence  of  such  an  institution.  . .

On  the  true  position  of  these  things  being  made  known  to  the
Companions  at  Madison,  in  the  proper  spirit  of  Masonry  they  im-
mediately suspended  all  work,  closed  their  chapter,  and  determined
to  lay  their  case  before  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  which  was  done
by  their  High-Priest,  M.  E.  Joseph  G.  Norwood,  in  a very  frank,
perspicuous,  and  able  manner,  presented  amongst  the  documents,
accompanied  by  their  dispensation,  their  return  for  1842  to  the  pres-
ent time  (September  10,  1844),  and  the  payment  of  such  dues  as
have  accrued  within  that  time.  No  return  had  been  made  from
1819  to  1842.  Their  irregularities  were  evidently  the  result  of  mis-
takes as  to  the  extent  of  power  given  by  their  dispensation,  and

1 “ Compendium,”  p.  116.

1508

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

they  asked  that  their  acts  may  be  made  lawful  by  the  General  Grand
Chapter  and  that  all  dues  up  to  1842  be  remitted,  and  asked  for  a
Charter.1  This  was  duly  granted,  September  12,  1844,2  and  all  dues
remitted  up  to  1842.  The  past  work  was  pronounced  illegal,  and
authority  was  given  to  heal  all  who  had  received  degrees  in  it.  At
the  twelfth  meeting  above  mentioned  (1844),  the  Deputy  General
Grand  High-Priest  reported  having  issued  a dispensation  to  Lafay-
ette Chapter,  No.  3,  at  Lafayette,  August  17,  1843; 3 a Charter
was  granted  to  this  chapter,  September  11,  1844;  at  this  meeting
permission  was  granted  by  the  General  Grand  Chapter  for  a conven-
tion to  assemble,  dated  November  18,  1845,  an<^  the  Grand  Chap-
ter of  Indiana  was  duly  constituted  December  25,  1845.

Iowa.

At  the  thirteenth  meeting  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  held
September  14,  1847,  the  Deputy  General  Grand  High-Priest  re-
ported that  since  the  triennial  session,  in  1844,  he  had  authorized
the  consecration,  by  proxy,  of  Iowa  Chapter,  at  Burlington,  la.,
and  also  Iowa  City  Chapter,  at  Iowa  City.  He  had  also  issued  a
dispensation  to  form  Dubuque  Chapter,  No.  3,  at  Dubuque,  la.4
Charter  to  the  same  was  dated  September  17,  1847.

Dispensation  to  Iowa  Chapter,  No.  1,  was  dated  August  24,

1 843. 5 Charter  to  the  same  was  dated  September  1 1,  1844.
Dispensation  to  Iowa  City  Chapter,  No.  2,  was  dated  March  19,

1844.6  Charter  to  the  same  was  dated  September  17,  1847.

At  the  fifteenth  meeting  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  held
September  17,  1853,  Washington  Chapter,  No.  4,  at  Muscatine,  la.,
was  chartered,  dated  September  17,  1853.7

A dispensation  had  been  issued  to  McCord  Chapter,  No.  5,  at
Fairfield,  probably  in  March,  1853.  The  Deputv  General  Grand
High-Priest,  Joseph  K.  Stapleton,  having  died  .ry  soon  there-
after, no  report  was  made.8  That  chapter  received  a Charter  from
the  Grand  Chapter  of  Iowa  after  it  was  constituted,  dated  June
14,  1854.

A convention  of  the  above-named  chapters,  by  their  delegates,

1 “ Compendium, ” p.  117.  2 Ibid.,  pp.  128,  129.  8 Ibid.,  p.  121.

4 Ibid.,  p.  145.  5 Ibid.,  p.  121.  6 Ibid.,  p.  122.

7 Ibid.,  p.  259.  8 Proceedings,  1856,  p.  361.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1509

was  held  at  Mount  Pleasant,  June  8,  1854,  by  the  authority  of  the
General  Grand  Scribe,  A.  V.  Rowe.1

The  history  of  Capitular  Masonry  in  Iowa  would  not  be  com-
pleted were  we  to  omit  one  of  those  peculiar  episodes  which,  with
cyclonic  force,  carries  away  before  it  all  the  valuable  works  of  the
good  and  great  Masonic  Architects,  who  have  labored  so  hard,  and
industriously,  in  the  erection  of  Masonic  temples,  and  which  we
quote  from  Companion  A.  F.  Chapman’s  history  of  Capitular  Ma-
sonry in  the  History  of  Masonry  and  Concorda7it  Orders:

“Within  about  two  years  after  being  organized,  the  usefulness
of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  came  under  discussion.  The  Grand
High  Priests  early  gave  emphasis  to  this  negative  feeling.  In  1857
the  delegates  to  the  next  session  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter
were  instructed  to  vote  for  its  dissolution.  This  was  re-enforced  in
1858.  The  Grand  Chapter  asserted  its  sovereignty  and  independent
right  to  organize  chapters  in  Nebraska  or  elsewhere,  where  no  Grand
Chapter  existed,  and  finally,  on  August  16,  i860,  the  resolution  de-
claring the

“'Grand  Chapter  sovereign  and  independent,  and  in  no  manner  whatever
subject  to  the  General  Grand  Chapter  of  the  United  States,  and  this  Grand
Chapter  is  forever  absolved  from  all  connection  therewith,’

was  passed  by  a vote  of  twenty-eight  ayes  to  fifteen  nays.

“ This  condition  continued  for  nine  years,  when,  at  the  triennial
convocation,  September,  1871,  the  General  Grand  High  Priest  re-
ported that,  under  date  of  October  26,  1869,  he  had  ‘received  official
notice  that  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Iowa  had  rescinded  the  act  of
secession  passed  in  i860,  and  had  directed  that  the  0.\B.\  of  alle-
giance should  be  administered  to  all  the  members  of  chapters  in
that  jurisdiction,  and  that  hereafter  it  would  be  administered  to
candidates  receiving  the  Royal  Arch  degree.’ 2

“This  Grand  Chapter  has  been  represented  in  the  General
Grand  Chapter  since  1871.

“ Robert  Farmer  Bower  of  Iowa  Grand  Chapter  was  chosen
General  Grand  High  Priest  in  1880,  and  died  before  his  term  was
out."

1 Proceedings,  1856,  p.  376.

2 “ History  of  Masonry,”  p.  613.

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

1510

Kansas.

The  first  dispensation  was  issued  to  Leavenworth  Chapter,  No.
1,  at  Leavenworth,  January  24,  1857  , to  Washington  Chapter,  at
Atchison,  May  18,  1859.  These  two  dispensations  were  reported
by  the  General  Grand  High-Priest  at  the  seventeenth  meeting  of  the
General  Grand  Chapter,  held  September,  1859,  and  at  this  meeting
a Charter  was  granted  to  Washington  Chapter,  No.  2,  September
14,  1859.  In  the  proceedings  of  the  special  convocation  of  the
General  Grand  Chapter  called  by  Comp.  Albert  G.  Mackey,  General
Grand  High-Priest,  which  assembled  in  Columbus,  O.,  September
7,  1865,  Washington  Chapter,  No.  1,  of  Kansas,  is  reported  present
hy  Jacob  Saqui,  H.  P.1  At  the  triennial  communication  held  next
day,  September  8th,  at  the  same  place,  the  Deputy  General  Grand
High-Priest  reported  that  he  had  renewed  the  dispensation  of
Leavenworth  Chapter  in  May,  1863.®  On  September  8,  1865,  a
Charter  was  granted,3  and  also  a Charter  was  granted  to  Fort  Scott
Chapter,  the  General  Grand  Secretary  having  reported  that  a dis-
pensation had  been  issued  to  the  chapter.4

By  permission  of  the  Deputy  General  Grand  High-Priest  a com
vention  of  the  delegates  of  the  several  chapters  was  held  January,
1866,  and  on  February  23,  1866,  a Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter  was
duly  organized  and  constituted.

Kentucky.

In  the  proceedings  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  at  the  fifth
regular  meeting,  September  9,  1819,  the  proceedings  of  the  Grand
Chapter  of  Kentucky  were  presented  and  read,  and  a resolution
was  passed,  viz.  : “ Whereas , It  has  been  communicated  to  the

General  Grand  Chapter  that  several  Warrants  of  Constitution  were
granted  since  the  last  communication  authorizing  the  opening  and
holding  of  Royal  Arch  Chapters  in  Lexington,  Frankfort,  and
Shelbyville,  in  the  State  of  Kentucky,  by  our  late  Most  Excellent
Companion,  Thomas  Smith  Webb,  and  that  said' Chapters  having
been  constitutionally  in  operation  for  the  space  of  more  than  one
year,  did  form  themselves  into  a Grand  Chapter  for  said  State

1 Proceedings  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  1862-65,  p.  7.

4 Ibid.,  p.  23.  3 Ibid.,  p.  31.  4 Ibid.,  p.  27.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1511

under  the  jurisdiction  of  this  body,  and  have  been  regularly  organ-
ized as  such,  by  M.  E.  Companions  De  Witt  Clinton,  General
Grand  High  Priest,  and  Thomas  Smith  Webb,  late  Deputy  Gen-
eral Grand  High  Priest.

“ Resolved , Therefore,  that  this  General  Grand  Chapter  ap-
proves and  recognizes  the  formation  of  said  Grand  Chapter  for  said
State  of  Kentucky.”1

The  dispensations  for  the  above-mentioned  three  chapters  had
been  issued  by  Companion  Thomas  Smith  Webb,  Deputy  General
Grand  High- Priest,  October  16,  1816.

In  the  proceedings  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Kentucky  will  be
found  the  correspondence  in  reference  to  the  formation  and  con-
stituting of  the  Grand  Chapter,  and  also  the  recognition  by  the
Deputy  General  Grand  High-Priest,  dated  December  12,  1817,  at
Worthington,  O.,  and  by  DeWitt  Clinton,  M.  Ex.  General  Grand
High-Priest,  December  30,  1817.

At  the  annual  convocation  of  the  Grand  Chapter,  held  in
Lexington,  September  5,  1825,  the  Grand  Chapter  adopted  certain
resolutions,  to  petition  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  and  to  address
letters  to  the  other  Grand  Chapters  on  the  propriety  of  dissolving
the  General  Grand  Chapter.2  The  memorial  was  issued,  and  it  is
found  in  the  proceedings  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  for  the
sixth  meeting,  September  4,  A.  L.  582b.3  This  memorial  was  re-
ferred to  an  appropriate  committee,  which  reported,  giving  a
statement  as  to  how  the  several  Grand  Chapters  had  acted  upon
the  question  showing,  that  “as  a majority  of  the  Grand  Chapters  of
the  Several  States  dissented  from  the  resolution  of  the  Grand  Chap-
ter of  Kentucky,  it  is  not  expedient  for  the  General  Grand  Chapter
to  take  any  further  measures  on  the  subject.”  This  was  after  some
consideration  referred  to  a committee  of  the  whole.  That  com-
mittee after  having  deliberately  considered  and  discussed  the  report,
it  was  agreed  to  report  the  same  without  amendment  to  the  General
Grand  Chapter,  which  body  decided  by  a vote  of  yeas  47,  noes  2,
to  agree  to  the  report  of  the  committee.4

Very  properly,  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Kentucky  appeared  to  be
contented  with  this  decision.

The  report  of  the  General  Grand  Secretary  at  the  triennial  ses-

v “ Compendium,”  p.  52.
r Ibid.,  pp.  52-69.

2 Ibid.,  p.  62.

4 Ibid.,  p.  71.  Proceedings,  1874,  p.  17.

1512

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

sion,  September,  1859,  shows  that  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Kentucky
had  adopted  resolutions  of  withdrawal  from  the  General  Grand
Body.

At  the  twenty-second  triennial  convocation,  held  November  24,
1874,  the  General  Grand  High-Priest,  in  his  address,  stated  “That
the  Grand  Chapter  of  Kentucky  has  rescinded  her  resolutions  of
withdrawal  and  has  renewed  her  allegiance.  Her  representatives  are
here  with  us,”  etc.  She  has  remained  in  true  allegiance  ever  since.

Louisiana.

The  first  reference  we  find  in  the  proceedings  of  the  General
Grand  Chapter  to  Royal  Arch  Masonry  in  Louisiana,  is  at  the
twelfth  meeting,  held  September  10,  1844,  wherein  is  a report  on
the  appeal  of  C.  D.  Lehman,  of  New  Orleans,  from  a judgment  of
the  so-called  Grand  Chapter  of  Louisiana,  difficulties  had  oc-
curred between  the  officers  and  members  of  Hodand  chapter,  No.
9,  in  New  Orleans.  From  the  documents  presented  the  committee
learned  “that  a Grand  Chapter  of  Louisiana  was  organized  in  1813,
by  the  ‘ Royal  Lodges  ’ Concordia  and  Perseverance,  and  such
Officers  and  Members  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  State  as  were
Royal  Arch  Masons.”  Note,  these  lodges  were  originally  organ-
ized in  the  Island  of  San  Domingo,  under  charters  from  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Pennsylvania,  with  powers  to  confer  all  the  degrees  from
Entered  Apprentice  to  Royal  Arch  inclusive.  When  the  revolution
occurred  in  San  Domingo,  many  of  the  members  of  these  lodges
made  their  escape  and  stopped  for  a while  in  Cuba,  but  finally  settled
in  New  Orleans,  and  having  retained  their  charters,  resumed  labor
in  that  city.1

The  Grand  Chapter  formed  in  the  manner  above  stated  was
attached  to,  and  made  dependent  on,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Louisiana,
and  the  M.  W.  Grand  Master  of  that  body  was  ex  officio  and  by
“inherent  right”  Grand  High-Priest  of  the  new  Grand  Chapter.

The  question  as  to  the  legality  of  these  proceedings  had  been
foreclosed  in  1829,  by  the  admission  of  a representative  from  the
Grand  Chapter  of  Louisiana,  in  the  person  of  Companion  McCon-
nell, on  whose  return  to  New  Orleans  the  Grand  High-Priest,  Com-
panion John  Holland,  convened  the  officers  and  members  of  the

1 Reprint  of  Proceedings  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  from  1798  to  1856,  p.  194.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1513

Grand  Chapter,  who,  by  an  official  act,  in  regular  assembly,  enrolled
themselves  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  in
the  manner  prescribed  by  the  13th  Section  of  the  4th  Article  of  the
General  Grand  Constitution  ; of  which  act  it  notified  all  the  sub-
ordinate chapters  under  its  jurisdiction,  and  directed  similar  action
on  their  part,  and  enjoined  a strict  observance  of  the  provisions  of
the  General  Constitution.

From  1829  to  1831  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Louisiana  conducted
all  of  her  proceedings  in  good  faith  and  true  allegiance  to  the  Gen-
eral Grand  Chapter.  From  1831  to  April,  1839,  there  was  no
meeting.  The  subordinate  chapters  had  ceased  to  exist,  except  Hol-
land, No.  9,  which  kept  up  its  work  until  the  revocation  of  its  Char-
ter in  1841.  In  that  year,  the  Grand  Secretary  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Louisiana,  by  direction  of  the  Grand  Master,  issued  notices  to
certain  Royal  Arch  Masons  in  New  Orleans,  to  assemble  and  elect
Grand  Officers,  with  the  intention  of  a reorganization  of  the  State
Grand  Chapter.  This  meeting  did  not  occur  ; but  another  was  soon
thereafter  called,  and  the  High-Priest  and  three  other  officers  of
Holland  Chapter  were  notified.  The  usual  Grand  Officers  were
elected  at  this  meeting,  and  the  so-styled  Grand  Chapter  of  Louisi-
ana was  organized.  From  the  testimony  submitted  to  the  commit-
tee, it  appeared  that  the  High-Priest  of  Holland  Chapter,  Compn.
Henry,  was  not  present  at  this  election  ; nor  could  the  committee
ascertain  that  there  was  any  Companion  present  who  was  entitled  to
vote  in  an  election  of  Grand  Officers.

Shortly  after  this,  Compn.  Henry  was  officially  notified  by  the
Grand  Secretary  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Louisiana  of  the  organ-
ization of  the  Grand  Chapter,  and  requiring  of  Holland  Chapter  her
dues  and  returns  from  1832  to  1838  inclusive.  Holland  Chapter
protested  against  this  demand  and  asked  for  evidence  of  the  legality
of  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Body,  which  was  refused,  and  Hol-
land Chapter  declined  to  recognize  its  authority.  The  body,  assum-
ing to  be  the  Grand  Chapter,  proceeded  to  revoke  the  Charter,  and
to  expel  the  High-Priest  and  Secretary  of  Holland  Chapter.  The
Secretary,  Compn.  C.  D.  Lehman,  made  his  appeal  to  the  General
Grand  Chapter.  On  July  24,  1843,  he  served  the  reputed  Grand
Chapter  with  a notice  of  his  intention,  and  it  was  shown  when  this
notice  was  served,  the  Grand  High-Priest  of  the  Grand  Chapter,  in
his  place,  and  in  open  chapter  declared  “that  he  did  not  acknowledge

15*4

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

any  other  body,  and  was  independent  of  the  General  Grand  Royal
Arch  Chapter  of  the  United  States.”

From  the  above'  statement  it  would  appear  that  the  Grand
Royal  Arch  Chapter,  organized  in  1813,  voluntarily  surrendered  its
independent  jurisdiction  and  enrolled  itself  under  the  General  Grand
Chapter,  which  body  continued  until  1831,  and  having  ceased  her
operations  by  not  meeting  and  electing  officers,  as  required  by  the
General  Grand  Constitution,  it  ceased  to  exist.  All  the  existing
subordinate  chapters  came  immediately  under  the  jurisdiction  of
the  General  Grand  Chapter,  which  alone  had  legal  authority  over  the
jurisdiction  thus  vacated,  as  by  Article  2,  Section  2,  of  the  General
Grand  Constitution.  The  deceased  Grand  Chapter  could  only  be  re-
vived by  Article  2.  Section  9.

The  committee  recommended  and  which  was  unanimously
adopted:  That  Holland  Chapter,  No.  9,  be  directed  to  resume  its
labors  under  the  direction  of  its  former  officers  and  members,  with
power  to  fill  existing  vacancies,  and  that  it  be  required  to  make  its
annual  returns,  and  settle  its  dues  with  the  General  Grand  Secre-
tary.1

In  the  proceedings  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  for  1847  we
find  in  a report  on  Holland  Chapter,  No.  9,  “that  the  Charter  of
said  Chapter  has  been  either  lost  or  stolen  ; and  that  the  dispensa-
tion under  which  it  has  been  working  for  the  past  year  expires  by
the  terms  of  its  own  limitation  with  the  present  session  of  this  Gen-
eral Grand  Chapter.  They  therefore  respectfully  recommend  that
the  General  Grand  Secretary  be  authorized  to  execute  a new  Char-
ter, to  take  the  place  of  that  which  has  been  lost,  etc.,  which  was
accepted.”2

The  General  Grand  Chapter  at  this  session  “ Resolved , That
there  is  not  at  this  time  any  constitutional  and  legally  authorized
Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter  in  the  State  of  Louisiana.

“ Resolved , That  the  Association  holding  its  meetings  in  the
City  of  New  Orleans,  and  assuming  to  exercise  the  functions  and
authority  of  a Grand  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons. is  an  irregular
and  unauthorized  Masonic  body  ; and  it  is  hereby  disowned,  and
repudiated  as  spurious,  clandestine,  and  illegal.”

Masonic  intercourse,  public  and  private,  was  interdicted,  and

1 Proceedings  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  from  1798  to  1856,  pp.  193-195*

2 Ibid.,  pp.  218,  219.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1 5 1 5

iue  notice  of  these  resolutions  was  to  be  forwarded  to  the  acting
Secretary  of  said  body  by  the  General  Grand  Secretary.1

The  Deputy  General  Grand  High-Priest  reported  at  this  session,
September  14,  1847,  that  since  the  session  of  1844  he  had  issued
dispensations  to  the  following  bodies  in  Louisiana  : New  Era,  No.
2 ; Red  River,  No.  3 ; East  Feliciana,2  No.  4.  No  dates  given.  He
had  also  issued  a dispensation  to  Holland  Chapter,  No.  x,  at  New
Orleans,  to  continue  work  until  the  present  session,3  April  7,  1845,
and  a new  Charter  recommended,  which  was  done  as  above  stated.
When  the  Charter  to  East  Feliciana,  No.  4,  was  granted,  by  request
of  the  chapter  the  name  and  place  were  changed  to  Clinton,  to
be  located  at  Clinton.4  At  the  same  time  charters  were  granted
to  New  Era,  No.  2,  at  New  Orleans;  Red  River,  No.  3,  at  Shreve-
port; viz.:  September  15,  1847.

At  the  fourteenth  meeting  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  Sep-
tember 10,  1850,  a committee  reported  that  “ on  the  personal  knowl-
edge of  one  of  their  own  members  who  represents  that  State  (Louis-
iana) in  this  Body,  that  those  difficulties  are  now  adjusted,  and  that
the  different  Grand  Bodies  of  that  State,  in  all  degrees  of  Masonry,
are  now  united  as  one  in  that  harmony  without  which  our  Order
can  not  exist.”5

At  this  session  (1850)  the  General  Grand  King  reported  “that
he  had  authorized  Holland  Chapter,  No.  1 ; New  Era  Chapter,
No.  2 ; Red  River  Chapter,  No.  3,  and  Clinton  Chapter,  No.  4,  in
the  State  of  Louisiana,  to  organize  and  establish  a Grand  Chapter
for  that  State  ; which  they  did  in  the  City  of  New  Orleans,  on  1st
day  of  May,  1848.” 6

Maine.

As  the  territory  occupied  by  Maine  was  a part  of  Massachusetts
until  it  was  made  a State  in  1820,  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Massa-
chusetts granted  a Warrant  of  Constitution  to  organize  a chapter
in  Portland,  Me.,  February  13,  1805.  The  same  Grand  Chapter
issued  dispensations,  December  17,  1819,  to  Montgomery,  at  Bath,
and  to  New  Jerusalem,  at  Wiscasset  ; on  December  29,  1819,  to
Jerusalem  Chapter,  in  Hollowed.  Henry  Fowle,  Deputy  Grand
High-Priest,  constituted  these  three  chapters,  respectively,  July  18,

1 Proceedings  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  from  1798  to  1856,  p.  128.

2 Ibid.,  p.  209.  3 Ibid.,  209.  4 Ibid.,  225.  5 Ibid.,  p.  248.  6 Ibid.,  p.  253.

1516

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

19,  and  21,  1820,  which  was  reported  by  him  to  James  Prescott,
Grand  High-Priest.

These  three  chapters,  with  Mt.  Vernon  Chapter,  of  Portland,
met  in  convention  in  Portland,  1820,  and  adopted  the  constitution
of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Massachusetts  provisionally,  and  the
Grand  Chapter  Officers  were  chosen  and  organized  and  constituted
the  Grand  Chapter  of  Maine.1 2

The  first  reference  to  Royal  Masonry  in  Maine  by  the  General
Grand  Chapter  is  found  in  the  proceedings  for  the  triennial  meet
ing,  September  15,  1826, ? when  the  committee  reported  the  legal
constitution  of  the  Grand  Chapter,  and  by  resolution  adopted,  that
Grand  Chapter  was  recognized  and  received  under  the  authority  and
sanction  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter.

This  Grand  Chapter  had  the  honor  of  having  two  of  her  Mem-
bers selected  as  General  Grand  Officers  in  the  General  Grand  Chap-
ter of  the  United  States,  viz.  : Robert  P.  Dunlap,  General  Grand
High-Priest  for  three  terms,  in  1847,  1850,  and  1853;  and  Josiah
H.  Drummond,  General  Grand  High-Priest  in  1871.

Maryland.

A circular  letter  from  Concordia  Chapter  in  Baltimore  was
issued  to  all  the  chapters  in  Baltimore  and  the  “ Encampment  of
Excellent,  Superexcellent,  Royal  Arch  ” (in  the  District  of  Colum-
bia), inviting  them  to  send  representatives  to  a convention  to  be
held  in  the  city  of  Washington,  January  21,  1807,  to  take  into  con-
sideration the  propriety  of  forming  a Grand  Chapter  for  the  State
of  Maryland  and  the  District  of  Columbia.

Those  chapters  in  Baltimore  which  met  in  this  convention  were
Washington,  Concordia,  and  St.  John’s.

We  find  from  Compn.  Edward  T.  Schultz’s  History  of  Capitu-
lar Masonry  in  Maryland  that  “ Undoubtedly  [Washington  Chap-
ter] was  the  Royal  Arch  Chapter  of  Jerusalem,  instituted  in  1787
by  virtue  of  the  dispensation  or  warrant  of  Lodge  No.  7,  Royal
Arch  Chapter  of  Jerusalem,  at  Chestertown,  and  was  attached  to
Lodge  No.  15,  now  Washington  Lodge,  No.  3."  This  chapter
finally  was  merged  with  Concordia  in  1822.

1 “ History  of  Masonry  and  Concordant  Orders,”  p.  616.

2 Proceedings  of  General  Grand  Chapter,  1826,  p.  82.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1517

Companion  Schultz  informs  us:1 2  “It  is  probable  that  Royal
Arch  Chapters  were  attached  to  most  of  the  active  Lodges  in  the
State.  Hiram  Lodge,  No.  27,  at  Port  Tobacco,  as  we  have  seen,
resolved  to  open  a ‘ Royal  Arch  Chapter.’  There  is  evidence  to
show  that  more  than  one  dispensation  was  granted  in  the  year  1 797.
Brother  David  Kerr  was  at  the  time  Grand  Master,  and  by  virtue
of  the  power  and  control  of  the  Royal  Arch  Degree,  believed  to  be
inherent  in  Grand  Masters,  issued  his  dispensations  for  the  forma-
tion of  these  several  Chapters  which  then,  in  connection  with  the
Chapter  attached  to  Washington  Lodge,  formed,  June  24,  1897,  the
first  Independent  Grand  Chapter  in  the  United  States.  The  Grand
Chapter  claimed  to  have  been  organized  in  1796  in  Pennsylvania,
was  an  appendage  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  that  State,  and  did  not
become  independent  until  the  year  1824.”

In  the  above  statement  of  Companion  Schultz  we  heartily  con-
cur. The  Grand  Chapter  of  1797  in  Maryland  became  dormant  in
1803,  and  was  revived  in  1807,  according  to  documents  shown  in
Companion  Schultz’s  history.8

A Grand  Royal  Arch  Convention  was  held  by  the  H.  Royal  Arch
Chapters  in  the  State  of  Maryland  and  District  of  Columbia  in  the
city  of  Washington  on  January  21,  1807.  Washington,  Concordia,
and  St.  John’s  chapters  of  Baltimore,  Federal  and  Washington  Naval
of  Washington  City  and  Potomac  Chapter  of  Georgetown  of  the
District  of  Columbia  were  present  by  their  representatives.  This
Convention  resolved  unanimously  to  organize  a Grand  Chapter  for
the  State  of  Maryland  and  the  District  of  Columbia.  They  elected
the  Grand  Officers,  and  opened  the  Grand  Chapter  in  ample  form.
A committee  was  appointed  to  frame  a constitution,  which  reported,
and  their  report  was  unanimously  adopted.

The  degrees  recognized  by  this  Grand  Chapter  were  Mark  Mas-
ter, Past  Master,  Most  Excellent  Master,  and  Royal  Arch.

We  make  the  following  extract  from  Companion  Schultz’s
Freemasonry  in  Maryland : 3

“ Since  the  finding  of  these  books  (old  Records),  documents
have  been  brought  to  light,  which  in  connection  with  them  throw
much  light  upon  the  early  history  of  the  Grand  R.  A.  Chapter  of
Maryland,  and  the  District  of  Columbia,  which  as  it  will  be  seen

1 “ History  of  Capitular  Masonry  in  Maryland,”  pp.  321,  322,  323.

2 Ibid.  3 Vol.  i.,  pp.  317,  318.

1518

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

was  the  title  of  the  body  subsequently  formed  by  the  representatives
of  the  chapters  in  Baltimore  and  Washington.”

The  great  care,  diligence,  and  indefatigable  zeal  of  Companion
Schultz  manifested  in  his  history,  deserve  especial  mention  by  all
succeeding  historians  of  Masonry,  for  his  valuable  additions  to  the
ancient  history  of  Masonry  in  Maryland  in  all  the  branches — and  we
continue  our  extracts  :

“ Some  months  since  we  learned  that  the  Masonic  papers  of
Philip  P.  Eckel,  which  were  supposed  to  have  been  lost  or  entirely
destroyed,  were  in  the  possession  of  his  granddaughter,  Mrs.  David
J.  Bishop,  living  in  this  city  (Baltimore),  and  who  has  since  most
kindly  placed  them  at  our  disposal.  These  papers  were  found  to  be
of  great  interest  as  they  disclosed  the  existence  of  Masonic  bodies
held  in  Baltimore  prior  to  the  year  1800,  that  were  not  previously
known  or  mentioned  by  any  Masonic  writer.”

Brother  Eckel  was  perhaps  the  most  active  and  zealous  Mason
that  ever  lived  in  this  jurisdiction  ; there  is  scarcely  a record  or  doc-
ument existing  in  this  State,  from  about  1792  to  1828,  that  does  not
mention  his  name  in  some  capacity.  Mackey  says  : “ He  was  one
of  the  most  distinguished  and  enlightened  Masons  of  his  day  ; ” and
we  add  to  this  that  he  was  evidently  an  “ Inspector  General  ” of  the
A.-.  A.’.  S.\  Rite.  Companion  Schultz  furnishes  facsimile  copies
of  several  of  the  documents  referred  to,  and  to  prove  that  a Grand
Chapter  existed  in  Baltimore  is  such  a copy  of  a “dispensation”
from  David  Kerr,  Grand  High-Priest,  to  Philip  P.  Eckel  as  High-
Priest,  to  assemble  a sufficient  number  of  Companions  to  open  and
hold  a chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons,  etc.,  in  Baltimore,  which
was  to  continue  in  force  until  June  20,  1797.  This  dispensation  is
dated  May  8,  1 797.

No  further  records  or  documents  of  any  description  have  been
discovered  in  reference  to  the  Grand  Chapter  organized  in  1807,  and
the  reorganization  which  occurred  in  the  year  1814.  On  May  9th
of  that  year  delegates  from  Chapters  Nos.  1,  2,  and  3 met  in  the
city  of  Baltimore,  when  a constitution  for  the  Grand  Royal  Arch
Chapter  of  the  State  of  Maryland  and  District  of  Columbia  was
adopted  and  Grand  Officers  elected.1

This  Grand  Chapter  continued  with  above  title  until  the  with-
drawal of  the  chapters  located  in  the  District  of  Columbia,  except

1 Schultz’s  “ History  of  Maryland,”  vol.  i.,  p.  325.

FIRST  VIEW  OF  JERUSALEM  BY  THE  CRUSADERS  FROM  THE  HILL  OF  EMMAUS

TUNE  10.  1099

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1519

Potomac,  No.  8,  at  Georgetown,  which  elected  to  remain  under  the
jurisdiction  of  Maryland.  This  severance  was  done  by  the  authority
of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  August  30,  1822.’

After  this  the  Grand  Chapter  of  the  District  of  Columbia  ceased
to  exist,  the  chapters  in  Washington  City  and  Alexandria  had  no
Grand  Head  until  1841,  when  steps  were  taken  to  place  the  chap-
ters in  the  District  of  Columbia  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand
Chapter  of  Maryland.1 2  This  condition  continued  until  May  7,  1867,
when  the  three  chapters  in  the  District  of  Columbia  which  were
under  tiie  jurisdiction  of  Maryland  and  District  of  Columbia,  viz. :
Columbia,  Washington,  and  Mount  Vernon,  were  duly  organized,
and  constituted  the  Grand  Chapter  of  the  District  of  Columbia.

That  this  was  regularly  and  lawfully  accomplished,  we  refer  to
the  proceedings  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  for  1865.  The  fol-
lowing was  referred  to  a committee :

“ Resolved, , That  the  Royal  Arch  Chapters  in  the  District  of
Columbia  or  any  three  of  them,  are  hereby  authorized  to  establish  a
Grand  Chapter  for  the  District  of  Columbia ; and  whenever  such
Grand  Chapter  shall  be  organized,  the  jurisdiction  now  exercised
over  the  chapters  taking  part  in  the  same,  by  the  Grand  Chapter  of
Maryland,  shall  cease.”  3 That  committee  reported  in  1868,  and  the
Grand  Chapter  of  the  District  of  Columbia  was  sustained.

Massachusetts.

The  Royal  Arch  Chapter  of  St.  Andrew’s  was  one  of  the  three
original  chapters  which  met  in  convention  in  Boston,  October  24,
1797,  and  issued  the  “ Circular,”  which  invited  the  assembling  of  a
convention  in  Hartford,  Ct.,  January  24,  1798,  “to  form  and  open
a Grand  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons,  and  to  establish  a Consti-
tution for  the  government  and  regulation  of  all  the  chapters  that
now  are  or  may  be  hereafter  erected  within  the  said  States.”  4

The  first  notice  of  conferring  the  Royal  Arch  degree  which  we
find  was  August  28,  1 769,  in  St.  Andrew’s  Chapter,  called  “ Royal
Arch  Lodge,”  under  the  sanction  of  St.  Andrew’s  Lodge  Charter,
No.  82,  under  the  Registry  of  Scotland.

From  August  12,  1769,  until  1788,  the  title  “Royal  Arch  Mas-
ter ” was  employed.

1 Proceedings  General  Grand  Chapter,  1826,  p.  77.

2 Ibid.,  1841,  p.  161  ; 1842,  p.  181.  3 Ibid.,  1865,  p.  31.  4 “ Compendium,”  p.  7.

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

1520

Michigan.

At  the  fifth  regular  meeting  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  held
September  9,  1819,  the  committee  reported  that  the  General  Grand
High-Priest  had  granted  a dispensation  to  Monroe  Chapter,  No.  i,
at  Detroit,  December  3,  1818.1

At  the  twelfth  meeting  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  a dispen-
sation was  reported  as  having  been  granted,  by  the  Dep.  General
Grand  High-Priest,  May  16,  1844,  to  St.  Joseph’s  Valley  Chapter,
No.  2,  at  Niles.2  Also  the  same  officer  reported,  at  the  thirteenth
meeting,  held  September  14,  1847,  that  a dispensation  had  been
granted  (without  date)  to  Jackson  Chapter,  No.  3,  in  Jackson.3

A Charter  was  granted  to  Monroe  Chapter,  No.  1,  September
11,  1819  ;4  and  at  the  session  of  September  14,  1847,  a Charter  was
granted  to  St.  Joseph’s  Valley,  No.  2 ;5  and  September  16,  1847,  to
Jackson  Chapter,  No.  3,®  by  vote  of  the  General  Grand  Chap-
ter. The  General  Grand  Scribe,  in  January,  1 848/ authorized  the
chapters  in  Michigan  to  meet  and  organize  a Grand  Chapter  for  the
State.

Minnesota.

The  first  notice  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry,  in  the  proceedings  of
the  General  Grand  Chapter,  we  find  at  the  fifteenth  meeting,  held
September  17,  1853,  when  the  committee  reported  that  “a  number
of  companions  at  St.  Paul,  Minn.,  have  petitioned  the  General
Grand  King  for  a dispensation,”  and  recommended  a dispensation
to  be  issued  by  the  present  Deputy  General  Grand  High-Priest.8

At  the  triennial  session,  September  11,  1856,  a Charter  was
granted.9  Dispensations  were  issued  by  the  General  Grand  High-
Priest  to  the  following  chapters  : Vermillion,  No.  2,  in  Hastings,
June  20,  1857  ; St.  Anthony  Falls,  No.  3,  in  St.  Anthony,  January
5,  1858.  On  September  14,  1859,  charters  were  granted  to  these.

A convention  was  held,  by  authority  of  Compn.  Albert  G.
Mackey,  General  Grand  High-Priest,  dated  December  1,  1859,  *n
St.  Paul.  December  17,  1859,  a constitution  was  adopted  and  the
Grand  Chapter  of  Minnesota  was  regularly  organized.

1 “ Compendium,”  p.  60.  2 Ibid.,  p.  182.  3 Ibid.,  p.  209.

4 Ibid.,  p.  60.  5 Ibid.,  p.  209.  6 Ibid.,  p.  225.  7 Ibid,,  p.  254.

8 Proceedings,  1853,  p.  320.  9 Ibid.,  1856,  p.  373.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1521

Mississippi.

At  the  sixth  meeting  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  held  Sep-
tember 14,  1826,  the  General  Grand  High-Priest  reported  having
issued  a dispensation  to  a chapter  at  Port  Gibson,  Miss.  On  the
15th,  at  the  same  meeting,  a Charter  was  granted.1

September  14,  1841,  it  was  reported  that  a dispensation  was
issued  to  Vicksburg  Chapter,  June  17,  1840;  and  a Charter  was
granted  September  17,  1841.  At  the  twelfth  session,  Septem-
ber 10,  1 844, 2 the  Deputy  General  Grand  High-Priest  reported
having  issued  dispensations  to  chapters  in  Mississippi  as  follows,
viz.  : to  Columbus  Chapter,  February  7,  1842  ; and  to  Jackson,
August  28,  1843.  The  General  Grand  High-Priest  reported  hav-
ing issued  a dispensation  to  a chapter  at  Holly  Springs,  October
30,  1 84 1. 3 At  the  thirteenth  session,  September  14,  1847,  the  Gen-
eral Deputy  Grand  High-Priest  reported  that  he  had  authorized
the  consecration  of  three  chapters  in  Mississippi  since  *he  ses-
sion of  1844,  for  which  charters  had  been  ordered  at  tha*  time,  viz. :
Columbus  Chapter,  at  Columbus ; Jackson  Chapter,  at  Jackson ;
and  Wilson  Chapter,  at  Holly  Springs.4  He  also  reported  having
issued  two  dispensations  to  organize  chapters  : Carrollton  Chapter,
No.  7,  at  Carrollton;  and  Yazoo  Chapter,  No.  8,  in  Yazoo
County.5

In  compliance  with  a petition  from  the  chapters  in  Mississippi,
the  General  Deputy  Grand  High-Priest  reported  that,  March  12,
1 846,  he  had  granted  permission  for  those  chapters  to  form  a Grand
Chapter  for  that  State  ; and  he  had  been  officially  notified  that  the
Grand  Chapter  had  been  duly  organized,  May  18,  1846.6

Missouri.

At  the  regular  meeting  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  (Septem-
ber 11,  1819)  it  was  reported  that  the  Grand  High -Priest  had
granted  a dispensation  to  form  a chapter  in  Missouri  Territory,  at
St.  Louis,  on  April  3,  18 19, 7 and  a Warrant  was  granted,  September
16,  1826, 8 at  the  sixth  meeting.

1 Proceedings  General  Grand  Chapter,  1798-185 6,  p.  89.

3 Ibid.,  p.  78.  4 Ibid.,  p.  209.

6 Ibid.,  p.  210.  7 Ibid.,  p.  56.

06

2 Ibid.,  p.  163.
5 Ibid.,  p.  209.
8 Ibid.,  p.  83.

1522

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

At  the  tenth  meeting,  September  14,  1838,  the  General  Grand
Scribe  reported  that  a dispensation  had  been  issued  for  a Charter  to
Palmyra  Chapter,  No.  21  (no  date  given).  The  committee  recom-
mended a Charter  to  be  issued  whenever  the  provisions  of  the  con-
stitution should  have  been  complied  with.  A Charter,  however,
was  not  given  by  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  but  after  the  forma-
tion of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Missouri,  it  was  given  October  16,
1847.

At  the  twelfth  meeting  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  held
September  10,  1844, 2 the  Deputy  General  Grand  High-Priest  re-
ported having  issued  dispensations  to  Liberty  Chapter,  No.  3,  at
Liberty,  February  7,  1842  ; one  to  Weston  Chapter,  No.  4,  at  Wes-
ton, January  17,  1843;  and  one  to  Booneville  Chapter,  No.  6,  at
Booneville,  March  3,  1843  ; one  to  La  Fayette  Chapter,  No.  5,  Sep-
tember 11,  1844.  Charters  were  ordered  to  all  chapters  reported
by  the  committee,  viz. : Nos.  3,  4,  5,  and  6.3

At  the  thirteenth  meeting,  held  September  14,  1847,  it  was
reported  by  the  Deputy  General  Grand  High-Priest  that  since
the  session  of  1844  he  had  issued  a dispensation  to  consecrate
Booneville  Chapter,  No.  6,  and  he  had  issued  dispensations  to
organize  St.  Louis  Chapter,  No.  8,  at  St.  Louis,  and  Hannibal
Chapter,  No.  7,  at  Hannibal,  Mo.  On  September  17,  1847,  char-
ters were  ordered  to  be  issued  to  Hannibal,  No.  7,  and  St.  Louis,
No.  8.4

The  convention  to  organize  a Grand  Chapter  for  the  State  of
Missouri  met  in  St.  Louis,  October  16,  1846,  and  the  delegates  of
Chapters  Nos.  1.  2.  5,  and  6 were  present,  and  did  organize  the
Grand  Chapter.

In  the  report  of  the  General  Grand  Secretary  of  the  General
Grand  Chapter,  at  the  thirteenth  meeting,  held  September  14,  1847.
he  states :

“ In  the  month  of  November,  1846,  I received  notice  of  the  for-
mation of  a Grand  Chapter  for  the  State  of  Missouri,  purporting  to
be  by  authority  from  the  General  Grand  Officers.  This,  however,
was  an  error;  and  on  being  informed  by  me  that  there  had  been  no
such  authority  given,  it  is  believed  no  further  proceedings  have
been  had  in  the  matter.”5

1 Proceedings  General  Grand  Chapter,  1798-1856,  p.  153.

3 Ibid.,  p.  185.  4 Ibid.,  p.  232.

2 Ibid.,  p.  181.
5 Ibid.,  p.  206.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1523

We  find  the  following  minute  in  the  proceedings  of  that  day  :

“To  the  General  Grand  Chapter:

“The  Committee  to  whom  was  referred  the  action  of  the  Grand
Chapter  of  Missouri,  have  had  the  same  under  consideration,  and
respectfully  report

“ That  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Missouri  was  formed,  as  we  think,
by  the  Chapters  thereof  in  good  faith,  believing  that  they  were  fully
authorized  to  do  so,  from  conversations  and  correspondence  with  the
Comp.  General  Grand  Secretary.  Your  Committee,  however,  be-
lieve that  this  organization  was  not  strictly  in  conformity  with  the
Constitution  of  this  General  Grand  Chapter  ; therefore,

“ Resolved , That  all  irregularities  be  removed,  and  that  said
Grand  Chapter  of  Missouri  be  fully  recognized,  and  that  its  repre-
sentatives be  invited  to  seats  in  this  General  Grand  Chapter.”1

Compn.  J.  W.  S.  Mitchell,  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Missouri,
offered  the  following :

“ Resolved , That  the  Chapters  working  by  dispensation  under
this  jurisdiction  in  Missouri  be,  and  they  are,  required  to  pay  dues  to
this  General  Grand  Chapter  up  to  the  period  when  a Grand  Chapter
was  organized  in  the  said  State  of  Missouri,  viz.  : October,  1846,”  5
which  was  adopted.

Montana.

The  organization  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Montana,  at  Helena,
June  25,  1891,  was  consummated  in  accordance  with  a call  of
the  chapters  and  a Warrant  which  had  been  issued  by  the  General
Grand  High-Priest,  Companion  David  F.  Day.

The  chapters  constituting  the  Grand  Chapter  were  :

Virginia  City,  No.  1,  at  Virginia  City,
Helena,  No.  2,  at  Helena,

Deer  Lodge,  No.  3,  at  Butte  City,
Valley,  No.  4,  at  Deer  City,

Yellow  Stone,  No.  5,  at  Miles  City,
Billings,  No.  6,  at  Billings,
Livingston,  No.  7,  at  Livingston,
Dillon,  No.  8,  at  Dillon,

Great  Falls,  No.  9,  at  Great  Falls,

Dispensation.
July  14,  1866,
December,  1867,
October  10,  1874,
July  22,  1880,
January  2,  1886,
May  6,  1886,

July  15,  1886,
January  15,  1887,
March  13,  1889,

Charter.

December  18,  1868.
December  18,  i868e
November  25,  1874
August  27,  1880,
October  1,  1886.
October  1,  1886.
October  1,  1886.
November  22,  1889
November  22,  1889,

Proceedings  General  Grand  Chapter,  1798-1856,  p.  239.

2 Ibid.,  p.  231,

1524

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Nebraska.

At  the  triennial  communication  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,
held  September  8,  1865.  the  General  Grand  King  reported  :

“On  the  2 1 st  day  of  November,  1859,  I granted  to  sundry
Companions  at  the  City  of  Omaha,  in  Nebraska  Territory,  a dis-
pensation to  form  and  open  a Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons  at
that  place,  to  be  called  Omaha  Chapter,  No.  1.”  He  also  reported
having  issued  a dispensation,  January  25,  1S60,  to  Keystone  Chap-
ter, No.  2,  at  Nebraska  City.  Also  that  on  July  13,  1864,  a dis-
pensation had  been  granted  to  Nebraska  Chapter,  No.  3,  at  Platts-
mouth.1  On  the  same  day  (September  8,  1865)  charters  were
granted  to  all  three  of  the  above  chapters.3

By  permission  of  the  Deputy  General  Grand  High-Priest  a
convention  was  held,  March  19,  1867,  and  the  Grand  Chapter  of
Nebraska  was  regularly  organized.

Nevada.

At  the  triennial  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  held  September
8,  1865,  the  General  Grand  High-Priest  reported  having  issued  a
dispensation,  in  May,  1863,  to  “ Lewis  Chapter,”  at  Carson  City,
Nevada,  which  name  was  a compliment  to  himself3  (John  L.
Lewis).  This  chapter  received  the  Charter,  dated  September  8,
1 865. 4 A dispensation  was  issued  to  Virginia  Chapter,  at  Virginia
City.6  From  the  report,  in  the  proceedings,  it  is  very  uncertain  when
the  dispensation  was  issued.  The  Charter  was  ordered  September
18,  1868.  A dispensation  was  granted  to  Austin  Chapter,  at  Aus-
tin, October,  1866,  and  a Charter,  September  18,  1868.  A dispen-
sation was  issued  to  White  Pine  Chapter,  at  Hamilton,  January  10,
1871  ; and  a Charter,  September  20,  1871. 8

A convention  of  these  four  chapters  was  held  by  authority  of
the  General  Grand  High-Priest,  November  18,  1873.

From  the  proceedings  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  for  No-
vember 21,  1874,  we  see  in  the  report  of  the  General  Grand  Secre-
tary that  a dispensation  had  been  issued  to  St.  John’s  Chapter,  at
Eureka,  April  26,  1873 ; and  also  to  Keystone  Chapter,  at  Pioche,

1 Proceedings  General  Grand  Chapter,  1865,  p.  25.  2 Ibid.,  p.  31.

3 Ibid.,  p.  23.  4 Ibid.,  p.  31.  5 Ibid.,  p.  23.  6 Ibid.,  1871,  p.  33.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1525

June  12,  1873.1  The  General  Grand  Secretary  says  : “The  Chap-
ters organized  U.\  D.\  in  Nevada,  made  returns  and  paid  dues  to
date  of  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Nevada,  of  which
they  became  components,  in  accordance  with  a custom  hitherto  ap-
proved by  the  General  Grand  Chapter.”  2

New  Hampshire.

In  the  session  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  of  the  United
States,  held  June  6,  1816,  we  find  that  the  General  Grand  King
reported  that  he  had  granted  warrants  or  charters  for  St.  Andrew’s
Chapter  at  Hanover,  January  27,  18x7;  Trinity  Chapel,  at  Hop-
kinton,  February  16,  1807;  Washington  Chapter,  in  Portsmouth,
November,  1815;  Cheshire  Chapter,  at  Keene,  May  4,  1816; 3 and
at  this  session  the  warrants  were  confirmed  June  7,  1816.4

The  Grand  Chapter  of  New  Hampshire  was  organized  on  June
io,  1819,  and  the  General  Grand  Chapter  was  duly  notified  by  John
Harris,  of  New  Hampshire,  August  21,  1819,  and  the  Grand  Chap-
ter was  recognized  by  the  General  Grand  Chapter  at  the  session
held  September  9,  1819.5  The  General  Grand  High-Priest  issued  a
Warrant  to  Union  Mark  Lodge,  No.  1,  in  Claremont,  July  3,  1818, 6
which  subsequently  passed  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand  Chap-
ter of  New  Hampshire.

New  Jersey.

The  first  official  notice  we  find  of  the  introduction  of  capitular
Masonry  in  New  Jersey,  is  in  the  proceedings  of  the  General  Grand
Chapter  for  June  6,  1816.  The  General  Grand  Scribe  had  granted
a Warrant  or  Charter  to  Washington  Chapter,  Newark,  May  26,
1813;  to  Cincinnati  Mark  Lodge,  No.  1,  Hanover,  April,  1811  ;
and  to  Union  Mark  Lodge,  No.  2,  Orange.7

At  the  triennial  meeting,  held  September  16,  1826,  the  report
of  the  General  Grand  High- Priest  stated  that  a dispensation  had
been  granted  by  him  to  Franklin  Chapter,  No.  3,  and  a Charter
was  granted.8

1 Proceedings  of  General  Grand  Chapter,  1874,  p.  41.  2 Ibid.,  p.  41.

3 There  were  no  meetings  of  General  Grand  Chapter  between  1806  and  1 8 16.

4 “ Compendium,”  fifth  meeting  of  General  Grand  Chapter  of  United  States,  p.  56.

b Ibid.,  p.  55.  6 Ibid.,  p.  60.

7 Proceedings  of  General  Grand  Chapter  for  1797  to  1856,  p.  45.  8 Ibid.,  p.  78.

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

1526

A special  committee  reported  September  10th  that  a Charter
had  been  granted  to  the  State  of  New  Jersey,  enabling  the  respec-
tive chapters  therein  to  form  and  hold  a Grand  Chapter  in  the  said
State,  by  the  Most  Excellent  General  Grand  High-Priest.1

At  the  triennial  session,  September  10,  1819,  a communication
from  a Companion  from  the  State  of  New  Jersey  on  the  subject
of  forming  a Grand  Chapter  being  referred  to  a committee,  they
reported,  that  it  appears  that  there  are  two  chapters  in  the  State  of
New  Jersey  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,
and  one  under  the  authority  of  the  State  of  Pennsylvania,  which
does  not  acknowledge  the  jurisdiction  of  the  General  Grand  Chap-
ter. The  committee  were  of  the  opinion  that  a Grand  Chapter
could  not  be  formed  until  there  were  three  chapters  acknowledging
the  jurisdiction  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  which  was  accepted
by  that  body.2

A dispensation  was  granted,  September  23,  1854,  to  Enterprise
Chapter,  No.  2,  at  Jersey  City,3  and  which  was  reported  at  the  trien-
nial meeting,  September  9,  1856,  and  February  23,  1856,  a dispensa-
tion was  issued  by  the  General  Grand  High-Priest  to  Boudinot  Chap-
ter, No.  5,  at  Burlington.

It  was  reported  by  the  committee  :

“ Union  Chapter,  No.  1,  Newark,  is  the  only  regularly  Char-
tered Chapter  now  immediately  subordinate  to  this  General  Grand
Chapter.4  The  following  chapters  have  been  working  under  dis-
pensations from  the  General  Grand  Officers  from  the  dates  of  their
dispensations  to  this  time,  viz.  : Enterprise,  No.  2,  Jersey  City  ; and
Boudinot,  No.  5,  Burlington.5  Hiram  Chapter,  No.  4,  Eatontown,
having  been  recognized  by  the  General  Grand  High-Priest  as  here-
tofore stated,  now  stands  a regular  subordinate  on  the  register  of
this  General  Grand  Chapter.”6

We  find  nothing  said  subsequently  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of
New  Jersey.  A resolution  was  adopted  in  the  General  Grand
Chapter  at  its  session,  September  17,  1841,  that  Hiram  Chapter  at
Trenton  be  advised  to  place  itself  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the
Grand  Chapter  of  the  State  of  New  York,  and  that  said  Grand
Chapter  be  advised  to  legalize  the  proceedings  of  Hiram  Chapter
subsequent  to  the  dissolution  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  New  Jersey.'

1 Proceedings  of  General  Grand  Chapter,  1797-1856,  pp.  77,82.  * Ibid.,  p.  54.

3 Ibid.,  p.  364.  4 Ibid.,  p.  365.  5 Ibid.,  p.  365.  6 Ibid.,  d.  365.  7 Ibid.,  p.  168.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1527

The  Deputy  General  Grand  High-Priest  issued  a dispensation
to  Union  Chapter,  No.  1,  for  Newark,  March  13,  1848,  and  re-
ported the  same  at  the  triennial  held  September  10,  1850,  and  also  to
Newark  Chapter,  No.  2,  March  20,  1848  j1  both  of  these  had  charters
granted  September  12,  1850.2

The  General  Grand  Secretary  reported  at  the  session  held  Sep-
tember 13,  1853,  viz.  : “On  the  23d  of  december  I received  from
the  Deputy  General  Grand  High-Priest  a letter  from  the  High-
Priest  of  Newark  Chapter,  stating  the  loss  of  the  Charter  of  said
Chapter ; which  letter  was  endorsed  by  Comp.  Stapleton,  advis-
ing the  issuing  of  a dispensation  enabling  the  Chapter  to  con-
tinue its  work  ; which  dispensation  was  issued  by  the  General  Grand
High-Priest.”3

It  appears,  however,  that  subsequently,  September  17,  1853,
Newark,  No.  2 was  merged  into  Union  Chapter.

The  peculiar  condition  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry  in  New  Jersey
continued  for  some  considerable  length  of  time,  and  was  not  satis-
factorily settled  until  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Chapter,  Feb-
ruary 13,  1857.

Hiram  Chapter,  which,  as  above  shown,  was  transferred  to  the
jurisdiction  of  New  York  Grand  Chapter,  by  the  resolution  of  the
General  Grand  Chapter,  September  17,  1841,  again  desired  to  be
under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  ; and  in  July,
1853,  requested  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  New  York  to  be  trans-
ferred thereto.  At  the  triennial  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  the
report  of  the  General  Grand  Secretary  shows  : “ Upon  examining
the  papers  which  came  into  my  possession  at  our  last  triennial  meet-
ing, after  the  adjournment,  I found  among  them  a petition  from
the  officers  and  members  of  Hiram  Chapter,  No.  4,  Eatontown,
New  Jersey,  directed  to  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  dated  Feb-
ruary 3,  1852,  setting  forth  that,  that  Chapter  was,  many  years
before,  chartered  by  the  Grand  Chapter  of  New  Jersey,  and  con-
tinued to  work  under  said  Charter,  so  long  as  that  Grand  Chapter
was  in  existence.  That  it  was  then  ‘ taken  under  the  fostering  care
of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  New  York,  to  which  it  had  ever  since
been  subservient,’  and  praying  to  be  acknowledged  and  registered
as  one  of  the  subordinates  of  this  General  Grand  Chapter.  To  the

Proceedings  of  General  Grand  Chapter,  1797-1856,  p.  250.
%i  Ibid.,  p.  257.  6 Ibid.,  p.  293.

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

{528

petition  was  appended  full  power  from  the  Grand  Chapter  of
New  York  to  the  petitioner  10  transfer  their  allegiance  from  the
Grand  Chapter  of  New  York  to  this  General  Grand  Chapter.  That
petition  seems,  from  the  endorsement  upon  it,  in  the  hand  writ-
ing of  Compn.  Swigert,  who  acted  as  my  assistant,  to  have  been
referred  to  the  Committee  on  Chapters  and  Dispensations.  It  is
not  mentioned  in  the  proceedings.”1  A correspondence  ensued
between  the  High-Priest  of  Hiram  Chapter  and  the  General  Grand
High-Priest  Hon.  R.  P.  Dunlap,  who  finally  directed  the  General
Grand  Secretary  to  register  Hiram  Chapter  on  the  roll  of  chapters
subordinate  to  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  which  was  done  No-
vember 14,  1854,  and  the  High-Priest  George  Finch  was  duly  noti-
fied thereof,  and  thereafter  the  returns  were  regularly  made  as  a
subordinate  chapter  to  the  General  Grand  Body.2  A Charter  was
ordered  for  Hiram  Chapter,  September  11,  1856. 3

The  following  chapters  applied  to  the  General  Grand  High-
Priest  for  his  consent  to  organize  a Grand  Chapter,  viz.  : Newark
Chapter,  No.  2 ; Hiram  Chapter,  No.  4,  and  Boudinot  Chapter,
No.  5.  This  approval  was  dated  January  24,  1857,  and  the  Grand
Chapter  was  regularly  organized  February  13,  1857.

New  York.

It  is  very  well  settled  that  the  Royal  Arch  degree  was  conferred
in  that  jurisdiction  under  lodge  charters,  as  it  was  elsewhere  in  the
colonies,  and  prior  to  the  formation  of  the  Grand  Chapter  for  the
New  England  States  and  New  York  in  1798.

A Warrant  was  issued  by  the  Duke  of  Athol,  September  5)
1781,  making  Rev.  William  Walter  the  Provincial  Grand  Master,
authorizing  him  to  form  a Provincial  Grand  Lodge  in  the  city  of
New  York.  The  first  meeting  of  this  provincial  body  was  held
December  5,  1782.  At  that  date  nine  lodges  existed  in  the  city,
and  there  were  six  military  lodges  of  the  British  Army.  It  is  sup-
posed by  some  writers,  and  probably  it  was  correct,  that  Washington
Chapter,  of  New  York,  styled  the  “ Mother  Chapter,”  originated
in  the  above-mentioned  Provincial  Grand  Lodge.  The  early  records
of  Washington  Chapter  were  destroyed  by  fire  in  New  York,  con-

1 Proceedings  of  General  Grand  Chapter  for  1797  to  1856,  p.  361.

2 Ibid.,  1856,  p.  361.  3 Ibid.,  1856,  p.  373.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1529

sequently  its  origin  is  unknown.  It,  however,  granted  warrants
for  other  chapters  through  a number  of  years,  Hiram  Chapter  in
Newtown,  Ct..  dated  April  29,  1791,  being  the  first  one  now
known.

The  following  chapters  assembled  in  convention  in  Albany,
March  14,  1798,  and  organized  and  established  a Deputy  Grand
Chapter  subordinate  to  the  Grand  Chapter  of  the  Northern  States
for  the  State  of  New  York,  viz.  : Hudson,  of  Hudson,  instituted  in
1796;  Temple,  of  Albany,  instituted  February  14,  1799;  Horeb,
of  Whitestown  ; Hibernian,  of  New  York  City;  and  Montgomery,
of  Stillwater  ; dates  of  these  three  not  known.  Comp.  Thomas
Frothingham  was  elected  Chairman  and  Comp.  Sebastian  Vischer,
Secretary.  The  constitution  was  read  by  Compn.  Thomas  Smith
Webb,  and  Compn.  De  Witt  Clinton  was  elected  Deputy  Grand
High-Priest ; John  Hammer,  Dep.  Grand  Secretary.

From  the  first,  warrants  were  issued  to  organize  Mark  lodges
and  chapters,  and  prosperity  attended  the  Royal  Craft.  Thirty-three
chapters  and  three  Mark  lodges  were  represented  in  the  Grand  Chap-
ter in  1820.  The  chapters  increased  to  fifty-three  in  1829,  and  sixty-
one  were  represented  in  1853  ; while  in  1839  and  1840,  following  the
Morgan  affair,  about  thirteen  only  were  reported.

As  New  York  is  the  most  populous  State  in  the  Union,  so  also
does  Masonry  take  the  lead  as  to  numbers  in  all  the  branches  in
Masonry.

The  General  Grand  Chapter  met  in  the  city  of  New  York  in
1816, 18x9, 1826, 1829,  and  1841.  De  Witt  Clinton  served  as  General
Grand  High-Priest  from  1816  to  1826;  Edward  Livingston,  1829
to  1835  ; John  L.  Lewis  in  1865,  and  James  M.  Austin  in  1868.

At  the  meeting  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  the  Northern  States,
held  January  10,  1799,  Section  1 of  Article  I.  of  the  Constitution
was  changed,  and  that  body  assumed  the  title  of  General  Grand
Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons  for  the  six  Northern  States  of
America  enumerated  in  the  preamble.1  The  State  organizations
were,  by  Article  II.,  Section  1,  required  to  drop  the  prefix  “Dep-
uty,” and  were  designated  as  “ Grand  Chapters.”

1 Proceedings  of  General  Grand  Chapter,  1797  to  1856,  p.  19,  and  at  p.  10  at  session,
January  26,  1798.  The  six  are  enumerated  in  the  preamble  and  New  York  is  also  added.

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

1530

North  Carolina.

At  the  thirteenth  meeting  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  of  the
United  States,  held  September  14,  1847,  in  the  city  of  Columbia
O.,  we  find  the  following  report  of  the  General  Grand  Secretary,
viz.  :

“ In  the  State  of  North  Carolina  there  is  no  Grand  Chapter.
The  time  was  when  such  an  institution  existed  there  as  a constitu-
ent of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  ; but  it  is  believed  that  it  ceased
to  exist  about  twenty  years  ago.  There  are  said  to  be  Chapters  at
Halifax,  Tarborough,  Fayetteville,  and  Wilmington  ; but  they  are
not  in  correspondence  with  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  although
some  of  them,  if  not  all,  were  instituted  under  its  immediate  juris-
diction.”

"Note. — Since  the  foregoing  was  written  I have  received  a
printed  copy  of  the  Minutes  of  a Convention  of  delegates  from  the
several  chapters,  by  which  it  appears  a Grand  Chapter  has  been  re-
organized for  the  State  of  North  Carolina.  Whether  this  organiza-
tion be  in  strict  compliance  with  the  Constitution  or  not,  there  can
be  no  doubt  it  was  the  intention  of  the  chapters  so  to  do,  as  the
whole  proceeding  seems  to  be  with  a view  of  regaining  their  former
position  in  the  Confederation.”

We  have  carefully  referred  to  the  proceedings  of  the  General
Grand  Chapter,  from  the  thirteenth  meeting  in  1847  back  to  the
commencement  of  1797,  and  find  that  the  first  notice  of  a chapter
in  North  Carolina  was  at  the  fourth  meeting,  June  6,  1816,  being  a
special  in  consequence  of  a lapse  in  1813,  reported  when  a Charter
was  to  have  been  issued  to  Concord  Chapter,  at  Wilmington,  May
4,  1815,  by  the  General  Grand  King.  He  had  also  issued  a Char-
ter to  Phoenix  Chapter,  at  Fayetteville,  September  1,  1 8 1 5.1

We  found  also  that  at  the  sixth  meeting,  held  September  14,
1826,®  the  Deputy  General  Grand  High-Priest,  Compn.  Fowle,  had
granted  a Warrant  to  Wadesborough  Chapter,  at  W^idesborough,  in
1822  (no  date  given).  At  this  meeting  there  was  no  delegate  pres-
ent from  North  Carolina.  When  the  “ Memorial  ” of  the  Grand
Chapter  of  Kentucky  was  presented  to  the  General  Grand  Chapter

1 “ Compendium,”  p.  46.

2 Ibid.;  p.  72.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1 53 [

at  its  sixth  meeting,  September  14,  1826,  asking  for  a dissolution  of
the  latter  body,  it  was  referred  to  a committee,  and  at  the  same
meeting  the  committee  reported  the  answers  of  all  the  Grand  Chap-
ters, and  North  Carolina  is  stated  as  concurring  with  the  Kentucky
Grand  Chapter’s  resolution.1  At  the  meeting  of  the  General  Grand
Chapter  (September  14,  1847)  above  referred  to,  the  matter  con-
cerning a Grand  Chapter  in  North  Carolina  being  referred  to  a
committee,  the  following  report  was  made  :

“ That  they  have  had  the  same  under  consideration  and  find
their  proceedings  to  be  regular.  They  assembled  as  appears  by
their  printed  proceedings,  on  the  28th  of  June,  1847  ; three  chapters
were  represented  ; they  proceeded  to  elect  Officers  and  adopt  a
Constitution  ; in  which,  however,  your  committee  would  remark
there  appear  to  be  several  unconstitutional  articles  or  sections,  and
we  would  respectfully  recommend  that  the  Grand  Chapter  of
North  Carolina  be  recognized  as  a legal  Grand  Chapter  on  their
altering  and  amending  their  constitution  to  conform  to  that  of
this  General  Grand  Chapter  in  the  following  particulars  noted  by
your  committee2  (omitted).  Which  recommendation  was  adopted.”
So  that  the  Grand  Chapter  of  North  Carolina  was  legally  author-
ized September  16,  1847.

At  the  fourteenth  triennial  session,  September  15,  1850,  Com-
panion L.  L.  Stephenson  was  present  as  proxy  for  the  Grand  High-
Priest.3

North  Dakota.

After  the  chapters  located  in  South  Dakota,  by  consent  of  the
Grand  Chapter  of  Dakota,  on  January  6,  1890,  had  organized  their
Grand  Chapter,  on  January  9th  following,  the  representatives  of
Missouri,  No.  6,  at  Bismarck;  Casselton,  No.  7,  at  Casselton ;
Cheyenne,  No.  9,  at  Valley  City;  Keystone,  No.  11,  at  Fargo;
Jamestown,  No.  13,  at  Jamestown  ; Lisbon,  No.  29,  at  Lisbon,
met  in  convention,  and  were  constituted,  by  Companion  Theodore
S.  Parvin,  by  authority  of  a dispensation  from  the  General  Grand
High-Priest,  Noble  D.  Lamer,  and  the  Grand  Chapter  of  North
Dakota  was  organized  in  ample  form  with  the  following  constitu-
ent chapters:  Missouri,  No.  1,  at  Bismarck;  Casselton,  No.  2,  at

1“  Compendium,”  p.  70.

2 Ibid.,  p.  155.

Ibid.,  p.  175.

1532

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Casselton  ; Corinthian,  No.  3,  at  Grand  Forks;  Cheyenne,  No.  4
at  Valley  City;  Keystone,  No.  5,  at  Fargo  ; Jamestown,  No.  6,  at
Jamestown  ; Lisbon,  No.  7,  at  Lisbon.

The  first  annual  convocation  was  held  at  Grand  Forks,  June  18,
1890.  The  membership  reported  of  the  seven  chapters  was  three
hundred  and  fifty-five.

Ohio.

The  very  first  notice  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry  in  Ohio  is  found
in  the  proceedings  of  the  fourth  meeting  of  the  General  Grand
Chapter,  held  June  6,  1816,  where  it  is  reported  that  the  General
Grand  Scribe  had  granted  a Warrant  or  dispensation  to  Washington
Chapter  at  Chillicothe,  O.,  September  20,  1 8 1 5,1  which  was  con-
firmed on  June  7,  i8i6.s  The  Committee  on  Examination  of  Cre-
dentials reported  :

“ On  examination  it  appears  that  American  Union  Chapter,  of
Marietta,  originated  in  the  year  1792  ; that  Cincinnati  Chapter  ex-
isted prior  to  the  27th  of  January,  1798;  that  Horeb  Chapter  had
authority  from  the  Deputy  Grand  High-Priest  of  the  State  of
Maryland  and  District  of  Columbia  dated  8th  March,  1815,  which
Grand  Chapter  is  in  connection  with  the  General  Grand  Chapter  of
the  United  States.”3

Cincinnati  Chapter  started  the  effort  to  form  a Grand  Chapter
by  sending  an  invitation  to  the  other  chapters  to  meet  at  Worth-
ington, October  21,  1816;  and  on  the  24th  of  that  month  the
Grand  Chapter  was  regularly  organized.  The  chapters  constituting
the  Grand  Chapter  were  : American  Union,  No.  1 ; Cincinnati,
No.  2 ; Horeb,  No.  3 ; Washington,  No.  4.

At  the  fifth  meeting  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  held  Sep-
tember 9,  1819,  it  was  “ Voted, , That  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Ohio  be
now  received  into  the  Union  of  the  State  Grand  Chapters,  under
the  jurisdiction  of  this  General  Grand  Chapter.”4

Proceedings  of  General  Grand  Chapter,  1797-1856,  p.  45.  2 Ibid.,  p.  45.

3 “ History  of  Masonry  and  Concordant  Orders,”  p.  626.  The  above  quotation  is
taken  from  the  history  of  the  “ Capitular  degrees,”  by  Comp.  Alfred  F.  Chapman,  who
stated  : **  On  the  second  day  of  the  Meeting  a Committee  was  appointed  to  examine  the
Credentials  and  reported  as  follows  : ” viz.,  the  above  quotation.

4 Proceedings  of  General  Grand  Chapter,  1797-1856,  p.  52.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1533

Pennsylvania.

Grand  H.  R.  A.  Chapter. — The  first  chapter  of  R.  A.  Masons
formed  in  Pennsylvania  was  that  working  under  the  Warrant  of
Lodge  No.  3,  and  its  date  was  anterior  to  1758.  From  that  period
until  the  fall  of  the  year  1795  all  Royal  Arch  chapters  were  at-
tached to  subordinate  lodges  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand
Lodge.  At  an  Extra  Grand  Lodge  of  the  Commonwealth  ot
Pennsylvania,  held  November  17,  1795,  “A  letter  was  received  and
read,  signed  by  Brother  Matthias  Sadler,  as  Grand  High-Priest  of  a
Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter,  by  him  said  to  be  established  under  the
several  warrants  of  Lodges  No.  19,  52,  and  67,  held  in  the  city  of
Philadelphia,  and,  on  motion,  the  Grand  Lodge  considering  such
action  irregular,  suspended  the  warrants  of  the  three  lodges  named
until  the  next  Grand  Communication.  At  an  adjourned  meeting
of  the  Grand  Lodge  held  November  23,  1795,  the  committee  ap-
pointed on  the  17th  of  same  month  to  take  into  consideration  the
action  of  Lodge  52,  etc.,  reported  fully  on  the  matter  and  offered
the  following  resolutions,  which  were  adopted  :

“ 4 Whereas , The  supreme  Masonic  jurisdiction  over  all  Lodges
of  Ancient  York  Masons,  held  in  Pennsylvania,  has  uniformly  been
and  is  duly  and  legally  vested  in  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania ;

“ 4 And  whereas , The  number  of  Royal  Arch  Masons  is  greatly
increased,  insomuch  that  other  Chapters  are  established  in  this  city
and  in  other  parts  of  Pennsylvania ;

4 4 4 And  whereas . It  was  always  contemplated  that  such  Chapters,
regularly  held,  should  be  under  the  protection  of  this  Grand  Lodge ;

4 4 4 And  whereas.  It  is  the  prevailing  wish  of  the  Royal  Arch
Masons  within  this  jurisdiction  that  a Royal  Arch  Grand  Chapter
should  be  opened  under  the  authority  of  this  Grand  Lodge.  Be
it  therefore,  and  it  is  hereby  resolved,  that  a Grand  Royal  Arch
Chapter  be  opened  under  the  immediate  sanction  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Pennsylvania.’  ”

At  a meeting  or  tne  Grand  Lodge,  held  March  5,  1798,  44  Rules
and  Regulations  for  the  government  of  the  Grand  Holy  Royal  Arch
Chapter,  held  under  the  protection  of,  and  supported  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Pennsylvania,  unanimously  agreed  to  and  established  a
Grand  Chapter,  held  in  Philadelphia,  February  24,  1798,”  were  con-
firmed.

1534

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

In  the  declaration,  preceding  these  rules  and  regulations,  was  the
following  :

“ Ancient  Masonry  consists  of  four  degrees,  the  three  first  oi
which  are  that  of  the  Apprentice,  the  Fellow  Craft,  and  the  sublime
degree  of  Master ; and  a brother  being  well  versed  in  these  degrees,
and  having  discharged  the  offices  of  his  lodge,  particularly  that  of
Master,  and  fulfilled  the  duties  thereof  with  the  approbation  of  the
brethren  of  his  lodge,  is  eligible,  on  due  trial  and  examination  by
the  Chiefs  of  the  Chapter  to  whom  he  shall  have  applied,  and  by
them  found  worthy  of  being  admitted  to  the  fourth  degree,  The
Holy  Royal  Arch.”

The  first  of  the  rules  declared  :

“That  no  Chapter  of  Holy  Royal  Arch  shall  be  held  or  con-
vened within  the  commonwealth  of  Pennsylvania  or  Masonic  juris-
diction thereunto  belonging,  but  under  the  authority  and  sanction
of  a regular  subsisting  warrant  granted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  accord-
ing to  the  old  institutions,  and  by  the  consent  of  said  lodge  first  sig-
nified to  the  Grand  Chapter.”

Subsequently  the  degrees  of  Mark  Master  and  Most  Excellent
Master  were  permitted  to  be  conferred  (so  as  to  enable  Compan-
ions of  Pennsylvania  to  enter  chapters  in  other  States),  but  the  con
ferring  of  them  was  not  to  be  considered  as  a recognition  of  them
as  degrees  of  Ancient  York  Masonry.

This  state  of  affairs  continued  until  May  17,  1824,  when  the  de-
pendent Grand  Chapter  to  the  Grand  Lodge  was  closed  sine  die.
and  on  the  same  day,  “ At  a meeting  of  the  Companions  of  the
Holy  Royal  Arch,  convened  at  the  Masonic  Hall,”  it  was  “ Re-
solved, That  the  Companions  now  present  do  organize  themselves
into  a Gran^  Holy  Royal  Arch  Chapter,”  and  on  the  24th  of  the
same  month  officers  were  elected,  Companion  Michael  Nisbet  be-
ing the  first  Grand  High-Priest  of  the  Independent  Grand  Chapter,
and  which  now  controls  all  the  degrees  of  its  sister  Grand  Chapters,
with  the  exception  of  that  of  Past  Master,  which  the  Grand  Lodge
still  controls.

The  Grand  Chapter  of  Pennsylvania  is  not  a constituent  of  the
General  Grand  Chapter  of  the  United  States,

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

*535

Rhode  Island.

Washington  Chapter,.  “ Mother,”  of  New  York,  gave  a Charter
to  Providence  Royal  Arch  Chapter,  September  3,  1 793,  and  was
with  the  other  chapters  in  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Chapter
of  Rhode  Island,  March  12,  1798.  This  Grand  Chapter  took  part
in  the  organization  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter1  and  continued
therewith  until  the  war  period  (1861-65),  and  as  the  General  Grand
Chapter’s  sessions  were  thereby  interrupted,  this  Grand  Chapter,  as
well  as  some  others,  held  that  in  consequence  of  the  non-attendance
at  the  regular  sessions,  the  General  Grand  Chapter  had  been  dis-
solved, and  the  Grand  Body  remained  out  of  the  Union  until  the
session  held  October  12,  1897,  when  she  again  sent  her  representa-
tives and  rejoined  the  Union.

This  action  was  resolved  upon  at  the  ninety-ninth  annual  convo-
cation of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Rhode  Island,  held  March  9,  1897.2

South  Carolina.

A Warrant  was  granted  by  the  Grand  Chapter  of  New  York,
February  1,  1803,  to  Carolina  Chapter,  in  Charleston.3  At  the
third  regular  meeting  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  January  9,
1806,  the  General  Grand  Officers  reported  having  granted  a War-
rant for  a chapter  at  Beaufort,  S.  C.,  by  the  name  of  Unity  Chap-
ter, which  was  then  confirmed.4  The  dispensation  for  this  chapter
had  been  issued  March  1,  1805.

In  consequence  of  the  war  with  Great  Britain  there  was  no
meeting  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  until  1816,  which  was  the
fourth,  being  a special.  At  the  meeting  of  1806  a petition  for  a chap-
ter in  Charleston,  by  Bryan  Sweeny  and  others,  was  presented  and
refused,  because  it  was  not  recommended  by  any  adjacent  chapter.6

The  Grand  Chapter  for  the  State  of  South  Carolina  was  insti-
tuted May  29,  1812.  We  can  not  find  any  reference  to  the  organ-
ization of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  South  Carolina  in  the  proceedings
of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  ; but  at  the  fourth  meeting,  held

1 ‘‘Compendium  of  Proceedings  General  Grand  Chapter  of  United  States,”  p.  8.

2 Proceedings  General  Grand  Chapter,  1897,  p.  29.

3 Proceedings  Grand  Chapter  of  New  York  in  “ History  of  Masonry  and  Concordant
Orders,”  p.  629.

4 Proceedings  General  Grand  Chapter,  1806,  p.  30.  5 Ibid.,  p.  31.

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

1536

June  6,  1816,  Thos.  Smith  Webb  is  reported  as  proxy  for  Wm.
Young,  the  Grand  High-Priest,  and  Foster  Burnet  as  proxy  for
Benj.  Phillips,  Grand  Scribe  ; therefore,  that  Grand  Chapter  was
duly  recognized  as  a constituent  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter.
We  must  presume  that  during  the  war  period,  as  was  reported  to
the  General  Grand  Chapter,  “ the  situation  of  the  country  was  such
at  that  time  as  to  render  it  highly  inconvenient  for  the  General
Grand  Chapter  to  convene.”1  This  Grand  Chapter  was  also  repre-
sented at  the  meetings  held  in  1826  and  1829,  and  not  again  until
1844,  and  then  not  until  1859.

During  the  years  1861  to  1865  that  Grand  Chapter  refused  to
withdraw  its  allegiance:  “And,  by  a resolution  adopted  in  1861,
the  oaths  of  office  and  of  initiation  have  included  allegiance  to  the
General  Grand  Chapter,”  was  stated  with  pride,  in  the  sessions  of
1862-65  by  Albert  G.  Mackey,  General  Grand  High-Priest  and  Past
Grand  High-Priest  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  South  Carolina.2

South  Dakota.

When  it  was  decided  by  the  chapters  of  Dakota  Grand  Chap-
ter to  organize  two  Grand  Chapters,  viz.,  for  North  and  South
Dakota,  a convention  was  held  by  all  the  chapters  located  in  South
Dakota.

There  were  present  the  representatives  of  the  following  chap-
ters, viz. : Yankton,  No.  1,  at  Yankton  ; Aberdeen,  No.  14,  at
Aberdeen  ; Mitchell,  No.  16,  at  Mitchell ; Brookings,  No.  18,  ai
Brookings;  Orient,  No.  19,  at  Flandreau ; Rabboni,  No.  23,  at
Webster.  Companion  Theodore  S.  Parvin  was  present,  and  by
authority  of  a dispensation  issued  to  him.  as  Deputy,  by  General
Grand  High-Priest  Noble  D.  Larner,  which  was  confirmed  by  the
then  General  Grand  High-Priest  David  F.  Day,  he  constituted  the
Grand  Chapter  of  South  Dakota  in  ample  form.

Tennessee.

March  2,  1818,  the  General  Grand  High-Priest  issued  a dispen-
sation to  Cumberland  Chapter,  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,3  which  received
a Charter  at  the  session  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  September
11,  1819.4

1 Proceedings  General  Grand  Chapter,  1 8 1 6,  p.  41.

2 Ibid.,  1865,  p.  1 1.  3 Ibid.,  1819,  p.  60.

4 Ibid.,  p.  60.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1537

At  the  meeting  held  September  15,  1826,  it  was  reported  that
dispensations  had  been  issued  to  the  following  chapters,  viz.  •
Franklin  Chapter,  at  Franklin,  March  25,  1S24  ; Clarksville  Chap-
ter, at  Clarksville,  December  11,  1824;  LaFayette,  at  Columbia,
January  5,  1825.  At  the  same  session  charters  were  ordered  to  be
issued.1  At  the  session  September  16,  1826,  the  Grand  Chapter  of
Tennessee  was  regularly  recognized  as  having  been  duly  organized
and  constituted,2  and  became  a constituent  of  the  General  Grand
Chapter.

Texas.

At  the  meeting  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  held  December
8,  1835,  an  application  was  made  by  Comps.  Samuel  M.  Williams,
James  H.  C.  Miller,  and  others  associated  with  them,  for  a Charter
to  constitute  a chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons  in  Texas.3  The
committee,  to  whom  this  was  referred,  recommended,  December
9th,  that  a Warrant  or  Charter  be  issued  to  them  by  the  name  of
San  Filipe  de  Austin,  Royal  Arch  Chapter,  No.  i.4

At  the  meeting  held  in  1850,  Austin  Chapter,  No.  6,  petitioned
to  have  the  name  changed  to  Lone  Star,  No.  6.

At  the  meeting  of  General  Grand  Chapter,  September  14,  1850,
the  following  chapters  received  charters,  the  General  Grand  King
having  reported  that  dispensations  had  been  issued  to  them  by  him,
viz. :

Name.

Dispensation  Issued.

Charter  Granted.

Place.

Washington  Chapter,  No.  2.

May  5,  1848

September  12,  1850  . . .
Dispensation  continued

Houston.

Jerusalem  Chapter,  No.  3...

March  10,  1849. . .

Anderson.

Trinity  Chapter,  No.  4

March  14,  1848. . .
April  14,  1849

Dispensation  continued

Crockett.

Brenham  Chapter,  No.  5

Austin  )

September  12,  1850  . . .

Brenham.

changed  to  V Chapter,  No.  6.
Lone  Star  )

San  Jacinto  Chapter,  No.  7. .
Washington  )

April  14,  1849

September  12,  1850  . . .

Austin.

January  22,  1850. .

Dispensation  continued

Huntsville.

changed  to  >•  Chapter,  No. 8.
Brazos  j

Rising  Star  Chapter,  No.  9. .

No  date,  1850

September  13,  1850  . . .

Washington.

February,  1850. . . .

September  14,  1850  . . .

San  Augustine.5

Those  chapters  in  the  above  table  having  their  dispensations
continued  were  recommended  and  authorized  to  surrender  them,

1 Proceedings  General  Grand  Chapter,  1826,  p.  78.

2 Ibid.,  p.  82.  3 Ibid.,  1835,  p.  129.

4 Ibid.,  p.  133.  5 Ibid.,  1850,  pp.  252,  257,  258,  268,  2720

97

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

153*5

and  receive  charters  from  the  Grand  Chapter  of  that  State,  if  one
be  organized  previous  to  the  next  meeting  of  the  General  Grand
Chapter.

“The  First  Grand  Chapter  of  the  Republic  of  Texas  was
formed  by  a convention  of  Royal  Arch  Masons,  delegates  from
San  Filipe  de  Austin  Chapter,  of  Galveston  ; Cyrus  Chapter,  of
Matagorda ; Lone  Star  Chapter,  of  Austin,  and  Rising  Star  Chap-
ter, of  San  Augustine.  The  Convention  met  in  the  city  of  Austin
on  the  14th  of  December,  1841.”1 *

The  Grand  Chapter  was  organized  and  the  constitution  adopted.
San  Filipe  de  Austin  Chapter  declined  to  sign  the  constitution
and  withdrew  from  the  convention.  The  constitution  was  adopted
and  ratified  on  December  21,  1841.  It  was  signed  by  B.  Gillespie,
Grand  High-Priest,  and  attested  by  H.  W.  Raglin,  Grand  Secre-
tary. Compn.  George  Lopas,  the  Grand  Secretary  of  the  Grand
Chapter  of  Texas,  in  1895,  was  instructed  to  prepare  a reprint  of
the  proceedings  of  the  Grand  Chapter,  which  he  accomplished,  and
the  valuable  results  of  his  labors  appear  in  two  beautiful  volumes,
from  which  we  are  enabled  to  gain  all  the  information  as  to  the
condition  of  capitular  Masonry  in  the  State  of  Texas.

It  is  probable  that  no  convocation  was  held  in  1842.  The
proceedings  of  1844  to  1849  included,  as  also  the  original  consti-
tution, were  printed  and  given  verbatim  in  the  reprint.  The  Grand
Chapter  met  in  1 848,  but  the  proceedings  were  not  printed.

When,  “for  the  sake  of  peace  and  harmony  among  the  Craft,”
this  Grand  Chapter  was  dissolved,  there  were  nine  chapters,  viz. :
Cyrus,  No.  1,  at  Matagorda;  Lone  Star,  No.  3,  at  Austin  ; Rising
Star,  No.  4,  at  San  Augustine  ; Washington,  No.  5,  at  Washington  ;
De  Witt  Clinton,  No.  6,  at  Clarksville;  Jerusalem,  No.  7,  at  Alta
Mira  (I'anthorp’s)  ; Houston,  No.  8,  at  Houston  ; Brenham,  No.  12,
at  Brenham,  and  Trinity,  No.  13,  at  Crockett.  The  compiler,
Compn.  Lopas,  was  unable  to  account  for  the  missing  Nos.  2,  9,  10,
1 1,  and  was  unable  to  learn  of  their  names  or  locations.8

The  chapter  San  Filipe  de  Austin,  No.  1,  to  be  located  at  San
Filipe  de  Austin,  in  consequence  of  unforeseen  events  was  never
opened  at  that  place,  but  was  opened  at  Galveston,  June  2,  1840,
four  years  and  a half  later.  This  was  reported  to  the  General  Grand

1 “ Historical  Sketch,”  by  George  Lopas,  Grand  Secretary,  1897,  p.  3.

’ ’bid.,  p.  \

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1539

Chapter  in  1844,  and,  on  September  12th.  by  a resolution  adopted,
the  removal  was  approved.1

A certain  Scotchman,  Dugald  McFarlane,  organized  a chapter
in  Matagorda,  in  1837,  and  named  it  Cyrus  Chapter,  having  neither
Warrant  or  Charter.  Doubts  having  arisen  as  to  its  legality,  in
1841,  they  petitioned  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  Republic  of  Texas
for  a dispensation  to  open  a chapter.  A dispensation  was  issued
to  them  December  10,  1841.  At  the  same  time  dispensations  were
also  issued  to  Rising  Star  Chapter,  at  San  Augustine,  and  Lone
Star  Chapter,  at  Austin.2

After  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Chapter  they  addressed  a
memorial  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Texas,  and  after  setting  forth  cer-
tain reasons  therefor,  respectfully  asked  the  Grand  Lodge  “to  re-
linquish and  surrender  all  jurisdiction  and  control  over  the  Royal
Arch  Chapters  and  Royal  Arch  Masons  in  the  Republic  of  Texas
upon  the  surrender  of  the  dispensations  heretofore  granted  by  your
worshipful  body.” 3

This  was  granted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Texas.

All  the  irregularities  of  these  chapters  in  Texas  in  the  early
years  were  respectively  cured  by  the  action  of  the  General  Grand
Chapter  in  the  one  case  of  San  Filipe  de  Austin  Chapter,  and  the
Grand  Lodge  of  the  Republic  of  Texas  as  to  the  other  chapters.

The  General  Grand  Chapter,  however,  did  not  recognize  the
Grand  Chapter  of  Texas  as  having  been  regularly  constituted,  as
they  had  not  asked  permission  to  organize  from  that  body,  and  the
General  Grand  Chapter  decided  to  suppress  it  by  mild  means.  In
1847  they  passed  a resolution  forbidding  Royal  Arch  Masons  under
that  jurisdiction  from  holding  Masonic  intercourse  with  the  Grand
Chapter  of  Texas,  its  subordinates,  and  those  acknowledging  its
authority.

“ At  the  formation  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Texas  in  the  city
of  Galveston,  December  30,  1850,  the  following  chapters  were  rep-
resented : San  Filipe  de  Austin,  No.  1,  chartered  by  the  General
Grand  Chapter,  December  9,  1835  ; Washington,  No.  2,  Brenham,
No.  5,  and  Brazos,  No.  8.

“ Of  the  Chapters  organized  by  authority  of  the  General  Grand
Chapter,  all  but  San  Filipe  de  Austin,  No.  1,  surrendered  their  au-

1 Proceedings  General  Grand  Chapter,  p.  191.

a<‘Ruthven*s  Reprint,”  p.  101.  3 Ibid.,  vol.  i.,  p.  112.

1540

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

thority  from  the  General  Grand  Chapter  to  the  Grand  Chapter  of
Texas,  and  received  their  charters,  dated  June  25,  1851,  and  signed
by  the  Grand  Officers  elected  at  the  second  annual  convocation  in
the  town  of  Huntsville,  June  24,  1851."

“ San  Filipe  de  Austin,  No.  1,  never  received  a charter  from  the
Grand  Chapter  of  Texas  until  June  22,  i860.”

“Many  of  the  Companions  who  belonged  to  Chapters  under
the  First  Grand  Chapter  of  the  Republic  of  Texas,  believing  the
action  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  in  regard  to  Royal  Arch  Ma-
sonry in  Texas  unwarranted  and  unjust,  refused  to  be  ‘ healed  ’
under  the  new  organization,  and  were  thereby  debarred  from  enjoy-
ing the  privileges  for  which  they  had  worked  so  earnestly  and  long.
Others  accepted  the  situation  until  such  time  as  they  should  be  able
to  sever  an  alliance  that  was  unsought  and  always  distasteful.”

“The  time  came  in  1861,  when,  on  the  17th  of  June,  the  Grand
Chapter  adopted  the  following  resolution  :

“ Resolved , That  all  connection  between  this  Grand  Chapter
and  the  General  Grand  Chapter  of  the  United  States  is  dissolved
and  forever  annihilated  by  the  separation  of  our  State  from  that
government.”  1 2

The  Grand  Chapter  of  Texas  has  steadily  refused  all  overtures
from  the  General  Grand  Chapter  to  return  to  the  fold  from  which
she  withdrew  in  1861.  “ Tempiis  aliit  omnia"  (Time  cures  all

things),  and  we  feel  assured  that,  with  the  passing  away  of  the  pres-
ent generation,  with  its  prejudices,  so  will  pass  away  that  feeling  in
the  Grand  Chapter  of  Texas  which  now  keeps  her  out  of  the  fold,
especially  as  some  of  her  best  members  never  left  the  General
Grand  Body.

Utah.

December  13,  1872,  Utah  Chapter,  No.  i,  Salt  Lake  City,  had
a dispensation  issued,  and  a Charter  was  granted  November  25,
1874.*  A dispensation  was  issued  for  Ogden  Chapter,  No.  2,  at
Ogden,  March  11,  1881  ; and  Ontario,  No.  3,  at  Park  City,  Octo-
ber 26,  1882;  and  charters  to  these  two  were  granted  August  15,
1883.*  Utah  has  no  Grand  Chapter,  and  is  under  the  control  of
the  General  Grand  Chapter.

1 “ Historical  Sketch,”  p.  7.

2 Proceedings  General  Grand  Chapter,  1874,  p.  56.  5 Ibid.,  1883,  pp.  96,  97.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1541

Vermont.

The  first  notice  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry  we  have  is  in  the  pro-
ceedings of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  at  its  third  regular  meet-
ing, held  January  9,  1806,  where  it  is  stated  that  a communication
from  Rutland  in  the  State  of  Vermont,  signed  by  Nicholas  God-
dard, Grand  Secretary,  was  presented,  informing  the  General  Grand
Chapter  of  the  formation  of  the  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter  in  the
State  of  Vermont,  etc.1  At  this  first  day  of  the  meeting  the
General  Grand  Chapter,  by  resolution,  admitted  the  said  Grand
Chapter  of  Vermont  into  union  with  that  body.2

From  the  records  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  New  York  we  learn
lhat  a Warrant  for  a Mark  Master  Mason’s  Lodge  was  granted  at
Bennington,  January  30,  1799.  Also  that  the  Deputy  Grand  High-
Priest  issued  a dispensation  to  Jerusalem  Chapter,  in  Vergennes,
March  25,  1805  ; and  the  Grand  Chapter  granted  it  a Charter,  Feb-
ruary 5,  1806.3

A Grand  Chapter  was  organized  in  Vermont,  December  20,
1804,  but  there  is  no  record  to  be  found  when,  nor  by  whom,  Royal
Arch  Masonry  was  introduced  into  the  State.  From  the  proceed-
ings of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  New  York  we  also  learn  that  in
February,  1805,  the  matter  of  the  formation  of  a Grand  Chapter  in
Vermont  was  under  consideration,  and  it  was  the  opinion  that  there
ought  to  be  at  least  three  regular  Royal  Arch  Chapters  to  form
a Grand  Chapter,  and  also  they  say  that  “your  Committee  have
had  authentic  evidence  from  respectable  sources,  that  there  were
but  three  members  at  the  formation  of  the  aforesaid  Grand
Chapter.”  *

A protest  was  made  against  the  effort  to  form  the  Grand  Chap-
ter ; nevertheless  we  find  that  the  General  Grand  Chapter  did  rec-
ognize the  organization  of  that  Grand  Chapter,  as  above  stated.

The  last  annual  convocation  was  held  in  1832,  six  years  after  the
great  anti-Masonic  excitement  commenced,  Compn.  Nathan  B.  Has-
well  (Blessed  be  his  memory)  being  then  Grand  High-Priest,  who
also  was  present  at  the  triennial  convocation  of  the  General  Grand
Chapter  in  1832.  At  the  session  of  1844  Compn.  Haswell  said:

“At  the  last  triennial  meeting  of  your  body  in  New  York  I had

1 Proceedings  General  Grand  Chapter,  1806,  p.  39.  1 Ibid.,  p.  29.

3 (i  History  of  Masonry  and  Concordant  Orders,”  p.  633.  4 Ibid.,  p.  633.

1542

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

the  honor  to  present  a communication  giving  an  account  of  the
state  of  Masonry  in  Vermont.  In  accordance  with  a duty  I owe
the  fraternity  and  in  behalf  of  many  good  and  true  Masons  in  my
State  I have  now  further  to  report  that  nothing  has  occurred  since
that  period  to  warrant  the  resuming  of  our  Masonic  labors.

“ In  no  State  of  our  Union  has  the  anti-Masonic  spirit  gained
so  strong  a foothold  as  in  Vermont.  Although  she  has  been  di-
vested of  the  political  power  that  for  years  worked  her  curse,  still
her  old  leaders  continue  restless  and  troublesome  ; and  under  the
abolition  excitement  which  now  pervades  the  State  they  still  exert
a secret  influence  hostile  to  our  institution,  which  time,  patience,
and  perseverance  can  alone  conquer.

“ Mortifying  and  unpleasant  as  it  is  to  be  compelled  by  the
continued  force  of  circumstances  to  suspend  our  Masonic  labors,
prudence  dictates  a course  so  important  to  the  well-being  and  future
welfare  of  the  whole  fraternity.

“We  look  forward,  however,  to  a period  when  we  can  peace-
fully resume  them  and  when  public  opinion  shall  do  us  justice,  and
sanction  a course  thus  adopted  ; then  shall  our  obscure  but  not  lost
Pleiad  again  break  forth,  diffusing  new  light  and  heat,  in  the  Ma-
sonic Constitution  [Constellation  perhaps].1

“We  now  ask  your  fraternal  advice  in  our  difficult  movements.
And  in  behalf  of  the  Companions  and  brethren  in  Vermont,  whose
fidelity  has  never  been  shaken,  I submit  this  report.

“Nathan  B.  Hasweli.,

“ High-Priest  and  Grand  Master

In  February,  1848,  Jerusalem  Chapter,  No.  2,  was  reopened  by
a dispensation  from  the  General  Grand  Scribe.  The  Grand  Lodge
of  Vermont  was  revived  in  1847;  and  soon  following  this  event
the  Companions  of  the  Grand  Chapter  made  a movement  toward
the  revival  of  the  Grand  Chapter,  and  under  the  direction  of  Com-
panion Haswell,  who  was  the  last  Grand  High-Priest,  and  sanc-
tioned by  the  Deputy-General  Grand  High-Priest,  the  Grand  Chap-
ter was  reorganized  July  18,  1849.

There  were  three  chapters  which  took  part  in  the  reorganiza-
tion : Jerusalem,  No.  2,  at  Vergennes  ; Burlington,  No.  12,  at
Burlington  ; and  LaFayette,  No.  15,  at  East  Berkshire.

1 Proceedings  of  General  Grand  Chapter,  1844,  pp.  183,  184.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1543

In  October,  1849,  the  Grand  High-Priest  granted  a renewal  of
the  Charter  to  Champlain  Chapter,  at  St.  Albans.

June  19,  1850,  an  attested  copy  of  the  original  Charter  of  this
chapter  was  shown  in  the  Grand  Chapter  with  proof  of  original
Charter  having  been  destroyed  by  fire.  Champlain  Chapter  paid
$25,  under  the  ruling,  and  was  revived  and  represented  at  that
grand  convocation.1

Since  that  period  the  Grand  Chapter  has  continued  to  be  rep-
resented in  the  General  Grand  Chapter.

Virginia.

The  introduction  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry  into  Virginia  in  1753
was  no  doubt  similar  to  its  introduction  into  Pennsylvania  and  other
States  north  of  it,  by  means  of  Royal  Arch  lodges,  so-called,  because
the  Royal  Arch  degree  was  permitted  to  be  conferred  under  the
lodge  Charter,  and  we  have  recently  seen  the  discovery  by  Bro.  S.
J.  Quinn,  of  Fredericksburg,  of  the  fact  that  in  that  ancient  town
there  was  such  a lodge,  in  which  the  Royal  Arch  degree  was  con-
ferred, earlier  than  in  any  other  place  in  the  colonies  ; and  very  soon
after  that  degree  had  been  introduced  into  the  work  of  the  lodges
in  England.

It  has  been  said,  by  others,  that  the  introduction  of  the  Royal
Arch  degree  into  Virginia  was  by  Bro.  Joseph  Myers,  who  was  the
successor  of  Da  Costa,  who  had  opened,  under  the  authority  of
Bro.  Michael  Moses  Hayes,  a Sublime  Grand  Lodge  of  Perfection
in  1783,  at  Charleston,  S.  C.  Bro.  Myers  subsequently  settled  in
Richmond,  Va.,  and  then  and  there  introduced  the  Holy  Royal
Arch  of  the  Ancient  Accepted  Scottish  Rite,  which  was  taught  in
Virginia  until  1820,  when  the  ritual  of  the  English  degree  was
adopted,  whose  officers  consisted  of  High-Priest,  King,  and  Scribe,
while  the  former  were  High-Priest,  Captain  of  the  Host,  and  Cap-
tain General.

Bro.  John  Dove,  in  his  history  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Vir-
ginia, uses  the  following  language  :

“ Royal  Arch  Masonry  was  taught  and  practiced  in  this  State
during  the  latter  part  of  the  last  century,  under  the  authority  of  a
Master’s  Warrant,  until  the  want  of  some  specific  legislation  seemed

1 ‘‘History  of  Masonry  and  Concordant  Orders,”  p.  633.

1544

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

evidently  indicated  for  the  internal  government  of  the  Royal  Arch
Chapters,  which  were  then  growing  in  number  and  increasing  in
members.”

This  was  in  the  early  part  of  1806,  and  from  his  acknowledged
intellectual  ability,  in  connection  with  the  record  of  his  constant  at-
tendance at  every  meeting  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Virginia  from
December  17,  1818,  to  December  17,  1868,  he  was  well  qualified  to
decide  with  authority.  In  discussing  the  matter  of  substitutes  he
said:  “We  have  been  in  the  constant  use  of  them  since  1792,  and
have  as  yet  seen  no  evil  result  therefrom.”

From  the  date  above  mentioned  by  Comp.  Dove,  viz.,  1792,
when  the  Royal  Arch  was  conferred,  we  may  be  safe  in  our  state-
ment that  as  early  as  1792  Royal  Arch  Masonry  was  practiced  in
Virginia.  We  also,  from  his  statement,  may  be  assured  that  in
Virginia  the  degree  of  Past  Master  was  in  the  chapter  series  and
had  been  in  Virginia  since  1790,  and  whatever  may  have  been  the
full  ritual  under  lodge  warrants,  it  was  practiced  until  1820.

At  a convocation  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Virginia,  held  Janu-
ary 7,  1820,  it  was  “ Resolved, , That  our  enlightened  Companion,
James  Cushman,  H.-P.  of  Franklin  Chapter,  No.  4,  Connecticut,
be  requested  to  exemplify  the  mode  of  work  at  present  adopted  by
the  General  Grand  Chapter  of  the  United  States,  it  appearing  from
his  credentials  that  he  is  fully  competent.”

On  January  18,  1820,  the  degrees  of  Mark  Master,  Past  Master,
Most  Excellent  Master,  and  Royal  Arch  Mason  were  exemplified
by  him  and  after  “ most  solemn  deliberation  ” were  adopted,  “that
harmony  and  unity  should  prevail  throughout  the  Masonic  world,
and  more  especially  the  United  States.”

From  1820  until  December  17,  1841,  the  council  degrees  of
Royal  and  Select  Masters  were  controlled  by  a Grand  Council.  At
the  latter  date,  by  mutual  agreement,  these  degrees  were  placed  un-
der the  control  of  the  Grand  Chapter,  and  the  following  resolutions
give  the  order  of  succession  :

“ Resolved,  That  hereafter  the  degrees  in  subordinate  chapters
be  given  in  the  following  order,  to  wit  : Mark  Master,  Past  Master,
Most  Excellent  Master,  Royal  Master,  Select  Master,  and  Royal
Arch.”  May  1,  1808,  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons  of
Virginia  was  established,  in  compliance  with  a proposition  from  a
convention  held  in  “ Norfolk  Borough,”  when  it  appeared  that  the

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1545

“ Grand  United  Chapter  of  Excellent  and  Superexcellent  Masons
of  Norfolk  had  proposed  to  the  Royal  Arch  Chapters  of  Richmond,
Staunton,  and  Dumfries  to  establish  a Supreme  Grand  Royal  Arch
Chapter  for  the  State  of  Virginia.”

This  movement  was  entirely  independent  of  the  General  Grand
Royal  Arch  Chapter  of  the  United  States,  and  that  Grand  Chapter
has  always  held  aloof  from  the  General  Grand  Body.

The  Supreme  Grand  Chapter  established  Magnolia  Chapter,  No.
16,  at  Appalachicola,  and  Florida  Chapter,  No.  32,  at  Tallahassee,
Fla.,  which  united  with  the  other  chapters  in  Florida  in  forming  the
Grand  Chapter  of  that  State.

Washington.

November  1,  1869,  a dispensation  was  granted  to  Seattle  Chap-
ter, No.  1,  in  Seattle.1  A dispensation  was  granted  to  Walla  Walla
Chapter,  No.  2,  in  Walla  Walla,  February  13,  1871.  Charters  were
granted  at  the  meeting  of  General  Grand  Chapter,  September  20,
1871. 2 3

From  difficulties  encountered  within  the  first  chapter  it  did  not
succeed,  and  its  Charter  was  suspended  by  the  General  Grand
High-Priest,  May  25,  1873,  an<^  reported  by  him  at  the  meeting  held
November  24,  18 74.®  The  report  of  the  committee  to  whom  this
action  had  been  referred,  as  also  a memorial  from  members  of  that
chapter,  recommended  that  the  action  of  the  General  Grand  High-
Priest  be  approved  ; and  that  the  memorial  be  referred  to  that  offi-
cer with  power  to  restore  or  arrest  the  Charter  of  said  chapter,  as
in  his  judgment  he  may  deem  best  for  the  interest  of  Royal  Arch
Masonry.4

On  August  27,  1880,  the  Charter  was  declared  forfeited  and  that
number  (1)  of  said  chapter  be  assigned  to  Walla  Walla  Chapter.5

A dispensation  was  granted  to  Spokane  Chapter,  No.  2,  at
Spokane  Falls,  November  1,  1881  ; and  one  to  Seattle,  No.  3,  at
Seattle,  January  2,  1883.  At  the  meeting  August  15,  1883,  char-
ters were  granted  to  both  of  these  chapters.6

A convention  having  been  called  to  meet  at  Spokane  Falls,  June
6,  1884,  the  General  Grand  High-Priest  decided  that  a letter  of  ap-

1 Proceedings  Grand  Chapter,  1871,  p.  33.  2 Ibid.,  p.  33.

3 Ibid.,  1874,  p.  15.  4 Ibid.,  p.  55.  5 Ibid.,  1880,  p.  69.  6 Ibid.,  1883,  p.  97.

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

1546

proval  should  first  have  been  obtained  before  holding  a convention,
and  gave  his  authority  to  hold  a convention  at  Walla  Walla  Octo-
ber 2,  1884.1  (May  10,  1884,  the  General  Grand  High-Priest  had
granted  a dispensation  to  Tacoma  Chapter,  No.  4,  which  by  order
passed  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand  Chapter.)

This  convention  was  held  at  that  date  by  the  three  chapters
above  mentioned.

We  si  Virginia.

After  the  State  of  West  Virginia  was  erected  and  the  Grand
Lodge  of  the  new  State  had  been  regularly  organized,  May  1 1,
1865,  the  Companions  of  the  various  chapters,  numbering  nine,
who  were  under  the  Constitution  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Vir-
ginia, deemed  it  proper  to  follow  the  example  of  the  lodges,  and
organize  a Grand  Chapter  for  the  new  territory.  This  movement
started  in  Wheeling  Union  Chapter,  No.  19,  Wheeling.  A memo-
rial was  issued  by  Wheeling  Union  Chapter,  which  sought  permis-
sion to  organize  a Grand  Chapter  for  the  State.  The  following
chapters  approved  the  memorial : Jerusalem  Chapter,  No.  55,  in
Parkersburg,  November  17,  1870;  Star  of  the  West  Chapter,
No.  18,  at  Point  Pleasant,  November  21,  1870;  and  Nelson  Chap-
ter, No.  26,  at  Morgantown,  November  30,  1870.  The  Grand
Chapter  of  Virginia  took  action  upon  the  memorial,  December,
1870,  and  gave  consent,  “ upon  the  same  terms  and  conditions,  and
with  the  same  limitations,  as  the  consent  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Virginia  was  given  to  the  formation  of  a Grand  Lodge  for  the  State
of  West  Virginia.”

A convention  was  held  November  16,  1871,  in  Wheeling,  and
the  four  chapters  above  mentioned  were  represented  by  their  dele-
gates ; in  addition  to  these  were  delegates  from  Lebanon  Chapter,
No.  9,  at  Martinsburg.  The  Grand  Chapter  of  West  Virginia  was
duly  and  constitutionally  instituted,  the  Grand  Officers  were  chosen
and  installed  by  Most  Excellent  John  P.  Little,  Grand  High-Priest
of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Virginia,  who  took  occasion  to  warn  the
Companions  against  a union  with  the  General  Grand  Chapter.2
This  warning,  like  that  which  oftentimes  only  excites  the  curiosity

1 Proceedings  Grand  Chapter,  1886,  p.  20.

2 “ Masonic  History  of  Concordant  Orders,”  p.  636.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1547

of  the  Warnee,  has  had  the  effect  of  bringing  the  Grand  Chapter  of
West  Virginia  into  the  fold,  which  we  trust  will  be  followed  by  the
Mother  of  the  Old  Dominion.

Wisconsin.

The  Deputy-General  Grand  High-Priest,  at  the  triennial  meet-
ing of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  held  September  io,  1844,  re-
ported having  granted  a dispensation  to  two  chapters  in  Wisconsin
Territory,  viz.  : February  16,  1844,  to  Milwaukee,  No.  1 ; and
Washington,  No.  2,  in  Plattesville,  July  2,  1844.1  At  the  meeting
September  14,  1847,  the  same  officer  reported  having  issued  a dis-
pensation to  Southport  Chapter,  No.  3,  in  Southport  (no  date);2
and  also  that  his  proxy  had  consecrated  Washington  Chapter,  No.
2,  at  Plattesville,  a Charter  having  been  granted  to  said  chapter,
September  x 1 , 1844.3  A Charter  was  granted  to  Southport,  No.  3,
at  the  meeting  held  September  17,  1847. 4

By  authority  of  the  Deputy-General  Grand  High-Priest  under
date  of  January  io,  1850,  a convention  was  held  in  Madison  of  the
delegates  of  the  three  chapters,  and  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Wis-
consin was  duly  constituted,  February  14,  1850.

The  Deputy-General  Grand  High-Priest  having  received  offi-
cially the  printed  proceedings  and  grand  constitution  under  date  of
July  5,  1850,  he  authorized  Argulus  W.  Stark  to  install  the  Grand
Officers,  which  was  done  August  7,  1850.

Wyoming.

At  the  triennial  meeting  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  held
September  19,  1871,  the  General  Grand  High-Priest  reported  that
he  had  issued  a dispensation  to  a constitutional  number  of  Com-
panions to  form  a chapter  at  Cheyenne,  Wyoming  Territory,  under
the  name  of  Wyoming  Chapter,  No.  i,6  which  was  chartered,  Sep-
tember 20,  1871. 6

Evanston  Chapter,  No.  2,  at  Evanston,  received  a dispensation
dated  April  25,  1876  ;7  and  Lebanon,  No.  8,  at  Laramie  City,  had

1 Proceedings  of  General  Grand  Chapter,  1844,  p.  182.

2 Ibid.,  1847,  p.  209.  3 Ibid.,  1844,  p.  185,  note.  4 Ibid.,  1847,  p.  228.

5 Ibid.,  1871,  p.  15.  6 Ibid.,  p.  33.  7 Ibid.,  1877,  p0  92.

1548

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

a dispensation  granted  March  15,  1877  ; and  these  two  had  char-
ters granted  August  24,  1877.1

Garfield  Chapter,  No.  4,  at  Rawlins,  had  a dispensation  issued
March  25,  1884;  and  a Charter  granted  October  1,  1886. 2 These
chapters  are  under  the  immediate  jurisdiction  of  the  General  Grand
Chapter,  never  having  organized  a Grand  Chapter,

Chronological  Memoranda  of  Important  Transactions  of  the  General

Grand  Chapter.3

October  24,  1797. — Preliminary  meeting  of  three  chapters  in  Boston,  Mass.

January  24,  1798. — Organization  of  the  “ Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter  of  the
Northern  States  of  America.”

September,  1798. — First  meeting  after  organization  for  the  choice  of  Officers.

January  9,  1799. — Adjourned  meeting;  change  of  name  to  that  of  General
Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter  of  the  Northern  States  of  America.

January  9,  1806. — Change  of  name  to  that  of  General  Grand  Chapter  of
Royal  Arch  Masons  for  the  United  States  of  America.  September,  1812,  was,
by  resolution,  fixed  as  the  time,  and  New  York  City  as  the  place,  for  the  next
Septennial  Session.

June  6,  1816. — Held  in  New  York  City,  by  reason  of  failure  to  meet  in  1812.
Constitution  changed,  so  as  to  have  a Deputy  General  Grand  High-Priest.

September,  1819. — Held  agreeably  to  adjournment.

February,  1823. — Adjournment  was  to  Washington,  District  of  Columbia,  at
this  time,  but  not  held.

September,  1826. — Met  according  to  previous  notice.  Meetings  made  tri-
ennial.

November,  1832. — Held  in  this  month  on  account  of  cholera  in  Baltimore
during  September.

September,  1862. — Appointed  to  meet  at  Memphis,  Tenn.,  but  not  held  on
account  of  Civil  War  then  prevailing.

September,  1871. — Constitution  amended,  admitting  Past  Grand  High-Priests
as  permanent  members.

November,  1874. — Constitution  amended,  making  the  first  four  Past  General
Grand  Officers  permanent  members.

October  13,  1897. — Centennial  Celebration  at  Baltimore,  Md.

1 Proceedings  of  General  Grand  Chapter,  1877,  pp.  02,  03.

2 Ibid.,  1886,  p.  125.  3 ibid.,  1897.

CHAPTER  LVII

HISTORY  OF  THE  INTRODUCTION  OF  FREEMASONRY  INTO  EACH  STATE
AND  TERRITORY  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES

The  Cryptic  Degrees

N the  Freemason' s Library  and  General  A himan
Rezon,  by  Samuel  Cole,  P.  M.,  published  in
Baltimore  in  1826,  we  find  a list  of  forty-three
degrees  which  was  taken  from  a “late  publica-
tion, 1816,”  which  the  author  states  are  con-
ferred in  the  Sublime  Grand  Lodges  in  Charles-
ton, S.  C.,  in  the  city  of  New  York,  and  in
Newport,  R.  I.,  which  we  have  heretofore  quoted.

“ Besides  those  degrees,  which  are  in  regular  succession,  most
of  the  Inspectors  are  in  possession  of  a number  of  detached  degrees,
given  in  different  parts  of  the  world,  and  which  they  generally  com-
municate, free  of  expense,  to  those  brethren  who  are  high  enough
to  understand  them.  Such  as  Select  Masons,  of  27,  and  the  Royal
Arch,  as  given  under  the  Constitution  of  Dublin,  etc.,  etc.”

In  a description  of  the  degree  of  Select  Master,  the  writer  says  :
“ There  is  reason  to  believe  that  this  degree  was  in  use  long  before
those  of  Most  Excellent  or  Mark  Master.”1

It  is  well  enough  to  quote  from  the  charge  to  a Select  Master,
to  indicate  its  proper  place  in  the  “curriculum”  of  the  degrees:
'•  Companion — Having  attained  to  this  degree,  you  have  passed  the
circle  of  perfection  in  Ancient  Masonry.”*

This  indicates  that  the  Select  degree  closed  all  the  degrees  apper-
taining to  the  “ Secret  Vault,"  as  it  really  did,  up  to  1826  at  least.

The  edition  of  the  above  work  of  1817  contains  an  article  by
Hezekiah  Niles  on  the  Select  degree,  in  which  he  says  : “Though
this  beautiful  Degree  is  known  to  some  persons  in  many  parts  of  the

i“  Freemason  s Library,”  Cole,  p.  220.  2 Ibid.,  p.  223.

1549

1550

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

United  States,  we  are  not  informed  that  it  is  worked  anywhere
but  in  Baltimore.  We  have  been  told  that  a regular  Chapter  of  Se-
lect was  held  at  Charleston,  S.  C.,  many  years  ago,  but  believe  it  has
declined.”  1

Bro.  John  Dove,  of  Virginia,  says:  “This  beautiful  Degree  is
comparatively  of  Modern  Origin,  having  been,  with  the  Degree  of
Royal  Master,  in  the  possession  of  a distinguished  Chief,  in  the  State
of  Maryland,  as  a purely  honorary  Degree,  elucidatory  of,  and  ap-
pendent  to  Royal  Arch  Masonry,  and  by  him  conferred  without  fee  ;
he  delegated  authority  to  others,  to  use  them,  in  the  same  way,  un-
til the  year  1824,  when  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Maryland,  with  his  con-
sent, took  charge  of  the  Degrees,  and  ordered  them  to  be  given  be-
fore the  Most  Excellent  Master  ; where  all  intelligent  workers  in  the
Royal  Arch  must  at  once  perceive  the  propriety  of  their  location.”  2

Brother  A.  G.  Mackey  says  : “ For  many  years  there  have  been
three  distinct  claims  urged  for  jurisdiction  over  these  degrees,  in
America — first,  by  the  Supreme  Council  of  the  33d  Degree  ; next
by  some  of  the  Grand  Chapters  ; and  lastly  by  the  Grand  Councils,
composed  of  the  subordinate  Councils  of  each  State.”

“Connected  with  this  question  of  jurisdiction  is  another  in  ref-
erence to  the  historical  origin  of  the  Degrees,  and,  as  the  person  or
persons,  by  whom  they  were  first  introduced  into  America.  The
Masons  of  Maryland  and  Virginia  contend,  that  the  Royal  and  Se-
lect Degrees  were  introduced  by  Philip  P.  Eckel,  of  Baltimore,  one
of  the  most  distinguished  and  enlightened  Masons  of  his  day,  who,
in  1817,  communicated  them  to  Jeremy  L.  Cross,  and  gave  him  au-
thority to  confer  them  in  every  Royal  Arch  Chapter  which  he  might
visit  in  his  official  character.”  This  clearly  shows  that  they  were  to
be  subsequent  to  the  Royal  Arch.

Dr.  Robert  Folger  says  : “ The  Masons  of  that  day  (1816)  were
divided  in  opinion  concerning  the  proper  place  to  which  these  de-
grees (Royal  and  Select)  belonged.  One  party  preferred  that  they
should  be  kept  separate,  and  left  where  they  were — a separate
system.”

At  the  fourth  meeting  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  June  6,
1816,  a discussion  took  place  upon  the  proposition  for  the  admission
of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Maryland  and  the  District  of  Columbia,

1 Schultz’s  “ History  of  Masonry  in  Maryland,”  vol.  i.,  p.  335.

2 Ibid-,  o.  336.

WILLIAM  J.  HUG  HAN

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

i55i

Philip  P.  Eckel  and  Benj.  Edes  being  the  representatives  of  that
Grand  Chapter.  We  learn  from  the  published  minutes  of  that
meeting,  that  a committee  made  the  following  report :

“ The  undersigned  having  been  appointed  a Committee  for  the
purpose  of  conferring  with  M.\  E.\  Comps.  Philip  P.  Eckel  and  Ben-
jamin Edes,  delegates  of  the  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter  of  the  State
of  Maryland,  beg  leave  to  report  that  they  have  had  an  interview
with  the  above  named  Companions,  from  whom  they  received  the
following  proposition,  to  wit  : The  Grand  Chapter  of  the  State  of
Maryland  and  District  of  Columbia  is  willing  to  support  the
Constitution  of  this  General  Grand  Chapter.  It  will  not  grant  any
warrants  out  of  its  District  and  will  discountenance  all  chapters
formed  contrary  to  the  General  Grand  Constitution  ; but  requests
that  it  shall  not  be  forced  to  alter  its  mode  of  working,  if  any  dif-
ference should  exist,  at  present,  and  to  be  received  on  an  equality
with  the  other  Grand  Chapters.

“ Under  a consideration  of  all  the  above  circumstances,  your
Committee  recommend  that  the  said  Grand  Chapter  of  the  State
of  Maryland  be  admitted  to  an  union  with  this  General  Grand
Chapter.

“ (Signed  by  the  Committee).

“The  Undersigned,  delegates  from  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Mary-
land and  District  of  Columbia,  agree  to  the  above  report.

“ Signed  P.  P.  Eckel,  G.  \ H.\  Pc.

“ Benj.  Edes.”

This  report  being  read  and  accepted,  it  was  thereupon  voted  to
receive  the  said  Grand  Chapter  of  the  State  of  Maryland  and  Dis-
trict of  Columbia  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  General  Grand
Chapter.1  Folger,  referring  to  this  meeting  of  the  General  Grand
Chapter,  says  : “ The  whole  matter  then  came  up  for  discussion,  Mr.
Eckel,  of  Maryland,  taking  a very  prominent  part  in  advocating  the
Union  of  these  two  degrees  with  the  services  of  the  Royal  Arch
Chapter.  The  discussion  became  warm  and  lasted  the  better  part  of
two  days,  when  the  motion  to  unite  them  was  rejected.  Where-
upon, immediately  after  adjournment,  the  State  Grand  Council  of
Royal  Masters  was  formed,  and  the  different  Councils  came  under
that  governing  power,  and  continued  so  up  to  1828.  It  was  this  move

1 Proceedings  General  Grand  Chapter,  1816,  p.  44.

1552

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

on  the  part  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  in  refusing  a recognition
of  those  degrees,  that  determined  Mr.  Cross  in  his  future  course.

“ Mr.  Eckel,  the  Baltimore  delegate,  then  went  home  ; and
when  Cross,  who  at  that  session  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  had
been  appointed  and  confirmed  as  General  Grand  Lecturer,  started
on  his  lecturing  tour,  he  stopped  at  Baltimore  and  purchased  and
received  the  privilege  from  Eckel  and  Niles  to  erect  and  establish
councils  of  Royal  and  Select  Masters  throughout  the  Southern  and
Western  States.  This  privilege  he  carried  out  pretty  effectually,
beginning  with  New  Jersey  ; and  all  the  councils  in  existence  in
those  States,  mentioned  in  his  narrative,  were  established  by  him-
self, also  the  Eastern  States,  except  Rhode  Island.”  Bro.  Edw.  T.
Schultz,  in  commenting  upon  what  Folger  had  published  as  above,
said  :

“ From  the  above  quotations  it  will  be  perceived  that  it  was  the
general  belief  that  the  control  of  the  Royal  and  Select  Degrees  were
vested  in  Eckel  and  Niles.

“ But  we  think  Bros.  Dove,  Mackey,  and  Folger,  and  others,
make  a great  mistake  in  coupling  the  Royal  Master's  Degree  with
the  Select,  in  connection  with  the  names  of  Eckel  and  Niles ; for
there  is  no  evidence  whatever  to  show  that  these  Brethren  ever  exer-
cised or  claimed  control  of  the  Royal  Master’s  degree,  or  that  they
were  even  in  possession  of  that  degree,  at  the  periods  named  by
them.”  1

From  Bro.  Josiah  H.  Drummond  we  learn  that,  on  apparently
good  authority,  Eckel  did  not  get  the  Royal  Master’s  degree  until
1819;  when  he  and  Benj.  Edes,  of  Baltimore,  received  it  from
Ebenezer  Wadsworth,  of  New  York.  Bro.  Schultz  thinks  “this  is
probably  true,  for  there  is  no  mention  of  that  degree  being  worked
in  this  jurisdiction  (Maryland)  in  any  document,  or  upon  the  records
of  the  Grand  Chapter  or  its  subordinates  earlier  than  1850.  Bro.
Cole,  in  1817,  speaks  of  it  incidentally,  but  not  as  among  the  de-
grees conferred.”*

Cole’s  edition  of  1826  (p.  319),  says:  “Royal  Master  and  Ark
Master  or  Noachite.”

These  are  considered  as  merely  preparatory,  and  are  usually  con-
ferred immediately  before  the  solemn  ceremony  of  exaltation.8  It

1 Schultz,  “ History,”  vol.  i.,  p.  339.

2 Ibid.,  p.  338.

3 Cole,  p.  319.

Co  all  tol)om  it  map  concern:

?

ez

cfmpreot  with  a perfect  conviction  that  a knowledge
of  the  mioterieo  of  the  degree  of  cRooi/al  Chrch  axe  eminent li/
promoted  hi/  a knowledg  e of  tix  0.1 1’  revealed  in  the  (Sounctl
of  delect  Sllba  oona ; and  L\{Viereao,  the  oaid  degree  of
delect  io  not  oo  extenoivelg  known  ao  ito  wanto  and  the

good  of  the  (Era  ft  require. here  fore  effonow  fl/e,  C(j  h a t

repooing  eopecial  confidence  in  nig  beloved  and  txuotg
(jompanion t t Jeremg  JE,  (Sr  cf  do  herein/,  kg  the  high
poweto  in  me  veoted,  authorize  and  empower  him  to  conf.
the  oaid  degree  ao  fol/owo  (viz.):  cfn  a ng  place  whe  L C Cl
regular  chapter  of  SRjogal  SCfrch  Slbaoono  io  eotaldiohed ,
the  Officer o or  chlloemhero  approving,  he  mag  confer  oaid
degree  according  to  ito  rti/eo  by  regulation o,  hut  on/g  on
SEoogal  Cl  ^zch  cVba  oono,  who  have  taken  all  the  preceding
degree o,  ao  io  required  hg  the  (feneral  (fraud  (jhapter,
When  a competent  number  of  delect  cMbaaono  are  thuo
made,  he  mag  grant  them  a warrant  to  open  a (jouncil  of
d elect  and  confer  the  degree  and  do  all  other  htioineoo
a ppertain ing  th ereto.

(given  under  mg  hand  and  deal  at  I Baltimore,  the
Sptli  dag  of  cVba g,  61.  ED,  iSip,  and  in  the  gear  of
the  EDio.  oSip',

digm  i Dhilip  E/E,  c 'rebel.

dahrice  of  llustzious  cV  (fraud  52 aussant  til  the  ifiand  Council
of  Select  at  ^Baltimore  Sf  Cbppzovcd  a.)  if.  if.  Scribe.

Cbppzoved  and  attested  as  bill,  in  the  If  rand  Council.

96.  ddles.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1553

will  be  remembered  that  on  page  220  of  Cole  we  quoted  him  as  say-
ing that  among  those  degrees  communicated  “ to  those  brethren  who
are  high  enough  to  understand  them,  such  as  Select  Masons  of  27”
and  the  Royal  Arch,  as  given  under  the  Constitution  of  Dublin,
etc.  This  evidently  shows  that  even  as  late  as  1826  these  two  de-
grees of  Royal  and  Select  were  not  united  ; and  also,  that  the  Royal
Master  preceded  the  Royal  Arch ; and  it  was  most  likely  that  the
Select  degree  followed  the  Royal  Arch.  We  show  herewith  a fac-
simile copy  of  the  original  commission  to  Jeremy  L.  Cross,  from
Eckel  and  Niles.

The  Select  degree  was  recognized  by  the  constitution  of  the
Grand  Chapter  of  Maryland  adopted  in  1824,  but  the  Royal  Mas-
ter’s degree  is  not  mentioned.1

Bro.  Schultz  continues  : “ Furthermore,  the  Warrant  granted  to
Cross,  by  Eckel  and  Niles,  a copy  of  which,  taken  from  a photo-
graph copy  of  the  Original,  in  the  possession  of  Bro.  Wm.  R.  Sin-
gleton, of  Washington,  is  here  inserted,  and  from  which  it  will  be
seen  that  the  Select  Degree  alone  is  mentioned.”

In  the  first  warrants  issued  by  Cross  under  this  commission,  the
Companions  were  empowered  “ to  form  themselves  into  a regular
Council  of  Select  Masters,"  but  in  the  warrants  issued  by  him  in
1819  and  thereafter,  the  High  Powers  in  him  vested,  by  the  Grand
Council  at  Baltimore,  were  enlarged  to  include  the  Royal  Master’s
degree.®

It  is  well  to  state  that  from  the  action  subsequently  taken  by
Grand  Chapter  of  Maryland  in  1827,  from  documents  submitted,
“ upon  the  subject  of  the  institution  of  the  Select  Degree  indepen-
dent of  the  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter,”  which  were  referred  to  a
committee,  who  recommended  that  a circular  be  sent  to  the  several
Grand  Chapters,  regarding  the  matter,  and  which  was  adopted.
Cross  was  charged  with  having  abused  the  “ authority  delegated  or
meant  to  be  delegated  ” to  him,  and  it  had  been  asserted  that  he  had
been  expelled  by  the  Grand  Chapter,  but  Bro.  Schultz  assures  us
that  there  is  nothing  in  the  records  to  warrant  such  an  assertion.3
Moreover,  Cross  did  not  belong  to  any  chapter  under  the  jurisdic-
tion of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Maryland.

Cross,  it  is  said,  established  about  thirty-three  councils  in  various

1 Schultz,  p.  338.
98

2 Ibid.

8 Ibid.

*554

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

parts  of  the  United  States.  He  also  delegated  others,  with  power
in  like  manner  to  issue  warrants  for  counciis  of  Royal  and  Select
Masters.

“ From  all  that  has  been  stated,  it  is  evident,  not  only  that  Eckel
and  Niles  claimed  to  have  had  the  supreme  control  and  authority
over  the  Select  degree,  but  that  this  claim  was  generally  regarded
valid  ; and  it  is  equally  as  evident,  we  think,  that  these  Brethren
never  claimed  the  control  of  the  Royal  Master’s  degree.”  “ It  has
always  been  a question  of  much  interest  with  Masonic  writers  to
know  the  source  whence  these  Brethren  received  their  authority,
and  the  control  of  the  Select  degree.  An  old  document,  that  most
unexpectedly  came  to  the  knowledge  of  the  writer  about  a year  ago,
settles  that  question  beyond  a doubt.  It  is  as  follows  :

“‘Whereas,  In  the  year  of  the  Temple,  2792,  our  thrice  illus-
trious Brother  Henry  Wilmans,  Grand  Elect,  Select,  Perfect  Sub-
lime Mason,  Grand  Inspector  General,  and  Gra  id  Master  of  Chap-
ters of  the  Royal  Arch,  Grand  Elect  and  Perfect  Master’s  Lodges
and  Councils,  Knight  of  the  East,  Prince  of  Jerusalem,  Patriarch
Noachite,  Knight  of  the  Sun,  and  Prince  of  the  Royal  Secret,  did
by  and  in  Virtue  of  the  powers  in  him  legally  vested,  establish,  or-
dain, erect  and  support  a Grand  Council  of  Select  Masons  in  the
City  of  Baltimore,  and  wrought  therein,  to  the  great  benefit  of  the
Craft,  and  to  the  profitable  extension  and  elucidation  of  the  Mys-
teries of  Masonry  : — and  Whereas,  we  the  subscribers  to  these  pres-
ents are  by  regular  succession  possessors  of  all  the  rights,  privileges
and  immunities  and  powers  vested  in  any  way  whatsoever  in  the
said  Grand  Council  of  Select  Masons,  considering  the  great  ad-
vantages that  would  accrue  to  the  Craft,  in  an  extension  of  the
knowledge  of  the  Royal  Secret,  as  introductory  to,  and  necessary
for,  the  better  understanding  of  the  Superior  Degrees.

“ * Know  all,  whom  it  may  concern,  that  we  do  hereby  authorize
and  empower  our  trusty  and  beloved  Companions  K.  S.  K.

T.  ...  H.  A.  ...  of  the  same,  to  open  and  to  hold  a
Chapter  of  Select  Masons  in  the  City  of  Baltimore  and  under  such
By-Laws  and  regulations  as  may  be  enacted  and  established  for  the
government  of  the  same  subject  to  the  following  general  rules  and
regulations.’  ” (Which  we  omit.)  *

From  some  cause  the  dispensation  was  not  used,  but  the  fact  is
fully  and  emphatically  stated  by  Eckel  and  Niles,  under  their  hand

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1 55S

and  seal,  that  they  were,  “ by  regular  succession , possessors  of  all
the  rights , privileges , and  immunities  and  powers  vested  in  any
way  whatsoever  in  the  said  Grand  Council  of  Select  Masons,"
which  has  been  instituted  in  the  city  of  Baltimore,  in  the  year  1792,
by  Henry  VVilmans,  “Grand  Inspector  General.”

“ This  document,  in  connection  with  the  Rules  and  Regulations
of  the  Lodge  of  Perfection  (referred  to  above),  leave  no  room  for
doubt  that  Wilmans  was  an  Inspector  of  the  Rite  of  Perfection,
and  that  he  exercised,  in  the  City  of  Baltimore,  in  1792,  the  powers
claimed  by  such  Inspectors.  But  from  whom  did  Wilmans  acquire
his  powers  of  ‘Grand  Inspector  General,’  and  the  authority  ‘to
establish,  ordain,  erect  and  support  a Chapter  of  Select  Masons  ?’”

“ We  regret  that  we  can  not  answer  the  question,  nor  could  the
learned  Brethren  in  various  parts  of  the  country,  to  whom  we  ap-
plied. The  name  of  Wilmans  does  not  appear  upon  any  register
or  document  in  the  archives  of  the  Supreme  Council  of  the  Southern
Jurisdiction,  or  upon  any  other  known  document  or  record  contain-
ing the  names  of  the  early  Inspectors.  From  the  fact  that  in  both
the  documents  he  is  styled  ‘Grand  Inspector  General,’  while  those
deriving  their  powers  from  Morin  are  styled  ‘ Deputy  Inspectors,’
led  to  the  supposition  that  he  might  have  derived  his  powers  from
Europe  ; acting  upon  which  supposition,  letters  were  addressed  to
the  Grand  Lodges  at  Berlin  and  Bremen.  While  the  result  of  the
correspondence,  which  ensued,  was  of  an  interesting  nature,  nothing
in  regard  to  his  Masonic  character  could  be  learned.

“ It  has  been  ascertained  that  Wilmans  was  a native  of  Bremen,
and  that  he  emigrated  to  this  country  as  early  at  least  as  the  year
1 790,  and  settled  in  Baltimore.  The  first  mention  of  his  name,  on
the  records  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  is  in  connection  with  Concordia
Lodge,  in  1793,  of  which  he  was  appointed  the  first  or  Charter
Master.  In  the  same  year  he  was  elected  Deputy  Grand  Mas-
ter, and  in  the  following  year,  Grand  Master  of  Masons  in  Mary-
land. The  register  of  the  Old  Zion  Lutheran  Church,  of  this  city,
shows  that  he  died  in  1795.”

“ In  a MSS.  book  of  Moses  Holbrook,  of  South  Carolina,
written  in  1829,  it  is  stated  that  Joseph  Myers,  a Deputy  Inspector
General,  deposited  in  the  year  1788,  in  the  archives  of  the  Grand
Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem  at  Charleston,  ‘a  certified  copy  of
the  Royal  and  Select  Master’s  degrees  received  from  Berlin.’  ”

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

1556

“This  is  evidently  an  error,  so  far  as  it  relates  to  the  Royal
Master’s  degree.  As  intimated,  the  degree  was  first  known  in  the
Eastern  States,  and  the  earliest  reliable  mention  of  it  there,  is  in
the  year  1809.”  “ Bro.  Holbrook  wrote  his  book  in  1829,  at  which

time  both  degrees  were  conferred  at  Charleston,  and  naturally  he
connected  the  two  in  his  statement,  making  a similar  error  that
others  do,  when  stating  that  Eckel  and  Niles  claimed  the  control  of
the  Royal  Master’s  degree.  The  book  referred  to  contains  also  the
statement,  that  somewhere  about  the  year  1788,  Joseph  Myers  was
for  a time  located  at  Baltimore.’’

“Did  Wilmans  receive  the  Select  degree  from  Myers,  or  did
Myers  receive  it  from  Wilmans?”

“If  the  degree  came  from  Berlin,  it  is  quite  probable  that  Wil-
mans brought  it  with  him,  as  he  came  from  Germany,  about  the
time  mentioned  for  the  deposit,  in  the  MSS.  of  Holbrook.”

“ There  is  a tradition  existing  in  the  Eastern  States,  that  Eckel
received  the  degree  from  a Prussian,  temporarily  sojourning  in
Baltimore.  The  period  of  Wilmans’  residence  in  Baltimore  was
perhaps  not  over  eight  years,  and  with  some  propriety,  he  might
have  been  regarded  as  a sojourner — and  a Prussian.”

“ It  is  stated,  but  upon  what  authority  we  know  not,  that  the
Royal  and  Select  degrees  were  conferred  by  Andrew  Franken  at
Albany  in  1769,  and  that  he  conferred  them  upon  Samuel  Stringer,
who  afterwards  removed  to  Maryland  ; but  we  have  not  been  able
to  find  this  name  upon  any  of  the  records  of  this  jurisdiction.”

“ These  statements  or  traditions,  it  will  be  seen,  all  point  to
Maryland  as  the  source  from  whence  the  select  degree,  and  (as  the
writers  will  have  it)  Royal  Master’s  degree  also,  were  subsequently
introduced  into  other  parts.”  1

Folger  says  Eckel,  at  the  session  of  the  General  Grand  Chap-
ter, advocated  “the  Union  of  the  degrees  with  the  services  of  the
Royal  Arch  Chapter.”

“ From  1824  to  1852,  the  Select  degree  only  was  worked  in  the
chapters  in  Maryland  and  District  of  Columbia.  After  1852,  both
degrees  were  worked  in  Councils  specially  convened  for  the  pur-
pose, after  the  Most  Excellent  and  prior  to  the  Royal  Arch.”  2

The  true  history  of  the  origin  and  progress  of  the  Cryptic  Rite

Schultz,  “ History  of  Maryland,”  vol.  i. , pp.  335  to  344.

2 Ibid.,  p.  344

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1 3:7

in  the  several  States,  if  it  were  possible  to  produce  it,  would  prove
of  great  interest  to  the  Masonic  student.

From  the  preceding  pages,  taken  mostly  from  the  labors  of
Companion  Edw.  T.  Schultz  in  his  valuable  History  of  Masonry  in
Maryland , we  learn  that,  while  the  degrees  of  Royal  Master  and
Select  of  Twenty-seven  may  have  been  conferred  in  various  places
prior  to  1792,  yet  we  must  concede  that  the  organization  of  the
Council  of  Select  Masons  in  Baltimore  by  Philip  P.  Eckel  and
Hezekiah  Niles,  under  the  sanction  of  Henry  Wilmans,  was  the
very  first  organized  effort  to  propagate  the  rite  in  this  country.
Companion  Schultz  has  shown,  very  clearly,  that  we  can  not  go
beyond  the  date  of  that  organization,  so  far  as  any  ancient  records
have  been  discovered.

After  Companion  Jeremy  L.  Cross  had  been  appointed  the
Grand  Lecturer  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  at  the  session  of
1816 — we  learn,  from  several  sources,  that  Cross  went  to  Balti-
more in  1817 — and  there,  no  doubt,  was  initiated  into  the  degree  of
Select  Master  and  received  the  Warrant  from  Eckel  and  Niles
which  is  referred  to  on  the  preceding  page  (1552)  of  this  chapter.  A
photograph  copy  of  the  original  is  in  the  possession  of  the  present
writer.  This  photo  copy  was  submitted  to  the  daughter  of  Bro.
Eckel,  who  was  the  wife  of  Brother,  Hon.  Elijah  Stansbury,  Ex-
Mayor  of  Baltimore,  and  they  both  certified  that  they  recognized
his  signature;  and,  moreover,  sent  the  writer  an  original  letter
written  by  Bro.  Eckel  in  1819.  These  evidences  were  submitted
to  experts  in  handwriting,  and  the  certificate  to  Cross  was  pro-
nounced a forgery ; because  the  real  later  signature  was  of  so  much
better  caligraphy  than  the  signature  in  the  suspected  paper,  as,  ac-
cording to  the  expert’s  idea,  it  should  not  have  been  better,  being
two  years  older  ! ! ! The  writer  has  in  his  possession  several  other
papers  signed  by  Eckel,  and  in  no  two  of  them  do  his  signatures
correspond.  Our  duty  as  a historian  requires  this  statement  to
be  made.  Our  own  opinion  is  yet,  that  the  document  shown  by
Cross  was  a veritable  commission  from  Eckel  and  Niles  to  propa-
gate the  degree,  and  the  Masonic  World  should  be  glad  thereof;  as
by  his  means,  the  rite  spread  rapidly  in  the  South  and  West.  The
writer  was  made  a Royal  and  Select  Master,  in  one  of  Cross’s
councils,  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  in  1841,  about  the  time  the  Grand
Council  of  the  State  was  organized,  as  he  then  copied  their  records

1558

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

into  the  record-hook.  The  Grand  Chapter  of  Maryland,  having  in-
corporated the  Select  degree  into  the  chapter  work  in  1824,  in  1828
that  Grand  Chapter  sent  communications  to  other  Grand  Chapters
suggesting  the  propriety  of  the  several  Grand  Chapters  in  the
United  States  assuming  jurisdiction  over  the  degrees  of  Royal  and
Select  Masters.

In  the  Grand  Chapter  of  South  Carolina,  this  matter  was  re-
ferred to  a committee,  who  reported  February  26,  1829,  which  re-
port was  unanimously  adopted  by  the  Grand  Chapter  :

“That  Committee,  after  extensive  and  careful  investigation,  re-
ported, that  in  February,  1783,  Dr.  Dalcho  and  many  others  re-
ceived those  degrees  in  Charleston  in  the  sublime  Grand  Lodge  of
Perfection,  then  established  in  that  city.  That  when  the  Grand
Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem  was  established  in  Charleston,
February  20,  1788,  Joseph  Myers,  one  of  the  Deputy-Inspectors
who  established  it,  deposited  in  the  Archives  certified  Copies  of  the
degrees  of  Royal  and  Select  Masters  from  Berlin  in  Prussia,  to  serve
for  the  future  guidance  and  government  of  that  new  body.  That
from  1788,  the  Grand  Officers  and  Supreme  Council  of  Inspectors-
General,  at  Charleston,  had  been  steadily  in  the  habit  of  conferring
these  degrees ; and  in  1828,  numbers  of  councils  of  Select  Masters
were  acting  under  their  authority  in  the  Southern  and  Western  States.

“The  Committee  had  seen  and  perused  the  first  copy  of  those
degrees  that  ever  came  to  America,  and  old  copies  of  Charters  that
had  been  returned  by  Councils,  in  States  where  Grand  Councils
had  been  formed,  and  Charters  obtained  from  such  Grand  Councils.
And  the  Committee  reported,  that  these  degrees  had  been  under
regular  and  independent  Masonic  protection  and  authority  for  more
than  forty-six  years,  and  were  so  circumstanced  in  the  United
States,  at  a period  long  prior  to  the  establishment  of  Grand  or
General  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapters,  or  even  of  Chapters  of  Royal
Arch  Masons,  in  any  part  of  the  world  ; and  that  the  Grand  Chap-
ter of  South  Carolina  ought  to  avoid  all  collision  with  contemporary
Masonic  jurisdictions,  regularly  established,  and  much  longer  in  ex-
istence than  their  own  ; and  so  reported  a formal  ' resolution  (which
the  Grand  Chapter  unanimously  adopted)  that  it  was  ‘ improper  and
inexpedient  to  assume  a jurisdiction  over  the  said  degrees,  and  thus
to  interfere  with  the  rights  and  privileges  of  our  brethren  in  another
and  higher  order  of  Freemasonry.’

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1559

“ Of  the  Illustrious  brothers  Myers,  Spitzer  and  Forst,  that
Committee  said,  ‘ the  above  named  three  respectable  Brethren  and
Companions  are,  and  steadily  have  been,  Members  and  Officers  of
the  said  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem.  Their  evidence  therefore,
must  be  conclusive  upon  these  points.’

“The  same  Committee  (Royal  Arch  Masons,  be  it  observed,  and
a Committee  of  a Royal  Arch  Chapter,  enquiring  into  its  own
jurisdiction)  said  of  the  Brothers  and  Companions,  Dr.  F.  Dalcho,
Dr.  Isaac  Auld,  Dr.  James  Moultrie,  Senior,  and  Moses  C.  Levy,
Esq.,  who  received  these  degrees  in  Charleston  in  1783,  from  the
sublime  Grand  Lodge  of  Perfection:  ‘Three  of  the  above  named
Brothers  are  still  living,  venerable  for  their  years  and  warm  attach-
ment to  the  glorious  cause  of  Freemasonry,  and  highly  respected
and  esteemed  for  their  standing  in  the  community  where  they  have
so  long  honorably  sojourned,  and  they  are  still  members  of  the
same  Sublime  Body.’  There  is  still  further  testimony  to  be  ad-
duced. The  report  to  the  Grand  Chapter,  which  we  have  quoted,
was  made  by  Compn.  Moses  Holbrook,  its  Chairman,  and  unani-
mously adopted  ; the  Grand  Chapter  thus  affirming  the  veracity
of  the  Masonic  Witnesses,  whose  testimony  was  adduced.  In
1830  the  same  Compn.,  Holbrook,  was  M.\  P.\  Grand  Commander
of  the  Supreme  Council  of  Sovereign  Grand  Inspectors  General  of
the  330  for  the  Southern  Jurisdiction  of  the  United  States  at
Charleston.

“In  February,  A.  I.  2383,  the  M.\  E.\  G.\  High-Priest  of  the
Grand  Chapter  of  South  Carolina,  John  H.  Honour,  who  was  then
and  still  is  (1853)  M.\  P. \ W.\  Commander  of  the  Sup.-.  Council,
S.\  G.\  I.-.  G.-.  of  330,  for  the  Southern  Jurisdiction  of  the  United
States  at  Charleston,  stated  in  his  address  to  the  Grand  Chapter,
that  he  had  in  his  possession  a manuscript  copy  of  the  degrees  of  the
Royal  and  Select  Masters,  in  which  there  was  a note  in  the  hand-
writing of  Brother  Plolbrook  dated  March  15,  1830,  in  these  words :
‘ In  Brother  Snell’s  book  is  written  the  following  :

“ ‘ Supreme  Council  Chamber,  Charleston,  S.  C.,  10th  Feb.,  1827.

“ ‘ I hereby  certify  that  the  detached  degrees,  called  Royal  and
Select  Master,  or  Select  Masters  of  27,  were  regularly  given  by  the
Sublime  Grand  Lodge  of  Perfection  (No.  2 in  the  U.  S.  A.),  es-
tablished by  Brother  Isaac  Da  Costa,  in  Charleston,  in  Feb.,  1783,
one  of  the  original  Members  of  which  Most  Illustrious  Brother

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

1560

Moses  C.  Levy,  is  still  alive  and  a Member  of  it  to  this  day,  without
ceasing  to  he  so  for  a day;  and  further,  that  at  the  first  establish-
ment of  a Grand  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  in  Charleston,
February,  1788,  by  the  111.-.  Dep.\  Inspectors  General,  Joseph
Myers,  B.  M.  Spitzer,  and  A.  Forst,  Brother  Myers  (who  suc-
ceeded Brother  Da  Costa  after  his  decease)  deposited  a certified
copy  of  the  Degrees  from  Berlin,  in  Prussia,  to  be  under  the  guid-
ance and  fostering  protection  of  the  government  of  the  above
Grand  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem.’

“ Brother  Myers  shortly  after  this  (Feb.  20,  1 788,)  resided  some
time  in  Norfolk,  Richmond,  and  Baltimore,  previous  to  his  removal
to  Europe,  and  he  communicated  a knowledge  of  these  degrees  to
a number  of  brethren  in  those  cities.  The  original  copy  is  still  in
my  keeping,  and  agreeably  to  the  obligations  of  the  same,  and  the
Grand  Constitutions  governing  those  degrees,  viz.  : Royal  and  Se-
lect Mason  of  27,  it  is  correct  and  lawful  to  give  them  either  to
Sublime  Masons,  who  have  arrived  to  the  Knights  of  the  Ninth
Arch  (13th)  or  to  the  Companions  of  the  3d  Arch  (Royal  Arch
Masons).”

From  this  statement,  of  those  who  held  the  control  originally,  it
will  be  observed  that  it  was  the  design,  always,  to  confer,  at  least
the  Select  degree,  only  on  those  who  had  a knowledge  of  the  Royal
Arch  degree  ; hence  to  impart  the  mysteries  of  the  Ninth  Arch  to
anyone  “ beneath  the  dignity  of  the  Royal  Arch,”  was  to  invert  the
true  order  of  succession , so  essential  in  all  Masonic  degrees.

It  has  been  asserted  by  some  that  the  Cryptic  degrees  had  been
worked  in  this  country  earlier  than  1783  ; as  early  perhaps  as  1766
in  the  city  of  Albany,  and  that  they  were  brought  from  France,  and
not  from  Prussia.  Brother  Pike  said  in  his  report  t1

“ We  can  soon  learn  how  it  was  that  the  Council  degrees  came
about  1766  from  France  and  not  from  Prussia.  In  1761,  the  lodges
and  Councils  of  the  superior  degrees  being  extended  throughout
Europe,  Frederic  II.  (or  the  Great),  King  of  Prussia,  as  Grand
Commander  of  the  Order  of  Princes  of  the  Royal  Secret,  or  32d
degree,  was  by  general  consent  acknowledged  and  recognized  as
Sovereign  and  Supreme  Head  of  the  Scotch  Rite.”

“On  the  25th  October,  1762,  the  Grand  Masonic  Constitutions

1 “ History  of  Masonry  and  Concordant  Orders,”  p.  649.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1561

were  finally  ratified  in  Berlin,  and  proclaimed  for  the  government  of
all  Masonic  bodies  working  in  the  Scotch  Rite  over  the  two  hemi-
spheres ; and  in  the  same  year  they  were  transmitted  to  Stephen
Morin,  who  had  been  appointed,  in  August,  1761,  Inspector  General
for  the  New  World  by  the  Grand  Consistory  of  Princes  of  the  Royal
Secret,  convened  at  Paris,  under  the  presidency  of  Chaillon  de  Join-
ville,  representative  of  Frederic,  and  Substitute-General  of  the  Order.
It  will  be  remembered  that  the  330  was  not  then  created  ; and,  under
Frederic  the  Great,  there  was  no  rank  higher  than  the  320,  nor  any
body  superior  to  a Consistory.  When  Morin  arrived  in  the  West
Indies,  he,  agreeably  to  his  patent,  appointed  M.  Hayes  a Deputy
Inspector  General,  with  the  power  of  appointing  others  when  neces-
sary. It  was  under  this  authority,  coming,  it  is  true,  from  the  Con-
sistory of  Paris  held  by  that  consistory  as  the  delegate  and  repre-
sentative of  Frederic  the  Great,  that  the  Lodges  of  Perfection  in
Albany  and  Charleston  were  established,  with  authority  to  confer
these  detached  degrees.”

“ Many  rites  flourished  in  Europe  awhile  and  died.  The  French
and  Scotch  Rites  reduced  the  degrees  practiced  by  their  votaries,
the  former  to  seven,  the  Seventh  being  the  Rose  Croix,  the  latter
to  thirty-three  and  some  auxiliary  degrees.  By  common  consent  it
became  Masonic  law  that  the  first  three  degrees  were  the  joint
property  of  all,  but  the  others,  the  peculiar  property  of  the  in-
ventors. Royal  Arch  Masonry  separated  itself  from  ‘ Blue  ’ Ma-
sonry, organized  itself,  invented  three  new  degrees,  and  commenced
an  independent  existence.  The  Royal  and  Select  Masters  formed
themselves  into  councils,  and  after  a time  they,  too,  organized  them-
selves into  Grand  Councils,  and  claimed  an  independent  existence.
The  Supreme  Council  did  not  deny  the  right,  but  simply  retained
their  original  right  to  confer  the  degrees,  and  Charter  councils  in
States  where  no  Grand  Councils  have  been  organized.”

The  following  is  a copy  of  a decree  issued  by  the  Supreme  Coun-
cil A.-.  A.\  A.-.  S.\  Rite  of  the  Northern  Jurisdiction,  the  true
copy  of  which  was  sent  to  the  Southern  Jurisdiction  and  was  pre-
sented to  the  writer  many  years  since  by  General  Albert  Pike.

“The  Supreme  Grand  Council  of  Sov.  Grand  Inspectors  Gen-
eral for  the  Northern  Masonic  District  and  Jurisdiction  of  the
U.  States  of  America  duly,  lawfully,  and  constitutionally  assem-
bled on  the  10th  day  of  June,  1850,  at  its  Grand  East,  the  City  of

1562

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

New  York,  in  its  Supreme  Grand  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem
do  declare  and  make  known  as  follows :

“That  in  addition  to  the  regular  series  of  degrees  and  order  of  the
ancient  and  accepted  rite,  the  said  rite  had,  from  time  immemorial,
been  in  possession  of,  and  claims  as  its  exclusive  property,  a number
of  detached  degrees  which  are  illustrative  of,  connected  with,  and
necessarily  appendant  to  certain  degrees  in  said  right  or  departments
thereof : and  that  the  Supreme  Grand  Council,  as  the  sole  conserva-
tors of  said  rite,  in  said  Northern  Jurisdiction,  is  sacredly  bound  to
preserve  intact  and  free  from  any  amalgamation  with  foreign  rites  or
Masonic  Bodies,  not  acknowledged  by  us  or  our  said  rite,  all  and
every  one  of  the  detached  degrees  referred  to.

“ That  two  of  such  detached  degrees,  called  ‘ Royal  Master  ’
and  ‘Select  Master,’  or  ‘Select  Masons  of  27,’  having  in  various
ways  and  at  different  times  fallen  into  the  hands  of  persons  in  no
way  connected  with  the  sublime  system  of  free  Masonry,  or  the  said
‘ ancient  and  accepted  rite,’  have  been  and  are  now  cultivated  in  a
garbled  form,  by  bodies  styling  themselves  Masonic,  and  working
under  self-assumed  powers  and  authority  in  this  regard,  claiming  the
right  to  grant  charters  to  confer  them  ; and,  moreover,  that  these
degrees,  in  some  places  of  this  Jurisdiction,  have  become  amalga-
mated with  a Modern  American  rite,  and  are  also  claimed  as  the
property  of  the  American  Royal  Arch  Chapters.

“ This  Supreme  Grand  Council  therefore,  as  in  duty  bound,  pro-
tests against  this  invasion  of  its  rights  and  privileges,  and  further
declares  and  makes  known  that  the  said  degrees  of  Royal  and  Se-
lect Master,  from  their  nature  or  character,  and  the  history  they
develop,  and  circumstances  upon  which  founded,  can  not,  except  in
an  anachronistic  and  improper  manner  be  conferred  disconnected
from  the  ineffable  degrees,  and  lodges  of  perfection  (14th  degree
ancient  and  accepted  rite)  and  that  said  degrees  belong  not  only
characteristically  and  historically,  but  legitimately,  to  ‘ Ineffable  Ma-
sonry ’ and  ‘ Lodges  of  Perfection,’  and  do  not  appertain  and  can  not
consistently  and  lawfully  be  made  an  appendage  to  any  Masonic  sys-
tem except  said  ‘ Sublime  System,’  nor  to  any  rite  except  said  ‘ an-
cient and  accepted  rite.’

“And  whereas,  such  assumed  authority  over  the  detached  de-
grees aforesaid,  may,  as  we  have  reason  to  believe  in  some  instances,
have  been  exercised  in  good  faith,  but  without  a due  appreciation  of

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1563

our  rights  and  prerogative  in  regard  to  them,  this  Supreme  Grand
Council  for  the  sake  of  harmony  is  willing  to  confer  and  advise
with  our  illustrious  Brethren,  the  Southern  Supreme  Grand  Council
at  Charleston,  S.  Carolina,  and  act  in  concert  with  them  in  adopting
such  measures  in  reference  to  those  degrees,  as  may  be  mutually
adjudged  most  feasible  and  proper,  without  infringing  in  any  way
whatever  upon  our  Supremacy  over  the  said  degrees.

“ ‘ Dens  meumque  jus ,’

“ J-  J-  J-  Gourgas,

Sovereign  Grand  Commander  of  33d
for  the  Northern  D.  and  J.,  U.  S.  A.

“ Jiles  F.  Yates,

Inspr.  Lieut  Grand  Commander.

“ N.  B. — Signed  on  the  original  by  Archd  Bull,  Sov.  Gr.  Insp.
General  33d;  K.  H.  Van  Rensselaer,  Sov.  Gr.  Insp.  Gen1  33d,  and
Francis  Turner,  Prince  of  Jerusalem  Rose  *f*  H.  R.  D.  M.  ; K.  H.;
S.  P.  R.  S.,  and  now  a member  of  this  Supreme  Grand  Council.

“To  the  Supreme  Grand  Council  of  the  33  degree,  ‘ancient  and  ac-
cepted rite,’  at  their  Grand  East,  the  City  of  Charleston,  S.  Carolina.

“Through  their  Illus.  Brother,  Albert  G.  Mackey,  M.D.,  Grand
Secretary  General  of  their  H.  E.”

A true  copy,

W.  R.  Singleton,  330.

The  Supreme  Council  of  the  Southern  Jurisdiction  held  to  the
same  contention  until  at  a meeting  of  the  Supreme  Council  at  Bal-
timore, May,  1870,  they  surrendered  all  claim  to  these  degrees.

Dr.  Olivar,  in  his  Historical  Landmarks'  gives  an  account  of
the  legend  of  the  Secret  Vault  as  discovered  in  the  construction  of
the  Second  Temple,  as  follows :

“ The  foundations  of  the  Temple  were  opened,  and  cleared  from
the  accumulation  of  the  rubbish,  that  a level  might  be  procured  for
the  commencement  of  the  building.  While  engaged  in  excavations
for  this  purpose  three  fortunate  sojourners  are  said  to  have  dis-
covered our  ancient  stone  of  foundation,  which  had  been  deposited
in  the  secret  crypt  by  Wisdom,  Strength,  and  Beauty,  to  prevent  the
communication  of  ineffable  secrets  to  profane  or  unworthy  persons.

“The  discovery  having  been  communicated  to  the  prince,2

1 Vol.  ii.,  p.  434.

2 Zerubbabel  was  Tirshatha  (Governor).

I5<54

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

prophet,  and  priest  of  the  Jews,  the  stone  was  adopted  as  the  Chief
Corner-Stone  of  the  re-edified  building,  and  thus  became,  in  a new
and  more  expressive  sense,  the  type  of  a more  excellent  dispensa-
tion. An  avenue  was  also  accidentally  discovered,  supported  by
seven  pairs  of  pillars,  perfect  and  entire,  which,  from  their  situation,
had  escaped  the  fury  of  the  flames  that  had  consumed  the  Temple,
and  the  desolation  of  war  that  had  destroyed  the  city.

“The  Secret  Vault,  which  had  been  built  by  Solomon  as  a
secure  depository  for  certain  secrets  that  would  have  inevitably  been
lost  without  some  such  expedient  for  their  preservation,  communi-
cated by  a subterranean  avenue  with  the  King’s  palace  ; but  at  the
destruction  of  Jerusalem,  the  entrance  having  been  closed  by  the
rubbish  of  falling  buildings,  it  had  been  discovered  by  the  appear-
ance of  a keystone  among  the  foundations  of  the  Sanctum  Sanc-
torum. A careful  inspection  was  then  made,  and  the  invaluable
secrets  were  placed  in  safe  custody.”

Brother  Mackey  says  : 1

“To  support  this  legend  there  is  no  historic  evidence  and  no
authority  except  that  of  the  Talmudic  writers.  It  is  clearly  a mythi-
cal symbol,  and  as  such  we  must  accept  it.  We  can  not  altogether
reject  it,  it  is  so  intimately  and  so  extensively  connected  with  the
symbolism  of  the  Lost  and  recovered  Word,  that  if  we  reject  the
theory  of  the  Secret  Vault  we  must  abandon  all  of  that  symbol-
ism, and  with  it  the  whole  of  the  science  of  Masonic  symbolism.
Fortunately  there  is  ample  evidence  in  the  present  appearance  of
Jerusalem  and  its  subterranean  topography  to  remove  from  any
tacit,  and  as  it  were,  conventional  assent  to  the  theory,  features  of
absurdity  and  impossibility.

“ Considered  simply  as  a historic  question,  there  can  be  no
doubt  of  the  existence  of  immense  vaults  beneath  the  superstructure
of  the  original  Temple  of  Solomon.  Prime,  Robinson,  and  other
writers,  who  in  recent  times  have  described  the  topography  of  Jeru-
salem, speak  of  the  existence  of  these  structures,  which  they  visited,
and,  in  some  instances,  carefully  examined.”  Dr.  Barclay  ( City  of
the  Great  King)  describes  in  many  places  of  his’interesting  topog-
raphy of  Jerusalem,  the  vaults  and  subterranean  chambers  which
are  to  be  found  beneath  the  site  of  the  Old  Temple.

1 “ Encyclopaedia  of  Freemasonry,”  p.  852.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1565

‘‘In  the  earliest  ages  the  cave  or  vault  was  deemed  sacred.
The  first  worship  was  in  cave-temples,  which  were  either  natural  or
formed  by  art  to  resemble  the  excavations  of  nature.

“The  vault  was,  in  the  ancient  mysteries,  symbolic  of  the  grave  ;
for  initiation  was  symbolic  of  death,  where  alone  Divine  Truth  is
to  be  found.  The  Masons  have  adopted  the  same  idea.  They
teach  that  death  is  but  the  beginning  of  life  ; that  if  the  first  or
evanescent  temples  of  our  transitory  life  be  on  the  surface,  we  must
descend  into  the  Secret  Vault  of  death  before  we  can  find  that
sacred  deposit  of  truth  which  is  to  adorn  our  second  temple  of
eternal  life.  It  is  in  this  sense  an  entrance  through  the  grave  into
eternal  life,  that  we  are  to  view  the  symbolism  of  the  Secret  Vault.
Like  every  other  myth  and  allegory  of  Masonry,  the  historical  rela-
tion may  be  true,  or  it  may  be  false  ; it  may  be  founded  on  fact,  or
be  the  invention  of  imagination,  the  lesson  is  still  there,  and  the
symbolism  teaches  it,  exclusive  of  the  history.”

The  above  quotations  have  been  made  because  the  present
writer  had  devoted  many  years  to  the  study  of  the  topography  of
Jerusalem  and  its  immediate  vicinity  in  connection  with  his  studies
in  the  various  Masonic  rites  which  locate  their  mysteries  in  that
city  and  in  and  about  the  Temple  area  now  called  Harem-esh
Sheriff.  His  conclusions  are  that  not  a single  degree  in  Masonry
can  properly  be  located  near  the  city  of  Jerusalem  nor  on  or  in  the
“ Sacred  Area”  of  the  Temple.

So  far  as  the  caves  or  cisterns  which  are  to  be  found  under  the
surface  of  the  “ Area  ” at  the  present  day  did  give  a key  to  those  who
formulated  the  Cryptic  degrees,  he  feels  assured  that  the  origina-
tors of  those  degrees  did  have  some  knowledge  of  their  existence —
but  with  accurate  maps  of  that  “ Area  ” and  the  location  of  every
vault  or  cistern  before  us,  furnished  by  the  accurate  survey  of  Cap-
tain Chas.  Warren  in  1867,  we  could  not  for  one  moment  entertain
the  belief  that  such  a system  of  vaults  or  arches  ever  existed  there,
as  described  in  our  lectures  of  any  of  the  Rituals — but  we  do  be-
lieve that  these  rituals,  being  symbolic  and  allegorical,  were  founded
upon  the  fact  of  vaults  found  in  that  locality.  We  can  refer  to
the  legend  of  Enoch  and  his  vaults,  erected  to  conceal  the  sa-
cred delta,  constructed  by  him  and  his  son  Methuselah,  after  the
ineffable  name  of  Deity  had  been  revealed  to  him,  and  which  name
he  had  engraved  upon  the  delta,  which  by  the  command  of  God,

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

1566

he  was  to  conceal  and  secure,  for  future  generations  to  discover.
These  vaults,  nine  of  them,  were  securely  constructed,  and  two  pil-
lars were  erected,  and  placed  near,  with  inscriptions  to  indicate  the
locality  of  the  vaults.  It  is  possible  that  the  pillars  were  destroyed
and  carried  away  by  the  flood.  The  fable  further  states  that  when
King  Solomon  commenced  the  preparation  of  the  ground  on  Mount
Moriah  for  the  temple,  his  workmen  broke  into  these  vaults  and
found  certain  mysterious  things  there ; and  upon  reporting  to  King
Solomon  what  they  had  found,  he  directed  them  to  cease  their  la-
bors, as  he  supposed  the  vault  had  been  a secret  place  for  the  worship
of  the  gods  of  the  original  inhabitants  of  Canaan.  God,  however,
notified  him  in  a dream  that  he  should  proceed  ; as  he  had  designed
!hat  spot  for  the  erection  of  the  Temple  for  his  worship,  as  it  had
been  thrice  dedicated,  first  by  Enoch  when  he  constructed  the
vaults  and  made  the  deposits  of  these  mysterious  emblems — second,
on  this  spot  Abraham  erected  the  altar  to  sacrifice  his  son  Isaac1
— and  third,  by  his  father  David,  where  he  erected  the  altar  on  the
threshing  floor  of  Arauna  and  sacrificed  to  stay  the  hand  of  the  de-
stroying Angel.2

There  is  no  doubt  whatever  in  the  mind  of  the  writer  but  that
the  inventors  of  the  degrees  above  the  three  original  degrees — such
as  the  Royal  Arch  and  Select,  designed  to  demonstrate  to  the  postu-
lant the  value  of  the  great  and  now  ineffable  and  mysterious  name
of  Deity.

It  is  well  known  to  all  students  of  the  ancient  mysteries  of  the
Orient  that  after  the  initiation  of  a candidate  in  the  lower  mysteries,
and  a certain  period  having  elapsed,  by  many  severe  tests,  lustra-
tions by  the  four  elements  and  trials,  he  was  invested  with  the
great  word  in  a very  solemn  and  mysterious  manner,  by  the  Archi-
Magus,  who  alone  could  communicate  this  word  to  the  postulant.
In  receiving  this  word,  was  conveyed  to  him  by  its  interpretation,
the  meaning  of  all  the  preceding  ceremonies.

Those  who  arranged  the  series  of  degrees  as  above  mentioned,
from  the  Entered  Apprentice  to  the  Select  Master,  designed  that  in
the  last  degree  there  should  be  a full  explanation  of  all  that  which
was  concealed  in  the  various  forms  and  ceremonies,  and  in  our  pres-
ent lectures  in  that  degree  it  is  very  evident  that  such  was  the  de-

1 Gen.,  ch.  xxii.

2 1.  Chron.,  ch.  xxi.,  verses  25  to  27.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1567

sign  of  closing  the  Ancient  Craft  Masonry  with  the  Select  of
Twenty-seven,  “to  pass  the  Circle  of  Ancient  Craft  Masonry.”

General  Grand  Council.

In  1871  the  Grand  Council  of  Massachusetts  undertook  the  task
of  bringing  order  out  of  the  disordered  condition  of  the  Cryptic
Rite  in  the  United  States,  and  having  enlisted  the  valuable  services
of  our  most  distinguished  Companion,  Hon.  Josiah  H.  Drummond,
of  Maine,1  who,  in  compliance  with  their  request,  called  a conven-
tion, and  fourteen  Grand  Councils  were  represented  at  the  meeting
in  New  York  City,  June  12, 1872,  at  which  the  following  was  adopted:

“ Whereas , In  some  jurisdictions  the  question  has  been  mooted
of  surrendering  the  Cryptic  Degrees  to  the  Chapters  ; and

“ Whereas,  There  are  many  Companions  who  have  received  the
degrees  in  Chapters  or  from  Sovereign  Inspectors  of  A.\A.\S.\
Rite,  therefore

“ Resolved,  That  it  is  the  sense  of  this  Convention  that  the
Cryptic  degrees  should  be  under  the  exclusive  jurisdiction  of  Grand
Councils,  and  that  no  one  should  be  recognized  as  a regular  Com-
panion of  the  Rite  who  had  not  received  the  degrees  in  a lawfully
constituted  Council  or  by  authority  of  the  Supreme  Council  of  the
A.\A.\S.\  Rite  previous  to  the  date,  or  has  been  lawfully  healed.”

The  convention  adopted  a uniform  system  of  nomenclature,
which  has  since  been  generally  adopted.

In  June,  1873,  another  meeting  of  the  Convention  was  held  in
New  York  and  nineteen  Grand  Councils  were  represented.  The
following  was  adopted  :

“ That  the  order  of  the  succession  of  the  degrees  be : First,
Royal  Master’s  ; second,  Select  Master’s;  and  that  it  be  left  optional
with  each  Grand  Council  to  confer  the  super-excellent  Master’s  de-
gree as  an  honorary  degree."

The  convention  announced  as  its  opinion  that  a General  Grand
Council  of  the  United  States  should  be  formed.  Subsequently
meetings  were  held,  December,  1874,  in  New  Orleans;  August,
1877,  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.  ; at  which  latter  meeting  twenty-two  Grand
Councils  were  represented,  and  also  Ontario,  Canada.  The  con-

Drummond,  “ History  of  Grand  Council  in  United  States,”  p.  89,  in  the  Cryptic
Rite.

1 568

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

vention  met  at  Detroit,  August  23,  1880,  when  a constitution  was
adopted  which  it  was  required  should  be  adopted  by  not  less  than
nine  regular  Grand  Councils,  and  then  should  become  operative.
The  General  Grand  Recorder,  George  W.  Cooley,  gave  notice,
February  23,  1881,  that  the  Grand  Councils  of  New  York,  Min-
nesota, Ohio,  Indiana,  Maryland,  Tennessee,  Massachusetts,  Ala-
bama, and  Louisiana  had  ratified  the  constitution.  On  March  1,
1881,  Hon.  Josiah  H.  Drummond,  General  Grand  Master,  issued
his  circular  to  the  officers,  and  also  announced  that  the  Grand
Council  of  South  Carolina  had  adopted  the  constitution.1  The  first
session  was  held  pursuant  to  this  circular,  at  Denver,  Col.,  August
14,  1883,  ar,d  the  following  Grand  Councils  were  represented  : Cali-
fornia, Florida,  Indiana,  Kansas,  Louisiana,  Maryland,  Maine,  Massa-
chusetts, Minnesota,  Missouri,  New  Hampshire,  Ohio,  New  York,
South  Carolina,  Tennessee,  and  Vermont.  (Forever  blessed  be
their  memory.)  Of  those  seventeen  who  originally  acceded  to  the
first  formation  of  the  provisional  General  Grand  Council,  in  1880,
these  were  absent : Georgia  and  Alabama ; and  South  Carolina
had  since  given  her  adhesion.  Alabama,  having  been  with  the
seventeen  Grand  Councils  to  join  in  the  formation  of  the  provi-
sional General  Grand  Council  in  1880,  was  never  represented  at
any  subsequent  assembly.

We  will  now,  in  a more  regular  manner,  give  the  history  of  the
formation  of  the  General  Grand  Council.  The  General  Grand
Council  of  the  United  States  was  organized  at  a convention  of
delegates  of  seventeen  Grand  Councils  which  met  at  Detroit,  Mich.,
August  23,  1880.

The  action  of  this  convention  was  at  once  approved  by  the  fol-
lowing Grand  Councils:  New  York,  Minnesota,  Ohio,  Indiana,
Maryland,  Tennessee,  Massachusetts,  Alabama,  and  Louisiana.

South  Carolina  Grand  Council  soon  thereafter  organized,  and
ratified  the  constitution  of  the  General  Grand  Council  and  resumed
work.  In  the  address  of  the  General  Grand  Master,  Josiah  H.
Drummond,  at  the  first  Triennial  Assembly,  held  at  Denver,  Col.,
August  14,  1883,  he  states:  “At  the  time  of  the  formation  of
the  provisional  General  Grand  Council  there  were  twenty-three
Grand  Councils,  which  had  not  adopted  the  ‘Mississippi  Plan.’

1 Proceedings,  1883,  p.  20.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1569

“ Of  these,  seventeen,  viz.,  Alabama,  California,  Florida,  Georgia,
Indiana,  Kansas,  Louisiana,  Maine,  Maryland,  Massachusetts,  Minne-
sota, Missouri,  New  Hampshire,  New  York,  Ohio,  Tennessee,  and
Vermont,  have  become  constituents  of  the  General  Grand  Council.1 2

“ Of  the  other  six,  five  continue  to  exist,  but  have  not  become
constituents  of  this  body,  viz.,  Connecticut,  Michigan,  New  Jersey,
Pennsylvania,  and  Rhode  Island.  Some  of  these,  however,  have  the
matter  under  consideration.  It  is  understood  why  Connecticut  has
not  given  her  adhesion  is,  the  law  of  this  body,  that  persons  receiv-
ing the  degrees  in  Chapters,  or  in  Councils  appurtenant  to  Chap-
ters, can  not  be  recognized.

“ The  remaining  one  of  twenty-three,  North  Carolina,  at  its  ses-
sion held  in  June  last  undertook  to  dissolve  and  turn  the  degrees
over  to  the  Chapter.  While  this  occasions  regret,  it  is  no  matter  of
surprise,  because  Royal  Arch  Masonry  is  at  an  exceedingly  low  ebb
in  that  State,  and  it  sometimes  seems  a matter  of  doubt  whether
the  Grand  Chapter  itself  will  be  able  to  maintain  its  existence.

“ Grand  Councils  at  the  advent  of  the  ‘ Mississippi  Plan  ’ existed
in  other  States,  as  follows : Arkansas,  Illinois,  Iowa,  Kentucky,  Mis-
sissippi, Nebraska,  South  Carolina,  and  Wisconsin.  All  of  which
accepted  in  some  form  the  general  features  of  the  ' Mississippi  Plan.’

“ The  Grand  Councils  of  Arkansas,  Illinois,  and  Kentucky  have
reorganized,  but  have  not  as  yet  ratified  and  adopted  the  General
Grand  Constitution.  The  Grand  Council  of  Illinois  never  formally
dissolved,  but  maintained  its  existence  and  undertook  to  surrender
the  degrees  to  the  Grand  Chapter ; this  action  had  been  rescinded
by  both  grand  bodies,  and  the  Grand  Council  now  exists  with  all
its  powers,  and  I trust  with  its  pristine  vigor.”3

We  have  followed  thus  far  the  history  of  the  Cryptic  Rite  as
given  by  Companion  Josiah  H.  Drummond  in  his  address  to  the
General  Grand  Council  at  the  first  Triennial  Assembly,  three  years
after  the  inauguration  of  that  body.  He  further  stated  the  follow-
ing Grand  Councils  had  taken  no  definite  action,  viz.,  Iowa  and
Nebraska.  Mississippi  had  taken  action  in  reference  to  the  over-
whelming sentiment  of  the  Craft,  which  looks  toward  reorganizing
the  Grand  Council  System.  The  situation  in  Wisconsin  is  anoma-
lous; the  Grand  Council  surrendered  the  degrees  to  the  Grand  Chap-

1 Proceedings  General  Grand  Council,  1883,  p.  7.

2 Ibid.,  General  Grand  Master’s  Address.

99

157°

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

ter,  which  authorized  the  conferring  of  them  in  a council  appurtenant
to  a chapter,1 2  so  that  in  theory,  if  not  in  practice,  each  chapter  had
a council  appurtenant  to  it,  the  chapter  officers  being  the  officers  of
the  council.  But  in  1881,  in  consequence,  as  I understand,  of  ob-
jections to  the  recognition  of  persons  receiving  the  degrees  in  such
councils,  a convention  of  the  delegates  of  these  councils  was  called,
and  a Grand  Council  of  Royal  and  Select  Masters  was  organized. 8

We  have  given  the  above  very  interesting  information  as  to  the
several  States  wherein  the  Cryptic  Rite  was  worked  in  this  place
rather  than  in  the  separate  individual  jurisdictions,  as  it  greatly  saves
space  and  time,  reserving  both  of  these  for  the  details  properly  be-
longing to  each  subordinate  jurisdiction  as  to  the  organization  of
the  constituent  councils  in  each,  as  it  will  appear  under  the  alpha-
betical arrangement.

Note. — Companion  Drummond  in  the  above  sketch  begins  with
Alabama,  but  that  Grand  Council  never  appears  in  any  subsequent
proceedings  as  a constituent  of  the  General  Council.

Alabama.

The  information  which  we  have  been  enabled  to  obtain  concern-
ing Cryptic  Masonry  in  Alabama  is  somewhat  vague.  It  is  supposed
that  John  Barker,  of  the  A.\  A.\  S.\  R.\  Southern  Jurisdiction,
started  the  first  councils  of  Royal  and  Select  Masters,  under  his
authority  as  Deputy  Inspector-General.  It  is  conceded  that  a Grand
Council  was  organized  in  1838  (December  13th).3  This  Grand  Coun-
cil repudiated,  very  properly,  the  course  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of
Virginia,  in  capturing  the  degrees  of  the  council,  and  incorporating
them  with  the  chapter  work,  in  1843.  The  council  also,  in  1849,
protested  against  the  Grand  Consistory  of  Charleston  granting  (of)
these  degrees  in  its  jurisdiction.4

This  Grand  Council  met,  with  some  omissions,  as  in  1840,  1861,
1862  or  1863,  until  in  1886  it  was  dissolved,  when  all  branches  of
Masonry  in  that  State  were  much  depressed.  Since  then,  however,
matters  have  greatly  improved.  This  Grand  Council  was  never
connected  with  the  General  Grand  Council  after  1881,  although  one
of  the  first  to  join  in  the  organization  in  1880.

1 Charters  issued  to  chapters  in  1848-49  provided  for  this  usage  — Editor.

2 Ibid.  3 “ History  of  Masonry  and  Concordant  Orders,”  p.  661.  4 Ibid.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1571

A rizona.

The  proceedings  of  the  Triennial  Assembly  of  the  General  Grand
Council  of  1897  show  that  the  following  councils  secured  their
warrants  :

Dispensation  Granted.  Chartered.

Olive  Council,  No.  i.At  Prescott,  July  1,  1893.  August  22,  1894.

Phoenix,  U.  D At  Phoenix,  April  4,  1895.  Surrendered  February  17, 1897.

Tucson,  U.  D At  Tucson,  April  5,  1895.  Surrendered  September  2, 1897.

Arkansas.

Four  subordinate  councils  were,  at  an  early  date,  chartered  by
the  Supreme  Council  A.\  A.\  S.\  R.\  of  the  Southern  Jurisdiction.
These  four  councils  were  formed  by  the  State  Grand  Council,  No-
vember 6,  i860.  In  1878  the  Companions  adopted  the  system  of
incorporation  with  the  chapters;  but  in  1881  resumed  the  inde-
pendent form  ; and  in  1886  united  with  the  General  Grand  Council,
and  is  yet  within  that  organization.  On  the  25th  of  April,  1899,
they  had  the  sad  misfortune  to  lose  their  Grand  Recorder  Com-
panion James  A.  Henry.

California.

The  Grand  Council  of  Alabama  granted  charters  to  organize
two  councils  in  California.  One  council  was  chartered  by  the
Grand  Council  of  Tennessee,  and  one  by  the  Grand  Council  of
Texas.  These  four  councils  organized  a Grand  Council,  June
26,  i860.  In  1880  this  Grand  Council  united  with  the  General
Grand  Council  in  its  organization.

Colorado.

The  following  councils  were  organized  in  Colorado  under  the
General  Grand  Council :

Dispensation  Granted.  Chartered.

Denver,  No.  i Denver,  January  16,  1892.  August  21,  1894,

Rocky  Mountain,  No.  2 Trinidad,  March  24,  1893.  August  21,  1894.

Durango,  No.  3 Durango,  May  16,  1893.  August  21,  1894,

Akron,  No.  4 Akron,  May  23,  1893.  August  21,  1894,

Canon  City,  No.  5 Canon  City,  June  5,  1893.  August  21,  1894,

Gunnison,  U.  D Gunnison.

Pueblo,  No.  7 Pueblo,  April  ic,  1894.  August  21.  1894

1572

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

All  of  these  councils  are  reported  as  being  in  existence  at  the
Triennial  held  in  1897.  At  that  session  the  General  Grand  Master
reported  that  he  had  issued  dispensations  as  follows :

To  Hiram  Council,  at  Greely,  with  sixteen  members,  December
8,  1894;  but  no  interest  being  taken,  the  dispensation  was  sur-
rendered, December  9,  1896.

To  Zabud  Council,  at  Colorado  Springs,  with  thirty-two  mem.
bers,  May  27,  1895.  This  council  made  reports  for  1895,  1896,
and  1897  ; paid  dues  for  1895  only,  and  asked  for  a Charter;  but
does  not  appear  in  the  list  of  councils  whose  dispensations  were
continued  ; nor  was  it  chartered.

To  Leadville  Council,  at  Leadville,  June  10,  1895,  and  dis-
pensation was  surrendered,  November  10,  1896.

Hiram,  U.  D.,  Greely,  December  8,  1894,  and  surrendered.

Zabud,  U.  D.,  Colorado  Springs,  May  27,  1895,  and  continued.

Leadville,  U.  D.,  Leadville,  June  10,  1895,  surrendered.

Connecticut.

In  1818  Companion  Jeremy  L.  Cross  was  very  industrious  in
propagating  the  Cryptic  Rite,  and  succeeded  in  forming  ten  coun-
cils in  Connecticut  The  first  Grand  Council  of  Select  Masters  for
the  State  was  organized  by  that  name  as  claimed.  There  are  no
records  of  this  body  up  to  1830.  In  1825  the  two  degrees  of
Royal  and  Select  Masons  were  recognized.  From  1826  to  1846,  in
consequence  of  the  Morgan  episode,  very  little  if  anything  was  done
in  this  as  well  as  other  branches  of  Masonry.

Since  the  revival,  in  all  the  States  where  the  anti-Masonic  spirit
had  prevailed,  Masonry  has  taken  a “ new  and  prolonged  lease,”
and  flourishes  to  a much  greater  degree  than  ever  before  in  its
history.  The  sons  and  grandsons  of  the  bitterest  anti-Masons  of
1830  are  now  the  most  zealous  in  their  efforts  to  spread  abroad  the
“ glad  tidings  of  peace  on  earth  and  good-will  toward  men.”

Connecticut  Grand  Council  does  not  belong  to  the  General
Grand  Council,  which  is  much  to  be  regretted.  The  benefits  of
her  union  with  that  body  would  be  mutual

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1573

Delaware.

It  is  said  that  Jeremy  L.  Cross,  when  on  his  lecturing  tour  in
the  early  days,  visited  Delaware  and  conferred  the  degrees  in  Wil-
mington and  Newcastle.  We  have  no  further  information  from
that  State.

District  of  Columbia.

The  Cryptic  degrees  are  first  mentioned,  in  the  history  of  Ma-
sonic degrees  in  the  District  of  Columbia,  in  the  records  of  the
Grand  Chapter  which  was  organized  in  1822.  At  the  Semi-Annual
Convocation  held  June  9,  1829,  the  report  of  the  Committee  on
Correspondence  refers  to  a circular  letter  which  had  been  sent  by
the  Grand  Chapter  of  Maryland  to  each  Grand  Chapter  in  the
United  States  ; which  is  as  follows  :*

“ M.  E.  Sir  and  Companion  :

“ I am  instructed  by  the  Grand  Chapter  over  which  I have  the
honor  to  preside,  to  address  you,  and  through  you  your  Grand
Chapter,  upon  the  unsettled  state  of  the  degree  of  Select  Mason,  a
subject  deemed  by  us  of  sufficient  importance  to  claim  the  particular
attention  of  your  Grand  Chapter.

“ This  degree  existed  under  the  authority  of  a distinguished
Chief  in  the  State  of  Maryland,  but  without  the  recognizance  of  our
Grand  Chapter  for  many  years;  until,  in  the  year  1824,  upon  the
revision  of  our  Constitution,  it  appearing  evident  that  the  Select
Degree  not  only  has  an  intimate  connection  with,  but  is  in  a meas-
ure necessary,  as  preparatory  to  and  elucidatory  of  that  of  the
Royal  Arch  ; it  was  formally  recognized  by  our  Grand  Chapter,
and  required  to  be  given  by  our  subordinate  Chapters  in  its  proper
order  immediately  preceding  that  of  the  Royal  Arch.  Under  this
arrangement  we  have  since  progressed,  much  to  our  satisfaction ;
but  it  is  with  regret  that  we  have  learned  that  Councils  or  Chapters
of  Select  Masons  have  been  established  in  some  of  our  sister
States,  independent  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry,  avowedly  in  pursuance
of,  but,  as  we  are  satisfied,  through  a great  mistake  or  actual  abuse
of  any  authority  delegated,  or  meant  to  be  delegated,  in  relation  to
the  Select  Degree.  We  would,  therefore,  beg  leave  respectfully  to

1 Proceedings  of  Grand  Chapter  of  District  of  Columbia,  1822-1833,  p.  108.

1574

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

recommend  to  your  Grand  Chapter  the  consideration  of  this  de-
gree, and  the  circumstances  under  which  it  exists,  within  your  juris-
diction ; with  the  hope  that  you  will  see  it  to  be  for  the  general
interest  of  the  Craft  to  take  the  degree  under  your  recognizance  and
control,  to  whom  of  right  it  belongs,  and  thereby  do  away  with  what
is  felt  to  be  a grievance,  by  those  distinguished  Chiefs,  whose  au-
thority, delegated  to  a limited  extent,  and  for  special  reasons,  has
been  perverted  for  sordid  purposes,  by  the  creation  of  an  indepen-
dent order,  never  contemplated  by  them  ; and  which  we  believe  to  be
inconsistent  with  the  spirit  and  best  interests  of  our  institution.

“ Respectfully  and  fraternally,  &c.”

This  was  never  officially  communicated  to  the  Grand  Chapter  of
the  District  of  Columbia  by  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Maryland,  but
was  taken  from  the  printed  proceedings  of  that  body,  pp.  15,  16,
and  17.

That  committee  also  reported  : “The  Grand  Chapter  of  North
Carolina  had  determined  that  the  degree  should  come  under  the
jurisdiction  of  State  Grand  Chapters,  and  recommended  it  to  the
favorable  consideration  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter.  The  Grand
Chapter  of  Maine  had  referred  the  subject  to  a Committee.  It
remains  for  the  Grand  Chapter  to  take  such  orders  in  the  premises
as  it  shall  seem  proper.”

The  Grand  Chapter  of  Ohio  has  passed  a resolution  of  which
the  following  is  a copy,  and  which  has  officially  been  communicated
to  this  Grand  Chapter  for  its  consideration.  “ At  a regular  com-
munication of  the  Grand  Chapter  [of  Ohio]  in  January,  1829,  the
following  resolution  was  adopted  :

“ Resolved , That  it  is  the  opinion  of  this  Grand  Chapter  that  the
General  Grand  Chapter  of  the  United  States  ought  to  be  dissolved.

“ Bela  Latham,

“Grand  Secretary.”1

A committee  to  whom  the  subject  was  referred  reported  : *

“ That  they  are  decidedly  of  the  opinion  that  the  Royal  and  Se-
lect Master’s  Degrees  should  be  recognized  by  and  conferred  under
the  direction  of  the  several  Grand  Chapters  of  the  respective  States
and  Territories  of  the  Union.  With  regard  to  the  proper  time  wher*

2 Proceedings  of  Grand  Chapter  of  District  of  Columbia,  p.  109.

2 Ibid.,  1 13*

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1575

these  degrees  should  be  conferred,  whether  before  or  after  the  Royal
Arch  Degree,  they  decline  expressing  an  opinion,  preferring  that
this  point  should  be  left  to  the  determination  of  the  General  Grand
Chapter  ; and  they  recommend  that  the  representatives  from  this
Grand  Chapter  to  that  body,  at  its  Triennial  meeting,  in  September,
be  instructed  to  conform  in  their  proceedings  on  this  subject,  to  the
tenor  of  the  foregoing.”  This  was  laid  on  the  table  for  the  present.
When  taken  up  again,  it  was  “ Resolved , That  the  further  considera-
tion thereof  be  postponed  till  the  first  Tuesday  in  August  next ; and
that  in  the  meantime  the  Grand  Secretary  be  directed  to  forward  a
copy  of  the  report  this  day  made  on  that  subject  to  the  several  Coun-
cils of  Royal  and  Select  Masters  in  the  District  of  Columbia.”  1

At  the  special  convocation,  held  August  31,  1829,  the  following
appears : Companion  Baldwin,  from  a committee  appointed  by  the
Council  of  Royal  and  Select  Masters  of  the  City  of  Washington
(which  body  had  been  addressed  on  the  subject  by  the  Grand  Secre-
tary, pursuant  to  order)  presented  to  the  Grand  Chapter  the  follow-
ing letter  and  report,  viz.  : 8

“Washington,  August  31,  1829.

“ At  a special  meeting  of  the  Council  of  Royal  and  Select  Mas-
ters, held  at  the  Central  Masonic  Hall,  on  Saturday,  the  29th  of
August,  instant,  the  written  report  having  been  presented  and  read,
was,  on  motion,  ordered  to  be  transmitted  to  the  Grand  Chapter  of
the  District  of  Columbia  at  their  next  meeting.

“John  Carothers,  T.  I.  G.  M.

“ W.  W.  Billings,  Recorder."

Report.

“ The  Committee  appointed  by  the  Council  of  Royal  and  Select
Masters  of  the  City  of  Washington,  to  whom  was  referred  the  pro-
priety of  extending  the  jurisdiction  of  the  General,  Grand,  and  Sub-
ordinate Royal  Arch  Chapters  so  as  to  embrace  the  Degrees  of
Royal  and  Select  Masters,  have  the  honor  to  report :

“ That  they  have  had  the  subject  under  consideration,  and  are
duly  impressed  with  its  vast  importance.  After  the  most  mature
deliberation  they  have  come  to  the  following  conclusions  : That
Masonic  light  in  its  principles,  and  the  order  of  its  development,  is
fixed  and  unchangeable  ! That  whatever  power  the  Fraternity  may

1 Proceedings  of  the  Grand  Chaptei  of  the  District  of  Columbia,  p.  1 15.  2 Ibid.,  1190

1576

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

have  over  forms  and  ceremonies,  yet  no  body  of  Masons,  however
exalted,  neither  have  nor  can  assume  the  power  of  changing  the  orig-
inal landmarks,  or  altering  its  elements.  Your  committee  are  confi-
dent, from  an  intimate  acquaintance  with  all  the  degrees,  that  those
of  ‘ Royal  and  Select  Master’  are  not  only  posterior  in  order  to  the
'Royal  Arch,’  but  that  in  our  opinion  it  would  not  be  consistent
with  ancient  Masonry  to  make  them  previous.

“ Whether  the  interests  of  the  Craft  would  be  promoted  by  this
extended  jurisdiction,  your  Committee  are  unable  to  say  ; but  should
that  course  be  thought  advisable,  by  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  in
its  solemn  deliberation,  your  Committee  are  decidedly  of  the  opinion
that  it  can  only  be  done  under  the  following  restrictions :

“ i st.  That  the  Degrees  of  Royal  and  Select  Masters  can  only
be  conferred  on  Royal  Arch  Masons.

“2d.  No  one  can  be  an  officer  of  any  Chapter  who  is  not  both
a Royal  and  Select  Master.

“Without  these  restrictions  your  Committee  can  never  consent
to  a change  in  the  present  established  mode  of  proceeding. 1

“ All  of  which  is  most  respectfully  submitted.

“ E.  Baldwin,  1
“ W.  W.  Billings,  j-  Committee ."
“J.  A.  Kennedy,  j

The  report  of  a committee  made  in  June  last  on  the  subject  of
the  degree  was  taken  up  and  read,  and  was  passed  by  a majority
of  one  vote  only,  and  on  motion  it  was

“ Resolved,  That  the  Grand  Secretary  transmit  to  the  General
Grand  Secretary  copies  of  the  two  reports  above  stated,  together
with  the  proper  credentials  of  the  proxies  appointed  to  represent
this  Grand  Chapter  in  the  General  Grand  Chapter  of  the  United
States,  at  its  ensuing  meeting  in  New  York  ; and  that  the  Grand
Secretary  do  prepare  the  proper  instructions.”

At  the  meeting  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  September  11,
1829,  this  question  came  up  for  action  on  a communication  from
Comp.  J.  K.  Stapleton,  upon  which  a suitable  committee  made  the
following  report,  and  it  and  the  resolutions  were  adopted  :

“ Whereas,  It  is  satisfactorily  proved  to  this  General  Grand
Chapter,  that  the  Constitution  of  the  Councils  of  Royal  and  Select

1 Proceedings  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  District  of  Columbia,  p.  120.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

iS77

Master  Mason,  in  different  parts  of  the  United  States,  by  sundry
persons,  has  been  without  any  legitimate  authority,

“ And  Whereas , Those  degrees  are  conferred  in  some  chapters,
under  the  authority  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter ; and  whereas  it
was  proved  that  it  was  the  only  and  sole  intention  of  the  Most  Ex-
cellent Companions  from  whom  these  degrees  emanated  that  they
should  be  conferred  under  the  authority  of  Royal  Arch  Chapters ;
therefore,

“ Resolved , That  this  General  Grand  Chapter  cordially  recom-
mend to  the  different  Councils  in  the  United  States  to  adopt  meas-
ures to  place  those  degrees  under  the  authority  of  the  State  Grand
Chapters.

“ Resolved , That  authority  be,  and  is  hereby,  granted  to  the
several  Grand  Chapters,  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  General  Grand
Chapter,  to  make  such  arrangements  as  shall  be  found  necessary  for
conferring  the  degrees  of  Royal  and  Select  Masters  in  Royal  Arch
Chapters ; provided  always  that  no  Grand  Chapter,  within  the
limits  of  which  is  a Grand  Council,  shall  authorize  the  Royal  Arch
Chapters  under  the  jurisdiction  to  confer  such  degrees  without  the
consent  of  such  Grand  Council.”

We  have  no  records  or  accounts  whatever  in  the  District  of
Columbia  as  to  what  became  of  the  “ Council,”  or  Councils,  if  more
than  one,  which  is  referred  to  above.

The  chapters  in  the  District  continued  to  confer  the  Royal  and
Select  degrees  prior  to  the  Royal  Arch,  until  in  1833,  when  the
Grand  Chapter  was  dissolved.  Several  of  the  chapters  again  joined
the  Grand  Chapter  of  Maryland,  which  body,  thereafter,  in  1844,
added  to  its  nomenclature  “ the  District  of  Columbia,”  and  the
Council  degrees  were  worked  within  the  chapters  prior  to  the
Royal  Arch,  until  May  23,  1867,  when  the  Grand  Chapter  of
the  District  of  Columbia  was  again  organized  ; and  on  that  day,
the  new  Grand  Chapter,  by  resolution,  unanimously  dropped  those
degrees  from  the  curriculum  of  the  chapter  work,  being  well  satis-
fied that  they  did  not  properly  belong  to  the  chapters.  Soon  after
the  organization  of  the  Grand  Chapter  in  1867,  Companion  Ben-
jamin B.  French,  the  Inspector-General  of  the  Southern  Jurisdic-
tion for  the  A.\A.’.  S..R.\,  for  the  District  of  Columbia,  issued
three  dispensations  to  form  three  new  councils  of  Royal  and  Select
Masters,  for  the  District  of  Columbia.

1578

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Those  who  had  received  those  degrees  in  regular  organized
councils  refused  t.o  join  in  this  movement.  Soon  after  this,  the
question  was  agitated  as  to  the  legality  and  propriety  of  thus  in-
augurating a new  method  of  propagating  the  Cryptic  degrees,  and
the  result  was,  these  three  councils  went  into  “ innocuous  desue-
tude.” When  the  time  was  deemed  judicious,  the  present  writer,
with  eight  others,  who  had  been  regular  Council  Masons,  prepared
a petition  to  the  Grand  Council  of  Massachusetts  for  a dispensa-
tion to  open  LaFayette  Council.  This  was  granted  August,  1870,
with  the  writer  as  Most  Illustrious  Master.  The  Grand  Officers  of
the  Grand  Council  of  that  State  came  to  Washington  and  opened
LaFayette  Council.

Inasmuch  as  the  great  body  of  Royal  and  Select  Masons  in  the
District  had  received  the  degrees  of  Royal  and  Select  Masters  in
their  several  chapters  prior  to  the  Royal  Arch,  it  was  decided  that
all  such  Royal  Arch  Masons,  as  well  as  those  who  had  never  re-
ceived the  Council  degrees,  should  be  received  at  a nominal  price
(five  dollars)  for  those  degrees.  Accordingly,  in  two  nights  sessions
the  Grand  Officers  conferred  the  Royal,  Select,  and  Super-excellent
degrees  upon  158  R.  A.  Masons.  A Charter  was  granted  Decem-
ber 14,  1870,  and  the  council  started  with  flying  colors  and  great
success.  This  council  continued  with  some  measure  of  prosperity
for  several  years,  when  from  internal  dissensions  the  members  lost
their  interest  and  in  a few  years  ceased  to  attend,  and  the  council
died  out.

When  the  General  Grand  Council  of  the  United  States  was
organized  in  1881,  the  present  writer,  after  correspondence  with
Companion  Josiah  H.  Drummond,  the  General  Grand  Master,  and  a
few  members  of  the  defunct  body,  petitioned  for  another  council  to
be  called  “ Washington,”  with  the  principal  officers  of  the  deceased
LaFayette  Council  at  the  head.  A dispensation  was  granted,
and  started  with  good  prospects.  At  the  next  meeting  of  the  Gen-
eral Grand  Council  a Charter  was  granted.  Since  that  time  Wash-
ington Council,  No.  1,  has  continued  to  grow,  but  not  as  rapidly  as
she  should.  Indeed,  the  District  of  Columbia  should  have  several
councils  in  prosperous  operation,  and  that.  too.  under  the  constitu-
tion of  a Grand  Council  for  the  District.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1579

Florida.

The  Southern  Supreme  Council,  exercising  its  undoubted  right
of  control  at  that  time  over  the  degrees  of  Royal  and  Select  Masons,
through  some  one  of  her  inspectors,  perhaps  in  South  Carolina,  had,
previous  to  1858,  issued  at  different  times  warrants  to  form  three
councils  in  Florida.  The  present  writer  is  personally  aware  of  the
one  existing  at  Warrington,  adjoining  the  navy-yard  at  that  locality,
as  he  reported  for  duty  as  Chief  Constructing  Engineer  at  that  naval
station  February,  1857,  and  found  a thriving  lodge,  chapter,  and
council  in  full  operation,  and  it  was  his  great  pleasure  to  assist  in
the  work  in  all  of  these  bodies  at  that  time.

January  13,  1858,  these  three  councils  organized  a Grand  Coun-
cil, at  the  time  of  the  agitation  of  who  should  control  these  degrees.
After  much  discussion  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Florida  declined  to
act.  The  Grand  Council  became  a member  of  the  General  Grand
Body.

There  have  been  no  proceedings  of  the  body  issued  since  1882,
and  there  have  been  no  meetings  since  1884.  In  the  proceedings
of  the  General  Grand  Council  for  1897  there  is  a broad  black  mark
across  the  page  opposite  to  Florida,  where  the  Grand  Recorder’s
name  should  have  been,  but  in  the  tables  of  annual  assemblies  from
1S94  to  1896  Florida  appears  with  names  of  the  Grand  Officers.

Georgia.

We  learn  that  one  of  the  deputies  of  the  Southern  Supreme  Coun-
cil, Abram  Jacobs,  conferred  the  degree  of  Select  of  Twenty-seven
in  the  State  of  Georgia.  On  May  2,  1 826,  a Grand  Council  was  organ-
ized by  the  authority  of  the  Inspector-General  of  the  Supreme
Council,  which  is  noticed  in  the  publications  of  that  day.  June
25,  1841,  three  councils  met,  and  a Grand  Council  was  established  by
the  authority  of  the  Supreme  Grand  Council  of  the  330,  in  Charles-
ton, S.  C.  They  adopted  the  constitution  of  the  former  Grand
Council  of  1826.  That  body,  having  ceased  to  work,  became  dor-
mant, and  the  records  were  lost.  In  the  revised  constitution  of
1842  they  claimed  to  be- the  highest  source  of  legitimate  Masonic
authority  in  the  State  of  Georgia,  and  of  right  ought  to  have  the
government  and  superintendence  of  all  councils  of  Royal  and  Select

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

1580

Masters  within  its  jurisdiction.1  This  Grand  Council  belongs  to
the  General  Grand  Council  and  is  reported  in  the  proceedings  of
1897.

Idaho.

A council  was  organized  in  Idaho  by  a dispensation  from  the
Officers  of  the  General  Grand  Council,  viz.,  Idaho  Council,  No.  1,
at  Pocatillo,  December  15,  1896 — which  was  annulled  afterward;
also  a dispensation  for  Adoniram  Council,  at  Boise,  January  30,
1896.  Dispensation  continued  until  next  assembly.

Illinois.

The  Grand  Council  of  Kentucky  having  issued  charters  to  sev-
eral councils  in  the  State  of  Illinois,  a Grand  Council  was  organized
March  10,  1854.  In  1877  the  degrees  were  surrendered  to  the  con-
trol of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons,  notwithstanding
that  in  1854  it  refused  to  heal  Royal  and  Select  Masters  who  had
been  made  in  the  chapters.  The  Grand  Council,  however,  con-
tinued its  annual  sessions,  its  constituents  being  composed  of  the
mixture  of  regularly  made  Council  Masters  and  those  made  in  the
chapters.  This  did  not  prove  satisfactory,  and  in  1882  the  Grand
Council  and  Grand  Chapter  agreed  to  resume  their  old  condition.
Illinois  Grand  Council  is  an  independent  Grand  Body.

Indiana.

In  the  State  of  Indiana  the  Council  degrees  were  given  in  the
chapter  work.  After  the  General  Grand  Chapter’s  decision,  coun-
cils were  chartered  by  the  Grand  Councils  of  Kentucky  and  Ohio.
Chapter  Royal  and  Select  Masons  were  “ healed  ” and  the  Grand
Council  of  Indiana  was  organized  December  20,  1855.

Iowa.

When  Royal  Arch  Masonry  was  first  planted  in  Iowa,  the  Coun-
cil degrees  were  part  of  the  chapter  work.  After  the  decision
of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  in  regard  to  these  degrees,  Com-
panions were  “healed”  by  the  authority  of  the  Grand  Master  of  the

1 44  History  of  Masonry  and  Concordant  Orders/'  p.  662.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1581

Grand  Council  of  Illinois.  Charters  were  issued  by  that  Grand
Council  to  councils  in  Iowa,  which  subsequently  organized  the
Grand  Council  of  Iowa,  January  2,  1857.  In  1878  the  Grand  Coun-
cil merged  itself  into  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Iowa,  nineteen  councils
having  been  duly  organized  prior  to  that  time.  To  the  present  day
those  degrees  are  merged  into  the  chapter  of  Royal  Arch

Kansas.

Three  councils  of  Royal  and  Select  Masters  were  chartered  by
the  Grand  Council  of  Missouri,  in  the  State  of  Kansas,  and  De-
cember 2,  1867,  these  three  councils  organized  a Grand  Council  of
Royal,  Select,  and  Super-excellent  Masons.

Kentucky.

The  Select  degree  was  carried  into  the  State  of  Kentucky  by
J.  L.  Cross,  when  in  1817  he  made  his  official  tour  through  the  West-
ern States  as  General  Grand  Lecturer  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter.
December  10,  1827,  six  councils  met  by  their  delegates  and  organ-
ized a Grand  Council  of  the  State,  which  is  said  to  be  the  result  of
John  Barker’s  efforts  in  behalf  of  the  Supreme  Council  of  the
Southern  Jurisdiction,  A.-.  A.-.  S.\  R.\  This  jurisdiction  felt  the
effects  of  the  Morgan  anti-Masonic  period  from  1830  to  1840,  when
the  Grand  Council  met  only  once.  The  degrees  were  merged  into
the  chapter  from  1878  to  1881.  After  the  organization  of  the
General  Grand  Council  the  Grand  Council  of  Kentucky  was  re-or-
ganized.  Companion  H.  B.  Grant,  M.\  111.'.  Gr.\  Master,  in  his
annals  mentions  the  case  of  a Thrice  Illustrious  Master  of  a council
who  communicated  the  degrees  outside  of  a council,  and  who  con-
strued his  obligation  to  mean  that  he  could  not  confer  the  degrees
except  in  a council,  but  could  communicate  the  degrees,  and  so  di-
rected the  record  to  be  made  as  if  conferred  in  a council.  This  was
declared  by  the  Grand  Master  to  be  irregular,  and  required  recog-
nition to  be  refused  until  they  were  “ healed  ” in  open  council.  The
Grand  Council  of  Kentucky  is  an  independent  body.

Louisiana.

It  is  stated  that  John  Barker  in  1827  organized  Holland  Coun-
cil, No.  1,  in  New  Orleans,  and  in  the  “tableau”  of  the  Grand

1582

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Chapter  of  Louisiana  in  1828  it  is  referred  to.  When  in  or  about
1850  Capitular  Masonry  was  re-organized,  Cryptic  Masonry  was
also  revived.  Four  councils  formed  a Grand  Council  February  10,
1856.  One  of  these  was  Holland,  No.  1.  The  others  had  been
chartered  by  the  Grand  Councils  of  Kentucky  and  Alabama.

Maine.

At  an  early  period  a council  had  been  organized  in  Maine,  work-
ing under  the  General  Grand  Chapter.  The  Grand  Council  of
Massachusetts  organized  three  councils,  and  these,  by  their  dele-
gates, formed  the  Grand  Council,  May  3,  1855.

Maryland.

In  the  introduction  of  this  history  of  the  Cryptic  Rite,  the  con-
nection of  Eckel  and  Niles,  as  leaders  at  an  early  date,  was  noticed.1
The  Select  degree  was  then  only  recognized  as  an  appendant  to
the  regular  curriculum  of  degrees  of  the  A. \ A.\  S.\  R.\  which
was  controlled  by  the  Deputy  Inspectors  of  that  rite.  This  was
prior  to  1800,  and  perhaps  extended  into  the  present  century,  as  late
as  the  date  of  the  certificate,  or  dispensation,  given  to  Cross.  We
have  seen,  under  District  of  Columbia,  the  steps  which  were  taken,
as  early  as  1824,  to  incorporate  these  degrees  with  the  chapter  work
and  to  precede  the  Most  Excellent  Master’s  degree.  This  union  of
the  Cryptic  with  the  Capitular  system  continued  until  1872,  when,
by  law,  the  Grand  Chapter  separated  them.  Six  councils  after  this
(May  12,  1874)  organized  the  present  Grand  Council  of  the  State,
which  became  a member  of  the  General  Grand  Council  and  so  con-
tinues.

Massachusetts.

In  1817  a voluntary  council  of  Royal  Masters  was  organized  by
Benjamin  Gleason  and  others,  and  subsequently  obtained  the  sanc-
tion of  Columbian  Council  of  New  York.  A Select  council  was
formed  at  Springfield,  May  28,  1818,  by  J.  L.  Cross.  Six  councils,
at  different  times,  having  been  organized,  their  delegates  met  Feb-
ruary 8,  1826,  and  on  June  15,  1826,  completed  the  formation  of  a
Grand  Council.  The  records  of  this  body  having  been  lost  during

1 See  pp.  1549,  1550.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1583

the  anti-Masonic  period,  nothing  is  known  concerning  these  degrees
until  the  re-organization  in  1847.  From  the  year  1853  the  Grand
Council  has  met  regularly  and  great  prosperity  has  followed.  It  is
asserted  that  Hiram  Council,  at  Worcester,  with  1,070  members  in
1897,  is  the  largest  council  of  Royal  and  Select  Masters  in  the
world.

Michigan.

The  Grand  Council  of  Connecticut  had  chartered  three  councils
in  the  State  of  Michigan,  and  these,  by  their  delegates,  met  in  con-
vention on  January  13,  1858,  and  organized  a Grand  Council  for
the  State.  In  1856  that  Grand  Council  granted  a Charter  for  a
council  at  Detroit.  This  Grand  Council  is  independent,  and  chap-
ter-made Royal  and  Select  Masons  are  not  in  favor.

Minnesota.

The  Grand  Council  of  Iowa  having  chartered  three  councils  in
Minnesota,  December  12,  1870,  these  three  by  their  delegates  organ-
ized a Grand  Council.  The  council  which  had  been  chartered  by
the  Grand  Council  of  New  York  in  1855  soon  became  dormant.
This  Grand  Council  is  a member  of  the  General  Grand  Council.

Mississippi.

From  our  careful  examination  into  the  early  history  of  Cryptic
Masonry  in  the  State  of  Mississippi,  we  find  that  John  Barker,  be-
fore mentioned  as  agent  for  the  Southern  Supreme  Council,  estab-
lished at  Natchez,  Miss.,  a Grand  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem
in  1829,  which  assumed  the  control  of  the  Royal  and  Select  Master’s
degrees,  and  under  the  auspices  of  the  Council  of  Princes  of  Jeru-
salem seven  councils  were  organized,  and  these  by  their  delegates
organized  a Grand  Council  January  19,  1856.  After  the  close  of
the  war,  in  1865,  a number  of  the  councils  having  surrendered  their
charters,  and  others  having  become  dormant,  the  Grand  Council,
which  had  assembled  annually,  in  1877  adopted  a plan  which  be-
came widely  known  as  the  “ Mississippi  Plan,”  which  provided  :

“ Each  Royal  Arch  Chapter  shall  hereafter  open  within  its  bosom,
under  its  charter,  as  a Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons,  a Council  of

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

1584

Royal  and  Select  Masters  ; the  officers  of  the  Chapter  corresponding
in  rank  to  those  of  the  Council.

“ All  the  Royal  Arch  Masons  who  have  not  received  the  degrees
of  Royal  Master  and  Select  Master  shall  be  entitled  to  have  the
same  conferred  or  communicated  on  their  request  and  without
charge  ; but  candidates  who  shall  hereafter  receive  the  Royal  Arch
degree  shall,  immediately  thereafter,  and  in  connection  with  the
Royal  Arch  degree,  receive  the  degrees  of  Royal  and  Select  Master
without  additional  charge.”

The  Grand  Council  was  dissolved,  and  this  plan  was  adopted  in
many  jurisdictions,  the  General  Grand  Chapter  having  placed  on
record  at  Lexington,  Ky.,  at  the  meeting  September  16,  1853,  the
following  resolution  :

“ Resolved , That  this  General  Grand  Chapter  and  the  governing
bodies  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry  affiliated  with,  and  holding  jurisdic-
tion under  it,  have  no  rightful  jurisdiction  or  control  over  the  de-
grees of  Royal  and  Select  Master.”

“ Resolved , That  this  General  Grand  Chapter  will  hereafter  en-
tertain no  question  or  matter  growing  out  of  the  government  or
working  of  these  degrees  while  in  their  present  position.”  1

All  of  the  independent  jurisdiction  except  Iowa,  which  adopted
the  “ Mississippi  Plan,”  have  rescinded  the  same  and  returned  to  the
council  organization.  In  1888  the  Grand  Council  of  Mississippi  at
its  session  that  year  adopted  the  following  :

“ Resolved , That  the  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter  hereby  releases
control  of  the  Cryptic  Degrees  and  recommends  that  the  Grand
Council  of  Royal  and  Select  Masters  resume  its  former  jurisdiction
of  the  degrees.

“ That  Chapters  are  hereby  prohibited  from  communicating  and
conferring  the  Cryptic  Degrees,  recognizing  the  authority  of  the
Grand  Council  in  all  matters  pertaining  to  said  degrees."  In  Feb-
ruary, 1888,  the  Grand  Council  of  Mississippi  met,  six  of  the  officers
being  of  those  elected  in  1877.  Six  councils  were  represented.

At  the  sixth  triennial  assembly  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,
which  met  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  October  1 1 , 1897,  the  following  pa-
per was  unanimously  adopted  :

“ Whereas , The  report  of  Companion  Josiah  H.  Drummond  as

1 Proceedings  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  1856,  p.  317.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1585

chairman  of  the  Committee  on  Correspondence  of  the  Grand  Coun-
cil of  Maine  for  the  year  1894,  and  the  Address  of  Companion
Frederic  Speed,  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Council  of  Mississippi
for  the  year  1895,  present  facts  that  conclusively  show  that  a mis-
understanding has  existed  in  the  minds  of  our  Companions  in  Mis-
sissippi for  some  years  past,  as  to  the  attitude  of  General  Grand
Council  towards  the  Grand  Council  of  Mississippi ; therefore  be  it

“Resolved,  That  the  General  Grand  Council,  through  its  Grand
Master,  extend  to  the  Companions  of  the  Grand  Council  of  Missis-
sippi its  fraternal  greetings  and  its  best  wishes  for  the  prosperity  of
the  Cryptic  Rite  in  Mississippi.”  1

Also  this  minute  appeared  : “ Most  Illustrious  Frederic  Speed,
Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Council  of  Mississippi,  was  announced
and  received  with  the  Grand  Honors,  escorted  to  the  East,  and
greeted  by  the  Most  Puissant  Grand  Master  in  a happy  and  felicitous
manner.

“ Companion  Speed  thereupon  addressed  the  General  Grand
Council  in  very  eloquent  language ; thanking  the  Puissant  Grand
Master  for  the  cordiality  of  his  reception,  etc.  The  above  preamble
and  resolution  was  then  read  and  Companion  Speed  spoke  feelingly
as  follows :

“ ‘ Most  Illustrious  Sir  and  Companions  :

“ ‘ When  I say  that  the  reading  of  the  resolution,  which  I have
just  heard,  affords  me  the  most  sincere  satisfaction  and  pleasure,  I
but  feebly  voice  the  emotions  of  my  heart.  If  I know  myself  or
the  great-hearted  men  who  comprise  the  Cryptic  Masons  of  Mis-
sissippi, I can  honestly  say  that  we  have  taken  no  pleasure  in  the  long
estrangement  which  has  unfortunately  divided  us,  and  I am  sure
they  will  receive  with  no  less  happiness  than  I now  do,  the  message
of  peace  and  good  will  which  come  to  us,  through  the  action  of  this
most  illustrious  Body.  Receive  then,  Sir,  this  right  hand  as  a
pledge,  in  their  name,  of  reconciliation  and  peace,  given  with  a de-
termination to  forget  the  past,  and  to  strive  in  the  bonds  of  friend-
ship and  brotherly  love,  with  you,  for  the  upbuilding  of  the  temple
of  the  Lord,  letting  the  past  bury  its  dead,  and  acting  in  the  living
present,  heart  within  and  God  overhead.  Whom  God  hath  joined
together,  let  no  man  put  asunder.”  2

1 Proceedings  General  Grand  Council,  1897,  p.  79.  2 Ibid.,  p.  82.

100

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

1586

Missouri,

It  is  said  by  very  good  authority  that  Cross,  in  his  tour  through
the  West,  conferred  the  Select  degree  in  Missouri ; in  what  year  is
uncertain.  Also  it  is  said  that  the  Royal  degree  was  introduced  as
early  as  1828.  In  1841  there  were  three  councils  in  the  State  :
one  in  St.  Louis,  one  at  Palmyra,  and  where  the  other  was  located
the  present  writer  can  not  recollect.  At  that  time,  1841-42,  he  was
in  St.  Louis  and  received  the  Royal  and  Select  degrees  in  Missouri
Council,  No.  1,  at  St.  Louis,  about  the  time  the  Grand  Council  met.
Immediately  after  the  Grand  Council  closed  he  wrote  up  and  re-
corded the  transactions  of  the  Grand  Council.

These  bodies  became  extinct,  as  well  as  some  councils  which
had  been  chartered  by  the  Grand  Council  of  Kentucky.  May  21,
1864,  the  Grand  Council  was  organized.

In  1848,  the  writer  having  gone  to  Independence  to  construct  a
local  railroad,  found  the  Council  degrees  incorporated  in  the  chap-
ter by  the  Charter,  to  be  worked  subsequent  to  the  Royal  Arch.

Montana.

The  following  councils  in  Montana  received  dispensations  from
the  General  Grand  Council,  viz. :

Glendive,  at  Glendive I APril  22>  i896-  Dispensation.

(October  12,  1897.  Chartered.

Custer,  at  Miles  City (October  24,  1897.  Dispensation.

(Annulled.

Adoniram,  at  Livingston (May  13,  1897.

(Continued.

Mystic,  at  Bozeman i 2°>  i897*

(Continued.

Zabud.  No.  2,  at  Butte (May  22,  1897.

(October  12,  1897.

Montana,  at  Dillon (October  24,  1897.

( Annulled.

Deer  Lodge,  at  Deer  Lodge (June  IO>  1897.

(Annulled.

Anaconda,  at  Anaconda ( June  n,  1897.

(Annulled.

Hellgate,  at  Missoula (September  1,  1897

(Continued.

Hiram,  at  Kalispell i September  2,  1897.

(Annulled.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1587

These  councils  were  all  reported  at  the  triennial  of  the  Supreme
Council  in  1897.

Nevada.

The  following  councils  were  organized  by  dispensations  issued  by
the  Grand  Officers  of  the  General  Grand  Council  for  Nevada.

Dispensation,
j September  3,  1896.

( Continued,
j September  4,  1896.

( Continued,
j September,  1896.

( Continued,
j September  21,  1896.

( Continued.

These  were  reported  to  the  triennial  6f  the  General  Grand  Coun-
cil in  1897.

Carson,  at  Carson

Mountain,  at  Virginia  City

Reno,  at  Reno

Eureka,  at  Eureka

New  Mexico .

The  following  councils  were  granted  dispensations,  by  the  Offi<
cers  of  the  General  Grand  Council,  for  New  Mexico,  viz.  :

Deming,  No.  1,  at  Deming
Las  Vegas,  at  Las  Vegas. .
Santa  F6,  at  Santa  Fe  . . . .
Hiram,  at  Albuquerque  . . .
Alpha,  at  Raton

j April  8,  1887.

( November  19,  1889.
j March  16,  1895.

1 Annulled,
j May  x,  1895.

( Continued.

| May  7,  1895.

( Annulled.

( May  11,  1895.

( Annulled.

Nebraska .

Omaha  Council  was  organized  July  8,  1867,  by  a Charter  from
the  Supreme  Council  of  the  Southern  Jurisdiction.  Two  other
councils  were  chartered  by  the  Grand  Council  of  Kansas.  The
Grand  Council  was  formed  by  the  delegates  of  the  above-mentioned
three  councils,  November  20,  1872.  In  1878  the  councils  adopted  the
“Mississippi  Plan.”  In  1886  the  Grand  Council  was  revived,  and
then  afterward  joined  the  General  Grand  Council,  where  she  is  now.

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

1588

New  Hampshire.

August  5,  1815,  four  Companions  organized  a council  of  Royal
Masters  at  Hopkinton,  N.  H.  J.  L.  Cross,  in  1819,  instituted  an-
other council  of  Select  Masons,  at  Hopkinton  ; these  two  were
united  in  1822.  On  July  9,  1823,  a Grand  Council  was  formed.
During  the  period  from  1835  to  1855  the  councils  were  dormant.
The  above  two  councils,  Orphan  and  Columbian,  after  1855  were
revived,  and  Adoniram  Council,  which  had  been  chartered  by  the
Grand  Council  of  Connecticut,  united  and  formed  a Grand  Council,
June  11,  1862.

New  Jersey.

Kane  Council,  No.  11,  was  chartered  by  the  Grand  Council  of
New  York;  and  two  other  councils,  viz.,  Scott,  No.  13,  at  New
Brunswick,  and  Gebal,  No.  14,  at  Trenton,  were  chartered  by  the
Grand  Council  of  Pennsylvania.  These  three  councils  organized
the  Grand  Council,  November  26,  i860.  It  has  always  been  an  in-
dependent Grand  Council.

New  York.

The  earliest  time  when  we  find  any  organization  in  the  State  of
New  York  of  the  Council  degrees  is  September  10,  1810;  at  which
time  a meeting  of  Royal  Masters  was  held  in  St.  John’s  Hall,  in
New  York  City,  and  a council  of  Royal  Masters  was  opened,  with
Companion  Thomas  Lowndes  presiding ; and  it  was  determined  to
organize  a Grand  Council  to  be  called  Columbian  Council  of  Royal
Master  Masons  for  the  City  of  New  York.  Thomas  Lowndes  was
elected  and  installed  Thrice  Illustrious  Grand  Royal  Master.  Nine-
teen members,  Royal  Master  Masons,  were  present.  It  is  thought,
and  no  doubt  correctly  so,  that  this  was  the  very  first  council
formed,  and  was  regarded  as  authority,  as  on  the  evening  of  Decem-
ber 6,  1817,  a petition  was  received  from  a council  organized  in
Boston,  asking  the  sanction  of  Columbian  Council  for  its  formation.
This  was  granted,  and  Benjamin  Gleason  was  recognized  as  T.  I.
G.  M.  of  the  said  new  council.

From  the  records  of  Columbian  Council  it  appears  that  a council
of  Knights  of  the  Round  Table  was  convened,  as  also  a Chapter  of

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

IS89

Illustrious  Knights  of  the  Holy  Order  of  the  Garter,  wherein
Companions  were  installed  Knights  of  the  Illustrious  and  Invincible
Order  of  St.  George  of  Cappadocia,  by  which  latter  title  the  Order
was  sometimes  known.

Thomas  Lowndes  was  annually  elected  T.  I.  G.  R.  M.  from  the
organization,  September  2,  1810,  to  July  9,  1820,  and  presided  at
every  meeting.  Five  Companions  received  the  degree  of  Super,
excellent  Master  December  22,  1817.  There  is  no  record  of  the
Select  Master’s  degree  earlier  than  November  25,  1821.  In  Janu-
ary, 1823,  ^ was  “ Resolved , That  it  is  expedient  to  form  a Grand
Council  of  Royal  Master  Masons  and  Select  Masons  for  the  State
of  New  York,  and  that  T.  I.  G.  R.  M.  Thomas  Lowndes  be  re-
quested to  call  a convention  of  all  the  present  and  past  Grand
Royal  Masters  and  Deputy  Grand  Royal  Masters  and  Grand  War-
dens in  this  city,  in  order  to  carry  into  effect  the  formation  of  said
Grand  Council.”  A convention  was  held  January  25,  1823,  and  a
Grand  Council  of  Royal  and  Select  Masters  was  formed  Thomas
Lowndes  being  elected  M.  I.  R.  G.  M.,  which  council  continued
until  June  4,  i860,  when  it  united  with  a Grand  Council  which  had
been  organized  in  the  city  of  New  York,  May  27,  1854,  by  dele-
gates from  councils  of  Royal  and  Select  Masons  working  under  the
authority  of  the  Grand.  Council  of  Connecticut.  In  the  formation
of  the  General  Grand  Council  the  New  York  Companions  took  a
very  active  part.

North  Carolina.

At  a very  early  date  Masonry  was  introduced  into  North  Caro-
lina. A Warrant  for  a lodge,  called  “ Royal  White  Hart  Lodge,”
at  Halifax,  was  granted  August  21,  1767,  and  the  first  Grand  Coun-
cil was  formed  at  Fayetteville,  June  21,  1822.  At  the  convention
for  the  organization  of  this  body  five  councils  were  represented,
they  having  all  been  chartered  by  the  Supreme  Council  of  the
Southern  Jurisdiction.  The  effort  to  incorporate  the  degrees  with
the  chapter  did  not  succeed.  The  Grand  Chapter  had  endeavored
to  control  the  degrees,  but  m 1859  “ Resolved , That  this  Grand
Chapter,  after  due  consideration,  hereby  disclaims  for  itself  and  sub-
ordinates any  and  all  control  over  the  Royal  and  Select  Master’s
degrees.”  The  Supreme  Council  of  Southern  Jurisdiction  char-
tered, by  Dr.  A.  G.  Mackey,  as  agent,  three  councils,  and  a Grand

1590

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Council  was  organized  June  6,  i860.  In  consequence  of  the  War
no  meeting  was  held  until  1868.  This  body  was  dissolved  in  1883,
and  the  degrees  were  turned  over  to  the  Grand  Chapter.  In  1887
the  Grand  Council  was  re-organized.  It  is  now  an  independent
body.

Ohio.

John  Barker,  the  agent  of  the  Supreme  Council  Southern  Juris-
diction, at  a very  early  day  organized  five  councils  in  Ohio.  J.  L.
Cross  had  been  in  Ohio  perhaps  as  early  as  1817;  some  authors
say  1816  ; we  think  not,  as  he  had  not  received  his  commission  as
General  Grand  Lecturer  until  the  session  of  the  General  Grand
Chapter,  June  8,  1816.  Moreover,  as  the  General  Grand  Chapter
refused  the  proposition,  at  that  session,  to  incorporate  the  degrees
in  the  chapter  work,  and  as  it  is  asserted  by  Folger  that  Cross
went  to  Baltimore,  and  the  paper  issued  by  Eckel  and  Niles  is
dated  in  1817  (May  27th),  the  very  fair  presumption  is  that  Cross
did  not  attempt  to  confer  the  Select  prior  to  the  date  of  his  au-
thority, whether  that  “ paper  ” was  genuine  or  a forgery,  as  Com-
panion Josiah  H.  Drummond  has  pronounced  it  to  be.  Com-
panion Drummond  has  traced  the  “itinerary”  of  Cross  through
Western  Pennsylvania,  Ohio,  Kentucky,  Mississippi,  and  Louisiana,
and  thence  to  Baltimore,  May,  1817.  In  1827  a council  was  estab-
lished at  Cleveland  by  Charter  from  the  Grand  Council  of  New
York.  A Grand  Council  for  the  State  was  organized  January  6,
1830,  by  the  five  councils  organized  by  John  Barker.

North  Dakota.

The  following  councils  received  their  dispensations  from  the
Officers  of  the  General  Grand  Council,  viz . :

Dispensation.

Casselton,  No.  i,  at  Casselton,  December  7,  1888,
Hilkiah,  No.  2,  at  Jamestown,  September  1,  1893.

Hiram  Council,  at  Valley  City
Rae  Council,  at  Grand  Forks  .

Charter.

November  10,  1889.
August  21,  1894.

Dispensation,
j December  31,  1893.
I Continued,
j January  2,  1896,

( Annulled.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1591

Zabud  Council,  at  Devil’s  Lake  .
Towner  Council,  at  Towner
Adoniram  Council,  at  Fargo  . . .
Damascus  Council,  at  Wahpeton
Mizpah  Council,  at  Park  River  .

Tyrian  Council,  at  Lisbon

Bismarck  Council,  at  Bismarck  .

Dispensation.

( January  3,  1896.

( Annulled,
j January  6,  1896.

{ Continued,
j February  15,  1896.
I Continued.

J February  18,  1896.
1 Annulled,
j March  15,  1896.

( Annulled.

J April  6,  1896.

1 Continued,
j April  20,  1896.

( Continued.

Oregon .

By  authority  of  the  General  Grand  Master  of  the  General  Grand
Council,  Companion  A.  H.  Hodson  was  authorized  to  convene  not
less  than  five  Royal  and  Select  Masters,  and  to  confer  the  degrees
upon  not  exceeding  nine  Royal  Arch  Masons.  A dispensation  was
issued  to  Pioneer  Council,  U.  D.,  at  McMinnville.

Three  councils  convened  February  3,  1885,  and  formed  a Grand
Council  for  Oregon  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  General  Grand
Council.

Pen  nsylva  71  ia.

October  26,  1847,  two  councils  in  Pennsylvania,  and  one  in
Texas,  formed  the  Grand  Council.  This  Grand  Council  disbanded
and  was  re-organized  in  1854.  Papers  of  the  meetings  from  1847  to
1851  have  been  found,  but  it  seems  no  regular  records  were  ever
kept.  It  was  proposed  in  the  Grand  Council,  in  1854,  to  turn  the
degrees  over  to  the  control  of  the  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,
which,  however,  was  not  accepted  ; and  December  30,  1854,  the
Grand  Council  was  re-organized.  It  is  an  independent  jurisdiction,
but  does  not  recognize  those  who  have  received  the  degree  in
chapters.

Rhode  Island.

A meeting  of  Royal  Masters  was  convened  in  Providence,  R.  I.,
March  28,  1818,  and  May  19th  “ Resolved , That  the  degree  of  Select
Master  be  attached  to  this  Council.”  J.  L.  Cross  gave  that  council

1592

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

a Charter  in  1819.  For  many  years  this  council  was  dormant,  and
no  meeting  was  held  until  1841.  The  Grand  Councils  of  Massa-
chusetts and  Connecticut  issued  charters  to  other  councils,  and  the
Supreme  Council  of  Northern  Jurisdiction  A. -.A.  \S.  \R.\  gave  au-
thority to  confer  the  degrees  of  Royal  and  Select  Master  upon  a
Charter  for  a Lodge  of  Perfection  at  Newport,  which  in  1870  was
revoked,  a Grand  Council  having  been  organized  on  October  30,
i860,  from  which  a Charter  was  obtained.  This  Grand  Council  is
independent.

South  Carolina.

In  the  preface  to  this  chapter  much  of  the  early  history  of  the
Cryptic  degrees  has  already  been  given  in  detail.  The  Supreme
Council  of  the  Southern  Jurisdiction  had  great  influence  in  the
direction  of  the  government  of  the  Cryptic  Rite  in  South  Carolina.
Nine  councils  of  Royal  and  Select  Masons  were  chartered  in  the
years  of  1858  and  1859.  The  Supreme  Council  in  i860  waived  its
rights,  and  a Grand  Council  was  regularly  formed,  February  15,
1850.  In  1880  the  “Mississippi  Plan”  was  adopted.  However,
in  1881,  the  Grand  Council  was  re-organized  and  became  a member
of  the  General  Grand  Council.

So2ith  Dakota.

The  following  councils  received  dispensations  from  the  Officers
of  the  General  Grand  Council  in  South  Dakota  :

Alpha  Council,  No.

i,  at  Sioux  Falls. j

j D.  April  11,  1891.

[ C.  July  21,  1891.

Lakota  “

“ Deadwood j

September  7,  1895.
Annulled.

Black  Hills  Council

“ Hot  Springs j

| September  9,  1895.

I Annulled.

Zabud

it

“ Yankton j

September  25,  1895.

[ Annulled.

Scotland

u

“ Scotland j

j October  1,  1895.

I Surrendered.

Omega

u

“ Salem j

| October  10,  1895.

[ Continued.

Hiram

tt

41  Canton j

\ October  30,  1895.

[ Annulled.

Koda

a

“ Flandreau <

j October  31,  1895.

[ Surrendered.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1593

Brookings  Council,  No.  1,  at  Brookings

Aberdeen

a

a

Aberdeen . . , .

Adoniram

a

a

Webster

Emanuel

a

a

Millbank

Mitchell

it

a

Mitchell

Oriental

u

tt

Pierre

Mystic

a

a

Huron

Faulk

u

a

Faulkland

j November  1,  1895.
j Annulled,
j November  4,  1895.

} Annulled.

( November  6,  1895.

( Annulled,
j November  14,  1865.
( Annulled.

( November  28,  1895.
| Annulled,
j December  12,  1895.

( Annulled,
j December  30,  1895.

( Surrendered.
(December  31,  1885.

( An  nulled.

Tennessee.

Two  councils  derived  their  authority  to  organize  councils  in  the
State  of  Tennessee  from  the  Supreme  Council  of  the  Southern  Ju-
risdiction. Two  other  councils  had  obtained  charters  from  the  Grand
Council  of  Kentucky,  and  one  other  had  received  a dispensation
from  the  Grand  Council  of  Alabama.  These  five  councils  by  their
delegates  organized  a Grand  Council,  October  13,  1847.

This  Grand  Council  united  with  the  General  Grand  Council.

Texas.

From  the  history  of  the  Cryptic  Rite  in  Pennsylvania  we  learn
that  a council  of  Texas  united  with  two  councils  in  Pennsylvania  in
the  organization  of  a Grand  Council  in  1847  I hence  these  degrees
must  have  been  worked  in  a council  in  Texas  at  that  time.  June
24,  1856,  a Grand  Council  for  Texas  was  organized,  which  was  dis-
banded in  1864,  and  the  degrees  remanded  to  the  chapters,  which
can  be  conferred  upon  Royal  Arch  Masons  only.

Utah.

The  following  dispensations  were  issued  by  the  Grand  Officers  of
the  Genera]  Grand  Council  to  form  councils  in  Utah,  viz.  :

Summit  Council,  at  Park  City,  September  2,  1895,  which  was
very  soon  surrendered.

Utah,  No.  1,  at  Salt  Lake  City,  dispensation  granted  February
13,  1892,  and  chartered  August  21,  1894.

1594

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Vermont.

After  J.  L.  Cross  had  made  his  tour  in  the  South  and  West  he
was  in  Vermont  in  July,  1817.  In  a letter  from  Haverhill,  N.  H.,
he  says  : “ I made  no  further  tarry  until  I arrived  at  Windsor,  Ver-
mont, where  I established  a council  of  Select  Masons.  They,  find-
ing that  the  degree  was  full  of  information,  and  that  it  could  not  be
given  antecedent  to  that  of  the  Royal  Arch,  wished  for  a warrant  to
empower  them  to  confer  it,  upon  which  I granted  them  one  in  the
words  following.”  (Omitted.)

Cross  was  made  a Royal  Arch  Mason  in  Champlain  Chapter,
No.  1,  at  St.  Albans,  Vt.,  July  n,  1815,  while  engaged  as  a lecturer
to  the  lodges.

Companion  Drummond  claims  that  the  first  permanent  body
of  Select  Masters  was  the  council  formed  by  Cross  at  Windsor,  Ver-
mont, J uly  5,  1817.  He  founded  a council  at  Bradford,  also,  in  1817.

By  himself  or  by  his  deputy,  John  H.  Cotton,  Cross  organized
nine  councils.

The  Warrant  of  the  council  at  Bennington  having  been  pre-
served, we  give  it,  as  follows:

“ To  all  whom  these  presents  may  come,  Greeting  :

“ Know  ye,  that  by  the  high  powers  in  me  vested  by  the  Thrice
Illustrious  and  Grand  Puissant  in  the  Grand  Council  of  Select  Mas-
ters, held  at  the  City  of  Baltimore,  in  the  State  of  Maryland,  North
America,  I do  hereby  constitute  and  empower  the  within  named
Companions  to  form  themselves  into  a regular  Council  of  Select
Masters,  and  I do  hereby  appoint  my  worthy  Companion  Samuel  S.
Young  to  be  first  Thrice  Illustrious  Grand  Master,  Zacheus  Hovey,
to  be  first  Illustrious  Deputy  Grand  Master,  and  Oliver  Abell  to  be
the  Principal  Conductor,  and  I do  grant  them  full  power,  with  their
constitutional  number,  to  assemble,  open,  and  confer  the  Degree  of
Select  master,  and  do  all  other  business  appertaining  to  said  degree,
for  which  this  shall  be  their  warrant,  until  revoked  by  the  Grand
Puissant.  And  I do  further  direct  said  Council  to  hold  its  meetings
at  Bennington,  Bennington  County,  and  State  of  Vermont.  Given
under  my  hand  at  Bennington  this  twenty-third  day  of  May,  a.d.
1818,  and  of  the  Discovery  2818.

“ Signed  John  H.  Cotton,

“Acting-  Deputy  Puissant  in  Grand  Council 7

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1595

These  councils  continued  until  1826-1828.  During  the  Morgan
anti-Masonic  period,  like  all  other  branches  of  Masonry,  nothing
was  done.  A re-organization  took  place  in  1849,  under  their  original
warrants,  until  1854.  Four  of  these  councils  organized  a Grand
Council  August  10,  1854.  Vermont  united  with  the  General  Grand
Council.

Virginia.

In  the  previous  history  of  the  rite  we  have  shown  that  Myers
remained  for  some  time  in  Virginia  and  was  in  Norfolk  and  in  Rich-
mond, where  he  communicated  the  degrees  of  Royal  Master  and
Select  of  Twenty-seven,  under  his  authority  as  Inspector  of  the
A.\A.\S.\  Rite.  Jeremy  L.  Cross,  it  is  said,  established  a coun-
cil of  Select  Masters  in  December,  1817,  in  Richmond,  and  soon
thereafter  in  Portsmouth  and  other  towns.

A Grand  Council  was  formed  in  1820  and  often  failed  to  meet,
as  in  1829  to  1839,  and  'n  1847  was  dissolved,  and  the  degrees  were
remanded  or  rather  turned  over  to  the  chapters,  where  they  have  re-
mained to  the  present  time.

These  degrees  are  conferred  in  the  chapter  preceding  the  Royal
Arch  under  the  mistaken  idea  that  the  incidents  therein  related
occurred  at  the  building  of  the  Temple,  and  those  of  the  Royal
Arch  were  laid  at  the  rebuilding  thereof,  forgetting  that,  as  allegor-
ical representations,  they  should  of  necessity  for  proper  instruction
be,  as  they  were  originally  designed,  subsequent  to  the  “ Mason  of
the  Royal  Arch,”  or  thirteenth  of  the  A.\A.\A.\R.\

Washington.

The  General  Grand  Council  by  its  Officers  issued  dispensations
to  Washington  to  organize  councils  as  follows  :

Dispensation.

To  Tacoma,  No.  i,  at  Tacoma February  9,  1891.

To  Colfax,  No.  2,  at  Colfax June  9,  1893.

To  Mt.  Baker,  No.  3,  at  New  Whatcom..  .June  14,  1893.

To  Spokane,  No.  4,  at  Spokane July  8,  1893.

To  Pomeroy,  No.  5,  at  Pomeroy July  16,  1893.

To  Seattle,  No.  6,  at  Seattle May  9,  1894.

Chartered.
July  21,  1891.
August  21,  1894.
August  22,  1894.
August  21,  1894.
August  22,  1894.
August  21,  1894.

1596

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

These  councils,  by  order  of  the  General  Grand  Master,  issued
May  31,  1895,  were  assembled  by  their  representatives,  June  5,
1895,  and  the  adoption  of  a constitution  and  the  election  of  their
Officers  were  duly  and  regularly  constituted,  and  the  Officers  were
installed  by  the  Special  Deputy,  Elijah  M.  Beatty,  and  so  reported
to  the  General  Grand  Recorder,

Zabud  Council,  No.  7,  at  Walla  Walla,  had  a dispensation
granted  December  8,  1874,  and  was  reported  for  1895.  This  coun-
cil became  a constituent,  under  a Charter,  of  the  Grand  Council  of
the  State,  chartered  June  8,  1896.

Wisconsin.

The  Grand  Council  of  Ohio  chartered  three  councils  in  Wiscon-
sin, and  a Grand  Council  was  organized  by  the  delegates  of  these
three  October  28,  1857.  By  arrangement  and  consent  the  degrees
were  turned  over  to  the  Grand  Chapter  in  1878.  In  1881  a Grand
Council  was  again  organized  by  delegates  from  forty-nine  councils.

Wisconsin  is  an  independent  Grand  Council.

Wyoming.

The  following  dispensations  were  issued  by  the  Grand  Officers
of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  for  Wyoming,  viz.  :

Cheyenne  Council,  at  Cheyenne. . . .

Laramie  “ “ Laramie

Zabud  “ “ Evanston. . . .

Tyrus  “ *•  Green  River.

Sheridan  “ “ Sheridan....

C June  24,  1895.

( Surrendered  June  5,  1896.
( July  4,  1896.

£ Annulled.

( September  2,  1895.

\ Annulled.

C September  3,  1896.

\ Surrendered.

C May  12,  1896.

) Annulled.

ABSTRACT  OF  RETURNS  OF  SUBORDINATE  COUNCILS  FOR  THE

YEAR  1896.

Name  of  Grand  Lodge.

Held  at.

Membership.

Washington,  No.  i

Washington,  D.  C

1 2 £

Olive,  No.  1

Prescott,  Ariz

j

10

Phcenix,  U.  D

Phcenix,  Ariz ...

Tucson,  U.  D

Tucson,  Ariz

Canon  City,  No.  5

Canon  City,  Col

32

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

iS97

Name  of  Grand  Lodge.

Held  at.

Membership.

Hiram,  U.  D

Greeley,  Col

16

Zabud,  U.  D

Colorado  Springs,  Col

35

Leadville,  U.  D

Leadville,  Col

Glendive,  U.  D

Glendive,  Mont

1 2

Custer,  U.  D

Miles  Citv,  Mont

Q

Adoniram,  U.  D

Livingston,  Mont

y

18

Mystic,  U.  D

Bozeman,  Mont

1 2

Zabud,  U.  D

Butte,  Mont

a

22

Montana,  U.  D.  „

Dillon,  Mont

1 2

Deer  Lodge,  U.  D

Deer  Lodge.  Mont

1 1

Anaconda,  U.  D

Anaconda,  Mont

12

Deming,  No.  i

Deming,  N.  M

17

Las  Vegas,  U.  D

Las  Vegas,  N.  M

j /

Santa  F6,  U.  D

Santa  Fd,  N.  M

16

Hiram,  U.  D

Albuquerque,  N.  M

Alpha,  U.  D

Raton,  N.  M

1 s

Casselton,  No.  i

Casselton.  N.  Dak

x j

22

Hilkiah,  No.  2

Jamestown,  N.  Dak

0

20

Hiram,  U.  D

Valley  City,  N.  Dak

22

Rae,  U.  D

Grand  Forks,  N.  Dak

I Q

Zabud,  U.  D

Devil’s  Lake,  N.  Dak

1 y

I 2

Towner,  U.  D

Towner,  N.  Dak

1 1

Adoniram,  U.  D

Fargo,  N.  Dak

1 7

Damascus,  U.  D

Wahpeton,  N.  Dak

IO

Mizpah,  U.  D

River  Park,  N.  Dak

0

Tyrian,  U.  D

Lisbon,  N.  Dak

y

1 1

Bismarck,  U.  D

Bismarck,  N.  Dak

18

Alpha,  No.  1

Sioux  Falls,  S.  Dak

2 2

Lakota,  U.  D

Deadwood,  S.  Dak

2 1

Black  Hills,  U.  D

Hot  Springs,  S.  Dak

l6

Zabud,  U.  D

Yankton,  S.  Dak

1 6

Scotland,  U.  D

Scotland,  S.  Dak

x i

Omega,  U.  D

Salem,  S.  Dak

10

Hiram,  U.  D

Canton,  S.  Dak

I A

Koda,  U.  D

Flandreau,  S.  Dak

I 7

Brookings,  U.  D

Brookings,  S.  D

1 /
l6

Aberdeen,  U.  D

Aberdeen,  S.  D

I A

Adoniram,  U.  D

Webster,  S.  Dak

Id

Emanuel,  U.  D

Milbank,  S.  Dak

IO

Mitchell,  U.  D

Mitchell,  S.  Dak

10

Oriental,  U.  D

Pierre,  S.  Dak

Ay

1 2

Mystic,  U.  D

Huron,  S.  Dak

id

Faulk,  U.  D

Faulkton,  S.  Dak

1 2

Utah,  No.  1 ...

Salt  Lake  City,  Utah

1 0

28

Summit,  U.  D

Park  City,  Utah

o

22

Cheyenne,  U.  D

Cheyenne,  Wyo

Laramie,  U.  D

Laramie,  Wyo

l8

Zabud,  U.  D

Evanston,  Wyo

I 2

Tyrus,  U.  D

Green  River,  Wyo

17

Sheridan,  U.  D

Sheridan,  Wyo

12

1598

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

SUBORDINATE  COUNCILS  UNDER  THE  IMMEDIATE  JURISDICTION  OF
THE  GENERAL  GRAND  COUNCIL,  1896.

Council

Location.

Date  of
Dispensation.

Date  of  Charter.

DISTRICT  OF  COLUMBIA.

Washington,  No.  I | Washington | No  dispensation!  August  14,  1883.

Oliver,  No.  1 . .
Phoenix,  U.  D .
Tucson,  U.  D.

ARIZONA.

Prescott

July  1, 1893

Phoenix

April  4,  1895. . .

Tucson

April  5,  1895.. .

August  22,  1894,

Surrendered.

Surrendered.

COLORADO.

Denver,  No.  1

Rocky  Mountains,  No.  1..

Durango,  No.  3

Akron,  No.  4

Canon  City,  No.  5

Pueblo,  No.  7

Hiram,  U.  D

Zabud,  U.  D

Leadville,  U.  D

Denver

Jan.  16,  1892. . .

Trinidad

March  24,  1895.

Durango

May  16,  1893  . .

Akron

May  23,  1893  ..

Canon  City

June  5,  1893...

Pueblo

April  10,  1894..

Greeley

Dec.  8,  1894. . .

Colorado  Springs. .

May  27,  1895. .

Leadville

June  10,  1895..

August  21,  1894.

August  21,  1894.

August  21,  1894.

August  21,  1894.

August  21,  1894.

August  21,  1894.
Surrendered.
Dispensation  continued.
Surrendered.

IDAHO.

Idaho,  U.  D

Adoniram,  U.  D

Pocatillo | Dec.  15,  1896.

Boise I Jan.  30,  1897  .

| Annulled.

I Dispensation  continued.

MONTANA.

Zabud,  No.  2

Glendive,  U.  D

Custer,  U.  D

Adoniram,  U.  D

Mystic,  U.  D

Montana,  U.  D

Deer  Lodge,  U.  D

Anaconda,  U.  D

Hellgate,  U.  D

Hiram,  U.  D

Butte

May  22,  1896.

Glendive

April  22,  1896..

Miles  City.

April  24,  1896. .

Livingston

May  13,  1896. .

Bozeman

May  20,  1896  . .

Dillon

May  24,  1896  . .

Deer  Lodge

June  10,  1896. .

Anaconda

June  1 1,  1896. .

Missoula

Sept.  1,  1896  . .

Kalispell

Sept.  2,  1896.. .

October  12,  1897.
Dispensation  continued.
Annulled.

Dispensation  continued.
Dispensation  continued.
Annulled.

Annulled.

Annulled.

Dispensation  continued.
Annulled.

NEVADA.

Carson,  U.  D.  „ .
Mountain,  U.  D.

Reno,  U.  D

Eureka,  U.  D.

Carson

Sept.  3,  1896. . .

Virginia  City

Reno

Sept.  4,  1896. .
Sept.  19,  1896  .
Sept.  21,  1896  .

Eureka

Dispensation  continued.
Dispensation  continued.
Dispensation  continued.
Dispensation  continued.

NEW  MEXICO.

Deming,  No.  1 . . .
Las  Vegas,  U.  D ,
Santa  F£,  U . D . . .

Hiram,  U.  D

Alpha,  U.  D

Deming

April  25,  1887..

Las  Vegas

March

16, 1895.

Santa  F£

May  1,

1895...

Albuquerque

May  7,

1895...

Raton

May  n

, 1895..

November  19,  1889.
Annulled.

Dispensation  continued.
Annulled.

Annulled.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1599

Council.

Location.

Date  of
Dispensation.

Date  of  Charter.

NORTH  DAKOTA.

Casselton,  No.  1 .
Hilkiah,  No.  2 . . .

Hiram,  U.  D

Rae,  U.  D

Zabud,  U.  D
Towner,  U.  D.
Adoniram,  U.  D
Damascus,  U.  D
Mizpah,  U.  D . . .
Tyrian,  U.  D.. . .
Bismarck,  U.  D.

Casselton

Dec.  17,  1888.  .

Jamestown

Sept.  1,  1893. .

Valley  City

Dec.  31,  1895..

Grand  Forks

Jan.  2,  1896.. . .

Devil’s  Lake

Jan.  3,  1896. . . .

Towner

Jan.  6,  1896

Fargo

Feb.  15,  1896. .

Wahpeton

Feb.  18,  1896..

Park  River

March  15,  1896.

Lisbon

April  6,  1896  . .

Bismarck

April  20,  1896  .

November  19,  1889.
August  2i,  1894.
Dispensation  continued.
Annulled.

Annulled.

Dispensation  continued.
Dispensation  continued.
Annulled.

Annulled.

Dispensation  continued.
Dispensation  continued.

SOUTH  DAKOTA.

Alpha,  No.  1

Lakota,  U.  D

Black  Hills,  U.  D

Zabud,  U.  D

Scotland,  U.  D . . .

Omega,  U.  D

Hiram,  U.  D

Koda,  U.  D

Brookings,  U.  D. .
Aberdeen,  U.  D. .
Adoniram,  U.  D. .
Emanuel,  U.  D . . .
Mitchell,  U.  D...
Oriental,  U.  D. . .

Mystic,  U.  D

Faulk,  U.  D

Sioux  Falls

April  i]

[,  1891  .

Deadwood

Sept.  7,

1895 ..

Hot  Springs

Sept.  9,

1895..

Yankton

Sept.  25,  1895..

Scotland

Oct.  1,

1895  ...

Salem

Oct.  10,

1895 ..

Canton

Oct.  30,

1895  ..

Flandreau

Oct.  31,

1895 . .

Brookings

Nov.  1,

1895...

Aberdeen.

Nov.  4,

1895...

Webster

Nov.  6,

1895. . .

Milbank

Nov.  14

, 1895. .

Mitchell

Nov.  28

. i89S- •

Pierre

Dec.  12

. 1895..

Huron

Dec.  30

• ’895..

Faulkton

Dec.  31

. 1895..

July  21,  1891.

Annulled.

Annulled.

Annulled.

Surrendered.
Dispensation  continued.
Annulled.

Surrendered.

Annulled.

Annulled.

Annulled.

Annulled.

Annulled.

Annulled.

Surrendered.

Annulled.

UTAH.

Utah,  No.  1 1 Salt  Lake  City  ....  I Feb.  13,  1892.  .|  August  21,  1894.

Summit,  U.  D | Park  City | Sept.  2,  1895  ..j  Surrendered.

Zabud,  U.  D

WASHINGTON.

Walla  Walla

Dec.  8,  1894.. . .

Became  Constituent
Grand  Council  of
Washington.

WYOMING.

Cheyenne,  U.  D
Laramie,  U.  D . .
Zabud,  U.D....
Tyrus,  U.  D...
Sheridan,  U.  D .

Cheyenne

June  24,  1895. .

Laramie

July  4,  1895  . . .

Evanston

Sept.  2,  1895. . .

Green  River

Sept.  3,  1895...

Sheridan

May  12,  1896. .

Surrendered.

Annulled.

Annulled.

Surrendered.

Annulled.

i6oo

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

SUMMARY  OF  GRAND  COUNCIL  RETURNS  FOR  THE  YEAR  1896.
From  the  Proceedings  of  the  General  Grand  Council,  1897.

Grand  Council.

Held  at.

Arkansas

Little  Rock

California

San  Francisco

Florida

Milton

Georgia

Macon

Indiana

Indianapolis

Indian  Territory

Muskogee

Kansas

Wichita

Louisiana

New  Orleans

Maine

Portland

Maryland

Baltimore

Massachusetts

Boston

Minnesota

St.  Paul

Missouri

Springfield

Nebraska

Omaha

New  Hampshire

Concord t

New  York

New  York  City

Ohio

Sandusky

Oregon

East  Portland

South  Carolina

Charleston

Tennessee

Nashville

Vermont

Burlington

Washington

Seattle

Subordinates  of  General  G.  Council. .

Membership.

321

901

72

Si8

2,525

97

797

207

2,189

555

5,294

734

704

37i

1,416

3,932

4,222

189

133

507

1,056

215

962

INDEPENDENT  GRAND  COUNCILS.

Grand  Council.

Held  at

Membership.

Alabama

Montgomery

Connecticut

Hartford

Illinois

Chicago

Kentucky

Covington

Michigan

Cold  water

Mississippi

Jackson

New  Jersey

Trenton

North  Carolina

Wilmington

Pennsylvania

Lancaster

Rhode  Island

Providence

Wisconsin

Milwaukee

FOREIGN  GRAND  COUNCILS.

Canada,  Ontario

Barrie,  Ontario v

England  and  Wales

London

New  Brunswick

St.  John

CHAPTER  LVIII

HISTORY  OF  THE  GRAND  AND  SUBORDINATE  COM M ANDERIES  IN  THE
SEVERAL  STATES  AND  TERRITORIES  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES

Templar.

|HE  records  of  the  early  conclaves  of  the  General
Grand  Encampment  are  the  only  sources  of  any
definite  information  in  regard  to  the  introduction
of  the  Templar  Order  into  the  several  Masonic
jurisdictions.  Whoever,  therefore,  has  gone  over
the  pages  of  those  early  records  for  any  extended
information  will  say,  that  for  want  of  order  and
exactness  they  will  compare  with  any  other  defective  records  now
extant.  Discrepancies  in  dates  continually  occur,  even  within  a few
pages  of  each  other,  so  that  the  compiler,  after  a diligent  search  and
memoranda  taken,  will  very  soon  have  to  alter  the  same.  We  can
refer  any  reader,  for  example,  to  the  statistical  tables  of  the  dates  of
organization  of  the  several  Grand  Commanderies  in  the  Proceedings
of  1880  and  of  1895,  for  comparison.  In  many  cases  in  the  reports
of  the  General  Grand  Officers,  as  to  the  formation  of  the  subordinate
commanderies,  it  is  said  frequently  : “ Since  the  last  conclave  I have
issued  dispensations  to  the  following  subordinate  Commanderies,”
without  giving  any  dates  whatever,  leaving  the  compiler  the  difficult
task  of  searching  in  the  future  pages  for  the  definite  years,  months,
and  dates  to  find  when  these  commanderies  had  their  dispensations
issued  to  them.  This  was  a constant  source  of  error  in  dates,  and,
frequently,  was  a great  annoyance  in  the  preparation  of  this  sketch.
We  trust  that  should  errors  in  dates  be  found  hereafter  the  finder
will  consider  the  quandaries  of  the  compiler,  and  especially  if  he
should  undertake  to  rectify  our  errors.

We  have  endeavored  sedulously  and  faithfully,  as  historian,  to
gather  all  the  facts  upon  record,  to  give  a truthful  narrative  of  the
formation  of  the  subordinate  bodies,  as  well  as  the  constitutions  of
them  also  ; and  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Commanderies  in  the

l6oi

IOI

(602

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

several  jurisdictions.  While  all  this  has  been  an  arduous  task,  there
has  been  mingled  with  the  task  quite  a pleasurable  sensation  in  trav-
eling over  the  “ sacred  ground  ” of  “ Templarism  ” ; and  our  “ pil-
grimage ” has  yielded  much  satisfaction  in  making  the  acquaintance
of  so  many  distinguished  knights  who  wrought  so  hard  in  building
up  an  institution,  which  from  the  small  beginnings  of  the  eighteenth
century,  at  its  end,  has  resulted,  in  the  close  of  the  nineteenth  cen-
tury, in  one  of  the  most  magnificent  “ Orders  ” the  world  has  ever
witnessed.

The  Knight  Templar  Order,  as  it  is  now  constituted  in  the
United  States,  has  no  rival  in  the  world,  and  to  emphasize  its  influ-
ences for  good  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States  should,
at  its  very  next  conclave,  carry  out  the  design  of  our  most  distin-
guished and  lamented  Knight,  J.  O.  A.  Fellows,  to  make  the  city  of
Washington  the  permanent  headquarters,  and  erect  such  a Temple
as  would  be  commensurate  with  the  dignity  and  importance  of  the
Magnanimous  Order  of  Knights  Templars  of  the  United  States  of
America.

Note. — Dates  of  all  the  blanks  marked  with  an  asterisk  could
not  be  ascertained.

Alabama.

The  Grand  Commandery  of  Knights  Templars  for  the  State  of
Alabama  was  organized  December  i,  i860,  by  the  representatives  of
five  commanderies,  viz.  :

Washington  (Marion),  at  Marion ; chartered  in  1844.  (No
history.)

Mobile,  No.  2,  at  Mobile;  formed  April  7,  1848,  and  chartered
May  8,  1851.

Tuscumbia,  No.  3,  at  Tuscumbia  ; formed  August  1,  1848  ; char-
tered October  12,  1850.

Montgomery,  No.  4,  at  Montgomery  ; formed  October  17,  1850*
chartered  September  19,  1853.

Selma,  No.  5,  at  Selma  ; formed  May  15,  1838  ; chartered  Sep-
tember 16,  1859.

A rizona.

The  Grand  Commandery  of  Arizona  was  formed  by  Warrant
from  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States  November  16,
1893.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1603

The  first  commandery  was  Arizona,  No.  1,  at  Tucson,  February
22,  1 883  ; 1 by  dispensation,  which  was  surrendered  September  2,
1897.  Then  followed:

Ivanhoe,  No.  2,  at  Prescott,  by  dispensation  September  30,
1892,  and  chartered  December  2,  1892.

Phoenix,  No.  3,  Phoenix,  by  dispensation  October  7,  1892,  and
chartered  November  14,  1892.

A rkansas.

The  Grand  Commandery  of  Arkansas  was  constituted  May  25,
1872.

The  first  commandery  organized  was  Hugh  de  Payens,  No.  1,
at  Little  Rock,  December  20,  1853,®  which  received  a Charter
September  10,  1856.

Hugh  de  Payens,  No.  3,  at  Fort  Scott;  dispensation  granted
April  13,  1867;  chartered  September  18,  1868;  constituted  October
11,  1868.3

Jacques  De  Molay,  No.  3;  dispensation  granted  December  30,
1 868, 4 and  chartered  September  21,  1871. 5

Baldwin,  No.  4,  Fayetteville;  dispensation  April  28,  1871;®
chartered  September  21,  18  71. 7

Bertrand  de  Guesclin,  Camden  ; dispensation  issued  April  13,
1867  ;8  chartered  September  10,  1868.9

California.

The  Grand  Commandery  of  Knights  Templars  for  California
was  organized  August  10,  1858,  under  the  Warrant  of  the  then
Grand  Master  of  the  General  Grand  Encampment  of  the  United
States,  Sir  William  B.  Hubbard.

The  first  commandery  formed  in  California  was  San  Francisco,
No.  1,  at  San  Francisco,  November  10,  1852,  and  chartered  No
vember  1,  1853.

The  second  was  Sacramento,  No.  2,  at  Sacramento,  May  23,
1852,  and  chartered  February  6,  1854.

The  third  was  Pacific,  No.  3,  at  Columbia,  February  20,  1856,
and  chartered  September  10,  1856.

1 Proceedings  General  Grand  Encampment,  1883,  p.  19.  2 Ibid.,  1865,  p.  114.

3 Ibid.,  1868,  p.  C}.  4 Ibid.,  p.  30.  5 Ibid.,  1 87 1 , p.  224.  6 Ibid.  p.  31.

7 Ibid.  8 Ibid.,  1868,  p.  13.  9 Ibid.,  p.  65.

i6o4

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Colorado.

The  Grand  Commandery  was  constituted  March  14,  1876.  The
commanderies  were  :

Colorado,  No.  1,  at  Denver;  dispensation  granted  January  13.
1866,  and  chartered  September  10,  1868  ; 1 constituted  January  26,
1869.

Central  City,  No.  2,  at  Central  City ; dispensation  granted
November  8,  1866, 2 and  chartered  September  18,  1868.3

Pueblo,  No.  3,  at  Pueblo  ; dispensation  granted  September  10,
1874,  and  chartered  December  3,  1874.

Connecticut.

The  Grand  Commandery  was  constituted  between  1829  and
1832,  according  to  the  list  in  the  Proceedings  of  1856,  p.  358  ; but
in  the  Proceedings  of  1898  the  date  is  given  September  13,  1827.
We  assume  the  first  date  to  be  correct,  as  in  the  Proceedings  of  the
Grand  Encampment  we  find  the  Grand  Encampment  of  Connecti-
cut represented  at  the  fifth  meeting,  held  November  29,  1832,  but
not  so  represented  at  the  fourth  meeting,  September  14,  1829,  nor
is  any  mention  made  of  the  formation  of  the  Grand  Body  in  the
minutes  of  said  meeting  of  1829,  which  would  have  been  if  the
Grand  Commandery  had  been  organized.  The  first  commandery
formed  was  Colchester,  at  Colchester;  Charter  dated  September,
1819.  The  second  was  New  Haven,  at  New  Haven  ; dispensation
issued  November  5,  1825,  and  chartered  September,  1826.

Note. — At  the  second  meeting  of  the  Grand  Encampment,  Pro-
ceedings of  September  16,  1819,  p.  6,  say:  “ Resolved , That  a
charter  oi  recognition  be  granted  to  the  encampment  of  Colchester
in  Connecticut.”

At  the  conclave  held  in  Pittsburg,  1898,  the  tabular  statement
for  that  year  shows  eleven  subordinate  commanderies.

Note. — The  report  of  the  General  Grand  Recorder  for  1880,,
in  tabular  statement,  p.  136,  under  Grand  Commandery  of  Con
necticut,  says  : “ Organized  July,  1796.”

1 Proceedings  General  Grand  Encampment,  1868,  p.  65.

2 Ibid.,  v.  12.  3 Ibid.,  1871,  p.  29.

FREEMASONRY  IN  T11E  UNITED  STATES  1605

Dakota  Territory.

Dakota,  No.  1,  at  Deadwood ; constituted  August  14,  1881.
Cyrene,  No.  2,  at  Sioux  Falls  ; dispensation  was  granted  August  14,
1881,  and  was  formed  November  22,  1881;  chartered  August  23,
1883.

February  25,  1882,  dispensation  was  granted  to  De  Molay,  No.
3,  at  Yankton  ; formed  March,  1882  ; chartered  August  23,  1883.

March  23,  1883,  dispensation  granted  to  Tancred,  No.  4,  at
Bismarck;  formed  April  12,  1883;  chartered  August  23,  1883.
Fargo,  No.  5,  at  Fargo  ; dispensation  issued  June  24,  1883.

Delaware.

The  first  commandery  formed  in  Delaware  was  St.  John’s,  No.
1,  at  Wilmington  ; dispensation  dated  March  10,  1868;  chartered
September  18,  1868.

District  of  Columbia.

The  first  commandery  organized  in  the  District  of  Columbia  was
Washington,  No.  1,  in  Washington  City,  December  31,  1824
chartered  January  14,  1825.

Columbia,  No.  2,  received  a dispensation  January  18,  1863,  and
a Charter  September  7,  1865.

Potomac,  No.  3,  in  Georgetown,  received  a dispensation  March

4,  1870,  and  a Charter  September  22,  1871.

De  Molay,  in  Washington  City,  received  a dispensation  Feb-
ruary 19,  1872,  and  a Charter  December  3,  1874.  This  com-
mandery  is  mounted.

Orient  Commandery,  in  East  Washington,  received  a Charter
August  29,  1895,  and  was  constituted  October  19,  1895.

Four  of  these  commanderies,  viz. : No.  1,  No.  2,  No.  4,  and  No.

5,  met  in  convention  January  14,  1896,  and  organized  the  Grand
Commandery  of  the  District  of  Columbia  by  authority  of  a Warrant
of  the  Grand  Encampment  dated  December  2,  1895.

Potomac,  No.  3,  united  with  the  Grand  Commandery  at  its  Or-
ganization under  the  Warrant,  January  4,  1896.

i6o6

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Florida.

The  Grand  Commandery  was  organized  August  15,  1895,  by  a
Warrant  dated  August  i,  1895.  The  following  commanderies  were
organized :

Coeur  de  Lion,  No.  1,  at  Warrington;  dispensation  June  20,
1868;  Charter  * 1868;  renewed  December  3,  1874.

Damascus,  No.  2,  Jacksonville;  dispensation  May  18,  1870;
chartered  September,  1871.

De  Molay,  No.  3;  dispensation  March  17,  1851.

Olivet,  No.  4;  dispensation  * 1889.

Pulaski,  No.  5 ; dispensation  February  21,  1893.

Plant  City,  No.  6 ; dispensation  March  10,  1895.

Georgia.

The  Grand  Commandery  was  organized  April  25,  i860,  by  au-
thority  approved  September  16,  1859.

Georgia  Encampment,  No.  1,  at  Augusta,  received  a dispensa-
tion dated  in  1823,  and  chartered  May  5,  1823.

St.  Omar,  No.  2,  at  Macon  ; dispensation  granted  July  26,  1848,
and  chartered  September  1 1,  1850.

St.  Aldemar,  at  Columbus  ; dispensation  dated  December  1,  1857.

Coeur  de  Lion,  at  Atlanta;  dispensation  dated  May  14,  1859,
and  chartered  September  17,  1859.

Idaho.

The  following  commanderies  have  been  instituted  in  Idaho  :

Idaho,  No.  1,  at  Boise  City ; dispensation  May  24,  1882  ; formed
September  13,  1882  ; chartered  August  23,  1883.

Lewiston,  No.  2,  at  Lewiston  ; chartered  August  11,  1892.

Moscow,  No.  3,  at  Moscow;  chartered  August  11,  1892.

Gate  City,  No.  4,  Pocatello  ; chartered  August  29,  1895  ; insti-
tuted December  14,  1895.

Illinois.

The  Grand  Commandery  was  organized  October  27,  1857,  by
authority  of  the  Grand  Encampment  June  27,  1857,  and  duplicated
September  15,  1857.  The  subordinate  commanderies  were  :

Apollo,  No.  1,  at  Chicago;  by  dispensation  1844  to  1847,  anc*

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1607

chartered  September  14,  1S47.  The  tabular  statement  in  Proceed-
ings for  1856,  p.  358,  is  indefinite.

Belvidere,  No.  2,  Alton  ; by  dispensation  March  25,  1853,  and
chartered  November  1,  1853.

Central,  or  Centre,  No.  3,  at  Decatur;  by  dispensation  July  26,
1856  ; extended  October  24,  1856  ; and  by  order  of  Grand  Encamp-
ment continued  until  the  ensuing  session  of  the  State  Grand  Com-
mandery.

Peoria,  No.  4,  at  Peoria  ; by  dispensation  July  25,  1853,  and
Charter  September  19,  1853.

Freeport,  No.  5,  at  Freeport ; by  dispensation  June  10,  1857,
and  Charter  September  16,  1859.

Indiana.

The  Grand  Commandery  of  Indiana  was  organized  May  16,
1854,  by  authority  of  the  Grand  Encampment  April  24,  1854.  The
commanderies  in  Indiana  were  :

Roper,  No.  i,  at  Indianapolis;  by  dispensation  May  14,  1848,
and  Charter  October  16,  i860.

Greensburg,  No.  2,  at  Greensburg ; by  dispensation  January  25,
1851,  and  Charter  September  19,  1853.

La  Fayette,  No.  3,  La  Fayette  ; by  dispensation  April  2,  1852,
and  Charter  September  19,  1853.

Fort  Wayne,  No.  4,  at  Fort  Wayne;  by  dispensation  May  13,
1853,  and  Charter  September  19,  1853.

Indian  Territory.

The  Grand  Commandery  was  instituted  by  authority  of  the
Grand  Encampment  December  17,  1895,  the  Warrant  being  issued
November  28,  1895,  at  Muscogee.  The  subordinate  commanderies
were :

Muscogee,  No.  1,  at  Muscogee  ; by  dispensation  dated  Decem-
ber 6,  1892,  and  Charter  *

Chickasaw,  No.  2,  at  Purcell  ; by  dispensation  dated  May  31,
1894,  and  Charter  August  29,  1895,  and  constituted  October  29,  1895.

McAllester,  No.  3,  at  McAllester  ; by  dispensation  dated  July
14,  1894,  and  Charter  August  29,  1895,  and  constituted  October
14,  1895.

l6o8

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Iowa.

The  Grand  Commandery  of  Iowa  was  organized  June  6,  1864,
by  authority  of  the  Grand  Encampment  September  19,  1859.  The
subordinate  commanderies  were :

De  Molay,  of  Iowa,  No.  1,  at  Muscatine  ; by  dispensation  March
14,  1855,  and  Charter  September  10,  1856.

Palestine,  No.  2,  at  Iowa  City;  by  Charter  at  once,  September
15-  1856.

Siloam,  No.  3,  at  Dubuque;  by  dispensation  February  9,  1857,
and  Charter  September  16,  1859.

Des  Moines,  No.  4,  at  Des  Moines  ; by  dispensation  July  10,  1857.

Kansas.

The  Grand  Commandery  was  constituted  December  29,  1868,
by  Warrant  from  the  General  Grand  Master,  Sir  William  Sewall
Gardner,  December  2,  1868.  The  subordinate  commanderies  were  :

Leavenworth,  No.  1,  at  Leavenworth  ; dispensation  issued  Feb-
ruary 10,  1864;  chartered  September  6,  1865.

Washington,  No.  2,  at  Atchison  ; dispensation  issued  June  5,
1865  ; chartered  September  6,  1865.

Hugh  de  Payen,  No.  3,  at  Fort  Scott ; dispensation  issued  April
13,  1867  ; chartered  September  18,  1868.

De  Molay,  No.  4,  Lawrence  ; dispensation  issued  March  10,
1 858  ; chartered  September  18,  1868.

Kentucky.

The  Grand  Commandery  was  constituted  October  15,  1847,  by
Warrant  from  the  Grand  Encampment.  The  subordinate  com-
manderies were  :

Webb,  No.  1,  at  Lexington;  by  Charter  at  once,  January  1,

(826.

Louisville,  No.  2,  at  Louisville;  by  dispensation  January  2,
1840,  and  by  Charter  September  17,  1851.

Versailles,  No.  3,  at  Versailles;  by  dispensation  April  26,  1842,
and  Charter  * 1844.

Frankfort,  No.  4,  Frankfort ; by  Charter  September  15,  1847.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1609

Montgomery,  No.  5,  at  Mt.  Sterling;  dispensation1 * * 4  some  time
6etween  1842  and  1847  ; by  Charter  September  15,  1847.

There  is  no  note  of  a dispensation  issued  to  Frankfort  En-
campment, but  in  the  account  current  of  the  G.  G.  Recorder  we
find  that  Frankfort  Encampment,  Kentucky,  paid  for  dispensation
$90,  also  that  Montgomery  Encampment  did  the  same,  and  as  in
the  latter  case  the  tabular  statement,  p.  358,  mentions  that  dispensa-
tion as  between  1842  and  1847,  Frankfort  Encampment  may  have
been  in  the  “same  boat.”  We  have  been  forcibly  impressed,  in
reading  over  these  old  records,  how  very  careless  the  General  Grand
Officers  and  also  the  recorders  and  committees  were  in  omitting
important  dates  in  their  reports,  which  omissions  have  cost  this
writer  many,  many  weary  hours  in  hunting  up  such  data  as  would
enable  him  to  supply  these  important  dates  for  the  benefit  of  the
luture  student  of  Masonic  history.

Louisiana.

The  Grand  Commandery  of  Louisiana  was  organized  by  the
Warrant  of  the  Grand  Encampment  February  12,  1864.

The  Invincibles,  at  New  Orleans,  was  organized  between  1826
and  1829,  and  a Charter  was  issued  some  time  in  1829.

Indivisible  Friends,  No.  1.  This  encampment  was  chartered  by
the  Grand  Encampment  of  New  York  in  1826.  Jurisdiction  was
transferred  to  the  General  Grand  Encampment  in  1838  and  ac-
cepted.9

Jacob  de  Molay,  No.  2,  New  Orleans;  dispensation  April  15,
1850;  continued  by  order  September  12,  1850,  and  chartered  April
25,  1851.

Maine.

The  Grand  Commandery  was  constituted  May  5,  1852,  for  the
State  of  Maine.

Portland  Encampment,  No.  2,  is  the  first  one  on  the  printed  list

1 From  Proceedings  of  Grand  Encampment,  1847,  we  copy  this  :

(i  Resolved , That  the  Report  of  the  Committee  of  Dispensations  and  New  Encamp,
ments  be  so  amended  as  to  permit  Frankfort  and  Montgomery  Encampments  to  j'oin  in
the  petition  for  the  formation  of  a Grand  Encampment  in  the  State  of  Kentucky.”  Which

was  rejected.

4 Note  at  bottom  of  p.  358,  Proceedings  of  General  Grand  Encampment,  1856.

I&IO

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

of  1856  at  Portland;  dispensation  issued  between  1842  and  1847,
and  chartered  September  14,  1847.

St.  John’s,  No.  3,  at  Bangor;  dispensation  February  18,  1850,
and  chartered  September  17,  1850.

We  can  not  find  any  evidence  in  the  body  of  the  Proceedings  of
No.  1,  but  the  “ Register”  at  end  of  1847  and  1850  Proceed-
ings gives  “Maine,”  No.  1,  at  Portland,  * 1844,  and  chartered

September  14,  1847.

Maryland.

The  Grand  Commandery  was  constituted  January  23,  1871.

The  first  commandery  instituted  was  Maryland,  No.  1,  at  Balti-
more. This  encampment  was  first  chartered  by  the  Grand  En-
campment of  Pennsylvania  May  2,  1814,  and  it  appears  on  the
record  of  1832  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States.  A
resolution  was  passed  admitting  it  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the
General  Grand  Encampment,  and  directing  that  its  Charter  be  en-
dorsed by  the  General  Grand  Officers.1

Baltimore,  No.  2,  Baltimore;  by  dispensation  June  17,  1859,  and
Charter  September  16,  1859.

We  shall  now  follow  the  history  of  the  Knight  Templar  Order
in  Maryland  by  Sir  Knight  Edward  T.  Schultz,  to  whom  the  whole
world  of  Masonry  is  indebted  for  his  four  volumes  of  the  history  of
Masonry  in  that  State.  The  result  of  his  labors  to  himself  has  been
almost  total  blindness,  brought  about  by  his  incessant  application  in
search  of  the  facts  connected  with  Masonry  in  Maryland.

Sir  Knight  Schultz  says  :

“The  writer  has  for  many  years  given  much  time  and  attention
to  the  investigation  of  the  origin  of  Encampment  No.  1 of  this
city,  and  while  he  has  been  fortunate  in  obtaining  documents  which
clearly  establish  the  date  of  its  organization,  and  many  interesting
facts  in  reference  to  its  early  history,  he  has  not,  he  regrets  to  state,
anything  but  theories  to  offer  in  regard  to  the  source  whence  it
emanated.”

He  had  been  furnished  by  the  Grand  Recorder  of  the  Grand
Commandery  of  Pennsylvania,  Bro.  Creigh,  with  certified  copies  of
several  documents  in  his  office,  written  in  1814  and  1815,  by  the

1 Proceedings  of  General  Grand  Encampment,  1832,  p.  32.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1611

Officers  of  Encampment  No.  1 of  Maryland  to  the  Grand  Officers
of  the  Grand  Encampment  of  Pennsylvania,  which  had  been  re-
cently formed  and  in  which  formation  Encampment  No.  1 had
participated  and  was  then  a constituent.  Here  follow  copies  of
several  old  documents  under  seal  to  prove  the  facts  set  forth.

In  one  of  these  documents  is  a Charter  of  “recognition”  which
allowed  their  claim  to  an  original  organization  prior  thereto — dated
in  1790 — as  the  letter  from  Archbishop  Dobbin  says:  “I  am  in-
duced to  state  that  this  Encampment  insists  in  receiving  its  number
and  rank  according  to  the  date  of  its  institution,  the  complete  organ-
ization of  which  took  place  in  the  year  1790.”  Consequently  we
must  class  Maryland  among  the  early  jurisdictions  where  Templary
had  its  origin.  This  Charter  of  “ recognition,”  we  must  observe,
was  issued  to  “ Encampment  of  Knight  Templars , No.  1,  Maryland,”
thus  showing  that  the  demand  made  by  the  encampment,  to  have
its  rank  and  number  agreeable  to  the  date  of  its  institution,  was  ad-
mitted to  be  a valid  claim  by  the  Grand  Commandery  of  Pennsyl-
vania, and  thereby  the  year  1 790  was  fully  recognized  to  be  the
date  of  the  complete  organization  of  Encampment  No.  1,  of  Mary-
land.

Sir  Knight  Schultz  shows  by  documents  that  this  encampment
has  had  a continued  existence  from  1790  to  the  present  day,  and  is
yet  known  by  the  same  name.  There  is  a facsimile  of  a Templar
diploma  shown  and  a copy  of  its  text  in  print  which  shows  that
this  Encampment  No.  1 was  in  1802  attached  to  Washington
Lodge,  No.  3,  as  Royal  Arch  Chapters  and  Encampments  of
Knights  Templars  in  those  early  days  were  generally,  if  not  wholly,
held  under  warrants  of  Master  Masons’  Lodges.

In  Webb’s  Monitors  of  1802  and  1805  are  shown  three  encamp-
ments in  Maryland,  viz.:  Nos.  3,  13,  and  24,  and  Sir  Knight  Schultz
thinks  they  were  Washington  Lodge,  No.  3 ; Concordia,  No.  13  ;
and  Zion  Lodge,  No.  24  ; the  first  two  located  in  Baltimore,  and
the  last  in  Havre  de  Grace,  Cecil  County.

There  is  shown  also  another  facsimile  diploma  issued  by  En-
campment No.  1 to  Philip  P.  Eckel,  which  Sir  Knight  Schultz
thinks  indicates  that  the  encampment  had  severed  its  connection
with  Lodge  No.  3 and  had  an  independent  organization,  and  says
it  must  have  been  certainly  as  early  as  1807,  from  a Masonic  notice
in  the  City  Directory  for  that  year,  viz. : “Maryland  Encampment

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

1612

No.  1,  Knights  Templars,  meets  on  the  second  Tuesday  in  every
second  month.”

The  copper-plate  from  which  this  diploma  was  printed  is  in
the  Archives  of  Maryland  Commandery.  It  was  designed  by
Philip  P.  Eckel  and  engraved  by  John  Bannerman.  An  old  lady
named  Elizabeth  Sadds,  living  in  Baltimore  in  1881,  aged  ninety-
four  years,  informed  Sir  Knight  Schultz  that  she  knew  Bannerman
well ; that  he  came  from  Scotland  in  1773  and  was  the  first  engraver
who  lived  in  Baltimore,  and  he  died  in  1809.  The  seal  is  the  same
on  all  the  documents  and  was  used  until  about  1814,  when  a new
seal  was  made  (which  is  shown).  This  latter  seal  was  used  until
1854,  when  the  name  was  changed  to  its  present  title,  “Maryland
Commandery,  No.  1.”  Sir  Knight  Schultz  has  only  theories  to
suggest  as  to  the  source  from  which  the  encampment  was  orig-
inally formed.  From  traditions  among  the  old  members  of  the
commandery  it  was  supposed  that  the  orders  came  from  San  Do-
mingo with  immigrants  from  that  island.  He  says  : “We  for  along
time  were  inclined  to  believe  that  the  encampment  originated  in  the
Rose  Croix  Chapter  ‘La  Verite,’  which  was  brought  to  Baltimore
by  the  refugees  from  San  Domingo  ; but  the  discovery  of  the  1802
diploma  would  indicate  that,  at  that  time  at  least,  the  Encampment
was  held  under  the  authority  of  a Master  Mason’s  Lodge.”

Sir  Knight  Schultz  refers  to  the  list  of  degrees  published  by  Cole
and  mentioned  by  us  in  Chapter  LI.1  In  this  list  we  enumerated
the  orders  of  the  Red  Cross,  Knights  Templar,  and  Knights  of  Mal-
ta, that  were  said  to  have  been  conferred  by  the  Sublime  Lodges,
at  Charleston,  New  York,  and  Newport  in  1816.

Sir  Knight  William  B.  Hubbard,  who  was  Grand  Master  of
Templars,  said:  “I  suppose  that  we  owe  the  origin  of  Templar
Masonry  in  the  United  States  to  a distinguished  Sov.\Ins.\  of  the
Scottish  Rite.” 2 Bro.  A.  G.  Mackey  thought  that  the  Orders  of
Knighthood  were  introduced  through  the  A.-. A.'.R.*.,  not  the
A.\A.\S.\R.\,  for  that  system  dates  only  from  1801,  when  it  is
well  known  that  the  Templar  and  Red  Cross  had  both  been  worked
as  early  as  the  South  Carolina  patent  shows,  in  1783.  Bro.  Robert
Macoy,  in  his  sketch  of  the  Knights  Templar  of  New  York,  says  :
“ After  a very  careful  examination  of  this  important  subject,  we

1 Ch.  LI.  of  this  work,  p.  1310.

2 Letter  to  T.  S.  Gourdin.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1613

are  impressed  with  the  conviction  that  the  introduction  of  the  Or-
der into  this  country  was  brought  about  somewhat  in  this  wise :
That  a few  Sir  Knights,  having  received  the  Order  in  England,  or
Ireland,  and  having  immigrated  to  this  country,  met  together,  as  they
became  known  to  each  other,  by  appointment,  in  a secluded  place
in  New  York  and  other  parts  of  the  country  ; and  after  testing
each  other  by  the  best  evidence  in  their  possession,  organized  them-
selves into  ‘ encampments  ’ or  ‘ conclaves,’  and  assumed  control
of  ‘territorial  jurisdiction,’  conferred  the  Orders,  elected  officers,
issued  diplomas,  etc.”  “ For  the  present,  or  something  more  re-
liable than  any  * statement  ’ yet  presented  can  be  accepted,  we  can
offer  nothing  better  as  authentic  history  for  the  introduction  of
the  Order  of  Knights  Templar  upon  this  Continent ; nor  do  we
deem  it  derogatory  to  the  legitimacy  of  the  ‘transmission’  or  of
the  merits  of  the  system  of  Templarism,  to  admit  these  conclusions.
During  the  early  period  of  the  institution  there  was  no  organized
body  that  possessed  absolute  authority  to  issue  warrants,  hence  it
was  recognized  as  legal  for  any  number  of  Sir  Knights,  having  the
inherent  right  to  assemble  in  a secure  place,  apply  the  essential
tests  to  each  other,  open  an  encampment,  receive  petitions  and
create  Knights  Templar.”

Sir  Knight  Schultz  concurs,  somewhat,  in  the  theories  of  Sir
Knight  Macoy,  which  he  thinks  “most  worthy  of  acceptance,”  and
says  : “ In  every  instance  in  which  there  is  a mention  of  the  Templar
degree  being  conferred  in  this  country  prior  to  the  year  1800,  it  is  in
connection  with  a Master  Mason’s  Lodge.  St.  Andrew’s,  of  Boston,
and  St.  Andrew’s  Lodge,  of  Charleston,  as  has  been  stated,  con-
ferred the  Order — the  former  in  1 769  and  the  latter  in  1 783.  The
early  encampments  in  Pennsylvania,  Bro.  Creigh  says,  were  held
under  warrants  of  a Master’s  Lodge;  and  Encampment  No.  1,  of
Maryland,  as  shown  by  the  first  diploma,  was  attached  to  Washing-
ton Lodge,  No.  3.”

After  the  organization  of  the  Supreme  Council  of  the  A.-.  A.-.
S.\R.\  at  Charleston,  in  1802,  the  Inspector-General  took  charge
of  all  the  degrees  having  no  governing  head,  and  as  was  stated  by
Cole,  above  referred  to,  “the  Sublime  Lodges  at  Charleston,  Albany,
and  Providence  conferred  as  many  as  fifty-five  degrees.”  1

1 l(  Freemason’s  Library,”  1826,  p.  317.

I6i4

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Subsequent  to  1800,  “Encampments  were  formed  by  Knights
who  received  the  Orders  from  an  Inspector,  or  High  Grade
Mason.”

At  the  constitution  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of  New  York,
Elias  Hicks,  Orator  of  the  day,  said:  “The  numerous  Encamp-
ments of  Knights  Templar  now  existing  within  this  State  being
self-created  bodies,  are  consequently  governed  by  their  own  private
and  individual  law,  acknowledging  no  superior  authority,  because,  in
fact,  none  heretofore  existed.1

Sir  Knight  Schultz  concludes,  therefore,  that  Encampment  No.  1
was  organized  in  the  same  manner  as  those  in  New  York  were.

At  the  convention  for  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Encamp-
ment in  Pennsylvania,  which  met  February  15,  1814,  Sir  Henry  S.
Keating  was  the  delegate  from  Encampment  No.  4,  of  Baltimore,
Md.  ; who,  on  the  election  of  Officers,  which  followed,  was  made
G.  St.  B.  Under  the  provision  adopted  therefor,  a Charter  of  Rec-
ognition was  granted  to  Encampment  No.  1,  of  Baltimore,  which
has  been  referred  to  in  this  chapter.

After  the  organization  of  the  General  Grand  Encampment  of
the  United  States,  in  New  York  City,  June  20,  1816,  Encamp-
ment No.  1,  of  Baltimore,  came  under  its  jurisdiction,  but  not  until
November  29,  1832,  and  an  endorsement  was  made  on  the  Charter
of  Recognition  received  from  the  Grand  Encampment  of  Pennsyl-
vania in  1814.

Sir  Knight  Schultz  claims  that  Encampment  No.  1 “is  the  old-
est existing  body  of  Knights  Templar  upon  the  American  Conti-
nent.” 2

After  Baltimore  Commandery,  No.  2,  was  chartered,  there  was
no  other  commandery  formed  until  Monumental,  No.  3,  of  Balti-
more, was  organized  by  virtue  of  a dispensation  issued  by  the  Grand
Master  of  Templars  May  16,  1866.  At  the  next  triennial  con-
clave, September,  1868,  at  St.  Louis,  a Charter  was  granted,  and  on
November  6,  1868,  the  commandery  was  duly  constituted.

July  12,  1870,  resolutions  were  adopted  to  organize  a Grand
Commandery  of  the  State.  This  occurred  January  23,  1871.

Jacques  De  Molay,  No.  4,  of  Frederick  City,  was  organized  by
virtue  of  a dispensation  issued  November  23,  1867,  by  Sir  Henry  L.

1 Schultz,  “ History,”  vol.  i.,  p.  367.

2 Ibid.,  p.  376.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  ids

Palmer,  Grand  Master  of  Templars,  which  occurred  March  2,  1868.
At  the  triennial  conclave  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  United
States,  September,  1868,  a Charter  was  ordered,  and  continued  until
the  formation  of  the  State  Grand  Commandery,  when  it  came  under
its  jurisdiction.

Grand  Master  William  Sewall  Gardner  issued  a dispensation
March  29,  1869,  to  form  Crusade  Commandery,  No.  5,  of  Balti-
more, and  April  26,  1869,  the  first  meeting  was  held.  The
Officers  were  selected,  all  of  whom  were  members  of  Maryland
Commandery.

Three  chartered  commanderies  met  in  convention  by  their  rep-
resentatives in  Baltimore,  Md.,  December  12,  1870,  and  elected
Grand  Officers.  The  Grand  Master  was  duly  notified  and  requested
to  grant  his  Warrant  for  the  formation  of  the  Grand  Commandery
of  Maryland.

The  three  commanderies  were:  Maryland,  No.  1,  Baltimore;
Baltimore,  No.  2,  Baltimore  ; Monumental,  No.  3,  Baltimore.

The  Warrant  of  the  Grand  Master  was  dated  January  3,
1871.  January  23,  1871,  the  Grand  Commandery  was  then  dedi-
cated in  ancient  form  to  St.  John  the  Almoner.  The  first  Grand
Conclave  of  the  New  Grand  Commandery  was  held  January  23,
1871.

May  11,  1871,  Crusade  Commandery,  No.  5,  of  Baltimore,  was
constituted,  under  Charter  granted  by  the  Grand  Commandery  May
10,  1871.

Antioch  Commandery,  No.  6,  of  Cumberland,  by  dispensation
issued  August  26,  1871,  was  organized  August  27,  1871.  A Char-
ter was  issued,  and  January  14,  1873,  the  commandery  was  duly
constituted.

Palestine  Commandery,  No.  7,  at  Annapolis,  was  organized
April  14,  1873,  a dispensation  having  been  issued  by  Grand  Com-
mander Mann.  A Charter  was  granted  May,  1873.  June  2,  1873,
this  commandery  was  duly  constituted.

Beauseant  Commandery,  No.  8,  received  a dispensation  May  27,
1875,  to  form  a commandery  in  Baltimore,  and  was  organized  June
15,  1875.  A Charter  was  granted  May  10,  1876,  and  the  com-
mandery was  duly  constituted  May  n,  1876.1

Schultz,  “ History  of  Masonry  in  Maryland,”  vol.  iv.,  p.  659.

i6i  6

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Massachusetts  and  Rhode  Island.

The  Grand  Encampment  of  Massachusetts  and  Rhode  Island
was  formed  May  6,  1805,  which  was  the  first  Grand  Encampment
to  be  organized  in  the  United  States,  according  to  the  authorities
in  Massachusetts,  which  statement  has  been  challenged  by  the
Templars  in  Pennsylvania,  who  claim  that  the  very  first  Grand  En-
campment was  organized  in  Philadelphia  May  12,  1797,  as  will  be
shown  under  that  head.  Sir  William  Sewall  Gardner,  M.  E.  Grand
Master  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of  Massachusetts  and  Rhode
Island,  at  the  semi-annual  meeting  in  Boston,  May  5,  1865,  in  his
address  said  : “This  day  completes  the  sixtieth  year  of  our  existence
as  a Grand  Encampment,  and  marks  an  epoch  in  our  history.  . .

“ On  the  6th  of  May,  1805,  Sir  Thomas  Smith  Webb,  of  Provi-
dence ; Sir  Henry  Fowlc,  of  Boston  ; Sir  Jonathan  Gage,  of  New-
buryport,  with  other  Templar  Masons,  assembled  in  the  Masonic
Hall  at  Providence  and  formed  this  Grand  Encampment.”  “There
they  assembled  and  laid  the  foundation  of  Templar  Masonry,  as
we  recognize  it  to-day.”  “ This  Grand  Encampment  was  the  germ
of  Templar  Masonry  as  now  organized  in  the  United  States,  and  the
ritual  as  adopted  here  has  been  taken  as  the  true  Templar  Work
throughout  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the
United  States.  I am  aware  that  in  Pennsylvania  there  was  a Grand
Encampment  in  the  early  part  of  this  century,  and  that  it  professed
to  confer  the  Order  of  the  Temple.  It  is  impossible  to  tell  now
what  its  ritual  was,  but  there  is  evidence  tending  to  show  that  it  was
entirely  different  from  that  taught  by  this  Grand  Body.”  . . .

Perhaps  no  person  in  the  United  States  had  more  to  do  with
the  formation  and  renovation  of  this  ritual  than  Sir  Henry  Fowle.
His  judgment,  therefore,  upon  the  ritual  as  exemplified  by  the
Grand  Encampment  of  Pennsylvania  in  1816  in  his  presence,  is  of
great  weight,  and  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  the  work  as  used  by
that  Grand  Body,  whereon  it  originated,  was  entirely  different  from
that  in  use  in  this  jurisdiction.

“ We  have  then  for  our  gratification,  not  only  the  fact,  which  is
now  universally  conceded,  that  this  Grand  Encampment  is  the
oldest  Grand  Body  of  Masonic  Knighthood  upon  this  continent,  but
also  that  it  has  furnished  the  ritual  which  is  now  used  in  all  the
bodies,  both  Grand  and  Subordinate,  within  the  United  States.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1617

“The  English  Order,  from  which  our  fathers  in  this  Grand  En-
campment derived  the  elements  of  our  ritual , is  termed  the  ‘ Masonic
Knights  Templar’s  Conclave’  in  open  and  avowed  confession  of  the
dependence  of  the  Order  upon  the  Masonic  institution.  I need  but
allude  to  the  ritual  to  convince  you  that  it  was  built  upon  Masonry,
and  that  the  form  and  manner  of  our  work  are  eminently  Masonic.
In  its  teachings  and  its  ceremonials,  this  Order  of  the  Temple  which
we  confer  is  but  Masonry  Christianized  ; a complete  acknowledg-
ment of  and  a full  belief  in  the  divine  Mission  of  the  risen  Messiah,
engrafted  upon  the  Masonic  forms,  precepts,  and  ritual.”

“ It  is  worthy  of  notice,  from  the  establishment  of  this  Grand
Encampment  to  the  present  time,  it  has  been  one  of  the  most  con-
servative bodies  of  Knighthood  in  the  United  States.”1

Mexico.

A Warrant  was  issued  to  organize  a commandery  called  “ Popo-
catapetl,”  No.  i,for  the  Federal  Districts  of  Mexico,  dated  Septem-
ber, 1893.

Michigan.

The  Grand  Commandery  of  Michigan  was  instituted  by  the
Grand  Master  of  the  General  Grand  Encampment,  in  person,  who
installed  the  Grand  Officers  January  11,  1858.  The  first  Warrant
was  issued  February  13,  1857.  The  first  commandery  organized
was  Detroit,  No.  1,  at  Detroit;  by  dispensation  November  1,  1850,
and  Charter  September  19,  1853.  Then  followed  Pontiac,  No.
2,  at  Pontiac  ; by  dispensation  March  25,  1852,  and  Charter  October
27,  1S53.

Eureka,  No.  3,  at.  Hillsdale  ; by  dispensation  February  13,  1854,
and  Charter  September  10,  1856.

Peninsular,  No.  4,  at  Kalamazoo;  by  dispensation  March  3,
1856,  and  Charter  September  10,  1856.

Monroe,  No.  5,  at  Monroe;  by  dispensation  March  29,  1856,
and  Charter  September  12,  1856.

De  Molay,  No.  6,  Grand  Rapids;  by  dispensation  May  9,  1856,
and  Charter  September  12,  1856.

1 Creigh,  “ History  of  Knight  Templars,”  ch.  v.,  pp.  501  and  502.

102

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

1618

Peninsular,  No.  4,  it  appears  from  the  record,1  declined  to  place
herself  under  the  Grand  Commandery  of  the  State  and  regularly
sent  her  returns  and  dues  to  the  General  Grand  Recorder,  acknowl-
edging no  other  superior  than  the  Grand  Encampment  from  which
she  received  her  Charter  on  September  10,  1856.  The  controversy
was  referred  to  the  Committee  on  Jurisprudence,  which  thoroughly
examined  the  whole  matter  and  the  principles  of  State-Sovereignty
in  a report  and  offered  the  following :

"Resolved,  That  the  Grand  Commandery  of  Michigan,  from  the
date  of  its  formation,  has  of  right  exercised  sole  and  exclusive
jurisdiction  over  all  subordinates  in  that  State.

“ Resolved , That  all  dues  paid  by  Peninsular  Commandery,  No.
4,  to  the  Grand  Recorder  of  this  Grand  Encampment,  occurring
since  the  formation  of  the  Grand  Commandery  of  Michigan,  be  paid
to  the  Grand  Recorder  of  that  body.” 2 Which  resolutions  were
adopted.  The  following  was  then  adopted  :

“ Resolved,  That  at  the  formation  of  a State  Grand  Commandery,
it  is  the  right  as  well  as  the  duty  of  every  subordinate  in  the  State,
whether  Chartered  or  under  Dispensation,  to  enroll  itself  under
such  State  Grand  Commandery,  and  respect  and  obey  its  laws  and
regulations.” 8

Minnesota.

The  Grand  Commandery  of  Minnesota  was  constituted  October
23,  1865.  The  following  were  the  subordinate  commanderies  :

Damascus,  No.  i,at  St.  Paul  by  dispensation  July  12,  1856,  and
Charter  September  10,  1856.

Coeur  de  Leon,  at  Winona  ; dispensation  issued  May  13,  1864;
chartered  September  6,  1865.

Mankato,  at  Mankato  ; dispensation  issued  April  5,  1865  ; char-
tered September  6,  1865.

Zion,  at  Minneapolis;  dispensation  issued  May  19,  1863;  char-
tered September  6,  1865.

Mississippi.

The  Grand  Commandery  of  the  State  of  Mississippi  was  constitut-
ed January  21,  1857.  The  order  to  establish  the  Grand  Commandery

1 Proceedings  of  General  Grand  Encampment,  1859,  p.  39.

2 Ibid.,  p.  53.  3 Ibid.,  p.  56.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  i6ig

was  first  issued  December  5,  1856,  and  renewed  December  22,  1856.
The  subordinate  commanderies  were  :

Mississippi,  No.  i,  at  Jackson  ; by  dispensation  July  5,  1844,  and
Charter  September  12,  1844.

Magnolia,  No.  2,  at  Vicksburg;  by  dispensation  October  io,
1850,  and  Charter  January  4,  1854.

Lexington,  No.  3,  at  Lexington ; by  dispensation  July  22,  1856,
and  Charter  September  1,  1856.

Missouri.

The  Grand  Commandery  for  the  State  of  Missouri  was  consti-
tuted May  22,  i860.  Approved  September  16,  1859.1

St.  Louis,  No.  1,  at  St.  Louis ; no  dispensation  ; chartered  Sep-
tember 17,  1847.

Weston,  No.  2 ; dispensation  March  9,  1853,  and  chartered  Sep-
tember 19,  1853.

Lexington,  No.  3 ; dispensation  September  30,  1853,  and  char-
tered September  10,  1856.

Montana.

The  Grand  Commandery  of  Montana  was  constituted  May  14,
1888.  Constituent  commanderies  :

Virginia  Ci-ty,  No.  1,  at  Virginia  City;  dispensation  August  27,
i860;  chartered  September  23,  1868.

Helena,  No.  2,  at  Helena;  dispensation  January  21,  1869;
chartered  September  21,  1871.

Montana,  No.  3,  at  Butte  ; by  dispensation  June  26,  1878,  and
chartered  August  20,  1880;  constituted  June  24,  1881.

Damascus,  No.  4,  at  Miles  City;  by  dispensation  March  8,
1886  ; formed  March  16,  1886,  and  chartered  September  23,  1886.

Nebraska.

The  Grand  Commandery  of  Nebraska  was  constituted  Decem-
ber 27,  1871  (statement  of  1895).  (Statement  of  1880  has  28th.)
The  first  commandery  was  Mount  Calvary,  No.  1 ; organized

1 Proceedings  General  Grand  Encampment,  1859,  p.  50.

1 620

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

July  24,  1865  ; chartered  September  6,  1865.  The  second  was
Mount  Olivet,  No.  2,  at  Nebraska  City  ; organized  January  25.
1 86 7 ; 1 chartered  September  18,  1868.1  In  the  Proceedings  of  the
nineteenth  triennial  of  the  General  Grand  Encampment,  for  Sep-
tember 15,  1 871, 2 it  is  recorded  under  “ Proxies  to  constitute  New
Commanderies,”  “V.*.  E.\  Sir  George  W.  Bek  constituted  and  in-
stalled the  officers  of  Mount  Olivet  Commandery,  No.  2,  Nebraska
City,  January  25,  1868.”  In  the  Proceedings  of  1868,  September
18,3  it  is  recorded  that  a Charter  was  ordered  to  be  issued  to  Mount
Olivet,  No.  2,  Nebraska  City  (September  18,  1868).  Here  appears
to  be  a discrepancy,  as  a Charter  was  granted  after  the  commandery
was  constituted  (January  25,  1868).  The  third  commandery  was
Mount  Carmel,  No.  3,  at  Brownsville;  organized  July  22,  1870;
chartered  September  21,  1871.  The  fourth  was  Mount  Moriah,
No.  4,  at  Lincoln;  organized  February  17,  1871  ; chartered  Sep-
tember 21,  1871.

Nevada.

The  first  commandery  organized  in  Nevada  was  De  Witt  Clin-
ton, No.  1,  at  Virginia,  February  4,  1867,  and  chartered  September
18,  1868;  constituted  and  officers  installed,  January  8,  1869.  The
second  was  Eureka,  No.  2,  at  Eureka;  dispensation  granted  June
6,  1880;  chartered  August  18,  1880,  and  constituted  October  15,
1880.

New  Hampshire.

The  Grand  Commandery  of  New  Hampshire  was  constituted
September  28,  1897.4

The  first  subordinate  encampment  which  was  warranted  was
Trinity,  No.  2,  located  at  first  at  Hanover,  March  24,  1824.5  It  was
dormant  for  some  time,  and  was  re-chartered  September  19,  1853  ;
and  removed  to  Manchester.6

De  Witt  Clinton,  No.  1,  Portsmouth  ; Charter  January,  1826.

1 Proceedings  General  Grand  Encampment,  1871,  p.  28.

2 Ibid.,  p.  30.  3 Ibid.,  p.  65.

4 The  General  Grand  Encampment  approved  the  formation  of  a State  Grand  En-
campment for  New  Hampshire  September  14,  1859  (see  p.  50  of  the  Proceedings  General

Grand  Encampment,  1859)  J but  it  was  never  formed  until  1897.

5 Proceedings  General  Grand  Encampment,  1826,  p.  12.  6 Ibid,,  1853,  p.  192.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1621

Mount  Horeb,  No.  4,  Hopkinton  ; Charter  May  21,  1826;  be-
came dormant  in  1856.

North  Star,  No.  3,  Lancaster;  dispensation  May  2,  1857;  char-
tered September  16,  1859.

St.  Paul,  No.  4,  at  Dover  ; dispensation  November  7,  x 85 7 °
chartered  September  16,  1859.

Mount  Horeb,  No.  5,  at  Concord  ; dispensation  May  31,  1859.
As  above  shown  the  original  Charter  was  issued  May  21,  1826,  and
was  restored  September  16,  1859.1

New  Jersey.

The  Grand  Commandery  of  New  Jersey  was  constituted  Febru-
ary 14,  i860,  by  the  approval  of  the  General  Grand  Encampment
dated  September  16,  1859.

The  first  subordinate  commandery  was  Hugh  de  Payens,  No.  1,
at  Jersey  City  ; by  dispensation  March  12,  1858,  and  Charter  Sep-
tember 16,  1859;  constituted  November  25,  1859.

St.  Bernard,  No.  2,  at  Hightstown  ; by  dispensation  March  27,
1859,  and  Charter  September  16,  1859;  constituted  October  12
1859.

Helena,  No.  3,  at  Burlington  ; by  dispensation  September  16.
1859,  and  chartered  September  16,  1859; 2 constituted  October  12,

1859.

New  Mexico.

The  first  commandery  organized  in  New  Mexico  was  Santa
Fd,  No.  1,  at  Santa  Fd  ; dispensation  granted  May  31,  1869;
organized  May  31,  1869,  and  Charter  September  21,  1871.

The  next  was  Las  Vegas,  No.  2,  at  Las  Vegas  ; dispensation
April  10,  1882  ; chartered  August  23,  1883.

Pilgrim,  No.  3,  at  Albuquerque;  dispensation  April  4,  1883;
chartered  August  23,  1883.

McGorty,  No.  4,  at  Deming ; dispensation  July  13,  1886;  char-
tered September  23,  1886.

1 Proceedings  General  Grand  Encampment,  p.  358,  in  note  to  table  (A").

2 The  record  shows  that  the  dispensation  and  Charter  were  issued  on  the  same  day.
— Proceedings,  1859,  P*  35&.

1622

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Aztec,  No.  5,  at  Raton  ; dispensation  November  16,  1892  ; char-
tered August  29,  1895,  and  constituted  December  20,  1895.

Rio  Hundo,  No.  6,  at  Raswell ; dispensation  June  17,  1895;
Charter  August  29,  1895;  constituted  November  30,  1895.

New  York.

The  Grand  Encampment  of  New  York  was  formed  ab  origine ,
June  18,  1 8 1 4.1

There  is  no  history  of  the  regular  formation  of  this  Grand  En-
campment. In  the  history  of  the  organization  of  the  General  Grand
Encampment  we  have  shown  how  the  formation  occurred.  We  are
reminded  of  the  remark  of  an  old  negro,  who  said  : “ Poor  Marse
Greely,  he  never  had  no  father  or  mother,  ’kase  he  said  hisself  that
he  was  a ‘self-made  man.’”  Nevertheless,  he  was  the  great  editor
of  the  great  State  of  New  York.  Moreover,  the  Templars  of  that
State  can  refer  to  another  illustrious  example,  viz.,  “ Melchizedek,
King  of  Salem,  the  Priest  of  the  Most  High  God,  who  met  Abra-
ham returning  from  the  slaughter  of  the  kings  and  blessed  him.
Without  father,  and  without  mother,  without  descent  (pedigree),
having  neither  beginning  of  days,  nor  end  of  life.”2

The  commencement  of  the  Templar  Order  in  New  York  is  in-
volved in  great  obscurity  ; yet  there  were  several  bodies,  having  no
authority  whatever,  which  were  organized  at  an  early  date.  Sir
Knight  Robert  Macoy  bestowed  great  labor  in  endeavoring  to  ar-
rive at  the  very  first  history  of  the  Order  in  New  York.

In  the  volume  of  Proceedings  of  the  Grand  Commander y ,
there  is  a history  of  the  Templar  Order  in  New  York  State,  pre-
pared by  the  Grand  Recorder.  In  a subsequent  report  he  states
that  “ Several  of  the  Grand  Recorders,  committees,  and  reporters
have  embodied  valuable  historical  hints  in  their  several  papers,  which
throw  light  upon  the  origin  of  Templary,  . . . but  none  thus

far  have  satisfactorily  supplied  the  link  that  separates  the  Templars
of  the  Crusades  from  the  modern  Templars  or-  Templarism  as  it
exists  in  the  United  States,  England,  and  Canada.”

Sir  Knight  Macoy  said  that  “ Sir  Knights  anywhere  in  the
United  States  could  and  probably  did  meet  and  increase  their  num-

1 Ante,  pp.  1390,  1391.

2 Heb.,  ch.  vii.,  vs.  i,  3.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1623

bcrs  or  dignify  their  worthy  companions  by  the  authority  of  inher-
ent rights,  keeping  few  and  probably  no  records.  We  are  certain
that  those  who  lived  and  labored  in  the  days  referred  to  have  passed
to  their  final  rest  and  have  left  few  traces  behind.”

Sir  Knight  Parvin,  on  commenting  upon  Sir  Knight  Macoy,
says : “ And  yet  the  few  traces  they  have  left  did  not  confirm  the
position  assumed  by  Sir  Knight  Macoy,  but  rather  go  to  prove
that  the  Sir  Knights  made  in  those  days  were  made  in  Lodges  or
Chapters  working  under  Lodge  Warrants,  except  possibly  in  a few
instances,  where  the  degree  of  Knight  Templar  was  conferred  by
officers  of  some  of  the  bodies  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scotch
Rite.”  1

In  this  we  agree  with  Sir  Knight  Parvin.

Sir  Knight  Macoy,  in  his  efforts  to  prove  priority  for  New
York  in  Templary,  supports  his  statement  as  to  the  existence  of  the
Order  prior  to  1785,  quotes  from  old  newspapers  published  in  New
York  City,  verified  by  reference  to  the  reprint  of  the  Grand  Lodge
Proceedings  from  1781  to  1815,  published  in  1876,  by  authority  of
the  Grand  Lodge.2

This  is  shown  in  the  order  of  procession  on  St.  John’s  Day  (De-
cember 27,  1785),  providing  that  Knights  Templars  with  drawn
swords  were  to  be  in  the  procession.  Also  from  the  “ Independent
Journal,”  December  28,  1785,  is  a notice  of  “the  proceedings  of
the  anniversary  of  St.  John  the  Evangelist,”  and  that  it  gave  the
same  programme  or  form  of  procession  as  was  provided  by  the  Grand
Lodge  ; and  then  states,  “ that  whilst  the  members  of  the  fraternity
celebrated  the  natal  days  of  their  patron  saints,  Sir  Knights  as  a
body  seldom  appeared  in  public.”

Sir  Knight  Macoy  says  further : “ We  refer  to  what  was  known
as  Old  Encampment,  Grand  Encampment,  and  sometimes  as  Mor-
ton’s Encampment,  of  which  General  Jacob  Morton  was  for  many
years  Grand  Master.  The  date  and  circumstances  under  which  this
Grand  Encampment  was  established  are  not  definitely  known.  The
general  belief  is  that  it  was  the  body  of  Knights  Templars  that  par-
ticipated in  the  celebrations  of  St.  John’s  Day,  December  27,  1785,
June  24,  1789,  and  again  in  1795.  The  first  published  list  of  this

1 “ History  of  Masonry,”  p.  539.

2 Reprint  of  Proceedings  of  New  York,  December  21,  1785,  p.  42.

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

1624

Commandery  appeared  in  1796,  when  Jacob  Morton  was  Grand
Master.  The  body  continued  to  noid  stated  meetings  until  1810.
when  it  disappeared.  Gen’l  Jacob  Morton  was  admitted  an  hon-
orary member  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  State  in  1815.”

Reference  is  also  made  in  these  transactions  of  the  Grand  Lodge
to  the  attendance  of  the  “ Knights  Templars  in  the  form  as  directed
by  their  presiding  officer,”  etc.,  at  the  observance  of  “the  solemn
funeral  rites  in  commemoration  of  our  illustrious  Brother,  George
Washington,  with  a procession,”  etc.

At  the  first  conclave  after  the  formation  of  the  Grand  Encamp-
ment of  the  State,  in  June,  1814,  the  Grand  Orator  “delivered  a
discourse  in  which  he  gave  a historical  sketch  of  the  foundation  of
the  Order  of  Knights  Templars,  in  a style  calculated  to  excite  the
liveliest  interest,  which  was  manifested  by  reiterated  applause  ; and
in  order,  at  the  same  time,  to  perpetuate  the  motives  that  led  to  the
establishment  of  this  Grand  Encampment  as  the  ground-work  of  our
future  operations.  He  concluded  by  giving  the  following  concise
account  of  the  proceedings  and  the  ceremonial  that  took  place  at  its
formation  by  the  Sov.\  Grand  Consistory  of  Chiefs  of  Exalted  Ma-
sonry for  the  United  States  of  America,  its  Territories  and  Depend-
encies, at  their  Asylum,  held  in  the  City  of  New  York,  on  the  22d
day  of  the  month  Shebath , of  the  Hebrew  year,  7813,  corresponding
with  the  eleventh  month,  a.l.  5813  ; January  a.d.  1814,  and  the  foun-
dation of  our  order  the  694th  year,  and  at  which  most,  if  not  all,  the
members  here  present  assisted.

“ The  numerous  Encampments  of  Knights  Templars  now  ex-
isting within  this  State,  being  self-created  bodies,  are  consequently
governed  by  their  own  private  and  individual  laws,  acknowledging
no  superior  authority,  because,  in  fact,  none  heretofore  existed.”  1

The  consistory  itself  which  authorized  this  Grand  Encampment
was  a ^//-constituted  body  of  the  Cerneau  creation  without  any  au-
thority, and  pirated  degrees  which  never  belonged  to  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Rite,  and  there  is  no  evidence  whatever  that  Cerneau
or  any  of  the  members  of  that  consistory  had  ever  received  the
Templar  or  Red  Cross  degree.  At  this  conclave  De  Witt  Clinton
was  chosen  Thrice  Illustrious  Grand  Master,  who  was  not  present;
and  by  reference  to  all  the  Proceedings  from  1814  to  1826  we  do

The  pot  called  the  kettle  black  /

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  162;

not  find  him  as  being  present  at  a single  conclave,  although  he  was
re-elected  at  every  election  until  his  death,  which  occurred  in  1828.

At  the  conclave  held  May  22,  1815,  Columbian  Encampment,
No.  5,  was  voted  to  have  a Charter  of  Recognition,  and  it  was  also
voted  “that  the  numerical  characteristics  1,  2,  3,  4,  be  kept  in  re-
serve for  the  several  encampments  already  established  within  this
State,  and  in  the  order  which  they  now  respectively  stands  should
they  or  any  of  them  apply  for  a renewal  of  their  Charters  under  the
Grand  Encampment." 1

At  the  conclave  held  May  4,  1816,  a Charter  was  granted  upon
the  petition  of  “a  collective  body  of  Sir  Knights  Templars,  Royal
Arch  Masons  and  Members  of  the  Sov.\  Grand  Council  of  Princes
of  the  Royal  Secret  for  the  State  of  Louisiana,  sitting  at  New  Or-
leans, authorizing  them  to  open  and  to  hold,  in  a regular  and  au-
thentic manner,  an  encampment  of  Sir  Knights  of  the  Red  Cross,
Most  Holy  and  Illustrious  Knights  of  Malta,  Knights  of  the  Med-
iterranean Pass  and  Invincible  Knights  Templars,  to  be  under  and
subject  to  the  jurisdiction  of  that  Grand  Encampment  and  who  had
formed  themselves  into  a provisory  association  under  the  title  of
Louisiana  Encampment,  No.  — , until  the  pleasure  and  sanction  of
the  Supreme  Body  be  known  and  obtained.  This  was  known  as
No.  6.

At  the  conclave  held  June  9,  1816,  a delegate  was  chosen  to  rep-
resent the  Grand  Encampment  in  the  convention  of  representa-
tives from  the  Grand  Encampments  of  the  several  States  in  the
Union,  to  be  held  at  Philadelphia  on  Tuesday  next,  and  Thomas
Lowndes  was  selected.

The  history  of  that  convention  has  already  been  written  in
Chapter  LI  II.

At  the  annual  conclave  held  June  29,  1816,  Columbian  Encamp-
ment, was  the  first  encampment  to  be  represented  in  any  conclave.
A Charter  was  also  issued  for  an  encampment  of  Knights  Templars
and  Appendant  Orders,  sitting  at  New  Orleans.

By  a special  conclave  the  Grand  Recorder  was  instructed  to
“correspond  with  Sir  Thomas  Smith  Webb,  Deputy  General  Grand
Master,  requesting  copies  of  the  Constitution  of  the  General  Grand
Encampment  of  the  United  States,  for  the  purpose  of  so  modifying

1 Proceedings  of  Grand  Encampment  of  New  York,  from  1814  to  1859,  p.  14.

1026

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

the  Constitution  of  this  Grand  Encampment  that  it  may  conform
thereto.”

At  the  annual  conclave  a committee  reported  and  submitted  a
form  of  new  constitution  and  it  was  adopted.

The  preamble  sets  forth  :

“ The  Grand  Encampment  of  the  State  of  New  York  having  by
its  representatives  assisted  to  form  the  General  Grand  Encampment
of  the  United  States  of  America,  and  having  acknowledged  the
supreme  authority  of  the  same,  did,  on  the  nth  day  of  December,
a. d.  1820,  in  full  session,  upon  report  of  a committee  appointed  to
revise  the  former  constitution,  adopt  the  former  constitution  for  its
future  government.” 1 *

From  the  minutes  of  the  special  conclave  held  on  Trinity  Sun-
day, June  1 7,  1821,  for  the  purpose  of  installing  the  Grand  Officers,
after  which  a resolution  was  adopted  to  transmit  certain  copies  of
the  constitution  to  different  parties,  the  only  subordinate  encamp-
ments mentioned  are  Columbian,  No.  5,  in  New  York,  and  Indi-
visible Friends,  No.  6,  in  New  Orleans,  which  No.  6 was  originally
chartered  as  Louisiana  Encampment.  Copies  were  also  sent  to  the
encampments  at  Albany  and  Stillwater,  in  that  State,  which  had  not
yet  united  with  the  Grand  Encampment.9

At  the  special  conclave  held  February  8,  1823,  upon  application
therefor,  a Warrant  was  issued  to  Utica  Encampment,  No.  7,  at
Utica.3  At  a special  conclave  February  18,  1823,  a Warrant  was
ordered  to  be  issued,  upon  application  therefor,  to  Temple  En-
campment, No.  2,  at  Albany.4

At  the  special  conclave  held  August  16,  1823,  upon  application
Oerefor,  a Warrant  was  issued  to  form  Morton  Encampment,  No.
4,  in  the  city  of  New  York.  This  encampment  was  regularly  in-
stalled by  the  Grand  Encampment  August  1 8th  following.

At  the  special  conclave  held  September,  1824,  upon  application
therefor,  a Warrant  was  issued  to  LaFayette  Encampment,  No.  7,
in  the  city  of  Hudson.

At  the  annual  conclave  there  were  present  the  representatives
or  proxies  of  Columbian,  No.  1 ; Utica,  No.  3;  Morton,  No.  4;
and  LaFayette,  No.  7.  At  the  annual  conclave  held  December

1 Proceedings  Grand  Encampment  of  New  York,  p.  28.

* Ibid.,  p.  34.  s Ibid.,  p.  41.  4 Ibid.,  p.  42.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

1627

16,  1825,  warrants  were  issued  to  Plattsburg  Encampment,  No.  8,
at  Plattsburg;  to  Cherry  Valley,  No.  9,  at  Cherry  Valley,  and  Gen-
esee, No.  10,  at  Le  Roy.

At  the  annual  conclave  held  June  9,  1826,  a Warrant  was  issued
to  Watertown  Encampment,  No.  11,  at  Watertown,  to  which  a dis-
pensation had  been  granted  previously  (no  date  mentioned).  At
the  special  conclave  held  September  18,  1826,  an  order  was  passed
to  authorize  a dispensation  to  be  issued  to  form  an  encampment  in
the  village  of  Rochester.  At  the  annual  conclave  held  June  8,
1827,  there  were  represented  : Columbus,  No.  1 ; Temple,  No.  2 ;
Utica,  No.  3;  Morton,  No.  4;  LaFayette,  No.  7;  Plattsburg,  No.
8 ; Cherry  Valley,  No.  9 ; Genesee,  No.  10  ; Watertown,  No.  n.

A Warrant  was  issued  to  New  Jerusalem  Encampment,  No.  13,
in  Ithaca.

A Warrant  was  also  issued  to  Monroe  Encampment,  No.  12.  a
dispensation  having  been  granted  to  this  encampment  in  Rochester,
ordered  September  16,  1826.

Genesee  Encampment  was  authorized  to  change  its  location  from
Le  Roy  to  Batavia.

At  a special  conclave  held  February  20,  1808,  resolutions  were
adopted  on  the  death  of  their  distinguished  Chief,  De  Witt  Clinton.

At  the  annual  conclave  held  June  6,  1828,  a Warrant  was  ordered
to  be  issued  to  Clinton  Encampment,  No.  14,  in  Brooklyn,  a dis-
pensation having  been  previously  issued.

We  have  now  brought  the  history  of  this  important  Grand  En-
campment down  from  its  doubtful  origin  to  the  death  of  the  dis-
tinguished Chief,  who  was  also  the  Head  and  Mainstay  of  the
General  Grand  Encampment  until  his  death,  and  our  limits  in  this
chapter  will  not  permit  us  to  proceed  any  further,  and  we  close  by
observing  that  no  single  Grand  Commandery  has  exerted  greater
influence  for  good  and  the  prosperity  of  Templar  Masonry  than  the
Grand  Commandery  of  the  Empire  State.

“ Esto  perpetua.”

North  Carolina.

The  Grand  Commandery  of  North  Carolina  was  constituted
May  10,  1881.

The  first  official  notice  of  Templarism  is  found  in  the  Proceed-

1628

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

ings  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States,  Septembei
19,  1826,  where  it  is  reported  that  a Charter  had  been  granted,
among  many  others,  to  Fayetteville  Encampment,  at  Fayetteville,
December  21,  182 1.1

In  the  report  of  the  General  Grand  Recorder  at  the  tenth  meet-
ing, held  September  14,  1847,2  he  stated  that  a dispensation  had
been  issued  to  that  Encampment,  but  whether  a Charter  was  granted
he  is  unable  to  say.  “ Certain  it  is,  the  encampment  is  known  to
have  ceased  all  operations  many  years  ago,  although  it  is  said  a
Charter  was  known  to  have  existed.”

The  General  Grand  Recorder  also  stated  : 3

“Some  time  in  1845  a Sir  Knight  from  Richmond,  Virginia,
and  another  from  another  State,  not  now  recollected,  assisted  by  a
most  respectable  Sir  Knight  of  Wilmington,  North  Carolina,  who,
it  is  said,  had  seen  the  Charter  which  had  there  been  consumed  by
fire,  held  a meeting  and  conferred  the  degrees  of  Knighthood  upon
so  many  Royal  Arch  Masons  as  seemed  to  them  sufficient  to  form
an  Encampment ; and,  having  done  so,  they  proceeded  to  elect  of-
ficers and  to  organize  an  encampment.  This  being  done,  the  Re-
corder of  that  body  so  formed  wrote  to  the  undersigned,  requesting
that  another  Charter  might  be  furnished  them.  Being  informed
that  all  their  proceedings  were  irregular,  it  is  believed  they  pro-
ceeded no  further,  but  he  can  not  assert  with  certainty  that  such  is
the  fact.”

Fayetteville  Encampment,  at  Fayetteville,  was  originally  char-
tered December  21,  1821 ; as  before  stated.

Wilmington  Encampment,  at  Wilmington,  was  chartered  orig-
inally at  an  early  date,  but  there  is  no  record  in  the  Proceedings  of
the  General  Grand  Encampment  except  in  1874,  where  it  is  said
the  dispensation  was  renewed  March  18,  1872.

The  following  was  adopted  at  the  conclave  of  the  General  Grand
Encampment  September  16,  1850.

“ Resolved , That  the  letter  of  P.  W.  Fanning,  dated  Wilmington,
North  Carolina,  September  8,  1850,  with  its  enclosure,  being  re-
ferred to  the  General  Grand  Recorder,  to  reply  to  the  same,  and
with  the  view  of  authorizing  the  Sir  Knights  of  Wilmington  and

1 Proceedings  of  General  Grand  Encampment,  1826,  p.  20.

2 Ibid.,  1847,  p.  1 14.  8 Ibid.,  p.  147.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1629

Fayetteville  to  resume  their  labors  as  Encampments  subordinate  to
this  General  Grand  Encampment ; and  that  the  Most  Excellent
General  Grand  Master  is  empowered,  in  his  discretion  and  upon  ex-
amination into  the  merits  of  the  case,  the  authorizing  of  a charter  in
the  place  of  the  one  lost,  without  other  than  the  Recorder’s  fee  as
to  him  may  appear  just  and  expedient.”  1 2

Charlotte,  No.  2,  at  Charlotte;  dispensation  was  issued  June  14,
1875,  and  chartered  August  30,  1877.®

Durham,  No.  3,  at  Durham  ; was  constituted  October  14,  1880.

North  Dakota.

The  Grand  Commandery  of  North  Dakota  was  constituted  June
16,  1890.

Ohio.

The  Grand  Encampment  of  the  State  of  Ohio  was  constituted
October  24,  1843.  The  General  Grand  Encampment  voted  for  the
constitution  of  the  Grand  Encampment  September  17,  1841. 3

The  first  subordinate  encampment  was  established  at  Worthing-
ton by  dispensation  June  * 1818,  and  chartered  September  16,
1819.

The  second  was  Miami,  at  Lebanon  ; by  Charter  May  14,  1826.

The  third  was  Clinton,  No.  1,  at  Mount  Vernon;  by  dispensa-
tion 1826  and  1829,  and  was  represented  in  the  General  Grand  En-
campment in  1829.

The  fourth  was  Lancaster,  No.  2,  at  Lancaster.  There  does  not
appear  on  record  any  dispensation,  but  a Charter  was  granted
December  9,  1835.

The  fifth  was  Cincinnati,  No.  3 ; by  dispensation  December,
1839,  and  Charter  September  17,  1841.

The  sixth  was  Massillon,  No.  4,  at  Massillon ; by  dispensation
July  5,  1843,  and  Charter  September  12,  1844.

The  seventh  was  Mount  Vernon,  No.  5,  at  Mount  Vernon  ; by
dispensation  July  22,  1843,  and  Charter  September  12,  1844,  which
was  originally  Clinton,  No.  1.

1 Proceedings  of  General  Grand  Encampment,  1850,  p.  150.

2 Ibid.,  p.  192  8 Ibid.,  1841,  p.  79.

1630

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Oklahoma.

The  Grand  Commandery  of  Oklahoma  was  constituted  by
authority  of  the  Grand  General  Encampment  February  io,  1896.
Warrant  to  form  Grand  Commandery  dated  November  8,  1895.1
The  subordinate  commanderies  were  :

Guthrie,  No.  1,  at  Guthrie  ; by  dispensation  November  17,  1892,
and  Charter  December  22,  1892.

Oklahoma,  No.  2,  at  Oklahoma;  by  dispensation  October  7,
1892,  and  Charter  November  12,  1892.

Ascension,  No.  3,  at  El  Remo;  by  dispensation  May  8,  1893,
and  Charter  August  29,  1895,  and  was  instituted  December  3,  1895.

Oregon.

The  Grand  Commandery  of  Oregon  was  constituted  April  13,
1887.

Ivanhoe,  No.  2,  at  Eugene  City;  by  dispensation  April  6,  1883,
and  chartered  August  23,  1883.

Temple,  No.  3,  at  Albany  ; by  dispensation  June  5,  1886,  formed
July  8,  1886,  and  chartered  September  24,  1886.

Pennsylvania.

The  commencement  of  the  Templar  Order  in  Pennsylvania
was  at  an  early  day,  and  a contest  was  vigorously  prosecuted  be-
tween the  Templars  of  Massachusetts  and  Rhode  Island  and  Penn-
sylvania as  to  when  a Grand  Commandery  was  formed  and  in  which
jurisdiction.  We  shall  quote  from  Sir  Alfred  Creigh’s  work  on
Templarism  in  Pennsylvania  to  show  what  he  has  written  on  that
point  in  his  reply2  to  Sir  Wm.  S.  Gardner,  of  Massachusetts,  in  his
address  at  the  semi-annual  meeting  in  Boston,  May  5,  1865.* 8

“The  history  of  Templarism  in  Pennsylvania  is  one  of  peculiar
interest  to  every  Sir  Knight  of  the  Order,  whether  enrolled  under
our  banner,  or  waging  war  in  sister  jurisdictions  in  defence  of  inno-
cent maidens,  helpless  orphans,  destitute  widows,  and  the  Christian
religion.  To  Pennsylvania  and  Pennsylvania  alone  are  we  indebted

1 Proceedings  of  General  Grand  Encampment,  1898,  p.  62.

8 “ Templarism  in  Pennsylvania/’  2d  series,  p.  504.

3 Ibid.,  p.  502.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1631

for  the  first  Grand  Encampment  which  was  ever  constituted  in  the
United  States.  She  therefore  has  no  competitor  for  the  honor,  the
glory,  and  the  immortality  which  is  emblazoned  upon  her  Templar
history  ; and  the  12th  day  of  May,  1797,  when  the  Convention  met
in  Philadelphia,  composed  of  delegates  from  Nos.  1 and  2 of  Phila-
delphia, No.  3 of  Harrisburg,  and  No.  4 of  Carlisle  (whose  re-
spective organizations  took  place  from  1793  to  1 797), 1 should  be
held  as  sacred  as  the  4th  of  July,  1776 — the  one  having  given  birth
to  the  Orders  of  Christian  Knighthood,  and  the  other  to  our  polit-
ical existence.  It  required  sober  thought,  sound  judgment,  mature
reflection,  discriminating  mind,  and  far-seeing  perception  in  the  Sir
Knights  composing  that  convention  as  they  were  about  to  inaugu-
rate a system  of  Christian  Ethics  which  would  have  an  influence  for
weal  or  for  woe  upon  the  dissemination  of  the  principles  of  Chris-
tian Knighthood.  The  idea  was  happily  conceived,  and  the  Sir
Knights  who  risked  their  Masonic  and  Templar  representation  upon
its  success  have  rendered  the  name  of  Pennsylvania  eternal  in  the
annals  of  Templarism.”

Sir  Knight  Creigh  then  enters  into  a statement  of  some  historical
and  other  dates  to  show  that  the  four  subordinate  encampments
which  organized  the  Grand  Encampment  were  regularly  constituted
prior  to  the  formation  of  the  Grand  Body.  But,  however,  he  finds
that  from  the  published  By-Laws  of  Nos.  1 and  2,  of  Philadelphia,
that  on  December  27,  1812,  these  two  united  as  No.  1,  and  from
this  encampment  and  also  No.  2,  of  Pittsburg,  was  formed  a second
Grand  Encampment,  on  February  16,  1814,  with  the  addition  of
delegates  from  Rising  Sun  Encampment,  No.  1,  of  New  York;
Washington  Encampment,  No.  1,  of  Wilmington,  Del.  ; and  Bal-
timore Encampment,  No.  1,  Baltimore,  Md.  The  style  of  the
second  Grand  Encampment  was  the  “ Pennsylvania  Grand  Encamp-
ment with  Masonic  Jurisdiction  thereunto  belonging.”  The  second
Grand  Encampment  existed  until  June  10,  1824,  or  at  least  its
Grand  Master,  Sir  Anthony  Fannen,  exercised  his  authority  as  such,
for  on  that  day  he  issued  a dispensation  to  the  officers  of  St.  John’s
Encampment,  No.  4,  which  was  instituted  June  8,  1819,  “to  dub
and  make  John  E.  Schwartz  a Sir  Knight  of  our  most  illustrious
Order  of  Knights  Templar.”  The  original  of  No.  1,  of  1794,  kept

1 It  is  very  remarkable  that  in  those  ancient  times  the  years  never  had  any  months
or  days. — Editor.

1632

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

up  a complete  and  unbroken  organization  until  June  13,  1824,  and
No.  2 was  merged  into  it  December  27,  1812,  as  above  noticed.

St.  John’s,  No.  4,  after  the  parent  body  had  ceased  in  1824,  still
existed  and  recognized  as  her  superior  the  source  of  all  Masonic
authority  within  the  State,  the  R.  W.  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsyl-
vania. It  was  upon  this  Rock  that  the  delegates  of  the  Pennsyl-
vania Grand  Encampment  of  1814,  and  the  delegates  of  the  New
England  States  which  assembled  in  convention  on  June  16,  1816,
in  Philadelphia,  split,  and  the  Pennsylvania  Grand  Encampment
charged  the  other  delegates  with  seceding  from  the  convention,
while  the  New  England  delegates  (consisting  of  Sir  Knights  Webb,
Fowle,  and  Snow)  reported  that  the  reason  why  Pennsylvania
would  not  enter  into  the  union  for  a General  Grand  Encampment
were:  1st,  “ That  the  Encampments  in  Pennsylvania  avow  them-
selves as  being  in  subordination  to  and  under  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Master  Masons;”  and  2d,  “Their  unwillingness  to  the  arrange-
ment or  order  of  succession  in  conferring  the  degrees,”  as  practised
by  the  New  England  States,  “ especially  to  the  Mark  and  the  Excel-
lent Master,  as  unnecessary  and  not  belonging  to  the  system  of
Masonry.”  The  delegates  of  the  New  England  States  then  ad-
journed to  meet  on  June  25,  1816,  in  New  York,  and  thei'e  formed
the  present  General  Grand  Encampment  of  Knights  Templars  of
the  United  States.

After  1824  all  the  subordinate  encampments  ceased  to  labor  ex-
cept St.  John’s,  No.  4,  and  she,  with  views  as  above  expressed,  con-
tinued to  be  loyal  to  the  Grand  Lodge  until  February  12,  1857.

In  May,  1852, 1 St.  John’s,  No.  4;  Philadelphia,  No.  5 ; Union,
No.  6 ; and  De  Molay,  of  Reading,  established  a Grand  Encamp-
ment, under  the  authority  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania,
but  the  Grand  Lodge  on  February  16,  1857,  resolved  (very  wisely,
if  very  late)  that  they  had  no  authority  over  the  degrees  of  Knight-
hood, but  that  its  legitimate  sphere  was  the  primitive  degrees  of
Ancient  Craft  Masonry  ; a union  was  therefore  effected,  and  both
Grand  Encampments  of  Pennsylvania  since  1857  acknowledge  as
their  legal  head  the  Grand  Encampment  of  Knights  Templars  of  the
United  States.

Prior  to  April  12,  1854,  the  subordinate  encampments  had  no

1 We  suppose  again,  May  had  no  days  then  !

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1633

governing  head.  Their  charters  were  derived  either  from  the  Gen-
eral Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States,  or  by  the  authority
of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania.

Pittsburg  Encampment,  No.  1 ; Jacques  De  Molay  (of  Wash-
ington), No.  2 ; and  St.  Omer's  (of  Uniontown,  but  afterward  of
Brownsville),  No.  3,  all  were  chartered  by  the  General  Grand  En-
campment. Hubbard  Commandery,  of  Waynesburg,  was  under
Dispensation  from  the  same  body.  St.  John’s  Encampment,  No.  4,
derived  her  Charter  from  the  Grand  Encampment  of  1814;  Phila-
delphia Encampment,  No.  5 ; Union  Encampment  (of  Philadel
phia),  No.  6;  and  De  Molay  (of  Reading),  No.  7,  were  under  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania.

It  was  firmly  believed  and  maintained  by  the  Brethren  of  Penn-
sylvania that  the  R.  W.  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania  was  the
source  of  all  Masonic  authority  within  her  geographical  limits,  and
they  were  sustained  by  reference  to  the  fact  that  Templar  Encamp-
ments were  held  under  Blue  Lodge  Warrants ; that  in  Ireland  the
Grand  Encampment  was  formed  as  early  as  1818,  yet  several  en-
campments continued  to  work  under  their  old  lodge  warrants,  as
was  also  the  fact  in  Scotland  and  in  Canada.  All  encampments
thus  constituted  in  Europe  were  considered  legal.1

A Warrant  was  issued  by  the  General  Grand  Master  of  the  Gen-
eral Grand  Encampment,  authorizing  the  formation  of  a Grand
Encampment  of  Pennsylvania.2  A convention  met  at  Brownsville
April  12,  1854,  and  organized  the  present  Grand  Commandery
of  Pennsylvania,  subordinate  to  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the
United  States.3

The  other  encampments  met  in  Philadelphia  May  10,  1854,
and  organized  a Grand  Encampment,  and  after  the  adoption  of  a
constitution  and  election  and  installation  of  officers,  instructed  the
Grand  Recorder  to  notify  the  Grand  Lodge  of  their  organization.4

After  some  time,  committees  of  conferences  having  been  ap-
pointed by  both  bodies5  and  duly  considered  the  condition  of  Tem-
plary  with  two  contending  rival  bodies,  good  counsel  prevailed.
The  supremacy  of  the  General  Grand  Encampment  was  acknowl-
edged 6 and  the  union  was  finally  accomplished,  which  was  officially

1 Templarism  in  Pennsylvania,”  2d  series,  p.  20.  2 Ibid.,  p.  77.

^ Ibid.,  p.  127.  4 Ibid.,  p.  118.  5 Ibid.,  1st  series,  pp.  131-35*

6 Ibid.,  2d  series,  p*  135.

103

1634

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

proclaimed  by  R.  E.  Sir  W.  VV.  Wilson,  Grand  Commander  of  the
Grand  Commandery,  June  i,  1857,  and  subsequently  by  M.  E.  Sir
William  B.  Hubbard,  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of
the  United  States.1

South  Carolina.

It  is  claimed  for  South  Carolina  that  the  Templar  Order  was
first  duly  organized  in  that  State  as  shown  in  the  old  patent  which
we  have  previously  described  in  Chapter  LI.,  pages  1377-78.

In  the  work  by  Theodore  S.  Gourdin,  from  which  we  have
quoted,  we  derive  the  principal  sources  of  our  information,  and  also
from  the  address  of  the  Grand  Master  of  Templars  to  the  Grand
Encampment  August,  1883,  as  well  as  from  Companion  Albert  G.
Mackey’s  History  of  Freemasonry  in  South  Carolina , are  we  in-
debted for  what  is  now  considered  a very  near  approach  to  the
period  of  the  introduction  of  the  Order  of  the  Temple,  and  we
may,  with  some  degree  of  exactness,  say  that  an  encampment  did
exist  prior  to  the  date  of  the  patent  referred  to,  which  was  issued
August  1,  1783.  As  this  document  has  been  fully  described,  we
need  not  here  dwell  upon  it,  and  rest  the  case.

The  following  are  the  commanderies  now  in  that  State,  which
are  subordinate  to  the  General  Grand  Encampment :

South  Carolina,  No.  1,  whose  original  Warrant  was  destroyed
by  fire  in  1843,  and  a dispensation  was  issued  May  17,  1843. 2

On  September  29,  1823,  a Charter  of  Recognition  was  issued,
as  the  encampment  had  been  working  for  many  years  prior  to  the
organization  of  the  General  Grand  Encampment.3

Columbia  No.  2,  at  Columbia;  dispensation  June  11,  1875;
chartered  August  30,  18 77. 4 A previous  Charter  of  Recognition
had  been  issued  January  24,  1824.5

Spartanburg,  No.  3,  at  Spartanburg;  dispensation  granted  Octo-
ber 1,  1891  ; chartered  August  29,  1895.

Note. — There  was  an  encampment  named  LaFayette  at  George-
town chartered  March,  1825, 6 but  there  is  no  further  notice  of  it  in
the  Proceedings  and  it  is  not  now  in  existence.

3 Templarism  in  Pennsylvania,  ist  series,  p.  22.

2 Proceedings  General  Grand  Encampment,  1844,  p.  81.  3 Ibid.,  p.  21.

4 Ibid.,  1 877,  p.  193.  5 Ibid.,  p.  20.  b Ibid.,  p.  20.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

163s

South  Dakota.

The  Grand  Commandery  of  South  Dakota  was  constituted  May
14,  1884  ; being  within  the  boundaries  of  the  State  of  South  Dakota,
it  continues  under  the  name  and  style  of  the  Grand  Commandery
of  South  Dakota.1

Tennessee.

The  Grand  Commandery  of  Tennessee  was  constituted  October
12,  1859.  Approved  September  16,  1859.

The  subordinate  commanderies  were  :

Dispensation.

Nashville,  No.  1,  at  Nashville Between  1844-47.

Yorkville,  No.  2,  at  Yorkville July  I0,  1857*

De  Molay,  No.  3,  at  Columbia December  20,  1859.

Cyrene,  No.  4,  at  Memphis March  27,  1859.

Chartered.

September  14,  1847.
September  17,  1859.
September  16,  1859.
September  16,  1859.

Texas.

The  Grand  Commandery  of  Texas  was  constituted  January  18,
1855.  A Warrant  had  been  issued  by  the  General  Grand  Master
to  form  and  establish  this  Grand  Encampment  December  31,  i853.a

The  subordinate  commanderies  were  San  Filipe  de  Austin,  No.
1,  at  Galveston,  by  Charter  December  10,  1835.

Ruthven  No.  2,  Houston  ; by  dispensation  February  2,  1848,
and  Charter  September  11,  1850.

Palestine,  No-  3,  at  Palestine;  by  dispensation  May  16,  1853,
and  Charter  September  19,  T853.

Utah.

The  following  subordinate  commanderies  were  organized  in
Utah  under  warrants  from  the  General  Grand  Encampment  :

Utah,  No.  1,  at  Salt  Lake  City  ; dispensation  granted  December
20,  1873,  chartered  December  3,  1874.

El  Monte,  No.  2,  at  Ogden;  had  a dispensation  granted  Octo-
ber 22,  1885,  which  was  opened  November  n,  1885;  chartered
September  23,  1886.

1 Proceedings  General  Grand  Encampment,  1892,  p.  41.  2 Ibid.,  1856,  p.  248.

1636

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Vermont.

The  Grand  Encampment  of  Vermont  was  constituted  August

14,  1S51-1

December,  1850,  consent  was  given  to  three  encampments  to
form  a Grand  Commandery.

Vermont,  at  Windsor  ; chartered  February  23,  1821.

Green  Mountain,  at  Rutland;  chartered  March  12,  1823.

Mount  Calvary,  at  Middlebury ; chartered  February  24,  1824.
Burlington,  No.  2,  at  Burlington;  dispensation  June  28,  1849
chartered  September  17,  1850.

LaFayette,  No.  4,  at  Berkshire ; dispensation  November  9
1850  ; old  Charter  endorsed  October  27,  1853.

Calvary,  at  Middlebury;  old  Charter  of  Mount  Calvary  renewed

Virginia.

The  Grand  Encampment  of  Virginia  was  constituted  November
27,  1823.

The  history  of  the  old  encampments  is  very  interesting,  but  is
too  lengthy  for  our  pages.  (See  Proceedings  of  General  Grand
Encampment.)  The  subordinate  encampments  in  the  State  were  :

Richmond,  at  Richmond  ; chartered  May  5,  1823.

Warren,  at  Harper’s  Ferry  ; chartered  July  4,  1824.

Winchester,  at  Winchester  ; chartered  July  4,  1824.

These  three  encampments  were  erased  September  17,  184 7.*

Wheeling,  No.  1,  at  Wheeling;  dispensation  issued  August  31,
1838,  and  afterward  extended  six  months.

It  appears  from  all  that  can  be  learned  in  the  Proceedings
of  the  General  Grand  Encampment  from  1823,  that  the  Grand  En-
campment of  Virginia,  which  in  the  Proceedings  is  only  recorded
as  having  been  organized  “prior  to  1826,”  did  not  continue  very
long.  The  encampments  at  Richmond,  Harper’s  Ferry,  and  Win-
chester, two  of  which  held  charters  of  recognition,  and  one  of  con-
stitution from  the  General  Grand  Encampment,  the  report  of  a
committee  in  18473  says:  “About  1826  these  three  Encampments

1 The  Table  in  Proceedings  of  General  Grand  Encampment  for  1895  says  June  27,  1824.
8 Proceedings  of  General  Grand  Encampment,  1847,  p.  no.  3 Ibid.,  1847,  p.  119.

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1637

formed  a Grand  Encampment  for  the  State,  which,  in  that  year,  was
represented  in  the  General  Grand  Encampment  (Sir  James  Cush-
man).1 *

“ Nothing  further  is  known  of  this  Grand  Encampment,  but  it
is  presumed  to  have  ceased  to  exist  soon  after  its  organization  ; for
it  appears  that  in  1858  a dispensation,  and  subsequently  a Charter,
was  granted  by  this  General  Grand  Encampment  to  a commandery
to  be  located  at  Wheeling  in  that  State.  Matters  continued  in  this
condition  until  this  nth  of  December,  1845,  when  delegates  from
sundry  Encampments,  including  the  three  owing  their  allegiance  to
the  General  Grand  Body,  met  at  Richmond,  and  having  resolved
that  it  was  impossible  to  revive  the  extinct  Grand  Encampment,
proceeded  to  form  a new  one  for  the  State.

“ Such  is  a brief  Statement  of  the  facts.  Your  Committee  are
of  the  Opinion  that  when  the  original  Grand  Encampment  of  Vir-
ginia ceased  to  exist,  jurisdiction  over  the  State  reverted  to  this  body.

“And  this  seems  to  have  been  the  view  entertained  in  1838,
when  this  General  Grand  Encampment  established  an  Encampment
at  Wheeling.

“ They  are  also  of  the  opinion  that  immediate  jurisdiction  over,
at  least,  the  three  Subordinate  Encampments,  which  derived  their
authority  from  this  body,  also  reverted  to  its  original  source.  This
being  true,  there  was  no  power  vested  in  the  Subordinate  Encamp-
ments in  Virginia  to  organize  a Grand  Encampment  without  the
consent  of  the  General  Grand  Encampment  as  provided  by  this
Constitution.  This  consent  or  approval  was  never  obtained  or  even
asked  for.

“ It  follows,  therefore,  that  the  body  now  existing,  and  styling
itself  the  Grand  Encampment  of  Virginia,  is  irregular  and  unauthor-
ized. It  refuses  allegiance  to  this  General  Grand  Encampment,  and
denies  its  authority  in  the  State  of  Virginia.”

In  1871,  at  the  Triennial  Encampment,  a memorial  from  the
Grand  Commandery  of  Virginia  was  presented  by  Sir  Knights  W.
B.  Isaacs  and  R.  E.  Withers  “ Asking  leave  to  withdraw  from  the
jurisdiction  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States.”
The  memorial  is  quite  too  lengthy  for  our  pages.  This  was  referred
to  a committee  of  three.8

1 Proceedings  of  General  Grand  Encampment,  1826,  p.  9.

* Proceedings,  1871,  pp.  175  to  180

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

i£>38

This  committee  made  a lengthy  report,  in  which  they  answered
the  reasons  for  a separation  as  set  forth  in  the  memorial,  and  pre-
sented the  following  :

“ Resolved,  That  the  Grand  Encampment  entertaining  for  the
Grand  Commandery  of  Virginia  the  most  courteous  and  friendly
feeling  of  fraternal  brotherhood,  and  being  anxious  to  preserve  in-
tact the  knightly  array  of  the  constituent  Grand  Commanderies  and
to  continue  to  preserve  the  good,  well-being,  and  perpetuation  of
‘Templar  Masonry,’  does  decline  and  refuse  ‘to  allow  the  Grand
Commandery  of  Virginia,  in  peace,  in  honor,  and  in  recognition,  to
withdraw  from  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand  Encampment  ’ as  prayed
for  in  its  memorial.

“ Respectfully  submitted  by  the  Committee,

“Theodore  S.  Parvin,

“ Charles  W.  Woodruff,

“ Richard  F.  Knott.”

N.  B. — Subsequently  Sir  Knight  Isaacs  was  made  the  General
Grand  Recorder,  and  Sir  Knight  Withers  the  General  Grand  Mas-
ter, of  the  General  Grand  Encampment.

Washington  Territory.

The  Grand  Commandery  was  organized  June  2,  1887.

Washington  Commandery,  No.  1,  at  Walla  Walla ; dispensation
issued  April  19,  1882,  and  a Charter  was  granted  August  23,  1883.

Seattle,  No.  2,  had  a dispensation  issued  February  22,  1883,  and
was  chartered  August  23,  1883.

Cataract,  No.  3,  at  Spokane,  had  a dispensation  issued  to  it  July
30,  1885,  and  was  organized  August  14,  1885  ; and  chartered  Sep-
tember 23,  1886.

Ivanhoe,  No.  4,  at  Tacoma  ; a dispensation  was  issued  March  23,
1886;  formed  April  27,  1886,  and  chartered  September  23,  1886.

West  Virginia.

West  Virginia  was  a part  of  the  State  of  Virginia  until  June
20,  1863.  As  we  have  shown,  under  Virginia,  the  Grand  Encamp-
ment was  organized  November  27,  1823,  and  from  October,  1824,
under  various  changes,  and  frequently  being  dormant  for  years,  and

FREEMASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1639

having  no  communion  with  the  majority  of  Templars  of  the  Gen-
eral Grand  Body,  that  Grand  Encampment,  now  Commandery,  has
existed  as  under  and  by  virtue  of  the  constitution  of  the  Grand
Encampment  of  the  United  States.  It  has  exercised  exclusive
jurisdiction  over  the  territory  now  included  in  the  State  of  West
Virginia,  with  a single  exception  under  the  constitution  of  the
Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States.  The  Grand  Command-
ery of  Virginia  continued  to  exercise  jurisdiction  over  it  the  same
as  theretofore.  In  the  list  of  its  subordinate  commanderies,  the
Grand  Commandery  of  Virginia  classed  Wheeling,  No.  1 ; Pales-
tine, No.  9,  at  Martinsburg  ; Star  of  the  West,  No.  12,  at  Mor-
gantown, and  in  1868  a dispensation  was  issued  by  the  Grand  Com-
mander of  Virginia  for  a new  commandery  at  Monongahela,1  all  in
West  Virginia.

After  the  formation  of  West  Virginia  State  the  Grand  Encamp-
ment did  not  claim  the  commanderies  therein  as  its  immediate  sub-
ordinates, nor  exercised  any  power  in  West  Virginia  hostile  to  the
jurisdictional  claim  of  the  Grand  Commandery  of  Virginia.2  The
Grand  Commandery  of  West  Virginia  was  organized  by  P.  G.  M.
James  H.  Hopkins,  February  25,  1874.  1°  the  history  of  the

Grand  Commandery  of  Virginia  we  have  shown  the  subordinate
commanderies  which  were  located  in  the  present  State  of  West
Virginia,  viz.,  Warren,  at  Harper’s  Ferry  ; Winchester,  at  Win-
chester ; and  Wheeling,  No.  x,  at  Wheeling.

Wisconsin.

The  Grand  Commandery  of  Wisconsin  was  organized  October
20,  1859.  Wisconsin,  No.  1 ; dispensation,  no  date  found,  and
Charter  granted  September  1 1 , 1850.

Note. — We  have  been  unable  to  find  any  reference  in  the  Pro-
ceedings of  the  General  Grand  Encampment  prior  to  1859  of  any
other  encampment  in  Wisconsin.

1 Proceedings,  1871,  p.  55.

2 Ibid.,  p.  56.

1640

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Wyoming.

The  Grand  Commandery  of  Wyoming  was  organized  by  au-
thority of  the  General  Grand  Encampment  September  23,  1886,
and  constituted  March  8,  1888.

The  constituent  commanderies  were  :

Place.

Dispensation.

Charter.

Wyoming,  No.  i

Ivanhoe,  No.  2

Cheyenne... .
Rawlins ...  j

March  15,  1873.
February  9,  1885.
February  16,  1885.
May  1,  1886.

May  18,  1886.

December  3,  1874.
September  23,  1886.

September  23,  1886.

Immanuel,  No.  3. . . .

Laramie. . j

CHAPTER  LIX

HISTORY  OF  COLORED  MASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

HE  action  taken  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  State
of  Washington,  wherein  the  legality  of  the  or-
ganization of  Prince  Hall  Lodge  was  duly  rec-
ognized, renders  it  proper  that,  in  the  history
of  Masonry  in  the  United  States,  some  notice
should  be  taken  of  that  lodge  and  its  successors
in  the  present  work.  In  our  examination  of
this  matter  we  have  found  the  subject  so  well  treated  by  the  Grand
Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts,  Brother  William
Sewell  Gardner,  in  an  address  delivered  before  that  Grand  Lodge,
in  1870,  that  we  shall  use  the  same  as  a foundation,  and  largely  as
the  structure  of  this  article,  for  the  reason  that  he  has  fully  and  thor-
oughly covered  the  entire  ground  and  answered  all  the  arguments
employed  by  the  friends  of  that  famous  body  of  negro  Masons,
within  the  years  1898  and  1899  in  almost  every  Grand  Lodge  in  the
United  States,  by  the  Grand  Masters,  and  committees  appointed,  to
respond  to  the  action  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Washington  in  1898,  who
have  clearly  set  forth  their  views,  in  opposition  to  the  recognition  of
negro  Masonry  in  this  country.  The  views  set  forth  in  this  address
have  been  referred  to  by  most  of  those  writers,  and  there  is  nothing
new  for  the  present  writer  to  urge  in  opposition  to  recognition.  In
his  own  response  in  the  report  on  correspondence  in  the  “ Annual
Proceedings  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  District  of  Columbia,”  for
the  year  1898,  one  point  insisted  upon  by  him  was,  that  the  charters  of
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  issued  to  Military  Lodges  did  not  au-
thorize said  lodges  to  make  Masons  of  citizens  in  any  country  where
there  were  already  duly  constituted  lodges  under  Grand  Lodge  juris-
diction. The  argument  used  was,  that  a lodge  could  not  go  beyond
the  letter  and  terms  of  the  Charter  by  whose  authority  it  worked.
We  laid  this  down  as  a necessary  and  fundamental  principle,  and  we
have  been  pleased  to  notice  very  many  of  our  correspondents  agree

164I

164-2

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

with  us  in  that  position ; and,  finding  that  Grand  Master  Gardner
uses  the  same  point,  we  have  thought  it  best  to  follow  out  his  address
as  being  more  comprehensive  and  more  strictly  adhering  to  the  true
history  of  the  first  introduction  of  this  foul  blot  upon  the  escutcheon
of  our  Masonry,  all  through  its  succeeding  ramifications,  and  subse-
quent discoloring  of  our  fair  fame  and  otherwise  pure  record  in  the
United  States.

It  is  due  to  our  Brethren  in  Washington  to  say,  that  when  it  be-
came known  to  the  Craft  at  large  in  that  State  that  the  movement,  on
the  part  of  their  leading  men,  thus  to  drag  in  the  dust  the  proud
banner  of  Masonry  had  aroused  the  ire  of  every  Grand  Lodge  in
the  country,  at  the  succeeding  Communication  in  June,  1899,  the
obnoxious  resolutions  were  annulled  and  former  harmonious  and
cordial  relations  have  been  restored.

We  now  proceed  to  use  Brother  Gardner’s  admirable  address  to
give  a true  history  of  Prince  Hall  Lodge  :

Ad dress.

Brethren  : In  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New  Hampshire,  at  its
session  held  at  Manchester  on  the  18th  of  June,  1869,  “the  Com-
mittee on  Foreign  Correspondence  offered  their  report,  and,  on
motion,  it  was  voted,  That  the  reading  of  the  report  be  dispensed
with,  and  that  it  be  published  with  the  printed  proceedings.”

In  this  report  the  following  statements  are  made  :

“ In  Massachusetts  there  was  no  legal  Grand  Lodge  till  the
Union  in  1 792.”

“The  American  doctrine  of  Grand  Lodge  jurisdiction  has  grown
up  since  ” the  establishment  of  the  African  Lodge  at  Boston,  by
authority  of  a Charter  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  “ and  is
not  elsewhere  fully  received  even  now  ; besides,  there  was  then  no
Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts,  or  in  that  State,  whose  rights  could
be  interfered  with  ; for,  notwithstanding  the  claim  to  antiquity  of
that  Grand  Lodge,  it  was  not  formed  till  1 792,  and  the  two  Provin-
cial Grand  Lodges,  before  existing  in  that  Colony,  both  expired  in
1 775  by  the  death  of  their  Provincial  Grand  Masters.  The  Massa-
chusetts Grand  Lodge  did  not  pretend  to  meet  after  the  death  of
Warren,  and  although  St.  John’s  Grand  Lodge  did  have  some  sort
of  meetings,  probably  no  law  that  ever  existed  in  Masonry  any-
where would  hold  such  meetings  regular.”

o o

COLORED  MASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1643

If  this  report  had  been  read  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New  Hamp-
shire, its  venerable  Past  Grand  Masters,  Israel  Hunt  and  Horace
Chase,  then  present,  could  have  informed  the  Committee  on
Foreign  Correspondence  that  they  were  treading  upon  dangerous
ground,  and  alluding  to  a delicate  subject.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  New  Hampshire  was  organized  on  the
8th  of  July,  1789,  by  four  Deputies  from  St.  John’s  Lodge  of  Ports-
mouth, chartered  by  the  Massachusetts  “St.  John’s  Grand  Lodge”
June  24,  1734,  and  one  Deputy  from  Rising  Sun  Lodge  of  Keene,
chartered  by  the  “ Massachusetts  Grand  Lodge”  March  5,  1 784 — five
Deputies  from  two  Lodges.  All  Masonic  authorities  claim  that,  to
organize  a legitimate  Grand  Lodge,  there  must  be  present  the  rep-
resentatives of  “ not  less  than  three  Lodges  holding  Charters  or
Warrants  from  some  legal  Grand  Lodge.”

All  the  Lodges  in  New  Hampshire  existing  prior  to  the  year
1790,  with  the  single  exception  of  St.John’s  of  Portsmouth,  re-
ceived their  Charters  from  the  “Massachusetts  Grand  Lodge.”

St.  Patrick’s  was  chartered  and  established  at  Portsmouth,  March
17,  1780.  It  continued  in  existence  until  the  latter  part  of  the  year
1790,  when  it  ceased  working,  most  of  its  members  joining  St.
John’s  Lodge,  which  was  revived  about  that  time.  It  never  ac-
knowledged the  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New  Hamp-
shire.

November  8,  1781,  the  “Massachusetts  Grand  Lodge”  char-
tered a Lodge  at  Cornish,  then  claimed  to  be  a part  of  Vermont,
but  now  set  off  to  New  Hampshire.  It  met  at  Cornish  a few
times,  and  when  Cornish  was  decided  to  be  in  New  Hampshire,  it
moved  to  Windsor,  Vt.,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  Connecticut
River,  and  took  the  name  of  Vermont  Lodge,  No.  1.

Rising  Sun,  of  Keene,  well  known  as  the  Lodge  which  gave
Masonic  light  to  Thomas  Smith  Webb,  was  chartered  by  the  “ Mas-
sachusetts Grand  Lodge”  March  5,  1784.  It  surrendered  its  Char-
ter to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New  Hampshire  August  3,  1792,  and
received  a new  one  with  the  same  name,  and  rank  No.  3.

The  “ Massachusetts  Grand  Lodge  ” granted  a Charter  for  a
Lodge  at  Charlestown  by  the  name  of  “ Faithful  Lodge,  No.  27,”
February  22,  1788.  This  Charter  was  surrendered  to  the  Grand
Lodge  of  New  Hampshire  April  30,  1800,  and  a new  one  given,  by
which  it  was  styled  “ Faithful  Lodge,  No.  12.”

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

1644

Dartmouth  Lodge,  of  Hanover,  received  a Charter  from  “ the
Massachusetts  Grand  Lodge”  December  18,  1788,  and  was  the  last
Lodge  chartered  by  this  Grand  Lodge  in  New  Hampshire.  Its
dissolution  took  place  before  it  acknowledged  the  jurisdiction  of
the  Grand  Lodge  of  that  State.

The  Grand  Secretary,  Horace  Chase,  says,  that  when  the  Grand
Lodge  of  New  Hampshire  was  formed,  July  8,  1789,  “ as  appears
from  the  record  there  were  but  three  Lodges  in  the  State,  viz.,  St.
John’s  and  St.  Patrick’s  at  Portsmouth,  and  Rising  Sun  at  Keene.”

However  irregularly  organized  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New
Hampshire  may  have  been,  the  “Massachusetts  Grand  Lodge”
disclaimed  jurisdiction  in  that  State  thereafter.  It  is  unnecessary
to  state  that  this  Grand  Lodge,  since  1 789  to  the  present  time,  has
been  on  the  most  friendly  and  fraternal  relations  with  our  sister
Grand  Lodge  of  New  Hampshire,  and  that  it  will  require  some-
thing; more  than  unauthorized  and  unconfirmed  statements  of  a
Committee  on  Foreign  Correspondence  to  unsettle  these  pleasant
relations.

Nevertheless,  when  it  is  pretended  before  a body  of  such  great
respectability  as  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New  Hampshire,  that,  in  1 784,
when  it  is  said  the  “ African  Lodge  ” in  Boston  obtained  its  Charter
in  England,  there  was  no  existing  Grand  Lodge  in  Massachusetts,
for  the  purpose  of  proving  the  then  and  present  legitimacy  of  the
African  Lodge,  and  of  adding  the  weight  and  influence  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  New  Hampshire  to  this  pretense,  it  is  due  to  our-
selves, and  to  the  Craft  universal,  that  the  truth  should  be  fully
known  and  fearlessly  spoken.

The  time  is  propitious  to  meet  this  false  pretense,  and  I need
but  resume  the  history  of  the  “ Massachusetts  Grand  Lodge”  where
it  was  left  at  its  Centennial  on  the  recent  Feast  of  St.  John  the
Evangelist.

The  system  of  Provincial  Grand  Lodges  originated  in  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England  in  1726,  and  arose  from  the  necessity  of  having,
in  the  distant  colonies  of  Great  Britain  where  Masonry  has  ex
tended,  some  authority  and  power,  not  only  to  control  and  govern
the  Craft,  but  also  to  establish  new  Lodges  in  the  Provinces.  The
Provincial  Grand  Master  was  appointed  by  commission  of  the
Grand  Master,  wherein  the  extent  of  his  powers  was  set  forth,  and
by  virtue  of  which  he  convened  his  Grand  Body.  In  the  language

COLORED  MASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1645

of  early  days,  this  commission  was  styled  a Deputation,  and  this
word  conveys  the  true  idea  of  the  Provincials’  position.  It  was  a
Deputy  Grand  Lodge,  with  its  various  Deputy  Grand  Officers,  con-
vened by  the  power  and  authority  of  the  Provincial  Grand  Master
as  the  Deputy  of  the  Grand  Master.  It  possessed  no  sovereign
power.  The  Lodges  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Provincial  Grand
Master  were  not  necessarily  registered  in  his  Grand  Lodge.  They
were  returned  to  England,  registered  in  the  Grand  Lodge  there,  and
classified  as  we  do  our  Lodges  at  the  present  day,  as  belonging  to
a certain  District  or  Province.  The  Provincial  Grand  Master  had
power  to  appoint  a Deputy  and  commission  him,  who  in  the  ab-
sence, sickness,  and  disability  of  his  chief,  assumed  his  functions.
The  Grand  Wardens  and  other  officers  he  also  had  the  exclusive
right  to  appoint,  although  sometimes  he  nominated  brethren  to
these  offices  and  permitted  the  Grand  Lodge  to  elect  them.

Each  Lodge  in  the  Province  had  the  right  of  representation  in
the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge,  by  its  Master  and  Wardens  or  by  a
regularly  appointed  representative,  and  the  expenses  of  the  Grand
Body  were  assessed  upon  the  various  subordinates.  The  right  of
appeal  existed  from  every  act  and  decision  of  the  Provincial  Grand
Master  or  Grand  Lodge,  to  the  Grand  Master  of  England,  thus
making  the  Provincial  and  his  Grand  Lodge  subordinate  to  the
power  by  which  they  were  created.

The  allegiance  of  the  Lodges  and  of  the  Craft  was  to  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England,  and  to  the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  and  Grand
Master,  through  the  parent  Body.  There  was  no  direct  allegiance
to  the  Provincial  from  the  Craft.  It  was  a temporary  power  which
he  held  ex  gratia,  and  of  which  he  could  be  deprived  at  the  pleas-
ure of  the  Grand  Master  by  whom  he  was  appointed.

Thus  it  will  be  seen  that  the  Provincial  Grand  Master  was  ap-
pointed for  the  convenience  of  the  administration  of  the  affairs  of
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  in  distant  parts,  in  the  same  manner
that  our  District  Deputies  are  appointed  at  the  present  time.  The
powers,  however,  in  the  one  case,  were  more  extended  than  they
are  in  the  other.  The  means  of  communication  with  London  were
not  so  easy  and  rapid  as  now,  and  the  distance  from  the  Grand
East  required  that  some  officer  should  be  stationed  here,  who  should
be  invested  with  authority  for  sudden  emergencies  and  instant
action.

1646

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

The  Provincial  Grand  Master  having  been  regularly  commis-
sioned and  installed,  could  not  resign  his  trust  to  his  Provincial
Grand  Lodge.  That  Body  had  no  power  to  accept  it.  His  resig-
nation must  be  made  to  the  Grand  Master  from  whom  he  received
his  commission.  The  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  was  the  creation  of
the  Provincial  Grand  Master,  and  was  wholly  under  his  direction
and  control.  He  appointed  its  officers,  and  summoned  the  repre-
sentatives of  the  Lodges  to  assemble  in  Grand  Lodge.  In  this
Grand  Lodge  there  was  no  inherent  power,  save  what  it  derived
from  the  Provincial  Grand  Master,  by  virtue  of  his  delegated
authority,  thus  making  it  the  very  reverse  of  a Sovereign  Grand
Lodge,  the  Grand  Master  of  which  derives  his  authority  from  the
Sovereign  Body  by  whose  votes  he  is  elected  to  office,  and  over
which  he  presides.

The  Grand  Master  appointing  his  Provincial,  could  annul  the
commission  at  his  will  and  pleasure.  The  officer  being  created  by
the  pleasure  of  the  Grand  Master  of  England,  all  the  adjuncts,  ap-
pointees, and  creations  of  the  office  depended  upon  the  same  pleas-
ure, and  existed  during  the  will  of  the  appointing  power.  If  a
Provincial  Grand  Master  was  removed,  and  his  commission  recalled,
and  the  Grand  Master  declined  to  appoint  his  successor,  it  is  clear
that  the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  established  by  virtue  of  such  com-
mission would  cease  to  exist.  Such  a Grand  Lodge  never  possessed
any  vitality  which  would  survive  the  life  of  the  commission  appoint-
ing the  Provincial  Grand  Master.

The  death  of  the  Provincial  would  also  lead  to  the  same  result.
The  commission  to  him  from  the  Grand  Master  would  lose  all  its
force  upon  his  decease.  Whatever  act  the  Provincial  performed,  he
did  by  virtue  of  the  commission  to  him.  His  Deputy  Grand  Mas-
ter and  Grand  Wardens,  appointed  by  him,  and  not  by  the  Grand
Master  of  England,  nor  by  his  confirmation,  derived  their  power
and  character  as  Grand  Officers  from  the  Provincial,  and  when  the
Provincial  expired,  their  tenure  of  office  expired  also.

To  show  that  these  conclusions  are  correct,  I will  refer  to  the
authorities.

The  office  of  Provincial  Grand  Master  was  established  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England,  as  has  already  been  stated,  in  1726,  and
the  first  Deputation  was  granted  May  10,  1727.  Preston  says  of
the  office,  at  this  date  : “A  Provincial  Grand  Master  in  that  district

DEWITT  CLINTON

COLORED  MASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1647

over  which  he  is  limited  to  preside,  and  being  invested  with  the
power  and  honor  of  a Deputy  Grand  Master  in  his  Province,  may
constitute  Lodges  therein,  if  the  consent  of  the  Masters  and  War-
dens of  three  Lodges  already  constituted  within  his  District  have
been  obtained,  and  the  Grand  Lodge  in  London  has  not  disap-
proved thereof.  He  wears  the  clothing  of  a Grand  Officer,  and
ranks,  in  all  public  assemblies,  immediately  after  Past  Deputy  Grand
Master.  He  must,  in  person  or  by  deputy,  attend  the  quarterly
meetings  of  the  Masters  and  Wardens  of  the  Lodges  in  his  District,
and  transmit  to  the  Grand  Lodge,  once  in  every  year,  the  proceed-
ings of  those  meetings,  with  a regular  statement  of  the  Lodges  un-
der his  jurisdiction.”

Speaking  of  the  year  1 737,  he  says:  “The  authority  granted  by
patent  to  a Provincial  Grand  Master  was  limited  to  one  year  from
his  first  public  appearance  in  that  character  within  his  Province  ;
and  if  at  the  expiration  of  that  period,  a new  election  of  the  Lodges
under  his  jurisdiction  did  not  take  place,  subject  to  the  approbation
of  the  Grand  Master,  the  patent  was  no  longer  valid.  Hence  we
find,  within  the  course  of  a few  years,  different  appointments  to  the
same  station  ; but  the  office  is  now  permanent,  and  the  sole  ap-
pointment of  the  Grand  Master.”

In  Entick’s  Constitutions  of  1 756  there  is  a section  entitled  “ Of
Provincial  Grand  Masters,”  which  is  as  follows  :

“Art.  1.  The  office  of  Provincial  Grand  Master  was  found  par-
ticularly necessary  in  the  year  1726;  when  the  extraordinary  in-
crease of  the  Craftsmen,  and  their  traveling  into  distant  parts,  and
convening  themselves  into  Lodges,  required  an  immediate  Head,  to
whom  they  might  apply  in  all  Cases,  where  it  was  not  possible  to
wait  the  Decision  or  Opinion  of  the  Grand  Lodge.

“ Art.  2.  The  appointment  of  this  Grand  Officer  is  a Prerog-
ative of  the  Grand  Master : who  grants  his  Deputation  to  such
Brother  of  Eminence  and  Ability  in  the  Craft,  as  he  shall  think
proper : not  for  life,  but  during  his  good  Pleasure.

“ Art.  3.  The  Provincial  thus  deputed,  is  invested  with  the
Power  and  Honor  of  a Deputy  Grand  Master;  and  during  the
continuance  of  his  Provincialship,  is  entitled  to  wear  the  Clothing,
to  take  rank  as  the  Grand  Officers,  in  all  publick  Assemblies,  im-
mediately after  the  past  Deputy  Grand  Masters  : and  to  constitute
Lodges  within  his  own  Province.

1648

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

“ Art.  4.  He  is  enjoined  to  correspond  with  the  Grand  Lodge,
and  to  transmit  a circumstantial  Account  of  his  Proceedings,  at
least  once  in  every  Year.  At  which  Times,  the  Provincial  is  re-
quired to  send  a List  of  those  Lodges  he  has  constituted  for  the
general  Fund  of  Charity : and  the  usual  demand,  as  specified  in  his
Deputation,  for  every  Lodge  he  has  constituted  by  the  Grand  Mas-
ter’s Authority.”

The  Constitutions  of  the  United  Grand  Lodge  of  England  have
been  more  particular  in  specifying  the  powers,  duties,  and  preroga-
tives of  the  Provincial  Grand  Master  and  Grand  Lodge.  I will
refer  to  a single  Section  of  these  Constitutions:

“ The  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  emanates  from  the  authority
vested  in  the  Provincial  Grand  Master,  and  possesses  no  other
powers  than  those  specified.  It  therefore  follows  that  no  Provincial
Grand  Lodge  can  meet  but  by  the  sanction  of  the  Provincial  Grand
Master  or  his  Deputy  ; and  that  it  ceases  to  exist  on  the  death,  res-
ignation, suspension,  or  removal  of  the  Provincial  Grand  Master,
until  some  Brother  is  duly  appointed  or  empowered  to  perform  the
functions  of  Provincial  Grand  Master,  by  whose  authority  the  Pro-
vincial Grand  Lodge  may  be  again  established.”

In  Scotland  this  office  was  created  in  1738,  and  the  first  nomi-
nation made  abroad  in  1747.  In  November,  1757,  R.  W.  Col.  John
Young  was  appointed  Provincial  Grand  Master  over  all  the  Lodges
in  America  holding  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland,  and  in  1768
James  Grant,  Governor  of  the  Province  of  East  Florida,  was  ap-
pointed Provincial  Grand  Master  of  North  America,  Southern  Dis-
trict.

The  commissions  were  issued  “ to  continue  in  force  until  re-
called.” In  1800  a series  of  regulations  for  the  government  of  these
officers  were  sanctioned  by  the  Grand  Lodge,  previous  to  which
time  it  is  presumed  that  they  were  governed  by  the  same  rules  and
regulations  as  in  England.

More  recently,  the  “ Laws  and  Constitutions  of  the  Grand
Lodge  ” have  provided  that  the  “ meeting  of  the  Provincial  Grand
Lodges  shall  not  be  interrupted  by  the  death  or  retirement  of  the
Provincial  Grand  Master,  unless  the  Grand  Lodge  shall  not  deem
it  expedient  within  the  space  of  one  year  to  appoint  another.  A
Provincial  Grand  Lodge  not  assembling  for  the  space  of  two  years,
also  becomes  dormant,  and  has  no  power  again  to  call  meetings

COLORED  MASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1649

unless  empowered  by  the  Provincial  Grand  Master,  or  by  the  order
of  the  Grand  Lodge  or  Grand  Committee.”  “ When  a Provincial
Grand  Lodge  becomes  dormant,  the  Lodges  in  the  District  come
under  the  immediate  supervision  of  the  Grand  Lodge  and  Grand
Committee.”

These  new  rules  and  regulations  were  made  to  prevent  the  dis-
ruption of  the  Provincial  Grand  Lodges,  which  was  inevitable  upon
the  decease  of  the  Provincial  Grand  Master.

In  Ireland  the  same  system  has  existed  as  in  England  and  Scot-
land. The  present  Constitutions  provided  that,  “ if  the  Provincial
Grand  Master  die,  resign,  or  be  removed,  the  authority  of  the  Pro-
vincial Deputy  Grand  Master  shall  continue  for  six  months  after,
or  until  a successor  to  the  Provincial  Grand  Master  be  appointed,
but  such  authority  of  the  Provincial  Deputy  Grand  Master  shall
not  continue  longer,  unless  he  be  re-appointed.”

If  these  authorities  support  the  position  taken,  and  if  the  con
elusions  arrived  at  are  correct,  it  follows  beyond  all  controversy
that  when  Provincial  Grand  Master  Joseph  Warren  expired  on
Bunker  Hill,  June  17,  1775,  the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge,  of  which
he  was  the  essence  and  life,  expired  also,  and  with  it  all  the  offices
of  which  it  was  composed.  The  Lodges  established  by  him,  and  by
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland,  were  not  affected  thereby,  as  has
already  appeared.  They  were,  or  should  have  been,  registered  in
Edinburgh,  and  owed  their  allegiance  to  the  Grand  Lodge  there.

The  conclusion  of  the  Eulogy  pronounced  by  Br.  Perez  Morton
at  the  re-interment  of  Joseph  Warren,  April  8,  1776,  was  devoted
to  the  subject  of  independence,  which  was  then  agitating  the  Colo-
nies. Some  of  the  language  made  use  of  by  him  upon  this  occasion
seems  to  foreshadow  the  Masonic  independence  of  Massachusetts,
which  was  soon  to  follow.  “ Now  is  the  happy  time,”  said  he,  “to
seize  again  those  rights  which,  as  men,  we  are  by  nature  entitled  to,
and  which  by  contract  we  never  have,  and  never  could  have,  sur-
rendered.”

On  the  4th  of  July  following,  “The  Declaration  of  Independ-
ence ” was,  by  order  of  Congress,  engrossed  and  signed,  by  which
the  United  Colonies  declared  themselves  to  be  free  and  independent
States.  The  effect  of  this  declaration  upon  the  Colonies  I need  not
allude  to ; Massachusetts,  by  virtue  of  its  claim,  became  a free,  in-
dependent, sovereign  State,  and  the  spirit  of  freedom  and  independ-
104

1650

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

ence  of  Great  Britain  became  infused  into  every  organization  and
society  which  before  this  were  bound  and  dependent.  It  was  an
absolute  revolution,  by  which  a dependent  colony  became  revolu-
tionized into  an  independent  State.  The  idea  of  a permanent  union
of  the  States  had  then  hardly  been  broached.  They  had  united  for
defence  against  a common  foe,  and  had  set  themselves  up  as  inde-
pendent States,  not  only  independent  of  Great  Britain,  but  inde-
pendent of  each  other.  Isolated  from  all  the  world,  they  each  stood
forth  free,  independent,  sovereign  States.

The  Institution  of  Freemasonry,  which  numbered  among  its
firmest  adherents  such  revolutionists  as  Webb,  Revere,  Morton,  and
a host  of  others  who  followed  in  the  footsteps  of  Warren,  could  not
long  withstand  the  influence  of  freedom,  and  Massachusetts  set  the
example  of  a revolution  in  Masonic  government,  which  has  been  fol-
lowed successfully  by  every  State  in  the  Union.  It  has  become  the
American  system,  or,  as  the  committee  of  New  Hampshire  call  it,
“The  American  Doctrine  of  Grand  Lodge  Jurisdiction,”  respected
and  recognized  by  the  Masonic  Fraternity  the  world  over.  It  had
its  birth  on  Bunker  Hill,  when  the  patriot  Warren  poured  out  his
life’s  blood  :

“ The  Patriot  Grand  Master,  who  fell  in  his  might —

The  second  of  three — in  defence  of  the  right  ! ”

“The  American  Doctrine  of  Grand  Lodge  Jurisdiction,”  briefly
stated,  is  this : “ Three  regularly-chartered  Lodges  existing  in  any
State  or  Territory  have  the  right  to  establish  a Grand  Lodge  there-
in. Such  Grand  Lodge,  when  lawfully  organized,  has  sole,  absolute,
and  exclusive  jurisdiction  over  the  three  degrees  of  Craft  Masonry  ;
over  the  Lodges  and  their  Members ; and  over  all  Masons,  unaffili-
ated as  well  as  affiliated,  in  such  State  or  Territory.  No  other  Grand
Lodge  whatever  can  lawfully  interfere  with  this  jurisdiction,  and  can
neither  establish  Lodges  in  such  State,  nor  continue  any  authority
over  Bodies  which  it  might  properly  have  exercised  prior  to  the
organization  of  such  Grand  Lodge  therein.”

By  the  erection  of  a Grand  Lodge  in  such  State,  all  Masonic
powers  over  what  is  popularly  called  Blue  Masonry  are  merged  in
it,  and  henceforth  it  exists  therein  supreme  and  sovereign  over  a
jurisdiction  which  it  can  neither  divide  nor  share  with  any  other
Masonic  Grand  Body  in  the  world.

COLORED  MASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1651

The  several  States  of  the  United  States  of  America,  the  Terri-
tories, when  legally  organized  as  such  by  Congress,  and  the  District
of  Columbia,  are  each  recognized  as  separate  and  independent  juris-
dictions in  which  Grand  Lodges  may  be  established.  This  is  the
American  doctrine,  most  religiously  and  masonically  adhered  to  by
the  Craftsmen  of  the  United  States,  and  which  our  brethren  upon
the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic  must  accede  to,  recognize,  and  sup-
port. After  the  Declaration  hereinafter  referred  to,  made  by  the
Massachusetts  Grand  Lodge,  December  6,  1782,  treaty  stipulations
were  entered  into  by  the  several  Grand  Lodges  then  in  existence,  in
confirmation  of  the  action  of  Massachusetts.

The  following  preamble  and  resolutions  were  adopted  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  New  York  :

“ Whereas , The  Grand  Lodge  of  the  State  of  Massachusetts
have  by  a communication,  dated  the  4th  of  January  last,  sug-
gestedto  this  Grand  Lodge  the  propriety  of  adopting  a resolution
declaring  that  no  Charter  or  Dispensation  for  holding  a Lodge  be
issued  by  any  Grand  Lodge  to  any  number  of  Masons  residing
out  of  the  State  wherein  the  Grand  Lodge  is  established,  be  it
therefore

“ Resolved  and  declared  by  this  Grand  Lodge,  that  no  Charter
or  Dispensation  for  holding  a Lodge  of  Masons  shall  be  granted  to
any  person  or  persons  whatever,  residing  out  of  this  State  and  within
the  jurisdiction  of  any  other  Grand  Lodge.”

The  Grand  Lodges  of  the  United  States  have  uniformly  resisted
every  encroachment  upon  the  jurisdiction  of  the  several  Grand
Lodges.

The  Feast  of  St.  John  the  Evangelist,  in  1776,  was  celebrated,
and  the  record  shows  that  a Grand  Lodge  was  held  by  thirty-three
brethren,  Joseph  Webb  presiding  as  Deputy  Grand  Master.  A
Grand  Lodge  was  called  by  the  Deputy  of  Warren,  February  14,
1 777,  to  hear  the  petition  for  a Charter  at  Stockbridge,  of  brethren
in  Berkshire  County.  This  proposition  aroused  the  brethren  to
a realizing  sense  of  their  status  and  condition  as  a Grand  Lodge.
They  were  doubtful  of  its  power,  as  then  organized,  to  grant  the
Charter  prayed  for.  The  petition  was  accordingly  laid  over  to  Fri-
day evening,  March  the  7th  next,  and  it  was  “ Voted , That  the
Deputy  Grand  Master  should  send  a summons  to  all  the  Masters
and  Wardens  under  the  jurisdiction  to  assemble  on  the  7th  March

1652

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

in  order  to  consult  upon,  and  to  elect,  a Grand  Master  for  this
State,  in  the  room  of  our  late  worthy  Grand  Master  Warren,
deceased.”

On  the  7th  of  March  the  brethren  met,  and  adjourned  until  the
following  evening.  March  8,  1777,  the  following  brethren  assem-
bled, representing  St.  Andrew’s  Lodge,  of  Boston,  Tyrian  Lodge,  of
Gloucester,  and  St.  Peter’s  Lodge,  of  Newburyport :

R.  W.  Joseph  Webb,  D.  G.  M.,  of  St.  Andrew’s  Lodge,  Boston.

Paul  Revere,  S.  G.  W.,  of  St.  Andrew’s  Lodge,  Boston.

Thomas  Crafts,  J.  G.  W.,  of  St.  Andrew’s  Lodge,  Boston.

John  Lowell,  G.  Treas.,  of  St.  Andrew’s  Lodge,  Boston.

Nat.  Peirce,  G.  Sec.  pro  tem.,  of  St.  Andrew’s  Lodge,  Boston.
Thomas  Urann,  S.  G.  D.,  of  St.  Andrew’s  Lodge,  Boston.

Edward  Proctor,  J.  G.  D.,  of  St.  Andrew’s  Lodge,  Boston.

Moses  Deshon,  P.  M.,  of  Tyrian  Lodge,  Gloucester.

Philip  Marett,  ) (of  Tyrian  Lodge,  Gloucester.

Winthrop  Grey,  ) ’ 1 s’  ( S.  W.,  of  St.  Andrew’s  Lodge,  Boston.

Wm.  Greenough,  M.,  of  St.  Peter’s  Lodge,  Newburyport.

The  brethren  then  unanimously  elected  a Grand  Master,  Grand
Wardens,  and  other  Grand  Officers.  Joseph  Webb  was  chosen
Grand  Master.

The  Grand  Lodge  then  acted  upon  the  petition  for  a new  Lodge
at  Stockbridge,  and  granted  the  same  ; this  being  the  first  act  of  the
Independent  Grand  Lodge.

Massachusetts  Lodge,  of  Boston,  was  not  represented  at  this
meeting;  but,  on  the  18th  of  December,  1778,  it  petitioned  the
Grand  Lodge,  “setting  forth  that  the  exigency  of  the  times  would
not  admit  of  their  assembling  sooner,  and  praying  said  Lodge  may
retain  the  rank  they  formerly  held  under  the  Grand  Lodge,”  which
was  granted.  All  the  Lodges  under  the  old  Provincial  Grand
Lodge  of  Warren,  with  the  exception  of  Massachusetts,  united  in
forming  the  independent  Grand  Lodge,  and  they  forthwith  yielded
allegiance  to  it.  However,  but  few  of  the  Lodges  in  Massachusetts
at  this  time,  were  in  a condition  to  hold  meetings,  by  reason  of  “the
exigency  of  the  times.”

The  record  of  the  meeting  setting  up  the  Independent  Grand
Lodge  contains  no  account  of  the  motives  and  incentives  which
gave  rise  to  this  action.

Grand  Master  Joseph  Webb  sent  the  following  letter  to  the

COLORED  MASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1653

Grand  Lodge  of  Georgia,  which  has  recently  been  discovered  by
R.  W.  Br.  I.  E.  Blackshear,  Grand  Secretary  of  that  State:

“Boston,  March  2,  1787.

“To  the  Right  Worshipful,  the  Grand  Master,  Dep.  G.  M.,  G.

Wardens,  and  Brethren  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Savannah  in

Georgia,  greeting.

“ Gentlemen  and  Brethren  : Having  lately  seen  the  Southern
papers,  that  you  had  at  last  assumed  to  your  selves  the  undoubted
right  of  Forming  a Grand  Lodge  in  your  State,  I Congratulate  you
on  so  Important  an  acquisition,  and  wish  you  all  the  success  imag-
inable : we,  in  this  Common  Wealth,  assumed  the  same  so  early  as
1777,  since  vv’ch  i find  Pennsilvania  and  N.  York  have  adopted;
but  how  they  have  proceeded  at  Charleston  or  Virginia  I have  not
as  yet  heard.  I hold  a correspondence  with  those  2 Lodges,  and
should  be  glad  of  the  same  with  you,  and  all  in  the  Union  at  least.
Since  our  adopting,  we  have  had  25  Lodges  under  the  jurisdiction
(tho’  some  of  them  Charters  of  Dispensation,  in  Connecticut,  Ver-
mont, N.  Hampshire),  until  they  appoint  a G.  Lodge  of  their  own.
Inclosed,  I have  taken  the  freedom  to  send  you  the  Regulations  of
our  G.  Lodge,  w’ch  you’l  please  to  accept  as  a small  token  of  my
Respect.  So,  wishing  the  Grand  Lodge  in  particular,  and  those
under  your  jurisdiction  in  general,  all  that  Universal  Benevolence,
Brotherly  Love,  and  Truth  : Adieu ! I remain  with  sincerity,  your
unknown  tho’  affectionate  Brother  and  H’ble  Serv.

“Jos.  Webb,

“ G.  M.  Com.  Wealth  Massachusetts."

(Received  27th  April.)

Josiah  Bartlett,  afterward  Grand  Master,  in  an  address  before
the  Grand  Lodge,  said  :

“ How  to  assemble  the  Grand  Lodge  with  regularity,  was  now
made  a serious  question,  as  the  commission  of  the  Grand  Master
had  died  with  him,  and  the  Deputy  had  no  power  independent  of
his  nomination  and  appointment.

“ Communications  for  the  consideration  of  this  subject  were
held  at  different  times,  till  the  8th  of  March,  1 777,  when,  expe-
riencing the  necessity  of  preserving  the  intercourse  of  the  brethren,
and  the  want  of  a proper  establishment  to  soften  the  rigors  of  an
active  and  distressing  war,  they  proceeded  to  the  formation  of  an

1654

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Independent  Grand  Lodge,  with  ‘ powers  and  prerogatives  to  be
exercised  on  principles  consistent  with  and  subordinate  to  the  regu-
lations pointed  out  in  the  Constitutions  of  Ancient  Masonry,’  and
our  late  worthy  and  Most  Worshipful  Brother,  Joseph  Webb,  Es-
quire, whose  amiable  deportment  and  fidelity  in  the  duties  of  his
important  office  now  claim  our  grateful  remembrance,  was  duly
elected  Grand  Master,  and  proceeded  to  install  his  officers,  and  or-
ganize the  Grand  Lodge.”

Thaddeus  M.  Harris,  who  compiled  the  Constitutions  in  1792,
referring  to  this  act  of  independence,  quotes  the  above  extract  from
Bartlett’s  address,  and,  in  a foot-note,  says  that  “ the  general  regu-
lations from  Entick’s  Constitutions  were  adopted  and  practiced ;
except  that  the  Grand  Master  and  Wardens  were  elected  by  a ballot
at  large.  The  other  officers  were  appointed  by  the  Grand  Master.”

The  record  itself,  of  December  6,  1782,  recites  the  facts:

“ Charters  were  not  only  granted  for  establishing  Lodges  in
Massachusetts,  but  also  in  other  States.  But  anticipating  that  the
independent  government  organized  in  this  State  would  be  followed
by  the  Craft  elsewhere,  it  was  determined  that  all  Charters  granted
without  the  limits  of  Massachusetts  should  be  in  force  only  until  a
Grand  Lodge  was  formed  in  such  State  or  Country  where  such
Lodges  were  held.  Upon  these  conditions  Lodges  were  established
in  New  Hampshire,  Vermont,  Connecticut,  and  New  York,  prior
to  December,  1782.”

“In  October,  1778,  it  was  voted  that  a Charter  be  granted  to  a
traveling  Lodge  in  the  American  army,  to  make  Masons,  pass,  and
raise,  in  this  State,  or  any  of  the  United  States  of  America,  where
no  other  Grand  Master  presides.  But  in  any  other  State  where
there  is  a Grand  Master  constituted  by  the  brethren  of  these  United
States,  they  are  to  inform  him,  and  receive  his  sanction.”

In  September,  1780,  the  Grand  Master  “laid  before  the  Grand
Lodge  a letter  dated  Philadelphia,  August  19,  1780,  signed  William
Smith,  Grand  Secretary,  inclosing  a printed  list  of  the  several
Lodges  in  Pennsylvania,  under  that  jurisdiction,  and  advising  that
they  had,  in  that  Grand  Lodge,  thought  it  expedient  to  make  choice
of  a Grand  Master  General,  for  the  thirteen  United  American
States;  that  they  had  nominated  His  Excellency  General  George
Washington,  and  requesting  the  opinion  and  approbation  oi  this
Grand  Lodge  thereon.”

COLORED  MASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  4655

“ Circular  letters  were  sent  to  the  several  Lodges  under  the
jurisdiction  requesting  the  attendance  of  the  Masters  and  Wardens
at  the  Grand  Lodge,  for  the  purpose  of  considering  this  proposition.
Brother  Perez  Morton  was  strongly  in  favor  of  the  project,  but  the
Grand  Lodge  Voted, , That  any  determination  upon  the  subject  can-
not, with  the  propriety  and  justice  due  to  the  Craft  at  large,  be
made  by  this  Grand  Lodge,  until  a general  peace  shall  happily  take
place  through  the  continent,  inasmuch  as  the  sentiments  of  the  va-
rious Grand  Lodges  in  the  United  States  upon  this  question  could
not  be  made  known  under  the  peculiar  circumstances  of  public  af-
fairs.”

On  the  10th  of  July,  1782,  it  was  “ Voted , That  a committee
be  appointed  to  draw  resolutions  explanatory  of  the  powers  and  au-
thority of  this  Grand  Lodge,  respecting  the  extent  and  meaning  of
its  jurisdiction,  and  of  the  exercise  of  any  other  masonic  authorities
within  its  jurisdiction.”  Brothers  Perez  Morton,  Paul  Revere,
John  Warren,  James  Avery,  and  John  Juteau  were  appointed  upon
the  committee.

A special  meeting  of  the  Grand  Lodge  was  called  to  receive  the
report,  September  30,  1782,  when  it  was  read  and  referred  to  the
next  meeting.  December  6,  1782,  in  a full  Grand  Lodge,  it  was
considered.

This  interesting  report,  omitting  the  formal  introduction,  is  as
follows :

“ The  Commission  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  granted
to  our  late  Grand  Master,  Joseph  Warren,  Esquire,  having  died
with  him,  and  of  course  his  deputy,  whose  appointment  was
derived  from  his  nomination,  being  no  longer  in  existence,  they
saw  themselves  without  a head,  and  without  a single  Grand  Officer,
and  of  course  it  was  evident  that  not  only  the  Grand  Lodge,  but
all  the  particular  Lodges  under  its  jurisdiction,  must  cease  to
assemble,  the  brethren  be  dispersed,  the  penniless  go  unassisted,
the  Craft  languish,  and  ancient  Masonry  be  extinct  in  this  part  of
the  world.

“ That  in  consequence  of  a summons  from  the  former  Grand
Wardens  to  the  Masters  and  Wardens  of  all  the  regular  constituted
Lodges,  a Grand  Communication  was  held  to  consult  and  advise
on  some  means  to  preserve  the  intercourse  of  the  brethren.

“ That  the  Political  Head  of  this  country,  having  destroyed  all

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

1656

connection  and  correspondence  between  the  subjects  of  these
States  and  the  country  from  which  the  Grand  Lodge  originally
derived  its  commissioned  authority,  and  the  principles  of  the  Craft,
inculcating  on  its  professors  submission  to  the  commands  of  the
civil  authority  of  the  country  they  reside  in,  the  brethren  did  as-
sume an  elective  supremacy,  and  under  it  chose  a Grand  Master
and  Grand  Officers,  and  erected  a Grand  Lodge  with  independent
powers  and  prerogatives,  to  be  exercised,  however,  on  principles
consistent  with  and  subordinate  to  the  regulations  pointed  out  in
the  Constitution  of  Ancient  Masonry.

“That  the  reputation  and  utility  of  the  Craft,  under  their  juris-
diction, has  been  most  extensively  diffused,  by  the  flourishing  state
of  fourteen  Lodges  constituted  by  their  authority  within  a shorter
period  than  that  in  which  three  only  received  Dispensations  under
the  former  Grand  Lodge.

“ That  in  the  history  of  our  Craft  we  find  that  in  England
there  are  two  Grand  Lodges,  independent  of  each  other  ; in  Scot-
land the  same,  and  in  Ireland  their  Grand  Lodge  and  Grand  Mas-
ter are  independent  either  of  England  or  Scotland.  It  is  clear
that  the  authority  of  some  of  their  Grand  Lodges  originated  in
assumption,  or  otherwise  they  would  acknowledge  the  head  from
whence  they  derived.

“ Your  committee  are  therefore  of  opinion  that  the  doings  of
the  present  Grand  Lodge  were  dictated  by  principles  of  the  clear-
est necessity,  founded  in  the  highest  reason,  and  warranted  by  prec-
edents of  the  most  approved  authority.

“ And  they  beg  leave  to  recommend  the  following  resolutions,
to  be  adopted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  and  engrafted  into  its  Constitu-
tions :

“I.  That  the  brethren  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  in  assuming  the
powers  and  prerogatives  of  an  independent  Grand  Lodge,  acted
from  the  most  laudable  motives  and  consistently  with  the  principles
which  ought  forever  to  govern  Masons,  viz.,  the  benefit  of  the
Craft  and  the  good  of  mankind,  and  are  warranted  in  their  pro-
ceedings by  the  practice  of  Ancient  Masons  in  all  parts  of  the  world.1

“ II.  That  this  Grand  Lodge  be  hereafter  known  and  called  by
the  name  of  ‘ The  Massachusetts  Grand  Lodge  of  Ancient  Masons,’

See  Calcot,  p.  107  ; “ Masons’  Pocket  Companion,”  p.  92,  London  edition.

COLORED  MASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1657

and  that  it  is  free  and  independent  in  its  government  and  official
authority  of  any  other  Grand  Lodge  or  Grand  Master  in  the  uni-
verse.

“III.  That  the  power  and  authority  of  the  said  Grand  Lodge
he  construed  to  extend  throughout  the  Commonwealth  of  Massa-
chusetts and  to  any  of  the  United  States,  where  none  other  is
erected,  over  such  Lodges  only  as  this  Grand  Lodge  has  consti-
tuted or  shall  constitute.

“ IV.  That  the  Grand  Master  for  the  time  being  be  desired  to
call  in  all  Charters  which  were  held  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the
late  Grand  Master,  Joseph  Warren,  Esquire,  and  return  the  same
with  an  endorsement  thereon,  expressive  of  their  recognition  of  the
power  and  authority  of  this  Grand  Lodge.

“ V.  That  no  person  ought  or  can,  consistently  with  the  rules
of  Ancient  Masonry,  use  or  exercise  the  powers  or  prerogatives  of
an  Ancient  Grand  Master  or  Grand  Lodge,  to  wit  : To  give  power
to  erect  Lodges  of  ancient  Masonry,  make  Masons,  appoint  superior
or  Grand  Officers,  receive  dues,  or  do  anything  which  belongs  to
the  powers  or  prerogatives  of  an  ancient  Grand  Lodge  within  any
part  of  the  Commonwealth  of  Massachusetts,  the  rightful  and  ap-
propriated limits  to  which  the  authority  of  this  Grand  Lodge  forever
hereafter  extends.”

The  foregoing  report  was  signed  by  Perez  Morton,  Paul  Revere,
John  Warren,  and  James  Avery.  It  “ was  read  paragraph  by  para-
graph, and,  after  mature  deliberation  thereon,  the  same  was  ac-
cepted and  ordered  to  be  recorded  in  the  proceedings  of  the  Grand
Lodge,”  where  it  now  appears,  signed  by  “Jos.  Webb,  Grand  Mas-
ter.” A majority  of  the  members  of  St.  Andrew’s  Lodge  ob-
jected to  this  report,  although,  at  a Grand  Lodge  held  March  1,
1782,  a petition  from  its  Master,  Wardens,  and  members  was  pre-
sented, “ praying  that  the  Grand  Lodge  would  grant  them  a Char-
ter by  the  ‘ name  of  Saint  Andrew,’  they  retaining  their  rank  and
precedency  as  heretofore  in  said  Grand  Lodge,”  which  was  unani-
mously granted.

“In  1768  John  Rowe  was  appointed  Provincial  Grand  Master
of  the  St.  John’s  Grand  Lodge.”  He  held  the  office  until  August
4,  1787,  when  he  died.  After  1775  this  Grand  Lodge  held  no
meeting  until  called  together  to  attend  the  funeral  of  Grand  Master
Rowe.  In  July,  1790,  the  Grand  Officers  assembled  and  voted  to

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

1658

elect  new  officers,  but  no  higher  officer  than  a Senior.  Grand  Warden
was  chosen.  The  Massachusetts  Grand  Lodge,  as  early  as  1787,
had  taken  action  upon  the  question  of  a union,  and  had  appointed  a
committee  to  consider  it.  “ It  is  evident  that  the  St.  John’s  Lodge
preserved  its  organization  as  such  for  the  purpose  of  completing  the
contemplated  union.  It  granted  no  Charters,  nor  did  it  assume  any
of  the  powers  of  a Charter  to  St.  John’s  Lodge,  Boston,  for  the
purpose  of  uniting  the  first  and  second  Lodges  into  one.  The
Grand  Lodge  record  contains  no  reference  to  it,  nor  was  there  any
record  kept  of  the  Grand  Lodge  doings  for  that  year.”

“Thus  by  the  record,  and  by  contemporaneous  history,  it  is  fixed
beyond  all  question  and  doubt  that  the  ‘ Massachusetts  Grand
Lodge,’  on  the  8th  of  March,  1777,  by  a revolution  and  by  assump-
tion of  the  powers,  duties,  and  responsibilities  of  a Grand  Lodge,
became  a free,  independent,  sovereign  Grand  Lodge,  with  a juris-
diction absolute,  exclusive,  and  entire  throughout  the  Common-
wealth of  Massachusetts,  and  a provisional  jurisdiction  in  other
States  and  countries.  By  this  revolution  and  assumption,  from  that
day  to  this,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts,  without  interrup-
tion, has  exercised  all  the  plenary  powers  of  a Grand  Lodge.  It
has  held  Regular  and  Special  Meetings,  elected  and  installed  its
Grand  Masters  and  other  Grand  Officers,  kept  full  and  complete
records  of  its  doings,  granted  Warrants  for  new  Lodges,  erected  and
erased  Lodges,  compelled  and  received  the  allegiance  of  its  subor-
dinates and  their  members,  and  has  been  in  correspondence  with
and  recognized  by  the  other  Grand  Lodges  of  the  world.  From  the
8th  of  March,  1777,  to  the  day  of  this  Quarterly  meeting,  the  full
and  just-complete  term  of  ninety-three  years,  there  has  never  been
any  successful  opposition  to  its  claim  of  sovereignty.  From  time  to
time  it  has  gathered  into  self  every  opposing  element  possessing
even  a colorable  title  to  legitimacy  which  it  found  within  the  bor-
ders of  its  jurisdiction.”

“ In  the  State  of  Massachusetts  there  have  been  three  Lodges
chartered  by  Grand  Lodges  of  foreign  jurisdictions,  and  but  three —
St.  Andrew’s,  chartered  in  1756,  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland,
and  now  one  of  our  subordinates;  Ancient  York  Lodge,  No.  169,
of  Boston,  chartered  prior  to  1772,  by  the  Atholl  Grand  Lodge  of
England,  and  had  but  a brief  existence  ; and  the  African  Lodge,  of
Boston.

COLORED  MASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1659

“ It  is  claimed  that  in  1775  the  persons  named  in  the  Charter  of
the  African  Lodge  were  made  Masons  in  a traveling  Lodge  attached
to  one  of  the  British  regiments  then  stationed  at  Boston,  and  that
they  ‘ were  soon  after  organized  as,  and  dispensated  into  a Lodge,’
before  the  death  of  Warren,  to  whom  they  applied  for  a Charter.
That  they  were  made  Masons  may  be  true.  That  they  received  a
Dispensation  for  a Lodge  there  is  not  the  least  proof  of,  nor  the
slightest  shadow  of  pretence  for.  Dispensations  for  Lodges,  as  pre-
liminary to  granting  a Charter,  were  not  made  use  of  in  those  days.
But  more  than  all,  there  was  no  authorized  power  here  to  grant  such
Dispensation  save  Provincial  Grand  Masters  Rowe  and  Warren.  A
traveling  Lodge,  although  attached  to  a British  regiment,  could  not
authorize  these  persons  to  assemble  as  a Lodge.  Nor  was  it  ever
pretended  that  such  Dispensation  existed  until  recently.  This  claim
is  nowhere  stated  directly,  and  contains  so  little  foundation  that  it
is  not  worth  considering.”

The  Massachusetts  Grand  Lodge,  at  its  Session  October  1,  1773,
after  mature  deliberation,  decided  that  neither  the  Lodge  at  Castle
William,  nor  any  other  traveling  Lodge,  “ has  any  right  to  make
Masons  of  any  citizen.”

There  is  no  doubt  that,  on  the  6th  of  March,  1775,  the  day  after
Warren  delivered  his  celebrated  oration  in  the  Old  South  Church,
where  he  was  menaced  by  British  troops,  Prince  Hall  and  thirteen
others  received  the  three  degrees  in  a traveling  Lodge  attached  to
one  of  the  British  regiments  in  the  army  of  General  Gage,  by  whom
Boston  was  then  garrisoned ; that  Prince  Hall  and  his  associates
met  as  a Lodge  thereafter  in  Boston,  without  any  warrant  or  author-
ity, until  May,  178 7.

Application  was  sent  to  England  for  a Charter  in  1 784.  The
letter  of  Prince  Hall,  dated  March  1,  1784,  accompanying  the  peti-
tion to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  for  the  Charter  of  the  African
Lodge,  says  • “ I would  inform  you  that  this  Lodge  hath  been

founded  almost  eight  years.”  “We  have  had  no  opportunity  to
apply  for  a Warrant  before  now,  though  we  have  been  importuned
to  send  to  France  for  one,  yet  we  thought  it  best  to  send  to  the
fountain  head,  from  whence  we  received  the  light,  for  a Warrant.”

A Charter  was  granted  September  29,  1784.  It  did  not  arrive
at  Boston  for  nearly  three  years,  and  was  received  April  29,  1787,
and,  on  the  6th  of  May  following,  Prince  Hall  organized  the  “Afri-

i66o

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

can  Lodge,”  at  Boston,  ten  years  after  the  Massachusetts  Grand
Lodge  had  asserted  its  freedom  and  independence  ; ten  years  after
the  American  doctrine  of  Grand  Lodge  jurisdiction  had  been  estab-
lished.

“Without  any  other  authority  than  that  contained  in  the  War-
rant for  said  Lodge,  Prince  Hall,  the  Master  thereof,  it  is  said,  on
the  2 2d  of  March,  1797,  granted  a Dispensation,  preliminary  to  a
Warrant,  to  certain  persons  in  Philadelphia.  Soon  afterwards
Prince  Hall  established  a Lodge  at  Providence,  R.  I.  African
Lodge,  of  Boston,  continued  to  act  as  a subordinate  Lodge  until
1808,  when,  with  the  assistance  of  the  Lodges  at  Philadelphia  and
Providence,  established  as  above  stated,  it  organized  a Grand  Lodge
at  Boston,  which  Body  granted  Charters  to  several  subordinates,  not
only  in  Massachusetts,  but  in  several  other  States.”

The  African'  Lodge  declared  its  independence  in  June,  1827,  and
published  its  Declaration  in  a newspaper  printed  at  Boston.

“ It  is  unnecessary  to  argue  the  masonic  and  legitimate  effect  of
this  Declaration.  It  was  a surrender  of  their  Charter,  and  a public
declaration  that  from  thenceforth  they  ceased  to  act  under  it,  or  to
recognize  its  validity  or  the  authority  from  whence  it  was  derived.
If  the  ‘African  Lodge’  had  any  existence  at  this  time,  by  force  of
this  Declaration  its  existence  came  to  an  end.”

A National  Grand  Lodge  was  formed  in  1847;  and,  says  the
petition  of  Lewis  Hayden  and  others  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Massachusetts,  set  out  on  page  132  of  the  Proceedings  for  1869:
“The  African  Lodge  of  Boston,  becoming  a part  of  that  Body,  sur-
rendered its  Charter,  and  received  its  present  Charter,  dated  Decem-
ber 11,  1847,  under  the  title  of  Prince  Hall  Grand  Lodge  of  Free
and  Accepted  Masons  for  the  Commonwealth  of  Massachusetts,  and
by  which  authority  we  this  day  exist  as  a Masonic  Body.”

The  Lodge  prospered,  but  after  the  death  of  Prince  Hall,  De-
cember 4,  1807,  set.  72,  it  became  dormant,  and  ceased.  Upon  the
union  of  the  Grand  Lodges  of  England,  in  1813,  African  Lodge,
which  had  been  registered  as  No.  459  and  as  370,  “was  removed
from  the  list,”  and  was  never  after  recognized  by  the  United  Grand
Lodge.  The  Declaration  of  1827  complains  “that  the  members  of
African  Lodge  could  open  no  correspondence  with  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England,  and  that  their  communications  and  advances
were  treated  with  the  most  studied  neglect.”

COLORED  MASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1661

“ Boyer  Lodge,  No.  1,  was  organized  at  New  York  City  by  the
African  Lodge  or  the  Prince  Hall  Grand  Lodge.  The  members  of
this  Lodge  applied  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New  York  for  recogni-
tion in  1812,  1829,  and  again  in  1845.  Grand  Secretary  James
Herring  made  a report  in  1846  which  contains  a letter  from  Brother
Charles  W.  Moore,  Grand  Secretary  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Massa-
chusetts, which  throws  some  light  upon  the  condition  of  the  African
Lodge  in  Boston  at  this  time.

“ Why  this  Charter  was  granted  without  the  consent  of  the
Lodges  in  Massachusetts,  and  without  any  correspondence  concern-
ing the  propriety  of  the  step,  is  a question  which  can  be  answered
by  every  American  who  remembers  the  bitter  hostility  existing  in
England  at  that  date  towards  the  successful  rebels  against  the  crown
of  Great  Britain.  This  Charter,  in  common  form,  conferring  no
extraordinary  powers  upon  the  petitioners,  authorizing  them  to  hold
a Lodge,  enter,  pass,  and  raise  Masons,  and  no  more,  was  undoubt-
edly granted  by  the  Grand  Master  of  England,  and  under  it  the
petitioners  commenced  Work.  The  successors  of  the  persons  named
in  that  Charter  have  magnified  the  powers  granted  by  it,  have  con-
strued it  to  confer  upon  them  Grand  Lodge  powers,  have  set  up
by  virtue  of  it  Grand  Lodges,  and  finally  a national  Grand  Lodge,
with  subordinate  Stations  and  Lodges,  and  have  established  an
‘American  doctrine  of  Grand  Lodge  jurisdiction  ’ peculiar  to  them-
selves, distinct  and  separate  from  any  other  Grand  Lodge  govern-’
ment  known  to  man.  Their  National  Grand  Body  ‘claims  and
exercises  masonic  authority  over  these  United  States,  with  full
power  and  authority  to  settle  all  masonic  difficulties  that  may  arise
among  the  Grand  Lodges  of  these  States.’  ”

The  original  Charter,  granted  September  29,  1 784,  under  which
the  successors  of  the  persons  named  have  claimed  to  act  from  April,

1 787,  to  the  year  1847,  and  which  was  the  only  plausible  authority
by  which  they  hope  to  be  justified  in  their  proceedings,  was  not  only
surrendered  by  operation  of  masonic  law,  June  18,  1827,  by  reason
of  the  Declaration  then  made,  but  on  the  nth  of  December,  1847
was  actually  in  set  form  of  words,  and  with  premeditation,  aban-
doned and  surrendered,  and  if  they  now  possess  the  parchment  upon
which  it  was  written,  it  is  kept  only  as  a curious  relic  of  the  past,
emasculated  of  its  virility.

The  first  difficulty  has  been  complicated  with  a National  Grand

1 662

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Lodge,  State  Grand  Lodges,  and  subordinate  Lodges,  so  that  it  will
not  be  easy  to  escape  from  the  triple  bonds  with  which  they  have
been  bound.

This  is  purely  a question  of  Grand  Lodge  jurisdiction,  which
was  settled  and  determined,  September  17,  1797,  by  Massachu-
setts Grand  Lodge,  when  it  incorporated  into  its  Constitution  this
Section  :

“ The  Grand  Lodge  will  not  hold  communication  with,  or  admit
as  visitors,  any  Masons,  residing  in  this  State,  who  hold  authority
under,  and  acknowledge  the  supremacy  of,  any  foreign  Grand
Lodge.”

In  some  form  of  language  the  same  feature  has  existed  in  their
Constitutions  from  1 797  to  this  day,  and  is  as  follows  :

“No  Lodge  of  Ancient,  Free  and  Accepted  Masons  can  legally
assemble  in  this  Commonwealth  under  a Warrant  granted  by  any
foreign  masonic  power.”  Which  is  a question  of  Grand  Lodge
jurisdiction.

“ The  Institution  of  Freemasomy  is  universal.  It  stretches  from
East  to  West,  from  North  to  South,  and  embraces  within  itself  the
representatives  of  every  branch  of  the  human  family.  Its  care-
fully-tyled  doors  swing  open,  not  at  the  knock  of  every  man,  but
at  the  demand  of  every  true  and  worthy  man,  duly  accepted,  whatever
his  religion,  his  race,  or  his  country  may  be.  This  Grand  Lodge
stands  upon  the  high  vantage  ground  of  this  catholic  society,  and
recognizes  the  great  principles  which  must  necessarily  underlie  an
Institution  which  has  a home  on  the  continents  and  on  the  islands
of  the  seas.”

“ When  that  celebrated  play  of  Terence,  styled  the  ‘ Self-Tor-
mentor,’ was  first,  introduced  upon  the  Roman  Stage,  before  the
great  amphitheatre  crowded  with  Senators,  knights,  citizens,  and
men  of  rank,  some  of  whom  had  been  found  worthy  of  a Roman
triumph,  and  Chremes,  in  his  reply  to  Menedemus,  repeated  these
words,

‘Homo  sum  ; humani  nihil  a me  alienum  puto  ’

(I  am  a man  ; nothing  which  relates  to  man  is  alien  to  me),

the  vast  assemblage  rose  up,  impelled  by  a common  sentiment,  and
rent  the  air  with  reiterated  plaudits.  The  memory  of  that  scene  has
not  yet  faded  away.  The  words  of  Chremes  have  not  yet  ceased  to

COLORED  MASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1663

reverberate.  We  bear  upon  the  Masons’  arms  of  Massachusetts,
and  have  inscribed  upon  our  Grand  Lodge  banner,  the  motto,

‘Humani  nihil  alienum.”'

(Man  everywhere  our  brother.)

The
seal  of  the
[ Grand  Lodge
of  Masons,
.London.

True  Copy  of  the  Charter  of  the  African  Lodge.

“Effingham,  A.  G.  M.  To  all  and  every  Right  Worshipful  and
loving  Brethren,  we,  Thomas  Howard,  &c.,  &c.,  &c.,  Earl  of  Effing-
ham, Lord  Howard,  Acting  Grand  Master  under
the  authority  of  His  Royal  Highness  Henry  Fred-
erick, Duke  of  Cumberland,  &c.,  &c.,  &c.,  Grand
Master  of  the  Most  Ancient  and  Honorable  Society
of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons,  sends  Greeting :

“ Know  ye,  that  we,  at  the  humble  petition  of  our  right  trusty
and  well  beloved  brethren,  Prince  Hall,  Boston  Smith,  Thomas
Sanderson,  and  several  other  brethren  residing  in  Boston,  New
England,  in  North  America,  do  hereby  constitute  the  said  brethren
into  a regular  Lodge  of  Free  and  accepted  Masons,  under  the  title
or  denomination  of  the  African  Lodge,  to  be  opened  in  Boston,
aforesaid ; and  do  further,  at  their  said  petition,  hereby  appoint  the
said  Prince  Hall  to  be  Master,  Boston  Smith,  Senior  Warden,  and
Thomas  Sanderson,  Junior  Warden,  for  opening  the  said  Lodge,
and  for  such  further  time  only  as  shall  be  thought  proper  by  the
brethren  thereof,  it  being  any  future  election  of  officers  of  the  Lodge,
but  that  such  election  shall  be  regulated  agreeably  to  such  By-Laws
of  the  said  Lodge  as  shall  be  consistent  with  the  general  laws  of  the
society,  contained  in  the  Book  of  Constitutions  ; and  we  hereby  will
and  require  you,  the  said  Prince  Hall,  to  take  special  care  that  all
and  every  the  said  brethren  are,  or  have  been,  regularly  made  Ma-
sons, and  that  they  do  observe,  perform,  and  keep  all  the  rules  and
orders  contained  in  the  Books  of  Constitutions ; and  further,  that
you  do,  from  time  to  time,  cause  to  be  entered  in  a book  kept  for  that
purpose  an  account  of  your  proceedings  in  the  Lodges,  together
with  all  such  rules,  orders,  and  regulations  as  shall  be  made  for  the
good  government  of  the  same ; that  in  no  wise  you  omit  once  in
every  year  to  send  to  us,  our  successors  Grand  Masters  or  to  Row-
land Holt,  Esq.,  our  Deputy  Grand  Master,  for  the  time  being,  an
account  in  writing  of  your  proceedings,  and  copies  of  all  such  rules,

1664

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

orders,  and  regulations  as  shall  be  made  as  aforesaid,  together  with  a
list  of  the  members  of  the  Lodge,  and  such  a sum  of  money  as  may
suit  the  circumstances  of  the  Lodge  and  reasonably  be  expected  to-
wards the  Grand  Charity.  Moreover,  we  hereby  will  and  require
you,  the  said  Prince  Hall,  as  soon  as  conveniently  may  be,  to  send
an  account  in  writing  of  what  may  be  done  by  virtue  of  these
presents.

“Given  at  London,  under  our  hand  and  seal  of  Masonry,  this
29th  day  September,  a.l.  5784,  a.d.  1784.

“ By  the  Grand  Master’s  Command.

“ Rowland  Holt,  D.  G.  M.,
“Witness  William  White,

“ Grand  Secretary."

The  “ Massachusetts  Centinal,”  printed  at  Boston,  in  its  issue  of
May  2,  1787,  has  the  following  document :

“ African  Lodge,

“ Boston,  May  2,  1787.

“ By  Captain  Scott,  from  London,  came  the  Charter,  &c.,  which
his  Royal  Highness  the  Duke  of  Cumberland,  and  the  Grand
Lodge,  have  been  graciously  pleased  to  grant  to  the  African  Lodge,
in  Boston.  As  the  brethren  have  a desire  to  acknowledge  all  favors
shown  them,  they,  in  this  public  manner,  return  particular  thanks
to  a certain  member  of  the  Fraternity  who  offered  the  so  generous
reward  in  this  paper,  some  time  since,  for  the  Charter,  supposed  to
be  lost ; and  to  assure  him,  though  they  doubt  of  his  friendship,  that
he  has  made  them  many  good  friends.”

“ (Signed)  Prince  Hall.”

Extract  from  an  Address  of  John  V.  De  Grasse,  before  the
Prince  Hall  Grand  Lodge,”  June  30,  1858  : “Although,  brethren,
our  Charter  was  granted  in  London,  September  17,  1784,  we  did
not  receive  it  until  April  29,  1787,  through  the  neglect  and  almost
culpable  carelessness  of  Brother  Gregory,  who  did  not  take  it  from
the  Office  of  the  Grand  Secretary,  where  it  had  remained  over  two
years.”  “ On  the  29th  of  April  the  Charter  and  a beautiful  bound
book  of  the  Constitutions  were  delivered  to  Prince  Hall.”

COLORED  MASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1665

Declaration  of  Independence  Published  in  a Newspaper  at  Boston ,

June , 182/.

“ African  Lodge,  No.  459.

“ Greeting  :

“ Be  it  known  to  all  whom  it  may  concern,  That  we,  the  Mas-
ter, Wardens,  Members  of  the  African  Lodge,  No.  459,  City  of
Boston  (Mass.),  U.  S.  of  America,  hold  in  our  possession  a certain
unlimited  Charter,  granted  September  29,  a.l.  5784,  a.d.  1784,  by
Thomas  Howard,  Earl  of  Effingham,  Acting  Grand  Master  under
the  authority  of  his  Royal  Highness  Henry  Frederick,  Duke  of
Cumberland,  &c.,  &c.,  &c.,  Grand  Master  of  the  Most  Ancient  and
Honorable  society  of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons.  Be  it  further
known,  that  the  Charter  alluded  to  bears  the  seal  of  the  Most
Worshipful  Grand  Lodge  at  London,  England,  and  was  presented
to  our  much  esteemed  and  worthy  brethren  and  predecessors,  Prince
Hall,  Boston  Smith,  Thomas  Sanderson,  and  several  others,  agree-
ably to  a humble  petition  of  theirs,  sent  in  form  to  the  above  Grand
Lodge.  Be  it  remembered  that,  according  to  correct  informa-
tion as  regards  this  instrument  and  the  manner  in  which  it  was
given,  it  appears  to  have  been  confined  exclusively  to  the  Africans,
and  to  certain  conditions.  Whether  the  conditions  have  been  com-
plied with  by  our  ancestors,  we  are  unable  to  say  ; but  we  can  add
that,  in  consequence  of  the  decease  of  the  above-named  Brother,
the  institution  was  for  years  unable  to  proceed,  for  the  want  of  one
to  conduct  its  affairs  agreeably  to  what  is  required  in  every  regular
and  well-educated  Lodge  of  Masons.  It  is  now,  however,  with
great  pleasure  we  state  that  the  present  age  has  arrived  to  that  de-
gree of  proficiency  in  the  art,  that  we  can  at  any  time  select  from
among  us  many  whose  capacity  to  govern  enables  them  to  preside
with  as  much  good  order,  dignity,  and  propriety  as  any  other  Lodge
within  our  knowledge.  This  fact  can  be  proved  by  gentlemen  of
respectability,  whose  knowledge  of  Masonry  would  not  be  ques-
tioned by  any  one  well  acquainted  with  the  art.  Since  the  rise  of
the  Lodge  to  this  degree  of  proficiency,  we  concluded  it  was  best
and  prope'r  to  make  it  known  to  the  Most  Worshipful  Grand  Lodge
from  whence  we  derive  our  charter,  by  sending  written  documents
and  monies,  to  fulfil  the  agreements  of  our  ancestors,  giving  informa-
tion of  the  low  state  to  which  it  had  fallen,  its  cause,  &c.,  with  its

105

1 666

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

rise  and  progress  ; and  also  soliciting  favors,  whereby  we  might  be
placed  on  a different  and  better  standing  than  we  had  heretofore.
And  notwithstanding  this  has  long  since  been  done,  and  more
than  sufficient  time  has  elapsed  for  returns,  yet  we  have  never  re-
ceived a single  line  or  reply  from  that  Hon.  Society.  In  con-
sequence of  that  neglect,  we  have  been  at  a stand  what  course  to
pursue.  Our  remote  situation  prevents  us  from  making  any  verbal
communication  whatever.  Taking  all  these  things  into  considera-
tion, we  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  with  what  knowledge  we
possess  of  Masonry,  and  as  people  of  color  by  ourselves,  we  are,  and
ought  by  rights,  to  be  free  and  independent  of  other  Lodges.  We
do,  therefore,  with  this  belief,  publicly  declare  ourselves  free  and
independent  of  any  Lodge  from  this  day,  and  that  we  will  not  be
tributary,  or  be  governed  by  any  lodge  than  that  of  our  own.  We
agree  solemnly  to  abide  by  all  proper  rules  and  regulations  which
govern  the  like  Fraternity,  discountenancing  all  imposition  to  injure
the  Order,  and  to  use  all  fair  and  honorable  means  to  promote  its
prosperity,  resting  in  full  hope  that  this  will  enable  us  to  transmit  it
in  its  purity  to  our  posterity  for  their  enjoyment.

“ Done  at  the  Lodge,  this  the  1 8th  June,  a.l.  5727,  a.d.  1827.

“ In  full  testimony  of  what  has  been  written,  we  affix  our
names :

“John  T.  Hilton,  R.  M.  W.,
“Thomas  Dalton,  Sen.  Ward.,

“ Lewis  York,  Jim.  Ward.,

“J.  H.  Purron,  Secretary.”

Letter  from  John  Hervey,  Grand  Secretary  of  the  United  Grand

Lodge  of  England.

“ Freemasons’  Hall,  London,  W.  C.,

“ nth  November,  1868.

“ Dear  Sir  and  R.  W.  Brother  : I am  in  receipt  of  your  favor
of  the  20th  ult.,  making  enquiries  respecting  a Warrant  granted  in
1784  to  a certain  Prince  Hall.  I have  caused  a most  diligent  search
to  be  made  in  our  books  here,  and  the  only  reference  I can  find  is
in  the  Calendar  for  1785,  when  a Lodge  appears  to  have  been  work-
ing under  the  English  Constitution,  at  Boston,  under  the  No.  459,
and  called  the  ‘African  Lodge.’  It  afterwards  became  370,  and,  I

COLORED  MASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1667

presume,  had  ceased  working,  as  at  the  Union,  in  1813,  it  was  re-
moved from  the  list.

“ To  reply  to  your  questions  categorically  :

“ 1st.  I can  find  no  record  in  1775  of  any  Dispensation  ; but  as
the  G.  L.  Books  were  not  then  kept,  as  they  are  now,  with  ac-
curacy, such  may,  nevertheless,  have  existed.

“ 2d.  It  was  struck  off  the  list  in  1813,  but  I can  find  no  trace
of  any  return  having  been  made,  and  consequently  imagine  it  must
have  ceased  working  long  before,  although  retained  on  the  list.

“3d.  I should  say  most  decidedly,  that  the  said  ‘ Prince  Hall’
was  never  appointed  D.  G.  M.,  or  had  power  to  grant  warrants  for
the  establishment  of  Lodges  in  your  country.  Henry  Price,  of
Boston,  was  P.  G.  M.  for  America  from  1775  to  1804,  after  which
year  his  name  disappears  from  the  lists.

“ It  is  quite  clear  that  the  Lodge  referred  to  is  not  working
under  the  English  Constitutions,  and  that  the  parties  holding  the
Warrant  can  have  no  right  to  it,  and  are  not  a regular  Lodge,  un-
less empowered  to  meet  under  your  Constitutions.

“ I am,  dear  Sir  and  Brother,  yours,  truly  and  fraternally,

“John  Hervey,

“ Grand  Secretary

Charles  W.  Moore,

Deputy  Grand  Master , Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts.

Extract  from  the  Report  of  James  Herring ; Grand  Secretary , to
the  Grand  Lodge  of  New  York , June  2 , 1846.

“ The  undersigned,  having  requested  the  R.  W.  Charles  W.
Moore,  Grand  Secretary  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts,  to
endeavor  to  see  the  Charter  of  the  so-called  African  Lodge,  of
Boston,  and,  if  possible,  obtain  a copy  thereof,  begs  leave  to  incor-
porate the  following  extract  from  Br.  Moore’s  letter,  dated  July  26,
1845  :

“ I called,  agreeably  to  your  request,  on  Mr.  Hilton — who,  I be-
lieve, is  the  Master  of  the  African  Lodge  in  this  city — stated  to
him  the  object  of  my  visit,  and  asked  permission  to  see  the  Charter
of  his  Lodge.  He  informed  me  that  there  was  a difficulty  between
his  and  Boyer  Lodge,  of  long  standing,  that  they  had  nothing  to
do  with  that  Lodge,  nor  would  they  have,  until  the  difference  re-

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

1668

ferred  to  was  settled.  He  further  stated,  that  they  were  entirely
independent  of  the  white  Lodges ; asked  no  favors  of  them  ; and
would  have  nothing  to  do  with  them  ; nor  would  they  admit  a
white  Mason,  if  he  should  present  himself  as  a visitor.  In  the
course  of  his  conversation  he  distinctly  said  that  he  had  been  ‘ told
by  them  people  ’ (meaning  Boyer  Lodge)  to  have  no  communica-
tion with  anybody  on  the  subject  of  their  recognition  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  New  York.  He  also  positively  and  repeatedly  refused  to
allow  me  to  see  the  Charter  of  his  Lodge,  or  to  give  me  any  in-
formation in  relation  to  its  history  or  present  existence.  It  is  prop-
er for  me  to  add,  that  my  conversation  with  him  was  kind  and  gen-
tle. I explicitly  stated  to  him  that  I did  not  call  officially,  but  as  a
friend,  and  at  your  request,  with  a view  to  ascertain  whether  Boyer
Lodge  was  a regular  constituted  Lodge,  such  as  the  Grand  Lodge
of  New  York  could  recognize.  . . .

“ The  African  Lodge  has  never  been  recognized  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  this  Commonwealth.  Applications  have  several  times
been  made  by  its  members  for  admission  to  our  Lodges,  but  they
have  generally,  if  not  always,  been  refused.  Mr.  Hilton  stated  to
me  that  he  had  once,  through  the  influence  of  a friend,  gained
admission  into  one  of  our  out-of-town  Lodges.  If  so,  the  Brother
who  introduced  him  laid  himself  open  to  censure,  and  would  have
been  dealt  with,  had  the  circumstance  come  to  the  knowledge  of
the  Grand  Lodge.  That  the  course  of  our  Grand  Lodge,  in  refer-
ence to  the  African  Lodge,  is  not  the  result  of  prejudice,  it  is  only
necessary  for  me  to  say,  that,  within  the  last  month,  a colored
Brother  from  England  has  visited,  and  been  kindly  received,  in  one
of  our  city  Lodges.

“ Such  is  the  state  of  the  case,  so  far  as  I am  able  to  communi-
cate it.  The  argument  does  not  belong  tome  ; but  you  will  permit
me  to  inquire,  whether  your  Grand  Lodge  is  prepared  to  recognize
any  real  or  pretended  Lodge,  existing  within  another  jurisdiction,
before  it  had  been  recognized'  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  that  juris-
diction ? Again,  does  your  Grand  Lodge  allow  other  Grand
Lodges  to  establish  Lodges  within  its  jurisdiction  ? and  is  it  ready
to  recognize  Lodges  so  established  ?

“ These  three  questions  have  been,  by  repeated  decisions  of  this
Grand  Lodge,  answered  in  the  negative  ; and,  according  to  the
treaty  stipulations  entered  into  by  the  Grand  Lodges  of  this

COLORED  MASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1669

continent,  soon  after  the  revolution,  and  the  uniform  resistance  of
any  encroachment  upon  the  sole  jurisdiction  of  the  several  Grand
Lodges  down  to  the  present  time,  these  questions  can  be  answered
only  in  the  negative.

“ The  undersigned  would  further  state,  that  the  legality  of  the
Body,  called  Boyer  Lodge,  No.  1,  has  been  already  twice  reported
on  by  Committees  of  this  Grand  Lodge  on  the  3d  of  March,  1812,
and  on  the  4th  of  March,  1829.  In  the  latter  report,  the  main  facts
were  correctly  stated  and  able  arguments  sustained,  and  the  conclu-
sion drawn  that  Boyer  Lodge,  No.  1,  can  be  regarded  only  as  a clan-
destine Lodge.  The  undersigned  can  arrive  only  at  the  same  con-
clusion, it  being  established  beyond  doubt  that  the  African  Lodge,
at  Boston,  was  illegally  established  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England
within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts  ; that
its  name  has  been  long  stricken  from  the  roll  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England  ; that  its  assumed  authority  to  grant  Warrants  was  un-
masonic  and  fraudulent ; and  further,  that  the  statement  contained
in  the  memorial  of  said  Boyer  Lodge,  that  it  had  been  ‘ regularly
and  legally  constituted  and  installed  as  a Master  Mason’s  Lodge,
with  a legal  Warrant  or  Charter,’  is  totally  unfounded.

“ All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted,

“James  Herring,

“ Grand  Secretary."

New  York,  June  2,  1846.

In  June,  1855,  one  Peter  G.  Smith,  of  Montpelier,  Vt.,  visited
Boston,  and  “joined  a Lodge  of  Masons.”  Upon  returning  to
Montpelier,  he  attempted  to  visit  a regular  Lodge,  but  was  refused
admission.  Mr.  Smith  then  wrote  to  Boston,  and  received  the  fol-
lowing reply  :

“ No.  60  Southac  Street,  Boston,

“ September  6,  1855.

“ Peter  G.  Smith,  Esq.

“My  Dear  Sir  and  Brother:  Yours,  bearing  date  August
14,  came  duly  to  hand.  You  say  that  the  Grand  Master  of  Ver-
mont says  that  the  colored  Masons  had  their  Charter  taken  from
them,  and  that  they  are  now  working  without  a Charter.  We  reply
that  the  charge  is  no  doubt  innocent,  but  it  is  nevertheless  false  from
beginning  to  end.  The  original  Charter  is  now  in  our  possession,
and  always  has  been,  and  we  worked  under  it  until  some  time  after

5670

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

die  war  between  this  country  and  Great  Britain,  when  the  colored
Masons  held  a Convention  and  declared  themselves  independent,
the  same  as  the  white  had  already  done  before.  This  was  done
■on  account  of  the  difficulties  of  making  the  returns  to  the  mother
country.  There  has  always  been  the  best  feelings,  and  our  brethren
all  visit  the  Lodges,  not  only  in  England,  but  in  all  parts  of  the
world.

“ If  the  Grand  Master  of  Vermont  wishes  any  more  light,  we  are
prepared  to  give  it  to  him  ; or,  if  he  has  a curiosity,  he  can  see  the
original  Charter.  Yours  fraternally,

“J.  S.  Rock,

“ Corresponding  Grand  Secretary  of  Prince  Hall  Grand
Lodge.'\

To  this  letter  Philip  C.  Tucker,  Grand  Master  of  Vermont,
replied  in  a communication  to  Peter  G.  Smith  as  follows :

“ Vergennes,  September  22,  1855.

“ Mr.  Peter  G.  Smith,  Montpelier.

“Sir:  1 received  yours  of  yesterday,  enclosing  a letter  to  you
from  Mr.  J.  S.  Rock,  of  Boston,  this  morning.

“ As  to  the  Lodge  of  colored  men  existing  in  Boston,  calling  it-
self ‘ Prince  Hall  Grand  Lodge,’  and  such  Lodges  as  acknowledge
its  jurisdiction,  1 have  to  say  that  my  understanding  on  the  subject
is  this :

“ 1 suppose  it  to  be  true  that  on  the  20th  day  of  September,
1784,  a Charter  for  a Masters’  Lodge  was  granted  to  Prince  Hall
and  others,  under  the  authority  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,
and  that  the  Lodge  then  chartered  bore  the  name  of  ‘ African
Lodge,  No.  459,’  and  was  located  at  Boston.  If  any  other  Charter
was  ever  granted,  at  any  other  time,  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng-
land, or  any  other  Grand  Lodge,  to  the  colored  persons  of  that  city,
it  has  never  come  to  my  knowledge.

“ I suppose  it  to  be  also  true  that  African  Lodge,  No.  459,  did
not  continue  its  connection  for  many  years  with  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England,  and  that  its  registration  was  stricken  from  the  rolls  of
that  Grand  more  than  fifty  years  ago.

“ 1 suppose  it  further  to  be  true  that  this  Lodge,  No.  459,  and
all  others  which  have  originated  from  it,  have  always  held  them-

COLORED  MASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1671

selves  aloof,  and  have  always  refused  to  acknowledge  any  allegiance
to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  Commonwealth  of  Massachusetts.

“ I also  suppose  it  to  be  true  that,  on  the  r 8th  day  of  June,
1827,  this  same  Lodge,  No.  459,  issued  a Declaration,  and  had  it
published  in  some  of  the  Boston  papers,  signed  by  John  T.  Hilton,
Thomas  Dalton,  Lewis  York,  j r. , and  J.  H.  Purron  (claiming  to  be
Master  Wardens,  and  Secretary  thereof),  which  Declaration  con-
tained the  following  language  : ‘ We  publicly  declare  ourselves  free
and  independent  of  any  Lodge  from  this  day,  and  we  will  not  be
tributary,  or  governed  by  any  Lodge  than  that  of  our  own.’

“ And  I still  further  suppose  it  to  be  true  that,  in  the  month  of
July,  1845,  R-  W.  Charles  W.  Moore,  the  Grand  Secretary  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts,  had  a personal  interview  with  Mr,
Hilton,  then  Master  of  this  said  Lodge,  No.  459,  in  which  interview
Mr.  Hilton  said,  that  they  (the  members  of  said  Lodge)  were  ‘en-
tirely independent  of  all  white  Bodies,  asked  no  favors  of  them,  and
would  have  nothing  to  do  with  them  ; nor  would  they  admit  a white
Mason,  if  he  should  present  himself  as  a visitor.’

“ All  these  things  are  of  record,  and  cannot,  I think,  be  denied
in  any  quarter.  From  them  I form  the  following  opinions :

“ First.  Even  if  a Charter  for  a subordinate  Lodge,  to  be  lo-
cated within  the  United  States,  could  be  lawfully  granted  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England,  after  the  close  of  the  American  Lodges,
its  vitality  would  necessarily  expire  when  the  grantor  substantially
revoked  the  grant  by  striking  it  from  its  records,  and  thus  disavow-
ing all  connection  with  the  grantee.

“ Second.  That  the  mere  retention  of  a Charter,  after  its  legal
revocation,  cannot  preserve  or  retain  any  right,  power,  or  authority
in  the  original  grantees  or  their  successors,  where  the  right  to  re-
voke is  reserved,  as  it  always  is  in  all  Grand  Lodges,  in  the  grantor.

‘‘Third.  Even  if  African  Lodge,  No.  459,  had  a lawful  masonic
existence  June  18,  1827,  the  Declaration  of  that  date  was  both  un-
masonic  and  revolutionary,  and  placed  that  Body  as  effectually  be-
yond recognition  by  either  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts  or
any  other  Grand  Lodge  in  the  United  States,  as  was  the  French
Lodge  of  Virginia,  or  the  German  Lodges  of  New  York.

“ Fourth.  Had  African  Lodge,  No.  459,  been  in  all  things  a
lawful  Lodge,  after  the  Declaration  of  its  first  officer,  of  July,  1845,
that  ‘ it  would  not  admit  a white  Mason  if  he  should  present  himself

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

io7j

as  a visitor,’  it  would  have  been  both  humiliating  and  degrading  to
have  allowed  the  doors  of  the  white  Lodges  to  stand  open  for  a
reciprocity  of  courtesies  which  were  thus  gratuitously  and  roughly
declared  inadmissible,  in  advance  of  any  request,  offer,  or  wish  to
establish  them.

“ I have  the  highest  masonic  authority  in  Massachusetts  for
denying  ‘the  brethren’  of  the  Lodge  in  question  ‘all  visit  the
Lodges,’  so  far  as  the  Lodges  of  Massachusetts  are  concerned.  A
Past  Grand  Master  of  the  Lodge  of  the  Commonwealth,  writing  at
Boston,  in  1848,  says:  ‘There  are  no  Lodges  of  colored  Masons
in  this  city  or  any  other  part  of  the  United  States  that  are  recog-
nized and  acknowledged  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts,  or
to  our  knowledge,  by  any  other  regularly-constituted  Grand  Lodge
in  this  country.  It  (the  African  Lodge)  was  never  recognized  by
the  Grand  Lodge  of  this  State,  nor  has  there  been  any  masonic  in-
tercourse between  the  two  Bodies.’

“The  same  Brother,  writing  at  the  same  place,  in  1846,  says,  in
referring  to  that  Lodge : ‘ Applications  have  several  times  been
made  by  its  members  for  admission  to  our  Lodges,  but  they  have
generally,  if  not  always,  been  refused.’  Again  he  says,  ‘ That  the
course  of  our  Grand  Lodge  in  reference  to  African  Lodge  is  not  the
result  of  prejudice,  it  is  only  necessary  for  me  to  say  that,  within
the  last  month,  a colored  Brother  from  England  has  visited,  and
been  kindly  received  in  one  of  our  city  Lodges.’

“ I believe  I am  correct  in  stating  that  the  two  following  propo-
sitions are  recognized  as  sound  masonic  law  in  this  country  :

“ First.  That  no  Grand  Lodge  of  any  State  can  regularly  recog-
nize a subordinate  Lodge  existing  in  another  State,  or  its  members,
until  such  subordinate  Lodge  is  recognized  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of
the  State  in  which  it  exists.

“ Second.  That  no  Grand  Lodge,  either  in  these  United  States,
or  any  other  country,  can  legally  establish  a subordinate  Lodge  in
any  other  State  where  a regularly-constituted  Grand  Lodge  exists.

“ From  these  views  you  will  readily  perceive  why  the  Masonry
of  the  United  States  does  not  and  cannot  either  recognize  ‘ Prince
Hall  Grand  Lodge,’  or  its  subordinates,  or  their  members,  as  regu-
lar. To  our  understanding,  the  whole  of  these  organizations  are
irregular  and  unmasonic,  and  exist  adverse  to  masonic  regulations
and  law.  If,  as  Mr.  Rock  asserts,  members  of  these  Bodies  are

COLORED  MASONRY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  1673

admitted  to  ‘visit  Lodges  in  England  and  all  parts  of  the  world,’
that  admission  probably  arises  from  the  fact  that  the  history  and
masonic  positions  of  these  Bodies  are  not  so  well  understood  else-
where as  they  are  in  the  United  States.

“ Mr.  Rock  expresses  an  inclination  to  ‘give  the  Grand  Master
of  Vermont  more  light’  on  this  subject.  As  he  signed  himself
‘ Corresponding  Secretary  of  Prince  Hall  Grand  Lodge,’  I suppose
him  to  possess  all  the  ‘ light  ’ which  the  subject  has  in  it ; and  what-
ever that  light  may  be  able  to  reflect  upon  me  of  the  truth  of  the
past  or  the  present,  will  always  receive  the  respectful  attention  it
may  deserve  from

“Your  Humble  Serv’t,

“ Philip  C.  Tucker,

“ Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Vermont."

Communication  from  the  Grand  Secretary  of  the  United  Grand

Lodge  of  England.

“ Freemasons’  Hall,  London,  W.  C.,

“ May  5,  1870.

•‘William  Sewall  Gardner,  Esq.,  Most  Worshipful  Grand  Mas-
ter of  Massachusetts.

“ M.  W.  Sir  and  Brother  : I would  have  replied  earlier  to
your  esteemed  letter  of  the  1 2th  March,  had  not  the  information
you  required  necessitated  a longer  search  than  could  be  prosecuted
at  the  moment.  I regret  that  I can  afford  so  little  information,
as  our  records,  excepting  as  to  the  proceedings  of  our  own  Grand
Lodge,  were  not  kept  in  the  accurate  manner  as  is  now  the  general
practice.

“As  you  are  already  aware,  the  Warrant  for  the  African  Lodge
was  granted  in  1 784,  and  was  numbered  459  ; but  the  fee  for  the
Warrant,  £4  4s.,  does  not  appear  in  our  Grand  Lodge  accounts
until  the  4th  April,  1787.  The  following  remittances  were  received
for  the  Charity  Fund  from  the  African  Lodge,  viz.  :

“November  25,  1789
“ April  18,  1792
“November  27,  1793
“November  22,  1797

£2  2s.  1 id.
1 1 o

1 5 6

1 5 °

1 674

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

“ In  1793  its  number  was  altered  to  370,  and  continued  so  num-
bered in  our  Calendar  until  1812,  when,  on  the  re-numbering  conse-
quent on  the  union  of  the  two  Grand  Lodges,  the  African  Lodge
was  omitted.

“ I send  you  enclosed  a verbatim  copy  of  all  the  documents  I
can  discover  relating  to  the  Lodge  ; but  the  petition  for  the  Lodge
is  not  forthcoming.  Should  any  other  documents  present  them-
selves, which  is  somewhat  unlikely,  I will  send  you  copies,  and  have
the  honor  to  remain,  M.  W.  Sir  and  Brother,

“Yours  fraternally,

“John  Hervey,

“ Grand  Secretary."

Copies  referred  to  in  the  above  letter :

“ Right  Worshipful  Sir  : We  now  send  you  an  account  of
the  Lodges  proceeding  since  we  sent  our  last,  which  was  in  August
last,  together  with  ten  dollars  for  the  Fund  of  the  Grand  Charity,
by  Captain  Scot,  which  he  saith  he  hath  delivered  to  the  Grand
Secretary,  but  he  hath  no  recept  with  him  for  the  money.  We
have  initiated  into  the  Lodge  this  year  Samovel  Beean,  a black
man,  and  the  Reverend  Mr.  John  Merrand,  a black  Minister  from
home,  but  last  from  Beech  Town  in  Nova  Scotia.  We  shall  make
a colletchen  on  St.  John’s  Day  next,  which  we  shall  send  by  the  first
carefull  hand ; the  Lodge  in  general  behaves  veriwell  in  there  Sta-
tion, so  that  there  no  just  complantes  made  against  them.  I hope
I may  allways  have  the  plesevr  of  sending  a good  account  of  the
African  Lodge.  After  whiching  all  Happynessto  our  Royal  Grand
Master,  and  all  the  Officers  and  Members  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  I
beg  leve  to  subscribe  myself  your  most  obedient  humble  servent
and  Brother,  Prince  Hall.”

Boston,  June  4,  1789.

“Boston,  November  9,  1789.

“To  the  Most  Worshipful  William  White,  Esq.,  G.  S.

“ Dear  Sir  : These  comes  to  acquant  you  that  we  have  sent
sundrey  letters  to  our  Right  Worshipful  Rowland  Holt,  Esq.,  and
to  your  Worship  according  to  my  order  in  the  Charter;  and  with
those  we  sent  you  datted  Augest  2,  1788,  we  sent  Ten  Dollars  for
the  Grand  Charity  but  have  not  had  a anser  wether  you  had  receved
them  or  not,  and  the  Lodge  is  uneasey  with  me  on  that  acount,  as

COLORED  MASONRY  IN  1'UE  UNITED  STATES  1675

I paid  the  money  to  Mr.  Bengmen  Greene,  Jun.,  one  of  Captain
James  Scotts  Merchants,  and  receved  his  recepte  for  the  money  to
be  sent  to  him  with  the  Letters  for  you,  as  I did  not  now  were  to
derecte  them  to  you,  and  if  you  receved  them  that  must  be  the
Reson  ; therefore,  Sir,  be  so  good  when  you  send  an  ansear  to  this
you  would  send  me  some  word  were  to  derect  them,  that  you  may
have  them,  which  we  hope  will  be  by  the  Berrer  hearof.  I have
sent  you  a sermon,  preched  on  St.  Johns  Day  by  our  Brother  John
Marrant,  for  our  Grand  Master,  and  another  for  you,  which  I hope
you  will  recevn.  Our  Brother  Sanderson  is  Dead.  All  the  rest  of
our  Br  are  in  health.  So  no  at  pesent.  But  must  beg  leve  to  sub-
scribe myself  your  vere  humble  servent  and  Br.,

“Prince  Hall.”

“To  the  Right  Worshipful,  the  Grand  Master,  Wardens,  and  Mem-
bers of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.

“ We  your  petitioners,  Sampson  IT.  Moody,  Peter  Howard,  Abra
ham  C.  Derendemed,  John  I.  Hilton,  James  Jackson,  Zadock
Low,  Samuel  G.  Gardner,  Richard  Potter,  Lewis  Walker,  and
other  Companions  Who  have  been  regularly  Exalted  to  the
Sublime  Degree  of  Royal  Arch  Masons.

“ Our  worthy  and  well  beloved  Brethren  Prince  Hall,  Boston
Smith,  Thomas  Sanderson,  and  several  Brethren  having  obtained
a Warrant  from  your  Honourable  Body,  on  September  29,  1784,
A.  D.,  A.  L.  5784,  when,  under  the  Government  of  Thomas
Howard,  Earl  of  Effingham,  Lord  Howard,  &c.,  &c.,  &c.,  acting
Grand  Master  Under  the  authority  of  his  Royal  Highness  Henry
Frederick,  Duke  of  Cumberland,  Grand  Master  of  the  Most  An-
cient and  Honourable  Society  of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons.

“This  Warrant  allowing  us  to  confer  but  the  three  Degrees,  and
Finding  it  injurious  for  the  benefit  of  our  Body  by  having  no  legal
authority  to  confer  the  other  four  degrees.  And  understanding  that
the  seven  degrees  is  given  under  the  Warrants  from  the  Grand
Lodge,  we,  therefore,  humbly  solicit  the  Renual  of  our  Charter  to
ourtherise  us  Legally  to  confer  the  same,  as  we  are  now  getting  in
a flourishing  condition.  It  is  with  regret  we  communicated  to  you
that,  from  the  Decease  of  our  Well  Beloved  Brethren  who  obtain’d
the  Warrant  we  have  not  been  able  for  several  years  to  transmit
Monies  and  hold  a regular  Communication  ; but,  as  we  are  now

1676

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

permanently  established  to  work  conformable  to  our  Warrant  and
Book  of  Constitutions.  We  will  send  the  Monies  as  far  as  circim-
stances  will  admit,  together  with  the  money,  for  a new  Warrant.
Should  your  Honourable  Body  think  us  worthy  to  receive  the  same.
We  remain,  Right  Worshipful  and  Most  Worshipful  Brethren,
“With  all  Due  Respect,  Yours  fraternally,

“(Signed)  Samson  H.  Moody,  W.  M.,

“ Peter  Howard,  Y.  IV.,

“C.  A.  DeRandamie,  J.  W.

“ Given  under  our  hands  at  Boston,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord
1824,  January  5th  (5824).

“William  J.  Champney,

“ Secretary."

CHAPTER  LX

THE  ANTI-MASONIC  EXCITEMENT

GENERAL  history  of  Masonry  in  the  United
States  would  be  incomplete  if  a notice  of  the
anti-Masonic  episode  were  left  out ; we  shall,
therefore,  devote  a few  pages  to  this  subject.
There  have  been,  generally  diffused  among  the
people,  very  erroneous  ideas  in  regard  to  the
sudden  disappearance  of  one  William  Morgan,
of  whom  it  was  said,  that  in  consequence  of  a threatened  publication
of  an  exposure  of  the  secret  work  of  Freemasonry,  he  was  either
murdered  or  kidnaped  and  conveyed  surreptitiously  out  of  the
country,  and  was  never  heard  of  afterward.  It  was  an  undeniable
fact  that  he  suddenly  disappeared  from  the  State  of  New  York,  and
there  is  no  satisfactory  evidence  that  he  was  ever  seen  by  anyone
again.

Volumes  have  been  published,  both  by  anti-Masons  and  Masons,
in,  apparently,  a vain  effort  to  establish  the  charge  on  one  side,  that
he  was  either  murdered  or  transported  out  of  the  country,  and,  on
the  other  side,  that  he  came  to  no  harm  from  the  Masons,  who  were
accused  of  his  “sudden  taking  off.”

The  latest  publication  was  prepared  by  Past  Grand  Master  Jesse
B.  Anthony,  330,  of  New  York,1  who  availed  himself  of  the  excel-
lent account  by  Hon.  Josiah  H.  Drummond,  Past  Grand  Master  of
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Maine,  and  the  pamphlets  published,  several
years  since,  by  Past  Grand  Master  Rob.  Morris,  of  Kentucky,  who
spent  much  time  and  money  in  the  State  of  New  York,  and  other
writers  who  had  investigated  all  the  circumstances  connected  with
the  affair.  Our  limits  in  this  work  do  not  admit  of  so  extended  an
examination  as  that  of  Brother  Anthony ; nevertheless,  it  will  be
necessary,  for  a proper  understanding  of  the  case,  to  devote  consid-

History  of  Masonry  and  Concordant  Orders,”  p.  514.
1677

1678

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

erable  space  to  a clear  statement  of  all  the  ascertainable  facts,  and
leave  all  speculations  and  conjectures  to  our  readers.

William  Morgan,  it  is  said,  was  from  Virginia;1  born  in  1775
or  1776;  was  a stone  mason  by  trade.  In  1821  be  resided  near
York  in  Upper  Canada  and  was  engaged  as  a brewer.2  His  brewery
being  destroyed  by  fire,  from  thence  he  found  his  way  to  Rochester,
N.  Y.,  and  worked  at  his  trade  as  a stone  mason,  and  in  1823  went
to  Batavia.3

In  the  “ Letters  to  John  Quincy  Adams”  it  is  related  that  “he
was  a hard  drinker,  and  his  nights,  and  sometimes  his  days  also,
were  spent  in  tippling-houses,  while  occasionally,  to  the  still  greater
neglect  of  his  family,  he  joined  in  the  drinking  carousals  of  the  vilest
and  most  worthless  men  ; and  his  disposition  was  envious,  malicious,
and  vindictive.”

Some  persons  doubt  if  he  ever  was  regularly  made  a Mason  ; but
it  is  nevertheless  true  that,  after  reaching  Batavia,  he  was  admitted
as  a visitor  in  Wells  Lodge  of  that  place.  After  this  he  was  made
a Royal  Arch  Mason  in  Western  Star  Chapter,  at  Le  Roy,  N.  Y.,
May  23,  1825.  His  name  was  on  the  first  petition  for  the  establish-
ment of  a Royal  Arch  Chapter  in  Batavia.  Some  others  seeing  his
name  on  the  petition,  declined  signing  it,  and  a new  one  was  gotten
up,  leaving  his  name  off.  After  the  chapter  was  organized,  upon  his
application  for  membership  he  was  rejected.4

There  was  at  that  time  a weekly  newspaper,  the  “ Republican
Advocate,”  conducted  by  one  David  C.  Miller.  It  is  said  he  had
been  initiated  in  a lodge  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  but  owing  to  his  noted
character,  ascertained  thereafter,  he  had  been  refused  advancement.6

These  two  worthies,  and  companions  in  dissipation,  both  impe-
cunious and  greatly  in  financial  difficulties,  concocted  the  scheme  to
divulge  what  they  knew  of  Masonry.6  Morgan  having  advanced
further  in  the  degrees,  was  to  furnish  the  information,  and  Miller
was  to  do  the  editing,  printing,  and  publishing.

This  scheme,  by  some  means,  became  known  to  the  Masons.
No  doubt,  in  the  drunken  orgies  of  Morgan  he  had  boasted  of  his
contemplated  revenge.  Articles  also  crept  into  the  paper ; 7 one  of
which  was  publicly  read  in  a bar-room  in  1826,  which  stated  : “There

1 H.  Brown’s  “Narrative,  Batavia,  New  York,  1829,”  p.  15.

2 Ibid.,  p.  16.  3 Ibid.,  p.  16.  4 Ibid.,  p.  17.

5 Ibid.,  p.  15.  6 Ibid.,  p.  15.  7 Ibid.,  p.  18.

UNITY,  PEACE  AND  PLENTY

THE  ANTI-MASONIC  EXCITEMENT

1679

will  be  issued  from  the  press  in  this  place,  in  a short  time,  a work  of
rare  interest  to  the  uninitiated,  being  an  exposition  of  Ancient  Craft
Masonry,  by  one  who  has  been  a member  of  the  institution  for
years.”

Morgan  having  had  some  transaction  in  Canandaigua  with  the
tavern-keeper — we  think  it  was  simply  borrowing  some  clothing,  and
having  failed  to  return  the  articles,  a warrant  was  taken  out  for  lar-
ceny, upon  which  his  arrest  followed,  and  he  was  carried  to  Canan-
daigua by  a posse  ; among  them  were  several  conspicuous  Masons.
He  was  acquitted  of  the  charge,  because  he  had  borrowed  the  cloth-
ing, and  had  not  stolen  them.  He  was  again  arrested  for  a debt  to
another  tavern-keeper,  and  upon  confession  of  judgment  he  was  sent
to  jail.  Miller  was  also  arrested,  September  12,  1826,  and  carried
to  Le  Roy  ;*  he  was  discharged,  as  the  plaintiff  did  not  appear  in
time.8

A few  days  previous  to  Miller’s  arrest,  a warrant  in  behalf  of
the  plaintiff  (Johns)  was  issued  by  a Justice  of  the  Peace  residing
in  Le  Roy  against  Miller  and  John  Davids,  his  partner  in  the  print-
ing office,  for  the  purpose  of  collecting  money  before  then  ad-
vanced by  Johns  in  the  prosecution  of  their  undertaking.  The
officer  in  whose  hands  the  warrant  was  placed  for  execution  was  a
constable  of  the  town  of  Stafford,  who,  having  learned  that  the  office
of  Miller  was  strictly  guarded,  and  that  he  was  fully  determined  to
resist  all  attempts  to  serve  any  process  upon  him,  engaged  a num-
ber of  assistants.  On  September  12th  he  and  his  posse,  who  were
followed  by  a large  number  of  people,  went  to  Batavia  to  make  the
arrest.  So  many  strangers,  without  any  ostensible  business,  making
their  appearance  in  Batavia,  aroused  the  most  fearful  apprehension
among  the  citizens.  Miller  received  a note  early  in  the  morning
from  some  unknown  person  that  an  effort  would  be  made  to  take
by  force  the  papers  intended  for  publication.  He  showed  this  note
to  a few  of  the  citizens  of  the  town,  some  of  whom  were  Masons,
and  asked  their  opinion.  They  advised  him  to  look  upon  the  mat-
ter as  idle  rumor,  as  to  attempt  such  a measure  was  impracticable
and  foolish.  So  many  unknown  persons,  however,  suddenly  mak-
ing their  presence  known,  and  as  if  by  concert,  those  who  had  ad-
vised him  to  take  no  notice  of  the  warning  received  by  Miller  be-

1 H.  Brown’s  “ Narrative,  Batavia.  New  York,  1829,”  P-  54*

2 Ibid.,  p.  56.

i68o

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

gan  to  fear  that  it  was  indeed  a preconcerted  plan  to  carry  out  the
intention  of  obtaining,  by  violence  if  necessary,  the  aforesaid  papers.
The  magistrates  were  all  absent  from  the  village,  and  this  also  in-
creased the  suspicions.  Very  soon  a number  of  the  citizens,  Masons
as  well  as  others,  offered  their  services  to  prevent  any  violence.
Morgan  had  gone  from  Batavia  the  day  before  this  in  the  charge  of
an  officer,  but  no  news  of  him  had  yet  been  received.  Consterna-
tion and  apprehension  pervaded  that  small  community,  but  as  noth-
ing further  transpired,  order  and  quietness  soon  prevailed.  Soon
after  this  the  constable,  with  a single  individual  accompanying  him,
went  to  the  office  to  arrest  Miller  and  Davids  with  a civil  process.
The  office  was  fortified  by  “ two  swivels,”  fifteen  or  more  guns,  and
six  pistols,  all  being  loaded,  but  was  at  that  time  undefended,  except
by  Miller,  Davids,  and  a son  of  Miller.

The  assistant  arrested  Davids,  who  called  for  a pistol  ; the  con-
stable arrested  Miller.  Both  of  them  submitted  and  were  carried
through  an  armed  crowd  of  their  friends  to  a tavern  across  the
street.  A very  large  number  of  persons,  nearly  fifty,  were  there
assembled.  They  gave  no  sign  of  any  hostility  whatever,  and  in  con-
versation with  others  showed  that  no  intention  on  their  part  existed
of  any  violence  or  wrong.  Subsequent  disclosures,  however,  clearly
showed  that  in  the  minds  at  least  of  a few  an  intention  had  existed
of  obtaining  possession  of  the  “ papers  ” by  force  if  necessary.  Those
Masons  in  Batavia  to  whom  this  design  had  been  communicated
severely  condemned  such  intention,  which  was  conceived  in  folly
and  would  be  fraught  with  mischief  and  ruinous  in  consequences.
These  views  having  been  communicated  to  the  leaders,  the  whole
scheme  was  abandoned.  The  absence  of  the  justices  was  caused
by  their  being  subpoenaed  as  witnesses  in  a trial  at  Bethany  on
that  day.1

From  the  evidence  produced  it  was  clearly  shown  that  certain
indiscreet  and  overzealous  Masons  did  inaugurate  a scheme  to  get
rid  of  Morgan  and  prevent  the  publication  of  his  pretended  “ex-
posure.” He  was  conveyed  out  of  the  State,  by-his  own  consent,
from  a fear  that  someone  would  murder  him.  A promise  was  made
to  take  care  of  his  wife  and  children,  and  with  $500  in  hand  he  was
taken  into  Canada.  There  were  a great  many  incidents  connected

1 The  above  account  is  condensed  from  Brown’s  “ Narrative,”  pp.  51-55.

THE  ANTI-MASONIC  EXCITEMENT  1681

with  the  expedition  to  transport  him  out  of  the  State,  which  we
deem  it  unnecessary  to  mention  in  detail.

This  affair  created  wonderful  excitement  in  all  the  New  Eng-
land States  and  in  New  York  and  Pennsylvania,  among  the  Masons
particularly  ; it  extended,  in  a milder  form,  southwardly,  and  reached
as  far  as  the  District  of  Columbia,  but  its  effects,  morally  and  po-
litically, south  of  the  famous  historical  “ line  of  Mason  and  Dixon,”
was  very  slight  indeed.  In  New  York,  Pennsylvania,  and  Ver-
mont, however,  the  loyal  members  of  the  Craft  sustained  their  in-
tegrity against  political,  religious,  and  social  persecutions.  A new
political  party  was  organized,  and  that  party  made  a national  issue
at  the  next  presidential  canvass  in  1832,  and  William  Wirt  was  their
candidate  for  the  office  of  Chief  Magistrate,  and  the  canvass  re-
sulted in  his  receiving  the  electoral  vote  of  Vermont,  the  only  State
to  cast  their  votes  for  him.  We  are  glad  to  announce  that  when
Masonry  again  revived  and  came  forth  from  that  terrible  time  of
persecution,  under  the  leadership  of  that  grand  and  magnanimous
M an,  Philip  C.  Tucker,  as  we  have  shown  in  preceding  chapters,  he
brought  order  out  of  confusion  and  re-established  Masonry  in  all  its
branches.  At  the  present  day  there  can  not  be  found  more  enthu-
siastic Masons  in  any  State  of  our  Union,  than  now  exist  in  the
Green  Mountain  State.

The  official  examinations  of  parties  who  were  directly  or  re-
motely connected  with  the  abduction  of  Morgan,  aroused  and  con-
tinued to  excite  the  sentiments  of  hostility  to  the  Masonic  Institu-
tion ; it  was  once  well  said  that  the  “ fice-dog  always  barks  at  what
he  does  not  understand,”  so  with  that  similar  class  in  every  com-
munity, they  are  always  ready  and  constantly  seeking  opportunities
to  oppose  what  is  beyond  their  limited  comprehension.  Charges
were  constantly  found  against  those  Masons  who  were  suspected  of
any  complicity  in  those  affairs,  and  suits  were  brought  against  them
for  several  years.  Among  those  who  were  arrested  and  imprisoned
was  Eli  Bruce.  From  1827  to  1831  there  was  always  some  one  or
more  confined  in  the  jail  at  Canandaigua.

Eli  Bruce  was  charged  with  the  abduction  of  Morgan,  and  was
acquitted,  for  it  was  not  proved  that  anyone  had  been  abducted.  De
Witt  Clinton  was  then  Governor  of  New  York,  as  well  as  one  of
the  most  prominent  and  distinguished  Masons  in  the  United  States,
and  was  of  course  eminently  desirous  of  ascertaining  the  truth  in  all
106

1682

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

these  matters.  He  formulated  certain  questions  to  Eli  Bruce,  who
was  the  High  Sheriff  of  the  County,  as  to  his  agency  in  these  mat-
ters : Bruce  declined  to  answer  them  and  he  was  promptly  removed
from  his  office.  Governor  Clinton,  it  is  well  known,  both  in  his
private  and  public  utterances,  condemned  the  whole  transaction  of
the  removal  of  Morgan.  The  official  account  of  Bruce’s  trial  shows
that  complaint  was  made  to  the  Governor,  and  Bruce  was  summoned
to  Albany  in  answer  to  the  charges  and  show  cause  why  he  should
not  be  removed.  The  reply  by  his  counsel  did  not  satisfy  the  Gov-
ernor, and  he  was  tried  in  the  court  at  Canandaigua,  in  August,

1828.  He  was  convicted  and  sentenced  to  twenty-eight  months  in
jail.  The  execution  of  the  sentence  was  postponed  until  May  13,

1829,  upon  his  appeal,  but  on  May  20,  1829,  he  was  imprisoned
until  September  23,  1831.  The  evidence  at  the  trial  showed  that
Bruce  understood  that  Morgan  voluntarily  consented  to  his  removal
and  that  a cell  at  Lockport  was  prepared  for  him  until  he  could  be
carried  to  Canada.  Heat  first  declined  to  have  anything  to  do  with
the  affair,  but  at  last  gave  in,  and,  with  the  others,  conveyed  Mor-
gan over  the  river  to  Canada.  Matters  having  been  delayed  for
Morgan’s  removal,  be  was  reconveyed  to  the  State  and  concealed
in  the  old  magazine  at  Fort  Niagara,  until  the  time  was  suitable  for
his  conveyance  to  the  farm  provided  for  him  in  Canada.  From  that
time  Morgan,  it  appears,  was  never  seen  by  anyone,  and  Bruce  tes-
tified that  he  did  not  know  when  or  how  he  disappeared.

Other  parties  were  implicated,  and  upon  trial  of  each,  they  were
punished  by  imprisonment.

The  anti-Masonic  spirit  was  not  satisfied  with  the  punishment
of  those  immediately  concerned  in  this  nefarious  transaction.  Many
conventions  were  held,  and  self-constituted  Missionaries  sprang  up,
like  toad-stools  in  a night,  and  scattered  their  venomous  seed  broad-
cast, and  found  favorable  soil,  in  the  debased  condition  of  many
polluted  minds,  in  which  to  foster  these  seeds  of  opposition  to  an
Institution  which,  in  all  its  principles  and  daily  practices,  had
demonstrated  its  utter  abhorrence  to  any  such  .transactions  as  the
Morgan  affair,  and  also  as  being  subversive  of  public  order,  private
human  rights,  and  the  clearly  enunciated  precepts  of  Masonry —
whose  Theological  virtues  are  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity,  whose  car-
dinal virtues  are  Temperance,  Prudence,  Fortitude,  and  Justice,
whose  principal  Tenets  are  Brotherly  Love,  Relief,  and  Truth.

THE  ANTI-MASONIC  EXCITEMENT  1683

A convention  of  delegates  from  several  Baptist  churches  was
held  at  Le  Roy,  N.  Y.,  January,  1827,  and

“ Resolved , That  all  such  members  as  belong  to  Baptist  churches
and  who  also  belong  to  the  Society  of  Freemasons,  be  requested  to
renounce  publicly  all  communication  with  that  order,  and  if  the  re-
quest is  not  complied  with  in  a reasonable  time,  to  excommunicate
all  those  who  neglect  to  do  so.”  If  the  present  writer  be  permitted
to  publicly  express  his  private  opinion,  it  would  be,  that  all  such
loyal  members  who  refused  to  comply  with  so  outrageous  a resolu-
tion would,  after  the  “ excommunication,”  be  immediately  received
into  the  church  of  an  all  merciful  Savior,  and  welcomed  out  of  so
bigoted  and  benighted  a congregation  ; as  time  has  subsequently
proved  they  were.

At  the  famous  Lewiston  Convention  they  published  the  fol-
lowing discoveries  :

1.  That  the  unhappy  Morgan  was  taken  to  Newark,  Upper
Canada,  gagged,'  bound,  and  blindfolded.

2.  That  he  was  then  offered  to  the  British  Masons  of  that  place,
with  the  request  that  they  should  get  him  on  board  a British  Man-of-
War  or  turn  him  over  to  Brandt,  the  Indian  Chief  and  a Mason,  to
be  executed  with  savage  cruelty.

3.  That  the  Newark  Lodge  assembled  on  this  proposition,  and
sent  for  Brandt,  who  came  accordingly.

4.  Brandt  proved  himself  too  noble  of  nature  to  have  anything
to  do  with  so  cowardly,  inhuman,  and  wicked  a transaction.  The
savage  hero  disdained  to  do  that  which  cowardly  white  monsters
urged  him  to  do.

5.  The  Newark  Masons,  thus  rebuked  by  savage  justice  and
magnanimity,  likewise  finally  declined  to  take  charge  of  the  miser
able  victim.

6.  The  diabolical  wretches,  who  had  him  in  custody,  brought
him  back  as  far  as  Fort  Niagara,  and  then  murdered  him  in  cold
blood,  cutting  his  throat  from  ear  to  ear,  cutting  out  his  tongue,
and  burying  him  in  the  sand,  and  concluding  the  hellish  rites  by
sinking  the  body  in  the  lake.

Brandt  denied  the  charge  so  far  as  it  related  to  him,  “ false  in
one,  false  in  all."  The  6th  is  a clincher  for  mendacity — the  whole
statement  is  contrary  to  all  the  legal  testimony  in  the  case,  and  does
not  tally  with  a subsequent  account  of  finding  Morgan’s  body  in

1684

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

the  Niagara  River,  but  was  put  forth  by  the  political  party  of  the
day  ; and  when  Thurlow  Weed  was  told  that  it  did  not  prove  to  be
Morgan’s  body,  he  said  very  pertinently,  “ It’s  good  enough  Mor-
gan till  after  election.”

September  11,  1S30,  a convention  was  held  in  Philadelphia.  A
committee  reported  an  address,  stating  that  Morgan  was  murdered
notwithstanding  that  in  all  the  legal  proceedings  there  was  not  a
single  witness  to  prove  that  Morgan  was  murdered.  This  address,
however,  demanded  the  suppression  of  the  Institution  of  Masonry.

The  following  extract  will  show  the  spirit  which  prevailed  :

“To  this  government  Freemasonry  is  wholly  opposed.  It  re-
quires submission  to  its  own  authority  in  contempt  of  public  opin-
ion, the  claim  of  conscience,  and  the  rights  of  private  judgment.  It
would  dam  up  the  majestic  currents  of  improving  thought,  among
all  its  subjects  throughout  the  earth,  by  restricting  beneficial  com-
munication. In  attempting  to  do  this  it  has  stained  our  country
with  a brother’s  blood,  tempted  many  of  our  influential  citizens  into
the  most  degraded  forms  of  falsehood,  and  burst  away  with  its
powers  undiminished,  its  vengeance  provoked,  and  its  pollution
manifest,  from  the  strong  arm  of  retributive  justice.  The  means  of
overthrowing  Masonry  cannot  be  found  in  any,  or  in  all  our  execu-
tive authorities.  They  cannot  be  found  in  our  judicial  establish-
ment.

“ The  only  adequate  corrective  of  Freemasonry — that  prolific
source  of  the  worst  abuses  is  to  be  found  in  the  right  of  election,
and  to  this  we  must  resort.

“ There  is  therefore  no  impropriety  in  resorting  to  the  elective
franchise  to  correct  the  evils  of  Freemasonry.

“ It,  Freemasonry,  ought  to  be  abolished  ; it  should  certainly
be  so  abolished  as  to  prevent  its  restoration.  No  means  of  doing
this  can  be  conceived  so  competent  as  those  furnished  by  the  ballot
boxes.”  We  here  see  what  prejudice,  ignorance  of  the  subject,  and
a spirit  of  persecution  can  effect  upon  the  minds  of  men,  when
prompted  by  ambition  for  public  office.  The  first  paragraph  is  a
long  tissue  of  falsehoods,  as  time  proved  those  utterances  to  have
been  ; not  a sentence  was  predicated  upon  a single  fact  which  had
been  or  could  be  proven.  Every  Mason  will  at  once  declare  that
every  charge  made  in  that  address  was  maliciously  false  and  mis«
leading.

THE  ANTI-MASONIC  EXCITEMENT

1685

In  1836  a National  Convention  of  anti-Masons  was  held  in
Philadelphia  and  nominated  William  H.  Harrison  for  President,
and  Francis  Granger  for  Vice-President,  and  this  ended  the  polit-
ical influence  of  that  party.

The  writer  of  this  article  was  old  enough  to  remember  that  con-
test and  the  prominent  actors  therein.  Their  failure  at  that  time
did  not  dishearten  most  of  the  leaders,  as  very  soon  thereafter  they
became  prominent  leaders  of  the  newly  organized  Anti-Slavery
party,  a subject  with  which  we  have  nothing  to  do  whatever.

All  the  Grand  Lodges  within  the  States  affected  by  this  unto-
ward anti-Masonic  persecution,  passed  such  resolutions  as  to,  and  did,
satisfy  most  people,  that  Masonry  as  an  institution  had  nothing  to
do  with  the  Morgan  affair,  but  condemned  the  injudicious  and  unau-
thorized individuals  who  were  participants,  nor  made  any  efforts  to
screen  them  from  merited  justice  ; nevertheless,  the  persecution  of
individuals  continued,  and  many  who  were  socially  so  situated  as  to
render  their  lives  unbearable,  surrendered  their  memberships  and
withdrew  from  the  Institution.  At  length,  in  some  of  these  States,
particularly  in  Vermont,  the  lodges  and  other  bodies  ceased  to  hold
their  meetings,  as  has  been  shown  in  our  different  histories  of  those
bodies.

In  1840  there  were  signs  of  renewal  of  activities  in  Masonic
affairs ; thirteen  years  of  persecution  had  passed  and  there  came  a
revival.

We  learn  from  the  authorities  in  New  York  that  the  lodge  at
Le  Roy,  Olive  Branch,  No.  39,  never  ceased  its  meetings,  although
located  in  the  immediate  neighborhood  of  the  place  where  the
whole  difficulty  originated,  and  is  considered  as  the  preserver  of
Masonry  in  Western  New  York  during  all  those  years  of  persecu-
tion and  excitement.

Governor  Clinton  wrote  to  the  Governors  of  Upper  and  Lower
Canada  asking  that  inquiry  be  made  in  regard  to  Morgan,  and  said
in  his  letters :

“ During  the  last  year  he  (Morgan)  put  a manuscript  into  the
hands  of  a printer  at  Batavia,  purporting  to  be  a promulgation  of
the  secrets  of  Freemasonry.  This  was  passed  over  by  the  great
body  of  the  Fraternity  without  notice  and  silent  contempt ; but  a
few  desperate  fanatics  engaged  in  a plan  of  carrying  him  off,  and
on  the  1 2th  of  September  last  (1826)  they  took  him  from  Canan-

1 686

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

daigua  by  force,  as  it  is  understood,1  and  conveyed  him  to  the
Niagara  River,  from  which  it  is  supposed  that  he  was  taken  to  his
Britannic  Majesty’s  dominions.  Some  of  the  offenders  have  been
apprehended  and  punished  ; but  no  intelligence  has  been  obtained
respecting  Morgan  since  his  abduction.”

In  response  to  this  request  of  Governor  Clinton,  the  Lieutenant-
Governor  of  Upper  Canada  issued  his  proclamation  :

“ ^50  Reward. — His  Excellency  the  Lieutenant-Governor  hav-
ing received  a communication  from  His  Excellency  the  Governor  of
the  State  of  New  York,  by  which  it  appears  that  William  Mor-
gan, who  some  years  ago  exercised  the  calling  of  a brewer  in  this
place,  and  who  has  recently  resided  in  Canandaigua,  in  the  State
of  New  York,  was  some  time  in  the  last  year  conveyed  by  force
from  that  place,  and  is  supposed  to  be  forcibly  detained  in  some
part  of  this  Province ; any  person  who  may  be  able  to  offer  any  in-
formation respecting  the  said  William  Morgan,  shall,  upon  com-
municating the  same  to  the  Private  Secretary  of  His  Excellency
the  Lieutenant-Governor,  receive  the  reward  above  offered.
“Government  House,  January  31,  i827.”a
The  Grand  Lodge  of  New  York  adopted  the  following  :

“ Whereas , It  is  alleged  that  an  outrage  has  been  committed  on
the  body  of  William  Morgan,  and

“ Whereas,  Proceedings  in  consequence  of  such  allegations  have
been  made  in  Courts  of  Justice  in  relation  to  the  subject,  and

“ Whereas,  By  reason  of  foul  misrepresentation  an  effort  has  been
made  to  impress  the  public  mind  with  an  opinion  that  the  Grand
Lodge  and  the  Fraternity  in  general  have  attempted  to  screen,  if  not
to  protect,  the  perpetrators  of  this  alleged  outrage  ; therefore  be  it
“ Resolved,  That  the  Grand  Secretary  be  instructed  to  ascertain
from  the  public  record  a statement  of  the  facts  in  relation  to  the
persons  said  to  have  been  Masons,  charged  and  convicted  of  the
abduction  of  Morgan,3  and  report  to  this  Grand  Lodge  at  its  next
annual  communication.”

A supplemental  report  was  adopted  (June  2,  1832)  : 4
“ That  participating  with  the  members  of  this  Grand  Lodge,
and  the  Great  Body  of  the  Masonic  Fraternity,  in  a feeling  of  deep

1 The  weight  of  evidence  was  that  he  went  voluntarily. — Editor.

History  of  Masonry  and  Concordant  Orders,”  p.  516.
s<‘  History  of  Grand  Lodge  of  New  York,”  vol.  iii.,  p.  2.

4 Ibid.

THE  ANTI-MASONIC  EXCITEMENT

168;

abhorrence  of  the  outrage,  which  was  a violation  alike  of  Masonic
obligation  and  the  law  of  the  land,  they  (the  Committee)  have
examined  the  papers  submitted  thereto  with  that  attention  which
the  importance  cf  the  subject  demands.

•‘The  voluminous  nature  of  the  papers  presented  and  the  short-
ness of  the  time  have,  however,  prevented  them  from  investigating
the  subject  as  fully  as  they  would  desire,  and  further  time  was  asked
m which  to  formulate  a report.”

At  the  communication  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New  York  heid
March  7,  1832,  Mordecai  Meyers  presiding,  twelve  experienced  and
capable  members  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  together  with  the  Grand
Officers,  were  appointed  to  visit  all  the  Lodges  in  the  City  of  New
York,  Brooklyn,  and  Staten  Island,  to  arouse  them  to  a sense  of
their  duty,  instruct  the  officers  of  said  lodges  in  their  work,  to
advise  and  encourage  them  to  a strict  adherence  to  the  Constitution
and  Regulation  of  this  Grand  Lodge,  and  to  inspect  their  books.

Extracts  from  the  “ Proceedings  of  the  Triennial  Session  of
the  Grand  Encampment  of  Knights  Templars  for  the  United  States
of  America  assembled  at  the  Asylum  in  Masonic  Temple,  in  the
City  of  Baltimore,  in  the  State  of  Maryland,  on  Tuesday,  the  19th
of  September,  a.d.  1871  a.o.  753.”

“ Grand  Master  Gardner  then  read  the  following  Address  :

“ Knights,  Companions  : On  Thursday,  the  29th  of  November,
1832,  fourteen  bold  and  valiant  Knights  assembled  in  the  Masonic
Temple  in  this  city,  and  proceeded  to  open  the  General  Grand  En-
campment of  the  United  States.  The  Rev.  Sir  Jonathan  Nye,  of
New  Hampshire,  presided  over  the  deliberations,  and  welcomed  his
associates  by  an  affectionate  and  fraternal  address.  The  illustrious
Sir  James  Herring,  of  New  York,  recorded  the  proceedings;  while
the  venerable  Prelate,  Rev.  Sir  Paul  Dean,  of  Massachusetts,  im-
plored the  blessings  of  heaven  upon  the  brave  Knights  and  their
doings.  Of  these  fourteen  good  men,  and  true,  two  were  from
New  Hampshire,  five  from  the  jurisdiction  of  Massachusetts  and
Rhode  Island,  one  from  Connecticut,  two  from  New  York,  one
from  Maryland,  and  three  from  the  District  of  Columbia.

1688

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

“The  General  Grand  Chapter  met  at  the  same  time  in  Baltimore,
that  distinguished  man  and  Mason,  Edward  Livingston,  of  Louis-
iana, being  its  presiding  officer.  He  was  re-elected  to  the  high
office  which  he  had  so  honorably  filled  for  the  preceding  three
years.

“No  session  of  the  National  Grand  Bodies,  held  before  or  since
that  time,  has  so  attracted  public  attention  as  did  this  of  1832.
John  Quincy  Adams,  ex-President  of  the  United  States,  did  not
consider  this  meeting  of  a mere  handful  of  men  in  Baltimore
beneath  his  notice,  or  unworthy  the  abuse  of  his  caustic  pen  ; and
page  after  page  of  his  letters,  then  published  in  the  newspapers  of
the  day,  since  collected  into  a volume,  attest  the  interest  which  that
meeting  occasioned.

“ The  period  was  indeed  a peculiar  one.  For  six  years  the  ex-
citement and  frenzy  of  anti-Masonry  had  been  gathering  strength
and  fury,  until  at  last,  in  a national  convention  of  anti-Masons  held
here  in  the  City  of  Baltimore,  candidates  were  nominated  for  the
two  highest  offices  of  the  Republic.  The  election  took  place  in
1832,  and  William  Wirt,  of  Maryland,  and  Amos  Ellmaker,  of
Pennsylvania,  the  nominees  of  the  anti-Masonic,  political  party  for
President  and  Vice-President,  received  the  seven  electoral  votes  of
Vermont,  and  no  more.  The  power  of  anti-Masonry  culminated
in  1832  ; and  when  the  General  Grand  Encampment  assembled
here,  in  the  waning  days  of  autumn,  and  found  the  fires  around
which  the  national  Council  of  anti-Masons  had  been  held,  and  read
by  their  uncertain  and  unsteady  light  the  strength  and  weakness  of
Anti-masonry  in  the  Union,  they  knew  that  the  battle  had  been
fought,  and  that  the  night  of  agony  was  over.  The  hate  and  bitter-
ness and  fiendish  hostility  they  knew  would  still  remain — powerful
in  localities  to  infinite  harm — but  the  Nation  had  repudiated  anti-
Masonry,  and  had  elected,  as  President,  Andrew  Jackson,  an
acknowledged,  out-spoken,  well-known  Freemason  ; so  well  known
that  on  the  23d  of  May,  1833,  John  Quincy  Adams,  in  a published
letter  to  Edward  Livingston,  then  Secretary  of  State,  paid  a merited
compliment  to  the  Past  Grand  Master  of  Tennessee,  in  words  in-
tended to  be  severe  and  censurable.

“ ‘ The  President  of  the  United  States,’  said  Adams,  ‘ is  a Brother
of  the  Craft,  bound  by  its  oaths,  obligations,  and  penalties,  to  the
exclusive  favors,  be  they  more  or  less,  of  which  they  give  the

THE  ANTI-MASONIC  EXCITEMENT

1689

mutual  pledge.  That  in  the  troubles  and  difficulties  which,  within
the  last  seven  years,  have  befallen  the  craft,  they  have  availed  them-
selves of  his  name,  and  authority,  and  influence,  to  sustain  their
drooping  fortunes,  as  far  as  it  has  been  in  their  power,  has  been
matter  of  public  notoriety.  A sense  of  justice  has  restrained  him
from  joining  in  their  processions,  as  he  has  been  importunately
urged  by  invitations  to  do,  but  he  has  not  withheld  from  them  his
support.’  ”

Almost  forty  years  have  passed  away  since  the  National  Grand
Bodies  assembled  in  Triennial  Session  in  the  City  of  Baltimore.
Behold  the  change ! Those  fourteen  brave  Knights  have  gone  to
their  reward  — not  one  of  them  now  lives  to  rejoice  at  this  tri-
umphant return  to  Baltimore.  They  sleep  peacefully  and  serenely
the  last  great  sleep  : peace  to  their  ashes ; honor  to  their  names.
The  railroad  and  telegraph  now  traverse  populous  States,  then
scarcely  known.  The  Union  stretches  from  ocean  to  ocean,  and
holds  in  its  fast  embrace  great  States,  whose  territory  was  then
unexplored.

From  all  parts  of  this  wide  extended  country — from  the  Atlantic
and  the  Pacific — from  the  great  rivers,  with  their  fertile  valleys —
from  the  mountain  ranges,  with  their  verdant  slopes  — from  the
rugged  North  and  the  sunny  South — from  the  great  West,  whither  the
star  of  empire  is  taking  its  course,  and  from  the  sea-girt  populous
East — come  up  here  to  Baltimore  to  this  Eighteenth  Triennial
Session  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States,  in  com-
panies, in  battalions,  in  regiments,  thousands  of  true  Knights,  bear-
ing the  banners  of  the  Cross,  living  witnesses  of  the  truth  of  the
resolutions  passed  by  the  General  Grand  Encampment  in  1832,  that
“ Political  Parties,  in  assailing  the  orders  of  Knighthood,  aim  a blow
at  all  the  free  institutions  of  the  country.”

The  institution  which,  in  1832,  was  abused  and  maligned,  its
members  insulted  and  degraded,  and  which  could  then  gather  in  its
National  Convention  but  fourteen  tried  souls,  has  survived  the
abuse,  the  malignity,  the  insults,  and  degradation,  and  stands  before
you  to-day  in  its  wisdom,  strength,  and  beauty.

In  1832  those  fourteen  Knights  did  not  disturb  the  usual  tran-
quillity of  Baltimore,  and  their  presence  here  was  unrecognized.
Quiet  in  demeanor,  unobtrusive  in  manner,  they  came  with  a firm
determination  to  fully  perform  their  devoirs  to  Temple  Masonry.

1690

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

In  1871  the  authorities  of  Baltimore,  with  a liberality  of  senti-
ment and  a heartiness  of  greeting  which  will  be  gratefully  appre-
ciated by  every  Templar  of  the  United  States,  welcome  us  as  guests
of  their  municipality.  The  Templar  Knights  throng  the  city — its
houses,  streets,  and  squares,  and  are  received  by  brethren  and  citi-
zens with  a warmth  of  fraternal,  generous  hospitality,  unbounded
atj'i  cathoFc  as  the  principles  of  Freemasonry.

CHAPTER  I

SYMBOLISM  OF  FREEMASONRY

Introduction.

HE  study  of  Symbols  is  so  closely  interwoven
with  Language  that  it  is  essentially  necessary,  in
a treatise  on  Symbology,  that  we  should  begin
with  an  examination  into  the  Origin  of  language
itself ; for  it  is  to  be  presumed  that  language,  or
rather  speech,  was  the  very  first  effort  of  man  to
make  his  wishes  known  to  his  fellow-man.  The
habitual  use  of  certain  words,  applied  to  the  same  objects,  produced
the  primitive  language.

We  shall  not  attempt  to  follow  those  who  have  supposed  that
ianguage  was  derived  from  certain  inorganic  sounds  predicated  upon
the  “utterances  of  Animals,”  called  “Bow-Wow”  theory  by  Max
Mailer  and  others.  Now  we  must  remember  that  it  has  been  clearly
proven  by  distinguished  philologists  that  “ the  whole  of  what  we  call
the  human  mind  is  realized  in  language,  and  in  language  only.  Our
next  task  would  be  to  try  to  discover  the  constituent  elements  of
language,  and  watch,  in  their  development,  the  true  historical  devel-
opment of  the  human  mind.”1  It  becomes  requisite  in  order  fully
to  understand  “ symbolisms,”  as  applied  to  the  Ancient  Mysteries,
the  Religions  of  the  World,  and  also  to  Speculative  Masonry,  that
we  should  be  more  particular  in  tracing  the  genealogy  of  language,
from  its  very  commencement,  so  far  as  it  is  possible  to  do  so,  by
consulting  the  works  of  those  distinguished  writers  of  the  present
century,  and  more  particularly  within  the  last  quarter  of  the  century
now  about  to  close ; and  inasmuch  as  on  this  particular  subject  of
language  there  is  intimately  associated  that  of  the  mind,  which
means  “thought”  and  which,  again,  means  “combination,”  no  bet-
ter work  can  possibly  be  referred  to  than  the  Science  of  Thought , by

1 Max  Muller,  “ Science  of  Thought,”  vol.  i.,  p.  176.
1693

1 694

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Max  Muller  in  his  recent  two  volumes,  which  we  may  constantly
quote  from  wherever  in  that  work  we  find  that  his  authority  will
confirm  our  own  ideas.

Muller  is  strictly  a “scientist”  in  whatever  line  of  thought  he
enters  for  examination,  and  upon  this  very  subject  he  has  shown  the
manner  in  which  we  may  attain  the  truth,  viz.,  by  the  “ Constituent
Elements  of  Thought,”  “Thought  and  Language,”  “Constituent
Elements  of  Language,”  the  “ Origin  of  Concepts  and  Roots.”

In  the  proper  examination  of  any  individual  subject-matter  the
only  true  method  of  examination  is  by  analysis  ; hence  Muller  does
analyze,  so  as  to  show  each  and  every  element  which  enters  into  the
composition  of  language.  He  says  :

“ Few  words  have  been  used  in  so  many  different  senses  as
Thought.  I mean  by  Thought  the  act  of  thinking,  and  by  thinking
I mean  no  more  than  combining.  I do  not  pretend  that  others  have
not  the  right  of  using  Thought  in  any  sense  which  they  prefer,  pro-
vided only  that  they  will  clearly  define  it.  I only  wish  to  explain
what  is  the  meaning  in  which  I intend  to  use  the  word,  and  in  which
I hold  it  outfit  to  be  used.  ‘ I think  ’ means  to  me  the  same  as  the
Latin  Cogito,  namely  Co-agito , ‘ I bring  together,’  only  with  the  pro-
viso, that  bringing  together  or  combining  implies  separating,  for  we
cannot  combine  two  or  many  things  without  at  the  same  time  sepa-
rating them  from  all  the  rest.  Hobbes  expressed  the  same  truth
long  ago  when  he  said  ‘that  all  our  thinking  consisted  in  addition
and  subtraction.’  ”

“ Humiliating  as  this  may  at  first  sight  appear,  it  is  really  not
more  so  than  that  the  most  subtle  and  complicated  mathematical
processes,  which  to  the  uninitiated  seem  beyond  all  comprehension,
can  be  reduced  in  the  end  to  addition  and  subtraction.

“ Thinking  may  not  seem  so  marvellous  an  achievement  as  we
formerly  imagined  when  we  look  up  with  vague  admiration  to  the
Mathematical  Calculations  of  New'ton,  or  to  the  Metaphysical
Speculations  of  Kant ; yet  if  what  these  thinkers  achieved  has  been
achieved  by  such  simple  processes  as  addition  and  subtraction,  com-
bining and  separating,  their  work  to  the  mind  becomes  in  reality
far  more  marvellous  than  it  appeared  at  first.  Much,  however,  de
pends  on  what  we  combine  and  separate,  and  we  have  therefore  to
consider  what  corresponds  in  thinking  to  the  numbers  with  which
the  mathematician  operates,  what  are,  in  fact,  the  known  quantities

SYMBOLISM  OF  FREEMASONRY  1695

that  constitute  the  material  of  our  thoughts,  what  are  the  elements
which  we  bring  together  or  co-agitate.”

Muller  then  proceeds  to  distinguish  in  our  knowledge  four  things  :
“Sensations,  Percepts,  Concepts,  and  Names,  and,  while  we  can  dis-
tinguish these,  we  must  not  suppose  that  they  ever  exist  as  separate
entities;  for  no  words  are  possible  without  concepts,  nor  can  there
be  concepts  without  percepts,  nor  percepts  without  sensations.  If
we  postulate  sensations  as  the  causes  of  percepts,  percepts  as  the
causes  of  concepts,  and  concepts  as  the  causes  of  names,  it  would
seem  a very  natural  conclusion  that  sensations  could  exist  previous
to  and  therefore  independent  of  percepts,  percepts  of  concepts,  con-
cepts of  words.  And  yet  we  have  only  to  try  the  experiment  in
order  to  convince  ourselves  that,  as  a matter  of  fact,  thought,  in  the
usual  sense  of  the  word,  is  utterly  impossible  without  the  simulta-
neous working  of  sensations,  percepts,  concepts,  and  names,  and  that
in  reality  the  four  are  inseparable.”

With  these  fundamental  principles  thus  clearly  laid  down  by
Muller,  we  may  discover  how,  at  the  earliest  period  in  man’s  history,
he  very  soon  found  a name  for  every  fact  which  was  presented  to
his  observation.  We  shall  follow  the  Author  in  his  most  interesting
and  conclusive  arguments  to  prove  the  position  which  he  has  taken.
The  service  of  language  is  to  convey  our  thoughts  to  one  another.

There  are  various  ways  in  which  men  can  communicate  with  one
another — by  gestures,  cries,  words  ; make  pictures  to  represent  their
ideas,  characters  or  letters.  These  are  signs,  and  in  order  to  under-
stand in  what  manner  they  operate  we  must  commence  with  such
signs  as  are  the  most  natural  and  simple.  When  parties  meet  who
speak  different  languages  they  endeavor  to  make  themselves  under-
stood bv  gestures  which  would  most  naturally  indicate  the  idea
wished  to  be  conveyed :

“This  is  the  gesture-language,  as  we  all  know  how  to  use  it.
But  to  see  what  a full  and  exact  means  of  Communication  it  may
be  worked  up  to,  it  should  be  watched  in  use  among  the  deaf  and
dumb,  who  have  to  depend  so  much  upon  it.  To  give  an  idea  how
far  gestures  can  be  made  to  do  the  work  of  spoken  words,  the  signs
may  be  described  in  which  a deaf-and-dumb  man  once  told  a child’s
story  in  presence  of  the  writer.  He  began  by  moving  his  hand,
palm  down,  about  a yard  from  the  ground,  as  we  do  to  show  the
height  of  a child — this  meant  it  was  a child  he  was  thinking  of.

1696

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Then  he  tied  an  imaginary  pair  of  bonnet-strings  under  his  chin
(his  usual  sign  for  female)  to  make  it  understood  that  the  child  was
a girl.  The  child’s  mother  was  then  brought  on  the  scene  in  a simi-
lar way.  She  beckons  to  the  child  and  gives  her  two-pence,  these
being  indicated  by  pretending  to  drop  two  coins  from  one  hand  into
the  other  ; if  there  had  been  any  doubt  as  to  whether  they  were  cop-
per or  silver  coins  this  would  have  been  settled  by  pointing  to  some-
thing brown  or  even  by  one’s  contemptuous  way  of  handling  coppers
which  at  once  distinguishes  them  from  silver.  The  mother  also  gives
the  child  a jar,  shown  by  sketching  its  shape  with  the  forefingers  in
the  air,  and  going  through  the  act  of  handing  it  over.  Then  by
imitating  the  unmistakable  kind  of  twist  with  which  one  turns  a
treacle-spoon,  it  is  made  known  that  it  is  treacle  the  child  is  to  buy.
Next,  a wave  of  the  hand  shows  the  child  being  sent  off  on  her
errand,  the  usual  sign  of  walking  being  added,  which  is  made  by
two  fingers  walking  on  the  table.  The  turning  of  an  imaginary
door-handle  now  takes  us  into  the  shop,  where  the  counter  is  shown
by  passing  the  flat  hands  as  it  were  over  it.  Behind  this  counter  a
figure  is  pointed  out ; he  is  shown  to  be  a man  by  the  usual  sign  of
putting  a hand  to  one’s  chin  and  drawing  it  down  where  the  beard  is
or  would  be ; then  the  sign  of  tying  an  apron  around  the  waist  adds
the  information  that  the  man  is  the  shopman.  To  him  the  child
gives  the  jar,  dropping  the  money  into  his  hand,  and  moving  her
forefinger  as  if  taking  up  treacle,  to  show  what  she  wants.  Then
we  see  the  jar  put  into  an  imaginary  pair  of  scales  which  go  up  and
down  ; the  great  treacle-jar  is  brought  from  the  shelf  and  the  little
jar  filled  with  the  proper  twist  to  take  up  the  last  trickling  thread  ;
the  grocer  puts  the  two  coins  in  the  till,  and  the  girl  sets  off  with
the  jar ; she  sees  a drop  of  treacle  on  the  rim,  wipes  it  off  with  her
finger,  and  puts  her  finger  in  her  mouth,  how  she  was  tempted  to
take  more,  how  her  mother  found  her  out  by  the  spot  of  treacle  on
her  pinafore,  etc.”

The  student  anxious  to  master  the  principles  of  language  will
find  this  gesture-talk  so  instructive  that  it  will  be  well  to  explain  its
workings  more  closely.  “The  signs  used  are  of  two  kinds.  In  the
first  kind,  things  actually  present  are  shown.  Thus,  if  the  deaf-mute
wants  to  mention  1 hand,’  or  ‘ shoe,’  he  touches  his  own  hand  or
shoe.  Where  a speaking  man  would  say  ‘ I,’  ‘ thou,’  ‘ he,’  the
deaf-mute  simply  points  to  himself  and  the  other  persons.  To  ex-

SYMBOLISM  OF  FREEMASONRY

1697

press  ‘red,’  or  ‘ blue,’  he  touches  the  inside  of  his  own  lip  or  points
to  the  sky.  In  the  second  kind  of  signs  ideas  are  conveyed  by  imi-
tations. Thus,  pretending  to  drink  may  mean  ‘water,’  or  ‘to
drink,’  or  ‘ thirsty.’  Laying  the  cheek  on  the  hand  expresses
‘sleep’  or  ‘bed-time.’  A significant  jerk  of  the  whip-hand  sug-
gests either  ‘whip’  or  ‘coachman,’  or  ‘to  drive,’  as  the  case  may
be.  A ‘ lucifer  ’ is  indicated  by  pretending  to  strike  a match,  and
‘ candle  ’ by  the  act  of  holding  up  the  forefinger  and  pretending  to
blow  it  out.  Also  in  the  gesture-language  the  symptoms  of  the
temper  one  is  in  may  be  imitated,  and  so  become  signs  of  the  same
temper  in  others.  Thus  the  act  of  shivering  becomes  an  expressive
sign  for  ‘cold’;  smiles  show  ‘joy,’  ‘approval,’  ‘goodness,’  while
frowns  show  ‘anger,’  ‘disapproval,’  ‘badness.’  It  might  seem
that  such  various  meanings  to  one  sign  would  be  confusing,  but
there  is  a way  of  correcting  this,  for  when  a single  sign  does  not
make  the  meaning  clear,  others  are  brought  in  to  supplement  it.
Thus,  if  one  wants  to  express  ‘ a pen,’  it  may  not  be  sufficient  to
pretend  to  write  with  one,  as  that  might  be  intended  for  ‘writing’
or  ‘letter’;  but  if  one  then  pretends  to  write  and  holds  up  a pen,
this  will  make  it  plain  that  the  pen  itself  is  meant.”

“ It  has  to  be  noticed  that  the  gesture-language  by  no  means
matches  sign  for  word  with  spoken  language.  One  reason  is  that  it
has  so  little  power  of  expressing  abstract  ideas.  The  deaf-mute  can
show  particular  ways  of  making  things,  such  as  building  a wall,  or
cutting  out  a coat,  but  it  is  quite  beyond  him  to  make  one  sign  in-
clude what  is  common  to  all  these,  as  we  use  the  abstract  term  to
‘make.’  Even  ‘in’  and  ‘out’  must  be  expressed  in  some  such
clumsy  way  as  by  pretending  to  put  the  thing  talked  of  in,  and  then  to
take  it  out.  Next  let  us  compare  an  English  sentence  with  the  sign
by  which  the  same  meaning  would  be  expressed  among  the  deaf  and
dumb.  It  will  at  once  be  seen  that  many  words  we  use  have  no
sign  at  all  corresponding  to  them.  Thus,  when  we  should  say  in
words,  ‘ The  hat  which  I left  on  the  table  is  black,’  this  statement
can  be  practically  conveyed  in  gestures,  and  there  will  be  signs  for
what  we  may  call  ‘real  ’ words,  such  as  hat , leave , black.  But  for
what  may  be  called  the  ‘ grammatical  ’ words,  the , which , is,  there
will  be  no  signs,  for  the  gesture-language  has  none.  Again,  gram-
mars lay  down  distinctions  between  substantives,  adjectives,  and
verbs.  But  these  distinctions  are  not  to  be  found  in  gesture-lan-

1698

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

guage,  where  pointing  to  a grass-plot  may  mean  ‘grass’  or  ‘green,’
and  pretending  to  warm  one’s  hands  may  suggest  ‘ warm  ’ or  to
warm  one’s  self,  or  even  ‘fire-place.’  Nor  (unless  where  artificial
signs  have  been  brought  in  by  teachers)  is  there  anything  in  the  gest-
ure-language to  correspond  with  the  inflection  of  words,  such  as  dis-
tinguish goest  from  go,  him  from  he,  domum  from  damns.  What  is
done  is  to  call  up  a picture  in  the  minds  of  the  spectators  by  first
setting  up  something  to  be  thought  about,  and  then  adding  to  or
acting  on  it,  till  the  whole  story  is  told.  If  the  signs  do  not  follow
in  such  order  as  to  carry  meanings  as  they  go,  the  looker-on  will  be
perplexed.  Thus,  in  conveying  to  a deaf-and-dumb  child  the  thought
of  a green  box,  one  must  make  a sign  for  ‘ box  ’ first,  and  then  show
as  by  pointing  to  grass  outside,  that  its  color  is  ‘green.’

“This  account  of  the  gesture-language  will  have  made  it  clear  to
the  reader  by  what  easy  and  reasonable  means  man  can  express  his
thoughts  in  visible  signs.”1  So  we  may  conclude  that  from  these
fundamentals,  by  which  men  formulated  their  special  gestures,  soon
they  became  enabled  to  produce  visible  signs  to  represent  “things,”
and,  gradually,  to  sketch  the  same  upon  any  plain  surface,  so  that
the  ideas  became  permanently  fixed  to  be  understood  by  others  for
any  given  time,  by  which  they  were  reminded  of  separate  facts,  or
continuous  narratives.

In  due  time,  when  religious  rites  were  adopted,  these  written  or
engraved  signs  became  symbols,  and  emblems,  and  were  perpetuated
from  fathers  to  sons,  along  the  track  of  time,  and  their  engravings
upon  stone,  either  as  monuments,  tombs,  obelisks,  or  temples,  have
existed  from  time  immemorial  to  our  day.

We  may  thus  trace  from  the  original  elements  of  symbols  the
great  variety  of  combinations  which  we  find,  in  the  representations
of  the  various  Deities,  in  all  the  ancient  religions  of  the  world,  in
which,  did  our  limits  permit,  we  might  with  great  profit  trace  the
gradual  development  from  the  simplest  forms  to  the  most  abstruse
and  recondite  representations  of  Deity.

“ Wherefore,  from  hence  it  plainly  appears  that  these  Platonic
and  Egyptian  pagans,  who  thus  reduced  their  multiplicity  of  Gods
to  the  divine  ideas,  did  not  therefore  make  them  to  be  so  many
minds  or  spirits,  really  distinct  from  the  Supreme  God  (though

“Anthropology,”  by  Tylor.

SYMBOLISM  OF  FREEMASONRY

16  99

dependent  on  him,  too),  but  indeed  only  so  many  partial  considera-
tions of  one  God,  as  being  all  things,  that  is,  containing  within
himself  the  causes  of  all  things.  And  accordingly  we  find  that  the
Egyptian  Theologers  called  their  religious  Animals  symbols  of  the
eternal  ideas ; so  did  they  also  call  them  symbols  of  God.

“ Celsus  applauds  the  Egyptian  Theologers  talking  so  magnifi-
cently and  mysteriously  of  those  brute  animals  worshipped  by  them,
and  affirming  them  to  be  certain  symbols  of  God.

“ But  lastly,  as  God  was  supposed  by  these  pagans  not  only  to
pervade  all  things,  and  to  fill  all  things,  but  also  he  being  the  cause
of  all  things,  to  be  himself  in  a manner  all  things,  so  was  he  called
also  by  the  name  of  everything,  or  everything  called  by  his  name  ;
that  is,  the  several  things  of  nature  and  parts  of  the  world  were
themselves  verbally  deified  by  these  pagans,  and  called  gods  and
goddesses.  Not  that  they  really  accounted  them  such  in  themselves,
but  that  they  thought  fit  in  this  manner  to  acknowledge  God  in
them,  as  the  author  of  them  all.”1  So  Paul  said  of  the  Athenians,
that  he  perceived  they  were  too  religious  (superstitious).

Symbols  were  the  means  used  from  the  remotest  antiquity  to
transmit  ideas — the  objective  form  for  the  subject-matter  in  the
mind.

That  the  investigation,  or  study,  of  symbolism  is  worthy  of  the
attention  of  the  greatest  minds,  we  have  the  evidence  in  the  great
number  of  volumes  which  have  been  written  on  this  subject,  in
every  age,  to  demonstrate  the  value  placed  by  learned  men  upon
the  study  of  symbols,  emblems,  and  allegories,  which  have  formed
the  foundation  of  every  religious  belief  known  to  Man,  the  remains
of  which  are  to  be  found,  not  only  in  the  existing  monuments  of
Antiquity,  but  are  to  be  traced  in  the  present  religions,  manners,
customs,  and  habits  of  thought,  and  even  modes  of  expression,  in
every  nation,  tribe,  kindred,  and  people  at  present  living  upon  this
globe.

This  would  appear  to  be  a rash  assertion,  but  every  successive
step  in  this  inquiry  reveals  the  fact  that  symbols,  known  and  applied
to  religious  purposes,  before  the  days  of  Abraham,  are  now  used  in
the  same  manner,  and  the  fundamental  principles  taught  in  the
Christian  Church,  and  which  constitute  its  peculiar  dogmas,  were

1 Cudworth.

1700

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

well  known  and  imparted  to  the  initiates  into  the  Mysteries  of
India,  Persia,  and  Egypt,  long  centuries  before  Christ.

In  fact,  there  is  strong  presumptive  evidence  that  when  the
great  Aryan  wave  of  emigration  passed  from  Arya  Varta  to  the
South  Eastward,  and,  crossing  the  Indus,  swept  before  it  to  the
Southward,  the  great  Turanian  Races,  who  had  preceded  them  and
had  long  been  inhabitants  of  the  Peninsula  of  Hindoostan,  they
carried  these  principles  with  them  and  engrafted  them  upon  the
superstitions  which  they  found  prevailing  over  the  races  thus  sub-
dued. Many  of  these  superstitions,  united  with  the  Christian  dog-
mas, are  to  be  found  in  several  branches  of  the  Christian  Church.

Simple,  individual  devotion  requires  no  outward  manifestation  ;
Concurrent  Religious  observances,  systematized,  demanded  a com-
mon method  in  which  the  many  should  Co-operate;  the  idea  in-
wardly suggested  must  be  objectively  represented  ; this  was  the
impelling  motive  for  public  worship — which  was  originally  per-
formed in  adoration  of  the  Heavenly  Bodies,  more  particularly  of
the  Sun,  the  greatest  benefactor  of  Man,  then  of  the  Moon  and  the
principal  Stars,  or  as  they  were  called  the  Planets  (moving  stars).

The  Mustarion  Sacramentum,  the  “ inward  feeling”  illustrated
by  some  symbol,  was  not  adopted,  but  the  originators  of  Rituals
substituted  Secret  Ceremonies,  taking  the  mysteries  in  a more  lit-
eral sense,  to  conceal  certain  facts  and  peculiar  doctrines  from  the
people,  and  yet  we  find  from  Tertullian  1 that  in  the  Orgies  of  Mith-
ras there  was  a remarkable  rite,  a kind  of  Sacrament,  which  was
administered  to  the  initiate  by  the  Hierophant.

In  adopting  Symbols  the  simplest  forms  were  selected  which
would  express  the  idea  to  be  conveyed.

The  words  now  in  use  for  certain  substantives  were,  in  the  Orig-
inal language,  Selected  to  express,  Metaphorically,  certain  ideas.

In  that  Country,  from  whence  was  partly  derived  our  own  lan-
guage, we  find  that  the  people,  our  great  Ancestors,  living  mostly
under  the  broad  Canopy  of  Heaven,  directed  their  religious  or  de-
votional thoughts  to  the  glorious  Light,  which,  upon  its  daily  re-
turn, was  the  source  of  all  earthly  desire.  The  fire  (Agni),  the
early  Dawn  (Ushas),  the  full  daylight  (Mitra),2  the  Rising  Sun,

1 Tertullian,  “ De  Prescriptio,”  ch.  xl.

2 Mitra,  Morning  Star;  Jupiter.  Agni,  Ushas,  Mitra;  these  initials,  A.  U.  M.,  con-
stituted the  Mystic  Name  of  the  Hindus.

SYMBOLISM  OF  FREEMASONRY

1701

the  Meridian  Sun,  and  declining  and  Setting  Sun,  all  had  their
appropriate  names.  The  Clouds  of  morning  and  evening,  the
Winds  which  gathered  or  dispersed  them,  also  had  their  peculiar
designations,  and  so  every  object  of  nature  which  added  to  their
pleasure  and  comfort,  or  in  any  manner  interfered  with  these,  so  as
to  interrupt  their  daily  duties  and  militate  against  their  happiness,
received  corresponding  names.

These,  in  succeeding  generations,  became  the  representatives  of
fictitious  personages  and  Supreme  objects  of  worship,  until  in  the
classic  days  of  Greece,  which  succeeded  the  Allegorical  age  of  Ind-
ian and  Egyptian  Mysticisms,  the  Pantheon  was  a complete  per-
sonification of  the  powers  of  Nature,  which  man  had  deified,  and
made  his  tyrants  to  control  every  emotion  of  the  heart  and  every
act  of  his  life,  thus  placing  the  whole  race  of  Man  under  the  do-
minion and  power  of  the  Priesthood  of  that  Pantheon,  who  also
exercised  their  Authority  in  such  a manner  as  to  enslave  the  Souls,
as  well  as  the  bodies,  of  the  Worshippers  at  their  Shrines.1

Max  Muller,  in  his  Treatise  on  Words,  clearly  shows  from
whence  are  derived  certain  words  which,  in  our  language,  have  be-
come so  common  as  to  have  lost  their  original  technical  sense.

Light.

The  great  object  of  Aryan  desire  derived  through  the  Latin
Lux,  from  the  Greek  Luknos,  was  nearly  the  same  in  Sanskrit,  and
the  Moon,  Lukina.  So  the  seven  Stars  in  the  North,  being  the
Seven  “Shiners,”  became  the  “Great  Bear,”  because  the  same  word
was  used  for  shining,  and  a bear,  whose  hair  was  shining.  We  have
the  Greek  Lukabos,  a year,  a revolution  of  Luc  ; Lukeios,  an  epi-
thet of  Apollo  ; Lukos,  a Wolf  with  shining  hair,  from  leukos,  white
or  shining,  and  sacred  to  Apollo  ; Lucus,  a grove,  because  planted
around  the  high  places  of  Luc ; the  English  word  Liick,  because  it
indicates  prosperity,  is  represented  by  Light.2

The  Seven  Stars,  or  Seven  Rishis,  were  derived  from  Rishi,  itin-
erant, from  Ri,  and  Rish,  to  go.  Arktos — Bear,  Riksha — Bear.

The  Worship  of  Light  passed  to  the  causes  of  Light;  first  of
the  Sun,  Moon,  and  Stars,  then  of  Fire  ; then  into  more  solid  forms,

*And  this  continues  to  the  present  day,  even  in  nations  called  civilized.

2 Faber,  “ Mysteries  Caberi,”  vol.  i.,  p.  29.

1702

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

to  represent  the  flame,  upright  Stones,  of  Conical  and  pyramidal
form,  rough  Stone  or  unhewn,  as  in  Gaul  and  in  Britain.

The  Worship  of  individuals,  either  real  or  mythical,  was  trans-
ferred to  animals,  which  were  made  to  represent  them  ; as,  from  the
doctrine  of  transmigration,  the  Soul  of  Osiris  had  passed  into  a Bull, ,
that  animal  became  the  Supreme  object  of  Worship  ; as  the  Cat  was
for  Diana,  and  the  Cow  for  Isis.  Now,  writing  Hieroglyphically
contributes  greatly  to  this  Species  of  idolatry,  and  the  Priests  did
then,  as  they  have  done  ever  since,  in  every  form  of  worship,  hold
the  power  and  the  method  of  interpretation  from  all  but  those
whom  they  chose  to  initiate  into  those  mysteries,  and  concealed  by
this  veil,  so  artfully  thrown  over  their  system,  from  all  others.

Thus,  the  Hieroglyph  for  God  was  a Star,  and  the  symbol  of  a
Star  was  a Serpent,  from  whence  proceeded  the  Universal  Serpent
Worship  which  extended  over  the  whole  World.

It  would  not  be  an  unprofitable  task  to  follow  out  to  its  legiti-
mate conclusion  the  subject  of  the  Serpent  Symbol,  but  we  shall
only  allude  to  some  of  the  symbols  in  our  further  illustrations  of
this  subject.  It  has  been  well  settled  that  the  serpent  symbol  was
legitimately  derived  from  the  traditions  of  Paradise,  so  familiarly
known  and  represented  by  all  the  Nations  of  Antiquity,  and  in  their
religious  rites,  it  may  be  said,  “ The  trace  of  the  Serpent  was  over
them  all.”

From  this  meager  sketch  it  may  be  seen  how  religion,  which
was  first  pure,  and  an  earnest  outpouring  of  the  heart  to  the  Great
and  beneficent  Creator,  degenerated  into  gross  idolatry.

We  now  pass  from  the  general  subject  to  the  more  special  one
of  Hieroglyphical  writings.

It  is  assumed  that  alphabetical  Characters  in  their  first  con-
dition were  substantive  emblems  or  simple  representations  of  lan-
guage.

From  Shuckford,  in  his  Connections  of  Sacred  and  Profane
History , we  leam  that  “the  first  language  had  but  one  part  of
speech,  and  consisted  chiefly  of  a few  names  for  creatures  and  things
Mankind  had  to  do  with.”  Others  do  not  concur  in  this,  and  say
“ The  art  of  thinking,  which  is  the  arrangement  of  our  ideas  from
the  perceptions  of  natural  objects,  cannot  exist  without  some  degree
of  reason  ; and  the  various  and  abstruse  combinations  of  reason  will
scarcely  be  produced  without  the  use  of  words  expressing  qualities ,

SYMBOLISM  OF  FREEMASONRY

1703

action,  or  passion,  as  well  as  connectives  to  draw  consequences  or
blend  ideas  which  are  relative,  uniform,  and  rational.”

Original  names  have  invariably  represented  innate  qualities  as
understood  universally  among  those  using  a common  language  ;
whence  the  origin  no  man  can  determine,  although  it  is  attempted
to  show  that  animals  received  names  which  in  their  utterance  would
indicate  some  distinguishing  trait  or  characteristic.  It  is,  however,
quite  certain  that  the  Oldest  Alphabets,  in  their  elements,  repre-
sented substantive  objects,  as  in  Hebrew  and  Cognate  Alphabets,
viz.,  Aleph  s,  the  Ox ; Beth  a,  a House  or  enclosure  ; Gam-
mel  5,  a Camel.  Spineto  1 says:  “The  Original  mode  of  Writing
was  the  exact  figure  of  the  object,  which,  for  the  Sake  of  diminish-
ing labor,  became  first  simple  drawing  of  the  Outline,  and  ulti-
mately an  arbitrary  Mark,  which  produced  the  three  different  modes
of  Writing  among  the  Egyptians,  generally  designated  by  the  ap-
pellations of  hieroglyphic,  demotic,  and  hieratic.”

A great  cause  which  advanced  the  Conventional  system  of  Writ-
ten signs  or  Characters  was  the  imagery  of  primitive  language.

One  Author  says : “ Rhetoric,  which  springs  naturally  out  of
language,  became  a Science  when  reduced  to  a system  ; natural  fig-
ures, untrammelled  by  the  restriction  of  rules,  became  more  expres-
sive : Cain’s  inquisitive  reply  to  the  stern  demand  was,  ‘Am  I my
brother’s  Keeper  ? ’ Lamech  says  to  his  wives  : ‘ Hear  my  voice,
ye  Wives  of  Lamech,  and  hearken  unto  my  speech,  for  I have  slain
a Man  to  my  wounding  and  a young  man  to  my  hurt.  If  Cain  shall
be  avenged  Seven  fold,  truly  Lamech  Seventy  and  Seven  fold.’”

In  the  Nabathean  Alphabet,  reputed  to  have  been  Antediluvian,
if  they  wished  to  state  in  what

manner  a man  died  by  a vio-
lent death,  they  used  one  of

these  characters,  viz.  :

1st,  By  lightning.  2d,  Guillotine.  3d,  Serpent.  4th,  Hatchet.
5th,  Poison.  6th,  Dagger.  7th,  Cord.  To  express  firmness  of
mind,  personal  strength  and  courage,  some  stately  or  majestic  pro-
duction of  Nature  was  employed,  as  the  Oak  and  Lion.  A warrior
was  termed  a Lion,  or  an  Oak  ; on  the  contrary,  an  irresolute  or  weak
man  by  a reed ; insincerity  by  a Serpent,  and  fidelity  by  a dog.

1 Spineto,  “ Hieroglyphs,”  ix.,  297.

1704

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

“ Let  us,  for  example,  suppose  that  the  letter  B was  called  Bai
and  such  a term  primarily  imported  being  or  existing.  We  are  told
Bai  was  the  Egyptian  denomination  for  a branch  of  the  Palm-tree,
which  tree  was  anciently  regarded  as  an  emblem  of  being,  existence,
or  immortality  ; again,  Ilorapollo  says,  Bai  signifies  a Hawk,  the
soul  and  the  Wind,  wherefore  the  Egyptians  used  the  Hawk  as  a
symbol  for  the  soul.

“The  Greeks  called  the  palm-branch  Baion,  Bais,  and  Beta  or
Baita,  the  letter  B,  preserves  the  sound  of  Hebrew  Beth  or  Egyp-
tian Bat , but  the  idea  of  the  name,  in  Greek  from  Bei  baioo,  to  con-
firm, establish  or  place  in  a permanent  state  of  existence.  The
Latins  called  this  letter  Be,  nearly  the  simple  name  of  the  Bai  or
symbolical  palm-branch.  And  Be  in  the  Celtic  conveys  the  same
leading  idea  of  existence.  Irish  Be  is  the  term  for  life  ; Cornish
signifies  Be,  Am,  Art,  is,  existent.”  1

The  Hebrew  word  for  the  Deity  called  the  Tetragrammaton  is
also  derived  from  the  word  “to  be,”  “ I am,”  “ I will  be,”  “ I am  all
that  exists.”  In  Egyptian,  the  same  word  is  used  for  the  principal
Deity.

The  Origin  of  Hieroglyphics  was  simply  picture-writing,  and
consisted  in  the  representation  of  a drawing  of  any  visible  object
connected  with  it.  Improvements  arose  to  obviate  difficulties  and
meet  the  necessities  of  circumstances  as  they  occurred,  and  in  due
season  a regular  system  was  ordained,  and  became  conventional  and
determinate.  Thus,  certain  symbols  became  known  and  established
for  certain  characteristics ; as,  for  instance,  The  Hawk,  as  an
emblem  of  the  Supreme  Deity,  because  of  its  piercing  sight  and
swiftness.  The  Asp  also,  not  being  subject  to  old  age,  and  moving
without  limbs.  The  Crocodile,  because  it  has  no  tongue,  which
organ  God  has  no  occasion  for.

At  the  period  of  the  greatest  perfection  of  Egyptian  writing
there  were  three  kinds,  viz.,  Epistolic,  Hieroglyphic,  and  Symbolic.
The  Priests  had  a fourth,  which  was  termed  Hierogrammatic,  which
was  known  only  to  their  order.  Modern  writers  subdivide  the
above  into :

i,  Pure  Hieroglyphic,  or  picture  ; 2,  Linear  Hieroglyphic,  or
emblems;  3,  Phonetic  Hieroglyphic,  or  representations  of  sound;

1 Davis,  of  “ Celt.  Res.”  p.  339,  in  Oliver’s  Lecture  V.,  p.  64.

SYMBOLISM  OF  FREEMASONRY

1705

and  4,  Demotic,  or  Epistolographic,  or  Enchorial1 2  writing,  for  the
uses  of  common  life.

Symbolic  writing  was  subdivided  into  three  parts,  viz.,  Curio-
logic,  speaking  literally  ; Tropical,  a figure  ; and  Allegorical,  descrip-
tion of  one  thing,  under  the  image  of  another.

This  was  for  greater  secrecy,  each  admitting  of  a different
method  of  interpretation,  which  was  communicated  only  to  a few.

In  the  Curiologic  style,  the  moon  was  pictured  by  a crescent ;
Tropically  by  a Cat ; Allegorically  by  the  figure  of  Isis  or  a
veiled  female ; The  Sun  by  a disk ; Tropically  by  an  Ox,  and
Allegorically  by  a figure  of  Osiris.

The  word  Symbol,  derived  from  Sumbolon  (Symbolum),  means
that  which  represents,  or  is  a sign  of  something  expressing  to  the
initiate  a doctrine,  thought,  or  principle ; Emblem,  from  Em-
blema,  first  signified  work  inlaid,  or  raised  ornaments,  or  Mosaic
work ; now  it  is  made  to  mean  the  same  as  symbol.

a.d.  363,  Yamblichus3  says  that  he  considered  the  mode  of
teaching  by  symbols  most  necessary,  and  that  nearly  all  the  Greeks
cultivated  it,  as  the  Most  Ancient  and  transcendentally  honored  by
the  Egyptians,  and  adopted  by  them  in  the  most  diversified  Manner.

“The  first  requisite  of  a symbol  is,  that  it  shall  really  mean
something ; that  it  shall  be  in  its  nature  a proper  and  adequate  sign
and  token  of  something  ; and  the  second  is,  that  this  something
shall  be  worth  knowing  and  remembering.”  3

“ The  Origin  of  the  science  of  Symbols  is  lost  in  the  night  of
time,  and  seems  to  connect  itself  with  the  Cradle  of  Humanity  ; the
most  ancient  Worships  submitted  to  its  law;  the  Arts  of  design,
Architecture,  Statuary,  and  Painting  were  born  under  its  influence,
and  the  primitive  writing  was  also  one  of  its  applications.” 4

“ Everything  is  Emblematic,  everything  is  figurative,  everything
is  more  or  less  Hieroglyphic  amongst  the  Ancients.  They  began  in
Chaldea  by  placing,  or  rather  by  giving  to  Some  Constellations  the
name  of  the  Ram,  and  of  the  Bull,  either  to  signify  the  productions
of  these  Animals  during  the  Spring,  or  to  pay  a peculiar  homage  to

1 Enchorios,  place,  country,  popular,  common,  invented  at  a late  period.  They
invented  another  system  of  Magical  Communication  which  imbedded  Cabalistic  Secrets
in  comprehensive  phrases,  that  were  not  only  mysterious,  but  absolutely  formidable  to
the  ignorant.  Soothsayers  were  Magic  Alarm-posts  ; philters  and  dangerous  compounds
were  treasure  Chambers,  etc.

2 “ Vita  Pythagoras.”  3 Albert  Pike.  4 Portal,  “ Symbols  des  Egyptiens.”

1706

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

the  Deity,  as  soon  as  they  began  to  depart  from  the  religion  of
Noah.  Fire  was  the  symbol  of  the  Deity  among  the  Persians.
The  rising  of  Sirius  or  Dog-Star  informed  the  Egyptians  of  the
inundation  of  the  Nile.  The  Serpent,  holding  its  tail  in  its  mouth,
became  the  image  of  eternity.  The  whole  of  nature  was  disguised
and  emblematically  represented  by  the  primitive  inhabitants  of  our
globe.  If  we  place  all  the  symbols  and  emblems  which  we  have
received  from  Antiquity  under  the  inspection  of  a Man  of  sense,  or
even  of  a scholar  who  had  never  heard  of  them,  he  will  not  be  able
to  explain  any  of  them.  It  is  a figurative  and  emblematic  language
which  requires  a particular  study  before  it  can  be  understood." 1

“ One  of  the  most  beautiful  of  the  Ancient  figures  is  that  of
Timaeus  of  Locri,  who  describes  Deity  to  be  “ a Circle  whose
centre  was  everywhere  and  whose  circumference  nowhere.”  2

“ The  philosophy  of  the  Egyptian  Priests  was  abstruse  and
hidden  ; enveloped  in  fable,  and  allegory,  and  exhibiting  only  dark
hints,  and  obscure  resemblances  to  truth,  and  thus  much  even  the
priests  themselves  insinuate  to  us,  in  many  instances,  particularly  in
those  sphinxes  which  they  seem  designedly  to  have  placed  before
their  Temples,  as  types  of  the  enigmatical  nature  of  their  theol-
ogy ; of  this  nature  was  the  inscription  engraved  upon  the  base  of
Minerva’s  statue  at  Sais,  whom  they  look  upon  the  same  as  Isis,
viz. : ‘ I am  everything  that  has  been,  that  is,  and  that  shall  be ;
Nor  has  any  Mortal  ever  yet  been  able  to  discover  what  is  under
my  Veil.’”3

The  name  of  Amun-Amn  is  interpreted  by  Manetho  to  signify
“ Concealment,”  or  something  which  is  hidden.  Osiris  is  designated
under  the  hieroglyphs  of  an  eye  and  a scepter,  the  former  denoting
his  providential  Wisdom,  as  the  latter  does  his  power,  they  being
the  two  most  distinguishing  Characteristics  of  Deity.  Also  of  sym-
bols— “ Under  which  the  Mystics  endeavored  to  lead  their  Votaries
to  the  Knowledge  of  divine  truth,  and,  though  some  of  these  are
more  clear  and  explicit  than  others,  yet  are  they  not  any  of  them
without  hazard  ; for  whilst  some  persons  by  wholly  mistaking  their
Meaning  and  application,  have  thereby  plunged  themselves  into
superstition,  others,  that  they  might  avoid  so  fatal  a quagmire,  have
unawares  dashed  themselves  upon  the  rock  of  Atheism.”

1 Spineto,  “ Lectures  on  Elements  of  Hieroglyphics.”  2 Albert  Pike.

3 Plutarch,  “ De  Isidi  et  Osiride,”  died  A.D.  140.

SYMBOLISM  OF  FREEMASONRY

1707

It  was  principally  among  the  East  Indians,  Egyptians,  and
Syrians  that  the  most  extraordinary  emblems  were  consecrated  to
religion.

A South  Sea  Island  Missionary  tells  how  once  being  busy  car-
pentering, and  having  forgotten  his  square,  he  wrote  a message  to
his  wife  for  it,  with  a piece  of  charcoal  on  a block,  and  sent  it  by  a
native,  who,  amazed  to  find  that  the  block  could  talk  without  a
mouth,  for  a long  time  afterward  carried  it  hung  around  his  neck
by  a string,  and  to  his  wondering  countrymen  told  what  he  saw
it  do.

The  art  of  writing,  however  strange  and  mysterious  it  seemed
to  the  savage  tribes  of  men,  was  developed  from  steps  of  invention.
Uncivilized  men  took  the  first  step  in  writing  by  making  pictures
of  such  natural  or  artificial  objects  known  to  them.

The  following  picture-writing,  used  by  hunting  tribes  of  Amerb
can  Indians,  records  an  expedition  across  waters,  led  by  a chief  on
horse-back,  having  a Magical  drumstick  in  his  hand.

PICTURE-WRITING,  ROCK  NEAR  LAKE  SUPERIOR  (AFTER  SCHOOLCRAFT).

There  were  fifty-one  men  in  four  canoes,  the  first  being  led  by
an  ally  of  the  chief  whose  name  was  Kishkemunazee  (Kingfisher),
as  shown  by  the  bird.  The  land  tortoise,  the  emblem  of  land,
shows  that  they  reached  the  other  side  of  the  water,  the  picture  of
the  three  suns  under  the  sky  indicating  three  days  in  crossing.

When  the  tortoise  is  painted  to  represent  land  it  is  not  a mere
imitation,  but  has  become  an  emblem  or  symbol.  The  bird  does
not  represent  a real  kingfisher,  but  a man  of  that  name ; this  be-
comes the  first  step  toward  phonetic  writing  or  by  sound,  i.e.,  to
make  a picture  stand  for  the  sound  of  the  word  to  be  spoken.

Tylor  says  (p.  169)  : “ How  men  may  have  made  the  next  move
toward  writing  may  be  learnt  from  the  common  child’s  games  of

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

1708

rebus , i.e.,  writing  words  ‘ by  things.’  Like  many  other  games,
this  one  keeps  up  in  child’s  sport  what  in  earlier  ages  was  man’s
earnest.  Thus  if  one  writes  the  word  ‘ waterman  ’ by  a picture  of
a water-jug  and  a man,  this  is  drawing  the  meaning  of  the  word  in
a way  hardly  beyond  the  American  Indian’s  picture  of  the  kingfisher.
But  it  is  very  different  when  in  a child’s  book  of  puzzles  one  finds
the  drawing  of  a water-can,  a man  being  shot,  and  a date  fruit,  this
representing  in  rebus  the  word  ‘ Can-di-date.’

“ For  now  what  the  pictures  have  come  to  stand  for  is  no  longer
their  meaning,  but  their  mere  sound.  This  is  true  phonetic  writing,
though  of  a rude  kind,  and  shows  how  the  practical  art  of  writing
really  came  to  be  invented.  This  invention  seems  to  have  been
made  more  than  once,  and  in  somewhat  different  ways.  The  old
Mexicans,  before  the  arrival  of  the  Spaniards,  had  got  so  far  as  to
spell  the  names  of  persons  and  places  by  pictures,  rebus  fashion.

Even  when  they  began  to  be  Christian-
L_J  C'T-o  ized,  they  contrived  to  use  their  picture-

cJL.3  v writing  for  the  Latin  words  of  their  new

religion.  Thus  they  painted  a flag  (pan),
a stone  (te),  a prickly  pear  (noch) — which
were  together  pronounced  pa-te-noch-te
and  served  to  spell  pater  noster,  in  a way  that  was  totally  exact  for
Mexicans  who  had  no  r in  their  language.  In  the  same  way  they
ended  the  prayer  with  the  picture  of  water  (a)  and  aloe  ( me ) to  ex-
press amen."

“This  leads  on  to  a more  important  system  of  writing.  Looking
at  the  ordinary  Chinese  characters  on  tea-chests  or  vases,  one  would
hardly  think  they  had  to  do  with  pictures  of  things.  But  there  are
fortunately  preserved  certain  early  Chinese  characters,  known  as  the
‘ ancient  pictures,’  which  show  how  what  were  at  first  distinctly
formed  sketches  of  objects  came  to  be  dashed  off  in  a few  strokes
of  the  rabbit’s  hair  pencil,  till  they  passed  into  the  meaningless  look-
ing cursive  forms  now  in  use,  as  is  seen  in  the  following  figure.

P®  te  noch  te

PATER  NOSTER  ON  MEXICAN  PICT-
URE-WRITING (AFTER  aubin).

Sun

Ancient.

Modem,

Moon  Mountain.

sA\

W

Tree

%

A

Dog

A

CHINESE  ANCIENT  PICTURES  AND  LATER  CURSIVE  FORMS.

SYMBOLISM  OF  FREEMASONRY

1709

“ The  Chinese  did  not  stop  short  at  making  such  mere  pictures
of  objects,  which  goes  but  little  way  toward  writing.  The  inventors
of  the  present  mode  of  Chinese  writing  wanted  to  represent  the
spoken  sounds,  but  here  they  were  put  in  a difficulty  by  their  lan-
guage consisting  of  monosyllables,  so  that  one  word  has  many  dif-
ferent meanings.  To  meet  this  they  devised  an  ingenious  plan  of
making  compound  characters,  or  ‘ pictures  and  sounds,’  in  which
one  part  gives  the  sound,  while  the  other  gives  the  sense.  To  give
an  idea  of  this,  suppose  it  were  agreed  that  a picture  of  a box  should
stand  for  the  sound  box.  As,  however,  this  sound  has  several  mean-
ings, some  sign  must  be  added  to  show  which  is  intended.  Thus  a
key  might  be  drawn  beside  it,  to  show  it  is  a box  to  put  things  in  ;
or  a leaf  if  it  is  to  mean  the  plant  called  box ; or  a hand,  if  it  is  in-
tended for  box  on  the  ear  ; or  a whip  would  show  it  was  to  signify
the  box  of  a coach.

“ This  would  be  for  us  a clumsy  proceeding,  but  it  would  be  a
great  advance  beyond  mere  picture-writing,  as  it  would  make  sure
at  once  of  the  sound  and  the  meaning.  Thus  in  Chinese,  the  sound
chow  has  various  meanings,  as  ship,  fluff,  flickering,  basin,  loquacity.
Therefore,  the  character  which  represents  a ship,  chow , which  is
placed  first  in  the  figure  as  represented  afterward  with  additional
characters,  to  show  which  particular  meaning  of  chow  is  intended.

“These  examples,  though  far  from  explaining  the  whole  mystery
of  Chinese  writing,  give  some  idea  of  the  principles  of  its  sound,
characters,  and  keys  of  determinative  signs,  and  show  why  a Chinese
has  to  master  such  an  immensely  complicated  set  of  characters  in
order  to  write  his  own  language.

“Next  as  to  the  cuneiform  writing,  such  as  is  to  be  seen  at  the
British  Museum  on  the  huge  man-headed  bulls  of  Nineveh,  or  on
the  flat  baked  bricks  which  were  pages  of  books  in  the  library  of
Sennacherib.  The  marks,  like  wedges  or  arrow-heads,  arranged  in
groups  or  rows,  do  not  look  much  like  pictures  of  objects.  Yet
there  is  evidence  that  they  came  at  first  from  picture-writing ; for
instance,  the  sun  was  represented  by  a rude  figure  of  it  by  four
strokes  arranged  round.  Of  the  groups  of  characters  in  an  in-
scription, some  serve  directly  to  represent  objects,  as  man,  woman,
river,  house,  while  other  groups  are  read  phonetically  as  standing  for
syllables.

" The  inventors  of  this  ancient  system  appear  to  have  belonged  to

1710

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

the  Akkadian  group  of  Nations,  the  founders  of  early  Babylonian
civilization.  In  later  ages  the  Assyrians  and  Persians  learned  to
write  their  language  by  Cuneiform  characters,  in  inscriptions  which
remain  to  this  day  as  their  oldest  records.  But  the  Cuneiform  writ-
ing was  cumbrous  in  the  extreme,  and  had  to  give  way  when  it  came
into  competition  with  the  alphabet.  To  understand  the  origin  of
that  invention,  it  is  necessary  to  go  back  to  a plan  of  writing  which
dates  from  antiquity,  probably  even  higher  than  the  Cuneiform  of
Babylonia,  namely,  the  hieroglyphics  of  Egypt.

“The  earliest  known  hieroglyphic  inscriptions  of  Egypt  belong
to  a period  approaching  3000  b.c.  Even  at  this  ancient  time  the
plan  of  writing  was  so  far  developed  that  the  scribes  had  the  means
of  spelling  any  word  phonetically,  when  they  chose.  But,  though
the  Egyptians  had  thus  come  to  writing  by  sound,  they  only  trusted
to  it  in  part,  combining  it  with  signs  which  are  evidently  remains  of
earlier  picture-writing.  Thus  the  mere  pictures  of  an  ox,  a star,
a pair  of  sandals,  may  stand  for  ox,  star,  sandals.  Even  where  they
spelled  words  by  their  sounds  they  had  a remarkable  way  of  adding
what  are  called  determinatives,  which  are  pictures  to  confirm  or
explain  the  meaning  of  the  spelled  word.  One  short  sentence  given
as  an  example  from  Renoul’s  Egyptian  Grammar  shows  all  these
devices.  The  meaning  is : ‘I  (am)  the  Sun  - God  coming  forth
from  the  horizon  against  his  enemies  ’ :

JL  °7

V 1 1

N Sun-god
K.  one
One

n

p

R

Walk

o
X

M horizon  B E enemy  pi.  P
T one.

nuk

I

ra  net  or  per  em  xut  er  xefu  -f
S d camin&

* forth  from  horizon  against  enemies -his

“ Here  part  of  the  pictures  of  animals  and  things  are  letters  to
be  read  into  Egyptian  words,  as  shown  underneath.  But  others  are
still  real  pictures,  intended  to  stand  for  what  they  represent.  The
sun  is  shown  by  his  picture,  with  a one  mark  below,  and  followed
by  the  battle-axe,  which  is  the  symbol  of  divinity,  while  further  on
comes  a picture  of  the  horizon  with  the  sun  on  it.  Besides  these,
some  of  the  figures  are  determinative  pictures  to  explain  the  words,

FINAL  DEFEAT  OF  THE  CRUSADERS  AT  ACRE

SYMBOLISM  OF  FREEMASONRY

1 7 1 1

the  verb  to  walk  being  followed  by  an  explanatory  pair  of  legs,  and
the  word  enemy  having  a picture  of  an  enemy  after  it,  and  then
three  strokes,  the  sign  of  plurality.  It  seems  that  the  Egyptians
began  with  mere  picture-writing,  like  that  of  the  barbarous  tribes  of
America,  and  though,  in  after  ages,  they  came  to  use  some  figures
as  phonetic  characters  or  letters,  they  never  had  the  strength  of  mind
to  rely  on  them  entirely,  but  went  on  using  the  old  pictures  as  well.
How  they  were  led  to  make  a picture  to  stand  for  a sound  is  not
hard  to  see.  In  the  figure  a character  may  be  noticed  which  is  read
R.  This  is  an  outline  of  an  open  mouth,  and  indeed  is  often  used
to  represent  a mouth  , but  the  Egyptian  word  for  mouth  being  R,  O
the  sign  came  to  be  used  as  a character  letter  to  spell  the  sound  R O
or  R wherever  it  was  wanted.  So  much  of  the  history  of  the  art  of
writing  may  thus  be  read  in  a single  hieroglyphic  sentence.”1

Firmly  believing  that  the  guiding  hand  of  an  all-wise  and  over-
ruling Providence  has  conducted  mankind  from  his  earliest  appear-
ance on  earth,  commencing,  as  we  have  endeavored  to  show,  with
his  primitive  notions  of  things  and  his  efforts  to  illustrate  his  first
crude  and  imperfect  ideas  and  clearly  to  demonstrate  his  gradual
advancement  in  expressing  those  ideas,  until  he  had  accomplished
the  same  by  framing  alphabetical  writing- — as  shown  in  the  earliest
written  languages — we  will  endeavor  to  demonstrate  that  it  must
have  been  by  Divine  Revelation  that  this  was  finally  accomplished
in  the  gradual  development  of  man’s  inventive  genius  implanted  by
Divine  Providence  in  the  “Three  Revelations.”

It  would  seem  evidently  proper  in  the  examination  of  symbol-
isms in  connection  with  the  ancient  religions  that  we  should  also
examine  that  religion  which,  commencing  with  Moses  and  the
children  of  Israel,  has  gradually  advanced  and  spread  over  the
whole  world.

1 Tylor  Anthropology,  pp.  173,  174.

CHAPTER  II

THREE  REVELATIONS

HE  Will  of  God  as  the  Supreme  rule  of  right  is
found  expressed  in  the  Moral  Constitution  of
the  world  ; of  the  Agent  himself,  and  of  Holy
Scripture.”

It  is  generally  admitted  that  these  three
forms  of  the  revelation  of  the  Divine  Will  do
exist.

The  light  of  nature,  or  moral  teaching,  from  the  moral  constitu-
tion of  the  World  and  of  Man  are  undervalued  by  some.  Those
who  deny  Christianity  as  a system,  and  simply  believe  in  the  exist-
ence of  God  only,  place  too  high  an  estimate  upon  the  Light  of
Nature,  and  reject  the  authority  of  the  revelation  of  the  Mind  and
Will  of  God  in  the  Scriptures,  known  to  us  as  the  Old  and  New
Testaments.

It  is  for  the  philosophical  Mind  to  discover  that  “ these  three
copies  of  the  Will  of  God  are  from  the  same  divine  Mind,”
“That  the  same  fundamental  moral  principles  and  tendencies  are
embodied  in  all  of  them.”

Now  we  write  for  those  who,  as  Masons,  have,  solemnly  and  in
the  presence  of  many  witnesses,  professed  a firm  belief  in  God,  and
that  they  put  their  “ trust  ” in  Him  ; therefore  we  must  confidently
expect  that  every  Mason  who  may  read  this  thesis  will  understand
that  he  is  under  Moral  obligations  to  obey  the  will  of  that  God  in
whom  we  trust  ; and  we  shall  proceed  to  show  how  the  Will  of  God
has  been  revealed  to  Man.

From  the  histories  of  all  the  Ancient  Nations  we  learn  this  fact,
that,  commencing  with  the  earliest  form  of  religion  down  to  the
present  Christian  era,  in  the  year  of  the  creation  of  the  world  com-
monly known  as  Anno  Mundi  4000,  according  to  the  recent  chro-
nology, every  form  of  religious  faith  has  been  founded  in  a “ Chris-
tos,” “the  Anointed,”  hence  each  was  a form  of  “Christianity.”

7 712

THREE  REVELATIONS

1713

The  “ fall  of  man,”  or  the  loss  of  innocence,  was  well  acknowl-
edged in  all  the  ancient  theologies  and  philosophies,  and  that  a
“ restoration  ” was  to  take  place  was  also  acknowledged  ; the  effort
in  every  mythology  was  to  complete  that  restoration  by  means  of  a
“ divine  savior.”

In  our  Masonic  system  of  the  first  era  there  is  no  question  what-
ever in  the  minds  of  all  impartial  examiners  that  the  authors  of  the
system  designed  to  teach  the  dogmas  peculiar  to  Christianity.  The
revolution  of  1717  divested  Masonry  of  most  of  its  Sectarian
dogmas,  and  opened  the  way  for  the  admission  of  all  who  would
merely  confess  a belief  and  trust  in  a Deity.  Nevertheless,  in  sub-
sequent years,  measurably  between  1760  and  1S00  a.d.,  the  several
lectures  introduced,  gradually,  a more  complete  acknowledgment  of
the  Christian  elements  than  existed  from  the  revolution  in  1717  to
the  former  date,  1760.  The  lectures,  now  used  in  every  State  of  the
Union,  clearly  teach  those  dogmas.

The  use  of  the  Sacred  writings,  holding  as  they  do  a position
representing,  par  excellence,  the  “ Great  Light,”  evidently  demon-
strates the  belief  in  their  direct  inspiration  from  God  himself,  or  the
whole  matter  is  an  imposition  and  should  be  removed  from  our  rit-
ual. To  declare  solemnly  that  the  Bible  “ is  the  inestimable  gift
from  God  to  man  ” is  a “ solemn  Mockery  ” if  it  be  not  the  ac-
knowledged “ Holy  Writing.”

It  is,  therefore,  the  conceded  guide  for  all  of  our  conduct,  and  if
not  inspired  by  that  confession,  then  we  are  defrauding  every  can-
didate who  receives  the  Entered  Apprentice’s  degree.

Assuming  that  we  are  honest  men  in  our  declarations,  we  pro-
ceed with  our  argument.

First  Subject. — Revelation  in  External  Nature.

The  Constitution  of  the  World  is  but  partially  discerned  by  man,
and  the  revelation  of  the  Will  of  God  is  but  dimly  perceived  therein.
The  light  of  conscience  and  direct  revelation  are  necessary  to  assist
him  in  understanding  external  Nature.

(a)  External  Nature  may  reveal  to  man  somewhat  of  God’s
Will  from  its  constitution,  when  in  all  its  parts  he  may  discover  in
the  government  of  God  therein  that  “there  is  a fixed  connection
between  virtue  and  happiness  and  between  vice  and  misery  as  the
108

1714

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

result  of  cause  and  effect ; and  vve  may  thus  conclude  that  God  has
so  constituted  all  Nature  that  he  approves  of  Virtue  and  condemns
Vice.  “ These  Moral  tendencies  are  universal,  being  everywhere
observed  in  creation  and  providence,  and  in  individual  and  social
experience.  They  are  inevitable  : — vice,  in  the  long  run,  producing
misery ; and  virtue  producing  happiness,  by  a law  as  unchangeable
as  the  law  of  gravitation.”  Plato  said,  by  the  Sophist  Hippias :
“ Now,  by  Jove,  I must  here  confess  that  I do  perceive  plain  traces
of  a Divine  Law ; for  that  laws  should  bring  along  with  them  their
own  penalty  when  broken  is  a most  rare  device,  to  which  no  mere
human  legislator  has  even  yet  been  able  to  attain.”

There  is,  evidently,  to  every  reflecting  mind,  in  God’s  Uni-
verse “a  Vast  and  Wondrous  System  of  Moral  compensations
and  Moral  retributions  embracing  all  the  subjects  of  the  Divine
Government.”

(b)  Not  easily  interpreted.  In  this  form  it  is  very  difficult  to
interpret  the  Will  of  God.  That  wonderful  Man  Paul  said  that  the
invisible  things  of  God — his  eternal  power  and  Deity — may  be  made
known  by  things  that  are  seen,  yet  Man,  limited  as  he  is,  bounded
by  the  enslavement  of  the  flesh,  can  see  but  dimly  the  record  of  the
Moral  attributes  and  Moral  law  by  the  results  of  causes  in  the  Nat-
ural World.  From  these  sources  only  those  who  have  attained  to
the  highest  philosophy  can  even  remotely  see  the  rule  of  right  from
external  Nature.  Nevertheless,  we  may  perceive,  even  if  remotely,
that  God  contemplated,  in  the  Creation  of  the  Universe,  that  all
things  should  work  together  for  a specific  purpose,  and  in  his  infi-
nite mind  there  could  not  be  a separation  of  the  Moral  attribute
from  those  essentially  necessary  in  his  character  as  the  Supreme
Governor  and  Creator  of  all  things.

Second  Subject. — Revelation  in  Man  s Nature.

We  presume  that  in  the  original  creation  of  Man,  the  revelation
of  the  Will  of  God,  in  Man’s  Moral  Constitution,  must  have  been
clear  and  perfect.  Is  this  the  case  now  with  Man  ? And  may  we
well  ask,  How  and  when  did  the  change  take  place  ? Observa-
tion and  our  own  personal  experience  clearly  demonstrate  the
fact  “ That  it  is  now  defective  and  dim,”  and  the  teaching  of  rev-
elation also  confirms  the  truth.

THREE  REVELATIONS

1715

The  following  is  the  immediate  and  practical  rule  : “ A rule
of  right,  in  order  to  be  in  the  highest  sense  practical,  must  be
always  at  hand  and  in  readable  form.  For  a being  essentially
and  always  active,  emergencies  of  Moral  action  must  be  constant
and  often  sudden  and  unexpected,  so  that  time  is  not  always  given
for  consulting  some  outward  rule  to  be  comprehended  by  the
processes  of  reasoning.  The  Author  of  Man’s  being  has,  there-
fore, placed  a revelation  of  the  rule  of  right  in  the  soul,  to  be
read  intuitively,  and  so  to  furnish  a practical  guide  suited  to  his
circumstances.”

For  Mankind  in  general,  experience  teaches  us  that  this  rule
is  the  chief  practical  guide  for  Moral  conduct.  Professor  Haven
says:  “Within  certain  limits,  the  Moral  nature  of  Man  decides,
without  hesitation,  as  to  the  Character  of  given  actions,  and  ap-
proves and  condemns  accordingly.  It  is  seldom  at  a loss  as  to
the  great  dividing  lines  which  separate  the  Kingdom  of  right  and
wrong.  It  is  the  voice  of  nature,  essentially  the  same  in  all  climes
and  ages  of  the  World,  approving  the  right,  condemning  the
wrong.  It  is  the  voice  of  God  speaking  through  the  Moral  Na-
ture and  constitution  which  has  been  bestowed  upon  his  creatures.
Thus  it  is  that  they  which  have  the  law  within  are  a law  unto  them-
selves.”

This  inner  sense  of  Moral  rectitude  can  not  be  the  Ultimate
guide,  for  it  is  well  known  that  education,  location,  customs,  and
habits  control  our  ideas  of  right  and  wrong  in  the  abstract ; and  it
is  also  true,  that  as  we  change  from  one  Kingdom  or  Nation  to
others  we  do  find  the  inner  consciousness  of  Men  differing — where-
fore, we  are  forced  to  find  the  Ultimate  principle,  by  which  to  de-
cide between  any  two  conflicting  ideas  of  Moral  rectitude  ; and  we
thus  come  to  a direct  revelation  by  “ Scripture " which,  when  re-
ceived as  those  of  divine  inspiration,  we  are  of  necessity  to  obey
them,  as  the  mind  and  will  of  God  ; and  to  which  we  must  refer  as
standards  for  our  government.

The  Christian  Theologians  have,  in  all  the  past,  written  con-
stantly in  advocacy  of  the  divine  origin  of  the  “ Bible.”  It  is  not
our  province,  in  so  short  an  Article  as  this  must  be,  to  enter  at  al]
into  a discussion  of  the  validity  or  the  “ Authenticity  ” of  the  Text
of  Scripture.  Volumes  have  been  written,  and  but  few  have  been
convinced,  save  those  already  “believers”;  hence  we  content  our*

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

1716

selves  in  this  “dictum”:  As  Masons,  we  receive  it  as  the  Ultimate
Standard  of  our  Morality,  and  by  it,  as  our  adopted  “ Constitu-
tion,” we  must  inevitably  be  tried,  and  be  acquitted  or  condemned.
If  it  be  but  of  human  origin,  it  is  nevertheless  the  foundation  upon
which  every  Moral  principle  in  Masonry  now  stands  ; just  as  we  are
governed  by  the  Constitutions,  Rules,  Regulations,  and  Edicts  which
are  acknowledged  as  of  human  authority  only,  and  do  govern  us  in
our  common  jurisprudence  throughout  the  entire  World  of  Masons,
so  do  the  Scriptures  rule  and  govern  our  Ethics  and  Moral  Con-
duct, whether  they  be  human  only,  or  of  Divine  origin.  Those
Moral  principles,  clearly  enunciated  in  the  Bible,  appeal  to  the
Moral  consciousness  of  Mankind  in  general ; and  it  is  only  in  the
Minds  of  those  who  have  suffered  their  Moral  principles  to  be
atrophied , that  there  ever  has  been  or  ever  will  be  anyone  to  deny
this.  Among  all  enlightened  and  good  men  it  is  “ the  most  perfect
expression  of  the  law  of  human  duty.”

“ In  bringing  to  light  new  relations,  as  arising  out  of  Man’s  sin,
the  ethical  system  of  the  Bible  has  vastly  widened  the  sphere  of
duty.”  We  must  believe  in  the  infinity  of  God  ; but  the  infinite
God  can  not,  by  us,  in  the  present  limitation  of  our  faculties,  be
comprehended,  but  only  conceived.  A Deity  understood  would  be
no  Deity  at  all ; and  it  is  blasphemy  to  say  that  God  only  is  as  we
are  able  to  think  Him  to  be.  We  know  God  according  to  the  fini-
tude  of  our  faculties  ; but  we  believe  much  that  we  are  incompetent
properly  to  know.  The  infinite  God  is  what,  to  use  the  words  of
Pascal,  is  infinitely  inconceivable.  Faith,  Belief,  is  the  organ  by
which  we  apprehend  what  is  beyond  our  knowledge.  In  this,  all
Divines  and  Philosophers,  worthy  of  the  name,  are  found  to  coin-
cide ; and  the  few  who  assent  to  Man  a knowledge  of  the  infinite,
do  this  on  the  daring,  the  extravagant,  the  paradoxical  supposition,
either  that  Human  Reason  is  identical  with  the  Divine,  or  that  Man
and  the  absolute  are  one.

In  Man’s  condition,  growing  out  of  his  imperfect  Nature  and
the  uncertainties  of  a correct  understanding  of  duties,  a revelation
became  a necessity,  so  soon  as  his  change  from  a sinless  to  a sinful
state  occurred.  We  here  encounter  at  once  the  Skeptical  view
which  denies  the  present  sinful  state  of  Man.  Let  us  then  assume
Man  as  sinless  and  take  the  following  sketch  of  Cousin  to  illustrate
the  present  condition  of  things — Good  and  Evil.  You  will  agree

THREE  REVELATIONS

1717

with  me  that  Man  is,  1st,  sinful ; or,  2d,  Man  is  sinless.  There  is
no  middle  term  of  this  category.

“ Good  and  Evil." — Distinction.

“ If  we  do  not  admit  the  essential  distinction  between  good  and
evil,  between  virtue  and  crime,  crime  founded  on  interest,  virtue
founded  on  disinterestedness,  then  human  language  and  the  senti-
ments that  it  expresses  are  inexplicable.

“ Disturb  this  distinction,  and  you  disturb  human  life  and  entire
society.  Permit  me  to  take  an  extreme,  tragic,  and  terrible  exam-
ple. Here  is  a man  that  has  just  been  judged.  He  has  been  con-
demned to  death,  and  is  about  to  be  executed — to  be  deprived  of
life.  And  why  ? Place  yourself  in  the  system  that  does  not  admit
the  essential  distinction  between  good  and  evil,  and  ponder  on  what
is  stupidly  atrocious  in  this  act  of  human  justice.  What  has  the
condemned  done?  Evidently  a thing  indifferent  in  itself.  Fo*-  if
there  is  no  other  outward  distinction  than  that  of  pleasure  and  pain,
I defy  anyone  to  qualify  any  human  action,  whatever  it  may  be,  as
criminal,  without  the  most  absurd  inconsequence.  But  this  thing,
indifferent  in  itself,  a certain  number  of  men,  called  legislators,  have
declared  to  be  a crime.  This  purely  arbitrary  declaration  has  found
no  echo  in  the  heart  of  this  Man.  He  has  not  been  able  to  feel  the
justice  of  it,  since  there  is  nothing  in  itself  just.  He  has  therefore
done,  without  remorse,  what  this  declaration  arbitrarily  interdicted.
The  Court  proceeds  to  prove  to  him  that  he  has  not  succeeded,  but
not  that  he  has  done  contrary  to  justice,  for  there  is  no  justice.  I
maintain  that  every  condemnation,  be  it  to  death,  or  to  any  punish-
ment whatever,  imperatively  supposes,  in  order  to  be  anything  else
than  a repression  of  violence  by  Violence,  the  four  following  Points  :
1 st,  That  there  is  an  essential  distinction  between  good  and  evil,  jus-
tice and  injustice,  and  that  to  this  distinction  is  attached,  for  every
intelligent  and  free  being,  the  obligation  of  conforming  to  good  and
justice.  2d,  That  man  is  an  intelligent  and  free  being,  capable  of
comprehending  this  distinction,  and  the  obligation  that  accompanies
it,  and  of  adhering  to  it  naturally,  independently  of  all  convention,
and  every  possible  law,  capable  also  of  resisting  the  temptations  that
bear  him  towards  evil  and  injustice,  and  of  fulfilling  the  sacred  law
of  natural  justice.  3d,  That  every  act  contrary  to  justice  deserves

THREE  REVELATIONS

1719

to  be  repressed  by  force,  and  even  punished  in  reparation  of  the
fault  committed,  and  independently  too  of  all  law  and  all  conven-
tion. 4th,  That  Man  naturally  recognizes  the  distinction  between
the  just  and  the  unjust  and  knows  that  every  penalty  applied  to  an
unjust  act  is  itself  most  strictly  just.”1

In  the  Scriptures  we  find  all  that  is  necessary  for  Man  to  do  in
his  progress  toward  reinstatement  to  his  original  sinless  condition.
It  is  no  argument  against  the  Bible  that  Men  differ  in  regard  to  the
very  language  of  it,  and  that  such  differences  have  created  bigotry,
fanaticism,  hatred,  persecution,  and  death  ; because  all  those  results
are  the  demonstrations,  palpably  true,  of  the  sinfulness  of  Man,  his
selfishness,  ambition,  and  lust  for  power,  in  utter  opposition  to  those
very  teachings  in  the  Bible  by  which  they  should  be  guided  to  a
course  of  love,  compassion,  charity,  and  beneficence.  In  all  ages
Men  have  done  precisely  the  same  things  to  their  fellow-Men  before
the  Bible  was  written  ; and  since  then,  when  in  utter  ignorance  of
its  existence,  when  there  were  no  redeeming  features  in  their  sav-
agery, inhumanity,  and  devilishness.

The  influence  of  the  Morality  of  the  Bible  has  tended,  contin-
ually, to  change  the  fierceness  of  the  Natural  Man  to  those  milder
and  heavenly  virtues  of  Love,  compassion,  and  Charity.

Third  Subject. — The  Written  Revelation  is  the  Perfect  Form
of  the  Supreme  Rule ; it  is  the  clearest  expression  of  the  Divine
Will.

Every  intelligent  Man  will  say  that  a Character  modeled  after
the  Morality  of  the  Bible  is  a perfect  Character : as  was  that  of
Jesus,  the  “ Christos ” of  the  Bible.  Every  departure  from  that
perfect  type  detracts  from  a perfect  Character.  Let  us  refer  to
those  Characters  who  were  represented  centuries  before  his  advent
and  see  if  in  their  Conduct  they  were  up  to  his  standard.  Were
“ Chrishna  ” of  India,  Mithras  of  Persia,  Osiris  of  Egypt,  Dionysus,
Bacchus,  Orphaeus  and  Adonis,  of  Classic  days,  such  as  to  be  ex-
amples for  us  to  follow  ? Were  they  not  all  of  them  the  mere
creations  of  human  imaginations  ? Who  now  believes  that  any  one
of  them  ever  had  a real  existence  ?

1 Cousin,  “True,  Beautiful,  and  Good,”  p.  223.

1720

THREE  REVELATIONS

1721

They  were  all  Characters  of  human  origin  in  the  Mythologic
ages  designed  as  the  “ Saviors  ” of  Men,  each  one  emphatically  the
representative  “ Christos,”  or  Christ  of  his  particular  Nation  ; and
the  religious  system  designed  to  restore  the  lost  and  fallen  race  of
Man.  This  idea  was  derived  from  the  traditions  of  the  fall  of  Man.
by  means  of  the  Serpent,  Kalinac.  Chrishna,  in  the  Ninth  Avatar,
is  represented  as  the  Good  Black  Shepherd  stamping  the  head  of
the  Serpent  Kalinac  with  his  heel,  while  he  holds  the  serpent  aloft
by  his  tail.1  In  the  Tenth  Avatar,  which  is  yet  to  come,  Chrishna,
the  “Anointed,”  is  to  restore  the  race  of  Man  to  its  pristine  inno-
cence and  happiness.  Hence,  we  assert,  that  since  God  promised
to  Adam  that  the  “ seed  of  the  Woman  should  bruise  the  head  of
the  Serpent,”  Christianity,  in  some  form,  has  existed  ever  since.
The  Old  Testament  writings  throughout  foreshadow  the  “ Savior,
Christos,”  and  the  Jews  are  yet  looking  for  him  to  come,  to  re-
store them  as  the  Children  of  Abraham  to  their  National  greatness
once  existing.  Christians  say  he  has  come  already.  Now  as  Ma-
sons we  decide  not  between  these,  but  take  all  in  as  our  Brethren,
and  the  One  God  as  our  Heavenly  Father,  revealed  to  us  as  such
in  the  Great  Light  of  Masonry.

“ Aristotle  has  said  that  Man  was  a political  animal — he  certainly
is  a religious  animal,  as  the  history  of  Mankind  shows  from  the
earliest  ages.”

In  the  twofold  nature  of  Man  no  one  has  a right  to  exalt  either
side  of  this  nature  at  the  expense  of  the  other  ; also  in  the  double
nature  of  his  intellectual  faculties  we  have  no  right  to  atrophy  either
the  reason,  on  the  one  side,  or  the  sentiments,  in  the  opposite  di-
rection ; but  it  is  the  result  of  true  wisdom  to  keep  them  in  due
equipoise,  for  the  proper  development  of  the  intellect,  for  the  wisest
and  best  of  purposes.  Moreover,  it  has  been  shown  that  Man  in
his  relation  to  his  fellow-Man  must  also  be  held  in  the  twofold  re-
lation of  egoism  and  altruism.  Every  animal  instinct  prompts  him
to  a pure  selfishness,  continued  until  that  instinct  be  satisfied.

In  the  sentimental  Nature  of  Man  we  find  the  promptings  to
social  life,  and  altruism  becomes  a balancing  force  which  brings  the
animal  instincts  to  the  equipoise,  when  controlled  by  reason.  When
the  sentimental  faculties  preponderate,  it  is  because  the  reasoning

1 See  plate,  fig.  12.

1722

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

force  has  become  weakened ; where  sentiment  is  suppressed,  the
reasoning  powers  have  been  unduly  stimulated.

From  time  immemorial  Man  has  manifested  the  sentimental
part  of  his  nature,  in  worshipping  something,  by  him  considered  his
superior.  As  has  been  shown  already,  his  worship,  in  the  form  of
sacrifices  offered,  has  been  to  appease  an  offended  Deity.

How  did  he  know  of  a Deity  ? and  how  know  that  the  Deity
was  offended  ?

Self-consciousness  of  wrong  done  was  the  inner  monitor,  which
taught  Man  what  was  right  and  what  wrong,  in  regard  to  a Superior
power.  That  men,  among  themselves,  soon  made  laws  for  their
Moral  government  we  can  readily  understand  ; but  how  did  Man
first  comprehend  that  above  him  was  a power  to  which  he  was  re-
sponsible ? That  of  himself  he  should  arrive  at  any  such  definite
conclusion  as  to  require  him  to  appease  an  offended  being,  is  in-
comprehensible to  us  ; it  is  out  of  all  human  categories  and  can
only  be  referred  to  a direct  revelation  of  God  himself  to  Man.

Its  universality  renders  it  certain  ; no  mere  accident  could  have
communicated  such  ideas  from  nation  to  nation,  and  keep  up  the
superstitious  notions  so  prevalent  among  the  most  abject  and  de-
plorable savage  tribes  as  are  found  in  America  and  in  Africa,  where
fetichism  of  the  lowest,  most  grovelling  kind,  “ keeps  alive  some
memory  of  the  old  Truth  in  the  human  heart.”  To  deny  this  is  to
deny  everything  concerning  the  Spirit  history  of  Man,  and  closes
our  eyes  to  the  broad  daylight  of  facts,  and  challenges  a logical
proof  of  the  shining  of  the  Mid-day  Sun  itself  ; both,  alike,  self-
evident  propositions,  requiring  no  proof,  they  are  our  axioms.

That  God  exists  is  as  true  as  that  the  Sun  Shines  continuously,
and  spreads  his  light  over  the  entire  Solar  System,  interrupted  only
by  partial  clouds,  as  they  screen  the  earth  from  his  rays.  As  well
might  we  deny  the  existence  of  the  sun  at  Midnight,  because  we
can  not  see  him  or  any  evidence  of  his  light,  as  to  deny  God,  be-
cause we  can  not  see  him  directly  or,  in  our  estimation,  any  evidence
of  his  overruling  power  ; yet  in  all  times  and  in  every  Nation  Men
have  had  faith  in  a Deity  ; they  have  put  their  trust  in  him  ; have
worshiped  him  in  some  form  or  other ; and  have  framed  theories
in  regard  to  him,  his  nature  and  his  attributes,  and  hence  have  arisen
mythological  systems,  Philosophical  hypotheses,  and  religious  for-
mularies by  which  Man  can  approach  nigh  unto  that  great  August

THREE  REVELATIONS

1723

Being,  recognized  as  the  great  Force  of  the  Universe  ; and  how-
ever many  diverse  gods  there  may  have  been,  and  howsoever  dif-
ferently portrayed  in  the  different  Nations  and  separate  Mythol-
ogies, yet  they  can  all  be  traced  to  but  one  great  Deity  or  Supreme
God,  of  whom  all  the  others  were,  originally,  emanations,  receiving
names  descriptive  of  their  peculiar  functions,  which  in  time  became
humanized  or  personated  and  worshiped  as  distinct  gods.

Again,  in  the  Original  Theocratic  systems  of  India,  Assyria,
and  Egypt.

Three  persons  are  distinctly  set  forth  in  the  Godhead,  and  their
peculiar  attributes,  alike,  each  to  each,  as  Creator,  Preserver,  and
Destroyer,  this  last  term  evidently  signifying  the  dissolution  of
animal  form  to  reproduce  a Spiritual  regeneration  and  resurrection
to  immortality.

In  the  Indian  system  the  Office  of  the  second  person  of  the
Trimurti  is  that  of  the  Preserver  of  Man,  and  in  the  Nine  sev-
eral Avatars  or  Incarnations  he  has  indicated  his  office,  and  more
particularly  in  the  Ninth,  where  as  the  Good  Black  Shepherd,  or
Chrishna,  “ Anointed  One,”  he  treads  upon  and  bruises  the  head  of
the  Old  Serpent  Calinac,  thus  demonstrating  the  promise  in  Gen.
iii.,  15  verse.  (See  plate,  figure  12.)

Now  what  do  all  these  well-known  Myths  refer  to  if  not  to  the
enmity  between  God  and  Man  ? the  necessity  of  reconciliation  and
the  provision  made  by  the  Deity  for  such  reconciliation  ? As  far
back  as  we  are  able  to  extend  our  examinations  into  the  history  of
Man,  we  find  him  striving  to  become  in  perfect  accord  with  God.
Hence  all  of  his  sacrifices  to  appease  an  offended  Deity.  We  have
the  best  of  opportunities  to  study  the  Paganism  of  the  earliest  civ-
ilizations of  the  Old  World,  compared  with  that  of  all  the  inter-
mediate centuries  and  the  present  day.  We  know  from  the  Old
Testament  precisely  the  Ceremonial  law  and  Observances  of  the
Mosaic  economy  and  the  subsequent  history  of  the  Israelites  to  the
present  day.

We  have  the  Koran  from  the  day  it  was  first  promulgated  by
Mahomet  to  its  spread  of  the  principles  and  practices  of  the  Many
Millions  now  governed  by  it,  and  yet,  when  all  these  come  into  the
light  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ  they  vanish  like  the  Morning  Mist  be-
fore the  glorious  sun  as  it  rises  above  the  horizon.

We  are  not  ignorant  of  the  objections  urged  by  all  skeptical

1724

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

writers  as  to  the  inaccuracies  of  the  Old  Testament  as  well  as  the
New.  Moses  did  not  make  so  many  mistakes  as  he  is  charged  with
by  Volney,  Voltaire,  and  Paine  of  the  last  century,  and  Colenso  of
this.  They  all  forget  that  this  is  an  age  of  inquiry  and  Theists
are  no  longer  afraid  to  read,  study,  and  controvert  infidel  Authors.
The  discoveries  made  during  the  last  twenty-five  years  or  more,
and  which  have  been,  in  that  time,  before  the  reading  World,  in  the
very  country  over  which  Moses  is  said  to  have  conducted  his  people,
have  demonstrated  incontestably  the  truth  of  the  entire  narrative
concerning  the  wanderings  of  the  Children  of  Israel ; and  he  who
denies  this,  after  reading  those  Official  narratives  in  connection  with
the  Mosaic  account  in  Exodus  and  Numbers,  must  be  set  down  to
the  account  of  “ None  so  deaf  as  those  who  will  not  hear.”

We  are  prepared  to  prove,  analogically,  geographically,  topo-
graphically, and  philologically,  that  the  accounts  in  Exodus  and
Numbers  must  have  been  written  on  the  spot,  at  the  time,  and  by
an  active  participant  in  the  Scenes  and  places  portrayed  and  de-
scribed.

We  are  not  now  advocating  any  inspiration  for  the  text,  any  more
than  we  would  for  Gordon’s  “ Annals  of  the  Revolutionary  War.”
He  was  a Cotemporary  writer  cognizant  from  day  to  day  of  the
events  of  the  times,  and  stated  them  as  he  saw  or  heard  of  them,
liable  to  mistakes  and  receiving  incorrect  information.  So  with  the
books  of  the  Pentateuch  giving  an  account  of  the  Exodus  and
Wanderings  for  the  forty  years  between  Egypt  and  the  East  banks
of  the  Jordan.  He  who  now  should  explore  that  country  from
Rameses  through  the  Desert  of  Sinai,  Et  Tih,  and  old  Moab,  or
should  critically  examine  the  Official  reports  of  Scientific  Men  and
Oriental  Scholars  combined,  would  be  obstinately,  willfully  blind,  if
not  convinced  of  the  truthfulness  of  the  Narrative,  so  far  as  the  es-
sential facts  are  at  issue.  It  must  be  remembered,  that  all  the  books
contained  in  the  Old  Testament  have  come  down  to  us  from  the
days  of  Ptolemy  Philadelphus,  almost  pure  and  unaltered,  save  in
some  non-essential  features,  as  the  Septuagint,  agreeing,  not  only
with  the  Hebrew  handed  down  to  us  from  that  people,  but  corrob-
orated by  Josephus,  who  wrote  after  our  Christian  era  began.  The
differences  between  the  Hebrew  and  the  Septuagint  are  no  greater
than  between  any  English  translation  and  an  original  classic  work.

Beyond  the  time  of  Alexander  the  Great,  back  to  the  return

THREE  REVELATIONS

1725

from  Babylonish  captivity,  we  rely  upon  the  Scribes,  who  professed
to  copy  the  sacred  books  precisely  as  given  to  them,  from  age  to
age,  for  the  preservation  of  the  text.  Extreme  care  was  observed
and  exactitude  insisted  upon,  in  every  copy  of  the  Law,  the  Prophets,
Psalms,  and  Histories.  To  prove  this  conclusively,  we  have  only  to
state  the  facts  connected  with  the  translation  of  the  Hebrew  Script-
ures into  Greek  at  Alexandria  by  order  of  Ptolemy  Philadelphus,
by  the  Seventy  Jews  (319  b.c.).  A certified  copy  was  furnished  by
the  High-Priest  at  Jerusalem  and  it  was  forwarded  to  Alexandria,
and  the  Seventy  completed  the  translation  into  Greek.  That  ver-
sion we  have  at  the  present  day  ; it  has  been  carefully  compared  with
the  Hebrew  Scriptures  handed  down  from  Jerusalem  and  copies  of
which  are  in  the  hands  of  the  Jewish  people  all  over  the  world  at
this  day.

It  is  found  that  no  Material  differences  occur  between  the  orig-
inal and  the  Septuagint,  than  might  be  anticipated  in  a translation
from  an  ancient  to  a more  Modern  tongue,  and  as  between  the  peri-
ods of  time,  from  319  b.c.  to  a.d.  1610,  when  King  James’s  transla-
tion in  England  was  perfected  and  published,  the  most  perfect  trans-
lation of  all  times.

Every  attempt,  by  Skeptical  writers,  to  invalidate  the  historical
argument  has  signally  failed  to  overthrow  the  Authenticity  of  the
Old  Testament.  It  stands  as  the  eternal  Rock  of  Ages,  against  all
the  lashings  of  every  element  hurled  against  it  for  its  overthrow,
and  it  will  continue  to  stand  until  time  shall  be  no  more,  and  all  the
enemies  of  the  Truth  shall  have  been  overwhelmed  with  confusion,
and  either  compelled  to  acknowledge  the  Truth,  as  thousands  have
already  done,  or  to  be  cast  aside  with  obloquy  and  shame.

No  single  work,  which  has  had  Man  for  its  Author  ever  had  the
severe  criticisms  which  have  been  urged  against  the  Scriptures,  both
of  the  Old  and  New  Testament;  yet  no  other  writings  have  been
so  triumphantly  vindicated  by  the  highest  talent,  learning,  and  genius
as  have  been  always  displayed  by  the  friends  of  Inspiration.

Yet,  nevertheless,  it  must  be  admitted,  that  the  claim  made  in
behalf  of  the  inspiration,  by  which  the  utterances  were  prompted,
must  challenge  the  freest  investigation  of  all  the  evidences  adduced,
in  support  of  that  claim.  Momentous  consequences  must  follow
the  categorical  decision.  If  the  Bible  be  from  God,  dictated  by  his
spirit,  then  its  every  mandate  must  be  implicitly  obeyed.  A failure

1726

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

to  comply  with  its  commands  and  directions,  according  to  its  own
utterances,  must  involve  eternal  banishment  from  the  presence  of
God.  To  follow  its  dictates,  as  far  as  imperfections  of  humanity
will  permit,  faith  in  all  its  utterances,  and  implicit  trust  in  the
Divine  Author,  according  to  the  text  of  Scripture,  will  secure  the
highest  blessings  on  Earth  and  the  promise  of  an  eternity  of  bliss.
It  is  then  highly  essential,  nay,  it  is  of  the  utmost,  absolute  conse-
quence that  every  one  should  settle  the  question  definitely  whether
he  will  exercise  that  saving  faith  in  the  “ Word  of  promise,”  and  ac-
cept the  offered  blessings,  or,  casting  away  every  offer,  he  will  ut-
terly deny  the  authority  of  Scripture  and  look  upon  the  “ Book  ” as
of  human  invention,  and  if  so,  then,  bearing  upon  its  pages  the  evi-
dence of  deception  and  fraud,  and  altogether  unworthy  of  the  atten-
tion of  reasonable  Men  and  to  be  itself  cast  out.

In  pursuing  our  discussion  upon  this  all-important  subject,  it  is
of  the  utmost  consequence  that  we  should,  each  one  for  himself,  de-
finitely settle  the  question  of  the  Authority  of  the  Word.

If  the  Bible  be  true  and  given  by  the  inspiration  of  the  Spirit  of
God,  then  its  dictates  are  to  be  strictly  obeyed  ; its  utterances  on  all
subjects  to  be  carefully  considered ; and  every  thought,  word,  and
deed  referred  to,  commands  and  dictates  therein  as  the  very  center
of  authority  whereby  we  are  to  be  governed.

If  the  Bible  be  not  true,  then  it  is  to  be  no  more  considered,  than
any  other  book,  which  treats  upon  the  conduct  and  affairs  of  Mankind.

The  arguments,  in  favor  of  inspiration  of  Scripture  have  been
fully  examined  by  the  highest  order  of  minds  that  have  ever  graced
our  schools  and  colleges.  They  have  impartially  considered  the
whole  subject  and  have  given  in  their  testimony  and  pronounced  in
favor  of  the  claim  to  inspiration.  Skeptics,  like  Lord  Rochester,
Lord  Byron,  Rousseau  and  many  others,  could  not  refrain  from  giv-
ing their  testimony,  as  to  the  Value  of  the  Bible  as  a Book  of  pure
Morality.  Bolingbroke  declared  that  “the  Gospel  is,  in  all  cases,
one  continued  lesson  of  the  strictest  Morality,  of  justice,  of  benevo-
lence, and  of  universal  Charity.”

Now  consider  the  state  of  society  in  Palestine,  and  we  may  say
all  over  the  Roman  Empire,  when  Christ  came  teaching  the  lessons
in  the  Gospel,  alluded  to  by  Bolingbroke.  Who  was  it  that  thus
taught?  Was  it  one  from  the  eminent  schools  of  that  age,  learned
in  Grecian  and  Roman  philosophy,  and  prepared  by  a long  course

THREE  REVELATIONS

1727

of  studies  to  become  a teacher  ? Nay,  but  an  unlearned  Carpenter’s
Son,  a denizen  from  that  most  depraved  of  all  the  abandoned  vil-
lages of  Galilee — the  proverbial  Nazareth — he  came,  astonishing  the
World,  with  a system  of  Morals,  so  vastly  above  all  that  had  ever
preceded  it,  that  it  was  incomprehensible  to  the  then  whole  World
of  Man,  and  they  utterly  rejected  Christ  and  his  teachings.

A simple  reference  to  the  profane  histories  of  that  day  will  clearly
demonstrate,  that  long  prior  to  the  coming  of  Christ,  during  his  life,
and  for  a century  following  his  death,  the  whole  world,  or  what  por-
tion of  it  was  known  to  and  conquered  by  Rome,  was  in  the  most
debased  condition  as  to  its  state  of  Morals.  The  question  must
then  very  naturally  arise  in  the  mind  of  the  impartial  investigator  as
from  whence  Christ  derived  his  ideas  of  a Morality,  so  pure  and  in-
finitely above  the  whole  conception  of  his  age,  as  to  command  the
respect  and  admiration  of  the  highest  civilization  in  all  ages  since
he  gave  utterance  to  those  precepts,  as  we  find  them  in  the  Gospels?
He  certainly  did  not  get  them  from  his  people,  or  by  education  in
Nazareth  or  in  any  other  town  of  Galilee  ; for  when  he  commenced
his  Mission  among  the  Cities  of  that  country,  he  astonished  all,  even
those  who  had  known  him  from  his  birth,  when  he  had  finished  the
famous  discourse  recorded  in  Matthew,  chapters  v.,  vi.,  and  vii.  It
is  written  :

“And  it  came  to  pass,  when  Jesus  had  ended  these  sayings  the
people  were  astonished  at  his  doctrine  : For  he  taught  them  as  hav-
ing authority,  and  not  as  the  scribes.”  And  well  they  might  be ;
for  it  was  so  different  in  all  its  principles  from  the  practices  of  his
day,  that  it  was  incomprehensible  to  them.  Yet  in  so  far  as  it  re-
ferred to  the  conduct  of  Men  toward  each  other,  in  the  ordinary
transaction  of  life,  the  lowest  and  poorest  classes  could  see  clearly
a broad  road  for  their  elevation  ; so  different  from  the  treatment
they  were  in  the  habit  of  receiving  from  those  above  them.  We
make  no  allusion  to  the  account  given  of  Miraculous  cures  wrought
by  him  upon  the  poor,  deceased,  and  stricken  people ; or  his  pro-
duction of  food  for  the  hungry  ; or  his  reported  power  over  the  ele-
ments ; it  is  the  quite  as  Miraculous  and  undeniable  fact  of  his
anomalous  teachings,  that  we  now  have  to  deal  with.  The  Miracles
may  be  denied,  but  the  principles  taught  by  him  are  undeniable;
and  that,  it  must  be  confessed,  was  quite  above  the  natural  tendencies
of  his  times  ; and  the  Morals  and  principles  of  the  whole  World  of

1728

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

Man,  from  the  lowest  classes  to  the  highest,  most  refined,  and  cul-
tivated. It  was  the  Augustan  age  in  literature.  In  that  age  we  find
a Cicero,  not  only  as  Author,  but  as  a leading  Statesman  ; Virgil,
Ovid,  Sallust  as  poets,  and  Annalist ; also  the  historian  Tacitus ;
Pliny  the  elder  and  younger,  and  other  Latin  Authors,  familiar  to
all  scholars  at  the  present  day.

The  World  was  utterly  ignorant  of  the  fundamental  principles
upon  which  the  Morality  taught  by  Christ  was  predicated,  viz.,  “To
do  unto  others  what  you  could  justly  wish  should  be  done  to  your-
self.” This  was  the  dictate  as  to  our  conduct  to  our  fellow-Man.
In  relation  to  our  duty  to  God.  If  the  World  of  Man  ever  came
up  to  the  Standard,  even  of  Socrates,  Plato,  or  Aristotle,  it  had  long
lost  a knowledge  of  any  true  principles  of  that  duty  since  the
Roman  Empire  had  succeeded  the  Grecian  ; and  during  the  period
between  the  decline  of  the  Alexandrian  successors  and  the  rise  of
Roman  domination  and  the  growth  of  that  luxury  which  over-
whelmed the  City  of  Rome,  spread  its  baneful  influences  wherever
the  Legions  and  cohorts  were  established  as  a permanence  ; even
over  the  Jewish  provinces  in  Palestine,  so  that  the  severe  discipline
of  the  Scribes  and  pharisees,  and  the  strictest  sect  of  Sadducees,
became  utterly  abandoned  to  the  Roman  influence,  brought  about
by  the  Herods  and  their  courts,  between  the  first  conquest  of  Pal-
estine and  the  period  when  Christ  commenced  his  peregrinations.

What  we  have  said  in  reference  to  Christ  is  well  authenticated
history ; just  as  reliable  as  the  history  of  the  conquest  of  Caesar,  the
history  of  Tacitus,  and  the  accounts  by  Pliny,  and  the  writings  of
Cicero,  Works  which  no  one  denies.

We  think  it  is  clearly  shown  that  the  Morality  taught  by  Christ
was  of  divine  origin.  It  is  a well-known  method  of  demonstration
in  Geometry  to  prove  a proposition  by  demonstrating  that  the  nega-
tive of  it  can  not  be  true.  Thus  I have  shown  that  Christ’s  Morality
could  not  possibly  have  been  of  human  origin,  hence  it  must  have
been  divine.

We  have  been  led  into  the  discussion  of  the  .“  Three  Revela-
tions ” through  the  examination  of  the  antiquity  of  signs,  symbols,  and
emblems.  The  very  remains  of  Antiquity,  from  which  we  derive
our  knowledge  of  the  sign  language,  show,  conclusively,  the  earliest
religious  instincts  of  Mankind.  It  is  to  be  here  remarked  that  the
original  religions  were  designed  to  teach  a pure  Morality  ; all  writers

THREE  REVELATIONS

1729

concur  in  this  fact ; and  the  gross  idolatries,  impure,  and  lascivious
rites,  came  at  a later  day.

We  copy  the  following  testimony  : A recent  writer  of  no  mean
repute,  a clergyman  in  the  Church  of  England,  says  : “ Christianity
is,  in  fact,  the  reintegration  of  all  scattered  religious  convictions,  and
this  accounts  for  the  adoption  by  the  Church  of  so  many  usages  be-
longing primarily  to  paganism,  and  for  the  doctrines  of  the  creed
resembling  in  so  many  points  the  traditions  of  heathenism.”

“The  use  of  the  temple,”  says  M.  Gilliot,  “of  churches  dedi-
cated to  saints,  and  adorned  with  branches  of  trees  on  certain  occa-
sions, incense,  lamps,  tapers,  votive  offerings  made  upon  convales-
cence, holy  water,  asylum,  festivals,  and  ember  seasons,  calendars,
processions,  the  benediction  of  land,  sacerdotal  vestments,  the
tonsure,  the  marriage  ring,  turning  to  the  East,  devotion  to  images,
even,  maybe,  the  strains  of  the  Church,  the  kyrie  eleison,  all  of
these  customs  and  many  others  are  of  Oriental  origin,  sanctified  by
the  adoption  of  the  Church.”  1

Thus  much  as  to  what  has  come  down  from  Paganism  to  the
Church.  Now,  it  is  well  known  that  when  Freemasonry  revived
under  the  influence  of  the  Church  it  was  a Church  affair,  and  its
rites,  ceremonies,  and  symbols  were  controlled  by  the  Churchmen.
The  vows  were  to  make  its  members  true  to  Mother  Church.  Then
the  ceremonial  of  baptism  was  an  essential  feature,  and  in  the  Eng-
lish rite  it  is  still  preserved.  Now,  let  us  examine  that  point,  and
we  quote  from  the  same  author,  viz.  :

“ Baptismal  ceremonial  includes  all  purifications.  The  idea  that
man  is  held  back  from  perfect  union  with  God  by  his  imperfection,
uncleanness,  sin,  is  widely  diffused,  and  manifests  its  existence  by
water,  blood,  and  fire  baptisms,  by  mutilation  of  the  body  and
maceration  of  the  flesh.”

“ Among  the  Greeks  the  mysteries  of  Cotys  commenced  with  a
purification,  a sort  of  baptism,  and  the  priests  of  the  Thracian  god-
dess derived  from  this  their  title  of  Baptai.”8

Apollo,  deriving  his  name  from  Apolouo,  to  purify,  was  the  god
of  expiation  by  baptism.

A festival  of  “ cleansing  ” was  celebrated  in  Thessaly.  “ Mus-
aeus”was  a complete  ritual  of  purifications,  and  divided  the  cere-
monies into  two  orders,  “ telctai  ” and  “ kalharmot,”  the  latter  being

1 Gilliot,  “ L'Orient,  roccident,”  etc.  2 Suidas,  sub.  voc.  Juvenal,  Satir.,  ii.,  92.

iog

1730

HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

purifications  and  expiations  accomplished  by  special  sacrifices,  the
former  resembled  the  purifications  performed  in  the  mysteries.

The  usual  mode  was  dipping,  or  by  aspersion.  Immersion  was
called  “loutron,”  the  other  “ perirransis.”  1 When  Diogenes  saw
one  baptized  by  aspersion,  he  said,  “ Poor  wretch  ! do  you  not  see
that  since  these  sprinklings  cannot  repair  your  grammatical  errors,
they  cannot  repair,  either,  the  faults  of  your  life.”  a

Lustral  water  was  placed  at  the  door  of  temples  for  the  priests
to  purify  the  profane.  The  hands  and  feet  were  washed  before
entering  the  temple.  The  brazen  laver  of  the  Mosaic  tabernacle
was  for  that  purpose.  Blood  was  sprinkled  by  the  peristiarch,  who
had  slain  the  victim  when  the  proedrai  had  opened  the  assembly.
The  herald,  taking  the  peristiarch’s  place,  continued  the  lustration
by  burning  incense.  Fumigations  constituted  another  form  of  puri-
fication. Sand  was  used,  and  salt,  in  default  of  water,  which  was
regarded  as  possessed  of  the  virtue  of  purification,  and  a symbol
of  incorruption  ; every  impure  act  whatever  demanded  purification.

The  Romans  practiced  baptism,  as  we  learn  from  Juvenal,  Satir.,
vi.,  522,  where  he  satirizes  those  who  dipped  their  heads  thrice,  in
the  morning,  into  the  waters  of  Tiber.

At  the  feast  of  Pales,  Goddess  of  Flocks,  shepherds  purified
themselves  by  washing  their  hands  in  new  fallen  dew.3  A lustra-
tion was  made  by  consecrated  water  shaken  from  a branch  of  laurel
or  olive  ; and  Propertius,  like  David,  prays,  “ Spargite  me  lymphis ,”
“ purge  me  with  hyssop.”  4 The  waters  of  Ganges  have  a purifying
effect ; children  are  bathed  in  it,  the  sick  are  sprinkled  with  its
waters,  the  dead  are  plunged  in  it.

Drinking  of  the  water  washes  away  sin,  and  the  Indians  take  it
with  them  and  use  it  in  the  ceremonies  of  their  temples.

In  Egypt  it  was  held  that  the  dead  were  washed  from  their  sin
by  Osiris,  and  on  the  sarcophagi  the  departed  is  often  represented
kneeling  before  him,  who  pours  over  him  water  from  a pitcher.

Purification  with  water  and  urine  of  cows  and  earth  is  the  most
prominent  feature  in  the  ceremonial  of  Zend.  Among  the  Jews,
was  practiced  the  rite  of  baptism,  to  cleanse  by  immersion  or  asper-
sion with  consecrated  water.  (Numb.  viii.  7;  xix.  9,  13-20;  xxxi.

23  ; Ezek.  xxxvi.  25,  26  ; Psl.  li.  2-7.)

— - - - - ■ ■ - *

1 Plat.,  “Craty,”  47  ; Theophr.,  ‘‘Hist.  Plaut.,”  ix.,  12.

2 Diog.,  “ Laert.,”  Lib.  VI.  3 Ovid,  “ Fasti,*’  iv.,  778.  4 Proper.,  vol.  vi.5  7.

THREE  REVELATIONS

i73i

Infant  baptism  was  practiced  in  Scandinavia  before  the  intro-
duction of  Christianity,  and  the  child  was  then  named.

The  Druids  practiced  baptism  by  dipping  or  aspersion,  also  by
fire,  borrowed  from  the  Phoenicians.  This  was  “ passing  through
the  fire  to  Moloch.”  “ Beltein  ” is  still  observed  in  Ireland.  Cattle
are  driven  through  fires  built  on  high  hills,  on  May  1st.

Among  the  Mexicans,  the  new-born  child  was  bathed,  and  these
words  spoken  by  the  nurse : “ Take  this  water,  for  the  goddess

Chalchiuhcueja  is  thy  mother,”  etc.

The  second  baptism  occurred  later,  and  was  by  fire.  A boy  was
passed  four  times  through  the  flames.

This  passing  through  the  fire  was  customary  with  the  Romans
after  their  return  from  a funeral,  to  purify  themselves.  The  same
custom  prevails  in  Syria.  Throughout  Europe,  in  the  Middle
Ages,  was  kept  up  the  old  custom  of  leaping  through  a fire,  and
driving  cattle  betwixt  flames,  and  was  condemned  by  the  Councils
of  the  Church.  “Every  purification,”  said  Servius,  “is  made  either
with  water,  or  fire,  or  air.  In  all  sacred  rites  there  are  three  purifi-
cations, for  they  are  purified  either  with  the  torch  and  sulphur,  or
are  washed  with  water,  or  are  ventilated  with  air.”  1

In  Portal’s  work  on  Egyptian  Symbols,  compared  with  those  of
the  Hebrews,  we  find  this  under

Water.

“ In  Egyptian  Cosmogony,  as  in  the  first  book  of  Moses,  the
world  was  created  from  the  body  of  waters.  This  doctrine,  says
Champollion,  was  professed  in  Egypt  in  the  most  distant  times.
Water  was  the  mother  of  the  world,  the  matrix  of  all  created  beings,
and  the  word  MSCHBR  signifies  matrix  and  waves.

“ Man  was  considered  as  an  image  of  the  world,  the  initiate  was
to  be  born  again  to  a new  life,  and  the  baptism  thenceforward
symbolized  the  primeval  waters.  It  was  on  this  account  that  the
initiate  was  called  MSCHE,  Moses,  a word  signifying  in  Egyptian,
according  to  Josephus  ( Antiq .,  II.,  9,  § 6),  saved  from  the  water,
or  by  the  water ; designated  in  Hebrew  by  MSCHBEE,  unction,
and  MSCHE,  to  save.”

Water  was  the  symbol  of  purity  (according  to  Horapollo)  and

1 In  Aen.,  ii.,  384  ; Ovid,  “ Metam.,”  viii.,  261  ; Terque  senetn  flamma , ter  aqua , ter
sulfur e lust  rat.

l732  HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

designated  the  birth  of  the  pure  or  initiates,  as  we  shall  show  in  the
article  Dew.

Under  the  article  Frog , he  says:

“Thus  the  profane  is  compared  to  primal  matter,  damp,  and
without  form,  over  which  the  spirit  has  not  yet  moved,  and  which
is  born  again  from  the  waters  of  baptism.”

Dew.

“ The  sign  we  give  here  is  an  abridgment  of  the  scene  represent-
ing Egyptian  baptism,  or  shedding  celestial  dew  on  the  head  of  the
neophyte.

“ Horus  and  Thoth-Lunus  pour  water  on  the  head  of  the  neo-
phyte, which  is  transformed  to  divine  life  (ansated  cross),  and  to
purify  (hoopoe-headed  sceptre),  and  is  thus  translated  : Horus,  son
of  Isis,  baptizes  with  water  and  fire  (repeat  four  times).

“The  baptism  of  water  and  fire,  designated  in  the  Zend  by  the
characters  that  Leemans  has  explained,  is  identical  in  its  exterior
form  with  the  baptism  of  water,  the  spirit,  and  of  fire,  in  Luke  iii.
16-17.”

The  name  received  by  the  baptized  or  anointed  was  given  in  the
Bible  to  the  chief  of  the  Hebrews — Moses.  This  name  exists  on
the  Egyptian  monuments ; it  is  written  by  the  sign  of  the  dew  or
baptism , equal  to  Hebrew  M,  and  the  bent  stalk,  equal  to  Sheen,
the  group ; in  Hebrew  SCH,  M,  or  M-SCH-E  is  translated  in
Champollion’s  grammar  by  begotten  ; we  give  it  the  signification  of
regenerated  or  begotten  again.

But  why  multiply  examples  from  antiquity  ? Let  it  suffice  that
when  Masonry  adopted  the  symbolism  of  the  ancients,  how  could
the  most  important  one  be  omitted  ?

Masonry  is  made  up  of  symbolisms.  The  rite  of  consecration
belongs  to  it,  and  by  some  form  or  other  must  take  place  ; and  we
hold  that  every  form  whatever  the  “ pious  rite  may  bear,”  is  “ ma-
sonic,” because  that  word  expresses  the  original  idea.  The  “genus,”
“York,”  “Scotch,”  “ French,”  “modern,”  are  the  “species,”  or  sep-
arate specific  forms  of  ritualism  ; and  we  might  go  further,  and  class
every  “ religion  ” that  existed  as  specific  forms  of  “ masonry,”  for  by
that  word  we  distinguish  the  true  relation  existing  between  the
Creator  and  his  creatures — that  is.  Masonry  or  Religion  (rc-ligo,  to
bind  again).

\

PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SUPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY

HS
40  3
M26
1906
v.6

MaCiuy'  ,llbert  Gallatin

The  histojy  0f  freemasonry


# VOLUME VII

LIBRARY  f\

Brigham  Young   University  ^P

if

FROM

Call      366.1  Ace.  O-foct.c  *C

No KL5&& No .<<X<^bf*>  ..  jF

7.  7  I

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2011  with  funding  from
Brigham  Young  University

http://www.archive.org/details/historyoffreemas07mack

V/l

THE

HISTORY  of  FREEMASONRY

ITS  LEGENDS  AND  TRADITIONS
ITS  CHRONOLOGICAL  HISTORY

By  ALBERT  GALLATIN  MACKEY,  M.D.,  33°.

THE  HISTORY  OF  THE

SYMBOLISM  OF  FREEMASONRY

THE

ANCIENT  AND  ACCEPTED  SCOTTISH  RITE

AND  THE

ROYAL  ORDER  OF  SCOTLAND

By  WILLIAM  R.  SINGLETON,  33°.

WITH  AN  ;  ,,  i   ':,',

ADDENDA

By  WILLIAM  JAMES  HUGHAN

P.".  S.\  G.\  D.\  of  G.\  L.\  of  England— P.".  S.\  G.\  W.\  of  Egypt,  etc.

Volume  Seven
218595

PUBLISHED  BY

THE  MASONIC  HISTORY  COMPANY

New  York  and  London

••  •    •••  •,

>

*  *       *  t  •  ♦

•  •     *

•  «      •     f       •     *  •  m

COPYRIGHTED  1898  &  1906  BY

TWEp)'

1-  1P(&

ALL  RKU1X5  RESERVED.

PRINTED    IN    THE    UNITED    STATES    OF    AMERICA

•  «        t  •     ♦

*  •   t    •

•  •      »    *

*        *  t  «

i  *      i  i<

€  "      *  «

CHAPTER   III

L...M

SYMBOLISM    OF    NUMBERS

HE  best  way,"  says  Lawrie  in  his  preface,  "of
refuting  the  calumnies  which  have  been  brought
against  the  fraternity  of  Freemasons  is  to  lay
before  the  public  a  correct  and  rational  account
of  the  nature,  origin,  and  progress  of  the  institu-
tion, that  they  may  be  enabled  to  determine
.whether  or  not  its  principles  are,  in  any  shape,
connected  with  the  principles  of  revolutionary  anarchy,  and  whether
or  not  the  conduct  of  its  members  has  ever  been  similar  to  the  con-
duct of  traitors."  And  from  the  publication  of  such  sentiments  it
must  be  evident  to  every  Brother's  experience  that  the  feeling
against  Freemasonry,  which  displayed  itself  so  openly  only  a  few
years  ago,  has  assumed  a  much  milder  form,  if  it  be  not  entirely
removed.

It  will  not,  however,  be  difficult  to  account  for  the  dearth  of
Masonic  writers  in  a  preceding  age.  Before  the  18th  century  sym-
bolical masonry,  being  limited  to  the  simple  ceremonial,  needed
few  illustrations ;  because,  as  the  science  was  chiefly  operative,  the
most  valuable  secrets  would  be  those  which  had  a  reference  to  build-
ing, to  the  scientific  ornaments  and  decorations  of  each  particular
style  of  architecture  as  it  flourished  in  its  own  exclusive  period  ;  and
these  mysteries  were  communicated  gradually,  as  the  candidate  rose
through  the  different  stages  of  his  order  or  profession.

There  appears  to  have  been  one  general  principle,  which  ex-
tended itself  over  every  style  from  the  early  English  to  the  florid,
decorated,  and  perpendicular,  and  constituted  one  of  the  most  inef-
fable secrets  of  the  Masonic  lodges.  It  is  now  known  to  have  been
the  hieroglyphical  device  styled  Vesica  Piscis ;  "  which  may  be
traced  from  the  Church  of  St.  John  Lateran,  and  the  old  St.  Peter's
at  Rome,  to  the  Abbey  Church  at  Bath,  which  is  one  of  the  latest
Gothic  buildings  of  any  consequence  in  England.     It  was  formed

1733

1734  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

by  two  equal  circles  cutting  each  other  in  the  centers,  and  was  held
in  high  veneration,  having  been  invariably  adopted  by  Master  Ma-
sons in  all  countries.  In  bas-reliefs,  which  are  seen  in  the  most
ancient  churches,  over  doorways,  it  usually  circumscribes  the  figure
of  our  Saviour.  It  was  indeed  a  principle  which  pervaded  every
building  dedicated  to  the  Christian  religion,  and  has  been  exclusively
attributed  to  the  scientific  acquirements  of  Euclid." 1

Oliver,  in  Pythagorean  Triangle,  says:  "The  secret  meetings
of  master  masons,  within  any  particular  district,  were  confined  to
consultations  with  each  other,  which  mainly  tended  to  the  communi-
cation of  science,  and  of  improvement  in  their  art.  An  evident  re-
sult was  seen  in  the  general  uniformity  of  their  designs  in  architect-
ure, with  respect  both  to  plan  and  ornament,  yet  not  without
deviations.  We  may  conclude  that  the  craft  or  mystery  of  archi-
tects and  operative  masons  was  involved  in  secrecy,  by  which  a
knowledge  of  their  practice  was  carefully  excluded  from  the  acquire-
ment of  all  who  were  not  enrolled  in  their  fraternity.  Still,  it  was
absolutely  necessary,  that  when  they  engaged  in  contracts  with  bish-
ops or  patrons  of  ecclesiastical  buildings,  a  specification  should  be
made  of  the  component  parts,  and  of  the  terms  by  which  either  con-
tracting party  should  be  rendered  conversant  with  them.  A  certain
nomenclature  was  then  divulged  by  the  master  masons  for  such  a
purpose,  and  became  in  general  acceptation  in  the  middle  ages."2

The  abstruse  calculations  which  accompanied  the  sciences  of
geometry  and  arithmetic  are  no  longer  necessary  to  Freemasonry  as
an  institution  purely  speculative  ;  and  they  were  accordingly  omitted
in  the  revised  system,  as  it  was  recommended  to  the  notice  of  the
Fraternity  by  the  Grand  Lodge  in  1 71 7,  and  we  retain  only  the  beau-
tiful theory  of  these  sciences,  with  their  application  to  the  practice
of  morality,  founded  on  the  power  and  goodness  of  T.  G.  A.  O.  T.  U.

It  would  be  an  injustice  to  our  Brethren  of  the  last  century  to
believe  that  they  did  not  entertain  a  profound  veneration  for  the
principles  of  the  Masonic  order.  But  the  customs  and  habits  of  the
people  of  England,  living  in  that  day,  differed  materially  from  our
own.

"  There  were  times  when  conviviality  and  a  love  of  social  har-
mony prevailed  over  the  more  sedate  pursuits  and  investigations  of

1  Kerrich  in  "Archasol.,"  vol.  xvi.,  p.  292.

2  Dallaway,  "  Archit.,"  p.  410.

SYMBOLISM   OF  NUMBERS  173S

science,  in  which  such  an  astonishing  progress  distinguishes  the
present  times.  In  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries  Lon-
don was  an  atmosphere  of  clubs,  and  a  society  of  this  kind  existed
in  every  street  for  the  peculiar  use  of  its  inhabitants,  besides  those
which  were  exclusively  frequented  by  persons  possessing  similar
tastes  or  habits  of  amusement.  And  it  will  be  no  disparagement
to  masonry  if  we  believe  that  its  private  Lodges  did  not  sustain  a
much  higher  rank  than  some  of  these  celebrated  meetings,  for  the
Kit-Cat,  the  Beefsteak,  and  other  clubs  were  frequented  by  the  no-
bility and  most  celebrated  characters  of  that  polished  era.

"It  was  the  organization  of  Freemasonry  that  gave  it  the  dis-
tinctive character  which  elevated  its  pretensions  above  the  common
routine  of  club-life,  and  although  it  is  admitted  that  the  members  of
the  latter  entertained  a  strong  attachment  to  their  several  institu
tions,  yet  none  were  so  enthusiastic  as  those  who  had  enlisted  in  the
cause  of  masonry,  as  we  may  learn  from  the  few  testimonies  which
remain.  A  mason  of  high  standing,  more  than  a  century  ago,  thus
expresses  his  feelings  respecting  the  order :  '  Masonry  is  the  daugh-
ter of  heaven,  and  happy  are  those  who  embrace  her.  By  it  youth
is  passed  over  without  agitation,  the  middle  age  without  anxiety,
and  old  age  without  remorse.  Masonry  teaches  the  way  to  content,
a  thing  almost  unknown  to  the  greater  part  of  mankind.  In  short,
its  ultimate  resort  is  to  enjoy  in  security  the  things  that  are,  to  re-
ject all  meddlers  in  state  affairs  or  religion,  or  of  a  trifling  nature ;
to  embrace  those  of  real  moment  and  worthy  tendency  with  fer-
vency and  zeal  unfeigned,  as  sure  of  being  unchangeable  as  ending
in  happiness.  They  are  rich  without  riches,  intrinsically  possessing
all  desirable  good,  and  have  the  less  to  wish  for  by  enjoyment  of
what  they  have.  Liberty,  peace,  and  tranquillity  are  the  only  ob-
jects worthy  of  their  diligence  and  trouble.' "  1

"  But  this,  as  well  as  almost  all  the  testimonies  of  that  period
to  its  superior  excellence,  is  confined  exclusively  to  the  practice  and
rewards  of  Christian  morality.

"  Modern  revision  has,  however,  extended  the  limits  of  scientific
investigation  in  the  order  of  Freemasonry  beyond  what  was  in-
tended by  those  who  decreed  that  '  the  privileges  of  masonry  should
no  longer  be  restricted  to  operative  masons,  but  extend  to  men  of

1 "  Pocket  Companion,"  p.  296.

1736  •         HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

various  professions,  provided  they  were  regularly  approved  and  ini-
tiated into  the  order.'  And  Dr.  Hemming  and  his  associates,  in
the  year  1814,  thought  it  expedient  to  introduce  some  peculiar  dis-
quisitions from  the  system  of  Pythagoras  on  the  combinations  of
the  point,  the  line,  the  superfice,  and  the  solid,  to  form  rectangular,
trilateral,  quadrilateral,  multilateral  figures  and  the  regular  bodies,
the  latter  of  which,  on  account  of  their  singularity  and  the  mysteri-
ous nature  usually  ascribed  to  them,  were  formerly  known  by  the
name  of  the  five  Platonic  bodies  ;  and  they  were  so  highly  regarded
by  the  ancient  Geometricians  that  Euclid  is  said  to  have  composed
his  celebrated  work  on  the  Elements,  chiefly  for  the  purpose  of  dis-
playing some  of  their  most  remarkable  properties.  These  disquisi-
tions usually  conclude  with  an  explanation  of  the  forty-seventh  prob-
lem of  Euclid,  which  is  called  the  Eureka  of  Pythagoras.

"  That  great  philosopher,  Pythagoras,  who,  by  the  superiority  of
his  mind,  infused  a  new  spirit  into  the  science  and  learning  of
Greece,  and  founded  the  Italic  sect,  taught  his  disciples  Geometry
that  they  might  be  able  to  deduce  a  reason  for  all  their  thoughts
and  actions,  and  to  ascertain  correctly  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  any
proposition  by  the  unerring  process  of  mathematical  demonstration.
Thus  being  enabled  to  contemplate  the  reality  of  things  and  to
detect  imposture  and  deceit,  they  were  pronounced  to  be  on  the
road  to  perfect  happiness.  Such  was  the  discipline  and  teaching  of
the  Pythagorean  Lodges.  It  is  related  that  when  Justin  Martyr
applied  to  a  learned  Pythagorean  to  be  admitted  as  a  candidate
for  the  mysterious  dogmata  of  his  philosophy,  he  was  asked  whether,
as  a  preliminary  step,  he  had  already  studied  the  sciences  of  Arith-
metic, Music,  Astronomy,  and  Geometry,  which  were  esteemed  the
four  divisions  of  the  mathematics  ;  and  he  was  told  that  it  was  im-
possible to  understand  the  perfection  of  beatitude  without  them,  be-
cause they  alone  are  able  to  abstract  the  soul  from  sensibles,  and
to  prepare  it  for  intelligibles.  He  was  further  told  that  in  the  ab-
sence of  these  sciences  no  man  is  able  to  contemplate  what  is  good.
And  because  the  candidate  acknowledged  his  ignorance  of  them  he
was  refused  admission  into  the  societv.

J

"  Above  all  other  sciences  or  parts  of  the  mathematics,  however,
the  followers  of  Pythagoras  esteemed  the  doctrine  of  Numbers,
which  they  believe  to  have  been  revealed  to  man  by  the  celestial
deities.     And  they  pronounced  Arithmetic  to  be  the  most  ancient

SYMBOLISM   OF   NUMBERS  173?

of  all  the  sciences,  because,  being  naturally  first  generated,  it  takes
away  the  rest  with  itself,  but  it  is  not  taken  away  with  them.  For
instance,  animal  is  first  in  nature  before  man  ;  for  by  taking  away
animal  we  take  away  man  ;  but  by  taking  away  man  we  do  not  take
away  animal.  They  considered  numbers  extending  to  the  decad,  to
be  the  cause  of  the  essence  of  all  other  things ;  and  therefore  es-
teemed the  creation  of  the  world  as  nothing  more  than  the  harmo-
nious effect  of  a  pure  arrangement  of  number.  This  idea  was
adopted  by  Dryden  :

1  From  harmony,  from  heavenly  harmony,
This  universal  frame  began  ;

From  harmony  to  harmony,
Through  all  the  compass  of  the  notes  it  ran,
The  diapason  closing  full  in  man.'

"  Pythagoras  had  another  idea,  as  we  are  informed  by  Censorinus,
respecting  the  creation  of  the  world,  and  taught  that  it  was  fash-
ioned according  to  the  principles  of  musical  proportion  ;  that  the
seven  planets  which  govern  the  nativity  of  mortals  have  a  harmo-
nious motion,  and  intervals  corresponding  to  musical  diastemes,  and
render  various  sounds,  according  to  their  several  distances,  so  per-
fectly consonant  that  they  make  the  sweetest  melody,  but  '  inaudible
to  us  by  reason  of  the  greatness  of  the  noise,  which  the  narrow  pas-
sage of  our  ears  is  incapable  of  receiving.'

"And  further,  he  esteemed  the  monad  to  represent  the  great
and  good  Creator,  under  the  name  of  Dis,  or  Zeus,  or  Zau  ;  and  the
duad  he  referred  to  as  the  evil  and  counteracting  principle  or  dae-
mon, 'surrounded,'  as  Plutarch  expresses  it,  'with  a  mass  of  matter.'
And  Porphyry  adds,  that  the  monad  and  duad  of  Pythagoras  seem
to  have  been  the  same  with  Plato's  per  as  and  apeiron,  his  finite  and
infinite  in  his  Philebus  ;  the  former  of  which  two  only  is  substan-
tial, that  first  most  simple  Being,  the  cause  of  unity  and  the  measure
of  all  things.

"According  to  the  above  doctrine,  the  monad  was  esteemed  the
father  of  Number,  and  the  duad  its  mother ;  whence  the  universal
prejudice  in  favour  of  odd  numbers,  the  father  being  had  in  greater
honour  than  the  mother.  Odd  numbers  being  masculine,  were  con-
sidered perfect,  and  applicable  to  the  celestial  gods,  while  even  num-
bers, being  female,  were  considered  imperfect,  and  given  to  the  ter-
restrial and  infernal  deities.     Virgil  has  recorded  several  instances

1738  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

of  this    predilection   in   favour   of  odd  numbers.      In  his  eighth
Eclogue,  he  says  (thus  translated  by  Dryden)  :

'  Around  his  waxen  image  first  I  wind
Three  woollen  fillets  of  three  colours  join'd  ;
Thrice  bind  about  his  thrice-devoted  head,
Which  round  the  sacred  altar  thrice  is  led.
Unequal  numbers  please  the  gods.'

11  The  Eastern  nations  of  the  present  day  appear  to  reverse  this
principle.  When  two  young  persons  are  betrothed,  the  number  of
letters  in  each  of  their  names  is  subtracted  the  one  from  the  other,
and  if  the  remainder  be  an  even  number,  it  is  considered  a  favour-
able omen,  but  if  it  be  odd,  the  inference  is  that  the  marriage  will
be  unfortunate.

"  Every  tyro  knows  that  odd  numbers  are  masonic  ;  and  if  he
be  ignorant  of  the  reason  why  3,  5,  7,  and  11,  have  been  adopted  as
landmarks,  let  him  apply  to  the  Master  of  his  Lodge  for  informa-
tion, and  he  will  then  be  satisfied  of  the  wisdom  of  the  appropri-
ation, because  number  forms  one  of  the  pillars  which  contribute  to
the  support  of  scientific  masonry,  and  constitutes  an  elementary
principle  of  Geometry.  Thus,  in  the  celebrated  Pythagorean  tri-
angle, consisting  of  ten  points,  the  upper  single  dot  or
jod  is  monad  or  unity,  and  represents  a  point,  for  Py-
thagoras considered  a  point  to  correspond  in  proportion
to  unity  ;  a  line  to  2  ;  a  superfice  to  3  ;  a  solid  to  4 ;  and
he  defined  a  point  as  a  monad  having  position,  and  the
beginning  of  all  things ;  a  line  was  thought  to  correspond  with
duality,  because  it  was  produced  by  the  first  motion  from  indivisible
nature,  and  formed  the  junction  of  two  points.  A  superfice  was
compared  to  the  number  three,  because  it  is  the  first  of  all  causes
that  are  found  in  figures  ;  for  a  circle,  which  is  the  principal  of  all
round  figures,  comprises  a  triad,  in  centre,  space,  circumference.
But  a  triangle,  which  is  the  first  of  all  rectilineal  figures,  is  included
in  a  ternary,  and  receives  its  form  according  to  that  number ;  and
was  considered  by  the  Pythagoreans  to  be  the  author  of  all  sub-
lunary things.  The  four  points  at  the  base  of  the  Pythagorean  tri-
angle correspond  with  a  solid  or  cube,  which  combines  the  principles
of  length,  breadth,  and  thickness,  for  no  solid  can  have  less  than
four  extreme  boundary  points.

SYMBOLISM   OP  NUMBERS  1739

44  Thus  it  appears  that  in  applying  number  to  physical  things,
the  system  of  Pythagoras  terminated  in  a  tetrad,  while  that  of  Aris-
totle, by  omitting  the  point,  limited  the  doctrine  of  magnitude  to  a
triad,  viz.,  line — surface — body.  In  divine  things,  however,  the
former  philosopher  profusely  used  the  number  three,  because  it  rep-
resented the  three  principal  attributes  of  the  Deity.  The  first
whereof,  as  we  are  informed  by  Cudworth,  is  infinite  with  fecundity ;
the  second  infinite  knowledge  and  wisdom  ;  and  the  last  active  and
perceptive  power.  From  which  divine  attributes  the  Pythagoreans
and  Platonists  seem  to  have  framed  their  trinity  of  archical  hypos-
tases, such  as  have  the  nature  of  principles  in  the  universe,  and
which,  though  they  be  apprehended  as  several  distinct  substances
gradually  subordinate  to  one  another,  yet  they  many  times  extend
the  to  Theion  so  far  as  to  comprehend  them  all  within  it.

"  While  employed  in  investigating  the  curious  and  unique  prop-
erties which  distinguish  many  of  the  digits,  we  no  longer  wonder
that  the  inhabitants  of  the  ancient  world,  in  their  ignorance  of  the
mysterious  secrets  of  science,  and  the  abstruse  doctrine  of  causes
and  effects,  should  have  ascribed  to  the  immediate  interposition  of
the  Deity  those  miraculous  results  which  may  be  produced  by  an
artful  combination  of  particular  numbers.  Even  philosophy  was
staggered  ;  and  the  most  refined  theorists  entertained  singular  fan-
cies, which  they  were  unable  to  solve  without  having  recourse  to
supernatural  agency.  Hence  the  pseudo-science  of  Arithomancy,
or  divination  by  numbers,  became  very  prevalent  in  the  ancient
world  ;  and  was  used  by  Pythagoras  as  an  actual  emanation  of  the
Deity.  By  this  means,  according  to  Tzetzes,  he  not  only  was  able
to  foretell  future  events,  but  reduced  the  doctrine  to  a  science,  gov-
erned by  specific  rules,  which  he  transmitted  to  posterity  in  his
Book  of  Prognostics.

"  The  ancients  had  a  kind  of  onomantic  arithmetic,  the  invention
of  which  was  in  like  manner  ascribed  to  Pythagoras,  whether  truly
or  not  is  of  no  importance  here,  in  which  the  letters  of  the  alphabet,
the  planets,  the  day  of  the  week,  and  the  twelve  zodiacal  signs,
were  assimilated  with  certain  numbers  ;  and  thus,  by  the  use  of  pre-
scribed tables,  constructed  astrologically  according  to  the  aspects,
qualities,  dignities,  and  debilities  of  the  planets  relatively  towards
the  twelve  signs,  etc.,  the  adept  would  authoritatively  pronounce  an
opinion  on  questions  affecting  life  and  death,  good  and  evil  fortune,

i740  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

journeys,  detection  of  theft,  or  the  success  of  an  enterprise.  It
must  be  confessed,  however,  that  these  predictions  were  not  always
correct ;  for  the  rules  laid  down  in  different  systems  varied  so  es-
sentially that  the  wisest  magician  was  frequently  puzzled  to  select
an  appropriate  interpretation.  The  numeral  system  has  been  intro-
duced into  the  modern  practice  of  astrology,  and  very  important  re-
sults appear  to  depend  on  the  trine,  quartile,  and  sextile  aspect  of
the  planets  in  the  horoscope.

"  Something  of  this  sort  was  used  by  the  Jewish  cabalists  ;  and
hence  one  of  the  rules  of  their  cabala  was  called  gemetria,  or  nu-
meration, which  was  chiefly  confined  to  the  interpretation  of  their
sacred  writings.  The  letters  of  the  Hebrew  language  being  nu-
merals, and  the  whole  Bible  being  composed  of  different  combi-
nations of  those  letters,  it  was  supposed  that  the  correct  meaning  of
difficult  passages  could  only  be  ascertained  by  resorting  to  their
numerical  value.  The  Talmudists  entertained  an  opinion  that  the
mystery  of  numbers  was  actually  taught  in  their  scriptures  ;  because
after  the  idolatrous  priests  of  Baal  had  accepted  the  challenge  of
Elijah,  that  prophet  constructed  his  altar  of  twelve  stones,  corre-
sponding with  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel ;  but  they  say  that  when
he  took  this  number  for  the  special  purpose  of  conciliating  the  fa-
vor of  Jehovah,  it  was  not  merely  because  the  sons  of  Jacob  were
twelve  in  number,  but  because  that  particular  number  was  sup-
posed to  contain  a  profound  and  unfathomable  mystery.

"  Divination  by  numbers  was  not  confined  to  Jewish  or  heathen
nations,  but  occupied  much  attention  at  different  periods  of  Chris-
tianity ;  and  superstitious  properties,  I  am  afraid,  are  still  attached
to  particular  numbers,  as  forming  climacterics,  or  grand  climacter-
ics ;  for  the  days  of  a  man's  life  are  usually  considered  to  be  affect-
ed by  the  septenary  year,  which,  as  it  is  frequently  believed,  pro-
duces considerable  changes  in  both  body  and  mind.  But  the  most
remarkable  change  in  a  person's  life  is  at  the  climacteric,  or  7x7,  49
years  ;  or  the  grand  climacteric,  7x9,  63  years;  or  9x9,  81  years;
each  of  which  is  conceived  to  be  fraught  with  a  peculiar  fatality.
And  there  are  numbers  of  persons,  even  in  the  nineteenth  century,
who  contemplate  these  periods  with  some  degree  of  terror,  and  es-
teem it  a  relief  when  they  have  passed  away.

"  The  exalted  ideas  which  were  entertained  by  the  ancient  poets
and  philosophers  respecting  the  mysterious  properties  of  numbers,

SYMBOLISM    OF   NUMBERS  1741

may  be  estimated  from  the  superstitious  uses  to  which  they  were
made  subservient  in  all  countries,  whether  inhabitants  were  savages
or  refined.  The  former  saw  that  the  number  of  his  fingers  ended
at  ten  ;  and  this  constituted  the  amount  of  his  knowledge.  It
formed  the  standard  of  all  his  computations.  When  a  savage,  on
his  warpath,  was  asked  the  number  of  his  enemies,  if  few,  he  would
hold  one  or  more  of  his  fingers  ;  if  many,  them  all.  And  in  what-
ever manner  his  ideas  of  units  might  be  designated,  the  calculation
would  always  end  in  ten.  Thus,  in  Homer,  Proteus  counts  his  sea-
calves  by  fives,  or  in  other  words  by  the  number  of  fingers  on  his
hand.  Several  nations  in  the  wilds  of  America  have  to  this  day  no
other  instruments  of  calculation.  It  is  another  strong  presumption
of  the  truth  of  what  I  now  advance,  that  all  civilized  nations  count
by  tens  ;  tens  of  tens,  or  hundreds  ;  tens  of  hundreds,  or  thousands  ;
and  so  on,  but  always  from  ten  to  ten.  We  can  discover  no  reason
why  this  number  should  be  chosen  rather  than  any  other  for  the
term  of  numeration,  except  the  primitive  practice  of  counting  by
the  fingers."  l

44  Arithmetical  operations,"  says  the  Abbe  Pluche,  44were  facili-
tated and  shortened  first  by  the  use  of  counters,  and  afterwards  by
figures  or  chalked  letters.  Thus  the  Romans,  when  they  had  a  mind
to  express  unity,  either  held  up  one  finger  or  chalked  the  figure
1.  To  express  the  succeeding  numbers  they  drew  11,  in,  mi.
For  the  number  five  they  depressed  the  three  middle  fingers,  and  ex-
tended the  thumb  and  little  finger  only,  which  formed  the  V.  They
signified  ten  by  putting  two  V's,  one  upon  the  other,  thus  X,  or  by
joining  them  together,  which  formed  X.  Then  they  combined  the
X,  the  V,  and  the  1,  till  they  came  up  to  fifty,  or  five  tens,  which
they  expressed  by  laying  the  five  upon  its  side  thus,  <.  The  figure
in  this  posture  assumed  the  form  of  an  L.  A  hundred  was  marked
with  two  L's  put  one  upon  the  other  [,  which  was  subsequently
rounded  into  a  C.  Five  hundred  was  expressed  by  LC,  and  a
thousand  by  CL3.  These  figures  were  afterwards  changed,  the  one
into  D,  and  the  other  into  CLq,  or  M.  The  Greeks  and  Hebrews
employed  the  letters  of  the  alphabet  ranged  in  order,  to  express  all
imaginable  numbers.

"Amongst  these  sages,  the  Monad  represented  the  throne  of

1  Goguet,  '•  Origin  of  Laws,"  vol.  iv.,  p.  216.

i742  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

the  Omnipotent  Deity,  placed  in  the  centre  of  the  empyrean,  to
indicate  T.  G.  A.  O.  T.  U.,  by  whom  all  things  were  made  and
preserved.  This  disposition  was  symbolised  by  the  ^^
hierogram  of  a  point  within  a  circle  or  equilateral  f  •  1  /\
triangle,  to  exemplify  equally  the  unity  of  the  divine  v*-^
essence,  and  His  eternity,  having  neither  beginning  of  years  nor  end
of  days.  And  this  deduction  appears  perfectly  reasonable,  because
the  Monad  or  Point  is  the  original  and  cause  of  the  entire  numeral
system,  as  God  is  the  cause  of  all  things,  being  the  only  and  great
Creator  on  whom  everything  depends :  for,  if  there  were  more  all-
powerful  Beings  than  one,  none  would  be  independent,  nor  would  all
perfection  be  centred  in  one  individual,  '  neither  formally  by  reason
of  their  distinction,  nor  eminently  and  virtually,  for  then  one  should
have  power  to  produce  the  other,  and  that  nature  which  is  producible
is  not  divine.  But  all  acknowledge  God  to  be  absolutely  and  infinitely
perfect,  in  whom  all  perfections  imaginable,  which  are  simply  such,
must  be  contained  formally,  and  all  others  which  imply  any  mixture
of  perfection,  virtually.'  "  !

Sthenidas  the  Locrian  says,  "The  first  god  is  conceived  to  be
the  father  both  of  gods  and  men,  because  he  is  mild  to  everything
which  is  in  subjection  to  him,  and  never  ceases  to  govern  with
providential  regard.  Nor  is  he  alone  satisfied  with  being  the  maker
of  all  things,  but  he  is  the  nourisher,  the  preceptor  of  everything
beautiful,  and  the  legislator  to  all  things  equally.

44  The  universal  symbol  by  which  this  great  Being  was  designated,
viz.,  the  point  within  a  circle,  it  may  be  necessary  to  explain  with
some  degree  of  minuteness,  because  it  constitutes  one  of  the  most
important  emblems  of  masonry.  One  of  the  earliest  heathen  philos-
ophers of  whom  history  gives  any  account  was  Hermes  Trismegis-
tus,  and  he  describes  the  Maker  of  the  universe  as  4  an  intelligible
sphere  whose  centre  is  everywhere,  and  whose  circumference  cannot
be  defined,'  because  the  universe  is  boundless,  and  He  existed  from
all  eternity.  David  expressed  a  similar  sentiment  when  he  said,
4  Thou  art  the  same,  and  Thy  years  will  have  no  end.'  We  are  told
that  the  Persians,  when  they  wished  to  pay  a  high  respect  to  the
Deity,  ascended  to  the  top  of  a  high  mountain,  and  expanding  both
hands,  they  prayed  to  Him  in  the  name  of  'the  circle  of  heaven.

■  *

1  Pearson  on  the  Creed,  Art.  I.

SYMBOLISM   OF  NUMBERS  1743

In  like  manner,  the  Jews  entertained  a  belief  that  '  the  heaven  of
heavens  could  not  contain  Him.'  The  Romans  placed  a  circular
target  as  a  symbol  of  the  Deity,  because,  as  in  the  circumference
there  is  but  one  point  at  its  centre,  and  can  be  no  more,  so  in  the
whole  circumference  of  the  universe  there  can  be  only  one  perfect
and  powerful  God  ;  nor  is  it  possible  there  should  be  another.

"  I  have  received  a  suggestion  from  a  very  intelligent  brother
respecting  this  symbol,  which  merits  consideration.  He  says :
When  the  W.  M.  elect  enters  into  the  obligation  of  an  Installed
Master,  the  brethren  form  a  circle  round  him,  he  being  in  the
centre  ;  and  in  this  situation  he  is  said  to  be  the  representative  of
Solomon,  the  son  of  David.  Now,  as  this  is  unquestionably  a
Christian  degree,  I  understand  this  son  David  to  be  a  figurative
expression  for  the  Redeemer  of  mankind.  The  W.  M.  is  then
specially  intrusted  with  the  Holy  Scriptures  and  invested  with  a
jewel  which  is  emblematical  thereof,  and  it  then  becomes  his  duty
to  exhort  his  brethren  to  search  those  Scriptures,  because  they  con-
tain the  words  of  eternal  life,  and  testify  to  the  divinity  of  Christ.
Searching  implies  something  lost ;  and  our  ancient  brethren,  the
early  Christians,  after  they  had  lost,  by  an  untimely  death,  their
Lord  and  Master,  remembered  that  while  assembled  together  in
Lodge  here  below,  He  promised,  that  when  two  or  three  were
gathered  together  in  His  name,  He  would  be  in  the  midst  of  them;
and  cheered  by  the  recollection,  they  were  naturally  led  to  hope
that  He  would  always  be  found  in  the  centre  of  their  circle,  when-
ever regularly  assembled  together  in  a  just  and  perfect  Lodge
dedicated  to  God  and  holy  St.  John.  In  like  manner,  we  are  re-
minded by  that  sacred  symbol  that  He  is  always  in  the  midst  of  us
— that  His  all-seeing  eye  is  always  upon  us,  and  therefore  exhorted
to  discharge  our  duty  towards  Him  and  our  fellow-creatures  with
freedom,  fervency,  and  zeal.1

"  The  Monad,  amongst  the  Grecian  philosophers,  was  a  symbol
of  the  hermaphrodite  deity,  or  junction  of  the  sexes,  because  it  par-
takes of  two  natures.  In  a  mysterious  passage  of  the  Yajur  Veda,
Brahma  is  spoken  of,  after  his  emanation  from  the  golden  egg,  as
experiencing  fear  at  being  alone  in  the  universe  ;  he  therefore
willed   the    existence  of    another,  and  instantly  became    masculo-

1  This  refers  to  the  Ancient  Method  of  installing  a  worshipful  Master.  (W.R.S.)

1744  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

feminine.  The  two  sexes  thus  existing  in  one  god  were  immedi
ately,  by  another  act  of  volition,  divided  in  twain,  and  became  man
and  wife.  This  tradition  seems  to  have  found  its  way  into  Greece  ;
for  the  Androgyne  of  Plato  is  but  another  version  of  this  Oriental
myth.  If  the  Monad  be  added  to  an  odd  number,  it  makes  it
e\en,  and  if  to  an  even  number,  it  makes  it  odd.  Hence  it  was
called  Jupiter,  because  it  stands  at  the  head  of  gods  and  men  ;  and
also  Vesta  or  Fire,  because  like  the  point  within  a  circle,  it  is  seated
in  the  midst  of  the  world.  It  was  also  called  the  Throne  of  Jupi-
ter, from  the  great  power  which  the  centre  has  in  the  universe  being
able  to  restrain  its  general  circular  motion,  as  if  the  custody  of  the
Maker  of  all  things  were  constituted  therein.

"  Plutarch  tells  us  that  Numa  built  a  temple  in  an  orbicular  form
for  the  preservation  of  the  sacred  fire ;  intending  by  the  fashion  of
the  edifice  to  shadow  out,  not  so  much  the  earth  as  the  whole
universe ;  in  the  centre  of  which  the  Pythagoreans  placed  Fire,
which  they  called  Vesta  and  Unity.  The  Persians  worshipped  the
circumference,  but  it  could  only  refer  to  the  apparent  course  of  the
sun  in  the  firmament,  which  is  the  boundary  of  common  observa-
tion ;  for  the  real  circumference  is  far  beyond  the  comprehension  of
finite  man.  And  the  sun,  under  the  symbol  of  a  point  within  a
circle,  was  the  great  object  of  worship  amongst  the  Dionysian
artists  who  built  the  Temple  of  Solomon.

"The  Monad  further  signified  Chaos,  the  father  of  life,  sub-
stance, the  cause  of  Truth,  reason,  and  the  receptacle  of  all  things.
Also  in  greater  and  lesser  it  signified  equal ;  in  intention  and  remis-
sion, middle ;  in  multitude,  mean ;  in  time,  now,  the  present,
because  it  consists  in  one  part  of  time  which  is  always  present.1
The  cabalists  considered  that  the  first  eternal  principle  is  magical,
and  like  a  hidden  fire,  is  eternally  known  in  its  colours,  in  the  figure,
in  the  wisdom  of  God,  as  in  a  looking-glass.  The  magical  centre
of  the  first  principle  is  fire,  which  is  as  a  spirit,  without  palpable
substance."

"The  learned  Aben  Ezra,  on  the  i  ith  chapter  of  Daniel,  says  that
the  number  one  is  in  a  manner  the  cause  of  all  numbers,  and  it  is
besides  a  complete  number ;  it  causes  multiplication  and  remainder,
but  does  not  admit  of  either  itself.     And  in  another  place  he  says,

1  "  Macrob.  in  somn.,"  1.  i.,  s.  6.

THEODORE   S.    PARVIN

wi^fths  .z  a5ioaoa\\T

.. -

■  ■'■'  .

■  ■

-

I

i

SYMBOLISM   OF  NUMBERS  1745

'  Numbers  are  founded  on  the  unit  one.'  The  sage  Latif  observes
the  same.  According  to  Euclid,  in  his  second  definition  of  the
seventh  book,  numbers  are  formed  of  many  units ;  but  unity  being
indivisible,  has  no  composition,  nor  is  it  a  number,  but  the  fountain
and  mother  of  all  numbers.  Being  the  cause  of  all  numbers,  they
are  formed  by  a  plurality  of  units.  Thus  2  is  twice  1  ;  3  is  three
units,  etc.  ;  so  that  all  numbers  require  the  Monad,  while  it  exists
by  itself  without  requiring  any  other.  All  which  is  to  be  consid-
ered of  the  first  cause  ;  for  as  one  is  no  number,  but  the  cause  and
beginning  of  number,  so  the  First  Cause  has  no  affinity  to  creatures,
but  is  the  cause  and  beginning  of  them  ;  they  all  stand  in  need  of
Him,  and  He  requires  assistance  from  none.  He  is  all  in  all,  and
all  are  included  in  Him  in  the  most  simple  unity.  The  Jewish  Rab-
bins agree  that  He  is  One,  and  there  is  no  unity  like  His  in  the  uni*
verse  ;  the  nearest  idea  that  we  can  form  of  Him  is  symbolized  by
the  unit  or  figure  one.1

"  The  Pythagoreans  say,  '  the  Monad  is  the  principle  of  all
things.  From  the  Monad  came  the  indeterminate  duad,  as  matters
subjected  to  the  cause.  Monad,  from  the  Monad  and  indetermi-
nate duad  ;  Numbers,  from  numbers ;  Points,  points  ;  Lines,  from
lines  ;  Superfices,  from  superfices ;  Solids,  from  these  solid  Bodies,
whose  elements  are  four,  Fire,  Water,  Air,  Earth  ;  of  all  which,
transmuted,  and  totally  changed,  the  World  consists.' 9

"  But  Freemasonry  has  a  peculiar  preference  for  the  monad,  which
produces  some  very  striking  and  remarkable  coincidences  in  every
nation  under  the  sun.  In  an  old  ritual  of  the  Fellow-Craft's  degree,
used  about  the  middle  of  the  last  century,  we  find  the  following  pas-
sage in  reference  equally  to  the  first  step  of  the  winding  staircase,
the  Point,  and  the  letter  G  :  '  God,  the  great  Architect  of  the  Uni-
verse, whom  it  is  at  all  times  our  duty  to  worship  and  obey.'  In  a
ritual  still  more  ancient,  the  same  meaning  is  rather  differently  ex-
pressed, viz.,  'the  Grand  Architect  and  Contriver  of  the  Universe  ;
or  He  that  was  taken  up  to  the  topmost  pinnacle  of  the  Holy
Temple.'8

"  This  acknowledgment  of  the  divine  unity,  or  point  within  either
a  circle  or  a  triangle,  was  common  to  all  the  systems  of  Spurious
Freemasonry  that  ever  existed,  from  India  and  Japan  to  the  ex-

1  Manasseh  ben  Israel,  "  Concil.,"  vol.,  p.  105.

2  "  Laert."  in  vit.  Pyth.  3  Oliver,
no

1746  HISTORY   OF    FREEMASONRY

tremest  West,  including  the  Goths,  the  Celts,  and  the  aborigines  of
America.  All  acknowledge  the  unity  of  T.  G.  A.  O.  T.  U.,  whether
involved  in  the  deepest  ignorance,  or  refined  by  civilization  and  a
knowledge  of  philosophy  and  science.  The  sages  of  Greece,  through
a  series  of  wire-drawn  reasoning,  came  to  the  same  conclusion  as  the
uninformed  savages  of  Britain,  Scandinavia,  Mexico,  or  Peru.1

"  Zoroaster  is  sublime  in  his  description  of  the  Deity ;  but  he
had  enjoyed  the  advantage  of  associating  with  the  learned  Jews  at
Babylon,  and  from  them,  doubtless,  he  had  acquired  his  knowledge.
He  taught  that  '  God  is  the  first :  incorruptible,  eternal,  unmade,  in-
divisible, not  like  anything,  the  author  of  all  good,  the  wisest  of  the
wise,  the  father  of  justice,  self-taught  and  absolutely  perfect.'  An-
aximenes,  the  follower  of  Thales,  like  his  master,  was  a  bold  and
subtle  reasoner,  and  called  everything  by  its  proper  name.  He
denominated  the  one  God  Zeus,  by  which  he  intended  to  intimate
that,  like  the  air  we  breathe,  He  is  infinite,  omnipresent,  and  eternal.
The  Emperor  Trajan,  in  a  conversation  with  the  Rabbi  Joshua,  hear-
ing the  latter  say  that  '  God  is  everywhere  present,'  observed,  '  I
should  like  to  see  Him.'  'God's  presence  is  indeed  everywhere,'
replied  Joshua,  'but  He  cannot  be  seen;  no  mortal  eye  can  behold
His  glory.'  The  Emperor  insisted.  '  Well,' said  Joshua,  'suppose
we  try  first  to  look  at  one  of  His  ambassadors.'  The  Emperor  con-
sented. The  Rabbi  took  him  into  the  open  at  noonday,  and  bid
him  look  at  the  sun  in  his  meridian  splendor.  '  I  cannot — the  light
dazzles  me.'  '  Thou  art  unable,'  said  Joshua,  'to  endure  the  light  of
His  creatures,  and  canst  thou  expect  to  behold  the  resplendent  glory
of  the  Creator  ?     Would  not  such  a  sight  annihilate  you  ? ' 2

"  Xenophanes,  the  principal  leader  of  the  Aleatic  sect,  enter-
tained the  same  belief  ;  and  described  that  Great  Being,  whom  they
all  admitted  to  be  incomprehensible,  as  '  incorporeal,  in  substance,
and  figure  globular  ;  and  in  no  respect  similar  to  man.  That  He  is
all  sight  and  hearing,  but  does  not  breathe.  That  He  is  all  things ;
the  mind  and  wisdom ;  not  generate,  but  eternal,  impassible,  and
immutable.'  Parmenides  held  that  '  the  principle  of  all  things  is
one ;  but  that  it  is  immovable.'  Sophocles  assures  us  that  in  his
time,  the  belief  in  one  God,  who  made  heaven  and  earth,  was  preva-
lent among  those  who  had  been  initiated  into  the  Greater  mysteries.

1  Oliver.  '  Goodhugh's  "Lectures  on  Bibliographical  Literature."

SYMBOLISM   OF   NUMBERS  1747

M  Socrates  and  his  pupil  Plato  maintained  the  same  opinion.
'  By  the  name  of  God,'  said  they,  '  we  mean  the  parent  of  the  world ;
the  builder  of  the  soul ;  the  maker  of  heaven  and  earth  ;  whom  it  is
difficult  to  know  by  reason  of  His  incredible  power;  and  if  known,
it  is  impossible  to  clothe  our  knowledge  in  words.'  Anaxagoras
contended  for  the  supreme  government  of  one  God,  but  acknowl-
edged that  he  was  unable  to  comprehend  his  nature.  His  pupil,  Eu-
ripides, however,  was  more  fortunate,  for  he  discovered  the  omni-
presence of  the  Deity  ;  and  confessed  it  by  asking  whether  it  is  pos-
sible to  confine  Him  within  the  wall  of  a  temple  built  with  hands?
Protagoras  was  banished  by  the  Athenians  for  impiety  in  declaring
that '  he  knew  nothing  of  the  gods,  because  in  so  short  a  life  it  was
impossible  to  acquire  a  knowledge  of  them.'

"  Zeno  taught  the  unity  and  eternity,  of  the  Deity.  Plutarch,
learned  in  all  the  rites  and  doctrines  of  the  Spurious  Freemasonry
of  Egypt  and  Greece,  expresses  himself  plainly  on  this  point  in  his
treatise  of  Isis  and  Osiris.  Aristides  believed  and  taught  his  disci-
ples that  'Jove  made  all  existing  things,  in  the  earth,  the  heavens,  or
the  sea.'"

Thus  was  the  doctrine  of  the  Monad  or  unity,  the  first  point  in
the  Pythagorean  Triangle,  carried  out  in  these  early  ages,  and
among  an  idolatrous  people ;  for  however  they  might  worship  an
indefinite  number  of  intelligences,  they  had  discrimination  enough
to  perceive  that  there  could  be  only  one  Being  of  unbounded  power,
because  a  duplication  of  such  beings  would  circumscribe  the  potency
of  each  individual,  and  destroy  his  omnipotence  and  immutability.
"  It  was  idle,"  says  Bryant,  "  in  the  ancients  to  make  a  disquisition
about  the  identity  of  any  god,  as  compared  with  another;  and  to
adjudge  him  to  Jupiter  rather  than  to  Mars,  to  Venus  rather  than
Diana.  According  to  Diodorus,  some  think  that  Osiris  is  Serapis  ;
others  that  he  is  Dionysus  ;  others  still,  that  he  is  Pluto;  many  take
him  for  Zeus  or  Jupiter,  and  not  a  few  for  Pan."

"  The  twofold  reason  of  diversity  and  inequality,  and  of  every-
thing that  is  divisible  in  mutation,  and  exists  sometimes  one  way,
sometimes  another,  the  Pythagoreans  called  Duad,  for  the  nature  of
the  Duad  in  particular  things  is  such.  These  reasons  were  not  con-
fined to  the  Italic  sect,  but  other  philosophers  also  have  left  certain
unitive  powers  which  comprise  all  things  in  the  universe ;  and
amongst  them  there  are  certain  reasons  of  quality,   dissimilitude,

i748  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

and  diversity.  Now  these  reasons,  that  the  way  of  teaching  might
be  more  perspicuous,  they  called  by  the  names  of  Monad  and  Duad,
but  it  is  all  one  amongst  them  if  they  be  called  biform,  or  equali-
form,  or  diversiform."  '

"  From  such  definitions  and  principles  it  will  not  be  difficult  to
see  that  the  Duad  was  sufficiently  comprehensive  to  admit  of  a  vast
number  of  references  ;  and  therefore  the  prolific  fancy  of  poets  and
philosophers  assigned  to  it  a  variety  of  remarkable  qualities.  Being
even  it  was  esteemed  an  unlucky  number,  and  dedicated  to  the
malignant  genii  and  the  infernal  deities,  because  it  conveyed  to  the
mind  ideas  of  darkness,  delusion,  versatility,  and  unsteady  con-
duct."2 For  this  reason,  the  Pythagoreans  spoke  of  two  kinds  of
pleasure,  "  whereof  that  which  indulgeth  to  the  belly  and  to  lascivious-
ness,  by  profusion  of  wealth,  they  compared  to  the  murderous  songs
of  the  Syrens ;  the  other,  which  consists  in  things  honest  and  just,
comprising  all  the  necessary  indulgences  of  life,  is  quite  as  attrac-
tive as  the  former,  and  does  not  bring  repentance  in  its  train." 3  The
Duad  was  considered  indefinite  and  indeterminate,  because  no  per-
fect figure  can  be  made  from  two  points  only,  which,  if  united,
would  merely  become  a  right  line  ;  whence  a  notion  was  originated
that  it  is  defective  in  its  principles,  and  superfluous  in  its  applica-
tion to  the  sciences.  It  signified  also  misfortune,  from  a  general
belief  in  its  unpropitious  qualities  ;  and  discord,  because  in  music
that  which  renders  dissonances  grating,  is,  that  the  sounds  which
form  them,  instead  of  uniting  to  produce  harmony,  are  heard  each
by  itself  as  two  distinct  sounds,  though  produced  at  one  and  the
same  time.  Brand  tells  us4  that  there  is  a  little  history  extant  of
the  unfortunate  reigns  of  William  II.,  Henry  II.,  Edward  II.,
Richard  II.,  Charles  II.,  and  James  II.,  entitled  "  Numerus  In-
faustus  "  ;  in  the  preface  to  which  the  author  says,  "  Such  of  the
kings  of  England  as  were  the  Second  of  any  name,  proved  very
unfortunate  princes."

"  The  number  two  was  referred  to  Juno,  because  she  was  the  sis-
ter and  wife  of  Jove  ; 5  and  hence  the  Duad  became  a  symbol  of
marriage.  On  this  subject  Hierocles  says  two  things  are  necessary
to  all  men  in  order  to  pass  through  life  in  a  becoming  manner,  viz.,
the  aid  of  kindred,  and  sympathetic  benevolence.     But  we  cannot

1  Porph.,  "  Hist.  Phil.,"  p.  32.  2  Porph.,  "  Vit.  Pyth.,"  p.  84.  s  Ibid.,  p.  25.

4  "  Pop.  Ant.,"  vol.  iii.,  p.  145.         »  Mart.  Capcl.,  "  Eulog.  in  somn.  Scrip."

SYMBOLISM   OF   NUMBERS  1749

find  anything  more  sympathetic  than  a  wife,  nor  anything  more
kindred  than  children,  both  of  which  are  afforded  by  marriage.
And  to  produce  these  two  beneficial  effects,  Callicratides  gives  the
following  excellent  advice  :  •  Wedlock  should  be  coadapted  to  the
peculiar  tone  of  the  soul,  so  that  the  husband  and  wife  may  not
only  accord  with  each  other  in  prosperous,  but  also  in  adverse,  fort-
une. It  is  requisite,  therefore,  that  the  husband  should  be  the  reg-
ulator, master,  and  preceptor  of  his  wife.  The  regulator,  indeed,  in
paying  diligent  attention  to  her  affairs ;  but  the  master,  in  govern-
ing and  exercising  authority  over  her ;  and  the  preceptor  in  teach-
ing her  such  things  as  are  fit  for  her  to  know.'

"  But  how  unfortunate  soever  the  Duad  may  have  been  esteemed
as  a  general  principle,  it  was  not  devoid  of  its  share  of  beneficent
properties  to  balance  against  those  that  were  malignant  or  forbid-
ding. '  The  two  principles,'  said  the  Paracelsic  Lectures  of  Conti-
nental Masonry,  '  are  not  always  at  strife,  but  sometimes  in  league
with  each  other,  to  produce  good.  Thus  death  and  anguish  are  the
cause  of  Fire,  but  fire  is  the  cause  of  Life.  To  the  abyss  it  gives
sting  and  fierceness,  else  there  would  be  no  mobility.  To  the  Light
— world,  essence,  else  there  would  be  no  production  but  an  eternal
Arcanum.  To  the  world  it  gives  both  essence  and  springing,
whence  it  becomes  the  cause  of  all  things.'  The  Duad  was  defined
by  the  Pythagoreans,  '  the  only  principle  of  purity  ;  yet  not  even,
nor  evenly  evn,  nor  unevenly  even,  nor  evenly  uneven.'  It  was  an
emblem  of  fortitude  and  courage,  and  taught  that  as  a  man  ought  to
do  no  wrong,  neither  ought  he  to  suffer  any,  without  due  sense  and
modest  resentment  of  it ;  and  therefore,  according  to  Plutarch,  the
•  Ephori  laid  a  mulct  upon  Sciraphidas,  because  he  tamely  submitted
to  many  injuries  and  affronts,  concluding  him  perfectly  insensible
to  his  own  interest,  as  he  did  not  boldly  and  honestly  vindicate  his
reputation  from  the  wrongs  and  aspersion  which  had  been  cast  upon
it ;  under  the  impression  that  he  would  be  equally  dull  and  listless
in  the  defence  of  his  country,  if  it  should  be  attacked  by  a  hostile
invader.'

"  The  Duad  was  elevated  by  the  ancient  philosophers  of  the
Italic  sect  into  a  symbol  of  Justice,  because  of  its  two  equal  parts.
Hence  Archytas,  who  was  a  follower  of  Pythagoras,  says,  '  The
manners  and  pursuits  of  the  citizens  should  be  deeply  tinctured
with  justice  ;  for  this  will  cause  them  to  be  sufficient  to  themselves,

i75o  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

and  will  be  the  means  of  distributing  to  each  of  them  that  which  is
due  to  him  according  to  his  desert.  For  thus  also  the  sun,  moving
in  a  circle  through  the  zodiac,  distributes  to  everything  on  the
earth,  generation,  nutriment,  and  an  appropriate  portion  of  life :
administering,  as  if  it  were  a  just  and  equitable  legislation,  the  ex-
cellent temperature  of  the  seasons.' 1

"  It  signified  also  science,  because  the  demonstration  of  an  un-
known number  or  fact  is  produced  from  syllogistic  reasonings  on
some  other  number  or  fact  which  is  known  ;  and  this  is  deducible
by  the  aid  of  science.  It  was  further  considered  as  a  symbol  of  the
soul,  which  is  said  to  be  divided  into  two  parts,  the  rational  and  the
irrational ;  the  latter  being  subdivided  into  the  irascible  and  the
appetitive.  The  rational  part  enables  us  to  arrive  at  the  truth  by
contemplation  and  judgment ;  while  the  irrational  uniformly  im-
pels the  soul  to  evil.  And  it  signifies  Opinion,  which  must  be
either  true  or  false ;  and  Harmony,  whence  the  ancients  introduced
music  at  their  banquets  along  with  wine  ;  that  by  its  harmonious
order  and  soothing  effect  it  might  prove  an  antidote  to  the  latter,
Which  being  drank  intemperately,  renders  both  mind  and  body  im-
becile."

"The  Pythagorean  philosophy,"  says  Reuchlin,2  "  taught  that  the
Monad  and  Duad  were  a  symbol  of  the  principles  of  the  universe  ;
for  when  we  make  inquiry  into  the  causes  and  origin  of  all  things
what  sooner  occurs  than  one  or  two  ?  That  which  we  first  behold
with  our  eyes  is  the  same,  and  not  another  ;  that  which  we  first
conceive  in  our  mind  is  Identity  and  Alterity — one  and  two.  Alc-
maeon  affirmed  two  to  be  many,  which,  he  said,  were  contrarieties,
yet  unconfined  and  indefinite,  as  white  and  black,  sweet  and  bitter,
good  and  evil,  great  and  small.  These  multiplicitous  diversities  the
Pythagoreans  designed  by  the  number  Ten,  as  proceeding  from  the
Duad  ;  viz.,  finite  and  infinite,  even  and  odd,  one  and  many,  right
and  left,  male  and  female,  steadfast  and  moved,  straight  and  crooked,
light  and  darkness,  square  and  oblong.  These  pairs  are  two,  and
therefore  contrary  ;  they  are  reduced  all  into  ten,  that  being  the
most  perfect  number,  as  containing  more  kinds  of  numeration  than
the  rest ;  even,  odd  ;  square,  cube  ;  long,  plain  ;  the  first  uncom-
pounded,  and  first  compounded,  than  which   nothing  is  more  ab-

1  "  Fragments  "  of  Archytas,  p.  16.  2  "  A.  Cabal.,"  I.,  ii.,  p.  2.

SYMBOLISM   OF  NUMBERS  1751

solute,  since  in  ten  proportions  four  cubic  numbers  are  consum-
mated, of  which  all  things  consist."

"  Categories,  reducible  in  two,  Substance  and  Accident,  both
springing  from  one  essence  ;  for  ten  so  loves  two,  that  from  one
it  proceeds  to  two,  and  by  it  reverts  into  one.  The  first  Ternary  is
of  one  and  two,  not  compounded  but  consistent  ;  one  having  no
position,  makes  no  composition  ;  an  unit,  whilst  an  unit,  hath  no
position,  nor  a  point  whilst  a  point.  There  being  nothing  before
one,  we  rightly  say,  one  is  first ;  two  is  not  compounded  of  num-
bers, but  a  co-ordination  of  units  only.  It  is  therefore  the  first
number,  being  the  first  multitude ;  not  commensurable  by  any
number,  but  by  a  unit,  the  common  measure  of  all  number ;  for
one,  two,  is  nothing  but  two  ;  so  that  the  multitude  which  is  called
Triad,  arithmeticians  term  the  first  number  uncompounded,  the
Duad  being  not  an  uncompounded  number,  but  rather  not  com-
pounded." *

"The  Chinese  philosophers  entertained  similar  fancies  about  the
color  of  blue,  which  is  formed  by  a  mixture  of  red  and  black.
This  color,  they  say,  '  being  the  color  of  heaven,  represents  the
active  and  passive  principle  reunited  in  one  ;  the  male  and  female,
the  obscure  and  brilliant.  All  corporeal  beings  are  produced  by
inapprehensible  nature,  emanating  from  blue,  which  forms  the
origin  of  all  subtile  natures.'  In  the  science  of  astrology,  which
was  very  prevalent  half  a  century  ago,  the  signs  were  invested  with
significant  colors.  Thus  it  was  said  that  Taurus  was  designated
by  white  mixed  with  citron  ;  Aries  and  Gemini,  by  white  and  red  ;
Cancer,  green  and  russet  ;  Leo,  red  and  green ;  Virgo,  black  speck-
led with  blue ;  Libra,  black  or  dark  crimson  ;  Scorpio,  brown  ;
Sagittarius,  yellow  or  green  ;  Capricorn,  black  or  russet ;  Aquarius,
a  sky  color  or  blue  ;  and  Pisces  by  a  brilliant  white."

"  Nor  were  the  Jews  destitute  of  a  respect  for  the  number  two  ;
which  was  indeed  inculcated  in  the  Mosaical  writings.  Thus  while
the  clean  beasts  were  admitted  into  the  ark  of  Noah  by  sevens,  the
unclean  ones  were  allowed  to  enter  by  pairs.  The  angels  that  were
deputed  to  destroy  Sodom  were  two ;  Lot  had  two  daughters  ;  the
sons  of  Isaac  and  the  daughters  of  Laban  were  each  two  in  number,
as  were  also  the  sons  of  Joseph.     Moses  was  directed  to  make  two

1  Colebrook,  "  Philosophy  of  the  Hindus,"  p.  21.

i752  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

cherubim  ;  the  Onyx-stones  of  remembrance  on  the  high-priest's
shoulders  were  two,  to  symbolize  the  Sun  and  Moon,  as  Josephus
says ;  but  Beda  thinks  they  were  emblematical  of  the  faith  and
practice  of  the  patriarchs  and  prophets,  while  others  suppose,  with
greater  probability,  that  the  high-priest  bore  them  on  his  shoulders
to  prefigure  the  manner  in  which  Christ  was  to  bear  the  sins  of  His
people.  The  Jewish  offerings  were  frequently  directed  to  be  by
pairs ;  as  two  lambs,  two  pigeons,  two  turtles,  two  kids,  etc.  The
waive  loaves  were  two  ;  and  the  shewbread  was  placed  on  the  table
in  two  rows;  the  silver  trumpets  to  direct  the  march  of  the  Israel-
ites in  the  wilderness  were  the  same  number."

"Again,  Joshua  erected  two  monuments  on  passing  the  river
Jordan,  one  in  the  bed  of  the  river,  and  the  other  on  its  banks ;  the
temples  of  Solomon  and  of  Gaza  were  each  supported  on  two
pillars ;  Jeroboam  made  two  golden  calves,  and  set  them  up  at  Dan
and  Bethel  ;  there  were  two  witnesses  against  Naboth,  as  the
Mosaic  law  required  in  cases  affecting  human  life  ;  and  two  bears
were  sent  to  vindicate  the  character  of  Elisha.  In  the  case  of
Naaman  the  Syrian,  we  find  the  use  of  this  number  fully  exempli-
fied in  the  two  mules'  burden  of  earth — two  young  men  of  the  sons
of  the  prophets — two  talents — two  changes  of  garments — two  ser-
vants, etc.  In  the  visions  of  Daniel  the  ram  had  two  horns ;  and
in  Zachariah  we  have  two  olive-trees,  two  anointed  ones,  and  two
staves  called  Beauty  and  Bands,  an  emblem  of  brotherhood.  Simi-
lar coincidences  might  be  found  in  the  Gospels,  but  the  detail
would  be  tedious,  and  the  result  without  utility,  as  far  as  regards
Freemasonry."  *

"  In  our  system,  the  principle  of  the  duad  is  plainly  enunciated
(although  two  is  not  esteemed  a  masonic  number)  in  the  two  Pillars
of  the  porch  of  Solomon's  Temple,  which  were  placed  in  that  situa-
tion by  the  wise  and  judicious  monarch,  to  commemorate  the
remarkable  pillar  of  a  cloud  and  of  fire  ;  the  former  of  which
proved  a  light  and  guide  to  the  Israelites  in  their  escape  from  their
Egyptian  oppression  ;  the  other  represents  the  cloud  which  proved
the  destruction  of  Pharaoh  and  his  host  in  their  attempt  to  follow
them  through  the  depths  of  the  Red  Sea.  Our  noble  and  illustri-
ous Grand  Master  placed  them  in  this  conspicuous  situation,  that

1  Oliver.

SYMBOLISM   OF  NUMBERS  1753

the  Jews  might  have  that  memorable  event  in  their  recollection,
both  in  going  in  and  coming  out  from  divine  worship."

In  the  spurious  Freemasonry  of  some  ancient  nations,  this  prin-
ciple of  duality  was  extended  to  support  the  doctrine  of  a  good  and
evil  power,  who  possessed  almost  equal  government  in  this  lower
world  ;  and  the  prosperity  or  decadence  of  a  nation  was  supposed
to  be  produced  by  the  superiority  of  one  or  other  of  these  beings,
which,  however,  was  esteemed,  in  most  cases,  accidental.  In  Persia
the  doctrine  attained  its  climax.  Oromases  was  Light,  and  Ahri-
man,  Darkness.

Hyde  says,  "The  Magi  did  not  look  upon  the  two  principles  as
co-eternal,  but  believed  that  light  was  eternal,  and  that  darkness  was
produced  in  time  j1  and  the  origin  of  this  evil  principle  they  account
for  in  this  manner  :  Light  can  produce  nothing  but  light,  and  can
never  be  the  origin  of  evil ;  how  then  was  evil  produced  ?  Light,
they  say,  produced  several  beings,  all  of  them  spiritual,  luminous,
and  powerful ;  but  their  chief,  whose  name  was  Ahriman,  had  an
evil  thought  contrary  to  the  light.  He  doubted,  and  by  that  doubt-
ing he  became  dark.  From  hence  proceeded  all  evils,  dissension,
malice,  and  everything  also  of  a  contrary  nature  to  the  light.  These
two  principles  made  war  upon  one  another,  till  at  last  peace  was
concluded,  upon  condition  that  the  lower  world  should  be  in  sub-
jection to  Ahriman  for  seven  thousand  years  ;  after  which  space  of
time,  he  is  to  surrender  back  the  world  to  the  Light."2

In  countries  where  the  two  principles  were  represented  by  two
serpents,  the  solstitial  colures  were  described  under  these  symbols
Thus  in  the  Egyptian  hieroglyphics,  two  serpents  intersecting  each
other  at  right  angles,  upon  a  globe,  denoted  the  earth.  These
rectangular  intersections  were  at  the  solstitial  points.3  The  Teu-
tonic Masonry  of  the  last  century  thus  explained  the  two  principles
of  Light  and  Darkness :  "  From  the  eternal  centre  is  made  the
eternal  substantiality  as  a  body  or  weakness,  being  a  sinking  down,
and  the  spirit  is  a  springing  up,  whence  comes  motion,  penetration,
and  multiplication  ;  and  when  the  spirit  created  the  substantiality
into  an  image,  breathing  the  spirit  of  the  Trinity  into  it,  the  whole
essences,  even  all  forms  of  nature,  the  power  of  Light  and  Dark-

1  Darkness  is  the  absence  of  light,  cold  is  the  absence  of  heat. — EDITOR.

2  Hyde,  "  Rel.  Ant.  Pers.,"  c.  ix.,  p.  163.

sJablonski,  "  Panth.  Eg.,"  I.,  i.,  c.  4,  cited  by  Deane,  p.  73.

1754  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

ness,  and  the  whole  eternity,  it  instantly  blossomed  and  became  the
paradise  or  angelical  world.  In  the  Darkness  is  the  genetrix,  in
the  Light  is  the  wisdom  :  the  first  imaged  by  devils,  the  other  by
angels,  as  a  similitude  of  the  whole  eternal  being,  to  speak  as  a
creature.  And  Lucifer,  imaging  beyond  the  meekness  of  the
Trinity,  kindled  in  himself  the  matrix  of  Fire,  and  that  of  nature
becoming  corporeal,  then  was  the  second  form  of  the  matrix,  viz.,
the  meekness  of  the  substantiality  enkindled,  whence  water  origi-
nated, out  of  which  was  made  an  heaven  to  captivate  the  fire,  and
of  that  Fire  and  Water  came  the  Stars."

CHAPTER   IV

LEGENDS    AND    SYMBOLS    IN    THE    SEVERAL    DEGREES   OF    MASONRY

OST  Masonic  writers  of  recent  date  have  as
sumed  that  Speculative  Masonry  was  founded
upon  the  legends  and  symbols  of  antiquity.  Dr.
A.  G.  Mackey,  in  the  preface  to  his  valuable
work  on  Symbolism  of  Freemasonry,  says  :  "  Of
the  various  modes  of  communicating  instruction
to  the  uninformed,  the  Masonic  student  is  partic-
ularly interested  in  two  ;  namely,  the  instruction  by  legends,  and
that  by  symbols.  It  is  to  these  two,  almost  exclusively,  that  he  is
indebted  for  all  that  he  knows,  and  for  all  that  he  can  know,  of  the
philosophic  system  which  is  taught  in  the  institution.  All  its  mys-
teries and  its  dogmas,  which  constitute  its  philosophy,  are  intrusted,
for  communication,  to  the  neophyte,  sometimes  to  one,  sometimes
to  the  other  of  these  two  methods  of  instruction,  and  sometimes  to
both  of  them  combined.  The  Freemason  has  no  way  of  reaching
any  of  the  esoteric  teachings  of  the  Order  except  through  the  me-
dium of  a  legend  or  a  symbol."

It  is  greatly  to  be  regretted  that  the  most  important  legends  of
Masonry  are  so  communicated  and  represented,  when  the  degrees
are  conferred,  as  to  impress  upon  the  minds  of  the  candidates  the
realisms,  rather  than  the  "  allegories,"  which  were  originally  designed
as  "veils"  to  conceal  the  "moral  principles"  of  the  system,  and
which  are  also  "illustrated  by  symbols."

Legends  have  no  documentary  evidence  of  the  truthfulness  of
the  narrative  or  any  authenticity.  Such  are  the  legends  in  the
Masonic  degrees.  There  is  no  authenticity  whatever  for  the  state-
ments or  representations.  In  fact,  strict  adherence  to  authentic
history  as  contained  in  the  "Great  Light"  of  Masonry  itself,  con-
tradicts the  details  of  all  the  Masonic  legends ;  hence  we  arrive  at
the  truthfulness  of  the  allegorical  system,  which  was  originally  de-
signed to  teach  the  morality  contained  in  the  Institution.

1755

i756  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

The  first  three  degrees  of  Freemasonry  are  in  themselves  alle-
gorical, representing  certain  important  principles  in  their  enu-
meration. First,  the  introduction  into  Masonic  Life  and  Light.
Secondly,  the  progress  during  life  in  instruction — the  life-work —
education  in  all  branches  of  useful  knowledge.  Thirdly,  the  deca-
dence, death,  and  final  disposition  of  the  body,  its  resurrection,  and
the  immortality  of  the  soul.

In  each  of  these  degrees  symbolisms  are  introduced,  teaching
important  truths,  which  are  calculated  to  impress  upon  the  mind  the
value  of  the  great  moral  principles  thus  visibly  represented.  Step
by  step,  as  the  candidate  advances  in  each  degree,  he  learns  the
value  of  the  gradation  in  moral  lessons,  by  which  his  future  life  is  to
be  guided.  All  of  these  are  primarily  referable  to  his  first  declara-
tion of  "  Faith  in  God,"  "  Hope  in  Immortality,"  and  "  Charity  or
Love  to  all  Mankind."

In  these  we  recognize  the  several  "duties"  incumbent  upon  all
men,  which  were  inculcated  in  every  system  of  morality  taught  by  the
ancient  patriarchs  and  philosophers — our  duty  to  God,  our  duty  to
ourselves,  and  our  duty  to  all  men.  In  these  are  found  the  realisms
of  Masonry,  and  not  in  our  legends  and  allegories,  by  which  thev
are  veiled  and  concealed.

Of  what  value  to  us,  at  the  present  day,  are  the  representations
of  the  manner  in  which  the  Craftsmen  and  Apprentices  were  distrib-
uted when  the  Temple  of  Solomon  was  under  construction  ?  Or
when  and  how  they  received  their  wages  ?  Every  step,  from  the
first  admission  of  a  candidate  to  the  ante-room  of  a  regularly  con-
stituted lodge,  until  he  has  become  an  obligated  Mason,  has  its
moral  lesson.  His  preparation,  admission,  and  subsequent  progress
is  marked  by  a  lesson,  which  it  is  intended  shall  be  carefully  studied
by  the  candidate  for  his  future  guidance  in  life.  The  following
sections  of  that  degree  are  lessons,  explanatory  and  instructive,  in
the  art  of  Masonry.  The  first  section  of  the  second  and  third  de-
grees are  similar  to  that  of  the  first ;  and  the  following  sections  are
strictly  instructive  and  allegorical.  The  instructions  in  all  three  of
these  degrees  is  by  symbols  and  emblematical  representations.  The
science  of  symbolism  is  perhaps  as  old  as  any  other  science — the
learning  of  the  ancient  world  was  originally  conveyed  by  symbolism.
At  the  present  day  philosophy  treats  only  on  abstract  propositions.
Freemasonry,  however,  retaining  its  traditions,  continues  the  ancient

LEGENDS  AND   SYMBOLS   OF   MASONRY  1757

method  as  the  best  means  of  imparting  its  moral  lessons — by  sym-
bols— which  word,  derived  from  the  Greek,  means  to  compare  one
thing  by  another.  This  method  of  instruction,  or  "  object  teach-
ing," is  employed  in  schools  at  the  present  day.  It  is  the  language
of  poetry.  The  "  legend  "  is  a  spoken  symbol  and  is  employed  in
Masonic  teaching,  in  some  countries  is  an  acted  drama,  in  others  it
is  merely  recited  or  read  ;  in  both,  it  is  designed  to  convey  to  the
mind  important  moral  truths.  It  is  the  province  of  the  initiated
candidate  to  investigate  these  symbols  and  allegories  to  draw  out  from
them  the  philosophies  and  moral  lesson  concealed  by  them.  It  has
been  well  said  that  "Freemasonry  is  the  Science  of  Morality,  veiled
in  Allegory,  and  illustrated  by  Symbols."  We  personally  do  not
claim  for  Freemasonry  the  title  of  a  science,  but  we  do  insist  that  it
comprehends  all  true  philosophy.  Its  fundamental  principle  is  a
belief  in  God,  without  which  there  can  be  neither  morality  or  philos-
ophy. The  second  principle  taught  in  Masonry  is  the  immortality
of  the  soul ;  and  the  third  principle  is  the  resurrection  of  the  body.
These  constitute  the  philosophy  of  Freemasonry.  It  is  upon  these
principles  that  all  the  ancient  religions  were  founded.  In  the  belief
of  all  the  ancients  in  a  Deity,  we  find  a  multiplicity  of  gods ;  yet,  in
all  of  them,  there  was  a  chief  god,  who  was  so  far  above  all  the  others
as  to  constitute  a  distinct  Deity.  Most  of  these  ancient  religions
contemplated  a  Triune  God.

"The  rites  of  that  science  which  is  now  received  under  the
appellation  of  Freemasonry,  were  exercised  in  the  Antediluvian
World ;  revived  by  Noah  after  the  flood ;  practised  by  mankind  at
the  building  of  Babel,  conveniences  for  which  were  undoubtedly
contrived  in  the  interior  of  that  celebrated  edifice ;  and  at  the  dis-
persion spread  with  every  settlement,  already  deteriorated  by  the
gradual  innovations  of  the  Cabiric  Priests  and  modelled  into  a  form,
the  great  outlines  of  which  are  distinctly  to  be  traced  in  the  myste-
ries of  every  heathen  Nation,  exhibiting  the  shattered  remains  of
one  true  system  whence  they  were  all  derived.

"  The  rites  of  idolatry  were  indeed  strikingly  similar  and  gener-
ally deduced  from  parallel  practices,  previously  used  by  the  true
Masons ;  for  idolatry  was  an  imitative  system,  and  all  its  cere-
monies and  doctrines  were  founded  on  the  general  principles  of  the
patriarchal  religion.  If  the  patriarch  united  in  his  own  person  the
three   offices  of  king,  priest,  and  prophet,  the  secret  assemblies  of

i758  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

idolatry  were  also  governed  by  a  Triad,  consisting  of  three  supreme
offices  ;  if  primitive  Masonry  was  a  system  of  Light,  the  initiated
heathen  equally  paid  divine  honors  to  the  Sun,  as  the  source  of
light,  by  circumambulating  in  the  course  of  that  luminary,  during
the  ceremony  of  initiation."  1

Sammes,  in  his  Britannia?  says  :  "  The  Mysteries  of  the  Cabiric
rites  were  accounted  so  sacred  and  powerful  that  whosoever  was
initiated  in  them,  immediately  secured,  as  they  thought,  some  extra-
ordinary gifts  of  holiness,  and  that  in  all  their  dangers  they  had
a  present  remedy  and  expedient  about  them  to  deliver  and  rescue
them ;  but  that  which  most  affected  the  Pnoenicians  was  a  confi-
dence they  had  that  those  religious  ceremonies  preserved  them  from
dangers  by  sea ;  therefore  it  is  no  wonder  that,  arriving  in  Britain,
they  taught  the  inhabitants  that  worship  to  which  they  held  them-
selves most  obliged  for  their  safety."

In  the  above  extract  from  Oliver  reference  is  made  to  the  rite
of  circumambulation.  Every  Mason  will  recognize  that  rite  as  an
essential  one  in  every  degree  of  Masonry,  both  ancient  and  those
degrees  invented  since  171 7.  Pythagoras  required  his  initiates  to
pass  three  years  in  silence  and  darkness  before  admission  to  the
mysteries.  In  all  the  ancient  rites  of  the  Orient  the  candidate  was
conducted  by  devious  ways  over  many  rough  and  rugged  paths,  and
encountered  various  obstacles,  and  had  to  pass  through  the  cold  air,
and  water,  the  fire,  and  at  last  the  earth,  which  four  elements  were
symbols  of  purification,  and  lustrations  by  these  were  requisite
before  the  postulant  could  receive  the  higher  mysteries  and  become
an  epopt.

"  The  uniformity  of  practice  which  attended  the  progress  of
error  in  different  nations  is  truly  astonishing.  They  equally  used
the  Ambrosise  Petrae  as  vehicles  of  regeneration  ;  they  shrouded
their  rites  under  the  impenetrable  mask  of  secresy ;  they  possessed
the  same  mode  of  instruction  by  symbols,  allegory,  and  fable  ;  the
same  repugnance  to  committing  their  abstruse  secrets  to  writing;
the  same  system  of  morality  ;  the  same  attachment  to  amulets,  teles-
mans,  and  perhaps  Magic  ;  and  equally  inculcated  the  immortality
of  the  soul,  and  a  future  state  of  rewards  and  punishments,  which
were  alike  pantomimically  exhibited  during  the  initiations."3

1    Oliver's  "  Signs  and  Symbols,"  pp.  4,  5.  2  Ibid.,  p.  55.  3  Ibid.,  p.  5.

LEGENDS   AND   SYMBOLS   OF   MASONRY  1759

"  The  old  Asiatic  style,  so  highly  figurative,  seems,  by  what  we
find  of  its  remains  in  the  prophetic  language  of  the  sacred  writers,
to  have  been  evidently  fashioned  to  the  mode  of  the  ancient  hiero-
glyphics ;  for,  as  in  hieroglyphic  writing,  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars
were  used  to  represent  States  and  empires,  kings,  queens,  and
nobility,  their  eclipse  and  extinction,  temporary  disasters,  or  entire
overthrow,  fire  and  flood,  desolation  by  war  and  famine,  plants  or
animals,  the  qualities  of  particular  persons,  etc.  ;  so,  in  like  manner,
the  holy  prophets  call  kings  and  empires  by  the  names  of  the
heavenly  luminaries ;  their  misfortunes  and  overthrow  are  repre-
sented by  eclipses  and  extinction  ;  stars  falling  from  the  firmament
are  employed  to  denote  the  destruction  of  the  nobility ;  thunder
and  tempestuous  winds,  hostile  invasions  ;  lions,  bears,  leopards,
goats,  or  high  trees,  leaders  of  armies,  conquerors,  and  founders  of
empires ;  royal  dignity  is  described  by  purple  or  a  crown  ;  iniquity
by  spotted  garments ;  error  and  misery  by  an  intoxicating  draught ;
a  warrior  by  a  sword  or  bow  ;  a  powerful  man  by  a  gigantic  stature  ;
and  a  judge  by  balance,  weights,  and  measures.  In  a  word  the
prophetic  style  seems  to  be  a  speaking  hieroglyphic."1

Pythagoras  expressed  his  mystical  system  by  symbols  which
were  explained  to  the  initiated  and  were  not  comprehended  by  the
rest  of  the  world.  His  secrets  were  forbidden  to  be  committed  to
writing  and  were  communicated  orally  as  ineffable  mysteries.  The
Pythagoreans  conversed  with  each  other  mostly  by  the  sign  lan-
guage ,  instruction  by  symbols  was  found  useful  in  impressing  on  the
mind  the  most  comprehensive  truths,  and  it  is  said  was  adopted
from  Masonry  into  all  the  mystic  associations  :  "  The  most  ancient
and  such  as  were  contemporary  with,  and  disciples  of  Pythagoras,
did  not  compose  their  writings  intelligibly,  in  a  common  vulgar
style,  familiar  to  every  one,  as  if  they  endeavored  to  dictate  things
readily  perceptible  by  the  hearer,  but  consonant  to  the  silence
decreed  by  Pythagoras,  concerning  divine  mysteries,  which  it  is
not  lawful  to  speak  of  before  those  who  were  not  initiated ;  and
therefore  clouded  both  their  mutual  discourses  and  writings  by  sym-
bols ;  which,  if  not  expounded  by  those  that  proposed  them,  by  a
regular  interpretation  appear  to  the  hearers  like  old  wives'  prov-
erbs, trivial  and  foolish  ;  but,  being  rightly  explained,   and  instead

1  Warburton's  "  Divine  Legation,"  B.  IV.,  s.  iv.

1760  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

of  dark  rendered  lucid  and  conspicuous  to  the  vulgar,  they  dis-
covered an  admirable  sense,  no  less  than  the  divine  oracles  of  Pyth-
ian Apollo  ;  and  give  a  divine  inspiration  to  the  Philologists  that
understand  them."1

The  Druids  used  hieroglyphics  which,  with  much  reluctance,  were
communicated  even  to  their  initiates  themselves.  These  symbols
were  imitated  from  natural  objects.  Of  a  man  of  enlarged  mind  it
was  said,  "  he  is  an  oak  /"  an  irresolute  and  wavering  person  was  an
"  Aspcn-lcaf ';  "  one  who  was  deceitful  was  a  " Reed"%  The  Druids
used  geometrical  figures  as  lines,  angles,  squares,  and  perpendiculars
as  symbols.  They  did  not  use  enclosed  temples,  as  being  thought
by  them  inconsistent  with  the  dignity  and  majesty  of  the  gods ;
they  did  not  employ  carved  images  to  represent  deities,  but  em-
ployed the  rude  undressed  stones,  such  as  they  found  in  the  hills  or
on  sides  of  mountains,  which  were  erected  in  their  circles  for  wor-
ship, which  were  marked  out  by  rude  stone  pillars  surrounding  an
altar  placed  in  the  centre.  They  also  constructed  of  similar  stones
long  passages  between  two  rows  of  such  stones.  Some  of  these
passages  were  miles  in  extent.

In  Egypt,  in  all  probability,  originated  those  passages,  where  we
find  the  remains  of  them  as  sphinxes,  obelisks,  and  catacombs,  all
of  which  no  doubt  were  erected  for  the  observance  of  their  mystic
rites.  Clement  of  Alexandria  says :  "  Sphynxes  were  erected  in
front  of  temples  and  places  of  initiation,  to  denote  that  all  sacred
truth  is  enfolded  in  enigmatical  fables  and  allegories."3

In  the  Egyptian  mysteries  the  candidate  was  instructed  in  this
as  an  ineffable  secret,  that  the  mysteries  were  received  from  Adam,
Seth,  Enoch  ;  and  in  the  last  degree  the  postulant,  after  the  com-
pletion of  his  initiation,  was  called,  from  the  name  of  the  Deity,
AL-OM-JAH  ;  pronounced  Allhawmiyah.  In  India,  the  com-
pleted initiate  was  instructed  in  the  great  word,  A.  U.  M.,  pronounced
OME  (o  long)  ;  we  thus  see  that  the  same  word  was  used  in  Egypt
as  the  second  word.  It  has  been  supposed  by  some  that  these  were
initials  of  three  certain  names  of  Deity,  viz.  :  Agni,  Fire  ;  Ushas,
Dawn  ;  and  Mitra,  Mid-day  Sun,  all  of  them  referring  to  "  Light  "
in  its  different  degrees  of  intensity.  In  the  higher  degrees  in  Free-
masonry these  letters  appear,  having  a  deep  significance,  which  we

1  Stanley's  "  Life  of  Pythagoras,"  B.  IV.,  ch.  i.

2  Davis,  "  Celt.  Res.,"  p.  247.  3  Clement  of  Alexandria,  Lib.  V.,  ch.  iv.

LEGENDS   AND   SYMBOLS   OF   MASONRY  1761

are  not  at  liberty  here  to  say  more  of.     We  may  here  quote  from
Dr.   Oliver:     "It  is  an  extraordinary  fact  that  there  is  scarcely  a
single  ceremony  in  Freemasonry  but  we  find  its  corresponding  rite
in  one  or  other  of  the  idolatrous  mysteries ;  and  the  coincidence
can  only  be  accounted  for  by  supposing  that  these  mysteries  were
derived  from   Masonry.      Yet,   however  they  might  assimilate   in
ceremonial  observances,  an  essential  difference  existed  in  the  fun-
damental   principles  of  the  respective  institutions.     The  primitive
veneration  for  Light  accompanied  the  career  of  Masonry  from  the
creation  to  the  present  day,  and  will  attend  its  course  until  time
expires  in  eternity ;  but  in  the  mysteries  of  idolatry  this  veneration
soon  yielded  its  empire  over  men's  minds,  and  fell  before  the  claims
of  darkness  ;  for  a  false  worship  would  naturally  be  productive  of
impure  feelings  and  vicious  propensities."    It  is  true,  indeed,  that  the
first  Egyptians  worshipped  ON    (A.  U.  N.   in    Hebrew,  but  pro-
nounced Own)  as  the  chief  deity,  who  was  supposed  to  be  the  eternal
Light ;  and  hence  he  was  referred  to  the  Sun  as  its  great  source  and
emanation.     Thus  it   was  said  that    God  dwelt  in   the   Light,   his
Virtue  in  the  Sun,  and  his  Wisdo7n  in  the  Moon.      But  this  wor-
ship was  soon  debased  by  superstitious    practices.      The  idolaters
degenerated  into  an  adoration  of  Serpents  and  Scorpions,  and  other
representatives  of  the  evil  spirit ;  and,  amidst  the  same  profession
of  a  profound   reverence   for   Light,   became   most  unaccountably
enamoured  of   Darkness;  and  a  Temple  near  Memphis  was  dedi-
cated to  Hecate  Scotia,1  which  was  styled  the  Lord  of  the  Creation,
and  in  some  respects  deemed  oracular.     The  superstition  of  Egypt
which  gave  divine  honors  to  Darkness  spread  throughout  the  world
of  idolatry,  upon    the    principle  that    Darkness    of    Night,  which
existed  in  Chaos   before  the  Creation  of    Light,  was  of    superior
antiquity.     They  therefore  gave   precedence  to  Night ;  and  hence
to  signify  the  revolving  of  the  earth  they  said  a  night  and  a  day.
Even  the  Jews  began  their  time  with  the  evening  or  commence-
ment of  darkness,  as  in  Genesis  i.  2,  3.     Moses  said  God  created
Light    out    of    Darkness.       (1   Kings    viii.    12,   2;    Chron.  vi.    1;
Psalms  xviii.  9.)     Darkness  was  considered  the  incomprehensible
Veil  of  Deity.

In  the  Orphic  Fragments  Night  is  celebrated  as  the  parent  of

^'Diod.  Sic,"  B.  I.,  ch.  vii.
in

1762  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

gods  and  men  and  the  origin  of  all  things.  In  all  the  rites  of  initi.
ation  Darkness  was  saluted  with  three  distinct  acclamations ;  hence
we  may  see  that  before  the  Aspirant  could  participate  in  the  "higher
mysteries  "  he  was  placed  in  a  coffin,  bed  or  pastos,  or  was  subjected
to  confinement  for  a  period  of  time,  in  seclusion  and  darkness  for
reflection,  which  custom  is  still  employed  in  some  secret  societies.
This  was  a  representation  of  the  symbolic  death  of  the  mysteries  ;
when  he  was  released  from  that  ceremony,  it  was  to  indicate  his
deliverance,  and  represented  the  act  of  regeneration  or  being  born
again,  or  being  raised  from  the  dead.

We  learn  from  Clement  of  Alexandria  that  in  the  formulary  of
one  who  had  been  initiated  he  was  taught  to  say,  "  I  have  descended
into  the  bed-chamber."  Dr.  Oliver  says:  " The  ceremony  here  al-
luded to  was,  doubtless,  the  same  as  the  descent  into  Hades  ;  and  I
am  inclined  to  think  that  when  the  Aspirant  entered  into  the  Mystic
Cell,  he  was  directed  to  lay  himself  down  upon  the  bed,  which
shadowed  out  the  tomb  or  coffin  of  the  Great  Father.  This  process
was  equivalent  to  his  entering  into  the  infernal  ship ;  and  while
stretched  upon  the  holy  couch,  in  imitation  of  his  figurative  deceased
prototype,  he  was  said  to  be  wrapped  in  the  deep  sleep  of  death.
His  resurrection  from  the  bed  was  his  restoration  to  life,  or  his
regeneration  into  a  new  world  ;  and  it  was  virtually  the  same  as  his
return  from  Hades,  or  his  emergence  from  the  gloomy  cavern,  or
his  liberation  from  the  womb  of  the  ship-goddess."1

The  time  required  for  this  ceremony  or  imitation  of  death  was
generally  for  the  space  of  three  days  and  nights ;  but  was  varied  in
different  localities.  Nine  days  in  Great  Britain  were  required  for
the  solitary  confinement.  In  Greece  three  times  nine  days.  In
Persia  it  extended  to  fifty  days  and  nights  of  darkness,  want  of  rest
and  fasting.  The  remains  in  Great  Britain  of  the  places  where  the
ceremonies  were  observed  by  the  Ancient  Druids  are  very  numerous
and  well  known  at  the  present  day,  and  have  been  referred  to  in  a
former  part  of  this  sketch.  Among  these  are  the  remains  of  the
celebrated  Kit's  Cotti  House,  near  Maidstone.  "  This  was  a  dark
chamber  of  probation,  for  Kit  is  no  other  than  Ked,  or  Ceridwen,
the  British  Ceres ;  and  Cotti  or  Cetti  meant  an  Ark  or  Chest ;  and
hence  the  compound  word  referred  to  the  Ark  of  the  diluvian  god

'Fab.  Pag.  Idol  in  Oliver's  "  Signs  and  Symbols,"  p.  79.

LEGENDS   AND   SYMBOLS   OF   MASONRY  1763

Noah,  whose  mysterious  Rites  were  celebrated  in  Britain ;  ana
Ceridwen  was  either  the  consort  of  Noah,  or  the  Ark  itself  sym-
bolically the  great  Mother  of  Mankind.  The  peculiar  names  which
these  monuments  still  retain  throughout  the  kingdom,  are  a  deci-
sive proof  that  they  were  appropriated,  almost  exclusively,  to  this
purpose."  *

Near  a  village  in  Somersetshire  called  Stanton  Drew,  or  Druid
Stones,  there  are  the  evidences  of  a  rude  structure  which  originally
consisted  of  three  circles  of  stones  and  an  Adytune  or  a  Pastos.
There  were  various  other  similar  structures  in  different  parts  of
Britain,  evidences  of  the  prevalence  of  these  ceremonies,  religious
in  their  character.

The  initiation  into  the  mysteries  was  a  most  important  part  of
the  religious  worship  ;  and  all  those  who  held  any  important  place
as  priest  or  legislator,  must  pass  through  all  their  religious  cere-
monies, as  indispensable  preliminaries  to  their  advancement,  by  the
solitary  confinement  in  the  darkened  Pastos.  "  The  religionists  of
those  days  considered  initiation  as  necessary  as  the  Christians  do
baptism."  2

We  have  referred,  in  a  former  page,  to  the  several  steps  in  the
progress  of  initiation  in  the  mysteries  of  the  several  degrees  in
Freemasonry,  and  that  all  of  these  were  symbols  by  which  the  vari-
ous principles  sought  to  be  inculcated  were  thus  illustrated.  Each
individual  item  was  emphasized  as  the  candidate  progressed  ;  when
he  was  prepared  in  the  ante-room,  viz.,  his  raiment,  which  should
always  be  pure  white,  to  represent  that  he  was  a  candidate,  from  the
Latin  candidus,  which  means  white.  The  peculiar  arrangement  of
this  raiment,  in  each  degree,  is  explained  in  the  lecture  appertaining
to  each,  as  also  the  Zennaar 3  which  accompanies  the  raiment  of  each
degree,  which  is  in  Freemasonry  denominated  a  Cable-tow.  The
different  degrees  require  a  different  disposal  of  this  cable-tow  ;  in
each  there  is  a  distinct  svm  holism,  known  only  to  the  initiated.
The  candidate  thus  prepared  is  in  darkness  as  to  what  he  is  to  en-
counter, ignorant  of  what  will  be  revealed  to  him  in  his  progress  in

1  Oliver,  "  Signs  and  Symbols,"  p.  80.

8  Warburton,  "  Divine  Legation,"  B.  II.,  s.  iv.

3  The  Zennaar  in  Hindostan  was  a  cord  composed  of  nine  threads  twisted  into  a  knot
at  the  end,  and  hanging  from  the  left  shoulder  to  the  right  hip.  The  Masonic  scarf  takes
the  place  of  the  Zennaar.

1764  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

the  various  steps  of  his  initiation  ;  he  is  to  be  regenerated,  born  again
into  a  new  world  of  mysteries ;  as  he  was  originally  born  into  the
world  of  physical  light,  so  now  he  is  to  be  born  again  into  the  moral
and  intellectual  Light  of  Freemasonry.  The  following  preliminary
steps  are  purely  ritualistic,  and  each  Mason  who  has  passed  through
them  can  for  himself  apply  the  symbols  to  their  appropriate  signifi-
cations. It  would  be  well  for  us  just  here  to  call  to  mind  what  has
been  said  by  others  on  this  method  of  instruction  in  the  Church.
In  the  Explanation  of  the  Symbolism  of  the  Mass,  Bishop  England
said  that  in  every  ceremony  we  must  look  for  three  meanings.  "  The
first,  the  literal,  natural,  and  it  may  be  said,  the  original  meaning ;
the  second,  the  figurative  or  emblematic  signification  ;  and  thirdly,
the  pious  or  religious  meaning  ;  frequently  the  last  two  will  be
found  the  same ;  sometimes  all  three  will  be  found  combined."
Bro.  A.  G.  Mackey,  in  quoting  the  above  extract  from  the  "  Church-
man," makes  the  following  just  comment:  "The  Roman  Catholic
Church  is,  perhaps,  the  only  contemporaneous  institution  which  con-
tinues to  cultivate,  in  any  degree,  the  beautiful  system  of  symbolism.
But  that  which,  in  the  Catholic  Church,  is,  in  a  great  measure,  in-
cidental, and  the  fruit  of  development,  is,  in  Freemasonry,  the  very
life-blood  and  soul  of  the  institution,  born  with  it  at  its  birth,  or
rather,  the  germ  from  which  the  tree  has  sprung,  and  still  giving  it
support,  nourishment,  and  even  existence.  Withdraw  from  Free-
masonry its  symbolism,  and  you  take  from  the  body  its  soul,  leaving
behind  nothing  but  a  lifeless  mass  of  effete  matter,  fitted  only  for  a
rapid  decay."1

The  candidate,  after  his  admission  to  the  lodge-room,  follows
the  ancient  custom  of  all  the  mysteries  in  a  perambulation,  which
is  a  symbol  of  the  Sun  in  his  annual  course  through  the  twelve  signs
of  the  Zodiac,  as  also  his  diurnal  course  from  east  to  west  by  way
of  the  south.  The  candidates  in  the  mysteries  were  said  to  "  imitate
the  Sun  and  follow  his  beneficent  example."  This  symbolism  re-
ferred to  the  custom  of  Pythagoras,  who  required  his  candidates  to
pass  three  years  in  silence  and  in  darkness.  The  various  obstruc-
tions met  with  in  this  "  circumambulation "  were  in  imitation  of
those  encountered  in  the  Ancient  Mysteries,  but  of  quite  a  differ-
ent character,  as  in  the  Ancient  Mysteries  these  obstructions  were

1  Mackey,  "Symbolism  of  Freemasonry,"  p.  74-

LEGENDS   AND   SYMBOLS  OF   MASONRY  1765

to  severely  test  the  courage  and  persistence  of  the  candidate,  and
often  resulted  in  the  death  of  the  individual ;  and  in  some  of  their
underground  passages  which  have  been  explored  in  modern  times,
evidences  have  been  discovered  that  many  persons  thus  lost  their
lives.

After  the  most  solemn  and  impressive  ceremonies,  whereby  the
postulant  becomes  a  Mason,  he  is  brought  to  Light  in  Masonry  by
a  symbolism,  faint  indeed,  but  highly  significant  of  a  great  event  in
the  history  of  creation.  All  that  follows  is  instruction  in  the  science
and  morals  of  Masonry.  Each  degree  in  Masonry  is  divided  into
"  Sections  " — the  first  section  is  always  the  Rite  of  Initiation.  The
other  sections  are  for  the  instruction  of  the  Neophyte,  the  second
section  being  a  rehearsal  of  the  various  steps  in  the  first  section,
and  exoteric  reasons  for  these.  The  following  sections  contain  the
morals  and  dogmas  in  the  several  different  degrees  appertaining  to
each.  In  the  Fellow-Craft's  degree  the  second  section  is  a  pure
allegorical  representation  ;  no  intelligent  Mason  can  for  a  moment
accept  it  other  than  an  Allegory.  As  such  there  is  nothing  more
impressive  than  the  important  lessons  in  each  part  of  the  repre-
sentations. The  American  Rite  differs  from  all  others  in  the  ar-
rangement and  number  of  the  steps,  and  in  some  particulars  there
are  other  differences  along  the  whole  line.  That  this  legend  of  the
second  degree  is  an  allegory  we  have  simply  to  consult  the  only
history  of  King  Solomon's  Temple  as  found  in  the  "  Great  Light"
and  we  will  find  that  there  was  no  possibility  of  adapting  our
Masonic  ritual  to  that  structure.  In  the  sixth  chapter  of  the  First
Book  of  Kings  we  read  :  "  The  door  for  the  Middle  Chamber  was
in  the  right  side  of  the  house ;  and  they  went  up  with  winding
stairs  into  the  Middle  Chamber  and  out  of  the  Middle  Chamber
into  the  third."  Dr.  Mackey,  in  commenting  on  this  passage,  says:1
11  Out  of  this  slender  Material  has  been  constructed  an  Allegory,
which  if  properly  considered,  in  its  symbolical  relations,  will  be
found  to  be  of  surpassing  beauty.  But  it  is  only  as  a  symbol  that
we  can  regard  this  whole  tradition  ;  for  the  historical  facts  alike  for-
bid us  for  a  moment  to  suppose  that  the  legend  as  it  is  rehearsed
in  the  second  degree  of  Masonry  is  anything  more  than  a  magnifi-
cent philosophical  myth."

1  "  Symbolism  of  Freemasonry,"  p.  2ijt.

1766  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

In  addition  to  what  Dr.  Mackey  has  said,  we  would  say  that
the  middle  and  third  chamber  mentioned  in  the  text  referred  to
were  the  chambers  on  the  north  and  south  sides  of  the  Tem-
ple mentioned  in  the  same  chapter  of  First  Kings  and  fifth  and
sixth  verses  :  Fifth,  "  And  against  the  wall  of  the  house,  he  built
chambers  round  about,  the  walls  of  the  house  about,  of  the  temple
and  the  oracle  ; 1  and  made  chambers  round  about."  Sixth,  "The
nethermost  chamber  five  cubits  broad,  and  the  middle  six  cubits
broad,  and  the  third  seven  cubits  broad  :  for  without  of  the  house
he  made  narrowed  rests  round  about  that  the  beams  should  not  be
fastened  in  the  walls  of  the  house."

Then  followed  in  the  eighth  verse,  same  chapter,  as  to  where
the  door  was  to  these  three  tiers  of  chambers,  in  the  "right  side  of
the  house,"  viz.,  at  the  east  end,  inside  of  the  porch  or  vestibule.
We  take  occasion  at  this  place  to  say  that  in  all  of  our  rituals  our
lodge-rooms  are  diametrically  opposite  in  their  "  Orientation "  to
that  of  the  Temple,  which  it  is  supposed  we  copy,  viz. :  the  east  of  a
Masonic  lodge-room  is  at  the  end  opposite  to  the  "  entrance."
Now  the  entrance  to  the  Temple  was  at  the  east  end,  and  the
"  Oracle,"  or  Holy  of  Holies,  was  at  the  west  end,  where  we  now
place  the  presiding  officer,  and  all  Masonic  bodies  claim  it  to  be
the  "  East  "  or  "  Orient."

The  situation  of  Solomon's  Temple,  on  Mount  Moriah,  on  the
eastern  side  of  the  City  of  Jerusalem,  now  occupied  by  several
mosques  of  the  Mohammedan  worship,  the  central  building  being
the  mosque  of  Omar  ;  the  topography  of  that  part  of  the  city
militates  against  every  legend  and  myth  in  our  Masonic  rituals  in
all  the  various  rites,  and  thus  is  destroyed  any  attempt  at  realism  in
our  degrees,  which  many  very  excellent  Brethren  still  adhere  to  in
their  firm  belief  in  the  "  Masonry  of  the  Temple."  We  again  refer
to  Dr.  Mackey  for  his  comments  on  this  point:  "Let  us  inquire
into  the  true  design  of  this  legend  and  learn  the  lesson  of  symbolism
which  it  is  intended  to  teach.  In  the  investigation  of  the  true
meaning  of  every  Masonic  symbol  and  allegory,  we  must  be  governed
by  the  single  principle  that  the  whole  design  of  Freemasonry  as  a
speculative  science,  is  the  investigation  of  divine  truth.  To  this
great  object  everything  is  subsidiary.     The  Mason  is  from  the  mo-

1  Sanctum  Sanctorum.

LEGENDS  AND   SYMBOLS   OF   MASONRY  1767

ment  of  his  initiation  as  an  Entered  Apprentice,  to  the  time  at
which  he  receives  the  full  fruition  of  Masonic  light,  an  investigator
— a  laborer  in  the  quarry  and  the  temple — whose  reward  is  the
Truth.  All  the  ceremonies  and  traditions  of  the  order  tend  to  this
ultimate  design.  Is  there  light  to  be  asked  for  ?  It  is  the  intellect-
ual light  of  wisdom  and  truth.  Is  there  a  word  to  be  sought  ?
That  word  is  the  symbol  of  Truth.  Is  there  a  loss  of  something
that  has  been  promised  ?  That  loss  is  typical  of  the  failure  of  Man,
in  the  infirmity  of  his  nature,  to  discover  divine  truth.  Is  there  a
substitute  to  be  appointed  for  that  loss  ?  It  is  an  allegory,  which
teaches  us  that  in  this  world,  man  can  only  approximate  to  the  full
conception  of  truth."1

The  proper  lesson  in  the  Allegory  of  the  Fellow-Craft's  degree
is  to  teach  the  Seeker  after  Truth  that  the  intellectual  faculties
must  be  cultivated  and  educated  by  a  regular  course  of  instruction
in  the  liberal  arts  and  sciences.  In  the  Entered  Apprentice  degree
the  candidate  has  been  instructed  in  the  moral  and  fundamental
principles  so  essentially  necessary  for  the  proper  and  due  perform-
ance of  his  several  duties  in  life,  to  God,  his  neighbor,  and  himself.

All  Speculative  Masonry  must  be  philosophical.  No  man  can
become  truly  a  Speculative  Mason  without  a  knowledge  of  the  liberal
arts  and  sciences.  It  is  in  the  second  degree  that  the  postulant
learns  of  Operative  and  Speculative  Masonry,  and  these  two  divis-
ions are  simply  described  in  the  lecture.  The  candidate  must  apply
himself  diligently  to  those  seven  arts  and  sciences  enumerated  and
symbolized  by  the  seven  steps  in  order  to  appreciate  Speculative
Freemasonry.  Does  anyone  imagine  that  the  eighty  thousand
craftsmen  at  the  building  of  the  Temple  were  instructed  in  those
seven  liberal  arts  and  sciences  ?  That  there  was  among  them  all,
or  in  that  day  anyone,  who  understood  the  mechanics  of  the  heavens
or  who  did  believe  that  the  Sun  was  the  center  of  the  solar  system,
and  that  the  Earth  was  in  annual  revolution  around  the  sun,  and
diurnal  rotation  on  its  own  axis  ?  And  yet  these  two  principles
are  the  foundation  of  astronomy.

In  our  rituals  of  the  United  States,  the  winding  stairs  are  di-
vided into  three  sets  of  odd  numbers.  The  ancient  temples  were  all
approached  by  steps,  odd  in  number ;  and  Vitruvius,  the  most  an-

1  Mackey,  "  Symbolism  of  Freemasonry,"  p.  216.

1768  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

cient  writer  on  architecture,  assigns  the  reason  to  be  that,  commenc-
ing with  the  right  foot  at  the  bottom,  the  worshipper  would  find  the
same  foot  foremost  when  he  entered  the  temple,  which  was  consid-
ered a  fortunate  omen.  Dr.  Mackey  thinks,  however,  that  Masonry
derives  the  use  of  odd  numbers  from  Pythagoras,  in  whose  system
of  philosophy  it  plays  an  important  part,  and  in  which  odd  numbers
were  considered  as  more  perfect  than  even  ones.  Tracing  boards  of
the  1 8th  century  show  only  five  steps,  delineated,  and  in  some  there
are  seven.  The  lectures  used  in  England  in  the  commencement  of
the  present  century,  according  to  Preston,  make  as  many  as  thirty-
eight,  in  sums  of  one,  three,  five,  seven,  nine,  and  eleven.

After  the  union  of  the  two  Grand  Lodges  in  1813,  Dr.  Hem-
ming, the  Senior  Grand  Warden,  in  his  new  lectures  corrected  the
error  in  having  an  even  number  (38),  by  striking  out  the  eleven.
In  the  United  States  these  numbers  were  changed  to  three,  five,  and
seven,  making  fifteen.  Like  all  intellectual  acquirements  there  must
be  a  gradual  increase  in  knowledge.  The  postulant  at  his  approach
to  the  ascending  scale  of  knowledge  is  primarily  instructed  in  the
lessons  of  the  three  steps  ;  having  acquired  these,  he  advances  to  the
next  ascent  of  five,  wherein  he  is  instructed  in  the  human  senses,  so
essentially  necessary  for  the  apprehension  of  all  physical  knowledge
of  the  objective  world.  Now,  inasmuch  as  the  comfort  and  happi-
ness of  mankind  is  greatly  added  to  in  the  best  methods  of  con-
struction of  our  dwellings,  as  also  all  public  structures,  the  science  of
building  is  taught  by  showing  the  fundamental  principles  of  archi-
tecture as  illustrated  in  the  five  Orders  derived  from  the  three  origi-
nal Orders  of  the  Greeks.  In  the  next  steps  the  candidate  rises  to
the  highest  position  of  intellectual  cultivation  in  the  liberal  arts  and
sciences.  Having  attained  to  this  elevation,  he  is  entitled  to  his  re-
ward, which  is  denominated  "wages."  Here  is  introduced  another
allegory,  which  is  derived  from  a  scriptural  passage,  and  is  designed
to  prove  the  value  of  a  secret  pass-word,  in  all  of  our  Masonic  de-
grees, which  is  to  distinguish  a  friend  from  a  foe,  and  by  which  is
proved  the  right  of  a  member  to  admission  to  the  lodge,  and  should
always  be  given  before  opening  the  lodge,  and  by  every  member  or
visitor  before  admission.  This  is  often  entirely  neglected  in  some
jurisdictions.

LEGENDS   AND   SYMBOLS  OF   MASONRY  1769

King  Solomon  s  Temple  as  a  Masonic  Symbol.

Prior  to  i860 — many  writers  on  Masonry  held  to  the  opinion
that  Speculative  Masonry  dates  its  origin  from  the  building  of  King
Solomon's  temple  by  Jewish  and  Tyrian  artisans,  and,  no  doubt,
general  assent  was  given  to  the  proposition ;  but  subsequent  author-
ities in  Masonic  history  do  not  now  concur  therein.

Speculative  philosophy  existed  prior  to  the  construction  of
the  Temple,  but  we  may  conjecture  that  in  the  formation  of  the
rituals  of  the  three  degrees  of  Symbolic  Masonry,  the  authors  took
the  Temple  and  its  construction  as  symbols,  whereby  the  instructions
in  the  moral  principles,  which  formed  the  foundation  of  Speculative
Masonry,  were  conveyed  to  the  initiates.  The  very  spirit  of  all  of
our  lectures  proves  conclusively  that  when  they  were  formulated
they  were  designed  to  teach  pure  trinitarian  Christianity,  and  while
the  Jewish  scriptures  did  forecast  the  intermediary  of  a  Christos,  as
all  the  ancient  heathen  mysteries  did  also,  yet  Jesus  Christ  as  shown
and  demonstrated  in  the  writings  of  the  New  Testament,  was  not
understood  by  the  Jewish  writers  of  the  Old  Testament,  nor  by  but
very  few  of  that  faith  since.  The  first  three  degrees  taken  in  con-
nection with  the  Holy  Royal  Arch,  as  they  have  always  been  with
our  Brethren  of  England,  certainly  show  pure  Christianity,  as  taught
throughout  the  writings  of  the  New  Testament  scriptures.  It  is
possible  that  the  investigations  which  for  many  years  have  engaged
the  earnest  and  serious  attention  of  students  of  the  Quatuor  Coronati
Lodge  of  London,  may  result  in  determining  the  period  when  our
Masonic  lectures  were  definitely  formulated.  We  know  historically
that,  commencing  with  the  formation  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England  in  171 7,  the  separation  of  Masonic  "  Work  "  into  distinct
degrees  did  not  occur  earlier  than  1719.1  From  that  date,  those
who  aided  in  the  progressive  movement  were,  first,  Dr.  Anderson
and  Dr.  Desaguliers  ;  by  whom,  principally,  the  "  work  "  was  divided
into  the  three  degrees  of  Apprentice,  Fellow  of  the  Craft,  and  Mas-
ter ;  second,  Entick,  by  whom,  perhaps,  the  lectures  of  the  degrees
were  first  clearly  divided ;  the  third  one  who  made  important
and  valuable  improvements  in  the  lectures  was  Hutchinson  ;  and
about  the  same  period  Dunckerly  made  many  additions  and  subse-

1  Chaps.  xxxiii.-xxxvi.,  Part  II.  of  this  work.

i77o  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

quently  united  with  Hutchinson,  in  the  improvement  of  the  work
and  lectures  of  the  three  degrees.  The  fourth  attempt  to  improve
the  lectures  was  by  William  Preston.  He  entered  the  door  of  Ma-
sonry in  a  Lodge  of  the  Ancients,  but  subsequently  became  a  mem-
ber of  a  Lodge  of  the  Moderns.  Preston's  lectures  recommended
themselves  at  once  to  the  more  literary  class  of  Masons,  and  toward
the  close  of  the  18th  century  were  the  prevailing  lectures,  and  were
introduced  into  all  the  English  working  lodges  in  the  Colonies  ex-
cept in  Pennsylvania,  where  we  have  understood  the  work  and
lectures  of  the  ancients  continued  to  prevail  and  are  more  or  less  the
work  and  lectures  of  the  present  day.

When  the  two  rival  Grand  Lodges  of  England  united  in  1813
and  became  the  "  United  Grand  Lodge,"  Dr.  Hemming,  the
Senior  Grand  Warden  of  the  new  Grand  Lodge,  was  intrusted  with
the  work  of  preparing  a  new  set  of  lectures  and  arranging  the  floor
work  of  the  three  degrees  and  reconciling  any  discrepancies.  This
was  the  last  change  in  the  English  work  and  lectures  in  England.
About  the  close  of  the  18th  century  in  the  last  decade  Thomas  Smith
Webb,  who  became  very  conspicuous  as  a  Masonic  scholar  in  the
northern  part  of  the  United  States,  made  many  changes  in  the
work  and  lectures  of  all  the  several  degrees  in  Masonry  as  far  as
they  had  been  introduced  into  the  country.  Jeremy  L.  Cross,  of
Vermont,  became  his  scholar,  and  about  1816  he  too  "took  a  hand  "
at  the  lectures  and  made  changes  in  Webb's  work  ;  so  that  now,  in
all  the  States  of  the  Union  except,  as  before  said,  in  Pennsylvania,
the  Webb-Preston  work  and  lectures  prevail.

The  first  section  in  all  the  degrees  in  Masonry  is  the  initiatory
rite.  So  soon  as  the  candidate  in  any  degree  has  been  obligated
he  is  essentially  a  Mason  of  that  degree,  and  as  such  is  entitled  to
all  the  secrets  and  mysteries  appertaining  to  that  degree  ;  hence
every  following  section  in  any  degree  comprises  instructions  and
explanations  of  the  several  steps  in  the  initiatory  section  of  the
degree.

In  the  third  degree,  the  second  section  is  a  dramatical  represen-
tation of  the  "  Legend."  To  ordinary  minds,  unaccustomed  to  al-
legorical representations,  it  is  received  as  a  true  representation  of  a
real  occurrence.  Scholars  who  have  critically  examined  and  com-
pared all  the  circumstances  of  the  allegorical  representation,  are
well  satisfied  that  such  an  occurrence  could  not  have  happened  in

LEGENDS  AND   SYMBOLS  OF   MASONRY  1771

the  locality  represented.  The  situation  of  the  Temple  and  the  sur-
rounding topographical  features  all  forbid  any  such  circumstances  as
are  related  in  the  Legend.  Hence  we  must  assume  that  our  authors
of  the  legend  intended  it  to  be  the  culminating  Symbol  of  Ancient
Craft  Masonry.  In  that  legend  is  carried  out  to  its  ultimate  extent
the  grand  idea  which  prevailed  and  dominated  every  one  of  the  An-
cient Mysteries  of  the  Oriental  religious  rites,  and  when  we  carefully
"  read  between  the  lines  "  we  learn  how  very  near  to  the  funda-
mental principles  of  "  Christianity  "  all  of  those  religious  rites  ap-
proached, even  in  their  ignorance  of  what  Dr.  Oliver  and  Dr.
Mackey  have  denominated  "  true  Masonry."  True  Masonry,  as
originally  designed,  was  intended  to  be  strictly  "  Trinitarian  Chris-
tianity," and  every  step  taken  in  Masonry  prior  to  the  organization
of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  in  171 7,  was  Christian,  and  no  one
could  be  a  Mason  who  was  not  such,  and  was  true  to  "  Mother
Church,"  as  all  the  Ancient  Manuscripts  prove,  and  in  some  Grand
Lodges  in  Europe  this  test  is  still  required  and  a  Jew  or  an  infidel
is  excluded.  Perhaps  the  change  made  in  this  direction,  after  1717,
admitting  only  those  who  professed  a  belief  in  God  as  being  the
only  test  of  eligibility,  has  done  good,  by  spreading  abroad  all  the
valuable  principles  involved  in  our  several  lectures,  founded,  as  they
all  are,  upon  Faith  in  God,  and  having  no  other  dogma.  To  this  end
was  the  legend  of  the  third  degree  invented,  and  the  secret  mysteries
of  the  whole  of  Masonry  are  concealed  in  the  substitute  when  prop-
erly interpreted,  as  that  should  be,  and  not  as  now  generally  ex-
plained, which  has  no  meaning  whatever.  When  properly  explained,
it  agrees  precisely  with  that  for  which  it  was  substituted.1

Notwithstanding  the  conclusion  reached  by  Dr.  Mackey  in  the
Chapter  XXXI.  referred  to,  we  do  not  fully  agree  with  him,  but
believe  that  the  origin  of  the  Mysteries  involved  in  the  third  de-
gree were  invented  some  time  subsequent  to  the  organization  in
1 71 7;  and  that,  perhaps,  Chevalier  Ramsay  may  have  been  the  au-
thor, or,  with  the  priests  in  the  College  at  Clermont,  have  concocted
those  secrets,  and  invented  the  Royal  Arch  degree,  which  he
brought  with  him  into  England,  and  endeavored  to  introduce  into
the  work  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.  We  know  that  the  de-
gree was  finally  introduced  into  the  work  of  the  "  Ancients  "  of

1  See  in  this  work  ch.  xxxi. ,  p.  290  et  sequiter.

1772  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Dermott,  and  subsequently,  by  Dunckerly,  into  the  old  Grand  Lodge
of  England,  of  which  he  was  a  very  conspicuous  and  distinguished
member.  Through  him  the  third  degree  was  so  altered  that  to  ob-
tain the  original  essential  secrets  of  that  degree  it  became  requisite
to  take  the  Royal  Arch  degree.  Now,  in  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Rite  the  degree  of  "  Mason  of  the  Royal  Arch,"  which  is  essentially
the  same  as  the  Ramsay  degree,  is  so  nearly  like  the  English  Royal
Arch  degree  that  we  may  say  they  are  both  from  the  same  original
source.  Everyone  who  is  familiar  with  these  several  degrees  must
confess  there  is  a  family  likeness,  and  they  all  concur,  in  their  essen-
tial features,  in  demonstrating  that  the  religious  elements  are  the
same.1

In  reference  to  the  occult  science  in  India,  we  take  the  follow-
ing extract  from  Louis  Jacolliot,  as  translated  by  Willard  L.  Felt :

11  Remember  my  Son,  that  there  is  only  one  God,  the  Sovereign
Master  and  Principal  of  all  things,  and  that  the  Brahmins  should
worship  him  in  secret ;  but  learn  also  that  this  is  a  mystery,  which
should   never  be   revealed   to   the   vulgar   herd : — otherwise   great

harm  may  befall  you.  [Words
spoken  by  the  Brahmins  upon
receiving  a  candidate  for  in-
itiation according  to  Vrihas*
pad]  "

This  triangular  arrangement
of  the  great  name,  AUM,  rec-
ognized as  the  WORD  in  the
higher  Mysteries  in  India,  as  the  One  God  referred  to  in  the  above
extract,  represents  the  Triune  God  of  all  the  Ancient  Mysteries  of
the  Oriental  religions.

Under  the  head  of  Freemasonry,  Chapter  II.,  page  484,  Dr.
Mackay  says :

"  Krause  gives  ample  proof  that  the  Colleges  of  Artificers  made
use  of  symbols  derived  from  the  implements  and  usages  of  their
craft.  We  need  not  be  surprised  at  this,  for  the  symbolic  idea  was,
as  we  know,  largely  cultivated  by  the  ancients.  Their  mythology,
which  was  their  religion,  was  made  up  out  of  a  great  system  of
symbolism.     Sabaism,  their  first  worship,  was  altogether  symbolic,

1  See  in  this  work  ch.  xxii. ,  pp.  135  to  139 ;  also  ch.  xxvi.,  p.  178.

Creator

Brahma

A

Creation

Agni

[Preserver]

[Destroyer]

/ishnu  UshasU

Mitra

Siva

Preservation

Transformation

LEGENDS   AND   SYMBOLS   OF   MASONRY  1773

and  out  of  their  primitive  adoration  of  the  simple  forces  of  nature,
by  degrees  and  with  the  advancement  of  civilization,  was  developed
a  multiplicity  of  deities,  every  one  of  which  could  be  traced  for  his
origin  to  the  impersonation  of  a  symbol.  It  would,  indeed,  be
strange  if,  with  such  an  education,  the  various  craftsmen  had  failed
to  have  imbued  their  trades  with  that  same  symbolic  spirit  which
was  infused  into  all  their  religious  rites  and  their  public  and  private
acts."

In  plates  i  and  2  (pages  1718  and  1720)  we  have  shown  a  very
few  of  the  symbols  used  by  the  Ancients  in  their  mythologies,  and
which  are  copied  from  Calmet,  and  herewith  is  a  short  description
of  each.

Figure  1,  plate  1,  is  an  Indian  representation  of  Vishnu,  the
second  person  of  the  Trimurti — the  semblance  of  the  God,  is  seated
on  a  lotus-plant  having  four  arms,  and  in  each  hand  a  peculiar  em-
blem is  displayed.  The  stem  is  supported  by  Vishnu,  represented
as  an  immense  turtle.  A  huge  serpent  encircles  the  pillar;  the
gods  hold  the  tail  part  and  the  daityas  or  demons  hold  the  opposite
end.  By  pulling  the  serpent  alternately  the  sea  was  converted  into
milk,  and  then  into  butter,  and  from  this  was  obtained  the  Amrita
or  water  of  life  which  was  drank  by  the  Immortals.

Figure  2  represents  Brahma  seated  on  a  lotus  flower  after  the
deluge.  Calmet  supposes  it  to  represent  Noah  and  his  three  sons.
The  connection  between  numbers  one  and  two  may  be  seen  in  the
conch  shells  shown  in  the  hands,  and  the  chains  of  pearls  around  the
necks.

Figure  4  represents  the  Sun-God  and  Deus  Lunus.

Figures  3,  5,  and  6  are  different  forms  of  Nergal.  The  word
Ner-Gal  divides  into  two  parts  :  Ner  signifies  light,  or  luminary,
etc.,  and  gal  signifies  to  roll,  revolve,  a  revolution,  a  circuit,  the
two  together  implies  the  revolving  or  returning  light.  If  this  be
truly  descriptive  of  Nergal,  there  is  nothing  improbable  in  consider-
ing the  cock  as  allusive  to  it,  since  the  vigilance  of  the  cock  is
well  known,  and  that  he  gives  due  notice  of  the  very  earliest  reap-
pearance of  light  morning  after  morning.  There  are  different
senses  in  which  light  may  be  taken,  besides  its  reference  to  natural
light.

11  1  st.  Deliverance  from  any  singular  danger,  or  distress.  Esth.
viii.  16.

i774  HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

"  2dly.  Posterity  ;  a  son,  or  successor,  i  Kings  xi.  36  ;  2  Chron.
xxi.  7.

14  3dly.  Resurrection,  or  something  very  like  it.  Job  xxxiii.
28,  30;  Psalm  xcvii.  11."

In  the  figures  3,  5,  and  6  there  is  no  allusion  to  the  first  of
these  principles,  but  they  have  a  strong  reference  to  the  second,
Posterity,  and  the  idea  of  fecundity  is  expressed  in  the  adaptation
of  the  figure  of  a  cock,  which  signifies  the  returning  of  light.
In  figure  5,  which  is  taken  from  a  gem  in  the  Gallery  at  Flor-
ence, Italy,  two  cocks  are  yoked  to  the  car  of  Cupid,  and  driven
by  one  Cupid  and  led  by  another ;  and  not  merely  as  if  harnessed
to  a  common  car,  but  as  if  they  had  been  in  a  race  and  had
come  off  victorious  ;  as  the  driving  Cupid  carries  a  palm-branch,
which  is  the  reward  of  victory,  obtained  by  these  his  emblemat-
ical coursers.

In  figure  3  we  have  a  car  with  a  cock  standing  in  the  attitude  of
crowing  and  flapping  his  wings  ;  which  is  the  custom  of  this  bird  on
certain  occasions.  The  star  shown  is  the  Star  of  Venus,  and  dis
tinguishes  this  equipage  as  the  consecrated  vehicle  of  that  supreme
goddess  of  love  and  beauty.  At  a  short  distance  in  the  background
sits  Hymen,  the  god  of  marriage  and  conjugality  ;  his  torch  brightly
blazing ;  at  his  feet  is  a  cock  crowing,  etc.,  in  a  manner  and  attitude
very  like  the  other ;  and  with  precisely  the  same  allusions.  The  in-
dication of  this  allegory  is  the  influence  of  Venus  and  Hymen,  the
genial  powers  of  vitality,  on  the  renovation  of  life,  in  human  pos-
terity.

As  the  extinction  of  lamps,  or  torches,  indicated  utter  desola-
tion, deprivation  of  children  and  misery,  so  on  the  contrary  we  are
led  to  imply  the  joy  of  connubial  engagements.

The  figure  6  represents  a  cock  holding  in  his  bill  two  ears  of
corn  ;  he  is  attended  by  Mercury,  having  a  Caduceus  in  one  hand,
and  a  bag  of  money  in  the  other.  This  gem  has  puzzled  the
learned.  Montfaucon *  says :  "  To  see  Mercury  with  a  cock  is
common  enough  ;  but  to  see  him  walking  before  a  cock  larger  than
himself,  is  what  I  have  never  noticed,  except  in  this  representation.
It  may  denote  that  the  greatest  of  the  qualities  of  Mercury  is  vigi-
lance.    The  cock  holding  the  corn  in  his  bill,  may,  perhaps,  mean

1  Vol.  i.,  pp.  123,  128.

LEGENDS   AND   SYMBOLS   OF   MASONRY  1775

that  vigilance  only  can  produce  plenty  of  the  productions  neces-
sary to  the  support  of  life."  Ancient  Mythology  adopted  various
representations  of  the  human  form.

Figure  7  is  an  Abraxas,  taken  from  Montfaucon.  It  rep-
resents a  man  with  two  faces  having  on  his  head  the  bushel  or
sacred  Calathus ;  two  wings  are  on  his  shoulders  and  two  wings
on  his  hips,  and  a  scorpion's  tail  and  a  staff  in  each  hand.

Figure  8  evidently  represents  Neptune.

Figure  9  represents  Ashtaroth  or  Astarte,  which  is  the  same  as
Venus.  She  holds  a  long  cross  in  her  hand  and  has  the  sacred
Calathus  on  her  head.  This  is  a  Medal  of  Zidon,  which  was  a  city
of  great  antiquity ;  St.  Ambrose,  in  writing  to  Symmachus,  im-
plies that  Venus  is  the  Metrane  of  Persia,  and  though  worshipped
under  different  names  yet  is  constantly  the  same  power.  In  this
connection  we  must  enlarge  somewhat  upon  the  names  of  Ashtaroth,
Astarte,  and  Venus,  as  in  the  description  of  several  of  the  follow-
ing figures  the  subject  will  be  better  understood.

Venus  represented  with  a  dove  is  referred  to  Askelon,  and  yet
we  know  that  Egypt  had  her  Venus  and  dove,  as  shown  in  a  medal
when  she  stands  with  a  staff  in  one  hand  and  a  dove  supported  by
the  other  hand  extended.  This  medal  was  struck  in  Tentyra,  a  city
of  Egypt.  This  shows  that  the  worship  of  the  dove  was  very  prev-
alent in  these  countries.  The  etymology  of  Askelon  is  derived
from  weight,  or  balance,  shekel.  Another  origin  is  suggested  ;  Ash
in  Hebrew  denotes  fire  ;  Kel  denotes  activity,  briskness,  and  heat,
even  to  wasting ;  lun  denotes  to  reside,  to  stay,  to  remain.  These
ideas  combined,  mean,  M  the  residence,  or  station,  of  fire,  in  activity
or  heating."  To  explain  this  the  following  Hindoo  story  is  found
in  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  iv.,  p.  168,  which  agrees  with  this  etymol-
ogy. "  The  Puranas  relate  that  Sami  Rami,  in  the  shape  of  a  dove,
came  and  abode  at  Asc'halanorthan,  which  is  obviously  Askelon  ;
here  Samiramis  was  born,  according  to  Diodorus  Siculus,  and  here
she  was  nursed  by  doves.  She  was,  says  he,  the  daughter  of  Derke-
tos.  Here,  say  the  Indian  Puranas,  she  made  her  first  appearance.
Now,  by  doves,  we  are  to  understand  priestesses  ;  by  her  birth,  the
institution  or  establishment  of  her  worship,  as  daughter,  i.e.,  im-
mediate successor  or  offspring  of  Derketas.  Sami  is  the  Hindoo
word  for  fire,  and  Rama  signifies  the  fir-tree  ;  'Sthan  is  station,
residence,   dwelling.     By    uniting  these   ideas,    we   find   they   also

*776  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

signify  'the  residences,'  'Sthan,  of  fire,  Sami,  in  perfect  conformity
to  the  Hebrew  name,  as  above  explained."1

Figure    10  represents    Dagon,    properly    Dag-Aun.     We   must
anticipate  the   description   of  this  figure   by  reference  to  another
figure,  not  shown,  viz.  :     There  is  a  gem  in  the  Florentine  Gallery
which  is  probably  of  Grecian  workmanship  ;  it  shows  the  progress
of  those  variations  by  which  in  process  of  time  Art  relinquished  the
truly  ancient  representation  of  Dagon.     This  figure  exhibits  a  union
of  the  human  and  fishy  parts  ;  but  this  union  is   contrary  to   the
original  idea  of  the  emblem,  which  was  that  of  a  person  coming  out
of  a  fish,  not  making  a  part  of  the  fish,  but  issuing  from  it.     (As
will  be  seen  in  figure  10.)     Shall  I  be  thought  fanciful  in  referring
the  figures  of  this  plate  to  traditional  memorials  of  Noah,  his  wife,
and   three  sons  ?     All  of   them    having  human    upper   parts,    but
piscine  lower  parts  ;  i.e.,  all  of  them  originally  considered  as  having
issued  from  a  fish  ;  though  by  lapse   of  time   the   import  of  that
allegorical  representation  was  forgot.     N.  B.     The  original  Merman
and  Mermaid  of  our  heraldry  supporters.9     In  figure  io,  instead  of
the  male  and  female,  and  three  children,  all  having  piscine  lower
parts,  there  is  one  person   allied  to  a  fish  ;  but  this  one  person  has
four  arms,  or  governing  powers.     Now  I  take  the  fact  to  be  this  :
when  the  male  personage  was  used  as  a  type  of  the  event  com-
memorated in  this  emblem,  then  the  original  allusion  was  to  Noah
and  his  three  sons ;  but  when  a  female  personage  was  used,  as  an
emblem  of  the  very  same  event,  then  the  allusion  was  to  the  wife
of  Noah.     On  the  same  principle  genealogies  were  reckoned,  and
are  still  in  the  East,  only  by  the  male  sex  ;  we  have  no  genealogy
by  women  in  Scripture  ;  but  this  rule  was  departed  from,  speciali
gratia,  when  the  universal  mother  of  the  second  race  of  mankind
was  to  be  commemorated.      Vide  figure  2  for  the  picture  of  a  man
with  four  heads  and  four  arms,  that  is,  four  governing  powers,  Men-
tal and  Corporal ;  or  in  this  Indian  emblem,  the  four  states  and  con-
ditions of  life,  or  the  four  castes  and  distinctions  among  the  inhabi-
tants,  which  castes  are,  on  the  Indian   system,  equally  attributable
to  Noah  as  the  father,  or  to  his  wife  as  the  mother  of  succeeding
generations.     The  four  bearded  heads  may  be    those  of  the    four
fathers  of  mankind  united  into  one ;  signifying  legislative  govern-

1  Calmet,  Fragment  269,  p.  373.  2  Ibid.,  p.  133.

YORK  CATHEDRAL

LEGENDS  AND   SYMBOLS   OF   MASONRY  1777

ment,  morals,  etc.  The  four  arms  to  the  female  figure,  No.  10,
may  signify  executive  government.  Still  they  represent  govern-
ment in  some  manner  or  other;  and  wherefore  four?  unless  four
persons  had  originally  their  respective  departments  in  conducting
the  general  welfare  of  the  community,  their  descendants.

Figure  10,  plate  2,  is  from  Maurice's  History  of India}  It  rep-
resents a  female,  crowned,  having  four  arms,  each  holding  its  proper
symbol,  coming  out  of  a  great  fish  ;  as  if  this  great  fish  was  casting
forth  this  personage,  after  the  tempestuous  ocean  was  calmed,  the
evil  demon  destroyed,  and  the  verdant  meadows  were  again  clothed
with  cheerful  herbage,  as  appears  in  the  background  of  the  original.

This  emblem  is  called  in  Indian  one  of  the  appearances  of
Avartas  of  Vishnu.

There  is  an  ancient  fable  that  Oannes,  who  was  said  to  be  half  a
man  and  half  a  fish,  came  to  Babylon  and  taught  several  Arts  ;  and
afterward  returned  to  the  sea  .  .  .  there  were  several  of  these
Oannes  .  .  .  the  name  of  one  was  Odacon,  i.e.,  6  Dagon  [the
Dagon].  Berosus,  speaking  of  Oannes,  says  he  had  the  body  and
head  of  a  fish  ;  and  above  the  head  of  the  fish  he  had  a  human  head /
and  below  the  tail  of  the  fish  he  had  human  feet.  This  is  the  true
figure  of  Dagon,  who  was  the  God  of  the  Philistines,  i.e.,  the  most
of  the  inhabitants  of  Palestine,  long  prior  to  the  time  when  Joshua
led  the  children  of  Israel  across  the  river  Jordan  and  took  posses-
sion of  the  whole  country  and  divided  it  among  the  twelve  tribes.
Etymologists  say  that  Dagon  was  Saturn  ;  others  say  he  was  Jupiter  ;
others  say  Venus,  whom  the  Egyptians  worshipped  under  the  form
of  a  fish ;  because  in  Typhon's  war  against  the  gods,  Venus  con-
cealed herself  under  this  shape.2  Diodorus  Siculus  says,3  that  at
Askelon  the  goddess  Derceto,  or  Atagatis,  was  worshipped  under
the  figure  of  a  woman,  with  the  lower  parts  of  a  fish  (see  figure
18,  plate  2),  and  Lucian,  de  Dea  Syr:  describes  that  goddess,  or
Venus,  as  being  adored  under  this  form.

There  is  an  ancient  fable,  that  Oannes,  a  creature  half  man,  half
fish,  rose  out  of  the  Red  Sea,  and  came  to  Babylon,  where  he  taught
men  several  arts,  and  then  returned  again  to  the  sea.  Apollodorus
reports  that  four  such  Oannes,  in  several  ages,  had  arisen  out  of  the
Red  Sea,  and  that  the  name  of  one  of  them  was  Odacon  ;  whence  the

1  Plate  VII.,  p.  507,  per  Calmet,  vol.  iii.,  p.  183.
2  Ovid,  "  Met.,"  lib.  v.,  fab.  5.  *  Lib.  ii.,  p.  65.

112

1778  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

learned  Selden  derives  Dagon.1  The  worship  of  Dagon  continued
in  Palestine  until  the  change  in  the  mythology  of  early  days  to  the
Greek  nomenclature,  after  the  days  of  Alexander  the  Great.  The
temple  of  Dagon  was  pulled  down  by  Sampson  at  Gaza.  The  Phil-
istines deposited  the  ark  in  the  temple  of  Dagon  at  Azoth.

Figure  n,  plate  n,  represents  Succoth  Benoth,  and  is  a  com-
panion to  the  Deity  Nergal ;  which  the  Babylonians  selected  as  their
favorite  object  of  worship  (2  Kings  xvii.  30).

This  representation  is  evidently  Venus  rising  from  the  sea,  at-
tended by  Tritons,  who  regard  her  with  veneration  and  triumph
united  ;  but  this  is  not  the  original  Venus ;  it  is  the  story  poetically
treated,  varied  by  the  looser  imagination  of  the  Greeks,  from  the
ancient  emblem  ;  retaining  the  idea,  but  changing  the  figures,  etc.,
as  seen  they  did  in  Dagon,  and  as  they  were  accustomed  to  do  in  all
their  Deities  ;  from  whence  the  Egyptians,  etc.,  thought  them  im-
pious ;  and  indeed  their  images  became  hereby  altogether  desecrated.
To  this  incident  of  Venus  rising  from  the  Sea  ought  to  be  referred
all  that  the  poets  have  written  on  the  birth  of  the  goddess  of  beauty
from  the  briny  wave,  from  the  froth  or  foam  of  the  sea,  etc.,  of
which  enough  may  easily  be  met  with  among  the  classic  writers,
Greek  or  Latin.

The  Hebrew  word  Succoth  is  usually  rendered  booths,  i.e.,  tem-
porary residences,  as  tents,  etc.  The  Rabbins  translate  it  "  tents  of
the  young  women  "  :  it  is  literally  "  the  tabernacles  of  the  daughters,
or  young  women"  that  is,  "if  benoth  be  taken  as  the  name  of  a  fe-
male idol,  from  Beneh  to  build  up,  procreate  children,  then  the
words  will  express,  The  tabernacles  sacred  to  the  productive  powers
feminine."

The  dove,  when  used  as  an  insignia  or  as  a  token,  referred  pri-
marily to  the  dove  at  the  deluge ;  and  the  double-faced  Jason  re-
ferred primarily  to  Noah  ;  who  looked  backward  on  one  world,
ended,  and  forward  on  another,  beginning.  In  the  illustrations  con-
nected with  Succoth  Benoth  the  head  of  Venus  on  one  side  of  a
medal  with  a  dove  for  its  reverse,  and  a  head  of  Janus  with  a  dove
also  for  its  reverse,  must  originally  have  referred  to  the  same  event ;
and  this  event  was  what  the  figure  of  Derketos,  who  was  the  Syrian
goddess,  commemorated  ;  in  other  words,  Venus  rising  from  the  Sea.

1  Calmet's  Dictionary,  Dagon.

LEGENDS   AND   SYMBOLS   OF   MASONRY  1779

Derketos  issuing  from  a  fish  ;  1st,  Noah,  as  the  great  progenitor  of
mankind,  restored  to  light  and  life  ;  2dly,  the  prolific  powers  again
in  exercise,  to  3dly,  the  revival  of  human  posterity,  etc.,  after  a  tem-
porary residence  in  that  floating  womb  of  mankind,  the  ark  of  pres-
ervation.1

The  composition  of  a  woman  with  the  form  of  a  fish  is  seen  in
a  medal  of  Marseilles  representing  Atergatis,  Derketos,  the  Syrian
goddess  Venus.  Marseilles  was  settled  by  a  colony  of  Phoenicians
from  Syria.  They,  like  the  Men  of  Babylon,  carried  their  country
worship  and  gods  with  them  to  their  distant  settlement.2

In  figure  12  is  a  representation  of  the  eighth  Avatar  of  Vishnu,
in  which  he  represents  the  Good  Black  Shepherd  treading  upon  the
head  of  the  Serpent  Calanach.  The  promise  made  to  Adam  and
Eve  when  they  were  turned  out  of  the  garden  of  Eden,  was  that
their  seed  should  bruise  the  head  of  the  Serpent.  Now,  this  figure
of  Vishnu,  the  second  person  of  the  Indian  Trimurti,  was  called
Krishna — the  Anointed  one — and  some  have  thought  that  this
myth  was  to  illustrate  the  promise  made  to  Adam  and  Eve,  as  above
stated.

Figure  13  is  a  representation  of  Ashtaroth,  the  same  as  Astarte
or  Venus.  The  horns  are  not  united  to  form  a  crescent  as  in  other
pictures  but  are  more  natural ;  around  the  beautiful  head  are  the
Seven  stars  by  three  and  four,  and  two  figures  of  lightning  to  show
her  authority  as  regent  of  night.3

Figure  14  represents  another  form  of  Abraxas  which  has  more
emblems  than  figure  7.  This  figure  has  on  its  head  the  lotos  ;  it
has  four  wings  ;  and  connected  with  each  wing  an  arm  ;  and  in
each  of  its  four  hands  different  destructive  emblems.  It  has  on  its
feet  what  might  be  taken  for  a  third  pair  of  wings  ;  but  these  are
very  imperfect,  if  they  be  wings.

Figure  15  is  Dea  Luna  or  Deus  Lunus.  This  represents  a  man
with  a  Phrygian  bonnet  on  his  head,  clothed  in  a  short  dress,  a
sword  in  his  right  hand,  in  his  left  a  man's  head,  which  he  has  re-
cently cut  off  from  the  body  lying  by  him,  whose  flowing  blood
spirts  upward.  Marcrobius  says  "the  Moon  was  both  male  and
female ;  "  and  adds  one  particular  from  Philocorus,  that  the  male
sex  sacrificed  to  him  in  the  female  habit,  and  the  female  sex  in  the

L  Calmet,  vol.  ii.,  p.  283.  2  Ibid.,  p.  234.  3  Ibid.,  p.  375.

1780  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

male  habit.  Though  Spartian  speaks  of  Carhoe  as  a  place  famous
for  the  worship  of  Lunus,  the  reader  must  not  think  this  worship
was  confined  to  that  place  and  to  Mesopotamia  ;  for  it  was  spread
all  over  the  East.  This  worship  was  established  in  Phoenicia  long
before  the  empire  of  Caracalla ;  a  medal  published  by  Vaillant  hath
Antoninus  Pius  on  one  side  and  the  god  Lunus  on  the  other,  with
his  Syrian  cap  on,  and  holding  a  spear  with  a  great  star  on  one
side  of  him,  and  a  crescent,  which  signifies  the  moon,  on  the  other.
The  medal  was  struck  at  Gaba,  near  Caesarea  in  Palestine,  by  the
borders  of  Phoenicia.1

Figure  16  represents  the  Egyptian  Venus.  This  medal  was
struck  in  Tentyra,  a  city  of  Egypt,  as  appears  by  the  legend  upon
it.  Strabo  mentions  a  temple  of  Venus  at  Tentyra.  This  is  a
reverse  of  a  medal  of  Adrian ;  it  represents  Venus  holding  her
dove  in  one  hand,  in  the  other  a  staff.  On  the  whole,  this  has  a
strong  similitude  to  medals  of  Askelon,  and  shows  that  the  worship
of  the  dove  was  very  prevalent  in  these  countries,  and  in  their  re-
spective adjacencies.8

Figure  17  is  a  representation  of  a  four-horned  goat,  which  is
said  to  be  from  Spain,  with  two  upright  and  two  lateral  horns.  This
animal  was  alive  in  London  about  1 769.  It  is  a  symbol  of  the  goat
of  Mendes.

Figure  18  represents  the  figure  of  a  woman  united  to  the  form
of  a  fish,  and  is  similar  in  composition  and  shape  of  Atergatis-Der-
ketos,  the  Syrian  goddess.

Figures  19  and  20  represent  two  appearances  of  Baal.  They
are  human  heads  with  symbols  of  an  ox  added  to  them.

Observe  in  No.  19  the  stars  which  accompany  the  head  ;  if  these
stars,  or  if  a  single  star,  be  referred  to  the  Deity  it  accompanies,  then
we  see  how  easily  the  Israelites  might  "  take  up  the  Star  of  their
God"  (Amos  v.  26),  i.e.,  portrayed  on  medals,  or  small  figures,
whether  images  or  coins,  etc.,  carried  about  them  ;  and  secured
from  detection  by  their  smallness  and  readiness  of  concealment.
This  figure  has  the  bull's  or  cow's  horns  and  ears  on  its  head.

No.  20  has  only  the  ears  of  a  bull  or  cow ;  but  has  on  its  head
a  garland  of  vine-leaves  and  grapes,  whereby  it  is  allied  to  Bacchus  ;
with  two  apples  on  the  front  of  the  head,  whereby  it  is  allied  to

1  Calmet,  vol.  ii.,  p.  375.  2  Ibid.,  p.  374.

LEGENDS   AND   SYMBOLS  OF   MASONRY  1781

Ceres,  or  to  Pomona,  i.e.,  it  indicates  a  fruit-bearing  divinity,  perhaps
I  sis  fructifera}

We  have  selected  the  foregoing  examples  of  the  very  earliest
symbols  employed  by  the  Ancient  Nations  to  express  their  ideas  of
the  Deities  whom  they  worshipped  ;  these  all  coalesce  at  last  in  the
Sun  and  Moon.  What  was  Fortune?  Baal  Gad;  the  Luna
Dea  which  presided  over  favorable  times  ;  where  then  is  the  wonder
that  the  Israelites  should  be  tempted  to  solicit  favorable  seasons
from  this  goddess,  instead  of  entreating  them  from  the  Lord  ?  as
he  complains ;  or  that  they  should  offer  propitiatory  incense  to  the
queen  of  heaven  ?  (Jer.  xliv.  17)  or  that  the  question  be  asked,  Can
any  of  the  deities  of  the  heathen  give  rain  f  which  is  so  necessary
to  fertility ;  and  an  act  of  true  divinity  alone.  We  see,  too,  how
Gad  and  Meni  terminate  in  the  Sun  and  Moon.2

We  now  revert  to  quite  a  different  class  of  symbols,  which  we
find  prevailed  in  Egypt,  Persia,  Assyria,  and  was  employed  by  the
Almighty  himself  when  he  revealed  his  worship  to  the  children  of
Israel.  We  allude  to  the  Cherubim.  The  first  authentic  reference
which  we  have  in  history  we  find  in  Genesis,  ch.  iii.,  v.  24,  and  in
Exodus,  ch.  xxv.,  vs.  18,  19,  and  20,  which  we  quote,  viz. ;  "And
thou  shalt  make  two  Cherubims  of  gold,  of  beaten  work  shalt  thou
make  them,  on  the  two  ends  of  the  Mercy  Seat.  And  make  one
Cherub  on  the  one  end,  and  the  other  Cherub  on  the  other  end ;
even  of  the  Mercy  Seat 3  shall  ye  make  the  Cherubims  on  the  two
ends  thereof.  And  the  Cherubims  shall  stretch  forth  their  wings
on  high,  covering  the  Mercy  Seat  with  their  wings,  and  their  faces
shall  look  one  to  atnother  ;  toward  the  Mercy  Seat  shall  the  faces  of
the  Cherubim  be."

It  would  seem  from  the  directions  here  given  by  the  Almighty
to  Moses,  that  the  cherubic  form  was  well  known  to  him,  from  his
familiarity  with  the  Cherubim  so  common  in  Egypt.  We  must
therefore  look  to  the  Cherubim  of  Egypt  to  understand  the  subject
and  appreciate  the  Cherubim  of  the  first  Ark  of  the  Covenant  car-
ried by  the  children  of  Israel  in  their  forty  years  of  "  Wanderings  in
the  Wilderness,"  and  into  the  "  land  of  Promise  "  and  the  great
Miracle  wrought  by  it  in  the  midst  of  the  river  Jordan.  (Joshua,
ch.  iii.,  vs.  15,  16,  17.)

^^^— ^— — —  1-  ....  ...■■__  —  - .  — ..  .  — _  ,1  _      .     .    ... .  .  ,.,-..         .  — —^ —  ■<•

1  Calmet,  vol.  ii.,  p.  122.  2  Ibid.,  p.  124.

3  Another  rendering  may  be,  "  of  the  matter  of  the  Mercy  Seat."

1782  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

In  all  the  different  nations,  where  the  cherubic  forms  were  em.
ployed,  they  were  compound  animals.  The  various  authors  on  this
subject  have  employed  many  articles.  Mr.  Parkhurst,  in  his  Dic-
tionary, uses  no  less  than  sixty  ;  and  M.  Calmet  has  many  pages
and  numerous  illustrations,  some  of  which  we  will  use.  In  these
articles  Calmet  proceeds  by  giving  a  description  of  the  various
parts,  separately  entering  into  the  compound  animal.

I.  He  first  takes  the  Cherubim  described  in  the  Bible,  of  their
heads  or  countenances.  Each  Cherub  has  four  :  ist,  that  of  a  man  ;
2d,  that  of  a  lion  ;  3d,  that  of  an  ox  ;  4th,  that  of  an  eagle.  In
what  manner  were  they  placed  ?  Were  they  four  heads  attached
to  four  necks  rising  from  the  trunk  of  the  body ;  or  four  faces  at-
tached to  one  head  ?  He  thinks  they  were  four  faces  attached  to
one  head.

II.  Of  their  bodies,  i.e.,  from  the  neck  downward.  This  was
human,  the  "likeness  of  a  man,"  which  extended  below  the  navel
and  to  the  lower  rim  of  the  stomach.

III.  Of  their  wings.  Ezekiel  describes  them  as  having  four
wings ;  Isaiah  describes  the  Seraph  as  having  six  wings,  viz.  ;  two
on  the  head,  two  on  the  shoulders,  and  two  on  the  flanks.

IV.  Of  their  arms.  The  translations  say  hands,  but  certainly
imply  arms  at  length  ;  their  number  was  four,  one  on  each  side.

V.  The  lower  part.  It  must  have  been  ist,  either  human  thighs,
legs,  and  feet  to  which  was  appended  at  the  posteriors  the  body  and
hind  legs  of  an  ox  ;  or,  rather,  2d,  the  body  and  four  legs  of  an  ox,
out  of  which  the  human  part  seemed  to  rise,  so  that  all  below  the
rim  of  the  belly  was  in  the  form  of  an  ox,  and  all  above  that  was
human.

VI.  Their  services  ;  or,  what  they  appeared  to  do.  The  vision
seen  by  Ezekiel,  and  also  by  Isaiah,  was  the  resemblance  of  a  mov-
able throne  or  chariot,  of  prodigious  dimensions,  on  which  the  sov-
ereign was  supposed  to  sit ;  that  the  wheels  were  annexed  to  it  in
much  the  same  manner  as  to  the  royal  traveling  or  military  thrones
of  the  Persian  Kings  ;  and  that  the  four  Cherubims  occupied  the
places  of  four  horses  to  draw  this  capacious  machine.

Did  our  limits  permit,  we  could  extend  this  examination  into  the
subject  of  the  Cherubim  with  great  profit ;  but  our  object  will  have
been  obtained  if  we  can  succeed  in  showing  how  almost  universal
was  the  idea  of  compounding  different  animals  into  one  for  the  pur-

LEGENDS    AND   SYMBOLS   OF   MASONRY  1783

pose  of  illustrating  the  general  ideas  of  the  different  attributes  of
their  deities  among  all  the  nations  of  antiquity.

We  copy  from  Calmet's  Dictionary  the  following  description  of
the  Cherub.

Cherub — derived  from  the  Chaldee,  signifies  as  a  child ;  from
the  adverb  ki,  as,  and  rabia,  a  young  -man,  a  child  ;  otherwise,  as
multiplying,  or  as  combating ;  from  rahab,  or  abundance,  or  multi-
tude of  knowledge ;  from  rab,  a  multitude,  and  Nacar,  to  know  ;
otherwise,  in  Hebrew,  rahar  signifies  to  grow  great,  to  nourish,  to
bring  up  ;  in  Syriac,  to  labour.

This  term  in  Hebrew  is  sometimes  taken  for  a  calf  or  an  ox.
Ezekiel  i.  10  mentions  the  face  of  a  Cherub,  as  synonymous  to
the  face  of  an  ox.  The  word  Cherub  in  Syriac  and  in  Chaldee
signifies  to  till  or  plough,  which  is  the  work  of  oxen.  Cherub  also
signifies  strong  and  powerful,  possessing  the  strength  of  an  ox.
Grotius  says  the  Cherubim  were  figures  like  a  calf.  Bochart  thinks
they  were  nearly  the  figure  of  an  ox.  So  does  Spencer.  Josephus
says  they  were  extraordinary  creatures  of  a  figure  unknown  to  man-
kind. Clemens  of  Alexandria  believes  that  the  Egyptians  imitated
the  Cherubim  of  the  Hebrews  in  their  Sphinxes  and  hieroglyphical
Animals.1

The  descriptions,  in  various  parts  of  Scripture,  of  the  Cherubim
differ,  but  agree  in  a  figure  composed  of  various  creatures  except
in  the  first  description  in  Exodus.  The  others  an  ox,  a  lion,  a
man,  and  an  eagle,  as  in  Ezekiel  i.  5,  and  x.  2.  Those  placed  in  the
Temple  by  Solomon  were  probably  similar  to  these.  (1  Kings  vi.  23.)
We  can  readily  see  that  those  on  the  Original  Ark  could  not  have
been  like  those  in  the  Temple,  for  there  evidently  was  but  one  head
on  each  one  from  the  expression  "and  their  faces  shall  look  one  to
another ;  toward  the  mercy  seat  shall  the  faces  of  the  Cherubim  be."
(Ex.  xxv.  20.)  There  could  only  be  one  head  and  face  to  each  of
the  two  Cherubim.

Calmet's  own  conclusion  on  this  difficult  question  is  as  follows  :

"So great  obscurity  has  hitherto  overwhelmed  this  figurative  rep-
resentation, notwithstanding  it  has  been  the  theme  of  many  very
learned  men,  that  I  cannot  flatter  myself  with  succeeding  at  once
in  explaining  it.     I  think,  however,  that  this  opens  a  new  way  for

1  Calmet  Dictionary,  Cherub.

1784  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

attaining  some  conception  of  its  real  forms ;  and  I  feel  some  satis-
faction in  the  idea  that  these  symbols  were  not  unknown  in  king-
doms and  countries  independent  of  Judea."

The  Cherubic  or  compound  form  was  common  to  most  of  the
nations  of  the  Orient.  In  Egypt,  the  sphynx  and  other  examples
are  extant  at  the  present  day  ;  in  Assyria,  all  the  Temples  had
such  compound  figures  at  their  entrances,  and  we  show  some  of
these  in  figures  21,  22,  23,  24.

"  In  regard  to  these  Cherubic  forms,  there  were  two  extreme
opinions  :  1st.  That  it  pleased  God  to  compose  the  Jewish  religious
rites,  ceremonies,  and  symbols,  of  materials  as  unlike  as  possible  to
those  of  the  countries  around  them,  especially  of  Egypt,  in  order  to
establish  a  total  dissimilarity,  and  to  exclude  idolatry.  2d.  That  a
close  resemblance,  especially  to  Egyptian  manners,  was  established,
in  order  to  accommodate  the  services  to  the  temper  and  habits  of  a
people  who  had  been  used  to  such  in  Egypt.  This  was  the  hypoth-
esis of  the  learned  Spencer.  The  truth,  I  apprehend,  lies  between
these  opinions.     .     .     .

"  The  Jews  considered  the  Cherubim  as  of  the  utmost  importance
under  the  Levitical  priesthood  ;  yet  they  have  lost  their  true  repre-
sentation. If  the  flame  placed  to  keep  the  way  to  the  tree  of  life
was  a  Cherub,  then  this  emblem  is  extremely  ancient.  Mr.  Park-
hurst  finds  resemblance  to  this  symbol  in  the  West  Indies;  in  the
Temple  of  Elephanta,  in  the  East  Indies  ;  in  Diana ;  in  Proserpine  ;
in  Rhadigust,  an  ancient  German  idol  ;  in  Mithras,  a  Persian
Deity  ;  in  the  gryphon,  or  griffion,  of  Cochin-China ;  in  Yahuthana
Nasr,  Arabian  idols  resembling  a  lion  and  an  eagle  ;  and  in  many
other  parts  of  the  world.  The  opinion  of  this  writer  seems  to  be
sufficiently  established  to  warrant  the  inference,  that  this  emblem
was  not  borrowed  by  the  Jewish  ritual  from  Egypt  only,  but  was
known  among  many  other  nations  in  its  principle  at  least."  l

When  we  reflect  that  at  the  very  earliest  ages,  when  religious
rites  were  new  among  all  the  nations  of  the  earth,  it  does  seem  prob-
able that  they  all  derived  their  ideas  from  one  original  stock  ;  and
in  time  the  varieties  of  manners  and  customs,  and  also  following
these,  the  methods  of  worshipping  their  gods  with  the  same  central
and  general  ideas ;  the  variations  were  like  branches  of  an  original

1  Calmet.

No.22.

Fig.  21. — Assyrian  Winged  Man-headed  Lion.

From  a  doorway  in  the  palace  of  Assur-nasir-pal,  King  of  Assyria(B.c.  885-860),  discovered  at  Calah  (Nimrud),
now  in  the  British  Museum.  According  to  an  inscription  of  Esar-haddon,  the  colossal  figures  which
flanked  the  doorways  of  the  royal  palaces  turned  back  the  enemy  and  protected  and  blessed  the  paths  of
the  kings  who  set  them  up.

FlG.  22. — Assyrian  Winged  Man-headed  Bull.

Taken  from  the  same  locality.

(SSBlll

J||

<d(S^S\                  ^^"r^fillr

■*illlll3i  s

\\\  A           M<S^U'

If

^^^wl

yk

JWfc     v^T&^J^

JL     Ji  /     t— ''t;

a

1
1

^^^^s

Itllifi/    iPf!^

—     ffi^''i:\\^  ffc^'

1

1

HI      iSrjfi'l    1  8

1      M%  Hi

^^^-^^4- 1

>Ya£?.

Ab.<?4

Fig.   23. — Assyrian  Eagle-headed  Deity.

Is  of  the  palace  of  Assur-nasir-pal,  King  of  Assyria  (b.<
Calah  (Nimrud),  now  in  the  British  Museum.

Fig.  24. — Assur-nasir-pal,  King  of  Assyria  (b.c.  885-860).

From  a  bas-relief  on  walls  of  the  palace  of  Assur-nasir-pal,  King  of  Assyria  (b.c.  885-860),  discovered  at

Calah  (Nimrud),  now  in  the  British  Museum.

Thoth,
Scribe  ofttegod&

Osiris.

Judge  orthedeaa.

No.es.

No.26.

Afo.2Z

Fig.  25.— The  Egyptian  God,  Thoth,  Scribe  of  the  Gods.  Fig.  26.— An  Indian
Warrior  of  the  Present  Day,  clothed  and  equipped  similarly  to  the  foregoing
Assyrian  figures.  Fig.  27. — Osiris,  Judge  of  the  Dead,  having  in  his  right  hand
the  Crux-Ansata,  the  symbol  of  eternal  life,  and  in  the  left  hand  a  rod  having
on  its  top  the  head  of  the  Hopooe,  the  symbol  of  purity.

This  is  similar  to  the  rod  or  spear  in  the  right  hand  of  Fig.  26,  having  an  eagle's  feather  forming  a  cross  with  the
rod.     The  warrior  should  have  on  his  forehead  the  scalp  and  horns  of  a  buffalo,  which  they  frequently  wear.
He  has  also  around  his  neck  a  necklace  of  bears'  claws  and  teeth.     In  his  left  hand  the  same  form  of  bag  as
in  numbers  23,  24,  and  28.

LEGENDS   AND    SYMBOLS   OF   MASONRY

1787

stock.  The  fact  that  in  the  vast  number  of  cherubic  forms,  found
in  any  part  of  the  original  heathen  and  idolatrous  world,  the  com-
mon symbols  have  a  great  likeness  to  those  symbols  used  by  the
Jewish  people  and  described  in  the  Jewish  sacred  books.

No.28.

Fig.  28. — Assur-nasir-pal,  King  of  Assyria  (B.C.  885-860),  and  winged  attendants  per-
forming a  ceremony  before  a  sacred  tree.  Above  is  the  emblem  of  the  god  Assur,
who  was  the  Arian  God  Ormudz.

From  a  bas-relief  on  the  walls  of  the  palace  of  Assur-nasir-pal,  discovered  at  Calah  (Nimrud),  now  in  the  British  Mu-
seum. In  the  middle  is  the  famous  "  Ashera  "  translated  in  English  version  "  Grove  "  and  "  Groves,"  which  were
not  growing  trees  but  were  as  here  drawn.

The  Cross.

When  the  Cross  became  a  symbol  is  lost  in  the  remotest  antiq-
uity, and  there  is  no  mention  of  it,  historically,  at  any  period,  or  to
the  country,  or  the  people  who  were  the  first  to  make  use  of  it  as  a
symbol  ;  nevertheless,  it  is  found  at  a  very  early  period,  by  which
certain  forms  have  been  recognized  by  certain  names  having  specific
meanings.

There  are  principal  forms  of  the  cross  which  are  used  as  sym-
bols, and  others  frequently  employed  in  ornamentation  having  no
special  signification.  There  are  a  great  many  forms  of  the  cross.
Among  these  we  call  attention  to  ^  which  is  the  usual  form  of  the
Swastika,  or  Svastika,  a  symbol  which  has  recently  excited  very
much  attention  among  archaeologists.  In  1894,  the  Smithsonian
publication  contained  a  very  lengthy  paper  of  221  pages,  giving  the
most   complete   history  with  full  illustrations  and  examples  of  this

1788  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

symbol  by  Professor  Thomas  Wilson,  Curator  Department  of  Pre-
historic Anthropology,  U.  S.  National  Museum.  He  says  :  "  The
swastica  has  been  called  by  different  names  in  different  coun-
tries, though  nearly  all  countries  have  in  later  years  accepted  the
ancient  Sanskrit  name  of  Swastika  ;  and  this  name  is  recommended
as  the  most  definite  and  certain,  being  now  the  most  general  and,
indeed,  almost  universal.  It  was  formerly  spelled  s-v-a-s-t-i-c-a  and
s-u-a-s-t-i-k-a,  but  the  later  spelling,  both  English  and  French,  is
s-w-a-s-t-i-k-a.  The  definition  and  etymology  of  the  word  is  thus
given  in  Littre"s  French  Dictionary  :

"'  Svastica,  or  Swastika,  a  mystic  figure  used  by  several  (East)  Indian  sects.*
"  It  was  equally  well  known  to  the  Brahmans  as  to  the  Buddhists.  Most  of  the
rock  inscriptions  in  the  Buddhist  caverns  in  the  West  of  India  are  preceded  or
followed  by  the  holy  (sacramentclle)  sign  of  the  Swastika.  (Eugene  Burnouf,  Le
Lotus  de  la  bonne  lot  ;  Paris,  1852,  p.  625.)  It  was  seen  on  the  vases  and  pottery
of  Rhodes  (Cyprus)  and  Etruria.

"Etymology  :  A  Sanskrit  word  signifying  happiness,  pleasure,  good  luck.  It
is  composed  of  Su  (equivalent  of  Greek  c5),  '  good,"  and  asti,  '  being,'  *  good  be-
ing,' with  the  suffix  ka  (Greek  Ka,  Latin  co)."

In  the  Revue  a'Ethnographie  (IV.,  1885,  p.  329),  Mr.  Dumou-
tion  gives  the  following  analysis  of  the  Sanskrit  swastika :

"  Su,  radical,  signifying  good,  well,  excellent,  or  suvidas,  prosperity.
"  Asti,  third  person,  singular,  indicative  present  of  the  verb  as,  to  be,  which
is  sum  in  Latin.

"  Ka,  suffix  forming  the  substantive."

The  Century  Dictionary  says,  Swastika — [Sanskrit,  lit.,"  of  good
fortune."  Svasti  (su,  well,  -f-  asti%  bdng)*  welfare].  Same  as
fylfot.

Compare  crux  ansata  and  gammadion.1

In  Ilios  (p.  347),  Max  Muller  says :

"  Ethnologically,  svastika  is  derived  from  svasti  and  svasti  from  su,  'well,'
and  as,  *  to  be.'  Svasti  occurs  frequently  in  the  Veda,  both  as  a  noun  in  a  sense
of  happiness,  and  as  an  adverb  in  the  sense  of  '  well '  or  'hail ! '  It  corresponds
to  the  Greek  evto-Tw.  The  derivation  svasti-ka  is  of  later  date,  and  it  always
means  an  auspicious  sign,  such  as  are  found  most  frequently  among  Buddhists
and  Jainas."

1  Smithsonian  Report,  1894,  p.  769.

LEGENDS   AND   SYMBOLS   OF   MASONRY  1789

M.  Eugene  Burnouf  defines  the  Mark  Swastika  as  follows  :

"  A  monogrammatic  sign  of  four  branches,  of  which  the  ends  are  curved  (or
bent)  at  right  angles,  the  name  signifying,  literally,  the  sign  of  benediction,  or
good  augury."

The  foregoing  explanations  relate  only  to  the  present  accepted
name  "  Swastika."

The  sign  Swastika  must  have  existed  long  before  the  name  was
given  to  it.  It  must  have  been  in  existence  long  before  the  Budd-
hist religion  or  the  Sanskrit  language.

In  Great  Britain  the  common  name  given  to  the  Swastika  from
Anglo-Saxon  times  by  those  who  had  no  knowledge  whence  it  came,
or  that  it  came  from  any  other  than  their  own  country,  was  Fylfot,
said  to  have  been  derived  from  the  Anglo-Saxon  fower  fot,  mean-
ing  four-footed,  or  many-footed.1

"  Many  theories  have  been  presented  concerning  the  symbolism
of  the  Swastika,  its  relation  to  ancient  deities  and  its  representation
of  certain  qualities.  In  the  estimation  of  certain  writers  it  has  been
respectively  the  emblem  of  Zeus,  of  Baal,  of  the  Sun,  of  the  sun-
god,  of  the  sun-chariot,  of  Agni  the  fire-god,  of  Indra  the  rain-god,
of  the  Sky,  of  the  sky-god,  and  finally  the  deity  of  all  deities,  the
Great  God,  the  Maker  and  Ruler  of  the  Universe.  It  has  also  been
held  to  symbolize  light  or  the  god  of  light,  of  the  forked  lightning,
and  of  water.  It  is  believed  by  some  to  have  been  the  oldest  Aryan
symbol.  In  the  estimation  of  others  it  represents  Brahma,  Vishnu,
and  Siva,  Creator,  Preserver,  Destroyer.  It  appears  in  the  foot-
prints of  Buddha,  engraved  upon  the  solid  rock  on  the  Mountains
of  India.  It  stood  for  the  Jupiter  Tonans  and  Pluvius  of  the  Latins,
and  the  Thor  of  the  Scandinavians.  In  the  latter  case  it  has  been  con-
sidered— erroneously,  however — a  variety  of  the  Thor  hammer.  In
the  opinion  of  at  least  one  author  it  had  an  intimate  relation  to  the
Lotus  sign  of  Egypt  and  Persia.  Some  authors  have  attributed  a
phallic  meaning  to  it ;  others  have  recognized  it  as  representing  the
generative  principle  of  mankind,  making  it  the  symbol  of  the  female.
Its  appearance  on  the  person  of  certain  goddesses,  Artemis,  Hera,
Demeter,  Astarte,  and  the  Chaldean  Nana,  the  leaden  goddess  from
Hissarlik,  has  caused  it  to  be  claimed  as  a  sign  of  fecundity."  *

1  R.  P.  Greg  per  Smithsonian  Report,  1894,  p.  769.

2  Smithsonian  Report,  1894,  p.  771.

i79o  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

Commenting  upon  the  theories  of  the  various  writers  quoted,
Professor  Wilson  says  :

"In  forming  the  foregoing  theories  their  authors  have  been
largely  controlled  by  the  alleged  fact  of  the  substitution  and  permu-
tation of  the  Swastika  sign  on  various  objects  with  recognized  sym-
bols of  these  different  deities.  The  claims  of  these  theorists  are
somewhat  clouded  in  obscurity  and  lost  in  the  antiquity  of  the  sub-
ject. What  seems  to  have  been  at  all  times  an  attribute  of  the
Swastika  is  its  character  as  a  charm  or  amulet,  as  a  sign  of  benedic-
tion, blessing,  long  life,  good  fortune,  good  luck.  This  character
has  continued  into  modern  times,  and  while  the  Swastika  is  recog-
nized as  a  holy  and  sacred  symbol  by  at  least  one  Buddhistic  re-
ligious sect,  it  is  still  used  by  the  common  people  of  India,
China,  and  Japan  as  a  sign  of  long  life,  good  wishes,  and  good
fortune."

Whatever  else  the  sign  Swastika  may  have  stood  for,  and  how-
ever many  meanings  it  may  have  had,  it  was  always  ornamental.
It  may  have  been  used  with  any  or  all  of  the  above  significations,
but  it  was  always  ornamental  as  well.

"  Dr.  Schliemann  found  many  specimens  of  Swastika  in  his  ex-
cavation at  the  site  of  ancient  Troy  on  the  hill  of  Hissarlik.  They
were  mostly  on  spindle  whorls.  .  .  .  He  appealed  to  Professor
Max  Miiller  for  an  explanation,  who,  in  reply,  wrote  an  elaborate
description,  which  Dr.  Schliemann  published  in  IliosT

He  commences  with  a  protest  against  the  word  Swastika  being
applied  generally  to  the  sign  Swastika,  because  it  may  prejudice  the
reader  or  the  public  in  favor  of  its  Indian  origin.      He  says  :

"  I  do  not  like  the  use  of  the  word  Svastika  outside  of  India.  It  is  a  word  of
Indian  origin  and  has  its  history  and  definite  meaning  in  India.  .  .  .  The
occurrence  of  such  crosses  in  different  parts  of  the  world  may  or  may  not  point
to  a  common  origin,  but  if  they  are  once  called  Svastika  the  vulgus  profanum
will  at  once  jump  to  the  conclusion  that  they  all  come  from  India,  and  it  will
take  some  time  to  weed  out  such  prejudice.

"  Very  little  is  known  of  Indian  art  before  the  third  century  B.C.,  the  period
when  the  Buddhist  sovereigns  began  their  public  buildings.

"  The  name  Svastika,  however,  can  be  traced  (in  India)  a  little  farther  back.
It  occurs  as  the  name  of  a  particular  sign  in  the  old  grammar  of  Panani,  about
a  century  earlier.  Certain  compounds  are  mentioned  there  in  which  the  last
word  is  karna,  'ear.'  One  of  the  signs  for  marking  cattle  was  the  Svastika,  and
what   Panani  teaches    in  his  grammar  is  that  when  the  compound  is  formed,

LEGENDS   AND   SYMBOLS   OF   MASONRY  1791

svastika-karna,  i.e.,  having  the  ear  marked  with  a  sign  of  a  Svastika,  the  final  a
of  Svastika  is  not  to  be  lengthened,  while  it  is  lengthened  in  other  compounds,
such  as  datra-karna,  i.e.,  having  the  ear  marked  with  the  sign  of  a  sickle."

"  It  (the  Swastika)  occurs  often  at  the  beginning  of  Buddhist
inscriptions,  on  Buddhist  coins,  and  in  Buddhist  manuscripts.  His-
torically, the  Svastika  is  first  attested  on  a  coin  of  Krananda,  sup-
posing Krananda  to  be  the  same  king  as  Xandrames,  the  predecessor
of  Sandrokyptos,  whose  reign  came  to  an  end  in  315  b.c.  (See
Thomas  on  the  identity  of  Xandrames  and  Krananda.)  The  paleo-
graphic  evidence,  however,  seems  rather  against  so  early  a  date.

11  In  the  foot-prints  of  Buddha  the  Buddhists  recognize  no  less
than  sixty-five  auspicious  signs,  the  first  of  them  being  the  Svastika  ;
the  fourth  is  the  Suavastika,  or  that  with  the  arms  turned  to  the
left ;  the  third,  the  Nandydvarta,  is  a  mere  development  of  the
Svastika.  Among  the  Jainas  the  Svastika  was  the  sign  of  their
Seventh  Jina,  Suparsva."

"  In  the  later  Sanskrit  literature,  Svastika  retains  the  meaning  of  an  au-
spicious mark  ;  thus  we  see  in  the  Ramayana,  that  Bharata  selects  a  ship
marked  with  the  sign  of  the  Svastika.  Varapamihira  in  the  Brihat-samhita"
mentions  certain  buildings  called  Savastika  and  Nandyavarta,  but  their  outline
does  not  correspond  very  exactly  with  the  form  of  the  sign.  Some  Sthupas,
however,  are  said  to  have  been  built  on  the  plan  of  the  Svastika.  .  .  .
Originally,  Svastika  may  have  been  intended  for  no  more  than  two  lines  cross-
ing each  other,  or  a  cross.  Thus  we  find  it  used  in  later  times  referring  to  a
woman  covering  her  breast  with  crossed  arms,  Svahastasvastika-stani,  and  like-
wise with  reference  to  persons  sitting  cross-legged."1

Max  Miiller  continues :

"  Quite  another  question  is,  why  the  sign  p^  should  have  an  auspicious
meaning,  and  why  in  Sanscrit  it  should  have  been  called  Svastika.  The  simi-
larity between  the  group  of  letters  sv  in  the  ancient  Indian  alphabet,  and  the
sign  of  Svastika  is  not  very  striking,  and  seems  purely  accidental.

"A  remark  of  yours  [Schliemann]  (Troy,  p.  38)  that  the  Svastika  resembles
a  wheel  in  motion,  the  direction  of  the  motion  being  indicated  by  the  crampons,
contains  a  useful  hint,  which  has  been  confirmed  by  some  important  observa-
tions of  Mr.  Thomas,  the  distinguished  Oriental  numismatist,  who  has  called  at-
tention to  the  fact  that  in  the  long  list  of  the  recognized  devices  of  the  twenty-
four  Jaina  Tirthankaras  the  sun  is  absent,  but  that  while  the  eighth  Tirthankara
has  the  sign  of  the  half-moon,  the  seventh  Tirthankara  is  marked  with   the

1  Smithsonian  Report,  1894,  p.  772.

1792  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Svastika,  i.e.,  the  sun.  Here,  then,  we  have  clear  indications  that  the  Svastika,
with  the  hands  pointing  in  the  right  direction,  was  originally  a  symbol  of  the
sun,  perhaps  of  the  vernal  sun  as  opposed  to  the  autumnal  sun,  Suavastika,  and,
therefore,  a  natural  symbol  of  light,  life,  health,  and  wealth.

"  But,  while  from  these  indications  we  are  justified  in  supposing  that  among
the  Aryan  nations  the  Svastika  may  have  been  an  old  emblem  of  the  sun,  there  are
other  indications  to  show  that  in  other  parts  of  the  world  the  same  or  a  similar
emblem  was  used  to  indicate  the  earth.  Mr.  Beal  .  .  .  has  shown  .  .  .
that  the  simple  (  +  )  occurs  as  a  sign  for  earth  in  certain  ideographic  groups.  It
was  probably  intended  to  indicate  the  four  quarters — north,  south,  east,  west —
or,  it  may  be,  more  generally,  extension  in  length  and  breadth.

"That  the  cross  is  used  as  a  sign  for  •  four  '  in  the  Bactro-Pali  inscriptions
(Max  Miiller,  Chips  from  a  Ger?nan  Workshop,  Vol.  II.,  p.  298)  is  well  known;  but
the  fact  that  the  same  sign  has  the  same  power  elsewhere,  as,  for  instance,  in
the  Hieratic  numerals,  does  not  prove  by  any  means  that  the  one  figure  was  de-
rived from  the  other.  We  forget  too  easily  that  what  was  possible  in  one  place
was  possible  also  in  the  other  places  ;  and  the  more  we  extend  our  researches,
the  more  we  shall  learn  that  the  chapter  of  accidents  is  larger  than  we  im-

agine

»*  1

In  the  Smithsonian  Report  (Annual)  for  1897  we  find  an  article
by  Marquis  De  Nadaillac  on  the  "  Unity  of  the  Human  Species,"
who,  in  concluding  one  part  of  the  subject,  says  : 8

"  The  accumulated  proof  renders  it  incontestable  that  the  funeral
rite  of  cleaning  the  bones  and  coloring  them  red  was  practised  in
different  countries  widely  separated  by  sea  or  desert.  Thucydides
says  the  history  of  a  people  is  to  be  sought  in  their  tombs.  In  the
cases  cited,  the  tomb  has  responded  and  has  thrown  a  clear  light  on
the  earliest  origin  of  the  rite,  and  at  the  same  time  on  the  common
origin  of  man.  A  question  arising  from  these  facts  is,  whether  they
relate  to  religious  or  funeral  rites.  But  this  is  comparatively  of  small
importance.  It  was  surely  a  custom  of  the  unknown  ancestors  of
these  peoples,  transmitted  from  generation  to  generation.  These
facts  do  not  allow  us  to  say  that  primitive  life  was  everywhere  the
same,  nor  that  if  the  productions  of  men  are  everywhere  the  same,
they  are  always  to  satisfy  the  same  needs.  In  the  strange  rite  that
we  have  recounted,  a  rite  which  has  required  much  thought  and  mul-
tiplied cares  and  which  one  can  believe  was  strange  to  barbarous
and  nomadic  races,  it  is  not  a  question  of  similar  needs  growing  out
of  similar  creations.     In  order  to  find  a  solution  it  is  necessary  tc

1  Smithsonian  Report,  1894,  p.  773.  2  Ibid.,  1898,  pp.  563  to  569.

LEGENDS   AND   SYMBOLS   OF    MASONRY  i793

seek  higher  and  farther  ;  it  is  the  identity  of  the  genius  of  man  in
all  times  and  in  all  regions  that  should  be  inquired  of,  and  it  is  only
there  that  it  can  be  found.1

"  The  mysterious  Swastika  sign  born  in  undefined  regions  and
rapidly  extended  over  the  entire  world,  goes  to  support  this  hypoth-
esis.    We  will  seek  the  lessons  it  teaches.

"  For  a  long  time  the  Swastika  (the  croix  gammee,  a  Greek  cross,
with  arms  bent  to  the  right  at  right  angles)  has  been  regarded  as  an
Aryan  sign,  even  the  Aryan  sign  par  excellence.  From  this,  or  from
its  apparent  place  of  origin,  the  name  Indian  (East  Indian)  has  been
given  it ;  a  name  difficult  at  present  to  maintain  because  of  the  daily
discoveries  of  its  diffusion  or  spread  among  absolute  strangers  to  the
Aryan  race.2

"It  appears  from  the  researches  made  during  late  years  that  the
origin  even  of  the  Swastika  sign  appears  to  be  contested.  Thus  we
read  in  the  work  of  Count  Goblet  d'Alviella,3  one  of  those  who  has
best  studied  the  question  :

"  '  The  croix  gammee  (Swastika)  appears  from  prehistoric  times
among  the  peoples  originating  in  the  valley  of  the  Danube,  who  have
respectively  colonized  the  Troad  and  the  north  of  Italy.  It  extends
with  the  products  of  this  antique  culture,  on  one  side,  among  the
Greeks,  Etruscans,  Latins,  Gauls,  Germans,  British,  and  Scandina-
vians ;  on  the  other  side,  to  Asia  Minor,  Persia,  the  Indies,  and  to
China  and  Japan.'

"  Such  is  also  the  opinion  of  M.  Salomon  Reinach.4  According
to  him  the  sign  of  the  Swastika  already  represented  in  the  city  of
Hissarlik,  prior,  according  to  all  probabilities,  to  the  thirteenth  cen-

1  J.  McGuire,  Classification  and  Development  of  Primitive  Implements.  "  Amer.  An-
throp.,"  July,  1896.

2  The  literature  upon  the  Swastika  has  increased  in  late  years  until  it  has  become  a
library.  In  1889  Count  Goblet  d'Alviella  made  a  communication  to  the  Royal  Academy
of  Belgium  entitled  "  La  croix  gammee,  or  Swastika."  It  has  since  been  enlarged  and  pub-
lished under  the  title  "  La  migration  des  Symboles,"  Paris,  1891.  An  English  translation
appeared  with  an  introduction  and  note  by  Sir  G.  Birdwood.  Among  recent  publications
were  those  of  Michael  Zmigrodzki,  '•  Zur  Geschichte  der  Swatika,"  Brunswick,  1890,  and
Thomas  Wilson,  "The  Swastika,"  Washington,  1896.  Eminent  savants  in  all  countries
have  been  occupied  with  the  question  of  its  origin  and  signification,  but  it  appears,  never-
theless, that  it  is  not  yet  entirely  cleared,  for  Dr.  Brinton  writes:  "  It  is  easy  to  read  into
barbaric  scratches  the  thoughts  of  later  times,  and  we  must  acknowledge  that  something
more  than  the  figure  itself  is  needed  to  prove  its  symbolic  sense."

3  La  migration  des  Symboles.     "  Revue  des  deux  Mondes,"  May  12,  1889.

4  Le  mirage  oriental.     "  L' Anthropologic,"  1895.

113

1794  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

tury  b.c,  did  not  penetrate  the  Indies  until  after  that  period.1  He
continues  that  one  does  not  find  the  symbol  in  Egypt,2  nor  in
Phoenicia,  nor  Assyria  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  frequent  in
northern  Italy,  in  the  valley  of  the;  Danube,  in  Thrace,  in  Greece,
and  on  the  western  shores  of  Asia  Minor.  Thence  comes  his  con-
clusions that  we  should  seek  in  Europe  for  its  origin.3

"  I  do  not  pretend  to  contradict  this,  but  the  first  discovery  of
the  Swastika  on  the  hill  of  Hissarlik  determines  that  this  was  not  its
place  of  origin.  When  came  this  mysterious  sign  which  we  see  at
Troy  ?  To  what  rite  does  it  belong  ?  Where  did  it  originate  ?
These  are  questions  we  would  like  to  have  answered.  In  the  pres-
ent state  of  our  knowledge,  the  question  is  insoluble.  One  point
excites  my  interest,  that  is  the  long  persistence  of  the  Swastika  and
its  rapid  diffusion  throughout  such  different  regions.  I  see  in  this
an  important  argument  in  favor  of  the  unity  of  the  human  species.
This  argument  should  be  further  presented  and  such  facts  produced
as  justify  it.

"  An  infant,  the  child  of  a  savage,  might  amuse  himself  by  trac-
ing in  the  sand  or  on  stone,  or  on  the  first  object  that  came  under
his  hand,  squares  and  circles  and  crosses,  and  lines,  making  all  imag-
inable angles  ;  with  progress  the  child  can  reproduce  the  images  of
his  mind,  the  scenes  that  strike  him  most,  even  to  bizarre  figures
which  are  due  only  to  his  imagination.  He  will  not  produce  a  sign
as  complicated  as  the  Swastika  unless  he  has  it  or  has  had  it  before  his
eye,  or  unless  it  shall  have  been  transmitted  to  him  by  his  ancestors.
It  is  puerile  to  explain  its  presence  in  so  many  and  such  widely  sep-
arated regions  by  the  theory  of  the  identity  of  the  psychologic  state
among  human  races  which  have  the  same  rudimentary  culture.

1  M.  Reinach  afterward  recognized  that  the  Swastika  mentioned  by  Goblet  d'Alviella
on  certain  ingots  of  silver  in  the  form  of  dominoes,  serving  as  money,  and  also  those  with
inscriptions  in  honor  of  Acoka,  belonged  to  the  third  century  B.C. — "  L' Anthropologic,"
1894,  p.  248.

2  Flinders  Petrie  has  found  at  Naukratis  certain  vases  ornamented  with  the  Swastika
(Third  Memoir  Egyptian  Exploration  Fund),  but  this  pottery  appears  to  have  been  im-
ported from  Caria  or  from  Cyprus.  Stuffs  ornamented  with  the  same  sign  have  also  been  dis-
covered at  Panopolis,  Upper  Egypt,  but  these  have  been  attributed  to  Greek  workmen  who
were  numerous  at  Coptos,  a  neighboring  village  where  Clermont  Ganneau  has  recently
discovered  a  Greek  inscription. — "Acad,  des  Inscriptions,"  March  5,  1897  (Forrer,  "Die
Graber  und  Textilfunde  von  Achmin  Panopolis").

3  "  As  for  India,  everything  induces  the  belief  that  the  Swastika  was  there  introduced
from  Greece,  from  the  Caucasus,  or  from  Asia  Minor,  by  routes  as  yet  unknown." — Goblet
d'Alviella,  "  La  migration  des  symboles,"  p.  107.

LEGENDS   AND   SYMBOLS   OF   MASONRY  1795

"  The  mysterious  Swastika *  figured  on  the  idols  and  spindle
whorls  2  of  the  ancient  Dardania,  on  the  diadem  of  the  daughters  of
Priam,  and  on  the  numberless  objects  from  the  early  cities  on  the
hill  of  Hissarlik,3  in  the  sacred  temples  of  India  as  on  the  bas  relief
of  Ibriz,  attributed  to  the  Hittites,4  on  Celtic  funeral  urns,  and  on
the  hut  urns  of  Albano  or  Corneto,  a  curious  imitation  of  the  habi-
tations of  the  living  wherein  they  have  piously  deposited  the  ashes
of  the  dead.5

"  We  see  the  Swastika  on  the  balustrades  of  the  porticos  of  the
temple  of  Athena  at  Pergamos,  on  the  sculptured  ceiling  of  the
Treasury  at  Orchomenos,  on  the  vases  of  Milo  and  Athena,  those  of
Bologna,  the  ancient  Felsina  of  the  Etruscans,6  of  Caere  (Cerve-
tri),7  Cumes,8  Cyprus,9  and  on  the  pottery  gathered  at  Konigswalde
on  the  Oder  ;  on  a  golden  fibula  of  the  Museum  of  the  Vatican,  and
a  copper  fibula  of  the  Royal  Museum  of  Copenhagen.

"  It  is  encountered  in  the  most  ancient  paintings  of  the  cata-
combs of  Rome,  on  the  tunic  of  the  Bon  Pasteur,10  and  on  the  arch-
bishop's chair  of  St.  Ambrose  at  Milan,  where  it  is  associated  with

1  Sometimes  the  arms  of  the  Swastika  turn  to  the  left,  to  which  Professor  Max  Miiller
says  has  been  given  the  name  Suavastika.  (Mr.  Virchand  R.  Gandhi  reports  that  while
studying  an  ancient  Sanscrit  philosophy,  in  the  British  Museum  library,  he  found  the  word
Suavastika  in  connection  with  Swastika. — T.  W.)

2  The  number  of  these  objects  casts  a  doubt  upon  their  use  as  spindle  whorls  only.
They  have  been  religious  objects,  a  sort  of  ex-voto,  for  example.

3  Schliemann,  "Ilios,"  Figs.  1873,  191 1,  and  others.

4  S.  Reinach,  Le  mirage  oriental.     "  Anthropologic,"  1893.

5  Dennis,  "  Cities  and  Cemeteries  of  Etruria,"  vol.  i.,  p.  69;  vol.  ii.,  p.  457.  Dennis
regards  these  urns  as  anterior  to  the  Etruscan  civilization.  See  also  "  Annali  Dell'  Inst.
Romano,"  1871,  pp.  239,  279.  Professor  H.  W.  Haynes,  of  Boston,  is  of  opinion  that  these
belong  to  the  "  Iron  Age"  (Nation,  January  24,  1889).  Professor  Heilbig, "  Guide  to  the
Collection  of  Classic  Antiquities  in  Rome,"  vol.  ii.,  p.  267;  Pigorini,  "  Bulletino  Eth-
nologia  Italiana,"  vol.  xii.,  p.  262  ;  Chantre,  "  Necropoles  Halstattiennes  de  Italie  et  de
l'Autriche,  Materiaux,"  vol.  xviii.,  pp.  3,  4.

6  Gozzadini,  "  Scavi  Archaeologici,"  Plate  IV.

7  In  a  tomb  at  Caere  there  has  been  found  a  golden  fibula  with  engraved  Swastika.
Greffi,  "Monumenti  di  Caere,"  Plate  VI.,  No.  1.

8  At  Cumes  has  been  found  the  sign  (Swastika)  on  pottery,  buried  at  great  depth,
which  mark  the  establishment  of  sepulchres  at  the  most  ancient  periods,  beneath  the
tombs  of  the  Hellenic  epoch,  they  in  turn  being  under  those  of  the  Roman  epoch.  Alex.
Bertrand  ("  Arch,  celtique  et  gauloise,"  p.  45).

9  "  Cesnola,  Cyprus,  its  Ancient  Cities,  Tombs  and  Temples,"  Plates  XLIV.  and
XLVII.

10  Roller,  "  Les  Catacombes  de  Rome,"  Plates  VI.,  X.,  XXXII.,  XXXIX.,  LIV.,
LXXXVIL,  XCIV.

1796  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

the  Latin  cross  and  the  monogram  of  Christ ;  on  the  ancient  sacred
books  of  Persia,  as  well  as  on  the  coins  of  Arsacides  and  the  Sassa-
nides  ;  on  the  most  ancient  Christian  monuments  of  Scotland  and
Ireland,  often  accompanied  with  Ogam  inscriptions ; 1  on  the  Scan-
dinavian runic  books  ;  in  the  Halstattien  sepulchres  of  San  Mar-
garether  or  de  Rovische,2  and  in  the  necropolis  of  Koban.3

"  Schliemann  found  it  at  Tiryns  and  at  Mycenae  ; 4  Cartailhac  in
the  citanias,  those  strange  fortified  towns  of  Portugal,  some  of  which
date  from  Neolithic  times  ;5  Chantre  in  the  tombs  in  Caucasus,6  and
the  Russian  archaeologists  on  the  bronze  objects  from  their  country
in  the  Museum  of  Moscow.

"  The  Swastika  has  been  found  in  France,  in  the  Tumuli
(mounds)  of  Haguenau,  engraved  on  the  cinctures  of  bronze.7  It
is  perpetuated  on  objects  posterior  or  strange  to  the  Roman  domina-
tion. For  example,  on  those  taken  in  the  Frankish  tombs  opened  at
Colombe  (Loire-et-Cher),  on  a  funeral  stele  at  the  Museum  of  Tou-
louse, on  a  vase  at  the  Museum  of  Rouen,8  on  the  cinctures,  Gallo-
Roman  or  Merovingian,  near  La  Fere.9  The  Swastika  also  is  found
on  a  Celto- Roman  altar  erected  at  Ambloganna,  in  England  by  a  Da-
cian  legion  in  honor  of  Zeus  or  Jupiter.10  On  the  right  and  left  are
two  circles,  rayed  after  the  fashion  of  stars,  which  Gaidoz  believes
to  be  a  representation  of  the  sun.11  The  Laplanders  still  engrave
the  Swastika  on  their  drums  intended  to  be  used  in  Magic  rites.

11  The  Chinese  decorate  with  it  their  standards,  instruments  of
music,  and  their  cannon.19

"  The  Japanese  employ  it  as  a  mark  on  their  pottery,  and  the

I  Dr.  Graves,  Bishop  of  Limerick,  "  Proceedings  Roy.  Irish  Acad."  Ludvig  Muller
reports  the  same.

8  "  Materiaux,"  1884,  pp.  137,  139,  466,  and  Fig.  84.
»Ibid.,  1888,  p.  352.

4  "  Mycenae,"  p.  193.

5  "  L'Espagne  et  le  Portugal  prehistoriques,"  Figs.  410-412.  Recently  M.  da  Veiga
has  recognized  the  Swastika  in  the  compartments  of  a  mosaic  found  in  Algarve.  "  L'An-
thropologie,"  1891,  p.  222.

6  M.  Chantre  assimilates  these  burials  to  those  of  Villanoba,  Halstatt,  and  Bismen-
tovia  in  upper  Italy.     "  Materiaux,"  1881,  pp.  164,  165.

7De  Mortillet,  "  Album  prehistorique,"  pp.  98,  99,  100.

8  Ibid.,  Figs.  1247,  1257.

•Moreau,  "  Album  de  Caranada."

10  Goblet  d'Alviella,  "  La  migration  des  symboles."  p.  65.

II  "  Le  dieu  gaulois  du  soleil  et  la  migration  des  symboles."
n  The  Letter  of  Gordon  to  Schliemann.     "  Ilios,"  p.  352.

LEGENDS   AND   SYMBOLS   OF    MASONRY  1797

Hindus  paint  it  in  red  on  their  houses  at  the  beginning  of  the  New
Year,  and  make  it  with  flour  or  sacred  rice  upon  a  table  or  stand
when  entering  a  house  or  church  as  a  sign  of  good  luck  or  good
wishes,  or  the  occasion  of  a  wedding  or  fete.1

"  The  diffusion  of  a  sign  so  complicated  as  the  Swastika  through-
out all  time  and  in  all  countries  is  something  to  be  remarked,  and  of
which  we  should  recognize  the  importance.  Our  astonishment  is
doubled  when  we  find  the  same  symbol  among  the  Ashantes  on  the
western  coast  of  Africa,2  and  see  it  figured  in  America  among  the
most  ancient  civilization  of  which  we  have  any  knowledge.  By
what  migration  has  it  crossed  the  Atlantic,  by  what  migrations  has
it  penetrated  such  distant  countries  and  appeared  among  races  of
men  so  different  ?  And  if,  as  we  believe,  all  these  representations
are  due  to  an  indigenous  art,  either  Indian  or  African,  where  did
they  obtain  their  model  ?  Our  ignorance  on  these  points  is  com-
plete, and  the  most  we  can  do  is  to  give  a  resume*  of  the  principal
Known  facts.

"  The  Swastika  has  been  found  engraved  on  a  shell  from  a
mound  in  Tennessee  which  contained  thirty-two  human  burials,3  on
plates  (five)  of  copper  from  the  mounds  of  Chillicothe,  Ohio,4  a
stone  hatchet  from  Pemberton,  N.  J.,  on  an  Arkansas  vase  in  the
National  Museum,  on  a  silver  ornament,  the  authenticity  of  which
appears  incontestable,  and  which  was  shown  in  1887  at  the  reunion
ot  the  Association  Francaise  at  Toulouse.5

"  Nordenskiold  cites  numerous  examples  of  the  Swastika,  now
engraved  in  straight  lines,  other  times  indicated  by  dots,  among  the

1  It  has  been  contended  by  some  persons  that  the  triskelion  was  an  evolution  from  or
to  the  Swastika — the  triskelion  of  three  human  legs  bent  at  the  knee  and  joined  at  the
thigh.  It  is  found  on  the  Lycian  coins  about  480  B.C.,  and  thence  was  carried  by  Aga-
thocles  to  Sicily.  (Barclay  Head,  "  Coins  of  the  Ancients,"  Plate  XXXV.)  It  is  also
found  on  a  vase  from  Agrigentum.  (Waring,  "  Ceramic  Art  in  Remote  Ages,"  Plate
XLII.)  Newton  explains  how  the  symbol  (triskelion)  is  found  on  the  arms  of  Sicily,  and
also  those  of  the  Isle  of  Man.  ("  Athenaeum,"  September,  1892.)  The  Duke  of  Athol,
proprietary  of  the  Isle  of  Man,  sold  in  1765  his  right  to  the  Crown  of  England,  but  because
he  had  been  its  sovereign  he  kept  the  triskelion  in  his  coat  of  arms.

2  "  It  is  not  possible  to  admit,"  says  Count  Goblet  d'Alviella  ("  Migration  des  sym-
boles,"  p.  108),  "  that  this  has  been  spontaneously  conceived  and  executed.  Of  all  a  priori
hypotheses,  this  is  certainly  the  most  difficult  to  accept."

3  "  Third  Annual  Report,"  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  Fig.  140.

*  "  Twelfth  Annual  Report,"  Bureau  of  Ethnology.  Other  similar  discoveries  have
been  made  in  Ohio.

5"  Comptes  rendus,"  i.,  p.  284.

1798  HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY

cave  dwellers  of  Mesa  Verde,  and  the  same  is  done  by  Max  Miiller
in  Yucatan  and  Paraguay,  while  other  savants  have  found  it  among
the  Huacas  of  Peru  and  among  savage  tribes  of  Brazil,  where  the  tri-
angular pieces  of  pottery,  sometimes  bearing  the  mysterious  Swas-
tika sign,  often  form  the  only  dress  of  the  women.1

"  We  find  it  in  the  paintings  of  the  Navajos 2  and  on  the  orna-
ments of  the  Pueblo  Indians,  while  the  Sac  Indians  of  the  South-
west wear  it  on  their  collars  and  garters  on  occasion  of  their  religious
fetes,  although  it  is  not  possible  that  they  should  know  the  sense
which  is  attached  to  it,3  and  the  Wolpis  paint  it  on  their  dance
rattles.4

"  I  have  omitted  to  treat  of  numerous  figurines  ornamented  with
the  Swastika  in  the  hope  to  find  an  explanation  of  this  mysterious
symbol.  We  find  it  engraved  on  a  figure  of  Buddha  in  the  United
States  National  Museum,5  on  the  base  of  a  bronze  Buddha  from
Japan,  and  on  a  vase  in  the  Kunsthistorische  Museum  of  Vienna
where  it  figures  on  the  breast  of  Apollo.6  Astarte  bears  it  on  her
arms  and  shoulders,7  Adonis  on  his  arms,  a  follower  of  Aphrodite,
on  her  robe,8  a  centaur  from  Cyprus  on  his  right  shoulder.9  In  a
rude  representation  of  Apollo  directing  the  car  of  the  sun  it  is  found
on  the  wheels  of  the  chariot.10  A  female  statue  in  lead  found  at  Troy
wears  a  triangular  covering  over  the  ulva,  the  center  of  which  bears
a  Swastika.11  Numerous  cinctures  or  girdles  worn  by  women  bore
this  same  Swastika  sign.  Does  this  not  indicate  that  it  may  have
been  regarded  as  an  emblem  of  the  generative  forces  of  nature  ?

"  But  we  will  not  venture  further  in  our  researches  for  the  sig-
nification of  a  sign  so  obscure  as  is  the  Swastika.  Probably  (and
the  figurines  just  mentioned  give  this  hypothesis  a  semblance  of

1  Wilson,  Swastika,  "  Report  U.  S.  Nat.  Mus.,"  1894,  Plate  XVIII.

2  Ibid. ,  Plate  XVII.

3  Ibid.,  Plates  XV.  and  XVI.  (Nevertheless  these  Indians  recognize  it  as  a  sign  of
good  luck  and  give  it  a  corresponding  name. — T.  W.)

4  "  Rev.  d'Ethnographie,"  1885,  No.  1.

5  Wilson,  1.  c,  Plate  I.

6  Goblet  d'Alviella,  1.  c,  Plate  I.

7  "  Bui.  Soc.  d'Anth.,"  1888,  p.  676.

8 This  statuette  was  found  in  1887  in  a  Greek  tomb.  "Bui.  Soc.  d'Anth.,"  1888*
p.  677.

9  Cesnola,  "  Salaminia,"  p.  243.

10  Ibid.

u  Schliemann,  "  Ilios,"  Fig.  226.

LEGENDS   AND   SYMBOLS   OF  MASONRY  1799

truth)  it  was  a  religious  emblem,  an  amulet  consecrated  by  the  varied
superstitions  of  man,  as  is  the  hand  with  the  fingers  raised  a  survival
of  an  ancient  Chaldean  symbol  which  is  worn  to-day  by  the  Italians,
as  is  the  little  pig  by  the  Parisians.1  Was  it  dedicated  to  the  living
sun  ;  to  Zeus  or  Baal ;  to  Astarte  or  to  Aphrodite  ;  to  Agni,  the  god
of  fire  ;  or  to  Indra,  the  god  of  rain  ;  or,  still  further,  to  Vishnu  or
to  Siva,  the  Hindu  representatives  of  creation  and  destruction?  All
these  hypotheses  are  possible  ;  more  than  this,  all  of  them  are  prob-
able, for  the  signification  of  Swastika  has  singularly  varied  accord-
ing to  the  time  and  to  tradition.2  Those  persons  who  in  the  actual
state  of  our  knowledge  pretend  to  formulate  general  conclusions  are
sadly  in  error.

"  I  approach  the  end  of  my  task.  By  the  side  of  the  similarity
of  the  anatomic  structure  of  man  in  all  times  and  of  all  races,  I
have  sought  to  place  the  similarity  of  his  genius,  as  proved  by  the
identity  of  his  conceptions.  The  ossuaries  which  contain  the  remains
of  his  predecessors,  the  custom  of  coloring  his  bones  red  after  they
had  been  denuded  of  their  flesh,  the  mysterious  sign  to  which  we
have  given  the  name  Swastika,  and  other  conceptions,  other  almost
universal  creations,  which  it  would  be  easy  to  add,  all  tend  toward
the  confirmation  of  the  knowledge  given  to  us  by  the  earliest  arms,
the  first  tools  and  implements  of  flint,  and  the  most  ancient  pottery.
We  believe  it  impossible  to  misapprehend  or  mistake  the  multiplied
proofs  that  flow  from  modern  researches,  all  of  which  affirm  with  an
irrefutable  eloquence  the  unity  of  the  human  species."

Among  the  very  ancient  symbols  of  the  Orient  we  find  the
Pentalpha,  or  five-pointed  star.  In  one  of  the  illustrations  in  the
Iconographic  Encyclopedia  of  the  late  Professor  Baird,  President
of  the  Smithsonian  Institution,  who  succeeded  Professor  Henry,  we
observe  that  the  Pentalpha  occupies  the  most  conspicuous  place.
That  picture  represents  the  universe,  viz.,  the  great  celestial  serpent
forms  a  circle  having  the  tail  in  its  mouth,  at  the  top  ;  diametrically
opposite,  at  the  bottom  the  serpent  twists  the  body  in  a  large  coil ;
upon  this  coil  is  a  huge  tortoise  ;  on  the  back  of  the  tortoise  stand

1  W.  W.  Rockhill  ("Diary  of  a  Journey  through  Mongolia  and  Tibet,"  1891-92)
cites  the  Tibetan  who  had  a  Swastika  tattooed  on  his  hand.

2  Sewell  ("  Indian  Antiquary,"  July,  1881)  presents  innumerable  hypotheses  to  which
the  Swastika  has  given  rise.  To  cite  but  one  :  Mr.  Cunningham,  a  distinguished  savant,
believes  the  Swastika  to  have  been  a  monogram.

i8oo  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

four  elephants  occupying  the  four  cardinal  points  ;  on  these  ele-
phants rests  the  earth,  which  is  flat  on  the  bottom  and  hemispherical
on  the  top ;  above  the  earth  are  represented  concentrically  the
seven  heavenly  spheres ;  immediately  above  the  uppermost  sphere,
and  suspended  from  the  junction  of  the  tail  and  mouth  of  the  ser-
pent, is  the  Pentalpha.

The  Pentalpha  has  been  so  called,  because  the  five  (J>ente)  points
each  represented  the  Greek  letter  Alpha  (A).  It  was  called  Hygeia
or  symbol  of  health  by  Pythagoras.

We  refer  our  readers  to  Book  IV.,  Chapter  IV.,  pages  1755  to
1783 — and  especially  on  pages  1781  to  1783 — wherein  we  have
shown  the  connection  between  some  of  the  symbols  now  employed
in  our  modern  Masonic  system,  with  those  of  the  remotest  antiquity,
and  have  made  frequent  references  to  Dr.  Mackey  and  to  his
predecessor,  Dr.  Oliver,  from  whose  works  on  symbolism  we  have
freely  quoted  such  passages  as  would  demonstrate  our  subject.

The  writer  of  this  treatise  on  Symbolism  has  endeavored  to
place  before  the  reader  the  intimate  relation  between  all  the  forms
of  language,  as  displayed  by  man,  from  the  earliest  ages,  in  the
crudest  efforts  to  convey  his  ideas  to  others,  down  to  the  perfected
fosrms  of  animal  life,  as  displayed  in  the  unnatural  compositions  in
the  cherubim,  which  was  shown  first  to  Moses,  and  subsequently  to
the  prophets  Ezekiel  and  Isaiah,  as  described  in  the  text.

We  can  give  no  further  explanations  than  those  taken  from
ancient  writers,  as,  down  to  the  present  day,  they  are  as  mysterious
as  they  have  always  been  in  every  age  of  the  world,  like  the
image  of  the  veiled  Isis  in  her  temple  on  the  island  Philae  in
Egypt,  with  the  following  inscription :  "I  am  that  which  was,
which  is,  and  which  is  to  come,  and  no  mortal  hath  lifted  my
veil."

PART    FIVE

ANCIENT  AND  ACCEPTED  SCOTTISH   RITE
ROYAL  ORDER   OF  SCOTLAND

ANCIENT  AND  ACCEPTED  SCOTTISH  RITE

CHAPTER   I

THE    EARLY    HISTORY    OF    THE    SCOTTISH    RITE

N  Chapter  LI  of  this  work  will  be  found  a
11  History  of  Christian  Knighthood,"  and  in  the
following  chapter,  LI  I,  "Knight  Templarism
in  America."  In  pages  1332  to  1336,  Chapter
LI,  is  given  the  history  of  the  suppression
of  the  "  Templar  Order,"  the  death  of  the  last
Grand  Master,  Jacques  De  Molay,  and  the  dis-
persion of  the  "  Order."

There  is  no  need  to  repeat  in  this  place  the  account  of  the  de-
struction of  the  greatest  of  the  three  great  military  orders,  the  "  Poor
Fellow-soldiers  of  Christ  and  Solomon's  Temple  "  as  they  officially
described  themselves.  On  March  11,  1314,  the  Grand  Master,
Jacques  de  Molay,  was  burned  to  death  in  Paris,  declaring  with  his
last  breath  that  the  confessions  wrung  from  him  and  other  knights
by  torture  were  untrue,  and  that  the  order  was  innocent.  The
Papal  Bull,  issued  by  Clement  V.  the  year  before,  had  suppressed
the  order  and  transferred  its  estates  to  the  Knights  Hospitallers,  or
Knights  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem,  for  centuries  the  bitter  foes  of
the  Templars.  The  Templars  who  escaped  the  cruelty  of  the
French  King,  Philip  the  Fair,  fled  to  other  countries.

From  this  period  until  the  invention  of  printing  there  was  a
slow  but  gradual  increase  in  learning,  which  was  mostly  confined  to
the  priesthood  ;  very  few,  even  of  the  nobility,  could  read  or  write  ;
hence  they  employed  as  chaplains  the  learned  class  of  the  clergy,
who  conducted  all  of  their  business  affairs,  and  became  domesticated
in  their  families.  After  the  invention  of  movable  type  and  the  in-
crease of  books,  "  learning  "  became  more  popular,  and  by  the  polit-

1803

1804  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

ical  changes  in  the  kingdoms  of  Europe  there  were  important
improvements  in  science  and  the  arts  brought  about,  so  that  from
the  close  of  the  14th  century  to  the  death  of  Charles  II.  of  Eng-
land, very  important  events  had  taken  place  and  an  entire  revolu-
tion of  society  had  occurred,  growing  out  of  the  "  Reformation  "
in  religion.  The  great  fire  in  London — although  a  local  affair — had
its  effects  upon  other  parts  of  Europe.  The  reconstruction  of  the
city  of  London — and  particularly  of  the  religious  edifices — produced
a  revolution  in  architecture  under  the  supervision  of  Sir  Christopher
Wren,  who  was  appointed  by  Charles  II.  as  superintendent  of  all
the  public  buildings  after  the  great  fire.  Under  the  sanction  of  the
King,  Wren  visited  the  continent  and  became  familiar  with  the
classic  orders  of  architecture,  of  which  there  were  few  examples
in  England.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  great  cathedral  of  St.  Paul's
in  London,  in  its  order  of  architecture,  was  a  copy  of  St.  Peter's  in
Rome.

Sir  Christopher  Wren  has  often  been  called  by  Masonic  writers
a  Grand  Master  of  Masons,  but  there  is  no  evidence  whatever  that
he  was  even  an  Apprentice  Mason  when  he  became  the  govern-
ment architect  or  "  Superintendent."

Lessing,  the  German  critic,  goes  so  far  as  to  describe  Wren  as
the  inventor  of  Speculative  Masonry,  but  later  investigators  affirm
that  while  Inigo  Jones,  the  great  architect  of  so  many  noble  build-
ings in  England,  is  claimed  to  have  held  a  place  in  the  Masonic
order,  yet  Sir  Christopher  Wren  is  only  mentioned  in  a  professional
capacity.  As  the  first  code  of  Masonic  laws  and  the  first  items  of
Masonic  history  were  published  by  authority,  it  may  justly  be  in-
ferred that  the  triumvirate  of  compilers  had  no  knowledge  of  his
having  ever  been  a  member  of  the  Society.  The  English  Free-
masons of  the  period  of  the  so-called  revival  of  171 7  seemed  to
have  found  no  reason  to  believe  in  Wren's  connection  with  the  So-
ciety. Wren  was  one  of  the  most  eminent  men  of  the  time,  "  a
prodigy  of  universal  science,"  President  of  the  Royal  Society,  the
builder  of  the  new  cathedral  of  St.  Paul's,  London,  and  numerous
colleges  and  other  buildings,  and,  more  than  all,  the  rebuilder  of
London  after  the  Great  Fire,  and  it  would  be  strange  that  the  initia-
tion or  affiliation  of  such  a  distinguished  man  as  the  King's  Archi-
tect should  have  been  forgotten  by  the  lodges  of  Masons  subsisting
when  the  revival  of  171 7  took  place.

EARLY    HISTORY    OF   THE   SCOTTISH    RITE        1805

The  invention  of  new  degrees  was  continuous,  in  the  countries
of  Europe,  during  the  middle  portion  of  the  18th  century,  but  most
of  them  were  worked  to  a  limited  extent  only  and  soon  passed  into
oblivion.  The  three  degrees  of  Entered  Apprentice,  Fellow  Craft,
and  Master  Mason  were  the  source  from  whence  this  prolific  devel-
opment of  degrees  sprang,  and  these  three  degrees  were  selected,
with  twenty-two  others,  to  compose  a  Rite  which  was  destined  to
retain  its  vitality,  and  to  spread  its  influence,  throughout  the  world.
This  Rite  was  known  as  the  "  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite."

There  have  been  various  accounts  of  the  manner  in  which  these
degrees  were  selected  and  arranged  in  the  so-called  "  Rite  of  Per-
fection. "     The  most  reasonable  statement  is  as  follows  :

The  Chevalier  de  Bonneville  established  a  chapter  of  twenty-five
degrees  of  the  so-called  High  Degrees  in  the  College  of  Jesuits  of
Clermont,  in  Paris,  in  1 754.  The  adherents  and  followers  of  the
House  of  the  Stuarts  had  made  the  College  of  Clermont  their  asy-
lum, they  being  mostly  Scotchmen.  One  of  these  degrees  being  the
"Scottish  Master,"  the  new  Body  organized  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  in
1 801,  gave  the  name  of  "  Scottish  Rite  "  to  these  degrees,  which  name
ever  since  that  time  has  characterized  the  Rite  all  over  the  world,
of  which  more  anon.  The  name  previously  given  to  these  degrees
was  the  "  Rite  of  Perfection,"  or  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite.

The  Marquis  de  Lernais  carried  these  degrees  to  Berlin  in  1758
and  they  were  introduced  into  and  adopted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of
the  Three  Globes.  The  Rite  was  revived  in  Paris  that  year  under
the  authority  of  the  "  Council  of  Emperors  of  the  East  and  West."
In  consequence  of  the  interference  of  the  Jesuits,  who,  finding  that
their  former  efforts  had  not  succeeded  in  finally  suppressing  the
Rite,  again  forced  themselves  into  the  Rite  and  "  sowed  seeds  of
dissension,"  the  result  was  that  a  new  organization  was  formed
called  the  "  Council  of  the  Knights  of  the  East ; "  and  as  a  con-
sequence a  rivalry  sprung  up  between  these  two  bodies  and  the
Grand  Orient  of  France.  In  1781,  however,  both  of  these  bodies
became  incorporated  with  that  Grand  Body  which  held  the  Rite  of
Perfection  within  itself.

In  1762  it  is  asserted  that  Frederick  the  Great,  who  had  taken
under  his  patronage  all  of  Masonry  in  Germany,  formed  and  pro-
mulgated what  have  been  known  ever  since  then  as  the  Grand  Con-
stitutions of  1762.

1806  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

The  "  Rite  of  Perfection,"  which  for  a  quarter  of  a  century,
with  many  struggles,  had  not  fully  accomplished  the  work  proposed
for  it  by  its  authors,  was  improved,  it  is  said,  by  Frederick  him-
self, by  a  reorganization  and  reconstruction  which  placed  it  on  a
higher  standard  in  its  philosophy  and  in  its  teachings  ;  that  eight
other  degrees  were  added  to  it,  and  the  name  was  changed  to  "  The
Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite  of  Freemasonry,"  and  that  the
Grand  Constitutions  of  1 786  were  ratified  and  signed  by  Frederick  in
Berlin,  in  May  of  that  year.

By  these  Constitutions  of  1 786,  Frederick  the  Great  resigned  the
authority  he  had  held  from  1 762  as  Grand  Commander  of  the  Order
of  Princes  of  the  Royal  Secret,  and  Supreme  Chief  of  the  Scottish
Rite  or  of  Perfection.  His  Masonic  prerogatives  were  by  the  same
document  deposited  with  a  council  for  each  nation,  to  be  composed
of  Sovereign  Grand  Inspectors-General  of  the  Thirty-Third  and  last
degree  of  legitimate  Freemasonry,  limited  in  numbers  to  that  of  the
years  of  Christ  on  earth.

The  Grand  Constitutions  formed  in  1762  were  ratified  in  Bor-
deaux, October  25th  of  that  year,  and  were  proclaimed  as  the  gov-
erning laws  for  all  the  several  Bodies  of  the  "  Rite  of  Perfection  "
over  the  two  Hemispheres.

Prior  to  this,  in  1761,  Stephen  Morin  was  invested  with  power
by  the  Grand  Consistory  of  Sublime  Princes  of  the  Royal  Secret  in
Paris,  on  the  27th  of  August,  1761,  to  carry  the  "Rite  of  Per-
fection "  to  America.  He  received  a  Patent,  as  his  credential,  of
which  the  following  is  a  copy  :

Morin  s  Patent.

To  the  glory  of  the  G.  A.  O.  T.  U.,  etc.,  and  by  the  good  will
of  H.  S.  H.  the  very  illustrious  Brother  Louis  de  Bourbon,  Count
de  Clermont,  Prince  of  the  Blood  Royal,  Grand  Master  and  Pro-
tector of  all  Lodges.

At  the  Orient  of  a  most  enlightened  place  where  reign  Peace,
Silence,  and  Concord,  Anno  Lucis  5761,  and  according  to  the  com-
mon style,  27th  August,  1761.

Lux  ex  tenebris.     Unitas,  Concordia  fratrum.

We  the  undersigned,  Substitutes  General  of  the  Royal  Art,
Grand  Wardens  and  Officers  of  the  Grand  and  Sovereign  Lodge  of

EARLY    HISTORY   OF   THE   SCOTTISH   RITE        1807

St.  John  of  Jerusalem,  established  at  the  Orient  of  Paris  ;  and  We,
Sovereign  Grand  Masters  of  the  Grand  Council  of  the  Lodges  of
France,  under  the  sacred  and  mysterious  numbers,  declare,  certify,
and  decree  to  all  the  very  dear  Bros.,  Knights,  and  Princes  scattered
throughout  the  two  hemispheres,  that  being  assembled  by  order  of
the  Substitute  General,  President  of  the  Grand  Council,  a  request
was  communicated  to  us  by  the  worshipful  Bro.  Lacorne,  Substi-
tute of  our  very  illustrious  G.  M.,  Knight  and  Prince  Mason,  and
was  read  in  due  form.

Whereas  our  dear  Bro.  Stephen  Morin,  Grand  Perfect  Elect  (G.
elu  parfait)  and  Past  Sublime  Master,  Prince  Mason,  Knight  and
Sublime  Prince  of  all  orders  of  the  Masonry  of  Perfection,  member
of  the  Royal  Lodge  of  the  "  Trinity,"  etc.,  being  about  to  depart
for  America,  desires  to  be  able  to  work  with  regularity  for  the  ad-
vantage and  aggrandisement  of  the  Royal  Art  in  all  its  perfection,
may  it  please  the  Sovereign  Grand  Council  and  Grand  Lodge  to
grant  him  letters  of  constitution.  On  the  report  which  has  been
made  to  us,  and  knowing  the  eminent  qualifications  of  Bro.  S.
Morin,  we  have,  without  hesitation,  accorded  him  this  slight  grati-
fication in  return  for  the  services  which  he  has  always  rendered
this  Order,  and  the  continuation  of  which  is  guaranteed  to  us  by
his  zeal.

For  this  cause  and  for  other  good  reasons,  whilst  approving  and
confirming  the  very  dear  Brother  Morin  in  his  designs,  and  wishing
to  confer  on  him  some  mark  of  our  gratitude,  we  have,  by  con-
sent, constituted  and  invested  him,  and  do  by  these  presents  con-
stitute and  invest  him,  and  give  full  and  entire  power  to  the  said
Bro.  Stephen  Morin,  whose  signature  is  in  the  margin  of  these
presents,  to  form  and  establish  a  Lodge  in  order  to  admit  to  and
multiply  the  Royal  Order  of  Masons  in  all  the  perfect  and  sublime
degrees  ;  to  take  measures  that  the  statutes  and  regulations  of  the
Grand  and  Sovereign  Lodge,  general  or  special,  be  kept  and  ob-
served, and  to  never  admit  therein  any  but  true  and  legitimate
brothers  of  sublime  Masonry.

To  rule  and  govern  all  the  members  who  shall  compose  his  said
Lodge,  which  he  may  establish  in  the  four  quarters  of  the  world
wherever  he  may  arrive  or  shall  sojourn,  under  the  title  of  Lodge  of
St.  John,  and  surnamed  "  Perfect  Harmony  ; "  we  give  him  power
to  choose  such  officers  as  he  may  please  to  aid  him  in  ruling  his

i8o8  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Lodge,  whom  we  command  and  enjoin  to  obey  and  respect  him  ;
do  ordain  and  command  all  Masters  of  regular  Lodges  of  whatsoever
dignity,  scattered  over  the  surface  of  land  and  sea,  do  pray  and  en-
join them  in  the  name  of  the  Royal  Order,  and  in  the  presence  of
our  very  illustrious  G.  M.,  to  acknowledge  in  like  manner  as  we
recognise  our  very  dear  Bro.  Stephen  Morin  as  Worshipful  Master
of  the  Lodge  of  Perfect  Harmony,  and  we  depute  him  in  his  quality
of  our  Grand  Inspector  in  all  parts  of  the  New  World  to  reform
the  observance  of  our  laws  in  general,  etc.,  and  by  these  presents  do
constitute  our  very  dear  Bro.  Stephen  Morin  our  G.  M.  Inspector,
authorising  and  empowering  him  to  establish  perfect  and  sublime
Masonry  in  all  parts  of  the  world,  etc.,  etc.

We  pray,  consequently,  all  brothers  in  general  to  render  to  the
said  Stephen  Morin  such  assistance  and  succour  as  may  be  in
their  power,  requiring  them  to  do  the  same  to  all  the  brothers  who
shall  be  members  of  his  Lodge,  and  whom  he  has  admitted  and  con-
stituted, shall  admit  or  constitute  in  future  to  the  sublime  degree  of
perfection  which  we  grant  him,  with  full  and  entire  power  to  create
Inspectors  in  all  places  where  the  sublime  degrees  shall  not  already
be  established,  knowing  well  his  great  acquirement  and  capacity.

In  witness  whereof  we  have  given  him  these  presents,  signed  by
the  Substitute-General  of  the  Order,  Grand  Commander  of  the
Black  and  White  Eagle,  Sovereign  Sublime  Prince  of  the  Royal
Secret,  and  Chief  of  the  Eminent  Degree  of  the  Royal  Art,  and  by
us,  Grand  Inspectors,  Sublime  Officers  of  the  Grand  Council  and  of
the  Grand  Lodge  established  in  this  capital,  and  have  sealed  them  with
the  Grand  Seal  of  our  illustrious  G.  M.  His  Serene  Highness,  and
with  that  of  our  Grand  Lodge  and  Sovereign  Grand  Council.  Given
at  the  G.  O.  of  Paris,  in  the  year  of  light,  5761,  or  according  to  the
Vulgar  Era,  27th  August,  1761.  (Signed)  Chaillon  de  Jonville,
Substitute-General,  W.  M.  of  the  first  lodge  in  France  called  "  St.
Thomas,"  Chief  of  the  Eminent  Degrees,  Commander  and  Sublime
Prince  of  the  Royal  Secret.  Bro.  the  Prince  de  Rohan,  Master  of
the  Grand  Lodge  "  Intelligence,"  Sovereign  Prince  of  Masonry.
Lacorne,  Substitute  of  the  Grand  Master,  W.  Dep.  M.  of  Lodge
"Trinity," Grand  Perfect  Elect,  Knight  and  Prince  Mason.  Sava-
lette  de  Bucheley,  Grand  Keeper  of  the  Seals,  Grand  Elect,  Grand
Knight  and  Prince  Mason.  Taupin,  etc.,  Prince  Mason,  Brest-de-
la-Chauss£e,  etc.,  W.  M.  of  the  Lodge  "  Exactitude,"  Grand  Elect

APPRENTICE'S    PILLAR
Roslyn   Chapel,  near   Edinburgh,   Scotland

i)in;ljo^2    .liaindnibH    lEan   .bqsriJ    a\^oii

EARLY    HISTORY   OF   THE   SCOTTISH   RITE        1809

Perfect  Master,  Knight  Prince  Mason.  Count  de  Choiseul,  etc.,
Prince  Mason  Boucher  de  Lenoncourt,  etc.,  W.  M.  of  the  Lodge
11  Virtue,"  Prince  Mason.

By  order  of  the  Grand  Lodge.  Daubertin,  Grand  Elect  Perfect
Master  and  Knight  Prince  Mason,  W.  M.  of  the  Lodge  "  Saint  Al-
phonse,"  Grand  Secretary  of  the  Grand  Lodge  and  of  the  Sublime
Council  of  Prince  Masons  in  France,  etc.

The  first  soil  which  Morin  touched  on  his  mission  to  America
was  San  Domingo,  and  afterward,  on  his  arrival  at  Kingston,  Ja-.
maica,  he  appointed  Henry  Francken  a  Deputy  Inspector-General.1
Later  on  other  appointments  were  made  by  him  to  this  office,  and
these  Deputies  he  supplied  with  copies  of  the  Grand  Constitutions,
which  had  been  adopted  in  1762.  Soon  after  his  appointment
Francken  visited  the  North  American  Colonies,  where  he  gave  an
appointment  of  Deputy  Inspector-General  to  Moses  M.  Hayes,  at
Boston,  Mass.

Francken  established  under  his  commission  from  Morin  a  lodge
at  Albany,  N.  Y.  This  was  a  Lodge  of  Perfection  of  the  14th
Degree.  On  December  20,  1767,  he  conferred  the  degree  of
Sublime  Prince  of  the  Royal  Secret,  the  25th  Degree  of  the
Rite,  on  several  Brethren  of  the  order.  This  lodge  seems  not
to  have  prospered,  and  was  nearly  forgotten  when  in  1822  Giles
Fonda  Gates,  one  of  the  most  active  Brethren  of  the  Northern
Masonic  Jurisdiction,  discovered  the  original  Warrant,  together
with  some  patents  of  the  Brethren  of  the  body,  and  its  books  of
record.

This  was,  no  doubt,  the  very  first  body  of  the  "  Rite  of  Perfec-
tion" ever  planted  on  the  Continent  of  North  America,  and
there  were,  doubtless,  several  such  bodies  in  the  Islands  of  the
West  Indies.

Those  Masons  who  have  progressed  beyond  the  Blue  Lodge
degrees,  and  are  familiar  with  the  Capitular  and  Cryptic  Rites,  as
also  the  degrees  of  the  Commandery  and  those  of  the  A.*.  A.'.  A.*.
S.\  R.\  can  readily  perceive  how  Thomas  Smith  Webb  was  able  to
manufacture  the  degrees  attributed  to  him,  after  his  residence  in
Albany,  and  his  connection  with  the  Masons  of  that  city.

1  The  date  is  not  known,  but  it  must  have  been  between  1762  and  1767.

114

1810  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

Brother  Da  Costa  was  made  Deputy  Inspector-General  for  South
Carolina  by  Hayes  in  1781  ;  he  also  appointed  Solomon  Bush
Deputy  for  Pennsylvania,  and  B.  M.  Spitzer  Deputy  for  Georgia.

Da  Costa  established  in  Charleston  in  1  j8$  a  Sublime  Grand
Lodge  of  Perfection.

A  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem  was  duly  constituted  in
Charleston,  and  Meyers,  Spitzer,  and  Frost  were  present  and  in-
stalled the  Officers.  The  Council  of  Knights  Kadosh  was  organized
in  Philadelphia  in  1796  by  refugees  from  San  Domingo.  When
France  again  assumed  authority  over  San  Domingo,  these  Brethren
returned  home  and  the  council  became  dormant  if  not  entirely
extinct.

In  New  York  City  a  chapter  of  Rose  Croix  (18th  Degree)  was
established  in  1797,  the  Grand  Constitution  of  1786  and  the  ritual
of  the  eight  added  degrees  having  been  received  in  Charleston  at
that  time.  The  bodies  already  established  in  Charleston  accepted
the  new  regime  and  adopted  the  new  degrees,  and  in  1801  a  conven-
tion was  held  and  preliminary  steps  inaugurated  to  form  a  Supreme
Council  of  the  33d  and  Last  Degree  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Scottish  Rite  of  Freemasonry.

The  name  of  this  new  body  was  "  The  Supreme  Council  of  Sov-
ereign Grand  Inspectors-General  of  the  Thirty-third  and  Last  Degree
for  the  United  States  of  America."  It  was  formed  and  organized
by  John  Mitchell  and  Frederic  Dalcho,  and  during  the  year  the  full
number  of  members,  nine,  was  admitted.

This  new  body  recognized  the  Constitutions  of  1762,  the  Secret
Constitutions,  and  the  much-discussed  Constitutions  of  1786.

These  latter  constitutions  are  believed  to  have  been  approved
and  ratified  by  Frederick  the  Great  of  Prussia,  as  Supreme  Head
and  Governor  of  the  Rite,  and,  as  already  stated,  provide  for  the
government  of  the  Rite,  after  his  death,  by  a  council  in  each  nation.
Although  these  constitutions  claim  to  have  been  recognized  as  the
Supreme  Law  of  the  Rite  in  1786,  they  were  not  published  till
1832,  when  a  French  version  appeared.  A  Latin  text  was  pub-
lished two  years  afterward  which,  while  agreeing  with  the  French
book  in  essentials,  differs  in  many  of  the  details.  It  may  be  broadly
stated  that  the  Latin  version  is  more  precise,  more  complete,  more
in  legal  form,  and,  hence,  some  students  have  arrived  at  the  con-
clusion that  the  Latin  constitutions,  thus  written  in  a  language  uni-

EARLY   HISTORY   OF   THE   SCOTTISH    RITE        1811

versally  understood,  were  the  original,  while  the  French  version  was
really  an  adaptation  for  the  use  of  the  Brethren  in  France.

But  the  question  whether  the  French  or  Latin  text  is  the  original
is  a  mere  trifle  of  little  importance  compared  with  another  vital  one,
namely:  "Were  the  Constitutions  of  1786  ever  seen  or  sanctioned
by  Frederick  the  Great  ?  Were  they  not  forged  in  Charleston  ?
Those  who  asserted  the  falseness  of  the  constitutions  made  no
attempt  to  demonstrate  the  commission  of  forgery  at  Charleston,
but  confined  themselves  to  denying  that  they  were  ever  sanctioned
Dy  Frederick.  The  reasons  alleged  for  this  opinion  were  that  in
1 786  Frederick  was  mentally  and  physically  incapacitated  for  busi-
ness, and,  furthermore,  that  the  names  subscribed  to  the  Latin  ver-
sion were  fictitious.  The  injurious  suspicions  as  to  the  veracity  of
numerous  Masonic  statements,  caused  by  the  injudicious  zeal  and
the  uncritical  methods  of  many  Masonic  writers,  led  to  the  gen-
eral acceptance  of  the  belief  that  the  constitutions  as  contained  in
the  Latin  version  were  like  many  of  the  stories  invented  by  the
arch-impostor,  Cagliostro,  and  others,  simply  stupid  forgeries  by
men  ignorant  or  careless  of  historical  facts  and  historical  probabili-
ties. This  belief,  it  may  be  repeated,  was  held  not  only  by  men  not
affiliated  to  any  Masonic  order,  but  by  many  Masons  of  good  stand-
ing. It  was  reserved  for  an  American  Mason,  of  the  highest  degree,
Brother  Albert  Pike,  to  refute  this  theory.  That  eminent  Mason,
in  his  Historical  Inquiry,  showed  from  documents  of  the  period
that  in  1786  Frederick  the  Great,  while  undoubtedly  suffering  from
physical  ailments,  was  still  in  the  habit  of  attending  to  business.
Brother  Pike  likewise  showed  that  the  names  appended  to  the  Con-
stitution of  1786  were  those  of  men  who  were  connected  with  the
Court  of  Berlin.  The  result  of  his  investigations,  after  an  extensive
and  impartial  study  of  all  accessible  sources  of  information,  was  to
the  effect  that  the  aforesaid  constitutions  were  drawn  up  at  Berlin
and  duly  ratified  by  Frederick  in  the  year  assigned  to  them.  As
such  they  were  recognized  by  the  Southern  Supreme  Council.  This
refers  to  the  Latin  version  of  the  constitutions.  Another  student
of  the  history  of  the  Rite  considers  the  French  version  the  original,
and  this  is  the  version  which  is  recognized  by  the  Northern  Supreme
Council.

Without  quoting  at  length  from  Bro.  Pike's  Historical  Inquiry,
it  may  be  advisable  to  give  some  of  his  conclusions.     He  shows  that

1812  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

when  Francken  in  1767  introduced  the  Rite  into  the  American  Colo-
nies it  was  generally  understood  that  the  supreme  governing  power
was  in  Berlin,  and  that  in  1770  the  Lodge  of  Perfection  at  Albany
was  directed  to  transmit  reports  to  Berlin,  while,  still  earlier,  a  tracing-
board  made  by  one  of  its  members  displays  the  double  eagle  of  Prus-
sia as  a  symbol  of  the  head  of  the  order.  Moreover,  in  1785,  the
Lodge  of  Perfection  at  Philadelphia  drew  up  an  address  to  be  pre-
sented to  Frederick  as  head  of  the  order.

The  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite  of  330,  the  title  of
which  heads  this  chapter,  like  all  the  so-called  Scottish  Masonry,  has
nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland.  No
portion  of  it,  except  perhaps  the  Royal  Order  of  Scotland,  ever
originated  in  Scotland,  nor  were  any  of  these  so-called  Scottish  de-
grees at  any  time  practiced  in  Scotland.  Gould,  in  his  history,  ap-
plies the  word  Scots  as  distinguished  from  Scottish  to  show  these
additions  to  Freemasonry  made  on  the  Continent.  These  so-called
Scottish  or  Scots  degrees  seem  to  have  originated  about  the  year
1740  in  France.  The  statement  that  Irish  chapters  existed  in
Paris  from  1739,  holding  their  constitutions  from  the  Grand  Chap-
ter of  Dublin,  cannot  be  accepted.  There  is  no  evidence  to  sup-
port it,  and  Masonic  authorities  reject  it,  holding  that  a  much  later
date  must  be  assigned  to  all  these  Irish  degrees.  Nor  must  we  con-
fuse the  "  Orient  de  Bouillon  "  with  these  so-called  Scots  Masons,
for  that  was  simply  a  Grand  Lodge  established  in  Luxemburg,  years
afterward.

What  these  Scots  lodges  taught  nobody  knows  and  nobody  need
care.  Rituals  exist  in  lamentable  profusion,  but  unfortunately  they
do  not  agree.  They  are,  however,  all  permeated  with  one  notion,
the  absurdity  of  which  will  show  the  absurdity  of  the  system.  They
state  that  some  Scottish  crusaders  found  in  a  vault  the  long-lost  in-
effable word,  and  that  in  their  search  they  worked  "  with  the  sword
in  one  hand  and  the  trowel  in  the  other."  This  expression  is  taken
from  the  Hebrew  account  of  the  building  of  the  Second  Temple  of
Zerubbabel,  and  while  natural  enough  as  applied  to  builders,  is  quite
out  of  place  in  the  case  of  men  rummaging  in  some  subterranean
passage.  The  story  of  the  "  long  lost,  ineffable  word  "  we  meet  with
in  the  Arabian  Nights,  where  we  learn  that  the  knowledge  of  it
made  Solomon,  the  King  of  Genii,  able  to  perform  all  kinds  of
marvels.     The  Arabian  Nights  is  the  fit  place  for  the  story.     It

EARLY    HISTORY   OF   THE   SCOTTISH   RITE        1813

must  be  remembered,  too,  that  the  temple  that  the  Crusaders  saw
was  not  Solomon's  nor  Zerubbabel's,  but  Herod's,  erected  a  little
before  the  birth  of  Christ.

At  any  rate,  relying  on  this  fable,  the  Scots  Master  claimed  to  be
in  possession  of  the  true  secrets  of  Freemasonry,  the  true  history  and
the  real  designs  of  the  order.  He  claimed  also  to  be  in  every  way
superior  to  the  Master  Mason,  and  to  hold  various  peculiar  privileges.

In  utter  contempt  for  the  great  principle  on  which  Freemasonry
is  founded,  the  perfect  equality  of  all  its  members  with  a  governing
body  elective  and  representative,  the  Scots  Masters  claimed  to  rank
before  the  W.  M.  of  any  lodge  even  when  they  were  only  present
as  visitors.  They  claimed  the  right  to  wear  a  distinctive  dress  and
to  remain  covered  even  in  a  Master's  Lodge.  They  claimed  to  im-
part the  secrets  of  the  E.  A.,  F.  C,  and  W.  M.  degrees,  personally
and  either  with  or  without  ceremony  as  the  whim  seized  them.
They  would  not,  if  they  were  members  of  a  lodge,  permit  anyone
but  other  Scots  Masons  to  sit  in  judgment  upon  them.  Matters
became  still  worse  when  the  Scots  Lodges  were  "grafted  on  the
ordinary  Lodges,"  and  increased  in  number  and  in  arrogance.  In
these  cases  the  W.  M.,  instead  of  being  elected  by  the  lodge,  was
nominated  by  the  Scots  Lodge,  and  as  was  inevitable,  he  was  almost
always  one  of  themselves.  All  questions  of  ritual  and  doctrine  were
decided  by  the  Scots  Lodge,  all  the  finances  were  managed  by  the
Scots  Lodge,  in  fact  all  the  governing  powers  were  usurped  by  the
Scots  Lodge.  Nay,  the  Scots  Lodge  went  so  far  as  to  arrogate  to
itself  all  the  powers  of  a  Grand  Lodge,  and  as  such  to  issue  War-
rants of  Constitution.  From  the  exercise  of  these  powers  arose
the  so-called  Scots  Mother  Lodges  which  became  so  numerous  in
France,  each  Mother  Lodge  claiming  and  exercising  the  right  of
granting  constitutions  and  warrants  to  other  lodges,  and  of  develop-
ing systems  of  degrees  peculiar  to  themselves,  and  worked  in  chap-
ters all  independent  of  each  other.  France,  it  has  been  said,  was  the
inventor  of  all  these  novelties,  and  the  most  important  of  its  Scots
Mother  Lodges  was  the  one  established  in  Marseilles  in  1751  under
the  title  of  St.  John  of  Scotland.  To  give  it  some  ground  for  call-
ing itself  Scots,  it  professed  to  be  founded  by  a  traveling  Scotsman,
and  proceeded  to  grant  warrants  to  a  large  number  of  lodges  in
France  and  elsewhere.  From  it  descended  another  so-called  Mother
Lodge,  the  Mother  Lodge  of  the  county  of  Venaissin,  with  its  seat

1814  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

at  Avignon,  which  in  turn  became  the  mother  of  the  Scottish  Philo-
sophic Rite.  In  all  these  new  systems  not  only  was  the  true  original
and  beautiful  simplicity  of  the  Craft  overlaid  and  disfigured  by  fool-
ish legends  and  childish  ceremonies,  but  to  quote  Br.  Gould,  "  the
governing  power  is  autocratic  and  irresponsible,  a  hierarchy  is
formed,  the  highest  class  rules  all  the  others,  and  directs  the  lower
classes  without  appeal  from  those  below  it."  France,  we  have  seen,
may  be  considered  as  the  inventor  of  what  a  German  historian  of
Masonry  calls  "the  lying  fictions"  of  the  so-called  High  Degrees,
and  in  the  18th  century,  as  in  the  present,  set  the  fashion  to
Europe.  The  arch  impostor  Balsamo,  who  called  himself  the  Count
Cagliostro,  was  in  the  height  of  his  reputation,  preaching  the  doc-
trines of  his  Egyptian  Masonry,  of  which  he  made  himself  the
Grand  Cophta  ;  his  dupes  were  persons  of  the  highest  rank,  and
speedily  a  flood  of  imbecile  mysticism  overwhelmed  most  of  the
lodges  on  the  Continent  of  Europe.  From  France  it  spread  to
Germany,  and  the  name  of  its  introducer  into  the  Empire  is  given
as  a  Count  von  Schmettau.  In  Berlin  the  members  of  the  lodge
entitled  the  Three  Globes  erected  a  Scots  Lodge  in  1741,  Hamburg
followed  with  a  Scots  Lodge  or  two  in  1 744,  and  the  Saxon  city  of
Leipzig  in  1 747,  and  the  Free  City  of  Frankfort  followed  suit  in
1753.  It  is  stated  that  between  1742  and  1764  no  fewer  than  forty-
seven  such  lodges  were  erected  in  Germany.  These  Scots  Lodges,
however,  were  soon  absorbed  by  the  Clermont  system  with  its  low
chapter  degrees,  which  system  in  its  turn  was  absorbed  by  the  Tem-
plar system  of  "  Strict  Observance."  Even  now,  some  of  these
Scots  Lodges,  according  to  Mr.  Gould,  form  the  basis  of  the  German
Grand  Lodge  Systems,  styled  the  "  Inner  Orient."

To  France  and  to  the  Scots  Lodges  in  France  must  be  assigned
the  manufacture  of  those  new  degrees  which  connected  the  Scots
Masons  with  the  Knights  Templars  and  thus  gave  life  to  the  whole
system  of  Templarism.  It  was  an  age  of  disbelief  and  credulity,
of  sensuality  and  mysticism,  of  the  hardest  common-sense  and  the
wildest  tomfoolery.  It  was  an  age  of  unrest,  of  decay,  and  a  long-
ing for  a  new  birth,  and  the  teachings  of  history  were  scorned,  and
every  fable — the  more  improbable  the  better — was  eagerly  accepted,
till  men  really  believed  that  there  was  some  foundation  for  the  le<
gend  that  the  Military  and  Religious  Order  of  the  Temple,  in  spite
of  its  having  perished  in  fire  and  blood,  had  in  some  unknown  way,

EARLY    HISTORY   OF  THE  SCOTTISH  RITE        1815

preserved  a  germ  of  vitality  for  some  four  hundred  years.  In  1741
a  degree  called  the  Kadosh  degree,  representing  the  Vengeance  of
the  Templars,  was  invented  by  the  Masons  of  Lyons,  and  henceforth
all  the  new  rites  of  French  origin  contain  Knightly  and  almost  all
Templar  degrees,  the  connection  being  in  all  instances  formed  by
some  of  the  Scots  degrees.  The  German  Handbook  enumerates
over  sixty-eight  such  degrees  in  various  rites,  and  it  is  probable
this  list  could  be  extended.  The  name  Scottish,  too,  is  assumed
by  many  rites  to  designate  the  whole  system,  for  instance  the
Scottish  Philosophic  Rite.  The  above-mentioned  system  of  the
chapters  of  Clermont  was  a  Templar  continuation  of  the  Scots
degrees,  and  grew  into  the  so-called  Emperors  of  the  East  and
West,  and  finally  developed  into  the  "  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scot-
tish Rite  330."

It  was  on  the  Continent  of  Europe  that  these  innovations  on  the
simple  ceremonies  and  beneficial  doctrines  of  the  Craft  spread  out
most  luxuriantly.  Under  the  assumption  that  the  Scots  lodges
could  issue  warrants  of  constitutions,  whole  swarms  of  irrespon-
sible lodges  were  formed,  in  which  the  principles  of  the  Craft  were
little  considered.  From  this  period  may  be  dated  the  enmity  of  the
Church  and  the  Kings  of  Europe  to  any  association  that  bore  the
name  or  claimed  any  affiliation  with  the  Freemasons.  There  is  no
doubt  that  most  of  these  lodges  became  political  centers  of  social
and  political  conspirators.  In  the  hierarchy  of  these  rites,  each
class  is  self-elected,  and  thus  admits  only  those  it  pleases,  while  the
lower  classes  have  no  voice  in  the  management  of  their  affairs  or  in
the  election  of  their  rulers.

Our  limits  will  not  permit  any  very  extended  reference  to  the
varied  changes  in  these  so-called  "  High  Degrees  "  prior  to  the  full
establishment  of.  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite  ;  but  we  must
mention  the  most  important  events,  that  the  reader  may  appreciate
the  subsequent  and  final  establishment  of  the  Ancient  and  Ac-
cepted Scottish  Rite,  which  took  its  origin,  as  such,  in  Charles-
ton, S.  C,  in  1801,  and  the  formation  of  the  very  first  "  Su-
preme Council  of  Grand  Inspectors  General  of  the  33d  degree,  in
South  Carolina,"  with  Colonel  John  Mitchell  Sov.  Grand  Com-
mander.

From  all  the  authorities  which  have  been  examined,  in  respect
to  the  Chapter  of  Clermont,  the  system  of   Masonry  therein  prac-

i8i6  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

ticed  gives  no  definite  information.  Thory,  who  wrote  sixty  years
subsequently,  states  that  Chevalier  de  Bonneville  founded  a  chapter
on  November  24,  1754.  Brother  Gould,  in  his  history  of  this
chapter,  denies  the  statement  of  Thory,  that  Von  Hund  took  the
Templar  degrees  in  that  chapter,  as  he  had  left  France  for  the  last
time  in  1743,  or  eleven  years  previously,  and  erected  his  first  Tem-
plar Chapter  in  Unwurde  in  1 75 1.

Thory  also  says  :  "  The  Chapter  was  based  on  the  three  degrees
of  Freemasonry,  and  the  Scots  or  St.  Andrew  degree,  and  worked
three  higher,  50,  the  Knight  of  the  Eagle  or  Select  Master ;  6°,
the  Illustrious  Knight  or  Templar  ;  70,  the  Sublime  Illustrious
Knight."

The  Chevalier  de  Bonneville,  mentioned  above,  is  probably  the
same  person  as  the  Count  de  Bonneville  who  founded  in  1 760  a
lodge  in  the  Nouvelle  France,  near  Paris,  which  is  described  as  be-
ing brilliantly  conducted  and  frequented  by  persons  of  high  rank.
The  difference  in  the  titles  given  to  Bonneville  can  be  explained  by
the  old  French  system  by  which  a  younger  son  was  styled  Chev-
alier until  by  the  death  of  older  members  of  the  family  he  at-
tained the  higher  rank  of  Count,  and  such  deaths  may  have  occurred
between  the  two  dates  of  1754  and  1760.  Not  much  information
can  be  found  respecting  the  doings  of  this  lodge  created  by  M.  de
Bonneville,  and  it  is  probable  that  Kloss's  opinion  of  it  referring  to
the  "  Emperors  of  the  East  and  West  "  is  the  nearest  to  the  truth.
As  to  the  "  Emperors  of  the  East  and  West,"  an  account  will  be
given  later.  While  the  history  of  the  Rite,  as  far  as  France  is  con-
cerned, is  obscure,  its  history  in  Germany  is  more  important.

We  will  now  briefly  state  the  Masonic  affairs  of  Germany  in
connection  with  this  "Chapter  of  Clermont."  In  1742  the  mem-
bers of  the  "  Three  Globes  "  erected  the  Scots  Lodge  "  Union  "  to
work  the  fourth  or  Scots  degree.  The  Baron  Von  Printzen  was,
in  1750-54  and  1757-61,  W.  M.  of  the  Mother-Lodge  "Three
Globes"  of  Berlin;  i.e.,  he  was  ex-officio  Grand  Master  of  all  the
lodges  of  "Three  Globes."  In  1757  the  French  Marquis  Gabriel
Tilly  de  Lernais  came  to  Berlin  as  a  prisoner  of  war,  and  in  1758,
with  Printzen,  founded  a  chapter  of  the  three  Clermont  degrees,
grafted  upon  the  Mother-Lodge  of  the  "  Three  Globes,"  and  the
Scots  Lodge  "Union."  On  June  10,  1760,  this  chapter  consti-
tuted the  chapter  "  Sun  "  at  Rostock  ;  and  on  July  19,  1760,  took

EARLY    HISTORY    OF   THE   SCOTTISH    RITE       1817

the  title  of  "  Premier  Grand  Chapter  of  Clermont  in  Germany."
Philip  Samuel  Rosa  was  appointed  to  travel  over  the  north  of
Germany,  to  bring  the  lodges  under  the  control  of  the  "Three
Globes  "  and  to  institute  chapters.  A  fourth  chapter  was  constituted
by  Rosa  at  Stettin,  March,  1 762  ;  he  then,  subsequently,  instituted
eight  others,  in  different  cities,  until  in  June,  1763,  his  career  was
terminated  by  being  expelled  from  the  Craft  ;  his  successor,  Schu-
bart,  instituted  the  last  and  fifteenth  German  chapter  of  Clermont,
at  Magdeburg,  November  27,  1763.

It  has  been  thought  by  some  writers  that  the  name  of  Clermont
was  derived  from  the  College  of  Jesuits  of  that  name.  Brother
Gould,  however,  does  not  concur  therewith,  and  says  :  "  I  am  un-
able to  believe  that  the  Jesuits  could  have  consented  to  glorify  the
Knights  Templars,  nor  can  I  see  anything  new  in  these  degrees,
being,  as  they  were,  merely  amplifications  and  rearrangements  of
previous  ones.  I  prefer  to  consider  the  title  a  delicate  compliment
to  the  Duke  of  Clermont,  Grand  Master  of  French  Masonry  from
1743  to  1770."1

Inasmuch  as  the  "  Knights  of  the  East "  was  a  body  of  "  im-
proved "  Masonry  about  that  period,  it  becomes  proper  to  give
some  account  of  that  organization,  and  we  are  again  indebted  to
Brother  Gould  above  all  other  authors  for  his  very  impartial  exami-
nation into  the  history  of  not  only  this  particular  body,  but  also4
in  that  connection  all  of  those  systems  which  flooded  the  Conti-
nent about  the  middle  of  the  18th  century  and  toward  the  close
of  it.

The  only  real  attempt  to  arrive  at  the  facts,  in  regard  to  this
early  system,  was  made  by  Dr.  Kloss.  Other  writers  had  overlooked
the  separate  existence  of  Masons,  who  were  called  "Sovereign  Princes
of  Masonry,"  "either  confusing  them  with  certain  special  degrees  of
other  systems,  or  treating  them  as  an  offshoot  of  the  Emperors  of
the  East  and  West."  Even  the  usually  diffuse  Handbuch  is  exces-
sively meager  in  the  information  which  it  supplies.  Yet  if  Kloss's
extensive  and  minute  researches  are  to  be  given  their  just  weight,
it  is  to  the  rivalry  between  the  Knights  and  the  Emperors  that  must
be  attributed  the  sorrowful  picture  of  discord  presented  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  France,  1760-80.

1  Gould,  vol.  v.,  p.  95.

1818  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

In  1754  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  members  of  the  Chapter  of
Clermont  had  been  founded,  and  in  the  following  year  the  Grand
Lodge  of  France  acknowledged  the  privileges  which  were  claimed
to  be  possessed  by  the  so-called  Scottish  Masons.  This  action  may
probably  have  been  with  a  desire  to  counterbalance  the  influence  of
the  Chapter  of  Clermont.  This  chapter  seems  to  have  been  de-
cidedly of  an  aristocratic  order,  and  to  have  enrolled  as  its  members
only  the  high  nobility,  members  of  the  Court  circle,  high  officers  in
the  military  and  other  professions  reserved  to  nobles,  while  all  less
favored  individuals  were  refused  admission  to  it.  It  was  a  period  in
French  history  when  the  lower  noblesse,  and  the  noblesse  of  the
robe,  as  the  highest  lawyers  or  judges  were  entitled,  as  distinguished
from  the  noblesse  of  the  sword,  the  designation  of  the  old  feudal
nobility,  with  its  military  traditions,  were  striving  to  obtain  great
influence  and  higher  recognition  in  the  social  hierarchy.  It  was
from  this  class  of  the  lower  nobility  and  less  highly  placed  officials
that  the  association  of  "  Knights  of  the  East,  Princes  and  Sovereigns
of  Masonry "  was  formed  in  1 756.  Its  separate  subdivision  took
the  name  of  colleges,  each  of  which  bore  the  name  of  its  president.
The  chief  college  was  that  of  Valois  of  Paris.  If  this  college  fol-
lowed the  usage  of  its  fellow  colleges,  Valois  must  have  been  a
man  who  as  yet  remains  undiscovered.  Under  these  circumstances,
it  is  more  probable  that  the  name  is  taken  from  the  province  of  the
Valois,  adjoining  the  Isle  of  France,  in  which  Paris  is  situated,  and
which  gave  its  name  to  the  royal  family  that  sat  on  the  throne  of
France  from  Francis  I.  to  Henry  III.  Be  this  as  it  may,  some
names  of  these  Knights  of  the  East  survive,  and  they  clearly  show
that  the  association  was  recruited  mainly  from  the  lower  nobility
and  the  upper  middle  class.  The  occurrence  of  a  name  like  Baron
Tschadi  is  no  objection  to  this  view.  In  the  first  place,  the  name
shows  he  was  not  a  Frenchman,  and  in  the  second  place  the  title
baron  was  that  reserved  to  the  richer  members  of  the  mercantile  or
financial  class.

The  statutes  of  the  Rite  are  elaborate  ;  one  article  provides  that
the  position  of  Sovereign  shall  be  held  for  the  space  of  one  year  by
each  member  in  turn.  Another  article,  No.  7,  decrees  that  the
Knights  of  the  East  are  the  born  princes  of  the  complete  order,  just
as  the  Scottish  Masters  are  the  Grand  Superiors  of  the  Masonic
Order.    The  next  article  lays  down  the  doctrine  that  if  a  Knight  of

EARLY    HISTORY    OF   THE   SCOTTISH    RITE        1819

the  East  comes  in  his  travels  to  a  place  where  no  lodge  of  the  Rite
exists,  he  may  dispense  the  light  of  the  first  six  degrees  to  a  Master
Mason.  The  term  "  first  six  degrees"  implies  that  the  degrees  were
more  than  that  number,  and  that  therefore  there  were  at  least  seven
degrees  beyond  that  of  Master,  or  ten  degrees  in  all,  thus  working
three  degrees  higher  than  the  Chapter  of  Clermont.

The  dominant  position  of  the  College  of  Valois  in  the  Knights
of  the  East  was  lost  in  1762,  as  the  result  of  an  intestine  quarrel.
Its  place  was  taken  by  a  Sovereign  Council  of  the  Knights  of  the
East,  of  which  the  following  officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  France
were  members:  The  Grand  Keeper  of  the  Seal,  Brest  de  la  Chauss^e  ;
the  President,  one  of  the  Wardens  ;  the  Grand  Orator,  the  Secretary
General  and  the  Grand  Secretary.  The  prime  mover  of  this  resolu-
tion is  said  to  have  been  a  Parisian  tailor  named  Poilet,  but  this  is
improbable,  as  in  1 764  we  find  a  Poilet  acting  as  a  leading  member
of  the  rival  Emperors,  and  his  humble  profession  would  certainly
have  excluded  a  tailor  from  the  aristocratic  Emperors.  There  is
reason,  however,  to  believe  that  from  this  period  the  aristocratic
Emperors  of  the  East  and  West  lost  much  of  their  influence  in
Grand  Lodge,  while  the  lower  class  Knights  gained  power.  The
old  rivalry  still  went  on  and  in  1 766  the  Knights  sustained  a  defeat
from  the  Emperors  and  many  of  their  members  were  expelled.
The  Sovereign  Council  of  the  Knights  of  the  East  retaliated  by  a
circular  in  which  it  requested  all  lodges  to  cease  working  Templar
degrees.  The  Knights  evidently  did  not  do  so.  The  Emperors  of
the  East  and  West,  as  they  were  an  offshoot  and  continuation  of
the  Chapter  of  Clermont,  certainly  did  so.  The  quarrels  of  the  Em-
perors and  the  Knights  continued  and  grew  more  bitter,  till  it  be-
came necessary  in  1767  for  the  Government  to  issue  an  edict  dis-
solving the  Grand  Lodge.  From  that  the  Knights  of  the  East,  as
a  body,  sank  into  insignificance.

CHAPTER   II

THE    ORIGINAL    SUPREME    COUNCIL

HE  very  first  Supreme  Council  of  which  we  have
any  knowledge  whatever,  either  by  tradition  or
history,  was  the  one  organized  by  John  Mitchell,
Frederic  Dalcho,  Emanuel  De  La  Motta,  Abra-
ham Alexander,  Major  T.  B.  Bowen,  and  Israel
Delieben,  at  Charleston,  S.  C,  May  31,  1801.
This  was  a  transformation  of  the  former  "  Rite
of  Perfection,"  or  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite.

The  Brethren  who  constituted  this  new  Rite  were  all  members
of  the  several  Constituent  Bodies,  which  derived  their  Masonic  life,
and  constituted  authority  from  Morin  through  his  Deputies  duly
appointed  by  him  to  propagate  the  Rite  on  the  American  Conti-
nent, or  more  extensively  the  Western  Hemisphere.

The  pedigree  is  as  follows  :  Morin  commissioned  Francken,  and
Francken  commissioned  Moses  M.  Hayes ;  Moses  M.  Hayes  com-
missioned Barend  M.  Spitzer,  and  the  latter,  on  April  2,  1795,  com-
missioned John  Mitchell  as  Deputy  Inspector-General,  reciting  in
his  patent  of  commission  that  he  does  so  by  authority  of  the  Con-
vention of  Inspectors  held  in  Philadelphia,  June  5,  1781.  This  new
Rite,  which  came  into  the  world  apparently  fully  developed,  was
really  a  transformation  of  the  Rite  of  Perfection.

To  show  conclusively  as  to  when  the  Supreme  Council  of  the
33d  and  last  degree  was  organized,  we  are  permitted  to  furnish
herewith  a  facsimile  copy  of  the  "  Register"  of  the  several  bodies
of  the  A.*.  A.*.  A.\  S.\  R.\  which  met  in  the  city  of  Charleston,
S.  C,  in  1802.     The  original    is  in  the  Archives  of  the  Supreme

Council  of  the  Southern  Jurisdiction  in  Washington,  D.  C.

1820

THE   ORIGINAL  SUPREME  COUNCIL  1821

ANNUAL   REGISTER

OF  THE
BRETHREN  WHO  COMPOSE  THE

SUBLIME    GRAND    LODGE    OF    PERFECTION    Of
SOUTH-CAROLINA,

ESTABLISHED    AT  CHARLESTON.   ANNO   LUCM   5783.

ALSO,

THE  LIST  OF  THE  OFFICERS  OF  THE

GRAND  COUNCIL  OF  PRINCES  OP  JERUSALEM  ;

OFFICERS  OF  THE  SOVEREIGN  CHAPTER
OF  ROSE  CROiX  DE  HERODEN;

OFFICERS  AND  MEMBERS  OF  THE  GRAND
CONSISTORY,

AND

GRAND  INSPECTORS  GENERAL  OF  THE
33d  DEGREE.

Hoc  marime  officii,  ut  quisquc  rxmime  opis  indigeafc,
it*  ei  potissunum  opttulari.  Tuwu

REGISTER  FOR  THE  YEAR  580*;

CHARLESTON    (south-caroiiha}

*IIMTB9   8T   T.    B.    »OWEH>   WO   3»   BfcOAP'STfcllV

i«22  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

BT  THE  GLORT  OF^THB  GRAND
ARCHITECT  OF  THE  UNIVERSE.

LUX  »   TtHtBtl*.

Officers  of  the  Sublime  Grand
Lodge  of  Perfection  of  South
Carolina.

Sublime  Grand  Majtr.

Frederick  dalcho,  native  of  Mary*

land,  Do&or  of  Medicine,  Member  of  the
Medical  Society  of  South-Carolina,  Hono-
rary Member  of  the  Chemical  and  Medical
Societies  of  Philadelphia,  and  one  of  the  Phy.
ficians  of  the  Charlefton  Difpenfary,  &c.  &c#
aged  32  years,  R.»  J8L.\  K.  H. — P.  R.  S.
Sov.  Grand  Iafpe&or  General  of  the  33d
degree,,  and  Lieutenant  Grand  Commando
for  the  United  States.

As

THE  ORIGINAL  SUPREME  COUNCIL  182J

(4)

Sublime  Deputy  Grand  Mafter.

JOSEPH  JAHAN,  native  of  Montargis,
en  Gatinoi's,  Planter  of  Saint  Domingo,  aged
43  years,  Mafter  of  the  Lodge  la  Candeur9
R  J  I,  Paft  Sublime  Grand  Mailer*  R.**tt.*.
EL  H.— -P.  R.  S.

Sublime  Seniar  Grand  Warden.

ISAAC  AULD,  native  of  Pennfylvania,
Podtor  of  Medicine,  Member  of  the  Medical
Society  of  South-Carolina,  Honorary  Member
of  the  Medical  and  Chemical  Societies  of
Philadelphia,  and  cne  of  the  Phy  fi clans  of  the
Gimrlefton  Difpenfary,^  &c,  aged  32  years,
R.r.Sf.\  K.  H. — P,  R.  S.Sov.  Grand  Infpe&or
General  of  the  33d  degree.

Sublime  Junior  Grand  Warden*

WILLIAM  PORTED,  native  of  Ireland,
Commiffion  Merchant,  aged  37  years,  Prince
of  Jerufalem.

IS34  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Grand  Orator  end  Keeper  of  the  StUh

JAMES  MOULTRIE,  native  of  Soutfo
Carolina,  Do£toT  of  Medicine  Port  Phyfidan,
Vicc-Prefident  of  the  Medical  Society  of
South-Carolina,  and  o  ne  of  the  Phyficians  of
the  Charlefton  Difpenfary,  &c.  aged  38  years,
R.'.#.-.  K.  H.— P.  R.  S.  Sov.  Grand  Infpeaof
General  of  the  33d  degree*

Sublime  Grand  Treasurer .

JAMES  ALLISON,  native  of  Norsk,
Britain*  Cooper,  aged  46  years,  R.\$,*#

Sublime  Grand  Secretary*

JOHN  PETER  PROYS,  native  of  Hano-
ver, Accountant,  aged  33  years,  Prince  o!
Jerufalera.

Grand  Mqfier  of  Ceremonies,

ALEXANDER  PLACIDE,  native  of
Bourdcaux,  Manager  of  the  Charleston,
Theatre,  aged  45  yean,  R,  ♦,)&'.  K.  H.*-<»
P.  R«  S.

THE  ORIGINAL  SUPREME  COUNCIL  1825

(6)

Captain  vf  the  Guard**

PIERRE  RIGAOD,  native  of  Nantz,
Planter  of  Saint-Domingo,  aged  31  yeari,
K.-.fc.\  K.  H.— P.  R.  S.

Grand  Tyler,

DAVID  LABAT,  native  of  Hamburgh,
Storekeeper,  aged  4a  years,  Perfe&jon.

Members,

JOHN  MITCHELL,  native  of  Ireland,
Juflice  of  the  Quorum  and  Notary  Public,
late  a  Lieutenant-Colonel  in  the  American
Army,  Member  of  the  Cincinnati ;  and  Pad
Eubiime  Grand  Matter,  aged  60  year*.
*.•.*.-.  K.  H.—P.  R.  S.  Soy.  Grand
Ixifpector  General  of  the  33d  Degree  and
Crand  Commander  for  the  United  States.

THOMAS  BARTHOLOMEW  BOWEN.
native  of  Ireland t  Printer,  late  a  Major  la
the  American  Army  and  Member  of  the  Cirw
cianati ;  Pail  Sublime  Grand-Mafter,  aged  6"o

15

1826  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

(7*

years,  R.O&*«  &♦  H.— P.  R.  3.  5cm
Grand  Infpe&or  General  of  the  33d  Degree
and  HL  Grand  Matter  of  Ceremonies.

ABRAHAM  8ASPORTAS,  native  of
Bourdeaux,  Merchant,  aged  56"  years,  R.».&.#.
Knight  of  the  Sun.

PIERRE  BOUYSSOU,  native  of  Cape
Francois,    Planter,     late    Captain  of  Gen-
darmerie, and  Orator  of  the  Lodge  la  Can<kur%
aged  48  years,  R.\&.-.  K-  H — P.  R.  S.

ISRAE  L  DELIEBEN,  native  of  Bohemia,
Commiflion  Merchant,  aged  61  years,  R.
3K.%  K.  B.— P.  R    S.  Sov.  Grand  Infpeaon
General  of  the  33d  degree.

MICHEL  FRONTT,  native  of  Saint*
Martial,  en  Limouun,  Doctor  of  Medicine*
aged  50  years,  R.%£.\  K.  H.— P.  1L  S.

EMANUEL  DE  LA  MOTTA,  nadve  of
Santa  Croix,  Commiflion  Merchant  and
Auctioneer,  aged  42  years,  &.*.&*•  JK».H»— *
P.  R.  S.  Soy.  Grand  Infpeftor  General  of  the;
33d  degree,  and  111  Treafutej  General  of
iha  EL  Empire.

THE  ORIGINAL  SUPREME   COUNCIL  1827

ROBERT  I/ALLEMAND,  native  of  Port
Republican,  Planter  of  St  Domingo,  aged
53  years  Rv¥.*.  K.  H*— P.  R.  S.

JOSEPH  BEE,  native  of  South-Caroiina,
Planrer,  aged  56  years.  R.  .&.*♦—  drand
Pontiff.

ETIENNE  DTJBARRY,  native  of  Jarbes,
en  Bigore,  Planter  of  St  Domingo,  aged  49
years,  R.\0.\  K.  H — P.  R.  S.

PETER  SMITH,  native  of  South-Carolina,
Fa&or,  aged  53  years,  Prince  of  Jerufalem.

JOSEPH  CLARET,  natise  of  Narbonne,
Matter  of  Lodge  No.    45,  aged    36  years*,

SOLOMON  HARBY,  native  of  London-,
Comraiflion  merchant  and  Au&loneer,  aged
40  years,  RvKv  K*  H-P    R.  S.

JEAN  ANDRE  PELLET  ANT,  native
of  Planter  of  St,  Dcmingo

aged  yean,  R.*&?\

THOMAS  BA&ER^  native  of  Cngland,

Infurance

182S  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

(9)

Infurance    Broker,   aged    27  years,   Secret
Mailer.

JEAN  REIGNE',  native  of  Caftillon,
near  Bourdeaux,  aged  30  years.  R»*.  &V

JOSEPH  DICKINSON,  native  of  South-
Carolina,  Infpe&or  of  Exports,  late  a  Captain
of  Infantry,  aged  33  yean,  Intimate  Secre-
tary.

JEAN  JACQUES  THOMAS,  native  of
London,  Merchant,  aged  42  years,  R.  )£.*.

JACOB  BE  LEON,  native  of  Jamaica,
Commifiion  Merchant  and  Au&ioneer,  aged
38  years,  Intendant  of  the  Buildiug.

JEAN  DESBEAUX,  native  of  Buzet,
Cooper,  aged   37  years,  IV.  &.-•

FRANCIS  LOUVRIER  SAINT  MART,
native  of  Nevers,  aged  39  years,  Intimate
Secretary.

PffiRRE  JOSEPH  MORE,  native  of
Fontaine,  en  Franche  Comte,  Surgeon,  aged
50  years.  Knight  of  the  Eaft  and  Weft*

B

THE   ORIGINAL  SUPREME   COUNCIL  1829

€  10)

JEREMIAH  WIUCOX,  natire  of  Rhode*
Ifland,  Painter;, aged  33  years,  Provoft  and
Judge.

OEORGE  ESTLLLET,  native  of  Ne
Orleans,  aged  28  year*,  intimate  Secretary.

ISAAC  CANTER,  native  of  Santa  Croix,
Auctioneer,  .aged  33  years,  Knight  of  the
•Eafc

JOHN  HINCKLEY  MITCHEL,  native
«F  South-Carolina,  Juftice  of  the  Peace,  and
/Notary  Public,  aged  33  years,  Secret  Matter,

WILLIAM  ALEXANDER,  native  of
South-Carolina,  I^aCtor,  "aged  26  years,  Secret
Matter,

LEWIS  J.  RAYNAL,  native  of  South.

Carolina,  Accountant,  aged  24  yearn  Elected
©f  Nine*

JOHN  BAtf  KS,  native  of  England,  Ac
£Ourtiant,  aged  30  years,  Intimate  Secretary*

MORRIS     GOLDSMITH,    native    of

1830  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

London.  Merchant,  aged  si  yea/8,  Secret
Matter.

JOHN  BIIXEAUD,  uatire  of  Sainu
Sezatre,  en  Xaintonge,  aged  30  years*
Elefted  of  Fifteen.

THOMAS  NAPIER,  native  of  North*
Britain*  Merchant,  aged  30  years,  Knight  of
theEafh

EMANUEL  CANTOR,  native  of  Santa
Croix,  Merchant,  aged  30  years,  Intiraatew
Secretary.

Honorary  McmUtu

HU  Royal  Highnefs  CHAKLES,  Here,
ditary  Prince  of  the  Swedes,  Gcths  and
VacdalSi  Duke  cf  Sudermar.ia,  Heir  of
Norway*  DuVe  of  Slefwick,  Holitein,  Stor-
marric  and  Dittmarche,  Count  of  Oldenburg
and  DelroenhorfL  Grand  Admiral  of  Sweden,
Vicar  of  Solomon  of  the  7th  and  $ih  Pro-
vince, and  National  .Grand  Mafter  of  the
Kingdom  of  Sweden,  R.\  *.-.  K.  H— •
Ft  K.  S%

As

THE  ORIGINAL  SUPREME  COUNCIL  1831

Comtt  ALEXANDER  FRANCOIS
AUGySTE  DE  GRASSE,  native
of  Vcrfailles,  Planter  of  Saint  Domingo,
aged   36  years,  R.\  :«£.♦.    K.    H.—  P.    R.

5.  Sov.  Grand  Infpe&or  General  of  the
33d  degree,  Grand  Commaoder  for  the
French  Weft  Indies,  and  Reprefentative  of
the, Sublime  Gr2nd  Lodge  of  South-Caro»
lina,  in  and  to  the  Sublime  Lodge  10  Saint
Domingo.

JEAN  BAPTISTE  MARIE  DELAHO-
GUE,  native  of  Paris,  Planter  of  Saint
Domingo,  aged  58  years,  R.*.  #.*.  K.  H.—
P.R.  S.  Sov.  Grand  Infpe&or  General  o*
the  33d  degree,  and  Lieutenant  Grand  Com*
mander  for.  the  French  Weft  Indies.

JOHN  SUCKLEY,  native  of  London,
Merchant  of  Saint  Domingo,  aged  24.  year?,
R.\  &v  £.  H.— P.  R.  S.

NICOLAS  SAMSON  PANEL,  native
of  Normandy,  Merchant  of  Porto-Ricor
aged  28  yean,    R.\   •££.•

JONATHAN  BAYARD  SMITH,  natfre

'832  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

(«3>

ef  Pennfylvenia,  3gei  50  years,  fate  Gfand
Mailer  of  the  State  of  P cnfylvania>  $£\  #.•.
K.  II.— P.  R.  S.

SAMUEL  MY£RS,  native  of  New-
York,  Merchani  of  Virginia,  aged  43  years,
R.-.  *V.  K.  H—P.  R.S.

MOSES  MICHAEL   HAY£S,   native  of
Merchant,  of  Uoflbj,  R.\  Q.\
IL  H.— •*•  R. **

THE  ORIGINAL   SUPREME   COUNCIL

i833

ADDRESS:

TO  DOCTOR  FREDERICK  DALCRQ,

EAST-BAT.

Cha*lesto9,  ($4ittb-Car$is*a>b

«♦♦♦♦♦♦*♦♦♦♦

The  Sublime  Grand  Lodge*  meets  at  the
Ineffable  Lodge  Room,  Meeting-Greet,  every
other  Saturday  evening  at  fix  o'clock,  from
the  Autumnal  to  the  Vernal  Equinox,  and  en
the  ftrfs  Saturday  in  every  month  at  feven
o'clock,  i&  the  evening,  from  the  Vernal  to
the  Autumnal  Equinox.

r     D»  G.  M

-•  r»  5.  kj*  M*

wd  Keeper  cf  ihs  $cch*
Command*

*"7

$  inrsndJSecrdcir}

1834  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

*TTTirE  CLORT  OF  THE  GRAND
ARCHITECT, OF  THE  UNIVERSE.

LUX  X   ti.MS«W

HEALTH," STABILITY  AND  POWER.

Officers  of  the  Grand  Council  of  Princes  of
Jemfalem,  uiSomh-Carolina   A*  L.  5802,

ILL.  Bao.  *  Col.  JOHN  MTrCHELL—Moft  Eqat-
liable:

D*.  FREDERICK  DALCHO-Scnio?

Mod  Enlightened.

Or.  ISAAC  A ULD— Junior  Mod  En-
lightened.

ABRAHAM  ALEXANDER— X.   D.

SOLOMON  JHARBY— Grand  Owtoi,
and  Keeper  of  the  Scai&,

ISRAEL   DELIEBEN-^Graiul  Tree*

fines*
JOSEPH  BEE— G?a*d  Secretary.
AiEXANDERBLAClPE-Maftef  ofc

ceremonies.

THE   ORIGINAL   SUPREME   COUNCIL

i*35

ReprefentatfosinSU  Dmtng*

AUGUSTUS  DE  GRASSE—  K.  H-P.  R.  &
Sov.  Grand  Infpe&or  General  of  the  33d  Degree;

Conventicnt  are  held  on  thejirjt  Sunday*  ef
Fibruary,  May,  Auguji  a.\d  November ,  at  If?
'dock)  M,  at  the  Ineffable  Lodtf  Ram.

'J^T^&Z

PW

0.  a nd  Keeper p  the  SfaA

4

JiQf<S.

IN

Ig36  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

XVIII.
IN  THE  NAME  OF  THE  MOST  HOLt
AND  UNDIVIDED  TRINITY.

SS.  SS.  S&

Officers  of  the  Sovereign  Chapter  oi
Rofe  Croix  de  Hereden,  ia  South-Carolina^
A.  D,  1802.

Bio.  Cot.  JOHN   MITCHELL— E.    M.    Perfect

Sovereign.
Dr.  FREDERICK, DALCHO—M.    E., R

Senior  Warden*
Dr.  ISAAC  AULD— M.~4E.  P.  Junior  War<*

den.

EMANUEL    DE    LA    MOTTA— Grand

Treafurer.
ABRAHAM  ALEXANDER-Grand  Secre*

tary.
Major  T.  JB.   BOWEW-Grand   Matter    of

Ceremonies.

G/and  Trier  (w«*>

c

THE  ORIGINAL  SUPREME   COUNCIL

1837

Ajjmbteges  of  the  Knights  are  held  in  tbi
Ineffable  Lodge  Room  at  Meridian,  on  the  day
of  the  Annual  Fea/iy  Shrove  Tuefday>  Tuefday
after  Eafier,  the  day  cf  Afcenfion^  the  day  of
¥enticvftt  all  Saints  day  and  the  twofefttvals  qf<
St.  John.

£.    M.    P.    8.
a

2.  P.  8.  W,

M.  £•  P.  J.  W,

By  Command.

Grand  Secretary*

,838  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

(  *9  J

AD   GLORIAM   DEI

JCnights  of  K.  H.  and  Members  of  the  Grand
ConMory  of  Princes  of  the  Royal  Secret  in
South.Carolina,  A.  L.  5802.

Cot.  JOHN  MITCHELL— T,  HI.  Grand  Com-
mander.

Dr.  FREDERICK  DALCHO— T.  I.  Lieutenant
Grand  Commander.

JOSEPH  J  AH  AN— T.  1.  Lieutenant  Grand  Com.

mander.
Da.    JAMES    MOULTRIE— Miaifter  of  Stawi

and  Grand  Orator*

Dr.  MICHAEL  FRONTY— -Grand  Chaneellcf
EMANUEL  DELAMOTTA-GTand  Treaftfrc*.
ABRAHAM  ALEXAND2R-  Grand  Seermij.

PIERRE  BOU^SSOU— Grand.  Ma/kr  Atcfiited

and  EngineeTv

Dr.  ISAAC  AULD Jrhyfato  Gen*«L

ISRAEL  DEUEBEN— Kcep«r  <rf  the  S&h  ifid
Archives,

Major  T.  B  BOWEN—  Ctoand  Matter  of  Cere-
monies

Kl ERRE  RtGAUD— Captain  of  ifie  Guards

THE  ORIGINAL  SUPREME   COUNCIL

1839

(*<>)

Solomon  Harby.
Robert  Laixemawd.
Moses  C.  Levy*

(S.  Tyler  vacant.)
(J.  Tyler  vacant.)
Etiene  DuBARH?
ALEXANDER  PLACIDI.

Reprefentalive  in  St.  Domingo*

AUGUSTUS  DE  GRASSE—K.  H— P.  R.  3.
Scv.  Grand  Infpettor  General  of  the  33d  Degree.

Conjijlories  are  held  at  M.  at  the  Ineffable
LcJge  Rom,. on  the  i\Jt  March,  2$th  June*
2\/l  September  and  2pb  December.

L.  G.  Q*

andrArehfoet*

y  Command.
Crcnd  Secretary*

1840  HISTORY   OF    FREEMASONRY

<xvn—to— xxxra  inc.)

Vmverfi  terrarum  Orbit  Arcbiteftonu  gori*
ab  ingentis*

OEUS  MEUMQt!  E  JUS.

ORDO  AB  CHAO.

Supreme  Council  of  Grand  Ins-
pectors General  of  the  33d
degree,  in  South-Carolina*

Colonel  JOHN  MITCHEL— Sov.  Grand

Commander.
Da.  FREDERICK  DAiCHO— Lieutenant

Grand  Commander.
EMANUEL   DE  LA  MOTTA— UK  Trea.

furer  General  of  the  H*  Empire.
ABRAHAM  ALEXANDER— 111.  Secretary

General  of  the  H.  Empire.
Major  T.  B.  BOWEN— 1IL  Grand  Maftef

of  Ceremonies.
ISRAEL  DELIEBEN— Scnr.Grandlni  e&>

Genera!.

HIS  MAJESTY,  KING  EDWARD  VII.
P.G.M.  and  Protector  of  Masons  of  England

THE  ORIGINAL   SUPREME  COUNCIL  1841

0&»  ISAAC  AULD— Sov*  Grartd  Infpe&ar

General.
MOSES  a  LEVY— Sov.  Grand  Ihfpeaor

General.
Dr.   JAMES   MOULTRIE— Sor,    Grand

Infpe&or  General.

III.  CapL  of  the  life

Guards  (vacant.)

I«42

HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

<*3>

"Reprefentative.fa  SainljDoffilfigiK

AUGUSTUS  DE  GRASSE— Sov.  GraffA
Commander  for  the  French  Weftladies.

Councils  are  held  at  the  boufe  of  ihe  Grand
Commander  ot  Meridian,  every  third  neui
Moony  reckoning  from  the  new  Moon  in  Mfij»

Ll  Gd.  Com.

Soy.  Gd.  Com*

By  Com  mand,

.e^ary  General  of  the
&.  Empire*

CHAPTER   III

'•    '  'IfKJZ.

r-MJT- —

yy^t

$eWt

"  *5v    ^Mhilf

ilit^s  y^*»

tK^sES

V  «£•'

M**5

J**

5^

THE    SCOTTISH    RITE    IN    THE    UNITED    STATES

COUNCIL  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem  was  duly
constituted  in  Charleston,  February  20,  1788,
and  Brothers  Joseph  Meyers,  Behrend  M.
Spitzer,  and  A.  Forst  installed  the  Officers.

Notwithstanding  that  in  planting  the  Scot-
tish Rite,  or,  as  it  was  then  known,  the  "  Rite
J  of  Perfection,"  in  many  States,  by  the  appoint-
ment of  Inspectors,  who  had  only  received  what  was  at  that  early
date  recognized  as  the  25th  Degree  or  "  Prince  of  the  Royal  Se-
cret," the  Rite  was  only  worked  in  Charleston.  In  consequence
of  the  zeal  of  the  Brethren  in  that  city  and  their  devotion  to  the
Rite,  we  owe  the  foundation  of  the  first  bodies,  as  shown  in  the
fac-similes  given,  the  last  one  being  the  "  Supreme  Council  of  the
33d  and  last  degree  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite,
Mother-Supreme  Council  of  the  World."  A  council  of  Knights
Kadosh  was  organized  in  Philadelphia  in  1796,  by  Masons  who
were  refugees  from  San  Domingo,  during  the  negro  insurrection  on
that  island.  This  body  soon  ceased  to  exist,  in  consequence  of  the
return  of  the  Brethren  to  that  island  very  soon  after  its  organization.
In  New  York,  in  1797,  a  chapter  of  Rose  Croix  was  instituted.
In  1792  it  is  said  a  Lodge  of  Perfection  was  formed  at  Balti-
more, Md.,  by  Henry  Wilmans.1  There  is  no  certainty  as  to  his
authority  for  such  establishment.  Brother  Edward  T.  Schultz  gives
a  list  of  seventy-six  members.  There  was  also  a  Lodge  of  Perfec-
tion at  Albany,  N.  Y.,  which  was  in  accord  with  the  symbolic
lodge,  and  at  one  time  had  the  same  Brother  for  Master  ;  and  we
notice  also  that  the  symbolic  lodges  in  Philadelphia  were  in  union
with  the  Lodge  of  Perfection  in  that  city.2

1  "  History  of  Masonry,"  by  Edw.  T.  Schultz,  vol.  vi.,  p.  1555.

2  There  is  an  old  volume  in  the  archives  of  the  Supreme  Council  of  the  Southern
Jurisdiction,  which  contains  the  history  of  "Sublime  Free-Masonry  in  the  United  States

1843

1844  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

A  circular,  which  we  give  in  part  below,  was  issued  by  the
Supreme  Council  at  Charleston  (adopted  October  10,  1802),  under
date  of  December  4,  1802,  and  copies  were  sent  to  every  Grand
Lodge  then  in  existence  in  the  United  States  and  also  in  other
countries.

"  Circular  "

"As  Society  improved,  and  as  discoveries  of  old  records  were
made,  the  numbers  of  our  degrees  were  increased,  until,  in  progress
of  time,  the  system  became  complete.

"  From  such  of  our  records  as  are  authentic,  we  are  informed
of  the  establishment  of  the  Sublime  and  Ineffable  degrees  of  Ma-
sonry in  Scotland,  France,  and  Prussia,  immediately  after  the  cru-
sades. But  from  some  circumstances,  which  to  us  are  unknown,
after  the  year  4658  they  fell  into  neglect  until  the  year  5744,  when
a  nobleman  from  Scotland  visited  France  and  re-established  the
Lodge  of  Perfection  in  Bordeaux.

"In  5761  the  Lodges  and  Councils  of  the  Supreme  degrees
being  extended  throughout  the  Continent  of  Europe,  his  Majesty
the  King  of  Prussia,  as  Grand  Commander  of  the  Order  of  Prince
of  the  Royal  Secret,  was  acknowledged  by  all  the  Craft  as  the  head
of  the  Sublime  and  Ineffable  degrees  of  Masonry  throughout  the
two  hemispheres.  His  Royal  Highness  Charles,  Hereditary  Prince
of  the  Swedes,  Goths,  and  Vandals,  Duke  of  Sudermania,  Heir  of
Norway,  was,  and  still  continues  the  Grand  Commander  and  protec-
tor of  the  Sublime  Masons  in  Sweden  ;  and  his  Royal  Highness
Louis  of  Bourbon,  Prince  of  the  Blood,  Duke  de  Chartres,  and  the
Cardinal  Prince  and  Bishop  of  Rouen,  were  at  the  head  of  these
degrees  in  France.

"On  the  25th  of  October,  5762,  the  Grand  Masonic  Constitu-
tions were  finally  ratified  in  Berlin  and  proclaimed  for  the  govern-
ment of  all  the  Lodges  of  Sublime  and  Perfect  Masons,  Chapters,
Councils,  Colleges,  and  Consistories  of  the  Royal  and  Military  art
of  Free- Masonry,  over  the  surface  of  the  two  hemispheres.  There
are  Secret  Constitutions,  which  have  existed  from  time  immemorial,
and  are  alluded  to  in  these  instruments.

of  America.  Being  a  Collection  of  all  the  Official  Documents  which  have  appeared  on
both  sides  of  the  question  with  Notes  and  an  Appendix.  By  Joseph  McCosh,  Charleston,
S.  C,  1823."

SCOTTISH   RITE   IN   THE   UNITED   STATES         1845

"  In  the  same  year  the  Constitutions  were  transmitted  to  our
illustrious  Brother,  Stephen  Morin,  who  had  been  Appointed1  on
the  27th  of  August,  5761,  Inppector-General  over  all  Lodges  in  the
new  World,  by  the  Grand  Consistory  of  Princes  of  the  Royal  Secret
convened  in  Paris,  at  which  presided  the  King  of  Prussia  Deputy,
'Chaillon  de  Joinville,  substitute  General  of  the  Order,  Right  Wor-
shipful Master  of  the  first  Lodge  in  France,  called  St.  Anthony's,
Chief  of  the  Eminent  degrees,  Commander  and  Sublime  Prince  of
the  Royal  Secret,'  etc.

"  The  following  Illustrious  Brethren  were  also  present :  The
Brother  Prince  of  Rouen,  Master  of  the  Grand  Intelligence  Lodge
and  Sovereign  Prince  of  Masonry,  etc.

"  La  Coine,  substitute  of  the  Grand  Master,  Rignt  Worshipful
Master  of  the  Trinity  Lodge,  Grand  Elect,  Perfect,  Knight  and
Prince  of  Masons.

"  Maximillian  de  St.  Simon,  Senior  Grand  Warden,  Grand  Elect,
Perfect  and  Knight  and  Prince  of  Masons.

"  Savalette  de  Buchelay,  Grand  Keeper  of  the  Seals,  Grand
Elect,  Perfect  Knight  and  Prince  of  Masons.

"  Duke  de  Choiseuil,  Right  Worshipful  Master  of  the  Lodge  of
the  Children  of  Glory,  Grand,  Elect,  Perfect  Master,  Knight  and
Prince  of  Masons.

"  Topin,  Grand  Embassador  from  his  Serene  Highness,  Grand,
Elect,  Perfect  Master,  Knight  and  Prince  of  Masons.

"  Boucher  de  Lenoncour,  Right  Worshipful  Master  of  the
Lodge  of  Virtue,  Grand,  Elect,  Perfect  Master,  Knight  and  Prince
of  Masons.

"  Brest  de  la  Chausee,  Right  Worshipful  Master  of  the  Exac-
titude Lodge,  Grand,  Elect,  Perfect  Master,  Knight  and  Prince  of
Masons.  The  Seals  of  the  Order  were  affixed  and  the  Patent  coun-
tersigned by

"  Daubertiny,  Grand,  Elect,  Perfect  Master,  Knight  and  Prince
of  Masons,  Right  Worshipful  Master  of  the  Lodge  of  St.  Alphonso,
Grand  Secretary  of  the  Grand  Lodge  and  Sublime  Council  of
Princes  of  Masons,  etc.

"When  Brother  Morin  arrived  in  St.  Domingo,  he,  agreeably
to  his  patent,   appointed  a  Deputy  Inspector  General  for  North-

1  A  copy  of  his  commission  is  in  the  archives  of  the  Supreme  Council,  Southern
Jurisdiction,  and  is  given  in  chapter  i  of  A.  A.  S.  R.

1846  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

America.  This  high  Honor  was  conferred  on  Brother  M.  M.
Hayes,  with  the  power  of  appointing  others,  where  necessary.
Brother  Morin  also  appointed  Brother  Frankin  Deputy  Inspec-
tor-General of  Jamaica  and  the  British  Leeward  Islands,  and
Brother  Colonel  Provest  for  the  Windward  Islands  and  the  Brit-
ish Army.

"  Brother  Hayes  appointed  Brother  Isaac  Da  Costa  Deputy  In-
spector General  for  the  State  of  South  Carolina,  who,  in  the  year
5783,  established  the  Sublime  Grand  Lodge  of  Perfection  in  Charles-
ton. After  Brother  Da  Costa's  death,  Brother  Joseph  Myers  was
appointed  Deputy  Inspector-General  for  his  State,  by  Bro.  Hayes,
who,  also,  had  previously  appointed  Brother  Colonel  Solomon  Bush
Dep.  Insp.  Gen.  for  the  State  of  Pennsylvania,  and  Bro.  Barend
M.  Spitzer  to  the  same  rank  for  Georgia,  which  was  confirmed  by
a  Convention  of  Inspectors  when  convened  in  Philadelphia,  on  the
15th  of  June,  5781.

"  On  the  1  st  of  May,  5786,  the  Grand  Constitutions  of  the  Thirty-
Third  Degree,  called  the  Supreme  Council  of  Sovereign  Grand  In-
spectors General,  was  ratified  by  his  Majesty  the  King  of  Prussia,
who  as  Grand  Commander  of  the  Order  of  Prince  of  the  Royal
Secret,  possessed  the  Sovereign  Masonic  power  over  all  the  Craft.
In  the  New  Constitution  this  Power  was  conferred  on  a  Supreme
Council  of  Nine  Brethren  in  each  nation,  who  possess  all  the
Masonic  prerogatives  in  their  own  district  that  his  Majesty  individ-
ually possessed,  and  are  Sovereigns  of  Masonry.

"On  the  20th  of  Feb.,  5788,  the  Grand  Council  of  Princes  of
Jerusalem  was  opened  in  this  City  (Charleston,  S.  C),  at  which
were  present  Bros.  J.  Myers,  D.  I.  G.  for  South  Carolina,  B.  M.
Spitzer,  D.  I.  G.  for  Georgia,  and  A.  Forst,  D.  I.  G.  for  Virginia.
Soon  after  the  opening  of  the  Council,  a  letter  was  addressed  to  his
Royal  Highness,  the  Duke  of  Orleans,  on  the  subject,  requesting
certain  records  from  the  Archives  of  the  Society  in  France,  which
in  his  answer  through  Col.  Shee,  his  Secretary,  he  very  politely
promised  to  transmit,  but  which  the  commencement  of  the  French
Revolution  most  unfortunately  prevented.

"On  the  2d  of  Aug.,  5795,  Brother  Colonel  John  Mitchell,  late
Dep.  Quarter  Master  Genl.  in  the  Armies  of  the  United  States,  was
made  a  Dep.  Ins.  Genl.  for  this  State  by  Bro.  Spitzer,  who  acted  in
consequence  of  Bro.  Myers'  removal  out  of  the  Country.

SCOTTISH   RITE   IN   THE   UNITED   STATES         1847

"  Bro.  Mitchell  was  restricted  from  acting  until  after  Bro.  Spit-
zer's  death,  which  took  place  in  the  succeeding  year.

"  As  many  Brethren  of  eminent  degrees  had  arrived  from  For-
eign parts,  consistories  of  Princes  of  the  R.  S.  were  occasionally
held,  for  initiations  and  other  purposes.

"  On  the  31st  of  May,  5801,  the  Supreme  Council  of  the  Thirty-
third  degree  for  the  United  States  of  America  was  opened  with  the
high  honors  of  Masonry,  by  Brothers  John  Mitchell  and  Frederick
Dalcho,  Sov :  Gr  :  Insp  :  Genl  :;  and  in  the  course  of  the  present
year  the  whole  number  of  Grand  Inspectors  General  was  completed,
agreeably  to  the  Grand  Constitutions.

"  On  the  21st  of  January,  5802,  a  Warrant  of  Constitution  passed
the  Seal  of  the  Grand  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem  for  the  es-
tablishment of  a  Master  Mark  Mason's  Lodge  in  this  City  (Charles-
ton, S.  C).

"  On  the  21st  of  February,  5802,  Our  Illustrious  Brother,  Count
Alexandre  Francois  Auguste  Degrasse,  Deputy  Inspector  General,
was  appointed  by  the  Supreme  Council  a  Grand  Inspector  General,
and  Grand  Commander  of  the  French  West-Indies  ;  and  our  Illus-
trious Brother,  Jean  Baptiste  Marie  De  La  Hougue,  Dep.  Insp
Genl.,  was  also  received  as  an  Insp.  Genl.  and  appointed  Lieut
Grand  Commander  of  the  same  Islands.

"  On  the  4th  of  December,  5802,  a  Warrant  of  Constitution
passed  the  seal  of  the  Grand  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  for
the  establishment  of  a  Sublime  Grand  Lodge  in  Savannah,  Georgia

The  Names  of  the  Masonic  Degrees  are  as  Follows,  viz.  :

Entered  Apprentice.  \

Fellow  Craft.  >  Given  in  the  Symbolic  Lodges.

Master  Mason.  )

Secret  Master.
Perfect  Master.
Intimate  Secretary.
Provost  and  Judge.
Intendant  of  the  Building.
Elected  Knights  of  9.
Illustrious  Elected  of  15.
Sublime  Knight  Elected.
Grand  Master  Architect.
Royal  Arch.
14th       u  "         Perfection.

1st

degree,  (

;all<

2d

(i

«

3d

u

11

4th

u

«

5th

it

t«

6th

u

u

7th

u

u

8th

«

a

9th

M

11

10th

II

u

nth

M

11

12th

II

M

13th

M

II

Given  in  the  Sublime  Grand
Lodge.

1848

HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

15th  degree,

called

16th

II

11

17th

II

«i

18th

M

11

19th

U

11

*>r\t\l

II

11

2ISt

22d

11

II

23d

it

II

24th

11

•1

25th

11

II

26th

it

<l

27  th

11

M

28th

11

tt

29th

11

M

30th

«i

II

3ISt

M

II

32d

M

U

33d

u

Knights  of  the  East. )  Given  by  the  Princes  of  Jerusalem,

Prince  of  Jerusalem. )      which  is  a  governing  Council.

Knight  of  the  East  and  West.

Sovereign  Prince  of  Rose  Croix  de
Heredom.

Grand  Pontiff.

Grand  Master  of  all  Symbolic
Lodges.

Patriarch  Noachite,  or  Chevalier
Prussian.

Prince  of  Libanus.

Chief  of  the  Tabernacle.

Prince  of  the  Tabernacle.

Prince  of  Mercy.

Knight  of  the  Brazen  Serpent.

Commander  of  the  Temple.

Knight  of  the  Sun.

Knight  of  St.  Andrew.

K-H.

Grand  Inquisitor  Commander.

Sublime  Prince  of  the  Royal  Secret
Prince  of  Masons.

Sovereign  Grand  Inspectors  Gen-
eral.   Officers  appointed  for  life.

Given  by  the  Council
of  Grand  Inspectors,
who  are  Sovereigns
of  Masonry.

"Besides  the  degrees,  which  are  in  regular  succession,  most  of
the  inspectors  are  in  possession  of  a  number  of  detached  degrees,
given  in  different  parts  of  the  world,  and  which  they  generally  com-
municate, free  of  expense,  to  those  brethren  who  are  high  enough
to  understand  them.  Such  as  Select  Masons  of  27  and  the  Royal
Arch  as  given  under  the  Constitution  of  Dublin.  Six  degrees  of
Maconnerie  D' Adoption,  Compagnon  Ecossais,  Le  Maitre  Ecossais
and  Le  Grand  Maitre  Ecossais,  making  in  the  aggregate  52  de-
grees.

"  The  Committee  respectfully  submit  to  the  consideration  of
the  Council  the  above  report  on  the  principles  and  establishment  of
the  Sublime  degrees  in  South  Carolina  extracted  from  the  Archives
of  the  Society.  They  cannot,  however,  conclude  without  express-
ing their  ardent  wishes  for  the  prosperity  and  dignity  of  the  institu-
tion over  which  this  Supreme  Council  preside  ;  and  they  flatter
themselves  that  if  any  unfavorable  impressions  have  existed  among
the  Brethern  of  the  Blue  degrees,  from  a  want  of  a  knowledge  of  the
principles  and  practices  of  Sublime  Masonry,  it  will  be  done  away^

SCOTTISH    RITE   IN   THE   UNITED   STATES         1849

and  that  harmony  and  affection  will  be  the  happy  cement  of  the
Universal  Society  of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons.  That  as  all  aim
at  the  improvement  of  the  general  condition  of  Man-kind  by  the
practice  of  Virtue,  and  the  exercise  of  benevolence,  so  they  sincerely
wish  that  any  little  differences  which  may  have  arisen,  in  unimpor-
tant ceremonies  of  Ancient  and  Modern,  may  be  reconciled,  and
given  away  to  the  original  principles  of  the  order,  those  great  bul-
warks of  Society,  universal  benevolence  and  brotherly  love,  and  that
the  extensive  fraternity  of  Free-Masons,  throughout  the  two  Hemi-
spheres, may  form  but  one  band  of  Brotherhood.  '  Behold  how
good  and  how  pleasant  it  is  for  Brethren  to  dwell  together  in
Unity/

"  They  respectfully  Salute  your  Supreme  Council  by  the  Sacred
Numbers.  Charleston,  South  Carolina,  the  10th  day  of  the  8th
Month,  called  Chisleu  5553,  A.L.  5802,  and  of  the  Christian  Era,
this  4th  day  of  December,  1802.

"  Frederick  Dalcho.

44  K-H.P.R.S.,  Sovereign  Grand  Inspector  General  of  the
33d,  and  Lieutenant  Grand  Commander  in  the  United
States  of  America.

"  Isaac  Auld.

44  K-H.P.R.S.,  Sovereign  Grand  Inspector  General  of  the

33d.

44  E.  De  La  Motta.

"K-H.P.R.S.,  Sovereign  Grand  Inspector  General  of  the
33d,  and  Illustrious  Treasurer  General  of  the  H.  Empire.

44  The  above  report  was  taken  into  consideration,  and  the  Coun-
cil was  pleased  to  express  the  highest  approbation  of  the  same.

"  Whereupon,  Resolved,  That  the  foregoing  report  be  printed
and  transmitted  to  all  the  Sublime  and  Symbolic  Grand  Lodges,
throughout  the  two  Hemispheres.

44  J  no.  Mitchell.

44  K-H.P.R.S.,  Sovereign  Grand  Inspector  General  of  the
33d.  and  Illustrious  Secretary  General  of  the  H.  Empire."

Beus  flDeumque  5us.

1850  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

The  major  part  of  this  circular  recites  the  history  of  Masonry,
as  generally  understood  at  that  early  day,  and  which  we  omit,  con-
fining our  extracts  to  that  part  which  refers  only  to  the  A:A:A:S:R.

The  Supreme  Council,  having  been  thus  established  and  made
known  to  the  whole  world  of  Masonry,  is  the  mother  of  all  the
other  regular  Supreme  Councils  which  have  since  been  organized
either  immediately  or  mediately  by  her  authority.

The  council  in  Charleston  conferred  the  33d  Degree  on  Count
de  Grasse  Tilley,  Hacquet,  and  de  la  Hogue  ;  and  through  these
Brethren  by  the  authority  of  letters  patent  dated  February  21,  1802,
were  established  the  Supreme  Councils  of  France  and  also  of  the
French  and  English  West  India  colonies.  Illustrious  de  Grasse
Tilley  installed  the  Supreme  Council  of  France  on  December  22,
1804,  at  Paris.  This  was  the  first  and  only  Supreme  Council  estab-
lished in  France  ;  many  years  subsequently  it  was  divided  into  two
branches,  in  consequence  of  the  dissension  heretofore  mentioned ;
one  was  called  the  Supreme  Council  of  France,  and  the  other  the
Supreme  Council  of  the  Grand  Orient  of  France.  Both  of  these
bodies  are  still  in  existence  ;  the  former  only,  however,  is  in  rela-
tions of  comity  with  the  Mother  Supreme  Council,  and  all  the  other
regular  Supreme  Councils  of  the  world.  The  Supreme  Council  of
the  Grand  Orient  is  not  so.

The  Supreme  Councils  of  Italy,  Naples,  Spain,  and  the  Nether-
lands were  also  established  by  de  Grasse  Tilley.

Only  one  Supreme  Council  of  the  33d  Degree  can  exist  in  each
nation  or  kingdom  (by  Article  V.  of  the  Grand  Constitution  of
1 786)  :  two  in  the  United  States  of  America,  as  far  as  possible  one
from  the  other ;  one  in  the  British  Islands  of  America,  and  one
also  in  the  French  colonies.

The  first  Supreme  Council  at  Charleston,  S.  C,  began  its  labors
on  May  31,  1 801,  as  hereinbefore  stated,  and  its  jurisdiction  covered
all  of  the  United  States  of  America,  until  August  5,  1813,  at  wThich
date  the  "  Supreme  Council  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish
Rite  of  Freemasonry  for  the  Northern  Jurisdiction  of  the  United
States"  was  established  by  special  Deputy  Emmanuel  de  la  Motta
at  New  York.  This  Supreme  Council  was  substituted  for  the
Grand  Consistory  of  Sublime  Princes  of  the  Royal  Secret,  3 2d
Degree.  Brother  D.  D.  Tompkins,  Vice-President  of  the  United
States  of  America,  was  M.  P.  S.  Grand  Commander.

SCOTTISH    RITE   IN   THE   UNITED    STATES         1851

At  a  later  period  the  seat  of  the  Northern  Supreme  Coun-
cil was  changed  to  Boston.  The  jurisdiction  of  the  Northern  Su-
preme Council  included  all  the  northern  and  northeastern  States
east  of  the  Mississippi  River,  viz. :  Maine,  New  Hampshire,  Ver-
mont, Massachusetts,  Rhode  Island,  Connecticut,  New  York,  New
Jersey,  Pennsylvania,  Michigan,  Ohio,  Indiana,  Illinois,  and  Wis-
consin. The  other  States  and  Territories  were  reserved  for  itself
by  the  Supreme  Council  for  the  Southern  Jurisdiction  of  the  United
States.

The  Supreme  Council  of  England  and  Wales  was  created  by
the  Northern  Supreme  Council  in  March,  1846,  and  that  body  cre-
ated the  Supreme  Councils  of  Scotland  and  of  the  Canadian  Do-
minion. The  Supreme  Council  for  Ireland  was  established  by  the
Supreme  Council  of  the  Southern  Jurisdiction.

From  August  5,  1813,  Article  V.  of  the  Constitutions  of  1786
has  been  complied  with,  and  there  have  been  consequently  in  the
United  States  of  America  but  two  legitimate  Supreme  Councils,
which  have  ever  endeavored  to  preserve  and  enforce  their  authority  :
and  they  have  always  discountenanced  all  attempts  against  that
authority  which  rightfully,  according  to  the  Grand  Constitutions,  be-
longs to  them.

A  third  Supreme  Council  could  not  be  established  in  the  United
States  of  America,  without  a  violation  of  the  Constitutions  of  1786.
Neither  the  33d  Degree  nor  a  Supreme  Council  can  exist  witnout  a
compliance  with  that  constitution.  The  establishment  of  a  second
Supreme  Council  in  the  United  States  was  not  a  wise  measure,
although  the  constitutions  provided  for  it,  as  subsequent  events
demonstrated.  It  was  a  remarkable  coincidence  that  in  the  very
year  when  the  two  Grand  Lodges  of  Blue  Masonry  in  England
were  consolidated  into  one,  Scottish  Masonry  in  the  United  States
was  amicably  divided  into  two  organizations,  in  consequence  of
which  each  Supreme  Council  altered  and  amended  its  own  con-
stitutions and  statutes,  and  changed  and  made  material  alterations
in  the  rituals,  and  thereby  destroyed  the  harmony  and  uniformity
of  the  work.

The  injurious  and  pernicious  consequences  of  this  division  were
soon  manifested  and  both  Supreme  Councils  were  called  upon  to
make  their  defense  against  the  invasion  of  illegitimate  bodies,  which
not   only  affected   Scottish   Rite  Masonry,  but  also   all   the   other

1852  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

Grand  Bodies  of  Masonry,  from  the  Grand  Lodges  to  the  Grand
Commanderies  of  Knights  Templars,  illegitimate  bodies  of  which
were  soon  established,  as  well  as  of  the  Scottish  Rite,  by  these  un-
authorized parties.

On  October  7,  1856,  Foulhouze  formed  a  new  Supreme  Coun-
cil and  commenced  making  Masons  at  sight,  and  manufacturing
Thirty-thirds.  Pursuing  the  same  system  of  misrepresentation  as  in
1850-51,  he  succeeded  in  causing  two  lodges  to  withdraw  their  al-
legiance from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Louisiana.  This  rebellion  was
short-lived  ;  in  1858-59  these  lodges  memorialized  the  Grand  Lodge
to  be  reinstated  on  its  register,  and  with  difficulty  obtained  their  re-
quest. On  February  4,  1859,  tne  Grand  Orient  of  France  expelled
Foulhouze,  and  his  so-called  Supreme  Council  soon  became  dormant.
In  the  early  part  of  1867  an  attempt  was  made  to  revive  it,  and  it
obtained  recognition  from  the  Grand  Orient  of  France  ;  that  rec-
ognition, however,  failed  to  give  it  vitality,  and  in  a  short  time  it
either  became  dormant  or  ceased  to  exist.

It  would  be  useless  to  waste  valuable  time  in  tracing  out  all
these  irregular  bodies ;  yet  it  would  be  unwise  not  to  acknowledge
that  they  have  had  an  existence,  and  that  some  still  continue  to  the
detriment  of  Freemasonry.

We  quote  from  a  letter  of  the  late  111.  Bro.  Dr.  Henry  Beau-
mont Leeson,  the  Sovereign  Grand  Commander  of  the  Supreme
Council  of  England  and  Wales  and  their  Dependencies,  to  the
Grand  Commander  of  the  Southern  Supreme  Council  of  the
United  States,  written  at  London  in  i860,  in  which  he  says:  "Our
own  Council  is  now  in  a  flourishing  condition,  nearly  all  of  the
elite  of  Masonry  in  England  being  ranged  under  our  banners  ;  al-
though we  are  distinct  from  Grand  Lodge,  who  acknowledge  only
the  first  three  degrees,  and  the  Royal  Arch,  and  Grand  Conclave,
governing  the  Knights  Templars.  These  two  last  degrees  are  in  this
country,  perfectly  different  and  distinct  from  any  of  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Degrees,  and  of  very  modern  origin,  neither  having
existed  previous  to  the  middle  of  the  last  century.  The  Knight
Templar  Degree  was  concocted  in  France  and  i  possess  the  act-
ual   MINUTES  AND  OTHER  RECORDS  OF  THE  FRENCH    CONVENT.       The

Royal  Arch  (Dermott's)  was  concocted  by  Ramsay,  and  modern-
ized by  a  Chaplain  (G.  Brown)  of  the  late  Duke  of  Sussex."
(Grand  Master.)

SCOTTISH    RITE   IN   THE  UNITED   STATES         1853

This  spurious  French  Knight  Templar  Degree  differed  from  the
Webb  Templar  Degree  ;  it  was  carried  to  England  and  established
there ;  it  was  also  brought  to  the  United  States  by  Joseph  Cerneau,
who  made  Templars  of  New  Orleans  Masons1  as  well  as  he  did
those  in  New  York,  where  he  and  his  coadjutors  also  established
bodies  of  Templars,  and  of  the  Rite  of  Perfection  with  twenty-five
degrees,  in  New  Orleans  and  New  York,  changed  the  names  of
his  bodies  as  suited  his  pleasure,  and  declared  himself  and  his  coad-
jutors Sovereign  Grand  Inspectors-General  of  the  33d  Degree.
There  is  no  evidence  that  Cerneau  ever  had  received  the  33d  De-
gree. We  give  below  a  copy  of  the  only  document  he  ever  had  to
show  his  status  as  a  Mason.

[  Translation^

TO    THE    GLORY    OF    THE   [Gr.\    ARCH.-.   OF    THE

UNIV:]

Lux  ex  Tenebris.

From  the  Orient  of  the  Very  Great  and  Very  Puissant  Coun-
cil of  the  Sublime  Princes  [of  the  Royal  Secret],  Chiefs  of  Ma-
sonry, under  the  C:  C:  of  the  Zenith  [which  responds]  to  the  200
25'  N:  Lat:

To  our  111:  and  Very  Valiant  Knights  and  Princes,  Masons  of
all  the  Degrees,  over  the  surface  of  the  two  Hemispheres :

HEALTH  !

We,  Antoine  Mathieu  Dupotet,  Grand  Master  of  all  the
Lodges,  Colleges,  Chapters,  Councils,  Chapters  and  Consistories,
of  the  higher  degrees  of  Masonry,  Deputy  Grand  Master  of  the
Grand  Orient  of  Pennsylvania,  in  the  United  States  of  America ;
and  of  the  Grand  Lodge  and  Sovereign  Provincial  Grand  Chapter
of  Heredom  of  Kilwinning,  of  Edinburgh,  for  America,  under  the
distinctive  title  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  Grand  Provincial  of  San  Do-
mingo in  the  Ancient  Rite,  Grand  Commander  or  Sovereign  Pres-
ident of  the  Th:  Puissant  Grand  Council  of  the  Sublime  Princes  of
the  Royal  Secret,  established  at  Port  au  Prince,  Island  of  San  Do-

1  See  chapter  liii.,  pp.  1390,  1391,  of  this  work  ;  also  chapter  lviii.,  p.  1624.

1854  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

mingo,  by  constitutive  patent  of  16  January  and  19  April,  1801,
under  the  distinctive  title  of  The  Triple  Unity  ;  transferred  to  Bar-
acoa,  Island  of  Cuba,  on  account  of  the  events  of  war,

Do  declare,  in  the  name  of  the  Sublime  and  Th:  Puissant  Grand
Council,  do  certify  and  attest,  that  the  Very  Resp:  Gr:  Elect
Knight  of  the  White  and  Black  Eagle,  Joseph  Cerneau,  Ancient
Dignitary  of  the  Lodge  No.  47,  Orient  of  Port  au  Prince,  Grand
Warden  of  the  Provincial  Lodge,  same  Orient,  Venerable  founder
of  the  Lodge  of  the  Ancient  Constitution  of  York,  No.  103,  un-
der the  distinctive  title  of  The  Theological  Virtues,  Orient  of  the
Habana,  Island  of  Cuba,  has  been  regularly  initiated  in  all  the
Degrees  of  the  Sublime  Masonrv,  from  that  of  Secret  Master  to
and  including  that  of  Grand  Elect  Knight  of  the  White  and  Black
Eagle ;  and  wishing  to  give  the  strongest  proofs  of  our  sincere
friendship  for  our  said  Very  Dear  Bro:  Joseph  Cerneau,  in  recog-
nition of  the  services  which  he  has  rendered  to  the  Royal  Art,  and
which  he  is  rendering  daily,  we  have  initiated  him  in  the  highest,  in
the  most  eminent  and  final  Degree  of  Masonry  ;  we  create  him  our
Deputy  Grand  Inspector,  for  the  Northern  part  of  the  Island  of
Cuba,  with  all  the  powers  that  are  attached  thereto,  giving  him
full  and  entire  power  to  initiate  the  Bros:  Masons,  whom  he  may
judge  [worthy  ?],  to  promote  them  to  the  Sublime  Degrees,  from
the  4th  up  to  and  including  the  24th  ;  provided,  however,  that  these
Masons  shall  have  been  officers  of  a  Lodge  regularly  constituted
and  recognized,  and  in  places  only  where  there  may  not  be  found
Sacred  and  Sublime  and  regularly  constituted  Asyla  ;  from  which
Bros:  he  will  receive  the  obligation  required  and  the  authentic  sub-
mission to  the  Decrees  of  the  Sublime  Princes  ;  consulting,  however,
and  calling  to  his  aid  the  BB:  whom  he  shall  know  to  be  decorated
with  the  Sublime  Degrees ;  we  give  him  full  and  entire  powTer  to
confer  in  the  name  of  our  aforesaid  Grand  Council  the  highest  De-
grees of  Masonry  on  a  Kt:  Prince  Mason,  one  only  each  year,  whose
virtues  he  shall  recognize,  and  the  qualities  required  to  deserve  this
favor  ;  and  to  the  end  that  our  dear  'Bro:  Joseph  Ce7'neau,  so  deco-
rated, may  enjoy,  in  this  quality,  the  honours,  rights,  and  prerogatives
which  he  has  justly  deserved,  by  his  arduous  labors  in  the  Royal
Art,  we  have  delivered  to  him  these  presents,  in  the  margin  whereof
he  has  placed  his  signature,  that  it  may  avail  him  everywhere,  and
be  useful  to  him  alone.

SCOTTISH    RITE   IN   THE   UNITED    STATES  1855

We  pray  our  Resp:  BB:  regularly  constituted,  spread  over  the
two  Hemispheres,  with  whatever  Degree  they  may  be  decorated,
whether  in  Lodge,  Ch:,  Col:,  Sovereign  Council  .  .  .  Sublime,
to  recognize  and  receive  our  dear  Bro:,  the  Very  Illustrious  Sov:
and  Subl:  Prince,  Joseph  Cerneau,  in  all  the  Degrees  above  men-
tioned ;  promising  to  pay  the  same  attention  to  those  who  in  our
Orients  shall  present  themselves  at  the  doors  of  our  Sacred  Asyla
furnished  with  like  authentic  titles.

Given  by  us,  S:  Sublime  Princes,  G:  C:  G:  I:  G'al:  of  our  afore-
said Grand  and  Perfect  Council,  under  our  Mysterious  Seal,  and
the  Grand  Seal  of  the  Princes  of  Masonry,  in  a  place  where  are  de-
posited the  greatest  treasures,  the  sight  whereof  fills  us  with  conso-
lation, joy,  and  gratitude  for  all  that  is  great  and  good.

At  Baracoa,  Island  of  Cuba,  anno  5806,  under  the  sign  of  the
Lion,  the  15th  day  of  the  5th  month  called  Ab,  7806,  of  the  Cre-
ation 5566,  and  according  to  the  Common  Style  the  15th  July,
1806.

Signed,  Mathieu  Dupotet,

President,  Sov:     .     .     .      Gal:

A  true  copy :         Signed,  Mathieu  Dupotet,

President,  S:  G:  I:  Gal:

I  certify  that  what  is  transmitted  above  and  the  other  portions
are  conformable  to  my  Register.

Tiphaine,
S:  P:  R:  S:t  D:  I:  Gal:  G:  Comm:

The  foregoing  translation  of  the  ancient  copy  in  French  has
been  correctly  and  faithfully  made  by  me.

March  20,  1882.  Albert  Pike.

The  Northern  Supreme  Council  for  a  few  years  was  divided
into  two  factions  and  one  of  them  compromised  with  and  affiliated
some  of  these  irregular  Masons  and  took  them  in,  which  resulted
in  a  very  unfavorable  condition  of  the  Northern  Supreme  Council,
which  for  a  time  was  infected  with  an  unhealthy  absorption  of  bad
material,  by  this  unwise  compromise,  which  was  made,  as  was  sup-
posed, for  the  good  of  Freemasonry.

1856  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

Some  of  these  irregular  Masons  had  caused  a  division  even  in
the  Grand  Lodge  of  New  York,  and  the  original  chief  of  them,
Joseph  Cerneau,  had  previously  represented  the  irregular  Knights
Templars  of  New  Orleans  and  the  irregular  council  of  the  Rite  of
Perfection  of  Louisiana  in  the  Granc  Encampment  of  Knights
Templar  of  New  York,  as  is  found  in  the  records,  viz.  :  "  On  the
4th  day  of  May,  1816,  a  meeting  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of
Knights  Templar  of  New  York  was  called  to  act  upon  an  appli-
cation by  a  collected  body  of  Sir  Knights  Templar,  Royal  Arch
Masons  and  members  of  the  Sov.  Grand  Council  of  Sublime
Princes  of  the  Royal  Secret  for  the  State  of  Louisiana,  sitting  at
New  Orleans,  praying  that  a  constitutional  charter  be  granted
them,  etc.  They  had  previous  to  this  application  elected  and  in-
stalled their  officers.  The  charter,  by  resolution,  was  granted  them.
and  it  was  also

"Resolved,  That  the  111.  Bro.  Joseph  Cerneau,  having  been  des-
ignated by  the  Louisiana  Encampment  to  be  their  representative
and  proxy  near  this  Grand  Encampment,  be  and  is  hereby  ac-
knowledged and  accredited  as  such."

In  this  manner  the  irregular  French  Templar  Degree  that  was
carried  from  France  to  England  got  into  the  United  States  at
New  Orleans,  and  allied  with  an  irregular  rite  and  body,  became
amalgamated  with  the  American  Webb  Templar  Degree  at  New
York.

These  evils  which  have  beset  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Scottish  Rite  of  Freemasonry,  have  not  prevented  its  great  ad-
vancement and  prosperity ;  and  during  the  past  decade,  in  the
Northern  Jurisdiction  alone,  it  has  increased  over  fifty  per  cent,
in  numbers.

The  Southern  Supreme  Council  did  not  meet  from  February,
1862,  until  November  17,  1865,  which  was  in  Charleston,  S.  C.
Six  members  only  were  present,  and  all  of  them  are  now  dead.

There  were  no  bodies  of  the  Rite  working  anywhere  except  in
New  Orleans.

With  indomitable  energy  and  zeal  the  Illustrious  Sovereign
Grand  Commander,  Albert  Pike,  33d  Degree,  who  during  the
last  two  years  and  a  half  of  the  war  had  been  engaged  in  re-
writing and  restoring  the  rituals  of  the  degrees,  and  whose  scholar-
ship and  knowledge  of  the  Ancient  Mysteries  and  their  philosophy,

SCOTTISH    RITE    IN    THE    UNITED   STATES

1857

assisted  by  Albert  Gallatin  Mackay,  33d  Degree,  the  late  Secretary
General  of  the  Southern  Supreme  Council,  reconstructed  the  Rite
at  Charleston,  S.  C.

The  Supreme  Council  of  the  Southern  Jurisdiction  has  now  its
headquarters  in  Washington,  D.  C.  Its  library  of  nearly  fifty  thou-
sand volumes  is  not  surpassed  by  any  other  in  the  country  in  rare
and  valuable  works.

The  constituency  is  constantly  increasing,  with  five  hundred  and
twenty-five  organized  bodies  of  the  Rite  over  its  extended  territory,
and  nearly  approaching  in  numbers  that  of  its  more  prosperous
sister  council  of  the  Northern  Jurisdiction,  which  was  exempt  from
the  calamities  of  war,  as  a  reference  to  the  tabular  statements  fol-
lowing this  chapter  will  show.

The  legitimate  Supreme  Councils  duly  recognized  by  each  other
around  the  globe  are  the  following  :

Southern  Jurisdiction,  U.S. A Constituted

France  (Supreme  Council) "

Northern  Jurisdiction,  U.S.A "

Belgium "

Ireland "

Brazil "

Peru

New  Granada "

England,  Wales  and  Dependencies. ...  "

Scotland

Uruguay

Argentine  Republic

Turin,  of  Italy

Colon  (Cuba)

Venezuela

Mexico

May  31,
Sept.  22,
Aug.  5,
Mar.  11,
June  11,
April  6,
Nov.     2,

Mar.

«

«<

Sept.  13,

April  28,

Portugal

Chili

Central  America.

Hungary

Greece

Switzerland

Canada

Rome,  of  Italy  . .

Egypt,

Spain

Tunis

Canada

117

May  24,
May  27,
Nov.  25,
June  24,
Mar.  30,
Oct.
Jan.    14,

May   11,

801.
804.

813.
817.

825.
826.
830.

*33-
846.

846.

856.

858.

848.

855.
864.

868.

842.

862.

870.

871.

872.

873.
874.
877.

878.
879.
880.

1858  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

"  The  following  Supreme  Councils  have  been  formed,  but  have
not  received  formal  recognition  and  the  courtesy  of  an  exchange  of
representation :  Naples,  of  Italy,  Dominican  Republic,  Turkey,
Palermo,  of  Italy,  Florence,  of  Italy,  and  Luxemburg."

The  rituals  of  the  degrees  differ  very  much  in  their  dramatic
representations.  In  the  Northern  Jurisdiction  they  apply  more  di-
rectly to  the  history  and  scenes  of  the  Crusades ;  in  the  Southern
Jurisdiction  they  are  very  much  more  intellectual,  philosophical,  and
historic.

Councils  of  Deliberation  are  held  in  each  State  in  the  North-
ern Jurisdiction  of  all  the  bodies  from  the  14th  to  the  326.  degrees
inclusive,  which  are  presided  over  by  the  deputies  for  the  States.
In  these  are  presented  all  matters  of  local  legislation,  action  upon
which  must  subsequently  be  approved,  or  otherwise,  by  the  Su-
preme Council.

The  Supreme  Council  of  the  Rite  is  the  governing  body  over
all,  and  as  such  it  makes  and  promulgates  laws  and  statutes  for  the
various  divisions  of  the  organized  body.  This  Supreme  Council
confers  the  Governing  Degree,  namely,  33d  Degree,  Grand  Master
of  the  Kadosh  or  Sovereign  Grand  Inspector-General.  The  active
members,  according  to  the  Statutes  of  the  Southern  Supreme  Coun-
cil, are  limited  to  thirty-three  active  members  of  the  33d  Degree
and  no  more,  but  in  the  Northern  Supreme  Council  this  number
is  doubled,  so  that  the  active  members  of  the  33d  Degree  are  sixty-
six.  These  active  members  are  for  their  respective  States  rela-
tively the  Grand  Masters  of  the  Rite.  The  title  of  Honorary  In-
spectors-General is  given  to  those  who  are  elevated  to  the  degree
with  specifically  delegated  powers  and  no  others,  or  they  are  sent
as  special  delegates  to  establish  new  bodies  or  propagate  the  Rite
by  communicating  the  degrees.  These  special  delegates  have  a
voice  in  council  but  no  vote.

In  the  Southern  Supreme  Council,  with  its  number  of  active
members  of  the  33d  Degree  limited  to  thirty-three,  there  is  a
"Court  of  Honor,"  which  may  be  called  the  vestibule  to  the  33d
Degree.  This  Court  of  Honor  comprises  two  grades  or  ranks,  both
of  which  are  carefully  reserved  and  can  only  be  conferred  as  a  free

Note. — In  the  Southern  Supreme  Council,  the  council  or  preceptory  of  the  Knights
Kadosh  or  30th  degree  is  separate  from  the  consistory  of  31st  and  32d  degrees,  but  in  the
Northern  Supreme  Council  it  is  within  the  consistory.

SCOTTISH    RITE   IN   THE   UNITED   STATES         1859

gift,  and  a  mark  of  appreciation  for  services  rendered.  Each  active
member  and  each  Emeritus  member  of  the  Southern  Supreme  Coun-
cil is  ex-officio  a  member  of  both  grades.  These  grades  are,  first,  that
of  Knight  Commander.  This  is  conferred  upon  Brethren  of  the  32d
Degree  for  general  meritorious  service  rendered  to  the  Rite,  and  only
upon  the  recommendation  of  the  Grand  Consistories  or  by  the  Ac-
tive Inspectors-General  of  the  respective  States.  The  second  grade,
which  is  higher  than  the  grade  of  Knight  Commander,  is  that  of
Knight  Grand  Cross.  It  is  conferred  with  the  jewel  upon  Brethren
of  the  3 2d  Degree  for  extraordinary  services  to  the  Rite.  Neither
of  these  grades  can  be  given  to  anyone  who  solicits  for  them  ;  it
must  be  repeated  that  they  are  special  marks  of  honor,  gratuitously
conferred.  According  to  the  Statutes  of  the  Southern  Jurisdiction
the  possession  of  at  least  the  first  of  these  grades  is  a  condition  pre-
cedent of  eligibility  for  the  reception  of  the  33d  Degree.

The  difference  in  the  working  of  the  degrees  in  the  rituals  of  the
Rite,  between  the  ritual  of  the  Southern  and  that  of  the  Northern
Jurisdiction,  may  require  some  explanation,  which  likewise  will  ex-
plain why  the  changes  were  necessarily  made  in  working  the  degrees.
The  late  111.  Brother  Azariah  T.  Pearson,  33d  Degree,  Active  In-
spector-General for  the  State  of  Minnesota  in  the  Southern  Jurisdic-
tion, a  little  while  before  his  death,  made  the  following  statement :
"  That  the  late  Masonic  firm  of  Macoy  and  Sickles  of  New  York
City,  both  of  whom  are  33d  degree,  and  belong  to  the  Northern
Supreme  Council,  printed  in  the  rituals  for  the  supreme  Council
of  the  Southern  Jurisdiction  as  well,  but  who  unfortunately  failed
in  business,  and  that  the  stereotype  plates  which  belonged  to
either  or  both  regular  Supreme  Councils,  were  surreptitiously  seized
upon  and  taken  by  persons  connected  with  the  Cerneau  fraud,  who
had  claimed  that  they  had  bought  them  with  the  rest  of  the  prop-
erty of  Macoy  and  Sickles,  which  was  sold  for  the  benefit  of  their
creditors  ;  and  that  it  was  with  these  stereotype  plates  of  the  rituals
thus  surreptitiously  obtained  that  the  fraudulent  Cerneau  Supreme
Council  was  thus  enabled  to  improve  its  own  meagre  skeleton,  and
give  its  subordinate  bodies  a  semblance  of  the  true  work  conferred
under  the  authority  of  the  regular  Supreme  Councils,  which  for  self-
protection  against  impostors  and  clandestine  Scottish  Rite  Masons,
had  to  call  in  all  the  rituals  then  out,  and  to  issue  new  ones  in  lieu
thereof."

i860  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

It  mast  be  again  repeated,  with  a  degree  of  reiteration  which
may  be  tiresome  but  is  necessary,  that  the  Scottish  Rite  confers  no
degrees  but  those  of  its  own  Rite,  and  also  that  while  many  of  its
members  belong  to  legitimate  bodies  of  other  rites  of  Masonry,  it
has  no  conflict  with  any  such.  The  Scottish  Rite  has  doubled  its
members  in  the  last  few  years,  and  year  by  year  gains  new  ac-
cessions.

Antoine  Bideaud,  who  had  been  created  a  Deputy  Grand  In-
spector-General and  a  Sovereign  Grand  Inspector-General,  Septem-
ber 10,  1802,  by  De  Grasse  Tilley,  at  Cape  Francois,  in  San  Do-
mingo, so  soon  as  he  had  opened  his  Supreme  Council,  after  the
return  of  the  French  to  that  island,  was  in  New  York  and  on
August  4th  conferred  upon  J.  J.  Gourgas,  John  B.  Tardy,  Lewis
de  Soulles,  John  B.  Desdoity,  and  Pierre  Du  Peyrot  all  the  de-
grees of  the  A  :  A :  S :  Rite  to  the  32d.  Two  days  thereafter  a
consistory  was  opened,  which  although  exceeding  his  patent,
was  afterward  confirmed  by  proper  authority.  John  B.  Tardy
was  subsequently  appointed  Deputy  Inspector-General  by  Du
Plessis,  of  Philadelphia,  who  had  received  his  appointment  in  1 790
from  Augustine  Prevost,  who  derived  his  authority  directly  from
Francken  in  1774,  at  Jamaica.

Abraham  Jacobs,  who  claimed  to  be  a  Grand  Inspector-General,
made  such  by  Moses  Cohen  in  1790,  came  to  New  York  in  1804,
and  began  his  work  of  conferring  degrees.  He  states,  in  his  regis-
ter, that  by  the  wishes  of  J.  B.  Tardy  there  was  opened  a  council  of
Princes  of  Jerusalem  November  6,  1808,  there  being  present  J.  J.
Gourgas,  John  B.  Desdoity,  Maduro  Peixotto,  Moses  Levy,  John
B.  Tardy,  and  Abraham  Jacobs.  At  this  time  Richard  Riker  re-
ceived the  degrees.  It  appears  from  a  statement  by  Gourgas  that
Jacobs  had  exceeded  his  authority  by  interlining  words  in  his  patent,
for  which  he  was  afterward  expelled.  Gourgas  also  says  that  on
November  8,  1808,  Daniel  D.  Tompkins,  Richard  Riker,  and  Samp-
son Simpson  received  the  degrees,  including  the  32d  Degree,  in  the
consistory  which  was  formed  August  6,  1806,  and  that  he  was  made
a  Deputy  Inspector-General  on  November  12,  1808,  Desdoity  on  the
1 8th,  and  Peixotto  on  the  16th.

In  consequence  of  a  rumor  of  the  irregularities  which  had  oc-
curred in  the  bodies  in  New  York  having  reached  the  Supreme
Council  in  Charleston,  De  la  Motta,  who  was  an   officer  in  that

SCOTTISH    RITE    IN    THE   UNITED    STATES         1861

body,  was  sent  to  New  York  with  authority  from  the  Supreme
Council  to  investigate  the  whole  matter,  in  1 813.  August  5th  he
conferred  the  33d  Degree  upon  J.  J,  Gourgas  and  Sampson  Simp-
son ;  these  three  then  opened  a  Supreme  Council  and  conferred  the
degree  on  Richard  Riker,  John  B.  Tardy,  Daniel  D.  Tompkins,
and  Maduro  Peixotto.  On  the  same  day,  De  la  Motta,  by  authority
of  the  Mother  Supreme  Council  at  Charleston,  regularly  and  con-
stitutionally organized  what  was  then  called  the  "  Second  Grand
and  Supreme  Council  "  for  the  United  States.  Daniel  D.  Tomp-
kins was  installed  Grand  Commander ;  the  other  Officers  were
appointed  and  installed.  At  the  next  meeting  of  the  "  Mother  Su-
preme Council,"  at  Charleston,  the  following  December,  these  pro-
ceedings were  duly  confirmed.

As  heretofore  stated,  a  treaty  was  entered  into  by  and  between
the  two  Supreme  Councils,  and  the  jurisdiction  over  the  various
States  and  Territories  of  the  United  States  was  determined  for  each
of  these.

Like  all  human  voluntary  institutions,  the  histories  of  both  the
Northern  and  Southern  Supreme  Councils  are  records  of  bitter
controversies  growing  out  of  rival  bodies  which  were  irregularly
started  in  opposition  to  each  of  these  duly  constituted  Supreme
Councils,  and  which  greatly  retarded  the  advancement  of  this  val-
uable Rite.

In  the  Southern  Jurisdiction  these  controversies  continued  to
keep  the  Scottish  Rite  entirely  in  the  shade,  as  it  were,  until
General  Albert  Pike  received  the  several  degrees  and  was  elected
the  Grand  Commander.  Since  the  close  of  the  war  in  1865  the
progress  has  been  onward  and  upward,  as  has  been  shown  in  the
preceding  pages  of  this  chapter.

In  the  Northern  Supreme  Council  the  Rite  encountered  a  more
bitter  and  relentless  opposition  in  the  bodies  organized  by  Joseph
Cerneau,  originally  in  1807,  and  although  that  body  repeatedly  de-
clined, until  it  would  appear  to  be  utterly  extinguished,  yet  it  would
quite  unexpectedly  arise  again,  deceive  the  unwary,  and  so  soon
as  the  sunlight  of  Truth  was  poured  upon  it  would  again  decline,
wither,  and  disappear.

The  opposition  to  which  the  Northern  Supreme  Council  was
subjected  was  of  such  a  character  that  it  is  incumbent  on  us  to  take
some  notice  thereof  to  demonstrate  what  the   Scottish  Rite  of  the

i862  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

Northern  Supreme  Council  had  to  contend  against  in  defense  of
the  truth.

Giles  Fonda  Yates,  of  Albany,  became,  at  an  early  date  (1822),
interested  in  the  study  of  Masonry.  He  discovered  the  Warrant  of
the  Lodge  of  Perfection  granted  by  Francken  at  Albany  and  a
copy  of  the  Constitutions  of  1 762 ;  he  then  succeeded  in  resuscitating
the  old  lodge.  After  this  a  Grand  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem
was  organized  at  Albany,  and  several  lodges  of  Perfection  were
constituted  in  other  places.  A  consistory  was  instituted  in  1824  at
Albany,  and  several  bodies  were  established  in  Boston.  These  were
under  patents  of  the  Supreme  Council  at  Charleston.  Yates  re-
ceived the  33d  Degree  from  McCosh,  who  was  the  special  Deputy
of  this  council.  Afterward,  in  1828,  Yates  became  a  member
of  the  Northern  Supreme  Council.  Just  at  this  period,  from  1826,
the  Morgan  affair  having  occurred,  nearly  all  the  Masonic  bodies
at  the  North  became  extinct,  as  recited  in  the  chapter  devoted  to
that  subject.  In  1832  Gourgas  suspended  all  efforts  in  the  affairs
of  the  Scottish  Rite.  In  1842,  however,  the  great  excitement
had  mostly  died  out  and  the  fire  of  persecution,  bigotry,  and  fa-
naticism having  had  no  fuel  for  many  years,  waned,  and  all  efforts
against  the  Institution  ceased.  Yates  having  conferred  with  Gour-
gas and  other  Brethren  who  had  not  succumbed  under  their  severe
ordeal,  they  determined  to  resume  their  labors.  June  15,  1844,  a
meeting  was  held  ;  Gourgas  was  then  Grand  Commander,  and  Yates
Lieutenant  Grand  Commander.  These  two,  by  a  law  of  the  Rite,
that  if  only  one  member  of  a  Supreme  Council  survives,  that  coun-
cil does  not  cease  to  exist,  opened  the  Supreme  Council.

At  this  meeting,  November  13,  1844,  applications  were  received
from  Edward  A.  Raymond,  Ruel  Baker,  and  Charles  W.  Moore
(all  of  Massachusetts),  who,  having  received  the  32d  Degree,  were
crowned  Sovereign  Grand  Inspectors-General.

At  the  meeting  held  April  3-5,  1845,  Gourgas  declared  that  the
recent  publication  by  Clavel,  relating  to  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Rite,  was  utterly  incorrect,  and  stated  that  Cerneau's  name  was
struck  from  the  Tableau  of  the  Grand  Orient  of  France  in  1830,
the  Grand  Orient  having  written  to  him  that  it  was  a  7natter  quite
inexplicable  to  them  that  it  should  have  remained  there  so  long.

At  this  meeting  Gourgas  reorganized  the  Supreme  Council,
the  officers  being  appointed  by  the  constitutional  provisions.     From

SCOTTISH   RITE   IN   THE   UNITED   STATES         1863

this  time  the  Supreme  Council  became  very  industrious  in  estab-
lishing bodies  in  many  cities;  harmony  prevailed  over  this  jurisdic-
tion, and  the  Rite,  although  slowly,  was  steadily  extended.

At  an  important  meeting  held  September  4,  185 1,  Gourgas's  res-
ignation as  Grand  Commander  and  his  appointment  of  Yates  as
his  successor  were  received.  Yates  presided  at  this  meeting,  the
Sovereign  Grand  Consistory  was  organized,  and  the  degrees  in  the
various  bodies  were  conferred.  At  the  close  of  the  meeting  Yates
resigned  as  Grand  Commander  and  appointed  Raymond  to  that
position.  In  his  address  Yates  gave  a  forcible  exposition  of  the
laws,  the  objects,  and  the  history  of  the  Rite,  and  it  contains  so
much  information,  of  interest  and  value  to  its  members,  that  we
give  it  in  full  :

ADDRESS   OF    M.    P.    BRO.    GILES    FONDA    YATES

Respected  and  Beloved  Associates :  You  have  been  listening  to
the  valedictory  address  of  our  honored  friend,  long  triedi  true,  and
trusty.  His  sentiments,  I  am  well  assured,  are  reciprocated.  He
has  been  called  by  our  transatlantic  Brethren  "  the  patriarch  of  our
'  Illustrious  Order,'"  and  not  without  appropriateness.  John  James
J.  Gourgas — clarum  et  venerabile  nomen  /

He  has  been  pleased  to  allude  to  my  own  participation  in  some
of  the  works  and  administrative  duties  of  our  order,  but  such  par-
ticipation, as  you  are  well  aware,  has  been  at  a  later  day  and  for  a
shorter  period.  Under  the  circumstances  in  which  I  now  appear
before  you,  it  can  hardly  be  deemed  egotistic  in  me  if  I  advert
briefly  to  a  few  of  the  humble  contributions  to  the  cause  of  "  Sub-
lime Freemasonry"  previous  to  1840,  which  it  fell  to  my  lot  to
render.  These,  with  the  "  sublime  works "  performed  by  other
Brethren  of  our  order  before  and  since,  in  Massachusetts,  New
York,  New  Hampshire,  Connecticut,  and  Rhode  Island,  furnish
altogether  evidence  supplemental  to  that  given  by  my  predecessor,
in  complete  confutation  of  the  preposterous  charge  that  "  Sublime
Freemasonry  "  has  been  dormant  in  our  jurisdiction  since  its  estab-
lishment among  us.  A  charge  of  this  kind  has  been  the  stereotype
apology  of  surreptitious  Masons  for  their  occasional  attempts  to  foist
their  spurious  creations  upon  our  "  Sublime  System  "  within  our
Masonic  territory.     The  abundant  parole  testimony  which  can  be

1864  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

adduced  to  show  how  untrue  is  this  charge,  can  be  corroborated
by  our  archives,  and  will  be  found  iterated  in  manifestoes  issued  by
our  own  and  our  sister  council  for  the  Southern  Jurisdiction  of  the
United  States.

I  turned  my  attention  to  the  history  of  the  "  Sublime  Degrees"
very  soon  after  my  initiation  as  a  Mason.  My  intercourse  in  1822
with  several  old  Masons  in  the  city  of  Albany,  led  to  the  discovery
that  an  "  Ineffable  Lodge  of  Perfection  "  had  been  established  in
that  ancient  city  on  December  20,  1767.  I  also  discovered  that
not  only  the  Ineffable,  but  the  Superior  Degrees  of  our  Rite,
had  been  conferred  at  the  same  time  on  a  chosen  few,  by  the
founder  of  the  lodge,  Henry  A.  Francken,  one  of  the  Deputies  of
Stephen  Morin1  of  illustrious  memory.  It  was  not  long,  moreover,
before  I  found  the  original  Warrant  of  this  lodge,  its  book  of  min-
utes, the  patents  of  111.  Brother  Samuel  Stringer,  M.D.,  Jeremiah
Van  Rensselaer  and  Peter  W.  Yates,  Esquires,  Dep.  Inspectors-
General,  under  the  old  system  ;  also  "  the  regulations  and  contri-
butions of  the  nine  commissioners,"  etc.,  1 761,  and  other  docu-
ments that  had  been  left  by  Bro.  Francken  with  the  Albany  Breth-
ren when  he  founded  their  lodge.  With  the  concurrence  of  the
surviving  members  of  said  lodge  residing  in  Albany,  Dr.  Jonathan
Eights  and  the  Hon.  and  R.  W.  Stephen  Van  Rensselaer,  P.G.M.
of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New  York,  I  aided  in  effecting  its  revival.
The  necessary  proceedings  were  thereupon  instituted  to  place  the
same  under  the  superintendence  of  a  Grand  Council  of  Princes  of
Jerusalem,  as  required  by  the  old  constitutions  ;  and  such  Grand
Council  was  subsequently  opened  in  due  form  in  said  city.

Having  been  made  aware  of  "the  new  Constitution  of  the  Thir-
ty-third degree,"  ratified  on  the  first  of  May,  1786,  conferring  the
Supreme  Power  over  our  Rite  on  "  Councils  of  Nine  Brethren,"  I
hastened  to  place  myself  in  correspondence  with  Moses  Holbrook,
M.D.,  at  the  time  S.  G.  Commander  of  the  Supreme  Council  at
Charleston,  and  with  my  esteemed  friends,  Joseph  M'Cosh,  111.  Gr.
Sec.  Gen.   of  the  last-named   council,  and   Bro.   Gourgas,  at  that

1  Stephen  Morin  was  on  the  27th  day  of  August,  1761,  appointed  "  Inspector  General
over  all  Lodges,  &c,  &c,  &c,  in  the  new  world  by  the  Grand  Consistory  of  Princes  of
the  Royal  Secret  convened  in  Paris,  at  which  presided  the  King  of  Prussia's  Deputy,
Chaillon  De  Joinville,  Substitute  General  of  the  Order."  See  circular  issued  by  the  Su-
preme Council  at  Charleston,  S.  C,  December  4,  1802.

SCOTTISH    RITE    IN   THE    UNITED   STATES         1865

time  111.  Gr.  Sec.  Gen.  of  the  H.E.  for  this  Northern  Jurisdiction.
Lodges  of  Perfection  in  the  counties  of  Montgomery,  Onondaga,
Saratoga,  and  Monroe  in  the  State  of  New  York,  were  successively
organized,  and  placed  agreeably  to  the  constitutions  under  the  su-
perintendence of  the  Grand  Council  before  named.  The  establish-
ment of  this  last-named  body  was  confirmed,  and  all  our  proceed-
ings in  "  Sublime  Freemasonry  "  were  legalized  and  sanctioned  by
the  only  lawful  authorities  in  the  United  States,  the  aforesaid  Su-
preme Councils.

On  the  1 6th  day  of  November,  1824,  I  received  a  patent,  ap-
pointing me  S.  of  S.  of  a  consistory  of  S.P.R.S.,  established  in
the  city  of  Albany.  I  would  here  also  state  that  on  the  13th
day  of  February,  1825,  a  Charter  was  granted  to  111.  Bro.  Edward
A.  Raymond,  of  Boston,  Mass.,  and  eight  associates,  constituting
them  a  Grand  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem  ;  a  Charter  was  also
granted  them  for  a  consistory  of  S.P.R.S.,  both  bodies  to  be  hold-
en  in  the  citv  of  Boston.  All  these  several  bodies  named,  as  well
as  the  Albany  Grand  Council  and  Consistory,  have  since  their  es-
tablishment paid  due  faith  and  allegiance  to  our  Northern  Supreme
Council.

In  the  organization  of  the  New  York  State  Grand  Council,  and
of  the  different  lodges  of  Perfection  under  its  superintendence,  I
received  the  most  effective  aid  and  co-operation  of  several  dear
companions  whom  "it  delights  me  to  remember."  These  lodges
numbered  on  their  lists  of  initiates  some  of  the  brightest  and  wor-
thiest Masons  that  State  produced,  and  enjoyed  for  a  series  of  years
a  good  share  of  prosperity,  until  the  persecuting  fires  of  anti-Mason-
ry swept  over  the  land.  Their  labors  were  then  intermitted  for
awhile,  in  common  with  those  of  other  departments  of  the  Masonic
Institution,  from  the  same  cause.  But  the  consequences  were  not
in  the  main  inauspicious.  The  legitimate  effect  was  to  purify  and
cement  more  closely  the  materials  subjected  to  the  fiery  ordeal.

In  1825  I  took  my  vows  as  a  "  Sovereign  Grand  Inspector  Gen-
eral "  "  between  the  hands"  of  our  Brother  Joseph  M'Cosh,  he  hav-
ing been  specially  deputized  for  that  purpose.  I  was  shortly  after
constituted  and  accredited  the  "  Representative  "  of  the  Southern
Supreme  Grand  Council  near  this  Northern  Supreme  Grand  Coun-
cil, of  which  last  I  was  made,  and  have  ever  since  been  a  member.

I  would  fain  have  you  to  believe,  my  dear  Brethren,  that,  as  a

1866  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

member  of  the  Masonic  Institution,  if  I  have  had  my  ambition,  it
has  been  to  study  its  science,  and  to  discharge  my  duties  as  a  faith-
ful Mason,  rather  than  to  obtain  its  official  honors  or  personal  ben-
efits of  any  kind.  Self-aggrandizement  has  never  formed  any  part
of  my  Masonic  creed,  and  all  who  know  me  can  bear  witness  that  it
never  has  of  my  practise.  I  accordingly  shall  never  shirk  any  just
responsibility  imposed  upon  me  by  my  obligations  as  a  "  Sublime
Freemason,"  but  continue  to  prefer,  as  I  have  ever  done,  since  it  is
most  congenial  to  my  own  taste,  those  "  works  "  and  labors  of  the
Craft  not  necessarily  connected  with  its  administrative  duties.

As  Sovereign  Grand  Inspectors-General,  it  cannot  be  bootless
to  inquire  what  is  the  charge  committed  to  our  keeping — what  the
trust  reposed  in  us  ?  Is  it  true  that  the  degrees  and  orders  of  our
Rite  are,  as  our  enemies  allege,  only  superfetations  ?  Are  they
naught  but  excrescences  on  the  great  pyramid  of  Freemasonry  ?
Have  they  no  antiquity  ?  Are  they  of  an  irreligious  character  ?
Allow  me  to  deliver  a  few  of  my  own  views  on  this  subject — views,
as  you  are  well  assured,  I  have  not  arrived  at  hastily.

As  Brother  Gourgas  has  well  observed,  our  degrees  and  orders
constitute  of  themselves  a  perfect  system  and  Rite,  which  we  de-
nominate the  "  Sublime  system,"  and  the  "  Ancient  and  Accepted
Rite."  They  have  been  called  "  Honorary."  Such  they  are,  in  the
true  sense  of  the  term,  but  not  in  the  sense  generally  used,  which  is
construed  as  synonymous  with  "side,"  or  "detached  degrees."  We,
however,  possess,  in  addition  to  our  regular  series  of  degrees,  "  de-
tached degrees,"  of  more  or  less  value,  subsidiary  to  our  regular  de-
grees. But  none  of  our  degrees  are,  per  se,  subordinate  or  subsid-
iary to  any  other  system  or  Rite,  much  less  to  any  system  or  Rite
which  had  no  existence  when  our  Rite  was  reorganized  at  the  be-
ginning of  the  last  century.  All  attempts  to  make  them  so,  we,
as  faithful  conservators  and  guardians  of  our  Rites,  are  bound  to
resist.  Ours  are  not,  as  many  have  represented  them,  "  loose,"
•'floating,"  or  "side  degrees,"  nor  yet  are  they  "waifs  of  Masonic
stragglers."  !     If  the  star  of  "  Sublime  Freemasonry  "  is  never  per-

1  We  are  indebted  to  our  Worthy  Brother  Philip  C.  Tucker,  of  Vermont,  for  this  ap-
propriate designation  of  Masonic  pretenders  of  a  certain  description.  We  refer  to  those
who  occasionally  spring  up  in  this  country  and  elsewhere,  and  engage  in  "peddling"
Masonic  Degrees  ("  Marchands  de  Maconnere"),  and  who  assume  prerogatives  which
they  do  not  possess ;  and  over  degrees  which  most  probably  they  never  received  in  a

SCOTTISH    RITE   IN   THE   UNITED   STATES         1867

mitted  to  culminate  in  the  zenith  it  deserves  a  better  fate  than  to
become  a  satellite  to  any  other  orbs,  albeit  these  may  shine  with
more  distinguished  luster.  If  it  ever  becomes  depressed  to  the
nadir  of  the  Masonic  horizon,  it  will  not  be  because  of  its  want  of
value  or  merit.

Our  "  Sublime  Brother "  Dalcho  remarks  in  one  of  his  ora-
tions *  that  our  degrees  imparted  to  him  knowledge,  which  he  had
vainly  sought  for  in  the  lower  degrees — that  they  elucidated  the  ori-
gin and  principles  of  the  Masonic  Institution  and  its  connection  with
science  and  religion  more  intimately  than  the  symbolic  degrees.  I
have  myself  noticed  that  in  the  latter  general  ideas  only  are  com-
municated and  these  obscurely,  while  in  the  "  Sublime  Degrees "
these  ideas  become  clear  as  particular  truths  ;  though  still,  like  all
truths  regarding  the  mind  and  heart,  which  are  invisible,  they  can  be
expressed  only  by  figurative  terms  and  external  symbols.

By  imagery,  and  through  a  veil 2  of  metaphor,  the  light  of  truth
and  the  most  sublime  allusions  are  disclosed.  We  may  be  well  versed
in  the  ceremonials  of  our  order  and  yet  not  understand  their  true  im-
port ;  we  may  correctly  read  "  the  letter  "  of  our  traditions  and  le-
gends, and  yet  remain  blind  to  their  "  spirit,"  and  ignorant  of  the
principles  and  inferences  they  involve.  By  study  alone  can  we  solve
the  enigma,  "  de  quo  fabula  narratur?"  Many  of  the  character-
istic allegories,  legends,  symbols,  and  ceremonies  of  "  Sublime  Free-
masonry "  are  counted  as  insignificant  and  valueless,  because  they
are  not  palpable  to  the  senses,  and  fully  comprehended  at  the  first
blush.  Some  of  our  most  sacred  mysteries  are  lightly  esteemed,
because  they  furnish  no  disclosures  that  strike  dumb  with  amaze-
ment our  "hidden  treasures,"  and  spiritual  "  riches  of  secret  places"
are  unappreciated  ;  and  no  "  Royal  Secret "  which  humbly  professes
to  have  a  relation  only  to  the  life  of  the  heart  seems  to  be  cared
for  ;  nor  yet  any  "  precious  stone  "  in  our  mystic  edifice,  if  the  "  phi

lawful  manner.  These  men,  perchance  too,  may  have  surreptitiously  obtained  some  par-
tial information  from  garbled  MSS.  ;  or  if  they  have  obtained  any  degrees  lawfully,  are
guilty  of  a  violation  of  a  fundamental  Masonic  law  in  regard  to  "  allegiance  "  by  using
and  transmitting  to  others  Masonic  knowledge  under  assumed  authority,  in  a  manner
different  from  that  in  which  they  received  it.

1  See  his  oration  delivered  before  the  Sublime  Grand  Lodge,  at  Charleston,  S.  C,
March  21,  1803.

2  This  idea  is  beautifully  symbolized  in  one  of  the  "high  degrees"  by  a  figure  of
truth  covered  with  a  semi-transparent  veil.

1868  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

losopher's  stone  "  be  wanting  !    For  men  of  this  stamp,  our  degrees,
or  indeed  any  Masonic  degrees,  will  ever  fail  to  present  attractions.

"  Upon  the  arts  of  building  and  architecture  the  Order  of  Free
and  Accepted  Masonry  rises  like  a  fair  stupendous  pyramid  from  a
broad,  square  basis,  tending  regularly  up  to  a  summit  of  attainments,
ever  concealed  by  intervening  clouds  from  the  promiscuous  multi-
tude of  common  observers  below."  '  The  first  fourteen  degrees  of
our  Rite  are  in  a  part  an  amplification  of  "  Ancient  Craft  "  Ma-
sonry ;  while  the  "  superior  degrees  "  are  founded  on  those  Christian
and  "  religious  and  military  Orders  '  which  are  declared  by  the
oldest  book  of  York  Constitutions  to  be  cognate  to  the  Craft  de-
grees of  Freemasonry.

The  proofs  are  undeniable  that  the  learning  contained  in  the
"  Sublime  Degrees  "  was  taught  long  previous  to  the  last  century  ;
our  M.  P.  Brother  Dalcho  thinks  shortly  after  the  first  crusade.  In
Prussia,  France,  and  Scotland  the  principal  degrees  of  our  Rite  ap-
peared in  an  organized  form  in  171 3.  The  unfortunate  Lord  Der
Wentwater  and  his  associate  English  Brethren  were  working  in
lodges  of  Harodim,  in  1725,  at  Paris,  when  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England  transmitted  to  France  the  Ancient  York  Constitutions.
Many  Scotch  Brethren  (adherents  of  Charles  Edward  Stuart)  being
in  France  about  this  time,  also  cultivated  some  of  the  high  degrees
of  our  Rite.  Some  of  the  important  mysteries  celebrated  in  the
superior  degrees  were  instituted  by  the  successors  of  Jacques  de
Molay,  and  others  derive  their  origin  from  the  renowned  Robert
Bruce.  The  former  gave  the  military,  the  latter  the  Christian,  char-
acter to  the  degrees  and  orders  of  our  Rite  ;  and  from  what  has  been
alluded  to  relative  to  the  connection  of  our  Scotch  Brethren  with
our  degrees  and  orders,  I  think  we  may  readily  account  for  the
terms  Ecossais,  or  Scotch  as  applied  to  them.

No  person  can  pretend  that  any  one  department  or  system  of
Freemasonry  or  any  particular  Masonic  Rite,  however  unexception-
able, has  from  time  immemorial  existed  in  the  same  form  in  which
it  appears  at  the  present  day.  But  we  contend  that  the  (historical
epoch)  traditions  and  grades  of  knowledge  embodied  in  the  degrees
and  orders  of  the  Rite  we  profess,  have  descended  to  us  from  re-
mote antiquity.     This  fact  can  be  proved  to  the  reasonable  satisfac-

1  Quoted  from  an  old  edition  of  the  York  Constitution.

SCOTTISH    RITE    IN    THE    UNITED   STATES  1869

tion  of  the  most  skeptical,  by  the  writings  of  learned  Brethren  who
have  spent  years  in  investigating  the  subject.  To  the  same  effect,
too,  we  have  the  incidental  testimony  of  writers  who  never  belonged
to  the  Fraternity,  as  well  as  the  unwilling  admission  of  those  op-
posed to  us.  Even  a  brief  recapitulation  of  such  proofs  is  not  de-
manded by  present  occasion.  My  referring  to  this  topic  at  this
time  is  merely  to  remind  my  Brethren  that  our  "  Ancient  and  Ac-
cepted Rite  "  is  incorrectly  designated  as  a  "  modem  Rite."  *  When
we  use  the  term  "  modern  "  as  applicable  to  any  of  our  orders  or
degrees,  it  is  to  be  taken  in  a  comparative  sense,  and  not  in  its  vul-
gar acceptation.  It  refers  to  our  "religious  and  military  orders"
instituted  since  the  commencement  of  the  Christian  era,  and  after
that  of  "  the  holy  wars  ! "  Of  a  verity,  our  Rite  is  not  born  of
yesterday.

Many  of  our  degrees  imply  prerequisites  in  candidates  peculi-
arly stringent,  and  unknown  in  other  departments  of  Freemasonry  ;
and  not  a  few  partake  of  the  character  of  official  degrees.  Even
the  lowest  degrees  of  our  Rite,  the  eleven  "  Ineffable,"  are  designed
for  the  "  Select  few  "  only.  This  is  especially  the  case  with  our
principal  superior  degrees,  Prince  of  Jerusalem,  Sov.\  Prince  of
Rose  Cross,  elected  Knight  K.  H.  Grand  Inquisitor  Commander,
and  Sublime  Prince  of  the  Royal  Secret,  which  are  virtually  orders
of  Harodim.  Some  of  our  superior  degrees  confer  the  titles  of
14  Commander,"  "  Patriarch,"  "  Grand  Master,"  "  Prince,"  and  "  Sov-
ereign." But  it  behoves  me  to  observe  that  the  Masonic  titles  in
our  "  Inner  Easts,"  like  the  jewels  on  our  breasts,  are  not  cherished
and  worn  by  us  for  show  or  aggrandizement ;  they  are  suggestive
of  holy  truths  and  self-perfecting  duties,  which  every  conscientious
44  Sublime  Freemason  "  will  strive  to  learn  and  perform.

Some  persons  who  have  written  and  discoursed  about  our  de-
grees, have  obtained  what  little  knowledge  they  possess  of  them
from  spurious  and  corrupted  sources.  I  do  not  speak  unadvisedly
on  this  subject ;  for  I  have  critically  examined  rituals  identical  with
those    in    use   among   the    clandestine    and  "  soi-disant"  Supreme

1  It  is  doubtless  the  case  that  some  persons  confound  our  Rite  with  "  the  French  ot
Modern  Rite,"  which  is  confessedly  modern  and  was  invented  within  the  last  half  century.
It  embraces  the  three  symbolic  degrees  and  forms  the  basis,  and  is  part,  of  the  spurious
"  Scotch  Rite,"  which  aims  at  supplanting  us.  It  is  the  same  cultivated  in  some  French
lodges  in  this  country,  and  by  the  Louisiana  and  other  spurious  Supreme  Councils.

1870  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

Councils,  and  usurping  propagandists  of  "  Sublime  Freemasonry,'*
Now  and  then  an  orthodox  hieroglyphic  symbol  or  allegory  is  sur-
reptitiously obtained,  but  its  true  solution  is  not  attained  to,  by  the
vulgar  interpretations  of  superficialness,  or  it  is  purposely  perverted
by  the  infidel,  or  bigot,  or  sectarian,  to  suit  his  narrow  purposes  or
by  intriguers,  who

"  Like  scurvy  politicians,  seem  to  see
The  things  they  do  not."

Such  rituals,  too,  often  penned  by  blundering  copyists,  may  not
inaptly  be  likened  to  human  skeletons,  stripped  of  all  the  arteries,
nerves,  and  muscles  of  the  living  man,  deprived  of  soul,  life-blood,
and  spirit.

There  are  some  writers,  who,  while  they  may  not  deny  antiquity
to  the  doctrines  and  traditions  on  which  some  of  the  "  high  de-
grees" are  founded,  yet  with  a  Barruel  and  Robison  purposely
confound  our  "Ineffable"  and  "philosophical  degrees"  with  those
of  the  political  society  of  the  Illuminati  and  certain  infidel  sys-
tems of  philosophy.  A  learned  philosopher1  has  well  observed
that  "philosophy  is  not  possible,  unless  it  be  founded  on,  and
guarded  by,  Christianity.  Christianity  is  the  basis,  and  philosophy
the  superstructure  of  the  edifice."  It  is  with  philosophy  such  as
this  that  true  Freemasonry  has  to  do.  It  is  worthy  of  note  in  this
connection  that  speculative  science  as  well  as  practical  wisdom  once
ranked  among  the  virtues.  The  knowledge  of  the  Eternal  Being,
as  understood  by  philosophy,  reason,  and  religious  revelation,  is  the
basis  and  apex,  as  well  of  the  Masonic  as  the  scientific  pyramid.

"  No  art  or  learning  serveth  useful  ends,
But  as  the  heart  it  guides,  and  life  amends."

However  great  the  acquisitions  of  the  most  successful  cultiva-
tor of  "the  Royal  art  "  and  science,  all  will  be  vain  without  a  prac-
tical application  of  the  knowledge  acquired.  The  understanding
should  be  strengthened  that  the  conduct  may  be  directed  and  truth
discovered,  that  it  may  be  used  "for  the  better  endowment  and  help
of  man's  life."  One  of  the  cardinal  ends  designed  to  be  answered
by  Freemasonry,  in  any  of  its  departments,  is  to  make  men  better  as

1  Geoberti.

SCOTTISH    RITE   IN   THE    UNITED    STATES         1871

well  as  wiser.  The  eulogy  pronounced  by  Bro.  T.  S.  Webb1  on
"  the  eleven  ineffable  degrees,"  is  applicable  to  the  whole  system  of
"  Sublime  Freemasonry,"  that  it  is  "  intended  for  the  glory  of  the
Deity,  and  the  good  of  mankind."

Those  who  bring  the  charge  of  irreligion  against  our  Rite  would
do  well  to  bear  in  mind  that  learned  authors2  unfriendly  to  our  In-
stitution have  expressed  their  conviction  that  the  pure  doctrines  of
the  Zabians,  which  are  incorrectly  stigmatized  as  astrological  and
idolatrous,3  and  the  doctrines  of  St.  John  the  Baptist,  were  essen-
tially identical ;  while  Brethren  learned  in  the  secrets  of  "  Ineffable
Masonry,"  delivered  only  "  behind  the  veil,"  and  versed  in  the  doc-
trines of  "  Sublime  Freemasonry,"  have  become  penetrated  with  the
conviction  that  these  secrets  and  doctrines  are  in  essence  the  same
with  those  which  were  taught  by  the  Pythagorean  and  Essenean
rituals.

After  the  French  revolution  of  1793,  Christianity  in  France  was
ridiculed  into  obsoleteness.  Among  the  mass  of  the  people  who
became  atheists  were  the  mass  of  the  Masons.  Numerous  copies
of  that  holy  book,  which  we  esteem  as  the  first  great  light  in  Ma-
sonry, were  committed  to  the  flames.  Under  this  state  of  things,
"  Sublime  Freemasonry  "  fell  into  desuetude  ;  and  it  was  not  until
after  the  establishment  of  the  Supreme  Council  at  Charleston,
S.  C,  on  the  31st  day  of  May,  1801,  that  the  "Sublime  System"
was  revived  in  France  by  the  establishment  of  a  Supreme  Council
at  Paris,  to  wit,  in  1804,  by  Count  De  Grasse,  Grand  Inspector-
General,  under  authority  from  the  Charleston  Supreme  Council.
The  Paris  Supreme  Council  has  been  in  continuous  operation  ever

1  Bro.  Webb  did  not  pretend  to  be  a  professor  of  those  degrees,  or  of  any  other  in
"  Sublime  P'reemasonry."     See  his  preface  to  his  illustrations  of  those  degrees.

2  E.g.,  Cardinal  Wiseman — Syriac  version  of  the  Vatican  code  used  by  Adler  in  his
"  Druses  Montis  Libani."

3  I  here  quote  the  words  of  Dr.  Dewey  in  corroboration  of  the  idea  I  have  advanced
in  the  text,  because  he  expresses  this  idea  clearly  and  briefly.  It  is,  however,  far  from
being  a  singular  one,  or  original  with  him.  It  has  been  the  persuasion  of  every  philos-
opher and  divine  of  celebrity  who  has  bestowed  more  than  a  superficial  examination  upon
the  subject,  both  before  and  since  Lord  Bacon's  day  ;  who  proves  its  truth  in  detail.
"  The  idea  that  images  set  up  as  gods  were  worshipped,  is  erroneous.  They  were  esteemed
as  symbols  of  a  higher  power  and  as  '  symbols '  only.  A  species  of  images  (as  for  exam-
ple the  four-faced  Cherubim)  was  recognized  even  in  the  early  worship  of  the  Hebrews
when  under  the  immediate  government  of  God  himself.  I  would  not  be  understood  to  say  :
that  the  pure  doctrines  alluded  to  were  net  perverted,  or  that  there  were  no  persons  ob-
noxious to  the  charge  made  by  St.  Paul  in  Rom.  i.  23.

1872  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

since.  And  here  truth  compels  me  to  advert  to  the  fact  that  the
"  Grand  Orient  "  of  France,  which  had  a  legal  existence  only  as  a
"  Symbolic  "  Grand  Lodge  of  Master  Masons,  now  commenced  her
assumption  of  jurisdiction  over  all  the  degrees  of  the  "  Ancient  and
Accepted  Rite."  Disputes  hereupon  ensued  between  the  French
Supreme  Council  and  Grand  Orient,  which  have  never  been  fully
settled  up  to  the  present  day.

Every  lover  of  Masonic  order  and  constitutional  authority  can-
not but  regret  this  unhappy  occurrence ;  and  none  the  less  the  con-
duct of  the  Parisian  Brethren  on  sundry  occasions  during  the  last
half  century,  in  extending  their  jurisdiction  in  both  the  Symbolic
and  Sublime  degrees  over  territory  on  this  continent,  already  law-
fully occupied.  Their  example  in  this  last  respect  has  been  repeat-
edly followed  and  is  at  this  present  moment  producing  consequences
deleterious  to  the  Craft  at  large.  The  present  occasion  is  not  the
most  appropriate  one  for  descending  to  particularities  on  this  head.

It  is  unnecessary  for  me  to  make  more  than  a  passing  allusion
to  the  troubles  that  have  been  experienced  from  analogous  causes
by  our  sister  council  at  Charleston  and  our  own  Supreme  Council,
from  1806  to  the  present  time.  In  assaulting  our  Supreme  Councils
our  enemies  tried  to  shift  the  issue  from  principals  to  individuals,  and
resorted  to  wilful  perversions  of  facts  ;  and  failing  to  find  legitimate
and  real  subjects  to  attack,  they  for  the  nonce  fabricated  them.  As
"  the  droppings  of  their  lips "  were  anything  but  "  sweet-smelling
myrrh,"  or  the  "  perfume  of  hearty  counsel,"  as  true  gentlemen  and
Masons  we  could  not  meet  them  on  their  own  ground,  or  do  aught
else  than  simply  pronounce  their  allegations  false  and  unfounded.

A  word  or  two  with  regard  to  the  charge  of  interference  on  the
part  of  the  two  only  lawful  Supreme  Councils  in  this  country,  with
the  prerogatives  of  other  departments  of  Freemasonry.  No  Supreme
Councils  of  Sovereign  Grand  Inspectors-General  were  established
anywhere  in   the  world   till   after    1786.1      Previously,   Inspectors-

1  "On  May  I,  1786,  the  Grand  Constitution  of  the  Thirty-third  Degree,  called  the
Supreme  Council  of  Sovereign  Grand  Inspector-General,  was  finally  ratified  by  his
Majesty,  the  King  of  Prussia,  who,  as  Grand  Commander  of  the  Order  of  Prince  of  the
Royal  Secret,  possessed  the  Sovereign  Masonic  power  over  the  Craft.  In  the  New  Con-
stitution this  high  power  was  conferred  on  a  Supreme  Council  of  nine  Brethren  in  each
nation,  who  possess  all  the  Masonic  prerogatives  in  their  own  district  that  his  Majesty
individually  possessed,  and  are  Sovereigns  of  Masonry."  Extracts  from  the  circular  let*
ter  of  the  Charleston  Supreme  Council,  issued  December  4,  1802.

SCOTTISH    RITE   IN   THE    UNITED   STATES  1873

General  under  the  enlightened  Frederick  of  Prussia  were  charged
with  the  powers  and  duties  now  vested  in  such  Supreme  Councils
and  the  Grand  Bodies  under  them.  By  them  the  degrees  and
orders  of  our  Rite  were  conserved  and  propagated  in  the  constitu-
tional manner.  It  was  not  the  Grand  Orient  of  France,  as  is  by
many  erroneously  supposed,  nor  any  other  Grand  Body  on  the  Con-
tinent of  Europe,  except  the  Grand  Consistory,  over  which  presided
Frederick's  "  Substitute  General "  before  named,  that  had  any  author-
ity to  act  in  the  premises.  For  the  authors  of  the  numerous  new
rites  and  innovations  committed  on  the  old  system  of  Freemasonry,
which  were  erst  so  rife  on  the  European  Continent,  we  must  look
elsewhere  than  to  the  lawful  Deputies  Inspectors-General  under  the
old  system.

The  original  minutes  and  documents  left  by  111.  Brother
Francken,  who  established  the  Albany  Lodge  of  Perfection  in  1767,
evince  the  most  scrupulous  avoidance  of  interference  with  the  Mas-
ter's Lodge  in  that  city  or  the  Symbolic  Degree.  As  there  were  no
R.  A.  Chapters  or  Encampments  of  Knights  Templars  established
in  this  country  till  thirty  years  afterward,  to  speak  of  interference
with  them  would  be  an  anachronismic  absurdity,  akin  to  those
recently  spawned  by  ignorance  or  design  to  mislead  uninformed
Brethren,  or  for  other  unworthy  purposes.

The  first  Supreme  Council  ever  established  under  the  new  Con-
stitution of  1 786  was  that  at  Charleston,1  whose  jurisdiction  ex-
tended constitutionally  over  the  whole  of  the  United  States,  until
they  constituted,  by  their  Special  Deputy,  E.  De  La  Motta,  111.
Treas.  Gen.  H.  E.,  this  Northern  Supreme  Council  in  1813.2   Then

1  On  May  31,  1801,  the  Supreme  Council  of  the  33d  Degree  for  the  United  States  of
America  was  opened  with  the  high  honors  of  Masonry  by  Bros.  John  Mitchell  and
Frederick  Dalcho,  Sovereign  Grand  Inspectors-General  ;  and  in  the  course  of  the
year  the  whole  number  of  Grand  Inspectors-General  was  completed  agreeably  to  the
Grand  Constitutions.  The  other  members  of  this  Grand  Council  admitted  in  1801  were
Emanuel  De  La  Motta,  Dr.  J.  Auld,  Dr.  James  Moultrie,  Abraham  Alexander,  M.  C.  Livy,
Thomas  B.  Bowen,  and  J.  De  Lieban.

2  The  Supreme  Grand  Council  for  the  Northern  Jurisdiction  of  the  United  States
was  founded  on  August  5,  1 813,  by  the  M.  111.  Brothers  E.  De  La  Motta,  "  Special  Dep-
uty-Representative "  from  the  said  Supreme  Grand  Council  at  Charleston,  Daniel  D.
Tompkins,  S.  Simson,  John  J.  J.  Gourgas,  Richard  Riker,  J.  G.  Tardy,  and  M.  L.  M.
Peixotto.  In  the  words  of  a  manifesto  issued  by  the  last-named  council,  dated  August
2,  1845,  the  establishment  of  our  Northern  Supreme  Council  is  shown  "by  authenticated
documents  in  the  possession  of  this  (the  Charleston)  Council,  in  accordance  with  the
Secret  Constitutions,  by  Emanuel  De   La  Motta  as  the  Representative  and  under  the

118

i874  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

the  Northern  and  Southern  Jurisdictions  were  defined  and  regu-
lated. A  candid  review  of  all  the  acts  of  the  constitutional  regula-
tors and  governors  of  our  Rite  in  these  United  States  cannot  fail  to
establish  the  falsity  of  this  charge  of  interference  on  their  part.  If
I  am  not  much  mistaken,  they  have  been  "more  sinned  against  than
sinning."  If  we  have  not  claimed  the  benefit  of  the  legal  maxims,
Quod  prius  est,  verius  est,  et  quod  prius  est  tempore,  potius  est
jure,  it  has  not  been  because  we  were  not  entitled  to  this  benefit.

On  December  4,  1802,  our  Southern  Supreme  Council  pub-
lished a  report  from  which  I  make  the  following  extracts.  They
speak  for  themselves :

"  Although  many  of  the  Sublime  degrees  are  in  fact  a  continu-
ation of  the  Blue  degrees,  yet  there  is  no  interference l  between  the
two  bodies.  Throughout  the  continent  of  Europe  and  the  West
Indies,  where  they  are  very  generally  known,  they  are  acknowledged
and  encouraged.  The  Sublime  Masons  never  initiate  any  into  the
Blue  degrees,  without  a  legal  warrant  obtained  for  that  purpose
from  a  Symbolic  Grand  Lodge  ;  but  they  communicate  the  secrets
of  the  chair  to  such  applicants  as  have  not  already  received  them,
previous  to  their  initiation  into  the  Sublime  Lodge ;  yet  they  are
at  the  same  time   informed    that   it  does   not  give  them  rank  as

sanction  and  authority  of  the  Council  at  Charleston.  The  Masonic  Jurisdiction  of  the
Northern  Council  is  distributed  over  the  Northern,  North-western,  and  North-eastern
parts  of  the  United  States.  And  this,  with  the  Council  at  Charleston,  are  the  only
recognized  Councils  which  exist  or  can  exist,  according  to  the  Secret  Constitutions,  in  the
United  States.  Their  labors  have  never  been  suspended,  though  withdrawn  for  a  time
from  the  public  eye — their  authority  has  never  been,  and  cannot  be,  abrogated.  They
hold  in  their  archives  certified  copies  of  the  Secret  Constitutions,  derived  from  the
Grand  Consistory  held  at  Paris  in  1761.  Their  succession  of  officers  and  members  has
been  regularly  and  duly  continued,  and  the  Great  Light  of  '  Sublime  Masonry,'  which  has
been  confided  to  their  keeping,  like  the  sacred  fire  of  the  Vestals,  has  been  preserved
unextinguished  on  their  altars."

1  "  In  deference  to  the  Constitution  of  the  York  Rite  practiced  in  this  country,  it  waves
its  rights  and  privileges,  so  far  as  they  relate  to  the  first  three  degrees  of  Ancient  Craft
Masonry,  which  long  before  the  establishment  of  any  Supreme  Council  in  this  hemisphere,
were  under  the  control  of  Symbolic  Grand  Lodges."  See  circular  letters  of  both  Northern
and  Southern  Supreme  Councils,  1845.  "  The  object  of  the  Supreme  Council  is  not  to  in-
terfere with  the  rights  of  any  other  bodies,  but  simply  to  preserve  from  decay  or  innova-
tion those  Sublime  truths  and  ineffable  mysteries  which,  while  they  throw  a  brighter  light
upon  the  pure  system  of  Ancient  Craft  Masonry,  can  be  attained  only  by  those  who  have
sought  for  light  in  the  deepest  recesses  of  the  Masonic  Temple.  They  ask,  therefore,
as  the  legal  guardians  of  these  invaluable  treasures,  the  sympathy  and  fraternal  kindness
of  their  Brethren,  to  whom  they  take  this  occasion  of  offering  the  right  hand  of  brotherly
love  and  affection." — Charleston  Circular,  1845.

SCOTTISH    RITE   IN   THE   UNITED   STATES  1875

Past  Masters  in  the  Grand  Lodge."1  "On  January  21,  1802,
a  warrant  of  constitution  passed  the  seal  of  the  Grand  Council
of  Princes  of  Jerusalem  for  the  establishment  of  a  Master  Mark
Mason's  Lodge  in  the  City  of  Charleston,  S.  C."  "  Besides  those
degrees,  which  are  in  regular  succession,  most  of  the  Inspectors  are
in  possession  of  a  number  of  detached  degrees  given  in  different
parts  of  the  world  ;  and  which  they  generally  communicate  free  of
expense,  to  those  Brethren  who  are  high  enough  to  understand
them.  Such  as  select  Masons  of  27,  etc.,  making  in  the  aggregate
fifty-three  degrees."  As  to  the  Mark  and  Past  Master's  Degrees,  all
authority  over  them  was  surrendered  to  the  R.  A.  Chapters,  at  that
time  springing  into  existence.  Independent  lodges  of  Mark  Mas-
ter Masons  having  no  governing  head  were  afterward  established  in
this  country,  and  continued  in  operation  for  a  series  of  years ;  until
the  Gen.  Grand  Chapter  assumed  jurisdiction  over  both  the  Mark
and  Past  Master's  Degrees  as  "honorary  grades,"  and  incorporated
them  into  their  system.

No !  Brethren,  the  intermeddling  complained  of,  lies  at  the
door  of  the  spurious  bodies  established  by  the  impostor  Joseph
Cerneau,  et  id  omne  genus,  progeniesque,  whose  illegitimate  works
are  ever  and  anon  exhumed  and  revamped  for  sinister  purposes.
It  ought,  methinks,  to  be  a  sufficient  refutation  of  the  charge  of
our  intermeddling  with  other  departments  of  Masonry,  that  the
leading  Brethren  of  both  our  Northern  and  Southern  Supreme
Councils,  ever  since  their  establishment,  have  been  active  leaders  in
Symbolic  Grand  Lodges,  Grand  Chapters  of  R.  A.  Masons,  and
Grand  Encampments  of  Knights  Templar,  the  only  other  depart-
ments of  Freemasonry  in  our  land  which  we  recognize  and  ac-
knowledge.

"  No  Masonic  power  professing  our  Rite,  or  any  of  its  depend-
ent associations,  can,  under  any  pretence  whatever,  amalgamate  or
associate  by  representation  or  otherwise,  with  any  other  power,  or
with  any  association  depending  on  any  other  Rite,  nor  consent  to
become  a  section  or  dependence  thereof,  without  renouncing  the
object  of  its  institution,  and  losing  de  facto  its  sovereign  attributes."
This  fundamental  law  applicable  to  any  department  of  Freemasonry
is  a  truism,  and  surely  needs  no  argument  to  support  it.

1  This  practice  was  never  adopted  by  the  regular  "  Sublime  Freemasons  "  in  this
Northern  Jurisdiction.

1876  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

I  -jti  well  persuaded  that  our  Supreme  Grand  Council  will  ever
continue,  as  it  has  heretofore  done,  to  illustrate  the  truth  of  one  of
its  own  sentiments,  that  "  Sublime  Freemasonry  is  unobtrusive,  a
divine  manna  for  the  clear-sighted  to  gather — everyone  according  to
his  own  taste  and  ability."  We  claim  not  to  keep  the  vineyards  of
others,  and  we  challenge  to  the  proof  that  we  have  ever  trenched
upon  them.  And  while  we  guard,  as  we  are  bound  to  do,  our  own
possessions,  we  hope  to  be  permitted  to  sit  peaceful  and  undisturbed
"  under  our  own  vine  and  Jig-tree  "  /

The  institution  of  the  official  dignity  of  Sovereign  Grand  In-
spector-General, in  1786,  and  the  adoption  of  the  constitutional
provisions,  by  which,  on  the  decease  of  the  great  Frederick,  his
authority  and  duties  over  our  order  in  both  hemispheres  were  trans-
ferred to  a  limited  number  of  Brethren  in  each  nation,  operated
practically  as  a  distribution  among  many  Brethren  of  the  high  Ma-
sonic powers  and  prerogatives,  originally  possessed  by  one  Grand
Master.  Notwithstanding  the  numerous  efforts  made  to  enlighten
Brethren  as  to  the  true  nature  of  the  33d  Degree  "governing
itself  and  all  others  "  of  our  said  Rite,  and  conferring  rights  and
powers,  and  imposing  duties  "  agreeably  to  the  Grand  Constitu-
tions "  of  our  order,  of  an  executive  character,1  it  is  still  generally

1 1  will  fortify  my  statement  with  that  of  our  M.  Puis.  Bro.  Dalcho,  whose  authority  in
a  matter  of  this  kind  cannot  be  gainsaid.  I  quote  from  page  116,  appendix  to  his  ora-
tion delivered  before  tht  Sublime  Grand  Lodge  of  Charleston,  S.  C,  March  21,  1803.
"  By  the  Constitution  of  the  Order,  which  was  ratified  on  October  25,  1762,  the  King  of
Prussia  was  proclaimed  as  the  chief  of  the  Eminent  Degrees,  with  the  rank  of  Sovereign
Grand  Inspector-General  and  Grand  Commander.  The  higher  Councils  and  Chapters
could  not  be  opened  without  his  presence  or  that  of  his  substitute,  whom  he  must  appoint.
All  the  transactions  of  the  Consistory  of  the  thirty-second  degree  required  his  sanction,  or
that  of  his  substitute,  to  establish  their  legality  ;  and  many  other  prerogatives  were  at-
tached to  his  Masonic  rank.  No  provision,  however,  had  been  made  in  the  Constitutions
for  the  appointment  of  his  successor  ;  and,  as  it  was  an  office  of  the  highest  importance,
the  utmost  caution  was  necessary  to  prevent  an  improper  person  from  obtaining  it.  The
King,  being  conscious  of  this,  established  the  thirty-third  degree.  Nine  Brethren  in
each  nation,  from  the  Supreme  Council  of  Grand  Inspectors-General,  alter  his  decease
possessed  all  his  Masonic  prerogatives  and  power  over  the  Craft.  They  are  the  Execu-
tive Body  of  the  Masonic  Fraternity,  and  their  approval  is  now  necessary  to  the  acts  of
the  Consistory,  before  they  can  become  laws  ;  and  from  their  decision  there  can  be
no  appeal."

In  1825  I  received  from  Moses  Holbrook,  M.D.,  at  that  time  Sov.  Grand  Commander
of  the  Charleston  Supreme  Council,  a  letter  in  answer  to  some  inquiries  relative  to  the
subject  in  question,  from  which  letter  I  make  the  following  extracts  :  "  All  the  transac-
tions of  S.P.R.S.  required  the  sanction  of  Frederick  William  II.  (who  had  for  many
years  been  the  head  and  patron  of  the  Order),  or  that  of  his  substitute,  to  establish  their

SCOTTISH    RITE    IN    THE   UNITED   STATES  1877

but  most  erroneously  considered  as  an  "  honorary "  distinction
merely,  and  as  an  ordinary  degree  in  Freemasonry  ;  and  one  to
which  all  Brethren  having  the  usual  qualifications  required  for  initi-
ation into  most  of  the  lower  degrees  have  a  right  to  aspire.

The  tenure  of  office  in  a  Supreme  Grand  Council  being  for
life,  a  seat  in  such  a  body  can  be  vacated  only  by  death,  resigna-
tion, or  removal  from  its  jurisdiction.  This  is  a  fundamental  law,
and  may  not  be  changed,  though  its  inevitable  tendency  is  to  ex-
clude from  our  little  circle  some  good,  true,  and  worthy  Brethren,
who  would,  no  doubt,  adorn  our  assemblies,  and  prove  faithful  con-
servators, regulators,  and  governors  of  our  Rite.

By  being  tenacious  of  official  station,  I  may  be  the  means  of  ex-
cluding Brethren  whose  councils  are  needed  ;  and  I  may  also  stand
in  the  way  of  the  just  preferment  of  my  compeers.  Moved  by
reasons  like  these  I  have  named,  and  desirous  of  setting  an  exam-
ple, which  if  discreetly  followed  may,  without  violation  of  our  or-
ganic laws,  serve  in  a  degree  to  modify  what  is,  albeit  without  good
reason,  deemed  too  exclusive  a  feature  in  our  "sublime  system,"  I
nave  concluded  to  resign  the  official  station  I  now  hold  in  this
council.  There  are  other  considerations  also  which  induce  me  to
adopt  this  course.

By  a  constitutional  regulation  of  our  order,  the  office  of  chief
custodian  of  our  archives  devolves  upon  the  Sov.  Grand  Command-
er, who  should,  for  this  and  analogous  reasons  well  understood  by
us,  be  a  resident  of  one  of  the  Easts  in  our  jurisdiction.     Living  as

legality.  Many  other  prerogatives  were  attached  to  his  Masonic  rank  ;  and  not  least  in
the  consideration  of  the  day,  it  was  thought  that  in  the  United  States,  just  emerged  from
the  thraldom  of  the  mother  country,  after  a  long  and  arduous  struggle  for  their  liberty,  it
would  be  highly  improper  to  have  the  Masonic  head  and  jurisdiction  over  the  Ineffable
and  Sublime  degrees  in  another  country,  and  to  pay  allegiance  of  any  kind  to  a  foreign
potentate.  These  difficulties,  added  to  the  importance  attached  to  the  highest  office  in
Freemasonry,  and  the  very  great  caution  necessary  to  prevent  an  unsuitable  person  from
obtaining  an  office  so  respectable,  influential,  and  important,  weighed  with  the  King  and
the  high  Consistory  over  which  he  presided.  Upon  reading  the  respectful  petitions  and
statements  made  to  them  during  the  years  1784  and  1785,  the  subject  was  referred  to  a
highly  learned  and  able  committee,  who  reported  this  degree  (thirty-third)  to  constitute
nine  S.P.R.S.  in  each  nation,  a  Supreme  Council  of  Sovereign  Grand  Inspectors-General;
and  they  being  duly  organized,  accredited,  and  approved,  should  at  his  decease  possess
all  his  Masonic  prerogatives  over  the  concerns  of  the  Craft  within  the  country  or  territory
over  which  their  jurisdiction  extended;  and  their  appointment  was  ad  vitam.  They  be-
came the  Executive  Body  of  the  Masonic  Fraternity  within  their  territory.  This  arrange-
ment annulled  all  former  powers  granted  to  individuals  (Dep.  Ins. -Gen.)  in  different
parts  of  the  world."

1878  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

I  do  in  the  interior  of  my  native  State,  it  is  not  meet  for  me  to
become  such  custodian.  Our  archives,  valuable  and  voluminous,
should  have  a  fixed  and  permanent  depository,  under  the  charge  of
their  constitutional  guardian.

My  association  for  a  quarter  of  a  century  with  this  Supreme
Grand  Council,  and  my  active  participation  in  its  works  and  ad-
ministrative duties,  I  have  spoken  of  in  my  antecedent  remarks.
I  avert  to  the  fact  again,  and  in  this  connection,  to  remind  you,
that  it  places  me  before  you  in  such  a  position  as  to  render,  in  a
measure  applicable  to  my  own  case,  the  reason  for  abdication  ad-
vanced by  my  venerable  predecessor,  deducible  from  his  long  term
of  service.

My  much  esteemed  compeer,  your  *'  Most  Illustrious  Inspector
Lieutenant  Grand  Commander,"  Edward  A.  Raymond,  in  the  event
of  my  abdication  of  the  presidency  of  this  council,  is  pointed  out
by  the  constitutions  as  my  successor.  It  gratifies  me  to  reflect
that  such  is  the  case.  If  there  were  no  constitutional  provision
restricting  my  duty  in  the  emergency  named,  and  the  selection  of
my  successor  were  left  to  my  own  free  choice,  I  could  not  make
a  selection  more  congenial  to  my  feelings,  or  more  in  accordance
with  my  convictions  of  duty.  I  have  known  him  for  three  times
three  years  twice  told  as  a  "  Brother  of  the  mystic  tie,"  and  a
possessor  of  "the  high  degrees."  His  Masonic  age  and  experience,
derived  from  long  and  repeated  services  as  a  ruler  in  other  depart-
ments of  Masonry,1  and  the  satisfaction  he  has  given  to  his  com-
panions in  the  discharge  of  his  administerial  duties,  afford  an  ear-
nest that  he  will  not  be  found  wanting  as  a  chief  administrator  in
our  "Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite."  I  am  assured  that  he  has  the
requirements  demanded  by  our  Book  of  Constitutions,  that  he
"  can  be  entirely  depended  on,  that  his  discretion  is  proof  against
all  trials,  his  capacity  acknowledged,  and  his  probity  untouched."

In  1859  the  ambition  of  one  man  caused  some  trouble  in  this
Supreme  Council.  Grand  Commander  Raymond  contended  that
"  the  powers  of  Frederick  were  vested  in  him  as  Grand  Com-
mander and  not  in  the  Council  as  a  body."  He  had  conferred
the  33d   Degree  upon   Paul  Dean,  and  the  Supreme  Council  had

1  Bro.  Raymond  is  the  present  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts,
and  has  been  at  the  head  of  the  Grand  Chapter  Encampment  of  Massachusetts  (1851).

SCOTTISH   RITE   IN   THE   UNITED   STATES         1879

tacitly  recognized  him  as  a  member.  In  i860  an  extra  session  was
held,  and  the  controversy  with  the  Grand  Commander  reached  the
climax.

The  Grand  Commander  refused  to  put  certain  motions.  A
motion  was  made  to  close  the  council,  to  be  opened  at  four  o'clock  ;
this  he  refused  to  put,  and  declared  the  council  closed  until  ten
o'clock  on  the  following  morning.

At  that  hour  the  council  was  opened  and  the  minutes  read,
whereupon  the  Grand  Commander  declared  the  council  closed  sine
die.

Some  of  the  members  (five)  conferred  together,  and  being  advised
by  Gourgas,  reopened  the  council  and  proceeded  with  the  business.

Upon  the  report  of  a  committee  on  rules,  etc.,  previously  ap-
pointed, the  council  adopted  the  Constitutions  of  i860.

The  record  of  this  session  was  signed  by  Van  Rensselaer,  who
was  elected  Lieutenant  Grand  Commander,  Starkweather,  Moore,
Christie,  Case,  and  Young.  A  preamble  and  resolution  were
adopted,  deposing  the  Grand  Commander  in  effect.  Gourgas,
Turner,  Bull,  and  Hubbard  formally  approved  the  proceedings  ;
Carson  also  did  so  with  some  qualifications.

The  Grand  Commander,  Raymond,  disregarded  the  action  of
these  members  after  he  had  left  the  council.  Both  parties  published
the  proceedings  of  i860,  those  for  the  regular  session  being  alike,
Raymond's  being  a  record  of  his  action  in  conferring  the  33d  De-
gree upon  Lawson,  Starkweather,  and  Field,  who,  it  is  alleged,
by  him  were  elected  in  1857.  It  is  said,  however,  that  the  records
of  1857  show  only  the  election  of  Starkweather.

Both  of  these  factions  continued  to  operate  ;  we  shall  not,  how-
ever, dwell  upon  the  minutiae,  but  state  that  the  Van  Rensselaer
body  grew  in  numbers  and  importance.  There  was  a  large  acces-
sion in  1862  of  very  distinguished  and  prominent  Masons;  among
these  were  Josiah  H.  Drummond,  of  Maine,  and  Benjamin  Dean,
of  Massachusetts,  both  of  whom  subsequently  became  Grand  Com-
manders ;  Hubbard,  who  had  been  elected  Grand  Commander,  having
positively  declined  to  serve,  Van  Rensselaer  was  chosen.  Raymond
and  Robinson  having  been  summoned  to  attend,  and  failing  to  ap-
pear, were  tried  and  expelled.

Notwithstanding  the  controversies  between  these  two  bodies,
the  Van  Rensselaer  body  continued  to  prosper  until  1867.     With

m

M.

%y  A  Ufai.

&n>v!,  lie  tiriaU  «f'4Ae  Skpreme  //rand  Council  0/  Soverm'yn  rfirand  xfiurpttltot*  effeneral  of  Itte  33d  and  last  SHffr»
«/  the  erfneunl  and  <sSteeept-ed  ffltte,  fcrr  t/i*  Waited  States  0/  egtmerica/'tMir  Serritoriet  and  SBependetusiet,  whet*'
Soared  tifcyhem  M  ttneath  tAe  0. .  0.  ,  at  the  ty.\  <0fv  c/t&e  X:.,  tutor  tfo  SB..  M: ,  eorrespmdin?  with  40"  42": 40"
3f  &at.,  and  r  0'  Sr"  £  JtSm.

Be  it  Known,  c/2a/ **  4&  /ftf  £uc/j/t  &&£m  ■Mentf  9%dat,  &4vm  Q>flbJt\
£6££,    luututwty.    &   Me  jftt   dap    a/  ^e/uut-if,    /££$,  /%?.     W /  «9  tcfatfrx  at&ofa,  Om

ANCIENT  AND  ACCEPTED  RITE  Jm  tie  GJZtdLt  Jmufafo*.  V ' t&    tftiuAd'   S&&  J  &&m«*,  itftiy2*t

y  Me  <&&a   eat/  /&>/  £2yeau$    0/  /foe   Q/F     aw/-  G?t  .    <£%ae  yw   4u     owu&/    cT&fa  cf   Q/msue&f   &ea

Veu

'awn.

Be  it  further  Known,  g^/  /£  de&tiwm  Q^?***^*    &taW  G£fat/ji

tSL:  EDMUND  B, -HAYS—A/.-.  P.:  Sot,.:  Cr.:  Coamomtr.

"  EDW4KD  A.  RAYMOND— Atst.:  Sn:\  Cr.:  Cam.:

-  SIMON   W.   ROBrNSON— \Jt  LiaiL:  Cr.:  Cam.:

-  HOPKINS  THOMPSON— 2d  luiit:  O.:  Cam.:
"  BENJAMIN  C  LEVERIDCE—  Cr.-.  Orator.

<-  CEOEGE  M.  VAUDALL-Cr.^Ma^  <,/ Slate.  •

-  LUCIUS  R.  PAIGE-Cr.-.  daaalbr.

-  DANIEL  SICKELS—  C:  Stc.:  Corral  H.:  £.:

-  ROBERT  E.  ROBERTS—  (Jr.:  Tr'ts.:  0*l:  H.:  £.-.

B.-.  HENRY  C  BANKS— Cr.:  Marjhal  CrvrtL

*  AARON  P.   HUGHES—  Cr.:  Stcord  Brora.

*  H.  J.  SEYMOUR— I/f  Cr.-  Mai.-  of  Cor.:

"  CHARLES  T.  McCLENACHAN—  2d  Cr.:  Hal.:  of  dr.:

•  PETER  LAWSON—  Or.:  Ex.:  Utradnclar.
m>  ]OHN'INN£3 — Cr.:  Stu-ndad  Bearvr.

"   VM.  FIELD—  \ft  Cr.:  Cafil.:  of  At  Gmard.

•  WILLIAM  H.  JARV1S—  2d  dr.:  Copt  .  of  Ou  'Jvtrd.

%^£)/f  wfaea  ta  d&emteteiiAta,  am/ ett/tted  fr  <&  Jiam/avJ/gi/ /?  wZt?m>  */  may  cettcetn.

Done  at  the  Grand  EafV,  ffKm  S/orh  0ily,  thtt  eih  day  0/  tli*  S&irew  mcn-lh  engdar^
l£— ^  0$:.  c3?.\  seza,  amnoerinp  to  SHareA  7st,  7863  ffi:.  "2?. ./

Id  Testimony  of  all  which  t/  aave  hereunto  tet  my  J^and-,  and  eatMed  the  Seal  cf  the
t$7/pre?/ie  rfrand.  'Souneil  to  ie  affined.

dttot.

&&

UNIVERSI    TERRARUM    ORBIS   ARCHITECTONIC
PER  GLORIAM    INGENTIS.

Deus  Meumque  Jus.      Ordo  ab   Chao.

From  the  Orient  of  the  Supreme  Grand  Council  of  Sovereign  Grand  Inspectors  Gen-
eral  of  the  33d  and  last  Degree  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite,  for  the  United
States  of  America,  their  Territories  and  Dependencies,  whose  Sacred  Asylum  is
beneath  the  C.\  C.\,  at  the  V.\  P.\  of  the  Z.'.,  near  the  B.'.  B.'.,  corre-
sponding with  400  42'  40"  N.  Lat.,  and  2°  d  57"  E.  Lon.

To    ALL    TO    WHOM    THESE    PRESENTS    SHALL   COME,    GREETING  :

Be  it  Known,  That  on  the  17th  day  of  the  Hebrew  month
Shebat,  Anno  Mundi  5623,  answering  to  the  7th  day  of  February,
1863  (E.  V.),  by  solemn  articles,  the  Supreme  Council  of  Sover-
eign Grand  Inspectors  General  of  the  33d  and  last  Degree  of  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite  for  the  Northern  Jurisdiction  of  the
United  States  of  America,  sitting  at  Boston,  was  duly  consolidated
with  the  Supreme  Grand  Council  of  Sovereign  Grand  Inspectors
General  of  the  33d  and  last  Degree  of  the  A.  and  A.  Rite  for  the
United  States  of  America,  their  Territories  and  Dependencies,  sit-
ting at  New  York,  upon  terms  honorable  and  just  alike  to  all  par-
ties interested  therein.

Be  it  further  Known,  That  the  following  Sovereign  Grand  In-
spectors General,  in  pursuance  of  such  consolidation,  comprise  the
Officers  of  the  Supreme  Grand  Council  for  the  United  States  of
America,  their  Territories  and  Dependencies.  They  will  be  recog-
nized and  respected  accordingly.

111.-.  EDMUND  B.   HAYS— M.:  P.:  Sov.:  Gr.:  Commander.
EDWARD  A.   RAYMOND— Asst. :  Sov. :  Gr.:  Com.:
SIMON  W.   ROBINSON— \st  Lieut.:  Gr.:  Com.:
HOPKINS  THOMPSON— 2d  Lieut:  Gr.:  Com.:
BENJAMIN  C.  LEVERIDGE—  Gr. :  Orator.
GEORGE  M.  RANDALL— Gr. -.  Minister  of  State.
LUCUS  R.   PAIGE— Gr.:  Chancellor.
DANIEL  SICKELS—  Gr.  :  Sec:  General  H.:  £.:
ROBERT  E.  ROBERTS—  Gr. :  Treas.:  Gen.:  H.\  E.:
HENRY  C   BANKS— Gr.-.  Marshal  General.
AARON  P.   HUGHES— Gr.-.  Sword  Bearer.
H.  J.   SEYMOUR—  istGr.:  Mas.:  o/Cer.:
CHARLES  T.   McCLENACHAN— 2d  Gr.  :  Mas.:  of  Cer.'
PETER  LAWSON—  Gr. :  Ex. :  Introductor.
JOHN  INNES—  Gr.:  Standard  Bearer.
WM.   FIELD—  1st  Gr.:  Capt.:  of  the  Guard.
WILLIAM  H.  JARVIS—  zd  Gr.  :  Capt.:  of  the  Guard.

All  which  is  promulgated,  and  ordered  to  be  transmitted  to
whom  it  may  concern.

Done  at  the  Grand  East,  New  York  City,  this  8th  day  of  the
Hebrew  month  Adar,  A.*.  M.\  5623,  answering  to  March  1st,  1863
(E.-.  V.-.)

In  Testimony  of  all  which  I  have  hereunto  set  my  hand,  and
caused  the  Seal  of  the  Supreme  Grand  Council  to  be  affixed.
[seal.]  Edmund  B.  Hays  33.'.

Attest,  M.:  P.:  Sov.'.  G.\  Commander.

Daniel  Sickels  33^

Gr.:  Sec:  Gen.:  H.:  E.:         [seal.]

1882  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

the  exception  of  four  bodies  in  the  city  of  New  York,  which  had
been  organized  prior  to  the  schism,  all  others  continued  in  their
allegiance  to  this  body.  In  1867  there  were  twenty-eight  active
members  on  the  roll.

In  1862  three  Supreme  Councils  claimed  jurisdiction  over  the
Northern  section  of  the  United  States.  In  April,  1862,  by  the
records  of  Raymond  Council,  the  Cerneau  body,  presided  over  by
Hays,  had  made  overtures  to  the  Raymond  faction  for  a  union  of
the  two,  and  committees  were  appointed  to  meet  for  the  purpose  of
organizing  for  such  union.  January  23,  1863,  it  was  reported  to
the  Raymond  body  that  there  was  a  reasonable  prospect  of  effect-
ing the  union,  and  the  committee  was  granted  full  power  to  act.
January  19,  1863,  in  the  Hays  body  similar  action  ensued.

Under  date  of  February  7,  1863,  Articles  of  Union  were  agreed
upon  by  which  the  two  councils  were  consolidated.  The  number
of  members  was  increased  to  seventeen,  and  each  member,  and
body,  was  required  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  new  body
when  they  had  the  same  status  as  they  respectively  had  under  the
original  bodies.

Raymond,  Randall,  Paige,  Hughes,  Robinson,  Lawson,  Field,
and  McClenachan  of  the  Raymond  body  ;  and  Hays,  Thompson,
Sickles,  Roberts,  Leveridge,  Seymour,  Banks,  Jarvis,  and  Innis  of
the  Hays  body,  constituted  the  membership  of  the  united  body.
On  the  preceding  page  is  shown  the  copy  of  the  "  Article  of
Consolidation."

April  15,  1863,  Hays,  having  been  agreed  upon  as  Grand  Com-
mander, installed  the  Officers.  All  the  members  of  both  the  former
bodies  were  required  to  take  the  oath  of  fealty  to  the  newly  united
body,  hence  the  claim,  set  up  a  few  years  subsequently,  that  the
Raymond  body  was  merged  in  the  Hays  Council  is  entirely  without
foundation  ;  moreover,  when  a  few  of  the  old  Hays  Council  with-
drew from  the  united  body,  the  large  majority,  and  the  most  em-
inent Brethren,  remained  true  in  their  allegiance  to  that  body.

A  change  was  made  in  the  constitution  by  which  the  active
membership  was  increased  to  twenty-four,  besides  the  nine  officers.

The  members  of  this  united  body  became  very  active  ;  a  very
large  number  received  the  33d  Degree  ;  many  new  bodies  were  in-
stituted, particularly  in  States  where  the  Scottish  Rite  had  not  here-
tofore been  worked,  all  in  the  Northern  Jurisdiction.

SCOTTISH    RITE   IN   THE   UNITED   STATES         1883

Until  1864  the  tenure  of  office  had  always  been  ad  vitam,  but  at
the  meeting  this  year,  amendments  were  passed  for  the  triennial
election  of  the  officers  and  for  a  reduction  to  nine.

September  11,  1865,  a  session  was  held.  Communication  had
been  resumed  with  the  officials  of  the  Southern  Supreme  Council,
but  the  Hays  Council  having  declared  itself  as  having  jurisdiction  over
the  United  States,  this  body  was  not  in  a  condition  to  ask  the  recog-
nition of  the  Southern  Supreme  Council,  as  it  had  denounced  as
spurious  all  the  various  bodies  which  had  originated  in  New  York.

At  this  meeting  charges  were  presented  against  Harry  J.  Sey-
mour, who  was  Asst.  Grand  Master  of  Ceremonies.  A  committee
of  his  friends  of  the  old  Hays  body  was  appointed  to  try  these
charges.  At  a  subsequent  date  the  committee  reported.  Seymour
had  been  duly  notified  to  appear,  but  he  refused  to  do  so,  and  he
was  expelled,  as  will  be  seen  by  the  following  :

SUPREME   COUNCIL,   330
Northern  Masonic  Jurisdiction  U.  S.  A.

Gr. '.  Orient,  Boston,  Massachusetts,
OFFICE  OF  THE   SECRETARY   GEN.'.  H.\  E.\

New  York,  27    A.'.  M.\,  jdjl.

At  a  session  of  the  Supreme  Council  33*  for  the  Northern  Juris-
diction U.  S.,  held  on  the  10th  day  of  the  Hebrew  month  Elul,
Anno  Heb.  5625,  answering  to  the  nth  day  of  September,  1865,
V.  E.,  the  following  action  was  had  :

111.-.  Bro.\  C.  T.  McClenachan,  Rose  +.*.  33?  preferred  a  charge
with  three  specifications  of  the  violation  of  sundry  obligations  by
Henry  or  Harry  J.  Seymour  Rose -+-.'.  33°,  said  obligations  being
those  of  the  14? — 16° — 17? — 18° — 32°  and  33°  degrees  of  the
A.'.  A.*.  Scottish  Rite,  as  set  forth  in  the  Ritual  of  the  degrees.

The  charge  and  specifications  were  read  in  the  presence  of  the
Gr.*.  Commander,  and  the  Inspectors  General  present.

111.-.  Bro.\  Henry  C.  Banks,  Rose-f-.\  33°,  moved  that  the
charge  and  specifications  be  referred  to  a  Commission,  which  was
carried,  and  the  Gr.*.  Commander  announced

111.*.  Bros.%  Henry  C.  Banks,  33?,
John  Innes,  33?,
Hopkins  Thompson,  33?
said  commission  for  the  trial.

i884  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

At  an  adjourned  session  of  the  Sup.\  Council  for  the  Northern
Jurisdiction  of  the  U.  S.,  held  December  14,  1865,  the  Commission
rendered  the  following  report :

111.*.  Bro.  \  Banks,  chairman  of  the  commission  appointed  to  inves-
tigate certain  charges  and  specifications  presented  to  this  Supreme
Council  against  Harry  J.  Seymour,  a  past  officer  of  this  Supreme
Council,  reported  that  they  had  carefully  examined  the  said  charges
and  specifications,  and  the  proofs  thereof  ;  that  the  aforesaid  Harry
J.  Seymour  had  been  duly  notified  to  attend  the  meetings  of  the
commission  ;  had  been  served  with  a  copy  of  the  charges  and  speci-
fications ;  that  in  all  cases  he  had  refused  or  neglected  to  pay  any
attention  to  such  notices  ;  and  that  your  commission  have  arrived  at
the  conclusion  that  the  charges  and  specifications  have  been  fully
sustained,  and  offer  the  following  resolution  :

Resolved,  "That  the  said  Harrv  J.  Seymour  be,  and  he  is  hereby,
expelled  from  all  the  rights  ana  privileges  of  Masonry  in  every
branch  of  the  A.*.  A.  *.  Scottish  Rite."

Signed,  Henry  C.  Banks,  33°,       ]

John  I nnes,  33.?,  \  Committee.

Hopkins  Thompson,  33°,  )

On  motion  the  report  was  received,  and  the  resolution  unani-
mously adopted,  the  members  voting  "  viva  voce  "  by  roll-call,  be-
ginning with  the  Junior  Member.

A  true  copy  from  the  records,

Attest  :  Daniel  Sickels,  33?

[great  seal]  Gr. :  Sec.\  Gen.'.  H.  E.

A  committee  was  appointed  to  take  into  consideration  the  pro-
priety of  resuming  the  old  name,  viz.  :  the  Supreme  Council  of  the
Northern  Jurisdiction  of  the  United  States  of  America  "in  lieu  of
the  one  at  present  adopted."  Also  it  was  resolved  "  that  the  Grand
Commander  appoint  one  or  more  delegates  to  repair  to  Charleston,
South  Carolina,  at  the  meeting  of  the  Southern  Supreme  Council."
The  report  of  the  committee  was  unanimously  adopted  in  favor
of  resuming  the  old  name  of  the  "  Supreme  Council  of  the  North-
ern Jurisdiction  of  the  United  States."  Thus  it  appears  that  this
Supreme  Council,  composed  of  the  most  distinguished  Masons
among  the  old  members  of  the  two  councils,  fully  recognized  the
Supreme  Council  of  the  Southern  Jurisdiction.

SCOTTISH    RITE   IN   THE   UNITED   STATES         1885

Brothers  Paige  and  McClenachan  had  visited  the  council  at
Charleston  and  an  oral  report  was  made  to  the  Supreme  Council,
December  14,  1865,  but  it  does  not  appear  on  record.  Hays  re-
signed his  office  of  Grand  Commander,  and  Robinson  was  elected.
It  is  generally  inferred  that  the  Southern  Supreme  Council  did
not  agree  that  they  would  enter  into  recognition  with  a  council
whose  chief  officer  was  not  considered  a  regular  member  of  the
Scottish  Rite,  and  had  denied  the  regularity  of  the  union,  and  Ray-
mond being  dead,  Robinson  was  his  successor.  As  above  shown,
the  election  of  Robinson  followed,  so  that  both  by  election  and
succession  his  title  would  be  perfect.  The  record  says :  "  A
majority  of  all  the  officers  and  active  members  of  the  Supreme
Council  were  present."  Lucius  R.  Paige  was  appointed  to  visit
the  Southern  Supreme  Council  at  their  meeting  held  April  16
1866.

At  the  meeting  of  the  council  held  in  New  York  June  5,  1866,
in  the  address  of  Robinson,  Grand  Commander,  he  stated  that  the
Raymond  Council  was  forced  into  the  union  with  the  Hays  Coun-
cil for  self-preservation,  and  referred  to  the  Brethren  the  question  of
securing  friendly  relations  with  the  Southern  Supreme  Council.

At  the  Southern  Supreme  Council  meeting  held  April  6,  1866,
the  Grand  Commander  entered  at  some  length  upon  the  occurrences
in  the  Northern  Jurisdiction,  which  was  placed  in  the  hands  of  a
committee,  whose  report  was  in  consonance  with  the  views  of  the
Grand  Commander.

The  report  of  the  committee  was  to  the  following  effect,  namely,
that  Robinson  had  been  duly  appointed  Lieutenant  Grand  Com-
mander by  Raymond  before  the  deposition  of  the  latter ;  and  hence
if  Raymond  had  been  legally  deposed,  Robinson,  on  his  deposition,
would  naturally  succeed  him  as  Grand  Commander,  and  if  Raymond
had  not  been  legally  deposed,  still  Robinson,  now  that  Raymond
was  dead,  would  be  his  legitimate  successor.  The  report  added
that  the  only  legitimate  members  of  the  council  at  the  time,  after  the
death  of  Hubbard,  were  Moore,  Case,  Young,  and  Starkweather ,
that  both  of  the  factions  had  acted  in  a  manner  that  was  illegal  and
neither  of  them  could  be  recognized.  This  decision  did  not  find
general  acceptance  and  was  challenged  on  the  allegation  that  the  as-
sumption that  the  Northern  Supreme  Council  could  have  only  nine
members  was  erroneous  in  point  of   law.     Whether  this  assumption

1886  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

by  the  committee  was  or  was  not  erroneous  is  a  matter  of  no  mo-
ment at  this  time,  as  it  is  generally  admitted  that  the  Northern
Supreme  Council  had  the  right  to  increase  at  pleasure  the  number
of  its  active  members.

The  Northern  Supreme  Council,  upon  a  summons  from  the
Grand  Commander,  Robinson,  met  in  Boston  December  n,  1866.
Moore,  Case,  Starkweather,  and  Young,  although  included  in  the
summons,  did  not  appear,  and  Robinson  declared  their  seats  vacant ;
thereupon,  being  himself  as  the  only  member,  he  then  proceeded  to
fill  the  vacancies  according  to  the  provisions  of  the  Constitution  of
1786.  There  were  then  present  twelve  of  the  active  and  ten  of
the  honorary  members  of  the  united  council.  The  Grand  Com-
mander said  that  he  was  acting  "  with  the  unanimous  consent  of
every  member  of  that  council."

The  legal  effect  of  these  proceedings  was  a  reorganization  of  the
United  Council,  just  as  if  the  officers  and  members  had  elected
themselves  again.  In  form,  no  doubt,  there  was  a  dissolution  of  the
United  Council,  and  the  organization  of  a  new  council,  but  the  sub-
stance was  as  stated  above.  All  members  had  the  same  status,  no
new  oath  was  required,  everyone  was  recognized  as  Grand  Inspec-
tor-General, all  the  acts  of  the  United  Council  were  confirmed,  and
its  actions  of  every  kind  recognized  as  still  in  full  force.  In  every
way  the  proceedings  were  nothing  more  or  less  than  a  formal  reor-
ganization of  an  existing  body  in  deference  to  the  requirements  of
the  Southern  Supreme  Council.  But  although  the  action  of  the
committee  was  intended  to  meet  the  wishes  of  the  Southern  Supreme
Council,  it  did  not  satisfy  the  latter  body,  which  desired  to  effect
a  perfect  union,  and  had  hoped  to  see  the  five  members  whom  it
had  decided  to  be  active  members  uniting  in  the  action  to  be  taken.
The  position  of  the  New  York  Council  was  therefore  still  in  doubt.
In  December,  1866,  it  published  a  full  report  of  its  proceedings ;  and
it  had  already  adopted  a  resolution,  with  a  view  to  securing  a  union
with  the  Boston  Council,  which  was  a  copy  of  the  one  previously
adopted  with  the  same  view  to  union,  by  the  Boston  body.

The  committees  appointed  were  as  follows :  Boston  Council,
Evans,  of  New  York,  Woodbury,  of  Massachusetts,  Drummond,
of  Maine,  Ely,  of  Ohio,  Foss,  of  Illinois,  Harmon  G.  Reynolds,
of  Illinois,  an  Honorary  Member,  and  later  Gardner,  of  Massa-
chusetts.    New  York   Council,  Lewis    Paige,    McClenachan,   and

SCOTTISH   RITE   IN   THE   UNITED   STATES         1887

Sickles,  of  New  York,  Paige,  of  Massachusetts,  Palmer,  of  Wis-
consin, and  Barrett,  of  New  Hampshire.

These  two  committees  met  in  May,  1 867,  a  short  time  before
the  annual  session  of  the  Boston  Council.  There  was  considerable
discussion  as  to  the  details  of  the  union,  although  the  general  terms
were  soon  settled.  Local  interests  as  well  as  personal  considerations
created  such  difficulties  that  at  one  moment  it  seemed  as  if  the
negotiations  would  have  to  be  broken  off ;  indeed  so  hopeless  was
the  outlook  that  several  members  left  their  seats,  prepared  to  quit
the  room.  Then,  to  quote  Drummond's  account,  "a  brother  invited
all  to  4  break  bread  together,'  and  insisted  that  all  should  accept  the
invitation."  Before  they  returned  to  the  committee-room  every-
thing had  been  satisfactorily  arranged.  The  report  was  signed  by
all  the  members  of  the  two  committees,  and  adopted  by  the  unani-
mous vote  of  each  body,  and  the  approval  of  the  honorary  members.
The  two  councils  met  as  equals,  and  all  their  previous  actions  were
held  to  be  valid,  "  except  expulsions  on  account  of  former  differ-
ences," which  were  rescinded.  Each  council  consisted  of  twenty-
eight  active  members,  the  New  York  Council  consenting  to  the
admission  of  Charles  Levi  Woodbury,  of  Massachusetts,  "  in  recog-
nition of  his  services  in  bringing  about  the  union."

The  two  bodies  by  a  concurrent  vote  met  as  one  council.  The
two  great  commanders,  Killian  H.  van  Rensselaer,  of  the  New  York,
and  John  L.  Lewis,  of  the  Boston  Council,  then  conducted  the
Grand  Commander  elect  of  the  united  body  to  the  altar,  and  admin-
istered to  him  the  oath  of  fealty  in  the  presence  of  the  members  of
the  Supreme  Council.  In  his  turn  the  Grand  Commander  admin-
istered the  oath  to  all  the  members  present.  Other  officers  were
then  elected  and  installed,  and  a  constitution  was  adopted,  and  the
Northern  Supreme  Council  was  fully  organized.

Until  1872  harmony  prevailed  in  the  Northern  Jurisdiction.  In
that  year  H.  J.  Seymour,  who  had  been  expelled  in  1 86 — ,  put  for-
ward a  claim  that  Hayss  when  Grand  Commander  of  the  "rump
Council "  of  the  Cerneanites,  had  given  him  a  patent  empowering
him  to  create  33d  Degree  Masons  and  to  institute  a  Supreme  Coun-
cil. He  had  previously,  however,  authorized  an  application  to  Grand
Commander  Drummond  to  be  reinstated  in  all  his  rights  as  a  mem-
ber of  the  Supreme  Council,  on  condition  of  his  surrendering  all  his
papers  to  the  Supreme  Council.     It  was  after  the  rejection  of  this

1838  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

application  that  Seymour  began  his  active  work,  and  the  success  of
his  efforts,  limited  as  it  was,  encouraged  others  who  had  been  mem-
bers of  the  old  Hays  Council,  before  the  union  with  the  Northern
Council,  to  start  an  annexation,  styled  "  Cernean  Supreme  Council
revived."  These  men,  Hopkins  Thompson,  Robert  Folger  and
others,  had  been  members  of  the  United  Council  reorganized  in
1867  and  had  remained  therein  till  1881,  and  now  set  the  claim  that
in  December,  1866,  the  Union  Council  was,  and  that  all  the  mem-
bers were,  released  from  their  allegiance  to  it.  They  did  not  deny
that  they  had  taken  the  oath  of  fealty  to  the  reorganized  United
Council,  and  had  been  loyal  members  for  fourteen  years,  but  they
pleaded  that  their  conduct  arose  from  their  ignorance  of  the  pro-
ceedings of  the  council  in  1866,  and  therefore  they  claimed  to  be  a
revival  of  the  old  Hays  Council.  As  such  they  claimed  also  juris-
diction over  the  Southern  territorv,  a  claim  which  Thompson  and
Folger  and  others  had  unanimously  surrendered  in  1867.  They
deny  also  the  loyalty  of  the  Southern  Supreme  Council,  which  is
everywhere  accepted  as  the  "  Mother  Council  of  the  World, '  and
the  source  from  which  came  the  33d  and  last  degree.

No  regular  Supreme  Council  has  ever  been  acknowledged  as
cither  the  Cernean  Supreme  Council  revived  or  the  Seymour
association.

SCOTTISH    RITE   IN   THE   UNITED   STATES

1889

Supreme  Council  A.'.  A.'.  S.\  R.'.  of  the  Southern  Jurisdiction  of  the  United  States  of

America.

The  following  Exhibit  shows  the  number  of  Active  and  Honorary  33ds  and
It.  C  :  C  :  H  :  's  ;  the  number  of  14th  and  32d  Degree  Members  ;  the  num-
ber of  Lodges,  Chapters,  Councils,  Consistories,  and  Grand  Consistories.

ORIENT.

Alabama

Arizona

Arkansas

California

Colorado

District  of  Columbia  .

Florida

Georgia

Hawaiian  Islands  ....

Idaho ,

Indian  Territory ,

Iowa

japan

Kansas

Kentucky

Louisiana

Maryland

Minnesota

Mississippi

Missouri

Montana

Nebraska

Nevada

New  Mexico. ..
North  Carolina
North  Dakota  .

Oklahoma

Oregon

South  Carolina.
South  Dakota. .

Tennessee

Texas

U.  S.  Army  . ..

Utah

Virginia

Washington. . . .
West  Virginia  .
Wyoming

V

>
•a

Totals .

21

o  m
c  m
o

u

IO

5

353     !  599

I

1
5

3

1

3

17

32

47

6

7

24

22

4

3

1

9

2

4

4

3

2

12

70

1

7

29

34

27

27

14

17

7

8

26

35

1

4

11

22

12

9

29

39

5

15

7

.  .

6

*3

20

. .

2

10

H

6

11

8

25

4

21

15

25

10

4

1

1

9

9

13
0

31

235

439
359

243

'48

24

614
16

953
452
112

762

27
584

145
248

404
89

203  j

293  I
120

45
261

154

87
21

239

737

375

433

66

99

48

39

28

675

1,124

104
993
45
713
210

39i

44
19
394
101
287
47
397
124

393
34

9i
374
185

6,830    8,917

-

2
I

I

9

1

2
2

2
1
1
1
4

1
I

6

1
1
1
6
2

4

1

1
6

2

86

1

4
I

1

2
1
I

4
6

55

c

3
3

o

I

4

1
I

I
I
1

4

5

i.§

u  C
a  C

0.U

44

V

•c

o

c  2

M  C

t  *

00

37

I IQ

1890

HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

Statement  of  Subordinate  Masonic  Bodies,  their  number  and  membership,  and  the
proportion  of  Perfect  Elus  (14*/).  Knights  Rose  Croix  (18^),  Knights  Kadosh  (30^"),  Mas-
ters of  the  Royal  Secret  (32^/),  Royal  Arch  Masons,  and  Knights  Templars  to  Master
Masons,  in  the  several  States  and  Territories  embraced  in  the  Jurisdiction  of  the  Su-
preme  Council  of  the  33d  A:A:S:R:  of  Free-Masonry,  for  the  Southern  Masonic  Juris-
diction of  the  U.  S.  A.

ORIENT.

Alabama  . .

Arizona

Arkansas . .
California. .
Colorado  .  .
Dist.  of  Col
Florida. . . .
Georgia  . . .
Hawaiian  Is

Idaho

Indian  Ter.

Iowa

Japan

Kansas  ....
Kentucky..
Louisiana..
Maryland. .
Minnesota  .
Mississippi.
Missouri. . .
Montana. . .
Nebraska. .
Nevada. . . .
New  Mexico
N.  Carolina
N.  Dakota.
Oklahoma  .
Oregon ....
S.  Carolina.
S.  Dakota  .
Tennessee  .

Texas

U.  S.  Army

Utah

Virginia  . .
Washington
W.  Virginia
Wyoming.

Totals

Blue  Lodges.

No.

29

88
482

359

464

133
103
208

279
564

47

229

20

19

307

5o

34
110

185

93
428

626

9
269

99

in

16

7,H7

Mem.

376

'1,345

14

701

448

12,522

265

19,542

91

7,605

25

5,298

144

4,187

423

18,611

1,240

3,450
21,907

20,103

18,402

5,439
7,827

15,691

9,34i

31,360

2,850

",775

837

854

10,954

2,871

1,456

5,H3

5,840

4,460

17,248

27,718

807

12,904

4,663

6,251

985

338,187

Lodges  of
Perfection.

No.  I  Mem.

2

I
I

9

1
2
2
2
1
1
1
4

2

4
2

4
3
5

1

1
6
1
1
1
6
2

4

1

87
21

239

737

375

433
66

99

48

39

28

675

1,124

404

993

45

713
210

39i

44
'9

394
101

287

47

397

124

393
34

1  1   91

6    374

2  :   185

86  !  8,917

Chapters
Rose  Croix.

No.       Mem.

I

6

1

54

Councils
Kadosh.

Particular        Grand  Con-
sistories.

235

544

366

306!!

69
3i
24

642
1.014

61

891
22
632
187
320

404
96

237
36

327
80

258

65
312
148

7,307

No.   Mem.

44

235

468

36i  I

222  1

49
21

25
626

958

52

815

22

591
146

244

405

9i

222

3°4

76

118

5o

279
156

6,536

No.

Mem.

I

235

4

439

I

359

I

243

I

48

1

24

4

614

4

953

•  •

3

762

1
2

27
584

2
1

*  *

145
248

1
1

404

89

1

203

293

120

45
261

154

37  I  6,250

16

452
112

3  58o

SCOTTISH   RITE   IN    THE   UNITED   STATES         1891

ORIENT.

Alabama

Arizona

Arkansas

California

Colorado

District  of  Columbia

Florida

Georgia

Hawaiian  Islands. . . .

Idaho

Indian  Territory

Iowa

Japan

Kansas

Kentucky

Louisiana

Maryland

Minnesota

Mississippi

Missouri

Montana

Nebraska

Nevada

New  Mexico

North  Carolina

North  Dakota

Oklahoma

Oregon

South  Carolina

South  Dakota

Tennessee

Texas

U.  S.  Army

Utah

Virginia

Washington

West  Virginia

Wyoming

Totals

Proportion  of
14*  to  M.M.

to  143

to  33

to  52

to  26

to  20

tO      12

to  83
to  188

to  32
to  123
to    41

1  to    18

to  75
to  16
to  207
to  44
to  13
to    30

to  20
to  576
to  7
to  14
to  18
to  124
to  II
to  139
to    71

to  142

to      12

to    34

Royal  Arch  Chapters.

No.

33
5

li

33

10

16

108

7

24
121

82
61
20

19
61

96

15
52
8
8
18
13

27

»7

27
68

138

Z9o

18
20

7

1,334

Mem.

880
263
895

5.405

2,525
2,192

598

3»'49

297

781

7,482

5,140

2,923
1,067

1,880

4,916

1,388

6,924

811

2,919

298

380

703

874

1,101

599
1,456

2,714

6,205

2,710

i,i54

1,381

35o

72,639

Proportion  of

R.  A.  to

M.M.

I  to  13
1  to  3
1  to  14
1  to  4
I  to
1  to
1  to
1  to

3

2

7
6

1  to  4
1  to  4
1  to  4

1  to
1  to
1  to
1  to
1  to
1  to
1  to
1  to
1  to  40
1  to  3
1  to  2
1  to  16
1  to  3

6

5
4

3
6

4
3

to  5
to  10

1
1
1  to

to
to

1  to  5

1  to  4

1  to  4

1  to  3

Commanderies  K.  T.

No.

6

3
13

36
25

5

5
10

5

57

47

25

5

12

25
14
56
9
23

17
8

4
6

11
16

30

20

10

12

7

516

Mem.

288

122

502

3,IOI

1,667

I,48l

20O

719

182
4,470

3,234
2,151

373
1,234

2,534
441

4,375

374

1,655

347

449
170

399

75i
1,075
2,098

1.486

633
1,037

342

37,890

Note.— The  membership  of  the  Scottish  Rite  Bodies  is  based  upon  reports  of  June  30,  1809;  that
of  the  York  Rite  Bodies  upon  the  latest  reports  in  our  possession  when  the  statement  was  compiled.

Note. — In  giving  the  proportions,  where  the  fraction  was  one-half  or  less  it  has  been  subtracted :
where  more  than  one-half,  added.

1892

HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

APPENDIX.

Average  membership  of  Blue  Lodges 47$

"  Royal  Arch  Chapters 54.-$

"  Commanderies 73

' '  Lodges  of  Perfection 103$

"  Chapters  of  Rose  Croix 105I

"  Councils  of  Kadosh 148

**  Particular  Consistories 169

u
«
<«

Proportion  of  Royal  Arch  Masons  to  Master  Masons 1  to    4f

"  Knights  Templars     "      "  "         .... 1  to    9

"  i4d  "      "  "         1  to  38

"  i8d  "      "  "         1  to46*

"  3od  "      M  «         ...  1  to  51$

««
u

a

"32d

1  to  54

No  report  in  Secretary-General's  office  of  l4d  Masons  in  Japan,  Kentucky,  and  Louis-
iana, which  are  under  Grand  Consistories.

No  Lodges  of  Perfection  in  Nevada,  Utah,  or  Wyoming  from  which  returns  are  made
and  no  record  of  I4d.

Number  of  Blue  Lodges,  7,147  ;  membership,  338,187.

Number  of  Lodges  of  Perfection,  86  ;  membership,  8,917.

GRAND   CONSISTORIES.

Name  of  Body.

No.

Orient.

Name  of  Body.

No.

Orient.

Emp.  of  Japan  ..
Kentucky

...

Yokohama,  Japan.
Louisville,  Ky.

Louisiana

New  Orleans,  La.

PARTICULAR   CONSISTORIES.

Name  of  Body.

Arkansas  ....
San  Francisco

Oakland ,

Los  Angeles  .
Pasadena. . . .
Colorado  ....
Albert  Pike..
Benzibee  ....

Idaho

De  Molay

Iowa

Des  Moines. .

Zarephath

Topeka

Wichita

Salina

Fort  Scott
Minnesota
Minneapolis..

No.

I
I

2

3
4
I
I
I
I
I
2

3

4
1

2

3
4
1

2

Orient.

Little  Rock,  Ark.
San  Francisco,  Cal.
Oakland,  Cal.
Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Pasadena,  Cal.
Denver,  Col.
Washington,  D.  C.
Savannah,  Ga.
Lewiston,  Idaho.
Lyons,  la.
Cedar  Rapids,  la.
Des  Moines,  la.
Davenport,  la.
Topeka,  Kan.
Wichita,  Kan.
Salina,  Kan.
Fort  Scott,  Kan.
St.  Paul,  Minn.
Minneapolis,  Minn.

Name  of  Body.

Duluth

Mississippi

Missouri

West  Missouri
East  Montana

Butte

Nebraska

Dakota

Oklahoma

Oregon

Oriental

Black  Hills....
South  Dakota  .
Tennessee

Dalcho

Lawson

Oriental

West  Virginia,

No.

Orient

J
I
I
2
I
2
I
I
I
I
I

3
4
1

1
1
2
I

Duluth,  Minn,
Meridian,  Miss.
|St.  Louis,  Mo.
Kansas  City,  Mo.
;Li\i:igston,  Mont.
'Butte,  Mont.
Omaha,  Neb.
Fargo,  N.  Dak.
Guthrie,  Okla.
Portland,  Ore.
Yankton,  S.  Dak.
Deadwood,  S.  Dak.
Aberdeen,  S.  Dak.
Memphis,  Tenn.
Richmond,  Va.
Seattle,  Wash.
Spokane,  Wash.
Wheeling,  W.  Va.

SCOTTISH   RITE   IN   THE   UNITED   STATES

1893

COUNCILS  OF   KNIGHTS   KADOSH.

Name  of  Body.

God.  de  St.  Omar
God.  de  St.  Omar

De  Molay

Hughde  Payens.,

Temple

Denver

Robert  de  Bruce.

Gethsemane

Alex.  Liholiho. . .

Lewiston

Hughde  Payens..

St.  Andrews

Cyrus

Coeur  de  Leon  . .
Win.  De  La  More
God.  de  St.  Omar.
Robert  de  Bruce.

Wichita

Salina

Mayland

De  Molai

A.  Elisha  Ames..

No.

I
I

2

3
4
I
1
1
1
1
1
2

3

4
I

2
4

I

I
I

2

Orient.

Little  Rock,  Ark.
San  Francisco,  Cal,
Oakland,  Cal.
Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Pasadena,  Cal.
Denver,  Col.
Washington,  D.  C.
Savannah,  Ga.
Honolulu,  H.  Isl.
Lewiston,  Idaho.
Lyons,  Iowa.
Cedar  Rapids,  Iowa.
Des  Moines,  Iowa.
Davenport,  Iowa.
Lawrence,  Kan.
Topeka,  Kan.
Fort  Scott,  Kan.
Wichita,  Kan.
Salina,  Kan.
Baltimore,  Md.
St.  Paul,  Minn.
Minneapolis,  Minn.

Name  of  Body.

Zenith

Winona ,

Mississippi ,

Missouri ,

De  Molai

Livingston

Butte

St.  Andrews

Fargo

De  Sonnac

Multonomah  . . .
Robert  de  Bruce

Deadwood

Albert  Pike....

Cyprus

Pike-Tucker . . .

St.  Omar

Washington....

De  Molai

Occidental

Tacoma

Albert  Pike.  . . .

No.

3
4
1
1
2
1
2
I
1
1
1
1

3
4
1
I

I
1

2

3
4
1

Orient.

Duluth,  Minn.
Winona,  Minn.
Meridian,  Miss.
St.  Louis,  Mo.
Kansas  City,  Mo.
Livingston,  Mont.
Butte,  Mont.
Omaha,  Neb.
Fargo,  N.  Dak.
Guthrie,  Okla.
Portland,  Ore.
Yankton,  S.  Dak.
Deadwood,  S.  Dak.
Aberdeen,  S.  Dak.
Memphis,  Tenn.
Galveston,  Tex.
Richmond,  Va.
Seattle,  Wash.
Olympia,  Wash.
Spokane,  Wash.
Tacoma,  Wash.
Wheeling,  W.  Va.

CHAPTERS  OF   KNIGHTS   ROSE  CROIX.

Name  of  Body.

Birmingham

Excelsior

YerbaBuena... .
Gethsemane
Robert  Bruce  . . .

Temple

Mackey

Evangelist

Temple

White  Eagle . . .

Nuuanu

Lewiston

Delphic

Bruce

Emmanuel

St.  John's

Unity

Equality

Mackey

Wichita

Salina

Victory

Meredith

St.  Paul

St.  Vin.  de  Paul
A.  T.  C.  Pierson

Winona

Mississippi

No.

I
I
I

2

3

4
I
I
1

2
I
1
1

2

3

4
I

2
4

5
6

1
1

2
4

5
1

Orient.

Birmingham,  Ala.
Little  Rock,  Ark.
San  Francisco,  Cal.
Oakland,  Cal.
Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Pasadena,  Cal.
Denver,  Col.
Washington,  D.  C.
Savannah,  Ga.
Atlanta,  Ga.
Honolulu,  H.  Isl.
Lewiston,  Idaho.
Lyons,  Iowa.
Cedar  Rapids,  Iowa.
Des  Moines,  Iowa.
Davenport,  Iowa.
Topeka,  Kan.
Lawrence,  Kan.
Fort  Scott,  Kan.
Wichita,  Kan.
Salina,  Kan.
Kansas  City,  Kan.
Baltimore,  Md.
St.  Paul,  Minn.
Minneapolis,  Minn.
Duluth,  Minn.
Winona,  Minn.
Meridian,  Miss.

Name  of  Body.

St.  Louis

Areiopagus

Helena

Livingston

Butte

Semper  Fidelis..

Emmanuel

Constans

Pelican

Guthrie

Ainsworth

Buist

Mackey

Robert  Bruce

Aberdeen

Calvary

Philip  C.  Tucker.
L.  M.  Oppenh'r..

Houston

Pelican

Washington

Robert  Bruce

|St.  Andrews

Columbia

Tacoma

Cascade

Charity

No.

I
2
I

2

3
1

2

3
1
1
1
1
1
3
4
1

1

2

3

2
1

2

3
5

9
7
1

Orient.

St.  Louis,  Mo.
Kansas  City,  Mo.
Helena,  Mont.
Livingston,  Mont.
Butte,  Mont.
Omaha,  Neb.
Lincoln,  Neb.
Hastings,  Neb.
Fargo,  N.  Dak.
Guthrie,  Okla.
Portland,  Ore.
Charleston,  S.  C.
Yankton,  S.  Dak.
Deadwood,  S.  Dak.
Aberdeen,  S.  Dak.
Memphis,  Tenn.
Austin,  Texas.
Galveston,  Tex.
Houston,  Tex.
Richmond,  Va.
Seattle,  Wash.
Olympia,  Wash.
Pt.Townsend,Wash.
Walla  Walla,  Wash.
Tacoma,  Wash.
Spokane,  Wash.
Wheeling,  W.  Va.

i894

HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

LODGES  OF  PERFECTION.

Name  of  Body.

Alabama

Birmingham  . . .

Santa  Rita

Acacia

Yerba  Buena. . .

Oakland

King  Solomon..
Isaac  Davis

Pacific

Delta

Temple

Constans

Visalia

Delta

Mithras

Orient

Ponce  de  Leon  .

Orient

Acme

Alpha

Hermes

Kammehameha.

Lewiston

Alpha

Iowa

Kilwinning

Tabernacle  ....

Adonirain

Mackey

Oriental

Zerbal

Joabert

Elmo

Lafayette

Albert  Pike  ....

Delta

Carmel

Excelsior

North  Star

Winona

Meridian

Columbus

St.  Louis

Adoniram

No.

I
2
I
I
I
2

3

4

5
6

7

8

9

i

i

2

3

4

5
i

4
I
i

2
I

2

3
4

2

3

5
6

9
I

2
I
2

6

7
i

2
I

2

Orient

Montgomery,  Ala.
Birmingham,  Ala.
Tucson,  Ariz.
Little  Rock,  Ark.
San  Francisco,  Cal.
Oakland,  Cal.
Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Sacramento,  Cal.
Marysville,  Cal.
Redlands,  Cal.
Pasadena,  Cal.
San  Diego,  Cal.
Visalia,  Cal.
Denver,  Col.
Washington,  D.  C.
Georgetown,  D.  C.
Ocala,  Fla.
Jacksonville,  Fla.
Plant  City,  Fla.
Savannah,  Ga.
Atlanta,  Ga.
Honolulu,  H.  Isl.
Lewiston,  Idaho.
Chickashaw,  Ind.  T.
Lyons,  Iowa.
Cedar  Rapids,  Iowa.
Des  Moines,  Iowa.
Davenport,  Iowa.
Salina,  Kan.
Topeka,  Kan.
Lawrence,  Kan.
Fort  Scott,  Kan.
Wichita,  Kan.
Kansas  City,  Kan.
Baltimore,  Md.
Gaithersburg,  Md.
St.  Paul,  Minn.
Minneapolis,  Minn.
Duluth,  Minn.
Winona,  Minn.
Meridian,  Miss.
Columbus,  Miss.
St.  Louis,  Mo.
Kansas  City,  Mo.

Name  of  Body.

Winslow-Turner.

Columbia

Alpha

Khurum

King  Solomon. . .
Mount  Moriah. . .

Fiducia

Delta

Emeth

Damascus

Santa  Fe

Alpha

Enoch

Lisbon

Carmel

Ellendale

Hillsboro

Devil's  Lake.. . .

Guthrie

Oregon

Delta

Aleph

Alpha

Webster

Golden  Belt

].  C.  Batchelor..

Delta

Albert  Pike

John  Chester.. . .

Mizpah

San  Felipe

Fidelity

San  Jacinto

Dallas

Libertas

Washington

Olympia

Lafayette

Columbia

Albert  G.  Mackey

Tacoma ,

McDaniel

Purnell

Army

No.

3
4
i

4

5
I

3
4
5
7
i
i
i

4
6

I
I
I

2
I

4

5
6

i

5
i

4
6

7

5
i

2

3
5
8

9
i

2
I

Orient.

Plattsburg,  Mo.
Columbia,  Mo.
Helena,  Mont.
Livingston,  Mont.
Butte,  Mont.
Omaha,  Neb.
Hastings,  Neb.
Lincoln,  Neb.
Fremont,  Neb.
Kearney,  Neb.
Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex.
Asheville,  N.  C.
Fargo,  N.  Dak.
Lisbon,  N.  Dak.
Grand  Forks,  N.  D.
Ellendale,  N.  Dak.
Hillsboro,  N.  Dak.
Devil's  Lake,  N.  D.
Guthrie,  Okla.
Portland,  Ore.
Charleston,  S.  C.
Columbia,  S.  C.
Yankton,  S.  Dak.
Webster,  S.  Dak.
Deadwood,  S.  Dak.
Aberdeen,  S.  Dak.
Hot  Springs,  S.  D.
Eureka,  S.  Dak.
Jackson,  Tenn.
Memphis,  Tenn.
Galveston,  Tex.
Austin,  Tex.
Houston,  Tex.
Dallas,  Tex.
Richmond,  Va.
Seattle,  Wash.
Olympia,  Wash.
Port  Townsend,  W.
Walla  Walla,  Wash.
Spokane,  Wash.
Tacoma,  Wash.
Wheeling,  W.  Va.
Parkersburg,  W.  Va.
Ft.  Leavenworth,  K.

Supreme  Council  A.'.  A.'.  S.\  R.\  of  the  Northern  Masonic  Jurisdiction  of  the  United

States  of  America.

The  following  Exhibit  shows  the  number  of  Active  and  Honorary  33<ls  ;
the  Consistories,  and  the  number  of  Chapters,  Councils,  and  Lodges  of  Perfec-
tion, of  the  several  States  of  the  Northern  Jurisdiction.

Sovereign  Grand  Inspectors-General  of  the  Thirty-third  and  Last  Degree.

Officers 33

Active  members 48

Emeriti  Members

Past  Active  Member.

2
I

SCOTTISH   RITE   IN   THE   UNITED   STATES         1895

HONORARY   MEMBERS.

Maine 26

New  Hampshire 18

Vermont 21

Massachusetts 60

Rhode  Island 17

Connecticut 26

New  York 152

New  Jersey 19

Total 673

Pennsylvania 57

Ohio 87

Michigan 48

Indiana 51

Illinois  ...    57

Wisconsin 27

Non-resident  Honorary  Members  ....  7

Table  of Subordinate  Bodies  in  Northern  Jurisdiction,  by  States.

MAINE.

CONSISTORY.

Maine  Consistory  S:P:R:S:  32D,  Portland.  Date  of  Charter,  May  22,  a.d.,
1862.

CHAPTERS   OF   ROSE   CROIX.

Dunlap  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Portland.     Date  of  Charter,  May  14,  1857.

Bangor  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Bangor.  Date  of  Charter,  September  18,
1890.

H.  H.  Dickey  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Auburn.  Date  of  Charter,  Septem-
ber 17,  1891.

Emeth  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Augusta.  Date  of  Charter,  September  17,
1896.

General  Knox  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  U.  D.,  Rockland.  Date  of  Dis-
pensation, May  8,  1899.

COUNCILS   OF   PRINCES   OF   JERUSALEM.

Portland  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Portland.  Date  of  Charter,
May  14,  1857.

Auburn  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Auburn.  Date  of  Charter,  Sep-
tember 19,  1889.

Palestine  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Bangor.  Date  of  Charter,
September  19,  1889.

Deering  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Machias.  Date  of  Charter,
September  21,  1893.

Augusta  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Augusta.  Date  of  Charter,
September  19,  1895.

Rockland  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Rockland.  Date  of  Charter,
September  21,  1898.

LODGES   OF    PERFECTION.

Yates  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Portland.     Date  of  Charter,  May  14,  1857.
Lewiston   Lodge  of    Perfection,  Lewiston.     Date  of  Charter,   August  16,
1876.

1896  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Eastern  Star  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Bangor.  Date  of  Charter,  September
25,  1884.

Delta  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Machias.  Date  of  Charter,  September  17,
1891.

Kennebec  Valley  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Augusta.  Date  of  Charter,  Sep-
tember 19,  1895.

Rockland  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Rockland.  Date  of  Charter,  September  21,
1898.

NEW   HAMPSHIRE.

CONSISTORY.

Edward  A.  Raymond  Consistory,  Nashua.     Date  of  Charter,  June  4,  1864.

CHAPTERS    OF    ROSE    CROIX.

St.  George  Chapter  of    Rose  Croix,  Nashua.      Date   of   Charter,    June   4,

1864.
New  Hampshire  Chapter  of    Rose    Croix,  Portsmouth.     Date   of  Charter,

May  19,  1866.
Acacia  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Concord.     Date  of  Charter,  September  17,

1891.
Littleton  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Littleton.     Date  of  Charter,  September

19,  1895.

COUNCILS    OF   PRINCES   OF   JERUSALEM.

Grand  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Portsmouth.  Date  of  Charter,
June  25,  1845.

Oriental  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Nashua.  Date  of  Charter,
June  4,  1864.

Ariel  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Concord.  Date  of  Charter,  Sep-
tember 17,  1891.

Washington  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Littleton.  Date  of  Char-
,    ter,  September  19,  1895.

lodges  of  perfection.

Ineffable  Grand  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Portsmouth.  Date  of  original
Charter,  January  31,  1842,  which  was  destroyed  by  fire  November  30,  1865,
and  a  new  Charter  was  issued  on  the  19th  day  of  May,  1866.

Aaron  P.  Hughes  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Nashua.  Date  of  Charter,  June
4,  1864.

Alpha  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Concord.  Date  of  Charter,  September  17,
1891.

North  Star  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Lancaster.  Date  of  Charter,  September
19,  1895.

SCOTTISH   RITE   IN   THE   UNITED   STATES         1897

VERMONT.

CONSISTORY.

Vermont  Consistory    S:P:R:S:  32D,  Burlington.      Date   of  Charter,  August

19,  1874.

CHAPTER    OF    ROSE    CROIX.

Delta  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Burlington.  Date  of  Charter,  November
13,  i873-

COUNCILS   OF    PRINCES   OF    JERUSALEM.

Joseph  W.  Roby  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,   Burlington.      Date  of

Charter,  November  13,  1873.
Mount  Calvary  Council  of   Princes   of  Jerusalem,  Montpelier.     Date  of

Charter,  September  22,  1880.

lodges  of  perfection.

Haswell  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Burlington.     Date  of  Charter,  June  17, 1870.

Windsor  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Windsor.     Date  of  Charter,  August  18,  1875:

Gamaliel  Washburn  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Montpelier.  Date  of  Charter.
August  18,  1875.

Bennington  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Bennington.  Date  of  Charter,  Septem-
ber 20,  1882.

Mizpah  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Saint  Johnsbury.     Date  of  Charter,  September

20,  1882.

Newport  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Newport.     Date  of  Charter,  September  17,

1891.
Delta  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Rutland.     Date  of  Charter,  September  21, 1893.

MASSACHUSETTS.

CONSISTORY.

Massachusetts  Consistory  S:P:R:S:  32D,  Boston.  Date  of  Charter,  May  15
1861.

CHAPTERS  of  rose  CROIX.

Mount  Calvary  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Lowell.  Date  of  Charter,  May
16,  i860.

Mount  Olivet  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Boston.  Date  of  Charter,  Septem-
ber 11,  1863.

Lawrence  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Worcester.  Date  of  Charter,  June  17,
1870.

Springfield  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Springfield.  Date  of  Charter,  Sep-
tember 20,  1894,

1898  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

COUNCILS    OF    PRINCES   OF    JERUSALEM.

Lowell  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Lowell.     Date  of  Charter,  May

28,  1858.
Giles  Fonda  Yates  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Boston.      Date  of

Charter,  February  17,  1864.

Massasoit  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Springfield.  Date  of  Char-
ter, May  19,  1866.

Goddard  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Worcester.  Date  of  Charter,
June  17,  1870.

lodges  of  perfection.

Boston-Lafayette  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Boston.  Date  of  Charter,  January
21,  1842.

Lowell  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Lowell.     Date  of  Charter,  May  28,  1858.

Worcester  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Worcester.  Date  of  Charter,  September
30,  1863.

Sutton  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Salem.     Date  of  Charter,  April  8,  1864.

Evening  Star  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Springfield.  Date  of  Charter,  May  18,
1866.

Merrimack  Valley  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Haverhill.  Date  of  Charter,  Sep-
tember 22,  1892.

Onota  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Pittsfield.  Date  of  Charter,  September  20,
1894.

RHODE  ISLAND.

consistory.

Rhode  Island  Consistory  S:P:R:S:  32D,  Providence.  Date  of  Charter,  April
10,  1856.     Destroyed  by  fire  ;  new  Charter  issued  September  17,  1896.

chapter  of  rose  croix.

Rhode  Island  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Providence.  Date  of  Charter,  De-
cember 14,  1849.

COUNCIL  OF   PRINCES   OF   JERUSALEM.

Rhode  Island  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Providence.  Date  of
Charter,  December  14,  1849.

lodges  of  perfection.

Solomon's  Grand  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Providence.  Date  of  Charter,  1849.
Destroyed  by  fire  ;  new  Charter  issued  September  17,  1896.

Van  Rensselaer  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Newport.  Date  of  Charter,  De-
cember 14,  1849.

SCOTTISH   RITE   IN   THE   UNITED   STATES         1899

CONNECTICUT.

CONSISTORIES.

Lafayette  Consistory  S:P:R:S:  32D,  Bridgeport.     Date  of  Charter,  June  I,

1858.
Connecticut  Sovereign  Consistory  S:P:R:S:  32D,  Norwich.     Date  of  Char-
ter, May  28,  1864.

chapters  of  rose  croix.

Pequonnock  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Bridgeport.  Date  of  Charter,  June  1,
1858.

Norwich  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Norwich.     Date  of  Charter,  May  28, 1864.

New  Haven  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  New  Haven.  Date  of  Charter,  August
19,1875.

Cyrus  Goodell  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Hartford.  Date  of  Charter,  Au-
gust 16,  1876.

Corinthian  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Waterbury.  Date  of  Charter,  Septem-
ber 23,  1897.

COUNCILS    OF    PRINCES   OF    JERUSALEM.

Washington  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Bridgeport.  Date  of  Char-
ter, June  1,  1858.

Van  Rensselaer  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Norwich.  Date  of
Charter,  May  28,  1864.

Elm  City  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  New  Haven.  Date  of  Charter,
August  18,  1875.

Hartford  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Hartford.  Date  of  Charter,
August  16,  1876.

Ionic  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Waterbury.  Date  of  Charter,
September  23,  1897.

lodges  of  perfection.

De  Witt  Clinton  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Bridgeport.     Date  of  Charter,  May

11,  1858.
King  Solomon  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Norwich.     Date  of  Charter,  May  28,

1864.
Charter  Oak  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Hartford.     Date  of  Charter,  May  19,

1866.
E.  G.  Storer  Lodge  of  Perfection,  New  Haven.     Date  of  Charter,  August

19,  1874.
Doric  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Waterbury.    Date  of  Charter,  September  23,

1897.

1900  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

NEW   YORK.

CONSISTORIES.

The  Consistory  of  New  York  S:P:R:S:  32D,  New  York.  Date  of  Charter,
August  6,  1806.

Albany  Sovereign  Consistorv  S:P:R:S:  32D,  Albany.  Date  of  Charter,  No-
vember 16,  1824.

Central  City  Consistory  S:P:R:S:  32D,  Syracuse.  Date  of  Charter,  Novem-
ber 27,  1862.

Otseningo  Consistory  S:P:R:S:  32D,  Binghamton.  Date  of  Charter,  May  16,
1867.

Rochester  Consistory  S:P:R:S:  32D,  Rochester.  Date  of  Charter,  May  16,
1867.

Corning  Consistory  S:P:R:S:  32D,  Corning.     Date  of  Charter,  May  16,  1867.

Aurora  Grata  Consistory  S:P:R:S:  32D,  Brooklyn.  Date  of  Charter,  Sep-
tember 19,  1889.

Buffalo  Consistory  S:P:R:S:  32D,  Buffalo.  Date  of  Charter,  September  21,
1893.

chapters  of  rose  CROIX.

The  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix  of  New  York  City,  New  York.  Date  of
Charter,  August  6,  1806.

Albany  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Albany.  Date  of  Charter,  November  16,
1824.

Central  City  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Syracuse.  Date  of  Charter,  Novem-
ber 27,  1862.

Aurora  Grata  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Brooklyn,  Date  of  Charter,  June
6,  1866.

Otseningo  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Binghamton.  Date  of  Charter,  May  16,
1867.

Rochester  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Rochester.  Date  of  Charter,  May  16,
1867.

Corning  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Corning.     Date  of  Charter  May  16,  1867.

Delta  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Troy.     Date  of  Charter,  August  19,  1874.

Yah-nun-dah-sis  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Utica.  Date  of  Charter,  Septem-
ber 20,  1882.

Buffalo  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Buffalo.  Date  of  Charter,  September  21,
1893.

Ogdensburg  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Ogdensburg.  Date  of  Charter,  Sep-
tember 21,  1893.

COUNCILS    OF    PRINCES   OF    JERUSALEM.

Grand  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Albany.  Date  of  Charter,  De-
cember 20,  1767.

The  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem  of  New  York,  New  York.  Date
of  Charter,  November  3,  1808.

SCOTTISH   RITE   IN   THE   UNITED   STATES         1901

Central  City  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Syracuse.  Date  of  Char-
ter, November  27,  1862.

Aurora  Grata  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Brooklyn.  Date  of
Charter,  June  6,  1866.

Otseningo  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Binghamton.  Date  of  Char-
ter, May  16, 1867.

Rochester  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Rochester.  Date  of  Charter,
May  16,  1867.

Corning  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Corning.  Date  of  Charter,
May  16,  1867.

Palmoni  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Buffalo.  Date  of  Charter,  May
16,  1867.

Delta  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Troy.  Date  of  Charter,  August
19,  1874.

Yah-nun-dah-sis  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Utica.  Date  of  Char-
ter, September  20,  1882.

Olean  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Olean.  Date  of  Charter,  Sep-
tember 17,  1891.

Ogdensburg  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Ogdensburg.  Date  of
Charter,  September  21,  1893.

LODGES    OF    PERFECTION.

Ineffable  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Albany.  Date  of  Charter,  December  20,
1767.

The  Lodge  of  Perfection  of  New  York  City,  New  York.  Date  of  Char-
ter April  7,  1849.     Date  of  Precedence,  November  6,  1808.

Central  City  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Syracuse.  Date  of  Charter,  November
27,  1862.

Aurora  Grata  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Brooklyn.  Date  of  Charter,  Novem-
ber 6,  1808.     Reissued  May  12,  1866.

Otseningo  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Binghamton.  Date  of  Charter,  May  16,
1867.

Rochester  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Rochester.     Date  of  Charter,  May  16,  1867.

Corning  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Corning.     Date  of  Charter,  May  16,  1867.

Palmoni  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Buffalo.     Date  of  Charter,  May  16,  1867.

Delta  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Troy.     Date  of  Charter,  November  16,  1871.

Yah-nun-dah-sis  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Utica.  Date  of  Charter,  November
13,  1873.

Germania  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Rochester.  Date  of  Charter,  August  19,
1874.

Lock  City  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Lockport.  Date  of  Charter,  August  16,
1876.

Watertown  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Watertown.  Date  of  Charter,  September
5,  1884.

St.  Lawrence  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Canton.  Date  of  Charter,  September
19,  1889.

1902  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Northern  Star  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Plattsburgh.  Date  of  Charter,  Sep-
tember 19,  1889.

Olean  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Olean.     Date  of  Charter,  September  17,  1891.

Shebarim  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Walton.  Date  of  Charter,  September  21,
1893.

NEW  JERSEY.

CONSISTORIES.

New   Jersey    Sovereign    Consistory    S:P:R:S:    32D,  Jersey  City.      Date  of

Charter,  May  16,  1867.
Excelsior  Consistory  S:P:R:S:  32D,  Camden.     Date  of  Charter,  September

27,  1883.

chapters  of  ROSE  CROIX.

Trenton  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Trenton.     Date  of  Charter,  June  26,  1868.

Jersey  City  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Jersey  City.  Date  of  Charter,  No-
vember 16,  1871.

Excelsior  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Camden.  Date  of  Charter,  November
16,  1871.

Adoniram  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Paterson.     Date  of  Charter,  November

13,  l873-

COUNCILS  OF   PRINCES   OF   JERUSALEM.

Mercer  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Trenton.    Date  of  Charter,  May

19,  1866.
Excelsior  Council  of  Princes  of   Jerusalem,  Camden.    Date  of  Charter,

June  17,  1870.
Jersey  City  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Jersey  City.     Date  of  Char.

ter,  November  16,  187 1.
Adoniram  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Paterson.     Date  of  Charter,

November  13,  1873.

lodges  of  perfection.

Mercer  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Trenton.     Date  of  Charter,  May  23,  1863.
Jersey  City  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Jersey  City.     Date  of  Charter,  May  19,

.     1866.
Excelsior  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Camden.     Date  of  Charter,  June  17,  1870.
Adoniram  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Paterson.     Date  of  Charter,  November  13,

1873.

PENNSYLVANIA.

consistories.

Pennsylvania  Consistory  S:P:R:S:  32D,  Pittsburgh.     Date  of  Charter,  May

14,  1857.

Philadelphia  Consistory  S:P:R:S:  32D,  Philadelphia,  Date  of  Charter,  July
11,  1857.

SCOTTISH   RITE   IN   THE   UNITED   STATES         1903

Harrisburg  Consistory  S:P:R:S:  32D,  Harrisburg.  Date  of  Charter,  No-
vember 15,  1865.

Caldwell  Consistory  S:P:R:S:  32D,  Bloomsburg.  Date  of  Charter,  May  19,
1867.

Keystone  Consistory  S:P:R:S:  32D,  Scranton.  Date  of  Charter,  September
18,  1890.

Coudersport  Consistory  S:P:R:S:  32D,  U.  D.,  Coudersport  Date  of  Dis-
pensation, February  6,  1899.

chapters  of  rose  croix.
Pittsburg  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Pittsburg.      Date  of  Charter,  May  14,

1857.
Kilwinning  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Philadelphia.     Date   of  Charter,  July

11,  1857.

Evergreen  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Bloomsburg.  Date  of  Charter,  May  19,
1865.

Harrisburg  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Harrisburg.  Date  of  Charter,  Novem-
ber 15,  1865.

Keystone  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Scranton.  Date  of  Charter,  September
18,  1890.

Calvary  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Towanda.  Date  of  Charter,  September
20,  1894.

Coudersport  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix.  Date  of  Charter,  September  21,
1898.

COUNCILS   OF   PRINCES   OF   JERUSALEM.

Pennsylvania  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Pittsburg.  Date  of  Char-
ter, May  14,  1857.

De  Joinville  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Philadelphia.  Date  of
Charter,  July  11,  1857.

Harrisburg  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Harrisburg.  Date  of  Char-
ter, March  15,  1864.

Zerubbabel  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Bloomsburg.  Date  of  Char-
ter, May  19,  1865.

Keystone  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Scranton.  Date  of  Charter,
September  18,  1890.

Hayden  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Towanda.  Date  of  Charter,
September  20,  1894.

Coudersport  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Coudersport  Date  of
Charter,  September  21,  1898.

LODGES   OF   PERFECTION.

Gourgas  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Pittsburg.     Date  of  Charter,  May  14,  1852.
Philadelphia  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Philadelphia.     Date  of  Charter,  July  11,
1857.

1904  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Harrisburg  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Harrisburg.     Date  of  Charter,  March  15,

1864.
Enoch  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Bloomsburg.     Date  of  Charter,  May  19,  1865.
Lancaster  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Lancaster.     Date  of  Charter,  August  18,

i875.
Keystone  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Scranton.     Date  of  Charter,  September  19,

1888.

Presque  Isle  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Erie.  Date  of  Charter,  September  19,
1888.

Towanda  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Towanda.  Date  of  Charter,  September  18,
1890.

Coudersport  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Coudersport.  Date  of  Charter,  Septem-
ber 23,  1897.

OHIO.

consistories.

Ohio  Consistory  S:P:R:S:  32D,  Cincinnati.     Date  of  Charter,  May  4,  1854.
Lake  Erie  Consistory  S:P:R:S:  32D,  Cleveland.     Date  of  Charter,  Septem-
ber 18,  1890.

chapters  of  rose  croix.

Cincinnati  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Cincinnati.  Date  of  Charter,  Decem-
ber 27,  1853.

Ariel  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Cleveland.     Date  of  Charter,  May  19,  1866.

Columbus  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Columbus.  Date  of  Charter,  September
18,  1879.

Dayton  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Dayton.  Date  of  Charter,  September  20,
1880.

Cambridge  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Cambridge.  Date  of  Charter,  Septem-
ber 20,  1880.

Fort  Industry  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Toledo.  Date  of  Charter,  Sep-
tember 20,  1881.

COUNCILS   OF    PRINCES   OF   JERUSALEM.

Dalcho  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Cincinnati.  Date  of  Charter,
April  27,  1853.

Cambridge  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Cambridge.  Date  of  Char-
ter, May  14,  1857.

Bahurim  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Cleveland.  Date  of  Charter,
May  19,  1866.

Franklin  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Columbus.  Date  of  Charter,
September  18,  1879.

Miami  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Dayton.  Date  of  Charter,  Sep-
tember 20,  1880.

Northern  Light  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Toledo.  Date  of
Charter,  September  20,  1881.

GREEN  DRAGON  TAVERN
Boston,   Massachusetts

SCOTTISH    RITE   IN   THE   UNITED   STATES         1905

LODGES    OF    PERFECTION.

Gibulum  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Cincinnati.     Date  of  Charter,  April  27,  1853.
Cambridge  Lodge   of   Perfection,  Cambridge.     Date   of  Charter,   May  14,

1857.
Eli  ad  ah  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Cleveland.     Date  of  Charter,  May  19,  1866.
Enoch  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Columbus.      Date  of  Charter,  September  19,

1877.
Gabriel  Lodge  of  Perfection,   Dayton.      Date   of  Charter,  September   20,

1880.
Mi-a-mi  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Toledo.     Date  of  Charter,  September  20, 1880.
Emeth  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Canton.     Date  of  Charter,  September  17,  1896.

MICHIGAN.

CONSISTORIES.

Michigan  Sovereign  Consistory  S:P:R:S:  32D,  Detroit.      Date  of  Charter,

May  20,  1862.
De  Witt  Clinton  Consistory  S:P:R:S:  32D,  Grand  Rapids.    Date  of  Charter.

September  19,  1878.

chapters  of  rose  croix.

Mount  Olivet  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Detroit.  Date  of  Charter,  May  20,
1862.

Robinson  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Grand  Rapids.  Date  of  Charter,  Sep-
tember 19,  1878.

Saginaw  Valley  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Bay  City.  Date  of  Charter,  Sep-
tember 16,  1885.

Peninsular  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Marquette.  Date  of  Charter,  May  18,
1891.

COUNCILS   OF   PRINCES   OF   JERUSALEM.

Carson  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Detroit.     Date  of  Charter,  May

26,  1861.
Cyrus  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Grand  Rapids.     Date  of  Charter,

April  4,  1868.
Bay  City  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Bay  City.      Date   of  Charter,

September  16,  1885.
Lake   Superior    Council  of   Princes   of    Jerusalem,  Marquette.     Date  of

Charter,  September  15,  1886.
Moriah  Lodge  of   Perfection,  Grand   Rapids.     Date  of  Charter,  April   4,

1868.
Detroit-Carson  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Detroit.     Date  of  Charter,  May  26,

1861.     Date  of  new  Charter,  September  17,  1896.
McCormick  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Bay  City.     Date  of  Charter,  September  25,

1884.
Marquette  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Marquette.     Date  of  Charter,  September

15,  1886.

tao

1906  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

INDIANA.

CONSISTORY.

Indiana  Consistory  S:P:R:S:  32D,  Indianapolis.  Date  of  Charter,  May  19,
1865.

CHAPTER    OF    ROSE    CROIX.

Indianapolis  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Indianapolis.  Date  of  Charter,  May
19,  1865.

COUNCILS    OF    PRINCES    OF    JERUSALEM.

Saraiah  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Indianapolis.     Date  of  Charter,

May  19,  1865.
Darius  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Fort  Wayne.     Date  of  Charter,

September  18,  1890.

LODGES   OF    PERFECTION.

Adoniram  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Indianapolis.  Date  of  Charter,  May  19,
1865.

Fort  Wayne  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Fort  Wayne.  Date  of  Charter,  Sep-
tember 19,  1888.

ILLINOIS.

CONSISTORIES.

Oriental    Consistory   S:P:R:S:    32D,  Chicago.     Date  of  Charter,  May   14,

i857.
Quincy  Consistory  S:P:R:S:  32D,  Quincy.     Date  of  Charter,  March  16,  1866.
Freeport  Consistory  S:P:R:S:  32D,  Freeport.     Date  of  Charter,  February  7,

1867.
Peoria  Consistory  S:P:R:S:  32D,  Peoria.     Date  of  Charter,  February  25, 1867.

chapters  of  rose  croix.

Gourgas  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Chicago.  Date  of  Charter,  May  14,  1857.
Quincy  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Quincy.  Date  of  Charter,  March  16,  1866.
Freeport  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,   Freeport.     Date  of  Charter,  February  7,

1867.
Peoria  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Peoria.     Date  of  Charter,  February  25, 1867.

COUNCILS   OF   PRINCES   OF   JERUSALEM.

Chicago  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Chicago.  Date  of  Charter,
May  14,  1857.

Quincy  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Quincy.  Date  of  Charter,
March  16,  1866.

Freeport  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Freeport.  Date  of  Charter,
February  7,  1867.

Peoria  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Peoria.  Date  of  Charter,  Febru-
ary 25,  1867.

SCOTTISH   RITE  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES         190;

LODGES   OF    PERFECTION.

Van  Rensselaer  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Chicago.     Date  of  Charter,  May  14,

i857.
Quincy  Lodge  of  Perfection,  Quincy.     Date  of  Charter,  March  16,  1866.

Freeport   Lodge   of  Perfection,  Freeport.     Date  of  Charter,  February  j

1867.
Central   City    Lodge  of  Perfection,  Peoria.     Date  of  Charter,  February

25,  1867.

WISCONSIN.

Wisconsin  Consistory  S:P:R:S:  32D,  Milwaukee.     Date  of  Charter,  August  7

1863.
Wisconsin  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  Milwaukee.     Date  of  Charter,  August  7,

1863.
Wisconsin  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Milwaukee.     Date  of  Charter,

August  7,  1863.
Wisconsin   Lodge  of   Perfection,  Milwaukee.     Date  of  Charter,  August  7

186J.

CHAPTER   IV

ROYAL   ORDER   OF    SCOTLAND

(COTLAND  is  a  country  which  possesses  a  roman-
tic  history,  and  is  rich  in  legendary  lore,  and  both
romance  and  legend  are  found  in  the  story  of  the
Royal  Order  of  Scotland,  the  most  popular
of  the  added  degrees  worked  by  the  Craft.  It
was  difficult  to  obtain  any  reliable  information
as  to  its  true  history  till  D.  Murray  Lyon,  Grand
Secretary  of  Scotland,  in  his  History  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,
gave,  in  1873,  a  sketch  of  the  order.  It  embraces  two  degrees,  one
the  "  Heredom  of  Kilwinning,"  which,  according  to  one  fable,  was
founded  in  the  time  of  David  I.  of  Scotland  ;  the  other,  "The  Rosy
Cross,"  which,  according  to  another  fable,  was  instituted  by  King
Robert  Bruce  as  a  reward  for  the  aid  given  to  him  by  some  Templars
who  fought  on  his  side  at  Bannockburn.  As  the  Order  of  the
Templars  had  been  suppressed  by  Papal  Bulls  in  13 12,  some  late
members  may  have  been  present  in  Bruce's  army  in  13 14,  but  we
must  always  remember  that,  to  quote  Lyon's  remark,  "  the  fabulous
stories  about  the  early  origin  and  royal  patronage  of  the  Royal  Order
must  be  taken  for  what  they  are  worth,  which,  to  those  who  value
accuracy,  means  nothing."  The  fable  that  the  Hautes  Grades  had
their  source  in  the  "  Mother  Lodge,  Kilwinning,  is  totally  erroneous
and  based  on  ignorance  or  fraud,  for  that  ancient  lodge,  as  is  shown
by  its  records,  never  warranted  or  worked  any  degrees  beyond  the
well-known  "three  degrees."  It  is  true  that  the  "  Mother  Kilwin-
ning" did,  in  1779,  grant  to  some  Masons  in  Dublin  authority  to
form  a  regular  lodge  or  society,  and  that  the  lodge  so  formed  as-
sumed the  title  of  "  High  Knights  Templars  of  Ireland,  Kilwinning
Lodge ; "  but  all  the  evidence  collected  by  Lyon  and  the  Masonic
historian,  W.  J.  Hughan,  proves  that  the  Mother  Kilwinning  never
claimed  any  authority  beyond  the  three  degrees,  and  is  neither  more
nor  less  than  a  regular  Masonic  lodge,  and  that  the  ceremony  was

1908

ROYAL   ORDER   OF   SCOTLAND  1909

unknown  prior  to  the  last  century.  In  fact,  when  the  Dublin
Brethren,  after  conferring,  in  1782,  Royal  Arch,  Knight  Templar,
and  Rose  Croix  degrees,  petitioned  the  Mother  Lodge  for  docu-
ments to  establish  beyond  doubt  the  "  authority  and  regularity  of
their  warrant  as  High  Knights  Templars,"  the  request  was  never
granted,  because  impossible.  Moreover,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scot-
land, instituted  in  1736,  never  officially  countenanced  any  degrees
beyond  that  of  Master  Mason,  and  has  repeatedly  objected  to  lend-
ing any  support  to  ceremonies  worked  by  authority  of  the  Supreme
Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter  of  Scotland.  The  Grand  Lodge,  al-
though toleration  has  succeeded  to  opposition,  still  recognizes  only
three  degrees,  the  only  change  being  the  adoption  of  the  Mark  as  a
portion  of  the  Fellow-Craft  degree.  As  regards  the  claim  that  the
"  Mother  Kilwinning  "  possessed  other  degrees  of  Masonry,  careful
examination  shows  that  it  is  utterly  baseless,  and  devoid  of  any
corroborative  evidence.

There  is  no  authority  for  the  statement  of  Dr.  Arnot  that  the
Royal  Order  is  so  called  because  it  is  "  the  highest  and  most  sublime
degree  in  Masonry."  He  likewise  stated  that  the  "  Rose  Croix  was
got  up  by  the  adherents  of  Prince  Charles  Edward  Stuart,  and  only
received  the  name  of  Rose  Croix  (a  translation  of  the  R.  S.  Y.  C.  S.
of  the  Royal  Order)  in  1746  or  1747.  It  was  intended  to  be  a
Roman  Catholic  version,  or  rather  perversion,  of  the  Royal  Order,
this  last  being  deemed  for  the  French  too  bigoted ;  in  other  words,
it  was  too  purely  religious  and  Protestant,  although  it  is  Christianity
which  it  really  promulgates."  The  Royal  Order  in  France  is  said
to  have  been  established  by  the  Pretender  Charles  Edward  Stuart,
and  to  be  sanctioned  by  the  Grand  Orient  under  the  title  of  Rose
Croix  de  Heredom  de  Kilwinning,  and  Dr.  Arnot  states  that  the
Lodge  of  Constance  at  Arras  preserves  the  original  Charter  signed
by  the  Prince  in  1747.  Bro.  Hughan,  in  his  valuable  history,  informs
us  that  he  possesses  a  catalogue  of  books  advertised  for  sale  in  Paris
in  i860,  in  which  the  following  extract  occurs  :

"9.  Charles  Edward  Stuart,  roy  d'Angleterre,  de  France,
d'Ecosse  et  d'Irlande  .  .  .  voulant  temoigner  aux  ma9ons  arte-
siens  combien  nous  sommes  reconnaissant  envers  eux  des  preuves
de  bienfaisance  qu'ils  nous  ont  prodigues,  etc.,  creons  et  erigeons  par
la  presente  bulle  en  la  dite  ville  d'Arras  un  souv.  chap,  primatial  de
R.  C.  X.,  sous  le  titre  distinctif  d'  Ecosse  Jacobite,  qui  serra  regi  par

1910  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

les  chevaliers  Lagneau,  de  Robespierre,  avocats.  An  de  l'incarna*
tion  5745."

A  note  is  appended  that  "  Le  document  authentique,  sur
velin,  est  revetu  du  grand  sceau,  de  sept  timbres  et  d'un  grand
nombre  de  signatures.  C'est  l'expedition  originale  pour  le  chapitre
metropolitan  de  Paris."

The  date,  5745,  on  this  authentic  document  must  be  wrong,  as
that  year,  the  era  of  the  Incarnation,  is  still  some  four  thousand  years
away,  and  if  it  is  an  error  for  Anno  Mundi,  it  may  be  remarked  that
Charles  Edward  Stuart  did  not  succeed  to  the  empty  titles  enumer-
ated above  till  the  death  of  his  father  in  1 766.  All  trace,  however,
of  these  documents  escaped  the  research  of  such  a  diligent  inquirer
as  Bro.  Hughan,  who  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  it  is  an  error  to
connect  the  Royal  Order  with  the  Rose  Croix,  as  the  ceremonies
differ  essentially,  the  former  possessing  a  very  peculiar  and  quaintly
rhythmic  ritual.

With  regard  to  the  name  Heredom  of  Kilwinning,  many  deriva-
tions of  the  word  have  been  given.  Some  give  it  a  Greek  origin
and  interpret  it  as  Holy  House,  others  go  to  the  Hebrew,  and,  as  it
is  plural  in  form,  translate  it  by  "Rulers,"  others  derive  it  from
"  Heroden,  a  mountain  in  Scotland,"  without  assigning  any  reason  ;
Bro.  Hughan  takes  the  safe  course  of  concluding  that  as  the  rituals
of  both  degrees  do  not  reveal  the  secret,  the  subject  can  not  be  defi-
nitely decided  one  way  or  another.  The  word  occurs  under  the
form  Harodim  as  well  as  Heredom,  the  latter  seeming  to  be  a  Saxon
term  of  the  same  form  as  Kingdom,  which  might  be  represented  in
modern  German  by  Herrthum  or  Heerthum.

The  earliest  records,  strangely  enough,  relate  to  England,  not  to
Scotland,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  following  list  of  regular  chap-
ters, according  to  seniority :

Decree  of

Seniority.  List,  etc.  Date.

1.  Grand  Lodge  at  the  Thistle  and  Crown, Chandos  Street..  Time  Immemorial

2.  Grand  Chapter  at  the  Thistle  and  Crown,  Chandos  Street.  "

3.  Coach  and  Horses,  Welbeck  Street "

4.  White  Boar's  Head,  Exeter  Road "

5.  Golden  Horse  Shoe,  in  Cannon  Street,  Southwark December  11, 1743.

6.  The  Griffin,  in  Deptford,  in  Kent December  20, 1744

7.  Grand   Chapter   at  The    Hague,  empowered   to   act   as

Grand  Lodge July  22,  1750.

ROYAL  ORDER   OF  SCOTLAND  191 1

Decree  of

Seniority.  List,  etc.  Date.

S October  12, 1752

9.  (1)  Grand  Chapter  at  Rouen  in    Normandy,   empowered

to  act  as  a  Grand  Lodge May  1,  1 782.

10.  (2)  Choix  a  Paris October  4, 1786.

11.  (3)  Strasburg January  4, 1787.

12.  (4)  L'Union  Lavall January  4,  1787.

13-  (5)    October  4,  1787.

14.  (6)  Grand  Lodge,  Chambery April  4,  1788.

15.  (7)  Grand  Chapter  at   Chambery  in  Saxony,  empowered

to    act    as   a    Grand    Lodge    in    the   Dominion   of

King  of  Sardinia April  4,  1788.

16.  (8)  At  Martinique  (?) July  4,

17.  (9)  At  St.  Domingo July  4,

18.  (10)  At  Brest July  4,

Here  we  find  in  London  a  Grand  Lodge  and  a  Grand  Chapter,
evidently  the  governing  body  of  the  order ;  two  other  subordinate
bodies  also  described  as  "  immemorial."  and  two,  Nos.  5  and  6,  of  an
earlier  date  than  the  Scottish  Grand  Lodge  of  Edinburgh  which  was
originally  No.  7  on  the  above  list,  the  Grand  Chapter  at  The  Hague.
The  record-book  gotten  up  for  "  The  Brethren  of  H.  R.  D.  M.,
belonging  to  the  Hague,"  is  stated  to  belong  to  the  Grand  Chapter
termed  the  "  Grand  Lodge  of  the  Royal  Order  at  Edinburgh  consti-
tuted July  22,  1750."  Other  records  show  that  the  Royal  Order  of
Scotland  (in  England)  existed  much  earlier  than  any  of  the  other
degrees  in  the  United  Kingdom  except  the  "first  three."  The  Royal
Arch  is  alluded  to  in  print  in  1 744,  but  is  not  again  mentioned  till
1752,  and  the  minutes  do  not  begin  till  ten  years  later.  In  both,  the
evidence  of  the  existence  and  activity  of  the  Royal  Order  during  the
early  part  of  the  last  century  gives  it  a  position  superior  to  all  addi-
tional degrees,  and  thus  it  can  claim  a  very  respectable  antiquity.
The  notion  that  it  was  fabricated  by  the  Chevalier  Ramsey  has  been
perfectly  refuted  by  Bro.  Gould  in  his  history,  and  may  be  dismissed
from  consideration.  Bro.  Lyon  seems  to  incline  to  the  opinion  that
it  is  not  of  Scotch  origin,  alleging  the  fact  that  certain  privileges
were  allowed  to  No.  7  in  the  list  of  chapters  "  on  an  acknowledg-
ment once  a  year  to  the  Grand  Lodge  from  whom  it  derived  its  title
at  a  quarterly  Grand  Lodge  meeting  which  is  always  held  at  London
on  the  fifth  Sunday  in  the  months  having  so  many,"  and  arguing  there
from  that  a  body  of  Scotch  origin  would  not  so  far  desert  its  relig-

1912  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

ious  principles  as  to  hold  constitutional  meetings  on  the  Sunday,
There  is  evidence,  however,  that  in  England  "Masters'  "  lodges  did
meet  on  Sunday.  To  sum  up  the  whole  matter  in  the  words  of
Brother  Hughan,  "we  cannot  get  farther  back  than  the  Grand
Lodge  and  Grand  Chapter  in  London  with  three  subordinates  of
'time  immemorial'  antiquity  (so  called),  and  the  first  dated  consti-
tution of  December  n,  1743."

With  regard  to  the  first  offshoot  of  the  London  Grand  Lodge
(No.  7  in  the  list  of  chapters  given  above),  doubts  arose  respect-
ing the  meaning  of  the  contraction  "  Prov."  in  the  signature  of  the
Charter  constituting  the  new  lodge.  Scotland  had  for  a  long  series
of  years  been  in  very  close  relation  with  the  United  Provinces  of
the  Netherlands.  In  1444  a  contract  was  made  between  the  royal
burghers  of  Scotland  and  the  latter  power  by  which  Scotch  traders
were  freed  from  several  duties  and  governed  by  the  law  of  Scotland.
Among  the  Scots  residing  in  Holland  at  the  beginning  of  the  18th
century  was  William  Mitchell,  a  teacher  ol  languages.  It  is  stated
that  he  had  been  admitted  to  the  Royal  Order  in  France  in  1 749.
and  in  London  in  1750.  In  this  latter  year  Mitchell  and  a  Brother,
Jonas  Kluck,  of  the  Netherlands,  presented  a  petition  to  the  Pro.  G.
M.  in  South  Britain,  asking  the  London  Grand  Lodge  for  authority
to  enable  them  and  other  residents  at  The  Hague  to  found  a  Prov.
Grand  Lodge  there.  The  petition  was  duly  granted,  and  Brother
William  Mitchell  was  appointed  Prov.  G.  M.,  and  the  Prov.  Grand
Lodge  was  duly  constituted  at  London,  July  22,  1750.  The  official
register  is  as  follows  :

"  I  did  this  day  attend  at  the  house  of  Brother  Louis,  S.  N.  C.  R.
T.  Y.,  the  sign  of  the  Golden  Horse  Shoe,  in  Cannon  Street,  in
Southwark,  and  did  then  and  there  constitute  the  following  brethren
residing  at  The  Hague  into  a  regular  Chapter  in  full  form,  and  did
constitute  and  appoint  our  Right  Worshipful  and  highly  honored
Brother  William  Mitchell,  known  and  distinguished  among  the
Brethren  of  the  Order  by  the  sublime  title  and  characteristic  F.  D.
L.  T.  Y.,  and  Knight  of  the  R.  Y.  G  S.,  etc.,  T.  R.  S.  T.  A.,  by
delivering  the  patent,  etc.,  in  due  form,  as  usual,  for  the  constitution
of  Chapters  in  foreign  parts,  and  did,  by  virtue  of  my  authority,  ex-
change his  characteristic,  etc.,  for  that  of  R.  L.  F."

The  place  mentioned,  the  Golden  Horse  Shoe,  was  the  house
where  the  No.  5  chapters  and  lodges  were  accustomed  to  assemble.

ROYAL   ORDER   OF   SCOTLAND  1913

The  seal  on  the  diploma  appointing  Brother  Mitchell  Prov.  G.  M.  has
been  destroyed,  but  that  on  the  Charter  of  the  Prov.  Grand  Lodge
and  Chapter  exists.  The  design  represents  a  bridge  of  five  arches,
and  above  it  is  displayed  the  letter  Z,  and  recalls  to  mind  the  bridge
with  the  letters  L.  O.  P.,  well  known  to  members  of  the  16th  Degree
of  the  "Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite."  The  difficulty,  as  we  have
said,  is  connected  with  the  signature.  The  presiding  officer  signed
by  his  characteristic,  and  as  may  be  seen  in  the  fac-simile  in  Lyon's
history  the  words  "  Prov1.  Grad.  Masr."  stand  above,  and  the  words
"  In.  So.  B."  below,  the  seal.  Does  the  contraction  Prov1.  mean
"  Provincial "  or  "  Provisional  ?  "  If  the  former  meaning  is  assigned
to  it,  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  it  could  be  applied  to  the  President
of  the  original  Grand  Lodge  and  Grand  Chapter,  and  therefore  it  is
safer  to  assume  that  it  means  "  Provisional "  and  that  the  President
for  the  time  being  was  Grand  Master  pro  tempore.  The  Royal
Order,  it  may  here  be  added,  has  always  been  and  still  is  Christian  in
character,  and  the  following  prayer  resembles,  in  its  opening  lines,
the  Old  Charges  of  the  Freemasons  of  the  16th  century,  before
they  were  changed  and  adopted  as  the  Universal  Freemasonry.

"  The  might  of  the  Blessed  Father  of  Heaven,  the  wisdom  of
His  Glorious  Son,  and  the  fellowship  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  being  the
glorious  and  undivided  Trinity,  three  persons  in  one  God,  be  with
us  at  this  our  beginning,  and  so  guide  and  govern  our  actions  in  this
life,  that  at  the  final  conflagration,  when  the  world,  and  all  things
therein,  shall  be  destroyed,  we  may  be  received  with  joy  and  glad-
ness into  eternal  happiness,  in  that  Glorious,  Everlasting,  Heavenly
Kingdom,  which  shall  never  have  an  end.  '

The  regular  minutes  of  the  Royal  Order  at  Edinburgh  date
from  October  31,  1766.  Down  to  1763  the  register  contains  only
fifteen  names,  including  Brother  Mitchell,  but  between  that  date
and  the  commencement  of  the  regular  minutes  fifty  were  admitted,
and  it  is  recorded  in  the  minutes  of  July  28,  1769,  that  "  after  much
trouble  and  a  great  deal  of  expense  they  had  been  able  to  revive
and  establish  the  Ancient  Order  of  Scots  Masonry  in  the  metropo-
lis of  their  native  country,  which  would  be  attested  by  several  mem-
bers of  the  Honorable  Council."  In  the  same  year  by  permission
of  the  Provost  and  Baillies  of  the  city,  a  room  was  fitted  up  at  the
expense  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  in  a  "centrical  "  situation.  From  the
commencement  of  those  regular  minutes  the  sequence  of  the  high

i9i4  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

officials  can  be  traced.  Down  to  July  4,  1776,  Brother  William
Mitchell  was  the  Grand  Master  or  Governor  of  the  "  Royal  Order."
He  was  succeeded  by  Brother  Jas.  "Secresy"  Kerr.  He  resigned
in  1 776,  and  was  succeeded  by  Brother  William  "Honor  "  Baillie,  Ad-
vocate (afterward  Lord  Polkemmet).  When  he  resigned  in  1778,
Brother  William  Charles  "  Eloquence  "  Little,  Advocate,  succeeded
him.  The  chair  of  Deputy  Grand  Master  was  filled  in  1786  by
Brother  William  "  Worship  "  Mason,  who  was  admitted  to  the  de-
gree at  Edinburgh  a.d.  1754.  When  he  resigned  in  1789  there  was
elected  Dr.  Thomas  "Activity"  Hay,  who  died  in  1816.  In  1805
he  was  Grand  Master,  but  there  does  not  appear  to  have  been  any
minutes  recorded  from  that  date  to  1813.

During  the  period  from  1770  to  1780  the  office  of  Deputy  Grand
Master  was  filled  by  General  Oughton,  Brother  Little,  the  Earl  of
Leven,  and  Lord  Westhall.  Of  the  four  of  these  high  officials,  three
were  Grand  Masters  of  Scotland,  showing  that  at  this  period  the
Craft  showed  great  favor  to  the  Royal  Order.  But  as  may  be  seen
from  the  fact  that  no  minutes  were  made  between  1805  and  1813,
the  order  was  becoming  dormant,  and  it  continued  so  in  Scotland
till  the  revival  in  1839.

Abroad,  the  Royal  Order  spread  and  flourished.  In  Brother
Hughan's  catalogue  of  books  mentioned  in  the  preceding  page,  there
is  the  entry  :  "  No.  945,  of  the  year  1808,  is  entitled

"  Tableau  g£n£ral  des  officiers  et  membres,  composant  le  R.
chapitre  du  grand  et  sublime  ordre  de  H-d-m  de  Kilwinning,  sous
le  titre  distinctif  du  Choix,  constitute*  par  la  grande  loge  de  l'ordre
s£ante  a  Edinbourg,  le  4  Octobre,  1786.  Sous  les  auspices  de  Mgr.
le  Prince  de  Cambaceres,  grand  maitre  d'honneur  en  France."

Nos.  946  and  953  contain  "tableaux'*  of  the  officers  of  the  fore-
going, of  November  30,  1808,  and  a.d.  18 10,  the  latter  having
another  list  "  du  meme  ordre  s£ant  a  Rouen,"  1810,  in  the  same
volume.

Prince  Cambac6res,  Arch  Chancellor  of  the  French  Empire,  was
succeeded  in  his  office  of  Provincial  Grand  Master  by  the  head  of
the  Ducal  house  of  Choiseul.

The  above-mentioned  Charter,  for  the  Chapter  de  Choix,  from
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Edinburgh  in  1786,  was  addressed  to  Nicholas
Chadouille,  Avocat  en  Parlament,  and  other  Brethren.  A  few
months  previously  a  Charter  dated  Edinburgh,  May  1,   1786,  had

ROYAL   ORDER   OF   SCOTLAND  1915

established  a  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  of  Heredom  of  Kilwinning,
constituting  John  Matthews,  a  merchant  of  Rouen,  Provincial
Chief,  with  powers  to  disseminate  the  order.  Both  these  docu-
ments are  signed  by  William  Charles  Little,  Deputy  Grand  Master,
William  Mason,  and  William  Gibb.  To  commemorate  the  event  the
Chapter  du  Choix  struck  a  medal  which  is  engraved  in  the  Tresor
Numismatique  Napoleon.  It  represents  between  a  draw-bridge
open,  sinister  and  a  ladder  dexter,  a  tower  enbattled  supporting  a
pillar  on  which  is  an  open  book.  On  the  front  of  the  tower  are  two
square  stones,  one  exhibiting  the  square  and  compasses,  the  other
the  letter  R.     The  medal  is  inscribed  with  the  following  legend :

Obverse,  L'Ordre  de  H-d-m.  Introduit  en  Fr.  Par  J.
Matheus,  G.  M.  P.,  1786.

"Reverse,  in  eleven  lines,  (1)  T-r-s-t-a.  N.  Chadouille,  1786.
(2)  T-r-s-t-a.  L.  T.  Dorban,  1789.  (3)  T-r-s-t-a.  A.  C.  Durin,
1806.  (4)  T-r-s-t-a.  C.  A.  Thory,  1807.  Depute  T-r-s-t-a.  J.
P.  Rouyer.

In  exergue,  in  three  lines,  the  last  curving,  Chap  .*.  De  h-d-m.
Du  Choix  a  Paris,  1809,  Jaley  Fecit  L  .*.  A-p-ht-n."

Jaley  being  the  artist's  name.     The  Medal  is  of  copper.

A  short  time  after  the  establishment  of  the  order  in  France,  a
Provincial  Grand  Master  was  appointed  for  Spain,  Mr.  James  Gor-
don, a  merchant  of  Xeres  de  la  Frontera,  whose  commission  was
signed  by  Deputy  Grand  Master  Dr.  Thomas  Hay,  and  Messrs.
Charles  Moor  and  John  Brown.  The  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  in
France  had  jurisdiction  over  twenty-six  Chapters  of  Heredom,  in-
cluding some  in  Belgium  and  Italy,  but  as  fourteen  of  these  chap-
ters were  not  ratified  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Edinburgh  from  Jan-
uary 10,  1809,  to  October  4,  181 1,  they  may  have  been  irregular.

Coming  down  to  our  own  times,  we  find  that  the  following  Pro-
vincial Grand  Lodges  and  Chapters  have  been  authorized  during
the  last  half  century.     Those  in  italics  are  dormant.

The  Netherlands,  at  Amsterdam July  4,  1843.

Eastern  Provinces,  at  Calcutta,  India July  4,  1845.

North  of  France 1847.

Sweden  and  Norway Jan.  5,  1852,

Sardinia ?

New  Brunswick,  at  St.  John ?

Province  of  Quebec ?

i9i6  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

Glasgow  and  Neighboring  Counties  or  Isles Jan.  4,  1859.

London  (and  "  Royal  Bruce  "  Chapter) 1872.

Western  India,  at  Bombay ?

China,  at  Shanghai ?

United  States,  at  Washington,  D.  C Oct.  4,  1877.

Lancashire  and  Cheshire,  at  Manchester ?

Aberdeen ?

County  of  Yorkshire,  at  York 1886.

South-east  Africa,  at  Durban ?

Royal  Order  in  the  United  States.

As  early  as  1752  a  chapter  was  formed  in  Virginia,  but  seems
soon  to  have  ceased  all  activity.  We  must  come  down  to  the  year
1877  for  the  foundation  of  the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  in  the  United
States.  The  Warrant  signed  at  Edinburgh  October  4,  1877,  is  as
follows :

Charter  for  Royal  Order  in  the  United  States.

IN   THE   NAME   OF  THE    HOLY   AND    UNDIVIDED

TRINITY.

We,  Sir  John  Whyte,  W.  D.  M.,  President
of  the  Judges  and  Council  of  the  Great  S.  N.  D.

(        SEAL        )  R-  M.:  Warder  of  the  T.  W.   R.  of  R.  F.  R.  S.

(  R.  S.  Y.  C.  S.  J  M.  N.  T. :  Deputy  Grand  Master  and  Governor

of  the  High  and  Honourable  Orders  of  H.  R.  M.
of  K.  L.  W.  N.  G.  and  the  R.  S.  Y.  C.  S.  :  Sir
Alexander,  S.  T.  N.  T.  H.,  Senior  Grand  Warden,
Sir  William,  B.  T.  Y.,  Junior  Grand  Warden,
and  the  Remanent  Knights  Companions  of  the
Royal  Order  of  R.  S.  Y.  C.  S.  in  Grand  Lodge
assembled —

TO

Sir  Albert  V.  G.  R.  (Pike),  Knight  of  the  Order  of  the  R.  S.  Y.
C.  S.,  send  greeting  in  God  Everlasting.

By  virtue  of  the  authority  vested  in  US  from  time  immemorial
WE  do  hereby  grant  unto  you  and  the  rest  of  the  Right  Worthy  and
Worshipful  Brethren  of  the  Royal  Order  of  H.  R.  M.  and  of  the  R
S.  Y.  C.  S.  in  the  United  States  of  America,  full  power,  warrant  and
authority  to  hold  a  Chapter  of  the  order  of  H.  R.  M.  in  Washing-

ROYAL   ORDER   OF   SCOTLAND  1917

TON,  or  elsewhere  within  the  United  States  of  America,  so  long  as
you  and  they  shall  behave  becometh  as  Worthy  Brethren  of  the  said
Order,  or  until  the  powers  hereby  conferred  shall  be  withdrawn,
which  the  Grand  Lodge  of  our  Order  reserves  full  power  and  au-
thority to  do  when  they  consider  proper,  with  full  power  to  you  to
remove  the  same  from  place  to  place,  but  always  within  the  United
States  of  America,  as  occasion  shall  offer  for  the  good  and  glory  of
the  Order,  you  and  they  conforming  to  the  laws  and  regulations  of
the  Grand  Lodge  transmitted  to  you  now  or  afterwards,  and  we  do
hereby  appoint  you  T.  R.  S.  T.  A.  of  the  said  Chapter  and  grant
you  full  power,  warrant  and  authority  to  appoint  proper  officers  to
assist  you  therein,  viz.  :  a  Deputy  T.  R.  S.  T.  A.,  a  Senior  Guardian,
a  Junior  Guardian,  a  Secretary,  a  Treasurer,  a  Marischal,  a  Deputy
Marischal,  and  a  Guarder,  who  shall  act  as  Examiner  and  Introducer.

And  further,  know  you  that  for  the  good  and  promotion  of
the  Order  of  H.  R.  M.  in  general  we  do  hereby  empower  you  to
form  a  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  of  the  said  Order,  and  to  nomi-
nate, constitute  and  appoint  you,  the  said  Sir  Albert  V.  G.  R.,  to
preside  and  rule  over  and  govern  the  same  and  the  Brethren  there-
unto belonging,  so  long  as  you  shall  act  conformably  to  the  Laws
and  Rules  of  our  Grand  Lodge,  and  so  long  as  this  Charter  and  the
powers  therein  conferred  shall  continue  unrecalled,  and  we  do  here-
by authorize,  empower  and  charge  you  to  take  upon  yourself,  the
title  of  Provincial  Grand  Master  of  the  Order  of  H.  R.  M.  for
the  United  States  of  America,  being  the  Province  hereby  placed
under  your  superintendence  ;  and  we  do  hereby  grant  you  full  power,
warrant  and  authority  to  appoint  proper  officers  to  assist  you  in  the
high  office  hereby  on  you  conferred,  to  consist  of  the  following
number  and  denominations  :  one  Deputy  Provincial  Grand  Master,
a  Senior  Provincial  Grand  Warden,  a  Junior  Provincial  Grand
Warden,  a  Provincial  Grand  Sword-bearer,  a  Provincial  Grand
Secretary,  a  Provincial  Grand  Treasurer,  two  Provincial  Grand
Marischals,  a  Senior  Provincial  Grand  Steward,  and  three  other
Provincial  Grand  Stewards,  and  a  Provincial  Grand  Guarder.

And  further  be  it  known  to  all  and  every  one  of  the  Brethren
thai  we  hereby  invest  you  with  full  power,  warrant  and  authority  to
appoint  such  persons  to  be  your  officers  as  you  shall  think  are  most
proper  and  fit  for  each  respective  post  either  in  your  Chapter  or
Provincial  Grand  Lodge,  without  consulting  or  asking  the  consent

i9i8  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

or  approbation  of  any  Brother  of  the  Order  whatsoever,  unless  of
your  own  free  will  you  shall  think  proper  to  pay  such  compliment,
which  we  deem  expedient  and  therefore  recommend.

And  further,  we  hereby  invest  you  with  full  power,  warrant
and  authority  to  depose  or  displace  from  his  or  their  offices  any
officer  or  officers,  who  have  been  guilty  of  improper  conduct  or  dig-
nity to  your  Worship,  or  to  fine,  mulct  or  amerce  them,  or  any  of
them,  for  the  same,  without  being  obliged  to  bring  them  to  a  formal
trial,  or  asking  the  consent  or  approbation  of  the  Brethren  for  so
doing,  unless  you  shall  of  your  own  free  will  think  proper  so  to  do.
But  be  it  also  known  that  if  it  shall  appear  to  your  Provincial  Grand
Lodge  to  be  for  the  good  of  the  Order  in  your  Province  that  you
should  relinquish,  or  restrict  your  privilege  of  appointing  or  displac-
ing your  office-bearers,  either  in  your  Chapter  or  Provincial  Grand
Lodge,  or  in  both,  and  if  you  see  proper  to  consent  to  the  same,  it
shall  be  in  your  power  so  to  do,  notwithstanding  any  existing
general  law  of  our  Grand  Lodge  appearing  to  the  contrary,  and  to
cause  a  resolution  or  law  to  that  effect  specifying  how  and  where  the
elections  are  to  be  in  future  conducted,  to  be  endorsed  upon  or  an-
nexed to  this  Charter,  and  which  when  signed  by  you  and  registered
in  the  Minute  Book  of  your  Provincial  Grand  Lodge,  and  a  copy
thereof,  certified  by  your  Provincial  Grand  Secretary,  transmitted
to  and  approved  by  our  Grand  Lodge,  shall  thereafter  be  as  good
and  valid  a  law,  so  far  as  regards  your  Chapter  and  Provincial  Grand
Lodge,  as  if  it  had  been  made  by  our  Grand  Lodge  of  the  R.  S.  Y.
C.  S.  ;  and  being  entered  in  our  Record  Book  shall  be  irrevocable
by  you  and  your  successors  in  office  unless  by  application  to  and
with  the  approval  of  our  Grand  Lodge ;  it  being,  however,  declared
that  nothing  shall  affect  your  right  as  Provincial  Grand  Master  or  the
rights  of  your  successors  in  office  to  appoint  your  or  their  Deputy.

And  we  further  strictly  require  of  the  Brethren  in  general,  your
Provincial  Grand  Officers  as  well  as  others,  to  respect,  acknowledge
and  obey  you,  the  said  Sir  Albert  V.  G.  R.,  and  pay  you  due  respect
as  head  ruler  and  governor  over  them  and  their  Chapter  or
Chapters  in  your  said  Province :  And  we  do  hereby  appoint  you  to
hold  quarterly  meetings  of  your  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  for  regu-
lating the  affairs  of  the  Order  of  H.  R.  M.  in  your  Province.

And  further,  we  hereby  empower  you  and  your  Chapter  to
advance  to  the  Royal  Order  of  H.  R.  M.  (on  paying  a  fee  not  less

ROYAL   ORDER   OF   SCOTLAND  1919

than  two  guineas,  of  which  ten  shillings  and  sixpence  shall  be  trans-
mitted to  our  Grand  Lodge),  such  Master  Masons  as  are  compan-
ions of  the  Royal  Arch  Chapter  and  as  are  well-known  to  you  and
your  Brethren  to  be  worthy  of  that  High  Honor,  but  with  this  pro-
viso, that  you  shall  not  have  it  in  your  power  within  your  Provincial
Grand  Lodge  or  elsewhere  to  promote  any  Brethren  of  H.  R.  M.
to  the  Sublime  Order  of  the  R.  S.  Y.  C.  S.,  without  special  author-
ity obtained  from  our  Grand  Lodge  for  that  purpose,  nor  even  then,
unless  on  payment  of  a  fee  of  at  least  one  guinea  (of  which  ten  shil-
lings and  sixpence  shall  be  transmitted  to  our  Grand  Lodge).

And  further,  be  it  known  to  you  that  we  prohibit  and  dis-
charge you  and  your  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  or  Chapter  from
granting  any  Patents  or  Letters  of  Constitution  to  Chapters,
or  Diplomas  to  the  Brethren  or  Knights,  under  any  pretence  what-
ever, all  such  things  being  issued  by  us  alone,  and  diplomas  being
so  issued  free  of  charge,  on  payment  of  the  fees  above  mentioned,
payable  to  us  on  advancement  to  the  Order  of  H.  R.  M.  and  pro-
motion to  the  Sublime  Order  of  R.  S.  Y.  C.  S.

And  further,  be  it  known  to  the  Brethren  in  general  that  it
is  not,  nor  can  it  be,  in  their  power  to  depose  or  displace  you  or
your  successors  in  office  from  the  high  office  hereby  on  you  con-
ferred, except  for  high  or  enormous  crimes  tending  to  the  scandal
and  detriment  of  the  Order,  and  not  then  without  bringing  you  to
a  regular  trial,  and  an  account  of  the  proceedings  therein,  with  the
crime  and  sentence  of  the  Council,  being  first  sent  to  and  approved
by  our  Grand  Lodge  at  Edinburgh.

And  further,  we  empower  you  to  relinquish,  give  up,  or  re-
sign your  said  office  with  the  powers  and  privileges  attached  thereto
as  aforesaid,  in  case  you  shall  think  proper  or  be  desirous  so  to  do,
to  any  worthy  qualified  Knight  of  the  Order  of  the  R.  S.  Y.  C.  S.,
and  to  no  person  whatsoever,  under  that  degree,  but  your  successor
or  successors,  in  office,  before  he  or  they  shall  exercise  any  of  the
powers  connected  with  said  office  must  be  approved  by  our  Grand
Lodge.

And  further,  be  it  known  to  you,  that  if  you  or  your  succes-
sors in  office  are  guilty  of  acting  contrary  to  our  will  and  pleasure  or
any  of  the  Laws,  Rules  and  Regulations  now  appointed  by  us,  or
which  may  hereafter  be  appointed  for  your  observance  by  authority
of  our  Grand  Lodge,  from  which  you  hold  this  Constitution  or

i92o  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Charter,  These  Presents  and  all  power  thereunder  shall  forthwith
cease  and  determine  without  any  formal  revocation  on  our  part,  and
you  and  they  shall  be  rendered  incapable  of  holding  any  Grand
Office  or  authority  in  the  Royal  Order,  and  also  be  liable  to  be  ex-
truded for  contempt  and  disobedience.

That  all  companions  of  the  Royal  Order  admitted  in  your  Pro-
vincial Grand  Lodge  or  Chapter  may  be  duly  enrolled  in  our  Record
Book,  we  do  particularly  direct  your  attention  to  the  Twenty-sixth
Article  of  our  Constitution  and  Laws  as  revised  and  approved  on
Sixth  January,  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  sixty-two.

And  for  every  Authority,  Power  and  Privilege  herein  above
mentioned,  this  shall  be  your  sufficient  Warrant,  Patent  and  Charter.
In  testimony  whereof,  this,  our  Charter,  written  by  Alexander
Blues  Wyllie,  clerk  to  our  Grand  Secretary,  is  subscribed  by  John
Whyte-Melville,  of  Bennochie  and  Strathkinnes,  our  Deputy
Grand  Master  and  Governor;  Alexander  Hay,  our  Senior  Grand
Warden ;  William  Mann,  our  Junior  Grand  Warden  ;  George
Murray,  our  Grand  Treasurer,  and  John  Brown  Douglas,  our
Grand  Secretary ;  all  Knights  of  the  R.  S.  Y.  C.  S.,  duly  sealed
and  thereupon  approved  and  issued  by  our  Grand  Lodge  of  the
Royal  Order,  at  Edinburgh,  this  fourth  day  of  October,  in  the  year
of  our  Lord  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  seventy-seven,  and  of
the  Restoration  of  the  Order  564.

J.  Whyte-Melville,  W.  D.  M.

Alex.  Hay,  S.  T.  N.  T.  H.

W.  Mann,  B.  T.  Y.

George  Murray,  G.  T.

J.  B.  Douglas,  G.  S.

The  "  charter  members "  were  thirteen  in  number,  including
several  well-known  and  eminent  Brethren  (whose  labors  for  the
Craft  and  deep  interest  in  its  welfare  are  as  familiar  to  English
Masonic  students  as  to  those  in  America),  all  of  whom  became
members  of  the  Grand  Lodge  at  Edinburgh.

Founders'  Names,  a.d.  1877.

Brother  Albert  Pike,  Washington,  D.  C.

"        John  Robin  Mc Daniel,  Lynchburg,  Va.
"        Henry  L.  Palmer,  Milwaukee,  Wis.

ROYAL   ORDER   OF  SCOTLAND  1921

Brother  Jas.  C.  Bachelor,  New  Orleans,  La.

Vincent  L.  Hurlbut,  Chicago,  111.
"       Josiah  H.  Drummond,  Portland,  Maine.

William  M.  Ireland,  Washington,  D.  C.

Robert  McC.  Graham,  New  York,  N.  Y.
"        Albert  G.  Mackey,  Washington,  D.  C.

Enoch  Terry  Carson,  Cincinnati,  Ohio.

Charles  Roome,  New  York,  N.  Y.
"        Charles  Eugene  Meyer,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
"        Samuel  C.  Lawrence,  Boston,  Mass.

The  number  of  members  in  the  order  was  divided  equally
between  the  Southern  and  Northern  Masonic  Jurisdictions  of  the
United  States ;  the  total  number  was  fixed  at  one  hundred  and  fifty,
with  a  margin  of  twenty-five.1  Election  is  by  ballot,  which  must  be
unanimous.  At  present,  September,  1900,  there  are  two  hundred
and  fifty-seven  members.  There  are  no  by-laws  for  the  regulation
of  proceedings  in  the  United  States  except  the  rules  of  the  order,
and  the  series  of  standing  resolutions.

The  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  meets  alternately  at  Washington
in  the  District  of  Columbia,  and  in  New  York,  holding  their  annual
meetings  "  on  the  Monday  nearest  the  day  fixed  for  the  meetings
of  the  Supreme  Council."  The  only  special  regalia  worn  on  these
occasions  are  the  "  star  and  garter,"  the  aprons  and  cordons  not
being  obligatory.  The  archives  of  the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge
preserve  sketches  and  portraits  of  each  member.  Since  1883  the
ladies  of  the  Knights  Companions  have  been  admitted  to  their
annual  gatherings  and  banquets.

The  proceedings  on  these  occasions  include  an  "  allocution "
delivered  by  the  Provincial  Grand  Master.  The  addresses  of  the
first  Provincial  Grand  Master,  the  late  General  Albert  Pike,  have
been  printed  in  published  proceedings,  and  from  them  the  following
extracts  are  taken :

Antiquity  of  the  Royal  Order. — "  I  value  the  Ancient  Order,
for  it  is  eminently  Masonic.  It  has  close  kinship  with  the  three
degrees  of  Ancient  Craft  Masonry.  Its  quaint  old  Ritual  has
throughout  the  old-fashioned  simplicity  of  the  Masonry  of  the  sev-

1  Several  years  ago  the  Constitution  was  changed  and  the  number  is  no  longer  limited.
121

i922  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

enteenth  century,  when  it  and  those  degrees  were  all  the  Freema-
sonry that  existed  in  the  world.  We  read  it  and  breathe  the  air  of
the  old  days.  After  having  been  long  conversant  with  the  elabo-
rate ones  of  the  present  day,  it  is  like  going  from  the  pomp  and
show  of  cities  into  the  forest  and  prairie,  to  live  among  the  frank
hunters  and  sturdy  husbandmen  who  have  been  the  builders  of  the
States,  to  enjoy  the  long  days  of  October  in  the  woods,  and  sleep  at
night  under  the  protecting  stars."     (October  16,  1882.)

Primary  Aim  of  the  Rite. — "  We  represent,  not  altogether  un-
worthily, I  hope,  the  intellect  and  the  scholarship  of  the  Freema-
sonry of  the  United  States  :  Our  Father  who  is  in  Heaven  has  given
us  the  opportunity  to  serve  Masonry  worthily,  and  make  it  the
debtor  of  the  Royal  Order,  by  leading  the  Masons  of  the  '  Blue '
Lodges  to  the  living  springs  of  truth,  making  known  to  them  the
true  meaning  and  profound  significance  of  their  most  ancient  sym-
bols, and  teaching  them  to  set  a  higher  value  upon  their  Freema-
sonry, and  to  elevate  it,  in  the  estimation  of  the  world."  (Septem-
ber 24,  1883.)

"To  see  united  into  a  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  of  our  old  and
venerable  Order  a  certain  limited  number  of  good  men  and  Masons,
residing  in  all  our  States  and  Territories,  between  whom  the  new  ties
of  a  more  perfect  Brotherhood  might  be  created,  and  year  by  year
grow  stronger  and  more  enduring."     (October  20,  1884.)

Historical  Basis  of  the  Order. — "  It  was  established,  our  Ritual
declares,  'to  correct  the  errors  and  reform  the  abuses  which  had
crept  in  among  the  three  degrees  of  St.  John's  Masonry.'  It  is  'for
the  preservation  in  its  purity  of  St.  John's  Masonry.'  One  who
comes  to  seek  admission  here  declares  that  he  is  '  a  Mason  from  a
Lodge  dedicated  to  St.  John ; '  and  he  comes  to  seek  a  word  which
was  lost,  and  which  by  our  assistance  he  hopes  to  find.

"The  Royal  Order  has  also  the  early  symbolism  of  the  'Blue'
degrees,  and  not  that  borrowed  from  the  Alchemical  and  Hermetic
books.  The  column  of  the  Tower  of  Refreshment  has  a  square  base
of  pedestal,  intended  to  be  a  cube  or  perfect  ashlar.  The  shaft  of
the  column  has  nine  windows  looking  East,  one  for  each  flight  of
seven  (7)  steps.  On  the  column  is  a  triangular  entablature  ;  on  this
a  book  and  under  the  letters  upon  its  face  a  square,  a  level,  and  a
plumb  rule  ;  over  these  a  pair  of  compasses  extended  to  a  right
angle.     The  stairway  has  three  landing-places  and  the  lowest  flight

ROYAL   ORDER   OF   SCOTLAND  1923

of  stairs  is  of  seven  steps,  the  second  of  five,  and  the  '  apex  '  of
three."

"It  was  an  innovation  to  make  the  possession  of  the  Degree
of  the  Royal  Arch  a  necessary  qualification  for  admission  into  the
Order;  for  it  was  at  first  open  to  Master  Masons."  (October  15,
1888.)

The  present  Provincial  Grand  Master  is  Brother  Josiah  H.
Drummond,  of  Maine  ;  nominated  to  succeed  General  Albert  Pike.
The  Deputy  Provincial  Grand  Master  is  Thomas  H.  Caswell  of
California.

The  remaining  officers  duly  appointed  forming  the  tableau  to
date  are :

Prov.  Senior  Grand  Warden — George  M.  Moulton,  of  Illinois.

Prov.  Junior  Grand  Warden — Charles  H.  Fisk,  of  Kentucky.

Prov.  Grand  Secretary — W.  Oscar  Roome,  of  District  of  Co-
lumbia.

Prov.  Grand  Treastirer — Thomas  J.  Shyrock,  of  Maryland.

Prov.  Grand  Sword  Bearer — F.  M.  Highley,  of  Pennsylvania.

Prov.  Grand  Banner  Bearer — Nicholas  Coulson,  of  Michigan.

Prov.  Grand  Chaplain — Rev.  M.  Carmichael,  of  Virginia.

Prov.  First  Grand  Marischal — G.  E.  Corson,  of  District  of
Columbia.

Prov.  Second  Grand  Marischal — J.  H.  Olcott,  of  District  of
Columbia.

Prov.  Grand  Guarder — James  Hays  Trimble,  of  District  of
Columbia.

Prov.  Grand  Stewards — Allison  Nailor,  Jr.,  of  District  of  Co-
lumbia ;  William  Bromwell  Melish,  of  Ohio ;  Harrison  Dingman  ;
H.  H.  Williams,  of  Hawaii.

The  constitutions  and  laws  of  the  Royal  Order,  as  drawn  up
in  London  at  the  foundation  of  the  order  in  1742,  remained  un-
changed till  January  5,  1767.  By  one  of  these  laws,  Rule  19,  fees
are  to  be  paid  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Edinburgh  by  members
in  England,  and  the  Constitution  declares  that  the  King  of  Scot-
land is  Perpetual  Grand  Master,  and  therefor  not  an  elective
officer.

By  the  statutes,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  R.  S.  Y.  C.  S.  and  Grand
Chapter  of  H.  R.  M.  can  only  be  held  in  Scotland,  and  the  former
reserves  to  itself  the  right  to  promote  to  the  honor  of  Knighthood

1924  HISTORY   OF    FREEMASONRY

of  the  R.  S.  Y.  C.  S.,  but  usually  delegates  the  power  to  that  effect
to  the  Provincial  Grand  Masters,  by  personal  patents.

The  Grand  Lodge  officers  are  similar  to  those  already  noted  for
the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge,  only  the  Brother  who  rules  that  body,
until  a  king  of  Scotland  (called  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland)  is  able
to  become  Grand  Master,  is  termed  "Deputy  Grand  Master  and
Governor,"  a  Deputy  Governor  being  also  appointed,  all  having  cor-
responding rank  in  the  Grand  Chapter  of  H.  D.  M.  The  D.  G.
M.  (and  Governor)  and  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Grand  Lodge  are
ex-officiis  Warder  and  Deputy  Grand  Warder  of  the  T.  W.  R.  of
R.  F.  R.  S.  M.  N.  T.,  and  the  Provincial  Grand  Master  enjoys  a
similar  status  in  his  Province  ;  as  also  T.  R.  S.  T.  A.  of  his  own
chapter.

The  4th  of  July  is  election-day  for  the  Grand  Officers  and  also
for  subordinate  chapters  out  of  Scotland,  or  first  following  lawful
day,  if  the  4th  shall  be  a  Saturday  or  Sunday.  The  other  stated
meetings  of  Grand  Lodge  and  Provincial  Grand  Lodges  are  Octo-
ber 4th,  January  4th,  and  April  4th,  with  the  same  exceptions.

Members  acting  as  Grand  Officers  pro  tern,  have  power  to  sign
diplomas,  charters,  patents,  etc.  A  copy  of  a  certificate  issued  to
William  James  Hughan,  the  historian,  under  the  seal  of  the  Royal
Order  at  Edinburgh,  dated  March  6,  1867,  is  annexed  :

Copy  of  the  Royal  Order  Certificate,  a.o.  553.

IN    THE   NAME   OF    THE    HOLY   AND    UNDIVIDED

TRINITY.

We,  Sir  John  W7hyte,  W.  D.  M.,  President  of  the
.    Judges  and  Council  of  the  Great  S.  N.  D.  R.  M.,  and

<    Warder  of  the  T.   W.   R.  of  R.  F.  R.  S.  M.  N.  T.,

as  .

_^_^,       o    Deputy  Grand  Master  and  Governor  of  the  High  and

L.  s<   I    x    Honourable  Order  of  H.  R.  M.  of  K.  L.  W.  N.  G.

J^L,)     w    and  the  R.   S.   Y.  C.  S.;  Sir  Alexander,  S.  T.  N.  T.

s    H.,  Senior  Grand  Warden,  and  Sir  William,  B.  T.  Y.,

t-L^  Junior  Grand   Warden,   and  the    remanent    Knights

2    Companions  of  the  Royal  Order  of  the  R.  S.  Y.

<

C.  S.  in  Grand  Lodge  assembled.

d  We  do  hereby  certify  and  declare  that  our  Trusty

^    and  well  Beloved   Brother  William  James  Hughan,

ROYAL  ORDER   OF   SCOTLAND  1925

Master  Mason  of  the  Lodge  Number  594,  holding  of
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  and  Companion  Royal
Arch  Chapter,  Number  50  in  Scotland,  whose  signa-
ture is  on  the  margin,  having  been  advanced  to  the
Order  of  H.  R.  M.  of  K.  L.  W.  N.  G.  at  Glasgow,  in
the  Chapter  of  the  Provincial  Grand  Master  for  the
County  of  Lanark,  and  others,  on  the  twenty-eighth
day  of  February,  one  thousand  and  eight  hundred  and
sixty-seven,  by  the  characteristic  of  Geometry,  and
promoted  on  the  said  twenty-fifth  day  of  February,
one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  sixty-seven,  to  the

scarlet.  Honourable  Order  of  the  R.  S.  Y.  C.  S.  in  the  Pro-

vincial Grand  Lodge  for  the  County  of  Lanark,  and
others,  has  been  recorded  in  the  Books  of  our  Grand
Lodge  here,  and  therefore  we  recommend  him  as  a
lawful  member  of  the  Royal  Order,  Brother  of
H.  R.  M.  and  Knight  of  the  R.  S.  Y.  C.  S.,  to  all
Knights  and  Brethren  of  the  Order  wherever  found
and  established.

Given  under  our  hands  and  seals  of  the  Royal
Order  at  Edinburgh,  this  sixth  day  of  March,  a.d.
one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  sixty-seven,  and  of
the  Restoration  of  the  Order  553.

Gustavus  K.  Flindt,  P.  T.  W.  D.  M.

T.  D.  Porteous,  Pro  v.  Grand  Sy.  David  Sutherland,  P.  T.,  S.  T.  N.

F.  H.

J.  B.  Douglas,  Grand  Sec'y,     G.  L.  Brodie,  P.  T.,  B.  T.  Y.

The  minimum  fee  for  the  H.  D.  M.  and  Knighthood  is  three
guineas ;  subject  in  all  cases  to  the  approval  of  the  presiding  officer
as  respects  promotion  to  the  "  R.  S.  Y.  C.  S."  Conviction  of  crime
by  any  court  of  justice  involves  permanent  extrusion.

On  the  4th  of  April,  1855,  the  Supreme  Council  33d  Degree
of  Scotland,  and  on  the  nth  of  May  following,  the  Grand  Lodge
of  the  Royal  Order  agreed  to  a  reciprocal  treaty,  by  which  only
members  of  the  Royal  Order  can  be  admitted  to  the  18th  Degree,
and  all  Knights  of  the  Royal  Order,  provided  they  are  Royal  Arch
Masons,  have  special  privileges  as  to  fees  in  joining  the  A.\A.\S.*.
Rite.

I926  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

M.  W.  Brother  John  Whyte-Melville  was  the  Deputy  Grand
Master  and  Governor  for  many  years,  and  on  nis  decease  was  suc-
ceeded by  the  Right  Honorable,  the  Earl  of  Rosslyn,  in  1885,  who

died  September  6,  1890,  and  was  succeeded  by .     The

Grand  Secretary  is  the  Scottish  Masonic  historian,  Brother  D.
Murray  Lyon.

The  "Year  of  the  Restoration  of  the  Order"  dates  from  1314,
so  that  a.d.  1900  or  a.l.  4900  would  be  "  Anno  Ordinis  "  576  to  St.
John  the  Baptist  Day  ;  but  after  that  festival  it  would  be  577.  A
similar  mode  had  long  been  followed  by  the  Knights  Templars
(which,  doubtless,  refers  to  De  Molay's  martyrdom),  in  relation  to
the  same  year,  only  termed  "Anno  Caedis,"  thus  suggesting  an
intimate  connection  between  the  two  bodies.

THE    OLDEST    MASONIC    MINUTE    IN    EXISTENCE.
FAC-SIMILE    OF    THE    OLDEST    MINUTE    OF    THE    LODGE    OP    EDINBURGH    (MARY'S   CHAPEL).

TRANSCRIPTION.

VLTIMO  JULY   1599.

The  qlk  day  George  Patoun  maissoun  grenttit  &  confessit  that  he  had  offendit
agane  the  dekin  &  mrs  for  placeing  of  ane  cowane  to  wirk  at  ane  chymnay  heid
for  tua  dayis  and  ane  half  day,  for  the  qlk  offenss  he  submittit  him  self  in  the
dekin  &  mrs  guds  willis  for  qt  vnlaw  they  pless  to  lay  to  his  charge,  and  thay
having  respect  to  the  said  Georges  humill  submissioun  &  of  his  estait,  they  remittit
him  the  said  offenss,  Providing  ahvayis  that  gif  ather  he  [or]  ony  vther  brother
comitt  the  lyke  offenss  heirefter  that  the  law  sail  stryke  vpoun  thame  indiscreta
wtout  exceptioun  of  personis.  This  wes  done  in  prcs  of  Paull  Maissoun  dekin,
Thoas  Weir  warden,  Thoas  Watt,  Johne  Broun,  Henrie  Tailzefeir,  the  said
George  Patoun,  &  Adam  Walkar.

V

Ita  est  Adamus  Gibsone  norius.

Paull  Maissoun,  dekin.

PART  SIX

FREEMASONRY  IN  OTHER  COUNTRIES

FREEMASONRY   IN   OTHER  COUNTRIES

CHAPTER   I

FREEMASONRY    IN    CANADA

BY   WILL   H.    WHYTE,    P.  G.  M.    : :   K.  T.    OF   CANADA

HE  history  of  Freemasonry  in  British  North
America,  or  that  part  of  the  continent  now
better  known  as  the  "  Dominion  of  Canada,"  is
a  most  interesting  one.

Upon  the  advent  of  Confederation,  July  i,
1867,  local  control  in  each  Province  for  the
government  of  the  Masonic  Fraternity  of  the
Dominion  took  a  strong  hold  as  a  predominant  idea,  and  prevailed.
Each  Province  has  now  a  Grand  Lodge,  and  in  order  of  their
organization  are  as  follows :  Canada,  having  jurisdiction  only  in
Ontario,  1855  ;  Nova  Scotia,  1866  ;  New  Brunswick,  1867  ;  Quebec,
1869  ;  British  Columbia,  1871  ;  Manitoba,  1875  ;  Prince  Edward
Island,  1875  '<  Alberta,  1905  ;  Saskatchewan,  1906.  The  first
marks  of  the  Ancient  Craftsman  have  been  found  in  Nova  Scotia.
A  mineralogical  survey  in  1827  found  on  the  shore  of  Goat  Island
in  the  Annapolis  Basin,  partly  covered  with  sand,  a  slab  of  rock
z\  X  2  feet,  bearing  on  it  those  well-known  Masonic  emblems,
"the  Square  and  Compasses,"  and  the  date  1606.  Who  were  the
Craftsmen,  and  how  the  stone  came  there,  must  be  left  to  con-
jecture.

Nova  Scotia.

The  records  of  the  Craft  in  Boston,  Mass.,  state  that  Bro.
Henry  Price  was  appointed  Provincial  Grand  Master  of  New  Eng-
land by  Viscount  Montague,  Grand  Master  of  the  Premier  Grand
Lodge  of  England  (Moderns),  and  that  his  authority  was  sub-
sequently extended  to  all  North  America.

1929

i930  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

On  the  13th  of  November,  1737,  Erasmus  James  Phillips,  an
officer  of  the  Fortieth  Regiment,  then  stationed  at  Annapolis  Royal,
visited  Boston  and  was  made  a  Mason  in  the  "  First  Lodge  in
Boston."  This  Bro.  Phillips  was  a  nephew  of  Col.  Richard
Phillips,  the  first  governor  of  Nova  Scotia  and  the  secretary  of  the
governor's  council,  and  evidently  obtained  an  appointment  as
Deputy  from  Bro.  Price,  the  Provincial  Grand  Master  at  Boston.

The  first  lodge  established  in  Nova  Scotia  was  at  Annapolis
and  under  authority  from  Boston  by  the  St.  Johns  Grand  Lodge  of
Massachusetts.      Under  date  1740  the  minutes  read  :

"The  R\  Worsh'1  Grand  Master  granted  a  Deputation  at  the
Petition  of  sundry  Brethren  for  holding  a  lodge  at  Annapolis  in
Nova  Scotia,  and  appointed  the  Right  Worshipful  Erasmus  James
Phillips,  D.G.M.,  there,  who  afterward  erected  a  Lodge  at  Hali-
fax and  appointed  His  Excellency  Edward  Cornwallis  their  first
Master."

Bro.  Phillips,  having  organized  this  lodge  at  Annapolis  as
stated,  later  on — on  the  petition  of  the  Brethren  at  Halifax  in  1750
— granted  a  Warrant  for  a  lodge  and  appointed  Bro.  Edward
Cornwallis,  the  founder  of  Halifax,  1749,  and  first  governor  of
Nova  Scotia  (and  an  uncle  of  the  Lord  Cornwallis  who  figured  in
Revolutionary  times  i\i  the  United  States),  as  its  first  Master.  This
lodge  was  instituted  at  Halifax  July  19,  1750.  Bro.  Phillips
held  the  position  of  Provincial  Grand  Master  until  1758,  and  in
the  minutes  of  the  First  Lodge  at  Boston  in  1739  is  entered  as
Grand  Master  of  Nova  Scotia.

In  1756  lodge  meetings  were  held  in  Halifax,  by  the  Lodge  of
"  Social  and  Military  Virtues,"  No.  227,  Irish  Registry,  then  at-
tached to  the  Forty-sixth  Regiment  of  Light  Infantry.  This  lodge
is  now  "Antiquity  Lodge,"  No.  1,  Montreal,  on  the  Registry  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Quebec.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  Nova  Scotia  is  in  possession  of  a  large
amount  of  valuable  and  interesting  Masonic  documents,  among
them  a  Charter  to  form  a  Provincial  Grand  Lodge,  dated  December
27i  1757^  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  "Ancients,"  signed  Bles-
ington,  Grand  Master,  and  Laurence  Dermott,  Grand  Secretary.

On  the  2d  day  of  June,  1784,  a  Warrant  (apparently  a  renewal
of  the  1757)  was  granted  by  authority  of  Grand  Master  Antrim,
Deputy    Grand    Master    Laurence    Dermott,    and    Robert    Leslie,

FREEMASONRY    IN   CANADA  1931

Grand  Secretary.  Under  this  Warrant,  a  Provincial  Grand  Lodge
was  formed  on  September  24,  1 784 — Bro.  John  George  Pyke,  Pro-
vincial Grand  Master.  By  this  Warrant,  the  officers  "  together  with
their  lawful  assistants,  that  is  to  say  the  regular  Masters,  Wardens
and  Past  Masters  only,"  were  authorized  to  "  nominate,  choose,  and
install  their  successors  upon  or  near  every  St.  John  the  Evangelist
day  forever."

From  1786-1791,  His  Excellency,  John  Parr,  Governor-in-Chief
of  Nova  Scotia,  was  Provincial  Grand  Master,  followed  by  the
Hon.  Richard  Bulkeley,  1791-1800;  Duncan  Clark,  1800— 1  ;  Hon.
John  Wentworth,  LL.D.,  1801-10;  and  John  Geo.  Pyke,  1810-20.
At  this  time,  after  thirty-six  years,  there  were  thirty-one  lodges  on
the  Provincial  Registry.  Trouble  then  arose  over  a  successor  to
Bro.  Pyke  and  he  continued  in  office  another  year,  followed  by
John  Albro  from  182 1  to  1829.  At  this  period  the  number  of
lodges  had  been  reduced  to  sixteen.  For  another  forty  years  this
Provincial  Grand  Lodge  continued  its  work  until,  after  an  existence
of  eighty-five  years,  its  lodges  united  with  the  new  Grand  Lodge  of
Nova  Scotia  in  1869.

The  subject  of  an  independent  Grand  Lodge  had  been  agitated
for  five  years,  for  the  Grand  Lodges  of  England,  Ireland,  and  Scot-
land had  lodges  chartered  under  their  authority  in  this  Province.

In  1 86 1  a  committee  was  appointed  from  the  Provincial  Grand
Lodge  of  Scotland  to  act  in  conjunction  with  a  similar  committee
from  the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  of  England  regarding  the  practi-
cability of  forming  a  Grand  Lodge  of  Nova  Scotia.  Upon  reference
to  the  parent  Grand  Lodges,  England  refused  permission.  Scotland
never  answered.  On  the  16th  January,  1866,  a  meeting  of  delegates
from  all  the  Scottish  lodges  was  held,  twelve  out  of  thirteen  being
represented.  It  was  decided  to  call  a  convention  of  all  the  lodges
in  the  Province  at  Halifax  on  the  20th  February,  and  at  this  meeting
the  Grand  Lodge  was  duly  formed  and  M.  W.  Bro.  W.  H.  Davies
elected  Grand  Master.  From  1866  to  1869  the  Grand  Lodge  in-
creased to  twenty-five  lodges.  In  this  latter  year,  the  District  Grand
Lodge  under  the  English  Registry  decided  to  affiliate,  as  did  also
the  remaining  lodge  under  Scotland.  On  the  23d  June,  1869,  the
amalgamation  took  place,  the  twenty-five  English  and  one  Scotch
Lodge  uniting  with  the  twenty-five  Nova  Scotia  lodges  under  the
designation  of  "The  Grand  Lodge  of  Ancient  Free  and  Accepted

1932  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Masons  of  Nova  Scotia."  The  three  oldest  lodges  now  working
under  this  jurisdiction  are  in  Halifax  and  are  *'  St.  Andrew's,"
chartered  March  28,  1768,  London,  Laurence  Dermott,  Grand
Secretary;  "St.  John's,"  chartered  June  30,  1780,  London,  and
"Virgin"  Lodge,  February  18,  1782.

1906.  Nova  Scotia  has  sixty-six  lodges  on  the  roll  and  a  mem-
bership of  4,500.

New  Brunswick.

The  Province  of  New  Brunswick  previous  to  the  year  1786
formed  a  part  of  Nova  Scotia.  On  March  6,  1784,  application
was  made  to  John  George  Pyke,  Esq.,  Provincial  Grand  Master
elect,  at  Halifax,  by  Elias  Hardy,  Master  of  Lodge  169,  for  a
dispensation  to  establish  a  lodge  of  "Ancient  York  Masons"  at
Parr  Town.  Parr  Town,  now  the  City  of  St.  John,  was  named
after  His  Excellency  John  Parr,  Captain  General  and  Governor-in-
Chief,  and  who  had  been  elected  Provincial  Grand  Master  of  the
"Ancient"  Masons  of  Nova  Scotia  1786-91.

On  August  22,  1792,  a  Warrant  was  granted  by  the  Provincial
Grand  Lodge  at  Halifax  for  Solomons  Lodge,  No.  22  (now  No.  6
on  the  Registry  of  New  Brunswick),  to  be  located  at  "  St.  Anns,"
now  Fredericton,  the  capital  of  New  Brunswick.  On  June  7,  1826,
J.  Albro,  Provincial  Grand  Master  at  Halifax,  appointed  Benjamin
L.  Peters  Deputy  Grand  Master  for  the  city  of  St.  John  and  the
town  of  St.  Andrews  in  New  Brunswick.  On  March  10,  1829,  a
Warrant,  No.  52,  was  made  out  by  the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  at
Halifax  for  Albion,  No.  841,  St.  John.  This  lodge,  formerly  also
under  the  English  Registry  as  No.  400,  is  now  No.  1  on  the  Regis-
try of  New  Brunswick.

The  Act  confederating  the  Provinces  into  the  "  Dominion  of
Canada"  came  into  force  July  1,  1867.  This  new  state  of  political
existence  brought  prominently  to  the  front  the  Masonic  status  in.
each  Province,  and  the  formation  of  an  Independent  Grand  Lodge
for  the  Province  of  New  Brunswick  was  agitated.  On  the  16th  of
August,  1867,  a  meeting  of  the  Masters  and  Past  Masters  in  the
city  of  St.  John  was  held  and  it  was  resolved  to  address  a  circular
to  every  lodge  in  the  Province.  On  the  10th  day  of  October,  1867,
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ancient  Free  and  Accepted  Masons  of  New
Brunswick  was  formed  by  representatives  of  fourteen  lodges.
There  were   nineteen    lodges  represented,  but  the  delegates  from

FREEMASONRY    IN   CANADA  1933

St.  Andrews  Lodge,  364  R.  S.  retired  from  the  convention,  while
those  from  Howard,  668  and  Zetland,  886  E.  R.,  though  favoring
the  movement,  stated  they  had  no  authority  to  vote  for  a  new
Grand  Lodge.  The  representatives  of  two  others  were  not  present
when  the  vote  was  taken.  V.  W.  Bro.  Robert  T.  Clinch,  District
Grand  Master,  E.  R.,  was  elected  Grand  Master  but  declined,  as  he
had  not  resigned  his  office  under  the  English  Registry.  Bro.  B.
Lester  Peters  was  then  unanimously  elected  Grand  Master,  the
installation  taking  place  on  the  2 2d  of  January,  1868.  During  the
year  1867-68  ten  lodges  holding  under  the  English  Registry
became  of  allegiance  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New  Brunswick,  and
in  September,  1872,  St.  Andrews  Lodge,  at  Fredericton,  also
affiliated,  rendering  the  jurisdiction  of  this  Grand  Lodge  complete.
1906.     There  are  thirty-five  lodges  on  the  roll,  with  a  membership

of  2,200.

Quebec.

Although  it  has  been  affirmed  by  French  and  other  writers  that
a  lodge  of  Freemasons  existed  in  the  city  of  Quebec  in  the  year
1755,  no  records  or  other  evidences  are  known  to  be  in  existence,
and  Masonry  in  the  Province  only  dates  its  existence  from  the  time
of  "  Wolfe,"  when  the  "  Lily  "  flag  of  the  Bourbon  was  replaced  by
the  "  Union  Jack  "  over  the  citadel  of  Quebec.

Quebec  capitulated  in  September,  1759,  and  among  the  regi-
ments taking  part  in  the  capture  the  following  seven  held  travelling
warrants  for  lodges,  as  follows:  No.  245,  I.  R.,  warranted  1754,  in
the  Fifteenth  Regiment;  No.  35,  I.  R.,  warranted  1734,  in  the
Twenty-eighth  Regiment ;  a  lodge  in  the  Twenty-eighth,  "  Louis-
burg,"  Boston  warranted  1758;  No.  205,  I.  R.,  warranted  1749,  in
the  Thirty-fifth  Regiment;  No.  42,  E.  R.  "Ancient,"  warranted
1755,  in  the  Fortieth  Regiment;  No.  192,  I.  R.,  warranted  1748,  in
the  Forty-seventh  Regiment,  and  No.  218,  I.  R.,  warranted  1750,  in
the  Forty-eighth  Regiment.  There  were  likewise  lodges  in  seven
or  more  regiments  taking  part  in  the  capitulation  of  Montreal,  Sep-
tember 9,  1760,  holding  under  English,  Irish,  Scotch,  and  Colonial
charters.

The  following  extracts  from  a  document  in  possession  of  the
Grand  Librarian  of  England  succinctly  tell  the  story  of  the  forma-
tion of  the  first  "Lower  Canada"  Grand  Lodge  on  December  27,
1759,  in  the  city  of  Quebec.

i934  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

"In  the  winter  of  1759  the  Masters  and  Wardens  of  all  the
Warranted  Lodges  held  in  the  Regiments  garrisoned  there,  assem-
bled together  and  unanimously  agreed  to  choose  an  acting  Grand
Master  to  preside  over  them.  Agreeable  thereto  they  made  choice
of  Bro.  Guinnett,  Lieutenant  in  the  Forty-seventh  Regiment,  and
drew  out,  signed  and  sealed,  a  Warrant  empowering  him  and  his
successors  elected,  to  congregate  them  together  as  a  Grand  Lodge
for  the  intent  before  mentioned,  they  having  the  Constitution  as
their  chief  guide."

"The  24th  June,  1760,  Brother  Simon  Fraser,  Colonel  of  the
Highland  Regiment,  was  elected  to  preside  over  the  Lodges,  and
Brother  T.  Dunckerley  of  His  Majesty's  Ship  the  '  Vanguard,'  who
was  possessed  with  a  power  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  to
inspect  into  the  state  of  the  Craft  wheresoever  he  might  go,
installed  Brother  Fraser  in  his  high  office."

This  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  for  the  "  Province  of  Quebec,"
annually  elected  a  Grand  Master  and  officers,  and  was  in  existence
for  thirty-two  years,  1759-91.  Among  the  Grand  Masters  fol-
lowing the  Hon.  Simon  Fraser  were,  Capt.  Milborne  West,  1761;
Lieutenant  Turner,  1763  ;  Hon.  John  Collins,  1765  ;  Sir  Guy  Carle-
ton  (Lord  Dorchester),  1786,  and  Sir  John  Johnson,  Bart.,  who
resided  at  Montreal,  17S8.

According  to  M.  W.  Bro.  John  Hamilton  Graham,  LL.  D.,  who
compiled  that  valuable  work  The  History  of  Freemasonry  in
Quebec,  there  has  been  traced  some  forty  lodges  holding  under  or
emanating  from  this  Grand  Lodge.  The  first  lodges  it  chartered
were  in  the  city  of  Quebec:  "Merchants,"  No.  1,  "St.  Andrews,"
No.  2,  "St.  Patrick's,"  No.  3,  and  Select,  No.  o,  1759-61.  The
next  warranted  was  No.  4,  St.  Peter's,  Montreal,  instituted  1761,
and  lapsed  about  1792.  The  next  Montreal  charter  was  St.  Paul's,
No.  10,  and  of  date  November  8,  1770,  which  had  an  existence  up
to  1796.  Among  other  lodges  warranted  was  one  at  Vergennes,
Vt.,  U.  S.  A.,  named  "Dorchester,"  and  of  date  May  5,  1791,
granted  by  Sir  John  Johnson,  Bart.,  Prov.  G.  M.,  and  still  in  exist-
ence as  No.  1,  Vermont.

In  1752  the  schism  occurred  in  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England
which  caused  the  formation  of  a  rival  Grand  Lodge  under  the  cog-
nomen of  the  "  Ancients."  The  rivalry  between  these  two  Grand
Lodges  was  at  its  height  in   1 791,  when  "Prince  Edward,"  grand-

FREEMASONRY    IN   CANADA  1935

father  of  His  Majesty  King  Edward  VII,  arrived  in  Quebec  as
Colonel  of  the  Seventh  Royal  Fusiliers,  and  with  the  advent  of  the
"Prince"  came  a  new  era  in  Masonry  in  the  Province.

On  March  7,  1792,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  "Ancients"  in
England  issued  a  patent  deputing  Prince  Edward  "  Provincial
Grand  Master"  of  "Lower  Canada,"  and  on  June  22,  1792,  His
Royal  Highness  was  installed  with  great  dclat,  a  religious  service
and  procession  to  the  "  Recollect  Church  "  (R.  C.)  Quebec,  forming
part  of  the  ceremony.  In  1799  H.  R.  H.  was  created  "Duke  of
Kent,"  and  remained  Grand  Master  until  18 13,  when  he  resigned  to
accept  the  Grand  Mastership  of  the  "Ancients"  in  England,  being
succeeded  in  Quebec  by  the  Hon.  Claude  Denechau,  M.  P.  P.,  who
filled  that  important  post  until  1822.  This  new  Provincial  Grand
Lodge  in  a  period  of  over  thirty  years,  1 791-1823,  warranted  some
twenty-six  lodges,  five  of  them  still  in  existence,  under  the  present
Grand  Lodge  of  Quebec,  viz.:  "Dorchester"  at  St.  Johns;  "Select
Surveyors"  now  "  Prevost,"  at  Dunham;  "Nelson,"  now  at  St.
Armand  Station  ;  "  Golden  Rule,"  at  Stanstead  ;  and  "  Sussex  "
now  St.  Andrews,"  at  Quebec.  It  also  warranted  among  others
"Zion,"  No.  10,  now  No.  1  at  Detroit,  of  date  September  7,  1794,
and  St.  Paul's,  No.  12,  May  1,  1797,  which  was  apparently  formed
from  among  some  of  the  late  members  of  St.  Paul's,  No.  10,  under
the  former  Provincial  Grand  Lodge,  and  again  lapsed  as  a  pro-
vincial Lodge  about  1824.

April  2,  1823,  marked  another  era  in  the  history  of  the  Craft  in
the  Province  of  Quebec.  The  lodges  in  Montreal  as  well  as  others
in  the  Province  forwarded  their  provincial  or  Canadian  Charters  to
the  "  United  Grand  Lodge  of  England,"  and  exchanged  them  for
Warrants  under  that  body.  They  then  petitioned  said  Grand  Lodge
to  establish  a  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  for  Montreal  and  the  Bor-
ough of  William  Henry,  now  Sorel  ;  and  the  Grand  Lodge  across
the  ocean  saw  fit  to  grant  the  request,  and  the  Hon.  William  McGilli-
vray  was  appointed  Provincial  Grand  Master.  The  lodges  in  the
cities  of  Quebec  and  Three  Rivers  being  also  formed  into  another
Provincial  Grand  Lodge  under  the  Hon.  Claude  D£n£chau.

On  the  5th  September,  1826,  John  Molson,  Esq.,  was  installed
as  Provincial  Grand  Master  at  Montreal.  In  1836  the  Hon.  John
Molson  died,  and  the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  did  not  meet  again
for  over  ten  years.

1936  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

On  May  20,  1846,  the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  at  Montreal  was
revived  to  install  the  Hon.  Peter  McGill  as  Grand  Master.  In  1849
the  Hon.  Peter  McGill  resigned  his  office  and  was  succeeded  by  the
Hon.  William  Badgley  until  his  decease  in  1888.

In  "  Quebec,"  the  Hon.  Claude  Denechau,  deceased,  was  suc-
ceeded by  Thomas  Harington,  Esq.,  1852,  and  he  in  turn  by  James
Dean,  1857.

The  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  at  Quebec  finally  dissolving  in  1870,
the  members  joined  the  then  new  "  Grand  Lodge  of  Quebec."  That
of  "  Montreal  and  William  Henry  "  with  three  lodges  had  no  active
existence  after  the  formation  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Canada,  and
in  the  later  years  of  the  late  Judge  Badgley,  never  met.

A  third  period  of  thirty  years  had  thus  elapsed  when  in  October,
1855,  the  representatives  of  forty-one  lodges  in  Canada  West  (now
Ontario)  and  thirteen  in  Canada  East  (now  Quebec)  met  in  Ham-
ilton and  formed  the  "  Grand  Lodge  of  Canada,"  holding  jurisdic-
tion over  the  two  Provinces.

From  1855  to  1869  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Canada  was  the  con-
trolling Masonic  power  in  the  Province  of  Quebec,  but  with  the
birth  of  the  Dominion  came  also  the  agitation  for  separate  Grand
Lodges.  Several  meetings  were  held,  and  finally,  on  the  20th  Octo-
ber, 1 869,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Quebec  was  formed  by  twenty-eight
of  the  Warranted  Lodges  then  in  the  Province,  with  M.  W.  Bro.
John  Hamilton  Graham,  LL.D.,  as  Grand  Master.

A  number  of  the  lodges  did  not  at  once  join  in  this  movement,
but  gradually  were  absorbed.  Those  remaining  under  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Canada  (which  Grand  Lodge  vigorously  and  strenuously
opposed  the  formation  of  the  new  Grand  Lodge)  continued  until
September  23,  1874,  when  "Canada"  withdrew,  and  its  lodges
affiliated  with  Quebec.

On  the  27th  of  January,  1881,  three  lodges  holding  under  war-
rants from  Scotland  also  affiliated,  leaving  three  claiming  allegiance
to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.

1906.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  Quebec  has  now  on  the  roll  fifty-
eight  lodges  and  a  membership  of  5,000.

Canada  (in  Ontario).

The  history  of  the  Craft  in  the  Province  of  Ontario  has  been
exhaustively  compiled  by  Most  Wor.  Bro.  John  Ross  Robertson  in

FREEMASONRY    IN    CANADA  1937

his  admirable  work,  The  History  of  Masonry  in  Canada.  Lodge
No.  156  in  the  Eighth  Regiment  of  Foot  appears  to  have  been  the
first  lodge  to  hold  meetings  in  this  Province,  at  Fort  Niagara,  about
1 755—80.  From  1780  to  1792  some  ten  lodges  appear  to  have
worked  in  what  was  called  "  Upper  Canada."  Some  chartered  by-
England,  others  by  the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  at  Quebec,  among
them  St.  James  in  the  King's  Rangers,  No.  14,  at  Cataraqui  (King-
ston), 1 78 1  ;  St.  John's,  No.  15,  at  Michilimakinac  (Michigan),  then
part  of  Canada;  St.  John's,  No.  19,  at  Niagara,  and  Oswegatchie
Lodge,  1786,  at  Elizabethtown  (Brockville).

On  March  7,  1792,  Bro.  William  Jarvis  was  appointed  Provin-
cial Grand  Master  of  Upper  Canada  by  the  "  Ancient "  or  "  Athol "
Grand  Lodge  of  England.  Bro.  Jarvis  resided  at  Newark  (Niag-
ara), the  then  capital  of  the  Province.  During  his  Grand  Master-
ship, 1792  to  1804,  twenty  warrants  for  lodges  were  issued  for
various  parts  of  the  Province.

In  1797  Bro.  Jarvis  removed  from  Newark  to  York  (now  To-
ronto), when  the  capital  was  transferred  to  the  latter  place.

The  Brethren  at  Niagara  continued  to  be  active  and  enthusiastic,
and  urged  Bro.  Jarvis  to  assemble  Grand  Lodge  there,  but  he  re-
fused. This  refusal  caused  much  dissatisfaction,  and  the  Brethren
of  Niagara  District  met  in  1803  and  elected  Bro.  Geo.  Forsyth  as
Provincial  Grand  Master,  and  trouble  and  friction  ensued.

In  181 7,  at  Kingston,  a  Grand  Convention  was  called  by  the
Lodges  in  the  Midland  District  under  R.  W.  Bro.  Ziba  M.  Phillips.
All  the  lodges  attended  excepting  those  in  the  Niagara  District.
This  convention  was  held  annually  during  the  years  181 7,  1818,
1820,  1821,  1822.

After  repeated  entreaty  to  England  during  these  years,  R.  W.
Bro.  Simon  McGillivray  came  to  Canada  in  September,  1822,  with
authority  from  the  Duke  of  Sussex  to  reorganize  the  Craft  in
Upper  Canada.  The  Second  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  was  thus
formed  at  York  in  1822,  with  R.  W.  Bro.  Simon  McGillivray  as
Provincial  Grand  Master,  and  met  regularly  up  to  1830;  but  the
Morgan  excitement  in  the  United  States  also  told  somewhat  on  the
Fraternity  in  Canada,  and  while  a  number  of  the  lodges  remained
active,  the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  became  dormant  and  remained
so  until  1845.

In  1845  Masonic  enthusiasm  once  more  gained  the  ascendency,

T938  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

an  urgent  appeal  was  sent  out,  and  a  Third  Provincial  Grand
Lodge  organized  in  Hamilton  with  Bro.  Sir  Allan  MacNab
Provincial  Grand  Master  of  "  Canada  West,"  appointed  by  the
Earl  of  Zetland.  This  body  was  an  energetic  one,  and  continued
work  until  1858.

In  1853  a  number  of  the  lodges  holding  Irish  Warrants  organ-
ized a  Grand  Lodge,  but  'it  was  not  very  successful.  They  then
endeavored  to  secure  the  cooperation  of  the  Provincial  Grand
Lodge  in  forming  a  Grand  Lodge  for  Canada,  but  the  Provincial
Grand  Body  declined.  But  Home  Rule  and  a  self-governing  body
for  Canada  was  the  idea  uppermost  and  would  not  down,  and  finally
on  October  10,  1855,  a  convention  of  all  the  lodges  in  the  two
Provinces  was  called  at  Hamilton  and  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Canada
was  formed.  Forty-one  lodges  were  represented,  twenty-eight  in
Canada  West  (Ontario)  and  thirteen  in  Canada  East  (Quebec),  and
M.  W.  Bro.  William  Mercer  Wilson  was  elected  Grand  Master.

In  September,  1857,  the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  under  Eng-
land met  and  resolved  itself  into  an  independent  Grand  Lodge
under  the  name  of  "  Ancient  Grand  Lodge  of  Canada,"  but  the
next  year  in  July,  1858,  they  united  with  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Canada.  In  October,  1869,  the  majority  of  the  lodges  in  the
Province  of  Quebec  held  a  convention  and  decided  to  form  a
Grand  Lodge  for  that  Province.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  Canada
strenuously  opposed  this  new  body,  and  an  edict  of  suspension  cover-
ing all  the  lodges  and  Brethren  taking  part  was  issued.  The  Grand
Lodge  of  Quebec,  however,  becoming  duly  recognized  by  all  the
leading  Grand  Lodges  of  the  world,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Canada,
in  1874,  likewise  decided  to  do  the  same  and  withdrew  from  the
Province  ;  all  the  lodges  of  her  obedience  joining  the  Ouebec  Grand
Body.  In  1875  a  schism  occurred  and  a  number  of  Brethren  or-
ganized a  "  Grand  Lodge  of  Ontario."  This  breach  was  finally
healed  and  the  Brethren  and  lodges  became  of  allegiance  to  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Canada  in   1896.

In  1886  the  words  "in  the  Province  of  Ontario"  were  added
to  the  title  of  the  "  Grand  Lodge  of  Canada,"  owing  to  the  repre-
sentations of  other  Grand  Lodges  that  the  title  did  not  represent
the  jurisdiction  of  that  Grand  Body.

1906.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  Canada  has  now  395  lodges  and  a
membership  of  37,628.

FREEMASONRY    IN   CANADA  1939

British    Columbia.

The  first  lodge  established  in  this  Province  was  Victoria,  No.
783,  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  March  19,  1859,  and  the
first  chartered  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  was  Vancouver
Lodge  in   1862.

In  1 87 1  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  had  three  lodges  in  the
Province,  and  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  six  lodges.  A  con-
vention was  held  on  the  21st  day  of  October,  1871,  and  the  Grand
Lodge  of  British  Columbia  duly  organized.  Eight  out  of  the  nine
lodges  in  the  Province  were  represented.  The  Provincial  Grand
Master  of  Scotland  and  the  District  Grand  Master  of  England  both
took  an  active  interest  in  the  formation  of  the  new  Grand  Body,
and  M.  W.  Bro.  Israel  Wood  Powell,  M.D.,  was  unanimously
elected  Grand  Master.

In  1872  the  only  lodge  not  represented  at  the  formation  of  the
Grand  Lodge,  viz.,  "  Union  Lodge  "  of  New  Westminster,  late  899
E.  R.,  affiliated  with  twenty-three  members.

In  1875  two  of  the  lodges  in  Nanaimo,  "Caledonia"  and
"  Nanaimo,"  amalgamated  under  the  name  of  "Ashlar."

In  1878  Victoria,  No.  1,  and  British  Columbia,  No.  5,  of  Victoria,
united  as  Victoria  Columbia  Lodge,  and  Vancouver  and  Quadra
Lodges,  also  at  Victoria,  united  as  Vancouver  Quadra  Lodge.

1906.  Grand  Lodge  has  now  thirty-nine  lodges  and  a  member-
ship of  2,859.

Manitoba.

In  1864  a  dispensation  was  issued  over  the  signature  of  M.  W.
Bro.  A.  T.  Pierson,  then  Grand  Master  of  Masons  in  Minnesota,
and  "Northern  Light"  Lodge  was  organized  at  Fort  Garry  (Win-
nipeg), with  Bro.  Dr.  John  Schultz,  Worshipful  Master,  A.  G.  B.
Bannatyne,  S.  W.,  and  Wm.  Inkster,  J.  W.

In  1867  Bro.  Bannatyne  was  elected  W.  M.  and  the  lodge
went  out  of  existence,  shortly  before  the  Red  River  insurrection.
At  this  time,  the  country  was  claimed  by  the  "Hon.  Hudson  Bay  Co.";
but  when  the  transfer  was  made  to  Canada  in  1870  and  the  Red
River  Settlement,  as  it  was  then  known,  became  the  Province  of
Manitoba,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Canada  assumed  jurisdiction  and
shortly  afterward  issued  Charters  to  "Prince  Rupert's"  Lodge,
Winnipeg,  December,  1870,  and  Lisgar  Lodge,  Selkirk.

On  May  12,  1875,  the  three  lodges  then  existing,  viz.,  "  Prince

1940  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Rupert,"  "Lisgar"  and  "Ancient  Landmark,"  held  a  convention
and  formed  the  "  Grand  Lodge  of  Manitoba,"  electing  M.  W.  Bro.
the  Rev.  Dr.  W.  C.  Clarke  as  Grand  Master.  Unfortunately  he  re-
moved from  the  Province  before  his  year  of  office  expired.

In  1878  the  question  of  Ritual  created  considerable  trouble,  and
a  number  of  the  Brethren  endeavored  to  form  another  Grand
Lodge,  but  happily  peace  was  restored  the  following  year.

On  the  28th  July,  1881,  a  Warrant  was  ordered  issued  to  "  Al
Moghreb  Al  Asku,"  No.  18,  to  be  opened  at  Gibraltar,  but  protests
from  the  Grand  Lodges  of  Scotland  and  England  following,  it  was
shortly  afterward  transferred  to  Tangiers  in  Morocco.

This  Grand  Lodge  held  jurisdiction  over  the  Northwest  Ter-
ritories and  the  Yukon  Territory  as  well  as  Manitoba  until  1905,
when  the  Provinces  of  Alberta  and  Saskatchewan  were  formed,  fol-
lowed by  the  organization  of  Grand  Lodges  for  these  two  new  divi-
sions, upon  which  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Manitoba  withdrew.

1906.  Grand  Lodge  of  Manitoba  has  now  eighty  chartered
lodges  and  six  U.  D.,  with  a  membership  of  4,410.

Prince  Edward  Isla?id.

Previous  to  November,  1798,  Prince  Edward  Island  was  called
St.  Johns  Island,  the  name  being  changed  by  Imperial  Act  on  that
date.

On  the  9th  October,  1797,  St.  John's  Lodge,  now  No.  1  on  the
Registry  of  that  Province,  was  established  by  Warrant  at  Charlotte-
town  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.  The  then  Lieutenant-Gov-
ernor, General  Edward  Fanning,  was  one  of  the  Charter  members.
In  1857  Victoria  Lodge  at  Charlottetown  was  chartered  by  Scot-
land. In  1875  there  were  seven  lodges  in  this  Province  working
under  English  Warrants,  viz.,  St.  John's,  King  Hiram,  St.  George,
Alexandra,  Mount  Lebanon,  and  True  Brothers,  and  one  under  the
Scottish  Register,  "  Victoria."

On  the  23d  day  of  June,  1875,  these  eight  lodges  met  and
formed  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Prince  Edward  Island.  The  Hon.
John  Yeo  was  elected  Grand  Master  and  was  installed,  together
with  his  officers,  the  following  day  by  M.  Wor.  Bro.  John  V.  Ellis,
Grand  Master  of  New  Brunswick.

1906.  There  are  fourteen  lodges,  with  a  membership  of  635  on
the  roll.

•

FREEMASONRY   IN   CANADA  1941

Alberta.

Previous  to  October,  1905,  the  lodges  in  the  "Northwest
Territories"  of  Canada  were  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Manitoba.

The  political  changes  which  culminated  in  the  division  of  these
Territories  into  the  Provinces  of  "Alberta"  and  "Saskatchewan"
on  the  1st  of  September,  1905,  brought  forward  the  question  of
Provincial  Autonomy  for  the  Craft ;  accordingly  "  Medicine  Hat "
Lodge,  No.  31,  took  the  initiative  and  requested  the  Senior  Lodge
in  the  Province,  "  Bow  River  Lodge,"  No.  28,  to  call  a  convention
at  Calgary.  This  convention  was  held  on  the  25th  day  of  May,
1905,  and  arrangements  were  made  for  a  formal  meeting  on  the
1 2th  day  of  October,  1905.  Seventeen  lodges  out  of  eighteen  in
the  jurisdiction  were  represented  by  seventy-nine  delegates,  and  the
"Grand  Lodge  of  Alberta"  was  duly  formed,  with  M.  W.  Bro.  Dr.
George  MacDonald  elected  as  Grand  Master.  The  Most  Wor.  the
Grand  Master  of  Manitoba,  M.  W.  Bro.  W.  G.  Scott,  was  present
at  this  convention  and  installed  the  officers.

1906     Twenty  lodges,  with  a  membership  of  1,206.

Saska  tchcwan.

The  Brethren  of  the  Province  of  Saskatchewan  assembled  at
Regina  on  the  10th  day  of  August,  1906,  and  formally  resolved
themselves  into  the  "Grand  Lodge  of  Saskatchewan."  Twenty-
five  lodges  out  of  twenty-eight  located  in  the  Province  were  repre-
sented. M.  W.  Bro.  H.  H.  Campkin  was  elected  Grand  Master
and   was   installed   by   M.   W.   Bro.   McKenzie,  Grand   Master  of

Manitoba.

Newfoundland.

The  Ancient  Colony  of  Newfoundland  still  remains  without  the
Confederation  of  the  Canadian  Provinces.

Masonry  in  this  island  dates  back  to  1746,  the  first  Warrant
being  granted  by  the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  at  Boston.  Bro.
J.  Lane's  list  gives  six  lodges  warranted  in  the  eighteenth  century.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  the  Ancients  (England)  is  credited  with
four — one  in  1774  and  three  in  1788 — and  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England  (Moderns)  with  two — one  each  in  1784  and  1785.  Nine
others  were  chartered  by  the.  present  Grand  Lodge  of  England  up
to  1 88 1,  a  number  still  remaining  active.

CHAPTER  II

MEXICO

E  learn  from  several  writers  that  about  the  yea*
1810  Civil  and  Military  officers  of  the  Mon-
archy introduced  the  "  Scottish  Rite "  into
Mexico — then  the  principal  colony  of  Spain.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Louisiana  after  this
erected  lodges  in  18 16  and  181 7,  respectively,
at  Vera  Cruz  and  Campeachy.  The  Grand
Lodge  of  Pennsylvania  also  established  a  lodge  in  1824  at  Alvara-
do ;  subsequently  confusion  ensued,  Masonry  and  politics  being  so
closely  interwoven  that  any  attempt  at  separate  treatment  is  quite
hopeless.

The  Escoceses  and  the  Yorkinos  divided  the  country  into  two
factions,  moderate  measures  being  in  favor  with  the  former  under  a
constitutional  monarchy,  and  republican  institutions  being  advocated
by  the  latter  with  the  expulsion  of  the  "  old  "  or  native  Spaniards.

Among  the  Escoceses,  or  "  Scots  Masons,"  were  persons  having
titles  of  nobility  ;  all  the  Catholic  clergy ;  many  military  officers  ;
and  all  classes  of  native  Spaniards.

The  republicans  appreciating  the  progress  of  their  opponents,
resolved  "to  fight  the  devil  with  his  own  fire,"  and  thereupon  a
revival  faction  was  organized  with  the  title  of  Yorkinos,  whose
members  were  thought  to  be  of  the  York  Rite.  Mackey  is  author-
ity for  the  statement  that  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New  York  estab-
lished three  lodges  in  the  city  of  Mexico  in  1825.

These  lodges  were  formed  into  a  Grand  Lodge  of  the  York
Rite  by  Mr.  Joel  R.  Poinsett  (American  Minister),  a  former  G.  M.
of  South  Carolina.  There  is  no  record  that  since  the  year  181 5  any
foreign  lodges  have  been  warranted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New
York.  But  however  established,  the  so-called  York  Rite,  or,  in
other  words,  pure  English  Masonry,  flourished,  and  toward  the  end

of  1826  there  were  twenty-five  lodges,  with  a  membership  of  about

1942

FREEMASONRY    IN   MEXICO  1943

seven  hundred.  "  The  Escoceses,  or  '  Scots  Masons,'  finding  their
lodges  deserted,  regarded  the  Yorkinos  as  renegades  and  traitors,
and  with  a  view  to  counterbalance  the  fast  increasing  power  of  the
latter,  they  formed  the  Novenarios,  a  kind  of  militia,  which  derived
its  name  from  a  regulation  requiring  each  member  to  enlist  nine
additional  adherents.  These  ingratiated  themselves  with  the  clergy,
who,  after  having  been  the  most  embittered  enemies  of  the  Craft  in
past  years,  now  joined  the  Escoceses  almost  in  a  body.

"  The  Yorkinos,  becoming  aware  of  these  proceedings,  tried  to
outdo  their  rivals  by  recruiting  their  own  lodges  upon  the  plan  of
receiving  all  applicants  without  distinction,  provided  they  belong  to
the  federal,  i.e.,  the  patriotic  party.  Thus,  the  system  of  Masonry
very  soon  degenerated  into  a  mere  party  question,  and  at  last  all  the
adherents  of  one  side  styled  themselves  Escoceses,  and  of  the  other
side,  Yorkinos.  In  1828  the  two  parties  resorted  to  open  warfare,
with  a  view  to  deciding  the  question  at  issue  by  the  sword,  and  the
civil  war  then  commenced  lasted  for  more  than  a  generation.

"  Somewhere  about  this  time,  while  Dr.  Vincente  Guerrero — G.
M.  under  the  York  Rite — was  President  of  the  Republic,  a  law  was
enacted  by  which  all  Masonic  lodges  were  closed.  The  Yorkinos
obeyed  their  Grand  Master,  and  discontinued  their  meetings.  The
Escoceses  went  on  working,  but  some  of  their  most  influential
lodges  were  suppressed,  and  the  members  vanished.  Subsequently,
all  native  Spaniards  were  expelled  from  Mexican  territory.

"  This  internecine  strife  seriously  affected  the  Fraternity  in  gen-
eral, and  gave  birth,  during  the  darkest  hours  of  the  struggle  for
supremacy,  to  an  organization  called  the  National  Mexican  Rite,
formed  by  Masons,  and  composed  of  distinguished  men,  but  con-
taining innovations  and  principles  so  antagonistic  to  Masonic  usage
and  doctrine,  that  it  was  never  accorded  recognition,  even  in
Mexico,  by  any  Masonic  body  of  acknowledged  legality.

"  This  new  school  of  Masonry  was  established  by  nine  Brethren
of  both  rites,  and  who  had  belonged  to  ,the  highest  grade  of  either
system,  in  1830.  To  guard  against  the  intrusion  of  unworthy  mem-
bers and  the  revival  of  political  antagonism,  they  resolved  to  create  a
rite  which  should  be  national,  in  the  sense  of  not  depending  upon
any  foreign  Grand  Lodge  for  its  Constitution,  and  to  obviate  by
safeguards  and  precautions  of  an  elaborate  character,  the  dangers  to
be  apprehended  from  the  reception  of  either  Escoceses  or  Yorkinos.

1944  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

"The  National  Mexican  Rite  consisted  of  nine  degrees,  which,
omitting  the  first  three,  were  40,  Approved  Master  (equal  to  the
1 50,  'Scots');  50,  Knight  of  the  Secret  (equal  to  the  180,
4  Scots ' )  ;  6°,  Knight  of  the  Mexican  Eagle  ;  70,  Perfect  Archi-
tect or  Templar;  8°,  Grand  Judge,  and  90,  Grand  Inspector  Gen
eral.  All  of  these  degrees  had  their  equivalents  in  the  grades  of
the  A.  and  A.  S.  R.  S3-  With  the  'St.  John's'  (or  purely  Craft)
degrees  certain  special  signs  were  associated,  which,  however,  were
not  required  from  foreigners  unless  they  had  acted  as  auxiliaries  in
any  of  the  party  contests.

"  A  Grand  Orient,  composed  of  members  of  the  90,  was  supreme
in  matters  of  dogma  or  ritual.  There  was  also  an  administrative
body  or  National  Grand  Lodge,  whose  members  were  elective  and
met  in  the  metropolis.  The  Provincial  Grand  Lodges  had  their
seats  in  the  State  capitals,  and  were  formed  by  the  'three  lights'
of  at  least  five  St.  John's  lodges.

"  But  although  still  preserving  a  nominal  existence,  the  several
Grand  Bodies,  owing  to  political  convulsions,  were  virtually  dor-
mant for  many  years  after  1833.  A  lodge — St.  Jean  d'Ulloa — was
constituted  at  Vera  Cruz,  by  the  Supreme  Council  of  France,  in
1843  't  and  another — Les  Ecossais  des  Deux  Mondes — at  the  City
of  Mexico,  by  the  Grand  Orient  of  the  same  country,  in  1845.

"  The  National  Mexican  Rite  appears  to  have  somewhat  recov-
ered from  its  torpor  in  1863.  At  that  date  we  find  in  the  Metropolis
a  National  Grand  Lodge  with  six  working  lodges,  though  of  these
one — belonging  to  the  A.  and  A.  S.  R. — was  constituted  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  New  Granada,  and  consisted  chiefly  of  foreigners  ;
in  Toluca  a  Prov.  Grand  Lodge  with  five  lodges  ;  in  Vera  Cruz  and
Guadalajara  two  lodges  each  ;  and  in  five  other  cities  single  lodges.1

"In  the  year  1858  or  1859,"  according  to  the  official  report,
"  Bro.  Lafon  de  Ladebat  went  to  Mexico,  with  authority  from  Bro.
Albert  Pike  (of  Washington,  D.  C.)  to  organize  and  establish
Masonry  on  a  sound  basis  in  that  country.3  However,  Bro.  Lade-
bat did  not  organize  a  Grand  Lodge  of  Symbolic  Masonry  first,  as
instructed,  but  constituted  the  Supreme  Council  with  jurisdiction
over  the  three  degrees  of  E.  A.,  F.  C,  and  M.  M."  3

The  Grand  Lodge  of  Yorkinos  ceased  to  exist,  and  the  "  Scots

1  Gould,  vol.  vi.  2  Proceedings  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Louisiana,  1884.

3  This  was  entirely  in  opposition  to  Brother  Pike's  wishes.

FREEMASONRY   IN    MEXICO  1945

Rite,"  divested  of  all  political  coloring,  erected — December  27,  1865
— a  Supreme  Council  t>3°i  this  being  done  after  the  overthrow  of
the  Maximilian  Empire.  This  Supreme  Council  and  the  Supreme
Council  of  1858-59  were  joined  in  1868  and  both  were  fused  with
the  National  Grand  Lodge,  the  President  of  the  Republic,  Benito
Juarez,  being  one  of  the  highest  officials.  However,  this  union  was
more  of  a  friendly  pact  than  of  a  thorough  nature,  as  each  rite  was
independent  of  the  other  with  regard  to  its  own  ritual  and  internal
government.  The  National  Rite  numbered  thirty-two,  and  the  A.
and  A.  S.  R.  twenty-four,  lodges  in  1870.

''  It  would  seem  as  if  the  authority  of  Juarez  alone  held  these
rites  together,  since  at  his  death  in  1872 — although  he  was  suc-
ceeded as  President  by  his  chief  follower,  Sebastian  Lerdo  de  Teje-
da,  also  a  prominent  Freemason — dissensions  arose,  and  they  fell
asunder,  Alfredo  Chavero  becoming  G.  M.  of  the  Grand  Orient,
and  Jose  Maria  Mateos  of  the  National  Grand  Lodge.  In  1876  a
Lodge  of  Germans  left  the  G.  O.  and  joined  the  National  Grand
Lodge,  but  in  the  following  year,  with  the  consent  of  the  latter^
affiliated  with  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Hamburg — under  which  body
there  is  also  (1886)  another  lodge  at  work  in  Vera  Cruz."1

About  1882  the  two  rites  probably  seem  to  have  been  again
united,  though  information  is  so  meager  that  this  is  not  definite.
However,  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  National  Mexican  Rite  con-
tinued to  exist  though  its  proceedings  are  not  recorded.  As  far  as
there  is  any  evidence,  it  appears  that  Grand  Lodges  were  organized
by  the  lodges  which  were  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Supreme
Council.3  At  the  capital  a  Central  Grand  Lodge  was  formed,  hav-
ing jurisdiction  over  the  subordinate  lodges,  and  there  was  very  lit-
tle interference  upon  the  subject  of  Symbolism  except  by  the  Cen-
tral Grand  Lodge,  though  the  Supreme  Council  did  not  formally
waive  its  authority  thereover.

"  In  1883  there  were  the  following  State  Grand  Lodges  :  Vera
Cruz  and  Jalisco,  each  with  seven  lodges  ;  Puebla,  Yucatan,  and
Guanajuato,  with  six  ;  and  Morelos  and  Tlaxcala,  with  five  ;  thus
making  a  total  of  seven  Grand  and  forty-two  subordinate  lodges,
exclusive  of  the  Central  Grand  Lodge  and  the  metropolitan  lodges.

11  It  will  be  seen  that  at  this  period  there  existed  at  Vera  Cruz  a

1  Gould,  vol.  vi.  *  Recommended  by  General  Pike.

1946  HISTORY    OF    FREEMASONRY

State  Grand  Lodge,  but  from  the  fact  that  it  was  subordinate  to  the
Central  Grand  Lodge,  it  was  not  deemed  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Colon  to  exercise  legitimate  authority  over  Symbolism  in  that
State.  Indeed,  the  whole  of  Mexico  was  regarded  by  the  last-
named  body  as  '  unoccupied  territory,'  and  it  therefore  proceeded
to  charter  three  lodges,  which  in  January,  1883,  formed  themselves,
at  the  City  of  Vera  Cruz,  into  the  '  Mexican  Independent  Sym-
bolic Grand  Lodge.'  "

"  Two  of  the  lodges  taking  part  in  this  movement  had  originally
held  Mexican  warrants,  but  having  quarreled  with  their  superiors,
solicited  and  obtained  charters  from  the  G.  L.  of  Colon  (now  Colon
and  Cuba),  shortly  after  which  the  third  lodge  was  formed,  and
then,  finally,  the  Grand  Lodge,  although  the  Supreme  Council  of
Mexico  had  formerly  protested  against  the  invasion  of  its  territory.
Indeed  the  step  thus  taken  by  their  former  superiors  appears  rather
to  have  accelerated  the  action  of  the  three  lodges,  as  in  the  record
of  their  proceedings  it  is  stated,  ■  that  they  hasten  to  constitute
themselves  into  an  Independent  Grand  Lodge,  pending  the  protest
of  the  Supreme  Council  of  Mexico,  to  relieve  their  friend  and
mother,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Colon,  from  any  further  unpleasant
complications.'

"  The  Supreme  Council  of  Mexico,  in  a  Balustre  numbered
XXX.,  and  dated  April  25,  1883,  renounced  its  jurisdiction  over  the
symbolical  degrees,  and  promulgated  a  variety  of  relations  with  re-
gard to  Grand  and  subordinate  lodges.  This  threw  the  Craft  into
the  utmost  confusion,  and  might  have  ended  in  the  destruction  of  the
greater  number  of  Mexican  lodges,  or  at  least  in  the  establishment
of  some  half  dozen  Grand  Bodies,  all  claiming  supremacy,  had  it  not
been  for  the  skill  and  address  of  Carlos  Pacheco,  who  succeeded
Alfredo  Chavero  as  Sov.  G.  Com.  33°

"  The  former  Balustre  was  revoked,  and  by  a  new  one  (XXXII.),
dated  May  27,  1883,  the  Supreme  Council  renounced,  in  favor  of
the  State  Grand  Lodges  then  existing  or  which  might  afterward  be
formed,  the  jurisdiction  over  Symbolism  conferred  upon  it  by  the
Constitutions  of  the  A.  and  A.  S.  R.  330.  The  transmission  of  pow-
ers was  to  take  effect  from  June  24th  them  ensuing.  The  lodges
having  no  Grand  Lodge  were  to  remain  under  the  jurisdiction  of
the  Grand  Lodge  nearest  to  them,  or  the  oldest  if  two  were  equi-
distant, until  they  organized  their  own  in  accordance  with  Masonic

FREEMASONRY    IN    MEXICO  1947

usage  and  precedent.  The  lodges  of  the  Federal  District,  however,
were  directed  to  form  and  inaugurate  their  Grand  Lodge  on  June  1 5th
then  following.  Balustre  XXXII.  was  signed  (inter  alias)  by  Carlos
Pacheco,  Mariano  Escobedo,  Alfredo  Chavero,  and  Porfirio  Diaz.

"  On  June  25,  1883,  twelve  lodges  at  the  capital  met  and  estab-
lished the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  Federal  District  (or  city)  of  Mexico,
with  Porfirio  Diaz  as  the  first  G.  M.  The  event  was  announced  to
the  Masonic  world  in  two  circulars,  the  first  of  which  is  in  Spanish
— an  immense  document  of  one  hundred  and  eighty  pages !  The
second  is  in  English,  and  its  only  noticeable  feature  is  a  declaration
that  the  American  system  of  State  Grand  Lodges,  each  with  exclu-
sive jurisdiction,  has  been  adopted.  Grand  Lodges  have  since  been
established  on  the  same  plan — i.e.,  in  conformity  with  the  edict  of
the  Supreme  Council,  as  promulgated  in  Balustre  XXXII. — in  the
States  of  Vera  Cruz,  Tlaxcala,  Morelos,  Puebla,  Campeachy,  and
Lower  California.  The  complications,  however,  already  existing  in
the  Republic,  were  still  further  increased  in  1883,  by  the  action  of
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Missouri,  in  granting  a  Charter  to  the  Toltec
Lodge,  in  the  City  of  Mexico,  which  had  been  provisionally  estab-
lished at  the  close  of  the  previous  year  under  a  dispensation  from  the
Grand  Master."  1

"  The  recognition  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  which  Porfirio  Diaz
became  the  head,  by  the  Grand  Lodges  of  Louisiana  and  Florida,
was  duly  protested  against  by  Carlos  Pacheco,  Sov.  G.  Com.  33°,
and  Carlos  K.  Ruiz,  the  latter  of  whom  claimed  to  be  himself  the
legitimate  G.  M.  It  would  appear  from  '  La  Gran  Logia,'  a  bul-
letin published  by  some  members  of  the  Ruiz  Grand  Lodge,  and
denominated  their  official  organ,  that  on  the  same  day,  at  the  same
hour,  and  in  the  same  hall,  when  and  where  the  Diaz  Grand  Lodge
was  organized  and  installed,  the  other  body  was  organized  also.
There  was  this  difference,  however,  that  whereas  the  Diaz  party
transacted  their  affairs  within  the  body  of  the  lodge,  the  supporters
of  Ruiz  were  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  attending  to  theirs  in  the
anteroom — the  latter  Brethren  having  withdrawn  from  the  original
convention  while  it  was  being  organized,  but  not  leaving  the  build-
ing, in  the  vestibule  of  which  they  afterward  conducted  their  own
proceedings."8

1  Gould,  vol.  vi.  a  Ibid.

i948  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Extract  from  Proceedings  of  Grand  Lodge  of  Iowa.

Report  on  Foreign  Correspondence,  Theo.   S.   Parvin,  Chairman,

1896.

"The  year  1890  opens  before  us  the  new,  and  present  era  of
Mexican  Masonry.  The  functions  of  the  Supreme  Council  being
limited  and  confined  to  the  legitimate  Scottish  Rite  degrees  4th
and  33d,  inclusive,  with  no  organized  jurisdictions  of  Masonry  of
the  symbolic  degrees  except  the  Grand  Lodges  of  the  State  of  Vera
Cruz  and  the  Federal  District  (city  of  Mexico),  both  of  which  had
been  recognized  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Iowa  as  well  as  many  other
Grand  Lodges,  the  Lodges,  to  the  number  of  one  hundred  and
twenty-two  of  the  one  hundred  and  twenty-five,  met  in  convention,
and  after  a  session  of  ten  days,  on  the  20th  of  July,  1890,  unani-
mously created  and  organized  a  new  and  governing  body  of  Masonry,
styled  '  The  Gran  Dieta  Symbolica,'  or  the  Grand  Diet  of  Symbolic
Masonry  for  the  Republic  of  Mexico.  It  elected  for  its  Grand
Master,  and  who  has  since  by  annual  re-election  been  continued  in
office,  Bro.  Porfirio  Diaz,  the  distinguished  and  illustrious  President
of  the  Republic ;  and  for  its  Grand  Secretary  another  distinguished
citizen  and  Mason,  Ermilo  G.  Canton,  the  Clerk  of  the  Supreme
Court  of  the  United  States  of  Mexico,  who  also,  by  annual  re-
election, still  continues  in  office.

"  The  Gran  Dieta  promulgated  a  Constitution  of  forty-seven
pages,  consisting  of  eleven  titles  and  one  hundred  and  forty-five
articles.  The  three  sections  of  this  Constitution  relating  to  Ma-
sonic power  and  authority,  read  as  follows  (we  give  the  trans-
lation) :

"  'Article  30.  The  powers  of  Symbolic  Masonry  in  this  Re-
public are  constituted  in  the  governing  Grand  Lodge,  which  goes
by  the  name  of  the  "  Grand  Symbolic  Diet  of  the  United  States  of
Mexico,"  whose  duty  it  shall  be  to  watch  over  the  welfare,  absolute
liberty  and  independence  of  the  three  blue  degrees,  or  Symbolic
Lodges,  under  the  Grand  Lodges  of  the  different  States.'

"'Art.  31.  The  Sovereign  Masonic  Power  resides  essentially
and  originally  in  the  great  body  of  Masons,  who  deposit  their
obedience  for  its  exercise  in  the  Grand  Diet.'

"'Art.   32.     The   Supreme    Authority   of    Symbolic    Masonry

FREEMASONRY    IN    MEXICO  1949

shall  have  the  title,  '  Grand  Symbolic  Diet  of  the  United  States  of
Mexico.'  "

"  All  of  the  Grand  Lodges  save  three — that  of  the  State  of  Vera
Cruz,  the  Federal  District,  and  one  other — together  with  the  subor-
dinate Lodges  that  had  not  participated  in  its  organization,  trans-
ferred their  allegiance  to  the  Gran  Dieta.  These  constituent  Lodges
now  number  about  two  hundred,  and  the  membership  exceeds  ten
thousand  ;  the  reporter  for  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Texas  makes  the
former  two  hundred  and  fifty,  and  the  latter  twenty  thousand — too
high,  I  think — among  whom  I  found,  during  my  visit,  were  enrolled
among  its  members  not  only  the  President  of  the  Republic,  but  the
Governors  of  all  the  principal  States  (some  sixteen  of  which  I
visited),  the  Mayors  of  the  cities,  and  the  Judges  of  the  Supreme
Court.  The  Gran  Dieta  is,  therefore,  a  sovereign  and  independent
body,  organized  after  the  manner  of  the  Grand  Masonic  Bodies  of
the  United  States.  It,  and  it  alone,  exercises  supreme  authority  and
control  over  '  the  three  symbolic  degrees  of  masonry  '  in  Mexico.

"The  constituent  elements  in  the  Gran  Dieta  of  Grand  and
Subordinate  Lodges  and  in  the  membership  consists  of  Masons
both  of  the  York  and  Scottish  Rite.  We  have  learned  from  the
general  history  presented,  that  there  was  at  one  time  some  twenty
Lodges,  with  a  membership  of  near  eight  hundred,  that  had  ob-
tained their  charters  from  Grand  Lodges  in  the  United  States,  and
that  the  old  York  element  has  existed  in  Mexico  ever  since,  and,
like  the  leaven  of  old,  will  yet  under  fostering  care  more  and  more
each  year  permeate  the  system  of  Masonry  now  established  upon  a
new  basis.  The  ritual,  however,  used  in  a  majority  of  these  Lodges
and  Grand  Lodges  is  that  of  the  three  degrees  of  the  Scottish  Rite
as  practiced  in  Lodges  created  by  the  Supreme  Council,  the  excep-
tions being  the  Lodges  composed  exclusively  or  principally  of
American  citizens  resident  in  the  various  cities  of  the  Republic,  in
which  the  American  ritual  is  used.  There  are  now  some  half  dozen
so-called  American  Lodges — that  is,  Lodges  composed  of  American
citizens  resident  in  Mexico  and  other  cities  of  the  Republic.  These
Lodges  all  hold  their  charters  from  the  Grand  Dieta,  which  is  and
must  continue  to  be  the  only  governing  body  of  Symbolic  Masonry
in  Mexico.  The  last  effort  of  the  Grand  Lodges  in  the  United
States  to  establish  a  Lodge  in  Mexico,  was  that  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Missouri  which  chartered  Toltec  Lodge  some  ten  or  more  years

i95o  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY     .

ago,  but  which,  upon  the  organization  of  Gran  Dieta,  surrendered
its  charter  and  took  out  one  from  the  Gran  Dieta,  under  which  it
now  works.

"  There  are  thousands  of  American  citizens,  hundreds  of  them
being  Masons,  residing  in  the  various  cities  in  Mexico,  many  of
whom  are  affiliated  with  the  so-called  American  Lodges,  while
others  yet  hold  membership  in  the  Mexican  Lodges,  and  this  num-
ber is  increasing  each  year.

"  Upon  the  organization  of  the  Gran  Dieta  it  made  no  special
effort  to  secure  recognition  of  American  Grand  Lodges,  and  it  was
some  two  or  three  years  later  that  the  Grand  Lodges  of  Texas  and
New  York  recognized  it,  as  they  do  still,  and  then  the  subject  of  its
recognition  was  presented  to  other  Grand  Lodges,  which  deferred
action  for  further  information,  as  it  had  been  currently  reported,
especially  through  a  publication  issued  by  an  American  resident  of
the  city  of  Mexico,  that  the  Gran  Dieta  by  its  constitution  author-
ized the  making  of  women  Masons,  and  prohibited  the  use  of  the
Great  Light  in  their  lodges.  These  statements  I  had  heard  and  read
while  I  was  yet  writing  the  Reports  on  Correspondence  for  this
Grand  Lodge,  and  so  declined  to  present  the  subject  of  recognition
of  the  Gran  Dieta  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Iowa  until  I  could  satisfy
myself  more  fully  in  relation  to  these  rumors  developing  into  pub-
lished statements.  I  examined  the  Constitution  of  the  Gran  Dieta,
to  which  I  have  referred,  and  could  find  nowhere  within  it  any  pro-
vision prohibiting  the  use  of  the  Great  Light  in  their  Lodges,  or
authorizing  the  making  of  women  Masons ;  the  Constitution  is  en-
tirely silent  upon  both  subjects.  During  my  visit  to  the  Republic
of  Mexico  in  February  and  March  of  1895,  I  had  an  opportunity  to
satisfy  myself  upon  these  subjects.  I  found  that  the  Gran  Dieta
did  not,  by  any  law,  much  less  constitutional  provision,  prohibit  or
exclude  the  Great  Light  from  its  altars — it  did  and  does  permit  its
use ;  it  does,  however,  require  by  law  the  use  of  the  Book  of  Con-
stitutions upon  its  altars.  I  found  during  my  visit  to  Lodges  and
Grand  Lodges  in  some,  and  especially  all  of  the  American  Lodges,
the  Great  Light  open  upon  the  altar ;  in  other  Lodges  the  Book  of
Constitutions  only  ;  and  notwithstanding  the  requirement  that  the
Book  of  Constitutions  should  be  used,  I  found  in  some  Lodges  that
it  was  laid  aside  in  open  view,  and  the  Great  Light  substituted,  and
the  action  was  not  called  in  question  by  any  authority.      It  is  not

FREEMASONRY    IN   MEXICO  1951

true,  therefore,  as  has  been  stated,  that  the  Bible  is  excluded ;  its
use,  while  permitted,  is  not  required.

"In  reference  to  this  subject,  I  fail  to  find  any  warrant  or  require-
ment in  the  '  Book  of  Constitutions,'  the  Constitution  or  Code  of
Iowa,  or  any  other  Grand  Lodge  I  have  examined,  requiring  the  use
of  the  Great  Light  in  our  American  Lodges.  The  Constitution  of
the  United  States  has  no  reference  to  God  or  a  Supreme  Being,  and
many  of  our  Presidents,  in  their  annual  messages,  have  omitted  all
reference  to  a  Supreme  Being,  so  that  a  class  of  Christians  are  year
after  year  clamoring  for  an  amendment  to  that  National  Charter,  as
if  we  would  become  more  a  Christian  nation  by  its  insertion.  The
'Book  of  Constitutions'  not  only  does  not,  any  more  than  the  Con-
stitution of  the  Gran  Dieta,  require  the  use  of  the  Bible  in  Lodges,
but,  on  the  contrary,  we  learn  from  it  that  it  'charges  the  Masons
of  every  country  to  be  of  the  religion  of  that  country  or  nation,'
and  so,  of  course,  authorizes  the  use  of  the  book  of  the  religion  of
the  people  of  such  country  and  nation.  It  has  been  well  said  by
high  authority  that  '  he  that  is  without  sin  among  you,  let  him  first
cast  a  stone.'  Until  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Iowa  and  other  Grand
Lodges,  by  constitutional  or  legal  enactment,  shall  first  require  the
use  of  the  Great  Light  in  their  Lodges,  let  them  be  sparing  of  their
criticisms  and  censure  of  another  supreme  and  independent  Grand
Lodge  possessing  all  the  rights  and  privileges  they  claim.  With-
out the  exercise  and  practice  of  this  Christian  and  Masonic  charity,
Masonry  can  never  become,  as  the  Constitutions  affirm  it  is,  'the
center  of  union  and  the  means  of  conciliating  true  friendship  among
persons  that  must  otherwise  have  remained  at  a  perpetual  distance.'
Our  people  and  Masons  are  fast  becoming  important  factors  in  the
business  and  social  relations  (even  marrying  and  being  given  in
marriage)  of  the  cities  of  the  Mexican  Republic  ;  they  are  already
in  large  numbers  enrolled  as  members  of  their  Lodges ;  and  if
given  a  chance,  will  yet  bring  the  Masonry  of  that  country  more  in
harmony  with  ours.

"  Another  of  the  objections  urged  heretofore  against  the  recog-
nition of  the  Gran  Dieta  is,  that  it  made  Masons  of  women.  From
a  thorough  examination  of  the  Constitution,  I  learn  that  this  was
not  authorized  or  warranted  by  any  constitutional  provision  ;  it  was
not,  indeed,  until  a  year  later,  in  1891,  that  the  Gran  Dieta,  by  a
law  provided  for  the  initiation  of  women,  and  also  for  the  issuing  to

1952  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

them  of  charters  for  Lodges.  From  what  I  saw  and  the  best  in-
formation I  could  obtain,  there  were  some  two  or  three  only  of  the
Grand  Lodges  that  had  sanctioned  this  practice,  and  about  the  same
number  of  Lodges  that  had  acted  under  the  permission  thus  given.
I  found  both  in  the  city  of  Mexico  and  the  city  of  San  Luis  Potosi,
which  is  the  capital  of  the  State  of  the  same  name,  and  a  city  of
about  the  size  of  our  State  capital,  Des  Moines — a  woman's  Lodge  ;
that  is,  I  saw  the  charters  hanging  upon  the  wall  of  the  ante-room
side  by  side  with  the  charters  of  some  four  or  five  men's  Lodges
occupying  the  same  hall ;  the  charters  were  filled  out  upon  the  same
blanks,  in  the  same  manner,  signed  by  the  same  Grand  Officers,
and  with  the  great  seal  of  the  Gran  Dieta — the  only  difference
being  the  insertion  in  one,  of  the  names  of  women  rather  than  of
men.  Moreover,  I  find  from  an  examination  of  the  Masonic  Bul-
letin, the  official  organ  of  the  Gran  Dieta  for  1891-94,  edited  by
the  Gran  Dieta,  and  especially  in  the  number  for  February,  1893,
which  contains  the  official  list  of  a  hundred  and  more  Lodges  all
owing  obedience  to  the  Gran  Dieta,  among  them  one  or  two  Lodges
of  women,  chartered  by  the  Gran  Dieta  and  organized  by  the  Grand
Secretary  himself,  as  I  was  informed  by  the  brethren.  In  the
official  Bulletin  for  February,  1892,  pages  175-201,  there  is  a  list  of
the  officers  and  members,  of  some  twenty  Lodges,  all  of  them  con-
stituent members,  of  the  Gran  Dieta,  and  among  them  I  find  that
of  Martha  Washington  Lodge,  No.  156,  with  a  list  of  the  names  of
its  officers  and  members,  and  the  name  of  the  Master  is  Maria  C.
Beall,  the  Secretary  Josefina  S.  Rivera.  These  ladies  I  know  very
well — have  known  the  former  from  her  childhood — Mrs.  Beall  is  a
native  of  Iowa  City,  was  educated  in  our  State  University  (where
for  years,  I  was  a  professor),  was  graduated  in  1876,  and  went  to
Mexico  as  a  missionary,  where  she  met  and  married  her  husband,
who  was  a  member  at  that  time  and  later  Master  of  a  Mexican
Lodge  in  the  same  city,  as  his  name  appears  in  the  published  record
to  which  we  have  referred.  The  father  of  this  lady  is  and  has  been
for  many  years  a  leading  physician  of  Iowa  city,  and  a  prominent
Mason  for  half  a  century.  The  Secretary  is  the  niece  of  the  Gov-
ernor of  the  State,  the  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  and  the
daughter  of  Gen.  Rivera,  one  of  the  leading  citizens  of  the  Repub-
lic, and  the  second  officer  in  a  Lodge  that  has  in  its  membership
several  prominent  Americans,  among  them  the  Rev.  Mr.  Winton,

FREEMASONRY    IN    MEXICO  1953

who  has  long  been  a  resident  of  the  city,  and  thoroughly  informed
as  to  Mexican  Masonry.  From  them  I  learned,  as  also  from  the
Masters  and  other  officers  of  Mexican  Lodges  I  visited  in  the  city
of  Mexico,  that  the  women  were  accustomed  to  visit  the  men's
Lodges  at  pleasure.

"Wherever  I  went  and  visited,  either  Grand  or  subordinate
Lodges,  being  received  with  the  greatest  courtesy  and  welcomed  by
eloquent  addresses  delivered  by  the  Grand  Orator,  an  officer  attached
to  every  Lodge  for  the  purpose  of  welcoming  visitors,  I  took  oc-
casion in  my  responsive  addresses,  which  I  delivered  upon  every
occasion  and  at  considerable  length,  to  cite  attention  to  this  practice,
which  I  found  had  obtained  in  a  few  cases,  and  which  was  very
objectionable  to  American  Masons ;  and  I  assured  them  that  while
it  continued,  many  of  our  Grand  Lodges  would  not  recognize  the
Gran  Dieta,  under  whose  jurisdiction  they  worked.  I  was  every-
where informed,  in  public  and  in  private,  that  an  overwhelming
majority  of  the  Lodges  and  members  were  opposed  to  the  practice,
and  were  very  anxious  to  be  brought  into  closer  and  more  intimate
relations  with  American  Masons  and  Masonry.  This  sentiment  was
communicated  to  me  by  President  Diaz,  who  honored  me  with  two
very  interesting  interviews,  as  also  by  his  Deputy,  both  in  the  Su-
preme Council  and  Gran  Dieta,  and  other  prominent  Masons.

"  A  few  months  after  my  return  home  I  learned  that  the  Gran
Dieta  had  repealed  the  law  under  which  women  were  authorized  to  be
made  Masons,  and  upon  receiving  this  information,  I  replied  that  that
would  not  satisfy  American  Masons  ;  they  must  go  further,  and  pro-
vide by  law  for  the  revocation  of  charters  issued  to  women,  and  still
more,  deny  to  them  the  right  of  visitation  to  men's  Lodges,  both
of  which  the  Gran  Dieta  has  since  done,  as  I  am  informed.  Further
than  this  I  do  not  see  what  they  could  do.  They  cannot  unmake
the  women  who  are  made  Masons  any  more  than  we  can  by  expul-
sion declare  that  a  man  is  no  longer  a  Mason.  We  only  do  as  they
have  done,  deny  them  all  the  rights  and  privileges  of  Masonry.

11  The  making  of  women  Masons  is  not  a  new  departure  in  Mas-
onry ;  its  has  only  been  more  recent,  upon  a  larger  scale,  and  brought
nearer  home.  Every  well-read  Mason  knows  full  well  that  in  the
last  century  a  Lodge  in  Ireland,  Num.  44,  at  Doneraile,  initiated  a
woman,  Miss  Elizabeth  St.  Leger,  daughter  of  the  Right  Honorable

St.  Leger,  Viscount  Deneraile,  whose  son  and  successor  was  Master

123

1954  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

of  the  Lodge  at  the  time.  She  afterwards  married  Hon.  Richard
Aldworth,  of  the  County  of  Cork,  and  has  left  a  most  honorable
record  as  a  woman  and  a  woman  Mason.  Moreover,  the  Masonic
student  may  learn  that  during  the  reign  of  Napoleon,  the  First
Emperor,  a  woman  was  made  a  Mason,  he  being  Grand  Master  at
the  time.  She  was  a  colonel,  and  a  very  brave  and  distinguished
officer  in  his  army  ;  served  with  distinction  for  many  years,  and  her
sex  was  not  discovered  until  she  was  severely  wounded,  when,  upon
her  recovery,  the  Masons,  prompted  by  a  spirit  of  gallantry,  con-
ferred upon  her  the  three  symbolic  degrees.  Within  the  past  decade
the  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Hungary,  a  Symbolic
Grand  Lodge,  which  takes  a  prominent  part  the  present  year  with
the  officials  and  people  of  Hungary  in  the  celebration  of  their  Mil-
lenium Festival,  a  thousand  years  of  honorable  history,  conferred,
himself,  the  degrees  of  Masonry  upon  his  own  wife.  While  the
Masonic  press  commented  upon  this  last  case  as  Masonic  historians
have  upon  the  former,  I  have  yet  to  learn  that  any  Masonic  Grand
Body  ever  withdrew,  or  even  withheld,  their  recognition  from  those
Grand  Lodges  of  Ireland,  France,  and  Hungary.  They  were  all
recognized  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Iowa  as  independent  Grand
Masonic  Bodies  ;  and  it  was  only  when  the  Grand  Lodge  of  France
eliminated  from  its  ritual  the  requirement  of  '  a  belief  in  a  Supreme
Being,'  that  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Iowa,  following  the  example  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England,  and  later  followed  by  American  Grand
Lodges  other  than  our  own,  withdrew  its  recognition,  or  rather,  re-
fused to  hold  further  Masonic  intercourse  with  that  Grand  Body.

"Another,  and  the  third,  objection  has  been  very  recently  urged
against  the  recognition  of  the  Gran  Dieta  as  a  lawfully  constituted
Masonic  body,  and  the  very  sweeping  charge  has  been  made,  not
only  against  the  Gran  Dieta,  but  against  very  many  of  the  Grand
Lodges  of  the  world,  especially  those  of  Europe,  Asia,  Africa  and
South  America,  nearly  all  of  which  owe  their  origin  to  Supreme
Councils  of  Scottish  Rite  Freemasonry.  It  has  been  published  that
'  there  is  no  lawful  Masonry  anywhere  that  is  not  descended  from
the  Free  and  Accepted  Masonry  of  the  British  Isles,  the  Masonry  of
the  Charges  of  a  Freemason  ; '  and  it  is  declared  by  the  same  writer
that  this  is  '  an  indisputable  fact'  He  further  says  that  the  Lodges
in  Mexico  are  '  clandestine  ; '  that  '  their  members  are  impostors  and
dissenters  from  the  original  plan  of  Masonry,'  and  that  '  whoever

FREEMASONRY    IN    MEXICO  1955

visits  them  violates  his  Masonic  vows.'  If  these  statements  be  true,
then  all  the  Grand  Lodges  to  which  we  have  referred  are  clandes-
tine, and  their  members  are  impostors  and  dissenters,  and  all  who
visit  them,  as  I  and  thousands  of  other  American  Masons  have  done,
are  guilty,  as  charged,  of  violating  our  vows.  The  writer  affirms
that  the  statements  made  by  him  are  '  indisputable  facts.'  They  are
not  only  disputed  now,  but  have  been  through  the  whole  history  of
Freemasonry  in  the  United  States.  In  the  Reports  on  Correspond-
ence of  the  past  year,  Past  Grand  Masters  Drummond,  of  Maine,
and  Anthony,  of  New  York,  two  among  the  ablest  Masonic  writers
of  the  day,  and  certainly  the  peers  in  Masonic  knowledge  of  any
other  two  in  the  country,  not  only  deny  the  statement,  but  affirm,  to
which  an  overwhelming  majority  of  Grand  Lodges  and  Masonic
writers  give  their  adherence  quite  as  '  indisputably,'  that  '  a  Lodge
created  by  a  Supreme  Council  in  a  country  where,  by  the  Masonic
law  then  prevailing,  it  may  be  done,  is  just  as  lawful  a  Lodge,  and
its  Masons  as  regular  Masons,  as  any  to  be  found  outside  of  those
which  can  trace  their  origin  back  to  the  British  Grand  Lodges.  The
bodies  of  the  York  Rite  do  not,'  they  say,  '  embrace  the  whole  of
pure  and  accepted  Masonry.'  To  this  I  give  my  unwavering  ad-
herence.

"  One  of  the  so-called  landmarks  of  Masonry,  and  quite  as  essen-
tial and  important  in  its  character,  and  which  has  received  the
assent  of  quite  a  large  number  of  Masonic  writers,  affirms  and  de-
clares that  '  Masonry  is  cosmopolitan,'  and  is  universal,  in  which
statement  they  are  borne  out  by  the  Book  of  Constitutions  itself.

"  Let  us  refer  briefly  to  the  history  of  the  English  Grand  Lodge.
The  first  Grand  Lodge  of  which  Masonic  history  gives  any  record,
is  that  of  England,  organized  by  the  '  four  old  Lodges  of  London  '
in  1 71 7.  The  Constitution  (Charges  and  Regulations)  for  its  gov-
ernment was  presented  by  Dr.  Anderson  (and  since  known  by  his
name),  and  adopted  in  1823.  This  Grand  Lodge,  we  all  know,  was
constituted  by  only  four  Lodges,  leaving  a  larger  number  out  in  the
cold,  while  the  Gran  Dieta  was  constituted  by  one  hundred  and
twenty-two  of  the  one  hundred  and  twenty-five  Lodges  in  the  Re-
public. While  there  had  never  been  an  earlier  Grand  Lodge,  there
had  been  and  were  at  that  time  other  Lodges  constituted  in  the  same
way  as  those  four — by  voluntary  action  and  without  any  warrant  or
authority  save  the  brothers'  common  consent.     Now,  the  Constitu-

1956  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

tion  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  then  and  there  adopted  for  its
government  and  it  alone — for  it  was  not  and  is  not  binding  upon
any  Lodge  or  Grand  Lodge  till  accepted  as  such — is  either  a  truth
or  a  lie.  It  reads,  Head.  VI,  Division  2,  that  '  We  are  also  Masons
of  all  nations,  tongues,  kindreds,  and  languages,'  which  is  corrobo-
rated by  all  history  ;  that  there  was  at  that  time  other  and  '  lawful
Masonry'  elsewhere  than  in  England.  England,  while  her  political
flag  floats  on  every  sea,  has  no  '  monopoly '  of  Masonry,  outside  of
her  own  dominions.  There  was  and  is  '  lawful  Masonry  '  in  other
parts  of  the  globe,  and  so  recognized  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng-
land itself,  by  Scotland,  Ireland,  Canada,  and  all  English  colonies,
as  by  a  majority  of  the  Grand  Lodges  of  the  United  States,  includ-
ing Iowa.  It  cannot  be  said,  as  some  have  asserted,  that  the  Lodges
in  other  nations  sprung  from  the  loins  of  the  English  Grand  Lodge,
because  at  that  date,  1723,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  had  not
warranted  a  single  Lodge  beyond  England  and  it  was  several  years
before  she  constituted  one  beyond  the  '  British  Isles.'

"  Not  only  has  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Iowa,  but  a  majority  of  the
Grand  Lodges  of  this  country  as  well  as  those  of  England  and
Europe  have  recognized  the  Grand  Lodges  of  Cuba,  Veracruz,  and
the  Federal  District  in  Mexico,  together  with  those  of  Chili,  Peru,
Brazil,  Argentine  Republic,  and  others  in  the  Western  Hemisphere,
and  in  the  Eastern,  those  of  Spain,  Portugal,  Italy,  Roumania,
Hungary,  and  others,  all  of  which,  as  we  have  stated,  were  created  by
supreme  Councils.  We  have  not  had  time  to  look  into  many  of  the
proceedings  of  Grand  Lodges,  but  those  which  we  have  at  hand,  and
into  which  we  have  looked,  are  those  of  California,  Canada,  Louis-
iana, New  York,  as  well  as  Iowa,  all  of  which  have  recognized  the
aforesaid  Grand  Lodges  as  lawfully  constituted  Grand  Lodges  of
Masons.  It  will  never  do  for  us  or  others  to  assert  that  all  knowl-
edge, all  wisdom,  and  all  Masonic  intelligence  reside  either  in  Illi-
nois or  Iowa,  or  any  other  American  Grand  Lodge,  or  even  in  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England,  which  has  always  acknowledged  and
recognized  a  majority,  if  not  all,  of  the  several  Grand  Lodges  we
have  named.  Moreover,  the  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England,  the  Prince  of  Wales,  who  has  served  his  Grand  Lodge
and  Freemasonry  now  for  twenty-one  years,  was  made  a  Mason  in
a  Lodge  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Sweden  ;
and  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Norway,  which  is  now  seeking  recognition

FREEMASONRY   IN   MEXICO  1957

at  our  hands,  has  been  recognized  recently  by  some  of  the  American
Grand  Lodges,  as  well  as  in  former  years  by  others.

"  These  statements  and  averments  prove  that  Masonry  is  univer-
sal, wide  spread  and  cosmopolitan  in  its  character ;  it  embraces,  as
the  Constitutions  say,  '  Masons  of  all  nations,  tongues,  kindreds,
and  languages,'  Mohammedan,  Hindoos,  and  even  Pagans  have
Lodges  and  Grand  Lodges,  using  the  Koran,  the  Vedas,  and  other
sacred  books  of  their  religion,  instead  of  the  Bible.  I  have  myself
sat  in  Lodges  and  Grand  Lodges  with  native  aboriginal  Americans,
full-blooded  Indians.  One  of  the  Presidents  of  the  United  States,
a  former  Grand  Master  of  a  Grand  Lodge,  ordered  the  degrees  of
Masonry  conferred  upon  Indian  chiefs  visiting  the  Secretary  of
War  at  the  National  capital  on  business  pertaining  to  their  nation,
and  those  men  had  very  little  knowledge  of  the  Great  Light  in
Masonry,  or  of  any  other  sacred  book,  except  the  great  volume  of
nature,  and  as  little,  also,  of  the  Book  of  the  Constitutions,  or  the
laws  of  the  Grand  Lodge  under  whose  jurisdiction  they  were  made.

"  Let  us  inquire  what  is  a  'clandestine  Lodge'  and  see  whether
Lodges  I  visited  in  Mexico  were  'clandestine.'  What  is  a  '  clan-
destine Lodge,'  and  an  impostor  and  dissenter  or  '  clandestine
Mason  ? '  The  (Anderson)  Constitutions  declare,  Section  8,  that
where  a  number  of  Masons  shall  take  upon  themselves  to  form  a
Lodge  without  the  Grand  Master's  warrant,  the  regular  Lodges  are
not  to  countenance  them  nor  own  them  as  fair  brethren,  and  duly
formed.'  In  other  words,  a  Lodge  formed  without  a  warrant  from
the  Grand  Master  (we  now  say  Grand  Lodge)  is  4  clandestine,'  and
so  a  '  clandestine  Mason '  is  one  made  in  a  Lodge  without  a  warrant.
The  Gran  Dieta  Symbolica  of  Mexico,  and  the  Lodges  under  its
obedience,  are  as  regular  and  legal  bodies  of  Masons  as  is  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Illinois,  Iowa,  England,  or  any  other  Grand  Lodge  in  the
world.  The  Gran  Dieta  is  composed  of  Grand  and  subordinate
Lodges  that  obtained  their  charters  from  both  Supreme  Councils  of
the  Scottish  Rite  and  Grand  Lodges  of  the  York  Rite,  but  that
does  not  militate,  there  more  than  here,  against  its  lawful  character.

"  So,  too,  a  lawfully-constituted  (warranted)  Lodge  cannot  make
•clandestine  Masons.'  There  is  a  great  difference  between  an  •ir-
regularly-made '  and  a  '  clandestinely-made  '  Mason.  The  making  of
a  person  who  is  not  a  '  good  and  true  man  ; '  one  who  is  not  '  free-
born  ; '  one  who  is  not  of '  mature  and   discreet  (legal)  age ; '  or  a

1958  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

4 bondman,' a  'woman,'  or  an  'immoral  or  scandalous  man,'  and  not
of  '  good  repute,'  is  declared  by  Anderson's  Constitutions  to  be  irregu-
lar and  not  permissible — but  that  irregularity  does  not  make  them
'clandestine.'  There  are  few,  not  any  among  all  my  brethren  of
many  years'  standing  in  Masonry,  who  have  not  visited  Lodges
which  had  violated  one  or  more  of  these  six  commandments,  called
by  some  'landmarks.'  The  violation  of  a  '  landmark  '  by  a  Lodge
or  Grand  Lodge  does  not  make  it  or  its  members  clandestine.  Were
this  so,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  itself,  the  oldest  of  Grand
Lodges,  would  be  declared  clandestine  by  all  English-speaking  Grand
Lodges  in  the  world,  for  there  is  no  fact  more  notorious  than  that
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  very  many  years  ago,  upon  the
manumission  of  slaves  in  its  colonies,  changed  one  of  the  funda
mental  landmarks,  so  recognized,  from  '  free  born  '  into  '  free  man,'
and  thereby  authorized  the  making  of,  and  did  make,  Masons  of
those  who  were  born  in  slavery.  Moreover,  the  Grand  Lodges  of
England,  of  Pennsylvania,  and  several  other  Grand  Lodges  in  the
United  States — even  our  neighboring  Grand  Lodge  of  Missouri —
knowingly,  and  I  may  say  willfully,  made  Masons  of  those  of  non-
age. We  have  residing  in  the  State  of  Iowa  to-day  a  Mason  made
a  Mason  in  his  eighteenth  year  in  a  Lodge  in  Missouri,  and  the
Lodge  so  making  him  was  fully  cognizant  of  the  fact.  These  are
irregularities,  and  no  irregularity,  however  great,  can  vitiate  the
charter  or  the  legal  existence  of  the  body  performing  the  act,  how-
ever offensive  it  may  be  in  the  eyes  of  the  brethren.

"  Any  and  all  Masons  may  visit  any  and  all  Lodges  in  Mexico
without  violating,  as  charged  by  the  ignorant  or  malicious,  any  O.
B.  of  which  I  have  any  knowledge,  or  known  to  the  rituals  here  or
elsewhere  from  the  first  to  the  thirty-third  and  last  degree  in  Masonry.

"  The  Grand  Lodge  of  England  was  the  first  Grand  Lodge  and
it  was  not  created  till  171 7,  nor  its  Constitution  adopted  till  1723  j1
yet  within  twenty  years  there  was  a  schism  and  a  secession  of  a
number  of  brethren,  who  constituted  another  Grand  Lodge,  calling
themselves  the  '  Ancients,'  and  by  some  strange  hocus  pocus  their
mother  Grand  Lodge  the  '  Moderns  ' — all  this  about  the  middle  of
the  last  century.  This  new  schismatic,  clandestine  Grand  Lodge,
engineered  by  a  more   intelligent,  active  and  energetic  Grand  Secre-

1  Constitution  was  adopted  1721,  and  first  edition  printed  1723. — Editor.

FREEMASONRY   IN   MEXICO  1959

tary,  Laurence  Dermott,  grew  rapidly,  and  soon  assumed  large  and
permanent  proportions.  It,  too,  published  a  Book  of  Constitutions,
called  by  its  author,  the  Grand  Secretary,  the  '  Ahiman  Rezon,'  and
planted  its  Lodges  '  at  home '  and  abroad,  especially  in  America,  for
Bro.  Hughan,  the  great  Masonic  antiquarian  and  historian,  says  that
it  secured  the  '  almost  unanimous  support  of  the  Grand  Lodges  of
America.'  That  '  a  stream  cannot  rise  above  its  fountain,'  'nor  can  a
pure  stream  flow  from  an  impure  fountain,'  are  unquestionably  axioms
in  nature  and  in  Masonry.  Now,  there  are  a  few  Grand  Lodges
in  the  United  States  in  whose  veins  the  blood  of  the  '  Ancients,'
the  '  rebel  Dermott,'  and  his  clandestine  Grand  Lodge,  so  declared
from  1750  to  1813,  when  the  mother  Grand  Lodge  condoned  all
offenses  and  gave  her  the  'kiss  of  peace,'  better  by  far  than  that  of  the
'betrayal.'  If  there  is  no  Dermott  blood  in  Iowa  and  Illinois,  the
veins  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pensylvania  are  full  of  it,  and  they  still
glory  in  their  '  Ahiman  Rezon,'  and  reject  and  '  cast  over  among
the  rubbish  '  the  Anderson's  Constitutions.  Nor  is  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Pennsylvania  alone  in  this,  but  she  has  illustrious  associates  ;  and
yet  who  ever  heard  of  an  Illinois  or  Iowa  Mason,  or  one  from  any
other  jurisdiction,  calling  those  Grand  Lodges  clandestine,  or  refuse,
Masonically,  to  visit  their  Lodges  or  hold  Masonic  intercourse  with
their  members,  charging  them  with  being  '  impostors  and  dissenters
from  the  original  plan  of  Masonry  ? '

"  The  difference  between  the  Masonry  of  Mexico  and  the  United
States  is  just  here :  Their  origin  and  pedigree  is  more  pure  and  law-
ful than  ours,  while  their  practices  were  not  only  objectionable  to  us
but  to  others,  and  to  even  a  majority  of  their  own  membership,  as
they  have  repealed  and  abrogated  the  law  under  which  such  objec-
tionable practices  had  obtained  by  only  two  of  the  twenty  or  more
Grand  Lodges,  and  the  same  number  out  of  more  than  two  hundred
subordinate  Lodges.

"  It  has  been  publicly  proclaimed  that  the  Gran  Dieta  has  not  only
repealed  the  law  under  and  by  which  women  were  made  Masons,
but  revoked  and  recalled  the  charters  (only  three,  and  that  is  three
too  many)  granted  to  women  Lodges,  but  gone  further — further  they
could  not  go — and  forbidden  Lodges  to  admit  women  Masons  as
visitors  or  to  recognize  them  (though  they  be  as  lawful  Masons  as
the  men).

"  The  Gran  Dieta  being  a  lawfully  constituted  Masonic  Body,

i960  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

with  some  two  hundred  Lodges  and  (it  is  stated)  twenty  thousand
members,  with  several  American  Lodges  and  many  of  our  citizens
affiliated  therein,  and  having  not  only  proved  that  it  did  not  forbid
or  exclude,  but  permits,  as  she  has  always,  the  use  of  the  Great
Light  and  moreover  settled  the  question  of  the  past  woman,  she
knocks  at  the  door  of  the  American  Grand  Lodges  for  recognition.
Let  it  be  borne  in  mind  that  recognition  is  not  essential,  or  even
necessary  to  legality.  It  only  bears  in  its  train  a  more  enlarged  and
fraternal  intercourse  among  and  between  their  members

CHAPTER  III

CUBA    AND    PORTO    RICO

Cuba.

N  December  17,  1804,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Penn-
sylvania chartered  at  Havana  Le  Temple  des
Vertus  Theologales,  No.  103,  Joseph  Cerneau
being  the  first  Master.  Under  the  same  sanc-
tion other  lodges  were  erected — in  18 18,  Nos.
157,  161  ;  in  1819,  Nos.  166,  167  ;  in  1820,  No.
175  (at  Santiago  de  Cuba),  and  in  1822,  No.
181.  They  existed  up  to  1826,  at  which  time  the  charters  of  Nos.
175  and  181  had  been  revoked  for  failure  of  meeting  for  more  than
a  year,  and  the  others  had  died  out.  The  Grand  Lodges  of  Louisiana
and  South  Carolina  next  assumed  the  warranting  of  lodges  on  the
island.  Under  the  former  Grand  Lodge,  bodies  sprang  up,  in  181 5,
No.  7,  in  1818,  Nos.  11  and  14,  and  under  the  latter  in  1818,  No.
50,  and  in  18 19,  No.  52.  The  Grand  Orient  of  France  in  1819
established  a  lodge  and  consistory  (32),  and  two  further  lodges  in
1 82 1.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  South  Carolina  received  from  the  G.
L.  of  Ancient  Freemasons  in  Havana  in  182 1,  a  communication
stating  that  a  Grand  Lodge  had  been  organized  there,  to  which  the
Lodge  La  Amenidad,  No.  52,  desired  permission  to  transfer  its  alle-
giance. A  favorable  answer  was  returned,  but  La  Constancia,  No.
50,  was  retained  on  the  roll  of  the  G.  L.  of  South  Carolina  for  some
years,  after  which  the  Warrant  was  surrendered  by  the  members  "  in
consequence  of  the  religious  and  political  persecutions  to  which  they
were  subjected."

For  many  years  Masonry  languished  in  the  "  Pearl  of  the  An-
tilles," its  votaries  practicing  their  rites  in  secret,  but  not  daring  to
indulge  in  any  overt  acts,  which  might  entail  not  only  expulsion
from  the  country,  but  also  confiscation  of  their  property.  At
length,  however,  a  faint  revival  set  in,  and  a  Warrant  was  granted,
November  17,  1859,  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  South  Carolina  to  St-

1961

1962  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Andrew's  Lodge,  No.  93,  "  for  the  purpose  of  establishing,  with  the
co-operation  of  two  other  Lodges1  already  existing  on  the  island,  a
Grand  Lodge,"  which  was  accomplished  on  December  5th  of  the
same  year.

An  independent  "  Grand  Lodge  of  Colon  "  was  thus  established
at  Santiago  de  Cuba,  and — December  27,  1859 — a  Supreme  Council
of  the  A.  and  A.  S.  R.  330  was  founded  in  the  same  city  by  Andres
Cassard.2

At  this  time,  it  must  be  recollected,  the  practice  of  assembling
as  Freemasons  was  forbidden  by  the  Spanish  laws,  which  laws,  more-
over, though  destined  to  become — after  the  dethronement  of  Queen
Isabella  (1868) — innocuous  in  the  Peninsula,  remained  for  a  long
time  in  full  force  in  Cuba.

Several,  indeed,  of  the  Captains  General  and  other  officers  who
ruled  the  islands  were  Masons,  and  therefore  from  time  to  time  the
Craft  was  tolerated,  but  its  members  being  always  compelled  to  work
to  a  great  extent  in  the  dark,  found  it  necessary  to  observe  the  most
inviolable  secrecy,  and  even  to  shield  themselves  under  "  Masonic
names,"  lest  by  the  discovery  of  their  own,  they  might  incur  the
most  grievous  penalties.

For  the  same  reason  the  Supreme  Council  and  the  Grand  Lodge,
which  soon  after  united  in  forming  a  Grand  Orient,  found  a  con-
venient title  for  the  amalgamated  body  in  the  name  of  Colon — the
Spanish  for  Columbus — it  being  desired  above  all  things  to  conceal
from  the  public  ken  the  seat  of  the  "  Grand  East  "  of  the  Society.

At  the  formation  of  the  Grand  Orient  of  Colon,  a  constitution
published  at  Naples  in  1820  was  adopted  as  that  of  the  new  organ-
ization. By  this  the  Supreme  Council  necessarily  became  a  section
of  the  Grand  Orient.  In  1865  a  new  constitution  was  promulgated.
The  Sov.  G.  Com.  of  the  Supreme  Council  became — ex  officio — G.
M.  of  the  Grand  Orient,  but  the  G.  M.  of  the  Grand  Lodge  was
still  required  to  submit  himself  for  election.  All  charters  for  lodges
were  issued  by  the  Grand  Lodge,  but  had  to  be  confirmed  and  vised
by  the  Supreme  Council.

In  1867  the  Grand  Lodge  promulgated  a  constitution  of  its  own,
in  which,  while  recognizing  its  continued  membership  of  the  Grand

brothers  Albert  Pike  and  Josiah   H.  Drummond   agree  that  these   were  Spanish
lodges,  having  warrants  from  Spain.

2  Sanctioned  by  S.  C.  330  Southern  Jurisdiction.

CUBA   AND   PORTO   RICO  1963

Orient,  it  claimed  the  exclusive  power  to  enact  its  own  by-laws,
issue  charters,  constitute  and  regulate  lodges.  Their  right  to  do
this  was  denied  by  the  Supreme  Council.  In  1868,  September  30th,
the  Grand  Lodge  suspended  its  constitution  until  a  meeting  took
place  of  the  Grand  Orient,  convoked  for  November  30th.  But
before  that  time  the  revolution  broke  out,  and  Freemasons,  being
regarded  by  the  Spanish  Government  as  revolutionists,  the  G.  O.
could  not  meet.  The  Grand  Lodge,  so  far  as  it  was  possible,  re-
sumed labor.  But  the  times  were  unpropitious.  In  the  winter  of
1869,  at  Santiago  de  Cuba,  by  order  of  Gonzales  Bret,  an  officer  of
the  Government,  eighteen  persons  were  seized  without  warrant,  and
immediately  shot,  without  trial,  for  being  Freemasons — one  of  them
the  M.  W.  G.  M.  of  Colon — and  many  others  were  arrested  and
committed  to  prison  for  the  same  offence.

The  number  of  Cuban  lodges,  which  in  1868  amounted  to
about  thirty,  had  fallen  in  1870  to  about  seven,  and  in  the  latter
year  the  S.  C.  organized  a  Provincial  Mother  Lodge  at  Havana,
against  which  the  Grand  Lodge  very  naturally  protested.  The  War-
rant to  this  "  Mother  Lodge  "  was  soon  after  recalled,  but  the  dis-
pute between  the  S.  C.  and  the  Grand  Lodge  continued.  In  1873
— April  nth — the  Grand  Lodge  resumed  work  openly,  and  in  the
following  year  entered  into  a  compact  with  the  Supreme  Council,
whereby  it  was  agreed  that  the  former  should  have  exclusive  juris-
diction over  Symbolic  Masonry,  with  the  sole  right  of  chartering
lodges,  and  that  it  should  establish  a  Provincial  Mother  Lodge  in
the  western  section  of  the  island  to  govern  the  lodges  there,  but
in  submission  to  the  laws  of  the  Grand  Lodge.  After  this  compact
it  was  intended  that  the  Grand  Lodge,  though  still  nominally  a  sec-
tion in  the  Grand  Orient,  should  have  full  jurisdiction  over  the
Symbolic  Masonry.  Nevertheless,  it  is  quite  clear  that  there  was  a
divided  authority,  and  apparently  great  Masonic  confusion  on  the
island.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  Colon  held  five  meetings  in  August,  1876,
at  the  last  of  which — August  26th — it  declared  itself  free  from  all
other  authority,  a  sovereign  body,  with  full  and  unlimited  powers
over  its  subordinates.

This  action,  however,  was  accelerated  by  an  event  which  had
taken  place  on  August  1st,  when  the  representatives  of  nine  char-
tered lodges,  and  of  four  under  dispensation,  met  at   Havana,  and

1964  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

formed  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Cuba.  This  body  from  the  very  first
kept  itself  free  from  the  blighting  influence  of  the  (so-called)  high
degrees,  which  it  willingly  consented — December  31,  1876 — should
be  ruled  in  Cuba  by  the  Grand  Orient  of  Spain.  In  a  circular  of
September  4,  1876,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Colon  claimed  to  have  on
its  register  thirty-six  lodges  and  8,000  members  ;  while  its  newly
formed  rival,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Cuba,  in  1877,  possessed  an  ap-
parent following  of  seventeen  lodges.  In  the  latter  year — June  3d
— a  second  Grand  Lodge  of  Colon  (or  Columbus)  at  Havana  was
added  to  the  two  existing  Craft  Grand  Bodies.

Thus  we  find  three  organizations,  each  claiming  to  be  the  regu-
lar Grand  Lodge.  From  a  circular  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Cuba,
we  learn  that  in  1879  the  three  lodges  which  formed  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Colon,  at  Santiago  de  Cuba  in  1859,  and  four  others,  ad-
hered to  that  body  ;  but  that  the  remaining  lodges,  excepting  those
under  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Cuba,  were  subject  to  the  control  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Colon  at  Havana.  To  local  jealousies  must  be
attributed  this  multiplication  of  Grand  Lodges.  The  representa-
tives of  some  of  the  Havana  lodges  who  seceded  from  the  old  (or
original)  Grand  Lodge  of  Colon  at  Santiago  de  Cuba,  met  as  the
Grand  Lodge,  and  decreed  its  removal  to  Havana.

Eventually,  however,  the  Grand  Lodges  of  Colon  (at  Havana)
and  Cuba  formally  united,  and  March  28,  1880,  the  G.  M.  of  one
body  became  Grand  Master,  and  the  G.  M.  of  the  other  body  Dep-
uty Grand  Master.  The  title  assumed  by  the  new  organization  was
the  United  Grand  Lodge  of  Colon  and  the  Island  of  Cuba,  and  it
entered  upon  its  career  with  a  roll  of  fifty-seven  lodges,  and  between
5,000  and  6,000  Masons.  The  lodges  under  the  original  Grand
Lodge  of  Colon  at  Santiago  de  Cuba  remained  true  to  their  alle-
giance.

In  1885  the  number  of  lodges  under  the  "  United  Grand
Lodge"  had  apparently  increased  to  eighty-two,  with  Provincial
Grand  Lodges  at  Santiago  de  Cuba  and  Porto  Rico ;  but  on  the
official  list  there  were  only  fifty-eight  lodges  in  all  upon  the  roll.
Of  these,  thirty  are  in  the  capital,  or  in  its  vicinity,  and  twenty-eight
in  other  parts.  It  is  possible  that  further  schisms  may  have  dis-
turbed the  peace  of  Cuban  Masonry ;  and  it  is  somewhat  remark-
able that  the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  of  Porto  Rico — with  the
fourteen  subordinate  lodges  on  that  island,  shown  in  sundry  calen-

CUBA  AND   PORTO   RICO  1965

dars  for  1886 — have  wholly  disappeared  in  the  official  list  of  current
date.

It  only  remains  to  be  stated,  that,  from  the  statistics  before  me,
there  would  appear  to  have  been  in  existence  on  the  island  thirteen
lodges  under  the  National  Grand  Orient,  and  twenty-seven  under
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Spain.  The  latter  were  subject  to  a  Prov.
G.  M.,  whose  jurisdiction  also  extends  to  Porto  Rico.

Since  the  suppression  of  Masonry  in  Cuba  by  Spanish  authority,
and  the  murder  of  Masons  at  Santiago  de  Cuba,  no  authentic  in-
formation of  the  status  of  the  Institution  in  the  island  has  been
attainable.  No  official  documents  have  been  issued,  but  after  the
war  of  the  United  States  with  Spain  ended,  a  notice  announcing
that  several  bodies  of  the  Fraternity  in  the  island  had  resumed
their  labors  was  issued,  and  under  the  new  regime  there  is  no  doubt
that  Masonry  will  flourish  there,  and  its  prosperity  spread  into  other
parts  of  the  Antilles.

Porto  Rico.

The  early  Masonic  history  of  this  island  is  very  vague  and  con-
jectural, as  are  all  questions  relating  to  the  problem  of  Spanish
Masonry.  In  i860,  at  Mayaguez,  there  was  in  existence  a  Lodge
Restauracion  under  the  G.  O.  of  Colon,  but  the  changes  which  took
place  in  Cuba  during  the  struggle  for  existence  of  the  Grand  Lodges
there,  had  their  influence  throughout  all  of  the  Spanish  islands.

The  lists  show  that  the  Provincial  Superintendent  of  Cuba  and
Porto  Rico  under  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Spain  (of  which  Becera  was
the  G.  M.)  was  Don  Manuel  Romeno.  The  lodges  are  not  enu-
merated in  the  list,  but  five  are  on  the  roll  of  the  Grand  Orient  of
Spain,  however,  without  a  Provincial  Superintendent  named.  Le
Phenix,  No.  230,  constituted  in  1874,  was  the  only  lodge  represent-
ing the  S.  C.  of  France.  At  one  time  the  United  Grand  Lodge
of  Colon  in  Cuba  had  under  its  jurisdiction  fourteen  lodges  in  the
island.  However,  these  were  formed  into  an  Independent  Grand
Lodge,  September  20,  1885.  The  greatest  centres  of  Masonic
activity  have  been  San  Juan,  Ponce,  and  Mayaguez,  the  last-named
town  not  only  having  two  lodges,  but  also  a  consistory  of  320,  a
council  of  300,  and  a  chapter  of  180.

While  the  lodges  of  Porto  Rico  severed  their  connection  with
the  "United  Grand  Lodge"  oi  Colon   in   the  island  of  Cuba,   the

1966  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

chapters  and  other  associations  of  Masons  in  this  Spanish  depend-
ency retained  their  allegiance  to  the  Supreme  Council  of  the  same
title.

Upon  this  a  little  light  is  thrown  by  the  action  of  Don  Antonio
Romero  Ortiz  (at  the  same  time  presiding  over  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Spain),  who,  in  a  decree,  dated  March  13,  1883,  "denounced  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Colon  and  Cuba,  and  the  Masons  of  its  obedience
as  traitors  to  the  Government  and  to  the  Mother  Country,"  simply
because  they  declined  to  recognize  his  authority  to  govern  or  inter-
fere in  the  affairs  of  "  Symbolical  Masonry"  in  Cuba.  In  the  same
year  the  United  Grand  Lodge  of  Colon  and  Cuba  announced  by
circular  that  there  being  in  all  three  Supreme  Councils  and  three
Grand  Lodges  in  Spain,  it  had  recognized  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Seville  as  being  "the  only  really  independent  organization  of  Craft
Masonry  "  then  existing  in  that  country.  This,  of  course,  was  deal-
ing very  summarily  with  the  pretensions  of  the  Grand  Lodge  (or
Orient)  under  Ortiz,  which  Mr.  Albert  Pike  pronounced  to  be  the
only  Grand  Body  in  Spain  legitimately  entitled  to  recognition  as
a  regular  Masonic  body.  The  name  last  quoted  being,  as  many
will  be  aware,  that  of  the  Sov.  G.  Com.  of  the  S.  C.  $3°  for
the  U.  S.  A.,  Southern  Jurisdiction — the  body  of  which  he  is  the
head  being  to  other  Supreme  Councils  what  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England  is  to  other  Grand  Lodges,  and  his  own  personal  authority
perhaps  ranking  higher  than  that  of  any  other  Mason  either  in  the
Old  World  or  the  New.

The  Grand  Lodge  and  Supreme  Council  of  Colon  and  Cuba
have  therefore  followed  different  roads,  the  latter  treading  in  the
beaten  track  traversed  by  Supreme  Councils  in  amity  with  that  pre-
sided over  by  the  patriarch  and  law-giver  of  the  rite,  and  the  former
boldly  striking  out  a  path  of  its  own.

Owing  to  the  state  of  political  affairs  in  the  island,  and  from  the
influential  position  held  by  Ortiz  in  Spain,  the  charges  he  made
were  calculated  to  subject  the  Cuban  Masons  both  to  surveillance
and  persecution  on  the  part  of  the  authorities.  At  Porto  Rico  the
circumstances  were  somewhat  different.  Out  of  Cuba  itself  the
S.  C.  of  Colon  was  long  regarded — and  not  alone  by  votaries  of
the  A.  and  A.  S.  R.  330 — as  a  more  stable  institution  than  any  other
of  the  numerous  Grand  Bodies  which  sprang  up  like  mushrooms  in
the  island.     When,  therefore,  the  two  governing  bodies  at  Havana,

CUBA   AND    PORTO   RICO  1967

each  in  its  own  way,  attempted  to  solve  the  problem  of  Craft  sov-
ereignty in  Spain,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  the  confusion
existing  in  the  peninsula  was  reproduced  with  more  or  less  fidelity
in  the  Spanish  Antilles.  In  Porto  Rico  there  were  no  less  than
five  chapters  of  180,  besides  a  council  of  300,  and  a  consistory
of  3 20.  These,  as  already  related,  adhered  to  their  allegiance ;  but
the  lodges  on  the  island  set  up  a  Grand  Lodge  of  Porto  Rico  at  the
city  of  Mayaguez  in  1885,  and  it  is  satisfactory  to  state  that  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Colon  and  Cuba  subsequently  established  fraternal
relations  with  the  new  body.

CHAPTER    IV

FREEMASONRY    IN    ASIA

|E  are  greatly  indebted  to  Gould's  "  History  of
Freemasonry"  for  the  following  sketches  of
Masonry  in  Asia  and  other  countries  in  the
Eastern  Hemisphere.  He  says :  "  It  has  been
the  practice  of  Masonic  writers  to  pass  lightly
over  the  history  of  Free  Masonry  in  non-Eu-
ropean countries  and  to  exclude  almost  from
mention  the  condition  or  progress  of  the  Craft,  in  even  the  largest
Colonies  or  Dependencies  within  the  sovereignty  of  an  Old  World
Power."

Information  on  this  point  must  be  sought  amid  the  records  of
the  countries  discussed.  Too  little  emphasis  has  been  laid  by  writ-
ers upon  other  than  European  countries,  and  slight  attention  given
to  their  dependencies.  Of  these  latter  Findel  says  :  "  The  lodges
existing  in  these  quarters  of  the  globe  were  one  and  all  under  the
Grand  Lodges  of  England,  Scotland,  Holland  or  France,  and  there-
fore their  history  forms  an  inseparable  part  of  that  of  the  countries
in  question."  This  statement,  to  say  the  least,  is  inexact.  Owing
to  the  varied  admixture  of  peoples  found  in  the  Asiatic  countries
into  which  Europeans  have  entered,  the  practice  of  the  craft  ema-
nates from  many  different  sources.

While  in  the  Greater  Antilles  arose  Masonic  Innovations  claim-
ing equality  with  or  superiority  over  the  Grand  Authority  of  the
Craft,  in  the  Lesser  Antilles,  lodges  connected  with  different  Euro-
pean Grand  Bodies  existed  in  the  same  localities.  This  state  of
affairs  necessarily  induced  a  conflict  of  jurisdiction.     Rebold  says  :

"  After  Holland  had  become  incorporated  with  the  French  Em-
pire (July,  1810),  the  Grand  Orient  of  France  assumed  the  control
of  all  the  Dutch  Lodges  which  then  existed,  with  the  exception  of

those  of  the  Indies,  which  remained  under  the  obedience  which  had

1968

FREEMASONRY    IN   ASIA  1969

created  them,  and  which  carried  on  the  title  of  Grand  Lodge  of
the  United  Provinces  of  the  Low  Countries."

Likewise  the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  of  Bengal,  in  British
India,  was  more  than  once  independent  in  fact,  if  not  in  name,  and
its  archives  must  be  examined  for  Hindostanee  Freemasonry  or  else
nothing  would  be  known  of  lodges  the  names  of  which  do  not
appear  upon  the  rolls  of  those  European  Grand  Bodies  under  which
Fin  del  avers  they  came.

India.

George  Pomfret  was  authorized  in  1728  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England  "  to  open  a  new  Lodge  in  Bengal."  This  lodge  was
established  in  1 730  by  Captain  Ralph  Farwinter,  the  successor  of
Pomfret,  as  "  Provincial  Grand  Master  of  India."  This  lodge  is
described  as  No.  72,  Bengal,  and  is  distinguished  by  the  arms  of
the  Company  in  the  Engraved  Lists.

James  Dawson,  Zech  Gee,  and  Roger  Drake,  in  order,  succeeded
Captain  Farwinter.  Drake  was  Governor  of  Calcutta,  but  escaped
the  horrors  of  the  Black  Hole  in  1756  by  flying  to  the  ships.  He
returned  with  Clive,  but  does  not  appear  to  have  resumed  his
Masonic  office.

At  the  period  in  question  it  was  the  custom  in  Bengal  "  to  elect
the  Prov.  G.  M.  annually  by  the  majority  of  the  voices  of  the  mem-
bers then  present,  from  among  those  who  had  passed  through  the
different  offices  of  the  (Prov.)  Grand  Lodge,  who  had  served  as
Dep.  Prov.  G.  M."

Under  this  practice  Samuel  Middleton  was  elected  in  1767  and
confirmed  October  31,  1768.  But  a  few  years  previously  Earl
Ferrers  had  granted  a  roving  commission  to  "John  Bluvitt,  com-
mander of  the  Admiral  Watson  Indiaman  for  East  India,  where  no
other  Provincial  is  to  be  found."  The  annual  election  referred  to
was  confirmed  by  the  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng-
land without  its  being  thought  an  infringement  upon  his  preroga
tive.  But  the  dispensation  confirming  Middleton's  election  was
regarded  as  abrogating  annual  elections.  He  held  office  until  his
death  in  1775.

The  records  of  the  Bengal  Grand  Lodge  only  extend  back  to
1774.  But  prior  to  this  date  other  lodges  were  formed.  A  second
one,  of  whom  nothing,  save  its  existence,  is  known,  arose  and  seven

12:

i97o  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

members  of  this  organized  a  lodge  April  16,  1740,  and  on  petition
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  ordered  "  the  said  Lodge  to  be  en-
rolled (as  requested)  in  the  lists  of  regular  lodges,  agreeable  to  the
date  of  their  Constitution."

Other  lodges  were  formed  at  Chandernagore,  Calcutta,  Patna,
and  Burdwan,  the  names  of  only  some  of  which  are  preserved,  but
the  numbers  given  them  show  that  others  must  have  existed.

In  1774  there  were  only  three  lodges  in  Calcutta.  Besides  these
and  the  lodges  at  the  other  places  mentioned,  there  were  lodges  at
Dacca,  Moorshedabad,  and  "  at  some  military  stations  or  with  army
brigades."

"  The  Grand  Lodge  of  Solomon  at  Chinsura,"  which  was  under
Holland,  worked  in  harmony  with  the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge
under  England,  visits  being  interchanged  and  officials  of  both
engaging  in  the  same  ceremonies.

"In  1775,  February  15,  the  Pro  v.  Grand  Lodge,  'taking  into
consideration  the  propriety  of  preserving  concord  and  unanimity,
recommend  it  to  the  Brethren  who  call  themselves  "  Scott  and
Elect "  that  they  do  lay  aside  the  wearing  of  red  ribbons,  or  any
other  marks  of  distinction,  but  such  as  are  proper  to  the  Three  De-
grees, or  to  the  Grand  Lodge  as  such/  a  request,  we  are  told,  which
was  cheerfully  complied  with."

Upon  the  death  of  Middleton  in  1776,  Charles  Stafford  Pleydell
was  elected  in  his  stead.  Under  Philip  Milner  Dacres,  the  successor
of  Stafford,  the  Prov.  Grand  Lodge  of  Bengal  assembled  for  the
last  time  January  25,  1781.

The  war  in  the  Carnatic,  which  nearly  swept  Masonry  out  of
India,  had  much  to  do  with  this  dissolution.

"  Industry  and  Perseverance  "  of  the  lodges  in  Calcutta,  "  where
alone  in  Bengal  Masonry  may  be  said  to  have  existed,"  may  be  said
to  be  the  only  one  which  survived  with  a  feeble  light.

However,  the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  was  re-opened  July  18,
1 785,  under  George  Williamson,  a  former  Deputy  P.  G.  M.,  under
a  patent  from  England  appointing  him  Acting  P.  G.  M.,  and
authorizing  a  meeting  for  election  of  Grand  Master.

Upon  an  election  November  14th,  Edward  Fenwick,  former
Grand  Warden,  was  elected,  receiving  six  votes,  while  Williamson
received  four.  The  former  was  installed  March  17,  1786,  though
under  his  patent  Williamson  was  clearly  entitled  to  hold  his  acting

FREEMASONRY    IN   ASIA  1971

appointment  until  the  confirmation  from  London  of  the  election
of  Fenvvick.

This  led  to  trouble.  Williamson  was  sustained  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England,  but  the  Prov.  Grand  Lodge  maintained  its  posi-
tion and,  despite  protests,  Fenvvick  continued  in  the  duties  of  his
office  and  his  election  was  confirmed  May  5,  1788.

A  letter  of  February  6,  1788,  from  the  Prov.  Grand  Lodge  to
Grand  Secretary  White  contains  the  following  :

"  An  interesting  account  of  the  state  of  Masonry  in  Bengal  ap-
pears in  a  letter  of  February  6,  1788,  from  the  Prov.  Grand  Lodge
to  Grand  Secretary  White,  from  which  I  extract  the  following  :

" '  We  earnestly  wish  to  see  the  whole  number  of  Lodges  which
existed  in  1773  or  1774  re-established.  But  the  Subordinates  at
Patna,  Burdwan,  Dacca,  and  Moorshedabad  now  consist  of  such
small  societies,  and  these  so  liable  to  change,  that  we  must  confess
it  rather  to  be  our  wish  than  our  hope  to  see  Lodges  established  at
any  of  these  places.'

"At  this  assembly,  the  Wardens  of  Lodge  'Star  in  the  East'
said  their  meetings  had  been  interrupted,  because,  in  the  absence  of
the  Prov.  Grand  Lodge,  no  new  Master  could  be  installed.  Will-
iamson, however,  ordered  them  to  proceed  with  the  election  of  a
new  Master,  and  engaged  to  convene  a  Prov.  Grand  Lodge  for  his
installation.

"A  letter  from  G.  Sec.  White,  dated  March  24,  1787 — continu-
ing to  Williamson  the  powers  specified  in  his  patent  of  1 784 — was
read  in  the  Prov.  Grand  Lodge  on  August  27  of  that  year.  In  the
discussion  which  ensued,  the  Master  of  Lodge  Star  in  the  East  ob-
served :  .  .  .  '  Mr.  Williamson,  whose  affairs  have  long  been  in
a  most  anxious  situation — who  has  been  obliged,  for  a  long  time
past,  to  live  under  a  foreign  jurisdiction — who  now  cannot  come  to
Calcutta,  but  on  a  Sunday,  or,  if  he  comes  on  any  other  day,  is
obliged  to  conceal  himself  during  the  day  time,  and  to  be  extremely
cautious  how  he  goes  even  when  it  is  dark  ! '

"The  patent,  however,  did  not  arrive  in  India  until  March  4,
1789.

" '  With  respect  to  the  Brigades,  they  have  been  divided  into
six  of  Infantry  and  three  of  Artillery.  This  regulation  has  lessened
the  number  of  officers  in  each,  and  they  will  be  more  liable  to  re-

1972  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

movals  than  formerly.  The  first  circumstance  must  be  a  great  dis-
couragement to  the  formation  of  Lodges  in  the  Brigades,  and  the
second  would  sometimes  expose  such  Lodges  to  the  risk  of  being
annihilated.  However,  we  shall  give  all  encouragement  to  the
making  of  applications,  and  all  the  support  we  possibly  can  to  such
Lodges  as  may  be  constituted.'

44  A  grand  ball  and  supper  was  given  by  the  Prov.  Grand  Lodge,
January  14,  1789,  to  which  invitations  were  sent,  not  only  to  resi-
dents in  Calcutta,  but  also  to  •  Bro.  Titsingh,  Governor  of  Chinsu-
rah,  and  other  Masons  of  that  Colony  ;  to  Bro.  Bretel,  and  the
other  Masons  of  Chandernagore ;  and  also  to  the  Masons  of  Ser-
ampore,  and  to  the  Sisters  of  these  Colonies,  according  to  what  has
been  customary  on  such  occasions  formerly.'

44  In  1790 — December  27 — Fenwick  resigned  ;  and  on  the  same
day  the  Hon.  Charles  Stuart  was  elected  and  installed  as  his  succes-
sor. The  latter,  however — owing  to  the  government  of  the  coun-
try devolving  upon  him  in  consequence  of  the  absence  of  Lord
Cornwallis  from  Calcutta — appointed  Richard  Comyns  Birch  4  Act-
ing Prov.  G.  M.  of  Bengal.'

44  The  Lodges  in  the  Presidency  are  thus  described  in  the  Free-
masons'  Calendar  for  1 794  :

Star  in  the  East,  Calcutta,  1st  Lodge  of  Bengal 1740

Lodge  of  Industry  and  Perseverance,  Calcutta,  2d  Lodge  of  Bengal 1761

Lodge  of  Unanimity,  Calcutta,  3d  Lodge  of  Bengal 1772

Anchor  and  Hope,  Calcutta,  6th  Lodge  of  Bengal 1773

Lodge  of  Humility  with  Fortitude,  Calcutta,  5th  Lodge  of  Bengal 1773

Lodge  of  True  Friendship,  with  the  3d  Brigade,  4th  Lodge  of  Bengal 1775

At  Futty  Ghur,  Bengal 1786

Lodge  of  the  North  Star,  Fredericksnagore,  7th  Lodge  of  Bengal 1789

At  Chunar,  in  the  East  Indies,  8th  Lodge  of  Bengal 1793

Lodge  of  Mars,  Cawnpore,  9th  Lodge  of  Bengal '793"

There  was  also  another  lodge,  the  Marine  Lodge,  Calcutta,  and
a  Stewards'  Lodge  under  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.

From  the  first  two  lodges  of  the  above  list  the  officers  of  the
Prov.  Grand  Lodge  had  always  been  selected,  which  induced  resent-
ment upon  the  part  of  the  other  lodges.  This  feeling  brought
about  a  general  defection  from  the  Prov.  Grand  Lodge  of  Bengal
and   by   consequence    from   the    Grand    Lodge   of    England.     An

FREEMASONRY   IN   ASIA  1973

*phemeral  lodge — No.  146 — under  the  Atholl  (or  Ancient)  Grand
Lodge  was  established  at  Calcutta  in  1767,  but  no  others  were
founded  until  later.

"  The  Lodges  '  True  Friendship  '  and  '  Humility  with  Forti-
tude '  were  the  first  who  transferred  their  allegiance,  the  former
becoming  No.  315,  or  No.  1  of  Bengal,  Dec.  27,  1797;  and  the
latter,  No.  317,  or  No.  2  of  Bengal,  April  11,  1798.  The  ■  Marine
Lodge '  followed  their  example,  and  obtained  a  similar  warrant —
No.  323 — March  4,  1801.  Meanwhile,  Lodge  'Star  in  the  East'
fell  into  abeyance,  and  '  Industry  and  Perseverance '  was  on  the
point  of  closing  also.  One  meeting  only  was  held  in  each  of  the
years  1802,  1803,  and  1804,  after  which,  for  a  long  period,  there
were  no  more.  Lodge  '  Anchor  and  Hope '  obtained  an  Atholl
warrant  as  No.  325 — Oct.  1,  1801.  Little  is  known  of  Lodge
4  Unanimity,' which,  though  carried  forward  at  the  union  (1813),
must  have  died  out  at  least  several  years  before.

11  During  the  ten  or  eleven  years  that  intervened  between  the
obliteration  of  the  Prov.  Grand  Lodge  and  its  re-establishment  in
18 1 3,  Masonry  in  Calcutta  was  represented  almost  exclusively  by
the  Lodges  which  had  seceded  from  the  (older)  Grand  Lodge  of
England.

"On  St.  John's  Day  (in  Christmas),  1809,  tne  Lodges,  True
Friendship,  Humility  with  Fortitude,  Marine,  No.  338  (Ancients)
in  the  14th  Foot,  and  the  '  Dispensation  Lodge,'  working  under  a
warrant  granted  by  No.  ^^S,  walked  in  procession  to  St.  John's
Church,  where  a  Masonic  sermon  was  delivered  by  the  Rev.  Dr.
James  Ward.

"  Happily,  Lodges  Star  in  the  East,  and  Industry  and  Perse-
verance, were  revived  in  181 2,  and  on  December  22  of  that  yeai,
accompanied  by  the  'Officers'  Lodge,'  No.  347  in  the  14th  Foot,
and  Humility  with  Fortitude,  also  walked  in  procession  to  the  same
church,  and  benefited  by  a  like  sermon  from  Dr.  Ward.

"On  October  4,  18 13,  the  Earl  of  Moira — who  had  been  ap-
pointed Acting  Grand  Master  of  India — arrived  in  Calcutta.  The
first  Masonic  act  of  the  Governor-General  was  to  constitute  a  new
Lodge  in  that  city — the  Moira,  Freedom  and  Fidelity — November
8,  and  his  second,  to  re-establish  the  Prov.  Grand  Lodge  of  Bengal
under  the  Hon.  Archibald  Seton."

1974  HISTOR\    OF   FREEMASONRY

Upon  the  union  of  the  two  Grand  Lodges,  the  "Atholl"  lodges,
three  in  number,  at  Calcutta  came  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the
Prov.  Grand  Lodge.

Two  others  of  the  secession  are  not  mentioned  in  the  records  of
the  Province,  1814-40.

"  At  the  period  of  this  fusion,  there  were  the  following  Lodges
under  the  old  sanction :  The  Stewards,  Star  in  the  East,  Industry
and  Perseverance,  and  Sincere  Friendship  (Chunar).  Of  these
Lodges,  the  first  never  held  a  London  warrant,  and  the  last  was
struck  off  the  roll  inadvertently  at  the  Union.  There  were  also
then  in  existence  the  Moira  Lodge,  and  three  others,  constituted
since  the  revival  of  the  Prov.  Grand  Lodge,  the  names  of  which
head  the  following  table  of  Lodges  erected  during  the  period
1813-26:

Moira,  Calcutta,  November  13,  1813.

Oriental  Star,  Noacollee,  April  21,  1814.

Aurora,  Calcutta,  June  23,  1814.

Courage  with  Humanity,  Dum  Dum,  July  12,  1814.

Northern  Star,  Barrackpore,  July  18,  1816.

Sincerity,  Cawnpore,  January  8,  1819.

Hasting  Lodge  of  Amity  and  Independence,  Allahabad,  April  9, 1821.

United  Lodge  of  Friendship,  Cawnpore,  June  13,  182 1.

Humanity  with  Courage,  Prince  of  Wales'  Island,  July,  1822.

Amity,  St.  John's,  Poona  (Deccan),  January  30,  1824.

Kilwinning  in  the  West,  Nusseerabed,  October  20,  1824.

Larkins'  Lodge  of  Union  and  Brotherly  Love,  Dinapore,  October  20,  1824.

Independence  with  Philanthropy,  Allahabad,  October  26,  1825.

South-Eastern  Star  of  Light  and  Victory,  Arracan,  October  26,  1825.

Tuscan,  Malacca,  October  26,  1825.

Royal  George,  Bombay,  December  9,  1825.

Union  and  Perseverance,  Agra,  October  23,  1826.

Kilwinning  in  the  East,  Calcutta,  December  23,  1826.

"  Out  of  these  eighteen  Lodges,  however,  only  seven — Nos.  2,
3,  4,  6,  7,  13,  and  18  above— secured  a  footing  on  the  roll  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England,  and  it  is  not  a  little  curious  that  of  the  two
now  alone  surviving,  Courage  with  Humanity  (18 14),  and  Indepen-
dence with  Philanthropy  (1825),  which  were  placed  on  the  general
list  in  the  same  year  (1828)  in  juxtaposition,  the  latter  bears  the
earlier  number,  and  has  the  higher  precedence !  "

FREEMASONRY   IN   ASIA  1975

The  Duke  of  Sussex  empowered  Earl  Moira,  whose  sway  ex-
tended over  India,  to  appoint  Provincial  Grand  Masters,  as  if  ap-
pointed by  himself.

Acting  Prov.  G.  M.  Seton,  leaving  India  in  1817,  the  Governor-
General,  Marquis  of  Hastings,  selected  Hon.  C.  Stuart  to  succeed
him,  but  he  does  not  appear  to  have  qualified.  So  Hon.  C.  R.
Lindsay  was  appointed  by  Marquis  of  Hastings,  Prov.  G.  M.  Janu-
ary 17,  1818,  and  by  the  Deputy  G.  M.  of  India  January  13,  1819.

November  30,  18 18,  request  was  made  to  the  Grand  Master  of
India  by  eight  persons  for  permission  to  meet  as  a  lodge  at  St.
Andrew,  to  make  the  Hon.  Mountstuart  Elphinstone  a  Mason  and
also  to  install  him,  when  made,  as  deacon.  No  record  of  any  reply
has  been  kept.

John  Pascal  Larkins  succeeded  Lindsay  as  D.  G.  M.  of  India
and  Prov.  G.  M.  of  Bengal  December  24,  1819.  He  returned  to
Europe  in  1826,  and  until  1840  the  Craft  in  Bengal  was  ruled  by  a
Deputy  in  Calcutta.  From  this  resulted  the  overthrow  of  all  order
and  constitutional  authority.

"  The  Lodges  in  Bengal  made  their  returns  regularly,  and  for-
warded their  dues  punctually,  to  the  Prov.  Grand  Lodge  ;  but  as  no
steps  were  taken  for  the  transmission  of  these  returns  and  dues  to
their  destination,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  ceased  to  notice  or
regard  the  tributary  Lodges  of  Bengal.  On  the  submission  of  a
motion  for  inquiry — March  22,  1828 — the  Deputy  Prov.  G.  M.
'  felt  himself  constrained  to  resign  his  chair  on  the  spot,  and  the
Grand  Wardens  also  tendered  their  resignations.'

"  This  led,  at  the  instance  of  Lodge  Aurora,  to  the  formation  of
a  representative  body,  styled  the  Lodge  of  Delegates,  who  were
charged  with  the  duty  of  preparing  a  memorial  to  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England,  which,  bearing  date  August  22,  1828,  was  sent  to  the
Duke  of  Sussex,  signed  by  the  Masters  and  Wardens  of  the  follow-
ing Lodges :  True  Friendship,  Humility  with  Fortitude,  Marine,
Aurora,  Courage  with  Humanity,  and  Kilwinning  in  the  East.

"  To  this  no  reply  was  vouchsafed.  The  letters  of  the  Lodges  in
Bengal  remained  unanswered,  and  their  requests  unheeded.  The
usual  certificates  for  brethren  made  in  the  country  were  withheld,
notwithstanding  that  the  established  dues  were  regularly  remitted  ;
and  applications  for  warrants  were  also  unnoticed,  though  they  were

1976  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

accompanied  by  the  proper  fees.  This  state  of  affairs  continued
until  1834,  when  the  question  of  separation  from  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England  was  gravely  and  formally  mooted  in  the  Lodges.  Over-
tures for  a  reconciliation  at  length  came  in  the  shape  of  certificates
for  brethren  who  had  by  this  time  grown  gray  in  Masonry.  An-
swers to  letters  written  long  ago  were  also  received  ;  but  the  most
important  concession  made  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  was
the  constitution  of  the  first  District  Grand  Lodge  of  Bengal — under
Dr.  John  Grant — -which  held  its  first  meeting,  February  28,  1840."

44  In  1834  some  Masons  at  Delhi  applied  to  their  brethren  at
Meerut  for  an  acting  constitution  of  this  kind,  which  might  serve
their  purpose  until  the  receipt  of  a  warrant  from  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England.  At  the  latter  station  there  were  two  Lodges,  one  of
which,  however,  was  itself  working  under  dispensation,  and  could
not  therefore  dispense  grace  to  another.  The  other  belonged  to  the
26th  Foot,  No.  26,  under  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ireland.  This  Lodge
declined  giving  a  dispensation,  for  the  somewhat  Irish  reason  that
the  Cameronian  Lodge  had  already  granted  one  to  another  Lodge,
of  the  propriety  of  which  act  they  had  great  doubt ;  and  that  until
an  answer  had  been  received  from  Ireland  they  could  not  commit  a
second  act  of  doubtful  legality  !  The  custom,  however,  was  a  very
old  one.  In  1759,  Lodge  No.  74,  I.  R.,  in  the  1st  Foot  (2d  Batt),
granted  an  exact  copy  of  its  warrant — dated  October  26,  1737 — to
some  brethren  at  Albany,  to  work  under  until  they  received  a  sep-
arate charter  from  Ireland.  This  was  changed — February  21,  1765
— for  a  warrant  from  George  Harrison,  English  Prov.  G.  M.  of
New  York  ;  and  the  Lodge — Mount  Vernon — is  now  No.  3  on  the
roll  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  that  State."  l

In  the  British  Army  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ireland  has  been  the
favorite  of  Grand  Bodies,  and  yet  only  one  stationary  lodge  has
been  erected  in  India  under  its  jurisdiction.  This  was  in  1837  at
Kurnaul,  but  it  seems  to  have  lived  only  one  year.  At  Bombay,  in
1862,  an  attempt  was  made  to  organize  another  lodge.  But  the
attempt  failed,  as  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ireland  refused  a  warrant
on  the  ground  that  there  were  already  two  jurisdictions  in  India,
the  English  and  Scotch.

1  Cf.  Barker,  "Early  Hist,  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New  York,"  preface,  p.  xviii.

FREEMASONRY    IN   ASIA  1977

"In  the  decennial  periods  1840-50  and  1850-60  there  were  in
each  instance  12  additions  to  the  roll.  In  1860-70  the  new  Lodges
amounted  to  19,  and  in  1870-85  to  38.  These  figures  are  confined
to  the  English  Lodges,  but  extend  over  the  area  now  occupied  in
part  by  the  District  Grand  Lodges  of  Burmah  and  the  Punjaub,
both  of  which  were  carved  out  of  the  territory  previously  comprised
within  the  Province  of  Bengal  in  1868.  The  following  statistics
show  the  number  of  Lodges  existing — January  1,  1886 — in  the
various  states  and  districts  which  until  1868  were  subject  to  the
Masonic  government  of  Bengal :  under  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng-
land— Bengal  (D.  G.  L.),  39  ;  British  Burmah  (D.  G.  L.),  7  ;  and
Punjaub  (D.  G.  L.),  24.  Under  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland,  1 1
—the  earliest  of  which,  St.  David  (originally  Kilwinning)  in  the
East,  No.  371,  Calcutta,  was  constituted  February  5,  1849.

"The  Dutch  Lodges  in  Hindostan  have  passed  out  of  existence,
but  with  regard  to  these,  and  also  to  certain  other  Lodges  estab-
lished by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Holland  in  various  places  beyond
the  seas,  the  materials  for  an  exhaustive  list  are  not  available  to  the
historian."

Madras.

At  this  place  in  1752  was  established  the  earliest  lodge  in
Southern  India.  In  1765  three  others  were  formed  at  the  same
station.  Captain  Edmund  Pascal  was  appointed  Provincial  Grand
Master  for  Madras  and  its  Dependencies,  about  1 756.  In  the  fol-
lowing year  a  fifth  lodge  was  erected  at  Fort  St.  George.  The
other  English  settlements  in  India  were  dominated  by  this  presi-
dency for  a  short  period,  and  the  Carnatic  figures  largely  in  Indian
Masonic  history  during  the  latter  half  of  the  18th  century  owing
to  the  continuous  wars  with  the  French,  and  afterward  with  Hyder
Ali  and  his  son.

"  In  1768  a  lodge — No.  152 — was  established  by  the  Atholl  (or
Ancient)  Grand  Lodge  of  England  at  Fort  St.  George ;  and  in
1773  one  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Holland  at  Negapatam.  The
next  event  of  importance  was  the  initiation,  in  1776,  of  Umdat-ul-
Umara,  eldest  son  of  the  Nabob  of  Arcot,  at  Trichinopoly,  who  in
his  reply  to  the  congratulations  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,
stated  '  he  considered  the  title  of  an  English  Mason  as  one  of  the
most  honorable  he  possessed.'  "

1978  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

A  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  under  the  Atholl  sanction  was  estab-
lished at  Fort  St.  George  in  1781,  "but  the  dissensions  in  the
settlements  had  so  rent  asunder  every  link  of  social  life,  that  even
the  fraternal  bond  of  Masonry  has  been  annihilated  in  the  general
wreck."

Under  Brigadier-General  Horn,  "  Prov.  G.  M.  for  the  Coast  of
Coromandel,  the  Presidency  of  Madras  and  parts  adjacent,"  the
union  of  the  Brethren  in  Southern  India  was  effected.

All  the  older  lodges  at  this  time  seem  to  have  been  extinct  ;  but
there  was  established  at  Arcot  in  1786  the  C.  M.  L.  The  follow-
ing year  Lodge  No.  152  tendered  its  allegiance  to  General  Horn
and  joined  one  of  the  lodges  under  that  officer.

Of  these,  four  were  added  to  the  roll  in  1787.  Nos.  510-513 —
Perfect  Harmony,  St.  Thomas  Mount ;  Social  Friendship,  Madras ;
Trichinopoly ;  and  Social  Friendship,  St.  Thomas  Mount — and
styled  Nos.  3,  4,  5,  and  6,  Coast  of  Coromandel.  Two  other
lodges  were  also  established  in  the  same  year,  the  Stewards  and
Perfect  Unanimity,  which,  according  to  the  loose  practice  of  those
days,  were  given  the  places  on  the  list  of  the  two  earliest  Madras
lodges,  and  became  (in  1790)  Nos.  102  and  233  respectively.

A  lodge  of  happy  nomenclature — La  Fraternity  Cosmopolite —
was  constituted  at  Pondicherry  in  1786  by  the  Grand  Orient  of
France,  and  a  second — Les  Navigateurs  Reunis — 1790.

In  the  latter  year — July  5th — John  Chamier  received  a  similar
patent,  as  Prov.  G.  M.,  to  that  previously  held  by  General  Horn,
and  was  succeeded  by  Terence  Gahagan,  1806,  and  Herbert  Comp-
ton,  181 2.  During  this  period  four  lodges  were  added  to  the  roll —
Solid  Friendship,  Trichinopoly,  1790;  Unity,  Peace  and  Concord,
1798;  St.  Andrew's  Union,  19th  Foot,  1802;  and  Philanthropists,
in  the  Scotch  Brigade  (94th  Foot),  1802,  at  Madras.  These  lodges
were  numbered  572,  574,  590,  and  591  on  the  general,  and  7,  9,  10,
and  1 1  (Coast  of  Coromandel)  on  the  local,  lists  respectively.

After  the  union  the  Province  was  ruled  by  Dr.  Richard  Jebb,
1814;  George  Lys,  1820;  and  in  1825  by  Compton  once  more.
The  name  of  this  worthy  only  disappears  from  the  Freemasons
Calendar  in  1842,  and  with  it  the  provincial  title,  "  Coast  of  Coro-
mandel " — exchanged  for  "  Madras,"  over  which  Lord  Elphinstone
had  been  appointed  Prov.  G.  M.  in  1840.

Within    this    period — -1814-42 — numerous     Lodges   were    war-

FREEMASONRY    IN   ASIA  1979

ranted  locally,  as  in  Bengal ;  but  thirteen  only — of  which  seven
were  in  Madras  itself — secured  places  on  the  London  Register.

Eighteen  English  lodges  have  since  been  established  in  the
Presidency,  and  there  are  at  present  in  existence  twentv  lodges  on
the  register  of  England  and  two  on  that  of  Scotland — both  erected
in  1875 — but  the  introduction  of  Scottish  lodges  into  India  will  be
referred  to  in  the  ensuing  section.

The  French  lodge  of  Pondicherry — La  Fraternity  Cosmopolite
— was  revived  (or  a  new  one  established  under  the  old  title)  in  182 1.
Another — L'Union  Indienne — was  erected  at  the  same  station  in
1 85 1.  At  the  present  date,  however,  there  exist  throughout  India
and  its  dependencies  no  other  lodges  than  those  under  the  Grand
Lodges  of  England  and  Scotland  respectively.

Bombay.

During  the  18th  century  there  were  established  in  this  Presi-
dency a  lodge  at  Bombay  in  1758,  and  one  at  Surat  in  1798,  which
were  carried  on  in  the  lists  until  18 13,  but  disappear  at  the  union.
Jas.  Todd  was  appointed  in  1763  Provincial  Grand  Master,  and  his
name  only  drops  out  of  the  Freemasons  Calendar  in  1799.  The
78th  foot,  a  regiment  under  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  in  Mahratta  war,
and  which  took  part  in  the  decisive  victory  of  Assaye,  received  an
Atholl  Warrant  in  1801.  A  lodge  at  Poona  was  established  in
1818.  No  more  were  established  in  the  Presidency  until  1822,
when  the  Benevolent  Lodge,  Bombay,  was  placed  on  the  lists.  In
the  Bombay  Artillery  in  1823  there  was  "installed"  at  Poona  a
military  lodge  as  No.  15 — Orion  in  the  West — Coast  of  Coromandel,
November  15th.  The  Proceedings  of  this  lodge  show  that  mem-
bers "  were  examined  in  the  Third  Degree  T.  D.  and  passed  into
the  chair  of  the  Fourth  Degree" — paying  a  fee  of  three  gold
mohurs.

11  Among  the  Masons  about  this  time  in  Bombay  were  thirteen
non-commissioned  officers  who  were  too  poor  to  establish  a  lodge
of  their  own,  and  too  modest  to  seek  admittance  in  what  was  con-
sidered an  aristocratic  lodge.  They  met,  however,  monthly  in  the
guard-room  over  the  Apollo  Gate,  for  mutual  instruction  in  Ma-
sonry. This  coming  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Benevolent  Lodge,
the  thirteen  were  elected  honorary  members  of  No.  746,  for  which

1980  HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY

they  returned  heartfelt  thanks.  At  their  first  attendance,  when  the
lodge  work  was  over,  and  the  Brethren  adjourned  to  the  banquet,  the
thirteen  were  informed  that  refreshments  awaited  them  downstairs.
Revolting  at  the  distinction  thus  made  among  Masons,  they  one
and  all  left  the  place.  The  next  morning  they  were  sent  for  by
their  commanding  officer,  who  was  also  one  of  the  officers  of  the
lodge,  and  asked  to  explain  their  conduct.  One  of  the  party — Mr.
W.  Willis  (by  whom  this  anecdote  was  first  related  to  me) — told
him  that  as  Masons  they  were  bound  to  meet  on  the  level  and  part
on  the  square,  but  as  this  fundamental  principle  was  not  practiced
in  No.  746,  of  which  they  had  been  elected  honorary  members,  they
could  not  partake  of  their  hospitality.  The  astonished  Colonel
uttered  not  a  word,  but  waived  his  hand  for  them  to  retire.  Ever
after  this,  the  Benevolent  Lodge — including  the  thirteen — met  on
the  level,  both  in  lodge  and  at  the  banquet-table."  *

Burnes,  in  1836,  may  be  best  described,  in  ecclesiastical  phrase,
as  a  Prov.  G.  M.  "  in  partibus  infidelium"  for  whatever  lodges  then
existed  throughout  the  length  and  breadth  of  India  were  strangers
to  Scottish  Masonry.  But  the  times  were  propitious.  There  was
no  English  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  of  Bombay ;  and  under  the
Chevalier  Burnes,  who  had  been  bountifully  endowed  by  nature  with
the  qualities  requisite  for  Masonic  administration.  "Scottish  Masonry
presented  such  attractions,  that  the  strange  sight  was  witnessed  of
English  Masons  deserting  their  Mother  Lodges  to  such  an  extent
that  these  fell  into  abeyance,  in  order  that  they  might  give  their
support  to  lodges  newly  constituted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scot-
land. In  one  case,  indeed,  a  lodge — Perseverance — under  England
went  over  bodily  to  the  enemy,  with  its  name,  jewels,  furniture,  and
belongings,  and  the  charge  was  accepted  by  Scotland."

"  From  this  period,  therefore,  Scottish  Masonry  flourished,  and
English  Masonry  declined,  the  latter  finally  becoming  quite  dormant
until  the  year  1848,  when  a  lodge,  St.  George,  No.  807  on  the  roll
of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  was  again  formed  at  Bombay,  and
for  some  years  was  the  solitary  representative  of  English  Masonry
in  the  Province."  9

Rising  Star,  No.  413,  was  established  by  Burnes  at  Bombay,  for
the  admission   of  natives — a  beautiful   medal,  cut   by  Wyon,  was

1  Gould's  "  Hist.,"  vol.  vi.,  p.  354,  note  2.  a  Ibid.,  vol.  vi.,  p.  335.

FREEMASONRY   IN   ASIA  1981

struck  in  consequence— No.  414,  St.  Andrew  in  the  East,  at  Poona
was  formed  by  him.  Nos.  421,  Hope,  Kurrachee,  and  422,  Perse-
verance, Bombay,  1847,  followed.

In  1824  there  was  established  at  Poona  a  second  lodge  which,
however,  has  passed  out  of  existence  and  left  no  trace  thereof.  The
civilian  element  of  the  military  lodge  at  Poona,  No.  15,  seceded  in
1825  and,  also  at  Poona,  formed  a  lodge,  802,  the  Lodge  of  Hope.
At  this  point  Lodge  15,  unrecognized  at  home,  aided  in  the  seces-
sion of  some  of  its  members  who  obtained  a  Warrant,  on  the  recom-
mendation of  the  parent  lodge,  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.

In  1828,  Perseverance,  No.  818,  was  erected  at  Bombay.  No
notification  of  the  existence  of  Orion  in  the  west  had  been  received
by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  nor  had  any  fees  been  paid,
though  regularly  paid  to  the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  of  the  Coast
of  Coromandel,  though  this  was  not  ascertained  until  1830.  Also
it  was  ascertained  that  the  Prov.  G.  M.  of  the  Coast  of  Coromandel
had  gone  beyond  his  powers  in  permitting  the  erection  of  a  lodge
at  Bombay,  though  ultimately  there  war-  granted  from  England
July  19,  1833,  a  new  Warrant,  No.  598.

As  yet  there  had  been  no  invasion  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England  ;  but  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland,  in
1836,  appointed  Dr.  Jas.  Burnes  Prov.  G.  M.  of  Western  India  and
its  Dependencies.  But  not  until  January  1,  1838,  was  a  Prov.
Grand  Lodge  formed.  Subsequently  there  was  erected  in  Eastern
India  a  second  Scottish  Province.  This  was  absorbed  within  the
jurisdiction  of  Dr.  Burnes  on  the  retirement  of  the  Marquis  of
Tweeddale,  who  became  Prov.  G.  M.  for  all  India,  in  1846,  with  the
proviso,  however,  that  any  future  subdivision  of  the  Presidencies  was
not  to  be  restrained  by  this  appointment.

After  this,  in  Bengal,  Scottish  lodges  were  established — Kilwin-
ning in  the  East,  Calcutta,  1849  J  an^  in  Arabia  Felix,  Aden,  1850.
At  the  beginning  of  1886,  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland,  there
had  been  received  charters  by  nineteen  lodges  under  Bombay,  eleven
under  Bengal,  two  under  Madras,  and  one  in  Afghanistan — thirty-
three  lodges  in  all

In  1849,  Burnes,  leaving  India,  was  succeeded  in  Western  India
only  by  a  Prov.  G.  M.  However,  Captain  Henry  Morland  became
Prov.  G.  M.  of  Hindustan  in  1874,  and  subsequently  became  Grand
Master  of  All  Scottish  Freemasonry  in  India.

1982  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

Of  the  lodges  under  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  St.  George,
erected  in  1848,  was  the  only  representative  of  its  class  for  ten  years.
However,  "Concord"  and  "Union"  were  established  at  Bombay
and  Currachee  respectively,  in  1858.  From  its  dormancy,  "Orion
in  the  West  "  aroused  a  year  later.  A  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  was
established  in  1861,  and  other  subordinate  lodges  were  subsequently
chartered.

At  first  Freemasonry  did  not  take  any  real  root  among  the  native
population  of  India.

"  Umdat-ul-Umara,  son  of  the  Nabob  of  Arcot,  was  admitted  a
member  of  the  Society,  in  1776.  The  princess  Keyralla  Khan  (of
the  Mysore  family)  and  Shadad  Khan  (ex-Ameer  of  Scinde)  joined,
or  were  made  Masons  in,  the  lodge  of  "True  Friendship  "in  1842
and  1850  respectively;  and  in  1861  the  Maharajahs  Duleep  and
Kundeer  Sing  were  initiated  in  lodges  "  Star  of  the  East "  and
"  Hope  and  Perseverance  " — the  last-named  personage  at  Lahore,
and  the  other  three  in  Calcutta.

A  By-law  of  the  Pro  v.  Grand  Lodge  of  Bengal,  forbidding  the
entry  of  Asiatics  without  the  permission  of  the  P.  G.  M.,  was  in
force  until  May  12,  1871  ;  and  there  was  at  least  a  popular  belief  in
existence  so  late  as  i860,  that  Hindus  were  ineligible  for  initiation.

The  Parsees  of  Western  India  were  the  first  of  the  native  races
who  evinced  any  real  interest  in  the  institution,  and  are  to  be  con-
gratulated on  the  recent  election  (1886)  of  one  of  their  number-
Mr.  Cama— to  the  high  position  of  Treasurer  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England.

In  1876  a  Scottish  lodge,  No.  587,  "  Islam  " — presumably  for  the
association  of  Mohammedans — was  erected  at  Bombay.  The  ex-
tent to  which  Freemasonry  is  now  practiced  by  the  Hindus — who
form  y^  Per  cent,  of  the  total  population  of  India — I  am  unable  to
determine.  The  first  of  this  class  of  religionists  to  fill  the  chair  of  a
lodge  was  Mr.  Dutt,  whose  election  in  1874  may  not  have  been
without  influence  in  the  diffusion  of  Masonic  light.

The  Indian  Freemasons'  friend,  a  publication  of  rare  merit,  was
set  on  foot  at  Calcutta  in  1855,  but  was  short-lived.  A  new  or  second
series  was  commenced  in  May,  1861,  and  lasted  to  the  end  of  1867.
In  Bombay,  the  Masonic  Record  of  Western  India  enjoys  an  exten«
sive  circulation,  and  is  very  ably  conducted.

FREEMASONRY    IN   ASIA  1983

East   India  Islands.

Ceylon. — This,  for  convenience,  is  grouped  under  the  heading
"East  India"  and  in  these  islands  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Orient
established  Masonry.  In  1771  Fidelity  was  erected  at  Colombo  ;  in
1773  Sincerity  at  Point  de  Galle  ;  in  1794  Union,  another  at
Colombo.  When  the  British  possessed  themselves  of  the  Dutch
settlements  on  the  Island,  it  was  annexed  to  the  Presidency  of  Mad-
ras, but  in  1 801  was  formed  into  a  separate  crown  colony.  The
Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  granted  a  Charter  February  9,  1801,  to
the  51st  Regiment,  stationed  at  Colombo,  for  the  Orient  Lodge.
There  were  also  formed  on  the  islands  two  other  lodges  under  Atholl
(or  Ancient).  In  18 10  Sir  Alexander  Johnston  was  appointed  Prov.
G.  M.  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  though  his  name  disap-
pears from  the  lists  before  1838.  However,  greater  activity  was  dis-
played under  other  jurisdictions.  At  Colombo,  in  1821,  an  Irish
lodge  was  erected,  and  in  1822,  a  French  one  under  the  G.  O.  In
1832  there  was  revived  the  latter,  or  there  was  formed  a  new  lodge
of  the  same  name.

Sumatra.

There  was  established  at  Bencoolen,  in  1765,  an  English  lodge,
and  in  1 772  and  1 796,  at  Fort  Marlborough,  two  others.  Until
181 3  these  appeared  in  the  lists,  but  the  "  Marlboro,"  which  ulti-
mately became  No.  242,  was  carried  forward  at  the  union  but  was
erased  March  5,  1862,  having  omitted  to  make  any  returns  for
several  years.  Under  John  Macdonald,  in  1 793,  Sumatra  was  erected
into  an  English  Province,  and  he  was  succeeded  by  H.  R.  Lewis,
as  Prov.  G.  M.,  December  10,  182 1,  but  continued  to  hold  office
until  his  death  in  1877,  there  having  been  in  existence  at  the  date
of  his  original  appointment  one  lodge,  and  none  at  all  for  fifteen
years  preceding  his  decease.

Java.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  Holland  constituted  a  lodge — Star  in  the
East — into  this  island  in  1 769.  There  are  no  precise  records,  but  it
is  known  that  others  sprung  up  in  the  Capitol  and  larger  towns.
In  1 771  there  was  erected  at  Batavia  a  second  lodge,  and  at  Sama-
rang  in  1801,  and  at  Sourabaya,  1809,  charters  were  granted.  In
1886  there  were  eight  lodges  in  Java.

1984  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

Celebes.

There  was  erected  at  Macassar,  in  1883,  under  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Holland,  one  lodge — Arbeid  Adelt

Borneo.

An  English  lodge — Elopura — was  established  in  North  Borneo,
in  1885,  at  the  station  of  the  same  name.

The  Philippines.

In  1886  there  were  four  lodges  in  existence  in  these  islands,  one
under  the  National  Grand  Orient,  and  three  under  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Spain.  The  latter  form  a  Province,  and  are  subject  to  a  Pro-
vincial Superintendent.

Persia.

"  Thory  informs  us  that  Askeri-Khan,  ambassador  of  the  Shah  at
Paris,  and  who  was  himself  admitted  into  Masonry  in  that  city —
November  24,  1808 — took  counsel  with  his  French  Brethren  re-
specting the  foundation  of  a  lodge  at  Ispahan.  Whether  this  proj-
ect was  ever  carried  into  effect  it  is  impossible  to  say,  but  two  years
later  we  find  another  Persian — also  an  ambassador — figuring  in
Masonic  history.  On  June  15,  18 10,  "  His  Excellency  Mirza  Abul
Hassan  Khan  "  was  granted  the  rank  of  Past  Grand  Master  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England.  This  personage — the  Minister  accredited
from  the  Court  of  Persia  to  that  of  Great  Britain — in  addition  to
having  been  a  great  traveler  both  in  Hindustan  and  Arabia,  had
also  performed  his  devotions  at  Mecca.  In  the  course  of  his  journey
from  Teheran  he  passed  through  Georgia,  Armenia,  and  Antolia.
At  Constantinople  he  embarked  in  a  British  man-of-war,  and  reached
England  in  December,  1809.

"Sir  Gore  Ousely,  Bart.,  who  was  selected  to  attend  upon  the
Mirza  'as  Mehmander — an  officer  of  distinction,  whose  duty  it  is
to  receive  and  entertain  foreign  princes  and  other  illustrious  person-
ages' — in  the  following  year  (1810)  received  the  appointment  of
ambassador  to  the  Shah  of  Persia,  and  was  also  granted  an  English
patent  as  Provincial  G.  M.  for  that  country.  No  lodges,  however,
were  established  in  Persia  at  any  time  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng-

FREEMASONRY   IN   ASIA  1985

land,  nor — so  far  as  the  evidence  extends — by  any  other  external
authority.  The  Mirza  Abul  Hassan  Khan  was  made  a  Mason  by
Lord  Moira  in  18 10.  The  extent  of  his  services  to  the  Craft  we
must  leave  undecided ;  but  it  was  stated  somewhat  recently  in  the
Masonic  journals,  on  the  authority  of  a  Persian  military  officer  then
pursuing  his  studies  in  Berlin,  that  nearly  all  the  members  of  the
Court  of  Teheran  are  Brethren  of  our  Society."

The   Straits   Settlements.

The  Duke  of  Atholl  established  Neptune  Lodge,  No.  344,  at
Penang  (or  Prince  of  Wales  Island)  by  Warrant  September  6,  1809,
which  became  extinct  in  18 19.  Three  years  subsequently  a  military
lodge — Humanity  with  Courage — was  warranted  from  Bengal.
This  body,  however,  having  become  irregular  by  the  initiation  of
civilians,  the  Duke  of  Sussex  renewed  the  Charter  of  the  Atholl
Lodge,  which,  having  flourished  for  a  time,  eventually  fell  into
decay,  and  was  erased,  together  with  another  lodge  "  Neptune "
also  at  Penang — erected  in  1850 — No.  846  on  the  English  roll,
March  5,  1862.  The  only  lodge  now  existing  in  this  settlement
is  No.  1555,  warranted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  in  1875.

In  Malacca,  a  lodge  was  formed  under  the  Prov.  Grand  Lodge
of  Bengal  in  1825,  which  never  secured  a  place  on  the  general  list.
In  Singapore,  English  lodges  were  established  in  1845,  1858,  and
1867,  named  Zetland  in  the  East,  Fidelity,  and  St.  George,  Nos.
748,  1042,  and  1 1 52  respectively.  Of  these  the  first  and  last  sur-
vive, and,  together  with  the  lodge  at  Penang,  compose  the  province
of  the  Eastern  Archipelago,  of  which  Mr.  W.  H.  Read  was  ap-
pointed the  first  Prov.  G.  M.  in  1858.

Cock  in-  China.

In  this  French  dependency,  a  lodge — Le  Reveil  de  l'Orient —
was  established  by  Warrant  of  the  Grand  Orient  of  France,
October  22,  1868.

China.

During  the  last  century  two  lodges  of  foreign  origin  were  con-
stituted in  the  Celestial  Empire — the  lodge  of  "Amity,"  No.  407,
under  an  English,  and  "  Elizabeth  "  under  a  Swedish,  Warrant.    The
1*5

1986  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

former  was  erected  in  1767,  the  latter  in  1788;  and  in  each  case
the  place  of  assembly  was  Canton.  The  English  lodge  was  not
carried  forward  at  the  union  (18 13),  and  "Elizabeth,"  as  we  are  in-
formed by  the  Grand  Secretary  of  Sweden,  came  to  an  end  in  181 2.

The  next  lodge  erected  on  Chinese  soil  was  the  Royal  Sussex,
No.  735,  at  Canton,  for  which  a  Warrant  was  granted  by  the
United  G.  L.  of  England  in  1844.  A  second  Zetland,  No.  768 —
was  established  at  Hong-Kong  under  the  same  sanction,  in  1846;
and  a  third — Northern  Lodge  of  China — at  Shanghai,  in  1849.
No  further  increase  of  Lodges  took  place  until  1864,  in  which  year
two  were  added  to  the  English  roll,  at  Hong-Kong  and  Shanghai
respectively  ;  and  one  each  at  the  latter  port  under  the  Grand
Lodges  of  Scotland  and  Massachusetts.  The  progress  of  the  craft
in  the  "  Middle  Kingdom  "  has  since  been  marked,  but  uneventful,
though  as  yet  Freemasonry  has  failed  to  diffuse  its  light  beyond  the
British  Colony  of  Hong-Kong,  and  the  various  ports  of  the  main-
land opened  up  by  treaty  to  the  merchants  of  foreign  powers.  Mr.
Samuel  Rawson  was  appointed  by  Lord  Zetland  Prov.  G.  M.  for
China  in  1847;  and  a  second  Province  was  carved  out  of  the  old
one  in  1877,  by  the  appointment  of  Mr.  Cornelius  Thome  as  Dis-
trict G.  M.  for  Northern  China.

In  1886  there  were  in  existence  at  Victoria  (Hong-Kong)  and
the  Chinese  treaty-ports  thirteen  English,  one  American,  and  four
Scottish  Lodges;  and  with  a  solitary  exception — No.  12 17,  at
Ningpo,  formed  in  1868,  under  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  but
now  extinct — all  the  lodges  erected  in  China  or  Hong-Kong  since
the  revival  of  Masonry  in  the  Far  East  (1844)  were  still  active,
and  can  therefore  be  traced  in  the  calendars  of  current  date  by
those  desirous  of  further  information  respecting  them.

yapan.

"  English  Lodges  bearing  the  following  numbers  were  erected
at  Yokohama — 1092  and  1263 — in  1866  and  1869;  at  Yedo  (now
extinct) — 1344 — in  1870;  at  Kobe — 1401 — in  1872;  and  at  Tokio
— 2015 — in  1883.  These  are  subject  to  a  Prov.  G.  M.,  who  was
appointed  in  1873.

"  There  are  also  three  lodges  under  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland
— Nos.  498,  640,  and  710 — at  Kobe,  Yokohama,  and  Nagasaki."

FREEMASONRY    IN   AFRICA  1987

Cape    Colony.

Prior  to  the  acquisition  of  this  colony  by  Great  Britain,  two
Dutch  lodges  had  been  erected  at  Cape  Town,  in  1772  and  1802,
respectively.  While  these  survived,  several  other  lodges  under  the
same  jurisdiction  passed  away  without  leaving  any  trace  of  their
existence.

Afterward  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  established  at  the  cap-
ital lodges  in  181 1  and  1812 — the  "  British,"  No.  629  under  the
old  sanction,  in  the  former  year;  and  the  "Cape  of  Good  Hope"
Lodge  under  an  Atholl  Warrant  in  the  Tenth  Battalion  of  the
Royal  Artillery.

The  first  band  of  English  settlers  arrived  in  1820,  and  in  the
following  year  a  second  stationary  lodge,  under  the  United  Grand
Lodge  of  England — Hope,  No.  727 — was  erected  at  Cape  Town,
where,  also,  a  lodge  bearing  the  same  name,  under  the  G.  O.  of
France,  sprang  up,  November  10,  1824.  A  third  English  lodge,
Albany,  No.  817,  was  established  at  Grahamstown  in  1828.  "The
Dutch  lodges  received  the  English  Brethren  with  open  arms,  and
with  great  satisfaction.  When  English  Masonry  had  increased,  and
it  was  considered  right  to  form  a  Provincial  Grand  Lodge,  the
Brother  selected  for  the  office  of  Prov.  G.  M.  was  the  Deputy  G.  M.
of  the  Netherlands,  who  continued  till  his  death  to  hold  the  two
appointments."  This  must  have  been  Sir  John  Truter,  who
received  an  English  patent  in  1829;  for  although  an  earlier  Prov.
G.  M.  under  England,  Richard  Blake,  had  been  appointed  in  1801,
the  words  quoted  above  will  not  apply  to  the  latter.  Between  1828
and  1850  there  was  no  augmentation  of  the  lodges  ;  but  in  the  latter
year  a  revival  set  in,  and  during  the  decade  immediately  ensuing,
1851-60,  six  were  warranted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.

In  i860,  to  the  jurisdictions  already  existing  (those  of  Holland
and  England),  was  added  that  of  Scotland,  under  the  Grand  Lodge
of  which  country  a  lodge,  Southern  Cross,  No.  398,  was  erected  at
Cape  Town.  Shortly  afterward,  in  a  single  year  (1863),  two  Dutch
lodges  were  established  in  Cape  Colony,  and  one  at  Bloemfontein,
in  the  Orange  Free  State.  This  period  coincides  with  the  appoint-
ment, after  an  interregnum,  of  the  Hon.  Richard  Southy  as  Prov.
G.  M.  under  the  G.  L.  of  England  ;  and  it  will  be  convenient  if  I
here  proceed  to  describe  seriatim  the  progress  of  Masonry  under

1988  HISTORY    OF    FREEMASONRY

the  three  competing  jurisdictions.  Commencing  with  that  of  Eng-
land between  the  date  to  which  the  statistics  were  last  given  (i860)
down  to  the  close  of  1885,  sixty-two  lodges  were  added  to  the  roll.
The  number  at  present  existing  in  South  Africa,  as  shown  by  the
official  calendar  of  current  date,  is  fifty-four,  viz.  :  Eastern  Division,
twenty-four ;  Western  Division,  eight ;  Natal,  eleven  ;  and  eleven
not  subject  to  any  provincial  authority,  some  of  which  were  formerly
under  the  District  Grand  Lodge  of  Griqualand  (now  abolished),
and  two,  No.  1022,  at  Bloemfontein  (Orange  Free  State),  and  1747,
at  Pretoria  (Transvaal),  are  situate  in  foreign  territory.  Within  the
same  period  (1860-85)  twelve  lodges  have  been  established  under
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland,  and  now  compose  a  Masonic  District
(or  Province).  The  Dutch  Masonic  Calendar  for  1886  shows
twenty-four  lodges  as  existing  in  South  Africa.  Of  these,  as
already  related,  two  were  erected  before  1803,  and  three  in  1863.
The  latest  on  the  present  list  dates  from  1884.  These  lodges  are
distributed  throughout  the  British  possessions,  and  the  different
Boer  Republics,  as  follows,  viz.  :  In  British  South  Africa,  sixteen ;
in  the  Orange  Free  State,  four ;  and  in  the  Transvaal,  four  ;  and
at  the  head  of  all  is  a  Deputy  National  G.  M.,  Mr.  J.  H.  Hof-
meisr,  at  Cape  Town.

Between  the  English  and  Dutch  Masons  at  the  Cape,  there
have  always  been  the  most  friendly  relations.  In  1863  the  D.  G.  L.
under  England  was  re-erected,  and  there  assisted  at  its  re-inaugura-
tion the  Deputy  G.  M.  under  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  Netherlands.
And  the  Dutch  Fraternity  placed  their  Masonic  Hall  at  the  dis-
posal of  the  English  Brethren.  For  a  long  time  it  was  the  custom
on  St.  John's  Day  for  the  English  and  Dutch  Masons  to  assemble
at  different  hours  of  the  day  so  that  the  Brethren  might  be  present
at  both  meetings.  On  June  5,  1867,  there  was  stated  at  a  commu-
nication of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  that  "  recently  an  objection
has  been  raised  by  some  of  the  younger  English  Masons  against  the
establishment  of  some  new  Lodges  lately  formed  by  the  Dutch,  on
the  ground  that  the  Convention  of  1770  prohibits  their  doing  so,
the  Cape  now  being  an  English  possession,  and  having  been  so
since  the  early  part  of  the  present  century.  In  this  view,  the  Dis-
trict Grand  Lodge  does  not  seem  to  participate.  That  body  is
anxious  that  the  amicable  relations  that  have  so  long  subsisted
between  the  English  and   Dutch  Masons   should  continue.     .*.     .*,

FREEMASONRY   IN   AFRICA  1989

After  setting  the  foregoing  facts  before  the  Grand  Lodge,  the
Grand  Registrar  expressed  an  opinion  that  whatever  might  have
been  the  intention  of  the  Convention  of  1770,  it  had  not  been  acted
on  in  the  Cape  Colony,  but  that  the  G.  M.  of  England,  by  appoint-
ing the  Deputy  G.  M.  of  the  Netherlands  to  be  his  Prov.  G.  M.
over  English  Lodges,  virtually  recognized  the  Dutch  Lodges.  It
must  be  taken  for  granted  that  both  the  contracting  parties  have
tacitly  consented  that  it  should  not  apply  to  the  Cape.  He  was
of  opinion  that  as  both  parties  seem  to  have  considered  that  the
Cape  was  neutral  ground,  and  the  existence  of  two  Grand  Lodges
having  been  allowed  to  continue  side  by  side,  it  would  be  for  the
benefit  of  the  Brethren  in  that  Colony,  that  as  they  have  gone  on
working  as  friends  and  brothers,  they  should  continue  to  do  so."  A
resolution  embodying  the  foregoing  was  then  put  and  unanimously
adopted.

CHAPTER     V

AUSTRALASIA

New  South    Wales.

|HE  Lodge  of  Social  and  Military  Virtues — No.
227  on  the  roll  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ireland — ■
attached  to  the  46th  Foot  in  1752,  after  under-
going many  vicissitudes,  was  at  work  in  the
same  regiment  at  Sydney  in  18 16.  This  paved
the  way  for  the  establishment  of  stationary
lodges,  and  Irish  warrants  were  issued  to  Nos.
260,  Australian  Social,  in  1820,  and  266,  Leinster,  in  1824.  The
third  (strictly  colonial)  lodge,  No.  820,  Australia,  was  erected  by
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  in  1828.  The  last  named,  as  well  as
the  Irish  lodges,  met  at  Sydney,  the  capital.  The  first  established
in  any  other  part  of  the  Colony  was  No.  668,  St.  John,  constituted
at  Paramatta  in  1838,  and  the  second,  No.  697,  the  Lodge  of  Aus-
tralia Felix,  at  Melbourne — then  included  in  the  government  of
New  South  Wales — 1841.  An  Irish  lodge — No.  275 — was  erected
at  Windsor  in  1843,  and  in  the  same  year,  No.  408,  Australasian
Kilwinning,  at  Melbourne,  received  a  Charter  from  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Scotland.

During  the  two  decennial  periods  ensuing,  there  were  issued
in  the  Colony  twenty-one  English,  eight  Scottish,  and  two  Irish
lodges.  Between  1864-85  there  were  added  forty-seven  English,
forty-one  Scottish,  and  four  Irish  lodges.  Up  to  1886  there  were
seventy-four  English,  one  Irish,  and  fifty  Scottish  active  lodges.
In  1839  an  English  Provincial  Grand  Master  was  appointed,  and
one  for  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  in  1855,  and  that  of  Ireland
in  1858.

"  While  the  question  of  separation  from  the  Mother  Grand
Lodges  was  first  formerly  mooted  in  Victoria,  still  for  some  years,
at  least,  there  had  existed  in  Sydney  a  body  styling  itself  'the
Grand    Lodge    of    New    South    Wales,'    formed    from    the   great

iggo

FREEMASONRY   IN   AUSTRALASIA  1991

majority  of  a  regular  lodge — St.  Andrew's.  It  affected  to  make,
pass,  and  raise  Masons,  grant  charters,  and  issue  certificates.'

"On  December  3d,  1877,  tne  representatives  of  twelve  or  (at
most)  thirteen  Scottish  and  Irish  lodges  met  at  Sydney,  and  estab-
lished another  Grand  Lodge  of  New  South  Wales,  to  which,  how-
ever, the  pre-existing  body  of  the  same  name  eventually  made  sub-
mission, and  accepted  an  ordinary  Lodge  Warrant  at  its  hands.  At
this  time  (1877)  there  were  eighty-six  regular  Lodges  in  the  Col-
ony ;  English,  forty-seven  ;  Scottish,  thirty ;  and  Irish,  nine.  The
thirteen  lodges  which  thus  assumed  to  control  the  dissenting  major-
ity of  seventy-three,  sheltered  themselves  under  a  perverted  prin-
ciple of  Masonic  law — applied  to  a  wholly  illusory  state  of  facts.
This  was,  that  any  three  lodges  in  a  territory  ■  Masonically  unoc-
cupied ' — the  three  jurisdictions  already  existing  being  thus  coolly
and  quietly  ignored — could  form  themselves  into  a  Grand  Lodge,
and  that  when  so  formed,  the  remaining  lodges — averse  to  the
movement — were  they  one  hundred  or  one  thousand  in  number,
would  be  irregular  !  "

Mr.  Jas.  F.  Farnell,  appointed  Prov.  G.  M.  under  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Ireland,  1869,  was  a  leader  in  this  movement.  The  flag
of  independence  was  first  raised  by  the  Irish  lodges.  While  there
were  great  disadvantages  in  having  the  Australian  lodges  working
under  warrants  from  distant  Grand  Lodges,  still  there  were  reasons
not  entirely  sentimental,  which  raised  an  opposition  to  separation
from  the  earlier  existing  Grand  Lodges.  Whenever  matters  are
in  proper  condition  for  the  erection  of  an  Independent  Grand
Lodge,  the  matter  will  happily  culminate,  and  a  large  majority  of
the  lodges  and  brethren  interested  will  unite  therewith.  Should,
however,  the  movement  be  premature,  the  outcome  of  the  agitation
will  largely  depend  upon  the  character  and  influence  of  the  leaders,
or  what  is  the  same  thing,  upon  the  extent  of  the  following.

Mr.  Farnell  for  twenty  years  was  a  member  of  the  parliament  of
New  South  Wales,  and  was  also  Prime  Minister,  but  does  not  seem
to  have  had  great  influence  as  a  Mason.  The  Irish  Province  of
New  South  Wales  had  its  affairs  in  great  confusion  when  he  was
elected  Grand  Master.  And  not  the  smallest  of  the  motives  which
weighed  with  his  supporters — Scotch  as  well  as  Irish — seems  to
have  been  the  disinclination  to  be  taxed  by  (or  remit  fees  to)  the
mother  countries.

1992  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

The  new  organization,  at  the  close  of  1885,  had  been  recog-
nized as  the  only  regular  governing  Masonic  body  in  the  Colony  of
thirty-eight  Grand  Lodges,  chiefly,  however,  American.  There
seems,  indeed,  in  the  United  States  a  decided  inclination  to  regard
each  uprising  of  the  lodges  in  a  British  colony  as  a  tribute  to  the
efficacy  of  a  certain  doctrine  which  has  been  laid  down  by  Dr.
Mackey  with  regard  to  the  formation  of  Grand  Lodges.  But  those
American  jurisdictions  which  have  lent  a  willing  ear  to  the  specious
representations  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New  South  Wales  are  now
running  the  gauntlet  of  intelligent  criticism,  and  the  several  com-
mittees by  whom  they  have  been  hoodwinked  or  misled,  may  read
with  profit  some  of  the  reports  on  correspondence  in  the  larger
States,  notably,  Illinois,  Pennsylvania,  and  New  York,  where  the
unaccountable  delusion  into  which  so  many  Grand  Lodges  have
fallen  is  discussed  with  equal  candor  and  ability.  It  is  almost  need-
less to  say  that  a  Grand  Lodge  thus  constituted  by  a  small  minority
of  the  lodges  in  New  South  Wales,  has  been  refused  recognition  by
the  Grand  Lodges  of  the  British  Islands.

Victoria.

The  lodges  of  Australia  Felix  and  of  Australasia  (now  Nos.  474
and  530)  were  established  at  Melbourne  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England  in  1841  and  1846  respectively.  Scottish  Masonry  obtained
a  footing  in  the  same  city — with  "Australasian  Kilwinning" — in
1843;  ar,d  an  Irish  lodge — Hiram,  No.  349 — was  also  chartered
there  in  1847.  ^n  tne  same  year  a  third  English,  apparently  the
fifth  Victorian,  lodge — Unity  and  Prudence,  No.  801 — was  con-
stituted at  Geelong.  After  this  the  Craft  advanced  in  prosperity  by
leaps  and  bounds.  Thirty-six  English  lodges  were  added  to  the
list  between  1847  an^  tne  close  of  1862  ;  twenty-eight  during  the
ensuing  thirteen  years,  and  twenty  within  the  decennial  period  com-
mencing January  1,  1876.  During  corresponding  intervals  of  time,
the  Irish  warrants  granted  in  the  colony  were  respectively  twelve,
seven,  and  three ;  and  the  Scottish,  three  each  in  the  first  two
periods,  and  two  in  the  last.

The  first  Provincial  G.  M.  of  Victoria  (or  Australia  Felix)  was
the  Hon.  J.  E.  Murray.  The  date  of  his  appointment  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Scotland  has  not  been  recorded,  but  he  was  succeeded  by

FREEMASONRY    IN   AUSTRALASIA  '993

Mr.  J.  H.  Ross,  August  3,  1846.  The  present  District  G.  M.
is  Sir  W.  J.  Clarke,  who  received  his  Scottish  patent  in  1883
English  and  Irish  Provinces  were  established  in  1855  and  1856
respectively,  and  the  following  has  been  the  succession  of  English
Provincial  (now  District)  Grand  Masters  :  Captain  (now  Major-
General  Sir  Andrew)  Clarke,  1855  ;  Captain  F.  C.  Standish,  1861  ;
and  Sir  W.  J.  Clarke,  1883.  The  rulers  of  the  Irish  Province
have  been  Mr.  J.  T.  Smith,  1856-79;  and  from  1880,  Sir  W.  J.
Clarke.

The  lodges  now  at  work  under  the  three  jurisdictions,  all  of
which,  however,  are  in  a  manner  united  under  a  single  Provincial
G.  M.,  are  :  English,  ninety-one ;  Irish,  seventeen;  and  Scottish,
twelve  (including  one  in  Levuka,  Fiji).

The  idea  of  forming  an  independent  Grand  Lodge  of  Victoria
seems  to  have  been  first  launched  in  1863,  and  after  encountering
the  opposition  of  the  Earl  of  Zetland,  was  debated — March  2,  1864
— in  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  by  which  body  a  resolution  was
passed  declaring  its  "  strong  disapprobation  "  of  the  contemplated
secession.  It  was  observed  in  priecient  terms  by  the  late  John
Havers,  that  "  every  new  Grand  Lodge  was  the  forerunner  of  new
and  conflicting  degrees.  It  was  a  stone  pulled  away  from  the  foun-
dations of  Masonry,  and  opened  another  door  for  inroads  and  inno-
vations ;  "  and  he  exhorted  the  Brethren  in  Victoria  to  "  remember
that  union  was  strength,  and  universality  one  of  the  watchwords  of
Masonry."

In  1876  the  agitation  for  a  local  Grand  Lodge  was  renewed,  but
again  slumbered  until  1883,  when  the  scheme  was  fairly  carried  into
effect  by  an  insignificant  minority  of  the  lodges.

In  the  latter  year  a  meeting  was  held,  and  a  Masonic  Union  of
Victoria  formed,  April  27.  At  this  time  there  were  seventy  Eng-
lish, fifteen  Irish,  and  ten  Scottish  lodges  in  the  colony — total,
ninety-five.  On  June  19th  certain  delegates  met,  and  the  adhesion
of  eighteen  lodges — twelve  Irish,  five  Scottish,  and  one  English,  to
the  cause  was  announced.  But  the  number  has  since  been  reduced
by  the  subtraction  of  the  English  lodge  and  one  other,  which  were
erroneously  named  in  the  proceedings.  By  this  invention  it  was
resolved  "  that  the  date  of  founding  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Victoria
should  be  July  2,  1883."  Thus  we  find  sixteen  lodges,  with  an  esti-
mated membership  of  about  eight  hundred  and  forty,  calmly  trans-

1994  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

forming  themselves  into  the  governing  body  of  a  territory  contain-
ing ninety-five  lodges,  and  a  membership  of  five  thousand !

This  organization  has  a  following  of  about  twenty  subordinate
lodges ;  and  as  the  proceedings  of  some  Grand  Lodges  baffle  all
reasonable  conjecture,  it  will  occasion  no  surprise  to  learn  that  by
seventeen  of  these  bodies  the  titular  "  Grand  Lodge  of  Victoria"
had  been  duly  recognized  at  the  close  of  1885,  as  tne  supreme
Masonic  authority  in  this  Australian  colony.  At  the  same  date
Mr.  Coppin  entered  upon  the  second  year  of  his  Grand  Mastership,
having  been  installed — November  4th — in  the  presence  of  the
Grand  Masters  of  New  South  Wales  and  South  Australia.

Meanwhile,  however,  the  English,  Irish,  and  Scottish  lodges,
which  have  remained  true  to  their  former  allegiance,  are  united  in  a
solid  phalanx  under  a  single  Provincial  (or  District)  G.  M. — Sir  W.
J.  Clarke  ;  and  should  the  day  arrive  when  independence  is  con-
stitutionally asserted  by  the  century  and  more  of  lodges  which  obey
this  common  chief,  those  bodies  by  whom  the  soi-disant  Grand
Lodge  has  been  accorded  recognition,  will  find  themselves  con-
fronted by  an  interesting  problem,  not  unlike  that  propounded  with
so  much  dramatic  effect  by  the  late  Mr.  Sothern  in  the  role  of  Lord
Dundreary,  viz.,  "  Whether  it  is  the  dog  that  wags  its  tail,  or  the
tail  that  wags  the  dog  ?  "

South  Australia.

The  South  Australian  Lodge  of  Friendship,  Adelaide,  No.  613
(and  later,  No.  423),  on  the  roll  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,
was  constituted  at  the  British  metropolis  in  1834.  The  founders
were  all  in  London  at  the  time,  and  two  persons — afterward  Sir
John  Morphett,  President  of  the  Legislative  Council,  and  Sir  D.
R.  Hansen,  Chief  Justice  of  the  colony,  were  initiated.  A  second
English  lodge  was  established  at  Adelaide  in  1844,  and  in  the  same
year,  also  at  the  capital,  a  Scottish  one.

In  1855  the  first  Irish  Charter  was  received  in  the  colony,  and
in  1883  the  total  number  of  lodges  formed  in  South  Australia  was
as  follows  :  English,  twenty  active,  one  extinct ;  Irish,  seven  active,
three  extinct  ;  and  Scottish,  six,  all  active.

The  initiative  in  forming  a  Province  was  taken  by  Scotland  in
1846,  a  step  followed  by  England  in  1848,  and  Ireland  in  i860.

In   1883  there  were  premonitory  symptoms  that  the  lamentable

FREEMASONRY   IN   AUSTRALASIA  1905

examples  set  by  a  minority  of  the  lodges  in  the  adjacent  colonies  ol
New  South  Wales  and  Victoria,  in  usurping  the  authority  and  honor
which  should  belong  to  the  majority,  would  be  followed  in  South
Australia.  The  imminence  of  this  danger  induced  Mr.  H.  M.
Addison  to  form  a  Masonic  Union,  whose  labors  resulted — April
16,  1884 — in  a  convention  of  eighty-five  delegates,  representing
twenty-eight  lodges,  by  whom  the  Grand  Lodge  of  South  Australia
was  established.  The  proceedings  of  the  executive  committee  of
the  Masonic  Union,  which  were  characterized  throughout  by  the
most  scrupulous  regularity,  were  crowned  by  an  unprecedented
unanimity  of  feeling  on  the  part  of  the  lodges.  A  resolution  in
favor  of  independence  was  carried  nem.  con.  in  eighteen  English,  four
Irish,  and  six  Scottish  lodges,  and  with  a  single  dissentient  in  one
English,  and  with  two  dissentients  in  one  Irish,  lodge  ;  while  in  the
sole  remaining  lodge  under  England,  and  in  the  "  Mostyn  "  under
Ireland,  a  majority  of  the  members  joined  the  Union.  Thus,  in
effect,  out  of  a  grand  total  of  thirty-three  lodges  under  the  three
British  jurisdictions,  only  a  single  lodge — No.  363 — Duke  of  Leins-
ter  (1.),  has  adhered  to  its  former  allegiance.  The  new  Grand
Lodge  (besides  the  usual  indiscriminate  recognition  of  American
Grand  Bodies)  has  been  admitted  to  fraternal  relations  with  the
Grand  Lodges  of  England,  Ireland,  and  Scotland.  The  privilege,
however,  accorded  by  the  last  named  in  August,  1885,  was  cancelled
in  the  November  following  ;  a  proceeding,  there  is  every  reason  to
believe,  arising  out  of  the  inconsistent  action  of  the  colonial  Grand
Lodge  in  recognizing  the  authority  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New
South  Wales — the  irregular  establishment  of  which,  it  was  declared
by  Mr.  Addison,  at  the  formation  of  the  Masonic  Union  in  Adelaide,
July  30,  1883,  would,  if  initiated,  "  bring  Masonry  in  South  Aus-
tralia into  disrepute  throughout  the  world."

The  Hon.  S.  J.  Way,  Chief  Justice  of  the  Colony,  and  Mr.  J.
H.  Cunningham,  formerly  District  Grand  Secretary  (E.),  have  been
Grand  Master  and  Grand  Secretary  respectively,  since  the  founda-
tion of  the  Grand  Lodge.  The  subordinate  lodges  are  thirty-six  in
number,  with  a  total  membership  of  two  thousand  two  hundred  and
seventy-seven.

1996  HISTORY    OF   FREEMASONRY

Queensland.

The  North  Australian  Lodge  was  established  at  Brisbane  by
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  in  1859,  and  two  others  under  Irish
and  Scottish  warrants  respectively,  were  constituted  at  the  same
town  in  1864.

Each  jurisdiction  is  represented  by  a  Provincial  (or  District)
G.  M.,  and  the  number  of  lodges  is  as  follows  :  English,  twenty-six
active,  two  extinct ;  Irish,  eleven  active,  three  extinct ;  and  Scot-
tish, twelve,  all  active.

West  Australia.

Eight  lodges  in  all  have  been  formed  in  this  colony,  the  first  of
which — St.  John,  No.  712 — was  erected  at  Perth  in  1842.  Seven
of  these  survive,  and  being  included  in  no  Province,  report  direct  to
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  which  in  this  solitary  instance  has  not
suffered  from  the  exercise  of  concurrent  jurisdiction  by  other  Grand
Bodies.

Tasmania.

Lodges  under  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ireland  were  established
at  Hobart  Town  in  1823,  1829,  1833,  and  1834,  but  the  three  ear-
liest of  the  series  are  now  extinct.  A  fourth  lodge  under  the
same  sanction  was  constituted  at  Launceston  in  1843,  anc^  it  was
not  until  1846  that  English  Masonry  obtained  a  footing  on  the
island.  In  that  year  Tasmanian  Union,  No.  781,  was  formed  at
Hobart  Town,  and  a  second  English  lodge — Hope — sprang  up  (in
the  first  instance  under  a  dispensation  from  Sydney)  in  1852.  In
the  following  year  the  Rev.  R.  K.  Evving  became  the  Master  of  the
latter,  and  in  1856  the  lodges  of  Faith  and  Charity  were  carved  out
of  it — Mr.  Ewing  then  becoming,  on  their  joint  petition,  Prov.
G.  M.  The  other  English  lodge — Tasmanian  Union — objecting  to
these  proceedings,  as  having  been  carried  on  clandestinely,  was  sus-
pended by  the  Prov.  G.  M.,  and  remained  closed  for  nine  months.
The  strife  thus  engendered  nearly  put  an  end  to  English  Masonry
in  Launceston.  Lodge  faith  became  dormant,  Charity  was  volun-
tarily wound  up,  and  even  in  Hope  the  light  almost  went  out.
Soon,  however,  there  was  a  revival,  and  in  1876  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Scotland  also  began  to  charter  lodges  on  the  island,  where  there  are

AUSTRALASIA  1997

now  four  in  existence  under  its  jurisdiction.  These  are  included  in
the  Province  of  New  South  Wales.  The  Grand  Lodges  of  Eng-
land and  Ireland  have  each  a  roll  of  seven  lodges  on  the  island,  one
under  the  former  body,  and  four  under  the  latter,  having  surrendered
their  charters.  The  English  Prov.  Grand  Lodge  died  a  natural  death
on  the  removal  of  Mr.  Evving  to  Victoria,  but  a  new  one  was  estab-
lished under  Mr.  W.  S.  Hammond  in  1875.  The  Irish  lodges  were
constituted  into  a  Province  in  1884.

New  Zealand.

The  first  lodge  in  the  Colony — Francaise  Primitive  Antipo-
dienne — was  founded  at  Akaroa  by  the  Supreme  Council  of  France,
August  29,  1843;  the  second — Ara — at  Auckland,  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Ireland  in  1844  ;  and  the  third — New  Zealand  Pacific — by
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  in  1845.  No  further  charters  were
issued  until  1852,  when  English  lodges  were  established  in  Lyttel-
ton,  and  Christchurch,  whilst  others  sprang  up  at  New  Plymouth
and  Auckland  in  1856,  at  Wanganui  in  1857,  and  at  Nelson  and
Kaiapoi  in  1858.  In  the  latter  year  an  Irish  lodge  (the  second  in
the  Colony)  was  formed  at  Napier,  and  in  i860  an  English  one  at
Dunedin — where  also  the  first  Scottish  lodge  was  erected  in  1861.
After  this  the  diffusion  of  Masonry  throughout  New  Zealand  became
so  general,  that  I  must  content  myself  with  giving  the  barest  statis-
tics, which,  for  convenience  sake,  will  be  classified  so  as  to  harmo-
nize as  far  as  possible  with  the  Provincial  systems  of  the  three  com-
peting jurisdictions.  Between  i860  and  1875  there  were  warranted
in  the  Colony  twenty-five  English,  eight  Irish,  and  twenty-one  Scot-
tish lodges;  while  in  the  ten  years  ending  January  1,  1886,  the  num-
bers were  respectively  forty-seven,  seven,  and  thirty-two.

The  lodges  in  New  Zealand  are  usually  classified  according  to  the
Masonic  Provinces  of  which  they  form  a  part.  Of  the  latter  there
are  five  English  and  three  Scottish,  of  late  years  dominated  Districts,
in  order  to  distinguish  them  from  bodies  of  a  like  character  in  Great
Britain  ;  and  one  Irish,  to  which  the  more  familiar  title  of  Provin-
cial Grand  Lodge  is  still  applied.  These  preliminaries  it  will  be
necessary  to  bear  in  mind,  because  the  arrangement  which  seems  to
me  the  simplest  and  best,  is  to  group  the  lodges  according  to  their
positions  on  the  map,  which  in  the  present  case  will  correspond  very

i998  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

closely  with  the  territorial  classification,  or  division  into  Districts,
by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.

North  Island.

Auckland  District. — The  District  (or  Provincial)  Grand  Mas-
ters are  Mr.  G.  S.  Graham  (E.),  Sir  F.  Whitaker  (S.),  and  Mr.  G.
P.  Pierce  (I.)  ;  whilst  the  number  of  lodges  under  the  several  juris-
dictions is  eighteen  under  the  G.  L.  of  England,  and  six  each  under
those  of  Scotland  and  Ireland,  that  is,  if  taken  according  to  locality,
for  all  the  Scottish  lodges  on  the  North  Island  are  comprised  within
the  Auckland  District,  and  the  whole  of  the  Irish  lodges  in  both
islands  within  the  Auckland  Province.

Wellington  District.— The  only  D.  G.  M.  is  Mr.  C.  J.  Tox-
ward  (E.)  ;  and  the  number  of  lodges  is  respectively  eighteen  (E.),
eight  (S.),  and  four  (I).

Middle,  or  South,  Island.

Canterbury  District. — The  D.  G.  M.'s  are  Mr.  Henry  Thomson
(E.)  and  the  Rev.  James  Hill  (S.),  who  rule  over  nineteen  and
nine  lodges  respectively.  The  seat  of  government  is  at  Christ-
church,  where  there  is  also  an  Irish  lodge,  the  only  one  in  the
District.

Otago  and  Southland  District. — Mr.  T.  S.  Graham  presides
over  one  D.  G.  L.  (E.),  and  Mr.  G.  W.  Harvey  over  the  other  (S.).
There  are  fourteen  lodges  in  each  District,  i.e.,  according  to  the
local  arrangement,  for  the  Scottish  D.  G.  L.  (of  which  there  are
only  two  in  the  South  Island)  exercises  authority  beyond  the  terri-
torial limits  of  Otago  and  Southland.  The  total  number  of  lodges
on  its  roll  is  twenty-one,  and  doubtless  Otago  has  derived  much  of
its  importance  as  a  Scottish  Masonic  center,  from  the  fact  of  having
been  originally  founded  by  an  association  connected  with  the  Free
Church  of  Scotland.  At  Dunedin  and  Invercargill  there  is  in  each
case  an  Irish  lodge.

Westland  District. — The  only  D.  G.  M.  is  Mr.  John  Bevan
(E.),  who  rules  over  six  lodges ;  and  there  are  three  others  (S.)
which  are  comprised  within  the  D.  G.  L.  of  Otago  and  Southland
at  Dunedin.

AUSTRALASIA  1999

Marlborough  and  Nelson  District. — These  provinces  of  the
Colony  are  exempt  from  any  local  Masonic  jurisdiction,  under  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England,  which  is  represented  by  five  lodges.
There  is  also  a  Scottish  lodge  (at  Blenheim),  which  is  subject  to  the
D.  G.  L.  of  Otago  and  Southland.

Oceania.

Although  the  various  islands  and  archipelagoes  have  been  treated
as  far  as  possible  in  connection  with  the  continents  with  which  they
are  ordinarily  associated,  there  are  some  few  of  these,  lying  as  it
were  in  mid-ocean,  that  must  be  separately  dealt  with,  and  their
consideration  will  bring  this  chapter  to  a  close.

New  Caledonia. — This  island  was  taken  possession  of  by  France
in  1854,  and  has  been  used  for  some  years  as  a  penal  settlement.
At  Noumea,  the  chief  town  and  the  seat  of  government,  there  are
two  lodges,  L'Union  Caledonienne,  and  No.  1864,  Western  Poly-
nesia. The  former  was  established  by  the  Grand  Orient  of  France
in  1868,  and  the  latter  (which  is  included  in  the  Masonic  Province
of  New  South  Wales)  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  in  1880.

Fiji  Islands. — The  formation  of  a  lodge — Polynesia — at  Levuka,
with  the  assent  of  the  native  king,  was  announced  to  the  Masonic
world  in  a  circular  dated  March  12,  1872.  The  Islands  were
annexed  to  Britain  in  1874,  and  on  February  1,  1875,  a  Scottish
Charter — No.  562 — was  granted  to  a  lodge  bearing  the  same  name
and  meeting  at  the  same  place  as  the  self-constituted  body  of  1872.
This  is  comprised  in  the  Masonic  Province  of  Victoria.  A  second
British  lodge — No.  1931,  Suva  na  Viti  Levu — was  established  in
the  archipelago  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  in  1881.

Society  Islands. — Masonry  was  introduced  into  Papeete,  the
chief  town  of  Tahiti  (or  Otaheiti),  the  largest  of  the  Society  group,
by  the  Grand  Orient  of  France  in  1834.  A  Chapter — L'Oceanie
Francaise — was  established  in  that  year,  and  a  lodge  of  the  same
name  in  1842.

The  labors  of  these  bodies  were  intermittent,  the  latter  having
been  galvanized  into  fresh  life  in  1850,  and  the  former  in  1857.
Both  lodge  and  chapter  are  now  extinct.

Marquesas  Islands. — A  lodge,  which  has  long  since  ceased  to

2000  HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY

exist — L'Amitie — was  established  at  Nukahiva  by  the  Grand  Orient
of  France  in  1850.

Sandwich  or  Hawaiia,7i  Islands. — In  1875  there  were  three
lodges  in  this  group,  and  more  recent  statistics  show  no  increase  in
the  number  :  Le  Progres  de  l'Oceanie,  erected  by  Warrant  of  the
Supreme  Council  of  France  in  1850;  and  the  Hawaiian  and  Wai-
lukee  lodges,  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  California.
The  last  named  is  Maui ;  the  others  meet  at  Honolulu,  the  capital,
where  they  occupy  a  hall  in  common.  The  earliest  of  the  two
American  lodges  (Hawaiian)  was  formed  in  1852.  These  three
lodges  are  composed  of  natives,  Americans,  Englishmen,  and  Ger-
mans, between  whom  the  most  friendly  relations  subsist.  King
Kalakaua  was  an  act:  /e  member  of  Le  Progres  de  l'Oceanie,  and  also
his  brother,  William  Pitt  Leleihoku,  of  the  Hawaiian  Lodge.  The
former,  who  has  visited  many  foreign  countries,  also  evinced  the
same  interest  in  Masonry  while  on  his  travels.  On  January  7,  1874,
he  was  entertained  by  lodge  Columbian  of  Boston  (U.  S.  A.),  and
on  May  22,  1881,  by  the  National  Grand  Lodge  of  Egypt.  By
the  latter  body  the  king  was  elected  an  Honorary  Grand  Master,
and  afterward  delivered  a  lengthy  oration,  in  which  he  expressed  his
belief  in  Egypt  being  the  cradle  both  of  Operative  and  Speculative
masonry,  and  thus  may  be  said  to  have  fully  reciprocated  the  com-
pliment which  had  been  paid  him  by  the  meeting.

BROTHERLY    LOVE,   RELIEF   AND    TRUTH

/

SUPPLEMENT  TO  DR.  MACKEY'S  TEXT

By   W.    BRO.    WILLIAM   JAMES   HUGHAN
P.S.G.D.  of  England;  P.S.G.W.  of  Egypt,  Iowa,  etc.

Dr.  Mackey  and  I  had  long  been  regular  correspondents  and
fellow  Masonic  students,  when  his  lamented  decease  ended  our
happy  collaboration,  which  had  been  mutually  helpful  and  stimu-
lating.

My  residence  in  England  obtained  for  me  numerous  facilities
for  the  examination  of  old  and  original  MSS.  concerning  the  Craft.
Hence  my  esteemed  friend  was  often  glad  to  avail  himself  of  my
services  accordingly,  which  he  always  warmly  appreciated.

Since  Dr.  Mackey 's  regretted  death  in  1881,  several  important
works  have  been  published  and  valuable  discoveries  have  been  made
of  ancient  records,  which,  as  they  concern  and  in  part  affect  the
preceding  pages,  require  to  be  carefully  considered  and  duly  ex-
plained. Of  these,  mention  may  be  made  of  Bro.  R.  F.  Gould's
History  of  Freemasonry ;  the  Transactions  and  Reprints  of  the
Quatuor  Coronati  Lodge  (London) ;  Bro.  E.  Conder's  History  of
the  Masons  Cotnpany  (London)  ;  my  Old  Charges  of  the  British
Freemasons,  2d  Series,  and  others.

In  loving  memory  of  my  dear  friend,  and  in  fulfilment  of  an
offer  of  literary  aid  made  some  time  ago,  I  have  gone  through  his
comprehensive  history,  and  noted  the  corrections  and  additions
needful  to  make  it  as  complete  and  accurate  to  date  as  he  would
have  liked  it  to  be.

His  support  of  what  he  terms  the  "  Iconoclastic  School "  can  not
fail  to  help  us  throughout  the  United  States ;  as  we  seek  to  be  as
constructive  as  possible,  our  own  desire  is  that  the  legends  should
be  kept  distinct  from  authenticated  facts,  so  that  the  Fraternity  may
possess  a  complete  history,  perfect  in  all  its  parts  and  worthy  of
1 26  2001

2002  SUPPLEMENT

the  Free  and  Accepted  Masons  throughout  the  world.     His  words
on  the  subject  at  p.  8  are  worth  reproduction  :

"  To  this  school  I  have  for  years  been  strongly  attached,  and  in
the  composition  of  this  work  I  shall  adopt  its  principles.  I  do  not
fear  that  the  claims  of  Freemasonry  to  a  time-honoured  existence
will  be  injured  by  any  historical  criticism,  although  the  era  in  which
it  had  its  birth  may  not  be  admitted  to  be  as  remote  as  that  assigned
to  it  by  Anderson  or  Oliver."

Book  I.— The  Old  MSS.,  Etc.

Since  the  publication  of  my  Old  Charges  of  British  Freemasons,
in  1872,  many  copies  of  these  manuscript  constitutions  have  been
traced,  some  of  considerable  value  having  been  discovered  during
the  last  decade.  There  are  now  some  threescore  and  ten  rolls  or
books  of  these  "  Charges  "  in  existence,  the  text  of  certain  scrolls
being  of  great  importance.  The  dates  of  some  of  the  older  MSS.
have  also  had  to  be  revised,  such  as  a  few  noted  at  p.  15.  The  date
of  the  "  Halliwell  "  or  "Regius  MS.7'  has  been  placed  a  little  later,
by  a  few  critics,  and  that  of  the  "Cooke  MS."  has  been  put  back
to  1450  or  earlier.

An  unfortunate  error  was  made  by  the  Editor  of  the  "  Cooke
MS."  by  reading  the  final  word  in  the  line  "And  in  policronico  a
cronycle  p'uyd,"  as  printed,  instead  of  preuyd  or  proved,  as  pointed
out  by  Bro.  G.  W.  Speth  in  his  commentary  on  that  noted  little
gem  of  a  Book.

The  "  Harleian  No.  2054"  (British  Museum)  is  not  likely  to
have  been  written  before  1660  (not  1625,  p.  15),  and  a  still  older
copy  of  its  text  was  found  in  1899,  v*2->  tne  "John  T.  Thorp  MS."
of  a.d.  1629,  which  is  probably  the  original  of  both  it  and  the
"Sloane"of  1646.

The  "Grand  Lodge  MS.  No.  1,"  erroneously  placed  by  me  at
1632  (pp.  15,  69,  etc.),  is  really  of  1583,  and  the  numbers  of  the  two
York  MSS.  2  and  4  should  be  reversed,  the  first  mentioned  being
the  junior.  These  points  are  all  detailed  in  my  second  volume  on
the  "  Old  Charges"  (of  1895),  and  in  subsequent  additions  to  1899.

Since  Dr.  Mackey  wrote  his  history,  additional  information
has  been  obtained  relative  to  the  "  Four  Crowned  Martyrs"  referred
to  in  the  "Halliwell   MS."  and  elsewhere,  which  has  considerably

SUPPLEMENT  2003

modified  the  statements  thereon  at  pp.  16,  27,  34,  etc.  The  legend,
so  far  from  being  of  German  origin,  is  mentioned  in  England  many
centuries  before  there  is  historic  proof  of  its  having  acquired  cur*
rency  in  Germany.  On  this  subject  Bro.  Gould's  history  should  be
consulted,  both  in  relation  to  the  Steinmetzen  and  the  Masonic
MSS.  of  Great  Britain.  The  fact  of  the  legend  having  been  known
in  England  for  so  many  centuries  led  the  late  Bro.  the  Rev.  A.  F.
A.  Woodford  to  suggest  that  our  Students'  Lodge  No.  2076,  Lon-
don, should  be  called  the  "  Quatuor  Coronati,"  and,  though  rather  a
singular  title  for  such  an  organization,  we  agreed  thereto.

The  curious  name  of  "  Nosechidae"  for  Masons,  referred  to  at
p.  60,  may  be  traced  back  to  Dr.  Anderson's  Book  of  Constitutions,
1 738.  It  was,  however,  dropped  in  later  editions,  but  continued  by
Laurence  Dermott  in  his  AJiiman  Rezon,  which  was  a  pity,  the
term  being  so  absurd.

The  St.  Amphibalus  legend  is  not  peculiar  to  the  "  Cooke "
text  as  the  "William  Watson"  Roll  of  1687,  first  noted  in  1890,
contains  a  reference  to  that  ancient  celebrity,  and  I  believe  that  the
"  Henery  Heade "  MS.  of  1675,  in  the  Library  of  the  Temple,
London,  also  does  ;  but  its  recent  discovery  has  not  allowed  time
enough  for  its  complete  transcription.

There  are  several  MSS.  that  call  Edwin  the  King's  brother,  in-
stead of  son,  as  in  most  MSS.  (p.  103),  but  they  are  not  of  much
value  or  antiquity,  and  belong  to  the  "  Spencer"  family  as  respects
the  text.  Dr.  Anderson  probably  had  a  copy  of  the  "  Spencer  "  or
"  Cole  MS."  before  him  in  1738,  as  it  was  printed  in  1729.

As  to  Prince  Edwin  having  been  made  a  Mason  at  Windsor  (p.
98),  one  or  two  lately  discovered  Scrolls  contain  the  same  statement
as  the  "Lansdowne"  and  "Antiquity  MSS.,"  but  evidently  it  was
but  a  local  tradition.

Dr.  Mackey  observes  (p.  163)  that  the  reason  "why the  Temple
of  Solomon  was  exclusively  selected  by  the  Modern  Masons  as  the
incunabulum  of  their  Order  can  be  only  conjecturally  accounted
for."  That  is  so,  but  on  the  other  hand  the  extraordinary  popular-
ity of  works  on  the  Temple  of  Solomon,  and  the  numerous  models
made  and  exhibited,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  17th  century,  and  early
in  the  1 8th  century,  may  have  led  to  its  incorporation  in  the  Ma-
sonic Ritual  during  the  Revival  period,  1717-23.  It  cannot  be  said
that  the  "  Old  Charges  "  make  a  prominent  feature  of  that  great

joo4  SUPPLEMENT

historic  building,  and  neither  are  the  Biblical  worthies  familiar  to
the  modern  Freemasons  conspicuous  figures  in  the  ancient  MSS.
of  the  Fraternity.  The  Transactions  of  the  "  Quatuor  Coronati "
Lodge  for  1899  are  worth  a  careful  study  on  this  point.

Early   Records.

Of  the  most  valuable  entries  concerning  Freemasonry  in  the  1 7th
century  may  be  mentioned  those  by  Elias  Ashmole  in  his  famous
diary.  It  is  to  be  regretted,  however,  that  the  two  editions  of  the
typographical  reproduction  of  that  MS.  book  (171 7  and  1774)  con-
tain serious  errors  in  the  portion  relating  to  his  admission  into  the
Craft,  and  his  visitation  of  a  lodge,  in  1646  and  1682  respectively.
Unfortunately,  Dr.  Mackey  had  not  facsimiles  of  these  entries,  and
hence  his  adoption  of  the  faulty  transcripts  (pp.  322,  620-21,  etc.).

The  following  may  be  relied  on  as  being  an  exact  copy  of  the
two  entries  of  a.d.  1682.

"March  1682.

10  :  About  5.  p.m.  I  reed  a  sumons  to  appr.  at  a  Lodge  to  be  held  the  next
day,  at  Masons  Hall  London.

11.  Accordingly  I  went,  &  about  noone  were  admitted  into  the  Fellowship  of
Free  Masons,

Sr.  William  Wilson  Knight,  Capt.  Rich  :  Boothwick,  Mr.  Will  :  Woodman,
Mr.  Wm.  Grey,  Mr.  Samuell  Taylour  &  Mr.  William  Wise.

I  was  the  Senior  Fellow  among  them  (it  being  35  yeares  since  I  was  ad-
mitted)    There  were  prsent  beside  myselfe  the  Fellowes  after  named.

Mr.  Tho  :  Wise  Mr.  of  the  Masons  Company  this  prsent  yeare.  Mr.  Thomas
Shorthose,  Mr.  Thomas  Shadbolt,  .  .  .  Waindsford  Esqr.  Mr.  Rich :
Young  Mr.  John  Shorthose,  Mr.  William  Hamon,  Mr.  John  Thompson,  &  Mr.
Will :  Stanton

Wee  all  dyned  at  the  halfe  Moone  Taverne  in  Cheapeside,  at  a  NoWe  Dinner
prepaired  at  the  charge  of  the  New-accepted  Masons."

1

On  comparing  the  foregoing  excerpt  with  the  one  printed  at  pp.
621-22  of  the  history,  it  will  at  once  be  seen  that  Ashmole  was  not
reinitiated,  or  readmitted  into  the  fellowship,  a.d.  1682,  by  Sir
William  Wilson  and  others  ;  but  that  Wilson  and  the  others  named
were  themselves  "  accepted,"  and  subsequently  paid  for  the  dinner,
which  was  served  at  the  Half  Moon  Tavern,  in  Cheapside,  accord-
ing to  custom.

That  being  so,  the  elaborate  and  most  ingenious  arguments  in

SUPPLEMENT

2005

explanation  of  the  interpolated  word  "by"  are  wholly  unnecessary,
because  due  to  a  very  faulty  transcript.  Neither  can  it  be  said  that
the  lodge  in  which  Ashmole  was  initiated  in  1646  was  of  an  opera-
tive character,  because  Bro.  W.  H.  Rylands  has  demonstrated  most
fully  that  it  was  a  speculative  assembly.  See  his  Freemasonry  in
the  ryth  Century  ("Mas.  Mag.,"  London,  Dec,  1881).  So  far
from  the  celebrated  antiquary  having  been  made  an  "  Honorary
Member,"  it  is  quite  clear  that  he  was  admitted  to  the  full  privi-
leges enjoyed  by  the  Brethren  who  elected  him.

A  very  valuable  work  which  was  originally  published  in  1730  (but
no  copy  has  been  preserved),  and  a  2d  edition  was  printed  as  an
appendix  to  the  Book  of  Constitutions,  1738,  was  not  by  James
Anderson  (p.  364)  (as  generally  accepted  until  recent  years),  but
by  Bro.  Martin  Clare,  F.R.S.,  who  became  D.  G.  M.  in  1741.  It
was  entitled  A  Defence  of  Masonry,  publish 'd  A.D.  iyjo,  Occa-
sion d  by  a  Pamphlet  caWd  Masonry  Dissected.  In  a  paper  on
"  The  Old  Lodge  at  Lincoln,"  by  Bro.  Wm.  Dixon  (Quatuor  Coro-
natorum,  1891),  information  is  afforded  as  to  this  Brother,  and
copies  of  minutes  given  in  relation  to  his  authorship  of  the  Defence.
So  also  in  another  paper  of  the  same  year  read  to  the  members  of
the  "  Quatuor  C.  Lodge,"  London,  by  Bro.  R.  F.  Gould,  the  Masonic
historian,  on  "  Martin  Clare,  A.M.  &  F.R.S.,"  with  facsimiles.  One
minute  reads  thus:  Oct.  2,  1733.  "When  Brother  Clare's  Dis-
course concerning  Pritchard,  as  also  some  of  our  Regulations  and
By  Laws  were  read."

Book  II — Masonic  History.

It  was  impossible,  as  Dr.  Mackey  states  at  p.  598,  "to  obtain
any  continuous  narrative  of  the  transactions  of  the  Masons'  Com-
pany," but  happily  that  condition  is  now  altered  by  the  publication  of
the  Records  of  the  Hole  Crafte  and  Fellowship  of  Masons,  with  a
Chronicle  of  the  History  of  the  Worshipful  Company  of  Masons
in  the  City  of  London,  by  Bro.  Edward  Conder,  Jr.,  Master  of  the
Company,  1894.

In  this  important  volume  the  records  of  the  Company  are  inter-
estingly described,  and  many  are  of  a  very  remarkable  character.  It
appears  that  there  were  two  separate  Masonic  organizations  meet-
ing in  the  Masons'  Hall.    The  one  known  as  the  Masons'  Company

2006  SUPPLEMENT

proper,  and  the  other  a  Lodge,  termed  the  "  Acception."  In  the
first  named,  the  members  were  "  admitted,"  but  in  the  latter  they
were  "accepted."  The  Company  of  Free  Masons  was  so  termed,
about  the  middle  of  the  16th  century,  the  fellowship  before  being
of  the  Masons  only.     The  prefix  was  dropped  officially  after  1653.

There  were  thus  the  Free  Masons  of  the  Company,  and  the  Ac-
cepted Masons  of  the  Lodge,  until  the  former  ceased  to  use  the
term  "  Free."  Eventually  the  two  prefixes  were  united  as  "  Free
and  Accepted  Masons,"  but  precisely  when  we  can  not  say ;  prob-
ably toward  the  end  of  the  1 7th  century.

The  speculative  Lodge  of  the  Acception  is  noted  in  the  records
of  the  company  from  about  the  year  1620,  and  it  was  this  body  that
was  visited  by  Elias  Ashmole  in  1682.  The  grant  of  arms  was
made  to  the  Company  of  Masons  in  1472,  and  is  now  preserved  in
the  British  Museum,  but  the  copy  of  the  "  Old  Charges,"  so  often
noted  in  the  inventories,  has  been  missing  for  fifty  or  more  years.
This  is  a  great  pity,  as  we  are  unable  to  decide  for  certain  what  the
text  was,  or  how  near  it  agreed  with  those  still  preserved.

The  "  Phillipp's  MSS."  Nos.  1  and  2  may  be  copies  of  the  miss-
ing Masons'  Company  MS.,  of  1650  circa,  and  so  may  the  "G.  W.
Bain  MS."  of  the  same  period,  but  beyond  indicating  the  probabil-
ity of  such  relationship,  nothing  can  be  said.

Of  the  "  Harleian  No.  1942"  text  (p.  616,  etc.)  we  have  now
several  copies,  so  it  no  longer  enjoys  the  solitary  position  it  once
had.  Though  it  and  the  other  similar  documents  seem  to  have  been
written  for  and  used  by  a  company,  neither  of  them  can  be  the
missing  "  Masons'  Company  MS.,"  nor  can  they  be  copies  if  the
MSS.  previously  mentioned  represent  the  original  Scroll  or  book
which  belonged  in  the  Accepted  Masons'  Hall.  They  are,  however,
suggestive  of  the  use  of  the  term  accepted,  and  are  thus  especially
valuable  in  illustration  of  the  minutes  of  the  "  Acception."

I  do  not  consider  that  the  "  Sloane  MS.  No.  3329,"  British
Museum,  dates  from  "between  1640  and  1700,"  now  that  the
matter  has  been  thoroughly  sifted  ;  but  more  likely  to  have  been
written  soon  after  the  "Revival  of  171 7."  There  is  no  evidence
that  it  was  ever  known  to  Dr.  Plot  (not  "  Plott "),  the  historian  of
Staffordshire,  1686,  and  I  agree  that  it  is  unlikely  that  separate
ceremonies  or  degrees  were  worked  prior  to  the  18th  century,  as
Dr.  Mackey  emphatically  states.

SUPPLEMENT  2007

My  friend  declares  that  the  word  Free  Mason  is  not  to  be  found
in  the  "  Masonic  Constitutions,"  i.e.,  the  "  Old  Charges,"  of  the
operative  body,  but  this  is  not  correct.  It  does  not  appear  in  the
very  early  copies,  but  the  term  is  met  with  in  several  of  the  rolls  of
the  17th  century.

The  mark  degree  is  modern,  comparatively  speaking,  but  the
selection  of  marks  by  the  operative  and  speculative  Masons  is  a
very  old  custom.  Even  apprentices  chose  their  marks,  as  evi-
denced in  the  "  Mark  Book  "  of  the  Lodge  of  Aberdeen,  of  a.d.
1670  onward.  As  a  degree,  I  had  traced  it  back  to  1778  in  Dr.
Mackey's  time,  but  later  on  it  has  been  found  noted  in  Lodge  Min-
utes of  1777,  London;'  1773,  Durham;  and  1769,  Portsmouth.
The  last  mentioned  is  in  cypher,  and  has  only  recently  been  read.
The  first  entry  is  as  follows :

"  At  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter  held  at  the  George  Tavern  in  Portsmouth  on
First  Septr.,  Seventeen  hundred  and  sixty  nine,  Present:

"  Thomas  Dunckerley,  Esq.,  William  Cook  Z,  Samuel  Palmer  H,  Thomas
Scanville  J.,  Henry  Dean,  Philip  Joyes,  and  Thomas  Webb.

"Pro.  G.  M.  Thomas  Dunckerley  bro't  the  Warrant  of  the  Chapter,  and  hav-
ing lately  rec'd  the  mark  he  made  the  bre'n  Mark  Masons  and  Mark  Masters,
and  each  chuse  their  mark,  viz.,  W.  Cook  Z,  S.  Palmer  H,  T.  Scanville  J.,  Philip
Joyes,  T.  Webb.  He  also  told  us  of  this  mann'r  of  working  which  is  to  be  used
in  the  degree  w'ch  we  may  give  to  others  so  they  be  F.  C.  for  Mark  Masons
and  Master  M.  for  Mark  Masters."

Full  particulars  of  this  chapter  are  given  in  the  history  of  the
Phoenix  Lodge,  No.  257,  Portsmouth,  by  Bro.  Alexander  Howell,
1894.  The  Royal  Arch  was  started  in  that  town  under  the  regular
or  "  Modern  Masons"  in  1769.

Bro.  Dunckerly  received  the  Royal  Arch  Degree  in  Portsmouth
in  1754,  but  at  that  time,  though  worked  by  the  "Moderns,"  there
was  no  governing  body.  The  ceremony  was  known  in  England,
Ireland,  and  Scotland  in  the  5th  decade  of  the  17th  century,  and
was  thus  patronized  before  the  advent  of  the  "  Ancients  "  or  "  Atholl
Masons"  in  1751.  It  is  well  to  remember  this  fact,  as  Bro.  L.  Der-
mott  has  erroneously  been  credited,  or  his  Grand  Lodge,  with  hav-
ing arranged  and  started  the  degree.  Royal  Arch  Masonry  is  re-
ferred to  in  print  (a.d.  1743-44)  two  years  before  Dermott  obtained

'The  degree  is  noted  in  the  records  of  St.  Thomas's  Lodge,  London  (not  "  Lanca-
shire," vide  p.  822),  and  is  duly  referred  to  on  p.  821.

2008  SUPPLEMENT

the  degree  (1746),  and  undoubtedly  the  ceremony  was  worked  in
America  as  soon  as  it  was  worked  by  the  "Ancients"  in  England.
Bro.  Dermott  was  initiated  in  Ireland,  1740-41,  and  in  1752  was
a  member  of  Nos.  9  and  10,  London  (England),  when  he  was
elected  Grand  Secretary.     At  that  time  No.  1  was  kept  vacant.

It  was  the  usage,  certainly,  for  lodges  generally  to  be  known
by  the  taverns  or  hotels  in  which  they  assembled,  until  it  happily
became  the  custom  to  have  halls  built  for  Masonic  meetings.
Lodges,  however,  had  special  names  long  before  the  year  1767,  as
recorded  at  p.  885.  In  Masonic  Records,  1717-1894,  by  my
lamented  friend  and  Bro.  John  Lane,  will  be  found  several  instances
of  lodges  having  adopted  distinctive  titles,  the  first  to  do  so  ac-
cording to  this  excellent  authority  being  the  "  University  Lodge,"
No.  74,  in  a.d.  1730,  and  there  was  a  "  French  Lodge,"  also  held  in
London,  and  so  named  in  1737,  or  earlier.  It  is  not  a  matter  of
much  importance,  but  it  is  as  well  to  remember  that  lodge  nomen-
clature began  some  one  hundred  and  seventy  years  ago  as  respects
England,  and  probably  much  earlier  in  Scotland.  Neither  is  it
sure  that  there  were  only  four  operative  lodges  in  the  city  of  Lon-
don in  1 716  (p.  879).  The  immortal  quartette  of  1717  may  ha^e
been  mainly  operative,  but  even  that  is  not  certain,  as  we  are  not
informed  as  to  their  members  until  the  next  decade,  when  assuredly
they  were  severally  of  a  speculative  character.  We  are  wholly  in
ignorance  when  Dr.  Desaguliers  and  Dr.  Anderson  were  initiated,  or
in  what  lodges,  all  particulars  as  to  such  being  mere  guesswork.

Concerning  warrants  (p.  924),  it  should  be  stated  that  these
charters,  so  well  known  to  the  Fraternity  since  1750  in  England
(but  much  earlier  in  Ireland),  were  not  issued  originally  by  the
premier  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  but  Brethren  who  wished  to  be
constituted  into  a  lodge  petitioned  the  Grand  Master,  and  on  his
approval  of  their  prayer  a  day  would  be  fixed  for  its  constitution,
and  certified  accordingly.  In  the  provinces,  a  Brother  would  be
deputed  to  constitute  such  a  lodge  by  a  document  signed  by  the
requisite  authority ;  which  was  a  kind  of  Warrant,  but  did  not
nominate  the  W.  M.  and  Wardens,  as  since  the  period  mentioned.
The  fact  of  constitution  made  the  lodge  regular,  but  there  were
numerous  lodges  who  did  not  avail  themselves  of  that  favor,
and  so  were  irregular,  from  the  Grand  Lodge  point  of  view,  though
as  much  entitled  then  to  continue  their  meetings  as  they  were  be*

SUPPLEMENT  2009

fore  the  Grand  Lodge  was  formed.  It  is  impossible  now  to  de-
cide what  lodges  joined  the  new  organization  between  171 7  and
1 72 1  ;  hence  my  remark,  which  is  referred  to  in  the  note  at  p.  924.

A  mass  of  information  had  been  obtained  in  1894  and  printed  in
the  volume  by  Bro.  John  Lane  aforesaid,  respecting  the  old  lodges
noted  by  Dr.  Mackey  at  pp.  886-88.  The  "  Lodge  of  Antiquity  "
assembled  in  other  places  besides  those  stated,  and  so  as  to  several
of  the  other  lodges ;  but  they  need  not  be  recapitulated  now.  The
original  No.  2  was  erased  in  1736.  Dr.  Mackey  (p.  888)  assumes
that  the  original  No.  3  continued  to  work  from  1723,  but  as  a  mat-
ter of  fact  the  members  gave  up  their  distinctive  position,  and  were
constituted  into  a  new  lodge,  February  27,  1723,  taking  the  No.  11
in  1729.  From  successive  changes  it  is  now  12,  and  from  1768  was
named  the  "Fortitude,"  and  from  1818  "The  Lodge  of  Fortitude
and  Old  Cumberland."  Dr.  Anderson  puts  the  matter  quite  clearly
in  his  Book  of  Constitutions,  1738,  p.  185,  when  it  was  No.  10  on
the  list  of  London  lodges  only.

"This  was  one  of  the  four  Lodges  mentioned,  Page  109,  viz.,  the
Apple-Tree  Tavern  in  Charles  Street,  Covent  Garden,  whose  Con-
stitution is  immemorial :  But  after  they  removed  to  the  Queen's
Head  upon  some  Difference,  the  members  that  met  there  came  under
a  new  Constitution,  tho'  they  wanted  it  not,  and  it  is  therefore  placed
at  this  number."     It  is,  however,  of  Time  Immemorial  continuity.

As  to  the  age  of  the  Master  Masons'  Degree,  no  later  discovery,
subsequent  to  Dr.  Mackey's  period,  at  all  serves  to  make  the  matter
any  clearer,  save  to  indicate  that  the  ceremony  was  not  generally
worked  until  fairly  on  in  the  18th  century.  I  published  a  long  ac-
count of  the  minutes  of  a  London  lodge  from  1725,  which  men-
tions the  Third  Degree  in  1727.  This  is  the  oldest  of  the  kind
known,  appertaining  to  a  regular  lodge  in  London,  and  is  of  great
value.  The  musical  and  architectural  lodge,  quoted  pp.  1 000- 1 001,
was  never  on  the  register  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  but  its
records  afford  evidence  of  the  ceremony  being  worked  as  early  as
1725.     Minutes  published  in  facsimile  by  the  Q.  C.  Lo.  in  1900.

The  lodge  opened  in  Paris  as  No.  90  (p.  1029)  was  not  consti-
tuted until  April  3,  1732.  The  list  Dr.  Mackey  quotes  from,
though  begun  in  1730,  was  continued  for  two  years  later.  There  is
no  engraved  list  preserved  of  1733  ;  and  there  was  no  regular  lodge
in  France  until  the  year  I  name,  i.e.,  1732.

2oio  SUPPLEMENT

The  rival  Grand  Lodge  of  the  "Ancients"  was  inaugurated  in
175 1  (not  1753),  but  Laurence  Dermott  was  not  a  founder  (p.  1 105),
he  having  joined  in  the  year  1752,  when  he  became  Grand  Secre-
tary. Bro.  Henry  Sadler,  in  his  Masonic  Facts  and  Fictions  (1887),
objects  to  these  "Ancients"  being  termed  Schismatics,  and  ably
defends  them  in  that  well-known  work.  He  considers  they  were
mostly  Irish  Masons,  from  whom  Grand  Secretary  Dermott  also
came,  and  certainly  many  of  the  facts  he  presents  indicate  their
fondness  for  that  organization.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  date
given  at  p.  1 109,  viz.,  July  17,  1751,  was  the  day  on  which  this
body  was  established,  but  no  Grand  Master  was  elected  until  1753.

The  Royal  Arch  Degree  was  not  started  by  these  "Ancients"
(p.  1 108),  but  only  adopted  by  them  as  an  authorized  ceremony.
In  self-defence  the  "  Moderns,"  who  had  worked  it  before  the  origin
of  the  "Atholl  Masons,"  but  not  officially,  gradually  gave  it  more
prominence.  In  1767  they  formed  a  Grand  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch
Masons  and  issued  warrants  for  chapters,  pushing  the  degree  more
even  than  the  "Ancients,"  though  not  recognized  by  their  Grand
Lodge ;  so  at  the  union  of  the  two  Grand  Lodges  in  December,
1813,  the  way  was  prepared  for  the  inauguration  of  the  "  United
Grand  Chapter"  in  1817,  the  ceremony  being  adopted  as  the  com-
pletion of  the  Master  Mason's  ceremony,  not  as  a  separate  and  in-
dependent degree.

The  York  Masons  who  revived  their  Grand  Lodge  in  1761  had
never  any  dealings  with  the  "  Ancients,"  and  consequently  the  latter
had  no  right  to  style  themselves  "Ancient  York  Masons."  The
York  Grand  Lodge  never  warranted  any  lodges  out  of  England,
and  so  the  lodges  chartered  in  the  United  States  by  the  "  Atholl
Masons"  were  not  "A.  Y.  M."  (Ancient  York  Masons),  but  "An-
cient "  or  "  Atholl  Masons."

I  should  find  it  simply  impossible  to  treat  of  the  Introduction  of
Freemasonry  into  the  North  American  Colonies  in  brief,  and  so
shall  not  attempt  it,  and  must  leave  Dr.  Mackey's  interesting  Chap-
ter XLVI.  untouched.  I  may,  however,  just  state  that,  bearing  in
mind  the  distinction  already  noted  between  regular  and  irregular
lodges ;  the  one  duly  constituted  by  authority  of  a  Grand  Lodge,
and  the  other  not  constituted.  Let  me  say  that  the  "  St.  John's,"
Boston,  a.d.  1733,  was  the  first  regular  Masonic  lodge  in  North
America.      There   were  before   then  several  lodges  assembling  in

SUPPLEMENT  201 1

Philadelphia,  and  evidently  elsewhere  by  "  time  immemorial  "  usage,
and  these  had  as  good  a  right  to  meet  Masonically  as  any  other
organization.  Everywhere,  however,  outside  the  pale  of  regular
Grand  Lodge  Masonry,  and  unless  such  Brethren  joined  under  the
new  regime,  they  were  accounted  irregular.  Strange  to  say,  the
"  Modern  "  Grand  Lodge  of  England — the  premier  of  the  world —
never  had  a  Pennsylvania  lodge  on  its  register.  I  once  thought
that  a  lodge  assembling  in  Philadelphia,  Penn.  (1730,  etc.),  had
been  granted  by  its  constitutional  authority,  but  there  is  not  suffi-
cient evidence  to  warrant  the  conclusion.  There  were  regular  "An-
cient "  warrants  issued  for  Philadelphia  during  the  6th  decade  of
the  1 8th  century  and  a  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  formed.  As  a
matter  of  fact,  singular  as  it  reads,  the  lodge  of  1 730,  and  subse-
quent lodges  of  the  kind,  were  never  recognized  as  of  English  ori-
gin, though  a  Provincial  Grand  Master  was  appointed  by  the  "Mod-
erns "  for  the  "  Keystone  State"  in  1730,  etc.  This  was  done,  though
there  was  not  a  lodge  on  its  English  register  from  Pennsylvania.
An  unusual  experience  assuredly,  but  not  unique  as  respects  some
Provincial  Grand  Masters  appointed  in  England.

I  am  not  aware  of  any  authority  for  the  statement  at  p.  1252,
that  the  esteemed  Bro.  E.  T.  Carson  (deceased)  had  a  copy  of  Dr.
Dassigny's  celebrated  Enquiry  of  1 744  in  his  collection,  which  has
lately  been  acquired  by  General  S.  C.  Lawrence  (P.  G.  M.,  Mass.),
who  is  believed  to  have  the  largest  Masonic  library  in  America,  if
not  in  the  world.  The  only  copy  in  the  United  States  is  the  one  I
let  Bro.  R.  F.  Bower  have,  who  was  a  distinguished  collector  and
ardent  Masonic  student.  On  his  regretted  decease,  his  library  was
purchased  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Iowa,  which  has  a  great  collec-
tion of  Masonic  books,  MSS.,  and  curios  of  immense  value.  Since
my  discovery  of  that  volume  of  1 744,  another,  and  almost  perfect,
copy  has  been  traced  and  is  now  in  the  important  Masonic  library
of  the  province  of  West  Yorkshire ;  and  a  third  has  been  recog-
nized in  the  collection  of  Masonic  works  in  Newcastle  on  Tyne  ;
so  that  at  the  present  time,  three  copies  are  known,  all,  however,
lacking  the  frontispiece,  and  only  one  of  the  trio  is  complete  else.

The  references  in  the  history  of  Freemasonry  at  York,  and
especially  in  relation  to  the  additional  degrees,  i.e.,  those  after  the
Third,  require,  occasionally,  qualification,  in  the  light  of  discoveries
of  late  years.     It  is  necessary  also  to  carefully  study  both  portions

2012  SUPPLEMENT

of  my  Masonic  Sketches  and  Reprints,  as  the  second  part  was
written  after  the  first  was  printed,  and  contains  particulars  of  MS.
books  discovered  whilst  the  work  was  in  the  press.  There  is  an
excellent  American  edition  to  be  had  of  the  same  year  as  the  orig-
inal issue  in  England.

Chapter  XLVIII.  is  an  important  one,  and  deserves  particular
consideration,  for  many  of  the  statements  are  of  a  very  suggestive,
not  to  say  startling,  character,  and  advanced  by  a  Brother  of  great
eminence  and  research.  I  am  not  aware  of  the  existence  of  any
evidence  in  favor  of  the  assertion  that  Ramsay  (not  Ramsey)  ever
sought  to  introduce  any  of  the  additional  degrees  to  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England  early  last  century.  For  that  matter,  beyond
statements  of  fanciful  historians,  it  has  not  been  proved  that  he
arranged  the  ceremonies  so  long  connected  with  his  name  ;  and  all
the  declarations  concerning  the  Stuarts  and  the  Craft  must  be  re-
ceived with  caution.  Beyond  reiterated  assertions,  the  initiation  of
any  of  the  unfortunate  royal  family  has  not  at  all  been  clearly
established.

Chapter  XXX.  is  of  very  great  interest,  but  how  far  it  is  sup-
ported by  cold  and  hard  facts  it  is  not  for  me  to  say,  unless  time
and  space  were  ample.  At  all  events,  it  should  be  read  side  by  side
with  Chapter  XXX.  of  Bro.  Gould's  history  ;  so  that  the  reliability
or  otherwise  of  some  of  the  sources  depended  upon  should  be  tested.
At  p.  280  Dr.  Mackey  cites  the  Charter  of  Arras  (Rose  Croix),  said
to  have  been  granted  by  Charles  Edward  Stuart.  Now,  is  it  likely,
is  it  even  possible,  that  in  his  father's  lifetime  he  would  describe
himself  as  "  We,  Charles  Edward,  King  of  England,  France,  Scot-
land, and  Ireland  ?  "  Surely,  in  the  face  of  such  a  declaration,  there
is  no  authority  to  say  as  to  the  authenticity  of  this  Warrant  "  There
appears  to  be  no  doubt."  It  could  not  be  authentic  if  the  docu-
ment contained  any  such  title.

Another  subject  has  also  been  more  thoroughly  elucidated  of  late
years,  and  in  consequence  thereof  some  of  the  authorities  quoted  in
Chapter  XVIII.  have  been  found  to  be  unreliable  at  times,  and
rather  inclined  to  treat  the  question  as  fiction,  instead  of  as  history.
The  Steinmetzen  of  Germany  are  not  always  safe  in  the  hands  of
such  authors  as  Fallou  (not  "  Fallon  "  )  and  Winzer.  Gould  is  much
safer  than  either  to  follow,  and  the  reader  may  be  confident  that
existing  documents  will  verify  all  his  statements  thereon.     Consid-

SUPPLEMENT  2013

ering  the  paucity  of  really  critical  works  on  the  subject,  Dr.  Mackey
has  done  wonders.  Kloss  is  nearly  always  to  be  trusted,  either  as
respects  Germany  or  France,  but  in  respect  to  the  latter  country
all  mere  statements  as  to  the  introduction  of  Freemasonry  must  be
treated  with  suspicion  ;  for  prior  to  1732  we  have  actually  as  yet  no
evidence.

Some  parts  of  Dr.  Mackey's  massive  work  are  indications  as  much
of  his  valued  opinions  as  of  matters  of  fact,  and  these,  of  course,  are
left  alone,  and  can  not  well  be  questioned,  now  their  author  is  no
more.  They  are,  however,  of  considerable  worth,  and,  whilst  the
opinions  of  some  other  students  may  not  always  coincide,  so  long
as  they  are  accepted  as  inferences,  rather  than  evidences,  they  are  of
special  interest  and  importance,  and  can  not  fail  to  throw  light  on
points  needing  elucidation,  because  of  their  suggestiveness.

The  foregoing  does  not  aim  at  being  a  microscopic  examination
of  Dr.  Mackey's  history,  but  simply  a  fraternal  attempt  to  read  it
in  the  light  and  by  the  assistance  of  valuable  discoveries  made  since
the  year  of  his  lamented  decease.

INDEX

A.  A.  S.  R.   (see  "Scottish  Rite").
Abbotsbury,  charter  of  Orky's  Guild  at,  II,

565-
Abif,  Hiram  (see  Hiram  Abif).
Abraham,    episode   of,    in   Legend   of    the

Craft,  1,  20,  67.
Abraxas,  a   Gnostic  name  and   symbol   of

Deity,   11,   377,   378,  403;    vi,    17 18;  vn,

1775,  1779-

Acacia,  i,  136.

Academy  of  True  Masons,  a  new  Rite  es-
tablished by  Pernelty,  11,  353.

Acception  Lodge,  vii,  2006.

Acceptation,  two  kinds  of,  in  early  Ma-
sonry, in,  618.

Accepted,  the  term  of  admission  in  "Ac-
ception Lodge,"  vn,  2006.

Accepted  Masons'   Hall,   vii,   2006.

Accepted  Masons,  origin  and  meaning  of
the  words,  HI,  617.

Acre,  the  siege  of,  v,  1322.

Act  of  Union,  proclamation  of  the,  in
1813,  v,  1173-

Addison,  Joseph,  influence  of,  on  Specula-
tive Masonry,  hi,  854 ;  clubs  discussed
by,  in  the  Spectator,  hi,  857;  the  Holy
Sepulcher  and  Crusade  spirit  described
by,  v,  1312.

Adept  of  the  Eagle,  a  traditional  degree
of  Rosicrucian  origin,  11,  354.

Admission,  requirements  of,  in  early
Lodges,  hi,  613.

Adon  Hieronymus,  German  medieval  use
of,  hi,  767;  some  English  equivalents
of,  hi,  769.

Adon  Hiram   (see  Hiram  Abif),  11,  420.

Adoniram  (see  Hiram  Abif),  the  meaning
of,  11,  416.

Adonis,  the  mystery  of,  1,  177.

Affiliation,  early  use  of  the  term,  111,  617.

African  Lodge,  Boston  (cf.  "Colored
Masonry"),  illegal  organization  of,  in
1787,  vi,  1659 ;  copy  of  charter  of,  vi,
1663 ;  declaration  of  independence  of,
in  1827,  vi,  1660 ;  text  of  same,  vi,  1665 ;
record  of  correspondence  regarding,  vi,
i666ff. ;  United  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng-
land drops,  from  list,  vi,  1660.

Agrippa,  Cornelius,  his  Occult  Philos-
ophy, the  text-book  of  Rosicrucian
philosophy,    11,   349.

Ahiman  Rezon,  or  help  to  a  brother,  rv,

1105   (cf.  v,  1268;  vi,  1549)-
Aitcheson-Haven    MS.,    certain    date    of,

1,  15-
Ajuon,  an  early  MS.  name  for  Hiram,  iv,

932.  .      .

Alabama,  first  Lodge  and  organization  of
Grand  Lodge  in,  vi,  1458;  introduction
of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  VI,  1487;  cryptic
Masonry  in,  vi,  1570;  organization  of
Grand  Commandery  and  subordinate
commanderies  in,  vi,  1602 ;  Scottish  Rite
Masonry  in,  vn,  1889.

Alaska,  first  Lodge  and  organization  of
Grand  Lodge  in,  vi,  1484.

Albany,  N.  Y.,  development  of  Royal  Arch
Masonry  at,  v,  1290;  Temple  Chapter
founded  at,  v,  1293 ;  first  Lodge  of  Per-
fection established  at,  vn,  1809;  devel-
opment of  the  Scottish  Rite  at,  vn,  1862.

Albertus  Magnus  (Albert  the  Great),  ill,

735-

Alchemists,  theory  of  the  relation  of  the,
to  Rosicrucianism,  11,  336,  337 ;  sources
of  the  symbolism  of  the,  11,  350.

Alderman,  the  name  of  the  principal  offi-
cer in  Saxon  Guilds,  11,  577;  hi,  591.

Aleppo,  v,  1326.

Alexandrea  Lodge,  No.  29,  v,  1440.

Alnwick  Lodge  (Northumberland),  rec-
ords   of,     the    oldest    extant,    iv,     880,

895-

Alnwick  MS.,  certain  date  of,  1,   15.

AL-OM-JAH,  vii,  1760.

Aman,  an  early  MS.  name  for  Hiram,  iv,
932.

Ambroslf.   Petr^:,  vii,   1758.

"Amen,  so  mote  it  be,"  i,  28.

America,  introduction  of  Freemasonry
into  the  Colonies  of  North,  v,  1224;
popularity  of  the  "Ancients"  in  Colo-
nial, v,  1 159;  introduction  of  Royal
Arch  Masonry  into,  v,  1264 ;  conflicting
systems  of  Royal  Arch  in,  v,  1288;  or-
ganization of  G.  G.  Chapter  in,  v,  1290;
Knight  Templarism  in,  v,  1368;  organ-
ization of  G.  G.  Encampment  in,  v,
1384;  Cryptic  Masonry  in,  vi,  1549;
Scottish  Rite  Masonry  in,  vn,  1820,
1843,  1873 ;  Colored  Masonry  in,  vi,
1641.

American  Colonies,  Lodges  established  in,
by  Grand  Lodge  of  "Ancients,"  iv,  1126.

2015

20l6

INDEX

American  Rite  (cf.  "Degrees"),  Thomas
Smith  Webb  the  founder  of  the,  y,
1292;  the  Mark  degree  incorporated  in
the,  in,  659 ;  how  the,  differs  from  other
Rites,  vii,  1765.

Ancient  Accepted  Scottish  Rite  (see
"Scottish  Rite"  and  cf.  "Degrees").

Ancient  Craft  Masonry,  the  "Royal
Arch"  recognized  as  part  of,  a.d.  1813,
iv,  1 132.

Ancient  Landmarks,  proprietary  "marks"
important  feature  of,  III,  813.

Ancient  Masonry,  formerly  four  de-
grees, vi,  1534-

Ancient  Mysteries,  comparison  of  Free-
masonry and  the,  1,  174;  objection  to
theory  that  Freemasonry  is  derived
from  the,  hi,  866.

Ancient  York  Masons,  the  title  of  Athol
Grand  Lodge  Masons,  v,   1272.

"Ancients"  and  "Moderns,"  epithets  ap-
plied to  brethren  under  the  rival  Grand
Lodges  of  England,  iv,  nosff. ;  v,  11551!.

Ancients,  Grand  Lodge  of,  established
in  1753,  iv,  1 104,  1 106;  vii,  2010;  popu-
larity of  the,  iv,  1 1 19;  first  Colonial
warrant  granted  by  the,  v,  1264 ;  Lodges
established  in  Canada  by  the,  iv,  1126;
all  Colonial  Lodges  in  Pennsylvania
warranted  by,  vn,  201 1;  Royal  Arch  as
practiced  by,  v,  1257 ;  influence  of  the,  on
the  Royal  Arch,  v,  1288;  union  of  the,
with  G.  L.  of  the  "Moderns,"  v,  1155.

Anderson,  Rev.  James  (M.A.,  D.D.),
Temple  Legend  and  theory  first  promul-
gated by,  1,  7;  Temple  Legend  aban-
doned by,  1,  157;  treatment  of  Babylon
Legend  by,  1,  58;  theory  of,  that  Enoch
founded  Geometry  and  Masonry,  11,
401 ;  Pythagorean  philosophy  familiar
to,  11,  366 ;  views  of,  on  the  Pythagorean
origin  of  Freemasonry,  11,  364 ;  theory
of,  as  to  the  origin  of  Freemasonry,  1,
117;  influence  of,  on  the  reconstruction
of  Masonry,  11,  365 ;  and  the  develop-
ment of  Speculative  Masonry,  ill,  852;
early  history  of  Freemasonry  greatly
influenced  by,  11,  466;  "Old  Charges"  or
Constitutions  published  by,  in  1723,1,  56;
contribution  of,  1,  13 ;  inaccuracies  of,
in,  598;  transition  from  Operative  to
Speculative  Masonry  related  by,  iv,  882.

Andrea,  Johann  Valentin  (cf.  "Rosicru-
cianism"),  sketch  and  estimate  of,  11,
330;  Rosicrucian  works  published  by,
11,  331 ;  origin  of  Freemasonry  attrib-
uted to,  by  Buhle,  11,  345 ;  the  purpose
of  his  "Fama  Fraternitatis,"  11,  350;
Nicolai's  estimate  of,  11,  304.

Anglo-Saxons,  Operative  Masonry  among
the,  11,  540;  architecture  of  the,  com-
pared with  Roman,  n,  544 ;  Craft
Guilds  known  among  the,  11,  564.

Anglo-Saxon  Guilds,  the,  11,  559.

Annapolis,  first  Lodge  in  Maryland  estab-
lished at,  v,  1414.

Anti-Masonic  excitement,  history  of  the,
in  the  U.  S.,  vr,  1677.

Antioch,  v,  1324;  name  of  a  Latin  King-
dom of  the  East,  v,  1326.

Antiquity,    schism    in   the    Lodge    of,    iv,

1135-

Antiquities  of  Josephus,  indebtedness  of
the  Legend  of  the  Craft  to,  1,  69.

Antagonisms,  a  triple  series  of,  in  Ma-
sonic Symbolism,  v,  1239.

Apple  Tree  Tavern,  meeting  of  Lodges
at,  iv,  882,  885,  887;  meeting  of  Specu-
lative Masons  at  the,  in  1716,  in,  858.

Application,  an  early  form  of,  for  initia-
tion to  the  Royal  Arch,  v,  1259.

Apprentice,  a  bondman  mieht  not  become,
in,  610;  must  be  physically  sound,  in,
612;  position  of  the,  in  French  Guilds,
in,  671 ;  use  of  the  mark  by  the,  in
early  Scottish  Masonry,  in,  660.

Apprentice  Charge,  the  early,  iv,  950.

Apprentices,  young  members  of  Collegia
Fabrorum  like  those  in  Stonemasons'
Lodges,  11,  502;  regulations  regarding,
in  the  Strasburg  Constitutions,  in,  751;
seven  years  indenture  of,  iv,  920;  status
of  the,  in  Operative  Lodges,  iv,  944,
948;  regulation  controlling,  1723,  IV,
1 129;  marks  granted  to,  in  Scotland,
in,  809;  rank  instead  of  degree  in  early
Scottish  Lodges,  in,  648;  admission  fee
of  the,  in  early  Scottish  Lodges,  in,
650;  status  of,  when  Masonry  consisted
of  but  two  degrees,  iv,  976 ;  early  Spec-
ulative Masonic  regulations  regarding,
IV,  917.

Apprenticeship,  strict  regulations  regard-
ing, in,  612.

Arabian  Nights,  fabled  connection  of  the,
with  Scottish  Rite,  vn,  1812.

Arch  of  Enoch,  a  degree  of  Ramsay,  prac-
ticed in  America  until   1820,  v,  1272.

Architect,  Scottish,  a  term  introduced
into  Masonry  by  Ramsay,   n,   277.

Architects  of  Lombardy,  title  "Freema-
sons" first  assumed  by,  1,  42.

Architectural  Symbolism,  the  invention
and  development  of,  in,  727,  739,  759.

Architecture,  "Traveling  Freemasons"
founders  of  Gothic,  1,  191  ;  symbolic
style  of,  in,  704,  755;  history  of,  in  its
relation  to  Freemasonry,  in,  683 ;  three
distinct  epochs  of  medieval,  in,  713.

Architecture,  Masonry,  and  Geometry,
synonymous  terms  in  the  Legend  of  the
Craft,  1,  66.

Argentine  Republic,  Sup.  Council  A.  A.
S.  R.,  in,  vn,  1857.

Aristotle,  vi,  1721.

Arithmetic,  4th  liberal  science  mentioned
in  the  Legend  of  the  Craft,  1,  18.

Arizona,  first  Lodge  and  organization  of
Grand  Lodge  in,  vi,  1482;  introduction
of  Royal  Arch  Masonry  in,  vi,  1488;
Cryptic  Masonry  in,  vi,  1571 ;  organiza-
tion  of    Grand   Commandery   and    sub-

INDEX

2017

ordinate  commanderies  in,  vi,  1602 ;
Scottish  Rite  'Masonry  in,  vn,  1889,
1890,  1894.

Ark  of  the  Covenant,  vi,  1781.

Arkansas,  first  Lodge  and  organization  of
Grand  Lodge  in,  vi,  1459;  introduction
of  Royal  Arch  Masonry  in,  vi,  1489 ;
Cryptic  Masonry  in,  vi,  1571  ;  organiza-
tion of  Grand  Commandery  and  sub-
ordinate commanderies  in,  vi,  1603 ;
Scottish  Rite  Masonry  in,  vn,  1889,
1890,   1892.

Arms,  the,  of  the  Company  of  Masons,
1472,  vn,  2006.

Army,  U.  S.,  Scottish  Rite  Masonry  in,
vn,   1889,  1890,   1894.

Arras  (France),  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix
established  at,  1747,  11,  280,  28 1  ;  char-
ter of,  vn,  2012.

Articles  of  Union,  Grand  Lodges  1813,
v,  1 178;   Scottish  Rite  1863,  vn,   1881.

Ascalon,  defeat  of  Saladin  at,  v,  1322.

Ashmole,  Elias,  Ragon's  theory  of  "new
Degrees"  by,  in  1648,  11,  273 ;  becomes
a  member  of  the  Royal  Society,  11,  310;
becomes  a  Rosicrucian,  11,  339,  345 ;  in
club  of  astrologers,  11,  319;  meets  Wil-
liam Lilly,  11,  619;  one  of  the  earliest
members  of  Freemasonry,  11,  316;  in,
652;  passages  from  the  diary  of,  n,  320;
vn,  2004;  circumstances  of  initiation,
11,  620;  vn,  2004;  early  Craft  usages,
in,  624,  626 ;  seeming  inconsistencies  in
diary  of,  explained,  n,  323 ;  the  true  ex-
planation, vn,  2004 ;  Lodge  of  Acception
visited  by,  vn,  2006;  true  relation  of,  to
early  Speculative  Masonry,  11,  325 ;  a
Biblical  allegory  applied  to  Master's  de-
gree by,  11,  274.

Ashmolean   Museum    (Oxford),  11,   318.

Ashtaroth  (Venus),  an  early  symbol  of
Deity,  vi,  1718;  vn,  1775,  1779-

Asia,  Freemasonry  in,  vu,  1968.

Aspirant,  early  French  title  of  an  Appren-
tice desiring  promotion,  HI,  671.

Assassins,  the  sect  of,  and  Freemasonry,
1,  236;  defeat  of  the,  1 172;  v,  1330.

Assembly,  an  early  name  for  an  annual
meeting  of  the  Craft,  iv,  897 ;  functions
of  the  early  Masonic,  iv,  809;  applica-
tion of  name,  to  permanent  Lodge,  m,
623.

Assembly,  General,  early  Masonic  use  of
term,  in,  602,  604;  object  of  the,  III,  608.

Assembly  of  Masons  at  York,  1,  24,  26;
n,  556,  548;  in,  606.

Assideans,  Brewster's  effort  to  connect  the
Essenes  and  Builders  of  the  Temple
through  the,  11,  393.

Assistants,  supposition  regarding  the,  in,
602.

Astrea,  Freemasonry  to  restore  the  reign
of,  v,  1 190.

Astrologers,  supposed  relation  of  the
Freemasons  and  the,  11,  306,  310,  311,
315,  317-

Astronomy,  7th  liberal  science  in  the  Le-
gend of  the  Craft,  1,  18;  Rosicrucian
emphasis  of,  n,  341.

Atergatis-Derketos,  an  early  symbol  of
Deity,  vi,  1720;  vu,  1780.

Athelstan  (Athelstane,  Athelstone),  King,
and  the  York  Legend,  1,  23,  26,  27,  95ff.

Atholl,  the  Dukes  of,  iv,  1105.

Atholl  Grand  Lodge,  History  of  the,  iv,
1 104;  list  of  the  Grand  Masters  and
Secretaries  of,  iv,  1127;  working  of
military  Lodges  under,  v,   1293.

Atholl  Masons,  vu,  2010.

Attendance,  compulsory,  at  early  annual
meeting  of  the  Craft,  iv,  898.

Augustus,  Emperor,  development  of  fine
architecture  in  era  of,   11,  498.

A.  U.  M.,  vi,   1700  (note)  ;  vn,  1760.

Austin,  James  M.,  G.  G.  H.  P.,  1868,  v,
1301.

Australasia  ;  New  South  Wales,  Free-
masonry in,  vn,  1990.

Austria,  introduction  of  Freemasonry  in,
in,  721.

Avartas  of  Vishnu,  early  symbols  of
Deity,   vi,   1720;   vn,   1777.

Avignon,  the  statute  passed  at,  against  fra-
ternities in   1326,  in,  593.

Aynon,  an  early  MS.  name  for  Hiram,  iv,
932.

Baal,  an  early  symbol  of  Deity,  vi,  1720;
vn,   1780.

Babel,  the  Tower  of,  1,  53,  59.

Babylonian  Legend,  the  early  forms  of,  1,
20,  53,  59 ;  present  form  of,  1,  61.

Bacchus,  or  Dionysus,  the  significance  of,
in  the  Dionysian   Mysteries,   1,   171.

Bacon,  Lord,  romance  of  the  '"House  of
Solomon"  by,  11,  304,  326.

Bain  (G.  W.)  MS.,  vn,  2006.

Baird,  Henry  S.    (P.  G.  M.),  vi,  1460.

Balafre,  i,  246.

Baldwin,  E.,  vi,  1576.

Balsa  mo,  Count  Cagliostro,  influence  of
the   impostor,   vn,   1814.

Baltimore  (Md.),  the  development  and
practice  of  Cryptic  Degrees  at,  vi,  1549.

Bannf.rman.  John,  vi,   1612.

Baptism,  Pagan  practice  of,  vi,  1729.

Barker,  John  V.,  v,  1371.

Barruel,   Abbe,   ii,   289,  290,  383.

Basilides,  the  founder  of  a  sect  of  Gnos-
ticism, 11,  372,  377.

Basle,  Masonic  marks  discovered  at,  by
M.   Didron,  in,  658.

Batalha,  Portugal,  important  "marks"
found  at,  in,  805.

Bates,  Hon.  Edward,  vi.  1454.

Bauhutten,  name  of  the  Lodges  of  the
German   Steinmetzcn,  in,  713,  715.

Bavaria,  Adam  Weishaupt  established  se-
cret society  in,   1776,  n,  289.

20l8

INDEX

Belgium,  Sup.   Coun.  A.  A.  S.  R.,  in,  vn,

1857.

Bellerman,  11,  377.

Belleville,  first  Nebraska  Lodge  estab-
lished at,  vi,  1474.

Berlin,  Scottish  Rite  adopted  at,  in  1758,
vii,   1805.

Bertrand  du  Guesclin,  a  G.  M.  of  Tem-
plars, v,  1356.

Betrand  de  Blanquefort,  3rd  Gr.  M.  of
Templars,  v,  1329.

Billings,  W.  W.,  vi,  1575.

Bisellium,  the  meaning  of,  in  Roman  Col-
leges, 11,  480.

Blue,  the  color  of,  vii,  1751.

Bodleian  Library,  iv,  935.

Bo'he-Mond,  Count  of  Tarentum,  v,  1325.

Boileau,  Etienne,  valuable  contributions
of,  in,  668.

Bombay,  Freemasonry  in,  vii,  1979.

Boniface  VIII,  Templars  side  with,  in
contest  with  Philip  the  Fair,  v,  1331.

Bonneville.,  Chevalier  de,  a  fabricator  of
degrees,  vii,  1805,  1816.

Bonneville,  Nicholas  de,  a  French  His-
torian, 11,  310.

Booker,  John,  an  astrologer  and  associate
of  Elias  Ashmole,  11,  326.

Books,  language  and  contents  of  the,  kept
by  Craft  Guilds,  in,  599.

Borthwick,  Capt.  Richard,  associate  of
Elias  Ashmole,  11,  320.

Boston,  the  first  regular  Masonic  Lodge  in
North  America  at,  1733,  vii,  2010;  St.
Andrew's  Chapter,  the  first  at,  v,  1274,
1293 ;  development  of  the  Scottish  Rite
at,  vii,  1862 ;  Supreme  Council  of  the
Northern  Jurisdiction  A.  A.  S.  R.  at,
vii,   1851.

Boswell,  John,  Laird  of  Achinflek,  one  of
the  first  recorded  non-professional  Free-
masons, hi,  839.

Boswell,  William,  Laird  of  Auchinlech,
one  of  the  earliest  recorded  non-opera-
tive members  of  the  Lodge  of  Edin-
burgh, in,  652.

Bower,  Robert  F.,  G.  G.  H.  P.,  1880,  v,
1301 ;  distinguished  collector  and  Ma-
sonic scholar,  vii,  201 1.

Brahma,  an  early  symbol  of  Deity,  vi,
1718;  vii,  1773-

Brazil,    Sup.   Coun.   A.    A.   S.   R.,  in,  vii,

1857.

Brewer,  Hugh,  ii,  320.

Brewster,  David,  analogy  between  Essenes
and  Freemasonry  first  discovered  by,  1,
231 ;  11,  387;  theory  of,  as  to  influence  of
Assassins  on  the  Templars,   1,   253.

Britain  (see  England),  Roman  Colleges
of  Artificers  in,  11,  503,  511,  532,  534,
539.  557;  early  Masonry  in,  11,  530.

British  America,  Freemasonry  in,  vii,
1929.

British  Colonies,  Royal  Arch  Masonry
introduced  into,  at  Philadelphia,  1758,
v,  1271.

British  Columbia,  Freemasonry  in,  vn,
1933.

Brock  well,  Rev.  C,  views  of,  on  Freema-
sonry and  Religion,  11,  369.

Brotherhood,  common  spirit  of,  among  the
Essenes  and   Freemasons,  11,  395.

Bruce,  Robert,  ii,  279.

Buchan,  W.  P.,  articles  by,  in  the  London
Freemason,  iv,  900.

Buck,  the  Old,  name  given  the  Edinburgh
Kilwinning   MS.,   in,   633.

Buhle,  Johann  Gottlieb,  one  of  the  first
to  link  Freemasonry  with  Rosicrucian-
ism,  11,  345.

Builder,  the  (see  Hiram  Abif),  11,  420.

Building  Corporations  of  the  Middle
Ages,  Speculative  Freemasonry  an  evo-
lution from  the,  in,  876.

Bulls,  Papal,  n,  292;  v,  1191.

Burlington,  Iowa,  first  Lodge  organized
at,  vi,   1465.

Burton,  Dr.,  Bampton  Lectures  of,  cited
in  relation  to  Gnosticism,  11,  375.

Cabala,  ii,  349.

Cabiri,   Mysteries  of,  1,   177.

Cable-tow,  vii,  1763.

Cagliostro  (Joseph  Balsamo),  Count,  the
great  impostor  of  the  eighteenth  cen-
tury, vn,   1814.

Calcott,  Wellins,  author  of  A  Candid
Disquisition,  11,  361.

California,  first  Lodge  and  organization
of  Grand  Lodge  in,  vi,  1467;  introduc-
tion of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  vi,  1489;
Cryptic  Masonry  in,  vi,  1571 ;  organiza-
tion of  Grand  Commandery  and  sub-
ordinate commanderies  in,  vi,  1603 ;
Scottish  Rite  Masonry  in,  vn,  1889,
1890,  1892.

Callistus,  Nicephorus,  fable  of  sacred
stone,  related  by,  11,  399.

Cambridge,  Charter  of  the  Thanes'  Guild
at,  11,  568.

Canada,  Lodges  established  in,  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  "Ancients,"  iv,  1126;
severance  of  capitular  from  symbolic
Masonry  in,  v,  1288;  the  Royal  Arch
Ritual  in,  in  eighteenth  century,  v,  1287 ;
Supreme  Council  A.  A.  S.  R.,  estab-
lished in,  vn,   1851,   1857.  _

Cape  Colony,  Freemasonry  in,  vn,  1987.

Capitol,  the  U.  S.,  cornerstone  of,  laid
with  Masonic  Ceremonies,  1793,  V,  1440.

Capitular  Degrees,  nomenclature  and
precedence  of  the,   settled,  v,    1295.

Capitular  Masonry,  severance  of,  from
Lodge  Masonry  in  Canada,  1806,  v,
1288 ;  severance  of,  from  symbolic,  v,
1294;  influence  of  the  War  of  1812  on,
V,  1297;  efforts  in  1870,  to  supplement
the,  with  Royal  and  Select  Master,  v,
1299.

INDEX

2019

Carausius  and  St.  Alban,  apocryphal
character  of  the  story  of,  11,  538.

Carson  City,  Nev.,  first  Lodge  established
at,  vi,  1476.

Cassillis,  Lord,  election  of  to  deaconship
in  Lodge  of  Kilwinning,  11,  322.

Catechism,  the  form  of,  among  medieval
Freemasons,  in,  765 ;  text  of  the  earli-
est known,  iv,  930;  character  of  the,
IV,  937-

Cathedral  of  Cologne,  history  of  the,  in,
732 ;    traditionary  architects  of  the,  III,

735,  737-

Central  America,  Sup.  Coun.  A.  A.  S.  R.,
in,  vn,   1857.

Cerneau,  Joseph,  alleged  authority  of,  v,
1388 ;  not  a  K.  T.,  v,  1391 ;  translation
of  the  patent  of,  vn,  1853.

Chadouille,  Nicholas,  vii,   1914.

Chapman,  Alfred  F.,  G.  G.  H.  P.,  1883,
v,  1302.

Chapter  Degrees  (cf.  "Degrees"),  the  pre-
liminary, invented  by  Webb,  v,   1292.

Chapters,  R.  A.,  when  organized  as  inde-
pendent bodies,  v,   1282.

Charges  of  a  Freemason,  reputed  source
of,  in,  585 ;  sources  of  those  of  1718,
in,  851 ;  sources  of  the,  iv,  916;  adoption
of  the,  in  1722,  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England,  in,  872;  fac-simile  reprint  of
the  1723  text  of  the,  iv,  994;  importance
of,  in  the  development  of  Masonic  Law,
iv,  917;  recent  discovery  of  manuscript
text  of,  vn,  2002.

Charges,  Old  (see  "Old  Charges,"  "Old
Constitutions,"  "Old  Documents,"  "Old
MSS.,"  "Old  Records"),  for  list  of
manuscripts,  see  under  "Old  Charges."

Charleston,  S.  C,  the  first  Lodge  at,
1736,  v,  1230;  K.  of  R.  C.  and  K.  T.
degrees  conferred  in,  in  1782,  v,  1373;
a  council  of  the  Princes  of  Jeru-
salem established  at,  vn,  1810;  "Scot-
tish Rite"  first  applied  to  High  De-
grees at,  vn,  1805 ;  Sup.  Coun.  A.  A.
S.    R.,    established    at,    vn,    1850,    1871,

1873.

Charles  I,  of  England,  symbolized  as
Hiram,  n,  272,  274.

Charles  II,  Mason's  Company  granted
new  charter  in   1677  by,  in,  601,  616.

Charles  Martel,  tradition  of  his  connec-
tion with   Masonry,  in,  678.

Chartanier,  Benedict,  degrees  invented
by,  11,  354-

Charter  of  Cologne,  in,  738.

Charters,  the  St.  Clair,  in  Scotland,  in,
636.

Charters,  right  of  the  Grand  Chapters  to
issue,  v,  1297.

Chefdebien,  Marquis  de,  Leland  MS.  un-
favorably criticized  by,  II,  439.

Cherokee  Nation,  Masonic  Lodge  organ-
ized in  the,  vi,   1474.

Cherub,    etymology   and  definition  of,   vn,

1783.
Cherubim,  symbolism  of  the,  vn,  1781.

Chesterfield,  Constitution  of  the  Guild  of

the  Smiths  of,  n,  570.
Chiswell,     New     View     of    London    by,

quoted   on   early    Speculative    Masonry,

n,  323.
Chevalier  Macon  Ecossais,  a  high  degree
added  to  the  three  symbolic  degrees,  in
the  Lodge  held  at  St.  Germain,  u,  271,

275-

Chevalier,  St.  George,  name  commonly  ap-
plied to  son  of  James  II  (see  "Stuart
Masonry"),  n,  277.

Chickasaw  Nation,  Masonic  Lodge  or-
ganized in  the,  vi,  1475.

Chichester,  Lodge  at,  in  1697,  iv,  880.

Chief  of  the  Tabernacle,  23d  degree,
A.  A.  S.  R.  as  announced  by  the  Su-
preme Council  of  Charleston,  in  1802,
vn,  1848.

Chili,  Supreme  Council  A.  A.  S.  R.,  in
vn,  1857.

China,  Freemasonry  in,  vn,  1985.

Chinese,  the  picture-characters  of  the,  vi,
1708;  fancies  of  the,  about  color  blue,
vn,  1751-

Choctaw  Nation,  Masonic  Lodge  organ-
ized in  the,  vi,  1475-

Christianity,  a  definition  of,  vi,  1729;  the-
ory of  analogy  between,  and  Freema-
sonry, 11,  373.

Church,  the,  practice  of  symbolism  in,  vn,
1764;  connection  of  the  early  Freema-
sons with,  in,  695 ;  relation  of  Freema-
sonry to,  vn,  1771 ;  Traveling  Free-
masons servants  of,  in,  699;  Freemasons
originally  under  the  protection  of,  in,
777 ;  significance  of  the  relation  of  early
Freemasons  to,  in,  838;  Guilds,  Com-
panies or  Societies  for  mutual  help  con-
demned by,  in,  593 ;  gradual  dissever-
ance of  medieval  Masons  from,  in,  760;
Masonic  work  ordered  burned  by,  in
1750,  V,  1246;  origin  of  enmity  of,
toward  Freemasons,  vn,  1815.

Circumambulation,  universal  practice  of,
in  secret  bodies,  vn,  1758,  1764.

Civil  War,  effect  of  the,  upon  Masonry,
VI,  1480;  influence  of  the,  upon  Capitular
Masonry,  v,   1300.

Clare,  Martin,  work  of,  cited,  n,  369;  one
of  the  early  revisers  of  Masonic  Ritual,
11,  368 ;  v,  1382 ;  Defence  of  Masonry
published   by,    vn,    2005.

Clarke,  Rev.  Abraham  Lynsen,  elected
first  Grand  Chaplain,  v,   1295.

Clavel.  T.  B.,  a  French  Masonic  Historian,
11,  516.

Clement   V,    Pope,    and   the   Templars,  v,

133 1,  1337-

Clement  XII,  Pope,  the  bull  of,  against
Freemasonry,  n,  292;  v,  1191.

Clement  XIV,  Pope,  ii,  286.

Clement  of  Alexandria,  founder  of  a  sect
of  Gnosticism,  n,  373 ;  ancient  symbol-
ism mentioned  by,  vn,   1760,   1762.

Clermont,  high  degrees  in  the  Colleges  of
Jesuits  of,  1754,  vn,   1805;  Jesuits  mod-

2020

INDEX

ify  Third  degree  at  the  College  of,  H,
288 ;  inception  of  Stuart  Masonry  at  the
College  of,  n,  291 ;  the  Chapter  of,  or-
ganization of,  1754,  vii,  1805 ;  relation
of  German  Masonry  to  the  Chapter  of,
vii,  1816;  survival  of  elements  developed
at,  in  modern  Rituals,  11,  284;  degrees
of,  amplifications  and  rearrangements  of
previous  ones,  vii,   1817.

Clinton,  De  Witt,  G.  G.  H.  P.,  1816-
1826,  v,  1301 ;  vi,  1529,  1624.

Clubs,  influence  of  the  formation  of,  on
Speculative  Masonry,  in,  856.

Ccementarius,  the  medieval  name  for  an
Operative  Mason,  11,  552.

Collegia  Artificum  (see  Roman  Col-
leges of  Artificers),  prototype  of  Ma-
sonic Guilds,  1,  p.  ix ;  11,  485 ;  geo-
metrical proportions  in  building  link
medieval  Masons  with  the,  111,  758.

Collegia  Fabrorum,  or  Colleges  of  Ma-
sons (cf.  Roman  Colleges  of  Artificers),
11,  474,  485,  495 ;  rise  of,  in  the  Roman
Empire  under  Augustus,  11,  408;  tend-
ency of,  to  become  political  clubs,  11,
496;  rise  of  Masonry  in  the,  11,  468;  po-
sition of  apprentices  in  the,  11,  502.

Collegia  Licita  (lawful),  and  Illicita
(unlawful),  the  two  Roman,  11,  477,  494.

Collegia  Structorum  (Colleges  of  Build-
ers), 11,  492.

Collegium  Artificum  (College  of  Artifi-
cers) or  Collegium  Fabrorum  (College
of  Workmen),  1,  p.  ix.

Collegium  Fabrorum  (College  of  Ma-
sons),  Pliny  organizes  a,  11,  495,  499.

Collier,  James,  ii,  320.

Cologne,  early  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of,  in,  722 ;  charter  of,  in,  7^7-

Cologne  Cathedral  and  the  Stone  Ma-
sons of  Germany,  hi,  731.

Colonies,  introduction  of  Freemasonry
into  the  North  American,  v,   1224.

Colorado,  first  Lodge  and  organization  of
Grand  Lodge  in,  vi,  1476;  introduction
of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  vi,  1400;  Cryptic
Masonry  in,  vi,  1571 ;  organization  of
Grand  Commandery  and  subordinate
commanderies  in,  vi,  1604 ;  Scottish
Rite  Masonry  in,  vn,  1889,  1890,  1892.

Colored  Masonry,  history  of,  in  the  United
States,  vi,  1641  ;  recognition  of,  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Washington,  vi,  1641 ;
formation  of  National  Grand  Lodge  in
1847,  vi,   1660.

Columbia  Encampment  No.  2,  charter
creating,  v,   1374.

Comacine  Fraternity  (see  Traveling
Freemasons),  11,  468.

Commander  of  the  Temple,  27th  degree
A.  A.  S.  R.  as  announced  by  the  Su-
preme Council  of  Charleston,  S.  C,  in
1802,  vn,  1848.

Communications,  quarterly,  when  estab-
lished, iv,  912.

Como,  the  important  school  of  architecture
at,    in,   694;    spread    of   the    Fraternity

builders  from,  1,  p.  vi ;  spread  of  the
"Traveling  Freemasons"  from,  II,  508;
Company  of  Freemasons  thought  to  be
off-shoot  from  "Traveling  Freema-
sons" of,  in,  601;  the  Masters  of  (see
"Traveling  Freemasons"),  history  and
spread  of,  11,  508;  111,  682.

Companion,  the  use  of  the  term  in  French
Guilds,  in,  671 ;  status  of  a,  among  the
German  Steinmetzen,  ill,  722.

Company  and  Fraternity  of  Freemasons,
hi,  602.

Company  of  Freemasons,  a  chartered
Company  in  the  list  of  forty-eight  pub-
lished in  1370,  hi,  591 ;  representative  of
"Traveling  Freemasons"  in  England,
in,  599;  when  so  termed,  vn,  2006.

Company  of  Masons,  the,  name  of  the
"Company  of  Freemasons"  and  the
"Masons'  Company"  after  their  union,
hi,  599 ;  chartered  on  or  before  1370,  in,
591  ;  distinction  between  the,  and  the
Craft  of  Operative  Masonry,  n,  323;
some  members  of  the,  n,  318;  status  of
the,  in  1682,  11,  323 ;  usages  of  the,  in
the  seventeenth  century,  in,  626.

Compendium  of  Proceedings,  General
Grand  Chapter  of  the  United  States,  vi,

1535-

Comum  (Como),  Roman  Colleges  of  Ar-
tificers in,  11,  508.

Conde,  Louis  Henry  Bourbon,  v,  1356.

Conde,  Louis  Francis  Bourbon,  v,   1356.

Congregation  (see  Assembly),  in,  605;
an  early  name  for  an  annual  meeting
of  the  Craft,  iv,  897.

Connecticut,  first  Lodge  and  organization
of  Grand  Lodge  in,  v,  1416;  introduc-
tion of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  vi,  1490;  rep-
resented at  organization  of  the  General
Grand  Chapter,  1798,  v,  1294;  Cryptic
Masonry  in,  VI,  1572;  organization  of
Grand  Commandery  and  subordinate
commanderies  in,  vi,  1604;  list  of  Scot-
tish Rite  Bodies  in,  vn,  1899.

Conrad  III  of  Germany,  second  Crusade
under,  v,  1322.

Constantine  the  Great,  v,   1309.

constantine  red  cross,  v,  1371.

Constitution,  the  first  German  Masonic,
in,  716.

CONSTITUTIONES  ARTIS  GEOMETRIC  SE-
CUNDUM Eucleydem  (cf.  Halliwell
MS.),  title  of  earliest  Masonic  Docu-
ment, 1,  13;  in,  873.

Constitutions,  manuscripts  (see  "Old
Charges").

Constitutions,  some  early  Guild,  n,  570,
572 ;  law  suits  discouraged  by  the  Sax-
on, in,  587.

Constitutions,  Masonic,  formation  and
increase  of,  in  Germany,  in,  721 ;  the
development  of,  in  England,  in,  872 ;  iv,
990 ;  uniform  character  of  the  old,  iv,
915 ;  Anderson's  Book  of,  first  edition,
1,  32;  in,  872;  English  Grand  Lodge
adopts,   iv,   990;  law  suits   discouraged

INDEX

202 1

by,  in,  588;  second  edition  of,  iv,  977;
Anderson's  inaccuracies  in,  in,  598;  the
Kloss    collection    of    medieval    German,

ni,  743-

Constitutions  of  the  Art  of  Geometry
according  to  Euclid,  written  in  1399,
in,   873.

Continental  Lodges,  invention  of  high  de-
grees in,  11,  275.

Controversies,  the,  between  the  Northern
and  Southern  Supreme  Councils  A.  A.
S.  R.,  vii,  1861.

Cooke  MS.   (see  under  "Old  Charges"). _

Co-operative  Principle,  importance  of,  in
Operative  Masonry  as  basis  for  Spec-
ulative, 1,  p.  viii.

Corporations  des  Metiers,  Guilds  of  the
Middle  Ages  developed  into  the,  111,
663.

Council,  function  of  the,  in  early  French
Masonry,  v,  12 10.

Council  Degrees  (see  Cryptic  Degrees),
importation  of  the,  from  France,  vi,
1560;  G.  C.  of  Md.,  first  worked  in
Chapters,  v,   1298.

Council  of  Avignon,  effort  of  the,  to  ex-
tirpate fraternities  in  1326,  III,  593.

Council  of  the  Knights  of  the  East,
vii,  1805.

Councils,  Cryptic,  in  the  states  and  terri-
tories in  the  U.  S.,  vi,  1549,  i57off. ;  a
list  of  the  subordinate,  vi,   1596.

Count  Raymond  of  Toulouse,  v,   1325.

Count  Robert  of  Flanders,  v,   1325.

Coxe,  Daniel,  First  Deputy  Grand  M?s-
ter  of  North  American  Colonies,  1730,
v,  1225,  1427.

Cowan,  the  name  of  a  rough  layer  in
Scotland,  1,  p.  viii ;  11,  496 ;  iv,  959 ;  Ma-
sonic Constitution  forbade  Master  or
Fellow  from  working  with  the,  in,  586;
a,  might  not  work  within  or  without  an
early  Lodge,  in,  611;  not  admitted  into
the  Fraternity,  in,  618,  745,  846.

Craft,  two  important  conditions  of  the,  in
the  fourteenth  and  seventeenth  cen-
turies, in,  604 ;  usages  of  the,  in  the
seventeenth  century,  in,  616,  624,  626 ;
early  government  of  the,  iv,  1044;  early
usages  of  the  Masonic,  in  Scotland,  in,
642;  real  value  of  the  Legend  of  the,
1,  p.  v ;  importance  of  Legend  of  the,  1,
12;  Dowland  MS.  Legend  of  the,  1,  18.

Craft  Guilds,  influence  of  religious  char-
acter of,  11,  574;  Saxon  and  Norman,
condition  and  character  of,  n,  577 ;  sim-
ilar spirit  in  the  Masonic  Guilds  and
the,  in,  584;  books  kept  by  the,  in,  599.

Craftsmen  of  the  Middle  Ages,  wander-
ings of,  in  Europe,  in,  700 ;  rise  and
growth  of  the  English  Guilds  of,  n,  574.

Creed,  The  Masonic,  cosmopolitan  and
universal  character  of,  with  but  two  es-
sential tenets,  in,  691.

Creek  Nation,  Masonic  Lodge  organized
in  the,  vi,  1474.

Creigh,  Alfred,  vi,  1630.

Cromwell,    Oliver,    Freemasonry    and,   n,

293-

Cromwell,  Richard,  ii,  303.

Cross,  an  element  of  Rose  Croix  symbol-
ism, 11,  358;  early  symbolism  of  the,
vii,  1787.

Cross,  Jeremy  L.,  appointed  G.  Lecturer  of
G.  Chapter  in  1816,  vi,  1552,  1557;  influ-
ence of,  on  Cryptic  Masonry,  vi,  1552;
about  33  Councils  of  R.  and  S.  Masters
established  in  the  U.  S.  by,  vi,  1553.
1554,  1572,  1581,  1588,  1590,   1594.  .1595-

Crotona,  school  of  philosophy  established
at,  by  Pythagoras,  n,  366.

Crown  Ale-house,  meeting  of  Lodge  at,
iv,  882,  887.

Crowned  Martyrs,  The  Four,  Legend  of,
where  found,  1,  27,  29;  early  patrons  of
Freemasonry  in  Germany,  1,  16;  iv,  940;
newly  discovered  facts  regarding,  vn,
2002 ;  English  source  of  the  Legend  of,
vn,  2003.

Crusade,  the  first,  v,  1320;  the  second,  v,
1322;  leaders  of  the  third,  v,  1322;
Pope  Innocent  III  promotes  the  fourth,
V,  1323 ;  Frederick  II  leads  the  fifth,
v,  1323;  sixth  led  by  Louis  IX,  v,  1323;
seventh  led  by  Prince  Edward,  v,  1323.

Crusaders,  eminent  commanders  of  the,  v,
1325 ;  influence  of  the,  upon  the  archi-
tecture of  Europe,  1,  244.

Crusades,  outlined  history  of  the,  1,  218,
225 ;  v,  1367 ;  three  military  Orders  of
Knighthood  developed  during  the,  1,
225 ;  the  close  of  the,  v,  1324,  1325 ;  the
effect  of  the,  v,  1325 :  influence  of  the,
on  the  European  Nations,  v,  1326;
Freemasonry  and  the,  1,  217.

Cryptic  Degrees,  the  origin  and  spread  of
the,  vi,  1549,  1555,  1560,  1553,  1554.
1570;  Select  Master's:  early  practice
of,  vi,  1549,  1552,  1562;  modern  origin
of,  vi,  1550;  position  of,  in  curriculum,
established,  vi,  1567;  Royal  Master's:
earliest  mention  of,  vi,  1556;  precedence
of,  established,  vi,  1567;  Super-excellent
Master's:  an  optional  degree,  vi,  1567;
conferring  the,  vi,  1578;  source  of  the,
vi,  1557;  symbolism  of  the,  vi,  1565;  the-
ory of  Berlin  origin  of,  vi,  1555,  1558;
theory  of  French  origin  of,  vi,  1560;
spread  of,  in  the  U.  S.,  vi,  1552,  1553,
1554,  i57off. ;  influence  of  J.  L.  Cross  on
the  spread  of,  vi,  1552,  1553,  1554,  1572,
1581,  1588,  1590,  1594,  1595;  originally
conferred  in  chapters,  vi,  1550,  1556,
1558,  1562,  1567,  1575,  1577,  1578,  1580,
1583,  1584,  1589,  1591  ;  Royal  Master's
preceded  Royal  Arch  as  late  as  1826,
vi,  1553;  prerequisites  for  the,  vt,  1560,
1575 ;  appendant  to  the  A.  A.  S.  R.  in
Md.,  prior  to  1800,  vi,  1582 ;  chapter
work  in  Virginia,  vi,  1595 ;  conflicting
jurisdiction  over  the,  vi,  1550.

Cryptic  Rite,  origin  of  the  spread  of,  in
the  U.  S.,  vi,  1549,  1570;  G.  Council  oi
Mass.    initiates    re-organization   of   the,

2022

INDEX

in  1871,  vi,  1567;  General  Grand  Coun-
cil organized,  vi,  1567,  1568;  introduc-
tion of  the,  into  States  and  Territories
of  the  U.  S.,  vi,  i57off. ;  statistics  of
the,  in  the  U.  S.,  vi,  1596.
Cuba,  Freemasonry  in,  vu,  1961 ;  Supreme

Council  A.  A.  S.  R.  in,  VII,  1857.
Cuneiform  writing,  vi,  1709.
Customs  and  Usages  (cf.  "Degrees,"
"Freemasonry,"  "Lodges,"  "Masonry,"
"Ritual,"  and  "Symbolism")  some  his-
toric, prior  to  the  era  of  Speculative
Masonry.

Of  the  Ancient  Mysteries :  secret  wor-
ship, 1,  174;  doctrines  of  the  unity
of  Deity  and  immortality  taught,  I,
177-178,  181 ;  dramatic  and  allegorical
form  of  initiation,  1,  178,  184,  195 ;  steps,
classes  or  degrees,  1,  196:  (1)  Lustra-
tion, 1,  179,  197;  (2)  Initiation,  1,  174,
180,  197;  (3)  Perfection,  1,  181,  197;
funereal  ceremonies  practiced,  1,  184;
perambulation,  vu,  1764 ;  symbolic  use
of  light,  vu,  1761,  and  darkness,  vu,
1762.

Of  the  Indian  Mysteries :  use  of  the
"Word,"  v,  1772;  of  Deity,  vn,  1773.

Of  the  Essenes :  ascetic  celibacy  prac-
ticed, 11,  388;  preliminary  training  for
membership,  11,  388 ;  three  degrees  prac-
ticed, 11,  388;  exemplary  character  nec-
essary for  admission,  11,  389;  a  robe,
an  apron,  and  a  spade  presented,  11,
389;  an  oath  administered,  11,  389;  no
woman  admitted  to  the  Order,  11,  389;
signs  of  recognition,  11,  390;  community
life  practiced,  11,  390;  no  distinction  of
rank,  11,  390;  indigent  strangers  looked
after,  n,  390.

Of  the  Druids :  worship  in  groves,  1,  202 ;
secret  initiation,  1,  202 ;  three  degrees
practiced,  1,  203;  1st  degree,  the  coffin,
a  feature  of,  1,  203 ;  circumambulation,
1,  203 ;  an  oath  of  secrecy,  1,  203 ;  novice
assumed  character  of  various  animals,
1,  203 ;  symbolic  use  of  darkness  and
light,  1,  204 ;  "appalling  sounds"  a  fea-
ture of,  1,  204;  2d  degree,  lustration,  1,
205 ;  immortaiity  taughr  in  the,  1,  205 ;
use  of  the  talisman  against  danger,  1,
205 ;  3d  degree,  exclusive  character  of
the,  1,  205 ;  nine  months  solitude  im-
posed, 1,  205 ;  symbolic  death  and  re-
generation, 1,  205 ;  nocturnal  expedition
on  the  open  sea,  1,  205 ;  baptism  and
other  customs  among  the,  vi,  1731;  vu,
1760,  1762,  1763;  doctrines  of,  not  com-
mitted to  writing,  I,  202.

Of  the  Traveling  Freemasons :  ancient
sodalities  perpetuated  by,  in,  691 ;  a
school  of  Architecture  formed  at  Como,
I,  191;  hi,  694,  703;  title  "Freemasons"
assumed  by,  111,  696;  training  of  appren-
tices, in,  691 ;  only  members  allowed  to
work  on  religious  edifices,  ill,  696;  papal
bulls  invest,  with  authority,  111,  697;  a
camp  of  huts  built  near  building,  under

construction,  in,  696;  price  of  labor
fixed,  not  by  law  as  in  other  corpora-
tions, but  by  the  craft,  ill,  695 ;  models
and  proportions  of  timber  frame-work
applied  to  stone  by,  in,  698;  emigrant
Greek  Artists  admitted  to  ranks  of,  111,
699;  incursions  of  the,  into  Germany,
France,  England,  Scotland  and  other
countries,  in,  700;  traveling  about  for
work  leads  to  secret  modes  of  recog-
nition, in,  692-693,  700;  members  kept
up  correspondence  with  each  other,  III,
702;  pagan  Byzantin  style,  transformed
to  Christian  Gothic,  in,  703 ;  geometrical
symbolism  developed  by,  in,  704,  757,
759,  761 ;  uniformity  in  style  of  archi-
tecture developed  and  practiced  by,  III,
702.

Of  the  Steinmetzen  of  Germany,  in,  714,
715,  720-725,  741-752;  three  classes  of
members,  in,  714 ;  the  secret  ceremony,
in,  714,  753,  763,  747;  character  of  the
secrets,  in,  759,  761 ;  two  classes  of  se-
crets, in,  768-770;  secret  words  and
forms  of  recognition,  in,  714,  724,  764;
the  obligation  or  oath,  in,  714,  748;  the
initiation,  in,  745-747;  the  early  Cate-
chism, in,  765 ;  the  "Hutte"  or  form  of
Lodge,  in,  715;  exclusiveness,  in,  722;
mode  of  advancement,  in,  722;  the
Master,  in,  748,  749-751;  the  office  of
"Werkmeister"  (Master  of  the  work),
in,  750;  duties  of  the  "Parlirer,"  in,
748-751;  regulations  controlling  Ap-
prentices, in,  751 ;  a  Fellow  allowed  to
travel,  in,  750;  forms  of  salutation,  in,
750;  two  classes  of  Masons,  in,  789;
the  Rough  Masons,  or  the  "Maurer,"
ni,  783-784,  789,  700-791;  the  "Frei-
maurer,"  in,  788;  "Werkmann"  or  the
Steinmetz,  in,  789,  790;  first  use  of  the
chisel,  in,  791 ;  use  of  the  "Mark,"  in,
797,  798,803,  806,808,  811,812-814;  collec-
tions for  charity,  in,  723;  judicial  func-
tions of  lodges,  in,  724-725 ;  compulsory
attendance  at  church,  in,  745  ;  General
Assemblies,  in,  720;  imposition  of  fines,
in,  721  ;  "Geometry  of  Beauty,"  in,  757.

Of  the  Medieval  French  Masons:  Masons
employed  assistants  and  servants,  in,
747 ;  regulations  for  organizing  corpora-
tions, in,  670 ;  customs  of  the  early
Guilds,  in,  667;  use  of  marks.,  in,  801;
requirements  for  promotion  in  Craft
Masonry,  in,  671 ;  son  of  a  Mason  in-
itiated at  earlier  age  than  other  candi-
dates, in,  672 ;  none  but  men  of  good
report  admitted,  in,  672;  importance  of
secrecy,  in,  757 ;  an  oath  required,  in,
676 ;  improper  language  fined,  in,  672 ;
banquets  and  collections  for  charity,  in,
672;  St.  Blaise,  not  St.  John,  the  patron
Saint  of,  in,  674 ;  number  of  appren-
tices limited,  in,  675 ;  a  six-year  ap-
prenticeship prescribed,  in,  675 ;  short
hours  for  work  on  certain  days,  in,  676;
fines  and  penalties,   in,  677;  a  Master

INDEX

2023

General  appointed  by  the  King,  III,  678,
and  given  two  jurisdictions,  111,  679;
honorary  members  developed  independ-
ent lodges,  in,  680;  French  Operative
Masons  of  to-day  called  "children  of
Solomon,"  in,  680.

Of  the  English  Masons  in  the  15th,  16th
and  17th  centuries,  1 11,  617-628;  books
kept  by  Craft  Guilds,  in,  599;  a  par-
ticular dress  common  to  all  medie-
val Masons,  in,  594;  medieval  Ma-
sonic Assemblies,  in,  604,  607-609;
compulsory  attendance  at,  in,  605  ;  prac-
tice of  holding  local  Operative  Lodges,
in,  611;  Master  of  Operative  Lodges,
made  returns  of  membership  to  the
general  assembly,  III,  618;  exclusive
character  of  local  bodies,  in,  611;  ap-
prenticeship regulations,  in,  612;  one
degree  common  to  whole  craft,  iv,  938,
943,  949,  951,  954;  early  forms  of  initia-
tion, in,  617,  621-624,  746;  iv,  900;  the
importance  of  secrecy,  in,  614,  747,  748,
754,  756;  the  primitive  ritual,  III,  865;
a  form  of  the  "oath  of  secrecy,"  in,  615;
early  use  of  a  "word,"  in,  649,  720,  742 ;
cf.  iv,  934,  948,  1 120;  y,  1239.  1249;  vii,
1772;  circumambulation  a  universal
practice  in  secret  societies,  vn,  1758,
1764;  significance  of  the  term  "Accept-
ed," in,  745,  617,  846;  cowans  excluded
from  membership  in  Operative  Lodges,
in,  618;  Masters  might  not  work  with
cowans,  in,  586,  611;  Masons  made  by
Masters  and  Wardens  only  in  early
Operative  Lodges,  in,  619;  five  the
original  quorum,  in,  619 ;  opening  lodge
with  prayer  probably  an  Operative
usage,  in, '655-656 ;  honorary  members
admitted  into  seventeenth  century  Op-
erative Lodges,  in,  620,  624 ;  entertain-
ment of  members  and  wives  with  col-
lation, in,  625;  early  part  of  th,  18th
century:  an  early  Catechism,  iv,  930;
early  sign  for  lodge,  iv,  931 ;  the  Op-
erative ritual  followed,  iv,  937;  Fel-
lows made  Master  Masons  by  official
appointment,  IV,  944 ;  number  necessary
to  constitute  an  early  lodge,  iv,  892,
938;  meeting-places  of  early  lodges,  III,
610;  iv,  885;  vn,  2008;  creating  new
lodges  without  warrants,  v,  1229,  1231,
1233;  lodges  used  as  political  centres,
vn,  1815 ;  some  of  the  Operative  and
Speculative  usages  compared,  iv,  894,
897 ;  the  beginning  of  lodge  nomencla-
ture, vn,  2008.

Of  the  Early  Scottish  Masons,  in,  629-
645,  646-662 ;  suppression  of  "leagues"
and  institution  of  "Deacon"  or  "Master-
Mason,"  in,  634;  "Deaconship"  abol-
ished and  "Wardens"  created,  III,  635 ;
patrons  and  protectors,  in,  636ff. ;  early
self-government  of  the  Craft,  III,  641 ;
usages  prescribed  by  the  Schaw  Stat-
utes, in,  642,  644.  Scottish  Masons  in
the     17th     century,     in,    646-662;     cor-

porate organizations,  III,  646;  duties
of  the  "Master  of  the  Work,"  in,  647;
Principal  Warden  or  Lord  Warden-
General,  in,  647 ;  three  heads  of  the
Lodge,  in,  648;  three  classes  of  Mem-
bers, in,  648;  simple  form  of  initia-
tion, in,  649,  764;  "secret  signs  and
words,"  "oath  of  secrecy  and  fidelity,"
in,  627;  "wonderful  trials"  of  initia-
tion, in,  651;  practice  of  examina-
tion, in,  651 ;  admission  of  Honorary  or
"Gentlemen  Masons,"  in,  652-653 ;  ad-
mission of  Females,  in,  653-655  ;  open-
ing lodge  with  prayer,  in,  655-657;
some  forms  of  Scottish  prayer,  III,  656;
importance  of  the  Banquet,  in,  649.  812;
early  use  of  gloves,  III,  650;  the  "Essay
or  Trial  piece,"  III,  650;  the  significance
of  "marks"  (cf.  in,  795ff.),  in,  657-
660,  795-796,  799,  801,  802,  807-810,  814;
square  and  compasses  and  other  sym-
bols, in,  658,  661  (cf.  11,  349;  in,  805)  ;
the  position  and  duties  of  the  Appren-
tices, in,  660;  only  one  ceremony  and
set  of  secrets  for  Apprentices,  Fellow-
crafts  and  Masters,  iv,  947,  949,  951,
954;  the  "Mason  Word,"  iv,  948;  a  sign
and  grip,  iv,  948.

Dacier,  M.,  biographies  of  Pythagoras
translated  by,  11,  366;  quoted,  n,  370.

Dagon,  an  early  symbol  of  Deity,  vi,  1720;
vn,  1776,  1778.

Dakota  (see  "North"  and  "South  Da-
kota"), first  Lodge  and  organization  of
Grand  Lodge  in,  vi,  1477;  introduction
of  Royal  Arch  Masonry  in,  VI,  1492;  in-
troduction of  Cryptic  Masonry  in,  VI,
T590,  1592;  organization  of  Grand  Com-
mandery  and  subordinate  commander-
ies  in,  vi,  1605  ;  Scottish  Rite  Masonry
in,  vn,   1889,  1890,  1892.

Dalcho,  Frederic,  an  organizer  of  the  Su-
preme Council,  A.  A.  S.  R.,  vn,  1810,
1867.

Dalkeith,  The  Earl  of,  the  seventh  G.  M.
of  England,  1723,  iv,  906.

Dallaway,  Rev.  James,  ii,  534.

Damietta,  capture  of,  v,   1323.

Dassigny's  Enquiry,  vii,  201  i.

D'Aumont  Templars,  v,   1340.

Day,  David  F.,  G.  G  H.  P.,  1889,  v,  1302.

Deacon,  sometime  title  of  presiding  officer
in  early  Scottish  Lodges,  in,  648.

Dean,  Rev.  Paul,  G.  G.  H.  P.,  1835-1844,
v,   1301.

Death,  symbolic  use  of,  by  early  Masons,
11,  308.

Declaration  of  Masonic  Independence,
of  the  U.  S.  from  G.  B.,  Dec.  6,  1782,
vi,  165 1,  1655.

Decrees,  French  Grand  Lodge,  against  the
Grand  Orient,  a  schismatic  body,  V,
1214.

2024

INDEX

Degree,   but  one,    so   called,    of  Operative

Freemasons,   iv,  946.
Degrees,     the     absence    of,     in     Operative

Fraternities,   iv,  938,  943,  944,  946,   964,

969,  971,  974.

The   American,  or    So  Called  "York"
Rite

Symbolic  Degrees  (cf.  "Symbolism  iv"),
conferred  in  a  "Blue"  or  Symbolic
Lodge  :  Operative  base  for  the  three,
iv,  000,  992 ;  some  historical  sources
of  the,  iv,  937 ;  separate,  not  worked
prior  to  the  eighteenth  century,  vn,
2006 ;  opinion  of  Masonic  scholars  as
to  the  origin  of  the,  in,  672 ;  fabri-
cation of  the,  iv,  899;  VII,  1805;  de-
velopment of  the  old  Operative  Rit-
ual into  three  Speculative  degrees,
iv,  958;  "symbolical"  applied  to  the
first  three,  n,  271  ;  introduction  of
the  system  of,  iv,  940,  952 ;  origin  of
"sections"   in  the,  vn,   1765,   1769.

1.  Entered  Apprentice's  Degree  (cf.
"Apprentices")  :  tradition  as  to  fab-
rication of  the,  n,  311;  modeled  out
of  one  primitive  ritual,  iv,  958,  992,
1010,  1014;  adoption  of  the,  IV,  940,
952,  959;  conferred  in  subordinate
Lodges,  iv,  1012;  the  symbolism  of
the,  vn,   1756.

2.  Fellow-Craft's  Degree  (cf.  "Fel-
low-Crafts") :  non-existence  of  the,
before  1717,  11,  272;  iv,  976,  1000;
invention  of  the,  iv,  957-959,  960,
1003 ;  modeled  out  of  one  primitive
ritual,  iv,  992,  1010,  1014;  early  ele-
ments of  the,  iv,  959;  vn,  1745;  odd
numbers  in  the,  iv,  931;  vn,  1766;
lessons  in  the  allegory  of  the,  IV,
ion;  vn,  1756,  1765;  adoption  of
the,  iv,  960,  ion;  first  conferred  in
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  iv,  992,
1012 ;  Desaguliers  conferred,  in  Scot-
tish Lodge,  iv,  997 ;  when  subordi-
nate Lodges  first  conferred  the,  iv,
960,  993,  999 ;  the  Mark  Degree  a
part  of  the,  in  Scotland,  in,  818.

3.  Master  Mason's  Degree  (cf.  "Mas-
ter Masons")  :  non-existence  of,
among  Operative  Masons,  iv,  946,
964,  969,  974;  probable  period  of  ori-
gin, n,  272;  non-existence  of,  prior
to  1723,  iv,  082,  983,  989;  record  of
the,  in  1727,  vn,  2009;  the  invention
of  the,  iv,  959,  975,  978,  993 ;  Opera-
tive "rank"  of  Master,  probably  sug-
gested need  of  the,  iv,  1013 ;  modeled
from  one  primitive,  iv,  992 ;  some
sources  of  the  dogma  of  the,  1,  172;
sources  of  the  symbolism  of  the  (cf.
"Symbolism  iv"),  1,  74;  11,  416;  iv,
965;  v,  1347;  vn,  1755,  1769,  1771;
"loss  and  recovery,"  v,  1239;  the
"word"  originally  a  part  of  the,  v,
1240,  1241,  1242,  1252;  vn,  1757;  the

allegory  of  the,  1,  126;  Ashmole  said
to  have  applied  a  biblical  allegory  to
the,  11,  274;  the  Temple  Legend  in
the,  iv,  965 ;  the  Hiramic  Legend  in
the,  v,  1243;  theory  connecting  the
martyrdom  of  James  de  Molay  with,

II,  265 ;  introduction  and  adoption  of
the,  iv,  978,  997,  998,  1001,  1014-1015;
development  and  spread  of  the,  iv,
1001 ;  modification  of,  in  the  de-
velopment of  the  Royal  Arch,  v,
I239ff. ;  Royal  Arch  originally  the
completion  of  the,  vn,  2010;  division
of  the,  into  lectures  attributed  to
Entick,  vn,  1769;  English  and
French  expression  for  advancement,
in,  873.

Capitular  Degrees,  conferred  under  the
charter  of  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter :
4.  Mark  Master's  Degree  (cf.  "Masons'
Marks")  :  history  of  the  rise  and
progress  of  the,  III,  816-835 ;  charac-
ter and  legendary  history  of  the,  in,
660,  825-834 ;  fabled  relation  of  Hiram
Abif  to  the,  ill,  827,  832,  834 ;  suppo-
sition as  to  the  origin  of  the,  in,
659;    real    historical    origin    of    the,

III,  820,  824,  830;  origin  of  the,  in
Scotland,  III,  660,  817,  824,  832;  re-
lation of  the,  to  early  "proprietary
marks,"  in,  815,  816;  source  of  the
ritual  of  the,  III,  825,  830,  832,  833;
significance  of  the  "Mark"  in  the,  in,
826,  827-831,  833-834;  the  jewel  of
the,  in,  831  ;  introduction  of  the,
into  Speculative  Masonry,  in,  853 ;
given  in  Scotland  in  a.d.  1778,  III,
660 ;  originally  an  appendage  to  Fel-
low-Craft's degree  in  Scotland,  in,
818;  also  in  England,  in,  821;  earli-
est mention  of  the,  in  England,  a.d.
1777,  in,  821 ;  vn,  2007 ;  not  defi-
nitely introduced  into  England  till
1856,  and  then  under  an  independ-
ent jurisdiction  called  Mark  Grand
Lodge,  in,  817;  the,  in  Ireland,  in,
817;  not  known  in  France,  Italy,
Spain,  or  Germany,  in,  817;  intro-
duction and  early  practice  of  the,  in
Canada,  v,  1287;  introduction  of  the,
in  the  United  States,  in,  822;  18th
century  record  mention  of  the,  in  the
United  States,  v,  1275,  1278,  1280;
record  of  conferring,  in  a.d.  1807,  V,
1288;  originally  conferred  in  Craft
or  Blue  Lodges,  in,  660,  822,  824;
sometime  worked  in  independent
Mark  Lodges,  in,  818,  823,  825 ;  v,
1284;  sometime  conferred  by  G.  C.
of  Princes  of  Jerusalem  of  the  A.  A.
S.  R.,  in,  659,  817,  825  (cf.  v,  1275,
1280)  ;  influence  of  Webb  on  the,  v,
1292;  position  of  the,  in  modern  rit-
ual, in,  817-825;  made  a  chapter  de-
gree in  1856,  in,  824;  first  capitu-
lar in  the  American  Rite,  in,  817,
818;   G.   G.    Chapter  establishes  the,

INDEX

2025

as  1st  capitular  degree  preliminary
to  the  Royal  Arch,  in  1798,  v,  1295 ;
definitive  adoption  of  the  Webb,  v,
1299  (cf.  v,  1292).

5.  Past  Master's  Degree,  germ  of  the,
in  the  practice  of  exalting  only  "ac-
tual Past  Masters,"  v,  1255,  1258,
1260,  1286;  fabrication  of  the,  to
"pass  the  chair,"  and  make  "virtual
Past  Masters,"  v,  1260,  1286;  early
record  of  making  "virtual  Past  Mas-
ters," v,  1283,  1285 ;  significance  of
the,  in  Royal  Arch  Masonry,  v,  1286;
always  a  prerequisite  for  exaltation,
V,  1288;  originally  conferred  in  Mas-
ter's Lodges,  v,  1286;  United  Grand
Lodge  of  England  abandoned  the,
a.d.  1813,  v,  1260;  mention  of  the,
in  New  York,  in  1793,  v,  1278;  early
mention  of  in  R.  I.,  v,  1275,  1280;
lack  of  uniformity  in  the  eighteenth
century  ritual,  v,  1287 ;  influence  of
Webb  on  the,  v,  1292 ;  G.  G.  Chap-
ter establishes  as  2nd  capitular  de-
gree preliminary  to  the  Royal  Arch,
a.d.  1798;  v,  1295;  definitive  adop-
tion of  the  Webb  form  of  the,  v,  1299.

6.  Most  Excellent  Master's  Degree,  the
rise  of  the,  v,  1292;  Super-Excellent
exchanged  for  the,  v,  128 1 ;  first  rec-
ord of,  in  the  U.  S.,  a.d.  1796,  v,
1280 ;  early  record  mention  of  the,
V,  1278,  1288,  1280,  1275 ;  early  prac-
tice of  the,  in  the  Northern  but  not
in  the  Southern  States,  v,  1287;  in-
fluence of  Webb  on  the,  v,  1292 ;  G.
G.  Chapter  establishes,  as  3d  ca-
pitular degree  preliminary  to  the
Royal  Arch,  v,  1295 ;  definitive  adop-
tion of  the  Webb  form  and  prece-
dency of  the,  v,   1299.

7.  Royal  Arch  Degree  (cf.  "Royal
Arch  Masonry"),  history  of  the  rise
and  spread  of  the,  v,  1238-1252;  ori-
gin of  the,  in  mutilation  of  the  3d
degree,  iv,  1108,  1132;  v,  1238;  Ram-
say a  fabricator  of  the  symbolism  of,
v,  1243-1244,  1249,  1250;  his  "Ecos-
sais"  or  Scotch  Master's  degree  the
germ  of,  v,  1248,  1257;  various  early
Legends  of,  v,  1250;  the  "doctrine"
of,  distinguished  from  the  "degree"
of  the,  v,  1250-1252;  Ramsay's  doc-
trine incorporated  in,  but  his  Legend
of  Enoch  rejected,  v,  1256  (cf.  v,
1258),  1272;  connection  of  Dermott
with  the  fabrication  of,  iv,  11 19;  Leg-
end of  Enoch  probably  once  an  ele-
ment of,  v,  1258;  two  early  rituals
of  the,  v,  1262  (cf.  v,  1283)  ;  no  evi-
dence of  a,  in  England  prior  to  1738,
v,  1252,  1257;  development  of,  in
France,  v,  1248;  introduction  of,  into
England,  v,  1252,  1257;  vn,  2007;  the
"Ancients"  formulate  a  fourth  de-
gree called  the,  v,  1249,  1257 ;  Lodges
originally   worked,    as   a   supplement

of  the  third  degree,  ill,  817;  iv,  1109;
v,  1257,  1259,  1279,  1282,  1293;  vii,
2010;  originally  conferred  only  on
actual  Past  Masters,  v,  1258,  1260,
1279,  1286;  sometime  conferred  in
Lodges  attached  to  Chapters,  v,  1259,
1265-1271,  1285,  1293;  early  form  of
application  for  the,  V,  1259;  "An-
cients" organized  chapters  for  con-
ferring the,  v,  1259;  "Moderns"  con-
fer in  1765,  v,  1260;  influence  of
Dunkerly  on  the  R.  A.  degree  of
the  "Moderns,"  v,  1260-J261 ;  inde-
pendent jurisdiction  of  the  Grand
Chapter  of  the  Moderns,  v,  1262;
recognized  as  component  part  of
Ancient  Craft  Masonry  by  the
United  Grand  Lodge,  V,  1262;  the
Dunkerly  ritual  retained,  v,  1262;
early  practice  of,  in  Scotland,  v,
1263 ;  vii,  2007 ;  Grand  Lodge  of
Scotland  refuses  to  recognize,  v,
1263 ;  early  practice  of  the,  in  Eng-
land, Ireland  and  Scotland,  vii,  2007;
introduced  into  America  from
France,  v,  1248,  1289;  conferred  un-
der Master's  Warrants,  v,  1293 ;  in-
troduction of  the,  into  America  at
Philadelphia  by  a  military  Lodge,  v,
1264-1271,  1279;  severance  of  the,
from  Lodge  jurisdiction,  v,  1271 ;  the
practice  of,  at  Albany,  v,  1290;  in-
troduction of  the,  into  the  several
American  Colonies,  v,  I272ff.,  1293;
T.  S.  Webb  the  formulator  of  the
American,  v,  1272,  1278,  1292;  rela-
tion of  the,  to  the  "High  Degrees"
in  America,  v,  1275;  conferred  in
Royal  Arch  Lodge,  v,  1279;  some
elements  of  the  ritual  of,  v,  1285;
early  confusion  in  the  ritual  of,  v,
1288;  degrees  preliminary  to  the,
definitely  settled  by  the  G.  G.  Chap-
ter in  1798,  v,  1295  (cf.  1299)  ;  the
American  form  of  the,  different  from
that  in  Scotland,  v,  1279-1280;  a
part  of  the  A.  A.  S.  R.  in  Virginia,
v,  1272,  1280;  purpose  of  the,  VI,
1566.
Cryptic  Degrees,  conferred  in  a  Coun-
cil of  Royal  and  Select  Masters :  ori-
gin and  spread  of  the,  vi,  1549,  1555,
1560,  1553,  T554,  1570;  the  legend  of
the,  vi,  1563-1567;  source  of  the,  vi,
1557 ;  symbolism  of  the,  vi,  1565  ;  the-
ory of  the  Berlin  origin  of,  vi,
1555,  1558;  theory  of  the  French  ori-
gin of,  vi,  1560 ;  spread  of,  in  the
United  States,  vi,  1552,  1553,  1554,
l57off. ;  originally  conferred  in  Chap-
ters, vi,  1550,  1556,  1558,  1562,  1567,
1575,  1578,  1580,  1583,  1584,  1589,
1591  ;  prerequisites  for  the,  vi,  1560,
1575;  detached  characterof  the  early,
vi,  1530,  1550,  1562;  early  conflict-
ing jurisdiction  over  the,  vi,  1550;
claimed  by  A.   A.   S.  R.  as  Ineffable

2026

INDEX

degrees,   vi,    1550,    1559,    1562;    pur-
pose of  the,  vi,  1566.

8.  Royal  Master's  Degree,  modern  ori-
gin of  the,  vi,  1550;  earliest  men-
tion of,  vi,  1556;  precedence  of  the,
finally   established,  vi,    1557.

9.  Select  Master's  Degree,  theory  that
Mark  and  Most  Excellent  Master's
was  invented  later  than  the,  vi,  1549;
modern  origin  of,  vi,  1550;  early
practice  of  the,  VI,  1549,  1552,  1562;
relative  position  of  the,  in  Masonic
curriculum,  vi,  1549,  1567;  Royal
Arch  degree  a  prerequisite  for,  vi,
1560.

10.  Super-Excellent  Master's  Degree:
an     optional      degree,      not     strictly

_  Cryptic,  vi,  1567.
Chivalric    Orders,    conferred    under    the
charter  of  a  Commandery  of  Knights
Templar :

11.  Illustrious  Order  of  the  Red  Cross
(conferred  by  Knights  Templar,
meeting  as  a  Council  of  Companions
of  the  Red  Cross)  :  traditional  deri-
vation of  the,  v,  1327,  1371 ;  no  rela-
tion of  the,  to  primitive  Red  Cross
of  Rome  and  Constantine,  v,  1309,
1370  (cf.  v,  1371)  ;  theory  of  the
derivation  of,  from  the  15th  and  16th
degrees  of  the  A.  A.  S.  R.,  v,  1371,
1391  ;  vi,  1612;  the  source  of  the
allegory  in,  v,  1371 ;  not  the  same  as
the  Rose  Croix,  v,  1371 ;  probable
source  of  the  Ritual  of,  v,  1371,  1391 ;
introduction  of.  into  the  United
States,  v,  1379;  not  mentioned  in
early  accounts  of  the  Templar  Or-
der, v,  1371 ;  conferred  in  Charles-
ton, S.  C  in  1872,  v,  1373;  vi,  1612;
later  record  mentioned  of  the,  v,  1373,
1376,  1378,  1379;  vi,  1612;  sometime
conferred  by  Lodges,  v,  1379;  ques-
tion of  the  legitimacy  of  Lodge-con-
ferred, v,  1380-1382;  attached  to  the
Chapter  degrees  in  our  Revolution-
ary era,  v,  1372  (cf.  v,  1382)  ;  de-
velopment of  independent  body  for
conferring  the,  V,   1372-1373,    1377-

12.  Order  of  Knights  Templar,  funda-
mental principles  of  the  medieval
order  in  the,  v,  1368;  Christian  char-
acter of  the,  v,  1369,  1382;  Rebold's
theory  of  a  mythical,  11,  274  (cf.  II,
275)  ;  name  of  the,  in  the  Ramsay
Rite,  v,  1248;  conferred  in  Ireland
in  1779,  V,  1371 ;  theories  of  the  in-
vention of  the,  in  the  United  States,
V,  1391;  vi,  161 1,  1613;  theory  of
the  derivation  of  the  Ritual  of,  from
the  24th  degree  of  the  A.  A.  S.  R.,
v,  1391 ;  vi,  1612;  American  and
English  rituals  of  the,  differ,  v,  1370,
1391 ;  early  ritual  of.  still  preserved,
v,  1370 ;  development  of  the  ritual
of,  vi,  1616;  magnificence  of  the,  vi,
1602 ;    early   mention   of   the,   in   the

American  Colonies,  v,  1369;  earliest
record  of  conferring  the,  in  America,
August  28,  1769,  v,  1370,  1371,  1383;
VI,  1613 ;  conferred  in  Charleston,
S.  C.  in  1782-83,  v,  1373;  vi,  1612,
1613 ;  later  records  of,  v,  1373,  1376,
1378,  1379;  vi,  1612;  list  of  early
dates  and  places  of  conferring  the,  in
America,  v,  1383;  supposition  that
Lodges  conferred,  prior  to  the  Rev-
olutionary War,  v,  1372  (cf.  v.
1379)  ;  working  of  the,  under  war-
rants of  Master  Mason's  Lodges,  vi,
161 1,  1612,  1613;  question  of  the
legitimacy  of  Lodge-conferred,  v,
1380-1382;  sometime  under  the  Roy-
al Arch  jurisdiction,  V,  1371,  1372,
1382 ;  once  dependent  upon  the  A.
A.  S.  R.,  v,  1370,  1378;  dropped  as
a  chapter  degree  in  1796,  v,  1371 ;
development  of  independent  body  for
conferring  the,  v,  1372- 1373, 1377, 1379.
13.  Knights  of  Malta  (an  appendant
Order),  introduction  of  the,  into  the
United  States,  V,  1381 ;  early  mention
of,  vi,  1625 ;  question  of  the  legiti-
macy of,  when  conferred  by  Lodge,
v,  1380-1382.

Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite
(cf.  "Scottish  Rite")
Ineffable  or  Sublime  Degrees  (4th-i4th),
conferred  in  a  Lodge  of  Perfection:
origin  of  the,  in  France,  vn,  1805 ;
spread  of,  to  Germany,  vn,  1805;
traditional  influence  of  Frederick  the
Great,  vn,  1805-06,  1811;  Morin's  pa-
tent and  introduction  of  the,  into
America,  vn,  1806-09;  definite  es-
tablishment of  the,  in  America  at
Charleston,  S.  C.  in  1801,  vn,  1810;
relation  of  the,  to  the  Blue  Lodge
degrees,  vn,  1868,  1874;  allegory
and  symbolism  of,  vn,  1867;  the
purpose  of,  vn,  1870;  conferring  of
the,  at  Albany,  N.  Y.,  in  1767,  vn,
1864;  difference  between  those  of  the
Southern  and  Northern  jurisdiction,
vn,  1859.

4.  Secret  Master,  the  origin  of,  11,  274;
v,  131 1  ;  vn,  1847,  1848,  1867;  con-
ferring of,  at  Albany,  in  1767,  vn,
1864.

5.  Perfect   Master,  11,  274;  vu,  1847.

6.  Intimate  Secretary,  vn,   1847,  1848.

7.  Provost  and  Judge,  vn,  1847,   1848.

8.  Intendant  of  the  Building,  vn,  1847,
1848.

9.  Elected  Knight  of  the  Nine,  VII,
1847,  1848.

10.  Illustrious  Elect  of  the  Fifteen,  vn,
1847.    .

11.  Sublime  Kmghts  Elect  of  the
Twelve,  vn,  1847,  1848.

12.  Grand  Master  Architect,  vn,  1847.

13.  Knight  of  the  Ninth  Arch,  or  Roy-
al Arch  of  Solomon,  vn,  1847.

INDEX

2027

14.  Grand  Elect,  Perfect  and  Sublime
Mason,  vn,  1847.

Traditional  or  Historical  Degrees,  con-
ferred in  a  Council  of  Princes  of
Jerusalem :

15.  Knight  of  the  East,  vn,  1848.

16.  Prince  of  Jerusalem,  v,  1275,  1280;
vii,  1848  (cf.  in,  659,  817,  825)  ;  ex-
clusive character  of  the,  vn,  1869 ;
relation  of  the  early,  to  Royal  Arch
Masonry,   vn,   1810,    1845.

Philosophical  Degrees,  conferred  in  a
Chapter  of  Rose  Croix :

17.  Knight  of  the  East  and  West,  vii,
1848.

18.  Prince  Rose  Croix,  relation  of  the,
to  Rosicrucianism  or  Hermetic  Phi-
losophy, 11,  354-358;  derivation  of
the  term,  11,  357;  symbols  of  the,  II,
357,  358;  significance  of  the  origi-
nal degree  of,  11,  356;  Christian
character  of  the,  11,  356,  357,  358;
influence  of  Roman  Catholic  Spirit
on  the  early,  11,  292 ;  theory  of  the
origin  of,  v,  1327;  worked  in  New
York  as  early  as  1797,  VII,  1810;  ex-
clusive character  of,  VII,  1869;  em-
bodies no  Hermetic  Philosophy  in  its
present  form,  11,  355,  356;  definite
adoption  of  the,  in  the  A.  A.  S.  R.,
vii,   1848.

Consistorial  Degrees,  conferred  in  a
Consistory  of  32d  Degree,  A.  A.  S.  R.
Masons,  in  Northern  Jurisdiction
(Southern  Jurisdiction  confers  19th-
30th  in  a  Council  of  Kadosh)  :

19.  Grand  Pontiff,  vii,  1848.

20.  Grand  Master  of  Symbolic  Lodges,
vii,   1848.

21.  Noachite,  or  Prussian  Knight,  vn,
1848.

22.  Knight  of  the  Royal  Axe,  or  Prince
of  Libanus,  VII,   1848.

23.  Chief  of  the  Tabernacle,  vii,   1848.

24.  Prince  of  the  Tabernacle,  vii,  1848.

25.  Knight  of  the  Brazen  Serpent,  vii,
1848.

26.  Prince  of  Mercy,  vii,   1848.

27.  Knight  Commander  of  the  Temple,
vii,  1848.

28.  Knight  of  the  Sun,  or  Prince
Adept,  vii,  1848.

29.  Grand  Scottish  Knight  of  St.  An-
drew, vn,  1848.

30.  Knight   Kadosh,   vii,   1848.

31.  Inspector  Inquisitor  Commander,
vn,   1847,    1848.

32.  Sublime  Prince  of  the  Royal  Se-
cret, early  record  of  conferring  the,
in  the  United  States,  vn,  1809,  i860;
definite  adoption  of  the,  by  the  Su-
preme Council  at  Charleston,  S.  C,
vn,  1848;  exclusive  character  of  the,
vn,   i86q.

Crowning  Degree  of  the  A.  A.  S.  R.,
conferred  in  a   Supreme  Council :

33.  Sovereign  Grand  Inspector  General,

definite  establishment  of  the,  by  the
Supreme  Council  at  Charleston,  S.
C,  vn,  1848;  new  constitutions  of
the,  ratified  May  1,  1786,  VII,  1864;
the  true  nature  of  the,  vn,  1876.
Traditional,  Obsolete,  Detached,  etc.,  De-
grees :

Adept  of  the  Eagle,  a  traditional  Rosi-
crucian  Degree,  11,  354.

Arch  of  Enoch,  a  Ramsay  Degree  prac-
ticed in  America  till  1820,  v,   1272.

Bonneville  Degrees,  some  of  the,  vn,
1805,    1816.

Cerneau  Degree,  v,  1388;  VII,  1853.

Chartanier's  Degrees,  11,  354.

Chevalier  Maqon  Ecossais,  one  of  the
"High  Degrees"  developed  in  the
Lodge  of  St.  Germaine,  11,  271,  275.

Clermont  "High  Degrees,"  a  list  of
some  of  the,  vn,  1805 ;  character  of
the,  vn,    18 1 7.

Constantine  Red  Cross,  a  degree  of  the
Constantine  Orders  of  Knighthood,
v,   i37off.

Ecossais,  one  of  the  Ramsay  "High
Degrees,"  11,  352;  v,  1248,  1251.

Golden  Rosicrucian,  the  nine  degrees
of,  11,  354-355-

Grand  Hermetic  Chancellor,  a  tradi-
tional degree  of  Rosicrucian  origin,
11,  354-

Hautes  Grades  ("High  Degrees"),
Ramsay's  system  of,  11,  284;  v,  1205.

Heredom  of  Kilwinning,  one  of  the
two  degrees  of  the  Royal  Order  of
Scotland,  11,  279;  vn,  1908,  1910.

Hermetic  Knight,  a  traditional  degree
of  Rosicrucian  origin,  11,  354.

Illegitimate  Degrees,  the  names  of
some,  vn,  1866.

Knight  of  the  Eagle  and  Pelican,  11,
280,  355.

Knight  of  the  East  (cf.  also  A.  A.  S.
R.,  15  supra),  a  degree  of  the  French
Rite,  v,   1218.

Knight  Rose  Croix  (cf.  A.  A.  S.  R.,
18  supra),  a  degree  of  the  French
Rite,  v,  1218.

Knight  of  the  Sun  (cf.  A.  A.  S.  R.,  28
supra),  one  of  the  Pernelty  degrees,
11,  253.

Knight  Templar  Degree  (cf.  A.  or  Y.
Rite,  12  supra),  one  of  the  Ramsay
"High    Degrees,"    II,    352     (cf.    vn,

1853).
Knighthood    Degrees,    various    historic

and  traditioned,  11,   352;   v,   1310.
Perfection,   the  last  grade   in   the   An-
cient Mysteries,  1,  181.
Ramsay's  "High  Degrees,"  1,  245,  247;

v,  1248.
Red   Cross   of  Rome  and   Constantine,

character   of    the,   v,    i3ioff. ;    spread

of  the,  v,  1316,   1371.
Rosy    Cross,    the    2nd    degree    of    the

Royal    Order    of    Scotland,    n,    279;

vn,  1908.

2028

INDEX

Royal    Arch    of    Solomon,    a    degree

fabricated   by   Ramsay,  iv,   1130.
Scottish  Architect,  n,  277.
Scottish  Knight,  n,  272,  290.
Scottish    Knight    of    St.    Andrew,    11,

277-
Scottish  Mason,  v,  1218.
Scottish   Master,  II,  277;  vn,   1805.
Deity,      "Tetragrammaton"      the     Hebrew
title  for  the,  in,  800;  vi,  1704;  Timaeus
of  Locri  describes,  VI,   1706;   important
symbols  for  the,  vn,   1742.
Delalande,  Joseph  Jerome  Francois,  au-
thor of  a  History  of  Freemasonry,  writ-
ten   for    the    French    Encyclopedia,    v,
1 187.
Delaware,  the  First  Lodge  and  organiza-
tion of  Grand  Lodge  in,  v,  1431 ;  intro-
duction of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  vi,  1493;
Cryptic  Masonry  in,  vi,  1573;  organiza-
tion of  the  Grand  Commandery  and  sub-
ordinate    commanderies     in,    vi,     1605 ;
Scottish    Rite    Masonry    in    (see    under
Pennsylvania).
Demeter,  the  Mysteries  of,  1,  177.
De    Molay,    James    (see    "Molay,    James

de").
Denver.    Colo.,    first    session    of    General
Grand  Council  of  the  U.  S.  held  at,  in
1883,  vi,  1568.
Deputy    Grand    Chapters,    the    formation
of,    V,    1294;    name    changed   to    "State
Grand  Chapters,"   v,    1296.
Deputy    Grand    Master,    creation    of    the

office  of,  in  1721,  iv,  905.
De  Quincey,  Thomas,  ii,  345 ;   ignorance

of,  regarding  Masonry,  11,   346.
Derby,    Conn.,     Solomon    Chapter    estab-
lished at,  1794,  v,  1293.
Dermott,  Laurence,  a  sketch  of,  iv,  11 13;
name    "Noaechidae"    for    "Masons"    re-
vived  by,   vn,   2003 ;    not  a   founder   of
Grand  Lodge  of  Ancients,  vn,  2010.
Dermott     Grand     Lodge     (a     name     for

"Atholl   Grand   Lodge"),  iv,   1105.
Derwentwater,   Earl  of,   Master   of  first

Lodge  in  France,  n,  282;  v,  1337.
Desaguliers,  John  Theophilus  (LL.D.),
the  celebrated  ritualist  and  Third  Grand
Master  of  England,  11,  365;  iv,  905;
vn,  1769;  on  the  state  of  Masonry  be-
ginning of  18th  century,  11,  344;  Py-
thagorean Philosophy  known  to,  II,
366 ;  Pythagorean  symbols  introduced
into  Masonry  by,  11,  368;  influence  of,
on  the  development  of  Speculative  Ma-
sonry, in,  852;  iv,  900,  1006;  vn,  1769;
the  Fellow-Craft's  degree  invented  by,
IV»  958,  960,  991-992;  vn,  1769;  the
Master  Mason's  degree  invented  by,  iv,
975,  99iff- i  vn,  1769;  influence  of,  on
the  Masonic  Ritual,  iv,  917;  permanent
ritualistic  success  of,  v,  1289 ;  three
degrees  established  by,  vn,  1769;  Edin-
burg  Lodge,  record  of  visit  of,  in  1721,
iv,  109 1.
Deucher,  Alexander,  v,  1355.

Deus  Lumus  (Sun-God),  an  early  symbol
of  Deity,  vi,  1718;  VII,  1773,  1779.

Dew,  ancient  symbolic  use  of,  vi,  1732.

Dialectic,  3d  liberal  science  mentioned  in
Legend  of  the  Craft,  1,  18.

Didron,  M.,  Masonic  marks  discovered  by,
in  European  cities,  III,  658.

Differences,  the  essential,  between  medie-
val Operative  and  modern  Speculative
Masonry,  in,  863.

Dionysiac  Artificers,  the  Legend  of  the,
1,  156;  later  history  of  the,  1,  173;  theory
of  Brewster  that  Masons  sent  by  King
Hiram  were  members  of,  1,  166.

Dionysian  Artists,  v,  1346.

Dionysus,  the  Mysteries  of,  1,  168.

Diplomas,  fac-similes  of  Old  Knights  Tem-
plar, discovered  in  1378,  vi,  1011.

District  of  Columbia,  introduction  of
Freemasonry  in,  v,  1439 ;  first  Lodge
and  organization  of  Grand  Lodge  in,  v,
1439 ;  introduction  of  Royal  Arch  Ma-
sonry in,  vi,  1495 ;  admission  of  Grand
Chapter  of,  1816,  v,  1298;  Cryptic  Ma-
sonry in,  vi,  1573 ;  organization  of
Grand  Commandery  and  subordinate
commanderies  in,  vi,  1605 ;  Scottish
Rite  Masonry  in,  VII,  1889,   1890,  1892.

Divine  Will,  written  revelation  of  the,  vi,
1719.

Dominican  Friar  of  Norfolk,  A,  author
of  Promptorium  Parvulorum,  1440,  III,
780;  latest  edition,  with  annotations  by
Albert  Way,  1865,  in,  780.

Dowland  MS.  (see  under  "Old  Charges"),
1,  14-15,  17,  18.

Drake,  Francis  (M.D.),  contributions  of
to  the  history  of  Masonry,  iv,  1068;
speech  of,  before  the  Grand  Lodge  of
York,  cited,  11,  368.
Druidism  and  Freemasonry,  i,  199-216;
early  theories  regarding  relation,  1,  199;
system  of  the  Druids  described :  cere-
mony of  the  initiation  among  Druids,  1,
203 ;  the  First  degree,  1,  203 ;  the  Sec-
ond degree,  1,  204;  the  Third  degree,
1,  205  ;  various  theories  as  to  the  iden-
tity of  the  Druids,  1,  206-209;  theories
as  to  the  derivation  of  Freemasonry
from  Druidism,  1,  210-214;  argument
against  such  derivation,  1,  214.
Druids,  some  theories  regarding  the,  and
Freemasons,  11,  460;  baptism  among
the,  vi,  1731 ;  some  practices  of  the,  vn,
1760,  1762,  1763.
Drummond,  Josiah  H.,  G.  G.  H.  P.,  1871,

v,  1301 ;  G.  G.  Master,  vi,   1578.
Druses,    supposed    indebtedness    of    Tem-
plarism  to  the,  1,  233;  the  doctrines  of,
1,  234.
Duad,    the    Pythagorean,    vn,    1738,    1747;
among    the   Jews,    p.    1751 ;    among   the
Magi,    p.    1753 ;    among   the    Egyptians,
p.     1753;    in    Speculative    Freemasonry,
pp.   1738,   1749,  1752.
Due  Form,  early  use  of  the  term,  iv,  907.
Duke  of  Lorraine,  v,  1325.

INDEX

2029

Duke  of  Sussex,  the,  v,  1345.
Dunckerly,  Thomas,  a  sketch  of,  v,  1260;

one   of   the   early   revisors   of    Masonic

Ritual,  11,  368;  v,  1382;  influence  of,  on

the  Royal  Arch  Degree  of  the  Moderns,

v    1260.
Dun'lap,  Robert  P.,  G.  G.  H,  P.,  1847-1853,

v,  1301.
Dupotet,   Matthew,  text   (in  translation)

of  patent  from,  to  Joseph   Cerneau,  v,

1388.

East  India  Islands,  Freemasonry  in,  VII,

1083.

Eckel,  Philip  P.,  Council  of  Select  Ma-
sons organized  by,  and  H.  Niles,  vi,
1557;  history  of  diploma  (fac-simile
discovered)  issued  to,  by  Encampment
No.  1,  Md.,  vi,  161 1.

Ecossaim,  a  term  introduced  in  Masonry
by  Ramsay,  II,  277.

Ecossais,  one  of  the  Ramsay  High  De-
grees, II,  352;  v,  1251;  significant  in  the
development  of  the  Royal  Arch,  v,  1248.

Ecossaism  (doctrine  of  the  True  Word),
the  development  of,  v,   1251.

Edessa,  a  Latin  Kingdom  of  the  East,  v,
1326.

Edinburgh,  early  non-operative  member-
ship in  lodges  of,  II,  322;  claimed  that
Masonry  in  Scotland  originated  at,  III,

631.
Edinburgh-Kilwinning   MS.,   date   of,   I,
15;  preservation  of,  at  Kilwinning,  ill,

633.

Edward  I,  seventh  crusade  led  by,  v,  1323.

Egypt,  mysteries  first  invented  in,  1,  182;
the  use  of  "Marks,"  in  ancient,  ill,  793,
803 ;  priests  of,  taken  as  model  by  Jes-
uits, in  Masonry,  11,  200;  Supreme
Council  A.  A.  S.  R.  in,  vn,  1857.

Egyptian  Priests,  philosophy  and  allegory
of,  vi,  1706.

Egyptian  Mysteries,  practices  in  the,  vn,
1760;  influence  of  the,  on  Pythagorean
philosophy,  II,  366.

Egyptian  Venus,  vi,  1720;  vn,  1780.

Eleanora,  Princess,  v,  1324.

Elect  Mason,  a  degree  of  the  French  Rite,
v,  1218.

Elected  Knights  of  Nine,  9th  degree  A.
A.  S.  R.  as  announced  by  the  Supreme
Council    of    Charleston,    in    1802,    vn,

1847.

Eleusis,  the  Mysteries  of,  I,   177.

Ellam,  John,  ii,  320.

Elliot,  Captain  Joseph,  one  of  the  first
Grand  Wardens  in  England,  iv,  904.

England,  remains  of  Roman  Masonry  in,
u,  5ii.  534;  Roman  character  of  early
architecture  in,  11,  553 ;  no  records  of
the  meeting  of  the  Operative  Lodges
in,  during  seventeenth  century,  11,  321 ;
non-operative      Masons      members      of

lodges  in,  in  1646,  II,  321,  322 ;  early
Masonry  in,  11,  530;  influence  of  early
Christian  missionaries  on  Masonry  in,
Hi  536,  538;  the  admission  of  gentlemen
Masons  into  Operative  Lodges  in,  III,
843 ;  the  clergy  admitted  into  Freema-
sonry in  medieval,  in,  838;  origin  of
modern  Speculative  Masonry  in,  1,  p.  x ;
the  Grand  Lodge  of,  the  Mother  of
English  and  Continental  Masonry,  11,
272;  History  of  the  organization  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of,  iv,  877 ;  early  Specu-
lative Masonry  in,  11,  324 ;  iv,  903,  920 ;
extension  of  Rosicrucianism  into,  11,
335 ;  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of,  of  royal  or  noble  rank  since  1721,  iv,
905;  four  Grand  Lodges  in,  in  1780,  iv,
1152;  theory  of  Cromwellian  Masonry
in,  11,294;  theory  of  the  spread  of  Crom-
wellian Masonry  in,  11,  298;  the  Grand
Lodge  of  all,  established  at  York,  iv,
1043 ;  spread  of  Freemasonry  from,  to
France,  11,  287,  288;  the  schism  between
the  two  Grand  Lodges  of,  iv,  1104;  the
use  of  Masonic  Marks  in,  III,  802;  es-
tablishment of  Mark  Grand  Lodge  in,
in,  817;  introduction  of  the  Royal  Arch
degree  into,  v,  1257 ;  early  practice  of
Royal  Arch  in,  vn,  2007;  organization
of  a  Grand  Chapter  in,  v,  1261 ;  Su-
preme Council,  A.  A.  S.  R.,  established
in,  vn,  185 1,  1857;  new  school  of  Ma-
sonic history  in,  11,  516.

English  Freemasonry,  theory  that  York
was  the  birth-place  of,  iv,    1052.

English  Grand  Lodge  of  France,  v,  1196.

English  Guilds  of  Craftsmen,  rise  and
growth  of  the,  11,  574.

English  Lodges,  supposition  that  prayer
was  used  in  the  early,  111,  656.

English  Medieval  Guilds,  some  usages  of
the,  iv,  913.

English  Templars,  the,  v,  1344.

English,  James  H.,  G.  G.  H.  P.,  1874,  v,
1301.

Enoch,  Hebrew  meaning  of,  11,  403 ;  the
legend  of,  11,  396;  the  solar  character
of,  11,  404.

Entered  Apprentice's  Degree  (see  under
"Degrees"   1).

Entick,  John,  division  of  degrees  into  lec-
tures attributed  to,  vn,  1796;  provisions
in  1756  constitution  of,  vi,   1647.

Eranos,  the  Greek  analogue  of  the  Guild,
11,  560.

Erwin  of  Steinbuch,  a  celebrated  Master
of  Operative  Masonry,  iv,  944.

Esquire,  use  of  the  title,  in  early  lodges,
in,  621.

Essay,  or  piece  of  work:  requirement  of,
for  advancement  among  Operative  Ma-
sons, in,  651.

Essenes,  the  Jewish  sect  of,  1,  230 ;  charac-
ter of  the,  ii,  388;  origin  of  the,  in
Syria,  v,  1346;  symbolism  of,  not  based
on  the  art  of  building,  11,  392;  Freema-
sonry and  the,  11,  387.

2030

INDEX

Etymologies  of  St.  Isidore,  indebtedness
of  the  Legend  of  the  Craft  to,  i,  69.

Euclid,  the  tradition  of,  in  the  Legend  of
the  Craft,  1,  20,  67 ;  prominent  points
in  the  Legend  of,  1,  71 ;  the  47th  Propo-
sition, and  other  symbols  from,  1,  42;
11,  368;  Constitutions  of  the  Art  of  Ge-
ometry according  to,  written  in  1399,
in,  873-

Eugenius  III,  Pope,  Red  Cross  symbol  as-
signed to  Templars  by,  v,   1321,  1329.

Evangelist,  St.  John  the,  festivals  of,
and  Masonry,  in,  850;  iv,  883,  903,
1075;  v,  1397,  1399,   1400,  1401,   1413.

Examination,  form  of  the,  among  medie-
val Masons,  in,  765.

Exclusiveness,  the  practice  of,  in  early
Masonic  Guilds,  III,  586,  612.

Eyland,  James,  v,  1374.

F.  and  A.  M.  (see  infra,  "Free  and  Ac-
cepted Masons").

Faber,  Freemasonry  traced  to  Druidism
by,  1,  199.

Fairfax,  a  friend  of  Cromwell,  11,  294.

Fallou,  F.  A.,  author  of  Mysterien  der
Freimaurer,  in,  714;  vn,  2012.

Fees,  some  early  Masonic,  vi,  1497.

Fellow,  mark  given  a,  in  Middle  Ages,  m,
806,  819.

Fellow-Craft,  use  of  mark  by  the,  in  early
Scottish  Masonry,  in,  660.

Fellow-Crafts,  early  Speculative  regula-
tions regarding  the,  iv,  918;  status  of
the,  when  Masonry  consisted  of  but  two
degrees,  in,  976;  status  of  the,  in  1720
to  1722,  iv,  980;  admission  fee  of  the,
in  early   Scottish  Lodges,   in,  650.

Fellow-Craft's  Degree  (see  under  "De-
grees" 2).

Fellows,  rank  instead  of  degree  in  early
Scottish  Lodges,  in,  648;  early  provi-
sions  regarding,  in,  611.

Fellows,  J.  Q.  A.,  vi,  1602.

Fellowship,  the  Five  Points  of,  historical
evolution  of  the,  iv,  934.

Fergusson,  James,  author  of  "Tree  and
Serpent  Worship,"  1,  200 ;  in,  803 ;  of
"Rude  Stone  Monuments,"  11,  538;  of
"Architecture  in  all  Countries,"  in,  673.

Fiji   Islands,   Freemasonry  in,  vn,   1999.

Findel,  J.  G.,  author  of  a  German  History
of  Freemasonry,  1,  17;  11,  276,  439;  in,
712,  714 ;  iv,  1024 ;  scope  of  Masonic
History  by,  n,  517.

Fire,  significance  of,  in  early  symbolism,
vi,  173 1 ;  vn,   1749.

First  Degree  (cf.  "Degrees"  1),  symbol-
ism of  the,  vn,  1756.

Florida,  first  Lodge  and  organization  of
Grand  Lodge  in,  v,  1437;  introduction
of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  vi,  1501 ;  Cryptic
Masonry   in,    vi,   1579;    organization   of

Grand  Commandery  and  subordinate
commanderies  in,  vi,  1606;  Scottish
Rite  Masonry  in,  vn,   1889,   1890,    1894.

Fludd,  Dr.  Robert,  most  famous  and
earliest  of  English  Rosicrucians,  n,  338.

Forsyth's  Royal  Arch  Chapter  MS.
Minutes  of,  v,   1283.

Fort  Howard,  Wis.,  first  Lodge  organized
at,  vi,  1460.

Foulhouze,  James,  spurious  Scottish  Rite
Council  organized  by,  vn,  1852.

Four  Crowned  Martyrs,  Legend  of  the,
where  found,  1,  27,  29,  34 ;  early  patrons
of  Freemasonry  in  Germany,  1,  16 ;  iv,
940 ;  newly  discovered  facts  regarding,
vn,  2002;  English  source  of  the  Legend
of,  vn,  2003.

Four  Old  Lodges  of  London,  the  history
of  the,  iv,  1 136.

Fowle,  Henry,  the  Templar  Ritual  devel-
oped by,  and  others,  vi,  1616.

Frabrii  Cementarii  (Stone  Masons),  n,
492.

Franc-Macon,  the  name  of  a  Freemason
in  France,  in,  788.

France,  Romans  introduced  architecture
into,  11,  503,  506,  522 ;  early  Masonry  in,
II,  282,  516;  early  Operative  Masons  of,
a  continuation  of  Roman  Colleges  of
Artificers,  n,  523 ;  most  celebrated  ar-
chitects of  early,  11,  521 ;  Guilds  of  the
Middle  Ages  in,  in,  663 ;  Operative  Ma-
sons in,  at  present  day,  in,  680 ;  Free-
masonry introduced  into,  1725,  11,  272;
Speculative  Masonry  imported  into,  11,
681;  iv,  1017,  1040;  exiled  Royal  House
of  England  said  to  have  brought  Free-
masonry into,  11,  2S7 ;  first  Lodge  es-
tablished in,  11,  283:  first  legal  Lodge
in,  1732,  n,  282;  the  English  Ritual
adopted  in,  v,  1195;  the  clergy  admitted
into  Freemasonry  in  early,  in,  838;  his-
tory of  the  Grand  Lodge  of,  v,  1183;
the  English  Grand  Lodge  of,  v,  1196;
the  National  Grand  Lodge  of,  adoption
of  title,  v,  1 198;  two  rival  Grand  Lodges
in,  v,  1203,  1223 ;  the  degree  of  Mark
Master  not  known  in,  in,  817;  develop-
ment of  the  Royal  Arch  degree  in,  v,
1248 ;  elements  of  the  Royal  Arch  in-
troduced into  America  from,  v,  1289;
Chapter  of  Rose  Croix  established  in,
1747,  11,  280;  origin  of  the  Grand  Orient
of,  v,  1209 ;  Rites  fabricated  in,  by  Ram-
say, 1735-40,  11,  279;  Scottish  Rite
Freemasonry  originated  in,  1740.  vn,
1812;  Supreme  Council  A.  A.  S.  R.  es-
tablished in,  vn,  1850,  1857,  1871 ;
Thory  and  Clavel  on  the  history  of
Freemasonry  in,  11,  517.

Francken,  Henry  A.,  vn,  1864,  1873.

Franklin,  Benjamin,  bearing  of  corre-
spondence of,  with  Henry  Price  on
first  Lodge  in  America,  v,  1396;  First
Master  of  first  Lodge  in  America,  v,
1398;  Provincial  Grand  Master  of
Pennsylvania,   1734,   v,   1398.

INDEX

2031

Franklin  Chapter,  Norwich,  Conn.,
1796,  v,  1293;  participates  in  organiza-
tion of  general  Grand  Chapter,  1798,  V,
1294.
Fraternity,  growth  of  the  early  Specula-
tive, iv,  910.
Fraternity  of  Freemasons,  the  formation

of,  in,  761.
Frederick  II  of  Germany,  fifth  crusade  led

by,  v,  1323.
Frederick   the  Great,  vii,    1873 ;   relation
of,  to  the  A.  A.  S.  R.,  vii,  1805,  1806,
1810.
Free,  significance    of    term,    in    the    Craft

Guilds,  11,  575.
Free  and  Accepted  Masons,  early  use  of
the  title  in  England,  nf  307;  origin  and
meaning  of  title,  in,  617;  historical
source  of  term,  III,  786;  vii,  2006;  Elias
Ashmole  becomes  one  of  the,  III,  624.
Free  Brothers,    use   of   the   term,    in    the

Craft  Guilds,  11,  576.
Freemason,  the  term,  found  in  rolls  of  the
seventeenth  century,  vii,  2007 ;  deriva-
tion of  the  term,  11,  576;  application  of
the  term  to  English  workmen  only,  III,
787 ;  when  title  came  into  general  use,
in.  788.
FREEMASONRY:

I.  Operative  (cf.  "Operative  Masons"),
the  first  link  connecting  corporations
of  Rome  with,  11,  502 ;  Roman  intro-
duction of,  into  France  (see  under
"France"),  11,  503,  506,  522;  a  con-
tinuance of  the  Roman  Colleges  of
Artificers,  11,  523 ;  three  periods  of,
in  Germany  (cf.  "Germany"),  in,
726,  730;  Strasburg  the  original  cen-
ter of,  in  Germany,  in,  730:  reor-
ganized after  the  Roman  method  by
Christian  missionaries  in  Britain  (cf.
"England"),  II,  536;  a  guild  of  Op-
erative Masons  in  time  of  James  II,
11,  291  ;  condition  of,  among  the
Anglo-Saxons,  n,  540,  543ff. ;  early
period  of,  in  Scotland  (cf.  "Scot-
land"), importance  of  the  traditions
of  Kilwinning,  in,  629;  first  historic
period  of,  in  Scotland,  hi,  634;  dif-
ference between  that  of  to-day  and
of  the  tenth  and  eleventh  centuries,
ill,  690;  condition  of,  in  the  eleventh
century,  in.  693 ;  the  gradual  decay
of,  in,  855;  iv,  906:  the  extinction
of,  as  a  Guild  organization,  iv,  909;
the  death  of,  and  the  birth  of  Specu-
lative, iv,  1003 ;  Speculative  Mason-
ry founded  on,  III,  683;  decline  of
the  influence  of,  on  Speculative,  v,
1 177.
fl.  Speculative  (cf.  "Speculative  Mason-
ry")  :
I.  Philosophical  and  Social  Character
of  the  Institution :  The  accepted  defi-
nition of,  iv,  882;  v,  1 182,  1242;  the
philosophy  of,  developed  from  Ma-
sonic myths,  1,  1 ;  one  of  the  social

organizations  of  the  world,  1,  2;
Christian  character  of  early,  iv,  933,
940;  sources  of  the  symbols  of  (cf.
"Symbolism  iv"),  1,  42;  11,  350,  367;
the  early  ritual  of  (cf.  "Ritual"),  iv,
926,  928 ;  seven  early  revisions  of  the
Ritual  of,  11,  368;  sources  of  the
Ritual  of  the,  iv,  937;  preference  of,
for  the  Monad,  vii,  1745 ;  the  funda-
mental principles  of,  vn,  1757;  the
cardinal   purpose   of,   vn,   1870.

2.  Traditions  and  Theories  as  to  the
Origin  of  the  Order:  Efforts  to  trace
origin  of,   to  the  Ancient   Mysteries,

I,  174,  185,  188;  analogies  between,
and  the  Pagan  Mysteries,  1,  192,  197;
the  Gnostics  and,  11,  371 ;  the  So-
cinians  and,  n,  382;  the  Essenes  and,

II,  387;  rejection  of  theories  as  to
Oriental  origin  of,  11,  473;  distinc-
tion between  the  Legends  of,  and
Ancient  Myths,  11,  459 ;  Druidism
and,  1,  199;  theory  of  analogy  be-
tween, and  Christianity,  11,  373 ;  the-
ory that  the  Jesuits  invented,  11,  288,
289;  theory  of  the  Crusade  origin  of,

I,  217,  229;  Ramsay's  theory  of  the
origin  of,  v,  1246;  Temple  theory  of
origin  of,  criticized,  1,  48,  73 ;  theory
that  Ashmole  and  others  developed,
in  1648,  11,  273 ;  fable  that  Oliver
Cromwell  invented,  11,  293 ;  theory
of  Pythagorean  origin  of,  11,  365,
369;  distinction  between,  and  Rosi-
crucianism,  11,  342;  the  Jesuits  in,  11,
286;  two  theories  that  Speculative,
was    developed    in    London    in    1646,

II,  311;  the  Royal  Society  and,  11,
301 ;  Nicolai's  theory  as  to  the  com-
mon cause  of  the  Royal  Society  and,
II,  304,  307,  310,  316,  318;  theory  of
the  origin  of,  in  the  Royal  Society
rejected,  11,  313;  true  theory  of  the
origin  of,  in,  684.

3.  History  of  the  Fraternity :  Two
ways  of  looking  at,  exoteric  or  pub-
lic, and  eso  eric  or  secret,  1,  1;  two
periods  of  the  history  of,  1,  2;  scope
of  prehistoric  and  historic,  1,  9,  10;
position  of  the  legendary  history  of,

I,  p.  vi,  10;  sources  of  the  tradition-
ary history  of,  in,  598;  authentic  his-
tory of,  preliminary  outlook,  n,  455 ;
position  of  the  recorded  history,  1,
p.  vi ;  character  of  the  early  history
of,  11,  461 ;  distorting  influence  of  the
Legend  of  the  Craft  on  the  history
of,  II,  463  ;  the  beginnings  of.  n,  365  ;
derivation  of,  from  an  association  of
builders.  1,  pp.  vii,  viii ;  n,  468;  ill,
705 ;   essential   historical   features   in,

II,  472 ;  transition  from  Operative  to
Speculative,  in,  836;  Speculative  as-
cendency over  Operative,  in,  848;
epoch  of  real  birth  of,  in  England,
iy,  903,  920;  death  of  Operative  and
birth  of  Speculative,  iv,    1003;   first

2032

INDEX

step  in  the  separation  of  Speculative
from  Operative,  iv,  1012;  progress
of,  in  seventeenth  century,  III,  617;
influence  of  clubs  on  the  origin  of,
vii,  1735;  the  early  years  of  Spec-
ulative, in  England,  iv,  903 ;  the  evo-
lution of,  in,  843,  848,  850,  853,  854,
856,  862,  876;  iv,  882,  906,  909;  dif-
ferences between  Operative  and
Speculative,  ill,  863 ;  iv,  941 ;  fabri-
cation of  the  degrees  of  (cf.  "De-
grees"), iv,  899;  vii,  1805;  tradition
as  to  fabrication  of  the  First  degree,
11,  311;  invention  of  the  Fellow-
Craft's,  iv,  957-959.  960,  1003;  the
Master  Mason's,  IV,  959,  975,  978,
993 ;  source  of  prominent  portion  of
the  Third  degree  in,  II,  416;  conclu-
sions as  to  early  Speculative,  in  Eng-
land, 11,  324;  the  House  of  Stuart
and,  11,  267;  a  political  character
given  to,  11,  273 ;  the  High  Degrees
not  an  original  element  of,  11,  329;
condition  of,  in  eighteenth  century
England,  iv,  878;  influence  of  the
"Ancients"  upon,  iv,  1132;  slow
progress  of,  in  English  Provinces,
IV,  920;  introduction  of,  into  Ger-
many (cf.  "Germany"),  III,  727;  ex-
iled Royal  House  of  England  said  to
have  introduced,  in  France  (cf.
"France"),  11,  275,  287;  introduction
of,  into  France,  iv,  1017;  introduc-
tion of,  into  Scotland  (cf.  "Scot-
land"), in,  632;  relation  of  Females
to,  in  Scotland,  in,  652;  introduction
of,  into  the  North  American  Colo-
nies (see  also  under  "America,"
"United  States"  and  the  names  of
the  several  States  and  Territories),
v,  1224 ;  severance  of  American,
from  English  jurisdiction,  vi,  1650;
introduction  of,  into  New  York,  New
Jersey,  and  Pennsylvania,  v,  1225 ;
into  New  Hampshire,  v,  1229;  his-
tory of  the  introduction  of,  into  each
State  and  Territory  of  the  United
States,  v,  I293ff. ;  history  of,  in  Brit-
ish America,  vn,  1929;  in  New
Brunswick,  p.  1931 ;  in  Prince  Ed-
ward Island,  p.  1932 ;  in  Manitoba,
P-  1933;  in  British  Columbia,  p.  1933;
in  Quebec,  p.  1938;  in  Ontario,  p.
1939;  in  New  Brunswick,  p.  1939;  in
New  Foundland,  p.  1940;  in  Nova
Scotia,  p.  1940;  in  Mexico,  p.  1942;
in  Cuba,  p.  1961 ;  in  Puerto  Rico,
p.  1965;  in  Asia,  p.  1968;  in  India,
p.  1969;  in  Madras,  p.  1977;  in  Bom-
bay, p.  1979;  in  East  India  Islands,
p.  1983;  in  the  Philippines,  p.  1984;
in  Persia,  p.  1984;  in  the  Straits
Settlement,  p.  1985 ;  in  China,  p.
1985 ;  in  Japan,  p.  1986 ;  in  Cape
Colony,  p.  1987 ;  in  Australasia :  New
South  Wales,  p.  1990 ;  in  Victoria,
p.  1992;  in  South  Australia,  p.  1994;

in  Queensland,  p.  1996;  in  West
Australia:  Tasmania,  p.  1996;  in
New  Zealand,  p.  1997;  in  North  Is-
land, p.   1998;   in  Oceania,  p.   1999.

Freemasons,  origin  and  meaning  of  term,
in,  782;  architects  of  Lombardy  first
termed,  1,  42 ;  first  associations  of,  in
Como,  in,  687;  connection  of  early,  with
the  Church,  m,  695 ;  Gothic  Archi-
tecture founded  by  the  Traveling,  1,  191 ;
in,  727,  772 ;  character  of  the  symbols
of  the  Traveling,  11,  367;  the  guilds  of,
only  form  known  until  the  eighteenth
century,  11,  300 ;  fraternity  of,  organized
at  Strasburg  in  the  fifteenth  century,
in,  804;  similarity  between  the,  and
the  Steinmetzen  of  Germany,  in,  723 ;
non-professionals  admitted  into  the
ranks  of  the,  in,  838,  844;  a  "cowan"
not  allowed  to  work  with,  in,  618;  dif-
ferences between  the  Speculative,  and
the  medieval,  in,  863;  resemblances  be-
tween the  Speculative,  and  the  medie-
val, in,  864;  first  meeting  places  of
early  Speculative,  iv,  885 ;  fabrication
of  some  of  the  High  Degrees  of,  at  the
Chateau  of  St.  Germain,  11,  270.

Freemasons,  the  Company  of,  a  company
chartered  on  or  before  1370,  III,  591.

Freemasons,  Society  of,  Nicolai's  account
of  the,  11,  309.

Freemasons  and  Cowans,  regular  and  ir-
regular workmen,  11,  496.

Freemasons  and  the  Rough  Masons,  iii,

779-

Freemen,  St.  John's  Lodge,  Glasgow,  pri-
ority claim  made  by,  in,  631.

Freimaurer,  meaning  of  the  term,  among
German  Masons,  in,  788.

French,  Benjamin  B.,  v,  1384.

French  Guilds,  royal  confirmation  of  the
early  statutes  of,  in,  679.

French  Freemasons,  the  early  ritual  of
the,  v,  1 191.

French  Freemasonry  (cf.  "France"),  ef-
fect of  the  High  Degrees  on,  v,  1197.

French  Masons,  early  regulations  of  the,
in,  675.

French  Revolution,  serious  effect  of  the,
on   Freemasonry,  v,   1216;  vii,   1871.

Friendship  Lodge,  No.  3,  the  first  Lodge  to
assume  distinctive  name,  iv,  885.

Frizzel,  John,  G.  G.  H.  P.,  1877,  v,  1301,

Frontenac  Chapter,  No.  i,  first  in  Can-
ada, v,  1288.

Fylfot  (see  "Swastika"),  a  frequently  oc-
curring symbolic  mark  of  the  Middle
Ages,  in,  800;  vii,    1789.

G.,  the  letter,  1,  41;  vn,  1745;  historical
aspect  of  the  letter,  in,  763 ;  Hutchison's
theory  as  to  what  it  denotes,  1,  41.

Gadicke,  J.  C,  author  of  a  German  Lexi-
con of  Freemasonry,  1,   41 ;  opinion  of,

INDEX

2033

on  relation  of  Jesuitism  and  Free-
masonry, 11,  287.

Gage,  Jonathan,  influence  of,  on  Tem-
plarism,  vi,   1616.

Gardner,  Wm.  S.,  address  of,  giving  his-
tory of  Prince  Hall  Lodge  (colored),
vi,  1642;  address  by,  on  Templarism  in
Pennsylvania,  VI,   1630.

Gaul,  Roman  Colleges  of  Artificers  in,  11,
503,  506.

General  Assemblies,  early  French  cor-
porations held,  in,  670.

General  Assembly,  an  early  name  for  an
annual  meeting  of  the  Craft,  iv,  897.

General  Grand  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch
Masons  for  the  U.  S.  of  A.,  v,  1297;
list  of  the  presiding  officers  of,  v,  1301 ;
jurisdiction  of  the,  v,  1295 ;  national  as-
pect of  the,  v,  1299 ;  powers  of  the,
abridged,  v,  1296;  value  of  the,  V,  1300;
biennial  sessions  of,  v,  1296 ;  septennial,
v,  1296;  triennial,  established,  1826,  v,
1299 ;  constitution  of  the,  revived,  v,
1296;  memoranda  of  important  transac-
tions of  the,  vi,  1548.

General  Grand  Council,  organization  of
the,  vi,  1567.

General  Grand  Encampment  of  K.  T.,  in
the  U.  S.,  v,  1384;  organized  in  1816,
in  N.   Y.  City,   VI,  1416.

General  Regulations  (cf.  "Law"),  adop-
tion of,  in  1721,  in,  852;  some  provi-
sions of  the,  iv,  894 ;  substitution  of,  for
the  "Charges"  as  early  Masonic  Law,
iv,  917;  the,  the  first  code  of  Masonic
Law,  iv,  919;  some  features  of  the,  iv,

979-

General  Regulations  of  Royal  Arch
Masonry  of  Scotland,  v,  1342.

General  Warden,  position  of  the,  in  Scot-
tish  Masonry,   III,  648.

Gentleman,  use  of  the  title,  in  early
Lodges,  in,  621 ;  Masonic  record  de-
scribing Anthony  Sayer  as,  iv,  904.

Gentlemen  Masons,  a  title  of  early  non-
operative   members,   III,  841.

Geometrical  Marks,  hi,   796.

Geometrical  Mason,  title  for  a  Specula-
tive Mason  in  the  eighteenth  century,
1,  42.

Geometrical  Masons,  hi,   770.

Geometrical  Symbols,  source  of,  in  mod-
ern Freemasonry,  1,  42 ;   hi,  865.

Geometry  (cf.  "Euclid"),  etymology  of
the  word,  1,  68 ;  secret  use  of,  in  the
Middle  Ages,  in,  769 ;  medieval  secrecy
and  the  principles  of,  in,  796;  early
emphasis  of,  by  Freemasons,  11,  342;
origin  of  (in  the  Legend  of  the  Craft),
I,  19,  40 ;  Enoch  the  founder  of,  in  An-
dersonian  theory,  11,  401  ;  Operative  and
Speculative  regard  for,  in,  865  ;  identity
of,  with  Masonry,  1,  41,  43;  11,  368;  ill,
762.

Geometry,  Masonry  and  Architecture,
synonymous  terms  in  the  Legend  of  the
Craft,  1,  66.

Georgia,  introduction  of  Freemasonry  into,
v,  1230,  1395 ;  first  Lodge  and  organiza-
tion of  Grand  Lodge  in,  v,  1404 ;  intro-
duction of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  vi,  1503;
Cryptic  Masonry  in,  vi,  1579;  organiza-
tion of  Grand  Commandery  and  subor-
dinate commanderies  in,  vi,  1606;  Scot-
tish Rite  Masonry  in,  vn,  1889,  1890,
1893.

German  Architecture,  three  epochs  of
medieval,  111,  713.

German  Freemasonry,  medieval  initiation
into,  in,  745.

German  Freemasons,  first  written  Consti-
tution of  the,  in,  716.

German  Stonemasonry,  introduction  of,
into  England,  III,  742.

German  Stonemasons,  customs  and  usages
of  the,  in,   741,  743.

Germans,  influence  of  the,  on  Masonic
History,  11,  466.

Germany  (cf.  "Freemasonry"),  Traveling
Freemasons  introduced  Masonry  into,
in,  710;  evidence  of  Guilds  in,  in,  738;
the  Stonemasons  (cf.  "Steinmetzen")
of,  in,  707;  operative  marks  in,  in,
802 ;  customs  as  to  the  use  of  Masonic
marks  in,  in,  811;  the  degree  of  Mark
Master  not  known  in,  in,  817;  Rosicru-
cianism  originates  in,  11,  338;  the  clergy
admitted  into  Freemasonry  in  early,  in,
838;  constitutions  of  the  Freemasons
in,  in,  721 ;  influence  of  French  Masons
in,  hi,  708;  three  periods  of  Freemason-
ry in,  in,  726;  Cologne  and  Strasburg
each  claim  to  be  Masonic  center  of,  in,
729 ;  development  of  Scottish  Rite  Ma
sonry  in,  vn,   1816.

Gervase  of  Canterbury,  the  work  of,  in
the  "Decern  Scriptores  Angilise,"  in,
791.

Gervasius  Dorobornensis   (see  Gervase  of

Canterbury).
Gesture-language,   significance  of,   in  the

development  of  symbolism,  vi,   1695.
Gib,   Rev.   Adam,  an   antiburger  clergyman

of  eighteenth   century,   11,  269.
Gibraltar,  deputation  granted  to  Brothers,

1728,  in,  788.

Gilbert  d'Assalit,  the  Hospitalers  armed
by,  v,   1330.

Gillman,  Charles,  G.  G.  H.  P.,  1856,  v,
1301.

Glasgow,  claim  that  Masonry  in  Scotland
originated  at,  in,  631.

Gloves,  the  use  of,  in  the  initiation  of  Op-
erative Masons  and  in  Continental  Spec-
ulative Lodges,  in,  650.

Gnostics,  Freemasonry  and  the,  11,  371.

Gnosticism,  the  origin  and  character  of,
n,  372,  374;  the  character  of  Basilidian,
",  377-

Goat  of  Mendes,  symbol  of  Deity,  vi,
1720;  vn,  1780.

God,  character  of  the  Supreme,  in  Gnostic
Symbols,  n,  378;  vn,  1745.

2034

INDEX

Goddard,  Dr.,  supposed  relations  of,  to  the
Royal    Society    origin    of    Freemasonry,

II,  303,  327-

Godfrey  of  Bouillon,  v,  1325.

Golden  City,  Col.,  first  Lodge  organized
at,  vi,  1476.

Golden  Rosicrucians,  a  title  first  used  by
Samuel  Richter,  11,  354;  the  nine  de-
grees of  the,  n,  355.

Good  and  Evil,  distinction  between,  in  sym-
bolism,  vi,  1717.

Goose  and  Gridiron  Tavern,  Grand  Lodge
of  England  formed  at,  June,  1717,  III,
858;  iv,  882.

Gothic  Architecture,  Traveling  Freema-
sons founders  of,  1,  191 ;  III,  727 ;  the
Freemasons  and,  in,  772;  medieval
Freemasons  invented  the  style  of,  in,
774;  generic  use  of  the  name,  111,  728;
the  name,  not  suggestive  of  that  style
of  architecture,  III,  776;  distinguishing
features  of  the,  ill,  777',  "geometry  of
beauty"  in  the,  in,  757;  celebrated  mas-
ters of,  iv,  944 ;  influence  of,  on  Masonic
organization,  111,  727.

Gothic  Constitutions,  "Charges  of  a
Freemason"  identical  with,  iv,  917.

Gould,  Robert  Freke,  opinion  of,  as  to
when  ritual  was  developed,  v,  1347;
value  of  the  history  by,  on  the  Stein-
metzen  and  Masonic  MSS.,  VII,  2003.

Grammar,  1st  of  the  seven  liberal  sciences
in  Legend  of  the  Craft,  1,  18.

Grand  Architect  of  the  Universe,  The
(T.  G.  A.  O.  T.  U.),  vn,  1742,  1746.

Grand  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons,
"Moderns"  organize  a,  in  1767,  VII,
2010  (cf.  v,   1261).

Grand  Chapter  of  Kentucky,  memorial
of  the,  against  G.  G.   Chapter,  v,  1299.

Grand  Chapter  of  Massachusetts,  for-
mation of  the,  in  1799,  v,  1274.

Grand  Chapter  of  Pennsylvania,  early
subservience  of  the,  to  the  Grand  Lodge,
v,  1271.

Grand  Chapter  of  the  Northern  States,
first  meeting  of,  at  Middletown,  Conn.,
1798,  v,  1296.

Grand  Chapter  of  the  United  States,
history  of  the  General,  iv,  1 132;  v,  1290;
discussion  of  the  usefulness  of,  vi,  1509.

Grand  Constitutions  (A.  A.  S.  R.),
Frederick  the  Great  promulgated  the,
in  1762,  vn,  1805 ;  ratification  of  the,  at
Bordeaux,  VII,  1806.

Grand  Encampment,  K.  T.,  of  U.  S.  A.,
the  organization  of,  v,  1386.

Grand  Hermetic  Chancellor,  a  tradi-
tional degree  of  Rosicrucian  origin,  n,

354-

Grand  Inquisitor  Commander,  31st  degree
A.  A.  S.  R.  as  announced  by  the  Su-
preme Council  of  Charleston,  in  1802,
vn,  1848.

Grand  Lodge,  first  use  of  the  term,  m,  603.

Grand  Lodge  of  England,  II,  272;  the
mother  of  Speculative  Masonry,  11,  291 ;

history  of  the  organization  of  the,  in
1717,  iv,  877;  names  of  the  first  officers
of  the,  iv,  904 ;  the  method  of  forming
the,  iv,  908;  the  first,  of  whom  formed,
iv,  910,  911;  Anderson's  "Book  of  Con-
stitutions" adopted  by,  iv,  990;  query
whether  the  organization  of  the,  was  a
"Revival,"  iv,  890;  system  of  Provin-
cial Grand  Lodges  organized  by,  in
1726,  vi,  1644;  first  Lodge  of  France,
established  by  warrant  from,  1725,  11,
281 ;  grants  a  charter  to  African  Lodge
at  Boston,  in  1784,  vi,  1659,  1661 ;  union
of  the,  with  "Ancients,"  v,  1155,  1173-
1174;  Freemasons  meet  in  Philadelphia
before  the  organization  of,  v,  1230.

Grand  Lodge  of  All  England,  The,  es-
tablished at  York,  in  1725,  iv,  1043;
germ  of,  in  the  Operative  Guilds,  iv,
1066;  illegal  constitution  of,  iv,   1055.

Grand  Lodge  of  Ancients  (cf.  Atholl
Grand  Lodge),  organization  of  the,  in
the  year  1753,  Iv,  1104,  1106;  popular-
ity of,  due  to  the  Royal  Arch  degree,
iv,  1 1 19;  some  of  the  early  officers  of
the,  iv,  1 120;  influence  of  requirements
in  the,  on  American  Lodges,  ill,  614;
jurisdiction  extended  into  foreign  coun-
tries by,  iv,  1126,  1133;  first  Colonial
Warrant  granted  by,  in  1758,  v,  1264;
declaration  of  the,  regarding  union,
March  2,  1802,  v,  1 159;  union  of  the,
with  "Moderns,"  v,   1155,   1173.

Grand  Lodge  of  England  South  of  the
Trent,  1780-1790,  history  of  the,  iv,
1 135;  the  schismatic  attitude  of  the
"Lodge  of  Antiquity,"  iv,  1138;  text  of
the  Manifesto  of  December  16,  1778;  iv,
1 140;  a  discussion  of  the  grounds  of
dispute,  iv,  1 144;  organization  of  the,
at  London  in  1780,  iv,  1153;  historical
status  of  the,  iv,  1151;  reconciliation
between  the,  and  the  original  Grand
Lodge  of  England,  in  1790,  iv,  1152.

Grand  Lodge  of  England,  The  United,
formed  by  the  union  of  the  two,  v,  1155 ;
the  arms  adopted  by  the,  in  1813,  II,
formed  by  the  union  of  the  two,  v,  1155,
1173-1174;  the  arms  adopted  by  the,  in
1813,  11,  597;  Royal  Arch  Masonry  rec-
ognized by,  v,  1 179;  African  Lodge
(colored)  dropped  from  roll  by,  vi,
1660.

Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland,  organized  in
1736,  in,  645;  iv,  1079;  list  of  the
Lodges  forming  the,  iv,  1097;  Scottish
Rite  Masonry  has  no  relation  to,  vn,
1812.

Grand  Lodge  of  France,  history  of  the,  v,
1193-

Grand  Lodge,  the  method  of  forming  a,  in
America,  iv,  907;  establishment  of  a,
in  Penn.,  v,  1397;  in  Mass.,  v,  140 1 ;  in
Ga.,  v,  1405 ;  in  N.  H.,  v,  1408 ;  in  S.  C,
v,  1409;  in  N.  Y.,  v,  1410;  in  R.  I.,  v,
1413;  in  Md.,  v,  1415;  in  Conn.,  v,  1417;

INDEX

2035

in  Va.,  v,  1419 ;  in  N.  G,  v,  1423 ;  in
Me.,  v,  1424;  in  N.  J.,  v,  1428;  in  Mich.,
v,  1430;  in  Del.,  v,  1432;  in  Vt.,  v,
1434;  in  Fla.,  v,  1438;  in  Ky.,  v,  1439.

Grand  Lodge  of  Cologne,  early  jurisdic-
tion of  the,  ill,  722.

Grand  Lodge  of  Iowa,  valuable  Masonic
works  owned  by,  vn,  201 1.

Grand  Lodge  of  New  York,  established  by
the   Ancients,   in   1781,  III,  824.

Grand  Lodge  of  Rhode  Island,  Webb's
body  interred  by,  v,   1291.

Grand  Lodge  of  St.  Stephen  of  Vienna,
early  jurisdiction  of  the,  III,   721.

Grand  Lodge  of  the  Three  Globes  (Ger-
many), Scottish  Rite  degrees  adopted
by,  1758,  vn,  1805.

Grand  Lodge  MS.  (see  under  "Old
Charges").

Grand  Lodges,  the  first,  in  the  several
States  and  Territories,  v,  1394;  devel-
opment of  the  supreme  authority  of,  iv,
1 152;  the  several,  in  the  United  States
(see  under  the  respective  names  of
States  and  Territories)  ;  a  list  of  the
State,  vi,    1485.

Grand  Master,  first  use  of  the  term,  m,
603.

Grand  Master  Architect,  12th  degree,
A.  A.  S.  R.  as  announced  by  the  Su-
preme Council  of  Charleston,  in  1802,
vn,  1847.

Grand  Master  of  All  Symbolic  Lodges,
20th  degree,  A.  A.  S.  R.  as  announced
by  the  Supreme  Council  of  Charleston,
in  1802,  vi  1,  1848.

Grand  Mystery  of  Free-Masons  Discov-
ered, reprint  of  the  text  of  the,  iv,  930.

Grand  Orient,  French  title  for  the  Su-
preme  Masonic  Authority,    v,   1212.

Grand  Orient  of  France,  origin  of  the,  v,
1209;  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix  at  Paris
united  with,  11,  281  ;  rivalry  between
the,  and  the  "Council  of  the  Knights  of
the  East,"  vn,  1805.

Grand  Pontiff,  19th  degree,  A.  A.  S.  R.
as  announced  by  the  Supreme  Council
of  Charleston,  in   1802,  VII,   1848.

Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter,  first  consti-
tution of  the,  of  the  Northern  States  of
America,  adopted  in  1798,  III,  824;  or-
ganization of  the,  v,  1294;  establishment
of  a,  in  Canada,  1818,  v,  1288.

Grand  Scottish  Mason  of  James  VI,  a
high  degree  of  Stuart  period,  11,  269.

Grand  Wardens,  the  names  of  the  first
Speculative,  iv,  883.

Grande  Loge  Anglaise  de  France,  v,  1196.

Grandidier,  Abbe,  ii,  467.

Great  Schism  in  English  Masonry,  iv,
1 104,  1 128;  ritualistic  basis  for  the,  v,
1220;  influence  of  the,  on  Masonic  His-
tory, iv,  1 152;  the  French  schism  and
the,  contrasted  and  compared,  v,   1220.

Grecus,  Namus,  meaning  of  name,  in  Ma-
sonic lore,  1,  86.

Greece,  Supreme  Council  A.  A.  S.  R.  in,
vn,  1857.

Greeks,  The,  formation  of  secret  societies
among,  11,  497;  baptism  practiced  by,
vi,  1729 ;  some  practices  in  the  mys-
teries of  the  ancient,  vi,  1729;  fraterni-
ties among  the  ancient,   11,  475,  560.

Grey,  William,  ii,  320.

Grip,  evidence  of  the  early  use  of  the,
among  Masons,  iv,  930;  the  Operative,
iv,  969.

Guild  of  Freemasons,  early  form  of  the
order,  11,  300;  the  extinction  of  Opera-
tive Masonry,  as  a,  iv,  909.

Guild  of  the  Holy  Cross,  law-suits  be-
tween members  discouraged  in,  III,  587.

Guild  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  some  of  the
statutes  of  the,  hi,  586.

Guild,  Legend  of  the  (see  Legend  of  the
Craft),   1,  p.  v.

Guild  Spirit,  essential  characteristic  of  the
Masonic   Institution,    1,   viii.

Guild  of  St.  John  the  Baptist,  regula-
tion as  to  law-suits  between  members
in,  in,  587.

Guild  of  Tailors  at  Lincoln,  religious
and  Craft  character  of,  11,  573.

Guilds,  Adulterine,  11,  577.

Guilds,  Craft,  resemblance  of,  to  the  Ro-
man Colleges,  11,  563 ;  some  ancient  pro-
totypes of,  11,  559,  560;  members  of  Ma-
sonic, combining  with  other  guilds,  III,
598;  exclusive  character  of  the,  III,  612;
early  evidence  of,  in  Germany  (cf.
"Steinmetzen"),   III,  738.

Guilds,  The  Anglo-Saxon,  ii,  559;  com-
parison of,  with  the  priesthood  frater-
nity of  Egypt,  11,  559;  the  Eranos  of
the  Greeks  the  analogue  of  a  Guild,  II,
560;  the  Agapae  or  Love  Feasts  of  the
early  Christians  grew  to  resemble,  II,
560;  theories  as  to  the  origin  of,  n,  561;
influence  of  the  Roman  Colleges  on  the
formation  of,  11,  562 ;  analogies  between
the  Roman  Colleges  and,  11,  563;  the
antiquity  of,  11,  564;  the  number  13,
a  favorite  in,  11,  565 ;  text  of  the
original  charter  of  Orky's  Guild,  11,
565 ;  similarity  between  charters  of,
and  the  Constitutions  of  the  Freema-
sons, 11,  567;  the  charter  of  Thanes'
Guild  at  Cambridge,  11,  568;  principal
features  of,  11,  569;  charter  of  the  Guild
of  the  Smiths  of  Chesterfield,  11,  570;
charter  of  the  Tailors'  Guild  at  Lin-
coln, 11,  572 ;  character  of,  11,  573 ;  the
progress  of,  11,  574;  the  purpose  of,  11,
575 ;  use  of  "free"  and  "freemen"  in
charters  of,  11,  575 ;  character  of  the
early,  11,  576 ;  customs  and  usages  of,
ll,  577',  form  of  admission  and  oath
in,  11,  579;  suits  at  law  between  mem-
bers discouraged  in  all,  in,  587.

Guilds,  The  Early  English  Masonic,
hi,  581  ;  theories  as  to  the  origin  of,
11,  561  ;  Hughan  collects  and  publishes
the  ordinances  of  the,  III,  581 ;  text  of

2036

INDEX

the  "Charges"  of,  in  the  Landsdowne
MS.,  in,  582,  583 ;  internal  evidence
that  Speculative  Freemasonry  developed
from,  in,  584;  Anderson's  "Charges  of
a  Freemason"  compared  with  the
"Charges"  of,  III,  585 ;  some  statutes  of,
in,  586-587 ;  the  spirit  of  exclusiveness
in,  in,  586;  suits  at  law  discouraged  in,
in,  587-588 ;  connection  between  the,  and
modern  lodges,  in,  588;  some  usages  of,
iv,  913.

Guilds,  The  French  Medieval,  history
of,  in,  663 ;  derivation  of,  from  the
Roman  Colleges  of  Artificers,  III,
663,  664 ;  the  formation  of  the  "Cor-
poration des  Metiers,"  in,  663,  664;
regular  progress  of,  in,  666;  the  Pari-
sian Hanse,  or  the  "Merchadise  de
l'eau,"  in,  668;  legal  basis  for,  estab-
lished, in,  668 ;  royal  confirmation  of
charters  of,  a  universal  usage  in  the
fourteenth  century,  in,  669;  privileges
of  the  Parisian,  11,  669 ;  the  general  as-
semblies of,  in,  670;  classes  of  work-
man in,  in,  671 ;  some  regulations  in  the
statutes  of,  in,  672,  675 ;  St.  Blaise,  the
patron  of,  in,  674;  text  of  the  "Regula-
tions of  the  Masons,"  etc.,  in,  675 ;  royal
confirmation  of  the  statutes  of,  in  seven-
teenth century,  in,  679;  letters-patent
and  decrees  of  the  King's  Council  to,
in,  679.

Guilds,  Masonic,  Roman  Colleges  of  Ar-
tificers, the   prototype   of,  11,  485.

Guilds  and  Companies,  name  of  Operative
Masons  in  England,  1,  ix.

Guistiniani,  Abbe,  first  to  publish  tradi-
tions and  rituals,  v,  1316.

H

H,  initial  of  Scottish  Chapter  of  Heredon,
11,  280.

Hague,  The,  provincial  Grand  Lodge  es-
tablished at,  vn,  1912.

Halifax,  Freemasonry  in,  vn,  1940.

Hall,  Prince,  the  leader  of  colored  Free-
masonry in  the  U.  S.,  vi,  1659.

Hallam,  Henry,  views  of,  regarding
writers  on   Freemasonry,   11,   469.

Halliwell,  James  O.,  genuineness  of  Ice-
land Manuscript,  doubted  by,  11,  361.

Halliwell  MS.,  the  earliest  extant,  1,  25;
Temple  of  Solomon  not  mentioned  in,
1,  75 ;  thought  to  be  a  translation  from
a  German  original,  111,  742;  the  date  of
the,  vn,  2002.

Halliwell  Poem,  comparison  of,  with
other  Masonic  MSS.,  1,  30,  34;  origin
of  the,  1,  33 ;  analysis  of  the,  1,  26-30 ;
antiquity  of  the,  compared  with  other
documents,  1,  14;  Legend  of  the  Craft
and  the,  1,  25 ;  mention  of  the  Tower
of  Babel  in.  1,  53;  the  Legend  of  Euclid
in,  1,  68.

Hamel,  Count  de,  Charter  of  Rose  Croix
Chapter  at  Arras,  France,  discovered
by,  11,  280.

Hammer,  Von,  theory  of,  as  to  the  rela-
tions of  the  Assassins  and  Templarism,
1,  237.

Hamon,  Wm.,  11,  321.

Harleian  MSS.,  No.  1942,  supposed  date
of,  1,  15 ;  historical  importance  of,  in,
616;  an  analysis  of  the,  in,  6i7ff. ;  re-
cent discovery  of  new  copies  of,  vn.
2066;  No.  2054,  supposed  date  of,  1,  15;
Hughan's  view  of  the  date  of,  vn,  2002.

Harnouester,  Lord,  Grand  Master  of
France,  1736,  v,  11 88.

Hartford  (Conn.),  organization  of  Grand
Chapter  at,  in  1798,  v,  1294;  Grand
Chapter  the  first  in  America,  1798,  v,
1271 ;  General  Grand  Chapter  organized
at,  vi,  1491.

Harrington,  a  friend  of  Oliver  Cromwell,
n,  294.

Haswell,  Nathan  B.,  vi,  1542.

Haues,  Moses  Michael,  one  of  the  early
inspectors  of  the  Rite  of  Perfection,  v,
1274.

Haupthutte,  Lodge  of  Strasburg  recog-
nized as,  in,  720.

Hautes  Grades  (see  "High  Degrees"),  n,
284;  Ramsay's  system  of  7,  v,  1205;  the
spirit  of  their  ordinance,  v,  1243.

Hawaiian  Islands,  Freemasonry  in  the,
vn,  2000;  Scottish  Rite  Masonry  in  the,
vn,  1889,  1890,  1893.

Hayes,  Moses  M.,  appointed  D.  I.  G.,  at
Boston,  Mass.,  vn,  1809.

Henery  Heade  MS.,  of  1675,  vn,  2003.

Heart,  Jonathan,  vi,  1443.

Heguety,  a  member  of  the  first  Lodge  in
France,  n,  283.

Hemming,  Dr.,  Pythagorean  principles  in-
troduced by,  vn,  1736;  lectures  of,
adopted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng-
land, in,  868.

Henry,  Duke  of  Montmorency,  v,  1356.

Heraldry    (see  "Masonic  Arms").

Herbert,  William,  list  of  London  Com-
panies published  by,  in,  590.

Heredom,  a  term  introduced  in  Masonry  by
Ramsay,  11,  277;  theories  regarding  the
etymology  of   the  term,  II,   278.

Heredom  of  Kilwinning,  vn,    1908,   1910.

Heredom,  Royal  Order  of,  not  related  to
the  Templars,  1,  259.

Heredom  Templars,  v,  1342.

Heredon  (same  as  Heredom).

Heredon  of  Kilwinning,  a  degree  of  the
Royal  Order  of  Scotland,  11,  279;  vn,
1908,  1910.

Hermes,  significance  of,  in  Legend  of  the
Craft,  1,  20,  50 ;  symbolic  use  of  the
ancient  columns  of,  in  the  Royal  Soci-
ety, 11,  306;  theory  that  Enoch  was  iden-
tical with.  11,  400.

Hermetic  Degrees,  existence  of,  early  in
eighteenth  century,  n,  339;  Rose  Croix
the  most  influential  of  the,  n,  354.

INDEX

2037

Hermetic  Knight,  a  traditional  degree  of
Rosicrucian  origin,   II,   354.

Hermetic  Philosophy  (see  "Rosicru-
cianism"),  the  extinction  of,  II,  359.

Hervey,  John  G.,  Secy,  of  the  U.  G.  L.  of
England,  letter  from,  regarding  African
Lodge,  vi,  1667.

Hewitt,  John  (D.  D.),  11,  306.

Hieroglyphics,  origin  and  significance  of,
in  Symbolism,  vi,  1704,  1710.

Higden,  Ranulph,  Polychronicon,  or  Uni-
versal History  written  by,  1,  46 ;  indebt-
edness of  the  Legend  of  the  Craft  to
writings  of,  1,  69;  finding  of  one  of  the
Pillars  by  Pythagoras  mentioned  by,  in
his   Polychronicon,   11,  364.

Higgins,  Godfrey,  Freemasons  associated
with  the  Assassins  by,  1,  238.

High  Degrees,  The,  unknown  prior  to
1728,  11,  284;  the  flood  of,  develops  in
France,  v,  1205 ;  origin  of  some,  vn,
1805  ;  the  adoption  of  those,  of  the  Rite
Franchise,  v,  1218;  influence  of  Her-
metic philosophy  on,  II,  329 ;  doctrine
of  sacred  numbers  developed  in,  11,  380;
influence  of  Rosicrucianism  on,  11,  351,
352;  the  political  purpose  of,  11,  284;  ef-
fect of  the,  upon  French  Freemasonry,
V,  1 197;  influence  of,  on  American  Royal
Arch  Masonry,  v,  1275  ;  absurd  views  of
theorists,  at  time  of  fabrication  of,  11,
372;  philosophical  interpretation  of  sym-
bols in,  11,  287;  importance  of  the  Leg-
end of  Enoch  in  legendary  history  of,
11,  398;  changes  in  the  development  of,
vii,  1815 ;  significance  of,  vn,  1870.

High  Priest,  title  of  the  chief  officer  in
R.  A.  Chapter,  v,  1275 ;  duties  of  the,
in  eighteenth  century,  v,  1281.

Hiram  Abif,  origin,  history,  and  meaning
of  the  Legend  of,  11,  412;  meaning  of
name,  11,  418;  legend  of,  accepted  as
fact  from  time  of  Anderson  and  De-
saguliers,  1,  137 ;  preservation  of  the
Legend  of,  by  Freemasons  in  all  coun-
tries, 11,  419 ;  significance  of,  in  the
Legend  of  the  Temple,  1,  J7 ;  various
titles  of,  in  Speculative  Masonry,  II,
429;  the  historic  character  of,  II,  421;
work  done  in  the  Temple  by,  11,  430;  in-
fluence of  the  Legend  of  the  Smith  on
Masonic  use  of,  11,  431,  432;  theory  that
he  was  a  member  of  Dionysiac  Fra-
ternity, 1,  170;  theory  associating  James
de  Molay  with,  1,  265 ;  Charles  I  and
James  II  symbolized  as,  11,  268,  272,
283 ;  interpretation  of,  in  alleged  Crom-
wellian  Masonry,  11,  298;  fabled  relation
of,  to  Mark  Masonry,  in,  827,  831,  834.

Hiram,  King  of  Tyre,  ii,  416.

Hiramic  Legend  (cf.  Hiram  Abif),  medie-
val Masons  not  familiar  with  the,  in,
871 ;  importance  of,  in  the  Third  degree,
v,  1243.

History,  Masonic,  the  germ  of  in  Legend
of  the  Craft,  1,  19,  36.

Hitchcock,  General,  work  of,  to  prove
Swedenborg  was  a  Hermetic  philoso-
pher, 11,  253.

Holbrook,  M.  E.,  Sir  Moses  (M.  D.),  v,
1373;  MS.  book  of,  cited,  vi,  1555.

Holy  Sepulcher,  significance  of  the,  in
Knighthood,  v,   1312.

Honorary  Members,  status  of  the,  in  Op-
erative Lodges,  in,  842.

Hope,  Thomas,  historical  essay  on  archi-
tecture by,  in,  682;  secrets  of  medieval
Masons  in  essay  of,  III,  754.

Hopkins,  James  H.  (P.  G.  N.),  v,  1385.

Horner,  Joseph  P.,  G.  G.  H.  P.,  1891,  v,
1302.

Hosmer,  Stephen  Titus,  elected  first  G.
Treas.,  v,  1295.

Hospitallers,  The  Knights,  origin  of,  in
the  Crusades,  1,  225,  226;  Gilbert  d'As-
salit  arms,  v,  1330.

House  of  Solomon,  Lord  Bacon's  romance
of  the,  n,  304 ;  discussion  of  the,  n,  326.

H.  T.  W.  S.  S.  T.  K.  S.,  in,  831.

Hudson  Chapter,  participates  in  organiza-
tion of  General  Grand  Chapter,  1798,  v,
1294.

Hudson,  N.  Y.,  Chapter  organized  at,  1796,
v,  1293.

Hugh  the  Great,  v,  1325.

Hughan,  William  James,  opinion  of,  as
to  when  ritual  was  introduced,  v,  1347;
criticizes  King's  "The  Gnostics  and
their  Remains,  n,  371 ;  1725  Lodge  in
France  proved  clandestine  by,  n,  282;
theory  that  Elias  Ashmole  invented
Freemasonry  refuted  by,  n,  328;  Ma-
sonic Guild  ordinances  published  by,
in,  581;  iconoclastic  method  of,i,  6;  me-
morials of  the  Masonic  Union,  v,  1169;
copy  of  Royal  Order  certificate  issued
to,  vn,  1924;  supplement  to  Mackey's
text  by,  vn,  2001-2013.

Hugo  de  Paganis,  first  Master  of  the  Tem-
plars, v,   1320,  1328.

Hungary,  introduction  of  Freemasonry  in,
in,  721 ;  Supreme  Council  A.  A.  S.  R.
in,  vn,  1857.

Huntsville,  Ala.,  first  Lodge  at,  vi,  1458.

Hurd,  Benjamin,  Jr.,  first  G.  K,  v,  1295;
G.  G.  H.  P.,  1806,  v,  1301.

Hure,  first  Lodge  in  France  held  in  house
of,  n,  282.

Hutchinson,  theory  of,  that  Freemasonry
is  derived  from  Adam,  1,  186 ;  theory
of,  as  to  the  origin  and  progress  of
Freemasonry,  in  his  "The  Spirit  of
Masonry,"  1,  128 ;  the  Temple  Legend  as
discussed  by,  1,  155 ;  opinion  of,  in  re-
gard to  Basilidian  Gnosticism  and  Free-
masonry, 11,  379 ;  theory  of,  as  to  the
relation  of  the  Crusaders  and  Free-
masons,  1,   248.

Hutten,  or  old  German  Lodges,  Parlirer,
the  name  of  principal  officer  in,  iv,  893.

Hyneman,  Leon,  work  of,  on  English
Grand  Lodges  abounds  in  errors,  iv,
901.

2038

INDEX

I

Iao  (see  "Abraxas"),  11,  379.

Iconoclasts,  religious  and  masonic,  con-
trasted, 1,  5.

Iconoclastic  Criticism,  true  value  of,  in
Masonic  History,  1,  9.

Iconoclastic  School,  valuable  influence  of
the,   on  Masonic  History,  vn,  2001.

Idaho,  first  Lodge  and  organization  of
Grand  Lodge  in,  vi,  1478 ;  introduction
of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  vi,  1504;  Cryptic
Masonry  in,  vi,  1580;  organization  of
Grand  Commandery  and  subordinate
commanderies  in,  vi,  1606;  Scottish
Rite  Masonry  in,  VII,   1889,  1890,   1892.

Idaho  City,  first  Lodge  established  at,  vi,
1478.

Identity  and  Alterity,  development  of
the  idea  of,  vn,  1750.

Illegitimate  Degrees,  some  names  of,  vn,
1866.

Illinois,  first  Lodge  and  organization  of
Grand  Lodge  in,  vi,  1450;  introduction
of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  VI,  1505 ;  Cryptic
Masonry  in,  vi,  1580;  organization  of
Grand  Commandery  and  subordinate
commanderies  in,  vi,  1606 ;  list  of  Scot-
tish Rite  Bodies  in,  vn,  1906.

Illuminati,  Barruel's  views  regarding  the,
11,  290.

Illuminism,  11,  289.

Illustrious  Elected  of  15,  10th  degree
A.  A.  S.  R.  as  announced  by  the  Su-
preme Council  of  Charleston,  in  1802,
vn,  1847.

Immortal  Quartette,  the  four  lodges
which  organized  the  Mother  Grand
Lodge  of  the  world,  vn,  2008.

Impostor,  Joseph  Balsamo  ("Count  Cag-
liostro"),  the  great,  vn,  1814.

Increase  of  Wages,  the  French  expression
for  advancement  in  Masonic  degrees,
in,  873.

Independence,  Declaration  of  Masonic,
from  Eng.  by  the  U.  S.  in  1782,  vi,  1651,

1655-

Independents,  theory  of  Cromwellian  Ma-
sonry and,  11,  297 ;  position  of,  in  Crom-
wellian Masonry,  II,  298.

India,  the  use  of  "Marks"  in,  m,  803;
Freemasonry  in,  vn,   1969.

Indian  Territory,  first  Lodge  and  organ-
ization of  Grand  Lodge  in,  vi,  1474;
introduction  of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  vi,
1506;  organization  of  Grand  Command-
ery and  subordinate  commanderies  in,
VI,  1607 ;  Scottish  Rite  Masonry  in,  vn,
1889,  1890,   1894.

Indians,  American,  Masonic  Lodges  or-
ganized among,  vi,   1474-1475.

Indiana,  first  Lodge  and  organization  of
Grand  Lodge  in,  vi,  1455 ;  list  of  the
lodges  organizing  G.  L.  of,  vi,  1456;
introduction  of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  vi,
1506;  Cryptic  Masonry  in,  VI,  1580;  or-
ganization  of   Grand   Commandery   and

subordinate  commanderies  in,  vi,  1607;
Scottish   Rite  Bodies  in,  vn,  1906.

Ineffable  Degrees,  a  general  term  for  the
A.  A.  S.  R.  degrees  from  the  4th  to  the
14th  inclusive  (see  under  "Degrees"),
vi,  1562;  the  early  practice  of,  at  Al-
bany, v.   1291.

Ineffable  Name,  importance  of,  in  sym-
bolism of  the  Legend  of  Enoch,  11,  399.

In  hoc  signo  vinces,  adoption  of,  as  Ma-
sonic motto,  v,  1309.

Initiation,  the  second  step  in  the  Ancient
Mysteries,  1,  180;  but  one  esoteric  sys-
tem of,  among  Operative  Masons,  IV,
899 ;  character  of  the  Operative,  IV,  943 ;
some  elements  of  the  Operative,  iv,  900;
simple  character  of  the  early,  iv,  881 ;
some  early  terms  for,  III,  617;  early  re-
quirements regarding,  ill,  621 ;  simple
form  of,  in  seventeenth  century,  III,
649 ;   the   German  medieval,   in,   745.

Innocent  III,  Pope,  promotes  fourth  cru-
sade, v,  1323.

Inquisition,   influence   of  the   Spanish,   v,

1332.

Instructor,  usual  duty  of  the,  in,  652.

Intendant  of  the  Building,  8th  degree
A.  A.  S.  R.  as  announced  by  the  Su-
preme Council  of  Charleston,  in  1802,
vn,  1847.

Intimate  Secretary,  6th  degree  A.  A.  S.
R.  as  announced  by  the  Supreme  Coun-
cil of  Charleston,  in  1802,  VII,  1847.

Iowa,  first  Lodge  and  organization  of
Grand  Lodge  in,  vi,  1465 ;  introduction
of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  vi,  1508;  Cryptic
Masonry  in,  VI,  1580;  organization  of
Grand  Commandery  and  subordinate
commanderies  in,  vi,  1607;  Scottish
Rite  Masonry  in,  vn,  1889,  1890,  1892;
valuable  Masonic  works  owned  by
Grand  Lodge  of,  vn,  201 1.

Ireland,  theory  of  introduction  of  the
Cromwellian  masonry  in,  11,  298;  atti-
tude of  the  Grand  Lodge  of,  toward  the
English  Grand  Lodge  of  Moderns,  IV,
1 123;  system  of  provincial  Grand  Mas-
ter in,  vi,  1649;  the  degree  of  Mark
Master  in,  III,  817:  early  practice  of
Royal  Arch  in,  vn,  2007 ;  Supreme
Council  A.  A.  S.  R.  established  in,  vn,
1851,  1857.

Irish  Master,  Masonic  degree  during
time  of  Charles  I,  11,  274.

Italy,  the  degree  of  Mark  Master  not
known  in,  III,  817;  Supreme  Council  of
A.  A.  S.  R.  established  in,  vn,  1850,
1857.

Jacquesson,  a  symbol  for  the  son  of  James
II  in  the  Stuart  Period,   n,  270.

Jamaica,  Scottish  Rite  Masonry  established
in,  vn,  1809.

Jamblichus,  the  biographer  of  Pythagoras,
n,  366.

INDEX

2039

James  II,  relation  of,  to  Masonry,  11,  271.

Japan,  Freemasonry  in,  VII,  1986;  Scottish
Rite  Masonry  in,  VII,   1889,    1890,    1892.

Jekson,  a  significant  word  in  the  Scottish
or  Ramsay  degrees,  11,  270.

Jerusalem,  the  crusaders  capture  of,  v,
1325 ;  the  Latin  Kingdom  of,  v,   1326.

Jerusalem  Word,  The,  iv,  934.

Jesuits,  relation  of  the,  to  Freemasonry,
11,  286.

Jesuitic  Masonry,  11,  288,  290.

Jews,  three  sects  of,  in  time  of  Christ,  11,
388;  baptism  among  the,  vi,  1730,  1732.

Jones,  Inigo,  a  great  architect,  vn,  1804.

Josephus,  Legend  of  Lamech's  Sons  and
the  Pillars  mentioned  by,  1,  44 ;  the
Legend  of  the  Craft  drawn  from  the
Antiquities  of,  1,  69.

Jud^eus,  Philo,  citation  from,  in  regard  to
the  Essenes,  11,  390.

Jurisdiction,  The  American  Doctrine  of
Grand  Lodge,  vi,  1650 ;  discussion  of,  in
connection  with  colored  Freemasonry,
vi,  1642;  in  Constitution  of  G.  G.  Chap-
ter, v,  1295 ;  General  Grand  Chapter's,
abridged,  v,   1296.

Jurisprudence  (cf.  "Law"  and  "Stat-
utes"), operative  character  of  early  Ma-
sonic, iv,  939 ;  Payne's  "General  Regu-
lations," the  basis  of,  iv,  917,  918,  919;
influence  of  the  schism  of  the  Lodge  of
Antiquity  upon,  iv,  1152;  an  impor-
tant principle  of,  v,   1380.

K

Kansas,  first  Lodge  and  organization  of
Grand  Lodge  in,  vi,  1472;  introduction
of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  vi,  1510;  Cryptic
Masonry  in,  vi,  1581  ;  organization  of
Grand  Commandery  and  subordinate
commanderies  in,  vi,  1608;  Scottish
Rite  Masonry  in,  vn,  1889,  1890,  1892.

Kassideans,  The,  v,  1346.

Kaskaskia,  III.,  lodge  established  at,  in
1805,  by  charter  from  G.  L.  of  Pa.,  vi,
1450.

Kemble,  John  M.,  ii,  553.

Kennedy,  K.  A.,  vi,  1576.

Kentucky,  the  introduction  of  Freema-
sonry in,  V,  1438 ;  first  Lodge  and  organ-
ization of  Grand  Lodge  in,  v,  1438;  in-
troduction of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  vi,
1510;  Grand  Chapter  of,  1826,  tries  to
dissolve,  G.  G.  Chapter,  v,  1299;
Cryptic  Masonry  in,  VI,  1581 ;  organiza-
tion of  Grand  Commandery  and  subor-
dinate commanderies  in,  vi,  1608 ;
Scottish  Rite  Masonry  in.  VII,  1889,
1890,  1892.

K-H.,  30th  degree,  A.  A.  S.  R.  as  an-
nounced by  the  Supreme  Council  of
Charleston,  in  1802,  vn,  1848.

Kilwinning,  claim  that  Freemasonry  in
Scotland  began-  at,  III,  631 ;  efforts  to
identify  Robert  Bruce   with  secret  soci-

ety at,  11,  279;  manuscript  of  (see  Ed-
inburgh-Kilwinning MS.)  ;  election  of
Lord  Cassillis  to  the  deaconship  in  the
Lodge  of,  11,  322 ;  the  Abbey  of,  in,  630.

King,  C.  W.,  The  Gnostics  and  their  Re-
mains, Ancient  and  Medieval,  written
by  (1864),  11,  371,  380.

King  Cyrus  Chapter,  Newburyport,  1790,
v,  1293 ;  participates  in  formation  of
Grand   Chapter,    1798,  v,    1294.

Kingdom  of  Jerusalem,  v,  1325.

King's  Master  of  Work,  a  common  title
in  the  Middle  Ages,  III,  647.

Kirby,  Ephraim,  first  G.  H.  Priest,  v,  1295.

Kloss,  Georg,  ii,  293,  434.

Knight,   Sir  William  Wilson,   ii,  320.

Knight  of  the  Brazen  Serpent,  26th  de-
gree A.  A.  S.  R.  as  announced  by  the
Supreme  Council  of  Charleston,  in  1802,
vn,   1848.

Knight  of  the  Eagle  and  Pelican  (see
also   "Rose  Croix"),  11,  280,  355.

Knight  of  the  East,  a  degree  of  French
Rite,  v,  1218;  15th  degree  A.  A.  S.  R.
as  announced  by  the  Supreme  Council
of  Charleston,  in    1802,   vn,   1848.

Knight  of  the  East  and  West,  17th  de-
gree A.  A.  S.  R.  as  announced  by  the
Supreme  Council  of  Charleston,  in  1802,
vn,  1848.

Knight  of  the  Red  Cross,  v,  1327.

Knight  Rose  Croix,  a  degree  of  the  French
Rite,  v,  1218.

Knight  of  the  Sun,  a  degree  invented  by
Pernelty,  n,  253 ;  name  of  the  28th  de-
gree A.  A.  S.  R.  as  announced  by  the
Supreme  Council  of  Charleston,  in  1802,
vn,  1848.

Knight  of  St.  Andrew,  29th  degree  A.  A.
S.  R.  as  announced  by  the  Supreme
Council  of  Charleston,  in  1802,  vn,  1848.

Knight  Templar,  name  of  one  of  the  Ram-
say High  Degrees,  11,  352.

Knight  Templarism,  the  introduction  of,
into  America,  v,  1368.

Knighthood,  General  History  of  Chris-
tian, v,  1309.

Knights  of  Baldwin,  v,  1345.

Knights  of  the  East,  formation  of,  in
1756,  vn,  1818.

Knights  of  the  Holy  Temple  and  Sep-
ulcher  and  of  St.  John  of  Jerusa-
lem, H.  R.  D.  M.  K.  D.  S.  M.,  v,  1355.

Knights  Hospitallers,  Templars,  and
the  Teutonic  Knights,  origin  of,  in
the  Crusades,  1,  225.

Knights  of  Malta,  history  of  the,  v,  1347,
!353;  estates  of  the  Templars  shared
by,  v,  1335 ;  relation  of  the,  to  Freema-
sonry, v,  1318,   1339.

Knights  of  the  Red  Cross  of  Rome  and
constantine,  v,  i3o9.

Knights  of  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem,  ii,
393-

Knight  Templar  Degree,  the  spurious
French,  vn,  1853.

2040

INDEX

Knights  Templars,  medieval  order  of,  es-
tablished, v,  1326;  history  of  the,  from
1118  to  1291,  v,  1321 ;  list  of  G.  M.  of,
v,  1361 ;  suppression  of  the  military  or-
der of,  1,  256;  v,  I33iff-;  present  ritual
of,  a  modern  invention,  v,  1340;  tradi-
tion that  Chevalier  St.  George  was  ad-
mitted into  Order  of,  11,  280;  influence
of  the,  in  Europe,  v,  1326;  the  history
of  the,  in  America,  v,   1368ft.

Krause,  Dr.  Carl  Christian  Friedrich,
The  Three  Oldest  Documents  of  the
Fraternity  of  Freemasons  by,  cited  in
regard  to  the  Leland  MS.,  11,  438.

Krause  MS.  (York  Constitutions),  see  un-
der "Old  Charges."

La  Fayette,  General,  reception  of,  by  S.
C.  Encampment,  No.  1,  1825,  v,  1374  (cf.
v,  1421).

Lakin,  Geo.  W.,  vi,  1462.

Lalande  (see  Delalande),  history  of  Free-
masonry by,  v,  1 187.

Lamball,  Jacob,  one  of  the  first  Grand
Wardens  in  England,  iv,  904.

Lambskin  Apron,  hi,  593.

Lameche,  history  of,  in  Legend  of  Craft,
1,  19.

Lamech's  Sons  and  the  Pillars,  part  of
the  Legend  of  the  Craft,  1,  19,  44.

Landmarks,  Ancient,  proprietary  "marks"
important  features  of,  III,  814.

Landmarks  of  the  Order,  historical  basis
of  the,  iv,  896.

Landsdowne,  MS.  (cf.  "Old  Charges"),
supposed  date  of,  1,  15 ;  charges  in  the,
hi,  582;  compulsory  attendance  of  Mas-
ters and  Fellows  mentioned  in,  ill,  607.

Landsdowne  Statutes,  some  requirements
of  the,  in,  587.

Lapis  Angularis,  an  element  in  early  sym-
bolism, 11,  341.

Larmenius  of  Jerusalem,  Johannes  Mar-
cus, v,  1356.

Larmenius  Templars,  v,   1341.

Larner,  Noble  D.,  G.  G.  H.  P.,  1886,  v,
1302.

Larudan,  Abbe,  theory  of,  that  Oliver
Cromwell  invented  Freemasonry,  11,  293.

Latham,  Bela,  vi,  1574.

Lathrop,  Gurdon,   elected  first   G.   M.,  v,

1295-

Latin,  early  Masonic  secrets  concealed  by
use  of,  in,  748.

Latin  Christendom,  spread  of  Knight-
hood in,  v,  1321.

Laurie,  History  of  Freemasonry,  written
by  Sir  David  Brewster,  iv,  1025.

Law,  Masonic,  the  historical  basis  of  the,
hi,  628 ;  some  sources  of  modern,  ill,
872,  876;  iv,  917;  the  beginnings  of,  iv,
908 ;  the  foundation  of,  in  Operative
MS.    Constitutions,    iv,    918,    917;    the

first  code  of,  iv,  916;  source  of  the  first
code  of,  iv,  896;  Operative  charac-
ter of  the  early,  iv,  939,  940 ;  history  of
the  early  progress  of,  iv,  914,  917;  in-
debtedness of,  to  George  Payne,  iv,  919;
the  development  of,  iv,  994 ;  Lodges
governed  by,  instead  of  by  State  Law,
11,  496;  an  important  principle  of,  v,
1379>  a  principle  of  Royal  Arch  Law,  v,
1294 ;  Royal  Arch  Masonry  a  feature
of,  v,  1296;  influence  of  the  G  G.  Chap-
ter upon,  v,  1300;  the  principle  of,  gov-
erning degrees,  vi,   1561.

Lawrie's  History,  treatment  of  the  Essenes
in,  authentic,  11,  389.

Law-suits,  early  guild  spirit  discouraged,
between  members,   hi,  587.

Lawrence,  Gen.  S.  C.  (P.  G.  M.,  Mass.),
largest  Masonic  library  in  America
owned  by,  vn,  201 1.

Layer,  the  name  of  a  Rough  Mason,  III,
780.

Leeson,  Dr.  Henry  Beaumont,  Sov.  G.
C.  of  the  Supreme  Council  of  England,
a  letter  from,  on  the  condition  of  Scot-
tish Rite   Masonry,  vn,   1852.

Le  Franc,  Abbe,  theory  of,  tracing  Free-
masonry to  the  Socinians,  11,  382.

Le  Frere  de  la  Chausse,.  Memoire  Jus-
tificatif,  v,  1207.

Legend,  the  definition  of,  vn,  1757.

Legend  of  the  Craft,  importance  of  the,
in  Masonic  History,  1,  12;  supposed
sources  of  the,  in,  600;  successive  Con-
stitutions contain  the,  iv,  915  ;  the  Dow-
land  text  of  the,  1,  18;  the  Germ  of
History  in,  1,  36;  the  origin  of  Geom-
etry as  treated  in,  1,  18,  33,  40;  Lamech's
Sons  and  the  Pillars  discussed  in,  1,  19,
44;  the  significance  of  Hermes  in,  1,  20,
50 ;  The  Tower  of  Babel  and  meaning
of  in,  1,  20,  53 ;  Nimrod,  mention  and
discussion  of,  in  the,  1,  20,  63 :  Euclid,
significance  of  mention  of,  in  the,  1,  20,
67;  sources  of  the,  in  the  "Antiquities"
of  Josephus,  1,  69 :  prominent  points  of,
1,  71 ;  relation  of  the  Temple  Legend
to,  1,  73,  159;  iv,  948;  the,  as  a  narra-
tive of  the  rise  and  spread  of  architec-
ture, 1,  74 ;  modern  Speculative  Mason-
ry suggested  by,  1,  77 ;  value  of  the,  on
the  progress  of  Masonic  signs  and  sym-
bols, 1,  77 ;  the  spread  of  Masonry  into
other  countries  related  in,  1,  83 ;  signifi-
cance of  Charles  Martel  and  Namus
Grecus  in,  1,  22,  85 ;  the  Legend  of  St.
Alban  in,  1,  23,  90 ;  the  York  Legend  in
the,  1,  24,  95 ;  summary  and  significance
of  the,  1,  in  ;  element  of  the  historical
truth  in,  1,  38,  49,  50,  51 ;  later  theories
of  the  origin  of  Masonry  based  on  the,
1,  36,  38,  115,  117,  124,  128,  143;  influ-
ence of  French  Masons  on  the,  1,  34 ;
new  elements  introduced  in  the,  by
Cooke  MS.,  n,  370;  distorting  influence
of  the,  on  the  History  of  Freemasonry,
n,  463 ;  historical  value  of  the,  1,  p.  v,

INDEX

2041

38;  the  real  historical  foundation  of
the,  11,  549;  some  names  used  in  the,
in,  768;  Socinian  origin  of  Freemason-
ry disproved  by  the,  11,  386;  use  of  the,
by  Scottish  Speculative  Masons,  IV,
1101;  theory  of  the  introduction  of  Ma-
sonry into  France  in  the,  11,  527;  no
allusion  to  Pythagoras  in  the  old  MSS.
of  the,  11,  364.

Legend  of  Enoch,  Continental  origin  of,
11,  401;  symbolic  character  of,  11,  404;
the  vault,  etc.,  vi,  1565.

Legend  of  the  Four  Crowned  Martyrs
(see  "Four  Crowned  Martyrs").

Legend  of  Hiram  Abif  (cf.  "Hiram
Abif"),  the  substance  of,  11,  419.

Legend  of  the  Smith,  ii,  421,  424,  425,  427,
431;  influence  of  the,  on  Hiramic  sym-
bolism, 11,  431.

Legend  of  the  Temple,  i,  22,  73 ;  relation
of  the,  to  Masonic  symbolism,  1,  74;
symbolic  character  of,  1,   165.

Legend  of  the  Tower  of  Babel,  three  dif-
ferent forms  of,  1,  59;  present  form  of,

I,  61.

Legends,  three  classes  of  Masonic,  1,  4;
the,  in  Masonic  degrees,  vn,   1755.

Legends  and  Symbols  (cf.  "Symbolism"
iv),  importance  of,  in  Freemasonry,  1,  8.

Leland  MS.  (cf.  "Old  Charges"),  genuine
publications  of,  11,  433,  437;  theory  that
Sir  John  Mandeville's  work  was  the
real  source  of,  11,  451  ;  discussion  of
the,   11,  433 ;   spurious   character  of  the,

II,  347 ;  attitude  of  early  Masonic  wri-
ters toward  the,  11,  361 ;  the  true  char-
acter of  the,  11,  441.

Lemon,  Reuben  C,  G.  G.  H.  P.,  1897,  v,

1302.
Lenoir,  M.,  theory  of,  regarding  origin  of

Freemasonry,  1,  189.
Lenoncourt,  Robert,  v,  1356.
Lernais,  Marquis  de,  Scottish  Rite  intro-
duced into  Berlin  by,  in  1758,  vn,  1805.
Level  and  the  Square,  early  emblematic

use  of,  11,  345.
Lewis,  John  L,  G.  G.  H.  P.,  1865,  v,  1301.
Libero  Muratore,  name  of  Freemasons  in

Italy,  in,  788.
Light,   history   of   the    Symbolism   of,   VI,

1701 ;   significance  of  the  symbolism  of,

vii,  1749.
Light  from  the  East   (cf.  "Cabala"),  11,

349-
Lights,    the,   use   of,    in   early   rituals,   iv,

941.
Lilly,  William,  ii.  306,  316,  318,  319,  339.
Limerick  (Ireland),  early  emblematic  use

of    square    and    level    revealed    by    relic

discovered  at,  11,  349.
Lincoln,  Constitution  of  the  Tailors'  Guild

at,  11,  572.
Lists  of  Lodges,  some  early,  iv,  920,  924,

1028.
Littler,  Henry,  ii,  320.

Livert  Companies,  The  Twelve  Great,
In>  595 ;  exclusive  character  of  the,  in,
612.

Liveries  (analogous  to  "properly  clothed"),

Hi,  593,  594-
Livingston,   Edward,   G.   G.    H.    P.,    1829-

1832,  v,  1301.
Locke,   John,   Leland  MS.   discovered  by,

11,   360;   views   of,   on   Leland    MS.,   11,

435-

Lockharte,  Sir  Samuel,  ii,  281.

Lodge,  members,  necessary  to  organize  an
early  Speculative,  in,  619 ;  iv,  892 ;  num-
ber necessary  to  constitute  an  early,  iv,
938;  the  early  sign  for  a,  iv,  931.

Lodge  of  Antiquity,  London,  the  history
of  the,  iv,  886,  887 ;  original  title  of  the,
iv,  886;  several  meeting  places  of  the,
vii,  2009;  the  schism  of  the,  iv,  1135;
text  of  the  schismatic  Manifesto  of  the,
iv,  1 1 40.

Lodge  of  Antiquity  MS.  (cf.  "Old
Charges"),  1,    15;  vn,   2003.

Lodge  of  Five  Freemasons,  establishment
of  a,  in,  620.

Lodge  of  Fortituee  and  Old  Cumberland,
the  present  name  of  one  of  the  Lodges
sharing  in  the  organization  of  the  First
Grand  Lodge,  vn,  2009.

Lodge  Nomenclature,  the  beginning  of,
vn,  2008.

Lodge  of  St.  Germain,  peculiar  device  be-
longing to,  n,  271.

Lodges,  Operative  and  gentleman  member-
ship in  the  early  English,  iv,  881  ;  trans-
formation from  Operative  to  Specula-
tive, 1,  p.  x ;  modern  Masonic  Guild
spirit  of  secrecy  still  preserved  in,  III,
585 ;  General  Assemblies  of  medieval
Masons  and,  in,  604 ;  first  distinction
between,  and  the  Masons'  Company,
in,  602 ;  Speculative,  direct  successors
of  Operative,  in,  615 ;  early  meeting  of
the,  in,  610;  the  first  meeting  places  of
Speculative,  iv,  885 ;  first  named  after
Taverns  or  Hotels,  vn,  2008;  number
needed  to  constitute  the  early,  in,  619;
iv,  892;  the  early  method  of  organiz-
ing; iv,  924;  early  organization  of,
without  warrants,  v.  1229,  1231,  1233;
original  method  of  creating  new.  vn,
2008;  change  in  the  system  of  organiz-
ing, iv,  893 ;  organization  of,  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  "Ancients,"  iv,  1126;
the  multiplication  of,  in  England,  iv,
92off. ;  the  use  of,  as  political  centers  in
Europe,  vn,  1815 ;  the  establishment  of
Speculative,  in  France,  iv,  1020 ;  early
meeting  places  of,  in  France,  v,  1199;
the  increase  of,  in  France,  v,  1215 ;  in-
vention of  higher  degrees  in  continen-
tal, 11,  275  ;  Bauhiitten  the  name  of  those
of  the  German  Steinmetzen,  in,  715;
early  existence  of,  in  American  Colo-
nies, v,  1226;  the  first  in  the  States  and
Territories  of  the  United  States,  V,
1394.

2042

INDEX

Lodges  and  Incorporations,  names  of  As-
sociated Operative  Masons  in  Scotland,

I,  ix.

Lodges,  Scottish,  three  classes  of  members
in,  in,  648.

Logos  (Word),  early  use  of,  in  Freema-
sonry, 11,  308.

Lombardy,  remnants  of  Roman  Colleges  in,

II,  527 ;  Freemasons  first  associated  in,
in,  687 ;  condition  of  Freemasonry  in,
in  nth  century,  III,  693.

London,  remains  of  Roman  monuments  in,
11,  513;  four  Operative  lodges  at,  in
1717,  iv,  881 ;  two  theories  that  Specu-
lative Freemasonry  had  its  origin  in,
1646,  11,  311;  early  development  of
Speculative  Masonry  in,  in,  837.

London  Companies,  The  Masons'  Com-
pany and  the,  in,  589.

"Loss  and  Recovery,"  the  significance  of,
in   Masonic  Symbolism,  v,    1239.

Louis  VII  of  France,  second  Crusade  un-
der, v,  1322.

Louis  IX  of  France,  sixth  Crusade  led  by,
v,  1323.

Louis  XV,  hostile  attitude  of,  toward  Free-
masonry, v,  1 189.

Louis  Augustus,  Duke  of  Maine,  v,  1356.

Louisiana,  first  Lodge  and  establishment
of  Grand  Lodge  in,  vi,  1445 ;  introduc-
tion of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  v,  1512;
Cryptic  Masonry  in,  vi,  1581 ;  organiza-
tion of  Grand  Commandery  and  subor-
dinate commanderies  in,  vi,  1609 ;
Scottish  Rite  Masonry  in,  vn,  1889,
1890,  1892.

Lowen   (see  Layer),  in,  780.

Loyola,  designs  of  the  disciples  of,  in  the
use  of  Freemasonry,  n,  286.

Lozenge,  the  figure  of  a,  as  a  Masonic
mark,  III,  8c8.

Ludlow,  Edmund,  ii,  298.

Lustration,  the  first  step  in  the  Mysteries,
1,  179.

Lyon,  David  Murray,  ii,  280,  465;  in,  630,
641 ;  v,  1347.

M

Macbenac,  new  Master's  word  applied  by
Jacobites  to  James  of  England,  11,  268.

MacCalla,  Clifford  P.,  valuable  contribu-
tions by,  to  the  history  of  Freemasonry,
v,  1228.

Macon  Parfait,  ii,  271.

Madras,   Freemasonry   in,  vn,    1977.

Mackey,  Albert  G.  (M.  D.),  General
Grand  H.  P.,  1865,  v,  1300;  vi,  1536;
Memorials  on  the  death  of,  opp.,  v,  1302;
an  estimate  of,  v,  1305;  the  Supreme
Council  A.  A.  S.  R.  and,  VI,  1589.

Magistri  Comacini  (Masters  of  Como),
in,  705.

Maidment,  James,  hi,  634.

Maier,  Michael,  theory  that  Rosicrucian-
ism  was  introduced  into  England  by,
n,  227-

Maine,  first  Lodge  and  organization  of
Grand  Lodge  in,  v,  1424;  introduction
of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  vi,  1515;  Cryptic
Masonry  in,  vi,  1582;  organization  of
Grand  Commandery  and  subordinate
commanderies  in,  vi,  1609;  Scottish
Rite  Bodies  in,  VII,   1895.

Mainwaring,  Colonel,  one  of  the  earliest
recorded  non-operative  members  of
Lodge,  hi,  652.

Maitland,  W.,  light  thrown  on  early
Speculative  Masonry  by,  11,  323.

Maitre  Gerard  (Master  Gerard),  in,  737.

Maitres  inamovibles,  v,  1 196.

Mandeville,  Sir  John,  theory  that  Leland
MS.   was   developed  from   work  by,   n,

451.

Manitoba,  Freemasonry  in,  vn,  1933.

Manning,  Edward,  Cardinal  Archbishop
of  Westminster,  v,  1336.

Manuel  Comnenus,  v,   1322.

Manuscripts,  The  Old  Masonic  (cf.
"Old  Charges"),  1,  13;  list  of  the  prin-
cipal, 1,  15;  the  destruction  of  several
valuable,  in  1720,  IV,  916;  historical  im-
portance of  the  Harleian,  in,  616;  dis-
cussion of  the  Leland,  11,  433 ;  charges
in  the  Landsdowne,  in,  582 ;  Fremasons
forbidden  to  work  with  Rough  Masons
in  the,  in,  779.

Maria,  Henrietta,  ii,  268.

Mark  Book,  vii,  2007.

Mark  Degree  (cf.  "Degrees"  4),  relation
of  the,  to  early  "proprietary  mark,"  HI,

815,  816;  rise   and  progress  of  the,  in,

816,  v,  1292 ;  earliest  mention  of  the,  in
England,  hi,  821  ;  first  record  of  the
adoption  of,  1795,  v,  1280;  supposition
as  to  the  origin  of,  in,  659;  sources  of
the  ritual  of  the,  in,  826,  830,  832,  834;
introduction  of  the,  in  the  United  States,
in,  822 ;  made  one  of  the  preliminary
degrees  to  Royal  Arch,  v,  1295  ;  defini-
tive adoption  of  the  Webb,  v,  1299.

Mark  Lodges,  independent  existence  of,
last  part  of  18th  and  early  part  of  19th
centuries,  in,  822,  823-824,  825  ;  charters
for,  sometime  issued  by  Grand  Council
of  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  v,  1275 ;  later
by  the  Grand  Chapter,  III,  817,  818;  in-
dependent,  abolished  in  1853,  III,  818,
824.

Mark  Mason,  a  degree  given  to  Fellows
in  Scotland,  III,  820.

Mark  Masonry,  a  fabricated  history  of,
in,  825 ;  influence  of  the  ancient  tessera
hospitals  upon,  in,  826,  830;  common
element   in   the   various    rituals   of,   III,

834.

Mark  Masters,  the  jewel  of  the,  in,  821.

Marks,  the  history  of  Masons',  111,  792;
early  use  of,  by  Operative  Masons,  vn,
2007 ;  the  discovery  of,  by  M.  Didron,
in,  658;  three  classees  of,  in,  796,  797,
802;  resemblance  of  stonecutters',  to
old  printers'  devices,  111,  834;  the  char-
acter   of    the    old    Scottish,    in,    6591

INDEX

2043

the  use  of,  for  signatures  in  Scottish
Masonry,  III,  657.

Marquesas  Islands,  Freemasonry  intro-
duced in,  vn,  1999.

Martel,  Charles,  and  Namus  Grecus,
the  Legend  of,  1,  22,  85.

Maryland,  the  introduction  of  Freemason-
ry in,  v,  1414 ;  introduction  of  R.  A.
Masonry  in,  vi,  15 16;  G.  G.  Chapter  of
the  U.  S.  of  A.  admits  G.  Chapter  of,
1S16,  v,  1298;  Cryptic  Masonry  in,  vi,
1582;  organization  of  Grand  Command-
ery  and  subordinate  commanderies  in,
vi,  1610;  Scottish  Rite  Masonry  in,
vn,  1889,  1890,  1893.

Maskelyne,  a  member  of  the  first  lodge
in  France,  11,  283.

Mason  Allowed,  an  early  term  applied  to
one  admitted  into  the  fraternity,  in,
586.

Mason  of  the  Royal  Arch,  vn,  1772.

Mason  Word,  importance  of  the,  in  the
17th  century  form  of  initiation,  in,  649;
the  medieval,  iv,  948;  frequent  use  of
the,  in  Scottish  Lodge  Records,  iv,  970,

973-

Masonic  Archaeological  Society  of  Cin-
cinnati, the  Grand  Mystery  of  Free-
masons Discovered  (fac-simile  of  an
early  Catechism),  published  by,  iv,  930.

Masonic  Arch.eologists,  many  old  records
discovered  by,  III,  604.

Masonic  Arms,  an  account  of  the,  in,  597.

Masonic  Brethren,  first  mention  of,  in  the
American  Colonies,  V,  1394.

Masonic  Constitution,  an  ordinance  com-
mon iO  every  early,  11,  576.

Masonic  Constitutions  (cf.  "Old
Charges"),  name  applied  to  documents,
ranging  from  the  14th  to  18th  century,
in,  598;  Masters  and  Fellows  forbidden
to  work  with  a  Cowan  by,  in,  586.

Masonic  Degrees  (cf.  "Degrees"),  argu-
ments against  the  existence  of,  prior  to
1720,  iv,  953.

Masonic  Guilds,  the  Roman  Colleges  of
Artificers,  the  prototype  of,  11,  485 ;  in-
fluence of  Craft  Guild  spirit  on,  III,
584;  exclusive  character  of  the,  in,  612;
the  early  English,  III,  581  ;  character  of
the  French  medieval,  in,  674.

Masonic  Knighthood,  oldest  Grand  Body
of,  in  the  United  States,  vi,  1616.

Masonic  Law  (see  under  "Law").

Masonic  Legends  (see  "Legends"),  the
character  of,  11,  456.

Masonic  Lodges  (see  under  "Lodges"),
identity  of  regulations  between,  and
Roman  Colleges,  n,  476;  coalition  of,
in  England  early  in  the  18th  century,
in,  850;  origin  of  the  titles,  Masters
and  Wardens  in,  in,  592.

Masonic  Magazine,  best  discussion  of  Le-
land  MS.  in,  11,  440.

Masonic  Rites  (see  "Rites"),  rivalry  of,
with  Illuminism,  in  Germany  and
France,  n,  289.

Masonic  Society,  customs  of  the,  in,  625.

Masonic  Symbols  (cf.  "Symbolism"),  the
use  of,  to  establish  analogy  between
Freemasonry  and  the  Royal  Society,  n,
307-

Masonic  System,  Webb  the  author  of  a,
universally  practiced  in  the  United
States,  v,  1292.

Masonic  Union,  history  of  the,  in  Eng-
land, v,   1 1 55.

Masonry  (cf.  "Freemasonry"),  Temple
origin  of,  as  treated  by  different  schools
of  thought,  1,  7 ;  legendary  account  of
the  spread  of,  1,  83  ;  inherent  conditions
leading  to  the  spread  of,  in,  692 ;  Opera-
tive condition  of,  among  the  Anglo-
Saxons,  11,  540;  Operative,  some  Saxon
patrons  of,  11,  S43ff. ;  Masonry,  Geom-
etry, and  Architecture,  synonymous
terms  in  Legend  of  the  Craft,  1,  66;
in,  762;  the  decay  of  practical,  in,  849;
the  beginning  of  additions  to  Ancient
Craft,  11,  340;  alliance  of,  with  the
Knights  of  the  Red  Cross,  v,  1317;  made
subservient  to  English  Royalty,  n,  268,
269.

Masons,  a  particular  dress  common  to  the
medieval,  in,  594.

Masons  Allowed,  in,  617.

Masons'  Company,  direct  predecessor  of
the  Masons'  Lodges,  in,  590;  Stow's
account  of  the,  in,  595 ;  Chiswe'ii's  ac-
count of  the,  m,  596 ;  the  London  Com-
panies and  the,  in,  589;  Operative  Ma-
sons absorbed  by  the,  after  1717,  iv,
902;  history  of  the,  by  Edward  Conder,
Jr.,  vn,  2005.

Masons'  Company  of  London,  history  of
the,  in,  599.

Masons,  The  Company  of.  early  associa-
tion of,  in  England,  II,  307 ;  secrets  of
the  medieval,  in,  753 ;  the  General  As-
semblies and  Lodges  of  the  medieval,
in,  604 ;  non-operative,  early  election
of,  in  English  and  Scottish  Lodges,  n,
321,  365;  in,  620,  652;  Speculative  out-
numbering Operative,  11,  273 ;  early  reg-
ulations of  the  French,  III,  675 ;  re-
quirement for  admission  of,  in  early
Speculative  Lodges,   in,   613.

Masons'  Hall,  in  Basinghall  Street,  Lon-
don, 11,  307,  316.

Masons'  Marks,  the  history  of,  in,  792.

Mason's  Wound,  ii,  309.

Massachusetts,  introduction  of  Freema-
sonry into,  v,  1230;  first  Lodge  and  or-
ganization of  Grand  Lodge  in,  v,  1398;
introduction  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry  in,
about  1769,  v,  1273;  vi,  1519;  repre-
sented at  organizing  of  General  Grand
Chapter,  1798,  v,  1294;  formation  of
Grand  Chapter  in,  1799,  v,  1274;  Cryptic
Masonry  in,  vi,  1582;  organization  of
Grand  Commandery  and  subordinate
commanderies  in,  vi,  1616 ;  Scottish  Rite
Bodies    in,    vn,    1897.

2044

INDEX

Master,  origin  of  the  title,  in,  592 ;  early
meaning  of  the  term,  IV,  892 ;  early  au-
thority of  the,  in,  618;  importance  of
the,  in  Bauhutten  and  Speculative
Lodges  of  Germany,  ill,  749.

Master  of  Living  Stones,  hi,  800.

Master-General  of  the  Buildings,  juris-
dictions of  the,  in  French  Masonry,  III,
679.

Master  Mason,  early  duties  of  the,  iv,  1047.

Master  Masons,  14th  century  assemblies
of,  hi,  606.

Master  Mason's  Degree  (cf.  "Degrees"
3),  the  invention  of  the,  iv,  975;  record
of,  in  1727,  vii,  2009;  Royal  Arch  origi-
nally the  completion  of,  vii,  2010.

Master  Masons'  Lodge,  Templar  Mason-
ry under  jurisdiction  of,  prior  to  1800,
vi,  1613.

Master  Word  (see  Mason  word),  iv,  970.

Masters  and  Wardens,  titles  of  chief  offi-
cers, in  chartered  Guilds  and  Masonic
Lodges,  hi,  591  ;  early  use  of  the  terms,
hi,  602 ;  early  functions  of  the,  in  mak-
ing Masons,  in,  619.

Masters  of  Como  (cf.  "Traveling  Free-
masons"), history  and  spread  of  the,
hi,  682.

Masters,  Fellows  and  Apprentices,  com-
mon terminology  in  Operative  and  Spec-
ulative Masonry,  in,  869.

Masters,  early  Speculative  regulations  re-
garding the,  iv,  917;  rank  instead  of
degree  in  early  Scottish  Masonry,  in,
648;  unremovable,  v,  1196;  warrants  of
the  irremovable,  suppressed,  v,  121 1;
Masonic  schism  over  the  irremovable,  in
France,  v,  1220.

Master's  Legend,  political  interpretation
of,  11,  268.

Master's  Warrant,  conferring  of  Royal
Arch  degree  under,  v,   1293.

Master's  Word,  new  substitute  for  the,  n,
268.

Matthews,  John,  copy  of  medal  to,  1786,
vii,  1915.

Mayronne,  Dominique,  vi,  1445.

McCahan,  George  L.,  G.  G.  H.  P.,  1894,
v,  1302.

McClintock,  Dr.,  opinion  of,  as  to  mean-
ing of  Hiram  Abif,  n,  413.

Medal,  copy  of  a  copper,  to  John  Mat-
thews, 1786,  vn,  1915.

Medieval  Freemasons,  three  differences
between  the,  and  Speculative  Freema-
sons, in,  863.

Medieval  Masons,  secrets  of  the,  in,  753 ;
the  General  Assemblies  and  Lodges  of
the,  hi,  604.

Meeker,  Moses,  vi,  1462.

Membership,  early  and  modern  require-
ments as  to,  in  lodges,  ill,  618;  early
conditions  of,  in  English  lodges,  iv,  909.

Memoirs  of  Edmund  Ludlow  (1640),  great
value  of,  as  faithful   record,   11,  299.

Mestrice  des  Macons,  name  of  Operative
Masons  in  Gaul,  1,  ix.

Mexicans,  picture-characters  of  the  early,
vi,  1708.

Mexico,  Freemasonry  in,  vii,  1942;  organ-
ization of  Grand  Commandery  and  sub-
ordinate commanderies  in,  VI,  1617 ;
Supreme   Council  A.   A.   S.   R.   in,   vn,

1857.

Meyer,  J.  G.  L,  11,  434.

Michaeler,  Carl,  ii,  373.

Michaud,  Joseph  F.,  v,  1315.

Michelet,  M.,   11,  528;  hi,  712,  756.

Michigan,  first  Lodge  and  organization  of
Grand  Lodge  in,  v,  1428;  introduction
of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  vi,  1520;  Cryptic
Masonry  in,  vi,  1583;  organization  of
Grand  Commandery  and  subordinate
commanderies  in,  vi,  1617;  Scottish
Rite   Bodies  in,  vn,   1905.

Middletown  (Conn.),  first  meeting  of  the
Grand  Chapter  of  the  Northern  States
held  at,  1798,  v,  1296;  1806  session  of
G.  G.  Chapter  held  at,  v,  1297.

Military  Lodges,  some  early,  in  Pennsyl-
vania, v,  1266;  in  the  Civil  War,  v,
1418;  Royal  Arch  Masonry  imported
into  America  by,  v,  1266,  1279;  ele-
ments of  the  Royal  Arch  distributed  by,
v,  1288,  1293;  existence  of,  in  the  Amer-
ican Army,  V,  1427;  jurisdiction  of
English,  vi,  1641';  the  Templar  degree
and,  v,  1372.

Military  Templarism,  relation  of  modern
Templarism  to,  v,   1368.

Milwaukee,  early  lodges  organized  at,  vi,
1461.

Minnesota,  first  Lodge  and  organization
of  Grand  Lodge  in,  VI,  1468;  introduc-
tion of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  vi,  1520;
Cryptic  Masonry  in,  vi,  1583;  organiza-
tion of  Grand  Commandery  and  subor-
dinate commanderies  in,  vi,  1618;  Scot-
tish Rite  Masonry  in,  VII,  1889,  1890,
1892.

Minorca,  Lodge  established  in,  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  "Ancients,"   IV,    1126.

Minute,  fac-simile  of  the  oldest,  vn,  1926.

Mississippi,  first  Lodge  and  organization
of  Grand  Lodge  in,  VI,  1449;  introduc-
tion of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  vi,  1521  ;
Cryptic  Masonry  in,  vi,  1583 ;  organi-
zation of  Grand  Commandery  and  sub-
ordinate commanderies  in,  vi,  1618 ;
Scottish  Rite  Masonry  in,  vn,  1889,
1890,   1892.

Missouri,  first  Lodge  and  organization  of
Grand  Lodge  in,  vi,  1453 ;  introduction
of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  vi,  1521 ;  Cryptic
Masonry  in,  VI,  1586;  organization  of
Grand  Commandery  and  subordinate
commanderies  in,  vi,  1619 ;  Scottish
Rite  Masonry  in,  vn,   1889,  1890,  1892.

Mitchell,  John,  one  of  the  organizers  of
the  Supreme  Council  A.  A.  S.  R.,  vn,
1810.

Mithras,  the  Mysteries  of,  I,  177.

"Moderns"  (cf.  "Ancients"),  epithet  given
by    rivals    to    members    of    the    Grand

INDEX

2045

Lodge  of  1717,  iv,  1 104,  1 107,  1 109,  1 1 16,
1 1 17;  number  of  Lodges  under  the,  V,
1 176;  practice  of  the,  regarding  the
Royal  Arch  degree,  v,  11 77,  1260;  the
influence  of,  on  the  Royal  Arch,  v,  1288.

Modern  Masons,  the  Royal  Arch  adopted
by,  1769,  vii,  2007.

Molay,  James  (Jacques)  de,  last  G.  M.
of  Knights  Templars,  v,  1363 ;  vn,  1803 ;
sketch  of  the  life  of,  v,  1363-1364;  offi-
cial successors  of,  appointed  by,  v,  1356;
causes  which  led  to  marytrdom  of,  v,
1331 ;  the  execution  of,  v,  1332  (cf.  1,
256,  and  vn,  1803)  ;  theory  connecting
the  martyrdom  of,  with  the  Hiramic
Legend  of  the  3rd  degree,  i,  265 ;  Re-
bold's  theory  makes  violent  death  of,  an
element  in  a  mythical  Templar  degree,
11,  274.

Moller,  Georg,  Memorial  of  German
Gothic  Architecture  (trans,  by  W.  H.
Leeds,  London,  1836),  III,  685,  708.

Monad,  history  of  the  origin,  development
and  use  of  the,  vn,  1738,  1741-1747.

Monk,  a  friend  of  Cromwell,  II,  294.

MONOGRAMMATIC    "MARKS,"     III,     796,    814.

Montague,  The  Duke  of,  the  fifth  Grand
Master  of  England,  iv,  905.

Montana,  first  Lodge  and  organization  of
Grand  Lodge  in,  VI,  1479;  introduction
of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  VI,  1523 ;  Cryptic
Masonry  in,  VI,  1586;  organization  of
Grand  Commandery  and  subordinate
commanderies  in,  vi,  1619;  Scottish
Rite  Masonry  in,  vn,  1889,  1890,   1892.

Monteil  et  Rabutaux,  corporations  treat-
ed by,  in,  666.

Montfaucon,  list  of  "abraxas  gems"  given
by,  11,  378.

Moore,  John,  letter  from,  in  1715  (1716,
N.  S.),  mentioning  "Masonic  Breth-
ren" at  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  v,  1228,  1394.

Moore,  Sir  Jonas,  ii,  326.

Morgan,  William,  history  of  the  excite-
ment over  disappearance  of,  vi,  1671,
1677;  general  influence  of  excitement
over,  v,  1426,  1433 ;  effect  of,  on  Mason-
ry in  Conn.,  v,  1418.

Morality,  Freemasonry,  the  science  of,  vn,
1756,  1757-

Morin,  Stephen,  influence  of,  on  Royal
Arch  Masonry,  v,  1289;  text  of  the  pa-
tent of,  vn,  1806;  appointment  of,  in
1761,  as  Inspector  General  of  all  lodges
in  the  New  World,  vn,  1864.

Mosheim,  J.  L.,  11,  385.

Mosque  of  Omar,  now  on  the  site  of  Solo-
mon's Temple,   v,    1320.

Mossdorf,  Friedrich,  iv,  935.

Most  Excellent  Master's  Degree  (cf.
"Degrees,"  6),  first  record  of  the,  1796,
v,  1280;  rise  of  the,  v,  1292;  made  one
of  the  degrees  preliminary  to  the  Royal
Arch,  v,  1295 ;  definitive  adoption  of
the  Webb,  in  Capitular  Degrees,  v,  1299.

Mother  Kilwinning  Lodge,  priority  claim
made  by,  in,  631.

Mother  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry  in
America,  history  of  the  lodge  termed
the,  v,  1267.

Murer  (old  German  for  "wall-builder"),
same  as  "Cowan"  in  Scotland,  iv,  959.

Music,  6th  liberal  science  mentioned  in
Legend  of  the  Craft,  1,  18.

Musical  and  Architectural  Lodge,  The,
vii,  2009.

Myers,  Joseph,  Royal  Arch  Masonry  in
Virginia,  organized  by,   v,   1272,   1276.

Mysteries  (cf.  "Pagan  Mysteries"  and
"Customs  and  Usages"),  various  forms
of  the  Ancient,  1,  177;  principal  ele-
ments of  the  Ancient,  1,  174;  purpose
of  inventing  the  Ancient  or  Pagan,  i,
181  ;  steps  in  the  initiation  of  the,  1,  179;
sodality  character  of  the,  11,  472;  theory
of  new  degrees  founded  on  the,  11,  274;
Freemasonry  and  the,  1,  174;  a  com-
parison, 1,  192;  the  Dionysiac,  1,  167.

Mysteries  of  Egypt  and  Greece,  tradi-
tional source  of  1st  degree  in  Masonry,
11,  311.

Mysteries  of  Osisis  and  Isis,  in  Egypt,  i,

177.

Mystery,  meaning  of  the  term,  in  trade
Guilds,  in,  589;  meaning  of  the  word,
in  the  Middle  Ages,  in,  763.

Mystic  Cross  (see  "Fylfot"  and  "Swas-
tika";  cf.   "Symbolism"   I),  in,  801.

Mystical  Numbers,  the  medieval  use  of,
ni,  757-

Myths,  character  of  the  Ancient,  11,  458.

Myths  and  Legends,  subject  matter  of
Prehistoric  Masonry,  1,  9,  10.

Myths,  Masonic,  Masonic  philosophy  de-
veloped from,  1,  1.

N

Nabathean  Alphabet,  significant  picture-
characters  in,  vi,  1703.

Name,  The  Ineffable,  importance  of,  in
the  Legend  of  Enoch,  n,  399.

Namus  Grecus,  omitted  by  Dr.  Anderson
in  revision  of  Legend  of  the  Craft,  1,  86.

National  Grand  Lodge  of  France,  The,
adoption  of  the  title,  v,   1198.

Nature,  revelation  in  external,  vi,  1713.

Navarre,  The  King  of,  v,  1328.

Nebraska,  first  Lodge  and  organization  of
Grand  Lodge  in,  v,  1474;  introduction
of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  vi,  1524;  Cryptic
Masonry  in,  vi,  1587;  organization  of
Grand  Commandery  and  subordinate
commanderies  in,  vi,  1619;  Scottish
Rite  Masonry  in,  vn,  1889,  1890,  1892.

Negroes,  Prince  Hall  and  13  other,  made
Masons  by  an  English  Military  Lodge,
March  6th,  1775,  vi,  1659.

Nergal,  an  early  symbol  of  deity,  vi,  1718;
vn,  1773.

Netherlands,  Masonic  relations  between
the,  and  Scotland,  vn,  1912;  the,  Su-
preme Council  A.  A.  S.  R.  established
in  the,  vn,   1850.

2046

INDEX

Nevada,  first  Lodge  and  organization  of
Grand  Lodge  in,  VI,  1476;  introduction
of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  VI,  1524;  Cryptic
Masonry  in,  vi,  1587;  organization  of
Grand  Commandery  and  subordinate
commanderies  in,  vi,  1620 ;  Scottish
Rite  Masonry  in,  vn,  1889,  1890.

New  Brunswick,  Freemasonry  in,  vu,
I93i,  1939.

Newburyport,  King  Cyrus's  Chapter  at,  in
1798,  v,  1274.

New  Caledonia,  Freemasonry  in,  vn,
1999.

Newfoundland,  Freemasonry  in,  vn,  1940.

New  Jersey,  introduction  of  Freemasonry
into,  v,  1225 ;  first  Lodge  and  organiza-
tion of  Grand  Lodge  in,  v,  1427 ;  intro-
duction of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  vi,  1525 ;
Cryptic  Masonry  in,  vi,  1588;  organiza-
tion of  Grand  Commandery  and  sub-
ordinate commanderies  in,  vi,  1621 ;
Scottish  Rite  Bodies  in,  VII,  1902.

New  Granada,  Supreme  Council  A.  A.  S.
R.  in,  vn,  1857.

New  Hampshire,  introduction  of  Freema-
sonry into,  v,  1229;  first  Lodge  and  or-
ganization of  Grand  Lodge  in,  v,  1406;
concurrence  of,  in  the  G.  G.  Chapter,
asked,  v,  1295 ;  introduction  of  R.  A.
Masonry  in,  vi,  1525;  Cryptic  Masonry
in,  vi,  1588;  organization  of  Grand
Commandery  and  subordinate  com-
manderies in,  vi,  1620;  Scottish  Rite
Bodies   in,  vn,   1896.

New  Haven,  Franklin  Chapter  formed  at,
1796,  v,  1293.

New  Mexico,  first  Lodge  and  organization
of  Grand  Lodge  in,  vi,  1468;  Cryptic
Masonry  in,  vi,  1587;  organization  of
Grand  Commandery  and  subordinate
commanderies  in,  vi,  1621  ;  Scottish
Rite  Masonry  in,  vn,   1889,   1890,    1894.

New  Orleans,  first  Lodge  organized  in,
vi,  1445 ;  list  of  twelve  lodges  in,  prior
to  organization  of  Grand  Lodge,  vi,
1447;  Cerneau  degrees  in,  vn,  1853,
1856.

Newport  (R.  I.),  Royal  Arch  Masonry  in,
V,  1276;  early  Knighthood  degrees  in,
v,  1373-

New  York,  Grand  Lodge  established  in,  by
the  "Ancients,"  1781,  III,  824;  introduc-
tion of  Freemasonry  into,  v,  1225 ;  first
Lodge  and  organization  of  Grand  Lodge
in,  v,  1409 ;  introduction  of  the  Royal
Arch  degree  into,  v,  1273 ;  introduction
of  Capitular  Masonry  in,  vi,  1528;  rep-
resented at  organization  of  the  General
Grand  Chapter,  1798,  v,  1294;  Cryptic
Masonry  in,  vi,  1588;  early  Knighthood
degrees  in,  v,  1373 ;  Grand  Commandery
organized  in,  v,  1390;  Grand  Com-
mandery and  subordinate  commander-
ies in,  vi,  1622 ;  Columbian  Commandery
organized  in,  1816,  v,  1391 ;  list  of  Scot-
tish Rite  Bodies  in,  vn,  1900.

New  York  City,  1816  and  1826  sessions  of
G.  G  Chapter  held  at,  v,  1298,  1299;
Chapter  of  Rose  Croix  established  at,
in   1797,  vn,   1810.

New  Zealand,  Freemasonry  in,  vn,  1997.

Nicholas  de  Bonneville  (see  Bonne-
ville), 11,  311.

Nicolai,  Frederick,  theory  of,  that  Royal
Society  and  Freemasonry  resulted  from
same  cause,  11,  307 ;  treatment  of  Rosi-
crucianism  by,  11,  336;  the  ideas  of,  as
to  relation  of  Freemasonry  and  Rosicru-
cianism,  11,  347;  theory  of,  regarding  the
invention  of  Freemasonry,  11,  304,  310,
316,  318.

Niebuhr,  B.  G.,  influence  of  critical  spirit
of,  on  Masonic  scholarship,  1,  3,  9.

Niles,  Hezekiah,  Council  of  Select  Ma-
sons organized  by,  and  P.  P.  Eckel,  vi,
1557.

Nimrod,  mention  and  significance  of,  in
Legend  of  Craft,  1,  20,  63 ;  source  of  in-
formation regarding,  1,  64.

No^chid^e,  an  Andersonian  term  for  "Ma-
sons," vn,  2003.

Northern  Jurisdiction  (A.  A.  S.  R.),  es-
tablishment of  the,  VII,  1850,  1857,  1873.

Noachites,  early  theories  regarding  the,
and  Freemasons,  11,  407.

Noah,  influence  of  the  Legend  of,  on  Spec-
ulative Masonry,  II,  406.

Non-Operative  Members  of  Lodges,  some
early,  in,  840.

Nomenclature,  the  beginning  of  lodge,
vn,  2008.

North  America  (cf.  "United  States"),  in-
troduction of  Freemasonry  into,  v,  1224.

North  Carolina,  first  Lodge  and  organ-
ization of  Grand  Lodge  in,  v,  1422;  in-
troduction of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  vi
1530;  Cryptic  Masonry  in,  vi,  1589;  or-
ganization of  Grand  Commandery  and
subordinate  commanderies  in,  vi,  1627;
Scottish  Rite  Masonry  in,  vn,  1889,
1890,   1894.

North  Dakota,  first  Lodge  and  organiza-
tion of  Grand  Lodge  in,  vi,  1478;  intro-
duction of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  vi,  1531 ;
Cryptic  Masonry  in,  vi,  1590;  organiza-
tion of  Grand  Commandery  and  subor-
dinate commanderies  in,  vi,  1629 ;  Scot-
tish Rite  Masonry  in,  vn,  1889,  1890,
1892.

Non-sectarian  Character  of  Masonry,
the  origin  of,  iv,  942.

Northouck,  John,  ii,  274,  300,  543.

North  Island,   Freemasonry  in,  vn,   1998.

Norwich,  Conn.,  Franklin  Chapter  at,
1796,  v,  1293.

Nova  Scotia,  Freemasonry  in,  vn,  1940;
Provincial  Grand  Lodge,  established  in,
1757,  by  Grand  Lodge  of  "Ancients,"
iv,  1 1 26.

Novice,  name  of  one  of  the  Ramsay  high
degrees,  11,  352.

INDEX

2047

Numa,  germ  of  fraternal  idea  in  philosophy
of,  1,  vii ;  Collegia  Fabrorum  established
by,  11,  474.

Numbers,  Pythagorean  symbolism  of,  in-
corporated in  Speculative  Masonry,  11,
367 ;  the  science  of,  in  Gothic  Architec-
ture, in,  757;  ancient  doctrine  regard-
ing odd,  followed  in  numerical  symbol-
ism, iv,  931 ;  the  symbolism  of,  vn,
1733.

Oath,  character  of  the  Operative,  iv,  971 ;
form  of  the,  in  St.  Catherine's  guild  at
Stamford,  II,  579 ;  the  form  of,  not
given  in  Old  Constitutions,  in,  615 ;  that
of  the  Wardens,  1377,  iv,  892;  annual
renewal  of,  in  Scottish  Lodges,  in,  651.

Oath  of  Allegiance,  G.  G.  Chapter,
adopts  an,  v,  1297.

Oath  of  Secrecy,  an  early  form  of  the,  in,

6iS.
Oceania,   Freemasonry  in,  vn,  1999.
Odd  Numbers    (cf.  "Symbolism"  in),  an-
cient and  modern  symbolic  use  of,  vn,
1767.
Odo  de  St.  Amand,  a  G.  M.  of  the  Tem-
plars, 1 170,  v,  1330.
Officers,  titles  of  those,  of  General  Grand
Chapter  and  Deputy  Grand  Chapter,  v,
1295 ;   duties  of  the  G.  G.  Chapter,  vi,
1491 ;  adoption  of  oath  of  allegiance  for,
in  G.  G.  R.  A.  Constitution,  v,  1297;  list
of  the  G.  G.  Chapter,  v,  1301.
Ohio,  first  Lodge  and  Grand  Lodge  in,  vi,
1443 ;    introduction    of    R.  A.    Masonry
in,    vi,    1532;    Cryptic   Masonry   in,    vi,
1590 ;  organization  of  Grand  Command-
ery  and   subordinate   commanderies   in,
vi,   1629;   Scottish   Rite  Bodies  in,  vn,
1904.
Oklahoma,   first   Lodge   and   organization
of  Grand  Lodge  in,  vi,  1483 ;  organiza-
tion of  Grand  Commandery  and  subor-
dinate commanderies  in,  vi,  1630;  Scot-
tish  Rite  Masonry  in,   vn,    1889,    1890,
1892.
Old   Charges,    modification   of  the    spirit,
but  retention  of  the  words  of  the,  iv,
896.
Old  Charges,  or  Manuscript  Constitu-
tions :
Aitcheson-Haven  MS.,  1,   15.
Alnwick  MS.,  1.  15  (cf.  iv,  880,  895).
Antiquity  MS.,  1,  15,  69;  vn,  2003.
Bain  (G.  W.)   MS.,  vn,  2006.
Cooke    MS.,    the   date   of,    1,    15;   vn,
2002;    form   of    the    Legend    of   the
Craft  in,  1,  14;  Legend  of  Lamech's
Sons  and  the  Pillars  in,  1,  45 ;  Tower
of  Babel   in,   1,  54;  Legend  of   Eu-
clid in,  1,  68;  first  mention  of  Solo-
mon's Temple  in,  1,  75,  154;  Charles
Martel  and  Namus  Grecus,  as  given
in,  1,  85 ;  the  York  Legend  in,  1,  95 ;
additions  to  the  Legend  of  the  Craft
in,  11,  370.

Dowland  MS.,  date  and  publication  of,
1,  14-15;  full  text  of  the  Legend  of
the  Craft  in,  1,  17-18;  Tower  of
Babel  mentioned  in,  1,  55 ;  Legend
of  Euclid  in,  1,  69 ;  St.  Alban  Legend
given  in,  1,  92;  Temple  Legend  re-
cited in,  1,  154.

Edinburgh-Kilwinning  MS.,  preserva-
tion of,  at  Kilwinning,  in,  633.

Grand  Lodge  MS.,  1,  15;  vn,  2002.

Halliwell  MS.,  the  date  of,  1,  15,  25;
vn,  2002;  comparison  of,  with  other
MSS.,  1,  14,  30,  34;  analysis  of  the,
1,  26-30 ;  question  of  German  origin
of,  in,  742 ;  Legend  of  the  Craft  and
the,  1,  25 ;  Tower  of  Babel  in,  1,  53 ;
Legend  of  Euclid  in,  1,  68;  Temple
of  Solomon  not  mentioned  in,  1,  75 ;
York  Legend  in,  1,  95.

Harleian  MS.,  No.  1942,  supposed  date
of,  1,  15 ;  historical  importance  of,
in,  616;  an  analysis  of  the,  in,  6i7ff. ;
recent  discovery  of  new  copies  of,
vn,  2006.

Harleian  MS.,  No.  2054,  supposed  date
of,  1,  15 ;  Hughan's  view  of  the  date
of,  vn,  2002.

Henery  Heade  MS.,  vn,  2003.

Krause  MS.  (York  Constitutions),
source  and  publication  of  the,  1,  57,
58,  69;  date  of  the,  1,  71,  78;  the
Babylonian  Legend  in,  1,  58;  Legend
of  Euclid  in,  1,  69;  Temple  Legend
in,  1,  76;  Legend  of  St.  Alban  in,  1,
91 ;  quoted  in  relation  to  the  Noa-
chites,  11,  410 ;  worthless  character
of  the,  as  authority,  11,  418.

Landsdowne  MS.,  supposed  date  of,  1,
15 ;  charges  in,  in,  582 ;  some  re-
quirements mentioned  in,  III,  587 ;
compulsory  attendance  of  Masters
and  Fellows  in,   in,  607.

Masons'   Company  MS.,  vn,  2006.

Papworth  MS.,  1,  15,  78  (note)  ;  Me-
dieval Legend  of  Euclid  in,  1,  71.

Phillipp's  MSS.,  Nos.  1  and  2,  vn,
2006.

Regius  MS.  (Halliwell  MS.),  vn,
2002.

Roberts  MS.,  1,  102,  105.

Sloane  MS.,  No.  3848,  the  date  of  the,
I.  15.  37',  probable  source  of  the,  vn,
2002.

Sloane  MS.,  No.  3323,  the  date  of  the,

I,  15-
Sloane  MS.,  No.  3329,  the  date  of  the,

1,   15;   vn,   2002;   text  of,   published

by  Hughan,  in   1872,  in,  626;   most

valuable  and  important  of  the  Sloane

MSS.,  in,  626.
Spencer  MS.  (or  Cole  MS.),  vn,  2003.
Thorp  (John  T.)   MS.,  vn,  2002.
York  MSS.,  supposed  and  certain  date

of  various  (No.  1,  No.  2,  No.  4,  No.

5,  No.  6),  1,  15.
Old    Constitutions     (cf.    "Old    Charges"
and    "Statutes"),    some    regulations    in

2048

INDEX

the  Operative  Masons',  in,  593;  Hm~
form  character  of  the,  iv,  915 ;  exist-
ence of  early  Lodges  proved  by  the,  in,
610;  compulsory  attendance  prescribed
in  the  most  ancient,  iv,  898;  certain
modern  terms  not  found  in,  in,  603.

Old  Man  of  the  Mountains,  The,  name
of  the  Chief  of  the  Assassins,  v,  1330.

Oliver,  Rev.  George  (D.  D.),  Masonic
works  published  by,  1,  5,  25,  60,  187,
212;  11,  274,  367,  396;  in,  854,  856;  IV,
928,  933,  1005,  1024;  v,  1342;  yii,  1734,
1758;  theory  of,  as  to  the  Origin  and
Progress  of  Freemasonry,  I,  143 ;  the
Temple  Legend  accepted  by,  1,  4 ;  the
Temple  Legend  as  treated  by,  1,  155.

On,  vii,  1761.

Onom antic  Arithmetic,  the  ancient,  de-
scribed, vii,  1739.

Ontario,  Freemasonry  in,  vn,  1939.

Operative  Brotherhood,  but  one  esoteric
system  of  admission  to  the,  iv,  899.

Operative  Freemasonry  (cf.  Freemason-
ry, Operative),  the  extinction  of,  as  a
Guild,  iv,  909;  the  death  of,  and  the
birth  of  Speculative,  iv,  1003 ;  decline  of
the  influence  of,  in  Freemasonry,  v,  1177.

Operative  Freemasons,  the  one  degree  of,
iv,  946;  non-existence  of  a  Mason's  de-
gree among,  iv,  964.

Operative  Grand  Master,  a  name  for
Hiram  Abif,  n,  439.

Operative  Lodges,  continuation  of,  after
birth  of  Speculative  Masonry,  iv,  940 ;
exclusive  character  of  the,  III,  611;
gradual  decline  of  the,  iv,  881 ;  admis-
sion of  Theoretic  Masons  in  the,  did
not  affect  Operative  character  of,  iv,
896;  Speculative  Masonry  founded  on
the,  in,  683.

Operative  Masonry,  distinction  between
the  Craft  of,  and  the  "Company  of
Masons,"  n,  323 ;  pursuit  of,  in  early
lodges,  in,  611;  the  gradual  decay  of,
in,  855 ;  iv,  906 ;  Speculative  Masonry
founded  on,  m,  683.

Operative  Masons  (cf.  "Freemasonry"  1),
two  distinct  classes  of,  111,  744;  the
three  ranks  of,  the  basis  for  three
Speculative  degrees,  rv,  900;  early  em-
blematic use  of  the  square  and  the  level
by  the,  11,  349 ;  secrets  of  the,  hi,  761 ;
character  of  the  symbols  of  the,  in  Mid-
dle Ages,  11,  367;  symbolic  character  of
the  "Marks"  of,  in,  792;  the  ritual  of
the,  iv,  927,  930 ;  control  of  Lodges  taken
from,  11,  365.

Operative  Masonic  Law  (cf.  "Law"),
some  features  of,  in,  874.

Operative  Ritual,  iv,  927;  degrees  not
mentioned  in,  iv,  938.

Operative  System,  modification  of  the  laws
of  the,  for  Speculative  use,  iv,  914.

Operative  and  Speculative  Masons,  ri-
valry of  the,  iv,  878,  906;  usages  of  the,
compared,  iv,  984,  987.

Ophites     (a    Gnostic    sect),    theory    that

symbols  of,    were   incorporated    in   Ma-
sonry, 11,  373.
Order  of  Christ,  The,  v,   1340.
Order     of     the     Knights     Templar,     in

American  Colonies,  v,   1369.
Order  of  the  East,  v,  1327.
Order  of  the  Hospital  of  St.  John    (cf.

Knights  of  Malta),  v,  1349,   1343.
Order  of  H.  R.  D.  M.,  v,  1342.
Order  of  the  Knights  of  the  Holy  Sep-

ulcher,  v,  1310.
Order    of    Knights    Hospitalers    of    St.

John,  establishment  of,  v,  1326,  1349.
Order  of  the  Temple  in   Paris,  v,  1327,

1338.
Order  of  the  Templars,  legal  code  of,  v,

1328.
Orders    of    Knighthood,    the    three    great

military,   1,   225 ;   the   several   medieval,

v,  1318.
Orders  of  St.  John,  Rhodes,  and  Malta,

Grand  Masters  of  the,   v,   1364.
Ordinances     of     the     Stonecutters     of

Strasburg,    adoption    of,    in    1459,    in,

743-

Oregon,  first  Lodge  and  organization  of
Grand  Lodge  in,  vi,  1466;  Cryptic  Ma-
sonry in,  vi,  1591 ;  organization  of
Grand  Commandery  and  subordinate
commanderies  in,  vi,  1630 ;  Scottish
Rite  Masonry  in,  vn,   1889,  1890,  1892.

Oregon  City,  first  Lodge  organized  at,  vi,
1466.

Ordinacio  Cementariorum,  title  of  a  code
of  Masonic  rules,  a.d.   1370;  iv,  1044.

Origin  of  Freemasonry  (see  "Freemason-
ry, Speculative,"  2).

Origin  of  the  Royal  Arch,  iv,  1024.

Orky's  Guild  at  Abbotsbury,  ii,  565.

Ormesius,  Order  of  Rose  Croix  attributed
to,  v,  1327.

Orphic  Fragments,  vii,  1761.

Orvius,   L.  C.    (see  also  "Rosicrucians"),

h,  337-
Osiris  and  Isis,  the  Mysteries  of,  1,  177,

182;  influence  of  the  Mysteries  of,  upon

later  systems,   1,   182.
Oughtred,  William,  ii,  306,  316,  318.

Pagan  Mysteries,  the  Dionysia  were  a
part  of  the,  1,  171 ;  initiation  in  the,  1,
174;  significance  of  Death  in  the,  1,  175;
names  of  the  various,  1,  177;  similarity
in  form  and  design  of  all  the,  1,  177;
the  idea  of  "apotheosis"  in  the,  1,  178;
two  classes  of  the,  1,  179 ;  three  steps  in
the  initiation  of,  1,  179;  the  purpose  of
the,  1,  181 ;  the  Egyptian,  1,  182 ;  Osiris
in  the,  1,  182 ;  dramatic  form  of  alle-
gory in  all  the,  1,  185 ;  theories  of  the
origin  of  Freemasonry  in  the,  1,  186-
192 ;  analogies  between  modern  Free-
masonry and  the,  1,  192-198;  theory  of

INDEX

2049

the  origin  of  Freemasonry  in,  rejected,
1,  p.  vi.

Palestine,  list  of  Rulers  of  the  Latin
Kingdom  of,  v,  1366.

Paley,  F.  A.,  11,  379.

Papal  Charter,  question  of  a  Masonic,
in,  778.

Papworth  MS.  (see  under  "Old
Charges").

Paracelsus,  the  vocabulary  of  (see  "Rosi-
crucianism").

Parlirer,  name  of  principal  officer  in  the
"Hiitten,"  or  Old  German  Lodges,  iv,
893.

Paris,  introduction  of  Speculative  Freema-
sonry into,  by  Radcliffe,  v,  1187;  lodge
constituted  in,  1732,  VII,  2009;  the
Chapter  of  Clermont  organized  at,  1754,
vii,  1805.

Parvin,  Theodore  S.,  v,  1371 ;  vi,  1638.

Passwords,  the  origin  of,  in  Operative
Masonry,  in,  692.

Past  Master,  significance  of,  in  Royal
Arch  Masonry,  v,   1286.

Past  Master's  Degree,  the  rise  of  the,  v,
1292;  made  one  of  the  degrees  prelimi-
nary to  the  Royal  Arch,  v,  1295;  de-
finitive adoption  of  the  Webb,  v,  1299.

Patriarchs  of  Jerusalem,  a  list  of  the,  v,
1349-

Patriarch  Noachite,  or  Chevalier  Prus-
sian, 21  st  degree  A.  A.  S.  R.  as  an-
nounced by  the  Supreme  Council  of
Charleston,   in   1802,  VII,   1848.

Payne,  George,  the  second  (1718)  and
fourth  (1720)  Grand  Master  of  Eng-
land, iv,  888,  904;  influence  of,  on  the
development  of  Speculative  Masonry,
in,  852.

Pearson,  John  (D.  D.),  11,  306,  318.

Pelican,  an  element  in  Rose  Croix  sym-
bolism, 11,  358.

Pennsylvania,  military  lodges  in,  v,  1266;
first  provincial  Grand  Master  of,  a.d.
1730,  vii,  201 1 ;  introduction  of  Freema-
sonry into,  v,  1225,  1394;  first  Lodge
and  organization  of  Grand  Lodge  in,  v,
T395;  aH  colonial  lodges  in,  warranted
by  the  "Ancients,"  vn,  2011;  introduc-
tion of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  vi,  1533;
status  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of,  v,  1301 ;
Cryptic  Masonry  in,  vi,  1591 ;  Grand
Encampment  of  K.  T.  organized  in,  v,
1391 ;  organization  of  Grand  Command-
ery  and  subordinate  commanderies  in,
vi,  1630;  Scottish  Rite  Masonry  intro-
duced into,  vii,  1810;  list  of  Scottish
Rite  Bodies  in,  vn,  1902.

Pennsylvania  Gazette,  mention  of  Ma-
sonic Lodges  in,  1730,  v,  1226.

Pentalpha,  a  frequently  occurring,  sym-
bolic Mark  of  the  Middle  Ages,  ill,
800-805 ;  vn,    1799,   1800.

Peoria,  Masonic  records  burned  at,  in
1850;  vi,  1450.

Pepys,  S.,  the  Memoirs  of,  Quoted.  11,  319.

Perfect  Master,  the  degree  of,  11,  274;
vn,  1847.

Perfection,  the  last  grade,  in  the  Ancient
Mysteries,  1,  181 ;  name  of  14th  degree
A.  A.  S.  R.  as  announced  by  the  Su-
preme Council  of  Charleston,  in  1802,
vn,   1847.

Pernelty,  Antoine  Joseph,  Rite  known  as
"Academy  of  True  Masons,"  established

by,  11,  353.
Persia,   Freemasonry   in,  vn,   1984;    scene

of  the  Red  Cross  degree  in,  v,  131 1.
Peter  the  Hermit,  v,  1325.
Peru,  Supreme  Council  A.  A.  S.  R.  in,  vn,

1857.

Phallic  Religion,  the  symbolic  character
of,  in,  868.

Philadelphia,  early  lodges  at,  not  regu-
lar, vii,  201 1 ;  chapter  of  Royal  Arch
Masons,  established  in,  about  1758,  v,
1265;  first  American  chapter  in  1758,  v,
1293;  Grand  Chapter  established  at,
T79S,  v,  1271 ;  Council  of  Knights  Ka-
dosh,  organized  at,  1796,  vn,  1810;  a
colored  lodge  established  at,  vi,   1660.

Philalethes,  Eugenius,  the  pseudonym  of
Thomas  Vaughn,  II,   340,   344.

Philip  I  of  France,  Order  of  Knights  of
the  Holy  Sepulcher,  revived  by,  v,  13 12.

Philip  the  Fair,  v,  1331,  1338.

Philip  of  Naplous,  G.  M.  of  Templars,  v,
1330.

Philippines,  Freemasonry  in  the,  vn,
1984.

Phillips,  J.  O.  Halliwell — (consult  Bib-
liography).

Phillipp's  MSS.  (see  under  "Old
Charges").

Philosophic  Cabalist,  a  traditional  de-
gree of  Rosicrucian  origin,  II,  354.

Philosophic  Rose  Croix,  a  modification  of
the  original  Rose  Croix  degree,  11,  356.

Philosophy,  the  place  of,  in  Scottish  Rite
Masonry,  VII,   1870.

Phonetic  Writing,  the  development  of,
from    picture-writing,    vi,    1708.

Picture  Writing,  some  early,  vi,  1703,
1707,  1708,  1710  (cf.  also  in,  796,  800,
805,  808).

Pillars,  The  Two,  vii,  1752.

Pius  VII,  Pope,  ii,  287.

Plautus,  an  instance  of  the  use  of  the
"tessera  hospitalis"  given  by,  III,  829.

Pliny,  Collegium  Fabrorum  (College  of
Masons)    organized    by,    under  Trajan,

",  495-

Plutarch,  vii,  1747.

Politics,  all  questions  of,  abjured  by  Eng-
lish Grand  Lodge,  iv,   1037.

Polybius,  11,  275.

Polychronicon  of  Ranulph  Higden,  Tre-
visa's  translation  of,  1,  56;  Legend  of
the  Craft  suggested  by,  1,  69;  Legend
of  Lamech's  Children,   given   in,   1,  46,

47-
Pont    du    Gard,    most    important    Roman
Masonry  in  Gaul  (France),  11,  510.

2050

INDEX

Pope  Clement  V,  part  played  by,  in  sup-
pression of  Military  Templarism,  i,  256.

Pope  Clement  XII,  famous  bull  of,  against
Freemasonry,    1738,   V,    1191.

Pope  Eugenius  III,  the  Red  Cross  symbol
assigned  to  Templars  by,  v,  1321.

Pope  Innocent  III,  v,  1316.

Popes  of  Rome,  authority  of,  in  Order  of
Knights  of  the  Red  Cross,  v,  1310,  1312.

Porphyry,  a  biographer  of  Pythagoras,  11,
366.

Porto  Rico,  Freemasonry  in,  vn,   1961.

Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  establishment  of
Lodge  at,  v,  1229,  1231,  1406.

Portugal,  important  "marks"  discovered
in,  in,  805 ;  Supreme  Council  A.  A.  S.
R.  in,  vn,  1857.

Pownall,  Governor,  ii,  535 ;  in,  695.

Prayer,  use  of,  by  Scottish  Masons  in
opening  Lodge,  in,  655.

Pratt,  Foster    ( M.  D. ) ,  v,   1428.

Presbyterians,  theory  of  Cromwellian
Masonry  and  the,   11,  297.

Prescott,  Arizona,  first  Lodge  established
at,  vi,  1482.

Preston,  William,  Masonic  works  pub-
lished by,  1,  109;  in,  845;  iv,  879,  1 139;
theory  of,  as  to  the  Origin  and  Progress
of  Freemasonry,  1,  124;  the  Temple
Legend  as  treated  by,  1,  155 ;  theory  of,
regarding    Druidism   and    Freemasonry,

I,  109.

Prestonian  System,  adoption  of,  in  1772,

II,  368.

Prestonian  Work,  the  so-called,  v,  1291.

Prince  Edward  Island,  Freemasonry  in,
vn,  1932.

Prince  Hall  Lodge  (colored),  true  history
of,  by  Gardner,  vi,  1642.

Prince  Henry,  v,  1230,  1396,  1398.

Prince  of  Jerusalem,  16th  degree  A.  A.
S.  R.  as  announced  by  the  Supreme
Council  of  Charleston,  in  1802,  vn,
1848.

Prince  of  Libanus,  22d  degree  A.  A.  S.
R.,  vn,  1848.

Prince  of  Mercy,  25th  degree  A.  A.  S.  R.,
vn,  1848.

Prince  of  the  Tabernacle,  24th  degree
A.  A.  S.  R.,  vn,  1848.

Pritchard,  Samuel,  the  Charles  Martel
Legend  in  his  Masonry  Dissected,  1,  88.

Protestant  Religion,  influence  of  the,
upon  growing  Freemasonry,  iv,  941.

Proprietary  "Marks,"  hi,  803,  812;  influ-
ence of,  upon  Speculative  Mark  Mason-
ry, hi,  826.

Provincial  Grand  Lodges,  the  organiza-
tion of,  v,  1234;  origin  of  the  system  of,
in  1726;  vi,  1644;  the  French,  v,  1217.

Provincial  Grand  Lodge  of  Massachu-
setts, 1733,  v,  1230.

Provincial  Grand  Master,  jurisdiction
and  functions  of  the,  vi,  1645,  1649.

Provincial  Grand  Masters,  appointment
of,  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  "Moderns,"
iv,     1 133;    colonial    lodges    established

under,  v,  1396,  1398,  1407,  1409,  1414,
1421,  1423,   1427.

Providence,  influence  of  St.  John's  Lodge
at,  on  the  spread  of  the  Royal  Arch,  v,
1275 ;  a  colored  lodge  established  at,  vi,
1660;  Webb  removed  to,  v,  1291.

Providence  Chapter,  1793,  v,  1293;  par-
ticipates in  organization  of  General
Grand  Chapter,  1798,  v,  1294;  estab-
lished organization  of  Chapter  at,  1793,
v,  1275;  1799  session  of  G.  G.  Chapter
held  at,  v,  1296.

Provost  and  Judge,  7th  degree  A.  A.  S.  R.
as  announced  by  the  Supreme  Council
of  Charleston,  in  1802,  vn,  1847.

Pyrrhonists,  abusive  treatment  of  Temple
Legend  by,  1,  7.

Pythagoras,  school  of  philosophy  estab-
lished at  Crotona,  Italy,  by,  11,  366;
symbols  in  system  of,  vn,  1759;  the
symbolic  "Marks"  of  health,  in  school
of,  hi,  800.

Pythagorean  Philosophy,  the  character
of,  11,  366.

Pythagorean  Symbols,  adoption  of,  by
Speculative   Masons,  11,  367,  368.

Pythagorean  Symbolism,  influence  of,  on
Speculative  Freemasonry,  11,  370.

Pythagorean    Triangle,    The,   vii,    1738,

1747-
Pythagoreans,     Rosicrucians'     vows    like
those  of  the,  11,  337;  Freemasonry  and
the,  11,  360.

Quarterly  Communications,  iv,  912;  du-
ties of  the,  iv,  988;  supreme  authority
of  the,  v,  1210.

Quatuor  Coronati  Lodge,  new  name  of
Students  Lodge  No.  2076,  London,  vn,
2003 ;  the  Transactions  and  Reprints  of
the,  vn,  2001.

Quebec,  Freemasonry  in,  vn,  1938.

Queensland,  Freemasonry  in,  vn,  1996.

Quorum,  required  number  for  a,  in  early
and  modern  lodges,  in,  620;  iv,  938.

Radcliffe,  Charles,  escape  of,  to  France,
11,  282;  the  introducer  of  Speculative
Masonry  into  Paris,  v,  1187.

Ragon,  J.  M.,  theory  of,  regarding  etymol-
ogy of  the  word  Heredon,  11,  278;  sale
of  Masonic  charters  mentioned  by,  n,
281 ;  an  estimate  of,  iv,  967.

Ramsay,  Chevalier  Andrew  Michael,
biographical  sketch  of,  v,  1243 ;  charac-
ter and  purpose  of,  11,  277;  relation  of,
with  exiled  Royal  Family  of  England,
11,  269 ;  pretender  to  the  throne  of
England  one  of  the  pupils  of,  11,  270,
284;  theory  of,  regarding  the  origin  of

INDEX

2051

Freemasonry,  1,  245;  11,  283,  352,  519;
fabricator  of  rites  in  France,  1735-1740,
and  Royal  Order  of  Scotland,  II,  279,
352;  v,  1 197;  rites  and  degrees  found-
ed by,  1,  245,  247 ;  vii,  1771 ;  political
character  of  High  Degrees  fabricated
by,  11,  269,  277,  281 ;  Stuart  Masonry  in-
vented by,  11,  285 ;  English  attitude
toward  the  High  Degrees  of,  iv,  1130;
the  six  degrees  of  The  Rite  of,  v,
1248;  influence  of,  v,  1248;  influence  of,
on  Masonic  terminology,  11,  277 ;  Leg-
end of  Enoch  supposed  to  have  been  in-
vented by,  11,  401 ;  germ  of  the  Royal
Arch  in  the  "Hautes  Grades,"  fabricated
by,  v,  1243 ;  symbolism  of  a  Recovered
Word  suggested  by,  v,  1250;  degrees
invented  by,  not  philosophical  but  chi-
valric,  11,  352;  in  Rome,  in  1724,  11,  276.

Ramsay,  David,  a  "gentleman,"  made  a
member  of  Operative  Lodge,  1637,  III,
840.

Ramsay,   Sir  John  Mitchell,  v,  1354.

Raymond,  Edward  A.,  vn,   1878.

Rebold,  Emmanuel,  position  of,  as  a  Ma-
sonic historian,  11,  519,  523;  rise  of
Stuart  Masonry  traced  by,  11,  273.

Records,  recent  discovery  of  early  Mason-
ic, vii,  2001.

Recovered  Word,  the  symbolism  of  a,  sug-
gested by  Ramsay,  v,  1250.

Red  Cross,  a  symbol  assigned  to  Templars
by  Pope  Eugenius  III,  v,  1321,  1329.

Red  Cross  Degree,  v,  1309.

Red  Cross  of  Rome  and  Constantine,  or-
ganization of,  v,  1310;  spread  of  the
Order  of,  v,  1316,  1371.

Reghellini,  M.,  on  the  spread  of  symbol-
ism, 11,  373 ;  views  of,  regarding  Rosi-
crucianism  in  his  Masonry  Considered,
etc.,  11,  336,  347;  views  of,  regarding
Abbe  Le  Franc's  theory  of  the  origin
of  Freemasonry,  11,  383.

Reglements  sur  les  Arts  et  Metiers,  I,
16.

Religious  Wars,  influence  of  the,  on  de-
velopment of  Speculative  Masonry,  in,

855.

Regulations,  The  Thirty-nine,  reference
to,  iv,  1 147;  adopted  in  1721,  iv,  1148;
some  early,   v,    1258.

Renatus,  Sincerus,  the  pseudonym  of
Samuel  Richter,   11,  354.

Resemblances,  important,  between  medie-
val Operative,  and  modern  Speculative
Masonry,   ill,  864,  875.

Resurrection,  the  suggestion  of,  in  the
Ancient  Mysteries,  1,    178.

Revelations,  The  Three,  vi,  1712,  1713,
1714,   1719.

Revival,  term  sometimes  applied  to  birth
of  Speculative  Masonry,  1,  11;  the  so-
called,  of  Freemasonry,  discussed,  IV,
890;  development  of  Speculative  Mason-
ry not  a,  iv,  897.

Revival  of  Freemasonry,  the  Hermetic  de-
grees and  the,  11,  329.

Revivalists,  name  given  to  the  re-organiz-
ers of  Masonry  in  18th  century,  11,  367.
Revolution  of  1688,  condition  of  Freema-
sonry in  England  at  time  of  the,  iv,  902.
Rheims,  Masonic  marks  discovered  at,  by

M.  Didron,  in,  658.
Rhetoric,  2d  liberal   science  mentioned  in

Legend  of  the  Craft,  1,   18.
Rhode   Island,  first   Lodge  and  organiza-
tion of  Grand  Lodge  in,  v,  141 1;  intro-
duction of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  vi,  1535;
represented  at  formation  General  Grand
Chapter,  1798,  v,  1294;  Cryptic  Masonry
in,    vi,     1591 ;     organization    of    Grand
Commandery     and     subordinate     com-
manderies  in,  vi,   1616;   list  of  Scottish
Rite  Bodies  in,  vn,   1898;  Webb's  body
re-interred  by  Grand  Lodge  of,  v,   1291.
Richard  of  England,   Sov.   G.  M.  of  the
Knights   of   Rome   and    Constantine,   v,
1316;  wins  title  of  "Cour  de  Lion,"  v,
1322.
Richardi,  Prior  Hagustal,  ii,  551.
Richter,  Samuel,  "Golden   Rosicrucians,"

first  mentioned  in  work  of,  n,  354.
Rites  and  Systems  :

Academy  of  True  Masons,  a  Rite  es-
tablished by  Pernelty,  n,  353.
Ancient    Accepted    Scottish    Rite    (see
"Scottish  Rite"  and  under  "Degrees."
Basilidean   Gnosticism,  n,   372,  377.
Clement's  Gnosticism,  II,  373.
Company  of  Masons,  in,  599,  626.
Constantinian    Orders   of   Knighthood,

v,  1309,  i37off.
Capitular  Rite    (see  under  "Degrees,"

A.  or  Y.  Rite,  4-7).
Cryptic    Rite     (see    under    "Degrees,"

A.  or  Y.  Rite,  8-10).
Egyptian  Mysteries,  II,  366;  vn,  1760.
Eleusian  Mysteries,  1,   177.
Essenes,    the  Jewish  system   of  the,  1,

230,  11,  388.
French  Rite,  v,  1218.
Gnosticism,    the    origin    and    character

of  the  system  of,  11,  372,  374.
Kassideans,  v,  1346.
Mysteries  of  Cabiri,  1,   177.
Order  of  Christ,  v,  1340.
Order  of  the  East,  V,  1327.
Order  of  the  H.  R.  D.  M.,  v,  1342.
Order  of  the  Temple  in  Paris,  v,  1327,

1338.
Pagan    Mysteries    (see    under    "Pagan

Mysteries").
Pythagorean  system  of  Philosophy  (see

under  "Pythagoras").
Ramsay's    Rites,   1.    245,    247;    n,    279,

352;  v,  H97,  1248;  vn,  1771.
Rite  of  Strict  Observance,  11,  283,  290.
Rite  Franchise,  v,  1218.
Rite   of    Perfection,    original   name    of
the  "Scottish  Rite,"  vn,  1865;  origin
of   the   degrees   in   the,  vn,    1805.
Rosicrucian  System,  v,   1342.
Society  of  the  Trowel,  n,  384,  518.
Stuart  Masonry,  11,  273ff.

2052

INDEX

Supreme    Order    of    the    Holy    Royal
Arch,  iv,  1 109.

York   Rite    (see  under  "Degrees").

Ritual  (cf.  "Degrees"  and  "Symbolism,"
iv),  degrees  not  a  feature  of  the  Opera-
tive, iv,  943 ;  some  features  of  the  Opera-
tive, iv,  970;  description  of  the,  in  17th
century,  in,  626;  some  features  of  the
oldest  extant,  in,  865 ;  the  earliest  form
of  the,  iv,  930;  origin,  history  and  trans-
mission of  the  idea  and  use  of  "word"
in,  in,  649,  720,  742;  iv,  934,  948,  970,
1 130;  v,  1239,  1249;  vii,  1772;  influence
of  the  Operative,  upon  the  Speculative,
iv,  940 ;  the  source  of  geometrical  sym-
bols in  the,  III,  865;  simple  character  of
the  early,  iv,  899,  928 ;  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England  uses  old  Operative,  at  first,
iv,  1014;  the  early  Speculative,  iv,  926;
a  definition  of  the  term,  iv,  926;  first
alteration  in  the  old  Operative,  1719,  IV,
1010;  the  growth  of,  by  gradual  accre-
tions, in,  660 ;  Pythagoreans  source  of
early  Masonic,  n,  367 ;  modern  origin  of
the  Masonic,  V,  1347 ;  the  fabricator;;  of
the,  v,  1381 ;  Desaguliers  developed  the,
IV,  917;  method  of  determining  the
Desagulierian,  iv,  928;  sources  of  the
Speculative,  iv,  937;  development  of  the
old  Operative,  into  three  Speculative
degrees,  iv,  958 ;  some  changes  in  the
early  English,  iv,  1107;  the  symbolic
basis  of  the,  v,  1243 ;  traditional  sources
of  the  first  degree  in  the  Masonic,  n,
311;  incorporation  of  the  Fellow-Craft's
degree  in  the,  iv,  957;  of  the  Master
Mason's  degree,  iv,  975 ;  source  of  the
Third  degree  in  the  Masonic,  11,  416;
historic  reasons  for  the  symbolic  use  of
the  Temple  of  Solomon  in,  vn,  2003;
provisions  of  the  "Article  of  Union"  re-
garding the,  v,  1 179;  traces  of  the  early
French,  v,  1 191;  the  French,  derived
from  the  English,  v,  1195;  the  influence
of  Thomas  Smith  Webb  upon  the  Ma-
sonic, v,  1278 ;  Webb  develops  a,  for
preliminary  Chapter  degrees,  v,  1292;
origin  and  spread  of  the  Webb,  v,  1292;
development  of  that,  of  Mark  Masonry,
in,  825 ;  the  early  Royal  Arch,  v,  1283 ;
conflicting  sources  of  the  American
Royal  Arch,  v,  1288;  the  basis  for  the
Cryptic,  vi,  1565 ;  the  medieval  Tem-
plars had  a  secret,  v,  1347;  traces  of  me-
dieval, in  modern  Templar,  v,  1368;
source  of  the  Templar,  vi,  1617;  Tem-
plar, a  modern  production,  v,  1340;
adoption  of  the  Templar,  in  the  United
States,  vi,  1616;  source  of  the  Scottish
Rite,  vn,  1868.

Rivalry,  existence  of,  between  Operative
and  Speculative  Masons  in  18th  century,
iv,  878,  906.

Roberts,  J.,  in,  608.

Robert  de  Craou,  second  G.  M.  of  Tem-
plars, v,  1322,  1329.

Robert,  son  of  William  the  Conqueror,  v,

1325.

Robin,  Abbe  Claude,  a  writer  on  the  his-
tory of  Initiations,  iv,  1017;  believes
Pagan  mysteries  the  source  of  Freema-
sonry, 1,  188.

Roberts  MS.   (see  under  "Old  Charges"),

I,  102,  105.

Robison,  John,  account  of  the  origin  of
some  High  Degrees,  given  by,  11,  271 ;
views  of,  on  the  Jesuits,  11,  287,  289.

Rockwell,  William  S.,  the  Masonic
scholarship  of,  V,  1305.

Rocky  Mountains,  first  Lodge  established
west  of,  vi,  1470.

Roman  Catholic  Religion  (see
"Church"),  influence  of,  upon  early
Freemasonry,  iv,  940.

Roman  Colleges,  the  meaning  of  the,  11,
476;  the  offices  of,  11,  480;  the  growth
of  the,  11,  488.

Roman  Colleges  of  Artificers,  rise  and
progress  of  the,  11,  489;  spread  of  the,  in
the  colonies  of  Rome,  11,  502;  sodality
the  essential  feature  of,  11,  474 ;  non-
operative  members  in  the,  in,  652 ;  usage
of  non-professional  members  of,  fol-
lowed in  subsequent  ages,  iv,  877;  im-
portance of,  at  Comum,  the  modern
Como,  11,  508;  Lombards  imitate  the,
in,  688;  resemblance  of  the  Craft
Guilds  to  the,  11,  563 ;  origin  of  medie-
val Masonry  in  the,  1,  191  ;  Masons  of
France  a  continuation  of  the,  11,  523;
relation  of  the  Guilds  in  France  to  the,
in,  664;  identity  of  regulations  between,
and  Masonic  Lodges,  11,  476;  origin  of
Freemasonry  in,  1,  p.  vi ;  Speculative
Freemasonry  descended  from,  III,  705 ;
Dr.  Mackey's  theory  regarding  the  re-
lation of  Freemasons,  and  the,  11,  469,
471 ;  influence  of,  on  Masonry  through-
out Europe,  in,  644 ;  Geometrical  pro-
portions link  the  Freemasons  with  the,
in,  758.

Romans,  baptism  practiced  by  the,  vi,
1730;  meaning  of  a  College  among  the,

II,  476.

Rose  Croix  Degree  (see  under  "Degrees"
18),  not  the  same  as  "Red  Cross,"  v,
137;  ;  not  the  source  of  the  Mysteries
of  Freemasonry,  11,  290;  Ashmole  and
others  said  to  have  had,  n,  273;  first
brought  to  notice  by  Prince  Charles  Ed-
ward, 11,  356.

Rose  Croix  Chapter,  formation  of,  at
Arras  in  France  a.d.  1747,  n,  280;  first
Chapter  of,  in  N.  Y.  City,  1797,  vn,
1810.

Rosencreutz,  Christian,  the  mythical
founder  of  Rosicrucianism,  11,  331.

Rosenkreutzer    (see    "Rose    Croix"),    n,

354-
Rosicrucian  Masonry,  the  decline  of,  n,

355-
Rosicrucian  System,  a  partial  list  of  the
degrees  of,  II,  253.

INDEX

2053

Rosicrucianism,  outlined  history  and  char-
acter of,  11,  330;  the  essential  principle
of,  11,  333 ;  post-Andrean,  different
from  original,  II,  335;  Cornelius  Agrip-
pa's  Occult  Philosophy,  the  text-book
of,  11,  349;  defence  of,  by  Dr.  Robert
Fludd,  11,  338;  common  symbol  in  Free-
masonry and,  11,  341 ;  distinctions  be-
tween, and  Freemasonry,  11,  342;  influ-
ence of,  on  the  High  Degrees  of  Mason-
ry, 11,   352.

Rosicrucians,  some  of  the  early,  11,  345 ;
the  Golden,  II,  354;  influence  of  the,  on
Speculative    Freemasonry,   11,   304,   310,

320-

Rosy  Cross,  a  degree  of  the  Royal  Order  of
Scotland,  11,  279;  vn,  1908.

Rough  Layers,  hi,  846.

Rough  Mason  (see  also  "Cowan"),  might
not  become  a  Freemason,  III,  618;
meaning  of  the  term,  111,  781,  745;  cer-
tain employment  forbidden  to  the,  III,
611.

Rough  Masons,  The  Freemasons  and
the,  history  of  the  two  classes  of  work-
men, in,  779,   791.

Royal  Arch,  the  Supreme  Order  of  the
Holy,  iv,  1 109;  origin  of  the,  v,  1238;
recognition  of  the,  in  the  "Articles  of
Union,"  1813,  v,  1 179;  conflicting
sources  of  the,  in  America,  v,   1288.

Royal  Arch  Chapter,  formation  of  a,  in
1765,  iv,  1 132;  early  minutes  of,  v,  1284.

Royal  Arch  Lodge,  a  title  of  the  Colonial
period,  v,  1279.

Royal  Arch  Lodges,  early  existence  of,  vi,

1519,  1528,  1543.

Royal  Arch  Masonry  (cf.  Degrees,
Capitular),  source  of  the  essential  ele-
ment of,  v,  1249;  origin  and  develop-
ment of  degrees  in,  v,  1239,  1243,  1248,
1249,  1251,  1252,  1271,  1275,  1280;  the
early  ritual  of,  v,  1283 ;  introduction
of,  into  America,  v,  1264;  the  Mother
of,  in  America,  v,  1267;  severance  of,
from  symbolic  Masonry,  v,  1271 ;  the
spread  of,  in  Colonial  America,  v,  1273 ;
account  of  early,  in  Canada,  v,  1287;
origin  of  American  system  of,  v,  1293 ;
introduction  of,  into  Alabama,  vi,  1487,
in  Arizona,  1488,  in  Ark.,  1489,  in  Cal.,
1489,  in  Col.,  1490,  in  Dak.,  1492,  in
Del.,  1493,  in  D.  of  C,  1495,  in  Fla.,
1501,  in  Ga.,  1503,  in  Idaho,  1504,  in  111.,
1505,  in  I.  T.,  1506,  in  Ind.,  1506,  in
Iowa,  1508,  in  Kan.,  1510,  in  Ky.,  1510,
in  La.,  1512,  in  Me.,  1515,  in  Md.,  1516,
in  Mass.,  1519,  in  Mich.,  1520,  in  Minn.,

1520,  in  Miss.,  1521,  in  Mo.,  1521,  in
Mont.,  1523,  in  Neb.,  1524,  in  Nev.,  1524,
in  N.  H.,  1525,  in  N.  J.,  1525,  in  N.  Y.,
1528,  in  N.  C,  1530.  in  N.  Dak.,  1531,
in  Ohio,  1532,  in  Pa.,  1533,  in  R.  I.,  1535,
in  S.  G,  I53S,  in  S.  Dak.,  1536,  in  Tenn.,
1536,  in  Tex.,  1537,  in  Utah,  1540,  in
Vt,  1541,  in  Va.,  1543,  in  Wash.,  1545.
in  W.  Va.,  1546,  in  Wis.,  1547,  in  Wy.,

1547;  Grand  Chapter  law  of,  v,  1296;
the  Constitution  of  the  G.  G.  Chapter,
the  "Common  Law"  of  v,  1297;  relation
of,  to  Red  Cross  of  Rome  and  Constan-
tine,  v,  1317.

Royal  Arch  Masons,  preliminary  conven-
tion of,  Boston,  1797,  v,  1293 ;  Knight
Templar  degree  practiced  by  the,  v,
1371 ;  practiced  Royal  Arch  in  Scotland
without  recognition  of  Grand  Lodge,  v,
1288.

Royal  Arch  of  Solomon,  a  degree  fabri-
cated by  Chevalier  Ramsay,  iv,  1130;  an
early  title  for  the  Royal  Arch  degree,
v,  1280.

Royal  Arch  Word,  history  of  the,  v,  1241.

Royal  Art,  a  title  given  to  Freemasonry
by  Charles  II,  II,  273.

Royal  and  Select  Master's  Degrees,
made  preliminary  to  the  Royal  Arch  in
Maryland,  v,  1298.

Royal  Society  (of  England),  the  found-
ers of  the,  11,  305,  306;  contemporary
views  as  to  the  origin  and  purpose  of,
11,  311;  Nicolai's  theory  as  to  the  com-
mon origin  of  Freemasonry  and  the,
n»  307,  310;  Freemasonry  and  the,  II,
301 ;  influence  of  the,  on  Speculative
Freemasonry,  III,  853.

Royal  Society  of  Sciences  (name  of  the
"Royal  Society"  after  the  Restoration),
11,  301.

Royal  Order,  old  French  title  for  Masonic
Order,  v,  1217.

Royal  Order  of  Scotland,  an  order  of
Freemasonry,  11,  279;  Kings  as  Grand
Masters  of,  11,  280;  character  of  the
ritual  of,  in,  767 ;  the  history  of  the  two
degrees  of,  vn,  1908;  Heredom  of  Kil-
winning, p.  1910;  regular  minutes  at
Edinburgh,  from  1766,  p.  1813;  the,
in  foreign  countries,  p.  1914;  in  the
United  States,  p.  1916;  antiquity  of  the
Royal  Order,  p.  1921 ;  Primary  Aim  of
the  Rite,  p.  1922 ;  historical  basis  of  the
Order,  p.  1922;  copy  of  certificate  to  W.
J.  Hughan,  p.  1924.

Rummer  and  Grapes  Tavern,  meeting  of
lodges  at,  iv,  882,  888.

s

Sacred  Congregation  (of  Catholic
Church),  Masonic  work  ordered  burned
by,  1750,  v,  1246.

Sacred  Stone,  tradition  regarding,  11,  399.

St.  Alban,  the  Legend  of,  1,  23,  90.

St.  Amphibalus  Legend,  vii,  2003.

St.  Andrew  at  Hexham,  the  Church-yard
of,  11,  550.

St.  Andrew's  Chapter,  Boston,  first  m
Massachusetts,  v,  1274,  1293;  partici-
pates in  organization  of  Grand  Chapter,
1708,  v,  1294.

St.  Andrew's  Royal  Arch  Lodge,  Boston,
v,  1370.

2054

INDEX

St.  Bernard,  second  crusade  incited  by,  v,
1322.

St.  Blaise,  Operative  French  Masons  un-
der the  patronage  of,  III,  674.

St.  Catharine's  Guild,  at  Stamford,  form
of  admission  and  oath  in  charter  of,  II,

579-

St.  Clair  Charters  (Scotland),  in,  636;
a  consideration  of  the,  iv,  1085.

St.  Clair  of  Roslin,  William,  first  Grand
Master  of  Scotland,  iv,  1098.

St.  Edmundsbury,  Abbot  of,  contract  be-
tween, and  John  Wood,  in  1439,  III,
786.

St.  Helena,  Lodge  established  in  the  Is-
land of,  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the
"Ancients,"  iv,  1126.

St.  Isidore,  influence  of  his  "Chronicon"
or  Chronicle,  on  Masonry,  I,  48 ;  indebt-
edness of  the  Legend  of  the  Craft  to
Etymologies  of,  1,  69.

St.  John  the  Baptist,  use  of  the  title,
among  the  German  and  English  Free-
masons, in,  674.

St.  John  the  Baptist's  Day,  organization
of  first  Grand  Lodge  on,  1717,  III,  850,
851,  883,  903.

St.  John  the  Evangelist,  Masonic  cele-
brations of  festival  of,  1770,  iv,  1075;
v,  1397,  1399,  1400,  1401,  1413-,

St.  John's  Lodge,  Boston,  priority  claim
of,  v,  1395 ;  first  regular  Lodge  in  North
America,  vn,  2010.

St.  John  of  Jerusalem,  Knights  of,  v,
1318.

St.  John's  Masonry,  a  term  for  the  three
symbolic  degrees,  or  Ancient  Craft  Ma-
sonry, in,  818;  v,  1 180.

St.  Mary's  Chapel  Lodge,  Edinburgh,  pri-
ority claim  made  by,  in,  631.

St.  Paul's  Lodge,  original  title  of  the
Lodge  of  Antiquity,  iv,  886.

St.  Paul,  Minn.,  first  Lodge  organized  at,
vi,  1468.

Saladin,  v,  1322.

Salt  Lake  City,  first  Lodge  established  at,
vi,  1481.

Salutations,  Forms  of,  used  by  Traveling
Craftsmen,  in,  750.

Sanctum   Sanctorum,  vn,    1766.

San  Domingo,  introduction  of  Freemason-
ry in,  vi,  1445;  A.  A.  S.  R.  introduced
in,  vn,  1809.

Sankey,  Richard,  II,  320.

Savannah,  Ga.,  first  Lodge  established  at,
v,  1395 ;  early  Freemasonry  in,  v,   1405.

Saxon  Charters,  that  of  Orky's  Guild  one
of  the  oldest,  II,  565.

Saxon  Guilds,  antiquity  of  the,  n,  564.

Sayer,  Anthony,  first  Grand  Master  of
England,  iv,  883,  888.

Scandinavians,  legend  of  the  Smith  among
the,  11,  423.

Schaw  Statutes  (1598,  1599),  The,  earli-
est constitutions  of  Scotch  Freemasonry,
in,  642 ;  resemblance  between  the,  and
the  early  English  Constitutions,  in,  644;

influence    of,     in     the    development    of

Speculative   Freemasonry,   iv,    1082.

Schaw,  William,  position  of,  in  Scotch
Masonry,  III,  647.

Schism,  the  development  of  the,  between
two  Grand  Lodges  of  England,  iv,  1104,
1128;  the  ritualistic  basis  for  the,  in
England,  v,  1220;  influence  of  the  great,
on  Masonic  History,  iv,  1152;  develop-
ment of  a,  in  France,  v,  1200,  1205,  1214,
1220;  the  French,  and  English,  contrast-
ed and  compared,  v,  1220;  the  appear-
ance of  a,  in   Scotland,  v,  1176.

Schultz,  Edw.  T.,  vi,  1517.

Schoepflin,  John  D.,  Alsatia  Illustrated,
written  by  (Colmer,  1751),  in,  723.

Science  of  Numbers,  in,  757;  iv,  931;  vn,

1733-

Scotch  Knight,  the  first  degree  of  the
Maqon    Parfait,    II,    271.

Scotch  Templars,  v,  1342.

Scotland,  Lyon's  contribution  to  Masonic
History  in,  II,  321 ;  early  non-Opera-
ative  membership  in  Lodges  of,  II,  322;
in,  652,  839 ;  early  Masonry  in,  m,  629 ;
introduction  of  Freemasonry  in,  III,  632;
first  historic  period  of  Freemasonry  in,
in,  634;  tardy  development  of  Specula-
tive Masonry  in,  in,  837 ;  authentic  rec-
ords of  Freemasonry  in,  in,  641 ;  record
history  of  Transition  from  Operative,  to
Speculative  Masonry  in,  iv,  1090;  rela-
tion of  Speculative  Freemasonry  in,  to
that  of  England,  1,  p.  x ;  political  use  of
Masonry  in,  in  the  time  of  the  Stuarts,
Ii,  274 ;  theory  of  the  introduction  of
Cromwellian  Masonry  in,  n,  298;  three
Lodges  claimed  to  have  been  the  first
in,  in,  631 ;  customs  of  Masons  in,  in
the  17th  century,  in,  646;  earliest  rec-
ord of  the  Third  degree  in,  iv,  1001 ;
Speculative  Grand  Lodge  of,  organized
in  1736,  in,  645;  iv,  1079;  attitude  of
the  Grand  Lodge  of,  toward  the  Eng-
lish "Moderns,"  iv,  1123;  system  of
Provincial  Grand  Lodges  in,  vi,  1648;
customs  as  to  use  of  marks  in,  in,  809;
Mark  Master's  degree  given  in,  1778,
III,  660;  the  Mark  degree  originated
in,  in,  832;  history  of  the  Mark  degree
in,  in,  817-818,  820;  early  practice  of
Royal  Arch  in,  v,  1263;  vn,  2007;  the
Templars  in,  v,  1342 ;  some  Templar
Grand  Masters  in,  v,  1343 ;  Supreme  K.
T.  Encampment  formed  in,  v,  1343 ;
Supreme  Council  A.  A.  S.  R.,  in,  vn,
1857;  the  rise  of  Schism  in,  v,  1167;
history  of  the  Royal  Order  of,  11,  279;
vn,  1908;  Kings  of,  as  Grand  Masters
of  the  Royal  Order,  11,  280;  the  Knights
of  St.  John  in,  v,  1353 ;  relation  of
women   to  Freemasonry  in,   in,   653.

Scottish  Jacobite,  title  of  Rose  Croix
Chapter  established  at  Arras,  France,
1747,   n,  280.

Scottish  Knight,  or  Master,  fabrication
of  the  degree  of,  n,  272,  290.

INDEX

2055

Scottish  Knights  of  St.  Andrew,  a  term
introduced  into  Masonry  by  Ramsay,  II,
277,  288.

Scottish  Lodges,  records  of,  preserved
since  the  16th  century,  III,  633 ;  three
classes  of  members  in,  in,  648;  some
usages  of,  in  the  17th  century,  in,  655,
656.

Scottish  Mason,  a  degree  of  the  French
Rite,  v,  1218.

Scottish  Masons,  customs  of  the,  in  the
17th  century,  III,  646.

Scottish  Master,  a  term  introduced  into
Masonry  by  Ramsay,  11,  277 ;  name  of
a  degree  fabricated  by  de  Bonneville,
1754,  vii,  1805.

Scottish  Masonry,  date  of  the  origin  of,
in,  634 ;  the  development  of  Speculative,
iv,  1003.

Scottish  or  Stuart  Masonry,  an  addition
to  the  Symbolic  degrees,  11,  273.

Scottish  Rite  (A.  A.  S.  R.),  a  term  in-
troduced into  Masonry  by  Ramsay,  n,
277;  union  of  the  early,  with  symbolic
Freemasonry  in  France,  v,  1206;  early
history  of  the,  vn,  1803;  Wren's  rela-
tion to  development  of,  p.  1804 ;  the
Bonneville  High  Degrees,  p.  1805 ;
Frederick  the  Great  and,  p.  1806,  1810;
Morin's  Patent  and  visit  to  America,  p.
1806,  1809;  Webb's  influence  upon,  p.
1809;  Supreme  Council  of  the  33ds  es-
tablished, p.  1810;  the  Chapter  of  Cler-
mont, p.  1816;  Chevalier  de  Bonneville,  p.
1816;  recognition  of,  in  France,  p.  1818;
early  statutes  of  the,  p.  1818;  register
of  the  original  Supreme  Council,  p.
1821 ;  sources  of  the  degrees  of,  p.  1868 ;
titles  of  the  several  degrees  of,  p.  1847;
history  of  the,  in  the  United  States,
vn,  1843;  text  of  the  1802  Charleston,
"Circular,"  p.  1844;  names  of  the  sev-
eral degrees  in,  p.  1847;  councils  estab-
lished in  Italy,  Spain  and  the  Nether-
lands, p.  1850;  Northern  Jurisdiction
established  in  1813,  p.  1850;  Supreme
Council  of  England  and  Wales  estab-
lished in  1846,  p.  1851;  effect  of  the
division  of  the  United  States,  p.  1851 ;
the  new  Supreme  Council  of  Foulhouze,
p.  1852;  relation  of  Cerneau  to,  p.  1853;
faction  in  the  Northern  Supreme  Coun-
cil, p.  1855 ;  list  of  the  legitimate  Su-
preme Councils  of  the  world,  p.  1857;
unrecognized  Supreme  Council,  p.  1858;
conflicting  Rituals,  p.  1858;  Councils  of
Deliberation,  p.  1858;  jurisdiction  of  the
Supreme  Council,  p.  1858;  differing
work  of  the  Northern  and  Southern
jurisdictions,  p.  1859;  controversies,  p.
1861 ;  text  of  the  address  of  Yates,  p.
1863 ;  statistical  information,  p.  1889.

Scottish  Rite  Bodies,  tabular  statistics  of,
vn,  1892;  by  States,  p.  1895.

Scottish    Templars,   the   story  of   the,  I,

255.
Scribes,  vi,  1725.

Seceders,  The  English,  the  Master's  de-
gree supplemented  by,   v,    1293.

Second  Degree  (cf.  "Degrees,"  2),  sym-
bolism of  the,  vn,   1756,  1765,  1767.

Secrecy,  importance  of,  in  Masonic  Guilds,
m,  585 ;  importance  of,  in  early  Lodges,
in,  611 ;  an  oath  of,  taken  by  the  Square-
men  in  Scotland,  in,  649;  necessity  and
importance  of,  in  Operative  Masonry,
hi,  692,  747;  historical  development  of,
in,  614,  761 ;  the  Operative  Masons
practiced,  iv,  926;  origin  of  Speculative,
in  Operative,  in,  864;  widespread  prac-
tice of,  vn,  1758.

Secret  History  of  Clubs,  particularly  of
the  Golden  Fleece.  With  their  Origi-
nal :  And  the  characters  of  the  most
noted  Members  thereof,  in,  856.

Secret  Master  (cf.  "Degree"  S.  R.  4),
origin  of  degree  of,  11,  274;  4th  degree
A.  A.  S.  R.,  vn,  1847.

Secret  of  the  Order  of  Freemasons,  etc.,
The,  title  of  letter  in  the  Gentleman's
Magazine,   1737,  v,   1191.

Secret  Societies,  formation  of,  among  the
Greeks,  11,  497;  some  ancient,  v,  1346;
the  spread  of,  in  the  16th  century,  n,
384.

Secret  Vault,  vi,  1564;  significance  of  the,
vi,  1565.

Secret  Word,  use  of  a,  by  medieval  Ma-
sons, in,  767.

Secrets,  orre  set  of,  common  to  Appren-
tices, Fellow-Crafts  and  Masters,  in
Operative  Masonry,  iv,  947;  the  early
Operative,  m,  745;  iv,  948;  geometrical
character  of  medieval,  in,  679,  753,  796;
use  of  Latin  to  conceal  early  Masonic,
in,  748.

Sections,  the  sub-divisions  of  Masonic  de-
grees, vn,  1765,  1769.

Select  Master  (cf.  "Degrees"  9),  the  de-
gree of,  vi,  1549,  1553.

Select  Master  of  27,  degree  of,  in  capitu-
lar Masonry  of  Virginia,  V,  131 1.

Sepulcher,  Knights  of  the,  v,  1318.

Serpent  Symbol,  The,  vi,  1702,   1706.

Seven  Liberal  Sciences,  treatment  of,  in
Legend  of  the  Craft,  1,  18,  41.

Shadbolt,  Thomas,  ii,  320.

Shawneetown,  III.,  Lodge  established  at,
1815,  by  charter  from  Grand  Lodge  of
Tenn.,  vi,  1450.

Shoemarks,  proprietary  character  of  me-
dieval, in,  804,  807.

Shorthose,  John,  ii,  320.

Shorthose,  Thomas,  ii,  320.

Sidney,  Algernon,  ii,  294.

Sign,  early  use  of,  among  German  Stone-
masons, in,  720.

Signature,  the  use  of  Marks  for,  in,  657.

Signs,  early  written,  vi,  1698,  1703,  1707,
1708,  1710  (cf.  also  in,  796,  800,  805,
808;  vi,  1718,  1720.

Signs  and  Tokens,  the  Operative  use  of,
iv,  900.

Sinclair    of    Roslin,    Scottish    Operative

2056

INDEX

Masons  adopted  the  family  of,  as  pa-
trons and  protectors,  iv,   1088.

Singleton,  William  R.,  salutatory  by,  v,
1305 ;  record  certified  by,  VI,   1563.

Sirius,  or  Dog-Star,  vi,  1506.

Sismondi,  Republiques  Italiennes  of,  III,
709.

Skillful  Architect,  a  name  for  Hiram
Abif,  11,  429.

Sloane  MSS.,  No.  3848  (see  under  "Old
Charges").

Sloane,  George,  theory  of,  on  the  relation
of  the  Rosicrucians  and  Freemasons,
11,  348;  Leland  MS.,  criticised  by,  11,
440.

Smith,  Legend  of  the  (see  "Legend  of
the  Smith"),  wide  prevalence  of  the
myths  of  the,  11,  420 ;  influence  of,  on
Hiramic  symbolism,  11,  431.

Smith,  Sir  William  Sidney,  v,   1357.

Smith,  Toulmin,  writer  on  English
Guilds,  11,  561,  564.

Smithfield,  first  Kansas  Lodge  established
at,  vi,  1472.

Societa  della  Cucchiara  (Society  of  the
Trowel),  11,  384,  518.

Society  Islands,  Freemasonry  in,  vn,
1999.

Socinians,  Freemasonry  and  the,  11,  382.

Socinus,  Faustus,  theory  that  Freemason-
ry was  founded  by,  11,  383.

Socinus,  L^lius,  ii,  384.

Socrates,  vii,  1747.

Sodality,  principle  of,  in  development  of
Operative  and  Speculative  Masonry,  1,
p.  viii.

Sons,  The  Persian,  all  secret  societies  of
Syria  traced  to,  1,  239.

Sol'i-man,  Sultan,  v,  1325.

Solomon,  King  of  Israel,  significance  of,
in  Middle  Ages,  1,  82;  in  relation  to
Legend  of  Hiram  Abif,  1,  79;  11,  413;
French  Operative  Masons  of  to-day
called  the  "children"  of,  in,  680.

Solomon,  Lord  Bacon's  romance  of  the
House  of,  and  Freemasonry,  n,  304.

Solomon  Chapter,  Derp-y,  Conn.,  1794,  v,
1293 ;  participates  in  the  organization  of
the  General  Grand  Chapter,  1798,  v,
1294.

South  Australia,  Freemasonry  in,  vn,
1094.

South  Carolina,  introduction  of  Freema-
sonry into,  v,  1230;  the  first  Lodge  and
organization  of  Grand  Lodge  in,  v,
1408;  introduction  of  Royal  Arch  Ma-
sonry in,  V,  1283;  vi,  1535;  Cryptic
Masonry  in,  vi,  1592;  Templarism  estab-
lished in,  v,  1373;  Templarism  once  de-
pendent upon  the  A.  A.  R.,  in,  v,  1378;
organization  of  the  Grand  Commandery
and  subordinate  commanderies  in,  vi,
1634;  Scottish  Rite  Masonry  in,  VII,
1889,   1890,  1893.

South  Dakota  (cf.  "Dakota"),  introduc-
tion of  Royal  Arch  Masonry  in,  vi,
1536;  Cryptic  Masonry  in,  vi,  1592;  or-

ganization of  Grand  Commandery  and
subordinate  commanderies  in,  vi,  1635 ;
Scottish  Rite  Masonry  in,  vn,  1889,
1890,  1892.

Southern  States,  Capitular  degrees  given
in  symbolic  Lodges  in,  v,  1293.

Southern  Supreme  Council,  vi,   1579.

Sovereign  Grand  Inspectors-General  of
the  33RD,  formation  of  Council  of,  vn,
1806;  33rd  degree  A.  A.  S.  R.  as  an-
nounced by  the  Supreme  Council  at
Charleston,   in   1802,  vn,   1848.

Sovereign  Prince  of  Rose  Croix  de  Here-
dom,  18th  degree  A.  A.  S.  R.  as  an-
nounced by  the  Supreme  Council  at
Charleston,  in  1802,  VII,  1848.

Spain,  Roman  Colleges  of  Artificers  in,
n,  503,  504;  the  degree  of  Mark  Master
not  known  in,  III,  817;  Supreme  Council
of  A.  A.  S.  R.,  established  in,  vn,  1850,

1857.

Spectator,  influence  of  the,  on  the  develop-
ment of  Speculative  Masonry,  III,  854.

Speculative,  early  equivalents  of  the  term,
in,  844;  history  of  the  term,  in,  847;
period  when  the  term  came  into  general
use,  iv,  878.

Speculative  Freemasonry  (see  under
"Freemasonry,"   II,   Speculative).

Speculative  Lodges  (cf.  "Lodges"),  rela-
tion of  early,  to  the  Masons'  Company,
in,  590.

Speculative  Mark,  significance  of  the,  in,
828.

Speculative  Mark  Masonry  (cf.  "De-
grees" 4),  the  rise  of,  HI,  825.

Speculative  Mason,  admission  of,  into
Lodges  of  the  Operative  Craft,  III,  838,

844.

Speculative  Masonry  (cf.  "Freemasonry,"
II  Speculative),  development  of,  from
sodalities  of  Operative  Masonry,  in,
628;  Operative  Masonry  the  basis  for,
in,  683 ;  the  real  beginning  of,  in  1717,
Hj  37o !  some  Pythagorean  sources  of,
n,  368;  influence  of  various  legends
upon,  11,  396,  398,  404,  406,  429 ;  Opera-
tive source  of  the  early  symbolism  of,
11,  349;  in,  861-862,  various  influences
that  developed,  III,  853 ;  influence  of  re-
ligious features  of  Craft  Guilds  upon,
11,  574;  influence  of  T.  S.  Webb  upon
the  Ritual  of,  V,  1291 ;  introduction  of
the  Mark  degree  in,  III,  831 ;  hermetic
element  in  High  degrees  of,  n,  344.

Speculative  Masons,  indebtedness  of  the,
to    medieval    science    of   Geometry,    in
796 ;  arms  of  the  Operative  Masons  as
sumed  by  the,  III,  597;  adoption  of  som
Pythagorean   symbols  by,   11,  367.

Spencer,  or  Cole  MS.  (see  under  "Old
Charges").

Speth,  G.  W,  vii,  2002.

Spire.  Masonic  Marks  discovered  at,  by  M.
Didron,  HI,  658.

Square  and  Compasses,  phallic  use  of  the,
in    Rosicrucian   symbols,  n,  349;   early

INDEX

2057

symbolic  use  of,  in,  805 ;  early  emblem-
atic use  of,  disclosed  by  relic  discov-
ered near  Limerick,  n,  349.

Squaremen,  form  of  initiation  of  the,  in
Scotland,  in,  649.

Squaremen's  Word,  iv,  974.

Stamford,  St.  Catherine's  Guild  at,  form
of  admission  and  oath  in  charter  of,  n,

579-

Stanton,  William,  ii,  321.

Stapleton,  Joseph  K.,  vi,  1505,  1576.

State  Grand  Chapters,  adoption  of  the
name,  v,  1296 ;  internal  regulations  of,
v,   1297.

Statistics  :  names  and  dates  of  principal
Old  Manuscripts,  1,  15 ;  list  of  the  Pa-
triarchs of  Jerusalem,  v,  1349;  Grand
Officers  of  the  Knights  of  Malta,  v,
1351;  Grand  Masters  of  Knights  Tem-
plars, V,  1361 ;  Grand  Masters  of  the
Orders  of  St.  John,  Rhodes,  and  Malta,
V,  1364;  Rulers  in  the  Latin  Kingdom
of  Palestine,  a.d.  1099-1205,  v,  1366;  list
of  the  Popes  of  Rome,  a.d.  1088  to  1316,
V,  1366;  number  and  dates  of  the  Cru-
sades, v,  1367;  Grand  Masters  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England,  iv,  1127;  list
of  Lodges  which  organized  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Scotland,  iv,  1097;  list  of
Lodges  in  Virginia  prior  to  1786,  v,
1420 ;  the  twelve  chartered  Lodges  in
New  Orleans  prior  to  the  organization
of  the  Grand  Lodge,  vi,  1447 ;  Lodges
which  organized  the  Grand  Lodge  in
Indiana,  vi,  1456;  list  of  Grand  Lodges
in  the  United  States,  number  of  sub-
ordinate Lodges  and  membership,  vi,
1485 ;  list  of  Provincial  Grand  Lodges
and  Chapters,  vn,  1915;  some  Lodges
of  India,  vi,  1972,  1974;  memoranda  of
important  transactions  of  the  Gen.  Grand
Chapter,  vi,  1548;  list  of  G.  H.  Priests
of  the  Gen.  Grand  Chapter,  U.  S.  A.,  v,
1301  ;  subordinate  Councils  in  the
United  States,  vi,  1596;  list  of  States
in  which  Templar  Order  was  conferred
prior  to  the  organization  of  Gen.  Grand
Encampment,  v,  1383 ;  list  of  the  Su-
preme Councils,  A.  A.  S.  R.,  interna-
tionally recognized,  VII,  1857;  Scottish
Rite  statistics  for  the  United  States,
vn,  1889;  number  of  active  and  honor-
ary 33ds  in  the  United  States,  vn,  1889;
membership  in  the  United  States,  vn,
1890;  Consistories,  vn,  1892;  Councils
of  K.  K.,  vn,  1893;  Rose  Croix  Chap-
ters, vn,  1893 ;  Lodges  of  Perfection,
vn,  1894.

Statute  of  Excommunications,  Council
of  Avignon  issues,  against  Fraternities
in   1326,  in,  593-

Statutes  (cf.  "Constitutions"  and  "Old
Charges"),  an  enumeration  of  the  early,
of  German  Freemasons,  in,  721 ;  the
two  authentic,  of  the  Steinmetzen :  the
Strasburg  Statutes  of  1459,  in,  738,  739,
743,    744,   and   the   Torgau    Statutes   of

1462,  in,  743,  744;  some  Anglo-Saxon,
n,  565,  568,  570,  572;  the  English  Oper-
ative, in,  872;  text  of  two  14th  century
Craft  Guilds,  11,  570,  572 ;  the  old  Man-
uscript Statutes  from  the  13th  to  the
18th  century  (see  "Old  Charges"),  in,
872 ;  the  Schaw  Statutes,  the  earliest  of
Scotch  Masonry,  in,  642 ;  Statutes  of
French  Guilds,  ill,  672,  675  ;  Royal  con-
firmation of  the  early  French,  111,  669,
679;  early  statutes  of  the  Scottish  Rite,
vn,  1818;  Supreme  Council  of  the  A.
A.  S.  R.  promulgates,  vn,  1858.

Steele,  Sir  Richard,  influence  of,  on  Spec-
ulative  Masonry,   in,  854.

Steinmetzen,  the  Stonemasons  of  Ger-
many, 1,  p.  ix ;  11,  471 ;  meaning  of  the
term,  III,  790 ;  history  of  the,  in,  707 ;
analogy  between  the  methods  of,  and,
the  Collegia  Fabrorum,  n,  500;  fra-
ternal organization  of  the,  III,  713;  two
classes  of,  in  Middle  Ages,  in,  779;  the
only  two  authentic  statutes  of,  in,  744;
Cathedral  of  Cologne  and  the,  in,  731 ;
most  important  customs  of  the,  in,  714,
724,  741 ;  close  connections  between  the
Freemasons  of  England  and  the,  in,  768;
the  Speculative  Fraternity  modeled
after  the,   in,  862.

Stone,  symbolic  use  of  the,  11,  341.

Stones,  Druid,  vii,  1763.

Stowe,  Survey  of  London,  by,  quoted  on
subject    of   early    Speculative    Masonry,

",  323-

Stowell,  C.  L.,  33rd,  v,  1317.

Straits  Settlement,  Freemasonry  in  the,
vn,  1985.

Strasburg,  The  Cathedral  of,  and  the
Stonemasons  of  Germany,  in,  718;
usages  of  the  Masons  at,  in,  725 ;  im-
portation of  Masons  from,  into  Scot-
land, in,  634;  Masonic  Marks  discov-
ered at,  by  M.  Didron,  in,  658 ;  a  Grand
Lodge  established  at,  in,  720;  early
statutes  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of,  111,  743.

Stuart,    Charles   Edward,   v,    1338.

Stuart,  outline  history  of  the  family  of,  1 1,
267;  Freemasonry  and  the  house  of,  II,
267.

Stuart  Masonry,  recital  of  various  the-
ories regarding,  II,  273ff. ;  Chevalier
Ramsay  the  inventor  of,  II,  285 ;  polit-
ical purpose  of  the,  n,  281.

Student's  Lodge  No.  2076  (London),  name
of,  changed  to  Quatuor  Coronati,  vn,
2003.

Styria,  introduction  of  Freemasonry  in,
in,  721.

Sublime  Degrees,  general  term  for  the  A.
A.  S.  R.  from  the  4th  to  the  14th  inclu-
sive  (see  under  "Degrees"),  vn,  1867.

Sublime  Freemasonry,  influence  of  the
Pythagorean  and  Essenean  rituals  upon,
vn,    1871.

Sublime  Knight  Elected,  nth  Degree  A.
A.  S.  R.  as  announced  by  the  Supreme
Council  of  Charleston,  in  1802,  vn,  1847.

2058

INDEX

Sublime  Prince  of  the  Royal  Secret
Prince  of  Masons,  32c!  degree  A.  A.  S.
R.  as  announced  by  the  Supreme  Coun-
cil of  Charleston,  in  1802,  vn,  1848.
Sun,  references  to  the,  in  Gnostic  symbol-
ism, 11,  379-
Supreme   Being,   universal   Pagan  idea  of

one,  vn,   1747.
Supreme  Council  of  Sov.  G.  I.  G.  of  the
33RD  and  last  Degree  A.  A.  S.  R.  for
the   U.   S.   of  A.,  the  organization   of,
vn,    1810,    1820;   fac-simile   copy  of  the
register  of,  vn,   1821 ;  text  of  early  de-
cree by,  vi,  1561 ;  the  jurisdiction  of  the,
vn,  1858.
Supreme  Councils,  A.  A.  S.  R.,  list  of  le-
gitimate, vn,  1857.
Supreme  Order  of  the  Holy  Royal  Arch,

iv,  1 109.
Swastika  Cross,  The,  hi,  800;  vn,  1787,
1789;  the  discovery  of,  in  America,  vn,
1797.
Switzerland,   Supreme  Council,  A.  A.   S.

R.  in,  vn,  1857.
Symbolic      Architecture,     meaning     and

spread  of  the  style  of,  hi,  727,  739,  755.
Symbolic  Marks,  pictures  of  some  impor-
tant, medieval,  in,  800.
Symbolism,  history  of  the  origin,  character,
and    practice    of,    vi,    1693-1732;    vn,
1 733- 1 800.
I.  Introduction,    vi,    i693ff. ;   the  origin
of,  VI,  1693,  1705;  gesture-language,
VI,    1695;    written    signs,   VI,    1698;
symbols,  vi,    1698;   light,  vi,  1701 ;
hieroglyphic     writings,     vi,      1702;
definition    and    origin    of    symbols,
vi,    1705;    earliest    method   of  con-
veying  religious   and  ethical   ideas,
in,  868;  vi,   1699;  picture  writing,
vi,   1707;  pictures  of   ancient  sym-
bols, vi,   1718,   1720;   description  of
same,  vn,  1773 ;  merging  of  all  an-
cient symbols  in  the  sun  and  moon,
vn,  1781 ;   the  cherubim,  vn,  1781 ;
the   swastika   cross,    vn,    1787;    the
pentalpha,  vn,  1799;  development  of
the   science   of,  in,  853;   iv,    1130;
Gothic  architects  familiar  with,  ill,

797-
II.  The  Three  Revelations,  vi,  1712;  1,  in
external  nature,  vi,  1713 ;  2,  in
man's  nature,  vi,  1714;  distinction
between  good  and  evil,  vi,  1717;  3,
the  written  revelation,  vi,  1719;  sig-
nificance of  the  elements  in  symbol-
ism: light,  vi,  1701 ;  vn,  1761;  fire,
vi,  1706;  water,  vi,  1731 ;  dew,  vi,
1732.

III.  Symbolism  of  Numbers,  iv,  931 ;  vn,

1733;  Vesica  Piscis,  VII,  1733;
arithmetic  and  geometry,  vn,  1736;
the  triangle,  vn,  1738;  the  Monad
("the  point  within  a  circle"),  vn,
1742,  1743;  the  Duad,  vn,  1747;  the
Triad,  vn,   1751.

IV.  Legends  and  Symbols  in  the  Several

Degrees  of  Masonry  (cf.  "De-
grees"), vn,  1755;  historic  influ-
ences, in,  853 ;  sources  of  early
Masonic,  11,  349,  367,  372;  in,  770,
792,  797,  866,  868,  869;  the  first
three  degrees,  vn,  1756;  the  rite  of
"circumambulation,"  vn,  1758;  uni-
formity in  the  practice  of  primitive
people,  vn,  1758;  the  Pythagorean
system,  II,  365,  367;  vn,  1759;  the
Druids,  vn,  1760;  the  Egyptian
Mysteries,  vn,  1760;  significance  of
"light,"  11,  349;  vn,  1761,  1764;  of
"darkness,"  vn,  1762;  of  the  "per-
ambulation," vn,  1764;  of  the  "mid-
dle chamber,"  vn,  1765 ;  of  "odd
numbers,"  iv,  931  (note)  ;  VII,
1766;  the  "stone"  (Lapis  Angular-
is),  11,  341;  Solomon's  Temple  as  a
Masonic  Symbol,  1,  74;  IV,  965;  v,
1347 1  vn,  1769 ;  a  triple  series  of
antagonisms  in  Masonic,  v,  1239
(cf.  p.  1242);  vn,  1757;  the  three
lights,  iv,  940;  the  secret  vault,  vi,
1565 ;  influence  of  the  "Ancients"
upon  the  development  of,  iv,  1132;
in  the  Capitular  degrees:  the  Mark
degree,  in,  825,  830,  832-833,  827-
831,  833-834;  Operative  symbolic
use  of  "marks,"  in,  792;  in  the
Royal  Arch  degree,  v,  1243- 1244,
1249,  1250,  1285 ;  influence  of  the
Royal  Arch  on  the  general  develop-
ment of,  v,  1238;  the  important  ele-
ment of,  in  the  R.  A.,  v,  1239,  1242 ;
in  the  Cryptic  degrees,  vi,  1555,
1563-1567;  the  secret  vault,  VI,  1565;
in  the  Order  of  the  Red  Cross,  v,
1371,  1391 ;  in  the  Templar  Order,  v,
1368,  1370;  vi,  1616;  in  the  Scottish
Rite,  11,  357,  358;  v,  1309;  vn,  1867;
Ramsay's  contribution  to  Masonic,
v,  1249;  influence  of  Webb  on  Ma-
sonic, v,  1292 ;  the  elements  of  Rose
Croix,  11,  357;  the  Red  Cross  in,  v,
1309 ;  source  of,  in  the  Royal  Order,
vn,  1922.

Symbols,  significance  of,  in  Scottish  Rite
Masonry,  vn,   1867.

Syria,  origin  of  most  ancient  secret  soci-
eties in,  v,  1346.

Tacitus,    account    of    Romanizing    Britain

by,  11,  533-

Tailleurs  de  pierre,  name  of  Operative
Masons  in  France,  II,  471.

Tailors'  Guild  at  Lincoln,  Constitution
of  the,  11,  572.

Tancred,  v,   1325.

Tasmania,  Freemasonry  in,  vn,  1996.

Taylour,  Samuel,  associate  of  Elias  Ash-
mole,  11,  320.

Tellier,  Chancellor,  1531  Corporations
under,  in,  669.

INDEX

2059

Templar  Degree,  early  conferring  of  the,
in  America,  v,  1383.

Templar  Masonry,  origin  of,  in  the  United
States,  vi,   1612.

Templar  Order,  knighthoods  preceding
the,  v,  1309;  a  secret  ritual  in  the  me-
dieval, v,  1347;  mingling  of,  with  Royal
Arch,  prior  to  War  of  Independence,  v,
1382.

Templar  Ritual,  traces  of  medieval  Tem-
plarism  in,  v,  1368 ;  the  English  differ-
ent  from   the  American,   v,    1370.

Templarism,  Knight,  general  history  of
medieval,  V,  1309;  the  several  orders  of,
V,  1310,  1318;  during  the  Crusades,  v,
1320;  the  suppression  of  military,  1,  256;
execution  of  James  De  Molay,  v,  1331,
1332 ;  list  of  Grand  Masters,  v,  1361 ;
the  source  of  modern,  v,  1339;  influence
of  Scots  Lodges  upon,  vn,  1814;  intro-
duction of  modern,  into  America,  v,
1368;  first  record  of,  in  the  United
States,  v,  1370;  formation  of  first  en-
campment of,  in  the  United  States,  v,
1377;  the  spread  of,  in  the  United
States,  v,  1370,  1383;  General  Grand
Encampment,  in  the  United  States,  v,
1384 ;  list  of  Grand  Masters,  v,  1393 ;
Grand  and  subordinate  Commanderies,
in  the  States  and  Territories,  VI,  1601.

Templars,  The  Knights,  origin  of,  in  the
Crusade  movement,  I,  225,  227;  estab-
lishment of  the,  v,  1319;  influence  of
Oriental  societies  on,  1,  242;  theory  of
the  origin  of  Freemasonry  in  the,  in-
vestigated, 1,  243 ;  the,  and  the  Assas-
sins, 1,  253 ;  tradition  of  the  division  of
the,  after  the  death  of  De  Molay,  v,
1339  J  the  escape  of  the  surviving,  to
Scotland,  1,  260;  the  story  of  the  Scot-
tish, 1,  255 ;  the,  in  Scotland,  v,  1342 ;
in   America   (see  "Templarism").

Temple  Chapter,  Albany,  N.  Y.,  prior  to
1797,  v,  1293.

Temple-Builder,  the  Legend  of  the,  1,  22,
73;  the  Krause  MS.  recital  of,  1,  76;  a
discussion  of  the,  1,  151;  significance  of
the,  iv,  965.

Temple  of  Solomon,  work  done  by  Hiram
Abif  in,  11,  430;  apocryphal  character  of
classification  of  workmen  at,  11,  392,
476;  medieval  tradition  of  origin  of  Free-
masonry at,  1,  163 ;  11,  387 ;  mentioned
in  all  old  Constitutions,  iv,  933 ;  Opera-
tive ritualistic  use  of  the,  iv,  948;  as  a
Masonic  symbol,  ill,  871;  vn,  1769;
allegorical  significance  of,  vn,  1766;
symbolic  substitution  of,  in  place  of  Ba-
con's House  of  Solomon,  11,  310;  rea-
sons for  the  symbolic  use  of,  in  Spec-
ulative Masonry,  vn,  2003 ;  symbolic
character  of,  in  fable  of  Cromwellian
Masonry,  11,  297 ;  allegorical  relation  of
Bacon's  House  of  Solomon  and,  n,  326;
rejection  of  theory  that  Freemasonry
began  at,  n,  467;  theory  of  Mark  de-
gree at,  a  myth,  hi,  660.

Tennessee,  first  Lodge  and  organization
of  Grand  Lodge  in,  vi,  1449;  introduc-
tion of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  vi,  1536;
Cryptic  Masonry  in,  vi,  1593;  organiza-
tion of  Grand  Commandery  and  subor-
dinate commanderies  in,  vi,  1635 ;  Scot-
tish Rite  Masonry  in,  vn,  1889,  1890,
1892.

Ternary,  the  first,  vn,  1751.

Tertullian,  11,  275.

Tessera  Hospitalis,  resemblance  of  a
Speculative  "mark"  to  the,  of  the  An-
cients, in,  826,  829.

Tessier,  11,  269.

Tetragrammaton,  title  of  Hebrew  word
for  the  Deity,  n,  378;  in,  800;  vi,  1704.

Teutonic  Knights,  origin  of,  in  the  Cru-
sades, 1,  225,  228;  estates  of  the  Tem-
plars shared  by,  v,   1335.

Texas,  first  Lodge  and  organization  of
Grand  Lodge  in,  vi,  1464;  introduction
of  Royal  Arch  Masonry  in,  vi,  1537 ;
the  status  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of,  v,
1301 ;  Cryptic  Masonry  in,  vi,  1593 ;  or-
ganization of  the  Grand  Commandery
and  subordinate  commanderies  in,  vi,
1635;  Scottish  Rite  Masonry  in,  vn,
1889,  1890,  1893.

T.  G.  A.  O.  U.  (The  Grand  Architect  of
the  Universe),  vn,  1742,  1746.

Thanes'  Guild  at  Cambridge,  Charter  of,
II,  568.

Theodosius,  Emperor,  all  mystical  associa-
tions abolished  by,  1,  173.

Theoretical  Masons,  a  title  of  early  non-
Operative  members,  in,  841  ;  transform-
ing influence  of  the,  on  Masonry,  iv,
ion.

Theyer,  Charles,  a  17th  century  collector
of  MSS.,  1,  25.

Third  Degree  (see  "Degrees"  3).

Thompson,  John,  ii,  321.

Thompson,  Thomas  (M.D.),  11,  311.

Thorp  (John  T.)  MS.,  of  a.d.  1629,  vn,
2002.

Thory,  C.  A.,  a  French  Masonic  historian,
11,  516;  Acta  Latomorum  by,  11,  311.

Thought,  definition  and  significance  of,  in
developing   symbolism,   vi,    1694.

Three  Globes,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the,
vn,  1805.

Tilley,  Count  de  Grasse,  Scottish  Rite
spread  by,  vn,  1850.

Timeaus  of  Locri,  Deity  defined  by,  vi,
1706.

Timoleon,  Louis  Hercules,  v,  1356.

Titles,  significance  of  some  of  the  Scot-
tish Rite,  vn,  1869.

Toleration,  religious,  the  adoption  of,  in
Freemasonry,  iv,  942.

Tonson,  Jacob,  translation  of  Pythagorean
works  published  by,  n,  367.

Torgau,  Constitutions  of  1462  adopted  at,
in,  744.

Toulouse,  Veille  Bru,  or  Faithful  Scot-
tish Masons,  created  at,  n,  281.

2o6o

INDEX

Tower  of  Babel,  present  form  of  the  Leg-
end of,  i,  61.

Trajan,  Pliny  organizes  a  Collegium  Fa-
brorum  under,  II,  495;  development  of
Collegia  Fabrorum  into  political  clubs,
feared  by,  11,  496.

Transition,  The,  from  Operative  to  Spec-
ulative Freemasonry,  III,  836;  the  be-
ginnings of,  in,  652,  848;  the  remote
causes  of,  in,  850,  858;  way  prepared
for,  hi,  860 ;  character  and  develop-
ment of,  iv,  1003 ;  gradual  growth  of,
iv,  1008;  record  history  of,  in  Scotland,
hi,  661 ;  iv,    1090.

Traveling  Freemasons,  use  of  term,  in
10th  century,  1,  p.  vi ;  development  of,
in  Italy  from  Collegium  Fabrorum,  1,
p.  ix;  11,  468;  history  and  spread  of
the,  from  Como,  11,  508;  in,  682;  found-
ers of  Gothic  architecture,  1,  191 ;  unity
of  design  introduced  by,  III,  684 ;  church
employees  at  an  early  period,  in,  699;
Masonry  introduced  into  Germany  by
the,  in,  710;  relation  of  the,  to  the
Dionysiac  Architects,  1,  172;  "Company
of  Freemasons"  representative  of,  in
England,  in,  599,  601 ;  theory  of  their
spread  to  Scotland,  in,  631 ;  supposed
usages  of  the,  in  Scotland,  in,  632;
character  of  the  symbols  of,  11,  367.

Trent,  Grand  Lodge  of  England  South  of
the,  history  of  the,  iv,   1135.

Trevisa,  Higden's  Polychronicon  trans-
lated by,  1,  56.

Triad,  history  and  symbolism  of  the,  vn,
1751 ;  the  Welch  triads,  1,  203.

Trial  Piece,  the  early  use  of  a,  III,  650.

Triangle,  Operative  use  of  the,  in  symbol-
ism, iv,  1 130;  the  double,  a  frequently
occurring  symbolic  mark  of  the  Middle
Ages,  in,  800.

Trinitarian  Christianity,  original  Spec-
ulative Masonry  strictly,  vn,   1771.

Trinity,  early  ideas  regarding  the,  vi,
1723;  homage   to,  in  early  Masonry,  1,

IS-

Triskelion,  the  symbol  of  the,  vn,  1797.

True  Word  (see  "Eccossaism"),  v,  1251.

Truth,  all  Masonic  ceremonies  tend  to-
ward, vn,  1767.

Tubal  Cain,  theories  as  to  the  etymology
of,  11,  422 ;  in  the  Legend  of  the  Craft,
I,  19,  47;  the  Legend  of  (cf.  Legend  of
the   Smith),  II,  421.

Tunis,  Supreme  Council  A.  A.  S.  R.  in,
vn,  1857.

Turner,  Sharon,  ii,  512.

Two,  the  number   (see  "Duad").

u

Union,  in  1799,  of  the  Rival  Grand  Bodies

of  France,  v,  1220.
United    Grand    Chapter   established   in

1817,  vn,  2010.

United  Grand  Lodge  of  England  (see
"Grand  Lodge  of  England,  The  United").

United  States  (see  under  the  names  of
the  States),  the  spread  of  Freemasonry
in  the,  V,  1394;  introduction  of  Marie
degree  in,  in,  817,  823;  the  Gen.
Grand  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons
for  the,  v,  1297;  Gen.  Grand  Encamp-
ment of  K.  T.,  in,  v,  1601 ;  the  Templar
Order  in  the,  v,  1370 ;  history  of  the
Scottish  Rite  in  the,  vn,  1843.

Universal  Word,   The,  iv,  943.

Uruguay,  Supreme  Council  A.  A.  S.  R.  ir\
vn,  1857.

Unsectarian,  when  Speculative  Masonry
became,  iv,  942.

Usages  (see  "Customs").

Utah,  first  Lodge  and  organization  of
Grand  Lodge  in,  VI,  1481 ;  introduction
of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  vi,  1540;  Cryptic
Masonry  in,  vi,  1593;  organization  of
Grand  Commandery  and  subordinate
Commanderies  in,  vi,  1635 ;  Scottish
Rite  Masonry  in,  vn,  1889,  1890.

Vade  Mecum,  Free  Masons',  title  of  a
book  published  in  1734,  m,  788.

Vandalia,  III.,  convention  to  organize
Grand  Lodge  held  at,  1822,  vi,  1450.

Vaughn,  Thomas,  a  celebrated  Rosicru-
cian,  11,  340.

Vault,  the  Secret,  significance  of,  vi,  1565.

Veille  Bru,  "Faithful  Scottish  Masons"
(created  at  Toulouse),  n,  281.

Venezuela,  Supreme  Council  A.  A.  S.  R.
in,  vn,  i857._

Vermont,  the  introduction  of  Freemason-
ry in,  v,  1432 ;  the  first  Lodge  and  organ-
ization of  Grand  Lodge  in,  v,  1432 ;  con-
currence of,  in  the  Gen.  Grand  Chapter,
asked,  v,  1295 ;  introduction  of  Royal
Arch  Masonry  in,  vi,  1541 ;  Cryptic
Masonry  in,  vi,  1594;  organization  of
Grand  Commandery  and  subordinate
commanderies  in,  vi,  1636;  list  of  Scot-
tish Rite  Bodies  in,  vn,  1897.

Vesica  piscis,  a  prominent  mystic  symbol
of  the  medieval  Masons,  11,  367;  in,
756,   800;    widespread   use    of  the,    vn,

1733-
Victoria,  Freemasonry  in,  vn,  1992.
Vienna,    early   jurisdiction  of   the    Grand

Lodge  of,  in,  721.
Villaneuve,  Arnold  de  (see  "Rosicrucian-

ism"),  11,  340.
Vincennes,  Ind.,  first  Lodge  organized  at,

vi,  1456.
Viollet-le-Duc,    views    of,    on    spread    of

Roman  Colleges  of  Artificers,  11,  503.
Virginia,  introduction  of  Freemasonry  in,

v,  1419;  first  Lodge  and  organization  of

Grand  Lodge   in,  v,    1419;   Royal  Arch

Masonry    in,    v,    1272,    1288;    vi,    1543;

status  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of,  v,  1301 ;

INDEX

2061

Cryptic  Masonry  in,  vi,  1594;  organiza-
tion of  Grand  Commandery  and  sub-
ordinate commanderies  in,  vi,  1636;
Scottish  Rite  Masonry  in,  vn,  1889,
1800,   1892.

Virtual  Past  Master,  the  invention  of,  v,
1286.

Vishnu,  an  early  symbol  of  Deity,  vi,
1718;  vii,  1773.

Volund,  the  Legend  of,  in  Scandinavia  and
Iceland,  11,  424,  425.

w

Wages,  to  receive,  advancement  from  a
lower  to  a  higher  degree,  iv,  918.

Walcan,  the  name  for  Tubal  Cain  among
Steinmetzen,  iv,  932.

Walter  the  Penniless,  v,  1325.

War  of  1812,  influence  of,  on  capitular
Masonry,  v,  1297.

War,  The  Civil,  influence  of,  on  capitular
Masonry,  v,  1300.

Warden,  Richard  Penket,  ii,  320.

Warden  and  Deacon  (see  under  "Scot-
land"), in,  648.

Wardsfford,  Esq.,  ii,  320.

Warrants,  not  known  prior  to  1717,  v,
1 187;  introduction  of  the  system  of,  in
forming  subordinate  Lodges,  iv,  924;
VII,  2008;  history  of  the  early  Grand
Lodge,  v,  1235 ;  Lodges  in  American
Colonies  opened  under,  v,  1230;  the
grant  of,  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  "An-
cients," iv,  1 134.

Warrington  Lodge,  Elias  Ashmole  initi-
ated in,  11,  320  (cf.  vii,  2004).

Washington,  George,  at  communication  of
"American  Union  Lodge"  at  Morris-
town,  1779,  v,  1428.

Washington,  D.  C,  Supreme  Council  of
the  Southern  Jurisdiction  A.  A.  S.  R.
at,  vii,  1857.

Washington  Territory  and  State,  first
Lodge  and  organization  of  Grand  Lodge
in,  vi,  1469;  introduction  of  R.  A.  Ma-
sonry in,  vi,  1545 ;  Cryptic  Masonry  in,
VI»  *595 ',  organization  of  Grand  Com-
mandery and  subordinate  command-
eries in,  vi,  1638;  Scottish  Rite  Mason-
ry in,  vi  1,  1889,   1890,  1892.

Water,  significance  of,  in  early  symbolism,
vi,   1731.

Watson,  William,  roll  of  1687,  vii,  2003.

Webb,  Thomas  Smith,  a  prominent  Ritual
maker,  ill,  830;  sketch  of  the  Masonic
life  of,  v,  1290 ;  influence  of,  on  Mason-
ic Rituals,  v,  1278;  elected  first  G.  S.,  v,
1295 ;  source  of  the  degrees  fabricated
by,  vii,  1809;  preliminary  degrees  of
the  Chapter,  invented  by,  v,  1292;  the
Mark  degree  incorporated  in  the  Amer-
ican Rite  by,  ill,  659;  capitular  degrees
of,  definitely  adopted,  v,  1209;  influence
of,  on  Templarism,  v,  1371,  1387;  vi,
1616;  influence  of,  on  Scottish  Rite  Ma-
sonry, v,  1272.

Weishaupt,  Adam,  secret  society  estab-
lished in  Bavaria  by,  1776,  11,  289.

Werkmeister  (Master  of  the  Work),  im-
portance of,  in  German  Masonry,  in,
750.

West  Australia,  Freemasonry  in,  vii,
1996.

West  India  Colonies,  Supreme  Council
A.  A.  S.  R.,  established  in,  vn,  1850.

West  Virginia,  first  Lodge  and  organiza-
tion of  Grand  Lodge  in,  vi,  1480;  intro-
duction of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  vi,  1546;
organization  of  Grand  Commandery  and
subordinate  commanderies  in,  vi,  1638;
Scottish  Rite  Masonry  in,  vn,  1889,
1890,    1892.

Wharton,  George,  ii,  306,  316.

Wharton,  Thomas,  ii,  306.

Wharton,  The  Duke  of,  the  6th  Grand
Master  of  England,  1722,  iv,  905.

White  Mantle,  distinguishing  dress  of
medieval  Templars,  v,  1321.

Whittington,  G.  D.,  ii,  525.

Widow's  Son,  no  mention  of,  in  the  Hutch-
inson theory,  1,  138;  political  use  of
term,  in   Stewart  Masonry,  11,  238,  308.

Wieland,  Martin  (editor  of  German  Mer-
cury), cited  as  to  the  origin  of  Freema-
sonry, n,  311.

Wieland,  name  of  the  Artificer  in  the  Ger-
man Legend  of  the  Smith,  11,  425.

Wilke,  William  Frederick,  Legend  of
the  Scottish  Templars  attacked  by,  1,
263.

Wilkins,  Dr.  John,  ii,  301.

William  of  Sens,  a  celebrated  Master  in
Operative  Masonry,  iv,  944.

Will's  Coffee  House,  iv,  885.

Wing,  Rev.  Dr.,  work  by,  cited  in  relation
to  Gnosticism,  n,  376.

Winzer,  J.,  writer  on  German  Brother-
hoods of  the  Middle  Ages,  in,  716.

Wisconsin,  first  Lodge  and  organization
of  Grand  Lodge  in,  vi,  1460;  introduc-
tion of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  vi,  1547;
Cryptic  Masonry  in,  vi,  1596;  organiza-
tion of  Grand  Commandery  and  sub-
ordinate commanderies  in,  vi,  1639;  list
of  Scottish  Rite  Bodies  in,  vn,  1907.

Wise,  Thomas,  ii,  320.

Wise,  William,  ii,  320.

Woart,  William,  elected  first  Grand  Sec-
retary of  Mass.,  v,  1295.

Wodman,  William,   ii,  320.

Women,  relation  of,  to  Freemasonry  in
Scotland,  in,  653.

Wood,  John,  contract  between,  and  the
Abott  of  St.   Edmundsbury,  in,  786.

Woodford,  A.  F.  A.,  iconoclastic  spirit  of,
toward  Masonic  legends,  1,  6 ;  opinion  of
regarding  Halliwell  Poem,  1,  28.

Work  (cf.  "Ritual"),  the  Masonic,  mean-
ing of  the  term,  iv,  918.

Workmen,  two  classes  of,  in  the  Middle
Ages,  in,  779.

Word,  The,  history  and  significance  of  the
idea  of,  v,  1239-1249;  importance  of  the

2062

JNDEX

Mason,  in  the  17th  century  form  of  ini-
tiation, in,  649;  iv,  948,  970;  Operative
origin  of  the,  iv,  1130;  the  "Jerusalem,"
and  the  "Universal,"  in  the  early  Ritual,
iv,  934;  in  Indian  Mysteries,  vn,  1772.

Words  and  Signs,  early  use  of,  among
German  Stonemasons,  111,  720;  historic
transmission   of,  in,   742.

Worms,  Masonic  marks  discovered  at,  by
M.  Didron,  III,  658.

Wren,  Sir  Christopher,  influence  of  the
persecution  of,  on  change  of  symbolism,
11,  310;  Masonry  among  Anglo-Saxons
described  by,  n,  557;  the  Parentalia  of,
quoted,  in,  696,  772 ;  not  a  Mason,  vn,
1804.

Writing,  the  oldest  mode  of,  vi,  1703.

Written  Revelation,  in  symbolism,  vi,
1719.

Wyoming,  first  Lodge  and  organization  of
Grand  Lodge  in,  vi,  1483 ;  introduction
of  R.  A.  Masonry  in,  vi,  1547;  Cryptic
Masonry  in,  vi,  1596;  organization  of
Grand  Commandery  and  subordinate
commanderies  in,  vi,  1640;  Scottish
Rite  Masonry  in,  VII,  1889,  1890.

Yarker,  John,  11,  325.

Yates,  Giles  Fonda,  vn,  1809;  a  sketch
of,  vn,  1862;  address  on  the  laws,  ob-
jects and  history  of  the  Scottish  Rite,
by,  vn,  1863.

York,  remains  of  Roman  Masonry  in,  n,
513;  minutes  of  Lodge  at,  preserved
since  1712,  iv,  881 ;  text  of  the  early
rules  governing  Speculative  Freemasons
at,  iv,  1058;  the  Grand  Lodge  of,  iv,
1043 ;  no  Lodges  out  of  England  war-
ranted by,  Grand  Lodge  of,  vn,  2010.

York  Constitutions,  the  supposed  source
and  publication  of  the,  I,  57,  58,  69;
date  of  the,  I,  71,  78;  the  Babylonian
Legend  in,  I,  58;  Legend  of  Euclid  in,
1,  69;  Temple  Legend  in,  1,  76;  Legend
of  St.  Alban  in,  1,  91.

York  Legend,  The,  i,  95 ;  history  of,  1,  95,
101  ;  true  meaning  of,  1,  101.

York  MSS.    (see  under  "Old  Charges"),

1,  15-
York     Rite     (see     "Capitular     Masonry,"

"Royal  Arch  Masonry,"  "Cryptic  Rite,"

"Templarism,"    "Knight    Templarism" ;

and  also  "Degrees").
Young,  Nicholas,  ii,  320.

Xenophanes,  vii,  1746.

Yamblichus   (see  "Jamblichus"),  vi,  1705.
Yankton,    first    Lodge    in    Dakota    estab-
lished at,  vi,  1477.

Zend,   baptism   in   the   ceremonial   of,   vi,

1730,  1732.
Zeno,  vn,  1747.

Zennaar   (cf.  Cable-tow),  vn,  1763.
Zerubbabel,  vi,  1 49 1.
Zoroaster,  vii,  1746.
Zurich,    early    jurisdiction    of   the    Grand

Lodge  of,  in,  722.

PRONOUNCING  DICTIONARY

FOR   USE   BY   THE

MASONIC    FRATERNITY,

Containing    over    Fourteen    Hundred    Words    liable   to    Mispronunciation.

The  Form  of  Instruction  for  Pronunciation  is  the  same  Denned

in  the  American  Dictionary,  by  Noah  Webster,  LL.D.

BY   CHARLES  T.  McCLENACHAN.

KEY    TO    THE    PRONUNCIATION.

VOWELS,   REGULAR  LONG   AND   SHORT   SOUNDS.

A,  ft  (long),  as  in  Alt,  Fate.

A,  &  (short),  as  in  Add,  Ftitt.

A,  U  (Italian),  as  in  Arm,  Father,  Far.

E,  e  (long),  as  in  Eve,  Mete.

E,  5  (short),  as  in  End,  Met.

I,  I  (long),  as  in  Ice,  Fine.

<5,  o  (long),  as  in  Old,  Note.
O,  O  (short),  as  in  5eta,  ML
U,  U  (long),  as  in  Use,  Hume.
U,  H  (short),  as  in  Us,  HUm.
Y,  y  (long),  as  in  My,  Fly.
Y,  y  (short),  as  in  G/st,  N§mph.

t,  I  (short),  as  in  lU,  Fin.

The  above  simple  process  is  adopted,  omitting  instruction  relating  to  diphthongs  or
tripthongs,  occasional  sounds,  or  references  to  consonants.

Accent. — The  principal  accent  is  denoted  bj  a  heavy  mark ;  the  secondary,  by  a
lighter  mark,  as  in  Ab'ra-ca-dab'ra.  In  the  division  of  words  into  syllables,  these  marks
also  supply  the  place  of  the  hyphen.

WORDS   OF

PROPER

DOUBTFUL    PRONUNCIATION.

MASONIC    PRONUNCIATION.

Ab*

Ab

A'b&-cis'cu8

A-bad'don

A'ba-z&r

Abchal*

Ab'chal

Ab'da

Ab'da'mSn

Ab'dlel

Abditorium*

Ab'dl-to'rl-fim .    .    .    .

\'bpl-Ttps

Abib*

Ab'ib

Ab'i-ba-la

NOTATIONS.

Heb.  Father;  11th  Hebraic  month.

Flooring  blocks.

A  drawing-board — a  tray.

The  destroyer,  or  angel  of  darkness.

Master  of  Ceremonies  of  6th  Degree.

Father  of  Adoniram.
To  serve.
Servant  of  God.

A  secret  place  for  deposit  of  records.
A  secret  order  of  the  18th  century.
Seventh  Jewish  month.
Derived  from  Hebrew  Abi  and  Balah.

2063

3064

PRONOUNCING  DICTIONARY.

WORM  OP
DOUBTFUL  PRONUNCIATION.

Abibalk

Abif •

Abihael

Abibu

Abiram

Ablution

Abrac

Abracadabra  .  .   .  .

Abraxas

Acacia

Acanthus

Accessory

Accolade

Aceldama

Achad

Acha  ron  Scnilton  .  .

Achias

Achishar  .......

Achmetha

Achtariel

Acolyte

Acousmatici

Adab

Adar

Adarel

Adept

Adeptus  Coronatus

Adhere

Adjudicate

Admah

Ad  Majorum    .   .  .   .

Dei  Gloriam  . .  .

Adonai  ....       .   .  .

Adonhiram

Adoniram

Adonis

Adult

Ad  vitam

Adytum

Aeneid

Aeon

Affiliate* .

Agapae

Agate ■

Agathopades* ...
Age

PROPER
MASONIC   PRONUNCIATION.

Ab'I-balk  ......

Xb-ir

A-bi'ha-el

Xb'i-hu

Ab-i'ram

Ab-lu'shun

Xb-rac'

Ab-'ra-ca-d&b'ra    .   .

A-brax'as

A-ca/ci-a

A-canthus

Ak-ses'so-rl

Ac'co-lade'

A-ceTda-ma    ....

A-chad

A'cha-ron  Schil-t6n  .

A-cbi'as

Ac-hi'shar

Ach-'me-tha  ....

Ach-t&'rl-el

Ak'6-lite

A'cous-ma-tl'cl  .    .    .

A/da

A'dar

A'dar-el

A-dept'

Ad-ept'us  Coro-na'tus

Ad-here'

Ad-ju'di-kate  ....

Ad'ma

"I  Ad  ma-jo-rum       \
>       da-e  gld-ri-am  *

A/do-na'i

Ad'on-hl'ram  ....
Ad'o-rn'ram    ....

Ad-o'nis

A-dult'

Ad  ve-tam      ....

Ad'^-tum

.^-ne'id

M-6n .

Af-fil'e-ate

Ag'a-pse

Ag'it

X'ga-tho-pa/des  .  .   .
Aje

NOTATIONS.

Chief  of  the  three  assassins.

Literally,  his  father.

Father  of  Strength.

A  son  of  Aaron.

Abiram  Akisop,  traitorous  craftsman.

Washing,  baptizing.

Acquiring  the  science  of  Abrac.

A  term  of  Incantation.

A  symbol  of  the  year.

Symbolic  of  the  soul's  immortality.

A  part  of  the  Corinthian  capital.

Private  companionship

The  welcome  into  knighthood.

Field  of  blood.

A-kad.

A/ka-r5n  Schil-ton.

A-ke-as.

One  over  the  household  of  Solomon.

Name  of  a  Hebrew  city.

Cabalistic  name  of  God.

Candle  bearer.    Church  servant.

A-coo8/ma-te/ce\

Jephtha's  daughter.

The  twelfth  Jewish  month.

Angel  of  fire.

An  expert.

Seventh  Degree  of  the  Swedish  Rite.

Cling  to.

To  determine.

A  Hebrew  city.

To  the  greater  glory  of  God.

A-do-nah'e.    The  Lord.

Signifying  the  master  who  is  exalted.

Son  of  Abda.

Son  of  Myrrha  and  Cinyras.

Of  full  age.

For  life.

A  retired  part  of  the  ancient  temples.

A  creation  of  Virgil.

E'on.    Age  or  duration  of  anything.

Au  adopted  one.

Ag/a-pe.     Love  feasts.

The  eighth  stone  in  the  breastplate.

Ecclesiastical  Order  of  16th  century.

Of  a  given  number  of  years.

PRONOUNCING  DICTIONARY.

2065

WORDS  OF
DOUBTFUL  PRONUNCIATION.

Agenda*  .....

Agla

Agnus  Dei  ....

Ahad

Ahabath  Olam  .
Abasbuerus  .   .   .

Abel

Ahiah

Ah i hid  .  .  .  .  .
Ahiman  Rezon  .
Ahinadab  .  .  .  .
Ah  i sumach  ....

Ahisar

Alieshar

Aboliab

Ahriman

Aichmalotarch  .
Aixlachapelle  .  .

Akar

Akirop

Alapa

Alchemy

Aldebaran ....

Aleppo

Alethophlle  .  .  .
Alfader

Algabil  ....
Allan*  ....
Allegiance .  .
Allegory  .  .  .
Allelujah  .  .  .
Alleviate  .  .  .

Allies

Allocution  .  .
Almoner .   .  .

Alms

Al-om-  Jab  .  .
Alpha  ....
Alpina  ....

Als

Al  Shaddai  .  .
Al-Sirat*.  .  .
Alycuber  .  .  .
Amal-sagghi*
Amar-jah  .  .
Amboth  .  .  .

PROPER
MASONIC  PRONUNCIATION.

A-jSn'da

Ag'la

Ag'nua  De'I  ....

A'had

A'ha-bath  6'lam  .
A-has'-u-e'-rus  .  .

A'hel

A-hl'ah

A-hll'ud

A-hl'man  Re-zon'  .
A-hln'a-dab  .   .   .
A-hls'a-mak  .   .   .

A-hi'sar

A-hi'-shar  ....
A-ho'li-ab  .  -  .  .
Ann-man  ....
AIch-maFo-tarch  .
Aks-la-shii'-pel'  .  .

A'kiir

A-kl'rop

A-la-pa

Al'ki-my

Al-deb'a-ran  .   .   .

A-lep'po

A-le'tbo-phile .  .   .

Al-fa'der

Al'ga-bll

Xl'a

Al-le'jance  ....
APlS-gd-ry  ....
Al-le-lu'ya,  ....
Al-le've-ate    .    .   .

Al-liz/

Xl-lo-ku'shun

AVmo-ner

Amz

Al-6m-jah  ....

Al'fa

Al-pl-na  .....
Alz

Xl-shad'da-e  .
Xl'  Si-rat'  .  .
Al-e-ku'ber  .
Amal-Sag'ghl
A'mar-jah  .  .
Am'bdtb.  .  •  •

NOTATIONS.

Order  of  business.     Book  of  precepts.

One  of  the  Cabalistic  names  of  God.

Ag'nus  Da/e.     Lamb  of  God.

A  name  of  God.

Eternal  love.

Name  of  a  Persian  king.    •

A  curtain  of  the  Tabernacle.

A-he'a.  OneofthescribesofSolomou

The  father  of  Josaphat.

The  will  of  selected  brethren.

The  son  of  Jetdo.

The  father  of  Aholiab.

A-hi'sar.

An  officer  over  Solomon's  household.

A  skilful  artificer.

Principle  of  evil  in  Zoroaster  system.

The  Prince  of  Captivity.

A  city  of  Germany.

Or  Achar,  a  Pass  word.

One  of  the  ruffians  of  Thin    Degree,

A  symbol  of  manumission.

The  science  of  Chemistry.

A  star  of  the  first  magnitude.

A  town  in  northern  Syria.

Lover  of  Truth.

Chief  God  of  the  Scandinavians.

Signifying  The  Builder.

The  God  of  the  Moslem.

Fealty.

A  fable,  or  figurative  expression.

Praise  Jehovah.

To  relieve.

Companions  in  enterprise.

The  official  opening  address.

Dispenser  of  alms.

Charitable  gifts.

A  name  of  the  Supreme  Being.

Greek  letter  A.

Name  of  Grand  Lodge  of  Switzerland,

The  All-powerful  God.

The  second  sanctified  name  of  God.

The  path.

Master  of  the  Tribe  of  Manasseh.

Fifth  step  of  Kadesh  ladder.

God  spake.

A  country  in  Syria

2066

PRONOUNCING  DICTIONARY.

WORDS    OF
DOUBTFUL  PRONUNCIATION.

Anienti*

Ameth

Amethyst

Amicists

Aminidab

Amis  Reunis  .  .  .
Ammonites  ....
Amshaspands* . .  .

Amulets

Amun

Anachronism  .  .  .

Anakim*

Ananias

Ancient*

Andre

Andrea

Androgynous  .  .  .

Angel

Angerona

Anima  Mundi* .  .  .

Annihilate

Anno  Depositionis
Anno  Domini  .  .  .
Anno  Hebraico  .  .
Anno  Inventionis  .
Anno  Lucis  ....
Anno  Mundi ....
Anno  Ordinis  .  .   .

Annuaire

Ansyreeh

Antarctic

Antepenult  ....
Antipodeans ....

Antipodes

Anubis  or  Anepu* .

Apame

Aphanism

Apharsathchites  .
Apocalypse   ....

Apollo

Aporrheta

Apostle

Apotheosis

Apparent

Apprentice  ....
Apron*

PROPER
MASONIC    PRONUNCIATION.

.A-men'-tl  .   .
A'm«th  ....
Am'e-thist  .   .
A 'mi-cists    .   .
A-mln'a-dab  .
Amis  Re'unis  .
Arn'mon-itz.  .
Am-shaVpands
Am'u-lets    .   .
A'mun  ....
An-a'chrd-nlsm
An/a-klm.  .   .
An-a-nl'as  .   .
An/shunt .  .   .
An  drfi  ....
An'drea    .   .
An-drogJ  y-nous
An'jel   .    .
An'ge-ro-na    .
An'I-ma  Mun'dl
An-nl'he-late
Anno  De'pd-el/ti
An-no  DOm'In-
An'no  He'bra/I-co
An-no  In-ven'she
An'no  Lu'cis  .
An-no  Miin'di
An'no  Or'di-nis
An'nii-alre  .    .
An'sy-reSh  .    .
Ant  Ark'tic.  .
A  n-te-pe-nult'
An '  tl-po-de'ans
An-tip'o-dez  .
An-ii-bis  or  An-e-
Ap'a-me  .    .    .
Aph'an-ism  .  .
A-phar'-sath-ckltes
A-pSk'a-lIps  .
A-pOl'o    .    .   .
A'pdrr-he'ta  .
A-p6s'l  ....
Ap-o-the'o-sis
Ap-paVent  .    .
Ap-pren'tis  .  .
A/prun  ....

pu

nl«

nls

NOTATIONS.

Place  of  Judgment  of  the  Dead.

See  Emeth.

A  stone  in  the  breastplate.

Association  of  students  of  Germany,

One  of  the  Chiefs  of  Israel.

A'me  Re'-u-ne.

Descendants  of  Lot.

Principle  of  good  among  Persians.

Mystic  gems.

The  Supreme  God  of  the  Egyptians.

An  error  in  computing  time.

Giants.

Sapphira's  conspirator.

Indefinite  time.

Christopher  Karl  Andre\

John  Valentine  Andrea.

An-drOg-e-nous.     Side  degrees.

Messenger.

A  pagan  deity  of  the  Romans.

Soul  of  the  World.

Destroy  finally.

In  the  year  of  the  Deposite.

The  year  of  the  Lord.

In  the  Hebrew  year.

The  year  of  discovery.

In  the  year  of  Light.

The  year  of  the  world.

In  the  year  of  the  Order.

French  annual  record  of  proceedings.

A  6ect  of  Northern  Syria.

Opposite  to  the  Northern  circle.

The  last  syllable  except  two.

Les  Antipodiens.

Opposite  sides  of  the  globe.

Egyptian  deity.     Son  of  Osiris  and

Wife  of  King  Darius.       [Nephthys*

Concealing  of  the  body.

A  Persian  tribe.

Book  of  Revelation.

A  Greek  deity.

Intelligible  to  the  initiated.

A  deputed  agent.

Deification.

Evident.

The  servitor  of  a  mechanic.

Badge  of  a  Mason.

PRONOUNCING  DICTIONARY.

2007

WORM    OF
DOUBTFUL  PRONUNCIATION.

Aquarius  .  .   .   .

Arab

Arabici*  ....

Aral

Aranyaka*  . .  .

Araunah

Arbroath*  ...

Arcana

Archangel .  .  .  ,
Archbishop  .  .  ,
Archetype  .  .  .  ,
Archi  magus*  .  .
Achipelago  .  .  .
Architect*  .  .
Architectonicus

Archives

Archiviste  .  .   .  .

Arctic

Arduous

Area

Arelim

Areopagus  .  .  .  .
Arianism* .  .  .  .

Arid

Aries

Armenbusche .  .
Armistice  .   .  .  .

Aroba*

Aroma

Arrogant

Artaban

Artaxerxes . .  .  .

Artificer

Aryan*

Asarota*

Asher

Ashlar

Asia*

Asnapper  .  .  .  .

Aspirant

Associate

Assur

Astarte

Astrsea

Asylum

Atelier

PROPER
MASONIC   PRONUNCIATION.

A-qua'ri-us ....
Ar'ab  or  A'rab  .  .
A'ra-bl'cl    ....

A'rel

JL'ran-ya'ka  .  .  .
A-rau'nah  ....
Ar-broath    ....

Ar-kkYna

Ark-an/jel  ....
Arch-bish'op  .    .    .

A.r'ke-tlp

AT'chl-mS/gus  .  .
Ar-kl-pePa-go  .  .
Ar'kl-tect  ....
Ar'chi-tec-ton/I-cus

Ar'klvz

Ar'chi-vlste  ....

Ark'tik

Ar'du-ua

A/re-a

Ar'e-lim

A're-op'a-gus ...
A/rf-an-Ism    .   .   .    ,

Ar^id ,

A'riez. ,

Ar'men-busche  .   .   .

Ar'mia-tia

A-ro'ba

A-ro'ma

Ar'rd-gant

Ar'ta-ban

Ar'-tag-zerk'-zez  .    .

Ar-tiPi-eer

A'ry-an

A/sa-ro'ta   ,   .   .   .   .

Ash/er

Ashlar

A'shl-a

As-nap'-per

As-pir'ant

As-so'shl-at    .   .   .    .

NOTATIONS.

is'sur

As-tar'te
As'trii-ea
A-si'lum
A'tel-ier

Water-bearer.     Zodiac.

Inhabitant  of  Arabia.

Pertaining  to  the  Wilderness.

"Lion  of  God."

An  appendage  to  Veda  of  the  Indians.

See  Oman.

Abbey  of  England,  12th  century.

Secrets,  mystery.

An  Angel  of  the  highest  order.

A  church  dignitary.

An  original  model.

Chief  Ruler.

Group  of  islands.

Skilled  in  the  art  of  building.

Relating  to  Architecture.

Place  for  records.

An  officer  in  charge  of  the  archival.

A  northern  circle  of  space.

With  difficulty.

The  given  surface.

Literally,  valiant,  heroic.

A  tribunal.

The  doctrine  of  Arius.

Exhausted  of  moisture.

The  sign  Ram  in  the  Zodiac

The  poor  box.

Temporary  truce.

Pledge,  covenant.

An  agreeable  odor.

Overbearing.

A  Scribe  in  the  Scottish  Rite.

A  Persian  king.

Designer  of  buildings.

One  of  three  historical  divisions  of

A  variegated  pavement.      [religion

A  tribe  of  Israel.

Stone  as  taken  from  the  quarry.

An  Eastern  continent.

One  who  aspires.

Companion  with.

Assyria.

Female  Deity  of  the  Phoenicians.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  Russia.

Place  of  retreat.  [sembled

A  workshop  where  workmen  are  as

2068

PRONOUNCING  DICTIONARY.

■WORDS    OF
DOUBTFUL  PRONUNCIATION.

Athenaeum

Atossa*

Attacked

Attouchement  .  .  .
Atthakatha*  . .   ,  .  .

Atys

Audacious

Audience

Audi  Vide  Tace*.  .  .

Aufseher

Auriel

Aurim

Auserwahlter ....

A  inn  or  Om

Aut  "Vincere

Aut  Mori

Avatar*

Avis*

Axiom

Aye

Aynon

Azariah*

Azazel*

Baal

Baana

Babylon

Bactylea*

Baculus

Bafomet

Bagulkal

Baldachin

Baldric

Balm

Balsamo

Baluster

Banacas

Baphomet

Barabbas

Barbarous

Barbati  Fratres*.  .  .
Bar  Mitzvah*  ....
Barruel  Abbe  ....

Basmoth

Basilica*

Bath  Kol*

BeaMacheh

Beaucenifer

P  BO  PEE
MASONIC   PRONUNCIATION.

Ath-e-ne'um  ....

A-tos'sa

At-takt'

At-touch'ement  .   .   .

AVtha-ka'tha  ....

Xt'is

Aw-da'shus

An/dl-ence

Au-dl  Vl-de  Ta-ce    .

Auf'sfi-her

Au'rl-el

Au'rim

Atis'er-wahl-ter     .    .

Aum.     Om

Aut  Vln'ce-re    .    .   .
Aut  Mo'rl  .....

A'va-tar  ......

A'vls

Ak'sl-um

A.

Ay'non

Az-a-re/a

A-z&'zel

Ba'al ,

Ba-an'a   .   .   .   .   ,

Bab'e-lon

Bac'tyl-e'a  .  .  .  .
Ba'cu-lus  .  .  .  .  ,
Ba'fo-mSt .  .  .  .  .
Ba'gul-kal  .  .  .  ,
Bal 'da-chin  .  .  .   .

Bal'drik

Bam

Bal-sa'mo

Bal'us-ter  .  .  .  ,
Ban/a-kas  .  .  .  .
Baph'6-mgt  .  .  .  .
Ba-rab/bas  .  .  .  .
Bar'ba-rus  .  .  .  .
Bar-ba'tl  Fra'tres
Bar  Mltz'vah  .    .    .

Barruel  Ab'be    .

Bas/moth

Ba-sil'I-ca  .   .    .    .

Bath  K61

Be-a-mak'-a.  .  .  .
Beau-cfinl-fer   .   .

NOTATIONS.

A  building  for  philosophic  instruction

Daughter  of  Cyrus.

Assailed,  assaulted.

A-tou'sh-man.

Commentary  on  Canonical  books  ol

The  Phrygian  God.         [Buddhism.

Contemning  law.

An  assembly  of  hearers.

Hear,  see  and  be  silent.

Inspector,  overseer.

Angel  of  Fire.

Or  Urim.

Chosen,  selected.

God  of  the  Hindoos.

I  Either  conquer  or  die.

The  descent  of  a  Hindu  deity.

Self-evident  truth.

An  affirmative  vote.

Agnon,  Ajuon.

Solomon's  Captain  of  the  Guards.

"  Scapegoat,"  the  demon  of  dry  places.

Ba-a'lim.     Master.

Son  of  grief.

Gate  of  Bel.    A  kingdom.

The  pastoral  staff  carried  by  a  bishop.

See  Baphomet.

Guardian  of  the  sacred  ark.

A  canopy  supported  by  pillars.

A  ribbon  worn  from  shoulder  to  hip,

A  medicinal  gum.

Joseph  Balsamo.     See  Cagliostw.

The  support  of  a  stair-rail.

A  Captain  of  Guards.

An  imaginary  idol  or  symbol.

A  father's  son.  Son  of  Abba  or  Father

Not  Bax-ba'ri-ous.

Bearded  Brothers.

Son  of  Commandment.

Augustin  Barruel.

Fragrant,  spicy.

Court-room  for  administration  of  laws

A  voice  from  the  Shekinah.

To  be  with  God.

To  carry.

PRONOUNCING  DICTIONARY.

2069

•WORDS    OF
DOUBTFUL  PRONUNCIATION.

Bcauchaine  .   .   .   .   .

lieauseant

Begone

Bel  .

Belenus

Belshazzar

Belus

Benac

Benai*

Bendekar

Benjamin

Benkhurim

Benyah

Bereth

Beryl

Bethlehem

Beyerle

Beyond

Bezaleel

Biennial

Binah

Blatant

Blessed

Boaz

Bochim*

Boeber

Boehmen

Bonaim

Bone

Bosonian*

Bouddha  .  .   .  .

Bourn   .

Bramin

Brethren

Buh

Buhle

Bui

Buri  or  Bure*

Byblos

Byzantine

Caaba  or  Raaba* .  .  .

Cabiric

Cable-tow

Cabul

Caduceus

C;ementarius   .   .  .   .

Cag-liostro

Cahier

PROPER.
MASONIC    PRONUNCIATION.

Beau-chaine    ....

Beau'se-ant

Be-gon'

B6l

Bfi-le'nus

Bel-shaz'zar    ....

Be'lus

Be'nac

Be-n&l

Ben  de-kar

Ben'ja-min  .....
Ben-ku'-rim  ....

Benyah

Be-rith

Ber'il

Bfith'le-em      ....

Bey'er-le

Be-yond'

Be-zal'-e-el .....

Bi-en'ni-al

Bi'na

Blatant

Bles-ed

Bo'az

Bo'chlm

Bo-e'ber

Boeh'men

Bo-na'im

Bone'

Bo-so'nT-an

BuMa

Bourn

Bra/min

Brethren

Buh

Buhle

Bui

Bu/ri  or  Bu're    .    .    .

Byb'los

Biz'an-tin

Ca-&'ba  or  K&-a'ba  .

Ca-ba'la

Ca  bir-ic

Ka/ble-t5  ......

Ca'bul

Ca'du'ce-us

Ca'e-men-ta'ri-us  .  .
C&g'li-os'tro  ....
Cah'ier

NOTATIONS.

Bd-sha/ne.

A  war  banner.

Not  Be-gawn'.

A  contraction  of  Baal.

The  Baal  of  Scripture.

King  of  Babylon.

Corruption  of  Baal.  Lord.  A  temple.

See  Macbenac.

The  Intelligent  God.

One  of  the  Princes  of  Solomon.

Youngest  son  of  Jacob.

Free  since  birth.

The  son  of  Jah.

Alliance.

Chrysolite,  topaz.

Literally,  Place  of  food.    Of  Judah.

Francois  Louis  de  Beyerle.

Not  Be-yund'.

A  builder  of  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant.

Not  Bl-en'yal.

The  mother  of  understanding.

Not  Blatant.

Not  Blest.

Literally,  fleetness,  strength.

Bo'kim.     The  weepers.

Johann  Boeber.

Jacob  Boehmen.

Bo-nah/im.

Boneh,  a  builder.

Fourth  degree  of  African  Architects.

A  Hindoo  God.

Bound,  limit.

Corruption  of  Brahman.

Not  Breth'er-en.

A  corruption  of  the  word  Bel.

Johann  Gottlieb  Buhle.

The  rain-god.

The  first  god  of  Norse  mythology.

An  ancient  city  of  Phoenicia.

An  art  from  the  days  of  Constant?  ne.

Square  building  or  temple  in  Mecca.

Kabbala.     Mystical  philosophy  or

Dry,  sandy.         [theosophy  of  Jews.

A  man's  reasonable  ability

A  district  containing  twenty  cities.

Peace,  power,  wisdom.

A  builder  of  walls.

A  Masonic  charlatan.  [together.

Sheets^f  paper  or  parchment  fastened

2070

PRONOUNCING  DICTIONARY.

WORDS   OF
DOUBTFUL  PRONUNCIATION.

Cairns '.

Calatrava*

Calid*

Callimachus

Calm

Cama

Canaanite

Candelabra

Cantalever*

Capitular*

Capella

Capricornus

Capuchin*

Caravan

Carbonarism    .   .  .  .

Carbuncle

Carmel

Caryatides*

Casmaran

Catacombs*.

Catechumen*  .  .  .  .

Cathari*

Cement

Cement

Cemetery

Cenephorus*

Centaine

Centenary

Censer

Cephas

Ceres ...

Ceridwen*

Cerneau

Cerulean

Chaldea

Chalice

Chamber

Chaos

Chapeau

Chapiters

Chasidi  in

Chasm

Chastanier

Chasuble

Chef-d'oeuvre  . .  .  .

Cherubim*

Chesed

Chesvan

Cheth

Chibbelum

PROPER
MASONIC    PRONUNCIATION.

Cairns

Cal'a-tra'va. .  .  .

Cal'id ,

Cal-lim  '-a-chus  •  .

Kara

Ka/ma

Ka/nan-Ite .  .  .  .
Kan-del-a'bra  .  .  .
Can'ta-lev'er  .  .  .
Ka-pTt'u-lar   .    .    .

Ka-pSl'la

Kap-ri-korn'us  .  .
Ca-pu'chln  ....
Kar'a-van  ....
Car'bo-nar-ism  .  .
Kar'bun-kel  .  .  .
Kar'mel  ....
Car/y-at/i-des  .  .    .

Ca»'ma-ran ....

Kat'a-kombs  .  .  .
Cat'e-chii'men   .    .

Catb/ar-I

Sem'ent  or  Se-ment/

Se-ment/

Sem'e-ter-I  ....
Cen'e-pho'rus  .  .    .

Cfin'taine

Sen'te-na-rf    .    .    .

Sen'ser

Se'fas

Se'res

Ce-rid/wen  ....

CeVneau

Se-ru'le-an  ....

Chal-de'a

Chal'is

Cham'ber

Ka'os

Chap'eau

Chap'e-terz ....
Cha'sld-im  ....

Kazm

ChaVtan-I'er  .  .  .
Cbas'u-ble  ....
Chef-d'oeuvre'  .  .  .
Cher'u-bim  ....

ChS'sgd

Ches'van

Chfith

Chlb'be-lum   .   .   .

NOTATIONS.

Heaps  of  stones  of  a  conical  form.

Military  Order,  instituted  1158.

A  sultan  of  Egypt  about  1110.

Noted  Grecian  artist.

Tranquil,  serene.

A  Hindoo  God.

Descendants  of  Canaan.

A  branched  candlestick.

A  projecting  block  or  bracket.

Pertaining  to  a  Chapter.

The  name  of  a  star.

A  Zodiacal  sign,  the  Goat.

A  monk  of  the  Order  of  St.  Francis.

Not  Kar-a-van'.     Company  of  mer-

A  secret  society  of  Italy.         [chants.

A  stone  in  the  breastplate.

Literally,  A  fruitful  place.

The  women  of  Caryse.

The  angel  of  air.

A  cave  for  the  burial  of  the  dead.

A  novice  in  religious  rites.

Italian  heretical  society,  12th  century

The  noun.     The  bond  of  union.

The  verb.     To  bind  together.

A  place  of  burial.

Officer  in  charge  of  sacred  implements.

A  mystical  society  of  19th  centurj.

Not  Sen-ten 'a-rl.     A  century.

An  incense  cup  or  vase.

A  Syrian  name.     Literally,  A  stone.

The  goddess  of  corn.

The  Isis  of  the  Druids.

Cer'no.

The  color  of  the  sky.

A  country  along  the  Euphrates  and

A  cup  or  bowl.  [Tigris  rivers.

An  inclosed  placp.

Not  Ka'us.     A  confused  mass.

Shap'o.

The  capital  of  a  column.

A  sect  in  the  time  of  the  Maccabees

Not  Kaz'ura.     A  void  space.

Benedict  Chastanier.

An  outer  dress  in  imitation  of  ihe

She-deu'vr  [Roman  toga

Literally,  Those  held  fast.

Signifying  mercy.

Name  of  the  second  Jewish  month,

A  city  of  Palestine.

A  worthy  Mason

PRONOUNCING  DICTIONARY.

2071

WORDS    OF

PROPER

DOUBTFUL  PRONUNCIATION.

MASONIC   PRONUNCIATION.

NOTATIONS.

Chisel

An  instrument  used  by  mason  or  car-

Pertaining  to  chivalry.          [penter.

Chok'mah    ....

Heb.,  Wisdom.

The  Hindoo  God.

A  stone  in  the  breastplate.

Klan-des'tln   ....

Illegal.

A  cross  charged  with  another  cross.

Clothed

Invested  with  raiment.

Kur  de  Ll'on  ....

Surname  of  Richard  I  of  England.

A  winding  staircase.
An  assembly.

Living  at  the  same  time.

Karin

Not  Kawf'in.     Casket  for  the  dead.

Kon'I-zant      ....

Within  the  knowledge.

Not  Co-la'shun.     Luncheon.

Collocatio*

Col'ld-ca'ti-o  ....

C61-lo-ca/sheo.

K&l'um

Not  Kol'yoom.     A  pillar.

To  explain,  to  expound.

Koni-mizrer-at  .   .    .

Compassion  for,  to  pity.

C6m-p&n'ion  ....

A  French  term  for  Fellow  Craft.

An  order  of  Architecture.

An  assemblage  of  Templars.

Kon-dem'ner  ....

Not  Kon-dem'er.  One  who  censures.

Kon-do'lence  ....

Not  Kon'do-lence.     Sympathy.

Kon-fl-dant'  ....

Not  Kon'fi-dant.     A  bosom  friend.

Kon-sis'tc—ry  ....

An  assemblage  of  brethren  of  the  R.

Consummatum  ....

Con'sum-ma'tum   .    .

It  is  finished.                           [Secret.

Kon-splr'a-sl  ....

A  combination  for  evil  purpose.

Unwavering,  constant.

Contemplating  ....

Con'-tem-pla-ting  .  .

Looking  around  carefully  on  all  sides.

K6d/vc— ka'shun  .  .   .

An  assemblage  of  Royal  Arch  Masons

Corde  Gladio  Potens  .

Kor'da  gla'dl-o  p5'tenz

Powerful  in  heart  and  with  the  sword.

Kor'don

A  ribbon  of  honor.

Kor-in'thi-an  ....

An  order  in  Architecture.

Cor'y-ban'tea  ....

Rites  in  honor  of  Atys.

A  manner  of  dress.

Cottyto*

Myst  ries  of.  Rites  of  the  Bona  Dea.

John  Coustos.

Kii'vrir.

Covenant    .......

An  agreement,  a  contract.

Pretenders,  dry  dikers,  intruders.

The  hood  of  the  mantle.

CrS/ti  Re-po'a  .    .    .

An  Egyptian  rite  of  seven  degrees.

NotKredence.  Reliance  on  evidence

Symbol  of  Light  and  Truth,  open  lamp

An  island  in  the  Mediterranean.

A  large  stone  resting  on  two  or  more

The  staff  of  the  Prelate.         [stones

A  city  of  Greek  colonists  in  Italv

2072

PRONOUNCING  DICTIONARY.

WOBDS   or
DOUBTFUL  PBONTJNCIATIOK.

Cryptic

Cnix  Ansata

Cum  Civi

Cupola

Curetes

Custos  Arcani     .  .  .
Cynocephalus  ....

Cynosure

Cyrene

Cyrus

Dabir

Dactyli*

Daduchos

Daedalus*

Dais

Dambool*

Dao*

Darakiel*

Darius*

Dathan

Dazard

Decrepit

Deiseil*

Delalande  ...      .  .

Delaunay

Delineated

Delta

Demeter

Demit

Denderah*

Depths

Derogate

Desagruliers

Design

Dessert*

Deuchar  Charters .  .
Deus  Meumque  Jus

Devoir

Dew

Dieseal

Dieu  et  mon  Droit  .

Dieu  le  Veut

Different

Dionysian

Dionysus

Diploma

Dislodge

Disloyal

Dissolve

District

PBOPBK

MASONIC    PBONUNCIATION.

Krlp'tic

Crux-an-sa'ta  ....

Kum  Slvl

Ku/po-la

Cu-re'tes

Kus'tos  Ar-cA'nl  .    .
Cyn'6-ceph'a-lus  .  .    .

Sln'o-shodr

Cy-re'nS

Si'rus

Da-beV

Dac'ty-li

Da'du-chos

Dffd'a-lus

Da'is

Dam-bool

Da'6

Da-ra-klel'

Da-rl/U8

Da'than

Da'zard

De-crep'tt,

De-is'eil

Dfi-la-lan'de

Dfe-lau'uay

De-lin'e-a-ted    .   .   .

Del'tii

Dfe-meter

De-mlt'

Den-de'rah

Depths

Der'-o-gate     ....
D&-sir-gu'liers  ....

De-sin'

Dez-zert'

Deii-char'  Charters  .
Dfi'us  Me-um'que  Jus

De'voir

Du

Di-es-t'al

Dieu  6t  m6n  Droit .   .
Dieu  IS  Veut  ....

Dif'fer-ent

Dro-nys'Ian    ....

Di'o-nys'us

Dl-plo'ma

Dis-lodge'

Dis-loy'al

Diz-zolv'

Dis'trikt

WOTATIOHB.

Pertaining  to  Royal  and  Select  Ma-
The  cross  with  a  handle.  [sonry.

Arise  and  kneel.

Not  Ku'pa-lo.  A  surmounting  dome.
Priests  of  ancient  Crete.
The  guardian  of  the  treasury.
Figure  of  a  man  with  head  of  a  dog.
The  center  of  attraction.
Ancient  city  of  North  Africa.
A  king  of  Persia.

Most  6acred.

Priests  of  Cybele.

A  torch-bearer.

A  famous  artist  and  mechanician.

A  canopy.

Rock  temple  of  Buddhists  of  Ceylo».

From  Daer,  to  shine.

By  direction  of  God.

A  king  of  Persia.  [Mosee.

A  Reubenite  who  revolted  against

Michel  Francois  Dazard.

Wasted  by  age.

Southward,  following  course  of  theeun

Dfi-la-lan'-d.  Joseph  Jerome  FrancoU

Francois  H.  Stanislaus  Delaunay.

Marked,  described.

Fourth  letter  of  Greek  alphabet.

Greek  name  of  Ceres.

Release.

A  ruined  town  of  Upper  Egypt.

Not  Deps  nor  Debths.     Profundity.

Degrade.

John  Theophilus  Desaguliers.

A  preliminary  sketch.

The  last  course  of  a  feast.

Working  warrants.

God  and  my  right.

De'voa.

Atmospheric  moisture.

A  Druidic  term.

Dieu  a  mon  droa.

Dieu  16  Veu-t.

Not  Dif'rent.     Distinct,  separate.

Celebrations  by  which  the  years  were

Greek  name  of  Bacchus,  [numbered.

Not  Dl-plo-ma.     A  sealed  writing.

To  drive  from  a  place  of  rest.

Faithless.

Separation  into  component  parts.

A  portion  of  territory.

PRONOUNCING  DICTIONARY.

2073

WOBDS    OP
DOUBTFUL  PRONUNCIATION.

Dili*

Divest

Divulge

Domino  Deus  Meus*

Domitian

Donats

Doric

Doth

Drachma

Draeseke

Druid

Druses

Duad

Due  Guard

Dupaty

Dyaus*

Dye  na  Sore*  ....

Eastward

Ebal*

Ebau  Bohan*.  .  .  .

Eblis*

Ecbatana*

Ecossais

Ecossism

Edicts

Eheyeh ,

Elai  beni  almanah*

Elchanan

Eleazar

Electa*

Eleemosynary  .  .   .
Eleham.  .      ....

Elephauta

Eleusinian

Eleusis

Eliasaph

Elihoreph

Elohim*

El  Shaddai

Elu

Elul

Elus

Elysium

Emeritus

Emeth

Emir

Emounah*

FROPEE
MASONIC   PRONUNCIATION.

Dl'li

Dl-vest'

Dl-vulj'

Dom'i-ne  Da'us  Ma'us
Do-mlsh'i-an  ....

Do'n&ts

Dflr'ik

Duth

Drak'ma

Dra'e-seke

Droo'id

Dru'ses

Du'ad

Du'  Gard

Du'pa-ty

Dy'aus

Dy'e-na  So-re"   .   .    .

East/ ward ......

E'bal

F/ban  Bo'han  ....

EVlis

Ec-bat'a-na

E'c6s-sais

E'cos-slsm

E'dikte

E-he'ygh

E'la-I  ben-i  al-ma'nah

El-chan'an

El-e-a/zar

E-leVta

El-e-moz'I-na-rf  .   .

El'6-ham

fil-e-phan'ta  ....
E'leu-sIn'I-an  ....

E-lQ'sis

E-lI'a-saf.

Ell-ho'-reph  ....

El-6'hlm

El  Shad'da-e  ....

El'u

El'ul

El'us

E-lizb/I-um
E-merl-tus  .
E'mfith  .  .  .
A'mlr  .  .  .
E-mou'n&h  .

NOTATIONS.

The  "  Shining  Light  of  Heaven."

Deprive  of,  remove.

To  make  publicly  known.

0  Lord,  my  God.
A  Roman  Emperor.
Wearers  of  the  demi-cross.
An  order  in  Architecture.

Not  Doth.     Third  person  of  do.

A  coin,  a  weight.

Johann  Heinrich  Dernhardt  Draeseke

A  Celtic  priest.

A  sect  of  religionists  in  Syria.

Number  two  in  Pythagorian  system.

Mode  of  recognition.

Louis  Emanuel  Charles  M.  Dupaty.

Sanskrit  for  sky.     Bright,  exalted.

A  Masonic  romance  by  Van  Meyern.

Not  East'-ard.  Directiou  of  the  East.
Literally,  bare.    Son  of  Shobal.
A  witness  stone  set  up  by  Bohan.
Arabic  for  Prince  of  Apostate  Aug  .la.
Capital  of  Media.
A'cos-sais.

Decrees  by  an  authority.

1  am  that  I  am.

Third  degree  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite.

Al-kana'n.

Son  of  Aaron.

An  eminent  woman  of  J  udea.

Relating  to  charity.

See  Elchanan.

Ancient  temple  in  Gulf  of  Bombay

Mysteries  of  ancient  Athenian  reli-

An  ancient  Grecian  city.  [gion

A  Levite.

One  of  Solomon's  secretaries

The  Creator.

The  second  name  of  God  in  the  Bible

See  Elus.

Twelfth  civil  month  of  Jewish  yeai

Elected.

A  place  of  happiness.

One  who  has  served  out  his  time

Integrity,  fidelity,  firmness.

An  Arabic  counsellor.

Fidelity,  truth.

2074

PRONOUNCING  DICTIONARY.

WORDS    OP
DOUBTFUL  PRONUNCIATION.

Empyrean

Em  iinah

Encyclical  .  .  .   ...

En  fainille

Enochian *

En  Soph*

Ephod

Eons

Eostre*

Ephesus

Ephraini

Epistle

Epitome

Epopt

Eques  ;

Equitas

Eranoi

Erica

Erosch

Errand

Erratum

Esar  Haddon  ....

Esoteric

Esperance*

Esquire

Esrim

Essenes

Esther

Ethanim  or  Tishri*  .

Eumolpus

Eunuch

Eureka

European

Evates*

Eveilles,  Secte  des* .
Evergeten  Bundder*

Evora*

Exalt

Examine

Example

Excalibar*

Excellent

Executive

Exempt

Exist

Exordium

Exoteric

PROPER
MASONIC    PRONUNCIATION.

Em-pl're-an   ....

E-mu'nah

En-cy'cll-cal  ....

En  fa-mllle'

E-no'chi-an    ....

En'Soph

E'phod

E'ons

E-os'tre

EPe-sus   ......

E'fra-im

E-pis'l

E-pIfo-me

E'popt

E'ques

Ek'wl-tas

E'ra-nd'I

E-rFca

A-roshr

Er'rand

Er-ra'tum

E-sar   Had'don  .    .    .

Es'-o-ter'ic

Es'pe-rance

Es-kwir'

EVrim

Es'sen-es

EVter

Eth'a-nlm

Eii-mol  pus

Eu'nuch

U-re'ka

U-ro-pe'an

E-va'tes

E-v6il-les,  Sect-e  des
E'ver-ge'ten  Biind'der

E-v6-ra

Egz-awlt

Egz-au/In    •  .   .   .   .

Egz-am'pl

Ex-cal'i-bar  ....
Eks-sel-lent  ....
Egz-ek'u-tiv  ....

Egz-emt'

Egz-ist'

Egz-or/dI-um  ....
Ex'o-ter'ic

NOTATIONS.

The  highest  Heaven.

Fidelity  to  one's  promises.        [sons.

Circular,  sent  to  many  places  and  per-

En  fa-meel.

E-no'kee-an,  relating  to  Enoch.

Sacred  vestment  of  the  High  Priest.

Divine  spirits  in  intermediate  state.

Easter.

An  ancient  city  of  Asia.

A  tribe  of  Israel.

A  letter  missive.

A  summary.

An  eye-witness.

{Signifying  knight.

Equity.

Friendly  societies  among  the  Greeks.

A  sacred  plant  among  the  Egyptians.

The  Celestial  liaven.

A  commission.

An  error  in  writing.

A  king  of  Assyria.

That  taught  to  a  select  few.

Es'pe-r&nse.

Au  armor-bearer.

The  Hebrew  number  twenty.

Es'sen-ees.     A  Jewish  sect.

Wife  of  King  Ahasuerus.

The  seventh  Hebrew  month.

A  king  of  Eleusis.

Prohibited  candidates.

I  have  found  it.

Relating  to  Europe.

Second  degree  in  the  Druidical  system.

E-va-ea.     Bright,  enlightened.

Secret  order  similar  to  the  Iliuminati.

Knights  of.     A  military  order.

To  elevate.

To  scrutinize.

To  be  imitated.

King  Arthur's  famous  swoid.

Admirable.

An  executor  of  the  laws.

Rot  subject.

The  state  of  being.

The  introduction.

Public,  not  secret.

PRONOUNCING  DICTIONARY.

2075

WORDS    OF
DOUBTFUL  PRONUNCIATION.

Expert*

Expiration

Extempore

Ezekiel

Ezel

Familien  JJogen*.  .  .

Fanor*

Fasces

Fealty

February

Feix-Feax*

Fendeurs

Fervency

Feuillants*

Fiat  Lux

Fiat  Justitia

Ituat  Coelum

Fidelity*

Fides

Fiducial

Fillet

Finance

Forehead

Forest

Fraukincense  .   .   .  .

Frater

Freimaurer

Freres  Poutives*  .   .

Friendship

Frieze

Fylfot*

Gabaon

Gabor

Gabriel

Gaedicke

Galahad

G.  A.  O.  T.  U

Gareb

Garimout

Garinus

Gavel

Gebal

Gedaliah

Gemara

Generalissimo.  .  .   .

Geometry

Gethsemane

PROPER
MASONIC   PRONUNCIATION.

Eks'pert

Eks-pl-ra/shun  .  .  .
Eks-tem'po-re    .    .    .

E-ze'ki-el

E'zel

Fa-mil'I-en  Logen

F&D/or

Fasces

Fe'al-ty

Feb'rdd-a-ri  ....
Fe-Ix'  Fe-ax'    .   .   .

FSn-deura

Fur'ven-cy

Feu-H-lants

Fe'at  Lux

Fe'at  Jus-ti-shl-a    "»
ril'at  se-liim       *

Fl-del'I-tl

FI  des

Fl-du'ci-al

Fll'let

Fl-n&nce'

For'ed

FGr'est

Frank/in-s6nse    .    .    .

Fra/ter

Frei-mau'rer  ....
Frfres  P6n-tives    .    .

Frend'ship

Freez

Fyl'fSt

Ga/ba-6n

Ga7bor

Ga'bri-el

Gaed/icke

GS/la-had

G.  A.  O.  T.  U.  .   .   .

Ga'reb

Gar/i-m6ut

Ga'ri-nus

Gav'el

Ge'baZ

Ge-daFiab

Ge-ma'ra

Gen-e^-al-Is'-si-mo  .
Je-om'e-tre .  ...
Geth-sem^a-nC .  .   .

NOTATIONS.

An  experienced  person.
A  breathing  out.
Without  previous  study.
A  Hebrew  prophet.
Division,  separation.

A  family  lodge,  private.

Name  given  to  the  Syrian  Mason.

Speeches  or  records  done  up  in  a  rolL

Loyalty.

Second  month  in  the  Calendar.

Signifying  School  of  Thought.

Fan-deur.

Devotion.

Feu-ian-ts.

Let  there  be  light.

Let  justice  be  done  though  the

heavens  fall.
Faithfulness.

A  Roman  goddess.     Faith.
Confiding  trust.
Head -band.

Revenue  of  person  or  a  state.
The  front  of  the  skull.
Not  For/ist.     A  large  tract  of  wood.
An  odorous  resin.
Latin  for  Brother.
Fri-mou'rer.     A  builder  of  walls.
Friires  Pon-tives.

Personal  attachment,  [and  cornice.
The  entablature,  between  architrave
An  ancient  symbol.

A  high  place.

Strong.

An  archangel.

Gad/ick.    Johann  Christian.

A  corruption  of  Gilead.

Great  Architect  of  the  Universe.

A  Hebrew  engraver.

Corruption  of  Garimond  or  Garimund

A  standard-bearer.  [tice.

A  working  tool  of  an  Entered  Appren-

A  city  of  Phoenicia.     Border,  hilly.

Son  of  Pashur.

See  Talmud.

Second  officer  in  command  of  K.  T.

A  science  of  magnitudes.

A  garden  near  Jerusalem.

2076

PRONOUNCING  DICTIONARY.

WORDS    OF
DOUBTFUL  PRONUNCIATION.

Gershon

Ghemoul

Ghemoul  Binah  Thebounah  *
Gibeah*       ........

Giblim

Gilead*

Gnostics

God

Godfrey  de  St.  Aide  mar

Goetbe

Goetia*

Golgotha

Gomel*

Gormogons

Gomorrah

Gonfalon*

Gordian

Gorgeous

Gothic

Gravelot*

Gugomos

Guibs

Guillemain

Guttural

Gymnosophists* .  .  .  .

Habakkuk*

Habin*

Habramah*.

Hadeases

Hafedha*

Haggai

Hah

Hail

Hale

Hallelujah*

Hamaliel*

Haphtziel*

Harnouester

Harodim

Haruspices*

Haupt-Hutte

Hautes  Grades  ....

Heal

Heaven

Hecatomb

Heptagon

Hermaimes

Hermandad* .  .  *   .   .   .
Hermes

PROPER
MASONIC    PRONUNCIATION.

Gur'shon

Ge'mul   .    .   [bou'nah
Ghe'moulBl'nahThe-

Gib'e-ah

Gittlim

Gtt'e-ad

Gnfts'tics

God [mar

God'-fry-de-San-alde-

Goe'the

Gd-e'tia

Gol'go-tha

Go'mfil

Goi^md-gona  ....

Gom-6r/ra

G6n'fal-on'

Gor'dl-an

Gor'jus

Goth'ic

Grav'e-lot

Gu'go-mos

Gibz

GuiFle-main  ....

Gttt'-tur-al

Gym-nos'6-phists  .    .

Hab'ak-kuk    ....

Hab'In

Hab/ra-mah  ....
Ha-dees'-es    ....

Haf'6d-ha

Hag'ga-i

Hah'

Hail

Hale'

Hal-le-lu'ya  ....
Ham-a/ll-el    ....

Hapht'zl-el

Ham-ouest-er ....

Har'6-dim

Ha'rtis-pl'ces  ....
Haupt-Hutte  ....
Hautes  Grades ....

Heal'

HeVn

Hec'a-tum

Hep'ta-gSn

H6r-maimes  ....
Her-man-dad  ....
Her'mez

NOTATIONS.

A  son  of  Levi.
A  step  of  the  Kadesh  ladder.
Prudence  in  the  midst  of  vicissitude.
Literally,  height.
Stonesquarer.

The  Syrian  mountains.  [ledge.

N6s'tiks.  Superior  or  celestial  know-
Not  Gawd.  [Templarism.
Oneofthefoundersof  ancient  Knights
John  Wolfgang  von  Goethe.
Go-e'sha.

Name  given  to  Calvary  by  the  Jews.
Reward.

A  society  opposing  Freemasonry,
Name  of  a  Hebrew  city.
Ecclesiastical  banner.
Not  Gord'yan.
Magnificent.
A  style  of  Architecture.
One  of  the  three  ruffians.
Baron  von  Gugomos.
A  ruffian  in  the  Scottish  Rite.
Ge'ye— main.
Pertaining  to  the  throat.
Signifying  "Naked  sages."

Love's  embrace.     A  Jewish  prophet.

Initiate  of  4th  degree,  Mod.  French  R

Used  only  in  France.  [med,

Traditions  handed  down  by  Moham-

Second  of  four  godsof  Arab  tribeof  Ad

A  Hebrew  prophet.

Hebrew  definite  article  "the."

Whence  do  you  hail  ?

To  hide.

Praise  ye  Jehovah.

The  angel  of  Venus.

Haf-zi-el.

Ham-west-er.

Princes  in  Masonry.

Implying  a  soothsayer  or  aruspice.

Hout-hute

Ho-gra-d.

To  make  legal.

The  abode  of  bliss.

A  sacrifice  of  a  hundred  oxen.

A  plane  figure  of  seven  equal  sides.

A  corruption  of  Hermes.

"Spanish  Brotherhood."

The  Greek  God,  Mercurjr.

PRONOUNCING  DICTIONARY.

2077

words  or

DOUBTFUL  PRONUNCIATION.

Herodoin

Hesed

Hibbut-Hakkeber* .
Hieronymites*  ....

Hierophylax*

Hindoo

Hiram  Abba

Hiram-abif

Ho  La  Tai

Homage

Hor

Horeb

Horizon

Hoschea

Hospitallers*  ....

Humble

Huzza

Hypothenuse  ....

Hystaspes

Hyssop

Iatric ,

I-Colm-Kill*

Iconoclasts*

Iconology

lesus  Hominum  .  .  .  ,

Salvator ,

lesus  Nazerenus .  .  .  .

Bex  Judaeorum  .  .

Ih-Ho

Ijar* ,

Illumi  nati

Immanuel

Imaum*

Immortality

Impious

Imposter

Incomparable

Indian

Ineffable*

Inexplicable

In  Hoc  Sigmo  Vinces  .

Initiate*

Inquiry

Institute

Interesting

Ionic

Irrevocable

PROPER
MASONIC    PRONUNCIATION.

HeVo-dOin

He'sfid

Hlb'but  Hak'ke-ber
HI/e-r6n/y-  mites  .  .
Hi'e-ro-phy'l&x .  .    .

Hln'doo

Hl'ram,  A'ba  ....
Hiram-ab-If'  ....

Ho  la  ta-e

Hdm'aj

H6r

Ho'reb

H6-ri/zun

H6s-che-a

HOs'pI-tal-erz    .    .    .

Hum'bl

Huz-za'

Hi-poth/e-nus  .  .
His-tas'pez ....
His'up

NOTATIONS.

I-at'ric

Ic'Olm-Kill'   .    .
I-c6D/6-clasts  .    ,

I'con-ol'o-gy  .   .
Ya'sus  hom/e-niim

Sal-va'tor    .

Ya'siis  Na-za-ra-nus  "1

Rex  ju-de-d-rum  ■»

Ib-ho

I-j&r

ll-lu/mi-na/ti  ....
Im-man'-u-el  ....

Im/aum

Im-mor-tal'I-tl  .   .   .

Im/pl-us

Im-pos'ter

In-kSm'pa-ra-bl    .    .

In'dl-an

In-Sf'fa-bl

In-eks'pll-ka-bl .  .    .
In  h&k  slg'no  vin'sez

In-I'she-at

In-kwi'rf

In'stl-tut

In'ter-est-ing  ....

I-on'ic

Ir-rev/6-ca-bl ....

Mythical  mountain  in  Scotland.
Literally,  kindness.
Beating  of  the  sepulchre.
Hermit  order  of  tiie  14th  century.
Guardian  of  the  holy  vessels  and  vest-
A  native  of  Hindostan.  [ments.

Not  Abi.  Hiram  the  Master,  Father.
A  widow's  son  of  the  tribe  of  Naphtali.
He  has  suffered.
Reverential  worehip.
The  mountain  on  which  Aaron  died.
The  Mount  Sinai  range.  [earth.

Not  Hor'i-zOn.  Visible  boundary  of
A  corruption  of  the  word  huzza.
A  brancli  of  the  Templar  Knighthood
Lowly  of  mind.

Acclamation.  [angle.

The  longest  side  of  a  right  angle  tri-
Father  of  the  Persian  king,  Darius.
A  species  of  caper.

Searchers  after  universal  medicine.

Ik'6m-kil'.

Image-breakers.

Teaching  the  doctrine  of  images.

Jesus,  savior  of  men.

Jesus  of  Nazareth,  King  of  the  Jews

See  Ho-hi.

Eighth  month  of  the  Hebrew  year.

Immaculate.

God  with  us.

Im'dm.

Unending  existence.

Profane,  wicked.

Not  Im-paw'ster.     A  deceiver,

Trauscendent,  peerle-s.

Pertaining  to  the  Indies.

Unutterable.

Without  explanation.

By  this  sign  thou  shalt  conquer.

Performing  the  first  rite.

Search  for  information.

Erect,  establish.

Engaging  the  attention  or  curiosity.

A  style  of  Architecture.

Incapable  of  being  recalled.

2078

PRONOUNCING  DICTIONARY.

WORDS   OF
DOUBTFUL  PRONUNCIATION.

Ischugi*

Ish  Chotzeb

Ishmael

Ish  Sabal

IshSodi

Isiac  Tables*

Islamism

Isolate

Israfeel*

Isis

Ithamar

Itratics*

Izads*

Jaaborou  Hammain*

Jabesh

Jabescheh*

Jabulum*

Jachin

Jach  inai

Jacinth

Jacques  de  Molay  .  .  .

Jafuhar*

Jah

Jamblichus

James  de  Molay ....

Jaina*

Jared

Jasher*

Jasper

Jebusites

Jehoshaphat

Jeksan*

Jeroboam

Jetzirah  Sepher*  .  .  .

Jeva  Jova  Jua

Jezeeds*

Joabert

Joah

Jobel*

Jochebed*

Jod  he  vau  he

Joha

Jo-ha-ben*

Jokshan*

Joppa

Jordan

Josedech

Joshua

66

PROPER
MASONIC   PRONUNCIATION.

Isch'n-gl

Ish-chotzfib

Ish-ma'el  ......

ish-sa'bal

ish-so'dl

fs'I-ac  Ta'bles   .    .    .

Iz'lam-Izm

Iz'6-late

ts'ra-feel

I-sis

Itb/a-mar

I-tra'tics

Iz'&ds

Ja-ab'6-r6u  Ham-ma  In

Ja/bish

Ja-bes'cheh

Ja/bii-lum

Ja'kln

Ja/chln-al    ....

Jacinth

Shak'  da  Mc-lay'  .    .

Ja'fu-har

Jah

Jam'bll-chu*  ....
James  de  Molay  .    .    .

Ja-I'na

Ja'red

Ja'sher

J&'per

Jeb'u-sites

Je-hosh'-a-fat    .    .    .

Jgk'san

Jer-o-bo'-am  ....
Jet-zl'rah  Se'pher  .  .
Ja'va.    Jo'va.     Ju-a

Jfez'eeds

Jo-S/bert

Joah

Jo'bel

Jo-che'becl

Y6d  ha,  vau  he  .    .    .

Jo'ha

Yo-hii/ben

Jok'sh&n

JOp'pa

Jfir'dan

JS'se-dek

Josh'-u-a

NOTATIONS.

One  of  the  five  masters  of  Solomon.

Literally,  hewers.

God  is  hearing.

Men  of  burden.

A  select  master.

A  flat  rectangular  bronze  plate.

The  Moslem  faith.

Place  by  itself.

Trumpeting  Angel  of  Resurrection.

Sister  of  Osiris.  Beneficent  Goddess

Youngest  son  of  Aaron,     [of  Egypt.

A  society  of  adepts.

The  twenty-eight  creations  of  Ormudz

A  word  of  covered  significance.

Dry  place.

The  dry  soil.

Corruption  of  Ju-be-ltim'.    [temple.

To  establish.     A  pillar  in  Solomon's

Ja'kin-ahl.  Corruption  of  Shekinah.

A  mineral  gem  of  value.

Past  Grand  Master  of  the  Templars.

Synonym  for  Thor.

Triliteral  name  of  God.

A  Neoplatonic  philosopher.

Last  Grand  Master  of  ancient  K.  T.

A  cross  adopted  by  the  Jainas.

Descendant  of  Seth.  Lived  962  years.

Upright.

Fourth  stone  in  the  breastplate.

Natives  of  Jebus,  (afterwards  Jerusa-

A  valley  East  of  Jerusalem,    [lem  )

Son  of  Abraham  and  Keturali.

First  king  of  the  ten  tribes.

A  traditional  document.

Abbreviations  and  corruptions  of  Je-

Jah  is  honor.  [hovah.

The  chief  favorite  of  Solomon.

Jah  is  brother.

A  name  of  God.

Jo  -ke'bfid.     Jah  is  nonor.

Hebrew  letters  spelling  Jehovah.

Jah  is  living.

A  mystical  word.

Fowler.     Second  sou  of  Abraham.

Seacoastcity,  37  miles  from  Jerusalem

A  tortuous  river  of  Palestine.

Jah  is  righteous.    Father  of  Jeshua.

High  Priest  who  rebuilt  the  temple.

PRONOUNCING  DICTIONARY.

2079

WORDS    OF
DOUBTFUL  PRONUNCIATION.

Jua

Jubal

Jubalcain*

Jubela-o-m*

Jubala

Jubalo*   .......

Jubelum*

Kabbala

Kabbalistic*

Kadesh

Kadiri

Kamea

Karmatians*

Kasideans

Katharsis

Kheni*

Khepra*

Kher-heb*

Khesvan*

Khetem  el  Nabiim*  .  •

Khon*

Khotbah*

Khurum-Abba*  .  .  .  .

Ki*

Kid  rou

Kislev*

Knewt-neb-s*

Kohath

Kojiki*

Konx  Ompax

Korah*

Koran*

Krishna*

Kill  ma*

Kuni  Kivi

Kun*

Laanah*

Labarum

Laborare  est  orare  .   .

Lacorne

Lakak  Deror  Pessah*

Lalande

Lamaism*

Lamma  Sabactani*  .  .

Lanturelus  *

Lapicida

Larudan  Abbe  .  .  .   .

PROPER
MASONIC  PRONUNCIATION.

Ju'a

Ju'bal  ....
Ju'bal-caln  . .
Ju-be-l&'-o'm'
Ju-be-la/  .  .  .
Ju-be-lo'  .  .  .
Ju-be-lum  .   .

1\  !i     ii    Da      ••••••

Kab'ba-la'

Kab'bal-is-tic  ....

Ka/dash

Ka'dl-rl

Ka'me-a

K&r-ma/tians  ....
Ka'sl-de'ans   ....

Ka-thar'sis

Kh6m

Khe'pra

KheVheb

Khes'van

Khe'tem  el  Nab-Iim.

Kh6n

Khot'b&h

Khu-rum-A'bba    .    .

Ki

Kld'ron

Kls'lev

Knewt'neh-s  ....

Ko'hath

Ko'jl'ki

K6nx  Om/pax ....

Ko'rah

Ko'ran

Krishna

Kul'mi

KumKl-vI

Kun

La/a-nah

La'ba-rum

La/-bo-ra/re  est  o-r&'re

La-corne7

La'kak  Der'or  Pes'sah

La'lande'

La'ma-ism  ....
Lam'ma  Sa'b&c-ta'nl
L&n'tu-re'ltts  ....

NOTATIONS.

La'pl-d'da  .   .   .
L&'ru-dan  Ab^be

Corrupted  form  of  Tetra^rammaton.

Shout,  blow.     Son  of  Adah.

Founder  of  the  science  of  music

Assassins.

First  ruffian.

Second  ruffian.

Third  ruffian.

Ka-ar'bar.     Holy  temple  of  Mecca.

A  mystical  philosophy  of  the  Jews.

Pertaining  to  the  mysteries.

Holy.    Same  as  Kedesh.

An  Arabian  secret  society.

An  Amulet.

A  Mohammedan  sect.

Latinized  spelling  of  Chuidim.

Ceremony  of  purification.

The  Egyptian  deity,  Amon.

An  Egyptian  deity.

Master  of  Ceremonies.

Second  month  of  Jeirish  civil  year.

Ke'tem  el  Nahb-Iim.

The  dead.     Subject  to  examination.

Mohammedan  Confession  of  Faith.

Hiram  Abba.

In  old  Kitual  of  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite.

Turbid  water.  A  brook  near  Mountof

The  third  Hebrew  month.     [Olives

NQte'nebs.

Assembly.     Ancestor  of  Moses.

The  ancient  religion  of  Japan.

Definition  uncertain.

Baldness.     A  Son  of  Esau.

The  reading.    The  Moslem  Bible.

A  TrimurtiinHindureligioussystem

Hindustani  Confession  of  Faith.

Arise !  and  kneel  I

The  creative  fiat  of  God.

Wormwood.

Monogram  of  Christ.

To  labor  is  to  pray.

La'kor'na'.

Liberty  of  passage  and  thought.

See  -De  la  Lande.

Religion  of  Tibit  and  Mongolia.

Used  in  French  Rite  of  Adoption.

Instituted  in  1771.

A  stone-cutter.

Author  of  a  libellous  work.

2080

PRONOUNCING  DICTIONARY.

WOBD6  OF
DOUBTFUL  PRONUNCIATION.

Latomia

Latres .'  .

Laus  I>eo

Laurel

Lebanon

JLechangeur

Lefranc

Legate

Legend

Lehrling

Lemanceau

Leontica*

Lepage

Leu eh t

Level

Levitikon

Libanus

Libation

Liber*

Libertas

Libertine

Licht*

Lichtseber*

Linear  Triad

Listen

Livre  d'  Architecture  *

Livre  d'Or

Lodge

Logos

Loki*

Lotos

Louvetcau

Loyal

Lubec

Lumiere  La  Grande* .

Lux  e  tenebris

Lux  Fiat  et  Lux  Fit .  .
Luz*

Maaeha

Macbenac

Maccabees

Macconniere  Rouge* .
Macconnieke  Societeiten*  .

Macerio

Macio

Maconetus

Macon  ne

Macrocosm*

fifaczo

PBOPUt
MASONIC   PRONUNCIATION.

La'to-mS'a

La-tres'

Law-Os  Da/6 ....

Lor'el

LSl/a— non

LS-chan'geur  ....

Le-franc'

Leg'ate

Lej'end

Lfihr'ling

Lfi-man-ceau'  ....

Le-on'tl-ca

Lfe-page'

Leucht

LeVel

Lg-vit'I-kon   ....

Ll-ba'nus

Li-ba/shun

LI'ber

Lib-cr-taB'

Llb'er-tln

Licht

Llcht'se-her  ....
Lln'e-ar  Tri'ad  .   .    .

Lis'n

Ll'vre  d' Archi-tec-tur

Ll'vred'or

L6dg

LSg'os

Lo'kl

Lo'tus

Lou-ve-teau'  ....

Loi-al

Lu'bfik

Lu'mlere  La  Grande
Lux  e  ten'e-bris  .  .  .
Lux  Fl'at  €t  Lux  Fit
Luz

Ma-a-cha

Mac-be-nac

Mac'ca-bees

Ma-cSn'ne-rie  Rouge
Ma-con'nie-ke  So-ci'-

Ma'ce-rl'6

Ma'cl-o

Ma'con-e'tiis  ....

Ma'con-ne

Mac'ro-cosm  or  .  .  .
Max/zo

NOTATIONS.

A  stone  quarry.

A  brick.

God  be  praised.

An  evergreen  shrub.

The  forest  mountains  in  Syria.

A  bitter  enemy  of  Freemasonry.

An  embassador.

A  fable.

German  for  Entered  Apprentice.

La-man-so'.

Ancient  sacrifices  in  honor  of  the  sun.

Lfi-pa'j.

A  Masonic  charlatan.

An  instrument  to  find  a  horizontal  line

The  spurious  Gospel  of  St.  John.

The  Latin  for  Lebanon.

A  pouring  out  a  liquor.

The  Book.

Liberty.

A  dissolute,  licentious  person.

Light.

A  mystical  sect  of  the  16th  century.

A  figure  in  some  old  floor  cloths.

To  attend  and  hear.

Ll'vr  d'Ar'she-tek-tu-r.

Le'vr-d'or.     The  Book  of  Gold.

A  place  of  shelter.

The  word.

An  Egyptian  aquatic  plant.

Lou-v-to'.

Devoted,  faithful.

A  town  in  Germany.

The  Grand  Light.

Light  out  of  darkness.

Let  there  be  light,  and  there  was  light.

Literally,  bending,  curve.

Ma-ar'ka.

See  Mac.

A  heroic  Jewish  family.

Ma-s6n-ne-re  Kuge.

e-tel  'ten.     Dutch  Masonic  clubs.

This  word  is  now  obsolete.

Ma'she-o.

Ma'-son-e-tus.

Ma-son-e.

Ma'cro-cosm.  Creating  the  universe.

A  mason,  a  constructor  of  walls.

PRONOUNCING  DICTIONARY.

5081

words  or

OODBTFUL  PRONUNCIATION.

proper

masonic  pronunciation.

NOTATIONS.

Ma/ji.     Wise  men  of  Persia.

Magna  est   Veritas  et
prsevalebit*  ....

Mag'na  fist  vfir'e-tas  \
fit  pre'va-la-blt  .   »

Truth  is  mighty  and  will  prevail.

M4-gtis.

Hebrew  pronoun  "What."
A  Sanskrit  poem.

Ma'ha-bha'ra-ta  .  .

Ma'ha-de'va  ....

"The  Great  God."

Ma'ha-ka'ay-a-pa'  .

Disciple  of  Buddha  Sakyaranal

Maher-Skalal-Hasb>Baz

Ma'hfir  Sha-lal  Hash-

Make  haste  to  the  prey,  foil  upon  the

Ma-hom'et  .   .    .  [Baz

The  Moslem  prophet.               [spoiL

Man  Shim

A  standard  bearer.

Mal'tre  Ma-con'    .    .

Mfi'tr  Ma-son'.

Maitresse  Agissante  .

Acting  mistress.

Without  an  English  equivalent.

An  angel.

Messenger  of  Job.

The  angelic  messenger,      [of  Faith

Malek  Adhel  Sayfeddia

Ma'lek'ad-fil  Saf-fid-dla

The  just  king  who  holds  the  Sword

Malta

An  island  in  the  Mediterranean  Sea.

A  tribe  of  Israel.

Man/i-che/ans .  .   .   .

Souls  of  the  dead.

Also  termed  Gnostics.

Manu*

Man'u  .   ,

Corresponding  to  the  word  West.

Mar-kesh'van  ....

The  second  Jewish  month.

Mar'duk

A  victorious  warrior-god.

Ma'sd-ret'ic  points  .  .

A  Hebrew  work  on  the  Bible.

Masoretic  Points  .  .  .

Vowel  signs.

Mason.

Lord,  Chief,  Prince.

Amiability.

Mau-so-le'um  ....

A  stately  sepulchre.

Mort.

An  intermediate  world.

Or,  May-hen.

Or,  May-hdre.

German  for  master.

Mfil-ctuVe-dek  .   .   .

King  of  Salem.

Ma'lak.

Melesino,  Rite  of .   .   .

Mfil'es-I'-no   ....

Scarcely  known  out  of  Russia.

Mfil-I'ta

Ancient  name  of  island  of  Malta.

Memento  Mori   ....

Me-mfin'to  M6-re  .    .

Remember  death.       [duce  thoughts.

Mem'6-re    ...

Not  Mem'ry.  Mental  power  to  repro-

Me-n&t'chim  ....

Expert  Master  Masons.

Mfi'nii

Son  of  Brahma.

Heb. ,  Bitter.     Youngest  son  of  Levi.

Mer-Sker*  ......

Mer'  Skfir

Space  in  which  the  sun  move?.

Meshia  Meshiane*   .   .

Mesht-a  Mfish'I-ane

Corresponding  to  Adam  and  Eve.

Mes/6-po-ly/te    .    .    .

4th  degreeof  German  Unionof  XXII.

Mesouraneo

MSlaou-ra-ne'o  .   .   .

I  am  the  centre  of  heaven.

Heb.  quarryman,  one  of  the  assassins.

2082

PRONOUNCING  DICTIONARY.

■WORD*    OF
DOUBTFUL  PRONUNCIATION.

Mezuza* .  .   .

Microcosm

Minos

Mistletoe*

Mithras

Mitre

Mizpeh

Mizraim

Moabon*

Moloch*

Montfaucon,  Prior  of

Monument

Mopses

Moriah

Mortal

Mosaic

Moslem

Mot  de  Semestre  .  .   .

Murderer

Mystagogue

Mystes

Mythology

Naamah

Nabaim

Nadab

Naked

Naphthali

Narbonne

Naymus  Grecus ....

Nazarene*

Nebuchadnezzar  .  .  .

Nebuzaradan

Necum

Nee  proditur,  nee  pro-
di tur,  innocens  ferat

Neder

Neith*

Nekam

Nekamah

Neocorus*.

Ne  plus  ultra

Ne  varietur

Nicotiates*.  .......

Nihongi*

Nil  nisi  clavis

Nisan

Noachidae

Nottbdeli

PROPER
MASONIC    PRONUNCIATION.

Mez'u-za

Ml-cro-cosm  ....

MI'nos

Mlz'l-to

Mlth'ras

Mi'ter

MLz'pe

Mlz'raim

Md-a'b&n

Mdl'ok

Mont'fau-con',  Prior  of
Mon'u-ment    ....

Mfip'ses

M6-ri-a

Mor'tal

M6-sa-Ic

McVlem

Mot'  d6  Se-mes'tre .  .

Mur'der-er

Mys'ta-gdgue' ....

Mys'tes

Ml-thol'6-ji    ....

Na-a'mah

Na'ba-im

Na'dab

Na'ked

Naf'ta-li

Nar-bonne

Nay'mus  Gre'cus   .    .

Naz'a-rene

Neb-uk-ad-nez/zar.  .
Neb-u-zar'a-dan   .   .

Ne'koom

Nek  pro'dl-tor,  n6k  pro'
dl-tor  In-no-senz  fe-rat
Na/der

Neith

Ne'kam

Ne'ka-mah

Ne'o-co'rtis

Na  plus  ul'tra,  ....
Na  va-rl-e'tur  .  .  .
Ne-co'ti-a'tes  ....

Ni-hon'gl

Nil-nlsi-clavis    .    .    .

NFsan

No-ach'T-dse  ....
N6f'f6-del'  .....

NOTATIONS.

Third  principle  of  Judaism.

See  Man.

The  lawgiver  of  Crete.

An  evergreen  plant.

The  principal  Deity  of  the  Persian*,

The  covering  of  a  Bishop's  head.

A  city  in  Gilead.

Rite  of,  originated  at  Milan  in  1806.

Mo-ah'bon.

The  Deity  of  the  Ammonites.

One  of  the  two  traitors.

A  memorial.

A  pretended  name  for  Masonry.

The  hill  on  which  the  Temple  wu

Subject  to  death.  [built.

Variegated,  tessellated.

Mohammedan.

Mo7  de-se-mest-r.

Not  Murd'rer.     Assassin.         [tiate.

One  who  makes  or  conducts  an  ini-

To  shut  the  eyes.

The  science  of  myths.

The  daughter  of  Lamech.
See  Schools  of  the  Prophets.
High-priest  of  the  Persians.
Unclothed,  defenceless.
One  of  Jacob's  sons.

Possible  corruption  of  Magna  Gnecia

An  inhabitant  of  j^azareth

A  king  of  Babylon.

An  officer  under  Nebuchadnezzar.

Vengeance.

Not  the  traitor,  not  the  traitor,  let

the  innocent  bear  it.
Promise.

Egyptian  synonym  for  Greek  Athene.
Signifying  vengeance.
Same  as  Nekam.
The  Guardian  of  the  Temple.
Nothing  beyond.
Unless  changed.
Ne-co'tl-ah'tes.
Chronicles  of  Nihon.
Nothing  but  the  key  is  wanting.
First  month  of  Jewish  year.
Descendants  of  Noah.
An  apostate  Templar.

PRONOUNCING  DICTIONARY.

2083

WORDS    OF
DOUBTFUL  PRONUNCIATION.

Nonage

Nonesynches

Nonis*

Non  nobis,  Domine,
non  nobis  sed  nomi-
ni  t  no  da  gloriam  .  .

Nomae*

Notuina

Novice  Maconne   .  .  .

Novitiate  *

Nuk-pe-nuk*

Nyaya*

Nyctazontes*

Oannes*

Oath

Obligatory

Obsequies

Occult

Odious

Off

Offer

Office

Officiate

Often

OhebEloah  .

Oheb  Karobo

Oli  ban  um

Omega

Omer

Omnia  Tempus  Alit . .

On

Onech*

Onyx

Opbites*

Oral

Ordo  ab  Cbao

Oriflamme*

Orion

Ormudz  and  Ahriman
Oman

Osiris

Oterfut.

Otreb

Ouriel*

Overseer

PROPER
MASONIC    PRONUNCIATION.

Non'aj

None-sjfn-chea    .   .

No'nls

Non  no-bis,  Dom-X-ne
non  nobis,  sfid n5m
-In-e  tii-o  da  glo-
ri-am

Nor'nae

Nd-tum

N6vice  Ma-con'ne .   .

No-vish'e-ate  ....

Nuk'pe-nuk    .   .   .   .

Ny-a'ya

Nyc'ta-zdn'tes ....

O-an'nes

Oth

Ob'llga-tc— ry  ....

Ob'se-kwiz

Ok-kult'

O'dl-us

Off

Offer

Of'fia

Of-fishl-at

Of'n

O-heb  e-lo'a  ....
6-h6b  ka-ro'bo  .  .  .
Ol-I-bS/num   ....

O-me'gS,

O'mer

Om'nl-a  tem'pus  a'lft

On'

6'nech

6'nix

O'phites

6'ral

OVdo-ab-cha'o  .    .    .

O'rI-flamme

O-ri'un

Ormudz  and  Ah-rl-man
Or'nan

NOTATIONS.

O-sI'ris .  .
6'ter-fut  .

6'treb  .  .
Ou'ri-fil  .
O-ver-ser*

Under  lawful  age.

A  corruption  of  Noonshun  (luncbeon)

A  mystic  word.

Not  to  us,  O  Lord !  not  to  us,  but  to
Thy  name  give  the  glory.

Signifying  Past,  Present  and  Future.

Anagram  of  Aumont.

Novice  Ma-son-nd.

A  person  under  probation.

"  I  am  that  I  am."

A  system  of  ancient  Hindu  philosophy

An  ancient  sect.

Solemn  affirmation.
Binding  in  law  or  conscience.
Funeral  rites  or  solemnities.
Secret,  unknown.
Deserving  hatred.
Not  Awf.    Away  from.
Not  Aw'fer.   Present  for  acceptance.
Not  Aw'fis.  Assumed  duties  or  busi-
To  act  as  an  officer.  [ness,

Not  often.     Frequent.
Love  of  God.
Love  of  neighbor.
An  aromatic  sap,  frankincense.
Last  letter  of  Greek  alphabet.
A  Hebrew  measure.
Time  heals  all  things.
A  name  for  Jehovah  among  Egyptians
After  Enoch  or  Phenoch  (the  Phoenix)
A  stone  of  the  breastplate.
Brotherhood  of  the  Serpent.
Verbal,  by  word  of  mouth.
Order  out  of  chaos.
Ancient  banner  of  the  Counts  of  Vezin
One  of  the  constellation  of  stars.
Good  and  evil.     Darkness  and  light.
Strong.     Whose  threshing  floor  be-
came David's  altar.
Chief  god  of  old  Egyptian  mythology.
The  assassin  at  the  west  gate.
Pseudonym  of  Kosicrucian  Michel

[Mayet
Nutsacfa.    One  who  inspects

2084

PRONOUNCING  DICTIONARY.

■WORDS    OF
DOUBTFUL  PRONUNCIATION.

Ozee

Oziali*

Pacliacamac*

Paganis,  Hugo  de  .  .   .

Palestine*

Palladium

Paracelcus

Parent

Parian

Parikchai  Agrouchada*

Parlirer*

Parsees*

Pas  perdus

Pastophori

Pastos

Patent

Pax  vobis  cum* ....

Pectoral

Pedal

Pedum

Peetash*

Peleg-  or  Phaleg" ....

Penance

Pentacle*

Pentateuch

Perambulate

Periclyte*

Perignan

Persian

Pestle

Phaal  Choi

Phainoteletian  Society

Pharaxal

Pharaoh

Pharaoschol

Philalethes

Philistine

Philocoreites,  Order  of

Phylacteries*

Picart's  Ceremonies  .

Pilaster

Pilier

Pinceau

Pirlet

Pitaka*

Pitris*

Planche  Tracee  ....

Pleiades

Polkal

PROPER
MASONIC    PRONUNCIATION.

CK-zee

O'zi  -ah

Pach/a-ca/mac    .    .    .
Pa-ga'nls,  Hugo  de  .

Pal-es'tine

Pal-la'di-um  ....
Pa-ra-cel'sils  ....

Parent

Pa'ri-an

Pa'rfk-chS/I    A'grou-
P&r'llr-er  .    .  [cha'da

Par'sez

Pas'  per-dus'  ....
Pas'-to-pho'ri ....

Pas'tos

Pat'ent

Pax  vo-bes'  cum    .    .

Pek'to-ral

Pe'-dal

Pe'dum

Peetash

Pe'leg  or  Fa'leg  .  .    .

Pen'ance

Pen'ta-kl

PeVta-tiik

Per-am'bu-late  .    .    .

Per'i-clyte

Per'ig-nan  .    .

Per'shan

Pes'tl

Fa'al  K61

Phai/n6-te-le/tian  .  .

Pha/rax-al

Fa'ra-d

Fa-ra-os'kfil    ....
Phi'la-le'thes .   .    .   .

Fi-lis'tln

Phl'lo-co-re'I-tes  .    .
Phy-lac'ter-ies   .    .    .

Pl'cart

Pi-las'ter

Pll'ier

Pm'ceau

Plr'let

Pit'a-ka

Plt'rls

Plan/clie  Tra-cee   .    .

Pley'a-dez

Pol'kal

NOTATIONS.

Acclamation.

A  Prince  of  Judah.

Peruvian  for  Creator  of  the  Universe.

Latinized  name  of  Hugh  de  Payens.

Commonly  called,  The  Holy  Laud.

That  which  is  an  effectual  defense.

Degree  in  MSS.  collections  of  Peuvret.

One  who  begets  offspring.

A  fine  quality  of  marble.

An  occult  scientific  work  of  Brahma  ns

Spokesmen.

Followers  of  Zoroaster.

French  name  for  room  for  visitors.

Couch  or  shrine  bearers.

Greek  for  couch.

A  letter  securing  certain  rights.

Peace  be  with  you.

Pertaining  to  the  breast.

Pedes,  the  feet.

Literally,  a  shepherd's  crook.

The  Demon  of  Calumny.

Division.     A  son  of  Eber.

Suffering  as  evidence  of  repentance.

Two  intersecting  triangles.

The  five  books  of  Moses.

To  walk  over.

See  Elect  of  Perignan.

A  country  in  Western  Asia.

An  instrument  for  pounding.

Separated,  driven  apart

Founded  at  Paris  in  1840.

Division  and  subsequent  reunion.

A  king,  a  sovereign.

Congregated,  re-assembled.

Literally,  Friends  of  Truth.

An  inhabitant  of  Philistia.

Established  in  French  army  in  Spain

Ornaments.  [in  1808.

By  Bernard  Picart.

A  partly  projecting  column.

A  pillar  or  support  of  an  edifice.

Pin-so.    To  act  as  secretary.    [East.

Organizer  of  Council  of  Knights  of  the

The  Bible  of  Buddhism.

Spirits.

Designation  for  minutes  in  French

A  group  of  seven  stars.         [Lodges.

Altogether  separated.

PKONOUNCLNG  DICTIONARY.

2085

WORDS    OK
XttUBTFUL  PRONUNCIATION.

Polycronicon

Pomegranate

Pomme  Verte*

Poniard

Pontifes  Freres  ....

Pontiff

Porch

Position

Postulant

Potens

Potentate

Pours  uivant

Praxoeans*

Prelate

Precept.  ........

Presentation

Princeps

Progress

Proponenda

Propylaeuin*

Pro  tempore

Protean

Protocol

Provost

Prudence

Psalms

Psaterians*

Pseudonym

Puissant

Pulsanti  Operietur  .   .

Punjaub*

Pnranas*

Pursuivant*

Pythagoras

Quadrivium  andTrivium

Quaternion

Quetzialcoatl*

Rabbanaim

Rabbi

Rabbinism

Rabboni

Rag-on

Rahab

Ramayana*.

Raphodom

Ratisbon

Razahbelsijah

Recognize

PBOPBB
MASONIC    PRONUNCIATION.

PSly-cron'i-con  .  .  .
Pfime'-gran-ate .  .  .
Pomme  Verte  ....

Pon'yard

Pon'ti-fes  Freres   .   .

Pdn'tiff

Porch

Po-zish'un  .....

PcVtii-lant

Po'tenz

P6/ten-tat

Pour-su'I-vant   .   .   .

Prax'6-eans

Prel'ate

Pre'sept

PrSz-en-ta'shun  .  .    .

Princeps

Prog'res

Pro'po-nen'da .  .  .  .
Pr&p'y-lae'um  .  .  .
Pro  ten/po-re  ....

Pro'te-an

Pro'to-kOl

Prov'ust

Pru 'deuce

Samz

Ps&t-e'rians

Pseu-do-nym  ....

Pu-is'sant

Pul-san'ti  Ope-ri-e-tur

Pun-jaub'

Pu-ra'nas

Pur'sui-vant  ....
Py-thag'-o-ras  .   .    .

Quad-rfv'i-um  and
Qua-tei/nl-on  ....
Quet'zi-aPcoatl  .   .    .

Rab'ba-na/Im ....

Rab'be

Rab'bin-ism

Rab-bo'nl

Ra/g6n

Ra'ab

Ra'ma-ya'na  ....

Raf'o-dom

Rat'is-bon

Ra-zabel-sl'ya  .  .  .
Rek'ogr-nlz

NOTATIONS.

Latin  Chronicle  by  Eanulf  Higdeo.
Adopted  as  the  symbol  of  plenty.
Po-m  V6r-t.
A  small  dagger.
Pon'te-fees  Frares.
A  High  Priest.

Not  Pawrch.    A  gate  or  entrance.
Situation,  station.
From  Latin  postulans — asking  for.
Powerful.

One  of  high  authority.
Poor-su'e-van.
Followers  of  Praxeas.
A  dignitary  of  the  church.
An  injunction,  mandate.
Setting  forth,  a  gift-
Chief.

Advancement.
Subjects  to  be  proposed.
Court  or  vest  ibule  in  front  of  an  ediiio*
For  the  present  time.
Assuming  different  shapes.
The  original  writing.
A  presiding  officer.
Wisdom  applied  to  practice
A  sacred  song.
A  sect  of  Arians.

Su'dc—niin.   False  or  fictitious  nam  .
Powerful.

To  him  who  knocks  it  shall  be  opened.
Pun-jawb.

Text-booksof  worshippers  of  Vishnu.
Pei/swe-vant,  messenger.
School  of,  supposed  model  of  Masonry.

Trivl-um.

The  number  four.

Ket'ze-al'cotL

Chief  of  the  architects.

An  eminent  teacher.

A  Jewish  system  of  philosophy

My  Rabbi.  A  most  excellent  Master

A  noted  Masonic  writer  of  France.

A  name  of  Egypt.

The  great  epic  of  ancient  Indie,

A  mystic  word.

A  city  of  Bavaria.

A  mystic  word.

To  know  again

2086

PRONOUNCING  DICTIONARY.

worm  or

PROPER

MASONIC  PRONUNCIATION.

NOTATIONS.

DOUBTFUL  PRONUNCIATION.

Restoration.

Straightness,  justice.

Insubordinate.

Re-ho-bo'am  ....

Son  and  successor  of  Solomon.

A  Persian  officer.

An  appointed  place.

A  hymn  for  the  dead.

Investigation,  examination.

Re-splen'danz  ....

Resplendent.

Restoravit  pacempatri

Rft-sto-rav'it  pa-sem

He  restored  peace  to  his  country.

Rev'er-ent.  .    .  [patri

Expressing  veneration.

Re-vest'I-a-ry.  .   .    .

Wardrobe,  place  for  sacred  vestment*

Rex  regain  dominus
dominorum  ....

Rex  regum  d6m-I-    \
iius  dominorum      >

King  of  Kings  and  Lord  of  Lords.

Ro'be-lfit

A  distinguished  French  Mason.

Roz-crwa.     Literally,  Rose  Cross.

Rosenkreuz,  Christian

Ro'sen-kreuz  ....

See  Bosicrueianism.

RcV-i-cru'cians .  .   .

A  Brotherhood  of  the  14th  century.

Root

The  course  or  way.

Roosh'e-eL.

Literally,  hosts.

Worship  of  the  sun,  moon  and  stars.

Jehovah  of  Hosts.

Sab-bal'

Mystic  word,  Scottish  Rite.

Sab'I-an-ism  ....

Same  as  Sabaism.

A  walled  enclosure  without  roof.

Sas-er-do'tal  ....

Pertaining  to  the  order  of  priesta.

An  offering.               [cestor  of  Jesus

Sa-do'-ne-as  ....

Heb. ,  Just.     Father  of  Achim,  an

Significant  word  in  the  higher  degrees.

Sa-git'ta

The  keystone  of  an  arch.

Saint  Adhabell  ....

Saint  Ad'ha-bell .      .

Evidently  meaning  St.  Amphibalus.

Saint  Amphibalus   .  .

Saint  Am'pbl-baFu* .

Saint  Ulcaise      ....

Saint  Nl-caise  ....

Title  of  a  sensational  Masonic  work.

The  Divine  presence.

The  female  energy  of  Siva.

Sa-liih  ed-deen'  .  .   .

King  of  Kings.

Salts

Initials  forming  part  of  a  sentence.

Salle  des  Pas  Perdus  .

Salle  des  Pas'  Per-dus'

The  Hall  of  the  Last  Steps.

Ai»  island  in  the  Bay  of  Bombay

To  greet,  to  hail.

HeaUh.  a  Roman  greeting.

Sa-m&r'I-tan  ....

Of  the  principal  city  of  the  Ten  Tribe*

Sa-mo-thra'cl-an  .    .

See  Mysteries  of  Cabin.

Sanctum  Sanctorum  .

Sank'tdm  Sank-to-riim

Holy  of  Holies.

San  Graal  .             ...

An  emerald  dish.

San-he-drlni   ....

Highest  judicial  tribunal  of  the,  Jews.

Cited  in  the  nomenclature  ot  Pustiec

Arabic  followers  of  Mohammed.

PRONOUNCING  DICTIONARY.

2087

words  or

UOtTBTKtn,  PRONUNCIATION.

Sardius

Sarsena

SatB'hai*

Satrap

Scarabaeus

Schism  .

Schismatic

Schor-Laban*

Secretary

Setidd  Schamagan* .  .

Sejjin*

Selah.'

Selamu  Aleikum*  .  .  .

Semestre

Seneschal

Seniority

Sephiroth

Seraphim*

Serai

Serapis

Sesh  Bazzar

Sethosj .....   ....

Shaddai

Shalal  Shalom  Aba*.  .
Shalash  esrini*   ....

Shamir

Skastras .

Shaven

Shea  tiel

Shebat*

Shekel

Shekinah

Shelomoth

Shelumlecka*   .  .  .  .
Shem  Ham  Phorash  .

Shemitic*

Shesha*

Shetharboznai

Shibboleth

Shimshai

Shinar

Shoulkain*

Shrine

Shrub

Shushan

Sic  transit  gloria  mnndi

Syel  Al*

Simeon

Simorgh*

PKOPBB

MASONIC   PRONUNCIATION.

SarMe-us

Sar-se'na

SatB'hai'

Sat'rap  or  Sa'-trap  .
Skar'a-be-us  ....

Sizm

Schis-mat'Ic  ....
Schor-Laban' ....

Sek're-ta-rt

Se-fldd  Schi'ma-gan

Sej'jin

Se'liih

Sfi-la'mu  A'lei-kum .

SS-meVUe

Sen'e-shal

Seen-yor'-I-ty    .  .  .

Seph'i-r&th

Ser'a-fim

Se-ra'e .

Se-ra'pis

SSsh  baz-zar7  ....

Se'thas

Shad-da-I

ShaKal  ShSl'om  Ab'ba
ShaPash  6z-rem  .   .   .

Sham'Ir

Shas'tras

Sha'va.

She-al'te-el

She-bat

Shek'I

She-kl-nah

She'ld-moth  ....
She-lum  lecfi  .  .  .
Shem  ham  fd'rash  .  .

ShSm-it'ic

She'shS

She-thar-boz'na-I .  .
Shlb-bd'leth    ....

Shims-shal

Shi  nar

ShouKkain

Shrin

Shrub

Shu'shan.  .  .  [mundi"
Slk  transit  glSPia

Slg'elAl

Slm'e-on

Stm'orgh

VOTATION*.

A  precious  stone  of  the  breastplate.

Pretended  exposition  of  Freemasonry

Sot-b-hoi'.

A  local  Eastern  ruler.

An  insect  with  wings  cased.

Division,  separation.

Insubordinate  Masons.

White  Ox,  or  Innocence.

A  superintending  officer  of  record*

A  secret  Moslem  society.

Arabic  register  of  all  the  wicked.

A  pause  or  musical  note.

Se-la'moo  A'11-koom.

Semi-annual  word  used  only  in  Frank

A  steward.

Priority,  or  superiority  in  rank.

From  Saphiri — splendid.

An  angel  of  the  highest  order.

A  rest  house.

An  Egyptian  Deity

A  name  of  Zerubbabel.

A  popular  work  published  in  1731

One  of  the  names  of  God.

He  restored  peace  to  his  father.

Twenty-third.

The  worm  used  for  building  the  temp

The  sacred  book  of  the  Hindus

A  valley  in  Palestine.

Father  of  Zerubbabel,  who  led  bad*

the  Jews  from  Babylon.
Fifth  month  of  Hebrew  civil  year.
A  Jewish  coin.  Value  about  62  cent
To  dwelL
Peacefulness.

Password  of  the  Order  of  Felicity.
The  unsolved  mystery.     The  name
A  historical  religious  division.
Free,  noble.

See  Tainai.     A  Persian  officer.
An  ear  of  corn.     Stream  of  watei.

Babylonia  in  its  fullest  extent.
Stolkin,  mentioned  ia  A.  A.  S.  ft.
A  hallowed  place.
Not  Srub     A  dwarf  tree.
The  ancient  capital  of  Persia.
Thus  passes  the  glory  of  the  world
Recording  Angel  in  Islam
One  of  the  tribe3  of  Israel.
Guardian  or  the  Persian  mysterie*

2088

PRONOUNCING  DICTIONARY.

WORDS   OF
DOUBTFUL  PRONUNCIATION.

Sinai

Sirat*

Siroc

Sivan*

Smaragdine*  ....

Socius

Sofism

Sojourn

Solemn

Solomon

Solstice

Solus

Sorbonne

Southerly

Spes  mea  in  Deo  est

Squarmen*

Sruti*

Stauros

Stibium

Steinmetz

St*  Jean  d' Acre .  .  .

Stolkin

Strength

Succoth

Sultan

Superficies

Summoned ......

Sword

Symbolic

Synagogue

Synod

Syria

Systyle*

Tabaor*

Tabernacle

Tableau

Tadmor

Talisman  .......

Talith*

Taljahad*

Talmud

Tamuz*

Tapestry

Tarshatha

Tassel

Tatnai •

Tan

PBOPBB

MASONIC   PRONUNCIATION.

Sl'nSI

Sl'rat

Si'roc

Slv'aa

Sma-r&g/dlne  ....

So'cl-us

So'fism

So'jurn

SOl'em

Sol'o-mon

Sol'stis

So'-lus

Sor'bonne

Suth'er-le

Spes  me'-a  in  Deo'  fist

SquaVmen

Srii'tl

Stou/rus

Stlt/i-um

Stein'metz

Shan  darker

Stol'kin

Strength

Soc-koth'

Sottan

Su'per-flsh-ez    .  .  .

Surn'mund

S6rd

8im-bSl-ik

Sln'a-gog

Syn'od

Slr'i-a

Sys'tyle

Ta'ba-or

Tal/er-na-kl  ....

Tat/ld

Tad'mor

Tal'iz-man

Tal'Ith

Tal-jah'ad

T&i'mud

Ta'mttz

Tar/es-trfi

Tar-sha'thfi

TSs'sel

Tat'na-I

TSa

NOTATIONS.

A  mountain  of  Arabia.

Signifies  a  shoe-latchet.
The  ninth  Hebrew  month.
Foundation  of  Hermetic  knowledge,
6th  deg.  of  Order  of  Strict  Observance.
A  mystical  religious  sect  of  Persia,
Temporary  residence.
Reverential,  devout.
King  of  Israel.

The  apparent  stoppage  of  the  sun.
Latin,  alone.  [Paris-

College  of  theological  professes  in
Toward  the  South.
My  hope  is  in  God.  [land.

Companies  of  wr  ights,  slaters,  in  Scot-
Revelation.
A  stake.    Cross.
Antimony.

German  for  stonemason.
The  city  Acca,  taken  by  Richard  I.
in  1191  and  given  the  new  name.
Inspector  of  the  Tribe  of  Benjamin.
Not  Strenth.     Force,  vigor.
Heb. ,  Booths.  A  place  east  of  Jordan
A  Turkish  sovereign.
The  surface,  the  face  of  a  thing.
Not  Sum'manzd.     Commanded.
Not  Sword.  Military  officer's  weapon.
Relating  to  symbols.
Place  of  Jewish  worship.
A  meeting,  convention  or  council.
Heb.,  Aram.  East  of  the  Mediterra-
An  arrangement  of  columns,   [neau,

A  name  of  Edom.

A  temporary  habitation.

A  vivid  representation.

City  of  Palms.

Magical  charm.

An  oblong  shawl.

Angel  of  water.

The  Hebrew  laws  and  traditions.

The  tenth  Jewish  month.

Woven  hangings.

See  Tirshatha.

A  pendant  ornament.

A  Persian  officer.

The  last  letter  of  Hebrew  alphabet.

PRONOUNCING  DICTIONARY.

2089

WORDS    OP
DOUBTFUL  PRONUNCIATION.

Taurus ,

Tchaiidiilas  '■''

Tebet

Tebeth

Templum  Hierosolyma-

Tenets

Tengu

Tensio-Dai-Sin* .  .  .   ,

Teraphim

Tessellated

Tessera

Tetractys ,   .

Tetradites*

Tetragram

Tetragrammaton  •   .  .

Teutonic

Thainmuz

Thebet ,

Thebounah   .      .  .  .  .
Theopascbites  *  .  .  .  ,

Theoricus* ,

Therapeutae

Theriog*

Theurgy

Thokath*

Thuminim

Tiara     ,

Tiberius

Tiluk*

Timbre ,

Tirshatha

Tisri*

Tito ,

Torgau ,

Tortuous

Traveler

Tredic*

Trestle

Triad

Tribute

Triglypbs

Triliteral

Trimurti

Trinosophs

Tripitaka*

Triune

Tsaphiel*

Tsedakah*

Tsidoni* •  .

PROPER
HASONIC   PRONUNCIATION.

Tiiu'rus

Tchan'dal-as  ....

Ta'bSt

Te'-bSth  .    .    .  [y-mae
Tem'plum  HI/e-ro-86l/

Tfin'-ets

Tfin-gu

TensI-oDai'  Sin.   .

Ter'a-flm

TeVse-la-ted  ....

Tes'se-ra

Te-trac't^s

TeVra-dltes

Tfit'ra-gram

Tet'-ra-gram-ma-ton

Tu-ton'Ik

Tham'muz

Thibet

The-bu'na

The/o-pas/cbites .  .  .
The-or'i-cui  ....
Ther'a-peu'tse .  .    .    .

The'ri-og

The-ur'gy

Tho  kath

Thum/-mim    ....

Te-a/ra

Ti-be're-us

Tl'luk

TWbre

Tlr-sha'thi

Tls'rl

Tl-to

Tor-gau

T6rt'u-us

Trav'el-er

TrSd'ic

TreVsel

Tri'ad

Tribute

Tri'glifs

TrI-lit'e-ral    ....

Tri-mur'te

Tri'no-sophs  ....
Tri-pit'a-ka    ....

Tri'fin

TsS/phl-el

Tse-da-kah

Tfcl-dd-ni ......

NOTATIONS.

Bull.     A  sign  of  tbe  Zodiao.

A  class  of  pariahs.

The  fourth  Jewish  month.

Literally,  winter.

Latin  for  Temple  of  Jerusalem.

Dogmas,  doctrines  and  principles.

Initials  of  a  sentence.

A  deity  held  in  adoration  by  Japanese.

Household  deities.

Ornament  of  a  lodge.

Tessera  Hoepitalis,  token  of  theguest.

The  number  four.

Believers  in  a  Godhead  of  four  persons

A  four-letter  word.

Signifies  a  word  of  four  letters.

Relating  to  the  ancient  Germans.

Syrian  god  Adonis.

Same  as  Tebet,  above.

A  mystic  word  in  Kadesh.

Followers  of  Peter  the  Fuller.

12th  degree  of  German  Rose  Croix.

Ascetic  sect  of  Jews  in  first  A.D.

Magic  operated  by  celestial  means.

Strength.

See  Urim  and  Thummim.     Truth.

A  crown.     The  Pope's  triple  crown

A  city  of  Palestine.

Impress  upon  forehead  of  Brahman

Name  given  in  France  to  a  stamp.

Title  of  Persian  governors  of  Judea.

The  first  Hebrew  month.

A  favorite  of  the  king  of  Israel.

A  fortified  town  on  the  Elbe.

Deviating  from  rectitude.

One  who  journeys.

The  ranking  King  in  Scan.  Mysteries.

The  designing  board.

The  union  of  three  objects.

A  subsidy  or  tax.

An  ornament  in  the  Doric  Order.

Sacred  name  of  God  among  Hindoos.

The  Hindoo  Trinity.

A  lodge  instituted  at  Paris  in  1816.

Canonical  book  of  the  Buddhists.

Three  in  one.

Sa'fe-el     The  Luna  angel.

First  step  of  the  mystical  ladder.

Ad  enquirer.

2090

PRONOUNCING  DICTIONARY.

words  or

DOUBTFUL  PRONUNCIATION.

Tsoim*

Tuapholl

Tubal  Cain

Tunic

Turcopolier

Turquoise

Tuscan

Typhon

Tyrian

Unaffiliated

Unbele*

Unison

Upadevas*

Upanishad*

Ur*

Uri  .   .  •

Uriel

Urim

Usage

Utopia

Usurp

Vagao*

Valorous

Vase

Vashti ,

Veadar-

Vedas ,

Vehm-gericht ...

Verger ,

Veritas

Vesica  Pisces  .  .   .  •

Vespasian

Vexillum  Belli    .   .

Vicegerent

Vielle-Bru  ...   .   .
Vincere  aut  Mori  .

Vineyards

Vitra*

Viva  voce

Vivat

Voishnuvus*    .  .  .

Volutes

Vouch

Wahabites*

Warrant

Westward

PROPEB

MASONIC    PRONUNCIATION.

Tso'Im  ....
Tu-a-pholl  .  .
Tu-bal  Ca'Xa  .
Tu'nlk  ....
TtLr/co-p6-li/er
Tur-quolse  .  .
Tus'can  ....
Tl'fon  ....
Tlr'e-an  .   .   .

Cn-af-fil'e-a-ted
tTn-hele'.  .  .  .
Yu'ne-sun  .  .  .
U'pa-de'-vas  .  .
D'pan-Ish-ad  .   .

Ur

U'ri

U'ri-el

U'rfm

Yii'zij

U-to'pe-a  .  .  .
U-zilrp'  ....

NOTATIONS.

Va'ga-6

Val'or-ous

Vaz

Vash'te

Ve'ii-dar

Ve'das

Vfihm'-ger-Icht' .  .    .

Ver'jer

Ver'-i-tas

Ves'l-ca  Pls-cIs .  .  .
Ves-pa'-sian  ....
Vex-il'lum  Belli  .  .
Vis'ge-rent

Welle  Bra

Vln'ce-re  aut  Mori  .

Vln'ySrdz

Vl'tra

Ve'va  v5'sa

Vl'vat

Vo-Ish'nu-Yua   .    .   .

Vo'lutz

Vouch

Wa'ha-bites    .   .

Wfir'rant

Westward

85-Im.

A  term  used  by  the  Druids.

Son  of  Lamech  and  Zillah.

The  long  undergarment  of  the  clergy

Commander  of  cavalry.

Tur-koa-z.    A  stone  in  breastplate

An  order  of  Architecture.

The  Egyptian  evil  deity.

Relating  to  Tyre.

Not  a  member.

To  uncover  or  reveal.

Harmony,  concord.

Name  for  certain  Sanskrit  worfca.

Fire,  light  or  spirit.

Heb.,  Enlightened.     Son  of  Huz

God  is  light.

Lights.

Custom,  use,  habit.

Ideal  perfection.

Seize  and  hold  possession.

Found  in  French  Bite  of  Adoption.

Brave,  courageous.

An  ornamental  vessel.

Wife  of  Ahasuerus.

That  is,  the  second  Adar.

Sacred  canon  of  the  Hindoos.

See  Secret  Tribunal  of  Westphalia,

An  attendant  upon  a  dignitary.

Truth.

The  air-bladder  of  a  fish.

A  war  flag.

An  officer  authorized  to  act  for  another

V-ie-1  Bru,  Rite  of,  established  1748

To  conquer  or  to  die.

A  plantation  of  vines.

A  Mohammedan  sect  established  1740

By  word  of  mouth.

Vivat!  vivat!  vivat!     Acclamation.

A  spiral  ornament  in  Architecture.
To  attest  or  bear  witness.

Represents  the  opponents  of  Masonry.
Commission,  authority.
I  Not  West'urd.    Toward  the  West.

PRONOUNCING  DICTIONARY.

2091

WORDS    OF
DOUBTFUL  PRONUNCIATION.

PROPER
MASONIC   PRONUNCIATION.

NOTATIONS.

Wil'helms-bad   .   .    .

A  city  of  Germany.

Wol-fen-buttel  .   .   .

A  city  of  Lower  Saxony.

Title  of  honor.    To  adore.

Estimable,  possessing  merit.

Xe'ro-pha'glsts .    .   .

Eaters  of  dry  food.

The  seat  of  the  aouL

XyVu-thru«    ....

Zls'u-thrus.

Yah,  Yeva,  Yod  ....

Ya,  Yava,  Y6d    .   .   .

Corrupt  names  of  the  Deify;

Yaksha*

Yak'sha

Hindoo  Deity.

Yaveron  Hamaim   .  .

Ya've-ron  Ha'-maim

The  passage  of  the  river.

Yezdegerdian*   ....

Yea'dfe-gerMtan  .  .    .

Pertaining  to  the  era  of  Yezdegeru.

A  sect  bordering  on  the  Euphrates.

Sacred  tree,  Scandinavian  mythology.

Signifying  the  Eternal  God.

A  Hebrew  letter.

A  female  symbol  of  the  Orientalists.

Za-bad

A  historical  personage  at  Solomon's
Tenth  son  of  Jacob.                 [court.

Zadok

Za'dok

Bighteous.     Son  of  Ahitub,  a  priest.
Angel  of  the  planet  Jupiter.

Zad'kl-el

Zalierlaherbon  ....

Za-herMa-her-bon' .

Zaplmath-paaneah*   .

Zaph-nath-paa'ne'ah

Saviour  of  the  world.

Za'ra-thus-tra    .   .   .

Name  of  Zoroaster  in  Zend  language.

Zar'rl-el

The  angel  that  governs  the  sun.

See  Zeredatha.

Z6b'e-de  and  Zeb-eMe

Jah  is  gift.     Husband  of  Salome.

ZSd'e-ki'a

Jah  is  might.     A  false  prophet.

Zend  A-ves'ta  ....

Persian  Bible  in  Zend  language.

Sacred  cord  used  in  Hindustanee  ini-

tiation.

King  Solomon's  Captain  of  Guards.

See  Qay  Ground.

Ze-rub-ba/bel  ....

A  prince  of  the  House  of  Judah.

Zeus*

The  Chief  Deity  of  the  Greeks.

Zif  *

Zif

Blossom.  The  second  Jewish  month.

Little  bird.     Wife  of  Moses.

A  musical  instrument  of  28  strings.

Balustrade.

An  imaginary  belt  in  the  heavens.

Zo'h&r

Distinction,  nobility.
Nobility.

Zo-ro-as'ter    ....

Founder  of  the  Parsee  religion.

An  eminent  German  Masonic  author.

Indian  tribe  of  New  Mexico.

Modern  Parsee  name  for  Zoroaster.

Strong.    A  primitive  race.