»ir'i!:li


HRimnnfB^HmRflnBHffiKswM  bhw  UiHul  HHmfHH  m        hw  U^  hi


V"

V?


^


AN


/■


'b.


x0^.


*    8


'r.


£  ^


w


?>


A^'


•  xT  "<>-.


;  ^


ARTHUR  SCHOPENHAUER.


•Esaaya.


ESSAYS  OF


ARTHUR    SCHOPENHAUER

SELECTED  AND  TRANSLATED

By  T.  BAILEY  SAUNDERS,  MA


Vitam  impendere  vero. — Juvenal.


A.  L.  BURT  COMPANY,     *    j»    *    J>    <*
*    *    *    *    PUBLISHERS,  NEW  YORK

,Cf:


.E5S43


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.


Schopenhauer  is  one  of  the  few  philosophers  who  can
be  generally  understood  without  a  commentary.  All  his
theories  claim  to  be  drawn  direct  from  facts,  to  be
suggested  by  observation,  and  to  interpret  the  world  as  it
is;  and  whatever  view  he  takes,  he  is  constant  in  his
appeal  to  the  experience  of  common  life.  This  character-
istic endows  his  style  with  a  freshness  and  vigor  which
would  be  difficult  to  match  in  the  philosophical  writing
of  any  country,  and  impossible  in  that  of  Germany.
If  it  were  asked  whether  there  were  a»>Tr  circumstances,
apart  from  heredity,  to  which  he  owed  his  mental  habit,
the  answer  might  be  found  in  the  abnormal  character  of
his  early  education,  his  acquaintance  with  the  world
rather  than  with  books,  the  extensive  travels  of  his  boy-
hood, his  ardent  pursuit  of  knowledge  for  its  own  sake
and  without  regard  to  the  emoluments  and  endowments
of  learning.  He  was  trained  in  realities  even  more  than
in  ideas;  and  hence  he  is  original,  forcible,  clear,  an
enemy  of  all  philosophic  indefiniteness  and  obscurity;  so
that  it  may  well  be  said  of  him,  in  the  words  of  a  writer
in  the  "  Revue  Contemporaine,"  cen'est  pas  un  philosophe
comme  Us  auires,  c'est  un  philosophe  qui   a  vu   le  monde.

It  is  not  my  purpose,  nor  would  it  be  possible  within
the  limits  of  a  prefatory  note,  to  attempt  an  account  of
Schopenhauer's  philosophy,  to  indicate  its  sources,  or  to
suggest  or  rebut  the  objections  which  may  be  taken  to  it,
M.  Ribot,  in  his  excellent  little  book,*  has  done  all  that

*  "La  Pliilosophie  de  Schopenhauer,"  par  Ths  Ribot,


IV  TRANSLATORS  PREFACE.

is  necessary  in  this  direction.  But  the  essays  here  pre
sented  need  a  word  of  explanation.  It  should  be  observed,
and  Schopenhauer  himself  is  at  pains  to  point  out,  that
his  system  is  like  a  citadel  with  a  hundred  gates:  at  what-
ever point  you  take  it  up,  wherever  you  make  your
entrance,  you  are  on  the  road  to  the  center.  In  this
respect  his  writings  resemble  a  series  of  essays  composed
id  support  of  a  single  thesis;  a  circumstance  which  led
him  to  insist,  more  emphatically  even  than  most  philoso-
phers, that  for  a  proper  understanding  of  his  system  it
was  necessary  to  read  every  line  he  had  written.  Perhaps
it  would  be  more  correct  to  describe  "  Die  Welt  als  Wille
und  Vorstellung"  as  his  main  thesis,  and  his  other
treatises  as  merely  corollary  to  it.  The  essays  in  these
volumes  form  part  of  the  corollary;  they  are  taken  from
a  collection  published  toward  the  close  of  Schopenhauer's
life,  and  by  him  entitled  "  Parerga  und  Paralipomena,"
as  being  in  the  nature  of  surplusage  and  illustrative  of  his
main  position.  They  are  by  far  the  most  popular  of  his
works,  and  since  their  first  publication  in  1851  they
have  done  much  to  build  up  his  fame.  Written  so  as  to
be  intelligible  enough  in  themselves,  the  tendency  of  many
of  them  is  toward  the  fundamental  idea  on  which  his
system  is  based.  It  may  therefore  be  convenient  to
summarize  that  idea  in  a  couple  of  sentences;  more  es-
pecially as  Schopenhauer  sometimes  writes  as  if  his  advice
had  been  followed  and  his  readers  were  acquainted  with
the  whole  of  his  work.

All  philosophy  is  in  some  sense  the  endeavor  to  find  a
unifying  principle,  to  discover  the  most  general  conception
underlying  the  whole  field  of  nature  and  of  knowledge.
By  one  of  those  bold  generalizations  which  occasionally
mark  a  real  advance  in  science,  Schopenhauer  conceived
this  unifying  principle,  this  underlying  unity,  to  consist
in  something  analogous  to  that  will  which  self-conscious-


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  y

ness  reveals  to  us.  Will  is,  according  to  him,  the
fundamental  reality  of  the  world,  the  thing-in-itself;  and
its  objectivation  is  what  is  presented  in  phenomena.  The
struggle  of  the  will  to  realize  itself  evolves  the  organism,
which  in  its  turn  evolves  intelligence  as  the  servant  of  the
will.  And  in  practical  life  the  antagonism  between  the
will  and  the  intellect  arises  from  the  fact  that  the  former
is  the  metaphysical  substance,  the  latter  something
accidental  and  secondary.  And  further,  will  is  desire,
that  is  to  say,  need  of  something;  hence  need  and
pain  are  what  is  positive  in  the  world,  and  the  only
possible  happiness  is  a  negation,  a  renunciation  of  the
will  to  live.

It  is  instructive  to  note,  as  M.  Ribot  points  out,  that  in
finding  the  origin  of  all  things,  not  in  intelligence,  as
some  of  his  predecessors  in  philosophy  had  done,  but  in
will,  or  the  force  of  nature,  from  which  all  phenomena
have  developed,  Schopenhauer  was  anticipating  something
of  the  scientific  spirit  of  the  nineteenth  century.  To  this
it  may  be  added  that  in  combating  the  method  of  Fichte
and  Hegel,  who  spun  a  system  out  of  abstract  ideas,  and
in  discarding  it  for  one  based  on  observation  and  experi-
ence, Schopenhauer  can  be  said  to  have  brought  down
philosophy  from  heaven  to  earth.

In  Schopenhauer's  view  the  various  forms  of  religion
are  no  less  a  product  of  human  ingenuity  than  Art  or
Science.  He  holds,  in  effect,  that  all  religions  take  their
rise  in  the  desire  to  explain  the  world;  aud  that,  in  regard
to  truth  and  error,  they  differ,  in  the  main,  not  by  preach-
ing monotheism,  polytheism  or  pantheism,  but  in  so  far
as  they  recognize  pessimism  or  optimism  as  the  true
description  of  life.  Hence  any  religion  which  looked
upon  the  world  as  being  radically  evil  appealed  to  him  as
containing  an  indestructible  element  of  truth.  I  have
endeavored  to  present  his  view  of  two  of  the  great   reli-


VI  TRAN&IA WK'S  PREFACE.

gions  of  the  world  in  the  extract  to  whicn  I  have  given
the  title  of  "The  Christian  System."  The  tenor  of  it  is
to  show  that,  however  little  he  may  have  been  in
sympathy  with  the  supernatural  element,  he  owed  much
to  the  moral  doctrines  of  Christianity  and  of  Buddhism,
between  which  he  traced  great  resemblance.

Of  Schopenhauer,  as  of  many  another  writer,  it  may  be
Baid  that  he  has  been  misunderstood  and  depreciated  just
in  the  degree  in  which  he  is  thought  to  be  new;  and  that,
in  treating  of  the  conduct  of  life,  he  is,  in  reality,  valu-
able only  in  so  far  as  he  brings  old  truths  to  remembrance.
His  name  used  to  arouse,  and  in  certain  quarters  still
arouses,  a  vague  sense  of  alarm;  as  though  he  had  come
to  subvert  all  the  rules  of  right  thinking  and  all  the
principles  of  good  conduct,  rather  than  to  proclaim  once
again  and  give  a  new  meaning  to  truths  with  which  the
world  has  long  been  familiar.  Of  his  philosophy  in  its
more  technical  aspects,  as  matter  upon  which  enough,
perhaps,  has  been  written,  no  account  need  be  taken  here,
except  as  it  affects  the  form  in  which  he  embodies  these
truths  or  supplies  the  fresh  light  in  which  he  sees  them.
For  whatever  claims  to  originality  his  metaphysical  theory
may  possess,  the  chief  interest  to  be  found  in  his  views
of  life  is  an  affair  of  form  rather  than  of  substance;  and
he  stands  in  a  sphere  of  his  own,  not  because  he  sets  new
problems  or  opens  up  undiscovered  truths,  but  in  the
manner  in  which  he  approaches  what  has  been  already
revealed.

He  is  not  on  that  account  less  important;  for  the  great
mass  of  men  at  all  times  requires  to  have  old  truths  im-
parted as  if  they  were  new — formulated,  as  it  were,
directly  for  them  as  individuals,  and  of  special  application
to  their  own  circumstances  in  life.  A  discussion  of  human
happiness  and  the  way  to  obtain  it  is  never  either  un-
necessary  or   uncalled  for,  if  one  looks  to  the  extent  t<i


TRANSLA  TORS  PREFACE.  ?ii

which  the  lives  of  most  men  fall  short  of  even  a  poor
ideal,  or,  again,  to  the  difficulty  of  reaching  any  definite
and  secure  conclusion.  For  to  such  a  momentous  inquiry
as  this,  the  vast  majority  of  mankind  gives  nothing  more
than  a  nominal  consideration,  accepting  the  current
belief,  whatever  it  may  be,  on  authority,  and  taking  as
little  thought  of  the  grounds  on  which  it  rests  as  a  man
walking  takes  of  the  motion  of  the  earth.  But  for  those
who  are  not  indifferent — for  those  whose  desire  to  fathom
the  mystery  of  existence  gives  them  the  right  to  be  called
thinking  beings — it  is  just  here,  in  regard  to  the  conclu-
sion to  be  reached,  that  a  difficulty  arises,  a  difficulty
affecting  the  conduct  of  life:  for  while  the  great  facts  of
existence  are  alike  for  all,  they  are  variously  appreciated,
and  conclusions  differ,  chiefly  from  innate  diversity  of
temperament  in  those  who  draw  them.  It  is  innate  tem-
perament, acting  on  a  view  of  the  facts  necessarily  in-
complete, that  has  inspired,  so  many  different  teachers.
The  tendencies  of  a  man's  own  mind — the  idols  of  the
cave  before  which  he  bows — interpret  the  facts  in  accord-
ance with  his  own  nature:  he  elaborates  a  system  contain-
ing, perhaps,  a  grain  of  truth,  to  which  the  whole  of  life
is  then  made  to  conform;  the  facts  purporting  to  be  the
foundation  of  the  theory,  and  theory  in  its  turn  giving
its  own  color  to  the  facts.

Nor  is  this  error,  the  manipulation  of  facts  to  suit  a
theory,  avoided  in  the  views  of  life  which  are  presented
by  Schopenhauer.  It  is  true  that  he  aimed  especially  at
freeing  himself  from  the  trammels  of  previous  systems;
but  he  was  caught  in  those  of  his  own.  His  natural
desire  was  to  resist  the  common  appeal  to  anything  ex-
tramundane — anything  outside  or  beyond  life — as  the  basis
of  either  hope  or  fear.  He  tried  to  look  at  life  as  it  is;
but  the  metaphysical  theory  on  which  his  whole  philosophy
rests  made  it  necessary  for  him,  as  he  thought,  to  regard


Tiii  TRANSLATORS  PREFACE.

it  as  an  unmixed  evil.  He  calls  our  present  existence  an
infinitesimal  moment  between  two  eternities,  the  past  and
the  future,  a  moment — like  the  life  of  Plato's  "  Dwellers
in  the  Cave" — filled  with  the  pursuit  of  shadows;  where
everything  is  relative,  phenomenal,  illusory,  and  man  is
bound  in  the  servitude  of  ignorance,  struggle  and  need,
in  the  endless  round  of  effort  and  failure.  If  you  confine
yourself,  says  Schopenhauer,  only  to  some  of  its  small
details,  life  may  indeed  appear  to  be  a  comedy,  because
of  the  one  or  two  bright  spots  of  happy  circumstance  to
be  fcund  in  it  here  and  there;  but  when  you  reach  a
higher  point  of  view  and  a  broader  outlook,  these  soon  be-
come invisible,  and  life,  seen  from  the  distance  which
brings  out  the  true  proportion  of  all  its  parts,  is  revealed
as  a  tragedy — a  long  record  of  struggle  and  pain,  with  the
death  of  the  hero  as  the  final  certainty.  How  then,  he
asks,  can  a  man  make  the  best  of  his  brief  hour  under  the
hard  conditions  of  his  destiny?  What  is  the  true
Wisdom  of  Life?

Schopenhauer  has  no  pre-conceived  divine  plan  to
vindicate;  no  religious  or  moral  enthusiasm  to  give  a
roseate  hue  to  some  far-off  event,  obliging  us  in  the  end
to  think  that  all  things  work  together  for  good.  Let
poets  and  theologians  give  play  to  imagination!  he,  at  any
rate,  will  profess  no  knowledge  of  anything  beyond  our
ken.  If  our  existence  does  not  entirely  fail  of  its  aim,  it
must,  he  says,  be  suffering;  for  this  is  what  meets  us  every-
where in  the  world,  and  it  is  absurd  to  look  upon  it  as  the
result  of  chance.  Still,  in  the  face  of  all  this  suffering,
and  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  uncertainty  of  life
destroys  its  value  as  an  end  in  itself,  every  man's  natural
desire  is  to  preserve  his  existence;  so  that  life  is  a  blind,
unreasoning  force,  hurrying  us  we  know  not  whither.
From  his  high  metaphysical  standpoint,  Schopenhauer  is
ready  to  admit  that  there  are  nmny  things  in  life  which


TRANSLA  TOR'S  PREFA  GE.  {%

give  a  short  satisfaction  and  blind  us  for  the  moment  to
the  realities  of  existence — pleasures  as  they  may  be  called,
in  so  far  as  they  are  a  mode  of  relief;  but  that  pleasure  is
not  positive  in  its  nature  nor  anything  more  than  the
negation  of  suffering,  is  proved  by  the  fact  that,  if  pleas-
ures come  in  abundance,  pain  soon  returns  in  the  form  of
satiety;  so  that  the  sense  of  illusion  is  all  that  has  been
gained.  Hence,  the  most  a  man  can  achieve  in  the  way
of  welfare  is  a  measure  of  relief  from  this  suffering;  and,
if  people  were  prudent,  it  is  at  this  they  would  aim,  in-
stead of  trying  to  secure  a  happiness  which  always  flies
from  them.

It  is  a  trite  saying  that  happiness  is  a  delusion,  a  chimera,
the  fata  morgana  of  the  heart;  but  here  is  a  writer  who
will  bring  our  whole  conduct  into  line  with  that,  as  a
matter  of  practice;  making  pain  the  positive  groundwork
of  life,  and  a  desire  to  escape  it  the  spur  of  all  effort.
While  most  of  those  who  treat  of  the  conduct  of  life  come
at  last  to  the  conclusion,  more  or  less  vaguely  expressed,
that  religion  and  morality  form  a  positive  source  of  true
happiness,  Schopenhauer  does  not  professedly  take  this
view;  though  it  is  quite  true  that  the  practical  outcome  of
his  remarks  tends,  as  will  be  seen,  in  support  of  it;  with
this  difference,  however — he  does  not  direct  the  imagina-
tion to  anything  outside  this  present  life  as  making  it
worth  while  to  live  at  all;  his  object  is  to  state  the  facts  of
existence  as  they  immediately  appear,  and  to  draw  conclu-
sions as  to  what  a  wise  man  will  do  in  the  face  of
them.

In  the  practical  outcome  of  Schopenhauer's  ethics — the
end  and  aim  of  those  maxims  of  conduct  which  he  recom-
mends, there  is  nothing  that  is  not  substantially  akin
to  theories  of  life  which,  in  different  forms,  the  greater
part  of  mankind  is  presumed  to  hold  in  reverence.  It  is
the  premises  rather  than  the  conclusion  of  his  argument


X  TRANSLA  TOR'S  PREhACE.

which  interest  us  as  something  new.  The  whole  world,  he
says,  with  all  its  phenomena  of  change,  growth  and  devel-
opment, is  ultimately  the  manifestation  of  will — Wille
unci  Vorstellung — a  blind  force  conscious  of  itself  only
when  it  reaches  the  stage  of  intellect.  And  life  is  a  con-
stant self-assertion  of  this  will;  a  long  desire  which  ie
never  fulfilled;  disillusion  inevitably  following  upon  attain-
ment, because  the  will,  the  thing-in-itself — in  philosoph-
ical language,  the  noumenon — always  remains  as  the  perma-
nent element;  and  with  this  persistent  exercise  of  its  claim,
it  can  never  be  satisfied.  So  life  is  essentially  suffering;
and  the  only  remedy  for  it  is  the  freedom  of  the  intellect
from  the  servitude  imposed  by  its  master,  the  will.

The  happiness  a  man  can  attain,  is  thus,  in  Schopen-
hauer's view,  negative  only;  but  howr  is  it  to  be  acquired  ?
Some  temporary  relief,  he  says,  may  be  obtained  through
the  medium  of  Art,  for  in  the  apprehension  of  Art  we  are
raised  out  of  our  bondage,  contemplating  objects  of  thought
as  they  are  in  themselves,  apart  from  their  relations  to  oui
own  ephemeral  existence  and  free  from  any  taint  of  the
will.  This  contemplation  of  pure  thought  is  destroyed
when  Art  is  degraded  from  its  lofty  sphere,  and  made  an
instrument  in  the  bondage  of  the  will.  How  few  of  those
who  feel  that  the  pleasure  of  Art  transcends  all  others
could  give  such  a  striking  explanation  of  their  feeling  !

But  the  highest  ethical  duty,  and  consequently  the
supreme  endeavor  after  happiness,  is  to  withdraw  from  the
struggle  of  life,  and  so  obtain  release  from  the  misery
which  that  struggle  imposes  upon  all,  even  upon  those  who
are  for  the  moment  successful.  For  as  will  is  the  inmost
kernel  of  everything,  so  it  is  identical  under  all  its  mani-
festations; and  through  the  mirror  of  the  world  a  man
may  arrive  at  the  knowledge  of  himself.  The  recognition
of  the  identity  of  our  own  nature  with  that  of  others  is
the  beginning  and  foundation  of  all  true  morality.     For


TRAN8LA  TORS  PREFA  CE.  XI

once  a  man  clearly  perceives  this  solidarity  of  the  will,
there  is  aroused  in  him  a  feeling  of  sympathy  which  is  the
main-spring  of  ethical  conduct.  This  feeling  of  sympathy
must,  in  any  true  moral  system,  prevent  our  obtaining
success  at  the  price  of  others'  loss.  Justice,  in  this  theory,
conies  to  be  a  noble,  enlightened  self-interest;  it  will  for-
bid our  doing  wrong  to  our  fellow-man,  because,  in  injur-
ing him,  we  are  injuring  ourselves — our  own  nature,
which  is  identical  with  his.  On  the  other  hand,  the  recog-
nition of  this  identity  of  the  will  must  lead  to  commisera-
tion— a  feeling  of  sympathy  with  our  fellow-sufferers — to
acts  of  kindness  and  benevolence,  to  the  manifestation  of
what  Kant,  in  the  "  Metaphysic  of  Ethics/'  calls  the  only
absolute  good,  the  good  will.  In  Schopenhauer's  phrase-
ology, the  human  will,  in  other  words,  spus,  the  love  of
life,  is  in  itself  the  root  of  all  evil,  and  goodness  lies  in
renouncing  it.  Theoretically,  his  ethical  doctrine  is  the
extreme  of  socialism,  in  a  large  sense;  a  recognition  of  the
inner  identity  and  equal  claims,  of  all  men  with  ourselves;
a  recognition  issuing  in  dyanrj,  universal  benevolence,  and
a  stifling  of  pp.rticular  desires.

It  may  come  as  a  surprise  to  those  who  affect  to  hold
Schopenhauer  in  abhorrence,  without,  perhaps,  really
knowing  the  nature  of  his  views,  that,  in  this  theory  of  the
essential  evil  of  the  human  will — ?/3<»s,  the  common  selfish
idea  of  life — he  is  reflecting  and  indeed  probably  borrowing
what  he  describes  as  the  fundamental  tenet  of  Christian
theology,  that  "the  whole  creation  groaneth  and  tra-
vaileth  in  pain,*  standing  in  need  of  redemption.  Though
Schopenhauer  was  no  friend  to  Christian  theology  in  its
ordinary  tendencies,  he  was  very  much  in  sympathy  with
some  of  the  doctrines  which  have  been  connected  with  it,
In  his  opinion  the  foremost  truth  which  Christianity  pro*

"'  ■  -  '  'i       mrui

*  Romans  viii.  22.


xii  TRANSLA TORS  PREFACE.

claimed  to  the  world  lay  in  its  recognition  of  pessimism,
Its  view  that  the  world  was  essentially  corrupt,  and  that
the  devil  was  its  prince  or  ruler.*  It  would  be  out  of
place  here  to  inquire  into  the  exact  meaning  of  this  state*
ment,  or  to  determine  the  precise  form  of  compensation
provided  for  the  ills  of  life  under  any  scheme  of  doctrine
which  passes  for  Christian:  and  even  if  it  were  in  place,
the  task  would  be  an  extremely  difficult  one;  for  probably
no  system  of  belief  has  ever  undergone,  at  various  periods,
more  radical  changes  than  Christianity.  But  whatever
prospect  of  happiness  it  may  have  held  out,  at  an  early
date  of  its  history,  it  soon  came  to  teach  that  the  necessary
preparation  for  happiness,  as  a  positive  spiritual  state,  is
renunciation,  resignation,  a  looking  away  from  external
life  to  the  inner  life  of  the  soul — a  kingdom  not  of  this
world.  So  far,  at  least,  as  concerns  its  view  of  the  world
itself,  and  the  main  lesson  and  duty  which  life  teaches,
there  is  nothing  in  the  theory  of  pessimism  which  does  not
accord  witli  that  religion  which  is  looked  up  to  as  the
guide  of  life  over  a  great  part  of  the  civilized  world.

What  Schopenhauer  does  is  to  attempt  a  metaphysical  exN
planation  of  the  evil  of- life,  without  any  reference  to  any-
thing outside  it.  Philosophy,  he  urges,  should  be  cosmol-
ogy, not  theology;  an  explanation  of  the  world,  not  a
scheme  of  divine  knowledge:  it  should  leave  the  gods
alone — to  use  an  ancient  phrase — and  claim  to  be  left  alone
in  return.  Schopenhauer  was  not  concerned,  as  the
apostles  and  fathers  of  the  Church  were  concerned,  to
formulate  a  scheme  by  which  the  ills  of  this  life  should  be
remedied  in  another — an  appeal  to  the  poor  and  oppressed,
conveyed  often  in  a  material  form,  as,  for  instance,  in  the
story  of  Dives  and  Lazarus.  In  his  theory  of  life  as  the
self-assertion  of  will,  be  endeavors  to  account  for  the  6in,

*  John  xu.31


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFA CE.  xiii

misery  and  iniquity  of  the  world,  and  to  point  to  the  way
of  escape — the  denial  of  the  will  to  live.

Though  Schopenhauer's  views  of  life  have  this  much  in
common  with  certain  aspects  of  Christian  doctrine,  they
are  in  decided  antagonism  with  another  theory,  which,
though,  comparatively  speaking,  the  birth  of  yesterday,
lias  already  been  dignified  by  the  name  of  a  religion,  and
has,  no  doubt,  a  certain  number  of  followers.  It  is  the
theory  which  looks  upon  the  life  of  mankind  as  a  continual
progress  toward  a  state  of  perfection,  and  humanity  in  its
nobler  tendencies  as  itself  worthy  of  worship.  To  those
who  embrace  this  theory,  it  will  seem  that  because  Schopen-
hauer does  not  hesitate  to  declare  the  evil  in  the  life  of
mankind  to  be  far  in  excess  of  the  good,  and  that,  as  long
as  the  human  will  remains  what  it  is,  there  can  be  no  radi-
cal change  for  the  better,  he  is  therefore  outside  the  pale
of  civilization,  an  alien  from  the  commonwealth  of  ordered
knowledge  and  progress.  But  it  has  yet  to  be  seen
whether  the  religion  of  humanity  will  fare  better,  as  a
theory  of  conduct  or  as  a  guide  of  life,  than  either  Chris-
tianity or  Buddhism.  If  any  one  doctrine  may  be  named
which  has  distinguished  Christianity  wherever  it  has  been
a  living  force  among  its  adherents,  it  is  the  doctrine  of
renunciation;  the  same  doctrine  which  in  a  different  shape
and  with  other  surroundings,  forms  the  spirit  of  Bud-
dhism. With  those  great  religions  of  the  world  which  man-
kind has  hitherto  professed  to  revere  as  the  most  ennobling
of  all  infiuences;  Schopenhauer's  theories,  not  perhaps  in
their  details,  but  in  the  principle  which  informs  them,  are
in  close  alliance.

Renunciation,  according  to  Schopenhauer,  is  the  truest
wisdom  of  life,  from  the  higher  ethical  standpoint.  His
heroes  are  the  Christian  ascetics  of  the  Middle  Age,  and
the  followers  of  Buddha  who  turn  away  from  the  Sansara
to  the  Nirvana.     But  our  modern   habits  of   thought   are


Xiv  TRANSLA  TOR'S  PREFA  CR

different.  We  look  askance  at  the  doctrines,  and  we  have
no  great  enthusiasm  for  the  heroes.  The  system  which  is
in  vogue  among  us  just  now  objects  to  the  identification
of  nature  with  evil,  and  in  fact,  abandons  ethical  dualism
altogether.  And  if  nature  is  not  evil,  where,  it  will  be
asked,  is  the  necessity  or  the  benefit  of  renunciation
— a  question  which  may  even  come  to  be  generally
raised,  in  a  not  very  distant  future,  on  behalf  of  some  new
conception  of  Christianity.

And  from  another  poiut  of  view,  let  it  be  frankly
admitted  that  renunciation  is  incompatible  with  ordinary
practice,  with  the  rules  of  life  as  we  are  compelled  to
formulate  them;  and  that,  to  the  vast  majority,  the  doc-
trine seems  little  but  a  mockery,  a  hopelessly  unworkable
plan,  inapplicable  to  the  conditions  under  which  men
have  to  exist.

In  spite  of  the  fact  that  he  is  theoretically  in  sympathy
with  truths  which  lie  at  the  foundation  of  certain  widely
revered  systems,  the  world  has  not  yet  accepted  Schopen-
hauer for  what  he  proclaimed  himself  to  be,  a  great
teacher:  and  probably  for  the  reason  that  hope  is  not  an
element  in  his  wisdom  of  life,  and  that  he  attenuates  love
into  something  that  is  not  a  real,  living  force — a  shadowy
recognition  of  the  identity  of  the  will.  For  men  are  disin-
clined to  welcome  a  theory  which  neither  flatters  their
present  position  nor  holds  out  any  prospect  of  better  things
to  come.  Optimism— the  belief  that  in  the  end  everything
will  be  for  the  best — is  the  natural  creed  of  mankind;  and
a  writer  who  of  set  purpose  seeks  to  undermine  it  by  an
appeal  to  facts  is  regarded  as  one  who  tries  to  rob  human-
ity of  its  rights.  How  seldom  an  appeal  to  the  facts
within  our  reach  is  really  made!  Whether  the  evil  of  life
actually  out-weighs  the  good — or,  if  we  should  look  for
better  things,  what  is  the  possibility  or  the  nature  of  a
future  life,  either  for  ourselves  as  individuals,  or  as  part


TRANSLA TOR'S  PREFACE.  XV

of  some  great  whole,  or,  again,  as  contributing  to  a  coming
state  of  perfection? — such  inquiries  claim  an  amount  of
attention  which  the  mass  of  men  everywhere  is  unwilling
to  give.  But,  in  any  case  whether  it  is  a  vague  assent  to
current  beliefs,  or  a  blind  reliance  on  a  baseless  certainty,
or  an  impartial  attempt  to  put  away  what  is  false — hope
remains  as  the  deepest  foundation  of  every  faith  in  a
happy  future.

But  it  should  be  observed  that  this  looking  to  the
future  as  a  complement  for  the  present  is  dictated  mainly
by  the  desire  to  remedy  existing  ills;  and  that  the  great
hold  which  religion  has  on  mankind,  as  an  incentive  to
present  happiness,  is  the  promise  it  makes  of  coming  per-
fection. Hope  for  the  future  is  a  tacit  admission  of  evil
in  the  present;  for  if  a  man  is  completely  happy  in  this
life,  and  looks  upon  happiness  as  the  prevailing  order,  he
will  not  think  so  much  of  another.  So  a  discussion  of  the
nature  of  happiness  is  not  thought  complete  if  it  takes
account  only  of  our  present  life,  and  unless  it  connects
what  we  are  now  and  what  we  do  here  with  what  we  may
be  hereafter.  Schopenhauer's  theory  does  not  profess  to
do  this;  it  promises  no  positive  good  to  the  individual;  at
most,  only  relief:  he  breaks  the  idol  of  the  world,  and
sets  up  nothing  in  its  place;  and  like  many  another
iconoclast,  he  has  long  been  condemned  by  those  whose
temples  he  has  desecrated.  If  there  are  optimistic
theories  of  life,  it  is  not  life  itself,  he  would  argue,  which
gives  color  to  them;  it  is  rather  the  reflection  of  some
great  final  cause  which  humauity  has  created  as  the  last
hope  of  its  redemption:

"  Heaven  but  the  vision  of  fulfilled  desire,
And  hell  the  shadow  from  a  soul  on  fire,
Cast  on  the  darkness  into  which  ourselves.
So  late  em  erged  from,  shall  so  soon  expire.  "  *

*  Omar  Khayyam  ;  translated  by  E.  Fitzgerald.


xvi  TRANSLA  TOR&  PREFA  CE.

Still,  hope,  it  may  be  said,  is  not  knowledge,  nor  a  real
answer  to  any  question;  at  most,  a  makeshift,  a  moral
support  for  intellectual  weakness.  The  truth  is  that,  as
theories,  both  optimism  and  pessimism  are  failures;  be-
cause they  are  extreme  views  where  only  a  very  partial
judgment  is  possible.  And  in  view  of  the  great  uncer-
tainty of  all  answers,  most  of  those  who  do  not  accept  a
stereotyped  system  leave  the  question  alone,  as  being  either
of  little  interest,  or  of  no  bearing  on  the  welfare  of  their
lives,  which  are  commonly  satisfied  with  low  aims;  tacitly
ridiculing  those  who  demand  an  answer  as  the  most  press-
ing affair  of  existence.  But  the  fact  that  the  final  pro-
blems of  the  world  are  still  open,  makes  in  favor  of  an
honest  attempt  to  think  them  out,  in  spite  of  all  previous
failure  or  still  existing  difficulty;  and  however  old  these
problems  may  be,  the  endeavor  to  solve  them  is  one  which
it  is  always  worth  while  to  encourage  afresh.  For  the
individual  advantages  which  attend  an  effort  to  find  the
true  path  accrue  quite  apart  from  any  success  in  reaching
the  goal;  and  even  though  the  height  we  strive  to  climb
be  inaccessible,  we  can  still  see  and  understand  more  than
those  who  never  leave  the  plain.  The  sphere,  it  is  true,
is  enormous — the  study  of  human  life  and  destiny  as  a
whole;  and  our  mental  vision  is  so  ill-adapted  to  a  range
of  this  extent  that  to  aim  at  forming  a  complete  scheme  is
to  attempt  the  impossible.  It  must  be  recognized  that
che  data  are  insufficient  for  large  views,  and  that  we  ought
not  to  go  beyond  the  facts  we  have,  the  facts  of  ordinary
life,  interpreted  by  the  common  experience  of  every  day.
These  form  our  only  material.  The  views  we  take  must
of  necessity  be  fragmentary — a  mere  collection  of  apergus,
rough  guesses  at  the  undiscovered;  of  the  same  nature,  in-
deed, as  all  our  possessions  in  the  way  of  knowledge — little  x
tracts  of  solid  land  reclaimed  from  the  mysterious  ocean  of
the  unknown.


TRANSLATORS  PREFACE.  xvii

But  if  we  do  not  admit  Schopenhauer  to  be  a  great
teacher — because  he  is  out  of  sympathy  with  the  highest
aspirations  of  mankind,  and  too  ready  to  dogmatize  from
partial  views — he  is  a  very  suggestive  writer,  and  emi-
nently readable.  His  style  is  brilliant,  animated,  forcible,
pungent;  although  it  is  also  discursive,  irresponsible,  and
with  a  tendency  to  superficial  generalization.  He  brings  in
the  most  unexpected  topics  without  any  very  sure  sense  of
their  relative  place;  everything,  in  fact,  seems  to  be  fair
game,  once  he  has  taken  up  his  pen.  His  irony  is  note-
worthy; for  it  extends  beyond  mere  isolated  sentences,  and
sometimes  applies  to  whole  passages,  which  must  be  read
cum  grano  salis.  And  if  he  has  grave  faults  as  well  as
excellences  of  literary  treatment,  he  is  at  least  always  witty
and  amusing,  and  that,  too,  in  dealing  with  subjects — as
here,  for  instance,  with  the  Conduct  of  Life — on  which
many  others  have  been  at  once  severe  and  dull.  It  is  easy
to  complain  that  though  he  is  witty  and  amusing,  he  is
often  at  the  same  time  bitter  and  ill-natured.  This  is  in
some  measure  the  unpleasant  side  of  his  uncompromising
devotion  to  truth,  his  resolute  eagerness  to  dispel  illusion
at  any  cost — those  defects  of  his  qualities  which  were
intensified  by  a  solitary  and,  until  his  last  years,  unappre-
ciated life.  He  was  naturally  more  disposed  to  coerce  thau
to  flatter  the  world  into  accepting  his  views;  he  was  above
all  things  un  esprit  fort,  and  at  times  brutal  in  the  use  of
his  strength.  If  it  should  be  urged  that,  however  great
his  literary  qualities,  he  is  not  worth  reading  because  he
takes  a  narrow  view  of  life  and  is  blind  to  some  of  its
greatest  blessings,  it  will  be  well  to  remember  the  profound
truth  of  that  line  which  a  friend  inscribed  on  his  earliest
biography:  "Si  non  err  asset  fecer  at  ille  minus,"*  a  truth
which  is  seldom  without  application,  whatever  be  the  form  of
human  effort.     Schopenhauer  cannot  be  neglected  because

*  Slightly  altered  from  Martial.  Epigram  :  I.  xxii.


Xviii  TMAfrSLA  TORS  PREFACE.

he  takes  an  unpleasant  view  of  existence,  for  it  is  a  view
which  must  present  itself,  at  some  time,  to  every  thought-
ful person.  To  be  outraged  by  Schopenhauer  means  to  be
ignorant  of  many  of  the  facts  of  life.

In  this  one  of  his  smaller  works,  "  Aphorismen  zur
Lebensweisheit,"  Schopenhauer  abandons  his  high  meta-
physical standpoint,  and  discusses,  with  the  same  zest  and
appreciation  as  in  fact  marked  his  enjoyment  of  'hem,
some  of  the  pleasures  which  a  wise  man  will  seek  to  ob^s'n
— health,  moderate  possessions,  intellectual  riches.  Ana
when,  as  in  this  little  work,  he  comes  to  speak  of  the
wisdom  of  life  as  the  practical  art  of  living,  the  pessimist
view  of  human  destiny  is  obtruded  as  little  as  possible.
His  remarks  profess  to  be  the  result  of  a  compromise — an
attempt  to  treat  life  from  the  common  standpoint.  He  is
content  to  call  these  witty  and  instructive  pages  a  series  of
aphorisms;  thereby  indicating  that  he  makes  no  claim  to
expound  a  complete  theory  of  conduct.  It  will  doubtless
occur  to  any  intelligent  reader  that  his  observations  are
but  fragmentary  thoughts  on  various  phases  of  life;  and,
in  reality,  mere  aphorisms — in  the  old,  Greek  sense  of  the
word— pithy  distinctions,  definitions  of  facts,  a  marking-
off,  as  it  were,  of  the  true  from  the  false  in  some  of  our
ordinary  notions  of  life  and  prosperity.  Here  there  is
little  that  is  not  in  complete  harmony  with  precepts  to
which  the  world  has  long  been  accustomed;  and  in  this
respect,  also,  Schopenhauer  offers  a  suggestive  comparison
rather  than  a  contrast  with  most  writers  on  happiness.

The  philosopher  in  his  study  is  conscious  that  the  world
is  never  likely  to  embrace  his  higher  metaphysical  or
ethical  standpoint,  and  annihilate  the  will  to  live;  nor  did
Schopenhauer  himself  do  so  except  so  far  as  he,  in
common  with  most  serious  students  of  life,  avoided  the
ordinary  aims  of  mankind.  The  theory  which  rec-
ommended  universal    benevolence  as  the  highest  ethical


IRAN  SLA  TO  TVS  PR  EFA  CE.  xix

duty,,  came,  as  a  matter  of  practice,  to  mean  a  formal
standing- aloof — the  ne  plus  ultra  of  individualism.  The
Wisdom  of  Life,  as  the  practical  art  of  living,  is  a  com-
promise. We  are  here  not  by  any  choice  of  our  own;  and
while  we  strive  to  make  the  best  of  it,  we  must  not  let
ourselves  be  deceived.  If  you  want  to  be  happy,  he  says,
it  will  not  do  to  cherish  illusions.  Schopenhauer  would
have  found  nothing  admirable  in  the  conclusion  at  which
the  late  M.  Edmond  Scherer,  for  instance,  arrived.
"  L'art  de  vivre"  he  wrote  in  his  preface  to  Aniiel's
"Journal,"  " c'est  de  sefaire  une  raison,  de  souscnre  au
compromts,  de  se  preter  aux  fictions."  Schopenhauer
conceives  his  mission  to  be,  rather,  to  dispel  illusion,  to
tear  the  mask  from  life;  a  violent  operation,  not  always
productive  of  good.  Some  illusion,  he  urges,  may
profitably  be  dispelled  by  recognizing  that  no  amount  of
external  aid  will  make  up  for  inward  deficiency;  and  that
if  a  man  has  not  got  the  elements  of  happiness  in  himself,
all  the  pride,  pleasure,  beauty  and  interest  of  the  world
will  not  give  it  to  him.  Success  in  life,  as  gauged  by  the
ordinary  material  standard,  means  to  place  faith  wholly  in
externals  as  the  source  of  happiness;  to  assert  and  empha-
size the  common  will  to  live,  in  a  word  to  be  vulgar.
He  protests  against  this  search  for  happiness — something
subjective — in  the  world  of  our  surroundings,  or  anywhere
but  in  a  man's  own  self;  a  protest  the  sincerity  of  which
might  well  be  imitated  by  some  professed  advocates  of
spiritual  claims.

It  would  be  interesting  to  place  his  utterances  on  this
point  side  by  side  with  those  of  a  distinguished  interpreter
of  nature  in  this  country,  who  has  recently  attracted
thousands  of  readers  by  describing  "The  Pleasures  of
Life;"  in  other  words,  the  blessings  which  the  world  holds
out  to  all  who  can  enjoy  them — health,  books,  friends,
travel,  education,  art.     On  the  common  ground   of   their


xx  TRANSLATORS  PREFACE.

regard  for  these  pleasures  there  is  no  disagreement  between
the  optimist  and  the  pessimist.  But  a  characteristic  dif-
ference of  view  may  be  found  in  the  application  of  a  rule  of
fife  which  Schopenhauer  seems  never  to  tire  of  repeating;
namely,  that  happiness  consists  for  the  most  part  in  what
a  man  is  in  himself,  and  that  the  pleasure  he  derives  from
these  blessings  will  depend  entirely  upon  the  extent  to
which  his  personality  really  allows  him  to  appreciate  them.
This  is  a  rule  which  runs  some  risk  of  being  overlooked
when  a  writer  tries  to  dazzle  the  mind's  eye  by  describing
all  the  possible  sources  of  pleasure  in  the  world  of  our
surroundings;  but  Sir  John  Lubbock,  in  common  with
every  one  who  attempts  a  fundamental  answer  to  the
question  of  happiness,  cannot  afford  to  overlook  it.  The
truth  of  the  rule  is  perhaps  taken  for  granted  in  his  account
of  life's  pleasures;  but  it  is  significant  that  it  is  only  when
he  comes  to  speak  of  life's  troubles  that  he  freely  admits
the  force  of  it.  "  Happiness,"  he  says,  in  this  latter  con-
nection, "  depends  much  more  on  what  is  within  than
without  us."  Yet  a  rigid  application  of  this  truth  might
perhaps  discount  the  effect  of  those  pleasures  with  which
the  world  is  said  to  abound.  That  happiness  as  well  as
unhappiness  depends  mainly  upon  what  is  within,  is  more
clearly  recognized  in  the  case  of  trouble;  for  when  troubles
come  upon  a  man,  they  influence  him,  as  a  rule,  much
more  deeply  than  pleasures.  How  few,  even  among  the
millions  to  whom  these  blessings  are  open — health,  books,
travel,  art — really  find  any  true  or  permanent  happiness
in  them  !

While  Schopenhauer's  view  of  the  pleasures  of  life  may
be  elucidated  by  comparing  it  with  that  of  a  popular
writer  like  Sir  John  Lubbock,  and  by  contrasting  the
appeals  they  severally  make  to  the  outer  and  the  inner
world  as  a  source  of  happiness;  Schopenhauer's  view  of
life   itself   will   stand  out  more  clearly  if  we  remember  the


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  xxi

opinion  so  boldly  expressed  by  the  same  English  writer.
"  If  we  resolutely  look,"  observes  Sir  John  Lubbock,"!
do  not  say  at  the  bright  side  of  things,  but  at  things  as
they  really  are;  if  we  avail  ourselves  of  the  manifold  bless-
ings which  surround  us,  we  cannot  but  feel  that  life  is
indeed  a  glorious  inheritance."*  There  is  a  splendid  excess
of  optimism  about  this  statement  which  well  fits  it  to  show
up  the  darker  picture  drawn  by  the  German  philosopher.

Finally,  it  should  be  remembered  that  though  Schopen-
hauer's picture  of  the  world  is  gloomy  and  somber,  there
is  nothing  weak  or  unmanly  in  his  attitude.  If  a  happy
existence,  he  says — not  merely  an  existence  free  from  pain
— is  denied  us,  we  can  at  least  be  heroes  and  face  life  with
courage:  das  hochste  was  der  Mensch  erlangen  kann  ist  ein
heroischer  Lebenslauf.  A  noble  character  will  never
complain  at  misfortune;  for  if  a  man  looks  round  him  at
other  manifestations  of  that  which  is  his  own  inner  nature,
the  will,  he  finds  sorrows  happening  to  his  fellow-men
harder  to  bear  than  any  that  have  come  upon  himself.
And  the  ideal  of  nobility  is  to  deserve  the  praise  which
Hamlet — in  Shakespeare's  Tragedy  of  Pessimism — gave  to
his  friend:

"  Thou  hast  been
As  one,  in  suffering  all,  that  suffers  nothing."

But  perhaps  Schopenhauer's  theory  carries  with  it  its
own  correction.  He  describes  existence  as  a  more  or  less
violent  oscillation  between  pain  and  boredom.  If  this
were  really  the  sum  of  life,  and  we  had  to  reason  from
such  a  partial  view,  it  is  obvious  that  happiness  would  lie
in  action;  and  that  life  would  be  so  constituted  as  to
supply  two  natural  and  inevitable  incentives  to  action;
and  thus  to  contain  in  itself  the  very  conditions  of  happi-
ness.    Life   itself   reveals   our    destiny.     It    is    not    the

*"  The  Pleasures  of  Life.     Part  I.  p.  5."


xxii  TBANSLA  TORS  PREFACE.

struggle  which  produces  misery,  it  is  the  mistaken  aims
and  the  low  ideals — was  tins  alle  bandigt,  das  Gemeine!

That  Schopenhauer  conceives  life  as  an  evil  is  a
deduction,  and  possibly  a  mistaken  deduction,  from  his
metaphysical  theory.  Whether  his  scheme  of  things  is
correct  or  not — and  it  shares  the  common  fate  of  all
metaphysical  systems  in  being  unverifiable,  and  to  that
extent  unprofitable — he  will  in  the  last  resort  have  made
good  his  claim  to  be  read  by  his  insight  into  the  varied
needs  of  human  life.  It  may  be  that  a  future  age  will
consign  his  metaphysics  to  the  philosophical  lumber-room;
but  he  is  a  literary  artist  as  well  as  a  philosopher,  and  he
can  make  a  bid  for  fame  in  either  capacity.  T.  B.  S.


CONTENTS,


THE  WISDOM   OF  LIFE.

PASS

Introduction 1

I.  Division  of  the  Subject » 2

II.  Personality,  or  What  a  Man  Is 10

III.  Property,  or  What  a  Man  Has 33

IV.  Position,  or  a  Man's  Place  in  the  Estimation  of  Others —

Sect.  1 .  Reputation , 40

"    2.  Pride 46

"    3.  Rank 49

44    4.  Honor 50

"    5.  Fame 78


COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

Introduction 95

I.  General  Rules 96

II.  Our  Relation  to  Ourselves 106

III.  Our  Relation  to  Others 141

IV.  Worldly  Fortune 168

V.  The  Ages  of  Life 180


RELIGION  AND   OTHER  ESSAYS.

Religion.  A  Dialogue v .«»***  ...•••  20?

A  Few  Words  on  Pantheism ,t.„ 240

On  Books  and  Reading e - . . .  ° . .  •  •  245


xxiv  CONTENTS.

PAGE.

On  Physiognomy 250

Psychological  Observations. 258

The  Christian  System 268

The  Failure  of  Philosophy 277

The  Metaphysics  of  Fine  Art 279


THE  ART  OF  LITERATURE.

On  Authorship 291

On  Style 298

On  the  Study  of  Latin 313

On  Men  of  Learning 31 6

On  Thinking  for  One's  Self 321

On  Some  Forms  of  Literature. 330

On  Criticism « 337

On  Reputation 347

On  Genius 363


STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

On  the  Sufferings  of  the  World 381

On  the  Vanity  of  Existence , 394

On  Suicide , 399

Immortality:  A  Dialogue 404

Further  Psychological  Observations , 408

On  Education 427

On  Women 434

On  Noise 447

A  Few  Parable < •  « 452


THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.


INTRODUCTION.

Ik  these  pages  I  shallspeak  of  "The  Wisdom  of  Life"  in
the  common  meaning  of  the  term,  as  the  art,  namely,  of
ordering  our  lives  so  as  to  obtain  the  greatest  possible
amotmt  of  pleasure  and  success  ;  an  art  the  theory  of
which  may  be  called  Eudcemonology ,  for  it  teaches  us  how
to  lead  a  happy  existence.  Such  an  existence  might  per-
haps be  defined  as  one  which,  looked  at  from  a  purely
objective  point  of  view,  or,  rather,  after  cool  and  mature
reflection — for  the  question  necessarily  involves  subjective
considerations — would  be  decidedly  preferable  to  non-
existence  ;  implying  that  we  should  cling  to  it  for  its  cwa
sake,  and  not  merely  from  the  fear  of  death  ;  and  further,
that  we  should  never  like  it  to  come  to  an  end.

Now  whether  human  life  corresponds,  or  could  possibly
correspond,  to  this  conception  of  existence,  is  a  question  to
which,  as  is  well-known,  my  philosophical  system  returns
a  negative  answer.  On  the  eudsemonistic  hypothesis,  how-
ever, the  question  must  be  answered  in  the  affirmative  ;
and  I  have  shown,  in  the  second  volume  of  my  chief  work
(ch.  49),  that  this  hypothesis  is  based  upon  a  fundamental
mistake.  Accordingly,  in  elaborating  the  scheme  of  a
happy  existence,  I  have  had  to  make  a  complete  surrender
of  the  higher  metaphysical  and  ethical  standpoint  to  which
my  own  theories  lead  ;  and  everything  I  shall  say  here  will
to  some  extent  rest  upon  a  compromise  ;  in  so  far,  that  is,
as  I  take  the  common  standpoint  of  every  day,  and
embrace  the  error  which  is  at  the  bottom  of  it.  My
remarks,  therefore,  will  possess  only  a  qualified  value,  foi
the  very  word  eudcemonology  is  a  euphemism,  Further,  I
make  no  claims  to  completeness  ;  partly  because  the  sub-
ject is  inexhaustibie,  and  partly  because  I  shouH  otherwise


2  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

have   to  say  over  again   what  has  been  already  said   by
others.

The  only  book  composed,  as  far  as  I  remember,  with  a
like  purpose  to  that  which  animates  this  collection  of
aphorisms,  is  Cardan's  De  utilitate  ex  adversis  capiendo,,
which  is  well  worth  reading,  and  may  be  used  to  supple-
ment the  present  work.  Aristotle,  it  is  true,  has  a  few
words  on  eudsemonology  in  the  fifth  chapter  of  the  first
book  of  his  "  Rhetoric  ;"  but  what  he  says  does  not  come  to
very  much.  As  compilation  is  not  my  business,  I  have
made  no  use  of  these  predecessors ;  more  especially
because  in  the  process  of  compiling  individuality  of  view
is  lost,  and  individuality  of  view  is  the  kernel  of  works  of
this  kind.  In  general,  indeed,  the  wise  in  all  ages  have
always  said  the  same  thing,  and  the  fools,  who  at  all  times
form  the  immense  majority,  have  in  their  way  too  acted
alike,  and  done  just  the  opposite  ;  and  so  it  will  continue.
For,  as  Voltaire  says,  "  we  shall  leave  this  world  as  foolish
and  as  wicked  as  we  found  it  on  our  arrival."


CHAPTER  I.

DIVISION  OF  THE  SUBJECT.

Aristotle*  divides  the  blessings  of  life  into  three  clas-
ses— those  which  come  to  us  from  without,  those  of  the  soul,
and  those  of  the  body.  Keeping  nothing  of  this  division
but  the  number,  I  observe  that  the  fundamental  differ-
ences in  human  lot  may  be  reduced  to  three  distinct
classes  :

(1)  What  a  man  is :  that  is  to  say,  personality,  in  the
widest  sense  of  the  word :  under  which  are  included
health,  strength,  beauty,  temperament,  moral  character,
intelligence  and  education.

(2)  What  a  man  has  :  that  is,  property  and  possessions
of  every  kind.

(3)  How  a  man  stands  in  the  estimation  of  others :  by
which  is  to  be  understood,  as  everybody  knows,  what  a  man
is  in  the  eyes  of  his  fellow-men,  or,  more  strictly,  the  light
in  which  chey  regard  him.   This  is  shown  by  their  opinion

*  "Eth.  Nicbora."  I.  a


DIVISION  OF  THE  SUBJECT.  3

of  him  ;  and  their  opinion  is  in  its  turn  manifested  by  the
honor  in  which  he  is  held,  and  by  his  rank  and  reputation.
The  differences  which  come  under  the  first  head  are
those  which  Nature  herself  has  set  between  man  and
man  ;  and  from  this  fact  alone  wre  may  at  once  infer  that
they  influence  the  happiness  or  unhappiness  of  mankind  in
a  much  more  vital  and  radical  way  than  those  contained
under  the  two  following  heads,  which  are  merely  the  effect
of  human  arrangements.  Compared  with  genuine  per-
sonal advantages,  such  as  a  great  mind  or  a  great  heart,
all  the  privileges  of  rank  or  birth,  even  of  royal  birth,  are
but  as  kings  on  the  stage  to  kings  in  real  life.  The  same
thing  was  said  long  ago  by  Metrodorus,  the  earliest  dis-
ciple of  Epicurus,  who  wrote  as  the  title  of  one  of  his
chapters,  "  The  happiness  wre  receive  from  ourselves  is
greater  than  that  which  we  obtain  from  our  surroundings."*
And  it  is  an  obvious  fact,  which  cannot  be  called  in  question,
that  the  principal  element  in  a  man's  well-being — indeed,
in  the  whole  tenor  of  his  existence — is  what  he  is  made
of,  his  inner  constitution.  For  this  is  the  immediate
eource  of  that  inward  satisfaction  or  dissatisfaction  re-
sulting from  the  sum  total  of  his  sensations,  desires  and
thoughts  ;  while  his  surroundings, on  the  other  hand,  exert
only  a  mediate  or  indirect  influence  upon  him.  This  is
why  the  same  external  events  or  circumstances  affect  no
two  people  alike  ;  even  with  perfectly  similar  surround-
ings every  one  lives  in  a  wTorld  of  his  own.  For  a  man  has
immediate  apprehension  only  of  his  owTn  ideas,  feelings
and  volitions  ;  the  outer  world  can  influence  him  only  in
so  far  as  it  brings  these  to  life.  The  world  in  which  a
man  lives  shapes  itself  chiefly  by  the  way  in  which  he
looks  at  h%  and  so  it  proves  different  to  different  men  ;  to
one  it  is  barren,  dull,  and  superficial ;  to  another  rich,
interesting,  and  full  of  meaning.  On  hearing  of  the
interesting  events  which  have  happened  in  the  course  of  a
man's  experience,  many  people  will  wish  that  similar
things  had  happened  in  their  lives  too,  completely  forget-
ting that  they  should  be  envious  rather  of  the  mental
aptitude  which  lent  those  events  the  significance  they
possess  when  he  describes  them  ;  to  a  man  of  genius  they
were  interesting   adventures  ;  but   to  the  dull   perceptions

*  Cf.  Clemens  Alex,  Strom,  II.,  21.


ft  THW  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

of  an  ordinary  individual  they  would  have  been  stale,
everyday  occurrences.  This  is  in  the  highest  degree  tha
case  with  many  of  Goethe's  and  Byron's  poems,  which  are
obviously  founded  upon  actual  facts  ;  where  it  is  open  to  a
foolish  reader  to  envy  the  poet  because  so  many  delightful
things  happened  to  him,  instead  of  envying  that  mighty
power  of  phantasy  which  was  capable  of  turning  a  fairly
common,  experience  into  something  so  great  and  beautiful.
In  the  same  way,  a  person  of  melancholy  temperament
will  make  a  scene  in  a  tragedy  out  of  what  appears  to  the
sanguine  man  only  in  the  light  of  an  interesting  conflict,
and  to  a  phlegmatic  soul  as  something  without  any  mean-
ing— all  of  which  rests  upon  the  fact  that  every  event,  in
order  to  be  realized  and  appreciated,  requires  the  co-opera-
tion of  two  factors  :  namely,  a  subject  and  an  object ;
although  these  are  as  closely  and  necessarily  connected  as
oxygen  and  hydrogen  in  water.  When  therefore  the  objective
or  external  factor  in  an  experience  is  actually  the  same,  but
the  subjective  or  personal  appreciation  of  it  varies,  the
event  is  just  as  much  a  different  one  in  the  eyes  of  different
persons  as  if  the  objective  factors  had  not  been  alike  ;  for
to  a  blunt  intelligence  the  fairest  and  best  object  in  the
world  presents  only  a  poor  reality,  and  is  therefore  only
poorly  appreciated — like  a  fine  landscape  in  dull  weather,
or  in  the  reflection  of  a  bad  camera  obscura.  In  plain
language,  every  man  is  pent  up  within  the  limits  of  his
own  consciousness,  and  cannot  directly  get  beyond  those
limits  any  more  than  he  can  get  beyond  his  own  skin  ;  so
external  aid  is  not  of  much  use  to  him  On  the  stage,  one
man  is  a  prince,  another  a  minister,  a  third  a  servant  or  a
soldier  or  a  general,  and  so  on — mere  external  differences  •
the  inner  reality,  the  kernel  of  all  these  appearances  is  the
same — a  poor  player,  with  all  the  anxieties  of  his  lot.  In
life  it  is  just  the  same.  Differences  of  rank  and  wealth
give  every  man  his  part  to  play,  but  this  by  no  means  implies
a  difference  of  inward  happiness  and  pleasure  ;  here,  too,
there  is  the  same  being  in  all — a  poor  mortal,  with  his  hard-
ships and  troubles.  Though  these  may,  indeed,  in  every  case
proceed  from  dissimilar  causes,  they  are  in  their  essential
nature  much  the  same  m  all  their  forms,  with  degrees  of  in-
tensity which  vary,  no  doubt,  but  in  no  wise  correspond  to  the
part  a  man  has  to  play,  to  the  presence  or  absence  of  position
and  wealth.     Since  everything  which  exists  or  happens  for


DIVISION  OF  THE  SUBJECT.  5

a  man  exists  only  in  his  consciousness  and  happens  for  it
alone,  the  most  essential  thing  for  a  man  is  the  constitu-
tion of  this  consciousness,  which  is  in  most  cases  far  more
important  than  the  circumstances  which  go  to  form  its
contents.  All  the  pride  and  pleasure  of  the  world,
mirrored  in  the  dull  consciousness  of  a  fool,  is  poor  indeed
compared  with  the  imagination  of  Cervantes  writing  hip
"Don  Quixote"  in  a  miserable  prison.  The  objective  half  of
life  and  reality  is  in  the  hand  of  fate,  and  accordingly
takes  various  forms  in  different  cases  :  the  subjective  half
is  ourself,  and  in  essentials  it  always  remains  the  same.

Hence  the  life  of  every  man  is  stamped  with  the  same
character  throughout,  however  much  his  external  circum-
stances may  alter ;  it  is  like  a  series  of  variations  on  s
single  theme.  No  one  can  get  beyond  his  own  individual-
ity. An  animal,  under  whatever  circumstances  it  is
placed,  remains  within  the  narrow  limits  to  which  nature
has  irrevocably  consigned  it ;  so  that  our  endeavors  to
make  a  pet  happy  must  always  keep  within  the  compass  of
its  nature,  and  be  restricted  to  what  it  can  feel.  So  it  is
with  man  ;  the  measure  of  the  happiness  he  can  attain  is
determined  beforehand  by  his  individuality.  More  espe-
cially is  this  the  case  with  the  mental  powers  which  fix
once  for  all  his  capacity  for  the  higher  kinds  of  pleasure.
If  these  powers  are  small,  no  efforts  from  without,  nothing
that  his  fellowmen  or  that  fortune  can  do  for  him,  will
suffice  to  raise  him  above  the  ordinary  degree  of  human
happiness  and  pleasure,  half  animal  though  it  be  ;  his  only
resources  are  his  sensual  appetite — a  cozy  and  cheerful
family  life  at  the  most — low  company  and  vulgar  pastime ;
even  education,  on  the  whole,  can  avail  little,  if  anything,
for  the  enlargement  of  his  horizon.  For  the  highest,
most  varied  and  lasting  pleasures  are  those  of  the  mind,
however  much  our  youth  may  deceive  us  on  this  point ;  and
the  pleasures  of  the  mind  turned  chiefly  on  the  powers  of
the  mind.  It  is  clear,  then,  that  our  happiness  depends  in
a  great  degree  upon  what  we  are,  upon  our  individuality,
while  lot  or  destiny  is  generally  taken  to  mean  only  what
we  have,  or  our  reputation.  Our  lot  in  this  sense,  may
improve  ;  but  we  do  not  ask  much  of  \t  if  we  are  inwardly
rich  :  on  the  other  hand,  a  fool  remains  a  fool,  a  dull
blockhead,  to  his  last  hour,  even  though  he  were  sur-
rounded bv  hourisin  paradise,     This  is  why  Goethe*  in  the


ft  TETE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE

West-ostlicher  Divan,  says  that  eyery  man,  whether  h*
occupy  a  low  position  in  life,  or  emerges  as  its  victor,
testifies  to  personality  as  the  greatest  factor  in  happiness  :

"  Volk  und  Kneclit  und  Ueberwinder
Sie  gestehen,  zu  jeder  Zeit,
Hochstes  Gliick  der  Erdenkinder
Sei  nur  die  Personlichkeit."

Everything  confirms  the  fact  that  the  subjective  element
in  life  is  incomparably  more  important  for  our  happiness
and  pleasure  than  the  objective,  from  such  sayings  as
''Hunger  is  the  best  sauce/7  and  "Youth  and  age  cannot  live
together,"  up  to  the  life  of  the  genius  and  the  saint.
Health  outweighs  all  other  blessings  so  much  that  one  may
really  say  that  a  healthy  beggar  is  happier  than  an  ailing
king.  A  quiet  and  cheerful  temperament,  happy  in  the
enjoyment  of  a  perfectly  sound  physique,  an  intellect
clear,  lively,  penetrating  and  seeing  things  as  they  are,  a
moderate  and  gentle  will,  and  therefore  a  good  conscience
— these  are  privileges  which  no  rank  or  wealth  can  make
up  for  or  replace.  For  what  a  man  is  in  himself,  what
accompanies  him  when  he  is  alone,  what  no  one  can  give
or  take  away,  is  obviously  more  essential  to  him  than
everything  he  has  in  the  way  of  possessions,  or  even  what
he  may  be  in  the  eyes  of  the  world.  An  intellectual  man
in  complete  solitude  has  excellent  entertainment  in  his  own
thoughts  and  fancies,  while  no  amount  or  diversity  of
social  pleasure,  theaters,  excursions  and  amusements,  can
ward  off  boredom  from  a  dullard.  A  good,  temperate,
gentle  character  can  be  happy  in  needy  circumstances,
while  a  covetous,  envious  and  malicious  man,  even  if  he
be  the  richest  in  the  world,  goes  miserable.  Nay  more ;
to  one  who  has  the  constant  delight  of  a  special  individ-
uality, with  a  high  degree  of  intellect,  most  of  the
pleasures  which  are  run  after  by  mankind  are  perfectly
superfluous  ;  they  are  even  a  trouble  and  a  burden.  And
so  Horace  says  of  himself,  that,  however  many  are  deprived
of  the  fancy  goods  of  life,  there  is  one  at  least  who  can
live  without  them  :

"  Gemmas,  marmor,  ebur,  Tyrrbena  sigilla,  tabellas,
Argentum,  vestes  Gaetulo  rnurice  tinctas
Sunt  qui  non  habeant,  est  qui  Don  curat  habere;  *


DIVISION  OF  ThS  SUBJECT.  7

ana  when  Socrates  saw  various  articles  of  luxury  spread
out  for  sale,  he  exclaimed  :  "How  much  there  is  in  the
world  that  I  do  not  want."

So  the  first  and  most  essential  element  in  our  life's
happiness  is  what  we  are,  our  personality,  if  for  no  other
reason  than  that  it  is  a  constant  factor  coming  into  play
under  all  circumstances;  besides,  unlike  the  blessings
which  are  described  under  the  other  two  neads,  it  is  not
the  sport  of  destiny  and  cannot  be  wrested  from  us  ,  and,
so  far,  it  is  endowed  with  an  absolute  value  in  contrast  to
the  merely  relative  worth  of  the  other  two.  The  conse-
quence of  this  is  that  it  is  much  more  difficult  than  people
commonly  suppose  to  get  a  hold  on  a  man  from  without.
But  here  the  all-powerful  agent,  Time,  comes  in  and  claims
its  rights,  and  before  its  influence  physical  and  mental
advantages  gradually  waste  away.  Moral  character  alone
remains  inaccessible  to  it.  In  view  of  the  destructive
effect  of  time,  it  seems,  indeed,  as  if  the  blessings  named
under  the  other  two  heads,  of  which  time  cannot  directly
rob  us,  were  superior  to  those  of  the  first.  Another  advan-
tage might  be  claimed  for  them,  namely,  that  being  in
their  very  nature  objective  and  external,  they  are  attain-
able, and  every  one  is  presented  with  the  possibility,  at
least,  of  coming  into  possession  of  them  ;  while  what  is
subjective  is  not  open  to  us  to  acquire,  but  making  its
entry  by  a  kind  of  divine  right,it  remains  for  life,  immutable,
inalienable,  an  inexorable  doom.  Let  me  quote  those
lines  in  which  Goethe  describes  how  an  unalterable  destiny
is  assigned  to  every  man  at  the  hour  of  his  birth,  so  that
he  can  develop  only  in  the  lines  laid  down  for  him,  as  it
were,  by  the  conjunctions  of  the  stars ;  and  how  the
Sibyl  and  the  prophets  declare  that  himself  a  man  can
never  escape,  nor  any  power  of  time  avail  to  change  the
path  on  which  his  life  is  cast  :

"  Wie  an  dem  Tag,  der  dich  der  Welt  verliehen,
Die  Sonne  stand  zum  Grusse  der  Planeten,
Bist  alsobald  und  fort  und  fort  gediehen,
Nach  dem  Gesetz,  wonacli  du  angetreten.
So  musst  du  sein,  dir  kannst  du  nicht  entfliehen.
So  sagten  schon  Sibyllen  und  Propheten;
Und  keine  Zeit  und  keine  Macht  zerstiickelt
Gepragte  Form,  die  lebend  sich  entwickelt.*

The  only  thing  that  stands  in  our  power  to  achieve,  is


S  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

to  make  the  most  advantageous  use  possible  of  the  personal
qualities  we  possess,  and  accordingly  to  follow  such  pur-
suits only  as  will  call  them  into  play,  to  strive  after  the
kind  of  perfection  of  which  they  admit  and  to  avoid  every
other  ;  consequent!}',  to  choose  the  position,  occupation
and  manner  of  life  which  are  most  suitable  for  their
development.

Imagine  a  man  endowed  with  Herculean  strength  who  is
compelled  bj  circumstances  to  follow  a  sedentary  occupa-
tion, some  minute  exquisite  work  of  the  hands,  for  ex-
ample, or  to  engage  in  study  and  mental  labor  demanding
quite  other  powers,  and  just  those  which  he  has  not  got,
compelled,  that  is,  to  leave  unused  the  powers  in  which  he
is  pre-eminently  strong  ;  a  man  placed  like  this  will  never
feel  happy  all  his  life  through.  Even  more  miserable  will
be  the  lot  of  the  man  with  intellectual  powers  of  a  very
high  order,  who  has  to  lea^e  them  undeveloped  and  un-
employed, in  the  pursuit  of  a  calling  which  does  not
require  them,  some  bodily  labor,  perhaps,  for  which  his
strength  is  insufficient.  Still,  in  a  case  of  this  kind,  it
should  be  our  care,  especially  in  youth,  to  avoid  the  preci-
pice of  presumption,  and  not  ascribe  to  ourselves  a  super-
fluity of  power  which  is  not  there.

Since  the  blessings  described  under  the  first  head
decidedly  outweigh  ttiose  contained  under  the  other  two,
it  is  manifestly  a  wiser  course  to  aim  at  the  maintenance
of  our  health  and  the  cultivation  of  our  faculties,  than  at
the  amassing  of  wealth  ;  but  this  must  not  be  mistaken  as
meaning  that  we  should  neglect  to  acquire  an  adequate
supply  of  the  necessaries  of  life.  Wealth,  in  the  strict  sense
of  the  word,  that  is,  great  superfluity,  can  do  little  for  our
happiness  ;  and  many  rich  people  feel  unhappy  just  because
they  are  without  any  true  mental  culture  or  knowledge,
and  consequently  have  no  objective  interests  which  would
qualify  them  for  intellectual  occupations.  For  beyond
the  satisfaction  of  some  real  and  natural  necessities,  all
that  the  possession  of  wealth  can  achieve  has  a  very  small
influence  upon  our  happiness,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the
word  ;  indeed,  wealth  rather  disturbs  it,  because  the  preser-
vation of  property  entails  a  great  many  unavoidable
anxieties.  And  still  men  are  a  thousand  times  more
intent  on  becoming  rich  than  on  acquiring  culture,  though
it  is  quite  certain  that  what  a » man  is  contributes  much


DIVISION  OF  THE  SUBJECT,  9

more  to  his  happiness  than  what  he  has.  So  you  may  see
many  a  man,  as  industrious  as  an  ant,  ceaselessly  occupied
from  morning  to  night  in  the  endeavor  to  increase  his  heap
of  gold.  Beyond  the  narrow  horizon  of  means  to  this  end,
lie  knows  nothing  ;  his  mind  is  a  blank,  and  consequently
unsusceptible  to  any  other  influence.  The  highest  pleas-
ures, those  of  the  intellect,  are  to  him  inaccessible,  and  he
tries  in  vain  to  replace  them  by  the  fleeting  pleasures  of
sense  in  which  he  indulges,  lasting  but  a  brief  hour  and  at
tremendous  cost.  And  if  he  is  lucky,  his  struggles  result
in  his  having  a  really  great  pile  of  gold,  which  he  leaves  to
his  heir,  either  to  make  it  still  larger,  or  to  squander  it  in
extravagance.  A  life  like  this,  though  pursued  with  a
sense  of  earnestness  and  an  air  of  importance,  is  just  as
silly  as  many  another  which  has  a  fool's  cap  for  its
symbol.

What  a  man  has  in  himself  is,  then,  the  chief  element
in  his  happiness.  Because  this  is,  as  a  rule,  so  very  little,
most  of  those  who  are  placed  beyond  the  struggle  with,
penury,  feel  at  bottom  quite  as  unhappy  as  those  who  are
still  engaged  in  it.  Their  minds  are  vacant,  their  imagi-
nation dull,  their  spirits  poor,  and  so  they  are  driven  to  the
company  of  those  like  them — for  similis  simili  gaudet —
where  they  make  common  pursuit  of  pastime  and  enter-
tainment, consisting  for  the  most  part  in  sensual  pleasure,
amusement  of  every  kind,  and  finally,  in  excess  and
libertinism.  A  young  man  of  rich  family  enters  upon  life
with  a  large  patrimony,  and  often  runs  through  it  in  an
incredibly  short  space  of  time,  in  vicious  extravagance  ;
and  why  ?  Simply  because,  here  too,  the  mind  is  empty
and  void,  and  so  the  man  is  bored  with  existence.  He  was
sent  forth  into  the  world  outwardly  rich  but  inwardly
poor,  and  his  vain  endeavor  was  to  make  his  external
wealth  compensate  for  his  inner  poverty,  by  trying  to
obtain  everything  from  without,  like  an  old  man  who  seeks
to  strengthen  himself  as  King  David  or  Marechal  de  Eetz
tried  to  do.  And  so  in  the  end  one  who  is  inwardly  poor
comes  to  be  also  poor  outwardly.

I  need  not  insist  upon  the  importance  of  the  other  two
kinds  of  blessings  which  make  up  the  happiness  of  human
life  ;  nowadays  the  value  of  possessing  them  is  too  well
known  to  require  advertisement.  The  third  class,  it  is
crue,  may   seem,    compared   with   the   second,  of   a  very


10  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

ethereal  character,  as  it  consists  only  of  other  people's
opinions.  Still  every  one  lias  to  strive  for  reputation,  that
is  to  say,  a  good  name.  Rank,  on  the  other  hand,  should
be  aspired  to  only  by  those  who  serve  the  state,  and  fame
by  very  few  indeed.  In  any  case,  reputation  is  looked
upon  as  a  priceless  treasure,  and  fame  as  the  most  precious
of  all  the  blessings  a  man  can  attain — the  Golden  Fleece,
as  it  were,  of  the  elect :  while  only  fools  will  prefer  rank
to  property.  The  second  and  third  classes,  moreover,  are
reciprocally  cause  and  effect ;  so  far  that  is,  as  Petronius'
maxim,  habes  habeberis,  is  true ;  and  conversely,  the  favor
of  others,  in  all  its  forms,  often  puts  us  in  the  way  of  get-
ting what  we  want.


CHAPTER  II.

PERSONALITY,    OR  WHAT  A   MAN"    IS.

We  have  already  seen,  in  general,  that  what  a  man  is
contributes  much  more  to  his  happiness  than  what  he  has
or  how  he  is  regarded  by  others.  What  a  man  is,  and  so
what  he  has  in  his  own  person,  is  always  the  chief  thing  to
consider;  for  his  individuality  accompanies  him  always
and  everywhere,  and  gives  its  color  to  all  his  experiences.
In  every  kind  of  enjoyment  for  instance,  the  pleasure  de-
pends principally  upon  the  man  himself.  Every  one  admits
this  in  regard  to  physical,  and  how  much  truer  it  is  of  in-
tellectual pleasure.  When  we  use  that  English  expression,
"  to  enjoy  one's  self,"  we  are  employing  a  very  striking  and
appropriate  phrase;  for  observe — one  says,  not  "he  enjoys
Paris,"  but  "he  enjoys  himself  in  Paris/''  To  a  man
possessed  of  an  ill-conditioned  individuality,  all  pleasure  is
like  delicate  wine  in  a  mouth  made  bitter  with  gall.
Therefore,  in  the  blessings  as  well  as  in  the  ills  of  life,  less
depends  upon  what  befalls  us  than  upon  the  way  in  which
it  is  met,  that  is,  upon  the  kind  and  degree  of  our  general
susceptibility.  What  a  man  is  and  has  in  himself — in  a
word,  personality,  with  all  it  entails,  is  the  only  immediate
and  direct  factor  in  his  happiness  and  welfare.  All  else  is
mediate  and  indirect,  and  its  influence  can  be  neutralized
and  frustrated  ;  but  the  influence  of  personality  never.
This  is  why  the  envy  which  personal  qualities  excite  is  the


PERSONALITY,  OR  WHAT  A  MAN  18.  H

most  implacable  of  all — as  it  is  also  the  most  carefully
dissembled.

Further,  the  constitution  of  our  consciousness  is  the  ever
present  and  lasting  element  in  all  we  do  or  suffer  ;  our  in-
dividuality is  persistently  at  work,  more  or  less,  at  every
moment  of  our  life  :  all  other  influences  are  temporal,
incidental,  fleeting,  and  subject  to  every  kind  of  chance
and  change.  This  is  why  Aristotle  says  :  "  It  is  not  wealth
but  character  that  lasts."*  And  just  for  the  same  reason
we  can  more  easily  bear  a  misfortune  which  comes  to  us
entirely  from  without,  than  one  which  we  have  drawn  upon
ourselves  ;  for  fortune  may  always  change,  but  not  charac-
ter. Therefore,  subjective  blessings — a  noble  nature,  a
capable  head,  a  joyful  temperament,  bright  spirits,  a  well-
constituted,  perfectly  sound  physique,  in  a  word,  mens
sana  in  corpore  sano,  are  the  first  and  most  important  ele-
ments in  happiness  ;  so  that  we  should  be  more  intent  en
promoting  and  preserving  such  qualities  than  on  the  pos-
session of  external  wealth  and  external  honor.

And  of  all  these,  the  one  which  makes  us  the  most
directly  happy  is  a  genial  flow  of  good  spirits  ;  for  this
excellent  quality  is  its  own  immediate  reward.  The  man
who  is  cheerful  and  merry  has  always  a  good  reason  for
being  so — the  fact,  namely,  that  he  is  so.  There  is  noth-
ing which,  like  this  quality,  can  so  completely  replace  the
loss  of  every  other  blessing.  If  you  know  any  one  who  is
young,  handsome,  rich  and  esteemed,  and  you  want  to
know,  further,  if  he  is  happy,  ask,  Is  he  cheerful  and
genial  ? — and  if  he  is,  what  does  it  matter  whether  he  is
young  or  old,  straight  or  humpbacked,  poor  or  rich  ? — he
is  happy.  In  my  early  days  I  once  opened  an  old  book  and
found  these  words  :  "  If  you  laugh  a  great  deal,  you  are
happy  ;  if  you  cry  a  great  deal,  you  are  unhappy" — a  very
simple  remark,  no  doubt ;  but  just  because  it  is  so  simple
I  have  never  been  able  to  forget  it,  even  though  it  is  in  the
last  degree  a  truism.  So  if  cheerfulness  knocks  at  our
door,  we  should  throw  it  wide  open,  for  it  never  comes  in-
opportunely ;  instead  of  that,  we  often  make  scruples  about
letting  it  in.  We  want  to  be  quite  sure  that  we  have  every
reason    to  be  contented,  then  we  are  afraid  that  cheerful-

*Eth.  Eud.,  vii.  2.  37:—
tj  yap  q>v6i$  fteftviov,  ov  vd  xfiTJ/^ara,


12  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

ness  of  spirits  may  interfere  with  serious  reflections  or
weighty  cares.  Cheerfulness  is  a  .  direct  and  immediate
gain — the  very  coin,  as  it  were,  of  happines,  and  not,  like
all  else,  merely  a  check  upon  the  bank  ;  for  it  alone  makes
us  immediately  happy  in  the  present  moment,  and  that  is
the  highest  blessing  for  beings  like  us,  whose  existence  is
but  an  infinitesimal  moment  between  two  eternities.  To
s  cure  and  promote  this  feeling  of  cheerfulness  should
be  the  supreme  aim  of  all  our  endeavors  after  happiness.
Now  it  is  certain  that  nothing  contributes  so  little  to
cheerfulness  as  riches,  or  so  much,  as  health.  Is  it  not  in
the  lower  classes,  the  so-called  working  classes,  more
especially  those  of  them  who  live  in  the  country,  that  we
see  cheerful  and  contented  faces?  and  is  it  not  among
the  rich,  the  upper  classes,  that  we  find  faces  full  of  ill-
humor  and  vexation  ?  Consequently  we  should  try  as  much
as  possible  to  maintain  a  high  degree  of  health  ;  for  cheer-
fulness is  the  very  flower  of  it.  I  need  hardly  say  what
one  must  do  to  be  healthy — avoid  every  kind  of  excess,  all
violent  and  unpleasant  emotion,  all  mental  overstrain,
take  daily  exercise  in  the  open  air,  cold  baths  and  such  like
hygienic  measures.  For  without  a  proper  amount  of  daily
exercise  no  one  can  remain  healthy  ;  all  the  processes  of  life
demand  exercise  for  the  due  performance  of  their  functions,
exercise  not  only  of  the  parts  more  immediately  concerned,
but  also  of  the  whole  body.  For,  as  Aristotle  rightly
says,  "Life  is  movement ;"  it  is  its  very  essence.  Cease-
less and  rapid  motiongoes  on  in  everypart  of  the  organism.
The  heart,  with  its  complicated  double  systole  and  diastole,
beats  strongly  and  untiringly  ;  with  twenty-eight  beats  it
has  to  drive  the  whole  of  the  blood  through  arteries,  veins
and  capillaries  ;  the  lungs  pump  like  a  steam-engine,  with-
out intermission  ;  the  intestines  are  always  in  peristaltic
action  ;  the  glands  are  all  constantly  absorbing  and  secret-
ing ;  even  the  brain  has  a  double  motion  of  its  own,  with
every  beat  of  the  pulse  and  every  breath  we  draw.  When
people  can  get  no  exercise  at  all,  as  is  the  case  with  the
countless  numbers  who  are  condemned  to  a  sedentary
life,  there  is  a  glaring  and  fatal  disproportion  between  out-
ward inactivity  and  inner  tumult.  For  this  ceaseless  in-
ternal motion  requires  some  external  counterpart,  and  the
want  of  it  produces  effects  like  those  of  emotion  whieh  we
are  obliged  to  suppress.     Even  trees  must  be  shaken  by


PERSONALITY,  OR  WtiAT  A  MAN  18.  l£

the  wind,  if  they  are  to  thrive.  The  rule  which  finds
its  application  here  may  be  most  briefly  expressed  in  Latin ;
omnis  motus,  quo  celerior,  eo  magis  motus.

How  much  our  happiness  depends  upon  our  spirits,  and
these  again  upon  our  state  of  health,  may  be  seen  by  com-
paring the  influence  which  the  same  external  circumstances
or  events  have  upon  us  when  we  are  well  and  strong  with
the  effect  which  they  have  when  we  are  depressed  and
troubled  with  ill-health.  It  is  not  what  things  are
objectively  and  in  themselves,  but  what  they  are  for  us,  in
our  way  of  looking  at  them,  that  makes  us  happy  or  the
reverse.  As  Epictetus  says,  "  Men  are  not  influenced  by
things  but  by  their  thoughts  about  things."  And,  in  gen-
eral, nine-tenths  of  our  happiness  depends  upon  health
alone.  With  health,  everything  is  a  source  of  pleasure  ;
without  it,  nothing  else,  whatever  it  may  be,  is  enjoyable  ;
even  the  other  personal  blessings — a  great  mind,  a  happy
temperament — are  degraded  and  dwarfed  for  want  of  it.
So  it  is  really  with  good  reason  that,  when  two  people
meet,  the  first  thing  they  do  is  to  inquire  after  each  other's
health,  and  to  express  the  hope  that  it  is  good  ;  for  good
health  is  by  far  the  most  important  element  in  human
happiness.  It  follows  from  all  this  that  the  greatest  of
follies  is  to  sacrifice  health  for  any  other  kind  of  happiness,
whatever  it  may  be,  for  gain,  advancement,  learning  or
fame,  let  alone,  then,  for  fleeting  sensual  pleasures.
Everything  else  should  rather  be  postponed  to  it.

But  however  much  health  may  contribute  to  that  flow  of
good  spirits  which  is  so  essential  to  our  happiness,  good
spirits  do  not  entirely  depend  upon  health  ;  for  a  man  may
be  perfectly  sound  in  his  physique  and  still  possess  a
melancholy  temperament  and  be  generally  given  up  to  sad
thoughts.  The  ultimate  cause  of  this  is  undoubtedly  to  be
found  in  innate,  and  therefore  unalterable,  physical  con-
stitution, especially  in  the  more  or  less  normal  relation
of  a  man's  sensitiveness  to  his  muscular  and  vital  energy.
Abnormal  sensitiveness  produces  inequality  of  spirits,  a
predominating  melancholy,  with  periodical  fits  of  unre-
strained liveliness.  A  genius  is  one  whose  nervous  power
or  sensitiveness  is  largely  in  excess  ;  as  Aristotle*  has  very
correctly   observed,  "  Men   distinguished     in   philosophy,

*  Probl.  xxx.  ep.  1


H  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

politics,  poetry  or  art,  appear  to  be  all  of  a  melancholy
temperament."  This  is  doubtless  the  passage  which  Cicero
lias  in  his  mind  when  lie  says,  as  he  often  does,  "Aristoteles
ait  omnes  ingemosos  melancholicos  esse/'*  Shakespeare  has
very  neatly  expressed  this  radical  and  innate  diversity  ci
temperament  in  those  lines  in  "The  Merchant  of  Venice  :"

"  Nature  has  framed  strange  fellows  in  her  time ;
Some  that  will  evermore  peep  through  their  eyes
And  laugh,  like  parrots  at  a  bag-piper  ;
And  others  of  such  vinegar  aspect,
That  they'll  not  show  their  teeth  in  way  of  smile,
Though  Nestor  swear  the  jest  be  laughable. "f

This  is  the  difference  which  Plato  draws  between
evxoXoS  and  SvtixoXos — the  man  of  easy,  and  the  man  of
difficult  disposition — in  proof  of  which  he  refers  to  the
varying  degrees  of  susceptibility  which  different  people
show  to  pleasurable  and  painful  impressions  ;  so  that  one
man  will  laugh  at  what  makes  another  despair.  As  a  rule,
the  stronger  the  susceptibility  to  unpleasant  impressions,
the  weaker  is  the  susceptibility  to  pleasant  ones,  and  vice
versa.  If  it  is  equally  possible  for  an  event  to  turn  out
well  or  ill,  the  6v6xoA.os  will  be  annoyed  or  grieved  if  the
issue  is  unfavorable,  and  will  not  rejoice,  should  it  be
happy.  On  the  other  hand,  the  evxo^oi,  will  neither  worry
nor  fret  over  an  unfavorable  issue,  but  rejoice  if  it  turns
out  well.  If  the  one  is  successful  in  nine  out  of  ten
undertakings,  he  will  not  be  pleased,  but  rather  anno}Ted
that  one  has  miscarried  ;  while  the  other,  if  only  a  single
one  succeeds,  will  manage  to  find  consolation  in  the  fact
and  remain  cheerful.  But  here  is  another  instance  of  the
truth,  that  hardly  any  evil  is  entirely  without  its  compen-
sation ;  for  the  misfortunes  and  sufferings  which  the
8v6xo\oi,  that  is,  people  of  gloomy  and  anxious  character,
have  to  overcome,  are,  on  the  whole,  more  imaginary  and
therefore  less  real  than  those  which  befall  the  gay  and
careless ;  for  a  man  who  paints  everything  black,  who
constantly  fears  the  worst  and  takes  measures  accordingly,
will  not  be  disappointed  so  often  in  this  world,  as  one  who
always  looks  upon  the  bright  side  of  things.  And  when  a
morbid  affection  of  the  nerves,   or  a  derangement  of   the

*  Tusc.  i.f  32,


PERSONALITY,  OR  WHAT  A  MAN  IS.  15

digestive  organs,  plays  into  the  hand  of  an  innate  tendency
to  gloom,  this  tendency  may  reach  such  a  height  that
permanent  discomfort  produces  a  weariness  of  life.  So
arises  an  inclination  to  suicide,  which  even  the  most
trivial  unpleasantness  may  actually  bring  about  ;  nay,
when  the  tendency  attains  its  worst  form,  it  may  be
occasioned  by  nothing  in  particular,  but  a  man  may  resolve
to  put  an  end  to  his  existence,  simply  because  he  is  per-
manently unhappy,  and  then  coolly  and  firmly  carry  out
his  determination  ;  as  may  be  seen  by  the  way  in  which
the  sufferer,  when  placed  under  supervision,  as  he  usually
is,  eagerly  waits  to  seize  the  first  unguarded  moment,
when,  without  a  shudder,  without  a  struggle  or  recoil,  he
may  use  the  now  natural  and  welcome  means  of  effect-
ing his  release.*  Even  the  healthiest,  perhaps  even  the
most  cheerful  man,  may  resolve  upon  death  under  certain
circumstances;  when,  for  instance,  his  sufferings,  or  his
fears  of  some  inevitable  misfortune,  reach  such  a  pitch  as
to  outweigh  the  terrors  of  death.  The  only  difference  lies
in  the  degree  of  suffering  necessary  to  bring  about  the
fatal  act,  a  degree  which  will  be  high  in  the  case  of  a
cheerful,  and  low  in  that  of  a  gloomy  man.  The  greater
the  melancholy,  the  lower  need  the  degree  be  :  in  the  end,
it  may  even  sink  to  zero.  But  if  a  man  is  cheerful,  and
his  spirits  are  supported  by  good  health,  it  requires  a
high  degree  of  suffering  to  make  him  lay  hands  upon
himself.  There  are  countless  steps  in  the  scale  between
the  two  extremes  of  suicide,  the  suicide  which  springs
merely  from  a  morbid  intensification  of  innate  gloom,  and
the  suicide  of  the  healthy  and  cheerful  man,  who  has
entirely  objective  grounds  for  putting  an  end  to  his
existence.

Beauty  is  partly  an  affair  of  health.  It  may  be
reckoned  as  a  personal  advantage  ;  though  it  does  not,
properly  speaking,  contribute  directly  to  our  happiness.
It  does  so  indirectly,  by  impressing  other  people  ;  and  it  is
no  unimportant  advantage,  even  in  man.  Beauty  is  an
open  letter  of  recommendation,  predisposing  the  heart  to
favor  the  person  who  presents  it.  As  is  well  said  in  those
lines  of  Homer,  the   gift  of  beauty  is  not  lightly  to    be

*  For  a  detailed  description  of  this  condition  of  mind  cf.  Esquirol
Pes  maladies  mentaleg.


16  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

thrown  away,  that  glorious  gift  which  none  can   bestow
save  the  gods  alone —

ovroi  anofSXrjT^  l6rl  0£g3V  epiuvdia  8 (Spa,

066a  H8V  avrol  8gj6iv,  shgjv  8'ovk  av  nS  eXoiro.*

The  most  general  survey  shows  us  that  the  two  foes  oi
human  happiness  are  pain  and  -boredom.  We  may  go
further,  and  say  that  in  the  degree  in  which  we  are  fortu-
nate enough  to  get  away  from  the  one,  we  approach  the
other.  Life  presents,  in  fact,  a  more  or  less  violent  oscil-
lation between  the  two.  The  reason  of  this  is  that  each  of
these  two  poles  stands  in  a  double  antagonism  to  the  other,
external  or  objective,  and  inner  or  subjective.  Needy  sur-
roundings and  poverty  produce  pain  ;  while,  if  a  man  is
more  than  well  off,  he  is  bored.  Accordingly,  while  the
lower  classes  are  engaged  in  a  ceaseless  struggle  with  need,
in  other  words,  with  pain,  the  upper  carry  on  a  constant
and  often  desperate  battle  with  boredom,  f  The  inner  or
subjective  antagonism  arises  from  the  fact  that,  in  the
individual,  susceptibility  to  pain  varies  inversely  with  sus-
ceptibility to  boredom,  because  susceptibility  is  directly
proportionate  to  mental  power.  Let  me  explain.  A  dull
mind  is,  as  a  rule  associated  with  dull  sensibilities,  nerves
which  no  stimulus  can  affect,  a  temperament,  in  short,
which  does  not  feel  pain  or  anxiety  very  much,  however
great  or  terrible  it  may  be.  Now,  intellectual  dullness  is
at  the  bottom  of  that  vacuity  of  soul  which  is  stamped  on
so  many  faces,  a  state  of  mind  which  betrays  itself  by  a
constant  and  lively  attention  to  all  the  trivial  circumstances
in  the  external  world.  This  is  the  true  source  of  boredom
— a  continual  panting  after  excitement,  in  order  to  have  a
pretext  for  giving  the  mind  and  spirits  something  to  occupy
them.  The  kind  of  things  people  choose  for  this  purpose
shows  that  they  are  not  very  particular,  as  witness  the
miserable  pastimes  they  have  recourse  to,  and  their  ideas
of  social  pleasure  and  conversation  ;  or,  again,  the  number
of  people   who   gossip  on  the   doorstep  or  gape  out  of  the

*"  Iliad  "3,  65.

+  And  the  extremes  meet  ;  for  the  lowest  state  of  civilization,
a  nomad  or  wandering  life,  finds  its  counterpart  in  the  highest,
where  every  one  is  at  times  a  tourist.  The  earlier  stage  was  a  case  oi
necessity  ;  the  latter  is  a  remedy  for  boredom.


PERSONALITY,  OR  WHAT  A  MAN  18.  I?

window.  It  is  mainly  because  of  this  inner  vacuity  of
soul  that  people  go  in  quest  of  society,  diversion,  amuse-
ment, luxury  of  every  sort,  which  lead  many  to  extrava-
gance and  misery.  Nothing  is  so  good  a  protection
against  such  misery  as  inward  wealth,  the  wealth  of  the
mind,  because  the  greater  it  grows,  the  less  room  it  leaves
for  boredom.  The  inexhaustible  activity  of  thought  !
finding  ever  new  material  to  work  upon  in  the  multifarious
phenomena  of  self  and  nature,  and  able  and  ready  to  form
new  combinations  of  them — there  you  have  something
that  invigorates  the  mind,  and  apart  from  moments  of
relaxation,  sets  it  far  above  the  reach  of  boredom.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  this  high  degree  of  intelligence
is  rooted  in  a  high  degree  of  susceptibility,  greater  strength
of  will,  greater  passionateness ;  and  from  the  union  of
these  qualities  comes  an  increased  capacity  for  emotion,  an
enhanced  sensibility  to  all  mental  and  even  bodily  pain,
greater  impatience  of  obstacles,  greater  resentment  of  in-
terruption— all  of  which  tendencies  are  augmented  by  the
power  of  the  imagination,  the  vivid  character  of  the  whole
range  of  thought,  including  what  is  disagreeable.  This
applies,  in  varying  degrees,  to  every  step  in  the  long  scale
of  mental  power,  from  the  veriest  dunce  to  the  greatest
genius  that  ever  lived.  Therefore  the  nearer  any  one  is,
either  from  a  subjective  or  from  an  objective  point  of  view,
to  one  of  these  sources  of  suffering  in  human  life,  the
farther  he  is  from  the  other.  And  so  a  man's  natural
bent  will  lead  him  to  make  his  objective  world  conform  to
his  subjective  as  much  as  possible ;  that  is  to  say,  he  will
take  the  greatest  measures  against  that  form  of  suffering
to  which  he  is  most  liable.  The  wise  man  will,  above  all,
strive  after  freedom  from  pain  and  annoyance,  quiet  and
leisure,  consequently  a  tranquil,  modest  life,  with  as  few
encounters  as  may  be  ;  and  so,  after  a  little  experience  of
his  so-called  fellow-men,  he  will  elect  to  live  in  retirement,
or  even,  if  he  is  a  man  of  great  intellect,  in  solitude.  For
the  more  a  man  has  in  himself,  the  less  he  will  want  from
other  people,  the  less,  indeed,  other  people  can  be  to  him.
This  is  why  a  high  degree  of  intellect  tends  to  make  a
man  unsocial.  True,  it'  quality  of  intellect  could  be  made
up  for  by  quantity,  it  might  be  worth  while  to  live  even  in
the  great  world  ;  but,  unfortunately,  a  hundred  fools
together  will  not  make  one  wise  man.


18  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

But  the  individual  who  stands  at,  the  other  end  of  the
scale  is  no  sooner  free  from  the  pangs  of  need  than  he  en-
deavors to  get  pastime  and  society  at  any  cost,  taking  up
with  the  first  person  he  meets,  and  avoiding  nothing  so
much  as  himself.  For  in  solitude,  where  every  one  is
thrown  upon  his  own  resources,  what  a  man  has  in  him-
self comes  to  light;  the  fool  in  fine  raiment  groans  under
the  burden  of  his  miserable  personality,  a  burden  which  he
can  never  throw  off,  while  the  man  of  talent  peoples  the
waste  places  with  his  animating  thoughts.  Seneca  de-
clares that  folly  is  its  own  burden — omnis  stultitia  labor  at
fastidio  sui—&  very  true  saying,  with  which  may  be  com-
pared the  words  of  Jesus,  the  son  of  Sirach,  "  The  life  of  a
fool  is  worse  than  death/'*  And,  as  a  rule,  it  will  be  found
that  a  man  is  sociable  just  in  the  degree  in  which  he  is  in-
tellectually poor  and  generally  vulgar.  For  one's  choice
in  this  world  does  not  go  much  beyond  solitude  on  one
side  and  vulgarity  on  the  other.  It  is  said  that  the  most
sociable  of  all  people  are  the  negroes;  and  they  are  at  the
bottom  of  the  scale  in  intellect.  I  remember  reading
once  in  a  French  paperf  that  the  blacks  in  North  America,
whether  free  or  unslaved,  are  fond  of  shutting  themselves
up  in  large  numbers  in  the  smallest  space,  because  they
cannot  have  too  much  of  one  another's  snub-nosed
company.

The  brain  may  be  regarded  as  a  kind  of  parasite  of  the
organism,  a  pensioner,  as  it  were,  who  dwells  with  the
body:  and  leisure,  that  is,  the  time  one  has  for  the  free
enjoyment  of  one's  consciousness  or  individuality,  is  the
fruit  or  produce  of  the  rest  of  existence^  which  is  in
general  only  labor  and  effort.  But  what  does  most
people's  leisure  yield? — boredom  and  dullness;  except  of
course,  when  it  is  occupied  with  sensual  pleasure  or  folly.
How  little  such  leisure  is  worth  may  be  seen  in  the  way  in
which  it  is  spent:  and,  as  Ariosto  observes,  how  miserable
are  the  idle  hours  of  ignorant  men! — ozio  hmgo  d'uomini
ignoranti.  Ordinary  people  think  merely  how  they  shall
spend  their  time;  a  man  of  any  talent  tries  to  use  it.  The
reason  why  people  of  limited  intellect  are  apt  to  be  bored
is  that  their  intellect  is  absolutely  nothing   more  than  the

*Ecclesiasticus,  xxii.  11.      \Le  Commerce,  Oct.  19tli,  1837-


PERSONALITY,  OR  WHAT  A  MAN  18.  19

means  by  which  the  motive  power  of  the  will  is  put  into
force:  and  whenever  there  is  nothing  particular  to  set  the
will  in  motion,  it  rests,  and  their  intellect  takes  a  holiday,
because,  equally  with  the  will,  it  requires  something  ex-
ternal to  bring  it  into  play.  The  result  is  an  awful
stagnation  of  whatever  power  a  man  has — in  a  word,
boredom.  To  counteract  this  miserable  feeling,  men  run
to  trivialities  which  please  for  the  moment  they  are  taken
up,  hoping  thus  to  engage  the  will  in  order  to  rouse  it  to
action,  and  so  set  the  intellect  in  motion;  for  it  is  the
latter  which  has  to  give  effect  to  these  motives  of  the  will.
Compared  with  real  and  natural  motives,  these  are  but  as
paper  money  to  coin;  for  their  value  is  only  arbitrary —
card  games  and  the  like,  which  have  been  invented  for
this  very  purpose.  And  if  there  is  nothing  else  to  be  done,
a  man  will  twirl  his  thumbs  or  beat  the  devil's  tattoo;  or
a  cigar  may  be  a  welcome  substitute  for  exercising  his
brains.  Hence,  in  all  countries  the  chief  occupation  of
society  is  card-playing,*  and  it  is  the  gauge  of  its  value,
and  an  outward  sign  that  it  is  bankrupt  in  thought.
Because  people  have  no  thoughts  to  deal  in,  they  deat
cards,  and  try  and  win  one  another's  money.  Idiots!  But
I  do  not  wish  to  be  unjust;  so  let  me  remark  that  it  mav
certainly  be  said  in  defense  of  card-playing  that  it  is  a
preparation  for  the  world  and  for  business  life,  because
one  learns  thereby  how  to  make  a  clever  use  of  fortuitous
but  unalterable  circumstances  (cards,  in  this  case),  and
to  get  as  much  out  of  them  as  one  can:  and  to  do  this  a
man  must  learn  a  little  dissimulation,  and  how  to  put  a
good  face  upon  a  bad  business.  But,  on  the  other  hand,
it  is  exactly  for  this  reason  that  card-playing  is  so  demoral-
izing, since  the  whole  object  of  it  is  to  employ  every  kind
of  trick  and  machination  in  order  to  win  what  belongs  to
another.  And  a  habit  of  this  sort,  learned  at  the  card-table,
strikes  root  and  pushes  its  way  into  practical  life;  and  in
the  affairs  of  every  day  a  man  gradually  comes  to  regard
meum  and  tuum  in  much  the  same  light  as  cards,  and  to
consider    that    he    may    use    to    the    utmost     whatever

translator's  Note. — Card-playing  to  this  extent  is  now,  no  doubts
a  thing  of  the  past,  at  any  rate  among  the  nations  of  northern
Europe.  The  present  fashion  is  rather  in  favor  of  a  dilettante  in-
terest in  art  or  literature.


20  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFBK

advantages  he  possesses,  so  long  as  he  does  not  come  with-
in the  arm  of  the  law.  Examples  of  what  I  mean  are  of
daily  occurrence  in  mercantile  life.  Since,  then,  leisure  is
the  flower,  or  rather  the  fruit,  of  existence,  as  it  puts  a
man  into  possession  of  himself,  those  are  happy  indeed
who  possess  something  real  in  themselves.  But  what  do
you  get  from  most  people's  leisure? — only  a  good-for-
nothing  fellow,  who  is  terribly  bored  and  a  burden  to  him-
self. Let  us,  therefore,  rejoice,  dear  brethren,  for  "we  are
not  children  of  the  bondwoman,  but  of  the  free."

Further,  as  no  laud  is  so  well  off  as  that  which  requires
few  imports,  or  none  at  all,  so  the  happiest  man  is  one  who
has  enough  in  his  own  inner  wealth,  and  requires  little  or
nothing  from  outside  for  his  maintenance,  for  imports  are
expensive  things,  reveal  dependence,  entail  danger,  occa-
sion trouble,  and,  when  all  is  said  and  done,  are  a  poor  sub-
stitute for  home  produce.  No  man  ought  to  expect  much
from  others,  or,  in  general,  from  the  external  world.  What
one  human  being  can  be  to  another  is  not  a  very  great
deal  :  in  the  end  every  one  stands  alone,  and  the  important
thing  is  who  it  is  that  stands  alone.  Here,  then,  is
another  application  of  the  general  truth  which  Goethe
recognizes  in  "  Dichtungund  Wahrheit  "  (Bk.  III.), that  in
everything  a  man  has  ultimately  to  appeal  to  himself  ;  or,
as  Goldsmith  puts  it  in  "  The  Traveller  :"

"  Still  to  ourselves  in  every  place  consign'd
Our  own  felicity  we  make  or  find."

Himself  is  the  source  of  the  best  and  most  a  man  can  be
or  achieve.  The  more  this  is  so — the  more  a  man  finds  his
sources  of  pleasure  in  himself — the  happier  he  will  be.
Therefore,  it  is  with  great  truth  that  Aristotle*  says,  '-To
be  happy  means  to  be' self-sufficient."  For  all  other  sources
of  happiness  are  in  their  nature  most  uncertain,  precarious,
fleeting,  the  sport  of  chance  ;  and  so  even  under  the  most
favorable  circumstances  they  can  easily  be  exhausted  ;  nay,
this  is  unavoidable,  because  they  are  not  always  within
reach,  And  in  old  age  these  sources  of  happiness  must
necessttrilv  dry  up  :  love  leaves  us  then,  and  wit,  desire  to
travel,  delight  in  horses,  aptitude  for    social   intercourse;

*  Eth.  Eud.,  viL  2.


PERSONALITY,  OR  WHAT  A  MAN  IS.  21

friends  and  relations,  too,  are  taken  from  us  by  death.
Then  more  than  ever,  it  depends  upon  what  a  man  has  in
himself  ;  for  this  will  stick  to  him  longest  and  at  any  period
of  life  it  is  the  only  genuine  and  lasting  source  of  happi-
ness. There  is  not  much  to  be  got  anywhere  in  the
world.  It  is  filled  with  misery  and  pain  ;  and  if  a  man
escapes  these,  boredom  lies  in  wait  for  him  at  every  corner.
Nay  more  ;  it  is  evil  which  generally  has  the  upper  hand,
and  folly  makes  the  most  noise.  Fate  is  cruel,  and  man-
kind pitiable.  In  such  a  world  as  this,  a  man  who  is  rich
in  himself  is  like  a  bright,  warm,  happy  room  at  Christmas-
tide,  while  without  are  the  frost  and  snow  of  a  December
night.  Therefore,  without  doubt,  the  happiest  destiny  on
earth  is  to  have  the  rare  gift  of  a  rich  individuality,  and,
more  especially,  to  be  possessed  of  a  good  endowment  of
intellect ;  this  is  the  happiest  destiny,  though  it  may  not  be,
after  all,  a  very  brilliant  one.  There  was  great  wisdom  in
that  remark  which  Queen  Christina  of  Sweden  made,  in  her
nineteenth  year,  about  Descartes,  who  had  then  lived  for
twenty  years  in  the  deepest  solitude  in  Holland,  and,  apart
from  report,  was  known  to  her  only  by  a  single  essay  :  "  M.
Descartes,"  she  said,  "is  the  happiest  of  men,  and  his  con-
dition seems  to  me  much  to  be  envied."5"  Of  course,  as  was
the  case  with  Descartes,  external  circumstances  must  be
favorable  enough  to  allow  a  man  to  be  master  of  his  life
and  happiness  ;  or,  as  we  read  in  Ecclesiastesf — "  Wisdom
is  good  together  with  an  inheritance,  and  profitable  unto
them  that  see  the  sun."  The  man  to  whom  nature  and  f;ite
have  granted  the  blessing  of  wisdom,  will  be  most  anxious
and  careful  to  keep  open  the  fountains  of  happiness  which
he  has  in  himself  ;  and  for  this,  independence  and  leisure
are  necessary.  To  obtain  them,  he  will  be  willing  to
moderate  his  desire*  and  harbor  his  resources,  all  the  more
because  he  is  not,  like  others,  restricted  to  the  external
world  for  his  pleasures.  So  he  will  not  be  misled  by  expec-
tations of  office,  or  money,  or  the  favor  and  applause  of
his  fellow-men,  into  surrendering  himself  in  order  to  con-
form to  low  desires  and  vulgar  tastes  ;  nay,  in  such  a  case
he  will  follow  the  advice  that  Horace  gives  in  his  epistle

*  "Vie  de  Descartes/'  par  Baillet.     Liv.  vii.,  ch.  10.
f  vii.  12.


22  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

to  Maecenas.*  It  is  a  great  piece  of  folly  to  sacrifice  the
inner  for  the  outer  man,  to  give  the  whole  or  the  greater
part  of  one's  quiet  leisure  and  independence  for  splendor,
rank,  pomp,  titles  and  honor.  This  is  what  Goethe  did.
My  good  luck  drew  me  quite  in  the  other  direction.

The  truth  which  I  am  insisting  upon  here,  the  truth,
namely,  that  the  chief  source  of  human  happiness  is  in-
ternal, is  confirmed  by  that  most  accurate  observation  of
Aristotle  in  the  "  Xichomchen  Ethics, "f  that  every  pleasure
presupposes  some  sort  of  activity,  the  application  of  some
sort  of  power,  without  which  it  cannot  exist.  The  doctrine
of  Aristotle's,  that  a  man's  happiness  consists  in  the  free
exercise  of  his  highest  faculties,  is  also  enunciated  by
Stobaeus  in  his  exposition  of  the  Peripatetic  philoso-
phy :|  "happiness,"  he  says,  ''means  vigorous  and  success-
ful activity  in  all  your  undertakings;"  and  he  explains  that
by  vigour  {dpezrf)  he  means  mastery  in  any  thing,  whatever
it  be.  Now,  the  original  purpose  of  those  forces  with  which
nature  has  endowed  man  is  to  enable  him  to  struggle  against
the  difficulties  which  beset  him  on  all  sides.  But  if  this
struggle  comes  to  an  end,  his  unemployed  forces  become
a  burden  to  him  ;  and  he  has  to  set  to  work  and  play  with
them — use  them,  I  mean,  for  no  purpose  at  all,  beyond
avoiding  the  other  source  of  human  suffering,  boredom,  to
which  he  is  at  once  exposed.  It  is  the  upper  classes,  people
of  wealth,  who  are  the  greatest  victims  of  boredom.
Lucretius  long  ago  described  their  miserable  state,  and
the  truth  of  his  description  may  be  still  recognized  to-day,
in  the  life  of  every  great  capital — where  the  rich  man  is
seldom  in  his  own  halls,  because  it  bores  him  to  be  there-
and  still  he  returns  thither  because  he  is  no  better  off  out-
side— or  else  he  is  away  in  post-haste  to  his  house  in  the
country,  as  if  it  were  on  fire  ;  and  he  is  no  sooner  arrived
there,  than  he  is  bored  again,  and  seeks  to  forget  every-
thing in  sleep,  or  else  hurries  back  to  town  once  more.

"  Exit  saepe  foras  inagnis  ex  aedibus  ille,
Esse  doini  quern  pertaesum  est,  subitoque  reventat ;
Quippe  foris  nihilo  melius  qui  sentiat  esse.

*  Lib.  1.,  ep.  7,
Nee  somnuui  plebis  laudo,  satur  altilium,  nee
Otia  divitiis  Arabum  liborrima  muto.

f  i.  7  and  vii.  13,  14.  %  Eel.  eth.  ii.,  ch.  7,


PERSONALITY,  OR  WHAT  A  MAS  IS.  23

Currit,  agens  mannos,  ad  villain  precipitanter,
Auxiliuni  tectis  quasi  ferre  ardentibus  instans  :
Oscitat  exteinplo,  tetigit  quuin  limina  villae  ;
Aut  abit  in  somnuin  gravis,  atque  oblivia  quaerit  ;
Aut  etiam  properans  urbem  petit  atque  revisit."  *

In  their  youth,  such  people  must  have  had  a  superfluity
of  muscular  and  vital  energy — powers  which  unlike  those
of  the  mind,  cannot  maintain  their  full  degree  of  vigor
very  long;  and  in  later  years  they  either  have  no  mental
powers  at  all,  or  cannot  develop  any  for  want  of  employ-
ment which  would  bring  them  into  play;  so  that  they  are
in  a  wretched  plight.  Will,  however,  they  still  possess,
for  this  is  the  only  power  that  is  inexhaustible;  and  they
try  to  stimulate  their  will  by  passionate  excitement,  such  as
games  of  chance  for  high  stakes — undoubtedly  a  most  de-
grading form  of  vice.  And  one  may  say  generally  that  if
a  man  finds  himself  with  nothing  to  do,  he  is  sure  to  choose
some  amusement  suited  to  the  kind  of  power  in  which  he
excels — bowls,  it  may  be,  or  chess;  hunting  or  painting;
horse-racing  or  music;  cards,  or  poetry, heraldry, philosophy,
or  some  other  dilettante  interest.  We  might  classify  these
interests  methodically,  by  reducing  them  to  expressions  of
the  three  fundamental  powers,  the  factors,  that  is  to  say,
which  go  to  make  up  the  physiological  constitution  of  man;
and  further,  by  considering  these  powers  by  themselves,
and  apart  from  any  of  the  definite  aims  which  they  may  sub-
serve, and  simply  as  affording  three  sources  of  possible
pleasure,  out  of  which  every  man  will  choose  what  suits  him,
according  as  he  excels  in  one  direction  or  another.

First  of  all  come  the  pleasures  of  vital  energy,  of  food,
drink,  digestion,  rest  and  sleep;  and  there  are  parts  of  the
world  where  it  can  be  said  that  these  are  characteristic  and
national  pleasures.  Secondly,  there  are  the  pleasures  of
muscular  energy,  such  as  walking,  running,  wrestling,
dancing,  fencing,  riding  and  similar  athletic  pursuits,
which  sometimes  take  the  form  of  sport,  and  sometimes  of
a  military  life,  and  real  warfare.  Thirdly,  there  are  the
pleasures  of  sensibility,  such  as  observation,  thought,  feel-
ing, or  a  taste  ror  poetry  or  culture,  music,  learning,  reading,
meditation,  invention,  philosophy  and  the  like.  As  regards
the  value,  relative  worth  and  duration  of  each  of  these
kinds  of  pleasure,  a  great  deal  might  be  said,  which,  how-

*  111.  1073


24  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

ever,  I  leave  the  reader  to  supply.  But  every  one  will  see
that  the  nobler  the  power  which  is  brought  into  play,  the
greater  will  be  the  pleasure  which  it  gives;  for  pleasure  al-
ways involves  the  use  of  one's  own  powers,  and  happiness
consists  in  a  frequent  repetition  of  pleasure.  No  one  will
deny  that  in  this  respect  the  pleasures  of  sensibility  occupy
a  higher  place  than  either  of  the  other  two  fundamental
kinds;  which  exist  in  an  equal,  nay,  in  a  greater  degree  in
brutes;  it  is  his  preponderating  amount  of  sensibility  which
distinguishes  man  from  other  animals.  Now,  our  mental
powers  are  forms  of  sensibility,  and  tnerefore  a  preponder-
ating amount  of  it  makes  us  capable  of  that  kind  of  pleasure
which  has  to  do  with  mind,  so-called  intellectual  pleasure;
and  the  more  sensibility  predominates,  the  greater  the
pleasure  will  be.  *

*Xature  exhibits  a  continual  progress,  starting  from  the  mechanical
and  chemical  activity  of  the  inorganic  world,  proceeding  to  the  vege-
table, with  its  dull  enjoyment  of  self,  from  that  to  the  animal  world,
where  intelligence  and  consciousness  begin,  at  first  very  weak,  and
only  after  many  intermediate  stages  attainiug  its  last  great  develop-
ment in  man,  whose  intellect  is  Nature's  crowning  point;  the  goal  of
all  her  efforts,  the  most  perfect  and  difficult  of  all  her  works.  And
even  within  the  range  of  the  human  intellect,  there  are  a  great  many
observable  differences  of  degree,  and  it  is  very  seldom  that  intellect
reaches  its  highest  point,  intelligence  properly  so-called,  which  in
this  narrow  and  strict  sense  of  the  word,  is  nature's  most  consummate
product,  and  so  the  rarest  and  most  precious  thing  of  which  the
world  can  boast.  The  highest  product  of  Nature  is  the  clearest
degree  of  consciousness,  in  which  the  world  mirrors  itself  more  plain-
ly and  completely  than  anywhere  else.  A  man  endowed  with  this
form  of  intelligence  is  in  possession  of  what  is  noblest  and  best  on
earth;  and  accordingly,  he  has  a  source  of  pleasure  in  comparison
with  which  all  others  are  small.  From  his  surroundings  he  asks
nothing  but  leisure  for  the  free  enjoyment  of  what  he  has  got,  time,
as  it  were,  to  polish  his  diamond.  All  other  pleasures  that  are  not
of  the  intellect  are  of  a  lower  kind;  for  they  are,  one  and  all,  move-
ments of  will — desires,  hopes,  fears  and  ambitions,  no  matter  to  what
directed:  they  are  always  satisfied  at  the  cost  of  pain,  and  in  the  case
of  ambition,  generally  with  more  or  less  of  illusion.  With  intel-
lectual pleasure,  on  the  other  hand,  truth  becomes  clearer  and  clearer.
In  the  realm  of  intelligence  pain  has  no  power.  Knowledge  is  all  in
all.  Further,  intellectual  pleasures  are  accessible  entirely  and  only
through  the  medium  of  the  intelligence  and  are  limited  by  its  capacity.
For  all  the  wit  there  is  in  the  world  is  useless  to  him  who  has  none.
Still  this  advantage  is  accompanied  by  a  substantial  disadvantage;  for
the  whole  of  Nature  shows  that  with  the  growth  of  intelligence
comes  increased  capacity  for  pain,  and  it  is  only  with  the  highest  de-
gree of  intelligence  that  suffering  reaches  its  supreme  point.


PERSONALITY,  OR  WHAT  A  MAN  IS.  25

The  normal,  ordinary  man  takes  a  vivid  interest  in  any-
thing only  in  so  far  as  it  excites  his  will,  that  is  to  say,  is
a  matter  of  personal  interest  to  him.  But  constant  excite-
ment of  the  will  is  never  an  unmixed  good,  to  say  the  least;
in  other  words,  it  involves  pain.  Card-playing,  that  uni-
versal occupation  of  ''good  society"  everywhere,  is  a  device
for  providing  this  kind  of  excitement,  and  that,  too,  by
means  of  interests  so  small  as  to  produce  slightand  momen-
tary, instead  of  real  and  permanent,  pain.  Card-playing
is,  in  fact,  a  mere  tickling  of  the  will.*

On  the  other  hand,  a  man  of  powerful  intellect  is  capable
of  taking  a  vivid  interest  in  things  in  the  way  of  mere
knowledge,  with  no  admixture  of  will;  nay,  such  an  interest
is  a  necessity  to  him.  It  places  him  in  a  sphere  where  pain
is  an  alien,  a  diviner  air  where  the  gods  live  serene:

Qeol  pela  £,&)ovteS.\

Look  on  these  two  pictures — the  life  of  the  masses,  one
long,  dull  record  of  struggle  and  effort  entirely  devoted  to
the  petty  interests  of  personal  welfare,  to  misery  in  all  its
forms,  a  life  beset  by  intolerable  boredom  as  soon  as  ever
those  aims  are  satisfied  and  the  man  is  thrown  back  upon
himself,  whence  he  can  be  roused  again  to  some  sort  of  move-
ment only  by  the  wild  fire  of  passion.     On  the  other  side  you

*  Vulgarity  is,  at  bottom,  the  kind  of  consciousness  in  which  the
will  completely  predominates  over  the  intellect,  where  the  latter  does
nothing  more  than  perform  the  service  of  its  master,  the  will.  There-
fore, when  the  will  makes  no  demands,  supplies  no  motives,  strong
or  weak,  the  intellect  entirely  loses  its  power,  and  the  result  is  com-
plete vacancy  of  mind.  Now  will  without  intellect  is  the  most  vul-
gar and  common  thing  in  the  world,  possessed  by  every  blockhead,
who,  in  the  gratification  of  his  passions,  shows  the  stuff  of  which  he
is  made.  This  is  the  condition  of  mind  called  vulgarity,  in  which
the  only  active  elements  are  the  organs  of  sense,  and  that  small
amount  of  intellect  which  is  necessary  for  apprehending  the  data  of
sense.  Accordingly,  the  vulgar  man  is  constantly  open  to  all  sorts
of  impressions,  and  immediately  perceives  all  the  little  trifling  things
that  go  on  in  his  environment:  the  lightest  whisper,  the  most  trivial
circumstance,  is  sufficient  to  rouse  his  attention;  he  is  just  like  an
animal.  Such  a  man's  mental  condition  reveals  itself  in  his  face,  ia
his  whole  exterior;  and  hence  that  vulgar,  repulsive  appearance,
which  is  all  the  more  offensive,  if  as  is  usually  the  case,  his  will—
the  only  factor  in  his  consciousness — is  a  base,  selfish  and  altogether
bad  one.

\  Odyssey  IV.,  805.


26  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

have  a  man  endowed  with  a  high  degree  of  mental  power,
leading  an  existence  rich  in  thought  and  full  of  life  and
meaning,  occupied  by  worthy  and  interesting  objects  as
soon  as  ever  he  is  free  to  give  himself  to  them,  bearing  in
himself  a  source  of  the  noblest  pleasure.  What  external
promptings  he  wants  come  from  the  works  of  nature,  and
from  the  contemplation  of  human  affairs  and  the  achieve-
ments of  the  great  of  all  ages  and  countries,  which  are
thoroughly  appreciated  by  a  man  of  this  type  alone,  as
being  the  only  one  who  can  quite  understand  and  feel  with
them.  And  so  it  is  for  him  alone  that  those  great  ones
have  really  lived  ;  it  is  to  him  that  they  make  their  appeal ;
the  rest  are  but  casual  hearers  who  only  half  understand
either  them  or  their  followers.  Of  course,  this  character-
istic of  the  intellectual  man  implies  that  he  has  one  more
need  than  the  others,  the  need  of  reading,  observing,
studying,  meditating,  practicing,  the  need,  in  short,  of  un-
disturbed leisure.  For,  as  Voltaire  has  very  rightly  said,
"  there  are  no  real  pleasures  without  real  needs  ;"  and  the
need  of  them  is  why  to  such  a  man  pleasures  are  accessible
which  are  denied  to  others — the  varied  beauties  of  nature
and  art  and  literature.  To  heap  these  round  people  who
do  not  want  them  and  cannot  appreciate  them,  is  like  ex-
pecting gray  hairs  to  fall  in  love.  A  man  who  is  privi-
leged in  this  respect  leads  two  lives,  a  personal  and  ar_
intellectual  life  ;  and  the  latter  gradually  comes  to  be
looked  upon  as  the  true  one,  and  the  former  as  merely  a
means  to  it.  Other  people  make  this  shallow,  empty  and
troubled  existence  an  end  in  itself.  To  the  life  of  the  in-
tellect such  a  man  will  give  the  preference  over  all  his
other  occupations  :  by  the  constant  growth  of  insight  and
knowledge,  this  intellectual  life,  like  a  slowly-forming
work  of  art,  will  acquire  a  consistency,  a  permanent  inten-
sity, a  unity  which  becomes  ever  more  and  more  complete  ;
compared  with  which  a  life  devoted  to  the  attainment  of
personal  comfort,  a  life  that  may  broaden  indeed,  but  can
never  be  deepened,  makes  but  a  poor  show  :  and  yet,  as  I
have  said,  people  make  this  baser  sort  of  existence  an  end
in  itself.

The  ordinary  life  of  every  day,  so  far  as  it  is  not  moved
by  passion,  is  tedious  and  insipid  ;  and  if  it  is  so  moved,
it  soon  becomes  painful.  Those  alone  are  happy  whom
nature  has  favored  with  some  superfluity  of  intellect,  some-


PERSONALITY,  OR  WHAT  A  MAN  IS,  tf

thing  beyond  what  is  just  ne3essary  to  carry  out  the  be-
hests of  their  will  ;  for  it  enables  them  to  lead  an  intellect-
ual life  as  well,  a  life  unattended  by  pain  and  full  of  vivid
interests.  Mere  leisure,  that  is  to  say,  intellect  unoccu-
pied in  the  service  of  the  will,  is  not  of  itself  sufficient :
there  must  be  a  real  superfluity  of  power,  set  free  from  the
service  of  the  will  and  devoted  to  that  of  the  intellect ;  for,
as  Seneca  says,  ctium  sine  litter  is  mors  est  et  vivi  hominis
sepultura — illiterate  leisure  is  a  form  of  death,  a  living
tomb.  Varying  with  the  amount  of  the  superfluity,  there
will  be  countless  developments  in  this  second  life,  the  life
of  the  mind  ;  it  may  be  the  mere  collection  and  labeling
of  insects,  birds,  minerals,  coins,  or  the  highest  achieve-
ments of  poetry  and  philosophy.  The  life  of  the  mind  is
not  only  a  protection,  against  boredom,  it  also  wards  olf  the
pernicious  effects  of  boredom  ;  it  keeps  us  from  bad  com-
pany, from  the  many  dangers,  misfortunes,  losses  and
extravagances  which  the  man  who  places  his  happiness
entirely  in  the  objective  world  is  sure  to  encounter.  My
philosophy,  for  instance,  has  never  brought  me  in  a  six-
pence ;  but  it  has  spared  me  many  an  expense.

The  ordinary  man  places  his  life's  happiness  in  things
external  to  him,  in  property,  rank,  wife  and  children,
friends,  society,  and  the  like,  so  that  when  he  loses  them
or  finds  them  disappointing,  the  foundation  of  his  happi-
ness is  destroyed.  In  other  words,  his  center  of  gravity  is
not  in  himself  ;  it  is  constantly  changing  its  place,  with
every  wish  and  whim.  If  he  is  a  man  of  means,  one  day  it
will  be  his  house  in  the  country,  another  buying  horses,
or  entertaining  friends,  or  traveling — a  life,  in  short,  of
general  luxury,  the  reason  being  that  he  seeks  his  pleasure
in  things  outside  him.  Like  one  whose  health  and  strength
are  gone,  he  tries  to  regain  by  the  use  of  jellies  and  drugs,
instead  of  by  developing  his  own  vital  power,  the  true'
source  of  what  he  has  lost.  Before  proceeding  to  the  oppo-
site, let  us  compare  with  this  .common  type  the  man  who
comes  midway  between  the  two,  endowed,  it  may  be,  not
exactly  with  distinguished  powers  of  mind,  but  with  some-
what more  than  the  ordinary  amount  of  intellect.  He  will
take  a  dilettante  interest  in  art,  or  devote  his  attention  to
some  branch  of  science — botany,  for  example,  or  physics,
astronomy,  history,  and  find  a  great  deal  of  pleasure  in
such  studies,  and  amuse  himself  with  them  wrhen  external


28  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

sources  of  happiness  are  exhausted  or  fail  to  satisfy  him
any  more.  Of  a  man  like  this  it  may  be  said  that  hfs  cen-
ter of  gravity  is  partly  in  himself.  But  a  dilettante  inter-
est in  art  is  a  very  different  thing  from  creative  activity ;
and  an  amateur  pursuit  of  science  is  apt  to  be  superficial
and  not  to  penetrate  to  the  heart  of  the  matter.  A  man
cannot  entirely  identify  himself  with  such  pursuits,  or
have  his  whole  existence  so  completely  rilled  and  permeated
with  them  that  he  loses  all  interest  in  everything  else.  It
is  only  the  highest  intellectual  power,  what  we  call  genius,
that  attains  to  this  degree  of  intensity,  making  all  time
and  existence  its  theme,  and  striving  to  express  its  peculiar
conception  of  the  world,  whether  it  contemplates  life  as
the  subject  of  poetry  or  of  philosophy.  Hence,  undis-
turbed occupation  with  himself,  his  own  thoughts  and
works,  is  a  matter  of  urgent  necessity  to  such  a  man  ;  soli-
tude is  welcome,  leisure  is  the  highest  good,  and  every-
thing else  is  unnecessary,  nay,  even  burdensome.

{This  is  the  only  type  of  man  of  whom  it  can  be  said  that
his  center  of  gravity  is  entirely  in  himself  ;  which  explains
why  it  is  that  people  of  this  sort — and  they  are  very  rare —
no  matter  how  excellent  their  character  may  be,  do  not
show  that  warm  and  unlimited  interest  in  friends,  family,
and  the  community  in  general,  of  which  others  are  so  often
capable  ;  for  if  they  have  only  themselves  they  are  not  in-
consolable for  the  loss  of  everything  else.  This  gives  an
isolation  to  their  character,  which  is  all  the  more  effective
since  other  people  never  really  quite  satisfy  them,  as  being,
on  the  whole,  of  a  different  nature  :  nay  more,  since  this
difference  is  constantly  forcing  itself  upon  their  notice,
they  get  accustomed  to  move  about  among  mankind  as
alieu  beings,  and  in  thinking  of  humanity  in  general,  to
say  they  instead  of  ive.

So  the  conclusion  we  come  to  is  that  the  man  whom
nature  has  endowed  with  intellectual  wealth  is  the  hap-
piest ;  so  true  it  is  that  the  subjective  concerns  us  more
than  the  objective  ;  for  whatever  the  latter  may  be,  it  can
work  only  indirectly,  secondarily,  and  through  the  medium
of  the  former — a  truth  finely  expressed  by  Lucian  :

nXovroS  6  zr}$  tyvxyS  ithovroS  juovoS  edrlv  (xAtjQtjS
TaXXa  8}£X£i  cczijv  7t\siova  tobv  kteccvgdv  *

*  Epigramroata,  12,


PERSONALITY.  OR  WHAT  A  MAN  IS.  29

—the  wealth  of  the  soul  is  the  only  true  wealth,  for  with
all  other  riches  comes  a  bane  even  greater  than  they.  The
mau  of  inner  wealth  wants  nothing  from  outside  but  the
negative  gift  of  undisturbed  leisure,  to  develop  and  mature
his  intellectual  faculties,  that  is,  to  enjoy  his  wealth  ;  in
short,  he  wants  permission  to  be  himself,  his  whole  life
long,  every  day  and  every  hour.  If  he  is  destined  to  impress
the  character  of  his  mind  upon  the  whole  race,  he  has  only
3iie  measure  of  happiness  or  unhappiness — to  succeed  or
fail  in  perfecting  his  powers  and  completing  his  work.
All  else  is  of  small  consequence.  Accordingly  the  greatest
minds  of  all  ages  have  set  the  highest  value  upon  undis-
turbed leisure,  as  worth,  exactly  as  much  as  the  man
himself.  "  Happiuess  appears  to  consist  in  leisure,"  says
Aristotle  ;*  and  Diogenes  Laertius  reports  that  "  Socrates
praised  leisure  as  the  fairest  of  all  possessions."  So,  in  the
"  Nichornachean  Ethics/'  Aristotle  concludes  that  a  life
devoted  to  philosophy  is  the  happiest  ;  or,  as  he  says  in
the  "  Politics/'*!  "  the  free  exercise  of  any  power,  whatever
it  may  be,  is  happiness/"  This,  again,  tallies  with  what
Goethe  says  in"  Wilhelm  Meister:  "  "  the  man  who  is  born
with  a  talent  which  he  is  meant  to  use,  finds  his  greatest
happiness  in  using  it/'

But  to  be  in  possession  of  undisturbed  leisure,  is  far
from  being  the  common  lot  ;  nay,  it  is  something  alien  to
human  nature,  for  the  ordinary  man's  destiny  is  to  spend
life  in  procuring  what  is  necessary  for  the  subsistence  of
himself  and  his  family  ;  he  is  a  son  of  struggle  and  need,
not  a  free  intelligence.  So  people  as  a  rule  soon  get  tired
of  undisturbed  leisure,  and  it  becomes  burdensome  if  there
are  no  fictitious  and  forced  aims  to  occupy  it,  play,  pas-
time and  hobbies  of  every  kind.  For  this  very  reason  it  is
full  of  possible  danger,  and  difficilis  in  otio  quies  is  a  true
saying — it  is  difficult  to  keep  quiet  if  you  have  nothing  to
do.  On  the  other  hand,  a  measure  of  intellect  far  surpass-
ing the  ordinary,  is  as  unnatural  as  it  is  abnormal.  But
if  it  exists,  and  the  man  endowed  with  it  is  to  be  happy,
he  will  want  precisely  that  undisturbed  leisure  which  the
others  find  burdensome  or  pernicious  ;  for  without  it  he  is
a  Pegasus  in  harness,  and  consequently  unhappy.  If  these
two     unnatural    circumstances,    external     and     internal,

*  Eth.  Niclioiii.  x.  *  f  iv.  11.


30  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

undisturbed  leisure  and  great  intellect,  happen  to  coincide
in  the  same  person,  it  is  a  great  piece  of  fortune  ;  and  if
fate  is  so  far  favorable,  a  man  can  lead  the  higher  life,  the
life  protected  from  the  two  opposite  sources  of  human
suffering,  pain  and  boredom,  from  the  painful  struggle  for
existence,  and  the  incapacity  for  enduring  leisure  (which
is  free  existence  itself)  evils  which  may  be  escaped  only
by  being  mutually  neutralized.

But  there  is  something  to  be  said  in  opposition  to  this
view.  Great  intellectual  gifts  mean  an  activity  pre-
eminently nervous  in  its  character,  and  consequently  a
very  high  degree  of  susceptibility  to  pain  in  every  form.
Further,  such  gifts  imply  an  intense  temperament,  larger
and  more  vivid  ideas,  which,  as  the  inseparable  accom-
paniment of  great  intellectual  power,  entail  on  its  pos-
sessor a  corresponding  intensity  of  the  emotions,  making
them  incomparably  more  violent  than  those  to  which  the
ordinary  man  is  a  prey.  Now,  there  are  more  things  in
the  world  productive  of  pain  than  of  pleasure.  Again,  a
large  endowment  of  intellect  tends  to  estrange  the  man
who  has  it  from  other  people  and  their  doings  ;  for  the
more  a  man  has  in  himself,  the  less  he  will  be  able  to  find
in  them  ;  and  the  hundred  things  in  which  they  take
delight,  he  will  think  shallow  and  insipid.  Here,  then,
perhaps,  is  another  instance  of  that  law  of  compensation
which  makes  itself  felt  everywhere.  How  often  one
hears  it  said,  and  said,  too,  with  some  plausibility,  that
the  narrow-minded  man  is  at  bottom  the  happiest,
even  though  his  fortune  is  unenviable.  I  shall  make  no
attempt  to  forestall  the  reader's  own  judgment  on  this
point  ;  more  especially  as  Sophocles  himself  has  given
utterance  to  two  diametrically  opposite  opinions  :

IIoXXg)  to  (ppoveiv  svdaijuoviaS


He  says  in  one  place — wisdom  is  the  greatest  part  of  happi-
ness ;  and  again,  in  another  passage,  he  declares  that  the
life  of  the  thoughtless  is  the  most  pleasant  of  all:

}Ev  ry  cppovEiv  yap  jutjSZv  tjSio'to's  /3io$.\
*  Antigone,  1347-8.  \  Ajax,  554


PERSONALITY,  OR  WHAT  A  MAN  18.  31

The  philosophers  of  the  Old  Testament  find  themselves
in  a  like  contradiction.

"  The  life  of  a  fool  is  worse  than  death  "  *

and —

"  In  much  wisdom  is  much  grief  ;
And  he  that  increaseth  knowledge  mcreaseth  sorrow."

I  may  remark,  however,  that  a  man  who  has  no  mental
needs,  because  his  intellect  is  of  the  narrow  and  normal
amount,  is,  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word,  what  is  called
a  philistine — an  expression  at  first  peculiar  to  the  German
language,  a  kind  of  slang  term  at  the  universities,  after-
ward used,  by  analogy,  in  a  higher  sense,  though  still  in  its
original  meaning,  as  denoting  one  who  is  not  a  "  Son  of  the
Muses."  A  philistine  is  and  remains  ajuov6oi  avrjft.  I  should
prefer  to  take  a  higher  point  of  view,  and  apply  the  term
philistine  to  people  who  are  always  seriously  occupied  with
realities  which  are  no  realities ;  but  as  such  a  definition
would  be  a  transcendental  one,  and  therefore  not  generally
intelligible,  it  would  hardly  be  in  place  in  the  present
treatise,  which  aims  at  being  popular.  The  other  defini-
tion can  be  more  easily  elucidated,  indicating,  as  it  does,
satisfactorily  enough,  the  essential  nature  of  all  those
qualities  which  disti;iguish  the  philistine.  He  is  defined
to  be  "  a  man  without  mental  needs."  From  this  it  follows,
firstly,  in  relation  to  himself,  that  he  has  no  intellectual
pleasures  ;  for,  as  was  remarked  before,  there  are  no  real
pleasures  without  real  needs.  The  philistine's  life  is
animated  by  no  desire  to  gain  knowledge  and  insight  for
their  own  sake,  or  to  experience  that  true  aesthetic  pleasure
which  is  so  nearly  akin  to  them.  If  pleasures  of  this  kind
are  fashionable,  and  the  philistine  finds  himself  compelled
to  pay  attention  to  them,  he  will  force  himself  to  do  so,
but  he  will  take  as  little  interest  in  them  as  possible.
His  only  real  pleasures  are  of  a  sensual  kind,  and  he  thinks
that  these  indemnify  him  for  the  loss  of  the  others.
To  him  oysters  and  champagne  are  the  height  of  exist-
ence ;  the  aim  of  his  life  is  to  procure  what  will  contribute
to  his  bodily  welfare,  and  he  is  indeed  in  a  happy  way  ii

*  Ecclesiasticus,  xxii.  11.  +  Ecclesiastes,  i.  18.


32  THE  WISDOM  OF  LTFE.

this  causes  him  some  trouble.  If  the  luxuries  of  life  are
heaped  upon  him,  he  will  inevitably  be  bored,  and  against
boredom  he  has  a  great  many  fancied  remedies,  balls,
theaters,  parties,  cards,  gambling,  horses,  women,  drinking,
traveling  and  so  on  ;  all  of  which  cannot  protect  a  man
'from  being  bored,  for  where  there  are  no  intellectual
needs,  no  intellectual  pleasures  are  possible.  The  peculiar
characteristic  of  the  philistine  is  a  dull,  dry  kind  of  gravity,
akin  to  that  of  animals.  Nothing  really  pleases,  qrexcites,
or  interests  him,  for  sensual  pleasure  is  quickly  exhausted,
and  the  society  of  philistines  soon  becomes  burdensome,
and  one  may  even  get  tired  of  playing  cards.  True,  the
pleasures  of  vanity  are  left,  pleasures  which  he  enjoys  in
his  own  way,  either  by  feeling  himself  superior  in  point  of
wealth,  or  rank,  or  influence  and  power  to  other  people,
who  thereupon  pay  him  honor  ;  or  at  any  rate,  by  going
about  with  those  who  have  a  superfluity  of  these  blessings,
sunning  himself  in  the  reflection  of  their  splendor — what
the  English  call  a  snob.

From  the  essential  nature  of  the  philistine  it  follows,
secondly,  in  regard  to  others,  that,  as  he  possesses  no  in-
tellectual, but  only  physical  needs,  he  will  seek  the  society
of  those  who  can  satisfy  the  latter,  but  not  the
former.  The  last  thing  he  will  expect  from  his  friends  is
the  possession  of  any  sort  of  intellectual  capacity  :  nay,  if
he  chances  to  meet  with  it,  it  will  rouse  his  antipathy  and
even  hatred  ;  simply  because  in  addition  to  an  unpleasant
sense  of  inferiority,  he  experiences,  in  his  heart,  a  dull
kind  of  envy,  which  has  to  be  carefully  concealed  even
from  himself.  Nevertheless,  it  sometimes  grows  into  a
secret  feeling  of  rancor.  But  for  all  that,  it  will  never
occur  to  him  to  make  his  own  ideas  of  worth  or  value  con-
form to  the  standard  of  such  qualities  ;  he  will  continue
to  give  the  preference  to  rank  and  riches,  power  and  in-
fluence, which  in  his  eyes  seem  to  be  the  only  genuine  ad=
vantage,  in  the  world  ;  and  his  wish  will  be  to  excel
in  them  himself.  All  this  is  the  consequence  of  his
being  a  man  without  intellectual  needs.  The  great
affliction  of  all  philistines  is  that  they  have  no  interest  in
ideas,  and  that, to  escape  being  bored,  they  are  in  constant
need  of  realities.  Now  realities  are  either  unsatisfactory
or  dangerous  ;  when  they  lose  their  interest,  they  become
fatiguing.     But  the  ideal  world  ii  illimitable  and  calm,


PROPERTY,  OR  WHAT  A  MAN  HAS.  #    33

"  Something  afar
From  the  sphere  of  our  sorrow*"

Note. — In  these  remarks  on  the  personal  qualities  which
go  to  make  happiness,  I  have  been  mainly  concerned  with
the  physical  and  intellectual  nature  of  man.  For  an
account  of  the  direct  and  immediate  influence  of  morality
upon  happiness,  let  me  refer  to  my  prize  essay  on  "  The
Foundation  of  Morals  "  (Sec.  22).


CHAPTEE  III.

PROPERTY,    OR   WHAT   A   MAN   HAS.

Epicurus  divides  the  needs  of  mankind  into  three  classes,
and  the  division  made  by  this  great  professor  of  happiness
is  a  true  and  a  fine  one.  First  come  natural  and  necessary
needs,  such  as,  when  not  satisfied,  produce  pain — food  and
clothing,  victus  et  am  ictus,  needs  which  can  easily  be  satis-
fied. Secondly,  there  are  those  needs  which,  though
natural,  are  not  necessary,  such  as  the  gratification  of  cer-
tain of  the  senses.  I  may  add,  however,  that  in  the  re-
port given  by  Diogenes  Laertius,  Epicurus  does  not  mention
which  of  the  senses  he  means;  so  that  on  this  point  my  ac-
count of  his  doctrine  is  somewhat  more  definite  and  exact
than  the  original.  These  are  needs  rather  more  difficult  to
satisfy.  The  third  class  consists  of  needs  which  are  neither
natural  nor  necessary,  the  need  of  luxury  and  prodigality,
show  and  splendor,  which  never  come  to  an  end,  and  are
very  hard  to  satisfy.*

It  is  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  define  the  limits  which
reason  should  impose  on  the  desire  for  wealth;  for  there  is
no  absolute  or  definite  amount  of  wealth  which  will  satisfy
a  man.  The  amount  is  always  relative,  that  is  to  say,  just
so  much  as  will  maintain  the  proportion  between  what  he
wants  and  what  he  gets;  for  to  measure  a  man's  happiness
only  by  what  he  gets,  and  not  also  by  what  he  expects  to
get,  is  as  futile  as  to  try  and  express  a  fraction  which  shall
have  a  numerator  but  no  denominator.  A  man  never  feels
the  loss  of  things  which  it  never  occurs   to  him  to  ask  for;

*  Cf.  Diogenes  Laertius,  Bk.  x.,  ch.  xxvii.,  pp.  127  and  149;  also
Cicero  de  finibus,  i.  13-


34     ^  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

he  is  just  as  happy  without  them;  while  another,  who  may
have  a  hundred  times  as  much,  feels  miserable  because  he
has  not  got  the  one  thing  which  he  wants.  In  fact,  here
too,  every  man  has  an  horizon  of  his  own,  and  he  will  ex-
pect just  as  much  as  he  thinks  it  possible  for  him  to  get.
If  an  object  within  his  horizon  looks  as  though  he  could  con-
fidently reckon  on  getting  it,  he  is  happy;  but  if  difficulties
come  in  the  way,  he  is  miserable.  What  lies  beyond  his
horizon  has  no  effect  at  all  upon  him.  So  it  is  that  the
vast  possessions  of  the  rich  do  not  agitate  the  poor,  and
conversely,  that  a  wealthy  man  is  not  consoled  by  all  his
wealth  for  the  failure  of  his  hopes.  Kiches,  one  may  say,
are  like  sea- water;  the  more  you  drink,  the  thirstier  you
become:  and  the  same  is  true  of  fame.  The  loss  of  wealth
and  prosperity  leaves  a  man,  as  soon  as  the  first  pangs  of
grief  are  over,  in  very  much  the  same  habitual  temper  as
before;  and  the  reason  of  this  is,  that  as  soon  as  fate  dimin-
ishes the  amount  of  his  possessions,  he  himself  immediately
reduces  the  amount  of  his  claims.  But  when  misfortune
comes  upon  us,  to  reduce  the  amount  of  our  claims  is  just
what  is  most  painful;  once  that  we  have  done  so,  the  pain
becomes  less  and  less,  and  is  felt  no  more;  like  an  old
wound  which  has  healed.  Conversely,  when  a  piece  of
good  fortune  befalls  us,  our  claims  mount  higher  and  higher
as  there  is  nothing  to  regulate  them;  it  is  in  this  feeling  o£
expansion  that  the  delight  of  it  lies.  But  it  lasts  no  longer
than  the  process  itself,  and  when  the  expansion  is  com-
plete, the  delight  ceases;  we  have  become  accustomed  to
the  increase  in  our  claims,  and  consequently  indifferent  to
the  amount  of  wealth  which  satisfies  them.  There  is  a
passage  in  the  "Odyssey"*  illustrating  this  truth,  of
which   I  may  quote  the  last  two  lines:

ToioS  yap  v6o<i  e6ti    knix^oviajv  <xvQpG07tGav
Oiov  ecp  r/jitap  dyei  itarr/p  drdpcSr  re  Qegqv  ts.

— the  thoughts  of  man  that  dwells  on  the  earth  are  as  the
day  granted  him  by  the  father  of  gods  and  men.  Dis-
content springs  from  a  constant  endeavor  to  increase  the
amount  of  our  claims,  when  we  are  powerless  to  increase
the  amount  which  will  satisfy  them.

When  we  consider  how  full  of  needs  the  human   race  is,

*xviii.  130-7.


PROPERTY,  OR  WEAT  A  MAN  HAS.  35

how  its  whole  existence  is  based  upon  them,  it  is  not  a  mat-
ter for  surprise  that  wealth  is  held  in  more  sincere  esteem,
nay,  in  greater  honor,  than  anything  else  in  the  world;  nor
ought  we  to  wonder  that  gain  is  made  the  only  goal  of  life
and  everything  that  does  not  lead  to  it  pushed  aside  or
thrown  overboard — philosophy,  for  instance,  by  those  who
profess  it.  People  are  often  reproached  for  wishing  for
money  above  all  things,  and  for  loving  it  more  than  any-
thing  else;  but  it  is  natural  and  even  inevitable  for  people
to  love  that  which,  like  an  unwearied  Proteus,  is  always
ready  to  turn  itself  into  whatever  object  their  wandering
wishes  or  manifold  desires  may  for  the  moment  fix  upon.
Everything  else  can  satisfy  only  one  wish,  one  need;  food  is
good  only  if  you  are  hungry:  wine,  if  you  are  able  to  enjoy
it;  drugs,  if  you  are  sick;  fur  for  the  winter;  love  for  youth,
and  so  on.  These  are  all  only  relatively  good  dyaQd  npos  rz.
Money  alone  is  absolutely  good,  because  it  is  not  only  a
concrete  satisfaction  of  one  need  in  particular;  it  is  an
abstract  satisfaction  of  all.

If  a  man  has  an  independent  fortune,  he  should  regard
it  as  a  bulwark  against  the  many  evils  and  misfortunes
which  he  may  encounter  ;  he  should  not  look  upon  it  as
giving  him  leave  to  get  what  pleasure  he  can  out  of  the
world,  or  as  rendering  it  incumbent  upon  him  to  spend  it  in
this  way.  People  who  are  not  born  with  a  fortune,  but
end  by  making  a  large  one  through  the  exercise  of  whatever
talents  they  possess,  almost  always  come  to  think  that  their
talents  are  their  capital,  and  that  the  money  they  have
gained  is  merely  the  interest  upon  it;  they  do  not  lay  by
a  part  of  their  earnings  to  form  permanent  capital,  but
spend  their  money  much  as  they  have  earned  it.  Accord-
ingly, they  often  fall  into  poverty  ;  their  earnings  decrease,
or  come  to  an  end  altogether,  either  because  their  talent
is  exhausted  by  becoming  antiquated — as,  for  instance,
very  often  happens  in  the  case  of  fine  art ;  or  else  it  was
valid  only  under  a  special  conjunction  of  circumstances
which  has  now  passed  away.  There  is  nothing  to  prevent
those  who  live  on  the  common  labor  of  their  hands  from
treating  their  earnings  in  that  way  if  they  like ;  because
their  kind  of  skill  is  not  likely  to  disappear,  or,  if  it  does,
it  can  be  replaced  by  that  of  their  fellow-workmen  ;
morever,  the  kind  of  work  they  do  is  always  in  demand  ;
so  that  what  the  proverb  says  is  quite  true,  "  a  useful  trade


36  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

is  a  mine  01  gold."  But  with  artists  and  professionals  of
of  every  kind  the  case  is  quite  different,  and  that  is  the
reason  why  they  are  well  paid.  They  ought  to  build  up  a
capital  out  of  their  earnings ;  but  they  recklessly  look
upon  them  as  merely  interest,  and  end  in  ruin.  On  the
other  hand,  people  who  inherit  money  know,  at  least,  how
to  distinguish  between  capital  and  interest,  and  most  of
them  try  to  make  their  capital  secure  and  not  encroacK
upon  it ;  nay  if  they  can,  they  put  by  at  least  an  eighth  of
their  interest  in  order  to  meet  future  contingencies.  So
most  of  them  maintain  their  position.  These  few  remarks
about  capital  and  interest  are  not  applicable  to  com-
mercial life,  for  merchants  look  upon  money  only  as  a
means  of  further  gain,  just  as  a  workman  regards  his
tools  ;  so  even  if  their  capital  has  been  entirely  the  result
of  their  own  efforts,  they  try  to  preserve  and  increase  it
by  using  it.  Accordingly,  wealth  is  nowhere  so  much  at
home  as  in  the  merchant  class.

It  will  generally  be  found  that  those  who  know  what  it
is" to  have  been  in  need  and  destitution  are  very  much  less
afraid  of  it,  and  consequently  more  inclined  to  extrava-
gance, than  those  who  know  poverty  only  by  hearsay.
People  who  have  been  born  and  bred  in  good  circumstances,
are  as  a  rule,  much  more  careful  about  the  future,  more
economical,  in  fact,  than  those  who  by  a  piece  of  good
luckj  ^lave  suddenly  passed  from  poverty  to  wealth.
This  looks  as  if  poverty  were  not  really  such  a  very
wretched  thing  as  it  appears  from  a  distance.  The  true
reason,  however,  is  rather  the  fact  that  the  man  who  has
been  born  into  a  position  of  wealth  comes  to  look  upon  it
as  something  without  which  he  could  no  more  live  than  he
could  live  without  air  ;  he  guards  it  as  he  does  his  very
life  ;  and  so  he  is  generally  a  lover  of  order,  prudent  and
economical.  But  the  man  who  has  been  born  into  a  poor
position  looks  upon  it  as  the  natural  one,  and  if  by  any
chance  he  comes  in  for  a  fortune,  he  regards  it  as  a  super-
fluity, something  to  be  enjoyed  or  wasted,  because  if  it
comes  to  an  end,  he  can  get  on  just  as  well  as  before,  with
one  anxiety  the  less;  or,  as  Shakespeare  says  in  Henry  VI*.,

"  .  .  .  .  the  adage  must  be  verified
That  beggars  mounted  run  their  horse  to  death."

*  Part  III.,  Act  1,  Sc.  4.


PROPERTY,  OR  WHAT  A  MAN  HAS.  3?

But  it  should  be  said  that  people  of  this  kind  have  a  firm
and  excessive  trust,  partly  in  fate,  partly  in  the  peculiar
means  which  have  already  raised  them  out  of  need  and
poverty — a  trust  not  only  of  the  head,  but  of  the  heart
also  ;  and  so  they  do  not,  like  the  man  born  rich,  look
upon  the  shallows  of  poverty  as  bottomless,  but  console
themselves  with  the  thought  that  once  they   have  touched

f round  again,  they  can  take  another  upward  flight.
t  is  this  trait  in  human  character  which  explains  the  fact
that  women  who  were  poor  before  their  marriage  often
make  greater  claims,  and  are  more  extravagant,  than  those
who  have  brought  their  husbands  a  rich  dowry  ;  because
as  a  rule,  rich  girls  bring  with  them,  not  only  a  fortune,
but  also  more  eagerness,  nay,  more  of  the  inherited  in-
stinct, to  preserve  it,  than  poor  girls  do.  If  any  one
doubts  the  truth  of  this,  and  thinks  that  it  is  just  the
opposite,  he  will  find  authority  for  his  view  in  Ariosto's
first  satire  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  Dr.  Johnson  agrees
with  my  opinion.  "  A  woman  of  fortune,"  he  says,  "  being
used  to  the  handling  of  money,  spends  it  judiciously  ;
but  a  woman  who  gets  the  command  of  money  for  the
first  time  upon  her  marriage,  has  such  a  gusto  in  spending
it,  that  she  throws  it  away  with  great  profusion."  *  And  in
any  case  let  me  advise  any  one  who  marries  a  poor  girl  not
to  leave  her  the  capital  but  only  the  interest,  and  to  take
especial  care  that  she  has  not  the  management  of  the
children's  fortune.

I  do  not  by  any  means  think  that  I  am  touching  upon  a
subject  which  is  not  worth  my  while  to  mention  when  I
recommend  people  to  be  careful  to  preserve  what  they
have  earned  or  inherited.  For  to  start  life  with  just
as  much  as  will  make  one  independent,  that  is,  allow  one
to  live  comfortably  without  having  to  work — even  if  one
has  only  just  enough  for  one's  self,  not  to  speak  of  a  family
-—is  an  advantage  which  cannot  be  over-estimated ;  for
it  means  exemption  and  immunity  from  that  chronic
disease  of  penury,  which  fastens  on  the  life  of  man  like  a
plague  ;  it  is  emancipation  from  that  forced  labor  which
is  the  natural  lot  of  every  mortal.  Only  under  a  favorable
fate  like  this  can  a  man  be  said  to  be  born  free,  to  be,
in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word,  sui  juris,  master   of  his

*  Bosw ell's  "  Life  of  Johnson  "  :  ann  :  17?«J,  setat :  67.


36  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

own  time  and  powers,  and  able  to  say  every  morning,
"This  day  is  ni}  own."  And  just  for  the  same  reason  the
difference  between  the  man  who  has  a  hundred  a  year  and
the  man  who  has  a  thousand,  is  infinitely  smaller  than  the
difference  between  the  former  and  a  man  who  has  nothing
at  all.  But  inherited  wealth  reaches  its  utmost  value
when  it  falls  to  the  individual  endowed  with  mental  powers
of  a  high  order,  who  is  resolved  to  pursue  a  line  of  life
not  compatible  with  the  making  of  money  ;  for  he  is  then
doubly  endowed  by  fate  and  can  live  for  his  genius  ;  and
he  will  pay  his  debt  to  mankind  a  hundred  times,  by
achieving  what  no  other  could  achieve,  by  producing  some
work  which  contributes  to  the  general  good,  and  redounds
to  the  honor  of  humanity  at  large.  Another,  again,  may
use  his  wealth  to  further  philanthropic  schemes,  and  make
himself  well-deserving  of  his  fellow-men.  But  a  man  who
doesnoue  of  these  things,  who  does  not  even  try  to  do  them,
who  never  attempts  to  study  thoroughly  some  one  branch
of  knowledge  so  that  he  may  at  least  do  what  he  can
toward  promoting  it — such  a  one,  born  as  he  is  into  riches,
is  a  mere  idler  and  thief  of  time,  a  contemptible  fellow.
He  will  not  even  be  happy,  because,  in  his  ease,  exemption
from  need  delivers  him  up  to  the  other  extreme  of  human
suffering,  boredom,  which  is  such  martyrdom  to  him,
that  he  would  have  been  better  off  if  poverty  had  given
him  something  to  do.  And  as  he  is  bored  he  is  apt  to  be
extravagant,  and  so  lose  the  advantage  of  which  he  showed
himself  unworthy.  Countless  numbers  of  people  find
themselves  in  want,  simply  because,  when  they  had  money,
they  spent  it  only  to  get  momentary  relief  from  the  feel-
ing of  boredom  which  oppressed  them.  It  is  quite  another
matter  if  one's  object  is  success  in  political  life,  where
favor,  friends  and  connections  are  all-important,  in  order
to  mount  by  their  aid  step  by  step  on  the  ladder  of
promotion,  and  perhaps  gain  the  topmost  rung.  In  this
"<ind  of  life,  it  is  much  better  to  be  cast  on  the  world
without  a  penny  :  and  if  the  aspirant  is  not  of  noble  family,
but  is  a  man  of  some  talent,  it  will  redound  to  his  advan-
tage to  be  an  absolute  pauper.  For  wrhat  every  one  most
?iims  at  in  ordinary  contact  with  his  fellows  is  to  prove
tfiem  inferior  to  himself  ;  and  how  much  more  is  this  the
ess-?,  m  politics.  Now,  it  is  only  an  absolute  pauper  who
h&«  such    a    thorough    conviction    of    his   own   complete,


PROPERTY,  OR  WBAT  A  MAN  MA8.  39

profound  and  positive  inferiority  from  every  point  of  view,
of  bis  own  utter  insignificance  and  worthlessness,  that  he
can  take  his  place  quietly  in  the  political  machine.*
He  is  the  only  one  who  can  keep  on  bowing  low  enough,
and  even  go  right  down  upon  his  face  if  necessary ;  he
alone  can  submit  to  everything  and  laugh  at  it ;  he  alone
knows  the  entire  worthlessness  of  merit  ;  he  alone  uses  his
loudest  voice  and  his  boldest  type  whenever  he  has  to
speak  or  write  of  those  who  are  placed  over  his  head,  or
occupy  any  position  of  influence  ;  and  if  they  do  a  little
scribbling,  he  is  ready  to  applaud  it  as  a  master-work.
He  alone  undertands  how  to  beg,  and  so  betimes,  when  he
is  hardly  out  of  his  boyhood,  he  becomes  a  high  priest  of
that  hidden  mystery  which  Goethe  brings  to  light :

**  Ueber's  Niedertrachtige
Niemand  sick  beklage  :
Denn  es  ist  das  Machtige
Was  man  dir  auchsage  :"

—it  is  no  use  to  complain  of  low  aims  ;  for,  whatever
people  may  say,  they  rule  the  world.

On  the  other  hand,  the  man  who  is  born  with  enough
to  live  upon  is  generally  of  a  somewhat  independent  tarn
of  mind;  he  is  accustomed  to  keep  his  head  up;  he  has  not
learned  all  the  arts  of  the  beggar;  perhaps  he  even  presumes
a  little  upon  the  possession  of  talents  which,  as  he  ought  to
know,  can  never  compete  with  cringing  mediocrity;  in  the
long  run  he  comes  to  recognize  the  inferiority  of  those  who
are  placed  over  his  head,  and  when  they  try  to  put  insults
upon  him,  he  becomes  refractory  and  shy.  This  is  not  the
way  to  get  on  in  the  world.  Nay,  such  a  man  may  at  last
incline  to  the  opinion  freely  expressed  by  Voltaire:  "We
have  only  two  days  to  live;  it  is  not  worth  our  while  to  spend
them  in  cringing  to  contemptible  rascals."  But  alas!  let  me
observe  by  the  way,  that  "  contemptible  rascal"  is  an  attri-
bute which  may  be  predicated  of  an  abominable  number  of

*  Translator's  Note. — Schopenhauer  is  probably  here  making  one
of  his  many  virulent  attacks  upon  Hegel  ;  in  this  case  on  account  of
what  he  thought  to  be  the  philosopher's  abject  servility  to  the  govern-
ment of  his  day.  Though  the  Hegelian  sytem  lias  been  the  fruitful
mother  of  many  liberal  ideas,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  Hegel's
influence  in  his  own  lifetime,  was  an  effective  support  of  Prussian
bureaucraev.


40  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

people.     What  Juvenal  says — it  is  difficult  to   rise   if  you*
poverty  is  greater  than  your  talent —

"  Haud  facile  emergunt  quorum  virtutibus  obstat
Ees  angusta  dorni  " —

is  more  applicable  to  a  career  of  art  and  literature  than    to
political  and  social  ambition.

Wife  and  children  I  have  not  reckoned  among  a  man's
possessions;  he  is  rather  in  their  possession.  It  would  be
easier  to  include  friends  under  that  head;  but  a  man's
friends  belong  to  him  not  a  whit  more  than  he  belongs  to
them.


CHAPTER   IV.


„9C


POSITION,     OR    A     MANS    PLACE    IN    THE    ESTIMATION    OF
OTHERS.

Section  1. — Reputation.

By  a  peculiar  weakness  of  human  nature,  people  gene-
rally think  too  much  about  the  opinion  which  others  form
of  them;  although  the  slightest  reflection  will  show  that
this  opinion,  whatever  it  may  be,  is  not  in  itself  essential
to  happiness.  Therefore  it  is  hard  to  understand  why
everybody  feels  so  very  pleased  wLen  he  sees  that  other
people  have  a  good  opinion  of  him,  or  say  anything  flatter-
ing to  his  vanity.  If  you  stroke  a  cat,  it  will  purr;  and  as
inevitably,  if  you  praise  a  man,  a  tweet  expression  of  de-
light will  appear  on  his  face;  and  even  though  the  praise  is
a  palpable  lie,  it  will  be  welcome,  if  the  matter  is  one  on
which  he  prides  himself.  If  only  other  people  will  applaud
him,  a  man  may  console  himself  for  downright  misfortune,
sr  for  the  pittance  he  gets  from  the  two  sources  of  human
happiness  already  discussed:  and  conversely,  it  is  astonish-
ing how  infallibly  a  man  will  be  annoyed,  and  in  some
cases  deeply  pained,  by  any  wrong  done  to  his  feeling  of
self-importance,  whatever  be  the  nature,  degree,  or  circum-
stances of  the  injury,  or  by  any  depreciation,  slight,  or  dis-
regard.

If  the  feeling  of  honor  rests  upon  this  peculiarity  of
human  nature,  it  may  have  a  very  salutary  effect  upon  the


POSITION,  OR  A  MAN'S  PLACS.  41

welfare  of  a  great  many  people,  as  a  substitute  for  morality:
but  upon  their  happiness,  more  especially  upon  that  peace
of  mind  and  independence  which  are  so  essential  to  hap-
piness, its  effect  will  be  disturbing  and  prejudicial  rather
than  salutary.  Therefore  it  is  advisable,  from  our  point
of  view,  to  set  limits  to  this  weakness,  and  duly  to  con-
sider and  rightly  to  estimate  the  relative  value  of  ad-
vantages, and  thus  temper,  as  far  as  possible,  this  great
susceptibility  to  other  people's  opinion,  whether  the  opinion
be  one  nattering  to  our  vanity,  or  whether  it  causes  us
pain;  for  in  either  case  it  is  the  same  feeling  which  is
touched.  Otherwise,  a  man  is  the  slave  of  what  other
people  are  pleased  to  think — and  how  little  it  requires  to
disconcert  or  soothe  the  mind  that  is  greedy  of  praise:

"  Sic  leve,  sic  parvum  est,  animum  quod  laudis  avarum
Subruit  ac  reficit."*

Therefore  it  will  very  much  conduce  to  our  happiness
if  we  duly  compare  the  value  of  what  a  man  is  in  and  for
himself  with  what  he  is  in  the  eyes  of  others.  Under  the
former  comes  everything  that  fills  up  the  span  of  our  ex-
istence and  makes  it  what  it  is,  in  short,  all  the  advantages
already  considered  and  summed  up  under  the  heads  of
personality  and  property;  and  the  sphere  in  which  all  this
takes  place  is  the  man's  own  consciousness.  On  the  other
hand,  the  sphere  of  what  we  are  for  other  people  is  their
consciousness,  not  ours;  it  is  the  kind  of  figure  we  make  in
their  eyes,  together  with  the  thoughts  which  this  arouses. f
But  this  is  something  which  has  no  direct  and  immediate
existence  for  us,  but  can  effect  us  only  mediately  and  in-
directly, so  far,  that  is,  as  other  people's  behavior  to-
ward us  is  directed  by  it;  and  even  then  it  ought  to  affect  us
only  in  so  far  as  it  can  move  us  to  modify  what  we  are  in
and  for  ourselves.  Apart  from  this,  what  goes  on  in  other
people's  consciousness  is,  as  such,  a  matter  of  indifference'
to  us;  and  in  time  we  get  really  indifferent  to  it,  when  we
come  to  see  how  superficial  and   futile  are   most   people's

*  Horace,  Epist:  II,  1,  180.

f  Let  me  remark  that  people  in  the  highest  positions  in  life,  with
All  their  brilliance,  pomp,  display,  magnificence  and  general  show,
may  well  say:  Our  happiness  lies  entirely  outside  us,  for  it  exists
only  in  the  heads  of  others


42  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

thoughts,  how  narrow  their  ideas,  how  mean  their  senti-
ments, how  perverse  their  opinions,  and  how  much  of  error
there  is  in  most  of  them:  when  we  learn  by  experience
with  what  depreciation  a  man  will  speak  of  his  fellow,  when
he  is  not  obliged  to  fear  him,  or  thinks  that  what  he  says
will  not  come  to  his  ears.  And  if  ever  we  have  had  an  op-
portunity of  seeing  how  the  greatest  of  men  will  meet  with
nothing  but  slight  from  half-a-dozen  blockheads,  we  shaU
understand  that  to  lay  great  value  upon  what  other  people
say  is  to  pay  them  too  much  honor.

At  all  events,  a  man  is  in  a  very  bad  way,  who  finds  no
source  of  happiness  in  the  first  two  classes  of  blessings  al-
ready treated  of,  but  has  to  seek  it  in  the  third,  in  other
words,  not  in  what  he  is  in  himself,  but  in  what  he  is  in  the
opinion  of  others.  For,  after  all,  the  foundation  of  our
whole  nature,  and,  therefore,  of  our  happiness,  is  our
physique,  and  the  most  essential  factor  in  happiness  is
health,  and,  next  in  importance  after  health,  the  ability  to
maintain  ourselves  in  independence  and  freedom  from  care.
Therecan  benocompetiton  or  compensation  between  these
essential  factors  or.  the  one  side,  and  honor,  pomp,  rank  and
reputation  on  the  other,  however  much  value  we  may  set  upon
the  latter.  No  one  would  hesitate  to  sacrifice  the  latter  for  the
former,  if  it  were  necessary.  We  should  add  very  much  to  our
happiness  by  a  timely  recognition  of  the  simple  wruth  that
every  man's  chief  and  real  existence  is  in  his  own  skin,  and
not  in  other  people's  opinions;  and,  consequently,  that  the
actual  conditions  of  our  personal  life — health  tempera-
ment, capacity,  income,  wife,  children,  friends,  home,
area  hundred  times  more  important  for  our  happiness  than
what  other  people  are  pleased  to  think  of  us:  otherwise  we
Ehall  be  miserable.  And  if  people  insist  that  honor  is
dearer  than  life  itself,  what  they  really  mean  is  that  exist-
ence and  well-being  are  as  nothing  compared  with  other
people's  opinions.  Of  course,  this  may  be  only  an  exag-
gerated way  of  stating  the  prosaic  truth  that  reputation,
ihat  is,  the  opinion  others  have  of  us,  is  indispensable  if  we
are  to  make  any  progress  in  the  world:  but  J  shall  come
back  to  that  presently.  ^Vhen  we  see  that  almost  every-
thing men  devote  their  lives  to  attain,  sparing  no  effort
and  encountering  a  thousand  toils  and  dangers  in  the  pro-
cess, has,  in  the  end,  no  further  object  than  to  raise  them-
selves in  the  estimation    of   others;  when  we  see  that  not


POSITION,   OR  A  MAX'S  PLACE.  £3

only  offices,  titles,  decorations,  but  also  wealth,  nay,  even
knowledge*  and  ait,  are  striven  for  only  to  obtain,  as  the
ultimate  goal  of  all  effort,  greater  respect  from  one's  fellow
men — is  not  thjs  a  lamentable  proof  of  the  extent  to  which
human  folly  can  go?  To  set  much  too  high  a  value  on  other
people's  opinion  is  a  common  error  everywhere;  an  error,  it
may  be,  rooted  in  human  nature  itself,  or  the  result  of
civilization  and  social  arrangements  generally:  but,  what-
ever its  source,  it  exercises  a  very  immoderate  influence  on
all  we  do,  and  is  very  prejudicial  to  our  happiness.  We
can  trace  it  from  a  timorous  and  slavish  regard  for  what
other  people  will  say.  up  to  the  feeling  which  made  Virgin-
ins  plunge  the  dagger  into  his  daughter's  heart,  or  induces
many  a  man  to  sacrifice  quiet,  riches,  health  and  even  life
itself,  for  posthumous  glory.  Undoubtedly  this  feeling  is
a  very  convenient  instrument  in  the  hands  of  those  who
have  the  control  or  direction  of  their  fellow-men:  and  ac-
cordingly we  find  that  in  every  scheme  for  training  up
humanity  in  the  way  it  should  go,  the  maintenance  and
strengthening  of  the  feeling  of  honor  occupies  an  important
place.  But  it  is  quite  a  different  matter  in  its  effect  on
human  happiness,  of  which  it  is  here  our  object  to  treat;
and  we  should  rather  he  careful  to  dissuade  people  from
setting  too  much  store  by  what  others  tbi  tik  of  them.  Daily
experience  shows  us.  however,  that  this  is  just  the  mistake
people  persist  m  making:  most  men  set  the  utmost  value
precisely  on  what  other  people  think,  and  are  more  con-
cerned about  it  than  about  what  goes  on  in  their  own  con-
sciousness, which  is  the  thing  most  immediately  and  directly
present  to  them.  They  reverse  the  natural  order — regarding
the  opinions  of  others  as  real  existence  and  their  own
consciousness  as  something  shadowy:  making  the  derivative
and  secondary  into  the  principal,  and  considering  the  pic-
ture they  present  to  the  world  of  more  importance  than
their  own  selves.  By  thus  trying  to  get  a  direct  and  im-
mediate result  out  of  what  has  no  really  direct  or  immediate
existence,  they  fall  into  the  kind  of  folly  which  is  called
vanity — the  appropriate  term  for  that  which  lias  no  solid
or  intrinsic  value.  Like  a  miser,  such  people  forget  the
end  in  their  eagerness  to  obtain  the  means.

*&:ire  tutim  nihil  est  nisi  te  -scire  hoc  sciai  alter  (Persius  i  27)
— knowledge  is  no  use  unless  others  know  that  vou  have  it.


44  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

The  truth  is  that  the  value  we  set  upon  the  opinion  oi
others,  and  our  constant  endeavor  in  respect  of  it,  are  eacli
quite  out  of  proportion  to  any  result  we  may  reasonably
hope  to  attain;  so  that  this  attention  to  other  people's  atti-
tude may  be  regarded  as  a  kind  of  universal  mania  which
every  one  inherits.  Ln  all  we  do.  almost  the  first  thing  we
think  about  is,  what  will  people  say;  and  nearly  half  the
troubles  and  bothers  of  life  may  be  traced  to  our  anxiety  on
this  score;  it  is  the  anxiety  which  is  at  the  bottom  of  all  that
feeling  of  self-importance,  which  is  so  often  mortified  be-
cause it  is  so  very  morbidly  sensitive.  It  is  solicitude  about
what  others  will  say  that  underlies  all  our  vanity  and  pre-
tension, yes,  and  all  our  show  and  swagger  too.  Without
it,  there  would  not  be  a  tenth  part  of  the  luxury  which  ex-
ists. Pride  in  every  form,  point  oVlionneur  and  punctilio.
however  varied  their  kind  or  sphere,  are  at  bottom  nothing
but  this — anxiety  about  what  others  will  say — and  what
sacrifices  it  often  costs!  One  can  see  it  even  in  a  child;  and
though  it  exists  at  every  period  of  life,  it  is  strongest  r
age;  because,  when  the  capacity  for  sensual  pleasure  fail  /
vanity  and  pride  have  only  avarice  to  share  their  dominion.
Frenchmen,  perhaps,  afford  the  best  example  of  this  feel-
ing, and  among  them  it  is  a  regular  epidemic,  appearing
sometimes  in  the  most  absurd  ambition,  or  in  a  ridiculous
kind  of  national  vanity  and  the  most  shameless  boasting.
However,  they  frustrate  their  own  aims,  for  other  people
make  fun  of  them  and  call  them  la  grande  nation.

By  way  of  specially  illustrating  this  perverse  and
exuberant  respect  for  other  people's  opinion,  let  me  take  a
passage  from  the  Times  of  March  31st,  1846,  giving  a
detailed  account  of  the  execution  of  one  Thomas  Wix,  an
apprentice  who,  from  motives  of  vengeance,  had  murdered
his  master.  Here  we  have  very  unusual  circumstances
and  an  extraordinary  character,  though  one  very  suitable
for  our  purpose;  and  these  combine  to  give  a  striking
picture  of  this  folly,  which  is  so  deeply  rooted  in  human
nature,  and  allow  us  to  form  an  accurate  notion  of  the
extent  to  which  it  will  go.  On  the  morning  of  the
execution,  says  the  report,  "the  rev.  ordinary  was  early  in
attendance  upon  him,  but  Wix,  beyond  a  quiet  demeanor,
betrayed  no  interest  in  his  ministrations,  appearing  to
feel  anxious  only  to  acquit  himself  '  bravely  '  before  the
spectators  of   his  ignominious  end In  the  pro-


POSITION,  OR  A  MAN'S  PLACE.  45

cession  Wix  fell  into  his  proper  place  with  alacrity,  and,
as  he  entered  the  Chapel-yard,  remarked,  sufficiently  loud
to  be  heard  by  several  persons  near  him,  '  Now,  then,  as  Dr.
Dodd  said,  I  shall  soon  know  the  grand  secret/  On
reaching  the  scaffold,  the  miserable  wretch  mounted  the
drop  without  the  slightest  assistance,  and,  when  he  got  to
the  center,  he  bowed  to  the  spectators  twice,  a  proceeding
which  called  forth  a  tremendous  cheer  from  the  degraded
crowd  beneath."

This  is  an  admirable  example  of  the  way  in  which  a
man,  with  death  in  the  most  dreadful  form  before  his  very
eyes,  and  eternity  beyond  it,  will  care  for  nothing  but  the
impression  he  makes  upon  a  crowd  of  gapers,  and  the
opinion  he  leaves  behind  him  in  their  heads.  There  was
much  the  same  kind  of  thing  in  the  case  of  Lecomte,  who
was  executed  at  Frankfurt,  also  in  1846,  for  an  attempt  on
the  king's  life.  At  the  trial  he  was  very  much  annoyed
that  he  was  not  allowed  to  appear,  in  decent  attire,  before
the  Upper  House  ;  and  on  the  day  of  the  execution  it  was
a  special  grief  to  him  that  he  was  not  permitted  to  shave.
It  is  not  only  in  recent  times  that  this  kind  of  thing  has
been  known  to  happen.  Mateo  Aleman  tells  us,  in  the
Introduction  to  his  celebrated  romance,  "Guzman  de
Alfarache,"  that  many  infatuated  criminals,  instead  of
devoting  their  last  hours  to  the  welfare  of  their  souls,  as
they  ought  to  have  done,  neglect  this  duty  for  the  purpose
of  preparing  and  committing  to  memory  a  speech  to  be
made  from  the  scaffold.

I  take  these  extreme  cases  as  being  the  best  illustrations
of  what  I  mean :  for  they  give  us  a  magnified  reflection  of
our  own  nature.  The  anxieties  of  all  of  us,  our  worries,
vexations,  bothers,  troubles,  uneasy  apprehensions  and
strenuous  efforts  are  due,  in  perhaps  the  large  majority  of
instances, to  what  other  people  will  say  ;  and  we  are  just
as  foolish  in  this  respect  as  those  miserable  criminals.
Envy  and  hatred  are  very  often  traceable  to  a  similar
source.

Now,  it  is  obvious  that  happiness,  which  consists  for  the
most  part  in  peace  of  mind  and  contentment,  would  be
served  by  nothing  so  much  as  by  reducing  this  impulse  of
human  nature  within  reasonable  limits — which  would
perhaps  make  it  one-fiftieth  part  of  what  it  is  now.  By
doing  so,  we  should  get  rid  of  a  thorn  in  the  flesh  which  is


46  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

always  causing  us  pain.  But  it  is  a  very  difficult  task,  be-
cause the  impulse  in  question  is  a  natural  and  innate  perver-
sity of  human  nature.  Tacitus,  says,  "The  lust  of  fame  is  the
last  that  a  wise  man  shakes  off."  *  The  only  way  of  putting  an
end  to  this  universal  folly  is  to  see  clearly  that  it  is  a  folly;
and  this  may  be  done  by  recognizing  the  fact  that  most  of
the  opinions  in  men's  heads  are  apt  to  be  false,  perverse,  er-
roneous and  absurd,  and  so  in  themselves  unworthy  of  any
attention;  further,  that  other  people's  opinions  can  have
very  little  real  and  positive  influence  upon  us  in  most  of  the
circumstances  and  affairs  of  life.  Again,  this  opinion  is
generally  of  such  an  unfavorable  character  that  it  would
worry  a  man  to  death  to  hear  everything  that  was  said  of
him,  or  the  tone  in  which  he  was  spoken  of.  And  finally,
among  other  things,  we  should  be  clear  about  the  fact  that
honor  itself  has  no  really  direct,  but  only  an  indirect,
value.  If  people  were  generally  converted  from  this  uni-
versal folly,  the  result  would  be  such  an  addition  to  our
peace  of  mind  and  cheerfulness  as  at  present  seems  in-
conceivable; people  would  present  a  firmer  and  more  confi-
dent front  to  the  world,  and  generally  behave  with  less
embarrassment  and  restraint.  It  is  observable  that  a  retired
mode  of  life  has  an  exceedingly  beneficial  influence  on  our
peace  of  mind,  and  this  is  mainly  because  we  thus  escape
having  to  live  constantly  in  the  sight  of  others,  and  pay
everlasting  regard  to  their  casual  opinions;  in  a  word,  we
are  able  to  return  upon  ourselves.  At  the  same  time  a
good  deal  of  positive  misfortune  might  be  avoided,  which
we  are  now  drawn  into  by  striving  after  shadows,  or,  to
speak  more  correctly,  by  indulging  a  mischievous  piece  of
folly;  and  we  should  consequently  have  more  attention  to
give  to  solid  realities  and  enjoy  them  with  less  inter-
ruption than  at  present.  But  x^XsTtd  rd  uaXd — what  is
worth  doing  is  hard  to  do.

Section  2. — Pride.

The  folly  of  our  nature  which  we  are  discussing  puts
forth  three  shoots,  ambition,  vanity  and  pride.  The  differ-
ence between  the  last  two  is  this:  pride  is  an  established
conviction  of  one's  own  paramount  worth  in  some  par-
ticular respect,  while  vanity  is  the  desire  of  rousing  such  a

*Hist..  iv..6.


POSITION,  OR  A  MAN'S  PLACE.  47

conviction  in  others,  and  it  is  generally  accompanied  by  the
secret  hope  of  ultimately  coming  to  the  same  conviction
one's  self.  Pride  works  from  within;  it  is  the  direct  appreci-
ation of  one's  self.  Vanity  is  the  desire  to  arrive  at  this
appreciation  indirectly,  from  without.  So  we  find  that
vain  people  are  talkative,  and  proud,  taciturn.  But  the
vain  person  ought  to  be  aware  that  the  good  opinion  of
others,  which  he  strives  for,  may  be  obtained  much  more
easily  and  certainly  by  persistent  silence  than  by  speech,
even  though  he  has  very  good  things  to  say.  Any  one  who
wishes  to  affect  pride  is  not  therefore  a  proud  man;  but  he
will  soon  have  to  drop  this,  as  every  other  assumed  char-
acter.

It  is  only  a  firm,  nnsliakable  conviction  of  pre-eminent
worth  and  special  value  which  makes  a  man  proud  in  the
true  sense  of  the  word — a  conviction  which  may,  no  doubt,
be  a  mistaken  one  or  rest  on  advantages  which  are  of  an
adventitious  and  conventional  character  :  still  pride  is  not
the  less  pride  for  all  that,  so  long  as  it  be  present  in  real
earnest.  And  since  pride  is  thus  rooted  in  conviction,  it
resembles  every  other  form  of  knowledge  in  not  being
within  our  own  arbitrament.  Pride's  worst  foe — I  mean
its  greatest  obstacle — is  vanity,  which  courts  the  applause
of  the  world  in  order  to  gain  the  necessary  foundation  for
a  high  opinion  of  one's  own  worth,  while  pride  is  based
upon  a  pre-existing  conviction  of  it.

It  is  quite  true  that  pride  is  something  which  is  gener-
ally  found  fault  with,  and  cried  down  ;  but  usually,  1
imagine,  by  those  who  have  nothing  upon  which  they  can
pride  themselves.  In  view  of  the  impudence  and  fool-
hardiness  of  most  people,  any  one  who  possesses  any  kind
of  superiority  or  merit  will  do  well  to  keep  his  eyes  fixed
on  it,  if  he  does  not  want  it  to  be  entirely  forgotten  ;  for
if  a  man  is  good-natured  enough  to  ignore  his  own
privileges,  and  hob-nob  with  the  generality  of  other  people,
as  if  he  were  quite  on  their  level,  they  will  be  sure  to  treat
him,  frankly  and  candidly,  as  one  of  themselves.  This
is  a  piece  of  advice  1  would  specially  offer  to  those  whose
superiority  is  of  the  highest  kind — real  superiority,  I  mean,
of  a  purely  personal  nature — which  cannot,  like  orders  and
titles,  appeal  to  the  eye  or  ear  at  every  moment  ;  as  other-
wise, they  will  find  that  familiarity  breeds  contempt  or,  as
the  Romans   used   to   say,  sus  Miner vimi.     "  Joke  with  a


48  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

slave,  and  he'll  soon  show  his  heels,"  is  an  excellent  Arabian
proverb ;  nor  ought  we  to  despise  what  Horace  says,

"  Sume  superbiam
Quaesitarn  meritis  " —

usurp  the  fame  you  have  deserved.  No  doubt,  when
modesty  was  made  a  virtue,  it  was  a  very  advantageous
thing  for  the  fools  ;  for  everybody  is  expected  to  speak  of
himself  as  if  he  were  one.  This  is  leveling  down  indeed  !
for  it  comes  to  look  as  if  there  were  nothing  but  fools  in
the  world.

The  cheapest  sort  of  pride  is  national  pride  ;  for  if  a
man  is  proud  of  his  own  nation,  it  argues  that  he  has  no
qualities  of  his  own  of  which  he  can  be  proud  ;  otherwise,
he  would  not  have  recourse  to  those  which  he  shares  with
so  many  millions  of  his  fellow-men.  The  man  who  is
endowed  with  important  personal  qualities  will  be  only  too
ready  to  see  clearly  in  what  respects  his  own  nation  falls
short,  since  their  failings  will  be  constantly  before  his  eyes.
But  every  miserable  fool  who  has  nothing  at  all  of  which  he
can  be  proud  adopts,  as  a  last  resource,  pride  in  the  nation
to  which  he  belongs  ;  he  is  ready  and  glad  to  defend  all
its  faults  and  follies,  tooth  and  nail,  thus  re-imbursing
himself  for  his  own  inferiority.  For  example,  if  you
speak  of  the  stupid  and  degrading  bigotry  of  the  English
nation  with  the  contempt  it  deserves,  you  will  hardly  find  one
Englishman  in  fifty  to  agree  with  you  ;  but  if  there  should
be  one,  he  will  generally  happen  to  be  an  intelligent  man.

The  Germans  have  no  national  pride,  which  shows  how
lonest  they  are,  as  everybody  knows  and  how  dishonest  are
;hose  who,  by  a  piece  of  ridiculous  affectation,  pretend  that
:hey  are  proud  of  their  country — the  Deutsche  Brilder  and
the  demagogues  who  flatter  the  mob  in  order  to  mislead  it.
I  have  heard  it  said  that  gunpowder  was  invented  by  a
German.  I  doubt  it.  Lichtenberg  asks,  "Why  is  it  that  a
man  who  is  not  a  German  does  not  care  about  pretending
that  he  is  one;  and  that  if  he  makes  any  pretense  at  all,  it
is  to  be  a  Frenchman  or  an  Englishman?"*

*  Translator's  Note. — It  should  be  remembered  that  these  remarks
were  written  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  present  century,  and  that  a
German  philosopher  nowadays,  even  though  he  were  as  apt  to  say
bitter  things  as  Schopenhauer,  could  hardly  write  in  a  siruliaj
strain


POSITION,  OR  A  MAN'S  PLACE.  49

However  that  may  be,  individuality  is  a  far  more  im-
portant thing  than  nationality,  and  in  any  given  man  de-
serves a  thousand-fold  more  consideration.  And  since  you
cannot  speak  of  national  character  without  referring  to  large
masses  of  people,  it  is  impossible  to  be  loud  in  your  praisea
and  nt  the  same  time  honest.  National  character  is  onlv
another  name  for  the  particular  form  which  the  littleness,
perversity  and  baseness  of  maukind  take  in  every  country.
If  we  become  disgusted  with  one,  we  praise  another,  until
we  get  disgusted  with  this  too.  Every  nation  mocks  at
other  nations,  and  all  are  right.

The  contents  of  this  chapter,  which  treats,  as  I  have
said,  of  what  we  represent  in  the  world,  or  what  we  are  in
the  eyes  of  others,  may  be  further  distributed  under  thre&
heads;  honor,  rank  and  fame.

Section  3. — Rank,

Let  us  take  rank  first,  as  it  may  be  dismissed  in  a  few
words,  although  it  plays  an  important  part  in  the  eyes  of
the  masses  and  of  the  philistines,  and  is  a  most  useful
wheel  in  the  machinery  of  the  state.

It  has  a  purely  conventional  value.  Strictly  speaking,  it
is  a  sham;  its  method  is  to  exact  an  artificial  respect,  and,
as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  whole  thing  is  a  mere  farce.

Orders,  it  may  be  said,  are  bills  of  exchange  drawn  on
public  opinion,  and  the  measure  of  their  value  is  the  credit
of  the  drawer.  Of  course,  as  a  substitute  for  pensions,  they
save  the  state  a  good  deal  of  money;  and  besides,  they  serve
a  very  useful  purpose,  if  they  are  distributed  with  discrimi-
nation and  judgment.  For  people  in  general  have  eyes
and  ears,  it  is  true:  but  not  much  else,  very  little  judgment
indeed,  or  even  memory.  There  are  many  services  to  the
state  quite  beyond  the  range  of  their  understanding:  others
again,  are  appreciated  and  made  much  of  for  a  time,  and
then  soon  forgotten.  It  seems  to  me,  therefore,  very
proper,  that  a  cross  or  a  star  should  proclaim  to  the  mass
of  people  always  and  everywhere,  "This  man  is  not  like  you;
he  has  done  something."  But  orders  lose  their  value  when
they  are  distributed  unjustly,  or  without  due  selection,  or
in  too  great  numbers:  a  prince  should  be  as  careful  in  con-
ferring them  as  a  man  of  business  is  in  signing  a  bill.  It
is  a  pleonasm  to  inscribe   on  any   order  for  distinguished


50  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

service;  for  every  order  ought  to  be  for  distinguished  serv-
ice.    That  stands  to  reason.

Section  4. — Honor.

Honor  is  a  much  larger  question  than  rank,  and  more
difficult  to  discuss.     Let  us  begin  by  trying  to  define  it.

If  I  were  to  say  lienor  is  external  conscience,  and  conscience
is  inward  honor,  no  doubta  good  many  people  would  assent;
but  there  would  be  more  show  than  reality  about  such  ;i
definition,  and  it  would  hardly  go  to  the  root  of  the  matter.
I  prefer  to  say,  honor  is,  on  its  objective  side,  other  people's
opinion  of  what  we  are  worth:  on  its  subjective  side,  it  is
the  respect  we  pay  to  this  opinion.  From  the  latter  point
of  view,  to  be  a  man  of  honor  is  to  exercise  what  is
often  a  very  wholesome,  but  by  no  means  a  purely  moral.,
influence.

The  feelings  of  honor  and  shame  exist  in  every  man  who
is  not  utterly  depraved,  and  honor  is  everywhere  recognized
as  something  particularly  valuable.  The  reason  of  this  is
as  follows.  By  and  in  himself  a  man  can  accomplish  very
little;  he  is  like  Robinson  Crusoe  on  a  desert  island.  It  is
only  in  society  that  a  man's  powers  can  be  called  into  full
activity.  He  very  soon  finds  this  out  when  his  conscious-
ness begins  to  develop,  and  there  arises  in  him  the  desire  to
be  looked  upon  as  a  useful  member  of  society,  as  one,  that
is,  who  is  capable  of  playing  his  part  as  a  man — pro  parte
virili — thereby  acquiring  a  right  to  the  benefits  of  social
life.  Xow,  to  be  a  useful  member  of  society,  one  must  do
two  things;  firstly,  what  every  one  is  expected  to  do  every-
where, and,  secondly,  what  one's  own  particular  position
in    the    world  demands  and  requires.

But  a  man  soon  discovers  that  everything  depends  upon
his  being  useful,  not  in  his  own  opinion,  but  in  the  opinion
of  others;  and  so  he  tries  his  best  to  make  that  favorable
impression  upon  the  world,  to  which  he  attaches  such  a
high  value.  Hence,  this  primitive  and  innate  characteristic
of  human  nature,  which  is  called  the  feeling  of  honor,  or,
under  another  aspect,  the  feeling  of  shame — verecundia.
It  is  this  which  brings  a  blush  to  his  cheek  at  the  thought
of  having  suddenly  to  fall  in  the  estimation  of  others,  even
when  he  knows  that  he  is  innocent,  nay,  even  if  his
remissness  extends  to  no  absolute  obligation,  but  only  t<?
one  which  he  has  taken  upon  himself  of  his  own  free   will.


POSITION,  OR  A  MAN'S  PLAGE.  51

Conversely,  nothing  in  life  gives  a  man  so  much  courage  as
the  attainment  or  renewal  of  the  conviction  that  other
people  regard  him  with  favor;  because  it  means  that  every
one  joins  to  give  him  help  and  protection,  which  is  an
infinitely  stronger  bulwark  against  the  ills  of  life  than  any-
thing he  can  do  himself.

The  variety  of  relations  in  which  a  man  can  stand  to
other  people  so  as  to  obtain  their  confidence,  that  is  their
good  opinion,  gives  rise  to  a  distinction  between  several
kinds  of  honor,  resting  chiefly  on  the  different  bearings
that  meum  may  take  to  tuum  ;  or,  again,  on  the  perform-
ance of  various  pledges  ;  or  finally,  on  the  relation  of  the
sexes.  Hence,  there  are  three  main  kinds  of  honor,  each
of  which  takes  various  forms — civic  honor,  official  honor,
and  sexual  honor.

Civic  honor  has  the  widest  sphere  of  all.  It  consists
in  the  assumption  that  we  shall  pay  unconditional  respect  to
the  rights  of  others,  and,  therefore,  never  use  any  unjust
or  unlawful  means  of  getting  what  we  want.  It  is  the
condition  of  all  peaceable  intercourse  between  man  and
man  ;  and  it  is  destroyed  by  anything  that  openly  and
manifestly  militates  against  this  peaceable  intercourse,
anything,  accordingly,  which  entails  punishment  at  the
hands  of  the  law,  always  supposing  that  the  punishment
is  a  just  one.

The  ultimate  foundation  of  honor  is  the  conviction  that
moral  character  is  unalterable  :  a  single  bad  action  implies
that  future  actions  of  the  same  kind  will,  under  similar
circumstances,  also  be  bad.  This  is  well  expressed  by  the
English  use  of  the  word  character  as  meaning  credit,
reputation,  honor.  Hence  honor,  once  lost,  can  never  be
recovered  ;  unless  the  loss  rested  on  some  mistake,  such
as  may  occur  if  a  man  is  slandered  or  his  actions  viewed
in  a  false  light.  So  the  law  provides  remedies  against
slander,  libel,  and  even  insult  :  for  insult,  though  it
amount  to  no  more  than  mere  abuse,  is  a  kind  of  summary
slander  with  a  suppression  of  the  reasons.  What  I  mean
may  be  well  put  in  the  Greek  phrase — not  quoted  from
any  author — s6nv  rj  Xoidopia  diaftoXrj  6vvrojudS.  It  is  true
that  if  a  man  abuses  another,  lie  is  simply  showing  that
he  has  no  real  or  true  causes  of  complaint  against  him  ;
as,  otherwise,  he  would  bring  these  forward  as  the  premises,
and  rely  upon  his  hearers  to   draw    the   conclusion   them-


52  THE  WLWOM  OF  LIFE.

selves  :  instead  of  which,  he  gives  the  conclusion  and  leaves
out  the  premises,  trusting  that  people  will  suppose  that  he
has  done  so  only  for  the  sake  of  being  brief.

Civic  honor  draws  its  existence  and  name  from  the
middle  classes  ;  but  it  applies  equally  to  all,  not  excepting
the  highest.  Xo  man  can  disregard  it,  and  it  is  a  very
serious  thing,  of  which  every  one  should  be  careful  not  to
make  light.  The  man  who  breaks  confidence  has  forever
forfeited  confidence,  whatever  he  may  do,  and  whoever  he
may  be  ;  and  the  bitter  consequences  of  the  loss  of  con-
fidence can  never  be  averted.

There  is  a  sense  in  which  honor  may  be  said  to  have  a
negative  character  in  opposition  to  the  positive  character
of  fame.  For  honor  is  not  the  opinion  people  have  of
particular  qualities  which  a  man  may  happen  to  possess
exclusively  :  it  is  rather  the  opinion  they  have  of  the
qualities  which  a  man  may  be  expected  to  exhibit,  and  to
which  he  should  not  prove  false.  Honor,  therefore,  means
that  a  man  is  not  exceptional ;  fame,  that  he
is.  Fame  is  something  which  must  be  won  ;  honor  only
something  which  must  not  be  lost.  The  absence  of  fame
is  obscurity,  which  is  only  a  negative  ;  but  loss  of  honor  is
shame,  which  is  a  positive  quality.  This  negative  char-
acter of  honor  must  not  be  confused  with  anything  passive  ;
for  honor  is  abov^  all  things  active  in  its  working.  It  is
the  only  quality  which  proceeds  directly  from  the  man  who
exhibits  it  :  it  is  concerned  entirely  with  what  he  does  and
leaves  undone,  and  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  actions  of
others  or  the  obstacles  they  place  in  his  way.  It  is  some-
thing entirely  in  our  own  power — tcSv  aqfr/noov.  This  distinc-
tion, as  we  shall  see  presently,  marks  off  true  honor  from
the  sham  honor  of  chivalry.

Slander  is  the  only  weapon  by  which  honor   can   be   at-
tacked from  without:  and  the  only  way  to  repel  the  attack
is  to  confute  the  slander  with  the  proper   amount  of  pub
licity,  and  a  due  unmasking  of  him  who  utters  it.

The  reason  why  respect  is  paid  to  age  is  that  old  people
have  necessarily  shown  in  the  course  of  their  lives  whether
or  not  they  have  been  able  to  maintain  their  honor  un-
blemished; while  that  of  young  people  has  not  yet  been  put
to  the  proof,  though  they  are  credited  with  the  possession
of  it.  For  neither  length  of  years — equaled,  as  it  is,  and
even  excelled,  in  the  case  of  some  of  the  lower  animals —


POSITION,  OF,  A  MAY'.-  PLACE.  53

nor.  again,  experience,,  which  is  only  a  closer  knowledge  of
the  world's  ways,  can  be  any  sufficient  reason  for  the  re-
spect which  the  young  are  everywhere  required  to  show  to-
ward the  old;  for  if  it  were  merely  a  matter  of  years,  the
weakness  which  attends  on  age  would  call  rather  for  con-
sideration than  for  respect.  It  is,  however,,  a  remarkable
Lhat  white  hair  always  commands  reverence — a  rever-
ence really  innate  and  instinctive.  Wrinkles — a  much
6urer  sign  of  old  age — command  no  reverence  at  all:  you
never  hear  any  one  speak  of  "venerable  wrinkles;"  but
"venerable  white  hair"  is  a  common  expression.

Honor  has  only  an  indirect  value.  For,  as  I  explained
at  the  beginning  of  this  chapter,  what  other  people  think
of  us,  if  it  affe  affect  us  only  in  so  far  as  it

governs  their  behavior  toward  us,  and  only  just  so  long  a3
we  live  with,  or  have  to  do  with.  them.  But  it  is  to
society  alone  that  we  owe  that  safety  which  we  and  our
possessions  enjoy  in  a  state  of  civilization:  in  all  we  do  we
need  the  help  of  others,  and  they,  in  their  turn,  must  have
confidence  in  us  before  they  can  have  anything  to  do  with
us.  Accordingly,  their  opinion  of  us  is,  indirectly,  a  mat-
ter of  great  importance:  though  I  cannot  see  how  it  can
have  a  direct  or  immediate  value.  This  is  an  opinion  also
held  by  Cicero.  'T  quite  agree."  he  writes,  "with  what
sippna  and  Diogenes  used  to  say,  that  a  good  reputation
is  not  worth  raisins:  a  ringer  to  obtain,  if  it  were  not  that
it  is  so  useful."*  This  truth  has  been  insisted  upon  at  great
length  by  Helve tius  in  his  chief  work  De FEsprit,f  the
conclusion  of  which  is  that  we  love  esteem  not  for  its  own
sake,  but  solely  for  the  advantages  which  it  brings.  And
as  the  means  can  never  be  more  than  the  end,  that  saying.
of  which  so  much  is  made,  ••'honor  is  dearer  than  life  itself''
is.  as  I  have  remarkc  -:■  exaggerated    statement.     So

much,  then,  for  civic  honor.

Oitlcial  honor  is  the  general  opinion  of  other  people  that
a  man  who  rills  any  office  really  has  the  necessary  qualities
for  the  proper  discharge  of  all  the  duties  which  appe
to  it.     The  e   7  3  more  important  the  duties  a  man

has  to  discharge  in  the  state,  and  the  highei  and  more
influential  the  office  which  he  fills,  the  stronger  must  be
the  opinion  which  people  have  of  the  moral  and  intellect-

*  "De  finibus  "  iii.,  17.  f-  •*  Dise;"  iii,  13.


54  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

ual  qualities  which  render  him  fit  for  his  post.  There-
fore, the  higher  his  position,  the  greater  must  be  the
degree  of  honor  paid  to  him,  expressed,  as  it  is,  in  titles,
orders  and  the  generally  subservient  behavior  of  others
toward  him.  As  a  rule,  a  man's  official  rank  implies  the
particular  degree  of  honor  which  ought  to  be  paid  to  him,
however  much  this  degree  may  be  modified  by  the  capacity
of  the  masses  to  form  any  motion  of  its  importance.
Still,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  greater  honor  is  paid  to  a  man
who  fulfills  special  duties  than  to  the  common  citizen,
whose  honor  mainly  consists  in  keeping  clear  of  dishonor.

Official  honor  demands,  further,  that  the  man  who
occupies  an  office  must  maintain  respect  for  it,  for  the
sake  both  of  his  colleagues  and  of  those  who  will  come
after  him.  This  respect  an  official  can  maintain  by  a
proper  observance  of  his  duties,  and  by  repelling  any
attack  that  may  be  made  upon  the  office  itself  or  upon
its  occupant :  he  must  not,  for  instance,  pass  over  un-
heeded any  statement  to  the  effect  that  the  duties  of  the
office  are  not  properly  discharged,  or  that  the  office  itself
does  not  conduce  to  the  public  welfare.  He  must  prove
the  unwarrantable  nature  of  such  attacks  by  enforcing  the
legal  penalty  for  them.

Subordinate  to  the  honor  of  official  personages  comes
that  of  those  who  serve  the  state  in  any  other  capacity,  as
doctors,  lawyers,  teachers,  any  one,  in  short,  who  by  gradu-
ating in  any  subject,  or  by  any  other  public  declaration
that  he  is  qualified  to  exercise  some  special  skill,  slaims  to
practice  it ;  in  a  word,  the  honor  of  all  those  who  take  any
public  pledges  whatever.  Under  this  head  comes  military
honor,  in  the  true  sense  of  the  word,  the  opinion  that
people  who  have  bound  themselves  to  defend  their  country
really  possess  the  requisite  qualities  which  will  enable  them
to  do  so,  especially  courage,  personal  bravery  and  strength,
and  that  they  are  perfectly  ready  to  defend  their  country
to  the  death,  and  never  and  under  no  circumstances  desert
the  flag  to  which  they  have  once  sworn  allegiance.  I  have
here  taken  official  honor  in  a  wider  sense  than  that  in  which
it  is  generally  used,  namely,  the  respect  due  by  citizens  to
an  office  itself.

In  treating  of  sexual  honor  and  the  principles  on  which
it  rests,  a  little  more  attention  and  analysis  are  necessary;
and  what  I  shall  sav  will  sunnort  mv  contention  that  al?


POSITION,  OR  A  MAN'S  PLACE.  55

honor  really  rests  upon  a  utilitarian  basis.  There  are  two
natural  divisions  of  the  subject — the  honor  of  women  and
the  honor  of  men,  in  either  side  issuing  in  a  well-under-
stood esprit  de  corps.  The  former  is  by  far  the  more  im-
portant of  the  two,  because  the  most  essential  feature  in
woman's  life  is  her  relation  to  man.

Female  honor  is  the  general  opinion  in  regard  to  a  girl
that  she  is  pure,  and  in  regard  to  a  wife  that  she  is  faith-
ful. The  importance  of  this  opinion  rests  upon  the  follow-
ing considerations.  Women  depend  upon  men  in  all
the  relations  of  life  ;  men  upon  women  it  might  be
said,  in  one  only.  So  an  arrangement  is  made  for  mutual
interdependence — man  undertaking  responsibility  for  all
woman's  needs  and  also  for  the  children  that  spring  from
their  union — an  arrangement  on  which  is  based  the  welfare
of  the  whole  female  race.  To  carry  out  this  plan,  women
have  to  band  together  with  a  show  of  esprit  de  corps,  and
present  one  undivided  front  to  their  common  enemy,  man
— who  possesses  all  the  good  things  of  the  earth,  in  virtue
of  his  superior  physical  and  intellectual  power — in  order
to  lay  siege  to  and  conquer  him,  and  so  get  possession  of
him  and  a  share  of  those  good  things.  To  this  end  the
honor  of  all  women  depends  upon  the  enforcement  of  the
rule  that  no  woman  should  give  herself  to  a  man  except  in
marriage,  in  order  that  every  man  may  be  forced,  as  it
were,  to  surrender  and  ally  himself  with  a  woman  ;  by  this
arrangement  provision  is  made  for  the  whole  of  the  female
race.  This  is  a  result,  however  which  can  be  obtained  only
by  a  strict  observance  of  the  rule  ;  and,  accordingly,  women
everywhere  show  true  esprit  de  corps,  in  carefully  insisting
upon  its  maintenance.  Any  girl  who  commits  a  breach  of
the  rule  betrays  the  whole  female  race,  because  its  welfare
would  be  destroyed  if  every  woman  were  to  do  likewise  ;  so
*he  is  cast  out  with  shame  as  one  who  has  lost  her  honor.
No  woman  will  have  anything  more  to  do  with  her  ;  she
is  avoided  like  the  plague.  The  same  doom  is  awarded  to
a  woman  who  breaks  the  marriage  tie  ;  for  in  so  doing  she
is  false  to  the  terms  upon  which  the  man  capitulated  :
and  as  her  conduct  is  such  as  to  frighten  other  men  from
making  a  similar  surrender,  it  imperils  the  welfare  of  all
her  sisters.  Nay  more  ;  this  deception  and  coarse  breach
of  troth  is  a  crime  punishable  by  the  loss,  not  only  of  per-
sonal, but  also  of  civic  honor.     This  is  why  we  minimize


56  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

the  shame  of  a  girl,  but  not  of  a  wife  ;  because,  in  the
former  case,  marriage  can  restore  honor,  while  in  the  latter,
no  atonement  can  be  made  for  the  breach  of  contract.

Once  this  esprit  de  corps  is  acknowledged  to  be  the  foun-
dation of  female  honor,  and  is  seen  to  be  a  wholesome,  nay,
a  necessary  arrangement,  as  at  bottom  a  matter  of  prudence
and  interest,  its  extreme  importance  for  the  welfare  of
women  will  be  recognized.  But  it  does  not  possess  anything
more  than  a  relative  value.  It  is  no  absolute  end,  lying  be-
yond all  other  aim  of  existence  and  valued  above  life  itself.
In  this  view,  there  will  be  nothing  to  applaud  in  the  forced
and  extravagant  conduct  of  aLucretia  or  a  Virginius — con-
duct which  can  easily  degenerate  into  tragic  farce,  and
produce  a  terrible  feeling  of  revulsion.  The  conclusion  of
Emilia  Galotti,  for  instance,  makes  one  leave  the  theater
completely  ill  at  ease;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  all  the  rules
of  female  honor  cannot  prevent  a  certain  sympathy  with
Clara  in  Egmont.  To  carry  this  principle  of  female  honor
too  iar  is  to  forget  the  end  in  thinking  of  the  means — and
this  is  just  what  people  often  do;  for  such  exaggeration
suggests  that  the  value  of  sexual  honor  is  absolute;  while
the  truth  is  that  it  is  more  relative  than  any  Ither  kind.
One  might  go  so  far  as  to  say  that  its  value  is  purely  con-
ventional, when  one  sees  from  Thomasius  how  in  all  ages
and  countries,  up  to  the  time  of  the  Eeformation,  irregu-
larities were  permitted  and  recognized  by  law,  with  no
derogation  to  female  honor — not  to  speak  of  the  temple  of
Mylitta  at  Babylon.*

There  are  also  of  course,  certain  circumstances  in  civil  life
which  make  external  forms  of  marriage  impossible,  especially
in  Catholic  countries,  where  there  is  no  such  thing  as  divorce^
Ruling  princes  everywhere,  would,  inrny  opinion,  do  much
better,  from  a  moral  point  of  view,  to  dispense  with  forms
altogether  rather  than  contract  a  morganatic  marriage,  the
descendants  of  which  might  raise  claims  to  the  throne  if  the
legitimate  stock  happened  to  die  out:  so  that  there  is  a  pos-
sibility, though  perhaps,  a  remote  one,  that  a  morganatic
marriage  might  produce  a  civil  war.  And,  besides,  such  a
marriage,  concluded  in  defiance  of  all  outward  ceremony,  is
a  concession  made  to  women  and  priests — two  classes  of
persons  to  whom  one  should  be  most  careful  to  give  as  little

*  Herodotus,  i.  199.


POSITION.  OR  A  MAN'S  PLACE.  57

tether  as  possible.  It  is  further  to  be  remarked  that  every
man  in  a  country  can  marry  the  woman  of  his  choice,  ex-
cept one  poor  individual,  namely  the  prince.  His  hand
belongs  to  his  country,  and  can  be  given  in  marriage  only
for  reasons  of  state,  that  is,  for  the  good  of  the  country.
Still,  for  all  that,  he  is  a  man;  and,  as  a  man,  he  likes  to
follow  whither  his  heart  leads.  It  is  an  unjust,  ungrateful
and  priggish  thing  to  forbid,  or  to  desire  to  forbid,  a  prince
from  following  his  inclinations  in  this  matter;  of  course,  a&
long  as  the  lady  has  no  influence  upon  the  government  of
the  country.  From  her  point  of  view  she  occupies  an  ex-
ceptional position,  and  does  not  come  under  the  ordinary
rules  of  sexual  honor:  for  she  has  merely  given  herself  to  a
man  who  loves  her,  and  whom  she  loves  but  cannot  marry.
And  in  general,  the  fact  that  the  principle  of  female  honor
has  no  origin  in  nature,  is  shown  by  the  many  bloody  sacri-
fices which  have  been  offered  to  it — the  murder  of  chil-
dren and  the  mother's  suicide.  No  doubt  a  girl  who  con-
travenes the  code  commits  a  breach  of  faith  against  her  whole
sex:  but  this  faith  is  one  which  is  only  secretly  taken  for
granted,  and  not  sworn  to.  And  since,  in  most  cases,  her
own  prospects  suffer  most  immediately,  her  folly  is  infinitely
greater  than  her  crime.

The  corresponding  virtue  in  men  is  a  product  of  the  one
I  have  been  discussing.  It  is  their  esprit  de  corps,  which
demands  that,  once  a  man  has  made  that  surrender  of  him-
self in  marriage  which  is  so  advantageous  to  his  conqueror,
he  shall  take  care  that  the  terms  of  the  treaty  are  maintained
both  in  order  that  the  agreement  itself  may  lose  none  of  its
force  by  the  permission  of  any  laxity  in  its  observance,  and
that  men,  having  given  up  everything,  may,  at  least,  be  as-
sured of  their  bargain,  namely,  exclusive  possession.  Ac-
cordingly, it  is  part  of  a  man's  honor  to  resent  a  breach  of
the  marriage  tie  on  the  part  of  his  wife,  and  to  punish  it,
at  the  very  least  by  separating  from  her.  If  he  condones  the
offense,  his  fellow-men  cry  shame  upon  him:  but  the  shame
in  this  case  is  not  nearly  so  foul  as  that  of  the  woman  who
has  lost  her  honor:  the  stain  is  by  no  means  of  so  deep  a
dye — levioris  notae  macula — because  a  man's  relation  to
woman  is  subordinate  to  many  other  and  more  important
affairs  in  his  life.  The  two  great  dramatic  poets  of  modern
times  have  each  taken  man's  honor  as  the  theme  of  two
plays;  Shakespeare  in  "Othello"  and  "The  Winter's  Tale/'


58  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE,

and  Calderon  in  "El  medico  de  su  honra"  (the  "Physician
of  his  Honor)/'  and  "Asecreto  agravios  ecreta  vengeanza"
(f'for  Secret  Insult  Secret  Vengeance)."  It  should  be  said,
however  that  honor  demands  the  punishment  of  the  wife
only ;  to  punish  her  paramour  too,  is  a  work  of  snperogation.
This  confirms  the  view  I  have  taken,  that  a  man's  honor
originates  in  esprit  de  corps.

The  kind  of  honor  which  I  have  been  discussing  hitherto
has  always  existed  in  its  various  forms  and  principles
among  all  nations  and  at  all  times  ;  although  the  history
of  female  honor  shows  that  its  principles  have  undergone
certain  local  modifications  at  different  periods.  But  there
is  another  species  of  honor  which  differs  from  this  entirely,
a  species  of  honor  of  which  the  Greeks  and  Romans  had
no  conception,  and  up  to  this  day  it  is  perfectly  unknown
among  Chinese,  Hindoos  or  Mohammedans.  It  is  a
kind  of  honor  which  arose  only  in  the  Middle  Age,  and  is
indigenous  only  to  Christian  Europe,  nay,  only  to  an  ex-
tremely small  portion  of  the  population,  that  is  to  say,  the
higher  classes  of  society  and  those  who  ape  them.  It  is
knightly  honor,  or  point  cVhonneur.  Its  principles  are
quite  different  from  those  which  underlie  the  kind  of  honor
I  have  been  treating  until  now,  and  iu  some  respects  are
even  opposed  to  them.  The  sort  I  am  referring  to  produces
the  cavalier ;  while  the  other  kind  creates  the  man  of
honor.  As  this  is  so,  I  shall  proceed  to  give  an  explana>
tion  of  its  principles,  as  a  kind  of  code  or  mirror  ot
knightly  courtesy.

(1.)  To  begin  with,  honor  of  this  sort  consists,  not  in
other  people's  opinion  of  what  we  are  worth,  but  wholly
and  entirely  in  whether  they  express  it  or  not,  no  matter
whether  they  really  have  any  opinion  at  all,  let  alone
whether  they  know  of  reasons  for  having  one.  Other
people  may  entertain  the  worst  opinion  of  us  in  con-
sequence of  what  we  do,  and  may  despise  us  as  much  as  they
like;  so  long  as  no  one  dares  to  give  expression  to  his
opinion,  our  honor  remains  untarnished.  So  if  our
actions  and  qualities  compel  the  highest  respect  from  other
people,  and,  they  have  no  option  but  to  give  this  respect
— as  soon  as  any  one,  no  matter  how  wicked  or  foolish  he
may  be,  utters  something  depreciatory  of  us,  our  honor  is
offended,  nay,  gone  forever,  unless  we  can  manage  to
restore  it.     A  superfluous  proof  of  what  I  say,    namely,


POSITION,  OR  A  MAN'S  PLAGE.  §9

that  knightly  honor  depends,  not  upon  what  people  think,
but  upon  what  they  say,  is  furnished  by  the  fact  that  in-
sults can  be  withdrawn,  or,  if  necessary,  from  thesubjectof
an  apology,  which  makes  them  as  though  they  had  never
been  uttered.  Whether  the  opinion  which  underlay  the
expression  has  also  been  rectified,  and  why  the  expression
should  ever  have  been  used,  are  questions  which  are
perfectly  unimportant :  so  long  as  the  statement  is  with-
drawn, all  is  well.  The  truth  is  that  conduct  of  this  kind
aims,  not  at  earning  respect,  but  at  extorting  it.

(2.)  In  the  second  place,  this  sort  of  honor  rests,  not  on
what  a  man  does,  but  on  what  he  suffers,  the  obstacles
he  encounters  ;  differing  from  the  honor  which  prevails  in
all  else,  in  consisting,  not  in  what  he  says  or  does  himself,
but  in  what  another  man  says  or  does.  His  honor  is  thus
at  the  mercy  of  every  man  who  can  talk  it  away  on  the  tip
of  his  tongue  ;  and  if  he  attacks  it,  in  a  moment  it  is  gone
forever — unless  the  man  who  is  attacked  manages  to  wrest
it  back  again  by  a  process  which  1  shall  mention  presently,
a  process  which  involves  danger  to  his  life,  health,  freedom,
property  and  peace  of  mind.  A  man's  whole  conduct  may
be  in  accordance  with  the  most  righteous  and  noble  prin-
ciples, his  spirit  may  be  the  purest  that  ever  breathed,  his
intellect  of  the  very  highest  order ;  and  yet  his  honor  may
•disappear  the  moment  that  any  one  is  pleased  to  insult
him,  any  one  at  all  who  has  not  offended  against  this  code
of  honor  himself,  let  him  be  the  most  worthless  rascal  or
the  most  stupid  beast,  an  idler,  gambler,  debtor,  a  man,  in
short,  of  no  account  at  all.  It  is  usually  this  sort  of
fellow  who  likes  to  insult  people  ;  for,  as  Seneca*  rightly
remarks,  "  ut  quisqne  contemtissimas  et  ludibrio  est  it  a
solutissimm  linguoe  est" — the  more  contemptible  and  ridicu-
lous a  man  is,  the  readier  he  is  wTith  his  tongue.  His  in-
sults are  most  likely  to  be  directed  against  the  very  kind
of  man  I  have  described,  because  people  of  different  tastes
can  never  be  friends,  and  the  sight  of  pre-eminent  merit
is  apt  to  raise  the  secret  ire  of  a  ne'er-do-well.  AVhat
Goethe  says  in  the  "  West-ostlicher  Divan,"  is  quite  true,
that  it  is  uselesss  to  complain  against  your  enemies  ;  for
they  can  never  become  your  friends,  if  your  whole  being
is  a  standing  reproach  to  them  :

*  "  \>e  ^onstantia."  11.


60  TEE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

'*  Was  klagst  du  iiber  Feinde  ?
Sollten  Solche  je  werden  Freunde
Denen  das  Wesen,  wie  du  bist,
Im  stillen  ein  ewiger  Vorwurf  ist?"

It  is  obvious  that  people  of  this  worthless  description
lave  good  cause  to  be  thankful  to  the  principle  of  honor,
aecause  it  puts  them  on  a  level  with  people  who  in  every
other  respect  stand  far  above  them.  If  a  fellow  likes  to
insult  any  one,  attribute  to  him,  for  example,  some  bad
quality,  this  is  taken  as  prinia  facie  a,  well-founded  opinion
true  in  fact;  a  decree,  as  it  were,  with  all  the  force  of  law;
nay,  if  it  is  not  at  once  wiped  out  in  blood,  it  is  a  judg-
ment which  holds  good  and  valid  to  all  time.  In  other
words,  the  man  who  is  insulted  remains — in  the  eyes  of  all
honorable  people — what  the  man  who  uttered  the  insult —
even  though  he  were  the  greatest  wretch  on  earth — was
pleased  to  call  him;  for  he  has  "put  up  with"  the  insult — the
technical  term,  I  believe.  Accordingly,  all  honorable
people  will  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  him,  and  treat
him  like  a  leper,  and,  it  may  be,  refuse  to  go  into  any  com-
pany where  he  may  be  found,  and  so  on.

This  wise  proceeding  may,  I  think,  be  traced  back  to  the
fact  that  in  the  Middle  Age,  up  to  the  fifteenth  century,  it
was  not  the  accuser  in  any  criminal  process  who  had  to
prove  the  guilt  of  the  accused,  but  the  accused  who  had  to
prove  his  innocence.*  This  he  could  do  by  swearing  he  was
not  guilty;  and  his  backers — consacramentales — had  to  come
and  swear  that  in  their  opinion  he  was  incapable  of  perjury.
If  he  could  find  no  one  to  help  him  in  this  way,  or  the  ac-
cuser took  objection  to  his  backers,  recourse  was  had  to
trial  "by  the  judgment  of  God,"  which  generally  meant  a
duel.  For  the  accused  was  now  in  disgrace,!  and  had  to
clear  himself.  Here  then  is  the  origin  of  the  notion  of
disgrace,  and  of  that  whole  system  which  prevails  nowa-
days among  honorable  people — only  that  the  oath  is  omitted.
This  is  also  the  explanation  of  that  deep  feeling  of  indigna-
tion which  honorable  people  are  called  upon  to  show  if  they

*  See  C.  G.  von  Wachter's  "Beitrage  zur  deutschen  Geschichte,"
especially  the  chapter  on  criminal  law.

f  Translator's  Note. — It  is  true  that  this  expression  has  another  and
special  meaning  in  the  technical  terminology  of  chivalry,  but  it  is  the
nearest  English  equivalent  wh^h  I  can  find  for  the  German — ein
BexJioiUner,


POSIT  fON,  OR  A.  MAN'S  PLACE.  61

are  given  the  lie:  it  is  a  reproach  which  they  say  must  be  wiped
out  in  blood.  It  seldom  comes  to  this  pass,  however,  though
lies  are  of  common  occurrence:  but  in  England,  more  than
elsewhere,  it  is  a  superstition  which  lias  taken  very  deep
root.  As  a  matter  of  order,  a  man  who  threatens  to  kill
mother  for  telling  a  lie  should  never  have  told  one  himself.
The  fact  is,  that  the  criminal  trial  of  the  Middle  Age  also
admitted  of  a  shorter  form.  In  reply  to  the  charge,  the
accused  answered:  "That  is  a  lie;"  whereupon  it  was  left  to
be  decided  by  "the  judgment  of  God."  Hence,  the  code  of
knightly  honor  prescribes  that,  when  the  lie  is  given,  an
appeal  to  arms  follows  as  a  matter  of  course.  So  much,  then
for  the  theory  of  insult.

But  there  is  something  even  worse  than  insult,  something
so  dreadful  that  I  must  beg  pardon  of  all  "honorable  people"
for  so  much  as  mentioning  it  in  this  code  of  knightly  honor
for  I  know  they  will  shiver,  and  their  hair  will  stand  on
end,  at  the  very  thought  of  it — the  summum  malum  the
greatest  evil  on  earth,  worse  than  death  and  damnation.  A
man  may  give  another — horribile  dictu! — a  slap  or  a  blow.
This  is  such  an  awful  thing,  and  so  utterly  fatal  to  all
honor,  that,  while  any  other  species  of  insult  may  be  healed
by  blood-letting,  this  can  be  cured  only  by  the  coup-de-
grdce.

(3.)  In  the  third  place,  this  kind  of  hc^or  has  absolutely
nothing  to  do  with  what  a  man  may  be  in  and  for  himself;
or,  again,  with  the  question  whether  his  moral  character  can
ever  become  better  or  worse,  and  all  such  pedantic  inquiries.
If  your  honor  happens  to  be  attacked,  or  to  all  appearances
gone,  it  can  very  soon  be  restored  in  its  entirety  if  you  are
only  quick  enough  in  having  recourse  to  the  one  universal
remedy — a  duel.  But  if  the  aggressor  does  not  belong  to
the  classes  which  recognize  the  code  of  knightly  honor,  or
has  himself  once  offended  against  it,  there  is  a  safer  way  of
meeting  any  attack  upon  your  honor,  whether  it  consists
in  blows,  or  merely  in  words.  If  you  are  armed,  you  can
strike  down  your  opponent  on  the  spot,  or  perhaps  an  hour
later.     This  will  restore  your  honor.

But  if  you  wish  to  avoid  such  an  extreme  step,  from  fear
of  any  unpleasant  consequences  arising  therefrom,  or  from
uncertainty  as  to  whether  the  aggressor  is  subject  to  the
laws  of  knightly  honor  or  not,  there  is  another  means  of
making  your  position  good,  namely,  the  Avantage.     This


62  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

consists  in  returning  rudeness  with  still  greater  rudeness,
and  if  insults  are  no  use,  yon  can  try  a  blow,  which  forms  a
sort  of  climax  in  the  redemption  of  your  honor;  for  instance
a  box  on  the  ear  may  be  cured  by  a  blow  with  a  stick,  and
a  blow  with  a  stick  by  a  thrashing  with  a  horsewhip;  and
as  the  approved  remedy  for  this  last,  some  people  recom-
mend you  to  spit  at  your  opponent.  *  If  all  these  means
are  of  no  avail,  you  must  not  shrink  from  drawing  blood.
And  the  reason  for  these  methods  of  wiping  out  insult  is,
in  this  code,  as  follows:

(4.)  To  receive  an  insult  is  disgraceful;  to  give  one,honor-
able.  Let  me  take  an  example.  My  opponent  has  truth,
right  and  reason  on  his  side.  Very  well.  I  insult  him.
Thereupon  right  and  honor  leave  him  and  come  to  me,  and
for  the  time  being,  he  has  lost  them — until  he  gets  them
back,  not  by  the  exercise  of  right  or  reason,  but  by  shoot-
ing and  sticking  me.  Accordingly,  rudeness  is  a  quality
which,  in  point  of  honor,  is  a  substitute  for  any  other  and
outweighs  them  all.  The  rudest  is  always  right.  What
more  do  you  want?  However  stupid,  bad  or  Avicked  a  man
may  have  been,  if  lie  is  only  rude  into  the  bargain,  he  con-
dones and  legitimizes  all  his  faults.  If  in  any  discussion
or  conversation,  another  man  shows  more  knowledge,
greater  love  of  truth,  a  sounder  judgment,  better  under-
standing than  we  or  generally  exhibits  intellectual  qualities
which  cast  ours  into  the  shade,  we  can  at  once  annul  his
superiority  and  our  own  shallowness,  and  in  our  turn  be
superior  to  him,  by  being  insulting  and  offensive.  For
rudeness  is  better  than  any  argument;  it  totally  eclipses  in-
tellect. If  our  opponent  does  not  care  for  our  mode  of  at-
tack, and  will  not  answer  still  more  rudely,  so  as  to  plunge
us  into  the  ignoble  rivalry  of  the  Avantage,  we  are  the
victors  and  honor  is  on  our  side.  Truth,  knowledge,
understanding,  intellect,  wit,  must  beat  a  retreat  and  leave
the  field  to  this  almighty  insolence.

"Honorable  people"  immediately  make  a  show  of  moun-
ting their  war-horse,  if  any  one  utters  an  opinion  adverse  to
theirs,  or  shows  more  intelligence  than  they  can  muster;
and  if  in  any  controversy  they  are  at  a  loss  for  a  reply,  they

*  Translator's  Note. — It  must  be  remembered  that  Schopenhauer
is  here  describing-,  or  perhaps  caricaturing-,  the  manners  and  customs
of  the  German  aristocracy  of  half  a  century  ago.  Now,  of  sourso,
nous  avons  change  tout  cela!


POSITION,  OR  A  MAN'S  PLACE.  63

look  about  for  some  weapon  of  rudeness,  which  will  serve  as
well  and  come  readier  to  hand;  so  they  retire  masters  of  the
position.  It  must  now  be  obvious  that  people  are  quite
right  in  applauding  this  principle  of  honor  as  having
ennobled  the  tone  of  society.  This  principle  springs  from
another,  which  forms  the  heart  and  soul  of  the  entire
code.

(5.)  Fifthly,  the  code  implies  that  the  highest  court  to
which  a  man  can  appeal  in  any  differences  he  may  have
with  another  on  a  point  of  honor  is  the  court  of  physical
force,  that  is,  of  brutality.  Every  piece  of  rudeness  is,
strictly  speaking,  an  appeal  to  brutality:  for  it  is  a  declara-
tion that  intellectual  strength  and  moral  insight  are  in-
competent to  decide,  and  that  the  battle  must  be  fought
out  by  physical  force — a  struggle  which,  in  the  case  of  man,
whom  Franklin  defines  as  a  tool-making  animal,  is  decided
by  the  weapons  peculiar  to  the  species;  and  the  decision  is
irrevocable.  This  is  the  well-known  principle  of  the  right
of  might — irony,  of  course,  like  the  wit  of  a  fool,  a  par-
allel phrase.  The  honor  of  a  knight  may  be  called  the  glory
of  might.

(6.)  Lastly,  if,  as  we  saw  above,  civic  honor  is  very
scrupulous  in  the  matter  of  meum  and  tuum,  paying
great  respect  to  obligations  and  a  promise  once  made,  the
code  we  are  here  discussing  displays,  on  the  other  hand,
the  noblest  liberality.  There  is  only  one  word  which  may
not  be  broken,  the  word  of  honor — "upon  my  honor/' as
people  say — the  presumption  being,  of  course,  that  every
other  form  of  promise  may  be  broken.  Nay,  if  the  worst
comes  to  the  worst,  it  is  easy  to  break  even  one's  word  of
honor,  and  still  remain  honorable — again  by  adopting  that
universal  remedy,  the  duel,  and  fighting  with  those  who
maintain  that  we  pledged  our  word.  Further,  there  is  one
debt,  and  one  alone,  that  under  no  circumstances  must  be  left
unpaid — a  gambling  debt,  which  has  accordingly  been
called  a  debt  of  honor.  In  all  other  kinds  of  debt  you  may
cheat  Jews  and  Christians  as  much  as  you  like ;  and  your
knightly  honor  remains  without  a  stain.

The  unprejudiced  reader  will  see  at  once  that  such  a
strange,  savage  and  ridiculous  code  of  honor  as  this  has  no
foundation  in  human  nature,  nor  any  warrant  in  a  healthy
view  of  human  affairs.  The  extremely  narrow  sphere  of
its  operation  serves  only  to  intensify  the  feeling,  which  is


64  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

exclusively  confined  to.  Europe  since  the  Middle  Age,  and
then  only  to  the  upper  classes,  officers  and  soldiers,  and
people  who  imitate  them.  Neither  Greeks  nor  Romans
knew  anything  of  this  code  of  honor  or  of  its  principles  ;
nor  the  highly  civilized  nations  of  Asia,  ancient  or  modern.
Among  them  no  other  kind  of  honor  is  recognized  but
that  which  I  discussed  first,  in  virtue  of  which  a  man  is
what  lie  shows  himself  to  be  by  his  actions,  not  what  any
wagging  tongue  is  pleased  to  say  of  him.  They  thought
that  what  a  man  said  or  did  might  perhaps  affect  his  own
honor,  but  not  any  other  man's.  To  them,  a  blow  was
but  a  blow — and  any  horse  or  donkey  could  give  a  harder
one — a  blow  which  under  certain  circumstances  might
make  a  man  angry  and  demand  immediate  vengeance;
but  it  had  nothing  to  do  with  honor.  No  one  kept  ac-
count of  blows  or  insulting  words,  or  of  the  satisfaction
which  was  demanded  or  omitted  to  be  demanded.  Yet  in
personal  bravery  and  contempt  of  death,  the  ancients  were
certainly  not  inferior  to  the  nations  of  Christian  Europe.
The  Greeks  and  Romans  were  thorough  heroes,  if  you  like  ;
but  they  knew  nothing  about poi?it  cVhonneur.  If  they
had  any  idea  of  a  duel,  it  was  totally  unconnected  with  the
life  of  the  nobles  ;  it  was  merely  the  exhibition  of  mer-
cenary gladiators,  slaves  devoted  to  slaughter,  condemned
criminals,  who,  alternately  with  wild  beasts,  were  set  to
butcher  one  another  to  make  a  Roman  holiday.  When
Christianity  was  introduced,  gladiatorial  shows  were  done
away  with,  and  their  place  taken,  in  Christian  times,  by
the  "duel,  which  was  a  way  of  settling  difficulties  by  "the
judgment  of  God."  If  the  gladiatorial  fight  was  a  cruel
sacrifice  to  the  prevailing  desire  for  great  spectacles,
dueling  is  a  cruel  sacrifice  to  existing  prejudices  ;  a  sacrifice,
not  of  criminals,  slaves  and  prisoners,  but  of  the  noble  and
the  free.*

There  are  a  great  many  traits  in  the  character  of  tho
ancients  which  show  that  they  were  entirely  free  from  these
prejudices.  When  for  instance,  Marius  was  summoned
to  a  duel  by  a  Teutonic  chief,  he  returned  answer  to  the
effect  that,  if  the  chief  were  tired  of  his  life,  he  might  go

*  Translator's  Note.  These  and  other  remarks  on  dueling  will
no  doubt  wear  a  belated  look  to  English  readers ;  but  they  are
hardly  yet  antiquated  for  most  parts  of  the  Continent,


POSITION,  On  A  MAN'S  PLACE.  65

and  hang  himself  ;  at  the  same  time  he  offered  him  a
veteran  gladiator  for  a  round  or  two.  Plutarch  relates  in
his  life  of  Themistocles  that  Eurybiades,  who  was  in  com-
mand of  the  fleet,  once  raised  his  stick  to  strike  him  ',
whereupon  Themistocles,  instead  of  drawing  his  sword,
simply  said  :  "  Strike,  but  hear  me."  How  sorry  the  reader
must  be,  if  he  is  an  honorable  man,  to  find  that  we  have
no  information  that  the  Athenian  officers  refused  in  a  body
to  serve  any  longer  under  Themistocles,  if  he  acted  like
that !  There  is  a  modern  French  writer  who  declares  that
if  any  one  considers  Demosthenes  a  man  of  honor,  his
ignorance  will  excite  a  smile  of  pity,  and  that  Cicero  was
not  a  man  of  honor  either!*  In  a  certain  passage  in
Plato's  "  Laws,"f  the  philosopher  speaks  at  length  of  odxia
or  assault,  showing  us  clearly  enough  that  the  ancients  had
no  notion  of  any  feeling  of  honor  in  connection  with  such
matters.  Socrates'  frequent  discussions  were  often  fol-
lowed by  his  being  severely  handled,  and  he  bore  it  all
mildly.  Once,  for  instance,  when  somebody  kicked  him,  the
patience  with  which  he  took  the  insult  surprised  one  of
his  friends.  "  Do  you  think,"  said  Socrates,  "  that  if  an  ass
happened  to  kick  me,  I  should  resent  it  ?"J  On  another
occasion,  when  he  was  asked,  "  Has  not  that  lellow  abused
and  insulted  you  ?"  "No,"  washis  answer,  "what  he  says  is
not  addressed  to  me."§  Stobasus  has  preserved  a  long  passage
from  Musonius,  from  which  we  can  see  how  the  ancients
treated  insults.  They  knew  no  other  form  of  satisfaction
than  that  which  the  law  provided,  and  wise  people  despised
even  this.  If  a  Greek  received  a  box  on  the  ear,  he  could
get  satisfaction  by  the  aid  of  the  law  :  as  is  evident  from
Plato's  "Gorgias,"  where  Socrates' opinion  may  be  found.
The  same  thing  may  be  seen  in  the  account  given  by
Gellius  of  one  Lucius  Veratius,  who  had  the  audacity  to
give  some  Roman  citizens  whom  he  met  on  the  road  a  box
on  the  ear,  without  any  provocation  whatever  ;  but  to
avoid  any  ulterior  consequences,  he  told  a  slave  to  bring  a
bag  of  small  money,  and  on  the  spot  paid  the  trivial  legal
penalty  to  the  men  whom  he  had  astonished  by  his
conduct.

*  Soirees  litteraires  :  par  C.  Durand.     Rouen,  1828.      f  Bk.  ix
\  Diogene?  Laertius,  ii.  21.  §  Ibid.  36.


66  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

Crates,  the  celebrated  cynic  philosopher,  got  such  a
box  on  the  ear  from  Nieodromus,  the  musician,  that  his  face
swelled  up  and  became  black  and  blue;  whereupon  he  put
a  label  on  his  forehead,  with  the  inscription,  Nicodromus
fecit,  which  brought  much  disgrace  to  the  fluteplayer  who
had  committed  such  a  piece  of  brutality  upon  the  man
whom  all  Athens  honored  as  a  household  god.*  And  in  a
letter  to  Melesippus,  Diogenes  of  Sinope  tells  us  that  he
got  a  beating  from  the  drunken  sons  of  the  Athenians  ;  but
he  adds  that  it  was  a  matter  of  no  importance.!  And
Seneca  devotes  the  last  few  chapters  of  his  "  De  Constantia  "
to  a  lengthy  discussion  on  insult — contumelia ;  in  order  to
show  that  a  wise  man  will  take  no  notice  of  it.  In  Chapter
XIV.  he  says,  "  What  shall  a  wise  man  do,  if  he  is  given  a
blow  ?  What  Cato  did,  when  someone  struck  him  on  the
mouth  ;  not  fire  up  or  avenge  the  insult,  or  even  return
the  blow,  but  simply  ignore  it."

"Yes,"you  say,  "but  these  men  were  philosophers." — And
you  are  fools,  eh?     Precisely.

It  is  clear  that  the  whole  code  of  knightly  honor  was  ut-
terly unknown  to  the  ancients;  for  the  simple  reason  that
they  always  took  a  natural  and  unprejudiced  view  of  human
affairs,  and  did  not  allow  themselves  to  be  influenced  by  any
such  vicious  and  abominable  folly.  A  blow  in  the  face  was
to  them  a  blow  and  nothing  more,  a  trivial  physical  injury;
wheras  the  moderns  make  a  catastrophe  out  of  it,  a  theme
for  a  tragedy:  as,  for  instance,  in  the  Cid  of  Corneille,  or
in  a  recent  German  comedy  of  middle  class  life,  called  "The
Power  of  Circumstance,"  which  should  have  been  entitled
"The  Power  of  Prejudice."  If  a  member  of  the  national
assembly  at  Paris  got  a  blow  on  the  ear,  it  would  resound
from  one  end  of  Europe  to  the  other.  The  examples  which
I  have  given  of  the  way  in  which  such  an  occurrence  would
have  been  treated  in  classic  times  may  not  suit  the  ideas  of
"honorable  people;'"  so  let  me  recommend  to  their  notice,
as  a  kind  of  antidote,  the  story  of  Monsieur  Desglands  in
Diderot's  masterpiece,  "Jacques  le  fataliste."  It  is  an  excel-
lent specimen  of  modern  knightly  honor,  which,  no  doubt
they  will  find  enjoyable  and  edifying.  J;

*  Diogenes  Laertius,  vi.  87,  and  Apul  :  Flor  :  p.  126.

f  Cf.  Casaubon's  Note,  ad  Diog.   Laert.,  vi.  33.

I  Translator's  Note. — The  story  to  which  Schopenhauer  here  refers


POSITION,  OR  A  MAN'S  PLACE.  67

From  what  I  have  said  it  must  be  quite  evident  that  the
principle  of  knightly  honor  has  no  essential  and  spontaneous
origin  in  human  nature.  It  is  an  artificial  product,  and  its
source  is  not  hard  to  find.  Its  existence  obviously  dates
from  the  time  when  people  used  their  fists  more  than  their
heads,  when  priestcraft  had  enchained  the  human  intellect,
the  much  bepraised  Middle  Age,  with  its  system  of  chiv-
alry. That  was  the  time  when  people  let  the  Almighty
not  only  care  for  them  but  judge  for  them  too:  when  dif-
ficult cases  were  decided  by  an  ordeal,  a  "judgment  of  God;"
which,  with  few  exceptions,  meant  a  duel,  not  only  where
nobles  were  concerned,  but  in  the  case  of  ordinary  citizens
as  well.  There  is  a  neat  illustration  of  this  in  Shakespeare's
"Henry  VI,"*  Every  judicial  sentence  was  subject  to  an  ap-
peal to  arms — a  court,  as  it  were  of  higher  instance,  namely
"the  judgment  of  God;"  and  this  really  meant  that  physical
strength  and  activity,  that  is,  our  animal  nature,  usurped
the  place  of  reason  on  the  judgment  seat,  deciding  in  mat-
ters of  right  and  wrong,  not  by  what  a  man  had  done,  but
by  the  force  with  which  he  was  opposed,  the  same  system,  in
fact  as  prevails  to-day  under  the  principles  of  knightly  honor.
If  any  one  doubts  that  such  is  really  the  origin  of  our
modern  duel,  let  him  read  an  excellent  work  by  J.  B.  Mil-
lingen,  "The  History  of  Dueling."  f  Nay,  you  may  still
find  among  the  supporters  of  the  system — who,  by  the  way,
are  not  usually  the  most  educated  or  thoughtful  of  men —
some  who  look  upon  the  result  of  a  duel  as  really  consti-
tuting a  divine  judgment  in  the  matter  in  dispute:  no  doubt
in  consequence  of  the  traditional  feeling  on  the  subject.

is  briefly  as  follows:  Two  gentlemen,  one  of  whom  was  named  Des-
glands, were  paying  court  to  the  same  lady.  As  they  sat  at  table  side
by  side,  with  the  lady  opposite,  Desglands  did  his  best  to  charm  her
with  his  conversation;  but  she  pretended  not  to  hear  him,  and  kept
looking  at  his  rival.  In  the  agony  of  jealousy,  Desglands,  as  he  was
holding  a  fresh  egg  in  his  hand,  involuntarily  crushed  it;  the  shell
broke,  and  its  contents  bespattered  his  rival's  face.  Seeing  him  raise
bis  hand,  Desglands  seized  it  and  whispered:  "Sir,  I  take  it  as  given."
The  next  day  Desglands  appeared  with  a  large  piece  of  black  stick-
ing-plaster upon  his  right  cheek.  In  the  duel  which  followed,  Des-
glands severely  wounded  his  rival;  upon  which  he  reduced  the  size  of
the  plaster.  When  his  rival  recovered,  they  had  another  duel;  Des-
glands drew  blood  again,  and  again  made  his  plaster  a  little  smaller;
and  so  on  for  five  or  six  times.  After  every  duel  Desglands'  plaster
grew  less  and  less,  until  at  last  his  rival  was  killed.

*Part  II.,  Act  2,  Sc.  §.  \  Published  in  184»,


6S  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

But  leaving  aside  the  question  of  origin,  it  must  now  be
clear  to  us  that  the  main  tendency  of  the  principle  is  to
use  physical  menace  for  the  purpose  of  extorting  an  appear-
ance of  respect  which  is  deemed  too  difficult  or  superfluous
to  acquire  in  reality;  a  proceeding  which  comes  to  much
the  same  thing  as  if  you  were  to  prove  the  warmth  of  your
room  by  holding  your  hand  on  the  thermometer  and  so
make  it  rise.  In  fact,  the  kernel  of  the  matter  is  this:
whereas  civic  honor  aims  at  peaceable  intercourse,  and  con-
sists in  the  opinion  of  other  people  that  we  deserve  full
confidence,  because  we  pay  unconditional  respect  to  their
rights;  knightly  honor,  on  the  other  hand,  lays  down  that
we  are  to  be  feared,  as  being  determined  at  all  costs  to
maintain  our  own.

As  not  much  reliance  can  be  placed  upon  human  integrity,
the  principle  that  it  is  more  essential  to  arouse  fear  than  to
invite  confidence  would  not,  perhaps,  be  a  false  one,  if  we
were  living  in  a  state  of  nature,  where  every  man  would
have  to  protect  himself  and  directly  maintain  his  own
rights.  But  in  civilized  life,  when  the  state  undertakes  the
protection  of  our  person  and  property,  the  principle  is  no
longer  applicable:  it  stands,  like  the  castles  and  watch-
towers  of  the  age  when  might  was  right,  a  useless  and  for-
lorn object,  amid  well-tilled  fields  and  frequented  roads,  or
even  railways.

Accordingly,  the  application  of  knightly  honor,  which
still  recognizes  this  principle,  is  confined  to  those  small
cases  of  personal  assault  which  meet  with  but  slight  punish-
ment at  the  hands  of  the  law,  or  even  none  at  all,  for  de
minimis  non — mere  trivial  wrongs,  committed  sometimes
only  in  jest.  The  consequence  of  this  limited  application
of  the  principle  is  that  it  has  forced  itself  into  an  exagger-
ated respect  for  the  value  of  the  person — a  respect  utterly
alien  to  the  nature,  constitution  or  destiny  of  man — which
it  has  elevated  into  a  species  of  sanctity:  and  as  it  con-
siders that  the  state  has  imposed  a  very  insufficient  penalty
on  the  commission  of  such  trivial  injuries,  it  takes  upon
itself  to  punish  them  by  attacking  the  aggressor  in  life  or
limb.  The  whole  thing  manifestly  rests  upon  an  excessive
degree  of  arrogant  pride,  which,  completely  forgetting
what  man  really  is,  claims  that  he  shall  be  absolutely  free
from  all  attack  or  even  censure.  Those  who  determine
to  carry  out  this  principle  by   main,   force,  and   announce,


POSITION,  OR  A  MAN'S  PLACE.  60

as  their  rule  of  action,  "whoever  insults  or  strikes  me  shall
die!"  ought  for  their  pains  to  be  banished  the  country.*

As  a  palliative  to  tins  rash  arrogance,  people  are  in  the
habit  of  giving  way  on  everything.  If  two  intrepid  persons
meet,  and  neither  will  give  way,  the  slightest  difference
may  cause  a  shower  of  abuse,  then  fisticuffs,  and,  finally,
a  fatal  blow:  so  that  it  would  really  be  a  more  decorous
proceeding  to  omit  the  intermediate  steps  and  appeal  to
arms  at  once.  An  appeal  to  arms  has  its  own  special  for-i
malities;  and  these  have  developed  into  a  rigid  and  precise
system  of  laws  and  regulations,  together  forming  the  most
solemn  farce  there  is — a  regular  temple  of  honor  dedicated
to  folly!  For  if  two  intrepid  persons  dispute  over  some
trivial  matter  (more  important  affairs  are  dealt  with  by
law),  one  of  them,  the  cleverer  of  the  two,  will  of  course
yield;  and  they  will  agree  to  differ.  That  this  is  so  is
proved  by  the  fact  that  common  people — or,  rather,  the
numerous  classes  of  the  community  who  do  not  acknowledge
the  principle  of  knightly  honor,  let  any  dispute  run  its
natural  course.  Among  these  classes  homicide  is  a  hun-
dred-fold rarer  than  among  those — and  they  amount  per-
haps, in  all,  to  hardly  one  in  a  thousand — who  pay  homage
to  the  principle  :  and  even  blows  are  of  no  very  frequent
occurrence.

Then  it  has  been  said  that  the  manners  and  tone  of  good
society  are  ultimately  based  upon  this  principle  of  honor,

*  Knightly  honor  is  the  child  of  pride  and  folly,  and  it  is  need,
not  pride,  which  is  the  heritage  of  the  human  race.  It  is  a,  very  re-
markable fact  that  this  extreme  form  of  pride  should  be  found  ex-
clusively among  the  adherents  of  the  religion  which  teaches  the
deepest  humility.  Still,  this  pride  must  not  be  put  down  to  religion,
but,  rather,  to  the  feudal  system,  which  made  every  nobleman  a  petty
sovereign  who  recognized  no  human  judge,  and  learned  to  regard
his  person  as  sacred  and  inviolable,  and  any  attack  upon  it,  or  any
blow  or  insulting  word,  as  an  offense  punishable  by  death  The
principle  of  knightly  honor  and  of  the  duel  was  at  first  confined  to
the  nobles,  and,  later  on,  also  to  officers  in  the  army,  who,  enjoying
a  kind  of  off-and-on  relationship  with  the  upper  classes,  though  they
were  never  incorporated  with  them,  were  anxious  not  to  be  behind
them.  It  is  true  that  duels  were  the  product  of  the  old  ordeals;  but
the  latter  are  not  the  foundation,  but  rather  the  consequence  and  ap-
plication of  the  principle  of  honor:  the  man  who  recognized  no  human
judge  appealed  to  the  divine.  Ordeals,  however,  are  not  peculiar  to
Christendom:  they  maybe  found  in  great  force  among  the  Hindoos,
especially  of  ancient  times;  and  there  are  traces  of  them  even  now.


fO  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

which,  with  its  system  of  duels,  is  made  out  to  be  a  bul-
wark against  the  assaults  of  savagery  and  rudeness.  But
Athens,  Corinth  and  Rome  could  assuredly  boast  of  good,
nay,  excellent  society,  and  manners  and  tone  of  a  high  order,
without  any  support  from  the  bogey  of  knightly  honor.
It  is  true  that  women  did  not  occupy  that  prominent  place
in  ancient  society  which  they  hold  now,  when  conversation
has  taken  on  a  frivolous  and  trifling  character,  to  the  ex-
clusion of  that  weighty  discourse  which  distinguished  the
ancients.  This  change  has  certainly  contributed  a  great
deal  to  bring  about  the  tendency,  which  is  observable  in
good  society  nowadays,  to  prefer  personal  courage  to  the
possession  of  any  other  quality.  The  fact  is  that  personal
courage  is  really  a  very  subordinate  virtue — merely  the
distinguishing  mark  of  a  subaltern — a  virtue,  indeed,  in
which  we  are  surpassed  by  the  lower  animals  ;  or  else  you
would  not  hear  people  say,  "as  brave  as  a  lion."  Far  from
being  the  pillar  of  society  knightly  honor  affords  a  sure
asylum,  in  general  for  dishonesty  and  wickedness,  and  also
for  small  incivilities,  want  of  consideration  and  unmanner-
liness.  Rude  behavior  is  often  passed  over  in  silence  be-
cause no  one  cares  to  risk  his  neck  in  correcting  it.

After  what  I  have  said,  it  will  not  appear  strauge  thai
the  dueling  system  is  carried  to  the  highest  pitch  oi
sanguinary  zeal  precisely  in  that  nation  whose  political  and
financial  records  show  that  they  are  not  too  honorable
What  that  nation  is  like  in  its  private  and  domestic  life,  is
a  question  which  may  be  best  put  to  those  who  are  ex-
perienced in  the  matter.  Their  urbanity  and  social  culture
have  long  been  conspicuous  by  their  absence.

There  is  no  truth,  then,  in  such  pretexts.  It  can  be
urged  with  more  justice  that  as,  when  you  snarl  at  a  dog,
he  snarls  in  return,  and  when  you  pet  him,  he  fawns  ;  so
it  lies  in  the  nature  of  men  to  return  hostility  by  hostility,
and  to  be  embittered  and  irritated  at  any  signs  of  deprecia-
tory treatment  or  hatred:  and,  as  Cicero  says,  "there  is
something  so  penetrating  in  the  shaft  of  envy  that  even
men  of  wisdom  and  worth  find  its  wound  a  painful  one  ;"
and  nowhere  in  the  world,  except,  perhaps,  in  a  few
religious  sects,  is  an  insult  or  a  blow  taken  with  equanimity.
And  yet  a  natural  view  of  either  would  in  no  case  demand
anything  more  than  a  requital  proportionate  to  the  offense,
and  would  never  go  the  length  of  assiguing   death   as   the


POSITION,  OR  A  MAN'S  PLACE.  ft

proper  penalty  for  any  one  who  accuses  another  of  lying
or  stupidy  or  cowardice.  The  old  German  theory  of  blood
for  a  blow  is  a  revolting  superstition  of  the  age  of  chivalry.
And  in  aav  case  the  return  or  requital  of  an  insult  is  dic-
tated by  anger,  and  not  by  any  such  obligation  of  honor
and  duty  as  the  advocates  of  chivalry  seek  to  attach  to  it.
The  fact  is  that,  the  greater  the  truth,  the  greater  the
Slander  ;  and  it  is  clear  that  the  slightest  hint  of  some  real
delinquency  will  give  much  greater  offense  than  a  most
terrible  accusation  which  is  perfectly  baseless  :  so  that  a
man  who  is  quite  sure  that  he  has  done  nothing  to  deserve
a  reproach  may  treat  it  with  contempt,  and  will  be  safe  in
doing  so.  The  theory  of  honor  demands  that  he  shall  show
a  susceptibility  which  he  does  not  possess,  and  take  bloody
vengeance  for  insults  which  he  cannot  feel.  A  man  must
himself  have  but  a  poor  opinion  of  his  own  worth  who
hastens  to  prevent  the  utterance  of  an  unfavorable  opinion
by  giving  his  enemy  a  black  eye.

True  appreciation  of  his  own  value  will  make  a  man
really  indifferent  to  insult;  but  if  lie  cannot  help  resenting
it,  a  little  shrewdness  and  culture  will  enable  him  to  save
appearances  and  dissemble  his  anger.  If  we  could  only
get  rid  of  this  superstition  about  honor — the  idea,  I  mean,
that  it  disappears  when  you  are  insulted,  and  can  be
restored  by  returning  the  insult  ;  if  we  could  only  stop
people  from  thinking  that  wrong,  brutality  and  insolence
can  be  legalized  by  expressing  readiness  to  give  satisfaction,
that  is,  to  fight  in  defense  of  it,  we  should  all  soon  come
to  the  general  opinion  that  insult  and  depreciation  are
like  a  battle  in  which  the  loser  wins ;  and  that,  as  Vin-
cenzo  Monti  says,  abuse  resembles  a  church  procession,
because  it  always  returns  w  the  »oint  from  wiuv* "J  it  sets  out.
If  we  could  only  get  people  to  look  upon  insult  in  this
light,  we  should  no  longer  have  to  say  something  rude  in
order  to  prove  that  we  are  in  the  right.  Now,  unfortu-
nately, if  we  want  to  take  a  serious  view  of  any  question,  we
have  first  of  all  to  consider  whether  it  will  not  give  offense
in  some  way  or  other  to  the  dullard,  who  generally  shows
alarm  and  resentment  at  the  merest  sign  of  intelligence:
and  it  may  easily  happen  that  the  head  which  contains  the
intelligent  view  has  to  be  pitted  against  the  noddle  which
is  empty  of  everything  but  narrowness  and  stupidity.
If  all  this  were  done   away   with,  intellectual  superiority


72  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

could  take  the  leading  place  in  society  which  is  its  due — a
place  now  occupied,  though  people  do  not  like  to  confess
it,  by  excellence  of  physique,  mere  fighting  pluck,  in  fact :
and  the  natural  effect  of  such  a  change  would  be  that  the
best  kind  of  people  would  have  one  reason  the  less  for
withdrawing  from  society.  This  would  pave  the  way  for
the  introduction  of  real  courtesy  and  genuinely  good
society,  such  as  undoubtedly  existed  in  Athens,  Corinth
and  Rome.  If  any  one  wants  to  see  a  good  example  of
what  I  mean  I  should  like  him  to  read  Xenophon's
"Banquet."

The  last  argument  in  defense  of  knightly  honor  no  doubt
is,  that,  but  for  its  existence,  the  world — awful  thought!
— would  be  a  regular  bear-garden.  To  which  I  may  briefly
reply  that  nine  hundred  and  ninety-nine  people  out  of  a
thousand  who  do  not  recognize  the  code,  have  often  given
and  received  a  blow  without  any  fatal  consequences:  where-
as among  the  adherents  of  the  code,  a  blow  usually  means
death  to  one  of  the  parties.  But  let  me  examine  this  argu-
ment more  closely.

I  have  often  tried  to  find  some  tenable,  or  at  any  rate,
plausible  basis — other  than  a  merely  conventional  one — some
positive  reasons,  that  is  to  say,  for  the  rooted  conviction
which  a  portion  of  mankind  entertains,  that  a  blow  is  a  very
dreadful  thing;  but  I  have  looked  for  it  in  vain,  either  in
the  animal  or  in  the  rational  side  of  human  nature.  A
blow  is,  and  always  will  be,  a  trivial  physical  injury  which
one  man  can  do  to  another:  proving,  thereby,  nothing  more
than  his  superiority  in  strength  or  skill,  or  that  his  enemy
was  off  his  guard.  Analysis  will  carry  us  no  further.  The
same  knight  who  regards  a  blow  from  the  human  hand  as
the  greatest  of  evils,  if  he  gets  a  ten  times  harder  blow  from
his  horse,  will  give  you  the  assurance,  as  he  limps  away  in
suppressed  pain,  that  it  is  a  matter  of  no  consequence  what-
ever. So  I  have  come  to  think  that  it  is  the  human  hand
which  is  at  the  bottom  of  the  mischief.  And  yet  in  a  bat-
tle the  knight  may  get  cuts  and  thrusts  from  the  same  hand,
and  still  assure  you  that  his  wounds  are  not  worth  mention-
ing. Now,  I  hear  that  a  blow  from  the  flat  of  a  sword  is
not  by  any  means  so  bad  as  a  blow  with  a  stick;  and  that,  a
short  time  ago,  cadets  were  liable  to  be  punished  by  the  one
but  not  the  other,  and  that  the  very  greatest  honor  of  all  is
the  accolade.     This  is  all  the  psychological   or   moral  basis


POSITION,  OR  A  MAN'S  PLACE.  73

that  T  can  find;  and  so  there  is  nothing  left  me  but  to  pro-
nounce the  whole  thing  an  antiquated  superstition  that  has
taken  deep  root,  and  one  more  of  the  many  examples  which
show  the  force  of  tradition.  My  view  is  confirmed  by  the
well-known  fact  that  in  China  a  beating  with  a  bamboo  is
a  very  frequent  punishment  for  the  common  people,  and
even  for  officials  of  every  class;  which  shows  that  human
nature,  even  in  a  highly  civilized  state,  does  not  run  in  the
same  groove  here  and  in  China.

On  the  contrary,  an  unprejudiced  view  of  human  nature
shows  that  it  is  just  as  natural  for  man  to  beat  as  it  is  for
savage  animals  to  bite  and  rend  in  pieces,  or  for  horned
beasts  to  butt  or  push.  Man  may  be  said  to  be  the  animal
that  beats.  Hence  it  is  revolting  to  our  sense  of  the  fitness
of  things  to  hear,  as  we  sometimes  do,  that  one  man  has
bitten  another;  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  a  natural  and  every-
day occurrence  for  him  to  get  blows  or  give  them.  It  is  in-
telligible enough  that,  as  we  become  educated,  we  are  glad
to  dispense  with  blows  by  a  system  of  mutual  restraint.  But
it  is  a  cruel  thing  to  compel  a  nation  or  a  single  class  to  re-
gard a  blow  as  an  awful  misfortune  which  must  have  death
and  murder  for  its  consequences.  There  are  too  many-
genuine  evils  in  the  world  to  allow  of  our  increasing  them  by
imaginary  misfortunes,  which  bring  real  ones  in  their  train;
and  yet  this  is  the  precise  effect  of  the  superstition,  which
thus  proves  itself  at  once  stupid  and  malign.

It  does  not  seem  to  me  wise  of  governments  and  legis-
lative bodies  to  promote  any  such  folly  by  attempting  to  do
away  with  flogging  as  a  punishment  in  civil  or  military  life.
Their  idea  is  that  they  are  acting  in  the  interests  of  human-
ity; but,  in  point  of  fact,  they  are  doing  just  the  opposite;
for  the  abolition  of  flogging  will  serve  only  to  strengthen
this  in  human  and  abominable  superstition,  to  which  so
many  sacrifices  have  already  been  made.  For  all  offenses,
except  the  worst,  a  beating  is  the  obvious,  and  therefore  the
natural  penalty;  and  a  man  who  will  not  listen  to  reason  will
yield  to  blows.  It  seems  to  me  right  and  proper  to  administer
corporal  punishment  to  the  man  who  possesses  nothing  and
therefore  cannot  be  fined,  or  cannot  be  put  in  prison  be-
cause his  master's  interests  would  suffer  by  the  loss  of  his
services.  There  are  really  no  arguments  against  it;  only
mere  talk  about  "the  dignity  of  man" — talk  which  proceeds,
not  from  any  clear  notions  on  the  subject,  but  from  the  per*


74  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

nicious  superstition  I  have  been  describing.  That  it  is  a
superstition  which  lies  at  the  bottom  of  the  whole  business
is  proved  by  an  almost  laughable  example.  Not  long  ago
in  the  military  discipline  of  many  countries,  the  cat  was
replaced  by  the  stick.  In  either  case  the  object  was  to
produce  physical  pain;  but  the  latter  method  involved  no
disgrace,  and  was  not  derogatory  to  honor.

By  promoting  this  superstition,  the  state  is  playing  into
the  hands  of  the  principle  of  knightly  honor,  and  therefore
of  the  duel;  while  at  the  same  time  it  is  trying,  or  at  any
rate  it  pretends  that  it  is  trying  to  abolish  the  duel  by  leg-
islative enactment.  As  a  natural  consequence  we  find  that
this  fragment  of  the  theory  that  "might  is  right,"  which  ha*
comedown  to  us  from  the  most  savage  days  of  the  MiddleAge,
has  still  in  this  nineteenth  century  a  good  deal  of  life  left
in  it — more  shame  to  us!  It  is  high  time  for  the  principle
to  be  driven  out  bag  and  baggage.  Nowadays,  no  one  is
allowed  to  set  dogs  or  cocks  to  fight  each  other — at  any  rate
in  England  it  is  a  penal  offense — but  men  are  plunged  into
deadly  strife,  against  their  will,  by  the  operation  of  this
ridiculous,  superstitious  and  absurd  principle  which  imposes
upon  us  the  obligation  as  its  narrow-minded  supporters  and
advocates  declare  of  fighting  with  one  another  like  gladi-
ators, for  any  little  trifle.  Let  me  recommend  our  purists
to  adopt  the  expression  baiting,*  instead  of  duel,  which
probably  comes  to  us,  not  from  the  Latin  duellum  but  from
the  Spanish  duelo — meaning  suffering,  nuisance,  annoy-
ance.

In  any  case,  we  may  well  laugh  at  the  pedantic  excess  to
which  this  foolish  system  has  been  carried.  It  is  really
revolting  that  this  principle,  with  its  absurd  code,  can
form  a  power  within  the  state — imperium  in  imperio — a
power  too  easily  put  in  motion,  which,  recognizing  no  right
but  might,  tyrannizes  over  the  classes  which  come  within
its  range,  by  keeping  up  a  sort  of  inquisition,  before  which
any  one  may  be  haled  on  the  most  flimsy  pretext,  and  there
and  then  be  tried  on  an  issue  of  life  and  death  between  him-
self and  his  opponent.  This  is  the  lurking  place  from
which  every  rascal,  if  he  only  belongs  to  the  classes  in  ques'
tion,  may  menace  and  even  exterminate   the  noblest   and

best  of  men,  who,  as  such,  must  of  course  be   an  object  of

i     ' * — «.■•

*  Ritterbetze.


POSITION,  OR  A  MAN'S  PLAGE.  75

hatred  to  him.  Our  system  of  justice  and  police-protection
has  made  it  impossible  in  these  days  for  any  scoundrel  in
the  street  to  attack  us  with — "Your  money  or  your  life!"
and  common  sense  ought  now  to  be  able  to  prevent  rogues
disturbing  the  peaceable  intercourse  of  society  by  coming
at  us  with — "Your  honor  or  your  life!"  An  end  should  be
put  to  the  burden,  which  weighs  upon  the  higher  classes —
the  burden,  I  mean,  of  having  to  be  ready  every  moment
to  expose  life  and  limb  to  the  mercy  of  any  one  who  takes
it  into  his  rascally  head  to  be  coarse,  rude,  foolish  or  mali-
cious. It  is  perfectly  atrocious  that  a  pair  of  silly,  passion-
ate boys  should  be  wounded,  maimed  or  even  killed,  simply
because  they  have  had  a  few  words.

The  strength  of  this  tyrannical  power  within  the  state,
and  the  force  of  the  superstition,  may  be  measured  by  the
fact  lhat  people  who  are  prevented  from  restoring  their
knightly  honor  by  the  superior  or  inferior  rank  of  their
aggressor,  or  anything  else  that  puts  the  persons  on  a  dif-
ferent level,  often  come  to  a  tragic-comic  end  by  committing
suicide  in  sheer  despair.  You  may  generally  know  a  thing
to  be  false  and  ridiculous  by  finding  that,  if  it  is  carried  to
its  logical  conclusion,  it  results  in  a  contradiction:  and  here
too,  we  have  a  very  glaring  absurdity.  For  an  officer  is
forbidden  to  take  part  in  a  duel;  but  if  he  is  challenged
and  declines  to  come  out,  he  is  punished  by  being  dismissed
the  service.

-  As  I  am  on  the  matter,  let  me  be  more  frank  still.
The  important  distinction,  ^vhich  is  often  insisted  upon,
between  killing  your  enemy  in  a  fair  fight  with  equal  weap-
ons, and  lying  in  ambush  for  him,  is  entirely  a  corollary  of
the  fact  that  the  power  within  the  state,  of  which  I  have
spoken,  recognizes  no  other  right  than  might,  that  is,  the
right  of  the  stronger,  and  appeals  to  a  "judgment  of  God,"
as  the  basis  of  the  whole  code.  For  to  kill  a  man  in  a  fair
right,  is  to  prove  that  you  are  superior  to  him  in  strength
or  skill;  and  to  justify  the  deed,  you  must  assume  that  the
right  of  the  stronger  is  really  a  right.

But  the  truth  is  that,  if  my  opponent  is  unable  to  defend
himself,  it  gives  me  the  possibility,  but  not  by  any  means
the  right,  of  killing  him.  The  right,  the  moral  justification,
must  depend  entirely  upon  the  motives  which  I  have  for
taking  his  life.  Even  supposing  that  I  have  sufficient
motive  for  taking  a  man 's  life,  there  is  no   reason   why   I


76  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

should  make  his  death  depend  upon  whether  lean  shoot  01
fence  better  than  he.  In  such  a  case,  it  is  immaterial  in
what  way  I  kill  him,  whether  I  attack  him  from  the  front
or  the  rear.  From  a  moral  point  of  view,  the  right  of  the
stronger  is  no  more  convincing  than  the  right  of  the  more
skillful;  and  it  is  skill  which  is  employed  if  you  murder  a
man  treacherously.  Might  and  skill  are  in  this  case  equally
right:  in  a  duel,  for  instance,  both  the  one  and  the  other
come  into  play;  for  a  feint  is  only  another  name  for  treach-
ery. If  I  consider  myself  morally  justified  in  taking  a
man's  life,  it  is  stupid  of  me  to  try  first  of  all  whether  he
can  shoot  or  fence  better  than  I;  as,  if  he  can,  he  will  not
only  have  wronged  me,  but  have  taken  my  life  into  the
bargain.

It  is  Kousseau's  opinion  that  the  proper  way  to  avenge
an  insult  is,  not  to  fight  a  duel  with  your  aggressor,  but  to
assassinate  him — an  opinion,  however,  which  he  is  cautious
enough  only  to  barely  indicate  in  a  mysterious  note  to  one
of  the  books  of  his  "Emile."  This  shows  the  philosopher  so
completely  under  the  influence  of  the  mediaeval  supersti-
tion of  knightly  honor  that  he  considers  it  justifiable  to
murder  a  man  who  accuses  you  of  lying:  while  he  must
have  known  that  every  man,  and  himself  especially,  has
deserved  to  have  the  lie  given  him  times  without  number.
The  prejudice  which  justifies  the  killing  of  your  adver-
sary, so  long  as  it  is  done  in  an  open  contest  and  with  equal
weapons,  obviously  looks  upon  might  as  really  right,  and  a
duel  as  the  interference  of  God.  The  Italian  who,  in  a  fit
of  rage,  falls  upon  his  aggressor  wherever  he  finds  him,
and  despatches  him  without  any  ceremony,  acts,  at  any
rate,  consistently  and  naturally:  he  may  be  cleverer,  but  he
s  not  worse,  than  the  duelist.  If  you  say,  I  am  justified
n  killing  my  adversary  in  a  duel,  because  he  is  at  the  mo-
ment doing  his  best  to  kill  me;  I  can  reply  that  it  is  your
challenge  which  has  placed  him  under  the  necessity  of  de-
fending himself:  and  that  by  mutually  putting  it  on  the
ground  of  self-defense,  the  combatants  are  seeking  a
plausible  pretext  for  committing  murder.  I  should  rather
justify  the  deed  by  the  legal  maxim  Volenti  nonfit  injuria,  be-
cause the  parties  mutually  agree  to  set  their  life  upon  the  is-
sue. This  argument  may,  however,  be  rebutted  by  showing
that  the  injured  party  is  not  injured  volens;  because  it  is
this  tyrannical  principle  of  knightly  honor,  with  its  absurd


POSITION,  OR  A  MAN'S  PLACE.  »<?

code,  which  forcibly  drags  one  at  least  of  the  combatants
before  a  bloody  inquisition.

I  have  been  rather  prolix  on  the  subject  of  knightly
honor,  but  I  had  good  reasons  for  being  so,  because  the
Augean  stable  of  moral  and  intellectual  enormity  in  this
world  can  be  cleaned  out  only  with  the  besom  of  philoso-
phy. There  are  two  things  which  more  than  all  else  serve
to  make  the  social  arrangements  of  modern  life  compare
unfavorably  with  those  of  antiquity,  by  giving  our  age  a
gloomy,  dark  and  sinister  aspect,  from  which  antiquity,
fresh,  natural  and,  as  it  were,  in  the  morning  of  life,  is
completely  free;  I  mean  modern  honor  and  modern  disease
— parcnobile  fratrum  !  which  have  combined  to  poison  all
the  relations  of  life,  whether  public  or  private.  The
second  of  this  noble  pair  extends  its  influence  much  farther
than  at  first  appears  to  be  the  case,  as  being  not  merely  a
physical,  but  also  a  moral  disease.  From  the  time  that
poisoned  arrows  have  been  found  in  Cupid's  quiver,  an
estranging,  hostile,  nay  devilish  element  has  entered  into
the  relations  of  men  and  women,  like  a  sinister  thread  of
fear  and  mistrust  in  the  warp  and  woof  of  their  intercourse  ;
indirectly  shaking  the  foundations  of  human  fellowship,
and  so  more  or  less  affecting  the  whole  tenor  of  existence.
But  it  would  be  beside  my  present  purpose  to  pursue  the
subject  further.

An  influence  analogous  to  this,  though  working  on  other
lines,  is  exerted  by  the  principle  of  knightly  honor — that
solemn  farce,  unknown  to  the  ancient  world,  which  makes
modern  society  stiff,  gloomy  and  timid,  forcing  us  to  keep
the  strictest  watch  on  every  word  that  falls.  Nor  is  this
all.  The  principle  is  a  universal  Minotaur;  and  the
goodly  company  of  the  sons  of  noble  houses  which  it  de-
mands in  yearly  tribute,  comes,  not  from  one  country
alone  as  of  old,  but  from  every  land  in  Europe.  It  is
high  time  to  make  a  regular  attack  upon  this  foolish
system  ;  and  that  is  what  I  am  trying  to  do  now.  Would
that  these  two  monsters  of  the  modern  world  might  dis-
appear before  the  end  of  the  century  !

Let  us  ho#pe  that  medicine  may  be  able  to  find  some
means  of  preventing  the  one,  and  that,  by  clearing  our
ideas,  philosophy  may  put  an  end  to  the  other ;  for  it
is  only  by  clearing  our  ideas  that  the  eril  can  be  eradicated.
Governments  have  tried  to  do  so  by  legislation,  and  failed.


?8  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

Still,  if  they  are  really  concerned  to  suppress  the  dueling
system  ;  and  if  the  small  success  that  has  attended  their
efforts  is  really  due  only  to  their  inability  to  cope  with  the
evil,  I  do  not  mind  proposing  a  law  the  success  of  which  I
am  prepared  to  guarantee.  It  will  involve  no  sanguinary
measures,  and  can  be  put  into  operation  without  recourse
either  to  the  scaffold  or  the  gallows,  or  to  imprisonment
for  life.  It  is  a  small  homcepathic  pilule,  with  no  serious
after  effects.  If  any  man  send  or  accept  a  challenge,  let
the  corporal  take  him  before  the  guard  house,  and  there
give  him,  in  broad  daylight  twelve  strokes  with  a  stick
a  la  Chinoise;  a  non-commissioned  officer  or  a  private  to
receive  six.  If  a  duel  has  actually  taken  place,  the  usual
criminal  proceeding  should  be  instituted.

A  person  with  knightly  notions  might,  perhaps,  object
that,  if  such  a  punishment  were  carried  out,  a  man  of
honor  would  possibly  shoot  himself ;  to  which  I  should
answer  that  it  is  better  for  a  fool  like  that  to  shoot  himself
rather  than  other  people.  However,  I  know  very  well
that  governments  are  not  really  in  earnest  about  putting
down  dueling.  Civil  officials,  and  much  more  so,  officers
in  the  army  (except  those  in  the  highest  positions),  are
paid  most  inadequately  for  the  services  they  perform  ;  and
the  deficiency  is  made  up  by  honor,  which  is  represented
by  titles  and  orders,  and,  in  general,  by  the  system  of  rank
and  distinction.  The  duel  is,  so  to  speak,  a  very  service-
able extra-horse  for  people  of  rank  :  so  they  are  trained  in
the  knowledge  of  it  at  the  universities.  The  accidents
which  happen  to  those  who  use  it  make  up  in  blood  for
the  deficiency  of  the  pay.

Just  to  complete  the  discussion,  let  me  here  mention  the
subject  of  national  honor.  It  is  the  honor  of  a  nation  as  a
unit  in  the  aggregate  of  nations.  And  as  there  is  no  court
to  appeal  to  but  the  court  of  force  ;  and  as  every  nation
must  be  prepared  to  defend  its  own  interests,  the  honor  of
a  nation  consists  in  establishing  the  opinion,  not  only  that
it  may  be  trusted  (its  credit),  but  also  that  it  is  to  be
feared.  An  attack  upon  its  rights  must  never  be  allowed
to  pass  unheeded.  It  is  a  combination  of  civic  and  of
knightly  honor.

Section  5. — Fame.
Under  the  heading  of  place   in  the   estimation    of  the


POSITION,  OR  A  MAN'S  PLACE.  79

world  we  have  put  Fame ;  and  this  we  must  now  proceed
to  consider.

Fame  and  honor  are  twins  ;  and  twins,  too,  like  Castor
and  Pollux,  of  whom  the  one  was  mortal  and  the  other  was
not.  Fame  is  the  undying  brother  of  ephemeral  honor.
I  speak,  of  course,  of  the  highest  kind  of  fame,  that  is,  of
fame  in  the  true  and  genuine  sense  of  the  word  ;  for,  to  be
sure,  there  are  many  sorts  of  fame,  some  of  which  last  but
a  day.  Honor  is  concerned  merely  with  such  qualities  as
every  one  may  be  expected  to  show  under  similar  circum-
stances ;  fame  only  of  those  which  cannot  be  required  of
any  man.  Honor  is  of  qualities  which  every  one  has  a  right
to  attribute  to  himself  ;  fame  only  of  those  which  should
be  left  to  others  to  attribute.  While  our  honor  extends
as  far  as  people  have  knowledge  of  us  ;  fame  runs  in  ad-
vance, and  makes  us  known  wherever  it  finds  its  way.
Every  one  can  make  a  claim  to  honor;  very  few  to  fame,
as  being  attainable  only  in  virtue  of  extraordinary  achieve-
ments.

These  achievements  may  be  of  two  kinds,  either  actions
or  work  ;  and  so  to  fame  there  are  two  paths  open.  On
the  path  of  actions,  a  great  heart  is  the  chief  recommen-
dation ;  on  that  of  works,  a  great  head.  Each  of  the  two
paths  has  its  own  peculiar  advantages  and  detriments  ;  and
the  chief  difference  between  them  is  that  actions  are
fleeting,  while  works  remain.  The  influence  of  an  action,
be  it  never  so  noble,  can  last  but  a  short  time;  but  a  work
of  genius  is  a  living  influence,  beneficial  and  ennobling
throughout  the  ages.  All  that  can  remain  of  actions  is  a
memory,  and  that  becomes  weak  and  disfigured  by  time — a
matter  of  indifference  to  us,  until  at  last  it  is  extinguished
altogether  :  unless,  indeed,  history  takes  it  up,  and  pre-
sents it,  fossilized,  to  posterity.  Works  are  immortal  in
themselves,  and  once  committed  to  writing,  may  live  for-
ever. Of  Alexander  the  Great  we  have  but  the  name  and
the  record  :  but  Plato  and  Aristotle,  Homer  and  Horace
are  alive,  and  as  directly  at  work  to-day  as  they  were  in
their  own  life-time.  The  "Vedas"  and  their  "Upanis-
hads,"  are  still  with  us:  but  of  all  contemporaneous  actions
not  a  trace  has  come  down  to  us.*

*  Accordingly  it  is  a  poor  compliment,  though  sometimes  a  fash-
ionable one,  to  try  to  pay  honor  to  a  work    by   calling  it   an   action.


80  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

Another  disadvantage  under  winch  actions  labor  is  that
they  depend  upon  chance  for  the  possibility  of  coming  into
existence  ;  and  hence,  the  fame  they  win  does  not  flow
entirely  from  their  intrinsic  value,  but  also  from  the  cir-
cumstances which  happened  to  lend  them  importance  and
luster.  Again,  the  fame  of  actions,  if,  as  in  war,  they  are
purely  personal,  depends  upon  the  testimony  of  fewer
witnesses  ;  and  these  are  not  always  present,  and  even  if
present,  are  not  always  just  or  unbiased  observers.  This
disadvantage,  however,  is  counterbalanced  by  the  fact  that
actions  have  the  advantage  of  being  of  a  practical  char-
acter, and,  therefore,  within  the  range  of  general  human
intelligence  ;  so  that  once  the  facts  have  been  correctly  re-
ported, justice  is  immediately  done  ;  unless,  indeed,  the
motive  underlying  the  action  is  not  at  first  properly  under-
stood or  appreciated.  No  action  can  be  really  understood
apart  from  the  motive  which  prompted  it.

It  is  just  the  contrary  with  works.  Their  inception  does
not  depend  upon  chance,  but  wholly  and  entirely  upon
their  author;  and  whatever  they  are  in  and  for  themselves,
that  they  remain  as  long  as  they  live.  Further,  there  is  a
difficulty  in  properly  judging  them,  which  become  all  the
harder,  the  higher  their  character ;  often  there  are  no
persons  competent  to  understand  the  work,  and  often  no
unbiased  or  honest  critics.  Their  fame,  however,  does  not
depend  upon  one  judge  only  ;  they  can  enter  an  appeal  to
another.  In  the  case  of  actions,  as  I  have  said,  it  is  only
their   memory  which  comes  down  to  posterity,  and  then

For  a  work  is  something  essentially  higher  in  its  nature.  An  action
is  always  something  based  on  motive,  and,  therefore,  fragmentary
and  fleeting — a  part,  in  £act,  of  that  Will  which  is  the  universal  and
original  element  in  the  constitution  of  the  world.  But  a  great  and
beautiful  work  has  a  permanent  character,  as  being  of  universal
significance,  and  sprung  from  the  Intellect,  which  rises,  like  a  per
fume,  above  the  faults  and  follies  of  the  world  of  Will.

The  fame  of  a  great  action  has  this  advantage,  that  it  generally
starts  with  a  loud  explosion  ;  so  loud,  indeed,  as  to  be  heard  all  over
Europe  :  whereas  the  fame  of  a  great  work  is  slow  and  gradual  in
its  beginnings  ;  the  noise  it  makes  is  at  first  slight,  but  it  goes  on
growing  greater,  until  at  last,  after  a  hundred  years  perhaps,  it  at-
tains its  full  force  ;  but  then  it  remains,  because  the  works  remain,
for  thousands  of  years.  But  in  the  other  case,  when  the  first  explo-
sion is  over,  the  noise  it  makes  grows  less  and  less,  and  is  heard  by
fewer  and  fewer  persons  ;  until  it  ends  by  the  actions  having  only  a
shadowy  existence  in  the  pages  of  history.


POSITION,  OR  A  MAN'S  PLACE.  81

only  in  the  traditional  form  ;  but  works  are  handed  down
themselves,  and,  except  when  parts  of  them  have  been  lost,
in  the  form  in  which  they  first  appeared.  In  this  case  there
is  no  room  for  any  disfigurement  of  the  facts  ;  and  any
circumstances  which  may  have  prejudiced  them  in  their
origin,  fall  away  with  the  lapse  of  time.  Nay,  it  is  often
only  after  the  lapse  of  time  that  the  persons  really  com-
petent to  judge  them  appear — exceptional  critics  sitting  in
judgment  on  exceptional  works,  and  giving  their  weighty
verdicts  in  succession.  These  collectively  form  a  perfectly
just  appreciation  ;  and  though  there  are  cases  where  it  has
taken  some  hundreds  of  years  to  form  it,  no  further  lapse
of  time  is  able  to  reverse  the  verdict;  so  secure  and  in-
evitable is  the  fame  of  a  great  work.

Whether  authors  ever  live  to  see  the  dawn  of  their  fame
depends  upon  the  chance  of  circumstance;  and  the  higher  and
more  important  their  works  are,  the  less  likelihood  there  is
of  their  doing  so.  That  was  an  incomparably  fine  saying  of
Seneca's,  that  fame  follows  merit  as  surely  as  the  body
casts  a  shadow;  sometimes  falling  in  front,  and  sometimes
behind.  And  he  goes  on  to  remark  that  "though  the  envy
of  contemporaries  be  shown  by  universal  silence,  there  will
come  those  who  will  judge  without  enmity  or  favor/'  From
this  remark  it  is  manifest  that  even  in  Seneca's  age  there
were  rascals  who  understood  the  art  of  suppressing  merit
by  maliciously  ignoring  its  existence,  and  of  concealing
good  work  from  the  public  in  order  to  favor  the  bad:  it  is
an  art  well  understood  in  our  day,  too,  manifesting  itself,
both  then  and  now,  in  "an  envious  conspiracy  of  silence."

Asa  general  rule,  the  longer  a  man's  fame  is  likely  to
last,  the  later  it  will  be  in  coming;  for  all  excellent  prod-
ucts require  time  for  their  development.  The  fame  which
lasts  to  posterity  is  like  an  oak,  of  very  slow  growth:  and
that  which  endures  but  a  little  while,  like  plants  which
spring  up  in  a  year  and  then  die;  while  false  fame  is  like  a
fungus,  shooting  up  in  a  night  and  perishing  as  soon.

And  why?  For  this  reason;  the  more  a  man  belongs  to  pos-
terity, in  other  words,  to  humanity  in  general,  the  more  of
an  alien  he  is  to  his  contemporaries;  since  his  work  is  not
meant  for  them  as  such,  but  only  for  them  in  so  far  aa
they  form  part  of  mankind  at  large;  there  is  none  of  that
familiar  local  color  about  his  productions  which  would  ap-
peal to  them:  and  so  what  he  does,  fails  of  recognition  be-


82  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

cause  it  is  strange.  People  are  more  likely  to  appreciate
the  man  who  serves  the  circumstances  of  his  own  brief  hour,
or  the  temper  of  the  moment — belonging  to  it,  and  living
and  dying  with  it.

The  general  history  of  art  and  literature  shows  that  the
highest  achievements  of  the  human  mind  are,  as  a  rule,  not
favorably  received  at  first;  but  remain  in  obscurity  until
they  win  notice  from  intelligence  of  a  higher  order,  by
whose  influence  they  are  brought  into  a  position  which  thev
then  maintain,  in  virtue  of  the  authority  thus  given
them.

If  the  reason  of  this  should  be  asked,  it  will  be  found
that  ultimately,  a  man  can  really  understand  and  appreci-
ate those  things  only  which  are  of  like  nature  with  himself.
The  dull  person  will  like  what  is  dull,  and  the  common
person  what  is  common;  a  man  whose  ideas  are  mixed  will
be  attracted  by  confusion  of  thought;  and  folly  will  appeal
to  him  who  has  no  brains  at  all;  but  first  of  all,  a  man  will
like  his  own  works,  as  being  of  a  character  thoroughly  at
one  with  himself.  This  is  a  truth  as  old  asEpicharmus  of
fabulous  memory —

&av,ua6rov  ovdsv  e6tl  jue  rdvBJ  ovtgd  Xeyeiv
Kai  avddveiv  avroi6iv  avrovS,  nai  Sokeiv
KaX(3<i  TtEq)vv£vai-  nai  yap  6  hvgov  hvvi
KdXki6rov  sijusv  cpdivsrai,  nai  (3ov$  /3oi
OvoS  8J  ovoo  HaXXi6r6v  [sdriv],  vi  8>  vi.

The  sense  of  this  passage — for  it  should  not  be  lost — is
that  we  should  not  be  surprised  if  people  are  pleased  with
themselves,  and  fancy  that  they  are  in  good  case;  for  to  a
dog  the  best  thing  in  the  world  is  a  dog;  to  an  ox,  an  ox;
to  an  ass,  an  ass;  and  to  a  sow,  a  sow.

The  strongest  arm  is  unavailing  to  give  impetus  to  a
feather-weight;  for,  instead  of  speeding  on  its  way  and  hit-
ting its  mark  with  effect,  it  will  soon  fall  to  the  ground,
having  expended  what  little  energy  was  given  to  it,  and
possessing  no  mass  of  its  own  to  be  the  vehicle  of  momen-
tum. So  it  is  with  great  and  noble  thoughts,  nay,  with
the  very  masterpieces  of  genius  when  there  are  none  but
little,  wTeak,  and  perverse  minds  to  appreciate  them — a
fact  which  has  been  deplored  by  a  chorus  of  the  wrise  in  ail
ages.     Jesus  the   son  of  Sirach,  for  instance,  declares  thai


POSITION,  OR  A  MAN'S  PLACE.  83

"He  that  telleth  a  tale  to  a  fool  speaketh  to  one  in  slumber:
when  he  hath  told  his  tale,  he  will  say,  'What  is  the  mat-
ter?' "  *  And  Hamlet  says,  "A  knavish  speech  sleeps  in  a
fool's  ear."f  And  Goethe  is  of  the  same  opinion,that  a  dull
ear  mocks  at  the  wisest  word,

"  Das  glucklichste  Wort  es  wird  verhohnt,
Wenn  der  Horer  ein  Schiefohr  ist;  "

and  again,  that  we  should  not  be  discouraged  if  people  are
stupid,  for  you  can  make  no  rings  if  you  throw  your  stone
into  a  marsh.

"  Du  wirkest  nicht,  Alles  bleibt  so  stumpf;
Sei  guter  Dinge  !
Per  Stein  in  Sumpf
Macht  keine  Ringe."

Lichtenberg  asks:  "When  a  head  and  a  book  come  into
collision,  and  one  sounds  hollow,  is  it  always  the  book?"
And  in  another  place:  "Works like  this  are  as  a  mirror;
if  an  ass  looks  in,  you  cannot  expect  an  apostle  to  look  out."
We  should  do  well  to  remember  old  Gellert's  fine  and
touching  lament,  that  the  best  gifts  of  all  find  the  fewest
admirers,  and  that  most  men  mistake  the  bad  for  the  good
— a  daily  evil  that  nothing  can  prevent,  like  a  plague  which
no  remedy  can  cure.  There  is  but  one  thing  to  be  done,
though  how  difficult! — the  foolish  must  become  wise — and
that  they  can  never  be.  The  value  of  life  they  never  know,
they  see  with  the  outer  eye  but  never  with  the  mind,  and
praise  the  trivial  because  the  good  is  strange  to  them:

"  Nie  kennen  sie  den  Wertb.  der  Dinge,

Ihr  Auge  schliesst,  nicht  ihr  Verstand;
Sie  loben  ewig  das  Geringe

Wiel  sie  das  Gutrinie  gekannt."

To  the  intellectual  incapacity  which,  as  Goethe  says
fails  to  recognize  and  appreciate  the  good  which  exists,
must  be  added  something  which  comes  into  play  everywhere,
them  oral  baseness  of  mankind,  here  taking  the  form  of  envy.
The  new  fame  that  a  man  wins  raises  him  afresh  over
the  heads  of  his  fellows,  who  are  thus  degraded  in  pro-
portion.    All  conspicuous  merit  is  obtained  at  the   cost  of

*  Ecclesiasticus,  xxii.,  8.  .  f  Act.,  iv.,  sc.  2.


84  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

fhose  who  possess  none:  or,  as  Goethe  has  ft  in  the  "West
ostlicher  Divan,"  another's  praise  is  one's  own  depreci<
ation —

"Wenn  wir  Andern  Ekre  geben
Mussen  wir  uns  selbst  entadeln."

We  see,  then,  how  it  is  that,  whatever  be  the  form  which
excellence  takes,  mediocrity,  the  common  lot  of  by  far  the
greatest  number,  is  leagued  against  it  in  a  conspiracy  to  re-
sist, and  if  possible,  to  suppress  it.  The  pass-word  of  this
league  is  a  has  le  merite.  Nay  more;  those  who  have  done
something  themselves,  and  enjoy  a  certain  amount  of  fame,
do  not  care  about  the  appearance  of  a  new  reputation,  be-
cause its  success  is  apt  to  throw  theirs  into  the  shade.
Hence,  Goethe  declares  that  if  we  had  to  depend  for  our
life  upon  the  favor  of  others,  we  should  never  have  lived
at  all;  from  their  desire  to  appear  important  themselves,
people  gladly  ignore  our  very  existence;

"Hatteick  gezaudert  zu  werden,
Bis  man  rair's  Leben  gegount,
Ick.ware  nock  nicbt  auf  Erden,
Wenn  ikr  sekt,  wie  sie  sick  geberden,
Die  um  etwas  zu  sckeinen,
Mick  gerne  mockten  verneinen."

Honor,  on  the  contrary,  generally  meets  with  fair  ap-
preciation, and  is  not  exposed  to  the  onslaught  of  envy;
nay,  every  man  is  credited  with  the  possession  of  it  until
the  contrary  :s  proved.  But  fame  has  to  be  won  in  despite
of  envy,  and  the  tribunal  which  awards  the  laurel  is  com-
posed of  judges  biased  against  the  applicant  from  the  very
first.  Honor  is  something  which  we  are  able  and  ready  to
share  with  every  one;  fame  suffers  encroachment  and  is  ren-
dered more  unattainable  in  proportion  as  more  people  come
by  it.  Further,  the  difficulty  of  winning  fame  by  any
given  work  stands  in  inverse  ratio  to  the  number  of  people
who  are  likely  to  read  it;  and  hence  it  is  so  mucn  harder  to
become  famous  as  the  author  of  a  learned  work  than  as  a
writer  who  aspires  only  to  amuse.  It  is  hardest  of  all  in
the  case  of  philosophical  works,  because  the  result  at
which  they  aim  is  rather  vague  and,  at  the  same  time,  useless
from  a  material  point  of  view;  they  appeal  chiefly  to  readers
who  are  working  on  the  same  lines  themselves.


POSITION,  OR  A  MAN'S  PLACE.  85

It  is  clear,  then,  from  what  I  have  said  as  to  the  diffi-
culty of  winning  fame,  that  those  who  labor,  not  out  of
love  for  their  subject,  nor  from  pleasure  in  pursuing  it,
but  under  the  stimulus  of  ambition,  rarely  or  never  leave
mankind  a  legacy  of  immortal  works.  The  man  who  seeks
to  do  what  is  good  and  genuine,  must  avoid  what  is  bad,
and  be  ready  to  defy  the  opinions  of  the  mob,  nay,  even  to
despise  it  and  its  misleaders.  Hence  the  truth  of  the  re-
mark (especially  insisted  upon  by  Osorius  de  Gloria),  that
fame  shuns  those  who  seek  it,  and  seeks  those  who  shun  it;
for  the  one  adapt  themselves  to  the  taste  of  their  con-
temporaries, and  the  others  work  in  defiance  of  it.

But,  difficult  though  it  be  to  acquire  fame,  it  is  an  easy
thing  to  keep  it  when  once  acquired.  Here,  again,  fame
js  in  direct  opposition  to  honor,  with  which  every  one  is
presumably  to  be  accredited.  Honor  has  not  to  be  won  ;
it  must  only  not  be  lost.  But  there  lies  the  difficulty  !
For  by  a  single  unworthy  action,  it  is  gone  irretrievably.
But  fame,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word,  can  never  dis-
appear ;  for  the  action  or  work  by  which  it  was  acquired
can  never  be  undone  ;  and  fame  attaches  to  its  author,
even  though  he  does  nothing  to  deserve  it  anew.  The
fame  which  vanishes,  or  is  outlived,  proves  itself  thereby
to  have  been  spurious,  in  other  words,  unmerited,  and  due
to  a  momentary  over-estimate  of  a  man's  work  ;  not  to
speak  of  the  kind  of  fame  which  Hegel  enjoyed,  and  which
Lichtenberg  describes  as  "trumpeted  forth  by  a  clique  of  ad-
miring under-graduates — the  resounding  echo  of  empty
heads;  such  a  fame  as  will  make  posterity  smile  when  it  lights
upon  a  grotesque  architecture  of  words,  a  fine  nest  with
the  birds  long  ago  flown ;  it  will  knock  at  the  door  of  this
decayed  structure  of  conventionalities  and  find  it  utterly
empty  !  not  even  a  trace  of  thought  there  to  invite  the
passer-by."

The  truth  is  that  fame  means  nothing  but  what  a  man
is  in  comparison  with  others.  It  is  essentially  relative  in
character,  and  therefore  only  indirectly  valuable  ;  for  it
vanishes  the  moment  other  people  become  what  the  famous
man  is.  Absolute  value  can  be  predicated  only  of  what  a
man  possesses  under  any  and  all  circumstances — here,  what
a  man  is  directly  and  in  himself.  It  is  the  possession  of  ».
great  heart  or  a  great  head,  and  not  the  mere  fame  oi  1*


86  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

which  is  worth  having,  and  conducive  to  happiness.  Not
fame,  but  that  which  deserves  to  be  famous,  is  what  a  man
should  hold  in  esteem.  This  is,  as  it  were,  the  true  under-
lying substance,  and  fame  is  only  an  accident,  affecting
its  subject  chiefly  as  a  kind  of  external  symptom,  which
serves  to  confirm  his  own  opinion  of  himself.  Light  is  not
visible  unless  it  meets  with  something  to  reflect  it ;  and
talent  is  sure  of  itself  only  when  its  fame  is  noised  abroad.
But  fame  is  not  a  certain  symptom  of  merit ;  because  you
can  have  the  one  without  the  other ;  or,  as  Lessing  nicely
puts  it,  "  Some  people  obtain  fame,  and  others  deserve  it."

It  would  be  a  miserable  existence  which  should  make  its
value  or  want  of  value  depend  upon  what  other  people
think  ;  but  such  would  be  the  life  of  a  hero  or  a  genius  if  its
worth  consisted  in  fame,  that  is,  in  the  applause  of  the
world.  Every  man  lives  and  exists  on  his  own  account,
and,  therefore,  mainly  in  and  for  himself;  and  what  he  is
and  the  whole  manner  of  his  being  concern  himself  more
than  any  one  else  ;  so  if  he  is  not  worth  much  in  this  re-
spect, he  cannot  be  worth  much  otherwise.  The  idea
which  other  people  form  of  his  existence  is  something  sec-
ondary, derivative,  exposed  to  all  the  chances  of  fate,  and
in  the  end  affecting  him  but  very  indirectly.  Besides,
other  people's  heads  are  a  wretched  place  to  be  the  home
of  a  man's  true  happiness — a  fanciful  happiness  perhaps,
but  not  a  real  one.

And  what  a  mixed  company  inhabits  the  Temple  of
Universal  Fame  !  generals,  ministers,  charlatans,  jugglers,
dancers,  singers,  millionaires  and  Jews  !  It  is  a  temple  in
which  more  sincere  recognition,  more  genuine  esteem,  is
given  to  the  several  excellences  of  such  folk,  than  to
superiority  of  mind,  even  of  a  high  order,  which  obtains
from  the  great  majority  only  a  verbal  acknowledgment.

From  the  point  of  view  of  human  happiness,  fame  is,
surely,  nothing  but  a  very  rare  and  delicate  morsel  for  the
appetite  that  feeds  on  pride  and  vanity — an  appetite  which,
however  carefully  concealed,  exists  to  an  immoderate  de-
gree in  every  man,  and  is  perhaps,  strongest  of  all  in  those
who  set  their  hearts  on  becoming  famous  at  any  cost.
Such  people  generally  have  to  wait  some  time  in  uncer-
tainty as  to  their  own  value,  before  the  opportunity  comes
which  will  put  it  to  the  proof  and  let  other  people. see  what


POSITION,  OR  A  MAN'S  PLACE.  8?

they  are  made  of  ;  but  until  then,  they  feel  as  if  they  were
suffering  secret  injustice.*

But,  as  I  explained  at  the  beginning  of  this  chapter,
an  unreasonable  value  is  set  upon  other  people's  opinion,
and  one  quite  disproportionate  to  its  real  worth.  Hobbes
has  some  strong  remarks  on  this  subject  ;  and  no  doubt  he
is  quite  right.  "  Mental  pleasure,"  he  writes,  "  and  ecstasy
of  any  kind,  arise  when,  on  comparing  ourselves  witli  others,
we  come  to  the  conclusion  that  we  may  think  well  of  our-
selves." So  we  can  easily  understand  the  great  value
which  is  always  attached  to  fame,  as  worth  any  sacrifices  if
there  is  the  slighest  hope  of  attaining  it.

"  Fame  is  the  spur  that  the  clear  spirit  doth  raise
(That  last  infirmity  of  noble  mind)
To  scorn  delights  and  live  laborious  days."f

And  again  :

"  How  hard  it  is  to  climb
The  heights  where  Fame's  proud  temple  shines  afar  !"

We  can  thus  understand  how  it  is  that  the  vainest  people
in  the  world  are  always  talking  about  la  gloire,  with  thq
most  implicit  faith  in  it  as  a  stimulus  to  great  actions  and
great  works.  But  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  fame  is  some,
thing  secondary  in  its  character,  a  mere  echo  or  reflection
— as  it  were,  a  shadow  or  symptom — of  merit  :  and,  in  any
case,  what  excites  admiration  must  be  of  more  value  than
the  admiration  itself.  The  truth  is  that  a  man  is  made  happy,
not  by  fame,  but  by  that  which  brings  him  fame,  by  his
merits,  or  to  speak  more  correctly,  by  the  disposition  and
capacity  from  which  his  merits  proceed,  whether  they  be
moral  or  intellectual.  The  best  side  of  a  man's  nature
must  of  necessity  be  more  important  for  him  than  for  any
one  else  :  the  reflection  of  it,  the  opinion  which  exists  in
the  heads  of  others,  is  a  matter  that  can  affect  him  only  in

*  Our  greatest  pleasure  consists  in  being  admired  ;  but  those  who
admire  us,  even  if  they  have  every  reason  to  do  so,  are  slow  to  ex-
oress  their  sentiments.  Hence  he  is  the  happiest  man  who,  no
matter  how,  manages  sincerely  to  admire  himself-s-so  long  as  other
people  leave  him  alone.

f  Milton  "  Lycidas."


88  THE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

a  very  subordinate  degree.  He  who  deserves  fame  with-
out getting  it  possesses  by  far  the  more  important  element
of  happiness,  which  should  console  him  for  the  loss  of  the
other.  It  is  not  that  a  man  is  thought  to  be  great  by
masses  of  incompetent  anu  often  infatuated  people,  but
that  he  really  is  great,  which  should  move  us  to  envy  his
position ;  and  his  happiness  lies,  not  in  the  fact  that
posterity  will  hear  of  him,  but  that  he  is  the  creator  of
thoughts  worthy  to  be  treasured  up  and  studied  for  hun-
dreds of  years.

Besides,  if  a  man  has  done  this,  he  possesses  something
which  cannot  be  wrested  from  him,  and,  unlike  fame,  it  is
a  possession  dependent  entirely  upon  himself.  If  admi-
ration were  his  chief  aim,  there  would  be  nothing  in  him  to
admire.  This  is  just  what  happens  in  the  case  of  false,
that  is,  unmerited,  fame;  for  its  recipient  lives  upon  it
without  actually  possessing  the  solid  substratum  of  which
fame  is  the  outward  and  visible  sign.  False  fame  must
often  put  its  possessor  out  of  conceit  with  himself;  for  the
time  may  come  when,  in  spite  of  the  illusions  born  of  self-
love,  he  will  feel  giddy  on  the  heights  which  he  was  never
meant  to  climb,  or  look  upon  himself  as  spurious  coin;  and
in  the  anguish  of  threatened  discovery  and  well-merited
degradation,  he  will  read  the  sentence  of  posterity  on  the
foreheads  of  the  wise — like  a  man  who  owes  his  property
to  a  forged  will.  The  truest  fame,  the  fame  that  comes
after  death,  is  never  heard  of  by  its  recipient:  and  yet  he
is  called  a  happy  man.  His  happiness  lay  both  in  the  pos-
session of  those  great  qualities  which  won  him  fame,  and
in  the  opportunity  that  was  granted  him  of  developing
them — the  leisure  he  had  to  act  as  he  pleased,  to  dedicate
himself  to  his  favorite  pursuits.  It  is  only  work  done
from  the  heart  that  ever  gains  the  laurel.

Greatness  of  soul,  or  wealth  of  intellect,  is  what  makes  a
man  happy — intellect,  such  as,  when  stamped  on  its  pro-
ductions, will  receive  the  admiration  of  centuries  to  come —
thoughts  which  made  him  happy  at  the  time,  and  will  in
their  turn  be  a  source  of  study  and  delight  to  the  noblest
minds  of  the  most  remote  posterity.  The  value  of  posthu-
mous fume  lies  in  deserving  it;  and  this  is  its  own  reward.
Whether  works  destined  to  fame  attain  it  in  the  lifetime  of
their  author  is  a  chance  affair,  of  no  very  great  importance.
For  the  average  man  has  no  critical  power  of  his  own,  an^1


POSITION,  OR  A  MAN'S  PLACE.  89

is  absolutely  incapable  of  appreciating  the  difficulty  of  a
great  work.  People  are  always  swayed  by  authority;  and
where  fame  is  widespread,  it  means  that  ninety-nine  out  of
a  hundred  take  it  on  faith  alone.  If  a  man  is  famed  far
and  wide  in  his  own  lifetime,  he  will,  if  he  is  wise,  not  set
too  much  value  upon  it,  because  it  is  no  more  than  the
echo  of  a  few  voices,  which  the  chance  of  a  day  has  touched
in  his  favor.

Would  a  musician  feel  flattered  by  the  loud  applause  of
an  audience  if  he  knew  that  they  were  nearly  all  deaf,  and
that,  to  conceal  their  infirmity,  they  set  to  work  to  clap
vigorously  as  soon  as  ever  they  saw  one  or  two  persons
applauding?  And  what  would  he  say  if  he  got  to  know
that  those  one  or  two  persons  had  often  taken  bribes  to
secure  the  loudest  applause  for  the  poorest  player!

It  is  easy  to  see  why  contemporary  praise  so  seldom
develops  into  posthumous  fame.  D'Alembert,  in  an  ex-
tremely fine  description  of  the  temple  of  literary  fame,
remarks  that  the  sanctuary  of  the  temple  is  inhabited  by
the  great  dead,  who  during  their  life  had  no  place  there,
and  by  a  very  few  living  persons,  who  are  nearly  all  ejected
on  their  death.  Let  me  remark,  in  passing,  that  to  erect
a  monument  to  a  man  in  his  lifetime  is  as  much  as  declar-
ing that  posterity  is  not  to  be  trusted  in  its  judgment  of
him.  If  a  man  does  happen  to  see  his  own  true  fame,  it
can  very  rarely  be  before  he  is  old,  though  there  have  been
artzsts  and  musicians  who  have  been  exceptions  to  this
rule,  but  very  few  philosophers.  This  is  confirmed  by  the
portraits  of  people  celebrated  by  their  works;  for  most  of
them  are  taken  only  after  their  subjects  have  attained  celeb-
rity, generally  depicting  them  as  old  and  gray;  more
especially  if  philosophy  has  been  the  work  of  their  lives.
From  a  eudsemonistic  standpoint^  this  is  a  very  proper
arrangement;  as  fame  and  youth  are  too  much  for  a  mortal
at  one  and  the  same  time.  Life  is  such  a  poor  business  that
the  strictest  economy  mnst  be  exercised  in  its  good  things
Youth  has  enough  and  to  spare  in  itself,  and  must  res.
content  with  what  it  has.  But  when  the  delights  and  joys
of  life  fall  away  in  old  age,  as  the  leaves  from  a  tree  in
autumn,  fame  buds  forth  opportunely,  like  a  plant  that  u
green  in  winter.  Fame  is,  as  it  were,  the  fruit  that  mus1
grow  all  the  summer  before  it  can  be  enjoyed  at  Yule.
There  is  no  greater  consolation  in  age  than  the  feeling  of


90  TBE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

having  put  the  whole  force  of  one's  youth  into  works
which  stiJl  remain  young.

Finally,  let  us  examine  a  little  more  closely  the  kinds  of
fame  which  attach  to  various  intellectual  pursuits;  for  it
is  with  fame  of  this  sort  that  my  remarks  are  more  imme-
diately concerned.

I  think  it  may  be  said  broadly  that  the  intellectual
superiority  it  denotes  consists  in  forming  theories,  that  is,
new  combinations  of  certain  facts.  These  facts  may  be  of
very  different  kinds;  but  the  better  they  are  known,  and
the  more  they  come  within  every-day  experience,  the
greater  and  wider  will  be  the  fame  which  is  to  be  won  by
theorizing  about  them.  For  instance,  if  the  facts  in  ques-
tion are  numbers  or  lines  or  special  branches  of  science,
auch  as  physics,  zoology,  botany,  anatomy,  or  corrupt  pas-
sages in  ancient  authors,  or  undecipherable  inscriptions,
written,  it  may  be,  in  some  unknown  alaphabet,  or  obscure
points  in  history ;  the  kind  of  fame  which  may  be  obtained
by  correctly  manipulating  such  facts  will  not  extend  much
beyond  those  who  make  a  study  of  them — a  small  number
of  persons,  most  of  whom  live  retired  lives  and  are  envious
of  others  who  become  famous  in  their  special  branch  of
knowledge.

But  if  the  facts  be  such  as  are  known  to  every  one,  for
example,  the  fundamental  characteristics  of  the  human
mind  or  the  human  heart,  which  are  shared  by  all  alike;  or
the  great  physical  agencies  which  are  constantly  in  opera-
tion before  our  eyes,  or  the  general  course  of  natural  laws;
the  kind  of  fame  which  is  to  be  won  by  spreading  the
light  of  a  new  and  manifestly  true  theory  in  regard  to  them,
is  such  as  in  time  will  extend  almost  all  over  the  civilized
world;  for  if  the  facts  be  such  as  every  one  can  grasp,  the
theory  also  will  be  generally  intelligible.  But  the  extent
of  the  fame  will  depend  upon  the  difficulties  overcome;  and
the  more  generally  known  the  facts  are,  the  harder  it  will
be  to  form  a  theory  that  shall  be  both  new  and  true;  be-
cause a  great  many  heads  will  have  been  occupied  with  them
and  there  will  be  little  or  no  possibility  of  saying  anything
that  has  not  been  said  befoie.  On  the  other  hand,  facts
which  are  not  accessible  to  everybody,  and  can  be  got  at
only  after  much  difficulty  and  labor,  nearly  always  admit
of  new  combinations  and  theories;  so  that,  if  sound  under-
standing and  judgment  are  brought  to  bear  upon  them—


POSITION,  OR  A  MAN'S  PLAGE.  91

qualities  which  do  not  involve  very  high  intellectual  power
— a  man  may  easily  be  so  fortunate  as  to  light  upon  some
new  theory  in  regard  to  them  which  shall  be  also  true.
But  fame  won  on  such  paths  does  not  extend  much  beyond
those  who  possess  a  knowledge  of  the  facts  in  question.  To
solve  problems  of  this  sort  requires,  no  doubt,  a  great  deal
of  study  and  labor,  if  only  to  get  at  the  facts:  while  on  the
path  where  the  greatest  and  most  widespread  fame  is  to  be
won,  the  facts  may  be  grasped  without  any  labor  at  all.
But  just  in  proportion  as  less  labor  is  necessary,  more  talent
or  genius  is  required;  and  between  such  qualities  and  the
drudgery  of  research  no  comparison  is  possible,  in  respect
either  of  their  intrinsic  value,  or  of  the  estimation  in  which
they  are  held.

And  so  people  who  feel  that  they  possess  solid  intellectual
capacity  and  a  sound  judgment,  and  yet  cannot  claim  the
highest  mental  powers,  should  not  be  afraid  of  laborious
study;  for  by  its  aid.  they  may  work  themselves  above  the
great  mob  of  humanity  who  have  the  facts  constantly  be-
fore their  eyes,  and  reach  those  secluded  spots  which  are
accessible  to  learned  toil.  For  this  is  a  sphere  where  there
are  infinitely  fewer  rivals,  and  a  man  of  only  moderate
capacity  may  soon  find  an  opportunity  of  proclaiming  a
theory  that  shall  be  both  new  and  true;  nay,  the  merit  of
his  discovery  will  partly  rest  upon  the  difficulty  of  coming
at  the  facts.  But  applause  from  one's  fellow-students,  who
are  the  only  persons  with  a  knowledge  of  the  subject,
sounds  very  faint  to  the  far-off  multitude.  And  if  we  fol-
low up  this  sort  of  fame  far  enough,  we  shall  at  last  come
to  a  point  where  facts  very  difficult  to  get  at  are  in  them-
selves sufficient  to  lay  a  foundation  of  fame,  without  any
necessity  for  forming  a  theory — travels,  for  instance,  in
remote  and  little-known  countries,  which  make  a  man
famous  by  what  he  has  seen,  not  by  what  he  has  thought.
The  great  advantage  of  this  kind  of  fame  is  that  to  relate
what  one  has  seen,  is  much  easier  than  to  impart  one's
thoughts  and  people  are  apt  to  understand  descriptions
better  than  ideas,  reading  the  one  more  readily  than  the
other;  for,  as  Asm  us  says:

"  When  one  goes  forth  a- voyaging
He  has  a  tale  to  tell."

And  yet,  fpjall  that,  a   personal  acquaintance   with  cele-


92  TEE  WISDOM  OF  LIFE.

brated  travelers  often  reminds  us  of  a  line   from  Horace —
new  scenes  do  not  always  mean  new  ideas —

"Coeluni  non  animum  mutant  qui  trans  mare  curri.nt."*

But  if  a  man  finds  himself  in  possession  of  great  mental
faculties,  such  as  alone  should  venture  on  the  solution  of
the  hardest  of  all  problems — those  which  concern  nature
as  a  whole  and  humanity  in  its  widest  range,  h.e  will  do
well  to  extend  his  view  equally  in  all  directions,  without
ever  straying  too  far  amid  the  intricacies  of  various  by-
paths, or  invading  regions  little  known  :  in  other  words,
without  occupying  himself  with  special  branches  of  knowl-
edge, to  say  nothing  of  their  petty  details.  There  is  no
necessity  for  him  to  seek  out  subjects  difficult  of  access.,
in  order  to  escape  a  crowd  of  rivals  ;  the  common  objects
of  life  will  give  him  material  for  new  theories  at  once
serious  and  true  ;  and  the  service  he  renders  will  be  appreci-
ated by  all  those — and  they  form  a  great  part  of  mankind
who  know  the  facts  of  which  he  treats.  What  a  vast  dis-
tinction there  is  between  students  of  physics,  chemistry,
anatomy,  mineralogy,  zoology,  philology,  history,  and  the
men  who  deal  with  the  great  facts  of  human  life,  the  poet
and  the  philosopher  !

*  Epist.  I.  II.


COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.


boaheur  n'est  pas  chose  aisee:  il  est  tresdifficile  de  le  trouver  on  nOiL
Ot  impossible  de  le  trouver  ailleurs."— Ch assort.


COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.*


INTRODUCTION. .

If  my  object  in  these  pages  were  to  present  a  complete
scheme  of  counsels  and  maxims  for  the  guidance  of  life,
I  should  have  to  repeat  the  numerous  rules — some  op  them
excellent — which  have  been  drawn  up  by  thinkers  jf  all
ages,  from  Theognis  and  Solomonf  down  to  La  Roche-
foucauld ;  and,  in  so  doing,  I  should  inevitably  entail  upon
the  reader  a  vast  amount  of  well-worn  commonplace.
But  the  fact  is  that  in  this  work  I  make  still  less  claim  to
exhaust  my  subject  than  in  any  other  of  my  writing?

j^n  author  who  makes  no  claims  to  completeness  musfi
also,  in  a  great  measure,  abandon  any  attempt  at  system-
atic arrangement.  For  his  double  loss  in  this  respect,  the
reader  may  console  himself  by  reflecting  that  a  complete
and  systematic  treatment  of  such  a  subject  as  the  guidance
of  li.f"e  could  hardly  fail  to  be  a  very  wearisome  business.
I  have  simply  put  down  those  of  my  thoughts  which  appear
to  be  worth  communicating — thoughts  which,  as  far  as  I
know,  Liave  not  been  uttered,  or,  at  any  rate,  not  just  in
the  same  form,  by  any  one  else  ;  so  that  my  remarks  may

*  For  convenience  of  publication,  I  have  divided  this  translation
of  Schopenhauer's  "  Aphorismen  zur  Lebensweisheit "  into  two
parts  ;  and  for  the  sake  of  appearances,  a  new  series  of  chapters  has
been  begun  in  the  present  volume.  But  it  should  be  understood
that  there  is  no  such  division  in  the  original,  and  that  "  The  Wisdom
of  Life  "  and  "  Counsels  and  Maxims  "  form  a  single  treatise,  devoted
to  a  popular  exposition  of  the  author's  views  on  matters  of  practice.
To  the  former  volume  I  have  prefixed  some  remarks  which  may  help
the  reader  to  appreciate  the  value  of  Schopenhauer's  teaching,  and
to  determine  its  relation  to  certain  well-known  theories  of  life.

f  I  refer  to  the  proverbs  and  maxims  ascribed,  in  the  Old  Testa-
ment, to  the  king  of  that  name.


96  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS,

be  taken  as  a  supplement  to  whai  has  been  already  achieved
in  the  immense  field.

However,  by  way  of  introducing  some  sort  of  order  into
the  great  variety  of  matters  upon  which  advice  will  be
given  in  the  following  pages,  I  shall  distribute  what  I  have
to  say  under  the  following  heads:  (1)  general  rules  ;  (2)
our  relation  to  ourselves;  (3)  our  relation  to  others  ;  and
finally,  (4)  rules  which  concern  our  manner  of  life  and
our  worldly  circumstances.  I  shall  conclude  with  some
remarks  on  the  changes  which  the  various  periods  of  life
produce  in  us.


CHAPTER  I.

GENERAL   RULES.

§  1.  The  first  and  foremost  rule  for  the  wise  conduct
of  life  seems  to  me  to  be  contained  in  a  view  to  which  Aris-
totle parenthetically  refers  in  the  "Nichomachean  Ethics  "  *
6  qjpovifxos  to  aXvjjLov  Sicoxei  ov  to  f/dv,  or,  as  it  may  be  ren-
dered, "  not  pleasure,  but  freedom  from  pain  is  what  the
wise  man  will  aim  at."

The  truth  of  this  remark  turns  upon  the  negative  char-
acter of  happiness — the  fact  that  pleasure  is  only  the  nega-
tion of  pain,  and  that  pain  is  the  positive  element  in  life.
Though  I  have  given  a  detailed  proof  of  this  proposition
in  my  chief  work,f  I  may  supply  one  more  illustration  of
it  here,  drawn  from  a  circumstance  of  daily  occurrence.
Suppose  that,  with  the  exception  of  some  sore  or  painful
spot,  we  are  physically  in  a  sound  and  healthy  condition;
the  pain  of  this  one  spot  will  completely  absorb  our  at-
tention, causing  us  to  lose  the  sense  of  general  well-being,
and  destroying  all  our  comfort  in  life.  In  the  same  way,
when  all  our  affairs  but  one  turn  out  as  we  wish,  the  single
instance  in  which  our  aims  are  frustrated  is  a  constant
trouble  to  us,  even  though  it  be  something  quite  trivial.
We  think  a  great  deal  about  it,  and.  very  little  about  those
other  and  more  important  matters  in  which  we  have  been
successful.     In  both  these  cases  what  has  met   with  resist-

*vii.  (11)12.

+  "  Welt  als  Wille  und  Vorstellunir."  Vol.  I.  p.  58.


&ESE11AL  RULES.  97

ance  is  the  will;  in  the  one  case  as  it  is  objectified  in  the
organism,  in  the  other,  as  it  presents  itself  in  the  struggle
of  life;  and  in  both,  it  is  plain  that  the  satisfaction  of  the
will  consists  in  nothing  else  than  that  it  meets  with  no  re-
sistance. It  is,  therefore,  a  satisfaction  which  is  not  di*,
rectly  felt;  at  most,  we  can  become  conscious  of  it  only
when  we  reflect  upon  our  condition.  But  that  which
checks  or  arrests  the  will  is  something  positive;  it  proclaims
its  own  presence.  All  pleasure  consists  in  merely  removing
this  check — in  other  words,  in  freeing  us  from  its  action;
and   hence  pleasure  is  a  state  which  can  never  last  very

lon£-.

This  is  the  true  basis  of  the  above  excellent  rule  quoted

from  Aristotle,  which  bids  us  direct  our  aim,  not  toward
securing  what  is  pleasurable  and  agreeable  in  life,  but  to-
ward avoiding,  as  far  as  possible,  its  innumerable  evils.  If
this  were  not  the  right  course  to  take,  that  saying  of  Vol-
taire's "Happiness  is  but  a  dream  and  sorrow  is  real,"  would
be  as  false  as  it  is,  in  fact,  true.  A  man  who  desires  to
make  up  the  book  of  his  life  and  determine  where  the
balance  of  happiness  lies,  must  put  down  in  his  accounts,
not  the  pleasures  which  he  has  enjoyed,  but  the  evils  which
he  has  escaped.  That  is  the  true  method  of  eudsemonology
for  all  eudaemonology  must  begin  by  recognizing  that  its
very  name  is  a  euphemism,  and  that  "to  live  happily"  only
means  "to  live  less  unhappily" — to  live  a  tolerable  life.
There  is  no  doubt  that  life  is  given  us,  not  to  be  enjoyed,
but  to  be  overcome—  to  be  got  over.  There  are  numerous
expressions  illustrating  this — such  asdegere  vitam,  vita  de-
fungi:  or  in  Italian  si  scampa  cosi;  or  in  German,  man
muss  suchen  durchzukommen;  erwirdschon  durch  die  Welt
lcommen,  and  so  on.  In  old  age  it  is  indeed  a  consolation
to  think  that  the  work  of  life  is  over  and  done  with.  The
happiest  lot  is  not  to  have  experienced  the  keenest  delights
or  the  greatest  pleasures,  but  to  have  brought  life  to  a  close
without  any  very  great  pain,  bodily  or  mental.  To  meas-
ure the  happiness  of  a  life  by  its  delights  or  pleasures,  is  to
apply  a  false  standard.  For  pleasures  are  and  remain  some-
thing negative;  that  they  produce  happiness  is  a  delusion;
cherished  by  envy  to  its  own  punishment.  Pain  is  felt  to
be  something  positive,  and  hence  its  absence  is  the  true
standard  of  happiness.  And  if,  over  and  above  freedom
from  oaim  there  is  also  an  absence  of  boredom,  the  essential


98  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

conditions  of  earthly  happiness  are  attained:  for  all  else  is
chimerical.

It  follows  from  this  that  a  man  should  never  try  to  pur-
chase pleasure  at  the  cost  of  pain,  or  even  at  the  risk  of
incurring  it ;  to  do  so  is  to  pay  what  is  positive  and  real
for  what  is  negative  and  illusory  ;  while  there  is  a  net
profit  in  sacrificing  pleasure  for  the  sake  of  avoiding  pain.
In  either  case  it  is  a  matter  of  indifference  whether  the
pain  follows  the  pleasure  or  precedes  it.  While  it  is  a  com-
plete inversion  of  the  natural  order  to  try  and  turn  this
scene  of  misery  into  a  garden  of  pleasure,  "to  aim  at  joy  and
pleasure  rather  than  at  the  greatest  possible  freedom  from
pain — and  yet  how  many  do  it  !  there  is  some  wisdom  iu
taking  a  gloomy  view,  in  looking  upon  the  world  as  a  kind
of  hell,  and  in  confining  one's  efforts  to  securing  a  little
room  that  shall  not  be  exposed  to  the  fire.  The  foo1  rushes
after  the  pleasures  of  life  and  finds  himself  their  dupe  ;
the  wise  man  avoids  its  evils ;  and  even  if,  notwithstand-
ing his  precautions,  he  falls  into  misfortune,  that  is  the
fault  of  fate,  not  of  his  own  folly.  As  far  as  he  is  success-
ful in  his  endeavors,  he  cannot  be  said  to  have  lived  a  life
of  illusion  ;  for  the  evils  which  he  shuns  are  very  real.
Even  if  he  goes  too  far  out  of  his  way  to  avoid  evils,  and
makes  an  unnecessary  sacrifice  of  pleasure,  he  is,  in  reality,
not  the  worse  off  for  that ;  for  all  pleasures  are  chimerical,
and  to  mourn  for  having  lost  any  of  them  is  a  frivolous,
and  even  ridiculous  proceeding.

The  failure  to  recognize  this  truth — a  failure  promoted
by  optimistic  ideas — is  the  source  of  much  unhappiness.
In  moments  free  from  pain,  our  restless  wishes  present,  as
it  were  in  a  mirror,  the  image  of  a  happiness  that  has  no
counterpart  in  reality,  seducing  us  to  follow  it ;  in  doing
so  we  bring  pain  upon  ourselves,  and  that  is  something
undeniably  real.  Afterward  we  come  to  look  with  regret
upon  that  lost  state  of  painlessness  ;  it  is  a  paradise  which
we  have  gambled  away  ;  it  is  no  longer  with  us,  and  we
long  in  vain  to  undo  what  has  been  done.  One  might  well
fancy  that  these  visions  of  wishes  fulfilled  were  the  work  of
some  evil  spirit,  conjured  up  in  order  to  entice  us  away
from  that  painless  state  which  forms  our  highest  happi*
ness.

A  careless  youth  may  think  that  the  world  is  meant  to
be  enjoyed,  as  though  it  were  the   abode  of   some  real  or


GENERAL  RULES.  99

positive  happiness,  which  only  those  fail  to  attain  who  are
not  clever  enough  to  overcome  the  difficulties  that  lie  in
the  way.  This  false  notion  takes  a  stronger  hold  on  him
when  he  comes  to  read  poetry  and  romance,  and  to  be  de-
ceived by  outward  show — the  hypocrisy  that  characterizes
the  world  from  beginning  to  end  ;  on  which  I  shall  have
gomething  to  say  presently.  The  result  is  that  his  life  is
the  more  or  less  deliberate  pursuit  of  positive  happiness ;
and  happiness  he  takes  to  be  equivalent  to  a  series  of
definite  pleasures.  In  seeking  for  these  pleasures  he  en-
counters danger — a  fact  which  should  not  be  forgotten.
He  hunts  for  game  that  does  not  exist ;  and  so  he  ends  by
suffering  some  very  real  and  positive  misfortune — pain,
distress,  sickness,  loss,  care,  poverty,  shame,  and  all  the
thousand  ills  of  life.  Too  late  he  discovers  the  trick  that
has  been  played  upon  him.

But  if  the  rule  I  have  mentioned  is  observed,  and  a  plan
of  life  is  adopted  which  proceeds  by  avoiding  pain — in
other  words,  by  taking  measures  of  precaution  against
want,  sickness,  and  distress  in  all  its  for^is,  the  aim  is  a
real  one,  and  something  may  be  achieved  which  will  be
great  in  proportion  as  the  plan  is  not  disturbed  by  striving
after  the  chimera  of  positive  happiness.  This  3grees  with
the  opinion  expressed  by  Goethe  in  the  "  Elective  Affin-
ities," and  there  put  into  the  mouth  of  Mittler — the  man
who  is  always  trying  to  make  other  people  happy  :  "  To  de-
sire to  get  rid  of  an  evil  is  a  definite  object,  but  to  desire  a
better  fortune  than  one  has  is  blind  folly."  The  same
truth  is  contained  in  that  fine  'French  proverb  :  le
mieux  est  Vennemi  du  Men — leave  well  alone.  And,  as  I
have  remarked  in  my  chief  work,*  this  is  the  leading
thought  underlying  the  philosophical  system  of  the
cynics.  For  what  was  it  led  the  cynics  to  repudiate
pleasure  in  every  form,  if  it  was  not  the  fact  that  pain  is,
in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  always  bound  up  with  pleasure  ?
To  go  out  of  the  way  of  pain  seemed  to  them  so  much
easier  than  to  secure  pleasure.  Deeply  impressed  as  they
were  by  the  negative  nature  of  pleasure  and  the  positive
nature  of  pain,  they  consistently  devoted  all  their  efforts
to  the  avoidance  of  pain.  The  first  step  to  that  end  was,
in  their  opinion,  a  complete  and  deliberate  repudiation  of

*  "  Welt  als  Wille  und  Vorstellung,"  vol.  ii.,  cli.  16.


100  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

pleasure,  as  something  which   served  only  to  entrap  the
victim  in  order  that  he  might  be  delivered  over  to  pain.

We  are  all  born,  as  Schiller  says,  in  Arcadia.  In  other
words,  we  come  into  the  world  full  claims  to  happiness  and
pleasure,  and  we  cherish  the  fond  hope  of  making  them
good.  But,  as  a  rule,  Fate  soon  teaches  us,  in  a  rough  and
ready  way,  that  we  really  possess  nothing  at  all,  but  that
everything  in  the  world  is  at  its  command,  in  virtue  of  an
unassailable  right,  not  only  to  all  we  have  or  acquire,  to  wife
or  child,  but  even  to  our  very  limbs,  our  arms,  legs,  eyes
and  ears,  nay,  even  to  the  nose  in  the  middle  of  our  face.
And  in  any  case,  after  some  little  time,  we  learn  by  ex-
perience that  happiness  and  pleasure  are  a  fata  morgana,
which,  visible  from  afar,  vanish  as  we  approach  ;  that,  on
the  other  hand,  suffering  and  pain  are  a  reality,  which
makes  its  presence  felt  without  any  intermediary;  and  for
its  effect,  stands  in  no  need  of  illusion  or  the  play  of  false
hope.

If  the  teaching  of  experience  bears  fruit  in  us,  we  soon
give  up  the  pursuit  of  pleasure  and  happiness,  and  think
much  more  about  making  ourselves  secure  against  the  at-
tacks of  pain  and  suffering.  We  see  that  the  best  the
world  has  to  offer  is  an  existence  free  from  pain — a  quiet
tolerable  life;  and  we  confine  our  claims  to  this,  as  to  some-
thing we  can  more  surely  hope  to  achieve.  For  the  safest
way  of  not  being  very  miserable  is  not  to  expect  to  be
very  happy.  Merck,  the  friend  of  Goethe's  youth,  was  con
scious  of  this  truth  when  he  wrote:  "It  is  the  wretched
way  people  have  of  setting  up  a  claim  to  happiness — and
that,  too,  in  a  measure  corresponding  with  their  desires —
that  ruins  everything  in  this  world.  A  man  will  make
progress  if  he  can  get  rid  of  this  claim,  and  desire  noth-
ing but  what  he  sees  before  him."*  Accordingly  it  is  ad-
visable to  put  very  moderate  limits  upon  our  expectations
of  pleasure,  possessions,  rank,  honor  and  so  on;  because  it
is  just  this  striving  and  struggling  to  be  happy,  to  dazzle
the  world,  to  lead  a  life  full  of  pleasure,  which  entail  great
misfortune.  It  is  prudent,  and  wise,  I  say,  to  reduce  one's
claims,  if  only  for  the  reason  that  it  is  extremely  easy  to  be
very  unhappy;  while  to  be  very    happy  is   not  indeed  dif-

*  Letters  to  and  from  Merck


GENERAL  BULKS.  101

ficult,  but  quite  impossible.  With  justice  sings  the  poet
of  life's  wisdom:

"  Auream  qaisquis  rnediocritatem
Diligit,  tutus  caret  obsoleti
Sordibustecti,  caret  invidenda
Sobrius  aula.

"  Saevius  ventis  agitatur  ingens
Pinus:  et  celsae  graviori  casu
Decidunt  turres;  feriuntque  summos
Fulgura  rnontes  "  *

- — the  golden  mean  is  best — to  live  free  from  the  squalor  of
a  mean  abode,  and  yet  not  be  a  mark  for  envy.  It  is  the
tall  pine  which  is  cruelly  ghaken  by  the  wind,  and  the  lofty
towers  that  fall  so  heavily;  the  highest  summits  that  arfr
struck  in  the  storm.

He  who  has  taken  to  heart  the  teaching  or  my  philosophy
—  who  knows,  therefore,  that  our  whole  existence  is  some-
thing which  had  better  not  hrve  been,  and  that  to  disown
and  disclaim  it  is  the  highest  wisdom — he  will  have  no
great  expectations  from  anything  or  any  condition  in  life;
he  will  spend  passion  upon  nothing  in  the  world,  nor  la-
ment over-much  if  he  fails  in  any  of  his  undertakings.  He
will  feel  the  deep  truth  of  what  Platof  says:  ovve  n  tgov
dvBpGOrtirGov  aziov  ov  jueydXr/S  6nov8rfi — nothing  in  human
affairs  is  worth  any  great  anxiety;  or,  as  the  Persian  coet
teas  it:

"  Though  from  thy  grasp  all  worldly  things  should  flee.

Grieve  not  for  them,  for  they  are  nothing  worth:
And  though  a  world  in  thy  possession  be,

Joy  not,  for  worthless  are  the  things  of  earth.
Since  to  that  better  world  'tis  given  to  thee

To  pass,  speed  on,  for  this  is  nothing  worth."  \

The  chief  obstacle  to  our  arriving  at  these  salutary
views  is  that  hypocrisy  of  the  world  to  which  I  have  al-
ready alluded — an  hypocrisy  which  should  be  early  re-
vealed to  the  young.     Most  of  the  glories  of  the  world  are

*  Horace.     Odes  II.  x.

*  "Republic,"  x,  604.

*  Translator's  Note. — From  the  "Anvar-i  Suhaili" — "The  Lights  of
Canopus" — being  the  Persian  version  of  the  Tables  of  Bidpai,"  Trana-
alted  by  E.  B.  Eastwick,  ch   iii.     Story  iv.,  p.  289.


iO'l  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

mere  outward  show,  like  the  scenes  on  a  stage  :  thero  is
nothing  real  about  them.  Ships  festooned  and  hung  with
pennants,  firing  of  cannon,  illuminations,  beating  of  drums
and  blowing  of  trumpets,  shouting  and  applauding — these
are  all  the  outward  sign,  the  pretense  and  suggest  ion — as
it  were  the  hieroglyphic — of  joy  :  hue  just  there,  joy  is  as
a  rule,  not  to  be  found  ;  it  is  the  only  guest  who  has  de-
clined to  be  present  at  the  festival.  Where  thisguesi  may
really  be  found,  he  comes  generally  without  invitation  :
lie  is  not  formally  announced,  but  slips  in  quietly  by  him-
self sans  facon ;  often  making  his  appearance  under  the
most  unimportant  and  trivial  circumstances,  and  in  the
commonest  company — anywhere,  in  short,  but  where  the
society  is  brilliant  and  distinguished.  Joy  is  like  the  gold
in  the  Australian  mines — found  only  now  and  then,  as  it
were,  by  the  caprice  of  chance,  and  according  io  no  rule
or  law  ;  oftenest  in  very  little  grains,  and  very  seldom  in
heaps.  All  that  outward  show  which  I  have  described,  is
only  an  attempt  to  make  people  believe  that  it  is  really  joy
which  has  come  to  the  festival  ;  and  to  produce  this  im-
pression upon  the  spectators  is,  in  fact,  the  whole  object
of  it.

"With  mourning  it  is  just  the  same.  That  long  funeral
procession,  moving  up  so  slowly  ;  how  melancholy  it  looks  !
what  an  endless  row  of  carriages  !  But  look  into  them —
they  are  all  empty  ;  the  coachmen  of  the  whole  town  are  the
sole  escort  the  dead  man  has  to  his  grave.  Eloquent
picture  of  the  friendship  and  esteem  of  the  world  !  This
is  the  falsehood,  the  hallowness,  the  hypocrisy  of  human
affairs !

Take  another  example — a  roomful  of  guests  in  full  dress,
being  received  with  great  ceremony.  You  could  almost
believe  that  this  is  a  noble  and  distinguished  company  ;
but,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  compulsion,  pain  and  bore-
dom who  are  the  real  guests.  For  where  many  are  invited,
it  is  a  rabble — even  if  they  all  wear  stars.  Eeally  good
society  is  everywhere  of  necessity  very  small.  In  brilliant
festivals  and  noisy  entertainments,  there  is  always,  at
bottom,  a  sense  of  emptiness  prevalent.  A  false  tone  is
there  :  such  gatherings  are  in  strange  contrast  with  the
misery  and  barrenness  of  our  existence.  The  contrast
brings  the  true  condition  into  greater  relief.  Still,  these
gatherings  are  effective  from  the  outside  ;  and  that  is  just


genera  l  n  uzm  103

their  purpose.  Chamfort*  makes  the  excellent  remark
that  society — les  cercles,  les  salons,  ce  qu'on  appelle  le  monde
— is  like  a  miserable  play,  or  a  bad  opera,  without  any
interest  in  itself,  but  supported  for  a  time  by  mechanical
aid,  costumes  and  scenery.

And  so,  too,  with  academies  and  chairs  of  philosophy.
You  have  a  kind  of  a  sign-board  hung  out  to  show  the
apparent  abode  of  wisdom  :  but  wisdom  is  another  guest
who  declines  the  invitation;  she  is  to  be  found  elsewhere.
The  chiming  of  bells,  ecclesiastical  millinery,  attitudes  of
devotion,  insane  antics — these  are  the  pretense,  the  false
show  of  piety.  And  so  on.  Everything  in  the  world  is
like  a  hollow  nut ;  there  is  little  kernel  anywhere,  and
when  it  does  exist,  it  is  still  more  rare  to  find  it  in  the
shell.  You  may  look  for  it  elsewhere,  and  find  it,  as  a
rule,  only  by  chance.

§  2.  To  estimate  a  man's  condition  in  regard  to  happi-
ness, it  is  necessary  to  asK,  not  what  things  please  him,  but
yhat  things  trouble  him:  and  the  more  trivial  these  things
are  in  themselves,  the  happier  the  man  will  be.  To  be  ir-
ritated by  trifles,  a  man  must  be  well  off:  for  in  misfortune
trifles  are  unfelt.

§  3.  Care  should  be  taken  not  to  build  the  happiness
of  life  upon  a  ''broad  foundation" — not  to  require  a  great
many  things  in  order  to  be  happy.  For  happiness  on  such
a  foundation  is  the  most  easily  undermined;  it  offers  many
more  opportunities  for  accidents;  and  accidents  are  always
happening.  The  architecture  of  happiness  follows  a  plan
in  this  respect  just  the  opposite  of  that  adopted  in  every
other  case,  where  the  broadest  foundation  offers  the  great-
est security.  Accordingly,  to  reduce  your  claims  to  the
lowest  possible  degree,  in  comparison  with  your  means — of
whatever  kind  these  may  be — is  the  surest  way  of  avoiding
extreme  misfortune.

To  make  extensive  preparations  for  life — no  matter  what
form  they  may  take — is  one  of  the  greatest  and  commonest
of  follies.     Such  preparations  presuppose,  in  the  first  place,

*  Translator's  Note. — Nicholas  "  Chamfort  "  (1741-94),  a  French
Hi:seellaneous  writer,  whose  brilliant  conversation,  power  of  sar-
casm, and  epigrammatic  force,  coupled  with  an  extraordinary  career,
render  him  one  of  the  most  interesting  and  remarkable  men  of  his
time.  Schopenhauer  undoubtedly  owed  much  to  this  writer,  fc<?
whom  he  constantly  refers.


104  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

a  long  life,  thifull  and  complete  term  of  years  appointed
to  man — and  how  few  reach  it!  and  even  if  it  be  reached;
it  is  still  too  short  for  all  the  plans  that  have  been  made,
for  to  carry  them  out  requires  more  time  than  was  thought
necessary  at  the  beginning.  And  then  how  many  mis-
chances and  obstacles  stand  in  the  way!  how  seldom  the
goal  is  ever  reached  in  human  affairs!  And  lastly  even
though  the  goal  be  reached,  the  changes  which  time
works  In  us  have  been  left  out  of  the  reckoning;  we  forget
that  the  capacity  whether  for  achievement  or  for  enjoyment
does  not  last  a  whole  lifetime.  So  we  often  toil  for  things
which  are  no  longer  suited  to  us  when  we  attain  them;  and
again,  the  years  we  spend  in  preparing  for  some  work,  un-
consciously rob  us  of  the  power  for  carrying  it  out.  How
often  it  happens  that  a  man  is  unable  to  enjoy  the  wealth
which  he  acquired  at  so  much  trouble  and  risk,  and  that
the  fruits  of  his  labor  are  reserved  for  others;  or  that  he  is
incapable  of  filling  the  position  which  he  has  won  after  so
many  years  of  toil  and  struggle.  Fortune  has  come  too
late  for  him;  or,  contrarily,  he  has  come  too  late  for  fortune
-when,  for  instance,  he  wants  to  achieve  great  things,  say
in  art  or  literature;  the  popular  taste  has  changed,  it  may
be;  a  new  generation  has  grown  up,  which  takes  no  interest
in  his  work;  others  have  gone  a  shorter  way  and  got  the  start
of  him.  These  are  the  facts  of  life  which  Horace  must
have  had  in  view,  when  he  lamented  the  uselessness  of  all
advice;

"  quid  eternis  minorern
Consiliis  animuni  fatigas?"  *

The  cause  of  this  commonest  of  all  follies  is  that  optical
illusion  of  the  mind  from  which  every  one  suffers,  making
life,  at  its  beginning,  seem  of  long  duration,  and  at  its  end,
when  one  looks  back  over  the  course  of  it,  how  short  a
time  it  seems!  There  is  some  advantage  in  the  illusion;
but  for  it,  no  great  work  would  ever  be  done.

Our  life  is  like  a  journey  on  which,  as  we  advance,  the
landscape  takes  a  different  view  fiom  that  which  it  pre-
sented at  first,  and  changes  again,  as  we  come  nearer.  This
is  just  what  happens — especially  with  our  wishes.  -We
often  find  something  else,  nay,  something  better  than  what

*  Odes  II.  xi.


GENERAL  RULES.  101

we  were  looking  for:  and  what  we  look  for,  we  often  find
on  a  very  different  path  from  that  on  which  we  began  a
vain  search.  Instead  of  finding,  as  we  expected,  pleasure,
happiness,  joy,  we  get  experience,  insight,  knowledge — a
real  and  permanent  blessing,  instead  of  a  fleeting  and  il-
lusory one.

This  is  the  thought  that  runs  through  "Wilhelm
Meister,"  like  the  bass  in  a  piece  of  music.  In  this  work
of  Goethe's,  we  have  a  novel  of  the  "intellectual"  kind,
and,  therefore,  superior  to  all  others,  even  to  Sir  Walter
Scott's,  which  are,  one  and  all,  "ethical;"  in  other  words,
they  treat  of  human  nature  only  from  the  side  of  the  will.
So,  too,  in  the  Zauberflote — that  grotesque,  but  still  signi-
ficant, and  even  ambiguous  hieroglyphic — the  same  thought
is  symbolized,  but  in  great,  coarse  lines,  much  in  the  way
in  which  scenery  is  painted.  Here  the  symbol  would  be
complete  if  Tamino  were  in  the  end  to  be  cured  of  his  desire
to  possess  Tamina,  and  received,  in  her  stead  initiation  into,
the  mysteries  of  the  Temple  of  Wisdom.  It  is  quite  right
for  Papageno,  his  necessary  contrast,  to  succeed  in  getting
his  Papagena.

Men  of  any  worth  or  value  soon  come  to  see  that  they  are
in  the  hands  of  Fate,  and  gratefully  submit  to  be  molded
by  its  teachings.  They  recognize  that  the  fruit  of  life
is  experience,  and  not  happiness;  they  become  accustomed
and  content  to  exchange  hope  for  insight:  and,  in  the  end,
they  can  say,  with  Petrarch,  that  all  they  care  for  is  to
learn:

"  Altro  diletto  che  'mparar,  non  provo."

It  may  even  be  that  they  to  some  extent  still  follow  their
old  wishes  and  aims,  trifling  with  them,  as  it  were,  for  the
sake  of  appearances;  all  the  while  really  and  seriously  look-
ing for  nothing  but  instruction;  a  process  which  lends  them
an  air  of  genius,  a  trait  of  something  contemplative  and
sublime.

In  their  search  for  gold,  the  alchemists  discovered  other
things — gunpowder,  china,  medicines,  the  laws  of  nature.
There  is  a  sense  in  which  we  are  a11  alchemists.


106  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

CHAPTER  II.

OUR   RELATION    TO   OURSELVES.

§  4.  The  mason  employed  on  the  building  of  a  house
may  be  quite  ignorant  of  its  general  design:  or,  at  any  rate,
he  may  not  keep  it  constantly  in  mind.  So  it  is  with  man
in  working  through  the  days  and  hours  of  his  life,  he  takes
little  thought  of  its  character  as  a  whole.

If  there  is  any  merit  or  importance  attaching  to  a  man's
career,  if  he  lays  himself  out  carefully  for  some  special
work,  it  is  all  the  more  necessary  and  advisable  for  him  to
turn  his  attention  now  and  then  to  its  plan,  that  is  to  say,
the  miniature  sketch  of  its  general  outlines.  Of  course,  to
do  that,  he  must  have  applied  the  maxim  Tv£>hi  6savr6v;  he
must  have  made  some  little  progress  in  the  art  of  under-
standing himself.  He  must  know  what  is  his  real,  chief,
and  foremost  object  in  life — what  it  is  that  he  most  wants
in  order  to  be  happy;  and  then,  after  that,  what  occupies
the  second  and  third  place  in  his  thoughts;  he  must  find
out  what,  on  the  whole,  his  vocation  really  is — the  part  he
has  to  play,  his  general  relation  to  the  wrorld.  If  he  maps
out  important  work  for  himself  on  great  lines,  a  glance  at
this  miniature  plan  of  his  life  will  more  than  anything  else
stimulate,  rouse  and  ennoble  him,  urge  him  on  to  action
and  keep  him  from  false  paths.

Again,  just  as  the  traveler,  on  reaching  a  height  gets  a
connected  view  over  the  road  he  has  taken,  with  its  many
turns  and  windings;  so  it  is  only  when  we  have  completed
a  period  in  our  life,  or  approach  the  end  of  it  altogether,
that  we  recognize  the  true  connection  between  all  our
actions — what  it  is  we  have  achieved,  what  work  we  have
done.  It  is  only  then  that  we  see  the  precise  chain  of
cause  and  effect,  and  the  exact  value  of  all  our  efforts.  For
as  long  as  we  are  actually  engaged  in  the  work  of  life,  we
always  act  in  accordance  with  the  nature  of  our  character,
under  the  influence  of  motive,  and  within  the  limits  of  our
capacity — in  a  word,  from  beginning  to  end,  under  a  law
of  necessity;  at  every  moment  we  do  just  what  appears  to
us  right  and  proper.  It  is  only  afterward,  when  we  come
to  look  back  at  the  whole  course  of  our  life  and  its  general
result,  that  we  see  the  why  and  wherefore  of  it  all.


OUR  RELATION  TO  OURSELVES.  10?

When  we  are  actually  doing  some  great  deed,  or  creating
some  immortal  work,  we  are  not  conscious  of  it  as  such;  we
think  only  of  satisfying  present  aims,  of  fulfilling  the  in-
tentions we  happen  to  haye  at  the  time,  of  doing  the  right
thing  at  the  moment.  It  is  only  when  we  come  to  view
our  life  as  a  connected  whole  that  our  character  and  capac-
ities show  themselves  in  their  true  light;  that  we  see  how,
in  particular  instances,  some  happy  inspiration,  as  it  were,
led  us  to  choose  the  only  true  path  out  of  a  thousand  which
might  have  brought  us  to  ruin.  It  was  our  genius  that
guided  us,  a  force  felt  in  the  affairs  of  the  intellect  as  in
those  of  the  world;  and  working  by  its  defect  just  in  the
same  way  in  regard  to  evil  and  disaster.

§  5.  Another  important  element  in  the  wise  Conduct  of
life  is  to  preserve  a  proper  proportion  between  our  thought
for  the  present  and  our  thought  for  the  future  ;  in  order
not  to  spoil  the  one  by  paying  over-great  attention  to  the
other.  Many  live  too  much  in  the  present — frivolous
people,  I  mean  ;  others,  too  much  in  the  future,  ever  anx-
ious and  full  of  care.  It  is  seldom  that  a  man  holds  the
right  balance  between  the  two  extremes.  Those  who  strive
and  hope  and  live  only  in  the  future,  always  looking  ahead
and  impatiently  anticipating  what  is  coming,  as  some-
thing which  will  make  them  happy  wrhen  they  get  it,  are,
in  spite  of  their  very  clever  airs,  exactly  like  those  donkeys
one  sees  in  Italy,  whose  pace  may  be  hurried  by  fixing  a
stick  on  their  heads  with  a  wisp  of  hay  at  the  end  of  it ;
this  is  always  just  in  front  of  them,  and  they  keep  on
trying  to  get  it.  Such  people  are  in  a  constant  state  of
illusion  as  to  their  whole  existence  ;  they  go  on  living  ad
interim,  until  at  last  they  die.

Instead,  therefore,  of  always  thinking  about  our  plans
and  anxiously  looking  to  the  future,  or  of  giving  ourselves
up  to  regret  for  the  past,  we  should  never  forget  that  the
present  is  the  only  reality,  the  only  certainty  ;  that  the
future  almost  always  turns  out  contrary  to  our  expecta-
tions ;  that  the  past,  too,  was  very  different  from  what  we
suppose  it  to  have  been.  Both  the  past  and  the  future  are,
on  the  whole,  of  less  consequence  than  we  think.  Dis-
tance, which  makes  objects  look  small  to  the  outward  eye,
makes  them  look  big  to  the  eye  of  thought.  The  present-
alone  is  true  and  actual  ;  it  is  the  only  time  which  pos-
sesses full  reality,  and  our  existence  lies  in  it  exclusively.


108  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

Therefore  we  should  always  be  glad  of  it,  and  give  it  the
welcome  it  deserves,  and  enjoy  every  hour  that  is  bearable
by  its  freedom  from  pain  and  annoyance  with  a  full  con-
sciousness of  its  value.  We  shall  hardly  be  able  to  do  this
if  we  make  a  wry  face  over  the  failure  of  our  hopes  in  the
past  or  over  our  anxiety  for  the  future.  It  is  the  height  of
folly  to  refuse  the  present  hour  of  happiness,  or  wantonly
to  spoil  it  by  vexation  at  by-gones  or  uneasiness  about
what  is  to  come.  There  is  a  time,  of  course,  for  fore-
thought, nay,  even  for  repentance  :  but  when  it  is  over  let
us  think  of  what  is  past  as  of  something  to  which  we  have
said  farewell,  of  necessity  subduing  our  hearts —

a\\a  rd  ukv  npoTervx^ca  eoc6ojhev  axyvuEvoi  TiEp
Ovjuov  hvi  6tt)6e66i  cpiXor  SajudtfavTES  dvdyxy,*

and  of  the  future  as  of  that  which  lies  beyond  our  power,
in  the  lap  of  the  gods —

a/l/V  rjtoi  filv  zavza  Qegov  kv  yovvatii  uEirai.\

But  in  regard  to  the  present  let  us  remember  Seneca's
advice,  and  live  each  day  as  if  it  were  our  whole  life  —
singular  dies  singulas  vitas  puta:  let  us  make  it  as
agreeable  as  possible,  it  is   the   only   real    time    we   have.

Only  those  evils  which  are  sure  to  come  at  a  definite
date  have  any  right  to  disturb  us  ;  and  how  few  there  are
which  fulfill  this  description.  For  evils  are  of  two  kinds  ;
either  they  are  possible  only,  at  most  probable  ;  or  they
ire  inevitable.  Even  in  the  case  of  evils  which  are  sure
co  happen,  the  time  at  which  they  will  happen  is  uncer-
tain. A  man  who  is  always  preparing  for  either  class  of
evil  will  not  have  a  moment  of  peace  left  him.  So,  if  we
are  not  to  lose  all  comfort  in  life  through  the  fear  of  evils
some  of  which  are  uncertain  in  themselves,  and  others,  in
the  time  at  which  they  will  occur,  we  should  look  upon  the
one  kind  as  never  likely  to  happen,  and  the  other  as  not
likely  to  happen  very  soon.

Xow,  the  less  our  peace  of  mind  is  disturbed  by  fear,
the  more  likely  it  is  to  be  agitated  by  desire  and  expecta-
tion.  This  is  the  true  meaning  of  that  song  of  Goethe's
which  is  such  a  favorite  with  every  one  :  Ich  liaV  mein'

*  "Iliad,"  xix.  65  f  Ibid,  xvii.  514.


OUR  RELATION  TO  OURSELVES.  109

Sack*  auf  niclits  gestellt.  It  is  only  after  a  man  has  got
rid  of  all  pretension,  and  taken  refuge  in  mere  unembel-
lished  existence,  that  he  is  able  to  attain- that  peace  of
mind  which  is  the  foundation  of  human  happiness.
Peace  of  mind  !  that  is  something  essential  to  any  enjoy-
ment of  the  present  moment ;  and  unless  its  separate
moments  are  enjoyed,  there  is  an  end  of  life's  happiness  as
&  whole.  We  should  always  recollect  that  to-day  comes
only  once,  and  never  returns.  We  fancy  that  it  will  come
again  to-morrow  ;  but  to-morrow  is  another  day,  which,
in  its  turn,  comes  once  only.  We  are  apt  to  forget  that
every  day  is  an  integral,  and  therefore  irreplaceable  portion
of  life,  and  to  look  npon  life  as  though  it  were  a  collective
idea  or  name  which  does  not  suffer  if  one  of  the  indi-
viduals it  covers  is  destroyed.

We  should  be  more  likely  to  appreciate  and  enjoy  the
present,  if,  in  those  good  days  when  we  are  well  and  strong,
we  did  not  fail  to  reflect  how,  in  sickness  and  sorrow,  every
past  hour  that  was  free  from  pain  and  privation  seemed  in
our  memory  so  infinitely  to  be  envied — as  it  were,  a  lost
paradise,  or  some  one  who  was  only  then  seen  to  have  acted
as  a  friend.  But  we  live  through  our  days  of  happiness
without  noticing  them  ;  it  is  only  when  evil  comes  upon
us  that  we  wish  them  back.  A  fhousand  gay  and  pleasant
hours  are  wasted  in  ill-humor  ;  we  let  them  slip  by  unen-
joyed,  and  sigh  for  them  in  vain  when  the  sky  is  overcast.
Those  present  moments  that  are  bearable,  be  they  never  so
trite  and  common — passed  by  in  indifference,  or,  it  may  be,
impatiently  pushed  away — those  are  the  moments  we
should  honor;  never  failing  to  remember  that  the  ebbing
tide  is  even  now  hurrying  them  into  the  past,  where  mem-
ory will  store  them  transfigured  and  shining  with  an  im-
perishable light — in  some  after-time,  and  above  all,  when
Dur  days  are  evil,  to  raise  the  veil  and  present  them  as  the
object  of  our  fondest  regret.

§  6.  "  Limitation  always  makes  for  happiness."  We
are  happy  in  proportion  as  our  range  of  vision,  our  sphere
of  work,  our  points  of  contact  with  the  world,  are  restricted
and  circumscribed.  We  are  more  likely  to  feel  worried  and
anxious  if  these  limits  are  wide;  for  it  means  that  our
cares,  desires  and  terrors  are  increased  and  intensified.
That  is  why  the  blind  are  not  so  unhappy  as  we  might  be
inclined  to  suppose,  otherwise   there   would    not   be   that


11.0  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

gentle  and   almost   serene   expression    of   peace   in   their
faces.

Another  reason  why  limitation  makes  for  happiness  is
that  the  second  half  of  life  proves  even  more  dreary  than
the  first.  As  the  years  wear  on,  the  horizon  of  our  aims
and  our  points  of  contact  with  the  world  become  more  ex-
tended. In  childhood  our  horizon  is  limited  to  the  nar-
rowest sphere  about  us;  in  youth  there  is  already  a  very
considerable  widening  of  our  view;  in  manhood  it  com-
prises the  whole  range  of  our  activity,  often  stretching  out
over  a  very  distant  sphere — the  care,  for  instance,  of  a  state
or  a  nation  in  old  age  it  embraces  posterity.

But  even  in  the  affairs  of  the  intellect  limitation  is  neces-
sary, if  we  are  to  be  happy.  For  the  less  the  will  is  excited
the  less  we  suffer.  We  have  seen  that  suffering  is  some-
thing positive,  and  that  happiness  is  only  a  negative  con-
dition. To  limit  the  sphere  of  outward  activity  is  to  re-
lieve the  will  of  external  stimulus:  to  limit  the  sphere  of
our  intellectual  efforts  is  to  relieve  the  will  of  internal
sources  of  excitement.  This  latter  kind  of  limitation  is  at-
tended by  the  disadvantage  that  it  opens  the  door  to  bore-
dom, which  is  a  direct  source  of  countless  sufferings:  for  to
banish  boredom,  a  man  will  have  recourse  to  any  means
that  may  be  handy — dissipation,  society,  extravagance,
gaming,  and  drinking,  and  the  like,  which  in  their  turn
bring  mischief,  ruin  and  misery  in  their  train.  Dijficiles  in
otio  quies — it  is  difficult  to  keep  quiet  if  you  have  noth-
ing to  do.  That  limitation  in  the  sphere  of  outward  ac-
tivity is  conducive,  nay,  even  necessary  to  human  happiness
such  as  it  is,  may  be  seen  in  the  fact  that  the  only  kind  of
poetry  which  depicts  men  in  a  happy  state  of  life — idyllic
poetry,  I  mean — always  aims,  as  an  intrinsic  part  of  its
treatment,  at  representing  them  in  very  simple  and  re
stricted  circumstances.  It  is  this  feeling  too,  which  is  at
the  bottom  of  the  pleasure  we  take  in  what  are  called  genre
pictures.

"Simplicity,"  therefore,  as  far  as  it  can  be  attained,  and
even  monotony,  in  our  manner  of  life,  if  it  does  not  mean
that  we  are  bored,  will  con  tribute  to  happiness;  just  because
under  such  circumstances,  life,  and  consequently  the  bur-
den which  is  the  essential  concomitant  of  life,  will  be  least
felt.  Our  existence  will  glide  on  peacefully  like  a  stream
which  no  waves  or  whirlpools  disturb.


OUR  RELATION  TO  OURSELVES.  \\\

§  7.  Whether  we  are  in  a  pleasant  or  a  painful  state  de-
pends, ultimately,  upon  the  kind  of  matter  that  pervades
and  engrosses  our  consciousness.  In, this  respect  purely
intellectual  occupation,  for  the  mind  that  is  capable  of  it,
will,  as  a  rule,  do  much  more  in  the  way  of  happiness  than
any  form  of  practical  life,  with  its  constant  alternations  of
success  and  failure,  and  all  the  shocks  and  torments  it  pro-
duces. But  it  must  be  confessed  that  for  such  occupation
a  pre-eminent  amount  of  intellectual  capacity  is  necessary.
And  in  this  connection  it  may  be  noted  that,  just  as  a  life
devoted  to  ^utward  activity  will  distract  and  divert  a  man
from  study  and  also  deprive  him  of  that  quiet  concentra-
tion of  mind  which  is  necessary  for  such  work;  so,  on  the
other  hand,  a  long  course  of  thought  will  make  him  more
or  less  unfit  for  the  noisy  pursuits  of  real  life.  It  is  advis-
able, therefore,  to  suspend  mental  work  for  awhile,  if  cir-
cumstances happen  which  demand  any  degree  of  energy  in
affairs  of  a  practical  nature.

§  8.  To  live  a  life  that  shall  be  entirely  prudent  and
discreet,  and  to  draw  from  experience  all  the  instruction
it  contains,  it  is  requisite  to  be  constantly  thinking  back —
to  make  a  kind  of  recapitulation  of  what  we  have  done,  of
our  impressions  and  sensations,  to  compare  our  former  with
our  present  judgments — what  we  set  before  us  and  strug-
gled to  achieve,  with  the  actual  result  and  satisfaction  we
have  obtained.  To  do  this  is  to  get  a  repetition  of  the  private
lessons  of  experience— lessons  which  are  given  to  every
one.

Experience  of  the  world  may  be  looked  upon  as  a  kind
of  text,  to  which  reflection  and  knowledge  form  the  com-
mentary. Where  there  is  a  great  deal  of  reflection  and  in-
tellectual knowledge,  and  very  little  experience,  the  result
is  like  those  books  which  have  on  each  page  two  lines  of
text  to  forty  lines  of  commentary.  A  great  deal  of  experi-
ence with  little  reflection  and  scanty  knowledge,  gives  us
books  like  those  of  the  "editio  Bipontina,"*  where  there  are
no  notes  and  much  that  is  unintelligible.

The  advice  here  given  is  on  a  par  with  a  rule  recommended

*  "Translator's  Note — A  series  of  Greek,  Latin  and  French  classics
published  at  Zweibriicken  in  the  Palatinate,  from  and  after  the  year
1779.     Cf.  Butter,  Ueberdie  Bipontmer:  und  die  editiones  Bipontinae.


212  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

by  Pythagoras — to  review,  every  night  before  going  to  sleep
what  we  have  done  during  the  day.  To  live  at  random,  in
the  hurly-burly  of  business  or  pleasure,  without  ever  reflect-
ing upon  the  past — to  go  on,  as  it  were,  pulling  cotton  off
the  reel  of  life — is  to  have  no  clear  idea  of  what  we  are
about:  and  a  man  who  lives  in  this  state  will  have  chaos  in
his  emotions  and  certain  confusion  in  his  thoughts;  as  is
soon  manifest  by  the  abrupt  and  fragmentary  character  of
his  conversation,  which  becomes  a  kind  of  mincemeat.  A
man  will  be  all  the  more  exposed  to  this  fate  in  proportion
as  he  lives  a  restless  life  in  the  world,  amid  a  crowd  of
various  impressions  and  with  a  correspondingly  small
amount  of  activity  on  the  part  of  his  own  mind.

And  in  this  connection  it  will  be  in  place  to  observe  that,
when  events  and  circumstances  which  have  influenced  us
pass  away  in  the  course  of  time,  we  are  unable  to  bring
back  and  renew  the  particlar  mood  or  state  of  feeling  which
they  aroused  in  us:  but  we  can  remember  what  we  were  led
to  say  and  do  in  regard  to  them;  and  this  forms,  as  it  were,
the  result,  expression  and  measure  of  those  events.  We
should,  therefore,  be  careful  to  preserve  the  memory  of  our
thoughts  at  important  points  in  our  life:  and  herein  lies
the  great  advantage  of  keeping  a  journal.

§  9.  To  be  self-sufficient,  to  be  all  in  all  to  one's  self,  to
want  for  nothing,  to  be  able  to  say  omnia  mea  mecum
porto — that  is  assuredly  the  chief  qualification  for  happi-
ness. Hence  Aristotle's  remark,  77  evSaijuoria  t<Sv
avTapx&v  sen  * — to  be  happy  means  to  be  self-
sufficient — cannot  be  too  often  repeated.  It  is,  at  bottom,
the  same  thought  as  is  present  in  that  very  well-turned  sen-
tence from  Chamfort,  which  I  have  prefixed  as  a  motto  to
this  volume.  For  while  a  man  cannot  reckon  with  cer-
tainty upon  any  one  but  himself,  the  burdens  and  disad-
vantages, the  dangers  and  annoyances  which  arise  from
having  to  do  with  others,  are  not  only  countless  but  una-
voidable.

There  is  no  more  mistaken  path  to  happiness  than
worldliness,  revelry,  high  life  :  for  the  whole  object  of  it
is  to  transform  our  miserable  existence  into  a  succession  of
joys,  delights  and  pleasures — a  process  which  cannot  fail

*"Eudein,Etk."  VII.  ii.  37.


0  UE  BEL  A  TION  TO  0  UR8BL  VE8.  H3

to  result  in  disappointment  and  delusion  ;  on  a  par,  in  this
respect  with  its  obbhgaio  accompaniment  the  interchange
of  lies.*

All  society  necessarily  involves,  as  the  first  condition  of
its  existence,  mutual  accommodation  and  restraint  upon
the  part  of  its  members.  This  means  that  the  larger  it  is,
the  more  insipid  will  be  its  tone.  A  man  can  be  himself
only  so  long  as  he  is  alone  ;  and  if  he  does  not  love  solitude,
he  will  not  love  freedom  ;  for  it  is  only  when  he  is  alone
that  he  is  really  free.  Constraint  is  always  present  in
society,  like  a  companion  of  whom  there  is  no  riddance  ;
and  in  proportion  to  the  greatness  of  a  man's  individuality,
it  will  be  hard  for  him  to  bear  the  sacrifices  which  all
intercourse  with  others  demands.  Solitude  will  be
welcomed  or  endured  or  avoided,  according  as  a  man's
personal  value  is  large  or  small — the  wretch  feeling,
when  he  is  alone,  the  whole  burden  of  his  misery;  the
great  intellect  delighting  in  its  greatness  ;  and  every  one,
in  short,  being  just  what  he  is.

Further,  if  a  man  stands  high  in  Nature's  list,  it  is
natural  and  inevitable  that  he  should  feel  solitary.  It
will  be  an  advantage  to  him  if  his  surroundings  do  not
interfere  with  this  feeling  ;  for  if  he  has  to  see  a  great
deal  of  other  people  who  are  not  of  like  character  with
himself,  they  will  exercise  a  disturbing  influence  upon
him,  adverse  to  his  peace  of  mind  ;  they  will  rob  him,  in
fact,  of  himself,  and  give  him  nothing  to  compensate  for
the  loss.

But  while  Nature  sets  very  wide  differences  between
man  and  man  in  respect  both  of  morality  and  of  intellect,
society  disregards  and  effaces  them  ;  or,  rather,  it  sets  up
artificial  differences  in  their  stead — gradations  of  rank  and
position,  which  are  very  often  diametrically  opposed  to
those  which  Nature  establishes.  The  result  of  this  arrange-
ment is  to  elevate  those  whom  Nature  has  placed  low,  and.
to  depress  the  few  who  stand  high.  These  latter,  then,
usually  withdraw  from  society,  where,  as  soon  as  it  is  at
all  numerous,  vulgarity  reigns  supreme.

*  As  our  body  is  concealed  by  the  clothes  we  wear,  so  our  mind  is
veiled  in  lies.  The  veil  is  always  there,  and  it  is  only  through  it
that  we  can  sometimes  guess  at  what  a  man  really  thinks  ;  just  as
from  his  clothes  we  arrive  at  the  general  shape  of  his  body.


114  COUNSELS  AND   MAXIMS.

What  offends  a  great  intellect  in  society  is  the  equality
of  rights,  leading  to  equality  of  pretensions,  which  every
one  enjoys;  while  at  the  same  time,  inequality  of  capacity
means  a  corresponding  disparity  of  social  power.  So-called
good  society  recognizes  every  kind  of  claim  but  that  of
intellect,  which  is  a  contraband  article;  and  people  are
expected  to  exhibit  an  unlimited  amount  of  patience  toward
every  form  of  folly  and  stupidity,  pervesity  and  dull-
ness while  personal  merit  has  to  beg  pardon,  as  it  were,  for
being  present,  or  else  conceal  itself  altogether.  Intellect-
ual superiority  offends  by  its  very  existence,  without  any
desire  to  do  so.

The  worst  of  what  is  called  good  society  is  not  only  that
it  offers  us  the  companionship  of  people  who  are  unable  to
win  either  our  praise  or  our  affection,  but  that  it  does  not
allow  of  our  being  that  which  we  naturally  are;  it  compels
us,  for  the  sake  of  harmony,  to  shrivel  up,  or  even  alter
our  shape  altogether.  Intellectual  conversation  whether
grave  or  humorous,  is  only  fit  for  intellectual  society;  it  is
downright  abhorrent  to  ordinary  people,  to  please  whom  it  is
absolutely  necessary  to  be  commonplace  and  dull.  This  de-
mands an  act  of  severe  self-denial ;  we  have  to  forfeit  three-
fourths  of  ourselves  in  order  to  become  like  other  people.
No  doubt  their  company  may  be  set  down  against  our  loss
in  this  respect;  but  the  more  a  man  is  worth,  the  more  he
will  find  that  what  he  gains  does  not  cover  what  he  loses,
and  that  the  balance  is  on  the  debit  side  of  the  account;
for  the  people  with  whom  he  deals  are  generally
bankrupt — that  is  to  say,  there  is  nothing  to  be  got  from
their  society  which  can  compensate  either  for  its  boredom,
annoyance  and  disagreeableness,  or  for  the  self-denial  which
it  renders  necessary.  Accordingly,  most  society  is  so  con-
stituted as  to  offer  a  good  profit  to  any  one  who  will  ex-
change it  for  solitude.

Nor  is  this  all.  By  way  of  providing  a  substitute  for
real — I  mean  intellectual — superiority,  which  is  seldom  to
be  met  with,  and  intolerable  when  it  is  found,  society  has
capriciously  adopted  a  false  kind  of  superiority,  conven-
tional in  its  character,  and  resting  upon  arbitrary  principles
— a  tradition,  as  it  were,  handed  down  in  the  higher  circles
and,  like  a  password,  subject  to  alterations;  I  refer  to  bon
ton  fashion.  Whenever  this  kind  of  superiority  comes
into  collision  with  the  real  kind,  its  weakness  is  manifest.


OUR  RELATION  TO  OURSELVES.  115

Moreover,  the  presence  of  "  good  tone"  means  the  absence
of  good  sense.

No  man  can  be  in  perfect  accord  with  any  one  but
himself — not  even  with  a  friend  or  the  partner  of  his  life;
differences  of  individuality  and  temperament  are  always
br  inging  in  some  degree  of  discord,  though  it  may  be  a  very
slight  one.  That  genuine,  profound  peace  of  mind,  that
perfect  tranquillity  of  soul,  which,  next  to  health,  is  the
highest  blessing  the  earth  can  give,  is  to  be  attained  only
in  solitude,  and,  as  a  permanent  mood,  only  in  complete
retirement:  and  then,  if  there  is  anything  great  and  rich
in  the  man's  own  self,  his  w7ay  of  life  is  the  happiest  that
may  be  found  in  this  wretched  world .

Let  me  speak  plainly.  However  close  the  bond  of  friend-
ship, love,  marriage,  a  man,  ultimately,  looks  to  himself,
to  his  own  welfare  alone:  at  most,  to  his  child's  too.  The
less  necessity  there  is  for  you  to  come  into  contact  with
mankind  in  general,  in  the  relations  whether  of  business  or
of  personal  intimacy,  the  better  off  you  are.  Loneliness
and  solitude  have  their  evils,  it  is  true;  but  if  you  cannot
feel  them  all  at  once,  you  can  at  least  see  where  they  lie;
on  the  other  hand,  society  is  insidious  in  this  respect;  as  in
offering  you  what  appears  to  be  the  pastime  of  pleasing  social
intercourse,  it  works  great  and  often  irreparable  mischief.
The  young  should  early  be  trained  to  bear  being  left  alone;
for  it  is  a  source  of  happiness  and  peace  of  mind.

It  follows  from  this  that  a  man  is  best  off  if  he  be  thrown
upon  his  own  resources  and  can  be  all  in  all  to  himself  :
and  Cicero  goes  so  far  as  to  say  that  a  man  who  is  in  this
condition  cannot  fail  to  be  very  happy — nemo  potest  non
beatissimus  esse  qui  est  totus  aphis  ex  sese,  quique  in  se
11710  ponit  omnia.*  The  more  a  man  has  himself,  the  less
others  can  be  to  him.  The  feeling  of  self-sufficiency  I
it  is  that  which  restrains  those  whose  personal  value  is  in
itself  great  riches,  from  such  considerable  sacrifices  as  are
demanded  by  intercourse  with  the  world,  let  alone,  then,
from  actually  practicing  self-denial  by  going  out  of  their
way  to  seek  it.  Ordinary  people  are  sociable  and  complaisant
just  from  the  very  opposite  feeling;  to  bear  others' com-
pany is  easier  for  them  than  to  bear  their  own.  Moreover,
respect  is  not  paid  in  this  world   to    that   which    has   real

*  "  Paradoxa  Stoicoruui."  II.


116  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

merit ;  it  is  reserved  for  that  which  has  none.  So  retire-
ment  is  at  once  a  proof  and  a  result  of  being  distinguished
by  the  possession  of  meritorious  qualities.  It  will  there-
fore show  real  wisdom  on  the  part  of  any  one  who  is  worth
anything  in  himself,  to  limit  his  requirements  as  may  be
necessary,  in  order  to  preserve  or  extend  his  freedom,  and,
— since  a  man  must  come  into  some  relations  with  his
fellow-men — to  admit  them  to  his  intimacy  as  little  as
possible.

I  have  said  that  people  are  rendered  sociable  by  their  in-
ablity  to  endure  solitude,  that  is  to  say,  their  own  society.
They  become  sick  of  themselves.  It  is  this  vacuity  of
soul  which  drives  them  to  intercourse  with  others — to
travels  in  foreign  countries.  Their  mind  is  wanting  in
elasticity  ;  it  has  no  movement  of  its  own.  and  so  they  try
to  give  it  some — by  drink,  for  instance.  How  much
drunkenness  is  due  to  this  cause  alone  !  They  are  always
looking  for  some  form  of  excitement,  of  the  strongest  kind
they  can  bear — the  excitement  of  being  with  people  of  like
nature  with  themselves  ;  and  if  they  fail  in  this,  their
mind  sinks  by  its  own  weight,  and  they  fall  into  a  grievous
lethargy.*  Such  people,  it  may  be  said,  possess  only  a
small  fraction  of  humanity  in  themselves  ;  and  it  requires
a  great  many  of  them  put  together  to  make  up  a  fair
amount  of  it — to  attain  any  degree  of  consciousness  as  men.
A  man,  in  the  full  sense  of  the  word — a  man   par   excel-

*  It  is  a  well-known  fact,  that  we  can  more  easily  bear  up  under
evils  which  fall  upon  a  great  inany  people  besides  ourselves.  As
boredom  seems  to  be  an  evil  of  this  kind,  people  band  together  to
offer  it  a  common  resistance.  The  love  of  life  is  at  bottom  only  the
fear  of  death  ;  and,  in  the  same  way,  the  social  impulse  does  not
rest  directly  upon  the  love  of  society,  but  upon  the  fear  of  solitude  ;
it  is  not  alone  the  charm  of  being  in  others'  company  that  people
seek,  it  is  the  dreary  oppression  of  being  alone — the  monotony  of
their  own  consciousness — that  they  would  avoid.  They  will  do  any
Thing  to  escape  it — even  tolerate  bad  companions,  and  put  up  with
the  feeling  of  constraint  which  all  society  involves,  in  this  case  a  very
burdensome  one.  But  if  aversion  to  such  society  conquer  the  aver-
sion to  being  alone,  they  become  accustomed  to  solitude  and  hardened
to  its  immediate  effects.  They  no  longer  find  solitude  to  be  such  a
very  bad  thing,  and  settle  down  comfortably  to  it  without  any  han-
kering after  society;  and  this,  partly  because  it  is  only  indirectly
that  they  need  others  '  company  and  partly  because  they  have  be-
come accustomed  to  the  benefits  of  beii  %  alone.


OUR  RELATION  TO  OURhELVES.  117

lence — does  not  represent  a  fraction,  but  a  whole  number  ;
he  is  complete  in  himself.

Ordinary  society  is,  in  this  respect,  very  like  the  kind
of  music  to  be  obtained  from  an  orchestra  composed  solely
of  Russian  horns.  Each  horn  has  only  one  note  :  and  the
music  is  produced  by  each  note  coming  in  just  at  the  right
moment.  In  the  monotonous  sound  of  a  single  horn,  you
iiave  a  precise  illustration  of  the  effect  of  most  people's
minds.  How  often  there  seems  to  be  only  one  thought
there  !  and  no  room  for  any  other.  It  is  easy  to  see  why
people  are  so  bored ;  and  also  why  they  are  so  sociable,  why
they  like  to  go  about  in  crowds — why  mankind  is  so
gregarious.  It  is  the  monotony  of  his  own  nature  that
makes  a  man  find  solitude  intolerable.  Omnis  stultitia
laborat  fastidio  sui:  folly  is  truly  its  own  burden.  Put  a
great  many  men  together,  and  you  may  get  some  result —
some  music  from  your  horns  !

A  man  of  intellect  is  like  an  artist  who  gives  a  concert
without  any  help  from  any  one  else,  playing  on  a  single
instrument — a  piano,  say,  which  is  a  little  orchestra  in  it-
self. Such  a  man  is  a  little  world  in  himself;  and  the
effect  produced  by  various  instruments  together  he  pro-
duces single-handed,  in  the  unity  of  his  own  consciousness.
Like  the  piano,  he  has  no  place  in  a  symphony  :  he  is  a
soloist  and  performs  by  himself — in  solitude,  it  may  be;
or,  if  in  company  with  other  instruments,  only  as  princi-
pal ;  or  for  setting  the  tone,  as  in  singing.  However,
those  who  are  fond  of  society  from  time  to  time  may  profit
by  this  simile,  and  lay  it  dow^n  as  a  general  rule  that
deficiency  of  quality  in  those  we  meet  may  be  to  some  ex-
tent compensated  by  an  increase  in  quantity.  One  man's
company  may  be  quiet  enough,  if  he  is  clever  ;  but  where
you  have  only  ordinary  people  to  deal  with,  it  is  advisable
to  have  a  great  many  of  them,  so  that  some  advantage  may
accrue  by  letting  them  all  work  together — on  the  analogy
of  the  horns  ;  and  may  Heaven  grant  you  patience  for  your
task!

That  mental  vacuity  and  barrenness  of  soul  to  which  I
have  alluded,  is  responsible  for  another  misfortune.  When
men  of  the  better  class  form  a  society  for  promoting  some
noble  or  ideal  aim,  the  result  almost  always  is  that  the  in-
numerable mob  of  humanity  comes  crowding  in  too,  as  it
always  does  everywhere,  like  vermin — their  object    being


118  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

to  try  and  get  rid  of  boredom,  or  some  other  defect  of  their
nature;  and  anything  that  will  effect  that,  they  seize  upon  at
once,  without  the  slightest  discrimination.  Some  of  them
will  slip  into  that  society,  or  push  themselves  in,  and  then
either  soon  destroy  it  altogether,  or  alter  it  so  much  that
in  the  end  it  comes  to  have  a  purpose  the  exact  opposite  of
that  which  it  had  at  first.

This  is  not  the  only  point  of  view  from  which  the  social
impulse  may  be  regarded.  On  cold  days  people  manage  to
get  some  warmth  by  crowding  together  ;  and  you  can  warm
your  mind  in  the  same  way — by  bringing  it  into  contact
with  others.  But  a  man  who  has  a  great  deal  of  intellectual
warmth  in  himself  will  stand  in  no  need  of  such  resources.
I  have  written  a  little  fable  illustrating  this  :  it  may  be
found  elsewhere.*  As  a  general  rule,  it  may  be  said  that
a  man's  sociability  stands  very  nearly  in  inverse  ratio  to  his
intellectual  value:  to  say  that  "so  and  so"  is  very  un-
sociable, is  almost  tantamount  to  saying  that  he  is  a  man
of  great  capacity.

Solitude  is  doubly  advantageous  to  such  a  man.  Firstly
it  allows  him  to  be  with  himself,  and,  secondly,  it  prevents
him  being  with  others — an  advantage  of  great  moment;  for
how  much  constraint,  annoyance,  and  even  danger  there  is
in  all  intercourse  with  the  world.  Tout  notre  mal,  says  La
Bruy ere,  vient  cle  ne pouvoir  etreseul.  It  is  really  a  very
risky,  nay,  a  fatal  thing,  to  be  sociable;  because  it  means
contact  with  natures,  the  great  majority  of  which  are  bad

*  Translator's  Note. — The  passage  to  which  Schopenhauer  refers
is  "  Parrega ;  "  vol.  ii.  §  413.  (4th.  edition).  The  fable  is  of
certain  porcupines,  who  huddled  together  for  warmth  on  a  cold  day  ;
but  as  they  began  to  prick  one  another  with  their  quills,  they  were
obliged  to  disperse.  However  the  cold  drove  them  together  again,
when  just  the  same  thing  happened.  At  last,  after  many  turns  of
huddling  and  dispersing,  they  discovered  that  they  would*  be  best  off
by  remaining  at  a  little  distance  from  one  another.  In  the  same
way,  the  need  of  society  drives  the  human  porcupines  together — only
to  be  mutally  repelled  by  the  many  prickly  and  disagreeable  qualities
of  their  nature.  The  moderate  distance  which  they  at  last  discover
to  be  the  only  tolerable  condition  of  intercourse,  is  the  code  of
Qolit^ness  and  fine  manners  ;  and  those  who  transgress  it  are  roughl)'
*ld — in  the  English  phrase — "to  keep  their  distance."  By  this
arrangement  the  mutual  need  of  warmth  is  only  very  moderately
satisfied — but  then  people  do  not  get  pricked.  A  man  who  has  some
heat  in  himself  prefers  to  remain  outside,  where  he  will  neither  prick
other  people  nor  get  pricked  himself.


OUR  RELATION  TO  OURSELVES.  119

fnorally,  and  dull  or  perverse,  intellectually.  To  be  un-
sociable is  not  to  care  about  sucb  people;  and  to  have
enough  in  one's  self  to  dispense  with  the  necessity  of  their
company  is  a  great  piece  of  good  fortune;  because  almost
all  our  sufferings  spring  from  having  to  do  with  other  people
and  that  destroys  the  peace  of  mind,  which,  as  I  have  said
comes  next  after  health  in  the  elements  of  happiness.
Peace  of  mind  is  impossible  without  a  considerable  amount
of  solitude.  The  cynics  renounced  all  private  property  in
order  to  attain  the  bliss  of  having  nothing  to  trouble  them;
and  to  renounce  society  with  the  same  object  is  the  wisest
thing  a  man  can  do.  Bernardin  de  Saint  Pierre  has  the
very  excellent  and  pertinent  remark  that  to  be  sparing  in
regard  to  food  is  a  means  of  health;  in  regard  to  society,  a
means  of  tranquillity — la  diete  des  alimens  nous  rend  la
sante  du  corps,  et  celledes  hommes  la  tranquillite  de  Vdme.
To  be  soon  on  friendly,  or  even  affectionate,  terms  with
solitude  is  like  winning  a  gold  mine:  but  this  is  not  some-
thing which  everybody  can  do.  The  prime  reason  forsocial
intercourse  is  mutual  need;  and  as  soon  as  that  is  satisfied,
boredom  drives  people  together  once  more.  If  it  were  not
for  these  two  reasons,  a  man  would  probably  elect  to  remain
alone;  if  only  because  solitude  is  the  sole  condition  of  life
which  gives  full  play  to  that  feeling  of  exclusive  importance
which  every  man  has  in  his  own  eyes — as  if  he  were  the
only  person  in  the  world!  a  feeling  which,  in  the  throng  and
press  of  real  life,,  soon  shrivels  up  to  nothing,  getting,  at
every  step,  a  painful  dementi.  From  this  point  of  view
it  may  be  said  that  solitude  is  the  original  and  natural  state
of  man,  where,  like  another  Adam,  he  is  as  happy  as  his
nature  will  allow.

But  still,  had  Adam  no  father  or  mother?  There  is  an-
other sense  in  which  solitude  is  not  the  natural  state;  for,
at  his  entrance  into  the  world,  a  man  finds  himself  with
parents,  brothers,  sisters,  that  is  to  say,  in  society,  and  not
alone.  Accordingly  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  love  of  soli-
tude is  an  original  characteristic  of  human  nature;  it  is
rather  the  result  of  experience  and  reflection,  and  these  hi
their  turn  depend  upon  the  development  of  intellectual
power,  and  increase  with  the  years.

Speaking  generally,  sociability  stands  in  inverse  ratio  with
age.  A  little  child  raises  a  piteous  cry  of  fright  if  it  is  left
alone  for  only  a  few  minutes:  and  later  on,  to  be  shut  up  by


120  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

itself  is  a  great  punishment.  Young  people  soon  get  on
very  friendly  terms  with  one  another;  it  is  only  the  few
among  them  of  any  nobility  of  mind  who  are  glad  now  and
then  to  be  alone — but  to  spend  the  whole  day  thus  would
be  disagreeable.  A  grown-up  man  can  easily  do  it;  it  ia
little  trouble  to  him  to  be  much  alone,  and  it  becomes  lesa
and  less  trouble  as  he  advances  in  years.  An  old  man  who  has
outlived  all  his  friends,  and  is  either  indifferent  or  dead
to  the  pleasures  of  life,  is  in  his  proper  element  in  solitude
and  in  individual  cases  the  special  tendency  to  retirement
and  seclusion  will  always  be  in  direct  proportion  to  intel-
lectual capacity.

For  this  tendency  is  not,  as  I  have  said,  a  purely  natural
one;  it  does  not  come  into  existence  as  a  direct  need  of  hu-
man nature;  it  is  rather  the  effect  of  the  experience  we  go
through,  the  product  of  reflection  upon  what  our  needs
really  are;  proceeding,  more  especially,  from  the  insight  we
attain  into  the  wretched  stuff  of  which  most  people  are
made,  whether  you  look  at  their  morals  or  their  intellects.
The  worst  of  it  all  is  that,  in  the  individual,  moral  and  intel-
lectual shortcomings  are  closely  connected  and  play  into
each  other's  hands,  so  that  all  manner  of  disagreeable  results
are  obtained,  which  make  intercourse  with  most  people  not
only  unpleasant  but  intolerable.  Hence,  though  the  world
contains  many  things  which  are  thoroughly  bad,  the  worst
thing  in  it  is  society.  Even  Voltaire,  that  sociable  French-
man, was  obliged  to  admit  that  there  are  everywhere  crowds
of  people  not  worth  talking  to;  la  terre  est  couverte  de  gens
qui  ne  merit ent  pas  qit'on  leur  parte.  And  Petrarch  gives
a  similar  reason  for  wishing  to  be  alone — that  tender  spirit!
so  strong  and  constant  in  his  love  of  seclusion.  The
streams,  the  plains  and  woods  know  well,  he  says,  how  he
has  tried  to  escape  the  perverse  and  stupid  people  who  have
missed  the  way  to  heaven:

"  Cercato  lio  sempre  solitaria  vita
(Le  rive  il  sanno,  e  le  campagne  e  i  bosclii)
Per  f  uggir  quest'  ingegni  storti  e  loschi
Che  la  strada  del  ciel'  hanno  sinarrita."

He  pursues  the  same  strain  in  that  delightful  book  of  his
"De  Vita  Solitaria,"  which  seems  to  have  given  Zimmerman
the  idea  of  his  celebrated  work  on  "Solitude."  It  is  the
secondary  and  indirect  character  of  the  love  of  seclusion  to


0  UR  MELA  TION  TO  0  VMSEL  VE8.  121

which  Chamfort  alludes  in  the  following  passage,  couched
in  his  sarcastic  vein:  "On  dit  quelquefois  d'un  liomme
qui  'vit  seulf  il  ri crime  pas  lasociete.  C'est  souvent  comme
si  on  disait  d'un  liomme  qu'il  n' crime  pas  la  prome-
nade, sous  le  pretexte  qu'il  ne  se  promene  pas  volontiers
le  soir  dans  la  foret  de   Bondy.

You  will  find  a  similar  sentiment  expressed  by  the  Per-
sian poet  Sadi,  in  his  "Garden  of  Roses."  "Since  that
time,"  he  says,  "we  have  taken  leave  of  society,  preferring
the  path  of  seclusion;  for  there  is  safety  in  solitude.  An-
gelus  Silesius,*  a  very  gentle  and  Christian  writer,  confesses
to  the  same  feeling,  in  his  own  mythical  language.  Herod,
he  says,  is  the  common  enemy;  and  when,  as  with  Joseph,
God  warns  us  of  danger,  we  fly  from  the  world  to  solitude,
from  Bethlehem  to  Egypt;  or  else  suffering  and  death  awaii
us!

"  Herodes  ist  em  Feind;  der  Joseph  der  Verstand,
Dem  machte  Gott  die  Gefahrirn  Traum  (in  Geist)  bekannt;
Die  Welt  ist  Bethlehem,  Aegypten  Einsamkeit,
Fleuch,  meine  Seele!  fleuch,  sonst  stirbest  du  vor  Leid."

Giordano  Bruno  also  declares  himself  a  friend  of  seclusion.
Tanti  uomini,  he  says,  die  in  terra  lianne  volnto  gnstare
vita  celeste,  dissero  con  una  voce,  "ecce  elongavi  fugiens  et
mansiin  solitudine" — those  who  in  this  world  have  desired
a  foretaste  of  the  divine  life,  have  always  proclaimed  with
one  voice:

"  Lo  !  then  would  I  wander  far  off:
I  would  lodge  in  the  wilderness."  f

And  in  the  work  from  which  I  have  already  quoted  Sadi
says  of  himself:  "In  disgust  with  my  friends  at  Damascus
I  withdraw  into  the  desert  about  Jerusalem,  to  seek  the
society  of  the  beasts  of  the  field."  In  short,  the  same  thing
has  been  said  by  all  whom  Prometheus  has  formed  out  oJ
better  clay.  What  pleasure  could  they  find  in  the  company
of  people  with  whom  their  only  common  ground  is  just
what  is  lowest  and  least  noble  in   their   own    nature — the

*  Translator's  Note — Angelus  Silesius,  pseudonym  for  Johannes
Scheffler,  a  physician  and  mystic  poet  of  the  seventeenth  century
(1624-77).

f  Psalms,  lv.  7.


122  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

part  of  them  that  is  commonplace,  trivial  and  vulgar?
What  do  they  want  with  people  who  cannot  rise  to  a  higher
level,  and  for  whom  nothing  remains  but  to  drag  others
down  to  theirs  ?  for  this  is  what  they  aim  at.  It  is  an
aristocratic  feeling  that  is  at  the  bottom  of  this  propensity
to  seclusion  and  solitude.

Rascals  are  always  sociable — more's  the  pity!  and  the
chief  sign  that  a  man  has  any  nobility  in  his  character  is
the  little  pleasure  he  takes  in  others5  company.  He  prefers
solitude  more  and  more,  and,  in  course  of  time,  comes  to
see  that  with  few  exceptions,  the  world  offers  no  choice
beyond  solitude  on  one  side  and  vulgarity  on  the  other.
This  may  sound  a  hard  thing  to  say;  but  even  Angelus
Silesius,  with  all  his  Christian  feelings  of  gentleness  and
love,  was  obliged  to  admit  the  truth  of  it.  However  pain-
ful solitude  may  be,  he  says,  be  careful  not  to  be  vulgar;
for  then  you  may  find  a  desert  everywhere:

"Die   Einsamkeit  ist  noth:  docli  sei  nur  niclit  geniein,
So  kannst  du  uberall  in  einer  Wiiste  sein."

It  is  natural  for  great  minds — the  true  teachers  of  hu-
manity— to  care  little  about  the  constant  company  of  others
just  as  little  as  the  schoolmaster  cares  for  joining  in  the
gambols  of  the  noisy  crowd  of  boys  which  surrounds  him.
The  mission  of  these  great  minds  is  to  guide  mankind  over
the  sea  of  error  to  the  haven  of  truth — to  draw  it  forth  from
the  dark  abysses  of  a  barbarous  vulgarity  up  into  the  light
of  culture  and  refinement.  Men  of  great  intellect  live  in
the  world  without  really  belonging  to  it;  and  so,  from  their
earliest  years,  they  feel  that  there  is  a  perceptible  difference
between  them  and  other  people.  But  it  is  only  gradually,
with  the  lapse  of  years,  that  they  come  to  a  clear  under-
standing of  their  position.  Their  intellectual  isolation  is
then  reinforced  by  actual  seclusion  in  their  manner  of  life;
they  let  no  one  approach  who  is  not  in  some  degree
emancipated  from  the  prevailing  vulgarity.

From  what  has  been  said  it  is  obvious  that  the  love  of
solitude  is  not  a  direct,  original  impulse  in  human  nature,
but  rather  something  secondary  and  of  gradual  growth.
It  is  the  more  distinguishing  feature  of  nobler  minds,
developed  not  without  some  conquest  of  natural  desires,
and  now  and  then  in  actual  opposition  to   the  promptings


OUR  RELATION  TO  OURSELVES.  123

of  Mephistopheles — bidding  you  exchange  a  morose  and
soul-destroying  solitude  for  life  among  men,  for  society  ;
even  the  worst,  he  says,  will  give  a  sense  of  human  fellow-
ship :

"  Hor'  auf  mit  deinem  Gram  zu  spielen,
Der,  wie  ein  Geier,  dir  am  Leben  frisst :
Die  schlechteste  Gesellschaft  lasst  dich  fiililen
Dass  du  ein  Mensch  mit  Menschen  bist."  *

To  be  alone  is  the  fate  of  all  great  minds — a  fate
deplored  at  times,  but  still  always  chosen  as  the  less  griev-
ous of  two  evils.  As  the  years  increase,  it  always  becomes
easier  to  say,  Dare  to  be  wise — sapere  aucle.  And  after
sixty,  the  inclination  to  be  alone  grows  into  a  kind  of  real,
natural  instinct;  for  at  that  age  everything  combines  in
favor  of  it.  The  strongest  impulse — the  love  of  women's
society — has  little  or  no  effect  ;  it  is  the  sexless  condition
of  old  age  which  lays  the  foundation  of  a  certain  self-
sufficiency,  and  that  gradually  absorbs  all  desire  for  others'
company.  A  thousand  illusions  and  follies  are  overcome;
the  active  years  of  life  are  in  most  cases  gone  ;  a  man  has
no  more  expectations  or  plans  or  intentions.  The  genera-
tion to  which  he  belonged  has  passed  away,  and  a  new  race
has  sprung  up  which  looks  upon  him  as  essentially  outside
its  sphere  of  activity.  And  then  the  years  pass  more
quickly  as  we  become  older,  and  we  want  to  devote  our
remaining  time  to  the  intellectual  rather  than  to  the  prac-
tical side  of  life.  For,  provided  that  the  mind  retains  its
faculties,  the  amount  of  knowledge  and  experience  we  have
acquired,  together  with  the  facility  we  have  gained  in  the
use  of  our  powers,  makes  it  then  more  than  ever  easy  and  in-
teresting to  us  to  pursue  the  study  of  any  subject.  A
thousand  things  become  clear  which  were  formerly
enveloped  in  obscurity,  and  results  are  obtained  which  give
a  feeling  of  difficulties  overcome.  From  long  experience
of  men,  we  cease  to  expect  much  from  them  ;  we  find  that,
on  the  whole,  people  do  not  gain  by  a  nearer  acquaintance  ;
and  that — apart  from  a  few  rare  and  fortunate  exceptions
— we  have  come  across  none  but  defective  specimens  of
human  nature  which  it  is  advisable  to  leave  in  peace.  We
are  no  more  subject  to  the  ordinary  illusions   of   life  ;  and

*  "Goethe's  "Faust  "  Part  L.  1281-5.


124  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

as,  in  individual  instances,  we  soon  see  what  a  man  is  made
of,  we  seldom  feel  any  inclination  to  come  into  closer
relations  with  him.  Finally,  isolation — our  own  society —
has  become  a  habit,  as  it  were  a  second  nature,  with  us,
more  especially  if  we  have  been  on  friendly  terms  with  it
/!rom  our  youth  up.  The  love  of  solitude  which  was
formerly  indulged  only  at  the  expense  of  our  desire  for
society,  has  now  come  to  be  the  simple  quality  of  our
natural  disposition — the  element  proper  to  our  life,  as
water  to  a  fish.  This  is  why  any  one  who  possesses  a
unique  individuality — unlike  others  and  therefore  neces-
sarily isolated — feels  that,  as  he  becomes  older,  his  position
is  no  longer  so  burdensome  as  when  he  was  youug.

For  as  a  matter  of  fact,  this  very  genuine  privilege  of  old
age  is  one  which  can  be  enjoyed  only  if  a  man  is  possessed
of  a  certain  amount  of  intellect;  it  will  be  appreciated  most
of  all  where  there  is  real  mental  power:  but  in  some  degree
by  every  one.  It  is  only  people  of  very  barren  and  vulgar
nature  who  will  be  just  as  sociable  in  their  old  age  as  they  were
in  their  youth.  But  then  they  become  troublesome  to  a  society
to  which  they  are  no  longer  suited,  and,  at  most,  manage  to
be  tolerated;  whereas  they  were  formerly  in  great   request.

There  is  another  aspect  of  this  inverse  proportion  between
age  and  sociability — the  way  in  which  it  conduces  to  edu-
cation. The  younger  people  are,  the  more  in  every  respect
they  have  to  learn;  and  it  is  just  in  youth  that  Nature  pro-
vides a  system  of  mutual  education,  so  that  mere  inter-
course with  others,  at  that  time  of  life,  carries  instruction
with  it.  Human  society,  from  this  point  of  view,  resembles
a  huge  academy  of  learning,  on  the  Bell  and  Lancaster
system,  opposed  to  the  system  of  education  by  means  of
books  and  schools,  as  something  artificial  and  contrary  to
the  institutions  of  Nature.  It  is  therefore  a  very  suitable
arrangement  that,  in  his  young  days,  a  man  should  be  a
very  diligent  student  at  the  place  of  learning  provided  by
Nature  herself.

But  there  is  nothing  in  life  which  has  not  some  drawback
— nihil  est  ab  mnni  parte  beat  urn,  as  Horace  says;  or,  in  the
words  of  an  Indian  proverb,  "no  lotus  without  a  stalk/'
Seclusion,  which  has  so  many  advantages,  has  also  its  lit-
tle annoyances  and  drawbacks,  which  are  small,  however,  in
comparison  with  those  of  society:  hence  any  one  who  is
worth  much  in    himself  will   get  on  better  without  othei


OUR  RELATION  TO  OURSELVES.  125

people  than  with  them.  But  among  the  disadvantages  of
seclusion  there  is  one  which  is  not  so  easy  to  see  as  the  rest.
It  is  this:  when  people  remain  indoors  all  day,  they  become
physically  very  sensitive  to  atmospheric  changes,  so  that
every  little  draught  is  enough  to  make  them  ill;  so  with
our  temper;  a  long  course  of  seclusion  makes  it  so  sensitive
that  the  most  trivial  incidents,  words,  or  even  looks,  are
sufficient  to  disturb  or  to  vex  and  offend  us — little  things
which  are  unnoticed  by  those  who  live  in  the  turmoil  of
life.

When  you  find  human  society  disagreeable  and  feel  your-
self justified  in  flying  to  solitude,  you  may  be  so  constituted
as  to  be  unable  to  bear  the  depression  of  it  for  any  length
of  time,  which  will  probably  be  the  case  if  you  are  young.
Let  me  advise  you,  then,  to  form  the  habit  of  taking  some
of  your  solitude  with  you  into  society,  to  learn  to  be  to
some  extent  alone  even  though  you  are  in  company:  not  to
say  at  once  what  you  think,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  not
to  attach  too  precise  a  meaning  to  what  others  say;  rather
not  to  expect  much  of  them,  either  morally  or  intellectually
and  to  strengthen  yourself  in  the  feeling  of  indifference  to
their  opinion,  which  is  the  surest  way  of  always  practicing
a  praiseworthy  toleration.  If  you  do  that,  you  will  not
live  so  much  with  other  people,  though  you  may  appear  to
move  among  them;  your  relation  to  them  will  be  of  purely
objective  character.  This  precaution  will  keep  you  from
too  close  contact  with  society,  and  therefore  secure  you
against  being  contaminated  or  even  outraged  by  it.  *  Soci-
ety is  in  this  respect  like  a  fire — the  wise  man  warming
himself  at  a  proper  distance  from  it;  not  coming  too  close
like  the  fool,  who,  on  getting  scorched,  runs  away  and
shivers  in  solitude,  loud  in  his  complaint  that  the  fire
burns.

§  10.  Envy  is  natural  to  man:  and  still,  it  is  at  once  a
vice  and  a  source  of  misery. f     We   should    treat   it   as  the

*  This  restricted,  or,  as  it  were,  entrenched  kind  of  sociability  has
been  dramatically  illustrated  in  a  play — well  worth  reading — of  Mora-
tin's,  entitled  "El  Cafe  o  sea  la  Comedia  Nuova"  (The  Cafe  or  the
New  Comedy),  chiefly  by  one  of  the  characters,  Don  Pedro,  and  es-
pecially in  the  second  and  third  scenes  of  the  first  act.

f  Envy  shows  how  unhappy  people  are:  and  in  their  constant  atten-
tion to  what  others  do  and  leave  undone,  how  much  they  are  bored.


126  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

enemy  of  our  happiness,  and  stifle  it  like  an  evil  thought.
This  is  the  advice  given  by  Seneca;  as  he  well  puts  it,  we
shall  be  pleased  with  what  we  have,  if  we  avoid  the  self-
torture  of  comparing  our  own  lot  with  some  other  and  hap-
pier one — nostra  nos  sine  comparatione  delectent;  nun-
quam  exit  felix  quern  torquehit  felicior.*  And  again:
quum  adspexeris  quot  te  antecedant,  cogita  quot  se-
qnantur\ — if  a  great  many  people  appear  to  be  better  off
than  yourself,  think  how  many  there  are  in  a  worse  position.
It  is  a  fact  that  if  real  calamity  comes  upon  us,  the  most
effective  consolation — though  it  springs  from  the  same
source  as  envy — is  just  the  thought  of  greater  misfortunes
than  ours;  and  the  next  best  is  the  society  of  those  who  are
in  the  same  ill  luck  as  we — the  partners  of  our  sorrows.

So  much  for  the  envy  which  we  may  feel  toward  others.
As  regards  the  envy  which  we  may  excite  in  them,  it  should
always  be  remembered  that  no  form  of  hatred  is  so  impla-
cable as  the  hatred  that  comes  |rom  envy;  and  therefore  we
should  always  carefully  refrain  from  doing  anything  to
rouse  it;  nay,  as  with  many  another  form  of  vice,  it  is  better
altogether  to  renounce  any  pleasure  there  may  *be  in  it  be-
cause of  the  serious  nature  of  its  consequences.

Aristocracies  are  of  three  kinds:  (1)  of  birth  and  rank;  (2)
of  wealth;  and  (3)  of  intellect.  The  last  is  really  the  most
distinguished  of  the  three,  and  its  claim  to  occupy  the  first
position  comes  to  be  recognized,  if  it  is  only  allowed  time
to  work.  So  eminent  a  king  as  Frederick  the  Great  admit-
ted it — les  dmes  privilegiees  rangent  a  Vegal  des  souverains,
as  he  said  to  his  chamberlain,  when  the  latter  expressed  hia
surprise  that  Voltaire  should  have  a  seat  at  the  table  re-
served for  kings  and  princes,  while  ministers  and  general/
were  relegated  to  the  chamberlain's.

Every  one  of  these  aristocracies  is  surrounded  by  a  hosi
of  envious  persons.  If  you  belong  to  one  of  them,  they
will  be  secretly  embittered  against  you  ;  and  unless  they
are  restrained  by  fear,  they  will  always  be  anxious  to  let
you  understand  that  you  are  no  better  than  they.  It  is  by
their  anxiety  to  let  you  know  this,  that  they  betray  how
greatly  they  are  conscious  that  the  opposite  is  the  truth.

The  line  of  conduct  to  be  pursued  if  you  are  exposed  to
envy  is  to  keep   the   envious  persons   at   a  distance,  and,

*  "De  Tra:"  iii.,  80.  t  "Epist.."  xv.


OUR  RELATION  TO  OURSELVES.  12?

as  far  as  possible,  avoid  all  contact  with  them,  so  that
there  may  be  l  wide  gulf  fixed  between  yon  and  them  ;  if
this  cannot  be  done,  to  bear  their  attacks  with  the  greatest
composure.  In  the  latter  case,  the  very  thing  that  pro-
vokes the  attack  will  also  neutralize  it.  This  is  what
appears  to  be  generally  done.

The  members  of  one  of  these  aristocracies  usually  g^t  on
very  well  with  those  of  another,  and  there  is  no  call  for
envy  between  them,  because  their  several  privileges  effect
an  equipoise.

§  11.  Give  mature  and  repeated  consideration  to  any
plan  before  you  proceed  to  carry  it  out ;  and  even  after
you  have  thoroughly  turned  it  over  in  your  mind,  make
some  concession  to  the  incompetency  of  human  judgment;
for  it  may  always  happen  that  circumstances  which  cannot
be  investigated  or  foreseeu,  will  come  in  and  upset  the
whole  of  your  calculation.  This  is  a  reflection  that  will
always  influence  the  negative  side  of  the  balance — a  kind
of  warning  to  refrain  from  unnecessary  action  in  matters
of  importance — quieta  nonmovere.  But  having  once  made
up  your  mind  and  begun  your  work,  you  must  let  it  run
its  course  and  abide  the  result — not  worry  yourself  by
fresh  reflections  on  what  is  already  accomplished,  or  by  a
renewal  of  your  scruples  on  the  score  of  possible  danger  :
free  your  mind  from  the  subject  altogether,  and  refuse  to
go  into  it  again,  secure  in  the  thought  that  you  gave  it
mature  attention  at  the  proper  time.  This  is  the  same  ad-
vice as  is  given  by  an  Italian  proverb — legala  bene  e  pot
lascia  la  andare — which  Goethe  has  translated  thus  :  see
well  to  your  girths,  and  then  ride  on  boldly.*

And  if,  notwithstanding  that,  you  fail,  it  is  because  all
human  affairs  are  the  sport  of  chance  and  error.  Socrates,
the  wisest  of  men,  needed  the  warning  voice  of  his  good
genius,  or  daiuoviov  to  enable  him  to  do  what  was  right  in
regard  to  his  own  personal  affairs,  or,  at  any  rate,  to  avoid
mistakes  ;  which  argues  that  the  human  intellect  is  incom-
petent for  the  purpose.  There  is  a  saying — which  is  re-
ported to  have  originated  with    one  the  popes — that  when

*  It  may  be  observed,  in  passing,  that  a  great  many  of  the  maxims
which  Goethe  puts  under  the  head  of  Proverbial,  are  translations
from  the  Italian.


128  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

misfortune  happens  to  us,  the  blame  of  it,  at  least  in  some
degree,  attaches  to  ourselves.  If  this  is  not  true  absolutely
and  in  every  instance,  it  is  certainly  true  in  the  great
majority  of  cases.  It  even  looks  as  if  this  truth  had  a
great  deal  to  do  with  the  effort  people  make  as  far  as  possi-
ble to  conceal  their  misfortunes,  and  to  put  the  best  face
chev  can  upon  them,  for  fear  lest  their  misfortunes  may
show  how  much  they  are  to  blame.

§  12.  In  the  case  of  a  misfortune  which  has  already
happened  and  therefore  cannot  be  altered,  you  should  not
allow  yourself  to  think  that  it  might  have  been  otherwise  ;
still  less,  that  it  might  have  been  avoided  by  such  and
such  means  ;  for  reflections  of  this  kind  will  only  add
to  your  distress  and  rnake  it  intolerable,  so  that  you  wTill
become  a  tormentor  of  yourself — kavrovriiiGopovpLEvos.  It  is
better  to  follow  the  example  of  King  David  ;  who,  as  long
as  his  son  lay  on  the  bed  of  sickness,  assailed  Jehovah  with
unceasing  supplications  and  entreaties  for  his  recovery  ;
but  when  he  was  dead,  snapped  his  fingers  and  thought  no
more  of  it.  If  you  are  not  light-hearted  enough  for  that,  you
can  take  refuge  in  fatalism,  and  have  the  great  truth
revealed  to  you  that  everything  which  happens  is  the  result
of  necessity,  and  therefore  inevitable.

However  good  this  advice  may  be,  it  is  one-sided  and
partial.  In  relieving  and  quieting  us  for  the  moment,  it
is  no  doubt  effective  enough  ;  but  when  our  misfortunes
have  resulted — as  is  usually  the  case — from  our  own  care-
lessness or  folly,  or,  at  any  rate,  partly  by  our  own  fault,
it  is  a  good  thing  to  consider  how  they  might  have  been
avoided,  and  to  consider  it  often  in  spite  of  its  being  a
tender  subject — a  salutary  form  of  self-discipline,  which
will  make  us  wiser  and  better  men  for  the  future.  If  we
have  made  obvious  mistakes,  we  should  not  try,  as  we
generally  do,  to  gloss  them  over,  or  to  find  something  to
excuse  or  extenuate  them  ;  we  should  admit  to  ourselves
that  we  have  .committed  faults,  and  open  our  eyes  wide  to
all  their  enormity,  in  order  that  we  may  firmly  resolve  to
avoid  them  in  time  to  come.  To  be  sure,  that  means  a
great  deal  of  self-inflicted  pain,  in  the  shape  of  discontent,
but  it  should  be  remembered  that  to  spare  the  rod  is  to
spoil  the  child — 6  y.r)  SapeiS  avBpa)7toi  ov  7t-*i2t:vErai*


OUR  RELATION  TO  OURbELVES.  129

§  13.  In  all  matters  affecting  our  weal  or  woe,  we  should
be  careful  not  to  let  our  imagination  run  away  with  us,
and  build  no  castles  in  the  air.  In  the  first  place,  they  are
expensive  to  build,  because  we  have  to  pull  them  down
again  immediately,  and  that  is  a  source  of  grief.  We
should  be  still  more  on  our  guard  against  distressing  our
hearts  by  depicting  possible  misfortunes.  If  these  were
misfortunes  of  a  purely  imaginary  kind,  or  very  remote
and  unlikely,  we  should  at  once  see,  on  awaking  from  our
dream,  that  the  whole  thing  was  mere  illusion  ;  we  should  re-
joice all  the  more  in  a  reality  better  than  our  dreams,  or,
at  most,  be  warned  against  misfortunes  which,  though  very
remote,  were  still  possible.  These,  however,  are  not  the
sort  of  playthings  in  which  imagination  delights  ;  it  is  only
in  idle  hours  that  we  build  castles  in  the-air,  and  they  are
always  of  a  pleasing  description.  The  matter  which  goes
to  form  gloomy  dreams  are  mischances  which  to  some  ex-
tent really  threaten  us,  though  it  be  from  some  distance  ;
imagination  makes  them  look  larger  and  nearer  and  more
terrible  than  they  are  in  reality.  This  is  a  kind  of  dream
#hich  cannot  be  so  readily  shaken  off  on  awaking  as  a
pleasant  one  ;  for  a  pleasant  dream  is  soon  dispelled  by
reality,  leaving,  at  most,  a  feeble  hope  lying  in  the  lap  of
possibility.  When  we  have  abandoned  ourselves  to  a  fit  of
the  blues,  visions  are  conjured  up  which  do  not  so  easily
vanish  again  ;  for  it  is  always  just  possible  that  the  visions
may  be  realized.  But  we  are  not  always  able  to  estimate  the
exact  degree  of  possibility  :  possibility  may  easily  pass  into
probability  ;  and  thus  we  deliver  ourselves  up  to  torture.
Therefore  we  should  be  careful  not  to  be  over-anxious  on
any  matter  affecting  our  weal  or  our  woe,  not  to  carry  our
anxiety  to  unreasonable  or  injudicious  limits  ;  but  coolly
and  dispassionately  to  deliberate  upon  the  matter,  as
though  it  were  an  abstract  question  which  did  not  touch  us
in  particular.  We  should  give  no  play  to  imagination
here  ;  for  imagination  is  not  judgment — it  only  conjures
up  visions,  inducing  an  unprofitable  and  often  very  painful
mood.

The  rule  on  which  I  am  here  insisting  should  be  most
carefully  observed  toward  evening.  For  as  darkness
makes  us  timid  and  apt  to  see  terrifying  shapes  everywhere,
there  is  somethiug  similar  in  the  effect  of  indistinct
thought ;  and  uncertainty  always  brings  with  it  a  sense  of


130  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

danger.  Hence,  toward  evening,  when  onr  powers  of
thought  and  judgment  are  relaxed — at  the  hour,  as  it  were,
of  subjective  darkness — the  intellect  becomes  tired,  easily
confused,  and  unable  to  get  at  the  bottom  of  things  ;  and
if,  in  that  state,  we  meditate  on  matters  of  personal  interest
to  ourselves,  they  soon  assume  a  dangerous  and  terrifying
aspect.  This  is  mostly  the  case  at  night,  when  we  are  in
bed  ;  for  then  the  mind  is  fully  relaxed,  and  the  power  of
judgment  quite  unequal  to  its  duties  ;  but  imagination  is
still  awake.  Night  gives  a  black  look  to  everything,  what-
ever it  may  be.  This  is  why  our  thoughts,  just  before  we
go  to  sleep,  or  as  we  lie  awake  through  the  hours  of  the
night,  are  usually  such  confusions  and  perversions  of  facts
as  dreams  themselves  ;  and  when  our  thoughts  at  that
time  are  concentrated  upon  our  own  concerns,  they  are
generally  as  black  and  monstrous  as  possible.  In  the
morning  all  such  nightmares  vanish  like  dreams  ;  as  the
Spanish  proverb  has  it,  noche  tinta,  bianco  el  dia — the
night  is  colored,  the  day  is  white.

But  even  toward  nightfall,  as  soon  as  the  candles  are  lit,
the  mind,  like  the  eye,  no  longer  sees  things  so  clearly  as
by  day  ;  it  is  a  time  unsuited  to  serious  meditation,  especi-
ally on  unpleasant  subjects.  The  morning  is  the  proper
time  for  that — as  indeed  for  all  efforts  without  exception,
whether  mental  or  bodily.  For  the  morning  is  the  youth
of  the  day,  when  everything  is  bright,  fresh  and  easy  of
attainment ;  we  feel  strong  then,  and  all  our  faculties  are
completely  at  our  disposal.  Do  net  shorten  the  morning
by  getting  up  late,  or  waste  it  in  unworthy  occupations
or  in  talk ;  look  upon  it  as  the  quintessence  of  life,  as  to  a
certain  extent  sacred.  Evening  is  like  old  age  :  we  •  are
languid,  talkative,  silly.  Each  day  is  a  little  life;  every
waking  and  rising  a  little  birth,  every  fresh  morning  a
little  youth,  every  going  to  rest  and  sleep  a  little  death.

But  condition  of  health,  sleep,  nourishment,  temperature
weather,  surroundings,  and  much  else  that  is  purely  ex-
ternal, have,  in  general,  an  important  influence  upon  our
mood  and  therefore  upon  our  thoughts.  Hence  both  our
view  of  any  matter  and  our  capacity  for  any  work  are  very
much  subject  to  time  and  place.  So  it  is  best  to  profit  by
a  good  mood — for  how  seldom  ifc-  ^omes —


OUR  RELATION  TO  OURSELVES.  131

"Nehnit  die  gute  Stimrnung  wahr,
Dennsie  kommt  so  selten."  *

We  are  not  always  able  to  form  new  ideas  about  our  sur-
roundings, or  to  command  original  thoughts;  they  come  if
they  will,  and  when  they  will.  And  so,  too,  we  cannot  al-
ways succeed  in  completely  considering  some  personal  mat-
ter at  the  precise  time  at  which  we  have  determined  before-
hand to  consider  it,  and  just  when  we  set  ourselves  to  do
so.  For  the  peculiar  train  of  thought  which  is  favorable  to
it  may  suddenly  become  active  without  any  special  call  be-
ing made  upon  it,  and  we  may  then  follow  it  up  with  keen
interest.  In  this  way  reflection,  too,  chooses  its  own
time.

This  reining-in  of  the  imagination  which  I  am  recom-
mending, will  also  forbid  us  to  summon  up  the  memory  of
past  misfortune,  to  paint  a  dark  picture  of  the  injustice  or
barm  that  has  been  done  us,  the  losses  we  have  sustained,
the  insults,  slights  and  annoyances  to  which  we  have  been
exposed;  for  to  do  that  is  to  rouse  into  fresh  life  all  those
hateful  passions  long  laid  asleep — the  anger  and  resentment
which  disturb  and  pollute  our  nature.  In  an  excellent  par-
able, Proclus,  the  Neoplatonist,  points  out  how  in  every
town  the  mob  dwell  side  by  side  with  those  who  are  rich  and
distinguished:  so,  too,  in  every  man,  be  he  never  so  noble
and  dignified,  there  is,  in  the  depths  of  his  nature,  a  mob
of  low  and  vulgar  desires  which  constitute  him  an  animal.
It  will  not  do  to  let  this  mob  revolt  or  even  so  much  as  peep
forth  from  its  hiding-place;  it  is  hideous  of  mien,  and  its
rebel  leaders  are  those  flights  of  imagination  which  I  have
been  describing.  The  smallest  annoyance  whether  it  comes
from  our  fellow-men  or  from  the  things  around  us,  may
swell  up  into  a  monster  of  dreadful  aspect,  putting  us  at
our  wits'  end — and  all  because  we  go  on  brooding  over  our
troubles  and  painting  them  in  the  most  glaring  colors  and
on  the  largest  scale.  It  is  much  better  to  take  a  very  calm
and  prosaic  view  of  what  is  disagreeable;  for  that  is  the
easiest  way  of  bearing  it.

If  you  hold  small  objects  close  to  your  eyes,  you  limit
your  field  of  vision  and  shut  out  the  world.  And,  in  the
same  way,  the  people  or  the  things  which  stand  nearest,
even  though  they  are  of  the  very  smallest   consequence,  are

*  Goethe


132  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

apt  to  claim  an  amount  of  attention  much  beyond  their  duev
occupying  us  disagreeably,  and  leaving  no  room  for  serious
thoughts  and  affairs  of  importance.  We  ought  to  work
against  this  tendency.

§  14.  The  sight  of  things  which  do  not  belong  to  us  is
very  apt  to  raise  the  thought:  "Ah,  if  that  were  ouly  mine!"
making  us  sensible  of  our  privation.  Instead  of  that  we
should  do  better  by  more  frequently  putting  to  ourselves
the  opposite  case:  "Ah,  if  that  were  not  mine!"  What  I
mean  is  that  we  should  sometimes  try  to  look  upon  our  pos-
sessions in  the  light  in  which  they  would  appear  if  we  had
lost  them;  whatever  they  may  be,  property,  health,  friends,
a  wife  or  child  or  some  one  else  we  love,  our  horse  or  our
dog — it  is  usually  only  when  we  have  lost  them  that  we  be-
gin to  find  out  their  value.  But  if  we  come  to  look  at
things  in  the  way  I  recommend,  we  shall  be  doubly  the
gainers;  we  shall  at  once  get  more  pleasure  out  of  them  than
we  did  before,  and  we  shall  do  everything  in  our  power  to
prevent  the  loss  of  them;  for  instance,  by  not  risking  our
property,  or  angering  our  friends,  or  exposing  our  wives  to
temptation,  or  being  careless  about  our  children's  health,
and  so  on.

We  often  try  to  banish  the  gloom  and  despondency  of  the
present  by  speculating  upon  our  chances  of  success  in  the
future;  a  process  which  leads  us  to  invent  a  great  many
chimerical  hopes.  Every  one  of  them  contains  the  germ  of
illusion,  and  disappointment  is  inevitable  when  our  hopes
are  shattered  by  the  hard  facts  of  life.

It  is  less  hurtful  to  take  the  chances  of  misfortune  as  a
theme  for  speculation:  because  in  doing  so,  we  provide  our-
selves at  once  with  measures  of  precaution  against  it,  and  a
pleasant  surprise  when  it  fails  to  make  its  appearance.  Is
it  not  a  fact  that  we  always  feel  a  marked  improvement  in
our  spirits  when  we  begin  to  get  over  a  period  of  anxiety?
I  may  go  further  and  say  that  there  is  some  use  in  occasion-
ally looking  upon  terrible  misfortunes — such  as  might  hap-
pen to  us — as  though  they  had  actually  happened,  for  then
the  trivial  reverses  which  subsequently  come  in  reality,  are
much  easier  to  bear.  It  is  a  source  of  consolation  to  look
back  upon  those  great  misfortunes  which  never  happened.
But  in  following  out  this  rule,  care  must  be  taken  not  to
neglect  what  I  have  said  in  the  preceding  section-


OUR  RELATION  TO  OURSELVES.  133

§  15.  The  things  which  engage  our  attention — whether
they  are  matters  of  business  or  ordinary  events — are  of  such
diverse  kinds,  that,  if  taken  quite  separately  and  in  no  fixed
order  or  relation,  they  present  a  medley  of  the  most  glaring
coutrasts,  with  nothing  in  common,  except  that  they  one
and  all  aifect  us  in  particular.  There  must  be  acorrespond-
ing  abruptness  in  the  thoughts  and  anxieties  which  these
various  matters  arouse  in  us,  if  our  thoughts  are  to  be  in
keeping  with  their  various  subjects.  Therefore,  in  setting
about  anything,  the  first  step  is  to  withdraw  our  attention
from  everything  else;  this  will  enable  us  to  attend  to  each
matter  at  its  own  time,  and  to  enjoy  or  put  up  with  it,
quite  apart  from  any  thought  of  our  remaining  interests.
Our  thoughts  must  be  arranged,  as  it  were,  in  little  drawers
so  that  we  may  open  one  without  disturbing  any  of  the
others.

In  this  way  we  can  keep  the  heavy  burden  of  anxiety  from
weighing  upon  us  so  much  as  to  spoil  the  little  pleasures  of
the  present,  or  from  robbing  us  of  our  rest;  otherwise  the
consideration  of  one  matter  will  interfere  with  every  other,
and  attention  to  some  important  business  may  lead  us  to
neglect  many  affairs  which  happen  to  be  of  less  moment.
It  is  most  important  for  any  one  who  is  capable  of  higher
and  nobler  thoughts  to  keep  his  mind  from  being  so  com-
pletely engrossed  with  private  affairs  and  vulgar  troubles  as
to  let  them  take  up  all  his  attention  and  crowd  out  worthier
matter;  for  that  is,  in  a  very  real  sense,  to  lose  sight  of  the
true  end  of  life — propter  vitam  vivendi  perdere  causas.

Of  course  for  this — as  for  so  much  else — self-control  is
necessary;  without  it,  we  cannot  manage  ourselves  in  the
way  I  have  described.  And  self-control  may  not  appear  so
very  difficult,  if  we  consider  that  every  man  has  to  submit
to  a  great  deal  of  very  severe  control  on  the  part  of  his  sur«
roundings,  and  that  without  it  no  form  of  existence  is  pos-
sible. Further,  a  little  self-control  at  the  right  moment
may  prevent  much  subsequent  compulsion  at  the  hands  of
others;  just  as  a  very  small  section  of  a  circle  close  to  the
center  may  correspond  to  a  part  near  the  circumference  a
hundred  times  as  large.  Nothing  will  protect  us  from
external  compulsion  so  much  as  the  control  of  ourselves;
and  as  Seneca  says,  to  submit  yourself  to  reason  is  the  way
to  make  everything  else  submit  to  you — si  tiiivis  omnia
suty'icere,  te  subjieee  ndioni.    Self-control,  too,  is  something


134  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

which  we  have  in  our  own  power;  and  if  the  worst  comes
to  the  worst,  and  it  touches  us  in  a  very  sensitive  part,  we
can  always  relax  its  severity.  But  other  people  will  pay  no
regard  to  our  feelings,  if  they  have  to  use  compulsion,  and
we  shall  be  treated  without  pity  or  mercy.  Therefore  it
will  be  prudent  to  anticipate  compulsion  by  self-control.

§  16.  We  must  set  limits  to  our  wishes,  curb  our  desires,
moderate  our  anger,  always  remembering  that  an  individual
?an  attain  only  an  infinitesimal  share  in  anything  that  is
worth  having:  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  every  one  must
Incur  many  of  the  ills  of  life;  in  a  word,  we  must  bear  and
forbear — abstinere  et  sustinere;  and  if  we  fail  to  observe
this  rule,  no  position  of  wealth  or  power  will  prevent  us
from  feeling  wretched.  This  is  what  Horace  means  when
he  recommends  us  to  study  carefully  and  inquire  diligently
what  will  best  promote  a  tranquil  life — not  to  be  always
agitated  by  fruitless  desires  and  fears  and  hopes  for  things,
which,  after  all,  are  not  worth  very  much:

• '  Inter  cuncta  leges  et  percontabere  doctos
Qua  ratione  queas  traducere  leniter  aevum:
Ne  te  semper  inops  agitet  vexetque  cupido,
Ne  pavor,  et  rerum  raediocriter  utilium  spes."  *

§  17.  Life  consists  in  movement,  says  Aristotle;  and  he  is
obviously  right.  We  exist,  physically,  "because  our  organism
is  the  seat  of  constant  motion;  and  if  we  are  to  exist  intel-
lectually, it  can  only  be  by  means  of  continual  occupation
— no  matter  with  what  so  long  as  it  is  some  form  of  practical
or  mental  activity.  You  may  see  that  this  is  so  by  the  way
in  which  people  who  have  no  work  or  nothing  to  think
about  immediately  begin  to  beat  the  devil's  tattoo  with  their
knuckles  or  a  stick  or  anything  that  comes  handy.  The
truth  is,  that  our  nature  is  essentially  restless  in  its  char-
acter; we  very  soon  get  tired  of  having  nothing  to  do;  it  is
intolerable  boredom.  This  impulse  to  activity  should  be
regulated,  and  some  sort  of  method  introduced  into  it,
which  of  itself  will  enhance  the  satisfication  we  obtain.
Activity — doing  something,  if  possible  creating  something,
at  any  rate  learning  something — how  fortunate  it  is  that
men  cannot  exist  without  that!     A  man   wants  to  use  hia

*  Epist.  I.  xviii.  97.


OUR  RELATION  TO  OURSELVES.  135

strength,  to  see,  if  he  can,  what  effect  it  will  produce;  and
he  will  get  the  most  complete  satisfaction  of  this  desire  if
he  can  make  or  construct  something — be  it  a  book  or  a
basket.  There  is  a  direct  pleasure  in  seeing  work  grow  un-
der one's  hands  day  by  day,  until  at  last  it  is  finished.  This
is  the  pleasure  attaching  to  a  work  of  art  or  a  manuscript,
or  even  mere  manual  labor;  and,  of  course,  the  higher  the
work,  the  greater  pleasure  it  will  give.

From  this  point  of  view,  those  are  happiest  of  all  who
are  conscious  of  the  power  to  produce  great  works  ani-
mated by  some  significant  purpose  :  it  gives  a  higher  kind
of  interest — a  sort  of  rare  flavor — to  the  whole  of  their
life,  which,  by  its  absence  from  the  life  01  the  ordinary
man,  makes  it,  in  comparison,  something  very  insipid.
For  richly  endowed  natures,  life  and  the  world  have  a
special  interest  beyond  the  mere  everyday  personal  interest
which  so  many  others  share  ;  and  something  higher  than
that — a  formal  interest.  It  is  from  life  and  the  world
that  they  get  the  material  for  their  works ;  and  as  soon  as
they  are  freed  from  the  pressure  of  personal  needs,  it  is  to
the  diligent  collection  of  material  that  they  devote  their
whole  existence.  So  with  their  intellect :  it  is  to  some  ex-
tent of  a  twofold  character,  and  devoted  partly  to  the
ordinary  affairs  of  every  day — those  matters  of  will  which
are  common  to  them  and  the  rest  of  mankind,  and  partly
to  their  peculiar  work — the  pure  and  objective  contempla-
tion of  existence.  And  while,  on  the  stage  of  the  world,
most  men  play  their  little  part  and  then  pass  away,  thegen-
mis  lives  a  double  life,  at  once  an  actor  and  a  spectator.

Let  every  one,  then,  do  something,  according  to  the
measure  of  his  capacities.  To  have  no  regular  work,  no
set  sphere  of  activity — what  a  miserable  thing  it  is  !  How
often  long  travels  undertaken  for  pleasure  make  a  man
downright  unhappy  ;  because  the  absence  of  anything  that
can  be  called  occupation  forces  him,  as  it  were,  out  of  his
right  element.  Effort,  struggles  with  difficulties  !  that  is
as  natural  to  a  man  as  grubbing  in  the  ground  is  to  a  mole.
To  have  all  his  wants  satisfied  is  something  intolerable — the
feeling  of  stagnation  which  comes  from  pleasures  that  last
too  long.  To  overcome  difficulties  is  to  experience  the  full
delight  of  existence,  no  matter  where  the  obstacles  are  en-
countered ;  whether  in  the  affairs  of  life,  in  commerce  or
business;  or  in  mental  effort — the  spirit  of  inquiry  that


/36  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

tries  to  master  its  subject.  There  is  always  something
pleasurable  in  the  struggle  and  the  victory.  And  if  a  maiv
has  no  opportunity  to  excite  himself,  he  will  do  what  he
can  to  create  one,  and  according  to  his  individual  bent,  he
will  hunt  or  play  cup  and  ball  ;  or  led  on  by  this  unsus-
pected element  in  his  nature,  he  will  pick  a  quarrel  with
some  one,  or  hatch  a  plot  or  intrigue,  or  take  to  swindling
and  rascally  courses  generally— all  to  put  an  end  to
a  state  of  repose  which  is  intolerable.  As  I  have  remarked,
difficilis  in  otio  quies — it  is  difficult  to  keep  quiet  if  you
have  nothing  to  do.

§  18.  A  man  should  avoid  being  led  on  by  the  phantoms
of  his  imagination.  This  is  not  the  same  thing  as  to  sub-
mit to  the  guidance  of  ideas  clearly  thought  out  :  and  yet
these  are  rules  of  life  which  most  people  pervert.  If  you
examine  closely  into  the  circumstances  which,  in  any
deliberation,  ultimately  turn  the  scale  in  favor  of  some
particular  course,  you  will  generally  find  that  the  decision
is  influenced,  not  by  any  clear  arrangement  of  ideas  lead-
ing to  a  formal  judgment,  but  by  some  fanciful  picture
which  seems  to  stand  for  one  of  the  alternatives  in  ques-
tion.

In  one  of  Voltaire's  or  Diderot's  romances — I  forget  the
precise  reference — the  hero,  standing  like  a  young  Her-
cules at  the  parting  of  ways,  can  see  no  other  represen-
tation of  Virtue  than  his  old  tutor  holding  a  snuff-box  in
his  left  hand,  from  which  he  takes  a  pinch  and  moralizes  ;
while  Vice  appears  in  the  shape  of  his  mother's  chamber-
maid. It  is  in  youth,  more  especially,  that  the  goal  of  our
efforts  comes  to  be  a  fanciful  picture  of  happiness,  which
continues  to  hover  before  our  eyes  sometimes  for  half  and
even  for  the  whole  of  our  life — a  sort  of  mocking  spirit ;
-for  when  we  think  our  dream  is  to  be  realized,  the  picture
fades  away,  leaving  us  the  knowledge  that  nothing  of  what
it  promised  is  actually  accomplished.  How  often  this  is
so  with  the  visions  of  domesticity — the  detailed  picture  of
what  our  home  will  be  like  ;  or  of  life  among  our  fellow-
citizens  and  in  society  ;  or,  again,  of  living  in  the  country
— the  kind  of  house  we  shall  have,  its  surroundings,  the
marks  of  honor  and  respect  that  will  be  paid  to  us,  and  so
on — whatever  our  hobby  may  be  ;  chaqu  fou  a  samarotte.
It  is  ©ften  the  same,  too,  with   our  dreams  about  one  we


0  UJR  HELA  TION  TO  0  URSEL  VE8.  137

love.  And  this  is  all  quite  natural  ;  for  the  visions  we
conjure  up  affect  ns  directly,  as  though  they  were  real  ob-
jects :  and  so  they  exercise  a  more  immediate  influence
upon  our  will  than  an  abstract  idea,  which  gives  merely  a
vague,  genera]  outline,  devoid  of  details;  and  the  details
are  just  the  real  part  of  it.  We  can  be  only  indirectly
affected  by  an  abstract  idea,  and  yet  it  is  the  abstract  idea
alone  which  will  do  as  much  as  it  promises ;  and  it  is  the
function  of  education  to  teach  us  to  put  our  trust  in  it.
Of  course  the  abstract  idea  must  be  occasionally  explained
— paraphrased,  as  it  were — by  the  aid  of  pictures;  but
discreetly,  cum  grano  salis.

§  19.  The  preceding  rule  may  be  taken  as  a  special  case
of  the  more  general  maxim,  that  a  man  should  never  let
himself  be  mastered  by  the  impressions  of  the  moment,  or
indeed  by  outward  appearances  at  all,  which  are  incom-
parably more  powerful  in  their  effects  than  the  mere  play
of  thought  or  a  train  of  ideas  ;  not  because  these  momentary
impressions  are  rich  in  virtue  of  the  data  they  supply — it
is  often  just  the  contrary — but  because  they  are  something
palpable  to  the  senses  and  direct  in  their  working;  they
forcibly  invade  our  mind,  disturbing  our  repose  and  shafc
tering  our  resolutions.

It  is  easy  to  understand  that  the  thing  which  lies  before
our  very  eyes  will  produce  the  whole  of  its  effect  at  once,  but
that  time  and  leisure  are  necessary  for  the  working  of  thought
and  the  appreciation  of  argument,  as  it  is  impossible  to
think  of  everything  at  one  and  the  same  moment.  This  is
why  we  are  so  allured  by  pleasure,  in  spite  of  all  our  deter-
mination to  resist  it;  or  so  much  annoyed  by  a  criticism,
Rven  though  we  know  that  its  author  is  totally  incompetent
to  judge;  or  so  irritated  by  an  insult,  though  it  comes  from
some  very  contemptible  quarter.  In  the  same  way,  to  men-
tion no  other  instances,  ten  reasons  for  thinking  that  there
is  no  danger  may  be  outweighed  by  one  mistaken  notion
that  it  is  actually  at  hand.  All  this  shows  the  radical  un-
reason of  human  nature.  Women  frequently  succumb
altogether  to  this  predominating  influence  of  present  impres-
sions, and  there  are  few  men  so  overweighted  with  reason
as  to  escape  suffering  from  a  similar   cause.

If  it  is  impossible  to  resist  the  effects  of  some  external
influence  by  the  mere  play  of  thought,  the  best  thing  to  dd


138  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

is  to  neutralize  it  by  some  contrary  influence;  for  example,
the  effect  of  an  insult  may  be  overcome  by  seeking  the
society  of  those  who  have  a  good  opinion  of  us;  and  the  un-
pleasant sensation  of  imminent  danger  may  be  avoided  by
fixing  our  attention  on  the  means  of  warding  it  off.  Leib-
nitz *  tells  of  an  Italian  who  managed  to  bear  up  under  the
tortures  of  the  rack  by  never  for  a  moment  ceasing  to  think
of  the  gallows  which  would  have  awaited  him,  had  he  re-
vealed his  secret;  he  kept  on  crying  out:  "I  see  it!  I  see  it!"
— afterward  explaining  that  this  was  part  of  his  plan.

It  is  from  such  reason  as  this,  that  we  find  it  so  difficult
to  stand  alone  in  a  matter  of  opinion — not  to  be  made  ir-
resolute by  the  fact  that  every  one  else  disagrees  with  us
and  acts  accordingly,  even  though  we  are  quite  sure  that  they
are  in  the  wrong.  Take  the  case  of  a  fugitive  king  who  is
trying  to  avoid  capture;  how  much  consolation  he  must  find
in  the  ceremonious  and  submissive  attitude  of  a  faithful  fol-
lower, exhibited  secretly  so  as  not  co  betrav  his  master's
strict  incognito;  it  must  be  almost  necessnry  to  prevent  hi  in
doubting  his  own  existence.

§  20.  In  the  first  part  of  this  work  I  have  insisted  upon
the  great  value  of  health  as  the  chief  and  most  important
element  in  happiness.  Let  me  emphasize  and  confirm  what
I  have  there  said  by  giving  a  few  general  rules  as  to  its
preservation.

The  way  to  harden  the  body  is  to  impose  a  great  deal  of
labor  and  effort  upon  it  in  the  daysotgood  health — to  exer-
cise it,  both  as  a  whole  and  in  its  several  parts,  and  to  habitu-
ate it  to  withstand  all  kinds  of  noxious  influences.  But  on
the  appearance  of  any  illness  or  disorder,  either  in  the  body
as  a  whole  or  in  any  of  its  parts,  a  contrary  course  should
be  takeu,  and  every  means  used  to  nurse  the  body,  or  the
part  of  it  which  is  affected,  and  to  spare  it  any  effort;  for
what  is  ailing  and  debilitated  cannot  be  hardened.

The  muscles  may  be  strengthened  by  a  vigorous  use  of
chem  ;  but  not  so  the  nerves  ;  they  are  weakened  by  it.
Therefore,  while  exercising  the  muscles  in  every  way  that
is  suitable,  care  should  be  take  to  spare  the  nerves  as  much
as  possible.  The  eyes,  for  instance,  should  be  protected
from  too  strong  a  light — especially  when  it  is  is  reflected

*  "Nouveaux  Essais."     Li  v.  I.  ch.  2   Sec.  11.


OUR  RELA1I0N  TO  OURSELVES.  139

light — from  any  straining  of  them  in  the  dark,  or  from
the  long-continued  examination  of  minute  objects  ;
and  the  ears  from  too  loud  sounds.  Above  all,  the  brain
should  never  be  forced,  or  used  too  much,  or  at  the  wrong
time ;  let  it  have  a  rest  during  digestion  ;  for  then  the
same  vital  energy  which  forms  thoughts  in  the  brain  has  a
great  deal  of  work  to  do  elsewhere — I  mean  in  the  digest-
ive organs,  where  it  prepares  chyme  and  chyle.  For  simi-
lar reasons,  the  brain  should  never  be  used  during,  or
immediately  after,  violent  muscular  exercise.  For  the
motor  nerves  are  in  this  respect  on  a  par  with  the  sensory
nerves  ;  the  pain  felt  when  a  limb  is  wounded  has  its  seat
in  the  brain  ;  and,  in  the  same  way,  it  is  not  really  our
legs  and  arms  which  work  and  move — it  is  the  brain,  or,
more  strictly,  that  part  of  it  which,  through  the  medium
of  the  spine,  excites  the  nerves  in  the  limbs  and  sets  them
in  motion.  Accordingly,  when  our  arms  and  legs  feel
tired,  the  true  seat  of  this  feeling  is  in  the  brain.  This  is
why  it  is  only  in  connection  with  those  muscles  which  are
set  in  motion  consciously  and  voluntarily — in  other  words,
depend  for  their  action  upon  the  brain — that  any  feeling
of  fatigue  can  arise  ;  this  is  not  the  case  with  those  muscles
which  work  involuntarily,  like  the  heart.  It  is  obvious,
then,  that  injury  is  done  to  the  brain  if  violent  muscular
exercise  and  intellectual  exertion  are  forced  upon  it  at  the
same  moment,  or  at  very  short  intervals.

What  I  say  stands  in  no  contradiction  wifh  the  fact  that
at  the  beginning  of  a  walk,  or  at  any  period  of  a  short
stroll,  there  often  comes  a  feeling  of  enhanced  intellectual
vigor.  The  parts  of  the  brain  that  come  into  play  have
had  no  time  to  become  tired  :  and  besides,  slight  muscular
exercise  conduces  to  activity  of  the  respiratory  organs,  and
causes  a  purer  and  more  oxydated  supply  of  arterial  blood
to  mount  to  the  brain.

It  is  most  important  to  allow  the  brain  the  full  measure
of  sleep  which  is  necessary  to  restore  it;  for  sleep  is  "to  a
man's  whole  nature  what  winding  up  is  to  a  clock.*
This  measure  will  vary  directly  with  the  development  and
activity   of   the   brain ;  to    overstep    the   measure  is  mere

*  Cf.  "Weltais    Willeund   Vorstellung/'  4th  Edition.     Bk,  IL
pp.  236-40,


140  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

waste  of  time  because  if  that  is  done,  sleep  gains  only  so
much  in  length  as  it  loses  in  depth.*

It  should  be  clearly  understood  that  thought  is  nothing
but  the  organic  function  of  the  brain  ;  and  it  has  to  obey
the  same  laws  in  regard  to  exertion  and  repose  as  any  other
organic  function.  The  brain  can  be  ruined  by  overstrain,
just  like  the  eyes.  As  the  function  of  the  stomach  is  to
digest,  so  it  is  that  of  the  brain  to  think.  The  notion  of  a
soul — as  something  elementary  and  immaterial,  merely
lodging  in  the  brain  and  needing  nothing  at  all  for  the
performance  of  its  essential  function,  which  consists  in
always  and  unweariedly  thinking — has  undoubtedly  driven
many  people  to  foolish  practices,  leading  to  a  deadening  of
the  intellectual  pouters  ;  Frederick  the  Great,  even,  once
tried  to  form  the  habit  of  doing  without  sleep  altogether.
It  would  be  well  if  professors  of  philosophy  refrained  from
giving  currency  to  a  notion  which  is  attended  by  practical
results  of  a  pernicious  character ;  but  then  this  is  just
what  professorial  philosophy  does,  in  its  old-womanish  en-
deavor to  keep  on  good  terms  with  the  catechism.  A  man
should  accustom  himself  to  view  his  intellectual  capacities
in  no  other  light  than  that  of  physiological  functions,  and
to  manage  them  accordingly — nursing  or  exercising  them
as  the  case  may  be  ;  remembering  that  every  kind  of
physical  suffering,  malady  or  disorder,  in  whatever  part  of
the  body  it  occurs,  has  its  effect  upon  the  mind.  The
best  advice  that  1  know  on  this  subject  is  given  by
Cabanis  in  his  Rapvorts  du  physique  et  du  moral  de
Vhomme.  \

Through  neglect  of  this  rule,  many  men  of  genius  and
and  great  scholars  have  become  weak-minded  and  childish,
©r  even  gone  quite  mad,  as   they   grew   old.     To   take    no

*  Cf.  loc  :  cit :  p.  275.  Sleep  is  a  morsel  of  death  borrowed
to  keep  up  and  renew  the  part  of  life  which  is  exhausted  by  the  day
— le  sommeil  est  uti  emprunt  fait  a  la  mart.  Or  it  might  be  said
that  sleep  is  the  interest  we  have  to  pay  on  the  capital  which  is
called  in  at  death  ;  and  the  higher  the  rate  of  interest  and  the  more
regularly  it  is  paid,  the  further  the  date  of  redemption  is  postponed.

f  Translator's  Note. — The  work  to  which  Schopenhauer  here
refers  is  a  series  of  essays  by  Cabanis,  a  French  philosopher  (1757-
1808),  treating  of  mental  and  moral  phenomena  on  a  physiological
basis.  In  his  later  days,  Cabanis  completely  abandoned  his  material-
istic standpoint.


OUR  RELATION  TO  0T&ER8.  Hi

other  instances,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  celebrated
English  poets  of  the  early  part  of  this  century,  Scott,
Wordsworth,  Sonthey,  became  intellectually  dull  and  in-
capable toward  the  end  of  their  days,  nay,  soon  after  pass-
ing their  sixtieth  year ;  and  that  their  imbecility  can  be
traced  to  the  fact  that,  at  that  period  of  life,  they  were  all
led  on,  by  the  promise  of  high  pay,  to  treat  literature  as  a
trade  and  to  write  for  money.  This  seduced  them  into  an
unnatural  abuse  of  their  intellectual  powers ;  and  a  man
who  puts  his  Pegasus  into  harness,  and  urges  on  his  Muse
with  the  whip,  will  have  to  pay  a  penalty  similar  to  that
which  is  exacted  by  the  abuse  of  other  kinds  of  power.

And  even  in  the  case  of  Kant,  I  suspect  that  the  second
childhood  of  his  last  four  years  was  due  to  overwork  in
later  life,  and  after  he  had  succeeded  in  becoming  a  famous
man.

Every  month  of  the  year  has  its  own  peculiar  and  direct
influence  upon  health  and  bodily  condition  generally;  nay,
even  upon  the  state  of  the  mind.  It  is  an  influence
dependent  upon  the  weather.


CHAPTER  III.

OUR    RELATION   TO    OTHERS.

§  21.  In  making  Ins  way  through  life,  a  man  will  find
it  useful  to  be  ready  and  able  to  do  two  things  ;  to  look
ahead  and  to  overlook  ;  the  one  will  protect  him  from  loss
and  injury,  the  other  from  disputes  and  squabbles.

No  one  who  has  to  live  among  men  should  absolutely
discard  any  person  who  has  his  due  place  in  the  order  of
nature,  even  though  lie  is  very  wicked  or  contemptible  or
ridiculous.  He  must  accept  him  as  an  unalterable  fact —
unalterable,  because  the  necessary  outcome  of  an  eternal,
fundamental  principle  ;  and  in  bad  cases  he  should  re-
member the  words  of  Mephistopheles  :  esmass  audi  solche
Kauze  geben* — there  must  be  fools  and  rogues  in  the  world.
If  he  acts  otherwise,  he  will  be  committing  an  injustice,  and
giving  a  challenge  of  life  and  death  to  the  man  he  dis-
cards.    No  one  can  alter  his  own  peculiar  individuality,

*  Goethe's  "  Faust,"  Part  I.


142  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

his  moral  character,  his  intellectual  capacity,  his  temper-
ament or  physique  ;  and  if  we  go  so  far  as  to  condemn  a
man  from  every  point  of  view,  there  will  be  nothing  left
him  but  to  engage  us  in  deadly  conflict;  for  we  are  practi-
cally allowing  him  the  right  to  exist  only  on  condition
that  he  becomes  another  man — which  is  impossible  ;  his
nature  forbids  it.

So  if  you  have  to  live  among  men,  you  must  allow  every
one  the  right  to  exist  in  accordance  with  the  character  he
has,  whatever  it  turns  out  to  be  :  and  all  you  should  strive
to  do  is  to  make  use  of  this  character  in  such  a  way  as  its
kind  and  nature  permit,  rather  than  to  hope  for  any  alter-
ation in  it,  or  to  condemn  it  offhand  for  what  it  is.  This
is  the  true  sense  of  the  maxim — "Live  and  let  live."
That,  however,  is  a  task  which  is  difficult  in  proportion
as  it  is  right ;  and  he  is  a  happy  man  who  can  once
for  all  avoid  having  to  do  with  a  great  many  of  his  fellow
creatures.

The  art  of  putting  up  with  people  may  be  learned  by
practicing  patience  on  inanimate  objects,  which,  in  virtue
of  some  mechanical  or  general  physical  necessity,  oppose  a
stubborn  resistance  to  our  freedom  of  action — a  form  of
patience  which  is  required  every  day.  The  patience  thus
gained  may  be  applied  to  our  dealings  with  men,  by  accus-
toming ourselves  to  regard  their  opposition,  wherever  we
encounter  it,  as  the  inevitable  outcome  of  their  nature,
which  sets  itself  up  against  us  in  virtue  of  the  same  rigid  law
of  necessity  as  governs  the  resistance  of  inanimate  objects.
To  become  indignant  at  their  conduct  is  as  foolish  as  to  be
angry  with  a  stone  because  it  rolls  into  your  path.  And
with  many  people  the  wisest  thing  you  can  do  is  to  resolve
to  make  use  of  those  whom  you  cannot  alter.

§  22.  It  is  astonishing  how  easily  and  how  quickly
similarity,  or  difference  of  mind  and  disposition,  makes
itself  felt  between  one  man  and  another  as  soon  as  they
begin  to  talk  ;  every  little  trifle  shows  it.  When  two
people  of  totally  different  natures  are  conversing,  almost
everything  said  by  the  one  will,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,
displease  the  other,  and  in  many  cases  produce  positive
mnoyauce ;  even  though  the  conversation  turn  upon
the  most  out-of-the  way  subject,  or  one  in  which  neither
of  the  parties   has   any   real   interest.     People   of   similar


OUR  RELATION  TO  OTHERS.  143

nature,  on  the  other  hand,  immediately  come  to  feel  a  kind
of  general  agreement  ;  and  if  they  are  cast  very  much  in  the
of  same  mold,  complete  harmony  or  even  unison  will  flow
from  their  intercourse.

This  explains  two  circumstances.  First  of  all,  it  shows
why  it  is  that  common,  ordinary  people  are  so  sociable  and,
find  good  company  wherever  they  go.  Ah  !  those  good,
dear,  brave  people.  It  is  just  the  contrary  with  those  who
are  not  of  the  common  rim ;  and  the  less  they  are  so,  the
more  unsociable  they  become  ;  so  that  if,  in  their  isolation,
they  chance  to  come  across  some  one  in  whose  nature  they
can  find  even  a  single  sympathetic  chord,  be  it  never  so
minute,  they  show  extraordinary  pleasure  in  his  society.
For  one  man  can  be  to  another  only  so  much  as  the  other
is  to  him.  Great  minds  are  like  eagles,  and  build  their
nest  in  some  lofty  solitude.

Secondly,  we  are  enabled  to  understand  how  it  is  that
people  of  like  disposition  so  quickly  get  on  with  one  another,
as  though  they  were  drawn  together  by  magnetic  force —
kindred  souls  greeting  each  other  from  afar.  Of  course
the  most  frequent  opportunity  of  observing  this  is  afforded
by  people  of  vulgar  tastes  and  inferior  intellect,  but  only
because  their  name  is  legion  ;  while  those  who  are  better
off  in  this  respect  and  of  a  rarer  nature,  are  not  often  to
be  met  with  :  they  are  called  rare  because  you  can  seldom
find  them.

Take  the  case  of  a  large  number  of  people  who  have
formed  themselves  into  a  league  for  the  purpose  of  carry-
ing out  some  practical  object ;  if  there  be  two  rascals
among  them,  they  will  recognize  each  other  as  readily  as  if
they  bore  a  similar  badge,  and  will  at  once  conspire  for
some  misfeasance  or  treachery.  In  the  same  way,  if  you
can  imagine— per  impossible — a  large  company  of  very  intel-
ligent and  clever  people,  among  whom  there  are  only  two
blockheads,  these  two  will  be  sure  to  be  drawn  together  by
a  feeling  of  sympathy,  and  each  of  them  will  very  soon
secretly  rejoice  at  having  found  at  least  one  intelligent
person  in  the  whole  company.  It  is  really  quite  curious
to  see  how  two  such  men,  especially  if  they  are  morally
and  intellectually  of  an  inferior  type,  will  recognize  each
other  at  first  sight ;  with  what  zeal  they  will  strive  to  be-
come intimate ;  how  affably  and  cheerily  they  will  run  to
greet  each  other,  just  as  though  they  were  old  friends — \%


144  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS

is  all  so  striking  that  one  is  tempted  to  embrace  the  Budd-
hist doctrine  of  metempsychosis  and  presume  that  they
were  on  familiar  terms  in  some  former  state  of  existence.

Still,  in  spite  of  all  this  general  agreement,  men  are
kept  apart  who  might  come  together  ;  or,  in  some  cases
a  passing  discord  springs  up  between  them.  This  is  due
to  diversity  of  mood.  You  will  hardly  ever  see  two  peo-
ple exactly  in  the  same  frame  of  mind  ;  for  that  is  some-
thing which  varies  with  their  condition  of  life,  occupation,
surroundings,  health,  the  train  of  thought  they  are  in  at
the  moment,  and  so  on.  These  differences  give  rise  to
discord  between  persons  of  the  most  harmonious  disposi-
tion. To  correct  the  balance  properly,  so  as  to  remove  the
disturbance — to  introduce,  as  it  were,  a  uniform  tempera-
ture— is  a  work  demanding  a  very  high  degree  of  culture.
The  extent  to  which  uniformity  of  mood  is  productive  of
good  fellowship  may  be  measured  by  its  effects  upon  a
large  company.  When,  for  instance,  a  great  many  people
are  gathered  together  and  presented  with  some  objective
interest  which  works  upon  all  alike  and  influences  them  in
a  similar  way,  no  matter  what  it  be — a  common  danger  or
hope,  some  great  news,  a  spectacle,  a  play,  a  piece  of
music,  or  anything  of  that  kind — you  will  find  them
roused  to  a  mutual  expression  of  thought,  and  a  display  of
sincere  interest.  There  will  be  a  general  feeling  of  pleas-
ure among  them  ;  for  that  which  attracts  their  attention
produces  a  unity  of  mood  by  overpowering  all  private  and
personal  interests.

And  in  default  of  some  objective  interest  of  the  kind  I
have  mentioned,  recourse  is  usually  had  to  something  sub-
jective. A  bottle  of  wine  is  not  an  uncommon  means  of
introducing  a  mutual  feeling  of  fellowship  ;  and  even  tea
and  coffee  are  used  for  a  like  end.

The  discord  which  so  easily  finds  its  way  into  all  society
as  an  effect  of  the  different  moods  in  which  people  happen
to  be  for  the  moment,  also  in  part  explains  why  it  is  that
memory  always  idealizes,  and  sometimes  almost  transfig-
ures, the  attitude  we  have  taken  up  at  any  period  of  the
past — a  change  due  to  our  inability  to  remember  all  the
fleeting  influences  which  disturbed  us  on  any  given  occa-
sion. Memory  is  in  this  respect  like  the  lens  of  a  camera
ohscura  :  it  contracts  everything  within  its  range,  and  so
produces  a  much  finer  picture  than   the  actual  landscape


OUR  RELATION  TO  OTHERS.  145

affords.  And,  in  the  case  of  a  man,  absence  always  goes
some  way  toward  securing  this  advantageous  light ;  for
though  the  idealizing  tendency  of  the  memory  requires
time  to  complete  its  work,  it  begins  it  at  once.  Hence
it  is  a  prudent  thing  to  see  your  friends  and  acquaintances
only  at  considerable  intervals  of  time  ;  and  on  meeting
them  again,  you  will  observe  that  memory  has  been  at
work.

§  23.  No  man  can  see  "over  his  own  height."  Let  me
explain  what  I  mean.

You  cannot  see  in  another  man  any  more  than  you  have
in  yourself  ;  and  your  own  intelligence  strictly  determines  the
extent  to  which  he  comes  within  its  grasp.  If  your  intel-
ligence is  of  a  very  low  order,  mental  qualities  in  another,
even  though  they  be  of  the  highest  kind,  will  have  no
effect  at  all  upon  you  ;  you  will  see  nothing  in  their  pos-
sessor except  the  meanest  side  of  his  individuality — in
other  words,  just  those  parts  of  his  character  and  disposi-
tion which  are  weak  and  defective.  Your  whole  estimate
of  the  man  will  be  confined,  to  his  defects,  and  his  higher
mental  qualities  will  no  more  exist  for  you  than  colors
exist  for  those  who  cannot  see.

Intellect  is  invisible  to  the  man  who  has  none.  In  any
attempt  to  criticise  another's  work/  the  range  of  knowl-
edge possessed  by  the  critic  is  as  essential  a  part  of  his
verdict  as  the  claims  of  the  work  itself.

Hence  intercourse  with  others  involves  a  process  of  level-
ling down.  The  qualities  which  are  present  in  one  man,
and  absent  in  another,  cannot  come  into  play  when  they
meet;  and  the  self-sacrifice  which  this  entails  upon  one  of
the  parties,  calls  forth  no  recognition  from  the  other.

Consider  how  sordid,  how  stupid,  in  a  word,  how  vulgar
most  men  are,  and  you  will  see  that  it  is  impossible  to  talk
to  them  without  becoming  vulgar  yourself  for  the  time  be-
ing. Vulgarity  is  in  this  respect  like  electricity;  it  is  easily
distributed.  Yon  will  then  fully  appreciate  the  truth  and
propriety  of  the  expression,  "to  make  yourself  cheap;"  and
vou  will  be  glad  to  avoid  the  society  of  people  whose  only
possible  point  of  contact  with  you  is  just  that  part  of  your
nature  of  which  you  have  least  reason  to  be  proud.  So  you
will  see  that,  in  dealing  with  fools  and  blockheads,  there  is
onlv  one  way  of  showing  your  intelligence — by  having  noth-


146  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

ting  to  do  with  them.  That  means,  of  course,  that  when
you  go  into  society,  you  may  now  and  then  feel  like  a  good
dancer  who  gets  an  invitation  to  a  ball,  and  on  arriving,
finds  that  every  one  is  lame — with  whom  is  he  to  dance?

§  24.  I  feel  respect  for  the  man — and  he  is  one  in  a  hun-
dred— who,  when  he  is  waiting  or  sitting  unoccupied,  re-
frains from  rattling  or  beating  time  with  anything  that  hap-
pens to  be  handy — his  stick,  or  knife  and  fork,  or  whatever
else  it  may  be.  The  probability  is  that  he  is  thinking  of
something.

With  a  large  number  of  people,  it  is  quite  evident  that
their  power  of  sight  completely  dominates  over  their  power
of  thought;  they  seem  to  be  conscious  of  existence  only
when  they  are  making  a  noise;  unless  indeed  they  happen
to  be  smoking,  for  this  serves  a  similar  end.  It  is  for  the
same  reason  that  they  never  fail  to  be  all  eyes  and  ears  for
what  is  going  on  around  them.

§  25.  La  Rochefoucauld  makes  the  striking  remark
that  it  is  difficult  to  feel  deep  veneration  and  great  affection
for  one  and  the  same  person.  If  this  is  so,  we  shall  have
to  choose  whether  it  is  veneration  or  love  that  we  want  from
our  fellow-men.

Their  love  is  always  selfish,  though  in  very  different
ways;  and  the  means  used  to  gain  it  are  not  always  of  a  kind
to  make  us  proud.  A  man  is  loved  by  others  mainly  in  the
degree  in  which  he  moderates  his  claim  on  their  good  feel-
ing and  intelligence:  but  he  must  act  genuinely  in  the  mat-
ter and  without  dissimulation — not  merely  out  of  forbear-
ance, which  is  at  bottom  a  kind  of  contempt.  This  calls
to  mind  a  very  true  observation  of  Helvetius:*  "the  amount
of  intellect  necessary  to  please  us,  is  a  most  accurate  meas-
ure of  the  amount  of  intellect  we  have  ourselves."  With
these  remarks  as  premises,  it  is  easy  to  draw  the  conclu-
sion.

Now  with  veneration  the  case  is  just  the  opposite;  it  is
wrung  from    men    reluctantly,  and   for  that    very  reason

*  Translator's  Note. — Helvetius,  Claude-Adrien  (1715-71),  a  French
philosophical  writer  much  esteemed  by  Schopenhauer.  His  chief
work  "De  1' Esprit,'  excited  great  interest  and  opposition  at  the  time
of  its  publication,  on  account  of  the  author's  pronounced  materia>
ism.


OUR  RELATION  TO  OTHERS.  147,

mostly  concealed.  Hence,  as  compared  with  love,  venera-
tion gives  more  real  satisfaction;  for  it  is  connected  with
personal  value,  and  the  same  is  not  directly  true  of  love,
which  is  subjective  in  its  nature,  while  veneration  is  ob-
jective. To  be  sure,  it  is  more  useful  to  be  loved  than  to
be  venerated.

§  26.  Most  men  are  so  thoroughly  subjective  that  noth-
ing really  interests  them  but  themselves.  They  always  think
of  their  own  case  as  soon  as  ever  any  remark  is  made,  and
their  whole  attention  is  engrossed  and  absorbed  by  the
merest  chance  reference  to  anything  which  affects  them
personally,  be  it  ever  so  remote;  with  the  result  that  they
have  no  power  left  for  forming  an  objective  view  of  things
should  the  conversation  take  that  turn;  neither  can  they
admit  any  validity  in  arguments  which  tell  against  their
interest  or  their  vanity.  Hence  their  attention  is  easily  dis-
tracted. They  are  so  readily  offended,  insulted  or  annoyed,
that  in  discussing  any  impersonal  matter  with  them,  no  care
is  too  great  to  avoid  letting  your  remarks  bear  the  slightest
possible  reference  to  the  very  worthy  and  sensitive  individuals
whom  you  have  before  you  for  anything  you  may  say  will  per-
haps hurt  their  feelings.  People  really  care  about  nothing
that  does  not  affect  them  personally.  True  and  striking  obser-
vations, fine,  subtle  and  witty  things  are  lost  upon  them;
they  cannot  understand  or  feel  them.  But  anything  that
disturbs  their  petty  vanity  in  the  most  remote  and  indirect
way,  or  reflects  prejudicially  upon  their  exceedingly  precious
selves — to  that,  they  are  most  tenderly  sensitive.  In  this
respect  they  are  like  the  little  dog  whose  toes  you  are  so  apt?
to  tread  upon  inadvertently — you  know  it  by  the  shrill
bark  it  sets  up ;  or,  again,  they  resemble  a  sick  man  covered
with  sores  and  boils,  with  whom  the  greatest  care  must  be
taken  to  avoid  unnecessary  handling.  And  in  some  people
this  feeling  reaches  such  a  pass  that,  if  they  are  talking
with  any  one,  and  he  exhibits,  or  does  not  sufficiently  con-
ceal, his  intelligence  and  discernment,  they  look  upon  it  as
a  downright  insult;  altough  for  the  moment  they  hide
their  ill  will,  and  the  unsuspecting  author  of  it  afterward
ruminates  in  vain  upon  their  conduct,  and  racks  his  brains
to  discover  what  in  the  world  he  could  have  done  to  excite
their  malice  and  hatred.

But  it  is  just  as  easy  to  flatter  and  win  them  over;  and


148  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

this  is  why  their  judgment  is  usually  corrupt,  and  why  their
opinions  are  swayed,  not  by  what  is  really  true  and  right
but  by  the  favor  of  the  party  or  class  to  which  they  belong.
And  the  ultimate  reason  of  it  all  is,  that  in  such  people
force  of  will  greatly  predominates  over  knowledge;  and
hence  their  meager  intellect  is  wholly  given  up  to  the  serv-
ice of  the  will,  and  can  never  free  itself  from  that  service
for  a  moment.

Astrology  furnishes  a  magnificent  proof  of  this  miserable
subjective  tendency  in  men,  which  leads  them  to  see  every
thing  only  as  bearing  upon  themselves,  and  to  think  of
nothing'  that  is  not  straightway  made  into  a  personal  mat-
ter. The  aim  of  astrology  is  to  bring  the  motions  of  the
celestial  bodies  into  relation  with  the  wretched  Ego  and
to  establish  a  connection  between  a  comet  in  the  6ky  and
squabbles  and  rascalities  on  earth.  *

§  27.  When  any  wrong  statement  is  made,  whether  in
public,  or  in  society,  or  in  books,  and  well  received — or,  at
any  rate,  not  refuted — that  is  no  reason  why  you  should
despair  or  think  that  there  the  matter  will  rest.  You
should  comfort  yourself  with  the  reflection  that  the  ques-
tion will  be  afterward  gradually  subjected  to  examination;
light  will  be  thrown  upon  it;  it  will  be  thought  over,  con-
sidered, discussed,  and  generally  in  the  end  the  correct
view  will  be  reached;  so  that,  after  a  time — the  length  of
which  will  depend  upon  the  difficulty  of  the  subject — every
one  will  come  to  understand  that  which  a  clear  head  saw
at  once.

In  the  meantime,  of  course,  you  must  have  patience.
He  who  can  see  truly  in  the  midst  of  general  infatuation  is
like  a  man  whose  wratch  keeps  good  time,  when  all  clocks
in  the  town  in  which  he  lives  are  wrong.  He  alone  knows
the  right  time;  but  what  use  is  that  to  him?  for  every  one
goes  by  the  clocks  which  speak  false,  not  even  excepting
those  who  know  that  his  watch  is  the  only  one  that  is
right.

§  28.  Men  are  like  children,  in  that,  if  you  spoil  them,
they  become  naughty.

Therefore  it  is  well  not  to  be  too  indulgent  or  charitable

*  See  for  instance,  Stobaeus,  "Eclog."     I.  xii.  9.


OUR  RELATION  TO  OTHERS.  149

with  any  one.  You  may  take  it  as  a  general  rule  that  you
will  not  lose  a  friend  by  refusing  him  a  loan,  but  that  you
are  very  likely  to  do  so  by  granting  it;  and,  for  similar
reasons,  you  will  not  readily  alienate  people  by  being  some-
what proud  and  careless  in  your  behavior;  but  if  you  are
very  kind  and  complaisant  toward  them,  you  will  often
make  them  arrogant  and  intolerable,  and  so  a  breach  will
ensue.

There  is  one  thing  that,  more  than  any  other,  throws
people  absolutely  off  their  balance — the  thought  that  you
are  dependent  upon  thern.  This  is  sure  to  produce  an  in-
solent and  domineering  manner  toward  you.  There  are
some  people,  indeed,  who  become  rude  if  you  enter  into
any  kind  of  relation  with  them;  for  instance,  if  you  have
occasion  to  converse  with  them  frequently  upon  confiden-
tial matters,  they  soon  come  to  fancy  that  they  can  take
liberties  with  you,  and  so  they  try  to  transgress  the  laws  of
politeness.  This  is  why  there  are  so  few  with  whom  you
care  to  become  more  intimate,  and  why  you  should  avoid
familiarity  with  vulgar  people.  If  a  man  comes  to  think
that  I  am  more  dependent  upon  him  than  he  is  upon  me,
he  at  once  feels  as  though  I  had  stolen  something  from
him;  and  his  endeavor  will  be  to  have  his  vengeance  and
get  it  back.  The  only  way  to  attain  superiority  in  dealing
with  men,  is  to  let  it  be  seen  that  you  are  independent  of
them.

And  in  this  view  it  is  advisable  to  let  every  one  of  your
acquaintance—  whether  man  or  woman — feel  now  and  then
that  you  could  very  well  dispense  with  their  company.
This  will  consolidate  friendship.  Nay,  with  most  people
there  will  be  no  harm  in  occasionally  mixing  a  grain  of
disdain  with  your  treatment  of  them;  that  will  make  them
value  your  friendship  all  the  more.  Chi  non  istima  vien
stimato,  as  a  subtle  Italian  proverb  has  it — to  disregard  is
to  win  regard.  But  if  we  really  think  very  highly  of  a
person,  we  should  conceal  it  from  him  like  a  crime.  This
is  not  a  very  gratifying  thing  to  do,  but  it  is  right.  Why,
a  dog  will  not  bear  being  treated  too  kindly,  let  alone  a
man!

§  29.  It  is  often  the  case  that  people  of  noble  character
and  great  mental  gifts  betray  a  strange  lack  of  wTorldly
wisdom  and  a  deficiency  in  the  knowledge  of  men,  more


150  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

especially  when  they  are  young;  with  the  result  that  it  is
easy  to  deceive  or  mislead  them;  and  that,  on  the  other
hand,  natures  of  the  commoner  sort  are  more  ready  and
successful  in  making  their  way  in  the  world.

The  reason  of  this  is  that,  when  a  man  has  little  or  no
experience,  he  must  judge  by  his  own  antecedent  notions;
and  in  matters  demanding  judgment  an  antecedent  notion
is  never  on  the  same  level  as  experience.  For,  with  the
commoner  sort  of  people,  an  antecedent  notion  means  just
their  own  selfish  point  of  view.  This  is  not  the  case  with
those  whose  mind  and  character  are  above  the  ordinary;  for
it  is  precisely  in  this  respect — their  unselfishness-— that
they  differ  from  the  rest  of  mankind;  and  as  they  judge
other  people's  thoughts  and  actions  by  their  own  high
standard,  the  result  does  not  always  tally  with  their  calcu-
lation.

But  if,  in  the  end,  a  man  of  noble  character  comes  to
see,  as  the  effect  of  his  own  experience,  or  by  the  lessons
he  learns  from  others,  what  it  is  that  may  be  expected  of
men  in  general — namely,  that  five-sixths  of  them  are
morally  and  intellectually  so  constituted  that,  if  circum-
stances do  not  place  you  in  relation  with  them,  you  had
better  get  out  of  their  way  and  keep  as  far  as  possible  from
having  anything  to  do  with  them — still,  he  will  scarcely
ever  attain  an  adequate  notion  of  their  wretchedly  mean
and  shabby  nature:  all  his  life  long  he  will  have  to  be
extending  and  adding  to  the  inferior  estimate  he  forms  of
them;  and  in  the  meantime  he  will  commit  a  great  many
mistakes  and  do  himself  harm.

Then  again,  after  he  has  really  taken  to  heart  the  lessons
that  have  been  taught  him,  it  will  occasionally  happen  that,
when  he  is  in  the  society  of  people  whom  he  does  not  know,
he  will  be  surprised  to  find  how  thoroughly  reasonable
they  all  appear  to  be,  both  in  their  conversation  and  in
their  demeanor — in  fact,  quite  honest,  sincere,  virtuous
and  trustworthy  people,  and  at  the  same  time  shrewd  and
clever.

But  that  ought  not  to  perplex  him.  Nature  is  not  like
those  bad  poets,  who,  in  setting  a  fool  or  a  knave  before
us,  do  their  work  so  clumsily,  and  with  such  evident  de-
sign, that  you  might  almost  fancy  }Tou  saw  the  poet  stand-
ing behind  each  of  his  characters,  and  continually  disavow-
ing their  sentiments^  and  telling  vou  in  a  tone  of  warning;


OUR  RE L A T10N  TO  0 URSEL VES.  1 5 1

"This  is  a  knave;  that  is  a  fool;  do  not  mind  what  he
says."  But  nature  goes  to  work  like  Shakespeare  and
Goethe,  poets  who  make  every  one  of  their  characters — even
if  it  is  the  devil  himself! — appear  to  be  quite  in  the  right
for  the  moment  that  they  come  before  us  in  their  several
parts;  the  characters  are  described  so  objectively  that  they
excite  our  interest  and  compel  us  to  sympathize  with  their
point  of  view;  for,  like  the  works  of  nature,  everyone  of
these  characters  is  evolved  as  the  result  of  some  hidden  law
or  principle,  which  makes  all  they  say  and  do  appear
natural  and  therefore  necessary.  And  you  will  always  be
the  prey  or  the  plaything  of  the  devils  and  fools  in  this
world,  if  you  expect  to  see  them  going  about  with  horns  or
jangling  their  bells.

And  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that,  in  their  inter-
course with  others,  people  are  like  the  moon  or  like
hunchbacks;  they  show  you  only  one  of  their  sides.  Every
man  has  an  innate  talent  for  mimicry — for  making  a  mask
out  of  his  physiognomy,  so  that  he  can  always  look  as  if  he
really  were  what  he  pretends  to  be;  and  since  he  makes  his
calculations  always  within  the  lines  of  his  individual
nature,  the  appearance  he  puts  on  suits  him  to  a  nicety,
and  its  effect  is  extremely  deceptive.  He  dons  his  mask
whenever  his  object  is  to  flatter  himself  into  some  one's
good  opinion;  and  you  may  pay  just  as  much  attention  to
it  as  if  it  were  made  of  wax  or  cardboard,  never  forgetting
that  excellent  Italian  proverb:  non  e  si  tristo  cane  die  non
meni  la  coda — there  is  no  dog  so  bad  but  that  he  will  wag
his  tail.

In  any  case  it  is  well  to  take  care  not  to  form  a  highly
favorable  opinion  of  a  person  whose  acquaintance  you  have
only  recently  made,  for  otherwise  you  are  very  likely  to  be
disappointed;  and  then  you  will  be  ashamed  of  yourself
and  perhaps  even  suffer  some  injury.  And  while  I  am  on
the  subject,  there  is  another  fact  that  deserves  mention.
It  is  this.  A  man  shows  his  character  just  in  the  way  in
which  he  deals  with  trifles — for  then  he  is  off  his  guard.
This  will  often  afford  a  good  opportunity  of  observing  the
boundless  egoism  of  a  man's  nature,  and  his  total  lack  of
consideration  for  others:  and  if  these  defects  show  them-
selves in  small  things,  or  merely  in  his  general  demeanor
you  will  find  that  they  also  underlie  his  action  in  matter*
of  importance,  although  he  may  disguise  the  fact.     This  is


152  CO  UNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

an  opportunity  which  should  not  be  missed.  If  in  the
little  affairs  of  every  day — the  trifles  of  life,  those  matters
to  which  the  rule  de  minimis  non  applies — a  mau  is  incon-
siderate and  seeks  only  what  is  advantageous  or  convenient
to  himself,  to  the  prejudice  of  others'  rights;  if  he  appro-
priates to  himself  that  which  belongs  to  all  alike,  you  may
be  sure  there  is  no  justice  in  his  heart,  and  that  he  would
be  a  scoundrel  on  a  wholesale  scale,  only  that  law  and  com-
pulsion bind  his  hands.  Do  not  trust  him  beyond  your
door.  He  who  is  not  afraid  to  break  the  laws  of  his  own
private  circle,  will  break  those  of  the  state  when  he  can  do
so  with  impunity.

If  the  average  man  were  so  constituted  that  the  good  in
him  outweighed  the  bad,  it  would  be  more  advisable  to
rely  upon  his  sense  of  justice,  fairness,  gratitude,  fidelity,
love  or  compassion,  than  to  work  upon  his  fears;  but  as
the  contrary  is  the  case,  and  it  is  the  bad  that  outweighs
the  good,  the  opposite  course  is  the  more  prudent  one.

If  any  person  with  whom  we  are  associated  or  have  to
do,  exhibits  unpleasant  or  annoying  qualities,  we  have  only
to  ask  ourselves  whether  or  not  this  person  is  of  so  much
value  to  us  that  we  can  put  up  with  frequent  and  repeated
exhibitions  of  the  same  qualities  in  a  somewhat  aggravated
form.*  In  case  of  an  affirmative  answer  to  this  question,
there  will  not  be  much  to  be  said,  because  talking  is  very
little  use.  We  must  let  the  matter  pass,  with  or  without
some  notice;  but  we  should  nevertheless  remember  that  we
are  thereby  exposing  ourselves  to  a  repetition  of  the  offense.
If  the  answer  is  in  the  negative,  we  must  break  with  our
worthy  friend  at  once  and  forever;  or  in  the  case  of  a  serv-
ant, dismiss  him.  For  he  will  inevitably  repeat  the
offense,  or  do  something  tantamount  to  it,  should  the
occasion  return,  even  though  for  the  moment  he  is  deep
and  sincere  in  his  assurances  of  the  contrary.  There  is
nothing,  absolutely  nothing,  that  a  man  cannot  forget —
but  not  himself,  his  own  character.  For  character  is  in-
corrigible; because  all  a  man's  actions  emanate  from  an
inward  principle,  in  virtue  of  which  he  must  always  do  the
same  thing  under  like  circumstances;  and  he  cannot  do
otherwise.     Let  me  refer  to  my  prize  essay  on  the  so-called

*  "  To  forgive  and  forget  "  means  to  throw  away  dearly  bought  ex
perience.


OUR  RELATION  TO  OURSELVES.  153

M Freedom  of  the  Will/'  the  perusal  of  which  will  dissipate
Any  delusions  the  reader  may  have  on  this  subject.

To  become  reconciled  to  a  friend  with  whom  you  have
broken,  is  a  form  of  weakness  ;  and  you  pay  the  penalty  of
it  when  he  takes  the  first  opportunity  of  doing  precisely
the  very  thing  which  brought  about  the  breach  ;  nay,  he
does  it  the  more  boldly,  because  he  is  secretly  conscious
that  you  cannot  get  on  without  him.  This  is  also  appli-
cable to  servants  whom  you  have  dismissed,  and  then  taken
into  your  service  again.

For  the  same  reason,  you  should  just  as  little  expect
people  to  continue  to  act  in  a  similar  way  under  altered
circumstances.  The  truth  is  that  men  alter  their  demeanor
and  sentiments  just  as  fast  as  their  interest  changes ;  and
their  design  in  this  respect  is  a  bill  drawn  for  such  short
payment  that  the  man  must  be  still  more  short-sighted  who
accepts  the  bill  without  protesting  it.  Accordingly,  sup-
pose you  want  to  know  how  a  man  will  behave  in  an  office
into  which  you  think  of  putting  him  ;  you  should  not
build  upon  expectations,  on  his  promises  or  assurances.
For,  even  allowing  that  he  is  quite  sincere,  he  is  speaking
about  a  matter  of  which  he  has  no  knowledge.  The  only
way  to  calculate  how  he  will  behave,  is  to  consider  the  cir-
cumstances in  which  he  will  be  placed,  and  the  extent  to
which  they  will  conflict  with  his  character.

If  you  wish  to  get  a  clear  and  profound  insight — and  it
is  very  needful — into  the  true  but  melancholy  elements  of
which  most  men  are  made,  you  will  find  it  a  very  instructive
thing  to  take  the  way  they  behave  in  the  pages  of  liter-
ature as  a  commentary  to  their  doings  in  practical  life,  and
vice  versa.  The  experience  thus  gained  will  be  very  useful
in  avoiding  wrong  ideas,  whether  about  yourself  or  about
others.  But  if  you  come  across  any  special  trait  of  mean-
ness or  stupidity — in  life  or  in  literature — you  must  be
careful  not  to  let  it  annoy  or  distress  you,  but  to  look  upon
it  merely  as  an  addition  to  your  knowledge — a  new  fact  to
be  considered  in  studying  the  character  of  humanity.
Your  attitude  toward  it  will  be  that  of  the  mineralogist
who  stumbles  upon  a  very  characteristic  specimen  of  a
mineral.

Of  course  there  are  some  facts  which  are  very  exceptional,
and  it  is  difficult  to  understand  how  they  arise,  and  how  it
is  that  there  come  to  be  such  enormous  differences  between


154  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

man  and  man  ;  but,  in  general,  what  was  said  long  ago  is
quite  true,  and  the  world  is  in  a  very  bad  way.  In  savage
countries  they  eat  one  another,  in  civilized  countries  they
deceive  one  another  ;  and  that  is  what  people  call  the  way
of  the  world!  What  are  states  and  all  the  elaborate  systems
of  political  machinery,  and  the  rule  of  force,  whether  in
home  or  in  foreign  affairs — what  are  they  but  barriers
against  the  boundless  iniquity  of  mankind  ?  Does  not  all
history  show  that  whenever  a  king  is  firmly  planted  on  the
throne,  and  his  people  reach  some  degree  of  prosperity,  he
uses  it  to  lead  his  army,  like  a  band  of  robbers,  against  ad-
joining countries  ?  Are  not  almost  all  wars  ultimately
undertaken  ion*  purposes  of  plunder  ?  In  the  most  remote
antiquity,  and  to  some  extent  also  in  the  Middle  Age,  the
conquered  became  slaves — in  other  words,  they  had  to
work  for  those  who  conquered  them  ;  and  where  is  the  dif-
ference between  that  and  paying  war- taxes,  which  represent
the  product  of  previous  work  ?

All  war,  says  Voltaire,  is  a  matter  of  robbery ;  and  the
Germans  should  take  that  as  a  warning.

§  30.  No  man  is  so  formed  that  he  can  be  left  entirely
to  himself,  to  go  his  own  ways;  every  one  needs  to  be  guided
by  a  preconceived  plan,  and  to  follow  certain  general  rules.
But  if  this  is  carried  too  far,  and  a  man  tries  to  take  on  a
character  which  is  not  natural  or  innate  in  him,  but  is
artificially  acquired  and  evolved  merely  by  a  process  of
reasoning,  he  will  very  soon  discover  that  Nature  cannot
be  forced,  and  that  if  you  drive  it  out,  it  will  return  despite
your  efforts  :

"Naturam  expellas  furca,  tamen  usque  recurret."

To  understand  a  rule  governing  conduct  toward  others,
even  to  discover  it  for  one's  self  and  to  express  it  neatly,  is
easy  enough  ;  and  still,  very  soon  afterward,  the  rule  may
be  broken  in  practice.  But  that  is  no  reason  for  despair  ;
and  you  need  not  fancy  that  as  it  is  impossible  to  regulate
your  life  in  accordance  with  abstract  ideas  and  maxims,  it
is  better  to  live  just  as  you  please.  Here,  as  in  all  theo-
retical instruction  that  aims  at  a  practical  result,  the  first,
thing  to  do  is  to  understand  the  rule  ;  the  second  thing  is
to  learn  the  practice  of  it.     The  theory  may  be  understood


OUR  RELATION  TO  OTHERS.  155

at  once  by  an  effort  of  reason,  and  yet  the  practice  of  it
acquired  only  in  course  of  time.

A  pupil  may  learn  the  various  notes  on  an  instrument  of
music,  or  the  different  positions  in  fencing  ;  and  wheu  he
makes  a  mistake,  as  he  is  sure  to  do,  however  hard  he  tries,
he  is  apt  to  think  it  will  be  impossible  to  observe  the  rules,
when  he  is  set  to  read  music  at  sight  or  challenged  to  a
furious  duel.  But  for  all  that,  gradual  practice  makes  him
perfect,  through  a  long  series  of  slips,  blunders  and  fresh
efforts.  It  is  just  the  same  in  other  things  ;  in  learning  to
write  and  speak  Latin,  a  man  will  forget  the  grammatical
rules;  it  is  only  by  long  practice  that  a  blockhead  turns  into  a
courtier,  that  a  passionate  man  becomes  shrewd  and  worldly-
wise,  or  a  frank  person  reserved,  or  a  noble  person  ironical.
But  though  self-discipline  of  this  kind  is  the  result  of  long
habit,  it  always  works  by  a  sort  of  external  compulsion,
which  Nature  never  ceases  to  resist  and  sometimes  unexpect-
edly overcomes.  The  difference- between  action  in  accord-
ance with  abstract  principles,  and  action  as  the  result  of
original  innate  tendency,  is  the  same  as  that  between  a
work  of  art,  say  a  watch — where  form  and  movement  are
impressed  upon  shapeless  and  inert  matter — and  a  living
organism,  where  form  and  matter  are  one,  and  each  is
inseparable  from  the  other.

There  is  a  maxim  attributed  to  the  Emperor  -Napoleon,
which  expresses  this  relation  between  acquired  and  innate
character,  and  confirms  what  I  have  said:  "everything  that
is  unnatural  is  imperfect  " — a  rule  of  universal  application,
whether  in  the  physical  or  in  the  moral  sphere.  The  only
exception  I  can  think  of  to  this  rule  is  aventurine,*  a  sub-
stance known  to  mineralogists,  which  in  its  natural  state
cannot  compare  with  the  artificial  preparation  of  it.

And  in  this  connection  let  me  utter  a  word  of  protest
against  any  and  every  form  of  affectation.  It  always  arouses
contempt  ;  in  the  first  place,  because  it  argues  deception,
and  the  deception  is  cowardly,  for  it  is  based  on  fear;  and,
secondly,  it  argues  self-condemnation,  because  it  means
that  a  man  is  trying  to  appear  what  he  is  not,  and  there-
fore something  which  he  thinks  better  than  he  actually  is.

*  Translator' $  Note— Aventurine  is  a  rare  kind  of  quartz  ;  and  the
r.ame  name  is  given  to  a  brownish-colored  glass  much  resembling  it,
which  is  manufactured  at  Murano.  It  is  so  called  from  the  fact  that
the  glass  was  discovered  bv  cbance  (avventura).


156  COUNSFjLS  AND  MAXIMS.

To  affect  a  quality,  and  to  plume  yourself  upon  it,  is  jugt
to  confess  that  you  have  not  got  it.  Whether  it  is  courage,
or  learning,  or  intellect,  or  wit,  or  success  with  women,  or
riches,  or  social  position,  or  whatever  else  it  may  be  that
a  man  boasts  of,  you  may  conclude  by  his  boasting  about
it  that  that  is  precisely  the  direction  in  which  he  is  rather
weak  ;  for  if  a  man  possesses  any  faculty  to  the  full,  it  will
not  occur  to  him  to  make  a  great  show  of  affecting  it ;
he  is  quite  content  to  know  that  he  has  it.  That  is  the
application  of  the  Spanish  proverb:  herradura  quechacolo-
tea  davo  le  falta — a  clattering  hoof  means  a  nail  gone.
To  be  sure,  as  I  said  at  first,  no  man  ought  to  let  the  reins
go  quite  loose,  and  show  himself  just  as  he  is;  for  there  are
many  evil  and  bestial  sides  to  our  nature  which  require  to
be  hidden  away  out  of  sight  ;  and  this  justifies  the  negative
attitude  of  dissimulation,  but  it  does  not  justify  a  positive
feigning  of  qualities  which  are  not  there.  It  should  also
be  remembered  that  affectation  is  recognized  at  once,  even
before  it  is  clear  what  it  is  that  is  being  affected.  And,
finally,  affectation  cannot  last  very  long  and  one  day  the
mask  will  fall  off.  Nemo  potest  personam  cliu  ferre  fidam,
says  Seneca;*  fida  cito  in  naturam  suam  recidunt — no  one
can  persevere  long  in  a  fictitious  character  ;  for  nature  will
soon  re-assert  itself.

§  31.  A  man  bears  the  weight  of  his  own  body  without
knowing  it,  but  he  soon  feels  the  weight  of  any  other,  if
he  tries  to  move  it:  in  the  same  way,  a  man  can  see  other
people's  shortcomings  and  vices,  but  he  is  blind  to  his  own.
This  arrangement  has  one  advantage:  it  turns  other  people
into  a  kind  of  mirror,  in  which  a  man  can  see  clearly  every-
thing that  is  vicious,  faulty,  ill-bred  and  loathsome  in  his
own  nature ;  only,  it  is  generally  the  old  story  of  the  dog
barking  at  its  own  image;  it  is  himself  that  he  sees  and  not
another  dog,  as  he  fancies.

He  who  criticises  others,  works  at  the  reformation  of
himself.  Those  who  form  the  secret  habit  of  scrutinizing
other  people's  general  behavior,  and  passing  severe  judg-
ment upon  what  they  do  and  leave  undone,  thereby  improve
themselves,  and  work  out  their  own  perfection  :  for  they
will  have  sufficient  sense  of  justice,  or  at  any  ra'te  enough

*  "De  Clementia."  I.  1.


OUR  RELATION  TO  OTHERS.  157

pride  ana  vanity,  to  avoid  in  their  own  case  that  which  they
condemn  so  harshly  elsewhere.  But  tolerant  people  are
just  the  opposite,  and  claim  for  themselves  the  same  indul-
gence that  they  extend  to  others — hanc  veniam  damns
petimusqne  vicissim.  It  is  all  very  well  for  the  Bible  to
talk  about  the  mote  in  another's  eye  and  the  beam  in  one's
own.  The  nature  of  the  eye  is  to  look  not  at  itself  but  at
other  things;  and  therefore  to  observe  and  blame  faults  in
another  is  a  very  suitable  way  of  becoming  conscious  of
one's  own.  We  require  a  looking-glass  for  the  due  dressing
of  our  morals.

The  same  rule  applies  in  the  case  of  style  and  fine  writ-
ing. If,  instead  of  condemning,  you  applaud  some  new
folly  in  these  matters,  you  will  imitate  it.  That  is  just
why  literary  follies  have  such  vogue  in  Germany.  The
Germans  are  a  very  tolerant  people — everybody  can  see
that!  Their  maxim  is — Hanc  veniam  damns  petimusque
vicissim.

§  32.  When  he  is  young,  a  man  of  noble  character  fan-
cies that  the  relations  prevailing  among  mankind,  and  the
alliances  to  which  these  relations  lead,  are,  at  bottom  and
essentially,  ideal  in  their  nature ;  that  is  to  say,  that
they  rest  upon  similarity  of  disposition  or  sentiment,  or
taste,  or  intellectual  power,  and  so  on.

But,  later  on,  he  finds  out  that  it  is  a  real  foundation
which  underlies  these  alliances  ;  that  they  are  based  upon
some  material  interest.  This  is  the  true  foundation  of
almost  all  alliances:  nay,  most  men  have  no  notion  of  an
alliance  resting  upon  any  other  basis.  Accordingly,  we
find  that  a  man  is  always  measured  by  the  office  he  holds,
or  by  his  occupation,  nationality,  or  family  relations — in  a
word,  by  the  position  and  character  which  have  been
assigned  him  in  the  conventional  arrangements  of  life,
where  he  is  ticketed  and  treated  as  so  much  goods.  Reference
to  what  he  is  in  himself,  as  a  man — to  the  measure  of  his
own  personal  qualities-is  never  made  unless  for  convenience
sake:  and  so  that  view  of  a  man  is  something  exceptional,
to  be  set  aside  and  ignored,  the  moment  that  any  one  finds
it  disagreeable;  and  this  is  what  usually  happens.  But  the
more  of  personal  worth  a  man  has,  the  less  pleasure  he  will
take  in  these  conventional  arrangements  ;  and  he  will  try
to  withdraw  from   the  sphere  in  which  they  apply.     The


158  COUNSELS  AlSl>  MAXIMS.

reason  why  these  arrangements  exist  at  all,  is  simply  that
in  this  world  of  ours  misery  and  need  are  the  chief  fea-
tures: therefore  it  is  everywhere  the  essential  and  para-
mount business  of  life  to  devise  the  means  of  alleviating
them.

§  33.  As  paper-money  circulates  in  the  world  instead  of
real  coin,  so,  in  the  place  of  true  esteem  and  genuine
friendship,  you  have  the  outward  appearance  of  it— a
mimic  show  made  to  look  as  much  like  the  real  thing  as
possible.

On  the  other  hand,  it  may  be  asked  whether  there  are
any  people  who  really  deserve  the  true  coin.  For  my  own
part,  I  should  certainly  pay  more  respect  to  an  honest  dog
wagging  his  tail  than  to  a  hundred  such  demonstrations  of
human  regard.

True  and  genuine  friendship  presupposes  a  strong  sym-
pathy with  the  weal  and  woe  of  another — purely  objective
in  its  character  and  quite  disinterested;  and  this  in  its  turn
means  an  absolute  identification  of  self  with  the  object  of
friendship.  The  egoism  of  human  nature  is  so  strongly
antagonistic  to  any  such  sympathy,  that  true  friendship
belongs  to  that  class  of  things — the  sea-serpent,  for  instance
— with  regard  to  which  no  one  knows  whether  they  are  fabu-
lous or  really  exist  somewhere  or  other.

Still,  in  many  cases,  there  is  a  grain  of  true  and  genuine
friendship  in  the  relations  of  man  to  man,  though  gener-
ally, of  course,  some  secret  personal  interest  is  at  the
bottom  of  them — some  one  among  the  many  forms  that
selfishness  can  take.  But  in  a  world  where  all  is  imperfect,
this  grain  of  true  feeling  is  such  an  ennobling  influence
that  it  gives  some  warrant  for  calling  those  relations  by  the
name  of  friendship,  for  they  stand  far  above  the  ordinary
friendships  that  prevail  among  mankind.  The  latter  are
so  constituted  that,  were  you  to  hear  how  your  dear  friends
speak  of  you  behind  your  back,  you  would  nevier  say
another  word  to  them.

Apart  from  the  case  where  it  would  be  a  real  help  to  you
if  your  friend  were  to  make  some  considerable  sacrifice  to
serve  you,  there  is  no  better  means  of  testing  the  genuine-
ness of  his  feeling  than  the  way  in  which  he  receives  the
news  of  a  misfortune  that  has  just  happened  to  you.  At
that  moment  the  expression  of  his  features  will  either  show


OUR  RELAlION  TO  OTHERS.  158

that  his  one  thought  is  that  of  true  and  sincere  sympathy
for  you;  or  else  the  absolute  composure  of  his  countenance,
or  the  passing  trace  of  something  other  than  sympathy,
will  confirm  the  well-known  maxim  of  La  Rochefoucauld:
Dans  Vadversite  cle  nos  meilleurs  amis,  nous  trouvons
toujonvs  quelque  chose  qui  ne  nous  deplait pas.  Indeed,,
at  such  a  moment,  the  ordinary  so-called  friend  will  find  it
hard  to  suppress  the  signs  of  a  slight  smile  of  pleasure.
There  are  few  ways  by  which  you  can  make  more  certain
of  putting  people  into  a  good  humor  than  by  telling  them
of  some  trouble  that  has  recently  befallen  you,  or  by  unre-
servedly disclosing  some  personal  weakness  of  yours.  How
characteristic  this  is  of  humanity!

Distance  and  long  absence  are  always  prejudicial  to
friendship,  however,  disinclined  a  man  may  be  to  admit  it.
Our  regard  for  people  whom  we  do  not  see — even  though
they  be  our  dearest  friends — gradually  dries  up  in  the
course  of  years,  and  they  become  abstract  notions;  so  that
our  interest  in  them  grows  to  be  more  and  more  intel-
lectual— nay,  it  is  kept  up  only  as  a  kind  of  tradition;
while  we  retain  a  lively  and  deep  interest  in  those  who  are
constantly  before  our  eyes,  even  if  they  be  only  pet
animals.  This  shows  how  much  men  are  limited  by  their
senses,  and  how  true  is  the  remark  that  Goethe  makes  in
"Tasso"  about  the  dominant  influence  of  the  present
moment:

*'  Die  Gegenwart  ist  eiue  maclitige  Gottin."  *

"Friends  of  the  house"  are  very  rightly  so  called;  because
they  are  friends  of  the  house  rather  than  of  its  master;  in
other  words,  they  are  more  like  cats  than  dogs.

Your  friends  will  tell  you  that  they  are  sincere  ;  your
enemies  are  really  so.  Let  your  enemies'  censure  be  like  a
bitter  medicine,  to  be  used  as  a  means  of  self-knowledge.

A  friend  in  need,  as  the  saying  goes,  is  rare.  Nay,  it  is
just  the  contrary;  no  sooner  have  you  made  a  friend  than
he  is  in  need,  and  asks  you  for  a  loan.

§  84.  A  man  must  be  still  a  greenhorn  in  the  ways  of  the
world,  if  he  imagines  that  he  can  make  himself  popular  in

*  Act  iv. .  sc.  4.


160  CO  UNSELS  A  ND  MAXIMS.

society  by  exhibiting  intelligence  and  discernment.  With
the  immense  majority  of  people,  such  qualities  excite  hatred
and  resentment,  which  are  rendered  all  the  harder  to  bear
by  the  fact  that  people  are  obliged  to  suppress — even  from
themselves — the  real  reason  of  their  anger.

What  actually  takes  place  is  this.  A  man  feels  and  per
ceives  that  the  person  with  whom  he  is  conversing  is  intel-
lectually very  much  his  superior.  He  thereupon  secretly
and  half-unconsciously  concludes  that  his  interlocutor  must
form  a  proportionately  iow  and  limited  estimate  of  his
abilities.  That  is  a  method  of  reasoning — an  enthymeme —
which  rouses  the  bitterest  reelings  of  sullen  and  rancorous
hatred.*  And  so  Gracian  is  quite  right  in  saying  that  the
only  way  to  win  affection  from  jDeojDle  is  to  show  the  most
animal-like  simplicity  of  demeanor — para  ser  hi  en  quisto,
el  unico  medio  vestirse  la  piel  del  mas  simple  de  los  bmtos.\

To  show  your  intelligence  and  discernment  is  only  an
indirect  way  of  reproaching  other  people  for  being  dull  and
incapable.  And  besides,  it  is  natural  for  a  vulgar  man  to
be  violently  agitated  by  the  sight  of  opposition  in  any  form
and  in  this  case  envy  comes  in  as  the  secret  cause  of  his
hostility.  For  it  is  a  matter  of  daily  observation  that
people  take  the  greatest  pleasure  in  that  which  satisfies
their  vanity;  and  vanity  cannot  be  satisfied  without  com-
parison with  others.  Now,  there  is  nothing  of  which  a
man  is  prouder  than  of  intellectual  ability,  for  it  is  this
that  gives  him  his  commanding  place  in  the  animal  world.
It  is  an  exceedingly  rash  thing  to  let  any  one  see  that  you
are  decidedly  superior  to  him  in    this  respect,   and   to  let

*  Of.  "Welt  als  Wille  und  Vorstellung,"  Bk.  II.  p.  256  (4th
Edit.),  where  I  quote  from  Dr.  Johnson,  and  from  Merck,  the  friend
of  Goethe's  youth.  The  former  says:  "There  is  nothing  by  which  a
man  exasperates  most  people  more,  than  by  displaying  a  superior
ability  of  brilliancy  in  conversation.  They  seem  pleased  at  the  time,
but  their  envy  makes  them  curse  him  at  their  hearts."  (BoswelPs
"  Life  of  Johnson,"  aetat:  74.)

f  Translator 's  Note. — Balthazar  Gracian  "  Oraculo  manuel,y  arte
de  prudencia,"  240.  Gracian  (1584-1658)  was  a  Spanish  prose  writer
and  Jesuit,  whose  works  deal  chiefly  with  the  observation  of  charac-
ter in  the  various  phenomena  of  life.  Schopenhauer,  among  others,
had  a  great  admiration  for  his  worldly  philosophy,  and  translated  his
"  Oraculo  manuel  " — a  system  of  rules  for  the  conduct  of  life — into
German.  The  same  book  was  translated  into  English  toward  the
close  of  the  seventeeth  century.


OUR  RELAZTON  TO  OTHERS.  161

other  people  see  it  too;  because  he  will  then  thirst  for  venge-
ance, and  generally  look  about  for  an  opportunity  of
taking  it  by  means  of  insult,  because  this  is  to  pass  from
the  sphere  of  intellect  to  that  of  will — and  there  all  are  on
an  equal  footing  as  regards  the  feeling  of  hostility.  Hence,
while  rank  and  riches  may  always  reckon  upon  deferential
treatment  in  society,  that  is  something  which  intellectual
ability  can  never  expect;  to  be  ignored  is  the  greatest  favor
shown  to  it;  and  if  people  notice  it  at  all,  it  is  because  they
regard  it  as  a  piece  of  impertinence,  or  else  as  something
to  which  its  possessor  has  no  legitimate  right,  and  upon
which  he  dares  to  pride  himself;  and  in  retaliation  and
revenge  for  his  conduct,  people  secretly  try  and  humiliate
him  in  some  other  way;  and  if  they  wait  to  do  this,  it  is
only  for  a  fitting  opportunity.  A  man  may  be  as  humble
as  possible  in  his  demeanor,  and  yet  hardly  ever  get  people
to  overlook  his  crime  in  standing  intellectually  above
them.  In  the  "  Garden  of  Roses,"  Sadi  makes  the  remark  :
"You  should  know  that  foolish  people  are  a  hundredfold
more  averse  to  meeting  the  wise  than  the  wise  are  indis-
posed for  the  company  of  the  foolish."

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  a  real  recommendation  to  be
stupid.  For  just  as  warmth  is  agreeable  to  the  body,  so  it
does  the  mind  good  to  feel  its  superiority  ;  and  a  man  will
seek  company  likely  to  give  him  this  feeling,  as  instinc
tively  as  he  will  approach  the  fireplace  or  walk  in  the  sun
if  he  wants  to  get  warm.  But  this  means  that  he  will  be
disliked  on  account  of  his  superiority  ;  and  if  a  man  is  to
be  liked,  he  must  really  be  inferior  in  point  of  intellect  ;
and  the  same  thing  holds  good  of  a  woman  in  point  of
beauty.  To  give  proof  of  real  and  unfeigned  inferiority  to
some  of  the  people  you  meet — that  is  a  very  difficult  busi-
ness indeed  !

Consider  how  kindly  and  heartily  a  girl  who  is  passably
pretty  will  welcome  one  who  is  downright  ugly.  Physical
advantages  are  not  thought  so  much  of  in  the  case  of  man,
thpugh  I  suppose  you  would  rather  a  little  man  sat  next  to
you  than  one  who  was  bigger  than  yourself.  This  is  why,
among  men,  it  is  the  dull  and  ignorant,  and  among  women
the  ugly,  who  are  always  popular  and  in  request.  It  is
likely  to  be  said  of  such  people  that  they  are  extremely
good-natured,  because  everyone  wants  to  find  a  pretext  for
caring  about  them — a  pretext  which  will  blind  both  himself


1 62  CO  UNSELS  A  NI>  MAXIMS.

and  other  people  to  the  real  reason  why  he  likes  them.
This  is  also  why  mental  superiority  of  any  sort  always  tends
to  isolate  its  possessor  :  people  run  away  from  him  out  of
pure  hatred,  and  say  all  manner  of  bad  things  about  him
by  way  of  justifying  their  action.*  Beauty,  in  the  case  of
women,  has  a  similar  effect  :  very  pretty  girls  have  no
friends  of  their  own  sex,  and  they  even  find  it  hard  to  get
another  girl  to  keep  them  company.  A  handsome  woman
should  always  avoid  applying  for  a  position  as  companion,
because  the  moment  she  enters  the  room,  her  prospective
mistress  will  scowl  at  her  beauty,  as  a  piece  of  folly  with
which,  both  for  her  own  and  for  her  daughters'  sake,  she
can  very  well  dispense.  But  if  the  girl  has  advantages  of
rank,  the  case  is  very  different  ;  because  rank,  unlike  per-
sonal qualities  which  work  by  the  force  of  mere  contrast,
produces  its  effect  by  a  process  of  reflection  ;  much  in  the
same  way  as  the  particular  hue  of  a  person's  complexion
depends  upon  the  prevailing  tone  of  his  immediate  sur-
roundings.

§  35.  Our  trust  in  other  people  often  consists  in  great
measure  of  pure  laziness,  selfishness  and  vanity  on  our  own
part :  I  say  laziness,  because,  instead  of  making  inquiries
ourselves,  and  exercising  an  active  care  we  prefer  to  trust
others  ;  selfishness,  because  we  are  led  to  confide  in  people
by  the  pressure  of  our  own  affairs  ;  and  vanity,  when  we
ask  confidence  for  a  matter  on  which  we  rather  pride  our-
selves. And  yet,  for  all  that,  we  expect  people  to  be  true
to  the  trust  we  repose  in  them.

But   we  ought   not  to   become  angry  if   people  put   no

*  If  you  desire  to  get  on  in  the  world,  friends  and  acquaintances  are
oy  far  the  best  passport  to  fortune.  The  possession  of  a  great  deal
of  ability  makes  a  man  proud,  and  therefore  not  apt  to  flatter  those
who  have  very  little,  and  from  whom,  on  that  account,  the  possession
of  great  ability  should  be  carefully  concealed.  The  consciousness  of
small  intellectual  power  has  just  tbe  opposite  effect,  and  is  very  com-
patible with  a  humble,  affable  and  companionable  nature,  and  with
respect  for  what  is  mean  and  wretched.  This  is  why  an  inferior  sort
of  man  has  so  many  people  to  befriend  and  encourage  him.

These  remarks  are  applicable  not  only  to  advancement  in  political
jife,  but  to  all  competition  for  places  of  honor  and  dignity,  nay,  even
for  reputation  in  the  world  of  science,  literature  and  art.  In  learned
societies,  for  example,  mediocrity — that  very  acceptable  quality — is
always  to  the  fore,  while  merit  meets  with  tardy  recognition,  or
with  none  at  all.     So  it  is  in  everything.


OUR  RELATION  TO  OTHERS.  163

trust  in  us  :  because  that  realty  means  that  they  pay  honesty
the  sincere  compliment  of  regarding  it  as  a  very  rare  thing,
so  rare,  indeed,  as  to  leave  us  in  doubt  whether  its  exist-
ence is  not  merely  fabulous.

§  36.  Politeness,  which  the  Chinese  hold  to  be  a  cardinal
virtue,  is  based  upon  two  considerations  of  policy.  I  have
explained  one  of  these  consideiations  in  my  "  Ethics"  *  ;  the
other  is  as  follows  :  Politeness  is  a  tacit  agreement  that
people's  miserable  defects,  whether  moral  or  intellectual,
shall  on  either  side  be  ignored  and  not  made  the  subject  of
reproach  ;  and  since  these  defects  are  thus  rendered  some
what  less  obtrusive,  the  result  is  mutually  advantageous.

It  is  a  wise  thing  to  be  polite  ;  consequently,  it  is  a  stupid
r,hing  to  be  rude.  To  make  enemies  by  unnecessary  and
willful  incivility,  is  just  as  insane  a  proceeding  as  to  set  your
house  on  fire.  For  politeness  is  like  a  counter — an  avowedly
false  coin,  with  which  it  is  foolish  to  be  stingy.  A  sensible
man  will  be  generous  in  the  use  of  it.  It  is  customary  in
every  country  to  end  a  letter  with  the  words  :  i(  your  most
obedient  servant" — voire  tres-humble  serviteur — suo  devo-
tissimo  servo.  (The  Germans  are  the  only  people  who  sup-
press the  word  servant — diener — because,  of  course,  it  is
not  true  !)  However,  to  carry  politeness  to  such  an  extent
as  to  damage  your  prospects,  is  like  giving  money  where
only  counters  are  expected.

Wax,  a  substance  naturally  hard  and  brittle,  can  be
made  soft  by  the  application  of  a  little  warmth,  so  that  it
will  take  any  shape  you  please.  In  the  same  way,  by
being  polite  and  friendly,  you  can  make  people  pliable  and
obliging,  even  though  they  are  apt  to  be  crabbed  and
malevolent.  Hence  politeness  is  to  human  nature  what
warmth  is  to  wax.

Of  course,  it  is  no  easy  matter  to  be  polite  ;  in  so  far,  I
mean,  as  it  requires  us  to  show  great  respect  for  everybody,

*  Translator's  Note. — In  tlie  passage  referred  to  ("  Grundlage  der
Moral,"  collected  works,  Vol.  IV.  pp.  187  and  198),  Schopenhauer
explains  politeness  as  a  conventional  and  systematic  attempt  to  mask
the  egoism  of  human  nature  in  the  small  affairs  of  life — an
egoism  so  repulsive  that  some  such  device  is  necessary  for  the
purpose  of  concealing  its  ugliness.  The  relation  which  politeness
bears  to  the  true  love  of  one's  neighbor  is  analogous  to  that  existing
between  justice  as  an  affair  of  legality,  and  justice  as  the  real  integrity
of  the  heart.


164  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

whereas  most  people  deserve  none  at  all  ;  and  again  in  so
far  as  it  demands  that  we  should  feign  the  most  lively
interest  in  people,  when  we  must  be  very  glad  that  we
have  nothing  to  do  with  them.  To  combine  politeness
with  pride  is  a  masterpiece  of  wisdom.

We  should  be  much  less  ready  to  lose  our  temper  over
an  insult — which,  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word,  means
that  we  have  not  been  treated  with  respect— if,  on  the
one  hand,  we  had  not  such  an  exaggerated  estimate  of  our
value  and  dignity — that  is  to  say,  if  we  were  not  so  im-
mensely proud  of  ourselves  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  if  we
had  arrived  at  any  clear  notion  of  the  judgment  which,  in
his  heart,  one  man  generally  passes  upon  another.  If
most  people  resent  the  slightest  hint  that  any  blame
attaches  to  them,  you  may  imagine  their  feelings  if  they
were  to  overhear  what  their  acquaintances  say  about  them„
You  should  never  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  ordinary
politeness  is  only  a  grinning  mask  :  if  it  shifts  its  place  a
little,  or  is  removed  for  a  moment,  there  is  no  use  raising  a
hue  and  cry.  When  a  man  is  downright  rude,  it  is  as
though  he  had  taken  off  all  his  clothes,  and  stood  before
you  in  puris  naturalibus.  Like  most  men  in  this  condi-
tion, he  does  not  present  a  very  attractive  appearance.

§  37.  You  ought  never  to  take  any  man  as  a  model  for
what  you  should  do  or  leave  undone  ;  because  position  and
circumstances  are  in  no  two  cases  alike,  and  difference  of
character  gives  a  peculiar,  individual  tone  to  what  a  man
does.  Hence  duo  cum  faciant  idem,  non  est  idem — two
persons  may  do  the  same  thing  with  a  different  result.  A
man  should  act  in  accordance  with  his  own  character,  as
soon  as  he  has  carefully  deliberated  on  what  he  is  about
to  do.

The  outcome  of  this  is  that  originality  cannot  be  dis-
pensed with  in  practical  matters  :  otherwise,  what  a  man
does  will  not  accord  with  what  he  is.

§  38.  Never  combat  any  man's  opinion  ;  for  though
you  reached  the  age  of  Methuselah,  you  would  never  have
done  setting  him  right  upon  all  the  absurd  things  that
he  believes.

It  is  also  well  to  avoid  correcting  people's  mistakes  in
conversation,  however  good  your  intentions  may  be  ;  for  it


OUR  RELATION  TO  OTHERS.  165

is  easy  to  offend  people,  and  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to
mend  them.

If  you  feel  irritated  by  the  absurd  remarks  of  two  people
whose  conversation  you  happen  to  overhear,  you  should
imagine  that  you  are  listening  to  the  dialogue  of  two  fools
in  a  comedy.     Prdbatum  est.

The  man  who  comes  into  the  world  with  the  notion  that
he  is  really  going  to  instruct  it  in  matters  of  the  highest
importance,  may  thank  his  stars  if  he  escapes  with  a  whole
skin.

§  39.  If  you  want  your  judgment  to  be  accepted,  ex-
press it  coolly  and  without  passion.  All  violence  has  its
seat  in  the  will  ;  and  so,  if  your  judgment  is  expressed
with  vehemence,  people  will  consider  it  an  effort  of  will,
and  not  the  outcome  of  knowledge,  which  is  in  its  nature
cold  and  unimpassioned.  Since  the  will  is  the  primary
and  radical  element  in  human  nature,  and  intellect  merely
supervenes  as  something  secondary,  people  are  more  likely
to  believe  that  the  opinion  you  express  with  so  much  vehe-
mence is  due  to  the  excited  state  of  your  will,  rather  than
that  the  excitement  of  the  will  comes  only  from  the  ardent
nature  of  your  opinion.

§  40.  Even  when  you  are  fully  justified  in  praising
yourself,  you  should  never  be  seduced  into  doing  so.  For
vanity  is  so  very  common,  and  merit  so  very  uncommon,
that  even  if  a  man  appears  to  be  praising  himself,  though
very  indirectly,  people  will  be  ready  to  lay  a  hundred  to
one  that  he  is  talking  out  of  pure  vanity,  and  that
he  has  not  sense  enough  to  see  what  a  fool  he  is  making  of
himself.

Still,  for  all  that,  there  may  be  some  truth  in  Bacon's
remark  that,  as  in  the  case  of  calumny,  if  you  throw
enough  dirt,  some  of  it  will  stick,  so  it  is  also  in  regard  to
self-praise  ;  with  the  conclusion  that  self-praise,  in  small
doses,  is  to  be  recommended.*


*  Translator  s  Note. — Schopenhauer  alludes  to  the  following  pas-
i  Bacon's  "  De  Augmentis  Scientarium,"  Bk.  viii.,  ch,  2:
Sicitt  enim  did  solet  de  calumnia,  audacter  caluraniare,  semper  aliquid
haeret :  sic  did  potest  de  jacantia  {nisi  plane  deformis  fuerit  et  ridi-
cula),  audacter  te  vendita,  semper  aliquid  haeret.  Haerebeit  certe
apud  populum  licet  prudentiores  subrideant.  Itaque  existimatio parta
apud  plurimos  pauQorum  fastidium  abunde  cornpensabit.


166  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

§  41.  If  you  have  reason  to  suspect  that  a  person  ia
telling  you  a  lie,  look  as  though  you  believed  every  word
he  said.  This  will  give  him  courage  to  go  on  ;  he  will
become  more  vehement  in  his  assertions,  and  in  the  end
betray  himself.

Again,  if  you  perceive  that  a  person  is  trying  to  conceal
something  from  you,  but  with  only  partial  success,  look  as
though  you  did  not  believe  him.  This  opposition  on  your
part  will  provoke  him  into  leading  out  his  reserve  of
truth  and  bringing  the  whole  force  of  it  to  bear  upon  your
incredulity.

§  42.  You  should  regard  all  your  private  affairs  as
secrets,  and,  in  respect  of  them,  treat  your  acquaintances,
even  though  you  are  on  good  terms  with  then),  as  perfect
strangers,  letting  them  know  nothing  more  than  they  can
see  for  themselves.  For  in  course  of  time,  and  under
altered  circumstances,  you  may  find  it  a  disadvantage
that  they  know  even  the  most  harmless  things  about
you.

And,  as  a  general  rule,  it  is  more  advisable  to  show
your  intelligence  by  saying  nothing  than  by  speaking
out;  for  silence  is  a  matter  of  prudence,  while  speech  has
something  in  it  of  vanity.  The  opportunities  for  displaying
the  one  or  the  other  quality  occur  equally  often;  but  the
fleeting  satisfaction  afforded  by  speech  is  often  preferred  to
the  permanent  advantage  secured  by  silence.

The  feeling  of  relief  which  lively  people  experience  in
speaking  aloud  when  no  one  is  listening,  should  not  be  in-
dulged, lest  it  grow  into  a  habit;  for  in  this  way  thought
establishes  such  very  friendly  terms  with  speech,  that  con-
versation is  apt  to  become  a  process  of  thinking  aloud.
Prudence  exacts  that  a  wide  gulf  should  be  fixed  between
what  we  think  and  what  we  say.

At  times  we  fancy  that  people  are  utterly  unable  to  be-
lieve in  the  truth  of  some  statement  affecting  us  personally,
whereas  it  never  occurs  to  them  to  doubt  it,  but  if  we  give
them  the  slightest  opportunity  of  doubting  it,  they  find  it
absolutely  impossible  to  believe  it  any  more.  We  often  be
tray  ourselves  into  revealing  something,  simply  because  we
suppose  that  people  cannot  help  noticing  it — justasa  man
will  throw  himself  down  f  rora  a  great  height  because  he  loses
his  head,  in  other  words,  because  he  fancies  that  he  cannot


OUR  UELATION  TO  OTHEHS.  16?

retain  a  firm  footing  any  longer;  the  torment  of  his  posi-
tion is  so  great,  that  he  thinks  it  better  to  put  an  end  to
it  at  once.  This  is  the  kind  of  insanity  which  is  called
acrophobia.

But  it  should  not  be  forgotten  how  clever  people  are  in
regard  to  affairs  which  do  not  concern  them,  even  though
they  show  no  particular  sign  of  acuteness  in  other  matters.
This  is  a  kind  of  algebra  in  which  people  are  very  pro-
ficient: give  them  a  single  fact  to  go  upon,  and  they  will
solve  the  most  complicated  problems.  So,  if  you  wish  to
relate  some  event  that  happened  long  ago,  without  men-
tioning any  names,  or  otherwise  indicating  the  persons  to
whom  you  refer,  you  should  be  very  careful  not  to  introduce
into  your  narrative  anything  that  might  point,  however
distantly,  to  some  definite  fact,  whether  it  is  a  particular
locality  or  a  date,  or  the  name  of  some  one  who  was  only  to
a  small  extent  implicated,  or  anything  else  that  was  even
remotely  connected  with  the  event;  for  that  at  once  gives
people  something  positive  to  go  upon,  and  by  the  aid  of
their  talent  for  this  sort  of  algebra,  they  will  discover  all
the  rest.  Their  curiosity  in  these  matters  becomes  a  kind
of  enthusiasm;  their  will  spurs  on  their  intellect,  and  drives
it  forward  to  the  attainment  of  the  most  remote  results.
For  however  unsusceptible  and  indifferent  people  may  be
to  general  and  universal  truths,  they  are  very  ardent  in  the
matter  of  particular  details.

In  keeping  with  what  I  have  said,  it  will  be  found  that
all  those  who  profess  to  give  instruction  in  the  wisdom  of
life  are  specially  urgent  in  commending  the  practice  of
silence,  and  assign  manifold  reasons  why  it  should  be  ob
served;  so  it  is  not  necessary  for  me  to  enlarge  upon  the
subject  any  further.  However,  I  may  just  add  one  or  two
little  known  Arabian  proverbs,  which  occur  to  me  as  pecul-
iarly appropriate:

' 'Do  not  tell  a  friend  anything  that  you  would  conceal
from  an  enemy."

"A  secret  is  in  my  custody,  if  I  keep  it;  but  should  it
escape  me,  it  is  I  who  am  the  prisoner."

"  The  tree  of  silence  bears  the  fruit  of  peace."

§  43.  Money  is  never  spent  to  so  much  advantage  as
when  you  have  been  cheated  out  of  it;  for  at  one  stroke  you
ha7e  purchased  prudence.


168  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

§  44.  If  possible,  no  animosity  should  be  felt  for  any
one.  But  carefully  observe  and  remember  the  manner  in
which  a  man  conducts  himself,  so  that  you  may  take  the
measure  of  his  value — at  any  rate  in  regard  to  yourself —
and  regulate  your  bearing  toward  him  accordingly;  never
losing  signt  of  the  fact  that  character  is  unalterable,  and
that  to  forget  the  bad  features  in  a  man's  disposition  is  like
throwiag  away  hard-won  money.  Thus  you  will  protect
yourself  against  the  results  of  unwise  intimacy  and  foolish
friendship.

"  Give  way  neither  to  love  nor  to  hate,"  is  one  half  of
worldly  wisdom:  "say  nothing  and  believe  nothing,"  the
other  half.  Truly,  a  world  where  there  is  need  of  such
rules  as  this  and  the  following,  is  one  upon  which  a  mao
may  well  turn  his  back.

§  45.  To  speak  angrily  to  a  person,  to  show  your  hatred
by  what  you  say  or  by  the  way  you  look,  is  an  unnecessary
proceeding — dangerous,  foolish,  ridiculous,  and  vulgar.

Anger  or  hatred  should  never  be  shown  otherwise  than
in  what  you  do;  and  feelings  will  be  all  the  more  effective
in  action,  in  so  far  as  you  avoid  the  exhibition  of  them  in
any  other  way.  It  is  only  cold  blooded  animals  whose  bite
is  poisonous.

§  46.  To  speak  without  emphasizing  your  words — par-
lev  sans  accent — is  an  old  rule  with  those  who  are  wise  iu
the  world's  ways.  It  means  that  you  should  leave  other
people  to  discover  what  it  is  that  you  have  said;  and  as
their  minds  are  slow,  you  can  make  your  escape  in  time.  On
the  other  hand,  to  emphasize  your  meaning — parler  avw
accent — is  to  address  their  feelings;  and  the  result  is  always
the  opposite  of  what  you  expect.  If  you  are  only  polite
enough  in  your  manner  and  courteous  in  your  tone  ther&
are  many  people  whom  you  may  abuse  outright,  and  yet
run  no  immediate  risk  of  offending  them.


CHAPTER  IV.

WORLDLY     FORTUNE.


§  47.     However  varied  the  forms  that  human   destiny
may  take,  the  same  elements  are   always  present;  and  so


WOMLDLT  FORTUNE.  169

life  is  everywhere  much  of  a  piece,  whether  it  is  passed  in
the  cottage  or  in  the  palace,  in  the  barrack  or  in  the  cloister.
Alter  the  circumstances  as  much  as  you  please!  point  to
strange  adventures,  successes,  failures!  life  is  like  a  sweet-
shop, where  there  is  a  great  variety  of  things,  odd  in  shape
and  diverse  in  color — one  and  all  made  from  the  same  paste.
And  when  men  speak  of  some  one's  success,  the  lot  of  the
man  who  has  failed  is  not  so  very  different  as  it  seems.  The
inequalities  in  the  world  are  like  the  combinations  in  a
kaleidoscope;  at  every  turn  a  fresh  picture  strikes  the  eye;
and  yet,  in  reality,  you  see  only  the  same  bits  of  glass  as
you  saw  before.

§  48.  An  ancient  writer  says,  very  truly,  that  there  are
three  great  powers  in  the  world:  Sagacity,  Strength,  and
Luck — dvvedis,  npctToS,  rvxv-  I  think  the  last  is  the  most
efficacious.

A  man's  life  is  like  the  voyage  of  a  ship,  where  luck —
secunda  aut  adversa  fortuna — acts  the  part  of  the  wind,
and  speeds  the  vessel  on  its  way  or  drives  it  far  out  of  its
course.  All  that  the  man  can  do  for  himself  is  of  little
avail;  like  the  rudder,  which,  if  worked  hard  and  continu-
ously, may  help  in  the  navigation  of  the  ship;  and  yet  all
may  be  lost  again  by  a  sudden  squall.  But  if  the  wind  is
only  in  the  right  quarter,  the  ship  will  sail  on  so  as  not  to
need  any  steering.  The  power  of  luck  is  nowhere  better  ex-
pressed than  in  a  certain  Spanish  proverb:  Daventura  a  tu
Mjo,y  echa  lo  en  el  mar — give  your  son  luck  and  throw  him
into  the   sea.

Still,  chance,  it  may  be  said,  is  a  malignant  power,  and
as  little  as  possible  should  be  left  to  its  agency.  And  yet
where  is  there  any  giver  who,  in  dispensing  gifts,  tells  us
quite  clearly  that  we  have  no  right  to  them,  and  that  we
owe  them  not  to  any  merit  on  our  part  but  wholly  to  the
goodness  and  grace  of  the  giver — at  the  same  time  allow-
ing  us  to  cherish  the  joyful  hope  of  receiving  in  all  humility,
further  undeserved  gifts  from  the  same  hands — where
is  there  any  giver  like  that,  unless  it  be  Chance?  who
understands  the  kingly  art  of  showing  the  recipient  that
all  merit  is  powerless  and  unavailing  against  the  royal
grace  and  favor.

On  looking  back  over  the  course  of  his  life — that  laby-
rinthine way  of  error — a  man  must  see   many  points  where


170  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

luck  failed  him  and  misfortune  came;  and  then  it  is  easy  to
carry  self-reproach  to  an  unjust  excess.  For  the  course  of
a  man's  life  is  in  no  wise  entirely  of  his  own  making:  it  is
the  product  of  two  factors — the  series  of  tilings  that  hap-
pened and  his  own  resolves  in  regard  to  them,  and  these
two  are  constantly  interacting  upon  and  modifying  each
other.  And  besides  these,  another  influence  is  at  work  in
the  very  limited  extent  of  a  man's  horizon,  whether  it  is
that  he  cannot  see  very  far  ahead  in  respect  of  the  plans  he
will  adopt,  or  that  he  is  still  less  able  to  predict  the  course
of  future  events:  his  knowledge  is  strictly  confined  to  pres-
ent plans  and  present  events.  Hence,  as  long  as  a  man's
goal  is  far  off,  he  cannot  steer  straight  for  it;  he  must  be
content  to  make  a  course  that  is  approximately  right;
and  in  following  the  direction  in  which  he  thinks  he  ought
to  go,  he  will  often  have  occasion  to  tack.

All  that  a  man  can  do  is  to  form  such  resolves  as  from
time  to  time  accord  with  the  circumstances  in  which  he  is
placed,  in  the  hope  of  thus  managing  to  advance  a  step
nearer  toward  the  final  goal.  It  is  usually  the  case  that
the  position  in  which  we  stand,  and  the  object  at  which  we
aim,  resemble  two  tendencies  working  with  dissimilar
strength  in  different  directions  ;  and  the  course  of  our  life
is  represented  by  their  diagonal,  or  resultant  force.

Terence  makes  the  remark  that  life  is  like  a  game  at
dice,  where  if  the  number  that  turns  up  is  not  precisely  the
one  you  want,  you  can  still  contrive  to  use  it  equally  well :
— in  vita  est  hominum  quasi  cum  luclas  tesseris  ;  si  illud
quod  maxime  opus  est  jactu  non  cadit,  illud  quod  cecidit
forte,  id  arte  tit  corrigas*  Or,  to  put  the  matter
more  shortly,  life  is  like  a  game  of  cards,  when  the  cards
are  shuffled  and  dealt  by  fate.  But  for  my  present  pur-
pose, the  most  suitable  simile  would  be  that  of  a  game
of  chess,  where  the  plan  we  determined  to  follow  is
conditioned  by  the  play  of  our  rival — in  life,  by  the
caprice  of  fate.  We  are  compelled  to  modify  our  tactics,
often  to  such  an  extent  that,  as  we  carry  them  out,  hardly
a  single  feature  of  the  original  plan  can  be  recognized.

But  above  and  beyond  all  this,  there  is  another  influence
that   makes   itself  felt   in  our  lives.     It  is  a  trite  saying

*  He  seems  to  have  been  referring  to  a  game  something  like
Wkgammon.


WORLDL  F  FORTUNE.  171

—only  too  frequently  true — that  we  are  often  more
foolish  than  we  think.  On  the  other  hand,  we  are  often
wiser  than  we  fancy  ourselves  to  be.  This,  however,  is  a
discovery  which  only  those  can  make,  of  whom  it  is  really
true  ;  and  it  takes  them  along  time  to  make  it.  Our  brains
are  not  the  wisest  part  of  us.  In  the  great  moments  of
life,  when  a  man  decides  upon  an  important  step,  his  action
is  directed  not  so  much  by  any  clear  knowledge  of  the  right
thing  to  do,  as  by  an  inner  impulse — you  may  almost  call
it  an  instinct — proceeding  from  the  deepest  foundations  of
his  being.  If,  later  on  he  attempts  to  criticise  his  action
by  the  light  of  hard  and  fast  ideas  of  what  is  right  in  the
abstract — those  unprofitable  ideas  which  are  learned  by  rote,
or,  it  may  be,  borrowed  from  other  people  ;  if  he  begins  to
apply  general  rules,  the  principles  which  have  guided
others,  to  his  own  case,  without  sufficiently  weighing  the
maxim  that  one  man's  meat  is  another's  poison,  then  he  will
run  great  risk  of  doing  himself  an  injustice.  The  result
will  show  where  the  right  course  lay.  It  is  only  when  a
man  has  reached  the  happy  age  of  wisdom  that  he  is  ca-
pable of  just  judgment  in  regard  either  to  his  own  actions
Dr  to  those  of  others.

It  may  be  that  this  impulse  or  instinct  is  the  unconscious
effect  of  a  kind  of  prophetic  dream  which  is  forgotten  when
we  awake — lending  our  life  a  uniformity  of  tone,  a  dra-
matic unity,  such  as  could  never  result  from  the  unstable
moments  of  consciousness,  when  we  are  so  easily  led  into
error,  so  liable  to  strike  a  false  note.  It  is  in  virtue  of
some  such  prophetic  dream  that  a  man  feels  himself  called
to  great  achievements  in  a  special  sphere,  and  works  in  that
direction  from  his  youth  up  out  of  an  inner  and  secret
feeling  that  that  is  his  true  path,  just  as  by  a  similar
instinct  the  bee  is  led  to  build  up  its  cells  in  the  comb.
This  is  the  impulse  which  Balthazar  Gracian  calls  la  gran
sinderesis,* — the  great  power  of  moral  discernment :  it  is

*  Translator's  Note. — This  obscure  word  appears  to  be  derived  from
the  Greek  6vvz^p£oo{^s.rY.  and  Polyb.)  meaning  "to  observe  strictly."
It  occurs  in  "  The  Doctor  &rA  Student  "  a  series  of  dialogues  between  a
doctor  of  divinity  and  a  student  on  the  laws  of  England,  first  pub-
lished in  1518;  and  is  there  (Dialog.  I.  ch.  13)  explained  as  "  a  natural
power  of  the  soule,  set  in  the  highest  part  thereof,  moving  and  stir-
ring it  to  good,  and  abhorring  evil."  This  passage  is  copied  into
Milton's  Commonplace  Book,  edit.  Horwood,  §  79.  The  word  is  alss
found  in  the  Dictionary  of  the  Spanish  Academy  (vol.  vL  of  the  yeai


172  COUNSELS  AXD  MAXIMS

something  that  a  man  instinctively  feels  to  be  his  salvation,
without  which  he  were  lost.

To  act  in  accordance  with  abstract  principles  is  a  difficult
matter,  and  a  great  deal  of  practice  will  be  required  before
you  can  be  even  occasionally  successful  ;  it  often  happens
that  the  principles  do  not  fit  in  with  your  particular  case.
But  every  man  has  certain  innate  concrete  principles — a
part,  as  it  were,  of  the  very  blood  that  flows  in  his  veins,
the  sum  or  result,  in  fact,  of  all  his  thoughts,  feelings  and
volitions.  Usually  he  has  no  knowledge  of  them  in  any
abstract  form  ;  it  is  only  when  he  looks  back  upon  the
course  his  life  has  taken,  that  he  becomes  aware  of  having
been  always  led  on  by  them — as  though  they  formed  an
invisible  clue  which  he  had.  followed  unawares.

§  49.  That  Time  works  great  changes,  and  that  aij
things  are  in  their  nature  fleeting — these  are  truths  that
should  never  be  forgotten.  Hence,  in  whatever  case  you
may  be,  it  is  well  to  picture  to  yourself  the  oppos.te  :  in
prosperity  to  be  mindful  of  misfortune;  in  friendship,  of
enmity  ;  in  good  weather,  of  days  when  the  sky  is  overcast,
in  love,  of  hatred  ;  in  moments  of  trust,  to  imagine  the  be-
trayal that  will  make  you  regret  your  confidence  ;  and  so,
too,  when  you  are  in  evil  plight,  to  have  a  lively  sense  of
happier  times — what  a  lasting  source  of  true  worldly  wisdom
were  there  !  We  should  then  always  reflect,  and  not  be  so
very  easily  deceived  ;  because,  in  general,  we  should  antici-
pate the  very  changes  that  the  years  will  bring.

Perhaps  in  no  form  of  knowledge  is  personal  experience
so  indispensable  as  in  learning  to  see  that  all  things  are  un-
stable and  transitory  in  this  world.  There  is  nothing  that,
in  its  own  place  and  for  the  time  it  lasts,  is  not  a  product
3f  necessity,  and  therefore  capable  of  being  fully  justified  ;
and  it  is  this  fact  that  makes  the  circumstances  of  every
year,  every  month,  even  of  every  day,  seem  as  though  they
might  maintain  their  right  to  last  to  all  eternity.     But  we

1739)  in  the  sense  of  an  innate  discernment  of  moral  principles,  where
a  quotation  is  given  f roin  Madre  Maria  de  Jesus,  abbess  of  the  convent
of  the  Conception  at  Agreda.  a  mystical  writer  of  the  seventeenth
century,  frequently  consulted  by  Philip  IV. — and  again  in  the  Bologn
ese  Dictionary  of  1824.  with  a  similar  meaning,  illustrated  from  the
writings  of  Salvini  (1653-1729).  For  these  references  I  am  indebted
to  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Norman  Maccoll.


WORLDL T  FORTUNE.  173

know  that  this  can  never  be  the  case,  and  that  in  a  world
where  all  is  fleeting,  change  alone  endures.  He  is  a  pru-
dent mail  who  is  not  only  undeceived  by  apparent  stability,
but  is  able  to  forecast  the  lines  upon  which  movement  will
take  place.*

But  people  generally  think  that  present  circumstances
will  last,  and  that  matters  will  go  on  in  the  future  much  as
they  have  done  in  the  past.  Their  mistake  arises  from  the
fact  that  they  do  not  understand  the  causes  of  the  things
they  see — causes  which,  unlike  the  effects  they  produce,
contain  in  themselves  the  germ  of  future  change.  The
effects  are  all  that  people  know,  and  they  holdfast  to  them
on  the  supposition  that  those  unknown  causes,  which  were
sufficient  to  bring  them  about,  will  also  be  able  tc  maintain
them  as  they  are.  This  is  a  very  common  error;  and  the
fact  that  it  is  common  is  not  without  its  advantage,  for  it
means  that  people  always  err  in  unison  ;  and  hence  the
calamity  which  results  from  the  error  affects  all  alike,  and
is  therefore  easy  to  bear ;  whereas,  if  a  philosopher  makes
a  mistake,  he  is  alone  in  his  error,  and  so  at  a  double  dis-
advantage.!

But  in  saying  that  we  should  anticipate  the  effects  of
time,  I  mean  that  we  should  mentally  forecast  what  they
are  likely  to  be  ;  I  do  not  mean  that  we  should  practically
forestall  them,  by  demanding  the  immediate  .performance
of  promises  which  time  alone  can  fulfill.  The  man  who
makes  this  demand  will  find  out  that  there  is  no  worse  or
more  exacting  usurer  than  Time;  and  that,  if  you  compel
Time  to  give  money  in  advance,  you  will  have  to  pay  a  rate

*  Chance  plays  so  great  a  part  in  all  human  affairs  that  when  a
man  tries  to  ward  off  a  remote  danger  by  present  sacrifice,  the  danger
^ften  vanishes  under  some  new  and  unforeseen  development  of  events;
and  then  the  sacrifice,  in  addition  to  being  a  complete  loss,  brings
about  such  an  altered  state  of  things  as  to  be  in  itself  a  source  of  posi-
tive danger  in  the  face  of  this  new  development.  In  taking  measures
of  precaution,  then,  it  is  well  not  to  look  too  far  ahead,  but  to  reckon
with  chance;  and  often  to  oppose  a  courageous  front  to  a  danger,  in
the  hope  that,  like  many  a  dark  thunder-cloud,  it  may  pass  away
without  breaking.

\  I  may  remark,  parenthically,  that  all  this  is  a  confirmation  of
the  principle  laid  down  in  "  Die  Welt  als  Wille  und  VorstelluDg,"  (Bk.
I.  p.  94:  4th  edit.),  that  error  always  consists  in  making  a  wrong  in-
ference, that  is,  in  ascribing  a  given  effect  to  something  that  does  not
cause  it.


174  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

of  interest  more  ruinous  than  any  Jew  would  require.  It
is  possible,  for  instance,  to  make  a  tree  burst  forth  into
leaf,  blossom,  or  even  bear  fruit  within  a  few  days,  by  the
application  of  unslaked  lime  and  artificial  heat;  but  after
that  the  tree  will  wither  away.  So  a  young  man  may  abuse  his
strength — it  may  be  only  for  a  few  weeks — by  trying  to  do
at  nineteen  what  he  could  easily  manage  at  thirty,  and  Time
may  give  him  the  loan  for  which  he  asks  ;  but  the  interest
he  will  have  to  pay  comes  out  of  the  strength  of  his  later
years  ;  nay,  it  is  part  of  his  very  life  itself.

There  are  some  kinds  of  illness  in  which  entire  restora-
tion to  health  is  possible  only  by  letting  the  complaint  run
its  natural  course  ;  after  which  it  disappears  without  leav-
ing any  trace  of  its  existence.  But  if  the  sufferer  is  very
impatient,  and  while  he  is  still  affected,  insists  that  he  is
completely  well,  in  this  case,  too,  Time  will  grant  the  loan,
and  the  complaint  may  be  shaken  off ;  but  life-long  weak-
ness and  chronic  mischief  will  be  the  interest  paid  upon
it.

Again,  in  time  of  war  or  general  disturbance,  a  man  may
require  ready  money  at  once,  and  have  to  sell  out  his  in-
vestments in  land  or  consols  for  a  third  or  even  a  still
Bmaller  fraction  of  the  sum  he  would  have  received  foi
them,  if  he  could  have  waited  for  the  market  to  right  it-
self, which  would  have  happened  in  due  course;  but  he
compels  Time  to  grant  him  a  loan,  and  his  loss  is  the  in-
terest he  has  to  pay.  Or  perhaps  he  wants  to  go  on  a  long
journey  and  requires  the  money  :  in  one  or  two  years  he
could  lay  by  a  sufficient  sum  out  of  his  income,  but  he  can-
not afford  to  wait ;  and  so  he  either  borrows  it  or  deducts
it  from  his  capital ;  in  other  words,  he  gets  Time  to  lend
him  the  money  in  advance.  The  interest  he  pays  is  a
disordered  state  of  his  accounts,  and  permanent  and  in-
creasing deficits,  which  he  can  never  make  good.

Such  is  Time's  usury  ;  and  all  who  cannot  wait  are  its
victims.  There  is  no  more  thriftless  proceeding  than  to
try  and  mend  the  measured  pace  of  Time.  Be  carefulf
then,  not  to  become  its  debtor.

§  50.  In  the  daily  affairs  of  life,  you  will  have  very
many  opportunities  of  recognizing  a  characteristic  differ-
ence between  ordinary  people  and  people  of  prudence  and
discretion.     In  estimating  the  oossibility  of  danger  in  con-


WORDLY  FORTUNE.  175

nection  with  any  undertaking,  an  ordinary  man  will  confine
his  inquiries  to  the  kind  of  risk  that  has  already  attended
such  undertakings  in  the  past;  whereas  a  prudent  person
will  look  ahead,  and  consider  everything  that  might  possi-
bly happen  in  the  future,  having  regard  to  a  certain
Spanish  maxim:  lo  que  no  acaece  en  un  aho,  acaece  en  im
rato — a  thing  may  not  happen  in  a  year,  and  yet  may  hap-
pen within  two  minutes.

The  difference  in  question  is,  of  course,  quite  natural;
for  it  requires  some  amount  of  discernment  to  calculate
possibilities;  but  a  man  need  only  have  his  senses  about
him  to  see  what  has  already  happened

Do  not  omit  to  sacrifice  to  evil  spirits.  What  I  mean  is,
that  a  man  should  not  hesitate  about  spending  time,  trouble,
and  money,  or  giving  up  his  comfort,  or  restricting  his
aims  and  denying  himself,  if  he  can  thereby  shut  the  door
on  the  possibility  of  misfortune.  The  most  terrible  misfor-
tunes are  also  the  most  improbable  and  remote — the  least
likely  to  occur.  The  rule  I  am  giving  is  best  exemplified
in  the  practice  of  insurance — a  public  sacrifice  made  on  the
altar  of  anxiety.  Therefore  take  out  your  policy  of  insur-
ance!

§51.  Whatever  fate  befalls  you,  do  not  give  way  to
great  rejoicings  or  great  lamentation;  partly  because  all
things  are  full  of  change,  and  your  fortune  may  turn  at
any  moment;  partly  because  men  are  so  apt  to  be  deceived
in  their  judgment  as  to  what  is  good  or  bad  for  them.

Almost  every  one  in  his  time  has  lamented  over  some-
thing which  afterwards  turned  out  to  be  the  very  best
thing  for  him  that  could  have  happened — or  rejoiced  at  an
event  which  became  the  source  of  his  greatest  sufferings.
The  right  state  of  mind  has  been  finely  portrayed  by
Shakespeare ;

"I  have  felt  so  many  quirks  of  joy  and  grief
That  the  first  face  of  neither,  on  the  start,
Can    Woman  me   unto't.*

And,  in  general,  it  may  be  said  that,  if  a  man  takes
misfortunes  quietly,  it  is  because  he  knows  that  very  many

*  "All's  Well  that  Ends  Well,"  Act  Hi.  Sc.  2.


176  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

dreadful  tilings  may  happen  in  the  course  of  life  ;  and  so
he  looks  upon  the  trouble  of  the  moment  as  only  a  very
small  part  of  that  which  might  come.  This  is  the  Stoic
temper — never  to  be  unmindful  of  the  sad  fate  of  human-
ity— condicionis  ImmancB  oblitus  ;  but  always  to  remember
that  our  existence  is  full  of  woe  and  misery,  and  that  the
ills  to  which  we  are  exposed  are  innumerable.  Wherever
he  be,  a  man  need  only  cast  a  look  around,  to  revive  the
sense  of  human  misery  :  there  before  his  eyes  he  can  see
mankind  struggling  and  floundering  in  torment — all  for
the  sake  of  a  wretched  existence,  barren  and  unprofitable  !

If  he  remembers  this,  a  man  will  not  expect  very  much
from  life,  but  learn  to  accommodate  himself  to  a  world
where  all  is  relative  and  no  perfect  state  exists  ;  always
looking  misfortune  in  the  face,  and  if  he  cannot  avoid  it,
meeting  it  with  courage.

It  should  never  be  forgotten  that  misfortune,  be  it  great
or  small,  is  the  element  in  which  we  live.  But  that  is  no
reason  why  a  man  should  indulge  in  fretful  complaints,
and,  like  Beresford,*  pull  a  long  face  over  the  "Miseries
of  Human  Life  " — and  not  a  single  hour  is  free  from  them ;
or  still  less,  call  upon  the  Deity  at  every  flea-bite — in
pulicis  ?norsu  Deum  invocare.  Our  aim  should  be  to  look
well  about  us,  to  ward  off  misfortune  by  going  to  meet  it,
to  attain  such  perfection  and  refinement  in  averting  the
disagreeble  things  of  life — whether  they  come  from  our
fellow-men  or  from  the  physical  world — that,  like  a  clever
fox,  we  may  slip  out  of  the  way  of  every  mishap,  great  or
small ;  remembering  that  a  mishap  is  generally  only  our
own  awkwardness  in   disguise.

The  main  reason  why  misfortune  falls  less  heavily  upon  us,
if  we  have  looked  upon  its  occurrence  as  not  impossible,  and,
as  the  saying  is,  prepared  ourselves  for  it,  may  be  this  :  if,
before  the  misfortune  comes,  we  have  quietly  thought  over
it  as  something  which  may  or  may  not  happen,  the  whole
of  its  extent  and  range  is  known  to  us,  and  we  can,  at  least,
determine  how  far  it  will  affect  us  ;  so  that,  if  it  really
arrives,  it  does  not  depress  us  unduly — its  weight  is  not
felt  to  be  greater  than  it  actually  is.     But  if  no  preparation

*  Translator's  Note. — Rev.  James  Beresford  (1764-1840)s  miscel-
laneous writer.  The  full  title  of  this,  his  chief  work,  is  "  The
Miseries  of  Human  Life  ;  or  the  last  groans  of  Timothy  Testy  and
Samuel  Sensitive,  with  a  few  supplementary  sighs  from  Mrs.  Testy."


WORLDL  T  FORTUNE.  177

has  been  made  to  meet  it,  and  it  comes  unexpectedly,  the
mind  is  in  a  state  of  terror  for  the  moment  and  unable  to
measure  the  full  extent  of  the  calamity  ;  it  seems  so  far-
reaching  in  its  effects  that  the  victim  might  well  think
there  was  no  limit  to  them  in  any  case,  its  range  is  exag-
gerated. In  the  same  way,  darkness  and  uncertainty  always
increase  the  sense  of  danger.  And,  of  course,  if  we  have
thought  over  the  possibility  of  misfortune,  we  have  also  at
the  same  time  considered  the  sources  to  which  wTe  shall  look
for  help  and  consolation  ;  or,  at  any  rate,  we  have  accus-
tomed ourselves  to  the  idea  of  it.

There  is  nothing  that  better  fits  us  to  endure  the- mis-
fortunes of  life  with  composure,  than  to  know  for  certain
that  everything  that  happens — from  the  smallest  up  to  the
greatest  facts  of  existence — happens  of  necessity.*  A  man
soon  accommodates  himself  to  the  inevitable — to  something
that  must  be  ;  and  if  he  knows  that  nothing  can  happen
except  of  necessity,  he  will  see  that  things  cannot  be  other
than  they  are,  and  that  even  the  strangest  chances  in  the
world  are  just  as  much  a  product  of  necessity  as  phenom-
ena which  obey  well-known  rules  and  turn  out  exactly  in
accordance  with  expectation.  Let  me  here  refer  to  whatl
have  said  elsewhere  on  the  soothing  effect  of  the  knowledge
that  all  things  are  inevitable  and  a  product  of  necessity. f

If  a  man  is  steeped  in  the  knowledge  of  this  truth,  he
will,  first  of  all,  do  what  he  can,  and  then  readily  endure
what  he  must.

AVe  may  regard  the  petty  vexations  of  life  that  are  con-
stantly happening,  as  designed  to  keep  us  in  practice  for
bearing  great  misfortunes,  so  that  we  may  not  become  com-
pletely enervated  by  a  career  of  prosperity.  A  man  should
be  a  Siegfried,  armed  cap-a-pie,  toward  the  small  troubles
of  every  day — those  little  differences  we  have  with  our
fellow-men,  insignificant  disputes,  unbecoming  conduct
in  other  people,  petty  gossip,  and  many  other  similar  an-
noyances of  life  ;  he  should  not  feel  them  at  all,  much  less
take  them  to  heart  and  brood  over  them,  but  hold  them  at

*  This  is  a  truth  which  I  have  firmly  established  in  mv  prize-essay
on  the  "  Freedom  of  the  Will,  "  where  the  reader  will  find  a  de-
tailed explanation  of  the  grounds  on  which  it  rests.  Cf .  especially  p.
60.     [Schopenhauer's  Works,  4th  Edit.,  vol.  iv. — Jr.]

i  Cf.  "  Welt  als  Wille  ur»d  ^orstellung/'  Bk.I.  p.  361  (4th  edit.}


178  COUNSELS  AND  MAXTMS.

arm's  length  and  push  them  out  of  his  way,  like  stones
that  lie  in  the  road,  and  upon  no  account  think  about  them
and  give  them  a  place  in  his  reflections.

§  52.  What  people  commonly  call  "Fate"  is,  as  a  gen-
eral rule,  nothing  but  their  own  stupid  and  foolish  conduct
There  is  a  fine  passage  in  Homer,*  illustrating  the  truth  01
this  remark,  where  the  poet  praises  nrjti^, — shrewd  counsel;
and  his  advice  is  worthy  of  all  attention.  For  if  wicked-
uess  is  atoned  for  only  in  another  world,  stupidity  gets  its
reward  here — although,  now  and  then,  mercy  may  be
shown  to  the  offender.

It  is  not  ferocity  but  cunning  that  strikes  fear  into  the
heart  and  forebodes  danger;  so  true  it  is  that  the  human
brain  is  a  more  terrible  weapon  than  the  lion's  paw.

The  most  finished  man  of  the  world  would  be  one  who
was  never  irresolute  and  never  in  a  hurry.

§  53.  Courage  comes  next  to  prudence  as  a  quality  of
mind  very  essential  to  happiness.  It  is  quite  true  that  no  one
can  endow  himself  with  either,  since  a  man  inherits  pru-
dence from  his  mother  and  courage  from  his  father  ;  still,
if  he  has  these  qualities,  he  can  do  much  to  develop  them
by  means  of  resolute  exercise.

In  this  world,  "  where  the  game  is  played  with  loaded
dice,"  a  man  must  have  a  temper  of  iron,  with  armor  proof
to  the  blows  of  fate,  and  weapons  to  make  his  way  against
men.  Life  is  one  long  battle  ;  we  have  to  fight  at  every
step  :  and  Voltaire  very  rightly  says  that  if  we  succeed,  it
is  at  the  point  of  the  sword,  and  that  we  die  with  the
weapon  in  our  hand — on  ne  reussit  dans  ce  monde  qu'a  la
pointe  de  Vepe,  et  on  meurt  les  amies  a  la  main.  It  is  a
cowardly  soul  that  shrinks  or  grows  faint  and  despondent
as  soon  as  the  storm  begins  to  gather,  or  even  when  the
first  cloud  appears  on  the  horizon.  Our  motto  should  be
"No  surrender;"  and  far  from  yielding  to  the  ills  of  life,
let  us  take  fresh  courage  from  misfortune;

"  Tu  ne  cede  malis  sed  contra  audentior  ito."  *

As  long  as  the  issue  of  any  matter  fraught  with  peril  is

*  i(  Iliad,"  xxiii.  313,  sqq.  *  Virgil,  "^neid,"  vi.,  95.


WORLDL  T  FORTUNE.  1 79

still  in  doubt,  and  there  is  yet  some  possibility  left  that  all
may  come  right,  no  one  should  ever  tremble  or  think  of
anything  but  resistance — just  as  a  man  should  not  despair
of  the  weather  if  he  can  see  a  bit  of  blue  sky  anywhere.
Let  our  attitude  be  such  that  we  should  not  quake  even  if
the  world  fell  in  ruins  about  us  :

"  Si  fractus  illabatur  orbis
Iinpavidum  ferient  ruinae."*

Our  whole  life  itself — let  alone  its  blessings — would  not
be  worth  such  a  cowardly  trembling  and  shrinking  of  the
heart.  Therefore,  let  us  face  life  courageously  and  show
a  firm  front  to  every  ill  :

"  Quocirca  vivite  fortes
Fortiaque  adversis  opponite  pectora  rebus."

Still,  it  is  possible  for  courage  to  be  carried  to  an  excess
and  to  degenerate  into  rashness.  It  may  even  be  said  that
some  amount  of  fear  is  necessary,  if  we  are  to  exist  at  all
in  the  world,  and  cowardice  is  only  the  exaggerated  form
of  it.  This  truth  has  been  very  well  expressed  by  Bacon,
in  his  account  of  "  Terror  Panicus  ;  "  and  the  etymological
account  which  he  gives  of  its  meaning,  is  very  superior  to
the  ancient  explanation  preserved  for  us  by  Plutarch,  f
He  connects  the  expression  with  Pan,  the  personification
of  Nature  ;J  and  observes  that  fear  is  innate  in  every
living  thing,  and,  in  fact,  tends  to  its  preservation,  but
that  it  is  apt  to  come  into  play  without  due  cause,  and
that  man  especially  exposed  to  it.  The  chief  feature  of
this  "  Panic  Terror  "  is  that  there  is  no  clear  notion  of  any
definite  danger  bound  up  with  it ;  that  it  presumes  rather
than  knows  that  danger  exists  ;  and  that,  in  case  of  need,
it  pleads  fright  itself  as  the  reason  for  being  afraid.

*  Horace,  Odes  iii.  3.  f  "  De  Iside  et  Osiride,"  ch.  14.

\  "  De  Sapientia  Veterum,"  c.  6.  "  Natura  eniin  rerum  omnibus
viventibus  indidit  inetum  ac  formidinem,  vitae  atque  essentia?  suae
conservatricem,  ac  mala  ingruentia  vitantem  et  depellentem.
Verumtamen  eadem  natura  modum  tenere  nescia  est  :  sed  timoribus
salutaribus  semper  vanos  et  innanes  admiscet ;  adeo  ut  omnia  (si
intus  conspici  darentur)  Panicis  terroribusplenissimasint,  praesertina
humana."


180  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

CHAPTER  V.

THE    AGES  OF  LIFE.

There  is  a  very  fine  saying  of  Voltaire's  to  the  effect
that  every  age  of  life  has  its  own  peculiar  mental  char-
acter, and  thai:  a  man  will  feel  completely  unhappy  if  his
mind  is  not  in  accordance  with  his  years:

"Qui  n'a  pas  l'esprit  de  son  age,
De  son  age  a  tout  le  inalkeur."

It  will,  Lherefore,  be  a  fitting  close  to  our  speculations
upon  the  nature  of  happiness,  if  we  glance  at  the  changes
which  the  various  periods  of  life  produce  in  us.

Our  whole  life  long  it  is  the  present,  and  the  present
alone,  that  we  actually  possess;  the  only  difference  is  that
\it  the  beginning  of  life  we  look  forward  to  a  long  future,
and  that  toward  the  end  we  look  back  upon  a  long  past;
also  that  our  temperament,  but  not  our  character,  under-
goes certain  well-known  changes,  which  make  the  present
wear  a  different  color  at  each  period  of  life.

I  have  elsewhere  stated  that  in  childhood  we  are  more
given  to  using  our  intellect  than  our  will;  and  I  have  ex-
plained why  this  is  so.*  It  is  just  for  this  reason  that  the
first  quarter  of  life  is  so  happy;  as  we  look  back  upon  it  in
after  years,  it  seem  a  sort  of  lost  paradise.  In  childhood
our  relations  with  others  are  limited,  our  wants  are  few —
in  a  word,  there  is  little  stimulus  for  the  will;  and  so  our
chief  concern  is  the  extension  of  our  knowledge.  The
intellect — like  the  brain,  which  attains  its  full  size  in  the
seventh  year,f  is  developed  early,  though  it  takes  time  to

* Translator 's  Note. — Schopenhauer  refers  to  "Die  Welt  als  Wille
und  Vorstellung,"  Bk.  II.  c.  31,  p. 451  (4th.  edit.),  where  he  explains
that  this  is  due  to  the  fact  that  at  that  period  of  life  the  brain  am-
nervous  system  are  much  more  developed  than  any  other  part  of  the
organism.

Translator's  Note. — This  statement  is  not  quite  correct.  The
weight  of  the  brain  increases  rapidly  up  to  the  seventh  year,  more
slowly  between  the  sixteenth  and  the  twentieth  year,  still  more  slow-
ly till  between  thirty  and  forty  years  of  age,  when  it  attains  its  maxi-
mum. iU  each  decennial  period  after  this,  it  is  supposed  to  deTeasf
in  weight  on  the  average  an  ounce  for  every  ten  years,


THE  AGES  OF  LIFE.  181

mature  and  it  explores  the  whole  world  of  its  surroundings
in  its  constant  search  for  nutriment:  it  is  then  that  existence
is  in  itself  an  ever  fresh  delight,  and  all  things  sparkle  with
the  charm  of  novelty.

This  is  why  the  years  of  childhood  are  like  a  long  poem.
For  the  function  of  poetry,  as  of  all  art,  is  to  grasp  the  idea
— in  the  Platonic  sense;  in  other  words,  to  apprehend  a
particular  object  in  such  a  way  as  to  perceive  its  essential
nature,  the  characteristics  it  has  in  common  with  all  other
objects  of  the  same  kind:  so  that  a  single  object  appears  as
the  representative  of  a  class,  and  the  results  of  one  experi-
ence hold  good  for  a  thousand.

It  may  be  thought  that  my  remarks  are  opposed  to  fact,
and  that  the  child  is  never  occupied  with  anything  beyond
the  individual  objects  or  events  which  are  presented  to  it
from  time  to  time,  and  then  only  in  so  far  as  they  interest
and  excite  its  will  for  the  moment;  but  this  is  not  really  the
case.  In  those  early  years,  life — in  the  full  meaning  of  the
word,  is  something  so  new  and  fresh,  and  its  sensations  are
so  keen  and  unblunted  by  repetition,  that,  in  the  midst  of
all  its  pursuits  and  without  any  clear  consciousness  of  what
it  is  doing,  the  child  is  always  silently  occupied  in  grasping
the  nature  of  life  itself — in  arriving  at  its  fundamental
character  and  general  outline  by  means  of  separate  scenes
and  experiences;  or,  to  use  Spinoza's  phraseology,  the  child
is  learning  to  see  the  things  and  persons  about  it  sub  specie
mternitatis — as  particular  manifestations  of  universal
law.

The  younger  we  are,  then,  the  more  does  every  individual
object  represent  for  us  the  whole  class  to  which  it  belongs;
but  as  the  years  increase,  this  becomes  less  and  less  the
case.  That  is  the  reason  why  youthful  impressions  are  so
different  from  those  of  old  age.  And  that  is  also  why  the
slight  knowledge  and  experience  gained  in  childhood  and
youth  afterward  come  to  stand  as  the  permanent  rubric,
or  heading,  for  all  the  knowledge  acquired  in  later  life —
those  early  forms  of  knowledge  passing  into  categories,  as
it  were,  under  which  the  results  of  subsequent  experience
are  classified;  though  a  clear  consciousness  of  what  is  being
done,  does  not  always  attend  upon  the  process.

In  this  way  the  earliest  years  of  a  man's  life  lay  the  foun-
dation of  his  view  of  the  world,  whether  it  be  shallow  or
deep,  and  although  this  view  may   fye  extended   and    per-


182  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

fected  later  on,  it  is  not  materially  altered.  It  is  an  effect
of  this  purely  objective  and  therefore  poetical  view  of  the
world — essential  to  the  period  of  childhood  and  promoted
by  the  as  yet  undeveloped  state  of  the  volitional  energy —
that,  as  children,  we  are  concerned  much  more  with  the  ac-
quisition of  pure  knowledge  than  with  exercising  the
power  of  will.  Hence  that  grave,  fixed  look  observable  in  so
many  children,  of  which  Kaphael  makes  such  a  happy  use
in  his  depiction  of  cherubs,  especially  in  the  picture  of  the
"Sistine  Madonna."  The  years  of  childhood  are  thus  ren-
dered so  full  of  bliss  that  the  memory  of  them  is  al-
ways coupled  with  longing  and  regret.

While  we  thus  eagerly  apply  ourselves  to  learning  the  out-
ward aspect  of  things,  as  the  primitive  method  of  under-
standing the  objects  about  us,  education  aims  at  instilling
into  us  ideas.  But  ideas  furnish  no  information  as  to  the
real  and  essential  nature  of  objects,  which,  as  the  foundation
and  true  content  of  all  knowledge,  can  be  reached  only  by
the  process  called  intuition.  This  is  a  kind  of  knowledge
which  can  in  no  wise  be  instilled  into  us  from  without;
we  must  arrive  at  it  by  and  for  ourselves.

Hence  a  man's  intellectual  as  well  as  his  moral  qualities
proceed  from  the  depths  of  his  own  nature,  and  are  not  the
result  of  external  influences  ;  and  no  educational  scheme —
of  Pestalozzi,  or  of  any  one  else — can  turn  a  born  simpleton
into  a  man  of  sense.  The  thing  is  impossible  !  He  was
born  a  simpleton,  and  a  simpleton  he  will  die.

It  is  the  depth  and  intensity  of  this  early  intuitive
knowledge  of  the  external  world  that  explain  why  the  ex-
periences of  childhood  take  such  a  firm  hold  on  the
memory.  When  we  were  young,  we  were  completely
absorbed  in  our  immediate  surroundings  ;  there  was  noth-
ing to  distract  our  attention  from  them  ;  we  looked  upon
the  objects  about  us  as  though  they  were  the  only  ones  of
their  kind,  as  though,  indeed,  nothing  else  existed  at  all.
Later  on,  when  we  come  to  find  out  how  many  things
there  are  in  the  world,  this  primitive  state  of  mind  van-
ishes, and  with  it  our  patience.

I   have  said   elsewhere*  that   the   world,  considered   as

*  "  Die  Welt  als  Will e  und  Vorstellung,"  Bk.  II. c  31,  p  426-7
(4th  Edit.),  to  whieh  the  reader  is  referred  for  a  detail  explanation
of  my  meaning.


THE  AGES  OF  LIFE.  183

object — in  other  words,  as  it  is  presented  to  us  objectively
— wears  in  general  a  pleasing  aspect  ;  but  that  in  the
world,  considered  as  the  subject — that  is,  in  regard  to  its
inner  nature,  which  is  will — pain  and  trouble  predominates
I  may  be  allowed  to  express  the  matter,  briefly,  thus  :  the
world  is  glorious  to  look  at,  but  dreadful  in  reality.

Accordingly,  we  find  that,  in  the  years  of  childhood,
the  world  is  much  better  known  to  us  on  its  outer  or  ob-
jective side,  namely  as  the  presentation  of  will,  than  on
the  side  of  its  inner  nature,  namely,  as  the  will  itself.
Since  the  objective  side  wears  a  pleasing  aspect,  and  the
inner  or  subjective  side,  with  its  tale  of  horror,  remains  as
yet  unknown,  the  youth,  as  his  intelligence  develops,
takes  all  the  forms  of  beauty  that  he  sees,  in  nature  and  in
art,  for  so  many  objects  of  blissful  existence  ;  they  are  so
beautiful  to  the  outward  eye  that,  on  their  inner  side,  they
must,  he  thinks,  be  much  more  beautiful  still.  So  the
world  lies  before  him  like  another  Eden;  and  this  is  the
Arcadia  in  which  we  are  all  born.

A  little  later,  this  state  of  mind  gives  birth  to  a  thirst
for  real  life — the  impulse  to  do  and  suffer — which  drives  a
man  forth  into  the  hurly-burly  of  the  world.  There  he
learns  the  other  side  of  existence — the  inner  side,  the  will,
which  is  thwarted  at  every  step.  Then  comes  the  great
period  of  disillusion,  a  period  of  very  gradual  growth,  but
once  it  has  fairly  begun,  a  man  will  tell  you  that  he  has  got
over  all  his  false  notions — Vdge  des  illusions  est  passe;  and
yet  the  process  is  only  beginning,  and  it  goes  on  extending
its  sway  and  applying  more  and  more  to  the  whole  of  life.
So  it  may  be  said  that  in  childhood  life  looks  like  the
scenery  in  a  theater,  as  you  view  it  from  a  distance;  and
that  in  old  age  it  is  like  the  same  scenery  when  you  come
up  quite  close  to   it.

And  lastly,  there  is  another  circumstance  that  contributes
to  the  happiness  of  childhood.  As  spring  commences,  the
young  leaves  on  the  trees  are  similar  in  color  and  much  the
same  in  shape;  and  iu  the  first  years  of  life  we  all  resemble
one  another  and  harmonize  very  well.  But  with  puberty
divergence  begins;  and,  like  the  radii  of  a  circle,  we  go
further  and  further  apart.

The  period  of  youth,  which  forms  the  remainder  of  this
earlier  half  of  our  existence — and  how  many  advantages  it
has  over  the  later  half — is  troubled  and  made  miserable  by


184  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

the  pursuit  of  happiness,  as  though  there  were  no  doubt
that  it  can  be  met  with  somewhere  in  life — a  hope  that  al-
ways ends  in  failure  and  leads  to  discontent.  An  illusory
image  of  some  vague  future  bliss — born  of  a  dream  and
shaped  by  fancy — floats  before  our  eyes:  and  we  search  for
the  reality  in  vain.  So  it  is  that  the  young  man  is  gener-
ally dissatisfied  with  the  position  in  which  he  finds  himself,
whatever  it  may  be;  he  ascribes  his  disappointment  solely
to  the  state  of  things  that  meets  him  on  his  first  intro-
duction to  life,  when  he  had  expected  something  very  dif-
ferent; whereas  it  is  only  the  vanity  and  wretchedness  of
human  life  everywhere  that  he  is  now  for  the  first  time
experiencing.

It  would  be  a  great  advantage  to  a  young  man  if  his  early
training  could  eradicate  the  idea  that  the  world  has  a  great
deal  to  offer  him.  But  the  usual  result  of  education  is  to
strengthen  this  delusion;  and  our  first  ideas  of  life  are
generally  taken  from  fictiou  rather  than  from  fact.

In  the  bright  dawn  of  our  youthful  days,  the  poetry  of
life  spreads  out  a  gorgeous  vision  before  us,  and  we  torture,
ourselves  by  longing  to  see  it  realized.  W3  might  as  well
wish  to  grasp  the  rainbow!  The  youth  expects  his  career  to
be  like  an  interesting  romance;  and  there  lies  the  germ  of
that  disappointment  which  I  have  been  describing.*  What
lends  a  charm  to  all  these  visions  is  just  the  fact  that  they
are  visionary  and  not  real,  and  that  in  contemplating  them
we  are  in  the  sphere  of  pure  knowledge,  which  is  sufficient
in  itself  and  free  from  the  noise  and  struggle  of  life.  To
try  and  realize  those  visions  is  to  make  them  an  object  of
will — a  process  which  always  involves  pain,  f

If  the  chief  feature  of  the  earlier  half  of  life  is  a  never-
satisfied  longing  after  happiness,  the  later  half  is  char-
acterized by  the  dread  of  misfortune.  For,  as  we  advance
in  years,  it  becomes  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  clea"
that  all  happiness  is  chimaerical  in  its  nature,  and  that
pain  alone  is  real.  Accordingly,  in  later  years,  we,  or  at
least,  the  more  prudent  among  us,  are  more  intent  upon
eliminating  what  is  painful  from  our  lives  and  making  our

*  Cf.  loc.  cit.  p.  428.

•{•Let  me  refer  the  reader,  if  lie  is  interested  in  the  subject,  to  the
volume  already  cited,  chapter  37.


THE  AGES  OF  LIFE.  185

position  secure,  than  on  the  pursuit  of  positive  pleasure.  I
may  observe,  by  the  way,  that  in  old  age  we  are  better  able
to  prevent  misfortunes  from  coming,  and  in  youth  better
able  to  bear  them  when  they  come.

In  my  young  days,  I  was  always  pleased  to  hear  a  ring  at
my  door:  ah!  thought  1,  now  for  something  pleasant.  But
in  later  life  my  feelings  on  such  occasions  were  rather  akin
to  dismay  than  to  pleasure;  heaven  help  me!  thought  I,  what
am  I  to  do?  A  similar  revulsion  of  feeling  in  regard  to  the
world  of  men  takes  place  in  all  persons  of  any  talent  or  dis-
tinction. For  that  very  reason  they  cannot  be  said  properly
to  belong  to  the  world;  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  according
to  the  extent  of  their  superiority,  they  stand  alone.  In  their
youth  they  have  a  sense  of  being  abandoned  by  the  world;
but  later  on,  they  feel  as  though  they  had  escaped  it.  The
earlier  feeling  is  an  unpleasant  one,  and  rests  upon  ignorance,
the  second  is  pleasurable — for  in  the  meantime  they  have
come  to  know  what  the  world  is.

The  consequence  of  this  is  that,  as  compared  with  the  ear-
lier, the  later  half  of  life,  like  the  second  part  of  a  musical
period,  has  less  of  passionate  longing  and  more  restfulness
about  it.  And  why  is  this  the  case?  Simply  because,  in
youth,  a  man  fancies  that  thepe  is  a  prodigious  amount  of
happiness  and  pleasure  to  be  had  in  the  world,  only  that  it
is  difficult  to  come  by  it;  whereas,  when  he  becomes  old,  he
knows  that  there  is  nothing  of  the  kind;  he  makes  his  mind
completely  at  ease  on  the  matter,  enjoys  the  present  hour
as  well  as  he  can,  and  even  takes  a  pleasure  in  trifles.

The  chief  result  gained  by  experience  of  life  is  clearness
of  view.  This  is  what  distinguishes  the  man  of  mature
age,  and  makes  the  world  wear  such  a  different  aspect  from
that  which  it  presented  in  his  youth  or  boyhood.  It  is  only
then  that  he  sees  things  quite  plain,  and  takes  them  for
that  which  they  really  are;  while  in  earlier  years  he  saw  a
phantom-world  put  together  out  of  the  whims  and  crotchets
of  his  own  mind,  inherited  prejudice  and  strange  delusion;
the  real  world  was  hidden  from  him,  or  the  vision  of  it
distorted.  The  first  thing  that  experience  finds  to  do  is  to
free  us  from  the  phantoms  of  the  brain — those  false  notions
that  have  been  put  into  us  in  youth.

To  prevent  their  entrance  at  all  would,  of  course,  be  the
best  form  of  education,  even  though  it  were  only  negative
in  aim;  but  it  would  be  a  task  full   of   difficulty.     At  first


1 86  CO  UNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

the  child's  horizon  would  have  to  be  limited  as  much  as
possible,  and  yet  within  that  limited  sphere  none  but  clear
and  correct  notions  would  have  to  be  given;  only  after  the
child  had  properly  appreciated  everything  within  it,  might
the  sphere  be  gradually  enlarged;  care  being  always  taken
that  nothing  was  left  obscure,  or  half  or  wrongly  understood.
The  consequence  of  this  training  would  be  that  the  child's
notions  of  men  and  things  would  always  be  limited  and
simple  in  their  character;  but  on  the  other  hand,  they
would  be  clear  and  correct,  and  only  need  to  be  extended,
not  to  be  rectified.  The  same  line  might  be  pursued  on
into  the  period  of  youth.  This  method  of  education  would
lay  special  stress  upon  the  prohibition  of  novel  reading;  and
the  place  of  novels  would  be  taken  by  suitable  biographical
literature — the  life  of  Franklin,  for  instance,  or  Moritz's
"Anton  Reiser."  *

In  our  early  days  we  fancy  that  the  leading  events  in  our
life,  and  the  persons  who  are  going  to  play  an  important
part  in  it,  will  make  their  entrance  to  the  sound  of  drums
and  trumpets;  but  when,  in  old  age,  we  look  back,  we  find
that  they  all  came  in  quite  quietly,  slipped  in,  as  it  were,
by  the  side-door,  almost  unnoticed.

From  the  point  of  view  we  have  been  taking  up  until
now,  life  may  be  compared  to  a  piece  of  embroidery,  of
which,  during  the  first  half  of  his  time,  a  man  gets  a  sight
of  the  right  side,  and  during  the  second  half,  of  the  wrong.
The  wrong  side  is  not  so  pretty  as  the  right,  but  it  is  more
instructive;  it  shows  the  way  in  which  the  threads  have
been  worked  together.

Intellectual  superiority,  even  if  it  is  of  the  highest  kind,
will  not  secure  for  a  man  a  preponderating  place  in  conver-
sation until  after  he  is  forty  years  old.  For  age  and  experi-
ence, though  they  can  never  be  a  substitute  for  intellectual
talent,  may  far  outweigh  it;  and  even  in  a  person  of  the
meanest  capacity,  they  give  a  certain  counterpoise  to  the
power  of  an  extremely  intellectual  man  so  long  as  the  latter
is  young.  Of  course  I  allude  here  to  personal  superiority,
not  to  the  place  a  man  may  gain  by  his  works.

And  on  passing  his  fortieth  year  any  man  of  the  slightest


*  Translator  s  Note. — Moritz  was  a  miscellaneous  writer  of  the  last
century  (1757-93).  His  "Anton  Reiser,"  composed  in  the  form  of  fa
Hovel,  is  practically  an  autobiography.


THE  AGES  OF  LIFE.  187

power  of  mind — any  man,  that  is,  who  has  more  than  the
sorry  share  of  intellect  with  which  Nature  has  endowed
five-sixths  of  mankind — will  hardly  fail  to  show  some  trace
of  misanthropy.  For,  as  is  natural,  he  has  by  that  time
inferred  other  people's  character  from  an  examination  of
his  own;  with  the  result  that  he  has  been  gradually  disap-
pointed to  find  that  in  the  qualities  of  the  head  or  in  those
of  the  heart — and  usually  in  both — he  reaches  a  level  to
which  they  do  not  attain;  so  he  gladly  avoids  having  any-
thing more  to  do  with  them.  For  it  may  be  said,  in  gen-
eral, that  every  man  will  lo^e  or  hate  solitude — in  other
words,  his  own  society — j*ust  in  proportion  as  he  is  worth
anything  in  himself.  Kant  has  some  remarks  upon  this
kind  of  misanthropy  in  his  "Critique  of  the  Faculty  ot
Judgment."  *

In  a  young  man,  it  is  a  bad  sign,  as  well  from  an  intel-
lectual as  from  a  moral  point  of  view,  if  he  is  precocious  in
understanding  the  ways  of  the  world,  and  in  adapting  him-
self to  its  pursuits;  if  he  at  once  knows  how  to  deal  with
men,  and  enters  upon  life,  as  it  were,  fully  prepared.  It
argues  a  vulgar  nature.  On  the  other  hand,  to  be  sur-
prised and  astonished  at  the  way  people  act,  and  to  be
clumsy  and  cross-grained  in  having  to  do  with  them,  indi-
cates a  character  of  the  nobler  sort.

The  cheerfulness  and  vivacity  of  youth  are  partly  due
to  the  fact  that,  when  we  are  ascending  the  hill  of  life,
death  is  not  visible  :  it  lies  down  at  the  bottom  of  the
other  side.  But  once  we  have  crossed  the  top  of  the  hill,
death  comes  in  view — death,  which,  until  then,  was  known
to  us  only  by  hearsay.  This  makes  our  spirits  droop,  for
at  the  same  time  we  begin  to  feel  that  our  vital  powers
are  on  the  ebb.  A  grave  seriousness  now  takes  the  place
of  that  early  extravagance  of  spirit  ;  and  the  change  is
noticeable  even  in  the  expression  of  a  man's  face.  As  long
as  we  are  young,  people  may  tell  us  what  they  please  !  we
look  upon  life  as  endless  and  use  our  time  recklessly  ;  but
the  older  we  become,  the  more  we  practice  economy.  For
toward  the  close  of  life,  every  day  we  live  gives  us  the
same  kind  of  sensation  as  the  criminal  experiences  at  every
step  on  his  way  to  be  tried.

From   the   standpoint    of   youth,  life   seems  to   stretch

*   'Kritik  der  TJrtheilskraft,"  Part  I.,  §  29.  Note  ad  fin.


188  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

awa)r  into  an  endless  future;  from  the  standpoint  of  old
age,  to  go  back  but  a  little  way  into  the  past ;  so  that,  at
the  beginning,  life  presents  us  with  a  picture  in  which  the
objects  appear  a  great  way  off,  as  though  we  had  reversed
our  telescope  ;  while  in  the  end  everything  seems  to  close.
To  see  how  short  life  is,  a  man  must  have  grown  old,  that
is  to  say,  he  must  have  lived  long.

On  the  other  hand,  as  the  years  increase,  things  look
smaller,  one  and  all ;  and  life,  which  had  so  firm  and
stable  a  base  in  the  days  of  our  youth,  now  seems  nothing
but  a  rapid  flight  of  moments,  every  one  of  them  illusory ;
we  have  come  to  see  that  the  whole  world  is  vanity  !

Time  itself  seems  to  go  at  a  much  slower  pace  when  we
are  young  ;  so  that  not  only  is  the  first  quarter  of  life  the
happiest,  it  is  also  the  longest  of  all ;  it  leaves  more  mem-
ories behind  it.  If  a  man  were  put  to  it,  he  could  tell  you
more  out  of  the  first  quarter  of  his  life  than  out  of  two  of
the  remaining  periods.  Nay,  in  the  spring  of  life,  as  in
the  spring  of  the  year,  the  days  reach  a  length  that  is
positively  tiresome;  but  in  the  autumn,  whether  of  the
year  or  of  life,  though  they  are  short,  they  are  more  genial
and  uniform.

But  why  is  it  that  to  an  old  man  hlr  past  life  appears  so
short  ?  For  this  reason  :  his  memory  is>  short ;  and  so  he
fancies  that  his  life  has  been  short  too.  lie  no  longer  re-
members the  insignificant  parts  of  it,  and  much  that  was
unpleasant  is  now  forgotten  ;  how  little,  then,  there  is
left  !  For,  in  general,  a  man's  memory  is  as  imperfect  as
his  intellect ;  and  he  must  make  a  practice  of  reflecting
upon  the  lessons  he  has  learned  and  the  events  he  has  ex-
perienced, if  he  does  not  want  them  both  to  sink  gradually
into  the  gulf  of  oblivion.  Now,  we  are  unaccustomed  to
reflect  upon  matters  of  no  importance,  or,  as  a  rule,  upon
things  that  we  have  found  disagreeable,  and  yet  that  is
necessary  if  the  memory  of  them  is  to  be  preserved.  But
the  class  of  things  that  may  be  called  insignificant  is  con-
tinually receiving  fresh  additions  :  much  that  wears  an  air
of  importance  at  first,  gradually  becomes  of  no  consequence
at  all  from  the  fact  of  its  frequent  repetition  ;  so  that  in
the  end  we  actually  lose  count  of  the  number  of  times  it
happens.  Hence  we  are  better  able  to  remember  ths
events  of -our  early  than  of  our  later  years.  The  longer  W9
live,  the  fewer  are  the  things  that  we  can  call  important  or


THE  AGES  OF  LIFE.  189

significant  enough  to  deserve  further  consideration,  and  by
this  alone  can  they  be  fixed  in  the  memory  ;  in  other
words,  they  are  forgotten  as  soon  as  they  are  past.  Thus
it  is  that  time  runs  on,  leaving  always  fewer  traces  of  its
passage.

Further,  if  disagreeable  things  have  happened  to  us  we
do  not  care  to  ruminate  upon  them,  least  of  all  when  they
touch  our  vanity,  as  is  usually  the  case  ;  for  few  mis-
fortunes fall  upon  us  for  which  we  can  be  held  entirely
blameless:  So  people  are  very  ready  to  forget  mauy  things
that  are  disagreeable,  as  well  as  many  that  are  unimpor-
tant.

It  is  from  this  double  cause  that  our  memory  is  so
short  ;  and  a  man's  recollection  of  what  has  happened  al-
ways becomes  proportionately  shorter,  the  more  things  that
have  occupied  him  in  life.  The  things  we  did  in  years  gone
by,  the  events  that  happened  long  ago,  are  like  those  ob-
jects on  the  coast  which,  to  the  seafarer  on  his  outward
voyage,  become  smaller  every  minute,  more  unrecognizable
and  harder  to  distinguish.

Again,  it  sometimes  happens  tnat  memory  and  imagi-
nation will  call  up  some  long  past  scene  as  vividly  as  if  it
had  occurred  only  yesterday:  so  that  the  event  in  question
seems  to  stand  very  near  to  the  present  time.  The  reason
of  this  is  that  it  is  impossible  to  call  up  all  the  intervening
period  in  the  same  vivid  way,  as  there  is  no  one  figure  per-
vading it  which  can  be  taken  in  at  a  glance;  and  besides
most  of  the  things  that  happened  in  that  period  are  forgot-
ten, and  all  that  remains  of  it  is  the  general  knowledge  that
we  have  lived  through  it — a  mere  notion  of  abstract  exist-
ence, not  a  direct  vision  of  some  particular  experience.
It  is  this  that  causes  some  single  event  of  long  ago  to  ap-
pear as  though  it  took  place  but  yesterday:  the  intervening
time  vanishes,  and  the  whole  of  life  looks  incredibly  short.
Nay.  there  are  occasional  moments  in  old  age  when  we  can
scarcely  believe  that  we  are  so  advanced  in  years,  or  that
the  long  past  lying  behind  us  has  had  any  real  existence —
a  feeling  which  is  mainly  due  to  the  circumstance  that  the
present  always  seems  fixed  and  immovable  as  we  look  at  it.
These  and  similar  mental  phenomena  are  ultimately  to  be
traced  to  the  fact  that  it  is  not  our  nature  in  itself,  but  only
the  outward  presentation  of  it,  that  lies  in  time,  and   that


190  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

the  present  is  the  point  of  contact  between  the  world  as
subject  and  the  world  as  object.  *

Again,  why  is  it  that  in  youth  we  can  see  no  eud  to  the
years  that  seem  to  lie  before  us?  Because  we  are  obliged
to  find  room  for  all  the  things  we  hope  to  attain  in  life.
We  cram  the  years  so  full  of  projects  that  if  we  were  to  try
and  carry  them  all  out,  death  would  come  prematurely
though  we  reached  the  age  of  Methuselah.

Another  reason  why  life  looks  so  long  when  we  are  young
is  that  we  are  apt  to  measure  its  length  by  the  few  years  we
have  already  lived.  In  those  early  years  things  are  new
to  us  and  so  they  appear  important;  we  dwell  upon  them
after  they  have  happened  and  of  ten  call  them  to  mind:  and
thus  in  youth  life  seems  replete  with  incident,  and  there-
fore of  long  duration.

Sometimes  we  credit  ourselves  with  a  longing  to  be  in
some  distant  spot,  whereas,  in  truth,  we  are  only  longing
to  have  the  time  back  again  which  we  spent  there — days
when  we  were  younger  and  fresher,  than  we  are  now.  In
those  moments  Time  mocks  us  by  wearing  the  mask  of  space,
and  if  we  travel  to  the  spot,  we  can  see  how  much  we  have
been  deceived.

There  are  two  ways  of  reaching  a  great  age,  both  of
which  presuppose  a  sound  constitution  as  a  conditio  sine
qud  non.  They  may  be  illustrated  by  two  lamps,  one  of
which  burns  a  long  time  with  very  little  oil,  because  it  has
a  very  thin  wick:  and  the  other  just  as  long,  though  it  has
a  very  thick  one,  because  there  is  plenty  of  oil  to  feed  it.
Here,  the  oil  is  the  vital  energy,  and  the  difference  in  the
wick  is  the  manifold  way  in  which  the  vital  energy  is
used.

Up  to  our  thirty-sixth  year,  we  may  be  compared,  in  re-
spect of  the  way  in  which  we  use  our  vital  energy,  to  people
who  live  on  the  interest  of  their  money;  what  they  spend
to-day,  they  have  again  to-morrow.  But  from  the  age  of
thirty-six  onward,  our  position  is  like  that  of  the  investor

* Translator 's  Note. — By  this  remark  Schopenhauer  means  that  will,
whicn,  as  he  argues,  forms  the  inner  reality  underlying  all  the  phe-
nomena of  life  and  nature,  is  not  in  itself  affected  by  time;  but  that
on  the  other  hand,  time  is  necessary  for  the  objectification  of  the  will
for  the  will  as  presented  in  the  passing  phenomena  of  the  world.
Time  is  thus  definable  as  the  condition  of  change,  and  the  present
time  as  the  only  point  of  contact  between,  reality  and  appearance.


THE  AGES  OF  LIFE.  191

who  begins  to  entrench  upon  his  capital.  At  first  he  hardly
notices  any  difference  at  all,  as  the  o-reater  part  of  his
expenses  is  covered  by  the  interest  of  his  securities;  and
if  the  deficit  is  but  slight,  he  pays  no  attention  to  it.  But
the  deficit  goes  on  increasing,  until  he  awakes  to  the  fact
that  it  is  becoming  more  serious  every  day;  his  position  be-
comes less  and  less  secure,  and  he  feels  himself  growing
poorer  and  poorer,  while  he  has  no  expectation  of  this  drain
upon  his  resources  coming  to  an  end.  His  fall  from  wealth
to  poverty  becomes  faster  every  moment — like  the  fall  of  a
solid  body  in  space,  until  at  last  he  has  absolutely  nothing
left.  A  man  is  truly  in  a  woeful  plight  if  both  the  terms
of  this  comparison — his  vital  energy  and  his  wealth — really
begin  to  melt  away  at  one  and  the  same  time.  It  is  the.
dread  of  this  calamity  that  makes  love  of  possession  increase
with  age.

On  the  other  hand,  at  the  beginning  of  life — in  the  years
before  we  attain  majority,  and  for  some  little  time  after-
ward— the  state  of  our  vital  energy  puts  us  on  a  level  with
those  who  each  year  lay  by  a  part  of  their  interest  and  add
it  to  their  capital:  in  other  words,  not  only  does  their  inter-
est come  in  regularly,  but  the  capital  is  constantly  receiv-
ing additions.  This  happy  condition  of  affairs  is  some-
times brought  about — with  health  as  with  money — under
the  watchful  care  of  some  honest  guardian.  Oh  happy
youth,  and  sad  old  age!

Nevertheless,  a  man  should  economize  his  strength  even
when  he  is  young.  Aristotle  *  observes  that  among  those
who  were  victors  at  Olympia  only  two  or  three  gained  a
prize  at  two  different  periods,  once  in  boyhood  and  then
when  they  came  to  be  men;  and  the  reason  of  this  was  that
the  premature  efforts  which  the  training  involved,  so  com-
pletely exhausted  their  powers  that  they  failed  to  last  on
into  manhood.  As  this  is  true  of  muscular,  so  it  is  still
more  true  of  nervous  energy,  of  which  all  intellectual
achievements  are  the  manifestation.  Hence,  those  infant
prodigies — ingenia  praecocia — the  fruit  of  a  hot-house
education,  who  surprise  us  by  their  cleverness  as  children,
afterward  turn  out  very  ordinary  folk.  Nay,  the  manner
in  which  boys  are  forced  into  an  early  acquaintance  with
the  ancient  tongues  may,  perhaps  be  to  blame  for  the  dull-

*  "Politics,"


192  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

ness  and  lack   of  judgment    which    distinguish   so  many
learned  persons.

I  have  said  that  almost  every  man's  character  seems  to  be
specially  suited  to  some  one  period  of  life,  so  that  on  reach-
ing it  the  man  is  at  his  best.  Some  people  are  charming  so
long  as  they  are  young,  and  afterward  there  is  nothing  at-
tractive about  them;  others  are  vigorous  and  active  in  man-
hood, aud  then  lose  all  the  value  they  possess  as  they  ad-
vance in  years;  many  appear  to  best  advantage  in  old  age,
wheu  their  character  assumes  a  gentler  tone,  as  becomes
men  who  have  seen  the  world  and  take  life  easily.  This  is
often  the  case  with  the  French.

This  peculiarity  must  be  due  to  the  fact  that  the  man's
character  has  something  in  it  akin  to  the  qualities  of  youth
or  manhood  or  old  age — something  which  accords  with  one
or  another  of  these  periods  of  life,  or  perhaps  acts  as  a  cor-
rective to  its  special  failings.

The  mariner  observes  the  progress  he  makes  only  by  the
way  in  which  objects  on  the  coast  fade  away  into  the  dis-
tance and  apparently  decrease  in  size.  In  the  same  way  a
man  becomes  conscious  that  he  is  advancing  in  years  when
he  finds  that  people  older  than  himself  begin  to  seem  young
to    him.

It  has  been  already  remarked  that  the  older  a  man  be-
comes, the  fewer  are  the  traces  left  in  his  mind  by  all  that
he  sees,  does  or  experiences,  and  the  cause  of  this  has  been
explained.  There  is  thus  a  sense  in  which  it  may  be  said
that  it  is  only  in  youth  that  a  man  lives  with  a  full  degree  of
consciousness  and  that  he  is  only  half  alive  when  he  is
old.  As  the  years  advance,  his  consciousness  of  what
goes  on  about  him  dwindles,  and  the  things  of  life  hur-
ry by  without  making  any  impression  upon  him,  just
as  none  is  made  by  a  work  of  art  seen  for  the  thous-
andth time.  A  man  does  what  his  hand  finds  to  do,  and
afterward  he  does  not  know  whether  he  has  done  it  or
not.

As  life  becomes  more  and  more  unconscious  the  nearer
it  approaches  the  point  at  which  all  consciousness  ceases,  the
course  of  time  itself  seems  to  increase  in  rapidity.  In
childhood  all  the  things  and  circumstances  of  life  are  novel
and  that  is  sufficient  to  awake  us  to  the  full  consciousness  of


THE  AGES  OF  LIFE.  193

existence:  hence,  at  that  age,  the  day  seems  of  such  immense
length.  The  same  thing  happens  when  we  are  traveling;
one  month  seems  longer  then  than  four  spent  at  home.
Still,  though  time  seems  to  last  longer  when  we  are  yon ng
or  on  a  journey,  the  sense  of  novelty  does  not  prevent  it
from  now  and  then  in  reality  hanging  heavily  upon  our
hands  under  both  these  circumstances,  at  any  rate  more  than
is  the  case  when  we  are  old  or  staying  at  home.  But  the
intellect  gradually  becomes  so  rubbed  clown  and  blunted  by
long  habituation  to  such  sensations  that  things  have  a  con-
stant tendency  to  produce  less  and  less  impression  upon  us
as  they  pass  by;  and  this  makes  time  seem  increasingly  less
important,  and  therefore  shorter  in  duration:  the  hours  of
the  boy  are  longer  than  the  days  of  the  old  man.  Ac-
cordingly, time  goes  faster  and  faster  the  longer  we  live,
like  a  ball  rolling  downhill.  Or,  to  take  another  example:
as  in  a  revolving  disc  the  further  apointlies  from  the  center
the  more  rapid  is  its  rate  of  progression,  so  it  is  in  the
wheel  of  life;  the  further  you  stand  from  the  beginning,  the
faster  time  moves  for  you.  Hence  it  may  be  said  that  as
far  as  concerns  the  immediate  sensation  that  time  makes
upon  our  minds,  the  length  of  any  given  year  is  in  direct
proportion  to  the  number  of  times  it  will  divide  our  whole
life:  for  instance,  at  the  age  of  fifty  the  year  appears  to  us
only  one-tenth  as  long  as  it  did  at  the  age  of  five.

This  variation  in  the  rate  at  which  time  appears  to
move,  exercises  a  most  decided  influence  upon  the  whole
nature  of  our  existence  at  every  period  of  it.  First  of  all,
it  causes  childhood — even  though  it  embrace  only  a  span
of  fifteen  years — to  seem  the  longest  period  of  life,  and
therefore  the  richest  in  reminiscences.  Next,  it  brings  it
about  that  a  man  is  apt  to  be  bored  just  in  proportion  as
he  is  young.  Consider,  for  instance,  that  constant  need  of
occupation — whether  it  is  work  or  play — that  is  shown  by
children  :  if  they  come  to  an  end  of  both  work  and  play,  a
terrible  feeling  of  boredom  ensues.  Even  in  youth  people
ire  by  no  means  free  from  this  tendency,  and  dread  the
♦lours  when  they  have  nothing  to  do.  As  manhood  ap-
proaches, boredom  disappears  ;  and  old  men  find  the  time
too  short  when  their  days  fly  past  them  like  arrows  from  a
bow.  Of  course,  I  must  be  understood  to  speak  of  men,
not  of  decrepit  brutes.  With  this  increased  rapidity  of
time,  boredom  mostW  masses  away  as  we  advance  in  life  ;


1 94  CO  UN8ELS  AND  MA X1MS.

and  as  the  passions  with  all  their  attendant  pain  are  then
laid  asleep,  the  burden  of  life  is,  on  the  whole,  appreciably
lighter  in  later  years  than  in  youth,  provided,  of  course,
that  health  remains.  So  it  is  that  the  period  immediately
preceding  the  weakness  and  troubles  of  old  age  receives
the  name  of  a  man's  best  years.

That  may  be  a  true  appellation,  in  view  of  the  comfort-
able feeling  which  those  years  bring  ;  but  for  all  that  the
years  of  youth,  when  our  consciousness  is  lively  and  open
to  every  sort  of  impression,  have  this  privilege — that  then
the  seeds  are  sown  and  the  buds  come  forth  ;  it  is  the
springtime  of  the  mind.  Deep  truths  may  be  perceived,
but  can  never  be  excogitated — that  is  to  say,  the  first
knowledge  of  them  is  immediate,  called  forth  by  some
momentary  impression.  This  knowledge  is  of  such  a  kind
as  to  be  attainable  only  when  the  impressions  are  strong,
lively  and  deep  ;  and  if  we  are  to  be  acquainted  with  deep
truth,  everything  depends  upon  a  proper  use  of  our  early
years.  In  later  life,  we  may  be  better  able  to  work  upon
other  people — upon  the  world,  because  our  natures  are
then  finished  and  rounded  off,  and  no  more  a  prey  to  fresh
views  ;  but  then  the  world  is  less  able  to  work  upon  us.
These  are  the  years  of  action  and  achievement ;  while  youth
ls  the  time  for  forming  fundamental  conceptions  and  lay-
ing down  the  groundwork  of  thought.

In  youth  it  is  fhe  outward  aspect  of  things  that  most
engages  us  ;  while  in  age,  thought  or  reflection  is  the
oredominating  quality  of  the  mind.  Hence,  youth  is  the
time  for  poetry,  and  age  is  more  inclined  to  philosophy.
In  practical  affairs  it  is  the  same  :  a  man  shapes  his
resolutions  in  youth  more  by  the  impression  that  the  out-
ward world  makes  upon  him  ;  whereas,  when  he  is  old,  it
is  thought  that  determines  his  actions.  This  is  partly  to
be  explained  by  the  fact  that  it  is  only  when  a  man  is  old
that  the  results  of  outward  observation  are  present  in
sufficient  numbers  to  allow  of  their  being  classified  ac-
cording to  the  ideas  they  represent — a  process  which  in
its  turn  causes  those  ideas  to  be  more  fully  understood  in
all  their  bearings,  and  the  exact  value  and  amount  of  trust
to  be  placed  in  them,  fixed  and  determined,  while  at  the
same  time  he  has  grown  accustomed  to  the  impressions
produced  by  the  various  phenomena  of  life,  and  their
effects  on  him  are  no  longer  what  they  were.


THE  AGES  OF  LIFS.  195

Contrarily,  in  youth,  the  impressions  that  things  make,
that  is  to  say,  the  outward  aspects  of  life,  are  so  overpower-
Ingly  strong,  especially  in  the  case  of  people  of  lively  and
imaginative  disposition,  that  they  view  the  world  like  a
picture  ;  and  their  chief  concern  is  the  figure  they  cut  in
it,  the  appearance  they  present ;  nay,  they  are  unaware  of
the  extent  to  which  this  is  the  case.  It  is  a  quality  of
mind  that  shows  itself — if  in  no  other  way — in  that  personal
vanity,  and  that  love  of  fine  clothes,  which  distinguish
young  people.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  intellectual  powers  are
most  capable  of  enduring  great  and  sustained  efforts  in
youth,  up  to  the  age  of  thirty-five  at  latest  ;  from  which
period  their  strength  begins  to  decline,  though  very  gradu-
ally. Still,  the  later  years  of  life,  and  even  old  age  itself,
are  not  without  their  intellectual  compensation.  It  is
only  then  that  a  man  can  be  said  to  be  really  rich  in  ex-
perience or  in  learning  ;  he  has  then  had  time  and  oppor-
tunity enough  to  enable  him  to  see  and  think  over  life
from  all  its  sides ;  he  has  been  able  to  compare  one  thing
with  another,  and  to  discover  points  of  contact  and  con-
necting links,  so  that  only  then  are  the  true  relations  of
things  rightly  understood.  Further,  in  old  age  there
comes  an  increased  depth  in  the  knowledge  that  was  ac-
quired in  youth  ;  a  man  has  now  many  more  illustrations
of  any  ideas  lie  may  have  attained  ;  things  which  he
thought  he  knew  when  he  was  young,  he  now  knows  in
reality.  And  besides,  his  range  of  knowledge  is  wider  ;
and  in  whatever  direction  it  extends,  it  is  thorough,  and
therefore  formed  into  a  consistent  and  connected  whole  ;
whereas  in  youth  knowledge  is  always  defective  and
fragmentary.

A  complete  and  adequate  motion  of  life  can  never  be
attained  by  any  one  who  does  not  reach  old  age  ;  for  it
is  only  the  old  man  who  sees  life  whole  and  knows  its
natural  course  ;  it  is  only  he  who  is  acquainted — and  this
is  most  important — not  only  with  its  entrance,  like  the
rest  of  mankind,  but  with  its  exit  too  ;  so  that  he  alone
has  a  full  sense  of  its  utter  vanity  ;  while  the  others  never
cease  to  labor  under  the  false  notion  that  everything  will
come  right  in  the  end.

On  the  other  hand,  there  is   more   conceptive  power  in


196  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS,

youth,  and  at  that  time  of  life  a  man  can  make  more  out  of
the  little  that  he  knows.  In  age,  judgment,  penetration
and  thoroughness  predominate.  Youth  is  the  time  for
amassing  the  material  for  a  knowledge  of  the  world  that
shall  be  distinctive  and  peculiar — for  an  original  view  of  life,
in  other  words,  the  legacy  that  a  man  of  genius  leaves  to
his  fellow-men;  it  is,  however,  only  in  later  years  that  he
becomes  master  of  his  material.  Accordingly  it  will  be
found  that,  as  a  rule,  a  great  writer  gives  his  best  work  to
the  world  when  he  is  about  fifty  years  of  age.  But  though
the  tree  of  knowledge  must  reach  its  full  height  before  it  can
bear  fruit,  the  roots  of  it  lie  in  youth.

Every  generation,  no  matter  how  paltry  its  character,
thinks  itself  much  wiser  than  the  one  immediately  pre-
ceding it,  let  alone  those  that  are  more  remote.  It  is  just
the  same  with  the  different  periods  in  a  man's  life;  and  yet
often,  in  the  one  case  no  less  than  in  the  other,  it  is  a  mis-
taken opinion.  In  the  years  of  physical  growth,  when  our
powers  of  mind  and  our  stores  of  knowledge  are  receiving
daily  additions,  it  becomes  a  habit  for  to-day  to  look  down
with  contempt  upon  yesterday.  The  habit  strikes  root,  and
remains  even  after  the  intellectual  powers  have  begun  to  de-
cline— when  to-day  should  rather  look  up  with  respect  to
yesterday.  So  it  is  that  we  often  unduly  depreciate  the
achievements  as  well  as  the  judgments  of  our  youth.

This  seems  the  place  for  making  the  general  observation
that,  although  in  its  main  qualities  a  man's  intellect  or
head  as  well  as  his  character  or  heart,  is  innate,  yet  the
former  is  by  no  means  so  unalterable  in  its  nature  as  the
latter.  The  fact  is  that  the  intellect  is  subject  to  very  many
transformations,  which,  as  a  rule  do  not  fail  to  make  their
actual  appearance;  and  this  is  so,  partly  because  the  intel-
lect has  a  deep  foundation  in  the  physique,  and  partly
because  the  material  with  which  it  deals  is  given  in
experience.  And  so,  from  a  physical  point  of  view,  we
find  that  if  a  man  has  any  peculiar  power,  it  first  gradu  -
ally  increases  in  strength  until  it  reaches  its  acme  after
which  it  enters  upon  a  path  of  slow  decadence,  until
it  ends  in  imbecility.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  we  must  not
lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  the  material  which  gives  employ-
ment to  a  man's  powers  and  keeps  them  in  activity — the
subject  matter  of  thought  and  knowledge,  experience,  in-
tellectual attainments,  the  practice  of  seeing  to  the  bottom


THE  AGES  OF  LIFE.  197

of  things,  and  so  a  perfect  mental  vision,  form  in  them-
selves a  mass  which  continues  to  increase  in  size,  until  the
time  comes  when  weakness  shows  itself,  and  the  man's
powers  suddenly  fail.  The  way  in  which  these  two  dis-
tinguishable elements  combine  in  the  same  nature — the  one
absolutely  unalterable,  and  the  other  subject  to  change  in
two  directions  opposed  to  each  other — explains  the  variety
of  mental  attitude  and  the  dissimilarity  of  value  which
attach  to  a  man  at  different  periods  of  life.

The  same  truth  may  be  more  broadly  expressed  by  saying
that  the  first  forty  years  of  life  furnish  the  text,  while  the
remaining  thirty  supply  the  commentary;  and  that  without
the  commentary  we  are  unable  to  understand  aright  the
true  sense  and  coherence  of  the  text,  together  with  the
moral  it  contains  and  all  the  subtle  application  of  which  it
admits.

Toward  the  close  of  life,  much  the  same  thing  happens
as  at  the  end  of  a  bed  masque — the  masks  are  taken  off.
Then  you  can  see  who  the  people  really  are,  with  whom  you
have  come  into  contact  in  your  passage  through  the  world.
For  by  the  end  of  life  characters  have  come  out  in  their
true  light,  actions  have  borne  fruit,  achievements  have  been
rightly  appreciated,  and  all  shams  have  fallen  to  pieces.
For  this,  Time  was  in  every  case  requisite.

But  the  most  curious  fact  is  that  it  is  also  only  toward
the  close  of  life  that  a  man  really  recognizes  and  understands
his  own  true  self — the  aims  and  objects  he  has  followed  in
life,  more  especially  the  kind  of  relation  in  wiiich  he  has
stood  to  other  people  and  to  the  wTorld.  It  wrill  often  hap-
pen that  as  a  result  of  this  knowledge,  a  man  will  have  to  as-
sign himself  a  lower  place  than  he  formerly  thought  was  his
due.  But  there  are  exceptions  to  this  rule;  and  it  will  oc-
casionally be  the  case  that  he  will  take  a  higher  position
than  he  had  before.  This  will  be  owing  to  the  fact  that
he  had  no  adequate  notion  of  the  baseness  of  the  world  and
that  he  set  up  a  higher  aim  for  himself  than  was  followed
by   the  rest  of  mankindc

The  progress  of  life  shows  a  man  the  stuff  of  which  he  is
made.

It  is  customary  to  call  youth  the  happy,  and  age  the  sad
part  of  life.  This  would  be  true  if  it  were  the  passions  that
made  a  man  happy.  Youth  is  swayed  to  and  fro  by  them;
and  they  give  a  great  deal  of  pain  and  little  pleasure.     In


198  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

age  the  passions  cool  and  leave  a  man  at  rest,  and  then
forthwith  his  mind  takes  a  contemplative  tone;  the  intellect
is  set  free  and  attains  the  upper  hand.  And  since,  in  itself,
intellect  is  beyond  the  range  of  pain,  a  man  feels  happy
just  in  so  far  as  his  intellect  is  the  predominating  part  of
him.

It  need  only  be  remembered  that  all  pleasure  is  negative,
and  that  pain  is  positive  in  its  nature,  in  order  to  see  that
the  passions  can  never  be  a  source  of  happiness,  and  that
age  is  not  the  less  to  be  envied  on  the  ground  that  many
pleasures  are  denied  it.  For  every  sort  of  pleasure  is  never
anything  more  than  the  quietive  of  some  need  or  longing;
and  that  pleasure  should  come  to  an  end  as  soon  as  the  need
ceases,  is  no  more  a  subject  of  complaint  than  that  a  man
cannot  go  on  eating  after  he  has  had  his  dinner,  or  fall
asleep  again  after  a  good  night's  rest.

So  far  from  youth  being  the  happiest  period  of  life,  there
is  much  more  truth  in  the  remark  made  by  Plato,  at  the
beginning  of  the  "Republic,"  that  the  prize  should  rather
be  given  to  old  age,  because  then  at  last  a  man  is  freed  from
the  animal  passion  which  has  hitherto  never  ceased  to  dis-
quiet him.  Nay,  it  may  even  be  said  that  the  countless  and
manifold  humors  which  have  their  source  in  this  passion,
and  the  emotions  that  spring  from  it,  produce  a  mild  state
of  madness:  and  this  lasts  as  long  as  the  man  is  suhject  to
the  spell  of  the  impulse— this  evil  spirit,  as  it  were,  of  which
there  is  no  riddance — so  that  he  never  really  becomes  a
reasonable  being  until  the  passion  is  extinguished.

There  is  no  doubt  that,  in  general,  and  apart  from  in
dividual  circumstances  and  particular  dispositions,  youth
is  marked  by  a  certain  melancholy  and  sadness,  while
genial  sentiments  attach  to  old  age;  and  the  reason  of  this
is  nothing  but  the  fact  that  the  young  man  is  still  under
the  service,  nay,  the  forced  labor,  imposed  by  that  evil
spirit,  which  scarcely  ever  leaves  him  a  moment  to  him-
self. To  this  source  may  be  traced,  directly  or  indirectly,
almost  all  and  every  ill  that  befalls  or  menaces  mankind.
The  old  man  is  genial  and  cheerful  because,  after  long
lying  in  the  bonds  of  passion,  he  can  now  move  about  in
freedom.

Still,  it  should  not  be  forgotten  that,  when  this  passion
is  extinguished,  the  true  kernel  of  life  is  gone,  and  noth-


THE  AGES  OF  LIFE.  199

ing  remains  but  the  hollow  shell  ;  or,  from  another  point
of  view,  life  then  becomes  like  a  comedy,  which,  begun
by  real  actors,  is  continued  and  brought  to  an  end  by
automata  dressed  in  their  clothes.

However  that  may  be,  youth  is  the  period  of  unrest,  and
age  of  repose;  and  from  that  very  circumstance,  the
relative  degree  of  pleasure  belonging  to  each  may  be  in-
ferred. The  child  stretches  out  its  little  hand  in  the
eager  desire  to  seize  all  the  pretty  things  that  meet  its
sight,  charmed  by  the  world  because  all  its  senses  are  still
so  young  and  fresh.  Much  the  same  thing  happens  with
the  youth,  and  he  displays  greater  energy  in  his  quest.
He,  too,  is  charmed  by  all  the  pretty  things  and  the
many  pleasing  shapes  that  surround  him;  and  forthwith
his  imagination  conjures  up  pleasures  which  the  world
can  never  realize.  So  lie  is  filled  with  an  ardent  desire
for  he  knows  not  what  delights — robbing  him  of  all  rest
and  making  happiness  impossible.  But  when  old  age  is
reached,  all  this  is  over  and  done  with,  partly  because  the
blood  runs  cooler  and  the  sajises  are  no  longer  so  easily
allured;  partly  because  experience  has  shown  the  true
value  of  things  and  the  futility  of  pleasure,  whereby  illu-
sion has  been  gradually  dispelled,  and  the  strange  fancies
and  prejudices  which  previously  concealed  or  distorted  a
Jree  and  true  view  of  the  world,  have  been  dissipated  and
put  to  flight;  with  the  result  that  a  man  can  now  get  a
juster  and  clearer  view,  and  see  things  as  they  are,  and
also  in  a  measure  attain  more  or  less  insight  into  the
^ullity  of  all  things  on  this  earth.

It  is  this  that  gives  almost  every  old  man,  no  matter  how
ordinary  his  faculties  may  be,  a  certain  tincture  of  wisdom,
winch  distinguishes  him  from  the  young.  But  the  chief
result  of  all  this  change  is  the  peace  of  mind  that  ensues
— a  great  element  in  happiness,  and,  in  fact,  the  condition
ftnd  essence  of  it.  While  the  young  man  fancies  that
there  is  a  vast  amount  of  good  things  in  the  world,  if  he
could  only  come  at  them,  the  old  man  is  steeped  in  the
truth  of  the  Preacher's  words,  that  "  all  things  are  vanity  "
— knowing  that,  however  gilded  the  shell,  the  nut  i&
hollow.

In  these  later  years,  and  not  before,  a  man  comes  to  a
true   appreciation    of    Horace's     maxim:  Nil    admiraru


200  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

He  is  directly  and  sincerely  convinced  of  the  vanity  of
everything  and  that  all  the  glories  of  the  world  are  as
nothing,  his  illusions  are  gone.  He  is  no  more  beset  with
the  idea  that  there  is  any  particular  amount  of  happiness
anywhere,  in  the  palace  or  in  the  cottage,  any  more  than
he  himself  enjoys  when  he  is  free  from  bodily  or  mental
pain.  The  worldly  distinctions  of  great  and  small,  high
and  low,  exist  for  him  no  longer;  and  in  this  blissful  state
of  mind  the  old  man  may  look  down  with  a  smile  upon  all
false  notions.  He  is  completely  undeceived,  and  knows
that,  whatever  may  be  done  to  adorn  human  life  and  deck
it  out  in  finery,  its  paltry  character  will  soon  show  through
the  glitter  of  its  surroundings;  and  that,  paint  and  bejewel
it  as  one  may,  it  remains  everywhere  much  the  same — an
existence  which  has  no  true  value  except  in  freedom  from
pain,  and  is  never  to  be  estimated  by  the  presence  of  pleas-
ure, let  alone,  then,  of  display.*

Disillusion  is  the  chief  characteristic  of  old  age;  for  by
that  time  the  fictions  are  gone  which  gave  life  its  charm
and  spurred  on  the  mind  to  activity;  the  splendors  of
the  world  have  been  proved  null  and  vain ;  its  pomp,
grandeur  and  magnificence  are  faded.  A  man  has  then
found  out  that  behind  most  of  the  things  he  wants,  and
most  of  the  pleasures  he  longs  for,  there  is  very  little  after
all  ;  and  so  he  comes  by  degrees  to  see  that  our  existence
is  all  empty  and  void.  It  is  only  when  he  is  seventy  years
old  that  he  quite  understands  the  first  words  of  the
Preacher;  and  this  again  explains  why  it  is  that  old  mei!
are  sometimes  fretful  and  morose.

It  is  often  said  that  the  common  lot  of  o)d  age  is  dis-
ease and  weariness  of  life.  Disease  is  by  no  means  essential
to  old  age  ;  especially  where  a  really  long  span  of  years
is  to  be  attained;  for  as  life  goes  on,  the  conditions  of
health  and  disorder  tend  to  increase — crescent  vita,  crescit
sanitas  et  morbus.  And  as  far  as  weariness  or  boredom  is
concerned,  1  have  stated  above  why  old  age  is  aven  less  ex
posed  to  that  form  of  evil  than  youth.  Nor  is  boredom
by  any  means  to  be  taken  as  a  necessary  accompaniment
of  that  solitude,  which,  for  reasons  that  do  not  require  to
be  explained,  old  age  certainly  cannct  escape;  it  is  rather
the  fate  that  awaits  those  who  have  never  known  any  other

*Cf.  Horace,   "Epist."  I.  12..  1-4.


THE  AGES  OF  LIFE.  201

pleasures  but  the  gratification  of  the  senses  and  the  de-
lights of  society — who  have  left  their  minds  unenlightened
and  their  faculties  unused.  It  is  quite  true  that  the  in-
tellectual faculties  decline  with  the  approach  of  old  age;  but
where  they  were  originally  strong,  there  will  always  be
enough  left  to  combat  the  onslaught  of  boredom.  And
then  again,  as  I  have  said,  experience,  knowledge,  reflec-
tion, and  skill  in  dealing  with  men,  combine  to  give  an
old  man  an  increasingly  accurate  insight  into  the  ways  of
the  world;  his  judgment  becomes  keen  and  he  attains  a
coherent  view  of  life;  his  mental  vision  embraces  a  wider
range.  Constantly  finding  new  uses  for  his  stores  of
knowledge  and  adding  to  them  at  every  opportunity,  he
maintains  uninterrupted  that  inward  process  of  self-educa-
tion which  gives  employment  and  satisfaction  to  the  mind,
and  thus  forms  the  due  reward  of  all  its  efforts.

All  this  serves  in  some  measure  as  a  compensation  for  de-
creased intellectual  power.  And  besides,  Time,  as  I  have
remarked,  seems  to  go  much  more  quickly  when  we  are
advanced  in  years;  and  this  is  in  itself  a  preventive  of  bore-
dom. There  is  no  great  harm  in  the  fact  that  a  man's
bodily  strength  decreases  in  old  age,  unless,  indeed,  he  re-
quires it  to  make  a  living.  To  be  poor  when  one  is  old,  is
a  great  misfortune.  If  a  man  is  secure  from  that,  and  re-
tains his  health,  old  age  may  be  a  very  passable  time  of
life.  Its  chief  necessity  is  to  be  comfortable  and  well  off;
and,  in  consequence,  money  is  then  prized  more  than  ever,
because  it  is  a  substitute  for  failing  strength.  Deserted  by
Venus,  the  old  man  likes  to  turn  to  Bacchus  to  make  him
merry.  In  the  place  of  wanting  to  see  things,  to  travel  and
•earn,  comes  the  desire  to  speak  and  teach.  It  is  a  piece
of  good  fortune  if  the  old  man  retains  some  of  his  love  of
study  or  of  music  or  of  the  theater — if,  in  general,  he  is  still
somewhat  susceptible  to  the  things  about  him;  as  is,  indeed,
the  case  with  some  people  to  a  very  late  age.  At  that  time
of  life,  what  a  man  has  in  himself,  is  of  greater  advan-
tage to  him  than  ever  it  was  before.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  most  people  who  have  never
been  anything  but  dull  and  stupid,  become  more  and  more
of  automata  as  they  grow  old.  They  have  always  thought,
said  and  done  the  same  things  as  their  neighbors:  and  noth-
ing that  happens  now  can  change  their  disposition,  or  make
them  act  otherwise.     To  talk  to  old  people  of  this  kind  is


202  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

like  writing  on  the  sand;  if  you  produce  any  impression  at
all  it  is  gone  almost  immediately;  old  age  is  here  nothing  but;
the  caput  mortuum  of  life — all  that  is  essential  to  manhood
is  gone.  There  are  cases  in  which  nature  supplies  a  third
set  of  teeth  in  old  age,  thereby  apparently  demonstrating
the  fact  that  that  period  of  life  is  a  second  childhood.

It  is  certainly  a  very  melancholy  thing  that  all  a  man's
faculties  tend  to  waste  away  as  he  grows  old,  and  at  a  rate
that  increases  in  rapidity:  but  still  this  is  a  necessary  nay  a
beneficial  arrangement,  as  otherwise  death,  for  which  it  is  a
preparation,  would  be  too  hard  to  bear.  So  the  greatest
boon  that  follows  the  attainment  of  extreme  old  age  is  eu-
thanasia— an  easy  death,  not  ushered  in  by  disease,  and
free  from  all  pain  and  struggle.*  For  let  a  man  live  as
long  as  he  may,  he  is  never  conscious  of  any  moment  but
the  present,  one  and  indivisible;  and  in  those  late  years  the
mind  loses  more  every  day  by  sheer  forgetfulness  than  ever
it  gains  anew.

The  main  difference  between  youth  and  age  will  always
be  that  youth  looks  forward  to  life,  and  old  age  to  death r
and  that  while  the  one  has  a  short  past  and  a  long  future
before  it,  the  case  is  just  the  opposite  with  the  other.  It  is
quite  true  that  when  a  man  is  old,  to  die  is  the  only
thing  that  awaits  him;  while  if  he  is  young,  he  may  expect
to  live;  and  the  question  arises,  Which  of  the  two  fates  is
the  more  hazardous,  and  if  life  is  not  a  matter  which,  on
the  whole,  it  is  better  to  have  behind  one  than  before?  Does
not  the  Preacher  say:  "the  day  of  death  [is  better]  than
the  day  of  one's  birth?"  \  It  is  certainly  a  rash  thing  to
wish  for  long  life;  %  for,  as  the  Spanish  proverb  has  it,  it
means  to  see  much  evil — Quien  larga  vida  vive  mucho
mal  vide.

*See  "Die  Welt  als  Wille  und  Vorstellung,"  Bk.  II.  ch.  41,  for  a
further  description  of  this  happy  end  to  4fe.

f  Ecclesiastes  vii.  1.

X  The  life  of  man  cannot,  strictly  speaking  be  called  either  long
or  short,  since  it  is  the  ultimate  standard  by  which  duration  of  time
n  regard  to  all  other  things  is  measured.

In  one  of  the  Vedic  "Upanishads"  (Oupnekhat,  II.)  the  "natural
length"  of  human  life  is  put  down  at  one  hundred  years.  And  I  be-
lieve this  to  be  right.  I  have  observed,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  that  it  is
only  people  who  exceed  the  age  of  ninety  who  attain  euthanasia — who
die,  that  is  to  say,  of   no  disease,  apoplexy  or  convulsion,   and  pass


THE  AGES  OF  LIFE.  203

A  man's  individual  career  is  not  as  astrology  wishes  to
make  out,  to  be  predicted  from  observation  of  the  planets;
but  the  course  of  human  life  in  general,  as  far  as  the  various
periods  of  it  are  concerned,  may  be  likened  to  the  succession
of  the  planets;  so  that  we  may  be  said  to  pass  under  the  in-
fluence of  each  one  of  them  in  turn.

At  ten,  Mercury  is  in  the  ascendant;  and  at  that  age,  a
man,  like  this  planet,  is  characterized  by  extreme  mobility
within  a  narrow  sphere,  where  trifles  have  a  great  effect
upon  him;  but  under  the  guidance  of  so  crafty  and  eloquent
a  god,  he  easily  makes  great  progress.  Venus  begins
her  sway  during  his  twentieth  year,  and  then  a  man  is
wholly  given  up  to  the  love  of  women.  At  thirty,  Mars
comes  to  the  front,  and  he  is  now  all  energy  and  strength —
daring,  pugnacious  and  arrogant

When  a  man  reaches  the  age  of  forty,  he  is  under  the
vule  of  the  four  Asteroids:  that  is  to  say,  his  life  has
gained  something  in  extension.  He  is  frugal;  in  other
words,  by  the  help  of  Ceres,  he  favors  what  is  useful;  he
has  his  own  hearth,  by  the  influence  of  Vesta;  Pallas  has
taught  him  that  which  is  necessary  for  him  to  know;  and
his  wife — his  Juno — rules  as  the  mistress  of   his  house.  *

away  without  agony  of  any  sort;  nay,  who  sometimes  even  show  no
pallor,  but  expire  generally  in  a  sitting  attitude,  and  often  after  a
meal — or  I  may  say,  simply  cease  to  live  rather  than  die.  To  come  to
one's  end  before  the  age  of  ninety,  means  to  die  of  disease,  in  othei
words,  prematurely.

Now  the  Old  Testament  (Psalms  xc.  10)  puts  the  limit  of  human  life
at  seventy,  and  if  it  is  very  long,  at  eighty  years;  and  what  is  more
noticeable  still,  Herodotus  (i.  32  and  iii.  22)  says  the  same  thing.  But
this  is  wrong;  and  the  error  is  due  simply  to  a  rough  and  superficial
estimate  of  the  results  of  daily  experience.  For  if  the  natural  length
of  life  were  from  seventy  to  eighty  years,  people,  would  die
about  that  time  of  mere  old  age.  Now  this  is  certainly  not  the  case.  If
they  die  then,  they  die,  like  younger  people,  of  disease;  and  disease  is
something  abnormal.  Therefore  it  is  not  natural  to  die  at  that  age.
It  is  only  when  they  are  between  ninety  and  a  hundred  that  people  die
of  old  age.  die  I  mean,  without  suffering  from  any  disease,  or  show-
ing any  special  signs  of  their  condition,  such  as  a  struggle,  death
rattle,  convulsion,  pallor — the  absence  of  all  which  constitutes
euthanasia.  The  natural  length  of  human  life  is  a  hundred  years
and   in  assigning  that  limit  the  Upanishads  are  right  once  more.

*  The  other  asteroids  which  have  been  discovered  since,  are  an  in-
novation, and  I  shall  have  nothing  to  do  with  them.  My  relation  to
them  is  that  of  the  professors  of  philosophy  to  me— I  ignore  them,
because  they  do  not  suit  my  book.


204  COUNSELS  AND  MAXIMS.

But  at  the  age  of  fifty,  Jupiter  is  the  dominant  influence.
At  that  period  a  man  has  outlived  most  of  his  contempora-
ries, and  he  can  feel  himself  superior  to  the  generation  about
him.  He  is  still  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  his  strength,  and
rich  in  experience  and  knowledge;  and  if  he  has  any  power
and  position  of  his  own,  he  is  endowed  with  authority  over
all  who  stand  in  his  immediate  surroundings.  He  is  no
more  inclined  to  receive  orders  from  others;  he  wants  to
take  command  himself.  The  work  most  suitable  to  him
now  is  to  guide  and  rule  within  his  own  sphere.  This  is
the  point  where  Jupiter  culminates,  and  where  the  man  of
fifty  years  is  at  his  best.

Then  comes  Saturn,  at  about  the  age  of  sixty,  a  weight
as  of  lead,  dull  and  slow:

"  But  old  folks,  many  feign  as  they  were  dead  ,
Unwieldy,  slow,  heavy  and  pale  as  lead."  *

Last  of  all,  Uranus;  or,  as  the  saying  is,  a  man  goes
to  heaven.

I  cannot  find  a  place  for  Neptune,  as  this  planet  has
been  very  thoughtlessly  named;  because  I  may  not  call  it
as  it  should  be  called — Eros.  Otherwise  I  should  point
out  how  Beginning  and  End  meet  together,  and  how
closely  and  intimately  Eros  is  connected  with  Death  ;  how
Orcus,  or  Amenthes,  as  the  Egyptians  called  him,f  is  not
only  the  receiver  but  the  giver  of  all  things— Xafifidvoov  xal
Sidovs.  Death  is  the  great  reservoir  of  Life.  Everything
comes  from  Orcus  ;  everything  that  is  alive  now  was  onc&
there.  Could  we  but  understand  the  great  trick  by  which
that  is  done,  all  would  be  clear!

*  "  Romeo  and  Juliet,"  ii.  5.

f  Plutarch,  "  De  Iside  et  Osiride,"  c.  29.


RELIGION  AND  OTHER  ESSAYS,


RELIGION.


A  DIALOGUE.

Demopheles. — Between  ourselves,  my  dear  fellow,  x
don't  care  about  the  way  you  sometimes  have  of  exhibit-
ing your  talent  for  philosophy  ;  you  make  religion  a  sub-
ject for  sarcastic  remarks,  and  even  for  open  ridicule.
Every  one  thinks  his  religion  sacred,  and  therefore  you
'Might  to  respect  it.

Philalethes. — That  doesn't  follow  !  I  don't  see  why,
3ecause  other  people  are  simpletons,  I  should  have  any
regard  for  a  pack  of  Jies.  I  respect  truth  everywhere,
and  so  I  can't  respect  what  is  opposed  to  it.  My  maxim
is  Vigeat  Veritas  et  per  eat  mundus,  like  the  lawyers'  Fiat
justitia  et  pereat  mundus.  Every  profession  ought  to
have  an  analogous  device.

Demopheles. — Then  I  suppose  doctors  should  say  Fiant
pilules  et  pereat  mundus — there  wouldn't  be  much  diffi-
culty about  that !

Philalethes. — Heaven  forbid!  You  must  take  every-
thing cum  grano  sails.

Demopheles. — Exactly;  that's  why  I  want  you  to  take
religion  cum.  grano  salis.  I  want  you  to  see  that  you
must  meet  the  requirements  of  the  people  according  to
the  measure  of  their  comprehension.  Where  you  have
masses  of  people,  of  crude  susceptibilities  and  clumsy  in-
telligence, sordid  in  their  pursuits  and  sunk  in  drudgery,
religion  provides  the  only  means  of  proclaiming  and  mak-
ing them  feel  the  high  import  of  life.  For  the  average
man  takes  an  interest,  primarily,  in  nothing  but  what
will  satisfy  his  physical  needs  and  hankerings,  and  beyond
this,  give  him  a  little  amusement  and  pastime.  Founders
of  religion  and  philosophers  come  into  the  world  to  rouse
him  from  his  stupor  and  point  to  the  lofty  meaning  of  ex*


208  RELIGION

istense;  philosophers  for  the  few,  the  emancipated,
founders  of  religion  for  the  many,  for  humanity  at  hirge.
For,  as  your  friend  Plato  has  said,  the  multitude  can't  be
philosophers,  and  you  shouldn't  forget  that.  Religion  is
the  metaphysics  of  the  masses;  by  all  means  let  tliem
keep  it:  let  it  therefore  command  external  respect,  for  to
discredit  it  is  to  take  it  away.  Just  as  they  have  popular
poetry,  and  the  popular  wisdom  of  proverbs,  so  they  must
have  popular  metaphysics  too  :  for  mankind  absolutely
needs  an  interpretation  of  life;  aud  this,  again,  must  be
suited  to  popular  comprehension.  Consequently,  this
interpretation  is  always  an  allegorical  investiture  of  the
truth:  and  in  practical  life  and  in  its  effects  on  the  feel-
ings, that  is  to  say,  as  a  rule  of  action  and  as  a  comfort
and  consolation  in  suffering  and  death,  it  accomplishes
perhaps  just  as  much  as  the  truth  itself  could  achieve  if
we  possessed  it.  Don't  take  offense  at  its  unkempt,
grotesque  and  apparently  absurd  form:  for  with  your
education  and  learning,  you  have  no  idea  of  the  round-
about ways  by  which  people  in  their  crude  state  have  to
receive  their  knowledge  of  deep  truths.  The  various
religions  are  only  various  forms  in  which  the  truth,  which
taken  by  itself  is  above  their  comprehension,  is  grasped
and  realized  by  the  masses;  and  truth  becomes  inseparable
from  these  forms.  Therefore,  my  dear  sir,  don't  take  it
amiss  if  I  say  that  to  make  a  mockery  of  these  forms  is
both  shallow  and  unjust.

Philalethes. — But  isn't  it  every  bit  as  shallow  and  un-
just to  demand  that  there  shall  be  no  other  system  of  meta-
physics but  this  one,  cut  out  as  it  is  to  suit  the  requirements
and  comprehension  of  the  masses?  that  its  doctrines  shall
be  the  limit  of  human  speculation,  the  standard  of  ah
thought,  so  that  the  metaphysics  of  the  few,  the  emanci-
pated, as  you  call  them,  must  be  devoted  only  to  confirm-
ing, strengthening,  and  explaining  the  metaphysics  of  the
masses?  that  the  highest  powers  of  human  intelligence  shall
remain  unused  and  undeveloped,  even  be  nipped  in  the  bud
in  order  that  their  activity  may  not  thwart  the  popular
metaphysics?  And  isn't  this  just  the  very  claim  which  re-
ligion sets  up?  Isn't  it  a  little  too  much  to  have  tolerance
and  delicate  forberrance  preached  by  what  is  intolerance
and  cruelty  itself?  Think  of  the  heretical  tribunals,  in-
quisitions, religious  wars,  crusades,  Socrates'  cup  of  poison,


A  DIALOGUE.  20J

Bruno's  and  Vanini's  death  in  the  flames!  Is  all  this  to-
day quite  a  thing  of  the  past?  How  can  genuine  philo-
sophical effort,  sincere  search  after  truth,  the  noblest  calling
of  the  noblest  men,  be  let  and  hindered  more  completely  than
by  a  conventional  system  of  metaphysics  enjoying  a  state
monopoly,  the  principles  of  which  are  impressed  into  every
head  in  earliest  youth  so  earnestly,  so  deeply,  and  so  firmly,
that,  unless  the  mind  is  miraculously  elastic,  they  remain
indelible.  In  this  way  the  groundwork  of  all  healthy
reason  is  once  for  all  deranged;  that  is  to  say,  the  capacity
for  original  thought  arid  unbiased  judgment,  which  is  weak
enough  in  itself,  is,  in  regard  to  those  subjects  to  which  it
might  be  applied,  forever  paralyzed  and  ruined.

Demopheles. — Which  means,  I  suppose,  that  people
have  arrived  at  a  conviction  which  they  won't  give  up  in
order  to  embrace  yours  instead.

Philalethes. — Ah!  if  it  were  only  a  conviction  based  on
insight.  Then  one  could  bring  arguments  to  bear,  and
the  battle  would  be  fought  with  equal  weapons.  But  re-
ligions admittedly  appeal,  not  to  conviction  as  the  result
of  argument,  but  to  belief  as  demanded  by  revelation.  And
as  the  capacity  for  believing  is  strongest  in  childhood,'
special  care  is  taken  to  make  sure  of  this  tender  age.  This
has  much  more  to  do  with  the  doctrines  of  belief  taking
root  than  threats  and  reports  of  miracles.  If,  in  early  child-
hood, certain  fundamental  views  and  doctrines  are  paraded
with  unusual  solemnity,  and  an  air  of  the  greatest  earnest-
ness never  before  visible  in  anything  else;  if,  at  the  same
time,  the  possibility  of  a  doubt  about  them  be  completely
passed  over,  or  touched  upon  only  to  indicate
that  doubt  is  the  first  step  to  eternal  perdition,  the
resulting  impression  will  be  so  deep  that,  as  a  rule,
that  is,  in  almost  every  case,  doubt  about  them  will
be  almost  as  impossible  as  doubt  about  one's  own  existence.
Hardly  one  in  ten  thousand  will  have  the  strength  of  mind
to  ask  himself  seriously  and  earnestly  is  that  true?  To
call  such  as  can  do  it  strong  minds,  esprits  forts,  is  a  de-
scription apter  than  is  generally  supposed.  But  for  the
ordinary  mind  there  is  nothing  so  absurd  or  revolting  but
what,  if  inculcated  in  that  way,  the  strongest  belief  in  it
will  strike  root.  If,  for  example,  the  killing  of  a  heretic
or  infidel  were  essential  to  the  future  salvation  of  his  soul,
almost  every  one  would  make  it  the  chief  event  of  his  life,


210  BELIQION,

and  in  dying  would  draw  consolation  and  strength  from
the  remembrance  that  he  had  succeeded.  As  a  matter  of
fact,  almost  every  Spaniard  in  days  gone  by  used  to  look
upon  an  auto  da  fe  as  the  most  pious  of  all  acts  and  one
most  agreeable  to  God.  A  parallel  to  this  may  be  found
in  the  way  in  which  the  Thugs  (a  religious  sect  in  India,
suppressed  a  short  time  ago  by  the  English,  who  executed
numbers  of  them)  express  their  sense  of  religion  and  their
veneration  for  the  goddess  Kali;  they  take  every  oppor-
tunity of  murdering  their  friends  and  traveling  compan-
ions, with  the  object  of  getting  possession  of  their  goods,
and  in  the  serious  conviction  that  they  are  thereby  doing  a
praiseworthy  action,  conducive  to  their  eternal  welfare.*
The  power  of  religious  dogma,  when  inculcated  early,  is
such  as  to  stifle  conscience,  compassion  and  finally  every
feeling  of  humanity.  But  if  you  want  to  see  with  your
own  eyes  and  close  at  hand  what  timely  inoculation  of
belief  will  accomplish,  look  at  the  English.  Here  is  a
nation  favored  before  all  others  by  nature;  endowed,  more
than  all  others,  with  discernment,  intelligence,  power  of
judgment,  strength  of  character;  look  at  them,  abased
and  made  ridiculous,  beyond  all  others,  by  their  stupid
ecclesiastical  superstition,  which  appears  among  their  other
abilities  like  a  fixed  idea  or  monomania;  jor  this  they
have  to  thank  the  circumstance  that  education  is  in  the
hands  of  the  clergy,  whose  endeavor  it  is  to  impress  all  the
articles  of  belief,  at  the  earliest  age,  in  a  way  that  amounts
to  a  kind  of  paralysis  of  the  brain;  this  in  its  turn  ex-
presses itself  all  their  life  in  an  idiotic  bigotry,  which
makes  otherwise  most  sensible  and  intelligent  people  among
them  degrade  themselves  so  that  one  can't  make  head  or
tail  of  them.  If  you  consider  how  essential  to  such  a
masterpiece  is  inoculation  in  the  tender  age  of  childhood
the  missionary  system  appears  no  longer  only  as  the  acme
of  human  importunity,  arrogance  and  impertinence,  but
l^o  as  an  absurdity,  if  it  doesn't  confine  itself  to  nations,
which  are  still  in  their  infancy,  like  Kaffirs,  Hottentots,
South  Sea  Islanders,  etc.  Among  these  races  it  is  success-
ful; but  in  India  the  Brahmans  treat  the  discourses  of  the
missionaries  with  contemptuous  smiles  of   approbation,  or

*  Cf.  Illustrations  of  the  history  and  practice  of  the  Thugs,  Lou-
■doo,  1837;  also  the  Edinburgh  Review,  Qct.-Jan.,  1886-7.


A  DIALOGUE.  211

simply  shrug  their  shoulders.  And  one  may  say  generally
that  the  proselytizing  efforts  of  the  missionaries  in  India,
in  spite  of  the  most  advantageous  facilities,  are,  as  a  rule,
a  failure.  An  authentic  report  in  Vol.  XXI.  of  the
Asiatic  Journal  (1826)  states  that  after  so  many  years  of
missionary  activity  not  more  than  three  hundred  living
converts  were  to  be  found  in  the  whole  of  India,  where  the
population  of  the  English  possessions  alone  comes  to  one  hun-
dred and  fifteen  millions;  and  at  the  same  time  it  is  admitted
that  the  Christian  converts  are  distinguished  for  their  ex-
treme immorality.  Three  hundred  venal  and  bribed  souls
out  of  so  many  millions!  There  is  no  evidence  that  things
have  gone  better  with  Christianity  in  India  since  then,  in
spite  of  the  fact  that  the  missionaries  are  now  trying,  con-
trary to  stipulation  and  in  schools  exclusively  designed  for
secular  English  instruction,  to  work  upon  the  children's
minds  as  they  please,  in  order  to  smuggle  in  Christianity;
against  which  the  Hindoos  are  most  jealously  on  their
guard.  As  I  have  said,  childhood  is'  the  time  to  sow  the
seeds  of  belief,  and  not  manhood;  more  especially  where
an  earlier  faith  has  taken  root.  An  acquired  conviction
such  as  is  feigned  by  adults  is,  as  a  rule,  only  the  mask  for
some  kind  of  personal  interest.  And  it  is  the  feeling  that
this  is  almost  bound  to  be  the  case  which  makes  a  man
who  has  changed  his  religion  in  mature  years  an  object  of
contempt  to  most  people  everywhere;  who  thus  show  that
they  look  upon  religion,  not  as  a  matter  of  reasoned  con-
viction, but  merely  as  a  belief  inoculated  in  childhood,
before  any  test  can  be  applied.  And  that  they  are  right
in  their  view  of  religion  is  also  obvious  from  the  way  in
which  not  only  the  masses,  who  are  blindly  credulous,  but
also  the  clergy  of  every  religion,  who,  as  such,  have  faith-
fully and  zealously  studied  its  sources,  foundations,  dogmas
and  disputed  points,  cleave  as  a  body  to  the  religion  of
their  particular  country;  consequently  for  a  minister  of
one  religion  or  confession  to  go  over  to  another  is  the
rarest  thing  in  the  world.  The  Catholic  clergy,  for  ex-
ample, are  fully  convinced  of  the  truth  of  all  the  tenets  of
their  church,  and  so  are  the  Protestant  clergy  of  theirs,
and  both  defend  the  principles  of  their  creeds  with  like
zeal.  And  yet  the  conviction  is  governed  merely  by  the
country  native  to  each;  to  the  South  German  ecclesiastic
the  truth  of  the  Catholic  dogma  is  quite  obvious,  to  the


212  RELIGION.

North  German,  the  Protestant.  If,  then,  these  convic-
tions are  based  on  objective  reasons,  the  reasons  must  be
climatic,  and  thrive,  like  plants,  some  only  here,  some
only  there.  The  convictions  of  those  who  are  thus  locally
convinced  are  taken  on  trust  and  believed  by  the  masses
everywhere.

Demopheles. — Well,  no  harm  is  done,  and  it  doesn't
make  any  real  difference.  As  a  fact,  Protestantism  is
more  suited  to  the  north,  Catholicism  to  the  south.

Philalethes. — So  it  seems.  Still  I  take  a  higher
standpoint,  and  keep  in  view  a  more  important  object,  the
progress,  namely,  of  the  knowledge  of  truth  among  man-
kind. And  from  this  point  of  view,  it  is  a  terrible  thing
that,  wherever  a  man  is  born,  certain  propositions  are  in-
culcated in  him  in  earliest  youth,  and  he  is  assured  that  he
may  never  have  any  doubts  about  them,  under  penalty  of
thereby  forfeiting  eternal  salvation;  propositions,  I  mean,
which  affect  the  foundation  of  all  our  other  knowledge  and
accordingly  determine  forever,  and,  if  they  are  false,  distort
forever,  the  point  of  view  from  which  our  knowledge
starts;  and  as,  further,  the  corollaries  of  these  propositions
touch  the  entire  system  of  our  intellectual  attainments  at
every  point,  the  whole  of  human  knowledge  is  thoroughly
adulterated  by  them.  Evidence  of  this  is  afforded  by
every  literature;  the  most  striking  by  that  of  the  Middle
Age,  but  in  a  too  considerable  degree  by  that  of  the  fif-
teenth and  sixteenth  centuries.  Look  at  even  the  first
minds  of  all  those  epochs;  how  paralyzed  they  are  by  false
fundamental  positions  like  these;  how,  more  especially,
all  insight  into  the  true  constitution  and  working  of  Nature
is,  as  it  were,  blocked  up.  During  the  whole  of  the  Chris-
tian period  Theism  presents  a  solid  barrier  to  all  intellect-
ual effort,  and  chiefly  to  philosophy,  arresting  or  stunting
all  progress.  For  the  scientific  men  of  these  ages  God,
devil,  angels,  demons  hid  the  whole  of  nature;  no  inquiry
was  followed  to  the  end,  nothing  ever  thoroughly  examined;
everything  which  went  beyond  the  most  obvious  causa]
nexus  was  immediately  set  down  to  those  personalities.
"  It  was  at  once  explained  by  a  reference  to  God,  angels
or  demons,"  as  Pomponatius  expressed  himself  when  the
matter  was  being  discussed,  "  and  philosophers  at  any
rate  have  nothing  analogous. "  There  is,  to  be  sure,  a
suspicion  of  irony  in  this  statement  of  Pomponatius,  as  his


A  DIALOGUE.  213

perfidy  in  other  matters  is  known;  still,  he  is  only  giving
expression  to  the  general  way  of  thinking  of  his  age.
And  if,  on  the  other  hand,  any  one  possessed  the  rare
quality  of  an  elastic  mind,  which  alone  could  burst  the
bonds,  his  writings  and  he  himself  with  them  were  burned;
as  happened  to  Bruno  and  Vanini,  How  completely  an
ordinary  mind  is  paralyzed  by  that  early  preparation  in
metaphysics  is  seen  in  the  most  vivid  way  and  on  its  most
ridiculous  side  whenever  it  undertakes  to  criticise  the
doctrines  of  an  alien  creed.  The  efforts  of  the  ordinary
man  are  generally  found  to  be  directed  to  a  careful  ex-
hibition of  the  incongruity  of  its  dogmas  with  those  of  his
own  belief:  he  is  at  great  pains  to  show  that  not  only  do
they  not  say,  but  certainly  do  not  mean,  the  same  thing;
and  with  that  he  thinks,  in  his  simplicity,  that  he  has
demonstrated  the  falsehood  of  the  alien  creed.  He  really
never  dreams  of  putting  the  question  which  of  the  two
may  be  right;  his  own  articles  of  belief  he  looks  upon  as
a  priori  true  and  certain  principles.

Demopheles. — So  that's  your  higher  point  of  view!
I  assure  you  there  is  a  higher  still.  "  First  live,  then
philosophize"  is  a  maxim  of  more  comprehensive  import
than  appears  at  first  sight.  The  first  thing  to  do  is  to
control  the  raw  and  evil  dispositions  of  the  masses,  so  as
to  keep  them  from  pushing  injustice  to  extremes,  and
from  committing  cruel,  violent  and  disgraceful  acts.  If
you  were  to  wait  until  they  had  recognized  and  grasped  the
truth,  you  would  undoubtedly  come  too  late;  and  truth,
supposing  that  it  had  been  found,  would  surpass  their
powers  of  comprehension.  In  any  case  an  allegorical  in-
vestiture of  it,  a  parable  or  myth,  is  all  that  would  be  of
any  service  to  them.  As  Kant  said,  there  must  be  a  public
standard  of  Right  and  Virtue;  it  must  always  flutter  high
overhead.  It  is  a  matter  of  indifference  what  heraldic
figures  are  inscribed  on  it,  so  long  as  they  signify  what  u
meant.  Such  an  allegorical  representation  of  truth  is
always  and  everywhere,  for  humanity  at  large,  a  serviceable
substitute  for  a  truth  to  which  it  can  never  attain,  for  a
philosophy  which  it  can  nevs:  grasp;  let  alone  the  fact
that  it  is  daily  changing  its  shape,  and  has  in  no  form  as
yet  met  with  general  acceptance.  Practical  aims,  then.
my  good  Philalethes,  are  .n  every  respect  suoerior  to  theo-
retical.


214  RELIGION.

Philalethes. — What  you  say  is  very  like  the  ancient
advice  of  Timaeus  of  Locrus,  the  Pythagorean,  "stop  the
mind  with  falsehood  if  you  can't  speed  it  with  truth."  I
almost  suspect  that  your  plan  is  the  one  which  is  so  much
in  vogue  just  now,  that  you  want  to  impress  upon  us
that

"  The  hour  is  nigh
When  we  may  feast  in  quiet."

/ou  recommend  us,  in  fact,  to  take  timely  precautions  so
that  the  waves  of  the  discontented  raging  masses  mayn't
disturb  us  at  table.  But  the  whole  point  of  view  is  as
false  as  it  is  nowadays  popular  and  commended;  and  so  I
make  haste  to  enter  a  protest  against  it.  It  is  false  that
state,  justice,  law  cannot  be  upheld  without  the  assistance
of  religion  and  its  dogmas;  and  that  justice  and  public
order  need  religion  as  a  necessary  complement,  if  legisla-
tive enactments  are  to  be  carried  out.  It  is  false,  were  it
repeated  a  hundred  times!  An  effective  and  striking
argument  to  the  contrary  is  afforded  by  the  ancients,  es-
pecially the  Greeks.  They  had  nothing  at  all  of  what  wc
understand  by  religion.  They  had  no  sacred  documents,
no  dogma  to  be  learned  and  its  acceptance  furthered  by
every  one,  its  principles  to  be  inculcated  early  on  the  young.
Just  as  little  was  moral  doctrine  preached  by  the  ministers
of  religion,  nor  did  the  priests  trouble  themselves  about
morality  or  about  what  the  people  did  or  left  undone.
Not  at  all.  The  duty  of  the  priests  was  confined  to  tem-
ple-ceremonial, prayers,  hymns,  sacrifices,  processions,
lustrations  and  the  like,  the  object  of  which  was  anything
but  the  moral  improvement  of  the  individual.  What  was
called  religion  consisted,  more  especially  in  the  cities,  in
giving  temples  here  and  there  to  some  of  the  gods  of  the
greater  tribes,  in  which  the  worship  described  was  carried
on  as  a  state  matter,  and  was  consequently,  in  fact,  an
affair  of  police.  No  one,  except  the  functionaries  per-
forming, was  in  any  way  compelled  to  attend,  or  even  to
believe  in  it.  In  the  whole  of  antiquity  there  is  no  trace
of  any  obligation  to  believe  in  any  particular  dogma.
Merely  in  the  case  of  an  open  denial  of  the  existence  of
the  gods,  or  any  other  reviling  of  them,  a  penalty  was  im-
posed, and  that  on  account  of  the  insult  offered  to  the
state,  which  served  those  gods:  bevond  this  it  was  free  to


A  DIALOGUE.  215

every  one  to  think  of  them  what  he  pleased.  If  any  one
wanted  to  gain  the  favor  of  those  gods  privately,  by  prayer
or  sacrifice,  it  was  open  to  him  to  do  so  at  his  own  expense
and  at  his  own  risk;  if  he  didn't  do  it,  no  one  made  any
objection,  least  of  all  the  state.  In  the  case  of  the  Romans
every  one  had  his  own  Lares  and  Penates  at  home:  these
were,  however,  in  reality,  only  the  venerated  busts  of  an-
cestors. Of  the  immortality  of  the  soul  and  a  life  beyond
the  grave,  the  ancients  had  no  firm,  clear  or,  least  of  all,
dogmatically  fixed  idea,  but  very  loose,  fluctuating,  in-
definite and  problematical  notions,  every  one  in  his  own
way:  and  the  ideas  about  the  gods  were  just  as  varying,
individual  and  vague.  There  was  therefore  really  no
religion,  in  our  sense  of  the  word,  among  the  ancients.
But  did  anarchy  and  lawlessness  prevail  among  them  on
that  account?  Is  not  law  and  civil  order,  rather,  so  much
their  work,  that  it  still  forms  the  foundation  of  our  own?
Was  there  not  complete  protection  for  property,  even
though  it  consisted  for  the  most  part  of  slaves?  And  did
not  this  state  of  things  last  for  more  than  a  thousand  years?
So  that  I  can't  recognize,  I  must  even  protest  against  the
practical  aims  and  the  necessity  of  religion  in  the  sense
indicated  by  you,  and  so  popular  nowadays,  that  is,  aa
an  indispensable  foundation  of  all  legislative  arrange-
ments. For,  if  you  take  that  point  of  view,  the  pure  and
sacred  endeavor  after  truth  will,  to  say  the  least,  appear
quixotic,  and  even  criminal,  if  it  ventures,  in  its  feeling  of
justice,  to  denounce  the  authoritative  creed  as  a  usurper
who  has  taken  possession  of  the  throne  of  truth  and  main-
tained his  position  by  keeping  up  the  deception.

Demopheles. — But  religion  is  not  opposed  to  truth;
it  itself  teaches  truth.  And  as  the  range  of  its  activity  is
not  a  narrow  lecture  room,  but  the  world  and  humanity
at  large,  religion  must  conform  to  the  requirements  and
comprehension  of  an  audience  so  numerous  and  so  mixed.
Religion  must  not  let  truth  appear  in  its  naked  form;  or,
to  use  a  medical  simile,  it  must  not  exhibit  it  pure,  but  must
employ  a  mythical  vehicle,  a  medium,  as  it  weie.  You
can  also  compare  truth  in  this  respect  to  certain  chemical
stuffs  which  in  themselves  are  gaseous,  but  which  for
medicinal  uses,  as  also  for  preservation  or  transmission,
must  be  bound  to  a  stable,  solid  base,  because  they  would
otherwise  volatilize.    Chlorine  gas,  for  example,  is  for  a]]


216  RELIGION.

purposes  applied  onty  in  the  form  of  chlorides.  But  if
truth,  pure,  abstract  and  free  from  all  mythical  alloy,  is
always  to  remain  unattainable,  even  by  philosophers,  it
might  be  compared  to  fluorine,  which  cannot  even  be
isolated,  but  must  always  appear  in  combination  with  other
elements.  Or,  to  take  a  less  scientific  simile,  truth,  which
is  inexpressible  except  by  means  of  myth  and  allegory,  is
like  water,  which  can  be  carried  about  only  in  vessels:  a
philosopher  who  insists  on  obtaining  it  pure  is  like  a  man
who  breaks  the  jug  in  order  to  get  the  water  by  itself
This  is,  perhaps,  an  exact  analogy.  At  any  rate,  religion
is  truth  allegorically  and  mythically  expressed,  and  so
rendered  attainable  and  digestible  by  mankind  in  general.
Mankind  couldn't  possibly  take  it  pure  and  unmixed,  just
as  we  can't  breathe  pure  oxygen;  we  require  an  addition
of  four  times  its  bulk  in  nitrogen.  In  plain  language,  the
profound  meaning,  the  high  aim  of  life,  can  only  be  un-
folded and  presented  to  the  masses  symbolically,  because
they  are  incapable  of  grasping  it  in  its  true  signification.
Philosophy,  on  the  other  hand,  should  be  like  the  Eleu-
sinian  mysteries,  for  the  few,  the  elite.

Philalethes. — I  understand.  It  comes,  in  short,  to
truth,  wearing  the  garment  of  falsehood.  But  in  doing  so
it  enters  on  a  fatal  alliance.  What  a  dangerous  weapon  is
put  into  the  hands  of  those  who  are  authorized  to  employ
falsehood  as  the  vehicle  of  truth!  If  it  is  as  you  say,
I  fear  the  damage  caused  by  the  falsehood  will  be  greater
than  any  advantage  the  truth  could  ever  produce.  Of
course,  if  the  allegory  were  admitted  to  be  such,  I  should
raise  no  objection;  but  with  the  admission  it  would  rob
itself  of  all  respect,  and  consequently,  of  all  utility.  The
allegory  must,  therefore,  put  in  a  claim  to  be  true  in  the
proper  sense  of  the  word,  and  maintain  the  claim;  while,
at  the  most,  it  is  true  only  in  an  allegorical  sense.  Here
lies  the  irreparable  mischief,  the  permanent  evil;  and  this
is  why  religion  has  always  been  and  will  always  be  in  con-
flict with  the  noble  endeavor  after  pure  truth.

Demopheles. — Oh  no!  that  danger  is  guarded  against.
If  religion  mayn't  exactly  confess  its  allegorical  nature,  it
gives  sufficient  indication  of  it.

Philalethes. — How  so?

Demopheles. — In  its  mysteries.  "Mystery,"  is  in
reality   only   a   technical    theological   term   for    religious


A  VIALOOUE.  21?

allegory.  All  religions  have  their  mysteries.  Properly
speaking,  a  mystery  is  a  dogma  which  is  plainly  absurd,
but  which,  nevertheless,  conceals  in  itself  a  lofty  truth,
and  one  which  by  itself  would  be  completely  incompre-
hensible to  the  ordinary  understanding  of  the  raw  multi-
tude. The  multitude  accepts  it  in  this  disguise  on  trust,
and  believes  it,  without  being  led  astray  by  the  absurdity
of  it,  which  even  to  its  intelligence  is  obvious;  and  in  this
way  it  participates  in  the  kernel  of  the  matter  so  far  as  it
is  possible  for  it  to  do  so.  To  explain  what  I  mean,  I  may
add  that  even  in  philosophy  an  attempt  has  been  made  to
make  use  of  a  mystery.  Pascal,  for  example,  who  was  at
once  a  pietist,  a  mathematician,  and  a  philosopher,  says
in  this  threefold  capacity:  "  God  is  everywhere  center  and
nowhere  periphery."  Malebranche  has  also  the  just  re-
mark: "  Liberty  is  a  mystery."  One  could  go  a  step  fur-
ther and  maintain  that  in  religions  everything  is  mystery.
For  to  impart  truth,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word,  to
the  multitude  in  its  raw  state  is  absolutely  impossible;  all
that  can  fall  to  its  lot  is  to  be  enlightened  by  a  mytho-
logical reflection  of  it.  Naked  truth  is  out  of  place  be-
fore the  eyes  of  the  profane  vulgar;  it  can  only  make
its  appearance  thickly  veiled.  Hence,  it  is  unreasonable
to  require  of  a  religion  that  it  shall  be  true  in  the  proper
sense  of  the  word;  and  this,  I  may  observe  in  passing,  is
nowadays  the  absurd  contention  of  Rationalists  and
Supernaturalists  alike.  Both  start  from  the  position  that
religion  must  be  the  real  truth;  and  while  the  former  de-
monstrate that  it  is  not  the  truth,  the  latter  obstinately
maintain  that  it  is;  or  rather,  the  former  dress  up  and
arrange  the  allegorical  element  in  such  a  way,  that,  in  the
propei'  sense  of  the  word,  it  could  be  true,  but  would  be,
in  that  case,  a  platitude;  while  the  latter  wish  to  main-
tain that  it  is  true  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word,  with-
out any  further  dressing;  a  belief,  which,  as  we  ought  to
know,  is  only  to  be  enforced  by  inquisitions  and  the  stake.
As  a  fact,  however,  myth  and  allegory  really  form  the
proper  element  of  religion;  and  under  this  indispensable
condition,  which  is  imposed  by  the  intellectual  limitation
of  the  multitude,  religion  provides  a  sufficient  satisfaction
for  those  metaphysical  requirements  of  mankind  which  are
indestructible.  It  takes  the  place  of  that  pure  philosophi-
cal truth  which  is  infinitely  difficult  and  perhaps  never
attainable.


.418  RELIGION.

Philalethes. — Ah!  just  as  a  wooden  leg  takes  the
place  of  a  natural  one;  it  supplies  what  is  lacking,  barely
does  duty  for  it,  claims  to  be  regarded  as  a  natural  leg.
and  is  more  or  less  artfully  put  together.  The  only
difference  is  that,  while  a  natural  leg  as  a  rule  preceded
the  wooden  one,  religion  has  everywhere  got  the  start  of
philosophy.

Demopheles. — That  may  be,  but  still  for  a  man  who
hasn't  a  natural  leg,  a  wooden  one  is  of  great  service.
You  must  bear  in  mind  that  the  metaphysical  needs  of
mankind  absolutely  require  satisfaction,  because  the
horizon  of  man's  thoughts  must  have  a  back-ground  and
not  remain  unbounded.  Man  has,  as  a  rule,  no  faculty
for  weighing  reasons  and  discriminating  between  what  ia
false  and  what  is  true;  and  besides,  the  labor  which  nature
and  the  needs  of  nature  impose  upon  him,  leaves  him  no
time  for  such  inquiries,  or  for  the  education  which  they
presuppose.  In  his  case,  therefore,  it  is  no  use  talking  of
a  reasoned  conviction;  he  has  to  fall  back  on  belief  and
authority.  If  a  really  true  philosophy  were  to  take  the
place  of  religion,  nine-tenths  at  least  of  mankind  would
have  to  receive  it  on  authority;  that  is  to  say,  it  too  would
be  a  matter  of  faith,  for  Plato's  dictum,  that  the  multi-
tude can't  be  philosophers,  will  always  remain  true.
Authority,  however,  is  an  affair  of  time  and  circumstance
alone,  and  so  it  can't  be  bestowed  on  that  which  has  only
reason  in  its  favor;  it  must  accordingly  be  allowed  to
nothing  but  what  has  acquired  it  in  the  course  of  history,
even  if  it  is  only  an  allegorical  representation  of  truth.
Truth  in  this  form,  supported  by  authority,  appeals  first
of  all  to  those  elements  in  the  human  constitution  which
are  strictly  metaphysical,  that  is  to  say,  to  the  need  man
feels  of  a  theory  in  regard  to  the  riddle  of  existence  which
forces  itself  upon  his  notice,  a  need  arising  from  the  con-
sciousness that  behind  the  physical  in  the  world  there  is  a
metaphysical,  something  permanent  as  the  foundation  of
constant  change.  Then  it  appeals  to  the  will,  to  the  fears
and  hopes  of  mortal  beings  living  in  constant  struggle;  for
whom,  accordingly,  religion  creates  gods  and  demons
whom  they  can  cry  to,  appease  and  win  over.  Finally,  it
appeals  to  that  moral  consciousness  which  is  undeniably
present  in  man,  lends  to  it  that  corroboration  and  support
without  which  it  would,  not  easily  maintain  itself  in  the


A  DIALOG  VE.  219

struggle  against  so  many  temptations.  It  is  just  from  this
side  that  religion  affords  an  inexhaustible  source  of  con
isolation  and  comfort  in  the  innumerable  trials  of  life,  a
comfort  which  does  not  leave  men  in  death,  but  rather
then  only  unfolds  its  full  efficacy.  So  religion  may  be
compared  to  one  who  takes  a  blind  man  by  the  hand  and
leads  him,  because  he  is  unable  to  see  for  himself,  whos<
concern  it  is  to  reach  his  destination,  not  to  look  at  every-
thing by  the  way.

Philalethes. — That  is  certainly  the  strong  point  of
religion.  If  it  is  a  fraud,  it  is  a  pious  fraud;  that  is  un-
deniable. But  this  makes  priests  something  between  de-
ceivers and  teachers  of  morality:  they  daren't  teach  the
real  truth,  as  you  have  quite  rightly  explained,  even  if
they  knew  it,  which  is  not  the  case.  A  true  philosophy,
then,  can  always  exist,  but  not  a  true  religion;  true,  I
mean,  in  the  proper  understanding  of  the  word,  not  merely
in  that  flowery  or  allegorical  sense  which  you  have  de-
scribed; a  sense  in  which  ail  religions  would  be  true,  only
in  various  degrees.  It  is  quite  in  keeping  with  the  in-
extricable mixture  of  weal  and  woe,  honesty  and  deceit,
good  and  evil,  nobility  and  baseness,  which  is  the  average
characteristic  of  the  world  everywhere,  that  the  most  im-
portant, the  most  lofty  the  most  sacred  truths  can  make
their  appearance  only  in  combination  with  a  lie,  can  even
borrow  strength  from  a  lie  as  from  something  that  works
more  powerfully  on  mankind:  and,  as  revelation,  must  be
ushered  in  by  a  lie.  This  might  indeed  be  regarded  as
the  cachet  of  the  moral  world.  However,  we  won't  give
up  the  hope  that  mankind  will  eventually  reach  a  point  of
maturity  and  education  at  which  it  can  on  the  one  side
produce,  and  on  the  other  receive,  the  true  philosophy.
Simplex  sigillum  vert:  the  naked  truth  must  be  so  simple
and  intelligible  that  it  can  be  imparted  to  all  in  its  true
form,  without  any  admixture  of  myth  and  fable,  without
disguising  it  in  the  form  of  religion.

Demopheles. — You've  no  notion  how  stupid  most
people  are.

Philalethes. — I  am  only  expressing  a  hope  which  J
can't  give  up.  If  it  were  fulfilled,  truth  in  its  simple  anc
intelligible  form  would  of  course  drive  religion  from  tin
place  it  has  so  long  occupied  as  its  representative,  and  by
stoat  very  means  kept  open  for  it      The  time  would   have


220  RELIGION.

come  when  religion  would  have  carried  out  her  object  and
completed  her  coarse:  the  race  she  had  brought  to  years
of  discretion  she  could  dismiss,  and  herself  depart  in
peace:  that  would  be  the  euthanasia  of  religion.  But  as
long  as  she  lives,  she  has  two  faces,  one  of  truth,  one  of
fraud.  According  as  you  look  at  one  or  the  other,  you
will  bear  her  favor  or  ill-will.  Eeligion  must  be  regarded
as  a  necessary  evil,  its  necessity  resting  on  the  pitiful  im-
becility of  the  great  majority  of  mankind,  incapable  of
grasping  the  truth,  and  therefore  requiring,  in  its  pressing
need,  something  to  take  its  place.

Demopheles. — Really,  one  would  think  that  you  phi-
losophers had  truth  in  a  cupboard,  and  that  all  you  had  to
do  was  to  go  and  get  it!

Philalethes. — Well,  if  we  haven't  got  it,  it  is  chiefly
owing  to  the  pressure  put  upon  philosophy  by  religion  at
all  times  and  in  all  places.  People  have  tried  to  make  the
expression  and  communication  of  truth,  even  the  contem-
plation and  discovery  of  it,  impossible,  by  putting  children,
in  their  earliest  years,  into  the  hands  of  priests  to  be
manipulated;  to  have  the  lines  in  which  their  funda-
mental thoughts  are  henceforth  to  run,  laid  down  with  such
firmness  as,  in  essential  matters,  to  be  fixed  and  determined
for  this  whole  life.  When  I  take  up  the  writings  even  of
the  best  intellects  of  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  cen-
turies (more  especially  if  I  have  been  engaged  in  oriental
studies),  I  am  sometimes  shocked  to  see  how  they  are
paralyzed  and  hemmed  in  on  all  sides  by  Jewish  ideas.
How  can  any  one  think  out  the  true  philosophy  when  he
r,  prepared  like  this?

Demopheles. — Even  if  the  true  philosophy  were  to  be  dis-
covered, religion  wouldn't  disappear  from  the  world,  as
you  seem  to  think.  There  can't  be  one  system  of  meta
physics  for  everybody;  that's  rendered  impossible  by  the
natural  differences  of  intellectual  power  between  man  anu.
man,  and  the  differences,  too,  which  education  makes.
It  is  a  necessity  for  the  great  majority  of  mankind  to  en-
gage in  that  severe  bodily  labor  which  cannot  be  dispensed
with  if  the  ceaseless  requirements  of  the  whole  race  are
to  be  satisfied.  Not  only  does  this  leave  the  majority  no
time  for  education,  for  learning,  for  contemplation;  but
by  virtue  of  the  hard  and  fast  antagonism  between
muscles  and  mind,  the  intelligence  is  blunted  by  so  muct


A  DIALOGUE.  221

exhausting  bodily  labor,  and  becomes  heavy,  clumsy,  awk-
ward and  consequently  incapable  of  grasping  any  other
than  quite  simple  situations.  At  least  nine-tenths  of  the
human  race  falls  under  this  category.  But  still  people
require  a  system  of  metaphysics,  that  is,  an  apcount  of  the
world  and  our  existence,  because  such  an  account  belongs
to  the  most  natural  needs  of  mankind,  they  require  a
popular  system;  and  to  be  popular  it  must  combine  many
rare  qualities.  It  must  be  easily  understood,  and  at  the
same  time  possess,  on  the  proper  points,  a  certain  amount
of  obscurity,  even  of  impenetrability:  then  a  correct  and
satisfactory  system  of  morality  must  be  bound  up  with  its
dogmas;  above  all,  it  must  afford  inexhaustible  consolation
in  suffering  and  death;  the  consequence  of  all  this  is,
that  it  can  only  be  true  in  an  allegorical  and  not  in  a  reaj
sense.  Further,  it  must  have  the  support  of  an  authority
which  is  impressive  by  its  great  age,  by  being  universally
recognized,  by  its  documents,  their  tone  and  utterances;
qualities  which  are  so  extremely  difficult  to  combine  that
many  a  man  wouldn't  be  so  ready,  if  he  considered  the
matter,  to  help  to  undermine  a  religion,  but  would  reflect
that  what  he  is  attacking  is  a  people's  most  sacred  treas-
ure. If  you  want  to  form  an  opinion  on  religion,  you
should  always  bear  in  mind  the  character  of  the  great
multitude  for  which  it  is  destined,  and  form  a  picture  to
yourself  of  its  complete  inferiority,  moral  and  intellectual.
It  is  incredible  how  far  this  inferiority  goes,  and  how
perseveringly  a  spark  of  truth  will  glimmer  on  even  under
the  crudest  covering  of  monstrous  fable  or  grotesque  cere-
mony, clinging  indestructibly,  like  the  odor  of  musk,  to
every  tiling  that  has  once  come  into  contact  with  it.  In
illustration  of  this,  consider  the  profound  wisdom  of  the
Upanishads,  and  then  look  at  the  mad  idolatry  in  the
India  of  to-day,  with  its  pilgrimages,  processions  and
festivities,  or  at  the  insane  and  ridiculous  goings-on  of  the
Saniassi.  Still  one  can't  deny  that  in  all  this  insanity  and
nonsense  there  lies  some  obscure  purpose  which  accords
with,  or  is  a  reflection  of  the  profound  wisdom  I  men-
tioned. But  for  the  brute  multitude,  it  has  to  be  dressed
up  in  this  form.  In  such  a  contrast  as  this  we  have  the  two
poles  of  humanity,  the  wisdom  of  the  individual  and  the
bestiality  of  the  many,  both  of  which  find  their  point  of
contact   in    the    moral    spliere.     That    saving    from    the


222  RELIGION.

Kurral  must  occur  to  everybody,  "  Base  people  look  like
men,  but  I  have  never  seen  their  exact  counterpart. *'
The  man  of  education  may,  all  the  same,  interpret  reli-
gion to  himself  cum  grano  sails;  the  man  of  learning,  the
contemplative  spirit  may  secretly  exchange  it  for  a  phi-
losophy. But  here  again  one  philosophy  wouldn't  suit
-everybody;  by  the  laws  of  affinity  every  system  would  draw
\o  itself  that  public  to  whose  education  and  capacities  it
was  most  suited.  So  there  is  always  an  inferior  meta-
physical system  of  the  schools  for  the  educated  multitude,
and  a  higher  one  for  the  elite.  Kant's  lofty  doctrine,  for
instance,  had  to  be  degraded  to  the  level  of  the  schools
and  ruined  by  such  men  as  Fries,  Krug  and  Salat.  In
short,  here,  if  anywhere,  Goethe's  maxim  is  true,  "  One
does  not  suit  all."  Pure  faith  in  revelation  and  pure  meta-
physics are  for  the  two  extremes,  and  for  the  intermediate
steps  mutual  modifications  of  both  in  innumerable  com-
binations and  gradations.  And  this  is  rendered  neces-
sary by  the  immeasurable  differences  which  nature  and
education  have  placed  between  man  and  man.

Philalethes. — The  view  you  take  reminds  mc  seriously
of  the  mysteries  of  the  ancients,  whicn  you  mentioned
just  now.  Their  fundamental  purpose  seems  to  have
been  to  remedy  the  evil  arising  from  the  differences  of
intellectual  capacity  and  education.  The  plan  was  out  of
the  great  multitude  utterly  impervious  to  unveiled  truth,
to  select  certain  persons  who  might  have  it  revealed  to
them  up  to  a  given  point;  out  of  these,  again  to  choose
others  to  whom  more  would  be  revealed,  as  being  able  to
grasp  more;  and  so  on  up  to  the  Epopts.  These  grades
corresponded  to  the  little,  greater  and  greatest  mysteries.
The  arrangement  was  founded  on  a  correct  estimate  of  the
intellectual  inequality  of  mankind.

Demopheles. — To  some  extent  the  education  in  our
lower,  middle  and  high  schools  corresponds  to  the  varying
grades  of  initiation  into  the  mysteries.

Philalethes. — In  a  very  approximate  way:  and  then
only  in  so  far  as  subjects  of  higher  knowledge  are  written
about  exclusively  in  Latin.  But  since  that  has  ceased  to
be  the  case,  all  the  mysteries  are  profaned.

Demopheles. — However  that  may  be,  I  wanted  to  re-
mind you  that  you  should  look  at  religion  more  from  the
practical  than  from  the  theoretical  side.     Personified  rneta-


A  DIALOGUE.  223

physics  may  be  the  enemy  of  religion,  but  all  the  same
personified  morality  will  be  its  friend.  Perhaps  the
metaphysical  element  in  all  religions  is  false,  but  the
moral  element  in  all  :  s  true.  This  might  perhaps  be  pre-
sumed from  the  fact  they  all  disagree  in  their  meta-
physics, but  are  in  accord  as  regards  morality.

Philalethes. — Which  is  an  illustration  of  the  rule  of
logic  that  false  premises  may  be  given  a  true  conclusion.

Demopheles. — Let  me  hold  you  to  your  conclusion
let  me  remind  you  that  religion  lias  two  sides.  If  it  can't
stand  when  looked  at  from  its  theoretical,  that  is,  its
intellectual  side;  on  the  other  hand,  from  the  moral  side,
it  proves  itself  the  only  means  of  guiding,  controlling  and
mollifying  those  races  of  animals  endowed  with  reason,
whose  kinship  with  the  ape  does  not  exclude  a  kinship
with  the  tiger.  But  at  the  same  time  religion  is,  as  a  rule,
a  sufficient  satisfaction  for  their  dull  metaphysical  neces-
sities. You  don't  seem  to  me  to  possess  a  proper  idea  of
the  difference,  wide  as  the  heavens  asunder,  the  deep  gulf
between  your  man  of  learning  and  enlightenment,  ac-
customed to  the  process  of  thinking,  and  the  heavy,
clumsy,  dull  and  sluggish  consciousness  of  humanity's
beasts  of  burden,  whose  thoughts  have  once  and  for  all
taken  the  direction  of  anxiety  about  their  livelihood,  and
cannot  be  put  in  motion  in  any  other;  whose  muscular
strength  is  so  exclusively  brought  into  play  that  the  nerv-
ous power,  which  makes  intelligence,  sinks  to  a  very  low
ebb.  People  like  that  must  have  something  tangible  which
they  can  lay  hold  of  on  the  slippery  and  thorny  pathway
of  their  life,  some  sort  of  beautiful  fable,  by  means  of
which  things  can  be  imparted  to  them  which  their  crude
intelligence  can  entertain  only  in  picture  and  parable.
Profound  explanations  and  fine  distinctions  are  thrown
away  upon  them.  If  you  conceive  religiou  in  this  light,
and  recollect  that  its  aims  are  above  all  practical,  and  only
in  a  subordinate  degree  theoretical,  it  will  appear  to  you
as  something  worthy  of  the  highest  respect.

Philalethes. — A  respect  which  will  finally  rest  upon
the  principle  that  the  end  sanctifies  the  means.  I  don't
feel  in  favor  of  a  compromise  on  a  basis  like  that.  Reli-
gion may  be  an  excellent  means  of  taming  and  training  the
perverse,  obtuse  and  ill-disposed  members  of  the  biped  race:
in   the   eyes   of   the   friend   of   truth   every   fraud,    even


324  RELIGION,

though  it  be  a  pious  one,  is  to  be  condemned.  A  system
of  deception,  a  pack  of  lies,  would  be  a  strange  means  of
inculcating  virtue.  The  flag  to  which  I  have  taken  the
oath  is  truth:  I  shall  remain  faithful  to  it  everywhere,  and
whether  I  succeed  or  not,  I  shall  fight  for  light  and  truth!
H  I  see  religion  on  the  wrong  side

Demopheles. — But  you  won't.  Religion  isn't  a  decep-
tion: it  is  true  and  the  most  important  of  all  truths.
Because  its  doctrines  are,  as  I  have  said,  of  such  a  lofty
kind  that  the  multitude  can't  grasp  them  without  an
intermediary;  because,  I  say,  its  light  would  blind  the
ordinary  eye,  it  comes  forward  wrapped  in  the  veil  of  allegory
and  teaches,  not  indeed  what  is  exactly  true  in  itself,  but
what  is  true  in  respect  of  the  lofty  meaning  contained  in
it;  and,  understood  in  this  way,  religion  is  the  truth.

Philalethes. — It  would  be  all  right  if  religion  were
only  at  liberty  to  be  true  in  a  merely  allegorical  sense.
But  its  contention  is  that  it  is  downright  true  in  the
proper  sense  of  the  word.  Herein  lies  the  deception,  and
it  is  here  that  the  friend  of  truth  must  take  up  a  hostile
position.

Demopheles. — This  deception  is  a  sine  qua  non.  If
religion  were  to  admit  that  it  was  only  the  allegorical
meaning  in  its  doctrines  which  was  true,  it  would  rob  it-
self of  all  efficacy.  Such  rigorous  treatment  as  this  would
destroy  its  invaluable  influence  on  the  hearts  and  morals
of  mankind.  Instead  of  insisting  on  that  with  pedantic
obstinacy,  look  at  its  great  achievements  in  the  practical
sphere,  its  furtherance  of  good  and  kindly  feelings,  its
guidance  in  conduct,  the  support  and  consolation  it  gives
to  suffering  humanity  in  life  and  death.  How  much  you
.  ought  to  guard  against  letting  theoretical  cavils  discredit
'  in  the  eyes  of  the  multitude,  and  finally  wrest  from  it,
something  which  is  an  inexhaustible  source  of  consolation
and  tranquillity,  something  which,  in  its  hard  lot,  it  needs
so  much,  even  more  than  we  do.  On  that  score  alone,
religion  should  be  free  from  attack.

Philalethes. — With  that  kind  of  argument  you  could
have  driven  Luther  from  the  field,  when  he  attacked  the
sale  of  indulgences.  How7  many  a  man  got  consolation
from  the  letters  of  indulgence,  a  consolation  which  noth-
ing else  could  give,  a  complete  tranquillity:  so  that  he
joyfully  departed  with  the  fullest  confidence  in  the  packet


A  DIALOGUE.  225

of  them  which  he  held  in  his  hand  at  the  hour  of  death,
convinced  that  they  were  so  many  cards  of  admission  to
all  the  nine  heavens.  What  is  the  use  of  grounds  of  con-
solation and  tranquillity  which  are  constantly  overshadowed
by  the  Damocles-sword  of  illusion?  The  truth,  my  dear
sir,  is  the  only  safe  thing;  the  truth  alone  remains  stead-
iast  and  trusty;  it  is  the  only  solid  consolation;  it  is  the
ndestrnctible  diamond.

Demoppieles. — Yes,  if  you  had  truth  in  your  pocket,
ready  to  favor  us  with  it  on  demand.  All  you've  got  are
metaphysical  systems,  in  which  nothing  is  certain  but  the
headaches  they  cost.  Before  you  take  anything  away,
you  must  have  something  better  to  put  in  its  place.

Philalethes. — That's  what  you  keep  on  saying.  To
free  a  man  from  error  is  to  give,  not  to  take  away.
Knowledge  that  a  thing  is  false  is  a  truth.  Error  always
does  harm:  sooner  or  later  it  will  bring  mischief  to  the
man  who  harbors  it.  Then  give  up  deceiving  people;
confess  ignorance  of  what  you  don't  know,  and  leave  every
one  to  form  his  own  articles  of  faith  for  himself.  Perhaps
they  won't  turn  out  so  bad,  especially  as  they'll  rub  one
another's  corners  down,  and  mutually  rectify  mistakes.
The  existence  of  many  views  will  at  any  rate  lay  a  foun-
dation of  tolerance.  Those  who  possess  knowledge  and
capacity  may  betake  themselves  to  the  study  of  philosophy,
or  even  in  their  own  persons  carry  the  history  of  philos-
ophy a  step  further.

Demopheles. — That'll  be  a  pretty  business!  A  whole
nation  of  raw  metaphysicians,  wrangling  and  eventually
coming  to  blows  with  one  another!

Philalethes. — Well,  well,  a  few  blows  here  and  there
are  the  sauce  of  life;  or  at  any  rate  a  very  inconsiderable
-vil,  compared  with  such  things  as  priestly  dominion,  plun-
lering  of  the  laity,  persecution  of  heretics,  courts  of  in-
quisition, crusades,  religious  wars,  massacres  of  St.
Bartholomew.  These  have  been  the  results  of  popular
metaphysics  imposed  from  without;  so  I  stick  to  the  old
saying  that  you  can't  get  grapes  from  thistles,  nor  expect
good  to  come  from  a  pack  of  lies.

Demopheles. — How  often  must  I  repeat  that  religion
is  anything  but  a  pack  of  lies?  It  is  the  truth  itself,  only
in  a  mythical,  allegorical  vesture.  But  when  you  spoke  of
your  plan  of  every  one  beino-  his  own  founder  of  religion-


226  RELIGION.

I  wanted  to  say  that  a  particularism  like  this  is  totally
opposed  to  human  nature,  and  would  consequently  destroy
all  social  order.  Man  is  a  metaphysical  animal — that  is  to
say,  he  has  paramount  metaphysical  necessities;  accord-
ingly, he  conceives  life  above  all  in  its  metaphysical
significance  and  wishes  to  bring  everything  into  line  with
that.  Consequently,  however  strange  it  may  sound  in
view  of  the  uncertainty  of  all  dogmas,  agreement  in  the
fundamentals  of  metaphysics  is  the  chief  thing;  because  a
genuine  and  lasting  bond  of  union  is  only  possible  among
those  who  are  of  one  opinion  on  these  points.  As  a  result
of  this,  the  main  point  of  likeness  and  of  contrast  between
nations  is  rather  religion  than  government,  or  even
language;  and  so  the  fabric  of  society,  the  state,  will  stand
firm  only  when  founded  on  a  system  of  metaphysics  which
is  acknowledged  by  all.  This,  of  course,  can  only  be  a
popular  system — that  is,  a  religion:  it  becomes  part  and
parcel  of  the  constitution  of  the  state,  of  all  the  public
manifestations  of  the  national  life,  and  also  of  all  solemn
acts  of  individuals.  This  was  the  case  in  ancient  India,
among  the  Persians,  Egyptians,  Jews,  Greeks  and  Romans:
it  is  still  the  case  in  the  Brahman,  Buddhist  and  Moham-
medan nations.  In  China  there  are  three  faiths,  it
is  true,  of  which  the  most  prevalent — Buddhism — is  pre-
cisely the  one  which  is  not  protected  by  the  state:  still,
there  is  a  saying  in  China,  universally  acknowledged,  and
of  daily  application,  that  "  the  three  faiths  are  only  one/*
— that  is  to  say,  they  agree  in  essentials.  The  emperor
confesses  all  three  together  at  the  same  time.  And  Europe
is  the  union  of  Christian  states:  Christianity  is  the  basis
of  every  one  of  the  members,  and  the  common  bond  of  all.
Hence  Turkey,  though  geographically  in  Europe,  is  not
properly  to  be  reckoned  as  belonging  to  it.  In  the  same
way,  theEuropean  princes  hold  their  place  "  by  the  grace  of
God:"  and  the  pope  is  the  vicegerent  of  God.  Accord-
ingly, as  his  throne  was  the  highest,  he  used  to  wish  all
thrones  to  be  regarded  as  held  in  fee  from  him.  In  the
same  way,  too,  archbishops  and  bishops,  as  such,  possessed
temporal  power;  and  in  England  they  still  have  seats  and
votes  in  the  Upper  House.  Protestant  princes,  as  such,
are  heads  of  their  churches:  in  England,  a  few  years  ago,
this  was  a  girl  eighteen  years  old.  By  the  revolt  from  the
pope,  the  Reformation  shattered  the  European  fabric,  and


A  DIALOGUE.  227

in  a  special  degree  dissolved  the  true  unity  of  Germany  by  de
stroying  its  common  religious  faith.  This  union,  whicfl
liad  practically  come  to  an  end,  had,  accordiugly,  to  be
restored  later  on  by  artificial  and  purely  political  means.
You  see,  then,  how  closely  connected  a  common  faith  is
with  the  social  order  and  the  constitution  of  every  state.
Faith  is  everywhere  the  support  of  the  laws  and  the  con
stitution,  the  foundation,  therefore,  of  the  social  fabric,
which  could  hardly  hold  together  at  all  if  religion  did  not
lend  weight  to  the  authority  of  government  and  the  dignity
of  the  ruler.

Philalethes. — Oh,  yes,  princes  use  God  as  a  kind  of
bogey  to  frighten  grown-up  children  to  bed  with,  if  noth-
ing else  avails:  that's  why  they  attach  so  much  importance
to  the  Deity.  Very  well.  Let  me,  in  passing,  recommend
our  rulers  to  give  their  serious  attention,  regularly  twice
every  year,  to  the  fifteenth  chapter  of  the  First  Book  of
Samuel,  that  they  may  be  constantly  reminded  of  what  it
means  to  prop  the  throne  on  the  altar.  Besides,  since  the
stake,  that  ultima  ratio  theologorum,  has  gone  out  of
fashion,  this  method  of  government  has  lost  its  efficacy.
For,  as  you  know,  religions  are  like  glow-worms;  they
shine  only  when  it's  dark.  A  certain  amount  of  general
ignorance  is  the  condition  of  all  religions,  the  element  in
which  alone  they  can  exist.  And  as  soon  as  astronomy,
natural  science,  geology,  history,  the  knowledge  of
countries  and  peoples  have  spread  their  light  broadcast,
and  philosophy  finally  is  permitted  to  say  a  word,  every
faith  founded  on  miracles  and  revelation  must  disappear;
and  philosophy  takes  its  place.  In  Europe  the  day  of
knowledge  and  science  dawned  toward  the  end  of  the
fifteenth  century  with  the  appearance  of  the  Renaissance
Platonists:  its  sun  rose  higher  in  the  sixteenth  and  seven-
teenth centuries  so  rich  in  results,  and  scattered  the  mists
of  the  Middle  Age.  Church  and  Faith  were  compelled  to
disappear  in  the  same  proportion;  and  so  in  the  eight-
eenth century  English  and  French  philosophers  were  able
to  take  up  an  attitude  of  direct  hostility;  until,  finally,
rmder  Frederick  the  Great,  Kant  appeared,  and  took
away  from  religious  belief  the  support  it  had  previously
enjoyed  from  philosophy:  he  emancipated  the  handmaid
of  theology,  and  in  attacking  the  question  with  German
thoroughness  and  patience,  gave  it  an  earnest,  instead  of  a


228  RELIGION.

frivolous  tone.  The  consequence  of  this  is  that  we  see
Christianity  undermined  in  the  nineteenth  century,  a
serious  faith  in  it  almost  completely  gone;  we  see  it  fight-
ing even  for  bare  existence,  while  anxious  princes  try  to
set  it  up  a  little  by  artificial  means,  as  a  doctor  uses  a  drug
on  a  dying  patient,  In  this  connection  there  is  passage  in
Condorcet's  "  Des  Progres  de  V esprit  humain"  which
looks  as  if  written  as  a  warning  to  our  age:  "  the  religious
zeal  shown  by  philosophers  and  great  men  was  only  a
political  devotion;  and  every  religion  which  allows  itself
to  be  defended  as  a  belief  that  may  usefully  be  left  to  the
people,  can  only  hope  for  an  agony  more  or  less  pro-
longed." In  the  whole  course  of  the  events  which  I  have
indicated,  you  may  always  observe  that  faith  and  knowl-
edge are  related  as  the  two  scales  of  a  balance;  when  the
one  goes  up,  the  other  goes  down.  3o  sensitive  is  the
balance  that  it  indicates  momentary  influences.  When,
for  instance,  at  the  beginning  of  this  century,  those  in-
roads of  French  robbers  under  the  leadership  of  Buona-
parte, and  the  enormous  efforts  necessary  for  driving
them  out  and  punishing  them,  had  brought  about  a  tem-
porary neglect  of  science,  and  consequently  a  certain
decline  in  the  general  increase  of  knowledge,  the  Church
immediately  began  to  raise  her  head  again  and  Faith  began
to  show  fresh  signs  of  life:  which,  to  be  sure,  in  keeping
with  frhe  times,  was  partly  poetical  in  its  nature.  On  the
other  hand,  in  the  more  than  thirty  years  of  peace  which
followed,  leisure  and  prosperity  furthered  the  building  up
of  science  and  the  spread  of  knowledge  in  an  extraordinary
degree'  the  consequence  of  which  is  what  I  have  indicated,
the  dissolution  and  threatened  fall  of  religion.  Perhaps
the  time  is  approaching  which  has  so  often  been  proph-
esied, when  religion  will  take  her  departure  from  European
humanity,  like  a  nurse  which  the  child  has  out-grown:
the  child  will  now  be  given  over  to  the  instructions  of  a
tutor.  For  there  is  no  doubt  that  religious  doctrines
which  are  founded  merely  on  authority,  miracles  and
revelations,  are  only  suited  to  the  childhood  of  humanity.
Every  one  will  admit  that  a  race,  the  past  duration  of
which  on  the  earth  all  accounts,  physical  and  historical,
agree  in  placing  at  not  more  than  some  hundred  times  the
life  of  a  man  of  sixty,  is  as  vet  only  in  its  first  childhood,
Demopheles. — Instead   of  taking  an  undisguised  pleas-


A  DIALOGUE.  22*

nre  in  prophesying  the  downfall   of   Christianity,  how   I

wish  you  would  consider  what  a  measureless  debt  of  grati-
tude European  humanity  owes  to  it,  how  greatly  it  has
benefitted  by  the  religion  which,  after  a  long  interval.,
followed  it  from  its  old  home  in  the  East.  Europe  re
ceived  from  Christianity  kleas  which  were  quite  new  to  it,
the  knowledge,  I  mean,  of  the  fundamental  truth  that  life
cannot  be  an  end  in  itself,  that  the  true  end  of  our  ex-
istence lies  beyond  it.  The  Greeks  and  Romans  had
placed  this  end  altogether  in  our  present  life,  so  that  in
this  sense  they  may  certainly  be  called  blind  heathens.
And,  in  keeping  with  this  view  of  life,  all  their  virtues  can
be  reduced  to  what  is  serviceable  to  the  community,  to
what  is  useful,  in  fact.  Aristotle  says  quite  naively,
"  Those  virtues  must  necessarily  be  the  greatest  which  are
the  most  useful  to  others."  So  tl  e  ancients  thought
patriotism  the  highest  virtue,  although  it  is  really  a  very
doubtful  one,  since  narrowness,  prejudice,  vanity  and  an
enlightened  self-interest  are  main  elements  in  it.  Just
before  the  passage  I  quoted,  Aristotle  enumerates  all  the
virtues,  in  order  to  discuss  them  singly.  They  are
Justice,  Courage,  Temperance,  Magnificence,  Magnan-
imity, Liberality,  Gentleness,  Good  Sense  and  Wisdom.
How  different  from  the  Christian  virtues!  Plato  himself,
incomparably  the  most  transcendental  philosopher  of  pre-
Christian  antiquity,  knows  no  higher  virtue  than  justice;
and  he  alone  recommends  it  unconditionally  and  for  its
own  sake,  whereas  the  rest  make  a  happy  life,  vita  beata,
the  aim  of  all  virtue,  and  moral  conduct  the  way  to  attain
it.  Christianity  freed  European  humanity  from  this
shallow,  crude  identification  of  itself  with  the  hollow  un-
certain existence  of  every  day,

"  coel unique  tueri
Jussit,  et  erectos  ad  sidera  tollere  vultus."

Christianity,  accordingly,  does  net  preach  mere  Justice,
but  the  Love  of  Mankind,  Compassion,  Good  Works,
Forgiveness,  Love  of  your  Enemies,  Patience,  Humility,
Resignation,  Faith  and  Hope.  It  even  went  a  step
further,  and  taught  that  the  world  is  of  evil,  and  that  we
need  deliverance.  It  preached  despisal  of  the  world,  self-
denial,    chastity,    giving  up   of   one's  own   will,  that  is,


280  RELIGION.

turning  away  from  life  and  its  illusory  pleasures,  ll
taught  the  healing  power  of  pain:  an  instrument  of
torture  is  the  symbol  of  Christianity.  I  am  quite  ready
to  admit  that  this  earnest,  this  only  correct  view  of  life
was  thousands  of  years  previously  spread  all  over  Asia  in
other  forms,  as  it  is  still,  independently  of  Christianity;
but  for  European  humanity  it  was  a  new  and  great  revela-
tion. For  it  is  well  known  that  the  population  of  Europe
consists  of  Asiatic  races  driven  out  as  wanderers  from
their  own  homes,  and  gradually  settling  down  in  Europe;
on  their  wanderings  these  races  lost  the  original  religion
of  their  homes,  and  with  it  the  right  view  of  life:  so,
under  a  new  sky,  they  formed  religions  for  themselves,
which  were  rather  crude;  the  worship  of  Odin,  for  in-
stance, the  Drnidic  or  the  Greek  religion,  the  metaphysical
content  of  which  was  little  and  shallow.  In  the  mean-
time the  Greeks  developed  a  special,  one  might  almost  say,
an  instinctive  sense  of  beauty,  belonging  to  them  alone  o.«
all  the  nations  who  have  ever  existed  on  the  earth,  pecul-
iar, fine  and  exact:  so  that  their  mythology  took,  in  the
mouth  of  their  poets,  and  in  the  hands  of  their  artists,  an
exceedingly  beautiful  and  pleasing  shape.  On  the  other
hand,  the  true  and  deep  significance  of  life  was  lost  to  the
Greeks  and  Romans.  They  lived  on  like  grown-up
children,  till  Christianity  came  and  recalled  them  to  the
serious  side  of  existence.

Philalethes. — And  to  see  the  effects  you  need  only
compare  antiquity  with  the  Middle  Age;  the  time  of  Peri-
cles, say,  with  the  fourteenth  century.  You  could  scarcely,
believe  you  were  dealing  with  the  same  kind  of  beings.
There,  the  finest  development  of  humanity,  excellent
institutions,  wise  laws,  shrewdly  apportioned  offices,
rationally  ordered  freedom,  all  the  arts,  including  poetry
and  philosophy,  at  their  best;  the  production  of  works
which,  after  thousands  of  years,  are  unparalleled,  the  crea-
tions, as  it  were,  of  a  higher  order  of  beings,  which  we  can
never  imitate;  life  embellished  by  the  noblest  fellowship,
as  portrayed  in  Xenoph'on's  *'*  Banquet."  Look  on  the
other  picture,  if  you  can;  a  time  at  which  the  Church  had
enslaved  the  minds,  and  violence  the  bodies  of  men,  that
knights  and  priests  might  lay  the  whole  weight  of  life
upon  the  common  beast  of  burden,  the  third  estate.
There,  you  have  .might  as  right,  Feudalism   and    Fauati-


A  DIALOG  US.  $31

eism  in  close  alliance,  and  in  their  train  abominable
ignorance  and  darkness  of  mind,  a  corresponding  intoler-
ance, discord  of  creeds,  religious  wars,  crusades,  inquisi-
tions and  persecutions:  as  the  form  of  fellowship,  chivalry,
compounded  of  savagery  and  folly,  with  its  pedantic
system  of  ridiculous  false  pretenses  carried  to  an  extreme,
its  degrading  superstition  and  apish  veneration  for
women.  Gallantry  is  the  residue  of  this  veneration,  de-
servedly requited  as  it  is  by  feminine  arrogance:  it  affords
continual  food  for  laughter  to  all  Asiatics,  and  the  Greeks
would  have  joined  in  it.  In  the  golden  Middle  Age  the
practice  developed  into  a  regular  and  methodical  service  of
women;  it  imposed  deeds  of  heroism,  coars  d' amour,
bombastic  troubadour  songs  etc.;  although  it  is  to  be
observed  that  these  last  buffooneries,  which  had  an  intel-
lectual side,  were  chiefly  at  home  in  France;  whereas
among  the  material  sluggish  Germans,  the  knights  dis-
tinguished themselves  rather  by  drinking  and  stealing;
they  were  good  at  boozing  and  filling  their  castles  with
plunder;  though  in  the  courts  to  be  sure,  there  was  no
lack  of  insipid  love-songs.  What  caused  this  utter  trans-
formation?    Migration  and  Christianity.

Demopheles. — I  am  glad  you  reminded  me  of  it.
Migration  was  the  source  of  the  evil;  Christianity  the  dam
on  which  it  broke.  It  was  chiefly  by  Christianity  that  the
raw,  wild  hordes  which  came  flooding  in  were  controlled
and  tamed.  The  savage  man  must  first  of  all  learn  to
kneel,  to  venerate,  to  obey;  after  that,  he  can  be  civilized.
This  was  done  in  Ireland  by  St.  Patrick,  in  Germany  bv
Winifried  the  Saxon,  who  was  a  genuine  Boniface.  It
was  migration  of  peoples,  the  last  advance  of  Asiatic  races
toward  Europe,  followed  only  by  the  fruitless  attempts  of
those  under  Attila,  Genghis^  Khan,  and  Timur,  and  as  a
comic  afterpiece,  by  the  gypsies — it  was  this  movement
which  swept  away  the  humanity  of  the  ancients.  C-hristian-
ity  was  precisely  the  principle  which  set  itself  to  work
against  this  savagery;  just  as  later,  through  the  whole  of
the  Middle  Age,  the  Church  and  its  hierarchy  were  most
necessary  to  set  limits  to  the  savage  barbarism  of  those
masters  of  violence,  the  princes  and  knights;  it  was  what
Oroke  up  the  ice-floes  in  that  mighty  deluge.  Still,  the
chief  aim  of  Christianity  is  uot  so  much  to  make  this  life
pleasant  as  to  render  us  worthy  of  a  better.     It  looks  away


232  RELIGION*.

over  this  span  of  time*  over  this  fleeting  dream,  and  geeks
to  lead  us  to  eternal  welfare.  Its  tendency  is  ethical  in
the  highest  sense  of  the  word,  a  sense  unknown  in  Europe
till  its  advent;  as  I  have  shown  you,  by  putting  the
morality  and  religion  of  the  ancients  side  by  side  with
those  of  Christendom.

Philalethes. — You  are  quite  right  as  regards  theory;
but  look  at  the  practice!  In  comparison  with  the  ages  of
Christianity  the  ancient  world  was  unquestionably  less
cruel  than  the  Middle  Age,  with  its  deaths  by  exquisite
torture,  its  innumerable  burnings  at  the  stake.  The  an-
cients, further,  were  very  enduring,  laid  great  stress  o
justice,  frequently  sacrificed  themselves  for  their  country,
showed  such  traces  of  every  kind  of  magnanimity,  and
such  genuine  manliness,  that  to  this  day  an  acquaintance
with  their  thoughts  and  actions  is  called  the  study  of
Humanity.  The  fruits  of  Christianity  were  religious  wars,
butcheries,  crusades,  inquisitions,  extermination  of  the
natives  in  America,  and  the  introduction  of  African  slaves
in  their  place;  and  among  the  ancients  there  is  nothing
analogous  to  this,  nothing  that  can  be  compared  with  it;
for  the  slaves  of  the  ancients,  the  familia,  the  vernce,
were  a  contented  race,  and  faithfully  devoted  to  their
masters'  service,  and  as  different  from  the  miserable
negroes  of  the  sugar  plantations,  which  are  a  disgrace  to
humanity,  as  their  two  colors  are  distinct.  Those  special
moral  delinquencies  for  which  we  reproach  the  ancients,
and  which  are  perhaps  less  uncommon  nowadays  than
appears  on  the  surface  to  be  the  case,  are  trifles  compared
with  the  Christian  enormities  I  have  mentioned.  Can
you  then,  all  considered,  maintain  that  mankind  has  been
really  made  morally  better  by  Christianity?

Demopheles. — If  the  results  haven't  everywhere  been
in  keeping  with  the  purity  and  truth  of  the  doctrine,  it
may  be  because  the  doctrine  has  been  too  noble
too  elevated  for  mankind,  that  its  aim  has  been
placed  too  high.  It  was  so  much  easier  to  come  up  to  the
heathen  system,  or  to  the  Mohammedan.  It  is  precisely
what  is  noble  and  dignified  that  is  most  liable  everywhere
to  misuse  and  fraud:  abusus  optimi  pessimus.  Those
high  doctrines  have  accordingly  now  and  then  served  as  a
pretext  for  the  most  abominable  proceedings,  and  for  acts
of   unmitigated    wickedness.      The   downfall   of   the    in-


A  DIALOGUE.  283

Btitutions  of  the  old  world,  as  well  as  of  its  arts  and
sciences,  is,  as  I  have  said,  to  be  attributed  to  the  inroad
of  foreign  barbarians.  The  inevitable  result  of  this  inroad
was  that  iguorance  and  savagery  got  the  upper  hand;
consequently  violence  and  knavery  established  their
dominion,  and  knights  and  priests  became  a  burden  to
mankind.  It  is  partly,  however,  to  be  explained  by  the  fact
that  the  new  religion  made  eternal  and  not  temporal  wel-
fare the  object  of  desire,  taught  that  simplicity  of  heart
was  to  be  preferred  to  knowledge,  and  looked  askance  at
all  worldly  pleasure.  Now  the  arts  and  sciences  subserve
worldly  pleasure;  but  in  so  far  as  they  could  be  made
serviceable  to  religion  they  were  promoted,  and  attained
a  certain  degree  of  perfection.

Philalethes. — In  a  very  narrow  sphere.  The  sciences
were  suspicious  companions,  and  as  such,  were  placed
under  restrictions:  on  the  other  hand  darling  ignorance,
that  element  so  necessary  to  a  system  of  faith,  was  care-
fully nourished.

Demopheles. — And  yet  mankind's  possessions  in  the
way  of  knowledge  up  to  that  period,  which  were  preserved
in  the  writings  of  the  ancients,  were  saved  from  destruc-
tion by  the  clergy,  especially  by  these  in  the  monasteries.
How  would  it  have  fared  if  Christianity  hadn't  come  in
just  before  the  migration  of  peoples?

Philalethes. — It  would  really  be  a  most  useful  inquiry
to  try  and  make,  with  the  coldest  impartiality,  an  unprej-
udiced, careful  and  accurate  comparison  of  the  advantages
and  disadvantages  which  may  be  put  down  to  religion.
For  that,  of  course,  a  much  larger  knowledge  of  historical
and  psychological  data  than  either  of  us  command,  would
be  necessary.  Academies  might  make  it  a  subject  for  a
prize  essay.

Demopheles. — They'll  take  good  care  not  to  do  so.

Philalethes, — I'm  surprised  to  hear  you  say  that:  it's
a  bad  lookout  for  religion.  However,  there  are  acad-
emies which,  in  proposing  a  subject  for  competition,
make  it  a  secret  condition  that  the  prize  is  to  go  to  the
man  who  best  interprets  their  own  view.  If  we  could  only
begin  by  getting  a  statistician  to  tell  us  how  many  crimes
are  prevented  every  year  by  religious,  and  how  many  by
other  motives,  there  would  be  very  few  of  the  former.
If  a  man  feels  tempted  to  commit  a  crime,  you  may  rety


234  RELIGION.

upon  it  that  the  first  consideration  which  enters  his  heaJ
is  the  penalty  appointed  for  it,  and  the  chances  that  it
will  fall  upon  him:  then  comes,  as  a  second  consideration,
the  risk  to  his  reputation.  If  I  am  not  mistaken,  he  will
ruminate  by  the  hour  on  these  two  impediments,  before
he  ever  takes  a  thought  of  religious  considerations.  If  he
gets  safely  over  those  two  first  bulwarks  against  crime,  1
think  religion  alone  will  very  rarely  hold  him  back  from
it

Demopheles. — I  think  that  it  will  very  often  do  so,
especially  when  its  influence  works  through  the  medium
of  custom.  An  atrocious  act  is  at  once  felt  to  be  repul-
sive. What  is  this  but  the  effect  of  early  impressions?
Think,  for  instance,  how  often  a  man,  especially  if  of
noble  birth,  will  make  trememloijs  sacrifices  to  perform
what  he  has  promised,  motived  entirely  by  the  fact  that
his  father  has  often  earnestly  impressed  upon  him  in  his
childhood  that  "  a  man  of  honor  "  or  " a  gentleman"  or
"a  cavalier"  always  keeps  his  word  inviolate.

Philalethes. — That's  no  use  unless  there  is  a  certain
inborn  honorableness.  You  mustn't  ascribe  to  religion
what  results  from  innate  goodness  of  character,  by  which
compassion  for  the  man  who  would  suffer  by  the  crime
keeps  a  man  from  committing  it.  This  is  the  genuine
moral  motive,  and  as  such  it  is  independent  of  all
religions.

Demopheles. — But  this  is  a  motive  which  rarely  affects
the  multitude  unless  it  assumes  a  religious  aspect.  The
religious  aspect  at  any  rate  strengthens  its  power  for  good.
Yet  without  any  such  natural  foundation,  religious  motives
alone  are  powerful  to  prevent  crime.  We  need  not  be
surprised  at  this  in  the  case  of  the  multitude  when  we  see
that  even  people  of  education  pass  now  and  then  under
the  influence,  not  indeed  of  religious  motives,  which  are
founded  on  something  which  is  at  least  allegorically  true,
but  of  the  most  absurd  superstition,  and  allow  themselves
to  be  guided  by  it  ail  their  life  long;  as,  for  instance,
undertaking  nothing  on  a  Friday,  refusing  to  sit  down
thirteen  at  table,  obeying  chance  omens,  and  the  like.
How  much  more  likely  is  the  multitude  to  be  guided  by
such  things.  You  can't  form  any  adequate  idea  of  the
narrow  limits  of  the  mind  in  its  raw  state;  it  is  a  place  of
absolute  darkness,  especially  when,  as  often  happens,  a  bad,


A  DIALOG  TIE.  235

unjust,  and  malicious  heart  is  at  the  bottom  of  it.  People
iu  this  condition — and  they  form  the  great  bulk  of  human-
ity— must  be  led  and  controlled  as  well  as  may  be,  even  if
it  be  by  really  superstitious  motives;  until  such  time  as
they  become  susceptible  to  truer  and  better  ones.  As  an
instance  of  the  direct  working  of  religion,  may  be  cited
the  fact,  common  enough,  in  Italy  especially,  of  a  thief
restoring  stoleu  goods,  through  the  influence  of  his  con-
fessor, who  says  he  won't  absolve  him  if  he  doesn't.
Think  again  of  the  case  of  an  oath,  where  religion  shows
a  most  decided  influence:  whether  it  be  that  a  man  places
himself  expressly  in  the  position  of  a  purely  moral
being,  and  as  such  looks  upon  himself  as  solemnly  ap-
pealed to,  as  seems  to  be  the  case  in  France,  where  the
formula  is  simply  je  le  jure,  and  also  among  the  Quakers,
whose  solemn  yea  or  nay  is  regarded  as  a  substitute  for
the  oath;  or  whether  it  be  that  a  man  really  believes  he  is
pronouncing  something  which  may  affect  his  eternal
happiness — a  belief  which  is  presumably  only  the  investi-
ture of  the  former  feeling.  At  any  rate,  religious  consider-
ations are  a  means  of  awaking  and  calling  out  a  man's
moral  nature.  How  often  it  happens  that  a  man  agrees
to  take  a  false  oath,  and  then,  when  it  comes  to  the  point,
suddenly  refuses,  and  truth  and  right  win  the  day.

Philalethes. — Oftener  still  false  oaths  are  really
taken,  and  truth  and  right  trampled  under  foot,  though
all  witnesses  of  the  oath  know  it  well.  Still  you  are
quite  right  to  quote  the  oath  as  an  undeniable  example  of
the  practical  efficacy  of  religion.  But,  in  spite  of  all
you've  said,  I  doubt  whether  the  efficacy  of  religion  goes
much  beyond  this.  Just  think;  if  a  public  proclamation
were  suddenly  made,  announcing  the  repeal  of  all  the
criminal  laws;  I  fancy  neither  you  nor  I  would  have  the
courage  to  go  home  from  here  under  the  protection  of  re-
ligious motives.  If,  in  the  same  way,  all  religions  were
declared  untrue,  we  could,  under  the  protection  of  the
laws  alone,  go  on  living  as  before,  without  any  special
addition  to  our  apprehensions  or  our  measures  of  precau-
tion. I  will  go  beyond  this,  and  say  that  religions  have
very  frequently  exercised  a  decidedly  demoralizing  influ-
ence. One  may  say  generally  that  duties  toward  God  and
duties  toward  humanity  are  in  inverse  ratio.  It  is  easy  to
Jet  adulation  of  the  Deitv  make  amends  for  lack  of  proper


236  RELIGION.

Lehavior  toward  man.  And  so  we  see  that  in  all  times  and
in  all  countries  the  great  majority  of  mankind  find  it
much  easier  to  beg  their  way  to  heaven  by  prayers  than  to
deserve  to  go  there  by  their  actions.  In  every  religion  it
soon  comes  to  be  the  case  that  faith,  ceremonies,  rites  and
the  like  are  proclaimed  to  be  more  agreeable  to  the  Divine
vill  than  moral  actions;  the  former,  especially  if  they  are
bound  up  with  the  emoluments  of  the  clergy,  gradually
come  to  be  looked  upon  as  a  substitute  for  the  latter,
Sacrifices  in  temples,  the  saving  of  masses,  the  founding
•of  chapels,  the  planting  of  crosses  by  the  roadside,  soon
come  to  be  the  most  meritorious  works,  so  that  even  great
crimes  are  expiated  by  them,  as  also  by  penance,  subjection
to  priestly  authority,  confessions,  pilgrimages,  donations  to
the  temples  and  the  clergy,  the  building  of  monasteries
and  the  like.  The  consequence  of  all  this  is  that  the
priests  finally  appear  as  middlemen  in  the  corruption  of
the  gods.  And  if  matters  don't  go  quite  so  far  as  that
where  is  the  religion  whose  adherents  don't  consider
prayers,  praise  and  manifold  acts  of  devotion,  a  substitute,
at  least  in  part,  for  moral  conduct?  Look  at  England,
where  by  an  audacious  piece  of  priestcraft,  the  Christian
Sunday,  introduced  by  Constantine  the  Great  as  a  substi-
tute for  the  Jewish  Sabbath,  is  in  a  mendacious  way
identified  with  it,  and  takes  its  name — and  this  in  order
that  the  commands  of  Jehovah  for  the  Sabbath  (that  is,
the  day  on  which  the  Almighty  had  to  rest  from  his  six
days''  labor,  so  that  it  is  essentially  the  last  day  of  the  week),
might  be  applied  to  the  Christian  Sunday,  the  dies  soils,
the  first  day  of  the  week  which  the  sun  opens  in  glory,
the  day  of  devotion  and  joy.  The  consequence  of  this
fraud  is  that  "Sabbath-breaking,"  or  "the  desecration  of
the  Sabbath,"  that  is,  the  slightest  occupation,  whether  of
business  or  pleasure,  all  games,  music,  sewing,  worldly
books,  are  on  Sundays  looked  upon  as  great  sins.  Surely
the  ordinary  man  must  believe  that  if,  as  his  spiritual
guides  impress  upon  him,  he  is  only  constant  in  "  a  strict
observance  of  the  holy  Sabbath,"  and  "a  regular  attend-
ance on  Divine  Service,"  that  is,  if  he  only  invariably  idles
away  his  time  on  Sundays  and  doesn't  fail  to  sit  two  hours
in  church  to  hear  the  same  litany  for  the  thousandth  time
and  mutter  it  in  tune  with  the  others,  he  may  reckon  on
indulgence  in  regard  to  those  little  peccadilloes  which  he


A  DIALOGUE.  23?

occasionally  allows  himself.  Those  devil's  in  human  form —
the  slave  owners  and  traders  in  the  free  states  of  North
America  (they  should  be  called  the  slave  states) — are,  as  a
rule,  orthodox,  pious  Anglicans  who  would  consider  it  a
grave  sin  to  work  on  Sundays:  and  in  confidence  in  this,
and  their  regular  attendance  at  church,  they  hope  for
eternal  happiness.  The  demoralizing  tendency  of  religion
is  less  problematical  than  its  moral  influence.  How  great
and  how  certain  that  moral  influence  must  be  to  make
amends  for  the  enormities  which  religions,  especially  the
Christian  and  Mohammedan  religions,  have  produced  and
spread  over  the  earth!  Think  of  the  fanaticism,  the  end-
less persecutions,  the  religious  wars,  that  sanguinary  frenzy
of  which  the  ancients  had  no  conception!  think  of  the
crusades,  a  butchery  lasting  two  hundred  years  and  inex-
cusable, its  war-cry  "  It  is  the  will  of  God,"  its  object  to
gain  possession  of  the  grave  of  one  who  preached  love  and
sufferance!  think  of  the  cruel  expulsion  and  extermination
of  the  Moors  and  Jews  from  Spain!  think  of  the  orgies  of
blood,  the  inquisitions,  the  heretical  tribunals,  the  bloody
and  terrible  conquests  of  the  Mohammedans  in  three  conti-
nents, or  those  of  Christianity  in  America,  whose  inhabit-
ants were  for  the  most  part,  and  in  Cuba  entirely,
exterminated.  According  to  Las  Casas,  Christianity
murdered  twelve  millions  in  forty  years,  of  course,  all  in
majorem  Dei  gloriam,  and  for  the  propagation  of  the
Gospel,  and  because  what  wasn't  Christian  wasn't  even
looked  upon  as  human!  I  have,  it  is  true,  touched  upon
these  matters  before;  but  when  in  our  day,  we  hear  of
"Latest  News  from  the  Kingdom  of  God,"*  we  shall  not
*)e  weary  of  bringing  old  news  to  mind.  And,  above  all,
ion't  let  us  forget  India,  the  cradle  of  the  human  race,
or  at  least  of  that  part  of  it  to  which  we  belong,  where
first  Mohammedans,  and  then  Christians,  were  most
cruelly  infuriated  against  the  adherents  of  the  original
fnith  of  mankind.  The  destruction  or  disfigurement  of
the  ancient  temples  and  idols,  a  lamentable,  mischievous
and  barbarous  act,  still  bears  witness  to  the  monotheistic
fury  of  the  Mohammedans,  carried  on  from  Marmud  the
Ghaznevid  of  cursed  memory  down  to  Aureng  Zeb,  the

*  A  missionary  periodical,  the  fortieth   annual  number  of   whicl/
appeared  in  1856.


238  RELIGION.

fratricide,  whom  the  Portuguese  Christians  have  zealously
imitated  by  destruction  of  temples  and  the  auto  da  fe  of
the  inquisition  at  Goa.  Don't  let  us  forget  the  chosen
people  of  God,  who  after  they  had,  by  Jehovah's  express
command,  stolen  from  their  old  and  trusty  friends  in
Egypt  the  gold  and  silver  vessels  which  had  been  lent  to
them,  made  a  murderous  and  plundering  inroad  into  "  the
Promised  Land,"  with  the  murderer  Moses  at  their  head,
to  tear  it  from  the  rightful  owners,  again  by  the  same
Jehovah's  express  and  repeated  commands,  showing  no
mercy,  exterminating  the  inhabitants,  women,  children
and  all  (Joshua,  ch.  9  and  10).  And  all  this,  simply  be-
cause they  weren't  circumcised  and  didn't  know  Jehovah,
which  was  reason  enough  to  justify  every  enormity  against
them;  just  as  for  the  same  reason,  in  earlier  times,  the
infamous  knavery  of  the  Patriarch  Jacob  and  his  chosen
people  against  Hamor,  king  of  Shalem,  and  his  people,  is
reported  to  his  glory  because  the  people  were  unbelievers!
(Genesis  xxxiii.  18.)  Truly,  it  is  the  worst  side  of  reli-
gions that  the  believers  of  one  religion  have  allowed  them-
selves every  sin  against  those  of  another,  and  with  the
utmost  ruffianism  and  cuelty  persecuted  them;  the
Mohammedans  against  the  Christians  and  Hindoos;  the
Christians  against  the  Hindoos,  Mohammedans,  American
natives,  negroes,  Jews,  heretics,  and  others.

Perhaps  i  go  too  far  in  saying  all  religions.  For  the
sake  of  truth,  I  must  add  that  the  fanatical  enormities
perpetrated  in  the  name  of  religion  are  only  to  be  put
down  to  the  adherents  of  monotheistic  creeds,  that  is,  the
Jewish  faith  and  its  two  branches,  Christianity  and
Islamism.  We  hear  of  nothing  of  the  kind  in  the  case  of
Hindoos  and  Buddhists.  Although  it  is  a  matter  of
common  knowledge  that  about  the  fifth  century  of  our
era  Buddhism  was  driven  out  by  the  Brahmans  from  its*
ancient  home  in  the  southernmost  part  of  the  Indian
peninsula,  and  afterward  spread  over  the  whole  of  the
rest  of  Asia;  as  far  as  I  know,  we  have  no  definite  account
of  any  crimes  of  violence,  or  wars,  or  cruelties,  perpetrated
in  the  course  of  it.  That  may,  of  course,  be  attribu table
to  the  obscurity  which  veils  the  history  of  those  countries;
bat  the  exceedingly  mild  character  of  their  religion,  to-
gether with  their  unceasing  inculcation  of  forbearance
toward  all  living  things,  and  the  fact  that  Brabmanism  bv


A  DIALOGUE.  239

its  caste  system  properly  admits  no  proselytes,  allows  one
to  hope  that  their  adherents  may  be  acquitted  of  shedding
of  blood  on  a  large  scale,  and  of  cruelty  in  any  form.
Spence  Hardy,  in  his  excellent  book  on  "Eastern
Monachism,"  praises  the  extraordinary  tolerance  of  the
Buddhists,  and  adds  his  assurance  that  the  annals  of
Buddhism  will  furnish  fewer  instances  of  religions  persecu-
tion than  those  of  any  other  religion.  As  a  matter  of  fact,
it  is  only  to  monotheism  that  intolerance  is  essential:  an
only  god  is  by  his  nature  a  jealous  god,  who  can  allow  no
other  god  to  exist.  Polytheistic  gods,  on  the  other  hand,
are  naturally  tolerant;  they  live  and  let  live;  their
own  colleagues  are  the  chief  objects  of  their  sufferance,  as
being  gods  of  the  same  religion.  This  toleration  is  after-
ward extended  to  foreign  gods,  who  are,  accordingly,
hospitably  received,  and  later  on  admitted,  in  some  cases,
to  an  equality  of  rights;  the  chief  example  of  which  is
shown  by  the  fact  that  the  Romans  willingly  admitted  and
venerated  Phrygian,  Egyptian  and  other  gods.  Hence,  it
is  that  monotheistic  religions  alone  furnish  the  spectacle
of  religious  wars,  religious  persecutions,  heretical  trib-
unals, that  breaking  of  idols  and  destruction  of  images  of
the  gods,  that  razing  of  Indian  temples,  and  Egyptian
colossi,  which  had  looked  on  the  sun  three  thousand  years;
just  because  a  jealous  god  had  said,  "  Thou  shalt  make  no
graven  image."

But  to  return  to  the  chief  point.  You  are  certainly
right  in  insisting  on  the  strong  metaphysical  needs,  of
Mankind;  but  religion  appears  to  me  to  be  not  so  much
a  satisfaction  as  an  abuse  of  those  needs.  At  any  rate,  we
have  seen  that  in  regard  to  the  furtherance  of  morality,
its  utility  is,  for  the  most  part,  problematical,  its  dis-
advantages, and  especially  the  atrocities  which  have
followed  in  its  train,  patent  to  the  light  of  day.  Of
course  it  is  quite  a  different  matter  if  we  consider  the
utility  of  religion  as  a  prop  of  thrones;  for  where  these  are
held  "  by  the  grace  of  God,"  throne  and  altar  are  inti-
mately associated;  and  every  wise  prince  who  loves  his  throne
and  his  family  will  appear  at  the  head  of  his  people  as  an
exemplar  of  true  religiou.  Even  Machiavelli,  in  the  eight-
eenth chapter  of  his  book,  most  earnestly  recommended
religion  to  princes.  Beyond  this,  one  may  say  that  revealed
religions  stand  to  philosophy  exactly  in   the   relation   of


240  A  FEW  WORDS  ON  PANTHEISM.

''sovereigns  by  the  grace  of  God,"  to  "the  sovereignty  of
the  people;  "  so  that  the  two  former  terms  of  the  parallel
are  in  natural  alliance.

Demopheles. — Oh,  don't  take  that  tone!  You're  going
hand  in  hand  with  ochlocracy  and  anarchy,  the  arch-
enemy of  all  legislative  order,  all  civilization  and  alV
humanity.

Philalethes. — You  are  right.  It  was  only  a  sophism
of  mine,  what  the  fencing-master  calls  a  feint.  I  retract
it.  But  see  how  disputing  sometimes  makes  an  honest
man  unjust  and  malicious.     Let  us  stop.

Demopheles. — I  can't  help  regretting  that,  after  all
the  trouble  I've  taken,  I  haven't  altered  your  disposition
in  regard  to  religion.  On  the  other  hand,  I  can  assure
you  that  everything  you  have  said  hasn't  shaken  my  con-
viction of  its  high  value  and  necessity.

Philalethes. — I  believe  you;  for  as  we  read  in
Hudibras:

"  He  that  complies  against  his  will
Is  of  his   own  opinion  still."

My  consolation  is  that,  alike  in  controversies  and  in  taking
mineral  waters,  the  after  effects  are  the  true  ones.

Demopheles. — Well,  I  hope  it'll  be  beneficial  in  your
case.

Philalethes. — It  might  be  so,  if  I  could  digest  a
certain  Spanish  proverb.

Demopheles. — Which  is?

Philalethes. — "  Behind  the  cross  stands  the  devil."

Demopheles. — Come,  don't  let  us  part  with  sarcasms.
Let  us  rather  admit  that  religion,  like  Janus,  or  better
still,  like  the  Brahman  god  of  death,  Yama,  has  two  faces,
and  like  him,  one  friendly,  the  other  sullen.  Each  of  us
has  kept  his  eyes  fixed  on  one  alone.

Philalethes. — You  are  right,  old  fellow!


A  FEW  WORDS  ON  PANTHEISM.

The  controversy  between  Theism  and  Pantheism
might  be  presented  in  an  allegorical  or  dramatic  form  by
supposing  a  dialogue  between  two  persons  in  the  pit  of   a


A  FEW  WORDS  ON  PANTHEISM.  241

theater  at  Milan  during  the  performance  of  a  piece.  One
of  them,  convinced  that  he  is  in  Girolamo's  renowned
marionette-theater,  admires  the  art  by  which  the  director
gets  up  the  dolls  and  guides  their  movements.  "  Oh,  you
are  quite  mistaken,"  says  the  other,  "  we're  in  the  Teatro
della  Scala;  it  is  the  manager  and  his  troop  who  are  on  the
stage;  they  are  the  persons  you  see  before  you;  the  poet
too  is  taking  a  part."

The  chief  objection  I  have  to  Pantheism  is  that  it  says
nothing.  To  call  the  world  "God"  is  not  to  explain  it;
it  is  only  to  enrich  our  language  with  a  superfluous
synonym  for  the  word"  world."  It  comes  to  the  same  thin£
whether  you  say  "the  world  is  God,"  or  "God  is  the
world."  But  if  you  start  from  "God"  as  something  that
is  given  in  experience,  and  has  to  be  explained,  and  then
say,  "God  is  the  world,"  you  are  affording  what  is.  to  some
extent,  an  explanation,  in  so  far  as  you  are  reducing  what
is  unknown  to  what  is  partly  known  (ignotum per  ?iotius);
but  it  is  only  a  verbal  explanation.  If  however,  you  start
from  what  is  really  given,  that  is  to  say,  from  the  world,
and  say,  "  the  world  is  God,"  it  is  clear  that  yon  say
nothing,  or  at  least  you  are  explaining  what  is  unknown
by  what  is  more  unknown.

Hence  Pantheism  presupposes  Theism;  only  in  so  far  as
you  start  from  a  god,  that  is,  in  so  far  as  you  possess  him
as  something  with  which  you  are  already  familiar,  can  you
end  by  identifying  him  with  the  world;  and  your  purpose
in  doing  so  is  to  put  him  out  of  the  way  in  a  decent
fashion.  In  other  words,  you  do  not  start  clear  from  the
world  as  something  that  requires  explanation;  you  start
'rom  God  as  something  that  is  given,  and  not  knowing
ivhat  to  do  with  him,  you  make  the  world  take  over  his
*61e.  This  is  the  origin  of  Pantheism.  Taking  an  un-
prejudiced view  of  the  world  as  it  is,  no  one  would  dream
of  regarding  it  as  a  god.  It  must  be  a  very  ill-advised  god
who  knows  no  better  way  of  diverting  himself  than  by
turning  into  such  a  world  as  ours,  such  a  mean,  shabby
world,  there  to  take  the  form  of  innumerable  millions  who
live  indeed,  but  are  fretted  and  tormented,  and  who
manage  to  exist  awhile  together  only  by  preying  on  one
another;  to  bear  misery,  need  and  death,  without  measure
and  without  object,  in  the  form,  for  instance,  of  millions
of  negro  slaves,  or  of  the  three  million  weavers  in  Europe


242  A  FEW  WORDS  ON  PANTHEISM.

who,  in  hunger  and  care,  lead  a  miserable  existence  in
damp  rooms  or  the  cheerless  halls  of  a  factory.  What  a
pastime  this  for  a  god,  who  must,  as  such,  be  used  to
another  mode  of  existence!

We  find  accordingly  that  what  is  described  as  the  great
advance  from  Theism  to  Pantheism,  if  looked  at  seriously,
and  not  simply  as  a  masked  negation  of  the  sort  indicated
above,  is  a  transition  from  what  is  unproved  and  hardl}
conceivable  to  what  is  absolutely  absurd.  For,  however
obscure,  however  loose  or  confused  may  be  the  idea  which
we  connect  with  the  word  "  God,"  there  are  two  pred-
icates which  are  inseparable  from  it,  the  highest  power
and  the  highest  wisdom.  It  is  absolutely  absurd  to
think  that  a  being  endowed  with  these  qualities  should
have  put  himself  into  the  position  described  above.
Theism,  on  the  other  hand,  is  something  which  is  merely
unproved;  ana  if  it  is  difficult  to  look  upon  the  infinite
world  as  the  work  of  a  personal,  and  therefore  individual,
Being,  the  like  of  which  we  know  only  from  our  experi-
ence of  the  animal  world,  it  is  nevertheless  not  an  abso-
lutely absurd  idea.  That  a  Being,  at  once  almighty  and
all-good,  should  create  a  world  of  torment  is  always
conceivable;  even  though  we  do  not  know  why  he  does
so;  and  accordingly  we  find  that  when  people  ascribe  the
height  of  goodness  to  this  Being,  they  set  up  the  inscru-
table nature  of  his  wisdom  as  the  refuge  by  which  the
doctrine  escapes  the  charge  of  absurdity.  Pantheism,
however,  assumes  that  the  creative  God  is  himself  the
world  of  infinite  torment,  and,  in  this  little  world  alone,
dies  every  second,  and  that  entirely  of  his  own  will;  which
is  absurd.  It  would  be  much  more  correct  to  identify
the  world  with  the  devil,  as  the  venerable  author  of  the
"'Deutsche  T)ieoloq%e"  has,  in  fact,  done  in  a  passage  of  his
immortal  work,  where  he  says,  "  Wherefore  tha  evil  spiril
and  nature  are  one,  and  where  nature  is  not  overcome,
neither  is  the  evil  adversary  overcome.'

It  is  manifest  that  the  Pantheists  give  the  .oansara  the
name  of  God.  The  same  name  is  given  h"  the  mystics  to
the  Nirvana.  The  latter,  however,  state  more  about  the
Nirvana  than  they  know,  which  is  not  done  by  the
Buddhists,  whose  Nirvana  is  accordingly  a  relative  noth-
ing. It  is  only  Jews,  Christians,  and  Mohammedans  win.
$ive  its  proper  and  correct  meaning  to  the  word  "  God. ''


ON  BOORS  AND  READING.  243

The  expression,  often  heard  nowadays,  "the  world  is
an  end-in-itself,"  leaves  it  uncertain  whether  Pantheism
or  a  simple  Fatalism  is  to  be  taken  as  the  explanation  of  it.
But,  whichever  it  be,  the  expression  looks  upon  the  world
from  a  physical  point  of  view  onty,  and  leaves  out  of  sight
its  moral  significance,  because  you  cannot  assume  a  moral
significance  without  presenting  the  world  as  means  to  a
higher  end.  The  notion  that  the  world  has  a  physical  but
not  a  moral  meaning  is  the  most  mischievous  error  sprung
from  the  greatest  mental  perversity.


ON  BOOKS  AND  HEADING.

Ignorance  is  degrading  only  when  found  in  company
with  riches.  The  poor  man  is  restrained  by  poverty
and  need:  labor  occupies  his  thoughts,  and  takes  yie
place  of  knowledge.  But  rich  men  who  are  ignorant
live  for  their  lusts  only,  and  are  like  the  beasts  of  the
field;  as  may  be  seen  every  day;  and  they  can  also
be  reproached  for  not  having  used  wealth  and  leisure  for
that  which  gives  them  their  greatest  value.

When  we  read,  another  person  thinks  for  us:  we  merely
repeat  his  mental  process.  In  learning  to  write,  the
pupil  goes  over  with  his  pen  what  the  teacher  has
outlined  in  pencil:  so  in  reading;  the  greater  part  of
the  work  of  thought  is  already  done  for  us.  This  is  why
it  relieves  us  to  take  up  a  book  after  being  occupied
with  our  own  thoughts.  And  in  reading,  the  mind
is,  in  fact,  only  the  playground  of  another's  thoughts.
So  it  comes  about  that  if  any  one  spends  almost  the  whole
day  in  reading,  and  by  way  of  relaxation  devotes  the
intervals  to  some  thoughtless  pastime,  he  gradually  loses
the  capacity  for  thinking;  just  as  the  man  who  always  rides,
:i  last  forgets  how  to  walk.  This  is  the  case  with  many
learned  persons;  they  have  read  themselves  stupid.  For
to  occupy  every  spare  moment  in  reading,  and  to  do  noth-
ing but  read,  is  even  more  paralyzing  to  the  mind  than
constant  manual  labor,  which  at  least  allows  those  engaged
in  it  to  follow  their  own  thoughts.  A  spring  never  free
from  the  pressure  of  some  foreign  body  at  last  loses  its
elasticity:  and  so  does  the  mind  if  other  people's  thoughts


244  ON  BOOKS  AND  HEADING

are  constantly  forced  upon  it.  Just  as  you  can  ruin  the
stomach  and  impair  the  whole  hody  by  taking  too  much
nourishment,  so  you  can  overfill  and  choke  the  mind  by
feeding  it  too  much.  The  more  you  read,  the  fewer  are
the  traces  left  by  what  you  have  read;  the  mind  becomes
like  a  tablet  crossed  over  and  over  with  writing.  There
is  no  time  for  ruminating,  and  in  no  other  way  can  you
assimilate  what  you  have  read.  If  you  read  on  and  on
without  setting  your  own  thoughts  to  work,  what  you  have
read  cannot  strike  root,  and  is  generally  lost.  It  is,  in
fact,  just  the  same  with  mental  as  with  bodily  food;
hardly  the  fifth  part  of  what  one  takes  is  assimilated.
The  rest  passes  off  in  evaporation,  respiration,  and  the  like.
The  result  of  all  this  is  that  thoughts  put  on  paper  are
nothing  more  than  footsteps  in  the  sand;  you  see  the  way
the  man  has  gone,  but  to  know  what  he  saw  on  his  walk,
yo,u  want  his  eyes.

There  is  no  quality  of  style  that  can  be  gained  by  reading
writers  who  possess  it;  whether  it  be  persuasiveness,  im-
agination, the  gift  of  drawing  comparisons,  boldness,
bitterness,  brevity,  grace,  ease  of  expression  or  wit,  unex-
pected contrasts,  a  laconic  or  naive  manner,  and  the  like.
But  if  these  qualities  are  already  in  us,  exist,  that  is  to
say,  potential^,  we  can  call  them  forth  and  bring  them  to
consciousness;  we  can  learn  the  purposes  to  which  they
can  be  put;  we  can  be  strengthened  in  our  inclination  to
use  them,  or  get  courage  to  do  so;  we  can  judge  by  ex-
amples the  effect  of  applying  them,  and  so  acquire  the
correct  use  of  them;  and  of  course  it  is  only  when  we  have
arrived  at  that  point  that  we  actually  possess  these
qualities.  The  only  way  in  which  reading  can  form  style
is  by  teaching  us  the  use  to  which  we  can  put  our  own
natural  gifts.  We  must  have  these  gifts  before  we  begin
to  learn  the  use  of  them.  Without  them,  reading  teaches
us  nothing  but  cold,  dead  mannerisms  and  makes  us
shallow  imitators.

The  strata  of  the  earth  preserve  in  rows  the  creatures
which  lived  in  former  ages;  and  the  array  of  books  on  the
shelves  of  a  library  stores  up  in  like  manner  the  errors  of
the  past  and  the  way  in  which  they  have  been  exposed.
Like  those  creatures,  they  too  were  full   of  life  in  their


ON  BOOKS  AND  READING.  245

time,  and  made  a  great  deal  of  noise;  but  now  they  are
stiff  and  fossilized,  and  an  object  of  curiosity  to  the
literary  palaeontologist  alone.

Herodotus  relates  that  Xerxes  wept  at  the  sight  of  his
army,  which  stretched  further  than  the  eye  could  reach,  in
the  thought  that  of  all  these,  after  a  hundred  years,  not
one  would  be  alive.  And  in  looking  over  a  huge  catalogue
of  new  books,  one  might  weep  at  thinking  that,  when  ten
years  have  passed,  not  one  of  them  will  be  heard  of.

It  is  in  literature  as  in  life:  wherever  you  turn,  yoei
stumble  at  once  upon  the  incorrigible  mob  of  humanity,
swarming  in  ail  directions,  crowding  and  soiling  every-
thing, like  flies  in  summer.  Hence  the  number,  which
no  man  can  count,  of  bad  books,  those  rank  weeds  of
literature,  which  draw  nourishment  from  the  corn  and
choke  it.  The  time,  money  and  attention  of  the  public,
which  rightfully  belong  to  good  books  and  their  noblb
aims,  they  take  for  themselves:  they  are  written  for  the
mere  purpose  of  making  money  or  procuring  places.
So  they  are  not  only  useless,  they  do  positive  mischief.
Nine-tenths  of  the  whole  of  our  present  literature  has  no
other  aim  than  to  get  a  few  shillings  out  of  the  pockets  of
the  public;  and  to  this  end  author,  publisher  and  reviewer
are  in  league.

Let  me  mention  a  crafty  and  wicked  trick,  albeit  a
profitable  and  successful  one,  practiced  by  litterateurs,
hack  writers  and  voluminous  authors.  In  complete  dis-
regard of  good  taste  and  the  true  culture  of  the  period,
they  have  succeeded  in  getting  the  whole  of  the  world  of
fashion  into  leading  strings,  so  that  they  are  all
trained  to  read  iu  time,  and  all  the  same  thing,  viz,,  the
newest  books;  and  that  for  the  purpose  of  getting  food
for  conversation  iu  the  circles  in  which  they  move.
This  is  the  aim  served  by  bad  novels,  produced  by  writers
who  were  once  celebrated,  as  Spindler,  Bulwer-Lytton,
Eugene  Sue.  What  can  be  more  miserable  than  the  lot  of
a  reading  public  like  this,  always  bound  to  peruse  the
latest  works  of  extremely  commonplace  persons  who  write
for  money  only,  and  who  are  therefore  never  few  in
number?  and  for  this  advantage  they  are  content  to  know
•by  m*me  only  the  works  of  the  few  superior  minds  of  all


246  ON  BOOKS  AND  HEALING.

ages  and  all  countries.  Literary  newspapers,  too,  are  a
singularly  cunning  device  for  robbing  the  leading  public
of  the  time  which,  if  culture  is  to  be  attained,  should  be
devoted  to  the  genuine  productions  of  literature,  instead
of  being  occupied  by  the  daily  bungling  of  commonplace
persons.

Hence,  in  regard  to  reading,  it  is  a  very  important
thing  to  be  able  to  refrain.  Skill  in  doing  so  consists  in
not  taking  mto  one's  hands  any  book  merely  because  at
the  time  it  happens  to  be  extensively  read:  such  as  polit-
ical or  religious  pamj  hlets,  novels,  poetry,  and  the  like,
which  make  a  noise,  and  may  even  attain  to  several
editions  in  the  first  and  last  year  of  their  existence.
Consider,  rather,  that  the  man  who  writes  for  fools  is
always  sure  of  a  large  audience;  be  careful  to  limit  your
time  for  reading,  and  devote  it  exclusively  to  the  works  of
those  great  minds  of  all  times  and  countries,  who  o'ertop
the  rest  of  humanity,  those  whom  the  voice  of  fame  points
to  as  such.  These  alone  really  educate  and  instruct.
You  can  never  read  bad  literature  too  little,  nor  good
literature  too  much.  Bad  books  are  intellectual  poison;
they  destroy  the  mind.  Because  people  always  read  what
is  new  instead  of  the  best  of  all  ages,  writers  remain  in
the  narrow  circle  of  the  ideas  which  happen  to  prevail  in
their  time;  and  so  the  period  sinks  deeper  and  deeper  into
its  own  mire.

There  are  at  all  times  two  literatures  in  progress,  running
side  by  side,  but  little  known  to  each  other:  the  one  real,
the  other  only  apparent.  The  former  grows  into  per-
manent literature;  it  is  pursued  by  those  who  live  for
science  or  poetry;  its  course  is  sober  and  quiet,  but  ex-
tremely slow;  and  it  produces  in  Europe  scarcely  a  dozen
works  in  a  century;  these,  however,  are  permanent.  The
other  kind  is  pursued  by  persons  who  live  on  science  01
poetry;  it  goes  at  a  gallop,  with  much  noise  and  shouting
of  partisans;  and  every  twelvemonth  puts  a  thousand  works
on  the  market.  But  after  a  few  years  one  asks,  "  Where
are  they?  where  is  the  glory  which  came  so  soon  and  made
so  much  clamor?"  This  kind  may  be  called  fleeting,  and
the  other,  permanent  literature.

In  the  history  of   politics,  half   a   century   is   always  a


ON  BOORS  AND  READING.  24?

considerable  time;  the  matter  which  goes  to  form  them  is
ever  on  the  move;  there  is  always  something  going  on.
But  in  the  history  of  literature  there  is  often  a  complete
standstill  for  the  same  period;  nothing  has  happened,  for
clumsy  attempts  don't  count.  You  are  just  where  you
were  fifty  years  previously.

To  explain  what  I  mean,  let  me  compare  the  advance  of
knowledge  among  mankind  to  the  course  taken  by  a
planet.  The  false  paths  on  which  humanity  usually  enters
after  every  important  advance  are  like  the  epicycles  in  the
Ptolemaic  system,  and  after  passing  through  one  of  them,
the  world  is  just  where  it  was  before  it  entered  it.  But
the  great  minds,  who  really  bring  the  race  further  on  its
course,  do  not  accompany  it  on  the  epicycles  it  makes
from  time  to  time.  This  explains  why  posthumous  fame
is  often  bought  at  the  expense  of  contemporary  praise,
and  vice  versa.  An  instance  of  such  an  epicycle  is  the
philosophy  started  by  Fichte  and  Schelling,  and  crowned
by  Hegel's  caricature  of  it.  This  epicycle  was  a  deviation
from  the  limit  to  which  philosophy  had  been  ultimately
bought  by  Kant;  and  at  that  point  I  took  it  up  again
afterward,  to  carry  it  further.  In  the  intervening  period
the  sham  philosophers  I  have  mentioned  and  some  others
went  through  their  epicycle,  which  has  just  came  to  an
end;  so  that  those  who  went  with  them  on  their  course
are  conscious  of  the  fact  that  they  are  exactly  at  the
point  from  which  they  started.

This  circumstance  explains  why  it  is  that,  every  thirty
years  or  so,  science,  literature,  and  art,  as  expressed  in  the
spirit  of  the  age  are  declared  bankrupt.  The  errors  which
appear  from  time  to  time  mount  to  such  a  height  in  that
period  that  the  mere  weight  of  their  absurdity  makes  the
fabric  fall;  while  the  opposition  to  them  has  been  gather-
ing force  at  the  same  time.  So  an  upset  takes  place,  often
followed  by  an  error  in  the  opposite  direction.  To  ex-
hibit these  movements  in  their  periodical  return  would  be
the  true  practical  aim  of  the  history  of  literature:  little
attention,  however,  is  paid  to  it.  And  besides,  the  com-
paratively short  duration  of  these  periods  makes  it  diffi-
cult to  collect  the  data  of  epochs  long  gone  by,  so  that  it
is  most  convenient  to  observe  how  the  matter  stands  in
one's  own  generation.  An  instance  of  this  tendency,
drawn  from  physical  science,  is  supplied  in  the  Neptunian


248  ON  BOOKS  AND  HEADING,

geology  of  Werter.  But  let  me  keep  to  the  example  cited
above,  the  nearest  we  can  take,  in  German  philosophy,
the  brilliant  epoch  of  Kant  was  immediately  followed  by  a
period  which  aimed  rather  at  being  imposing  than  at  con-
vincing. Instead  of  being  thorough  and  clear,  it  tried  to
be  dazzling,  hyperbolical,  and,  in  a  special  degree,  unin-
telligible: instead  of  seeking  truth,  it  intrigued.  Phi-
losophy could  make  ?io  progress  in  this  fashion;  and  at  last
the  whole  school  and  its  method  became  bankrupt.
For  the  effrontery  of  Hegel  and  his  fellows  came  to  such  a
pass — whether  because  they  talked  such  sophisticated
nonsense,  or  were  so  unscrupulously  puffed,  or  because  the
entire  aim  of  this  pretty  piece  of  work  was  quite  obvious —
that  in  the  end  there  was  nothing  to  prevent  the  char-
latanry of  the  whole  business  from  becoming  manifest  to
everybody:  and  when,  in  consequence  of  certain  dis-
closures, the  favor  it  had  enjoyed  in  high  quarters  warn
withdrawn,  the  system  was  openly  ridiculed.  This  most
miserable  of  all  the  meager  philosophies  that  have  ever
existed  came  to  grief,  and  dragged  down  with  it  into  the
abysm  of  discredit  the  systems  of  Fichte  and  Schelling
which  had  preceded  it.  And  so,  as  far  as  Germany  is
concerned,  the  total  philosophical  incompetence  of  the
first  half  of  the  century  following  upon  Kant  is  quite
plain:  and  still  the  Germans  boast  of  their  talent  for
philosophy  in  comparison  with  foreigners,  especially  since
an  English  writer  has  been  so  maliciously  ironical  as  to
call  them  "  a  nation  of  thinkers."

For  an  example  of  the  general  system  of  epicycles  drawn
from  the  history  of  art,  look  at  the  school  of  sculpture
which  flourished  in  the  last  century  and  took  its  name
from  Bernini,  more  especially  at  the  development  of  it
which  prevailed  in  France.  The  ideal  of  this  school  was
not  antique  beauty,  but  commonplace  nature:  instead  of
the  simplicity  and  grace  of  ancient  art,  it  represented  the
manners  of  a  French  minuet.  This  tendency  became
bankrupt  when,  under  Winckelmann's  direction,  a  return
was  made  to  the  antique  school.  The  history  of  painting
furnishes  an  illustration  in  the  first  quarter  of  the  century,
when  art  was  looked  upon  merely  as  a  means  and  instru-
ment of  mediaeval  religions  sentiment  and  its  themes  con-
sequently drawn  from  ecclesiastical  subjects  alone:  these,
however,  were  treated  by  painters   who  had  none  of  the


ON  BOOKS  AND  READING.  249

true  earnestness  of  faith,  and  in  their  delusion  they
followed  Francesco  Francia,  Pietro  Perugino,  Angelico
da  Fiesole  and  others  like  them,  rating  them  higher  even
than  the  really  great  masters  who  followed.  It  was  in
view  of  this  error,  and  because  in  poetry  an  analogous  aim
had  at  the  same  time  found  favor,  that  Goethe  wrote  his
"  Pfaffenspiel."  This  school,  too,  got  the  reputation  of
being  whimsical,  became  bankrupt,  and  was  followed  by  a
return  to  nature,  which  proclaimed  itself  in  genre  pictures
and  scenes  of  life  of  every  kind,  even  though  it  now  and
then  strayed  into  what  was  vulgar.

The  progress  of  the  human  mind  in  literature  is
similar.  The  history  of  literature  is  for  the  most  part  likf
the  catalogue  of  a  museum  of  deformities;  the  spirit  in
which  they  keep  best  is  pigskin.  The  few  creatures  that
have  been  born  in  goodly  shape  need  not  be  looked  for
there.  They  are  still  alive,  and  are  everywhere  to  be  met
with  in  the  world,  immortal,  and  with  their  years  ever  green.
They  alone  form  what  I  have  called  real  literature;  the
history  of  which,  poor  as  it  is  in  persons,  we  learn  from
our  youth  up  out  of  the  mouths  of  all  educated  people,
before  compilations  recount  it  for  us.

As  an  antidote  to  the  prevailing  monomania  for  reading
literary  histories,  in  order  to  be  able  to  chatter  about
everything,  without  having  any  real  knowledge  at  all,  let
me  refer  to  a  passage  in  Lichtenberg's  works,  (vol.  II.  p.
302),  which  is  well  worth  perusal.

I  believe  that  the  over-minute  acquaintance  with  the  history  of
science  and  learning,  which  is  such  a  prevalent  feature  of  our  day,
is  very  prejudicial  to  the  advance  of  knowledge  itself.  There  is
pleasure  in  following  up  this  history;  but,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it
leaves  the  mind,  not  empty  indeed,  but  without  any  power  of  its
own,  just  because  it  makes  it  so  full.  Whoever  has  felt  the  desire,
not  to  fill  up  his  mind,  but  to  strengthen  it,  to  devolop  his  faculties
and  aptitudes,  and  generally,  to  enlarge  his  powers,  will  have  found
that  there  is  nothing  so  weakening  as  intercourse  with  a  so-called
litterateur,  on  a  matter  of  knowledge  on  which  he  has  not  thought
at  all,  though  he  knows  a  thousand  little  facts  appertaining  to  its
history  and  literature.  It  is  like  reading  a  cookery  book  when  you
are  hungry.  I  believe  that  so-called  literary  history  will  never
thrive  among  thoughtful  people,  who  are  conscious  of  their  own
worth  and  the  worth  of  real  knowledge.  These  people  are  more
given  to  employing  their  own  reason  than  to  troubling  themselves
to  know  how  others  have  employed  theirs.  The  worst  of  it  is  that,
as  you  will  find,  the  more  knowledge  takes  the  direction  of  literary


850  PHYSIOGNOMY

research,  the  less  the  power  of  promoting  knowledge  becomes;  the
only  thing  that  increases  is  pride  in  the  possession  of  it.  Such
persons  believe  that  they  possess  knowledge  in  a  greater  degree
than  those  who  really  possess  it.  It  is  surely  a  well  iounded  remark,
that  knowledge  never  makes  its  possessor  proud.  Those  alone  let
themselves  be  blown  out  with  pride,  who,  incapable  of  extending
knowledge  in  their  own  persons,  occupy  themselves  with  clearing
up  dark  points  in  its  history,  or  are  able  to  recount  what  others  have
done.  They  are  proud,  because  tney  consider  this  occupation,
which  is  mostly  of  a  mechanical  nature,  the  practice  of  knowledge
I  could  illustrate  what  I  mean  by  examples,  but  it  would  be  an
odious  task.

Still,  I  wish  some  one  would  attempt  a  tragical  history
of  literature,  giving  the  way  in  which  the  writers  and
artists,  who  form  the  proudest  possession  of  the  various
nations  which  have  given  them  birth,  have  been  treated
by  them  during  their  lives.  Such  a  history  would  exhibit
the  ceaseless  warfare,  which  what  was  good  and  genuine
in  all  times  and  countries  has  had  to  wage  with  what  was  bad
and  perverse.  It  would  tell  of  the  martyrdom  of  almost
all  those  who  truly  enlightened  humanity,  of  almost  all
the  great  masters  of  every  kind  of  art:  it  would  show  us
how,  with  few  exceptions,  they  were  tormented  to  death,
without  recognition,  without  sympathy,  without  followers;
how  they  lived  in  poverty  and  misery,  while  fame,
honor,  and  riches,  were  the  lot  of  the  unworthy;  how
their  fate  was  that  of  Esau,  who,  while  he  was  hunting
and  getting  venison  for  his  father,  was  robbed  of  the
blessing  by  Jacob,  disguised  in  his  brother's  clothes;  how,
in  spite  of  all,  they  were  kept  up  by  the  love  of  their  fork,
until  at  last  the  bitter  fight  of  the  teacher  of  humanity
is  over,  until  the  immortal  laurel  is  held  out  to  him,  and
the  hour  strikes  when  it  can  be  said:

"Der  schwere  Panzer  wird  zum  Fliigelkleide
Kurz  ist  der  Schmerz,  unendlich  ist  die  Freude."


PHYSIOGNOMY.

That  the  outer  man  is  a  picture  of  the  inner,  and  the
face  an  expression  and  revelation  of  the  whole  character,
is  a  presumption  likely  enough  in  itself,  and  therefore  a
safe  one  to  go  by;  evidenced  as  it  is  by  the  fact  that
people  are  always  anxious  to  see  any  one   who   has   made


P&YSIOGXOMT.  251

himself  famous  by  good  or  evil,  or  as  the  author  of  some
extraordinary  work;  or  if  they  cannot  get  a  sight  of  him,
to  hear  at  any  rate  from  others  what  lje  looks  like.  So
people  go  to  places  where  they  may  expect  to  see  the
person  who  interests  them;  the  press,  especially  in
England,  endeavors  to  give  a  minute  and  striking  de-
scription of  his  appearance;  painters  and  engravers  lose
no  time  in  putting  him  visibly  before  us;  and  finally
photography,  on  that  very  account  of  such  high  value,
affords  the  most  complete  satisfaction  of  our  curiosity.
It  is  also  a  fact  that  in  private  life  every  one  criticises  .the
physiognomy  of  those  he  comes  across,  first  of  all  secretly
trying  to  discern  their  intellectual  and  moral  character
from  their  features.  This  would  be  a  useless  proceeding
if,  as  some  foolish  people  fancy,  the  exterior  of  a  man  is  a
matter  of  no  account;  if,  as  they  think,  the  soul  is  one
thing  and  the  body  another,  and  the  body  related  to  the
soul  merely  as  the  coat  to  the  man  himself.

On  the  contrary,  every  human  face  is  a  hieroglyphic,
and  a  hieroglyphic,  too,  which  admits  of  being  deciphered,
the  alphabet  of  which  we  carry  about  with  us  already  per-
fected. As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  face  of  a  man  gives  us
fuller  and  more  interesting  information  than  his  tongue;
for  his  face  is  the  compendium  of  all  he  will  ever  say,  as  it
is  the  one  record  of  all  his  thoughts  and  endeavors.
And,  moreover,  the  tongue  tells  the  thought  of  one  man  only,
whereas  the  face  expresses  a  thought  of  nature  itself:  so
that  every  one  is  worth  attentive  observation,  even  though
every  one  may  not  be  worth  talking  to.  And  if  every
individual  is  worth  observation  as  a  single  thought  of
nature,  how  much  more  so  is  beauty,  since  it  is  a  higher
and  more  general  conception  of  nature,  is,  in  fact,  hei
thought  of  a  species.  This  is  why  beauty  is  so  captivating.
it  is  a  fundamental  thought  of  nature:  whereas  the  in-
dividual is  only  a  by-thought,  a  corollary.

In  private,  people  always  proceed  upon  the  principle
that  a  man  is  what  he  looks;  and  the  principle  is  a  right
one,  only  the  difficulty  lies  in  its  application.  For  though
the  art  of  applying  the  principle  is  partly  innate  and  may
be  partly  gained  by  experience,  no  one  is  a  master  of  it,
and  even  the  most  experienced  is  not  infallible.  But  for
all  that,  whatever  Figaro  may  say,  it  is  not  the  face  which
deceives;  it  is  we  who  ^eo«ivs  ourselves  in  reading  in  it
what  is  not  there,


?52  PHYSIOGNOMY.

The  deciphering  of  a  face  is  certainly  a  great  and  diffi-
cult art,  and  the  principles  of  it  can  never  be  learned  in
the  abstract.  The  first  condition  of  success  is  to  maintain
a  purely  objective  point  of  view,  which  is  no  easy  matter.
For,  as  soon  as  the  faintest  trace  of  anything  subjective  is
oresent,  whether  dislike  or  favor,  or  fear  or  hope,  or  even
the  thought  of  the  impression  we  ourselves  are  making
upon  the  object  of  our  attention,  the  characters  we  are
trying  to  decipher  become  confused  and  corrupt.  The
sound  of  a  language  is  really  appreciated  only  by  one  who
does  not  understand  it,  and  that  because,  in  thinking  of
the  signification  of  a  word,  we  pay  no  regard  to  the  sign
itself.  So,  in  the  same  way,  a  physiognomy  is  correctly
gauged  only  by  one  to  whom  it  is  still  strange,  who  has
not  grown  accustomed  to  the  face  by  constantly  meeting
and  conversing  with  the  man  himself.  It  is,  therefore,
strictly  speaking,  only  the  first  sight  of  a  man  which
affords  that  purely  objective  view  which  is  uecessary  for
deciphering  his  features.  An  odor  affects  us  only  when
we  first  come  in  contact  with  it,  and  the  first  glass  of  a
wine  is  the  one  which  gives  us  its  true  taste:  in  the  same
way,  it  is  only  at  the  first  encounter  that  a  face  makes  its
full  impression  upon  us.  Consequently  the  first  impression
should  be  carefully  attended  to  and  noted,  even  written
down  if  the  subject  of  it  is  of  personal  importance,  pro-
vided of  course,  that  one  can  trust  one's  own  sense  of
\)ln^siognomy.  Subsequent  acquaintance  and  intercourse
will  obliterate  the  impression,  but  time  will  one  day  prove
whether  it  is  true.

Let  us,  however,  not  conceal  from  ourselves  the  fact
that  this  first  impression  is  for  the  most  part  extremely
unedifying.  How  poor  most  faces  are!  With  the  ex-
ception of  those  that  are  beautiful,  good-natured  or
intellectual,  that  is  to  say,  the  verr  few  and  far  between,
I  believe  a  person  of  any  fine  feeling  scarcely  ever  sees  a
new  face  without  a  sensation  akin  to  a  shock,  for  the
reason  that  it  presents  a  new  and  surprising  combination
of  unedifying  elements.  To  tell  the  truth,  it  is,  as  a  rule,
a  sorry  sight.  There  are  some  people  whose  faces  bear  the
stamp  of  such  artless  vulgarity  and  baseness  of  character,
such  an  animal  limitation  of  intelligence,  that  one
vonders  how  they  can  appear  in  public  with  such  a  coun-
tenance, instead    of   wearing  a    mask.     There   are   faces,


PHYSIOGNOMY.  253

indeed,  the  very  sight  of  which  produces  a  feeling  of
pollution.  One  cannot  therefore  take  it  amiss  of  people,,
whose  privileged  position  admits  of  it,  if  they  manage
to  live  in  retirement  and  completely  free  from  the  painful
sensation  of  "  seeing  new  faces."  The  metaphysical  ex-
planation of  this  circumstance  rests  upon  the  considera-
tion that  the  individuality  of  a  man  is  precisely  that  by
the  very  existence  of  which  he  should  be  reclaimed  and
corrected.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  a  psychological  ex-
planation is  satisfactory,  let  any  one  ask  himself  what
kind  of  physiognomy  he  may  expect  in  those  who  have  all
their  life  long,  except  on  the  rarest  occasions,  harbored
nothing  but  petty,  base  and  miserable  thoughts,  and
vulgar,  selfish,  envious,  wicked  and  malicious  desires.
Every  one  of  these  thoughts  and  desires  has  set  its  mark
upon  the  face  during  the  time  it  lasted,  and  by  constant
repetition,  all  these  marks  have  in  course  of  time  become
furrows  and  blotches,  so  to  speak.  Consequently,  most
people's  appearance  is  such  as  to  produce  a  shock  at  first
sight:  and  it  is  only  gradually  that  one  gets  accustomed
to  it,  that  is  to  say,  becomes  so  deadened  to  the  impres-
sion that  it  has  no  more  effect  on  one.

And  that  the  prevailing  facial  expression  is  the  result  of
a  long  process  of  innumerable,  fleeting  and  characteristic
contractions  of  the  features  is  just  the  reason  why  intel-
lectual countenances  are  of  gradual  formation.  It  is
indeed  only  in  old  age  that  intellectual  men  attain  their
sublime  expression,  while  portraits  of  them  in  their  youth
show  only  the  first  traces  of  it.  But.  sn  the  other  baud,
what  1  have  just  said  about  the  shock  which  the  first  sight
of  a  face  generally  produces  is  in  keeping  with  the  remark
that  it  is  only  at  that  first  sight  that  it  makes  its  true  and
full  impression.  For  to  get  a  purely  objective  and  un-
corrupted  impression  of  it,  we  must  stand  in  no  kind  of
relation  to  the  person;  if  possible,  wre  must  not  yet  have
spoken  with  him.  For  every  conversation  places  us  to
some  extent  upon  a  friendly  footing,  establishes  a  certain
rapport,  a  mutual  subjective  relation,  which  is  at  once
unfavorable  to  an  objective  point  of  view.  And  as  every
one's  endeavor  is  to  win  esteem  or  friendship  for  himself,
the  man  who  is  under  observation  will  at  once  employ  all
those  arts  of  dissimulation  in  which  he  is  already  versed,
and  corrupt  us  with  his  airs,  hynocrisies  and  flatteries;  se


254  PHYSIOGNOMY.

that  what  the  first  look  clearly  showed  will  soon  be  seeo
by  us  no  more.

This  fact  is  at  the  bottom  of  the  saying  that  "  most
people  gain  by  further  acquaintance;"  it  ought,  however,
to  run,  "delude  us  by  it."  3t  3s  only  when,  later  on,  the
bad  qualities  manifest  themselves  that  our  first  judgment
as  a  rule  receives  its  justification  and  makes  good  its
scornful  verdict.  It  may  be  that  "  a  further  acquaint-
ance "  is  an  unfriendly  one,  and  if  that  is  so,  we  do  not
find  in  this  case  either  that  people  gain  by  it.  Another
reason  why  people  apparently  gain  on  a  nearer  acquaint-
ance is  that  the  man  whose  first  aspect  warns  us  from
him,  as  soon  as  we  converse  with  him,  no  longer  shows  his
own  being  and  character,  but  also  his  education;  that  is,
not  only  what  he  really  is  by  nature,  but  also  what  he  has
appropriated  to  himself  out  of  the  common  wealth  of
mankind.  Three-fourths  of  what  he  says  belongs  not  to
him,  but  to  the  sources  from  which  he  obtained  it;  so
that  we  are  often  surprised  to  hear  a  minotaur  speak  so
humanly.  If  we  make  a  still  closer  acquaintance,  the
animal  nature,  of  which  his  face  gave  promise,  will
manifest  itself  "in  all  its  splendor. "  If  one  is  gifted  svith
an*acute  sense  for  physiognomy,  one  should  take  special
note  of  those  verdicts  which  preceded  a  closer  acquaintance
and  were  therefore  genuine.  For  the  face  of  a  man  is  the
exact  expression  of  what  he  is;  and  if  he  deceives  us,  that
is  our  fault,  not  his.  What  a  man  says,  on  the  other  hand,
is  what  he  thinks,  more  often  what  he  has  learned,  or  it
may  be  even,  what  he  pretends  to  think.  And  besides,
this,  when  we  talk  to  him,  or  even  hear  him  talking  to
others,  we  pay  no  attention  to  his  physiognomy  proper.
It  is  the  underlying  substance,  the  fundamental  datum,
and  we  disregard  it;  what  interests  us  is  its  pathognomy,  its
play  of  feature  during  conversation.  This,  however,  is
so  arranged  as  to  turn  the  good  side  upward.

When  Socrates  said  to  a  young  man  who  was  introduced
to  him  to  have  his  capabilities  tested,  "  Talk  in  order
that  I  may  see  you,"  if  indeed  by  "seeing"  he  did  not
simply  mean  "hearing"  he  was  right,  so  far  as  it  is  only
in  conversation  that  the  features  and  especially  the  eyes
become  animated,  and  the  intellectual  resources  and
capacities  set  their  mark  upon  the  countenance.  This  puts
us  in  a  position  to  form  a  provisional  notion  of  the  degree


PHYSIOGNOMY.  2bb

and  capacity  of  intelligence;  which  was  in  that  case
Socrates'  aim.  But  in  this  connection  it  is  to  be  ob-
served, firstly,  that  the  rule  does  not  apply  to  moral
qualities,  which  lie  deeper;  and  in  the  second  place,  that
what  from  an  objective  point  of  view  we  gain  by  the
clearer  development  of  the  countenance  in  conversation,
we  lose  from  a  subjective  standpoint  on  account  of  the
personal  relation  into  which  the  speaker  at  once  enters  in
regard  to  us,  aucl  which  produces  a  slight  fascination,  so
that,  as  explained  above,  we  are  not  left  impartial
observers.  Consequently  from  the  last  point  of  view  we
might  say  with  greater  accuracy,  ''Do  not  speak  in  order
that  I  may  see  you."

For  to  get  a  pure  and  fundamental  conception  of  a
man's  physiognomy,  we  must  observe  him  when  he  is
alone  and  left  to  himself.  Society  of  any  kind  and  con-
versation throw  a  reflection  upon  him  which  isnothisown,
generally  to  his  advantage;  as  he  is  thereby  placed  in  a
state  of  action  and  re-action  which  sets  him  off.  But
alone  and  left  to  himself,  plunged  in  the  depths  of  his
own  thoughts  and  sensations,  he  is  wholly  himself,  and  a
penetrating  eye  for  physiognomy  can  at  one  glance  take  a
general  view  of  his  entire  character.  For  his  face,  looked
at  by  and  in  itself,  expresses  the  keynote  of  all  his
thoughts  and  endeavors,  the  arret  irrevocable,  the  irrev-
ocable decree  of  his  destiny,  the  consciousness  of  which
only  comes  to  him  when  he  is  alone.

The  study  of  physiognomy  is  one  of  the  chief  means  of
a  knowledge  of  mankind,  because  the  cast  of  a  man's  face
is  the  only  sphere  in  which  his  arts  of  dissimulation  are  of
no  avail,  since  these  arts  extend  only  to  that  play  of
feature  which  is  akin  to  mimicry.  And  that  is  why  I
recommend  such  a  study  to  be  undertaken  when  the  sub-
ject of  it  is  alone  and  given  up  to  his  own  thoughts,  and
before  he  is  spoken  to:  and  this  partly  for  the  reason
that  it  is  only  in  such  a  condition  that  inspection  of  the
physiognomy  pure  and  simple  is  possible,  because  conver-
sation at  once  lets  in  a  pathognomical  element,  in  which  a
man  can  apply  the  arts  of  dissimulation  which  he  has
learned:  partly  again  because  personal  contact,  even  of
the  very  slightest  kind,  gives  a  certain  bias  and  so  corrupts
the  judgment  of  the  observer.

And  in  regard  to  the  stmlv  of  ohvsioguomy  in  general,


256  PHYSIOGNOMY.

it  is  further  to  be  observed  that  intellectual  capacity  is
much  easier  of  discernment  than  moral  character.  The
former  naturally  takes  a  much  more  outward  direction,
and  expresses  itself  not  only  in  the  face  and  the  play  of
feature,  but  also  in  the  gait,  down  even  to  the  very
glightest  movement.  One  could  perhaps  discriminate
from  behind  between  a  blockhead,  a  fool  and  a  man  of
genius.  The  blockhead  would  be  discerned  by  the
torpidity  and  sluggishness  of  all  his  movements:  folly  sets
its  mark  upon  every  gesture,  and  so  does  intellect  and  a
studious  nature.  Hence  that  remark  of  La  Bruvere  that
there  is  nothing  so  slight,  so  simple  or  imperceptible  but
that  our  way  of  doing  it  enters  in  and  betrays  us:  a  fool
neither  comes  nor  goes,  nor  sits  down,  nor  gets  up,  nor
holds  his  tongue,  nor  moves  about  in  the  same  way  as  an
intelligent  man.  (And  this  is,  be  it  observed  by  way  of
parenthesis,  the  explanation  of  that  sure  and  certain  in-
stinct which,  according  to  Helvetius,  ordinary  folk  possess
of  discerning  people  of  genius,  and  of  getting  out  of
their  way.)

The  chief  reason  for  this  is  that,  the  larger  and  more
developed  the  brain,  and  the  thinner,  in  relation  to  it  the
spine  and  nerves,  the  greater  is  the  intellect;  and  not  the
intellect  alone,  but  at  the  same  time  the  mobility  and
pliancy  of  all  the  limbs:  because  the  brain  controls  them
more  immediately  and  resolutely;  so  that  everything
hangs  more  upon  a  single  thread,  every  movement  of
which  gives  a  precise  expression'  to  its  purpose.  This  is
analogous  to,  nay,  is  immediately  connected  with  the  fact
that  the  higher  an  animal  stands  in  the  scale  of  develop-
ment.  the  easier  it  becomes  to  kill  it  by  wounding  a  single
spot.  Take,  for  example,  batrachia:  they  are  slow,
cumbrous  and  sluggish  in  their  movements;  they  are  un-
intelligent, and  at  the  same  time,  extremely  tenacious  of
life;  the  reason  of  which  is  that  with  a  very  small  brain,
their  spine  and  nerves  are  very  thick.  Now  gait  and
movement  of  the  arms  are  mainly  functions  of  the  brain;
our  limbs  receive  their  motion  and  every  little  modification
of  it  from  the  brain  through  the  medium  of  the  spine
This  is  why  conscious  movements  fatigue  us;  the  sensation
of  fatigue,  like  that  of  pain,  has  its  seat  in  the  brain,  not,
as  people  commonly  suppose,  in  the  limbs  themselves;
nence  motion  induces  sleeo.     On   the  other   hand  those


PHYSIOGNOMY.  257

motions  which  are  not  excited  by  the  brain,  that  is,  the
unconscious  movements  of  organic  life,  of  the  heart,  of
the  lungs,  etc.,  go  on  in  their  course  without  producing
fatigue.  And  as  thought  equally  with  motion  is  a  func-
tion of  the  brain,  the  character  of  the  brain's  activity  is
?xpressed  equally  in  both,  according  to  the  constitution
tt  the  individual;  stupid  people  move  like  lay-figures,
while  every  joint  of  an  intelligent  man  is  eloquent.
But  gesture  and  movement  are  not  nearly  so  good  an
index  of  intellectual  qualities  as  the  face,  the  shape  and
size  of  the  brain,  the  contraction  and  movement  of  the
features,  and  above  all  the  eye — from  the  small,  dull,
dead-looking  eye  of  a  pig  up  through  all  gradations  to  the
irradiating,  flashing  eyes  of  a  genius.  The  look  of  good
sense  and  prudence,  even  of  the  best  kind,  differs  from
that  of  genius,  in  that  the  former  bears  the  stamp  of
subjection  to  the  will,  while  the  latter  is  free  from  it,
And  therefore  one  can  well  believe  the  anecdote  told  by
Squarzafichi  in  his  life  of  Petrarch,  and  taken  from  Joseph
Brivius,  a  contemporary  of  the  poet,  how  once  at  the
court  of  the  Visconti,  when  Petrarch  and  other  noblemen
and  gentlemen  were  present,  Galeazzo  Visconti  told  his
son,  who  was  then  a  mere  boy  (he  was  afterward  first
duke  of  Milan),  to  pick  out  the  wisest  of  the  company;
how  the  boy  looked  at  them  all  for  a  little,  and  then  took
Petrarch  by  the  hand  and  led  him  up  to  his  father,  to  the
great  admiration  of  all  present.  For  so  clearly  does
nature  set  the  mark  of  her  dignity  on  the  privileged
among  mankind  that  even  a  child  can  discern  it.  There-
fore 1  should  advise  my  sagacious  countrymen,  if  ever
again  they  wish  to  trumpet  about  for  thirty  years  a  very
commonplace  person  as  a  great  genius,  not  to  choose  for
the  purpose  such  a  beerhouse-keeper  physiognomy  as  was
possessed  by  that  philosopher,  upon  whose  face  nature  had
written,  in  her  clearest  characters,  the  familiar  inscrip-
tion, "commouplace  person."

But  what  applies  to  intellectual  capacity  will  not  apply
to  moral  qualities,  to  character.  It  is  more  difficult  to
discern  its  physiognomy,  because,  being  of  a  metaphysical
nature,  it  lies  incomparably  deeper.  It  is  true  that
moral  character  is  also  connected  with  the  constitution,
with  the  organism,  but  not  so  immediately  or  in  such
direct  connection  with  definite  parts   of   its   system  as  i?


258  PSYCHOLOGICAL  OBSERVATIONS.

intellectual  capacity.  Hence  while  every  one  makes  a
show  of  his  intelligence  and  endeavors  to  exhibit  it  at
every  opportunity,  as  something  with  which  he  is  in
general  quite  contented,  few  expose  their  moral  qualities
freeiy,  and  most  people  intentionally  cover  them  up;  and
long  practice  makes  the  concealment  perfect.  In  the
meantime,  as  I  explained  above,  wicked  thoughts  and
worth* ess  efforts  gradually  set  their  mark  upon  the  face,
especially  the  eves.  So  that,  judging  by  physiognomy,  it
is  easy  to  warrant  that  a  given  man  will  never  produce  an
immortal  work;  but  not  that  he  will  never  commit  a
great  crime.


PSYCHOLOGICAL  OBSERVATIONS.

For  every  animal,  and  more  especially  for  man,  a
certain  conformity  and  proportion  between  the  will  and
the  intellect  is  necessary  for  existing  or  making  any  prog-
ress in  the  world.  The  more  precise  and  correct  the
proportion  which  nature  establishes,  the  more  easy,  safe
and  agreeable  will  be  the  passage  through  the  world.
Still,  if  the  right  point  is  only  approximately  reached,  it
will  be  enough  to  ward  off  destruction.  There  are,  then,
certain  limits  within  which  the  said  proportion  may  vary,
and  yet  preserve  a  correct  standard  of  conformity.  The
normal  standard  is  as  follows.  The  object  of  the  intellect
is  to  light  and  lead  the  will  on  its  path,  and  therefore,
the  greater  the  force,  impetus  and  passion,  which  spurs
on  the  will  from  within,  the  more  complete  and  luminous
must  be  the  intellect  which  is  attached  to  it,  that  the
vehement  strife  of  the  will,  the  glow  of  passion,  and  the
intensity  of  the  emotions,  may  not  lead  man  astray,  or
urge  him  on  to  ill  considered,  false  or  ruinous  action;  this
will,  inevitably,  be  the  result,  if  the  will  is  very  violent'
and  the  intellect  very  weak.  On  the  other  hand,  a
phlegmatic  character,  a  weak  and  languid  will,  can  get  on
and  hold  its  own  with  a  small  amount  of  intellect;  what
is  naturally  moderate  needs  only  moderate  support.  The
general  tendency  of  a  want  of  proportion  between  the  will
and  the  intellect,  in  other  words,  of  any  variation  from
the  normal  proportion  I  'nave  mentioned,  is'  to  produce
unhappiness,  whether  it  be  that  the  will'  is   greater   than


PSYCHOLOGICAL  OBSER VATIONS.  £59

the  intellect,  or  the  intellect  greater  than  the  will,
Especially  is  this  the  case  when  the  intellect  is  developed
to  an  abnormal  degree  of  strength  and  superiority,  so  as
to  be  out  of  all  proportion  to  the  will,  a  condition  which
is  the  essence  of  real  genius;  the  intellect  is  then  not
only  more  than  enough  for  the  needs  and  aims  of  life,  it
is  absolutely  prejudicial  to  them.  The  result  is  that,  in
youth,  excessive  energy  in  grasping  the  objective  world,
accompanied  by  a  vivid  imagination  and  a  total  lack  of  ex-
perience, makes  the  mind  susceptible,  and  an  easy  prey  to
extravagant  ideas,  nay,  even  to  chimeras;  and  this  issues
in  an  eccentric  and  fantastic  character.  And  when,  in
later  years,  this  state  of  mind  yields  and  passes  away
under  the  teaching  of  experience,  still  the  genius  never
feels  himself  at  home  in  the  common  world  of  every  day
und  the  ordinary  business  of  life;  he  will  never  take  his
place  in  it,  and  accommodate  himself  to  it  as  accurately  as
the  person  of  normal  intellect;  he  will  be  more  likely  to
make  curious  mistakes.  For  the  ordinary  mind  feels
itself  so  completely  at  home  in  the  narrow  circle  of  its
ideas  and  views  of  the  world  that  no  one  can  get  the  better
of  it  in  that  sphere;  its  faculties  remain  true  to  their
original  purpose,  viz.,  to  promote  the  service  of  the  will;
it  devotes  itself  steadfastly  to  this  end,  and  abjures  ex-
travagant aims.  The  genius,  on  the  other  hand,  is  at  bottom
a  monstnim  per  excessum  just  as,  conversely,  the  passionate,
violent  and  unintelligent  man,  the  brainless  barbarian,  is
a  monstrum  per  defectum.


The  will  to  live,  which  forms  the  inmost  core  of  every
living  oeing,  exhibits  itself  most  conspicuously  in  the
higher  order  of  animals,  that  is,  the  cleverer  ones;  and  so
in  them  the  nature  of  the  will  may  be  seen  and  examined
most  clearly.  For  in  the  lower  orders  its  activity  is  not
so  evident;  it  has  a  lower  degree  of  objectivation;  whereas,
in  the  class  which  stands  above  the  higher  order  of  animals,
that  is,  in  men,  reason  enters  in;  and  with  reason  comes
discretion,  and  with  discretion,  the  capacity  for  dissimula-
tion, which  throws  a  veil  over  the  operations  of  the  will.
And  in  mankind,  consequently,  the  will  appears  without
its  mask  only  in  the  affections  and  the  passions.  And
this  is   the   reason   wny   passion,  when   it   speaks,  always


260  PSYCHOLOGICAL  OBSERVATIONS.

wins  credence,  no  matter  what  the  passion  may  be;  and
rightly  so.  For  the  same  reason  the  passions  are  the  main
theme  of  poets  and  the  stalking  horse  of  actors.  The
conspicnousness  of  the  will  in  the  lower  order  of  animals
explains  the  delight  we  take  in  dogs,  apes,  cats,  etc,;  it  is
the  entirely  naive  way  in  which  they  express  themselves
that  gives  us  so  much  pleasure.

The  sight  of  any  free  animal  going  about  its  business
undisturbed,  seeking  its  food,  or  looking  after  its  young.,
or  mixing  in  the  company  of  its  kind,  all  the  time  being
exactly  what  it  ought  to  be  and  can  be — what  a  strange
pleasure  it  gives  us  !  Even  if  it  is  only  a  bird,  I  can
watch  it  for  a  long  time  with  delight;  or  a  water  rat  or  a
hedgehog;  or  better  still,  a  weasel,  a  deer  or  a  stag.
The  main  reason  why  we  take  so  much  pleasure  in  looking
at  animals  is  that  we  like  to  see  our  own  nature  in  such  a
simplified  form.  There  is  only  one  mendacious  being  in
the  world,  and  that  is  man.  Every  other  is  true  and
sincere,  and  makes  no  attempt  to  conceal  what  it  is,  ex*
pressing  its  feelings  just  as  they  are.


Many  things  are  put  down  to  the  force  of  habit  which
are  rather  to  be  attributed  to  the  constancy  and  immu-
tability of  orginal,  innate  character,  according  to  which
under  like  circumstances  we  always  do  the  same  thing:
whether  it  happens  for  the  first  or  the  hundredth  time,  it
is  in  virtue  of  the  same  necessity.  Real  force  of  habit,  as
a  matter  of  fact,  rests  upon  that  indolent,  passive  disposi-
tion which  seeks  to  relieve  the  intellect  and  the  will  of  a
fresh  choice,  and  so  makes  us  do  what  we  did  yesterday
and  have  done  a  hundred  times  before,  and  of  which  we
know  that  it  will  attain  its  object.

But  the  truth  of  the  matter  lies  deeper,  and  a  more
precise  explanation  of  it  can  be  given  than  appears  at
first  sight.  Bodies  which  may  be  moved  by  mechanical
means  only  are  subject  to  the  power  of  inertia;  and
applied  to  bodies  which  may  be  acted  on  by  motives,
this  power  becomes  the  force  of  habit.  The  actions
which  we  perform  by  mere  habit  come  about,  in  fact,
without  any  individual  separate  motive  brought  into
play  for  the  particular  case:  hence  in  performing  them,
•ve  really  do  not  think  about  them.     A  motive  was  pres-


PSYCHOLOGICAL  OBSER  VA TIONS.  261

en t  only  on  the  first  few  occasions  on  which  the  action
happened,  which  has  since  become  a  habit:  the  secondary
after-effect  of  this  motive  is  the  present  habit,  and  it  is
sufficient  to  enable  the  action  to  continue:  just  as  when  a
body  has  been  set  in  motion  by  a  push,  it  requires  no
more  pushing  in  order  to  continue  its  motion;  it  will  go
on  to  all  eternity,  if  it  meets  with  no  friction.  It  is  the
same  in  the  case  of  animals:  training  is  a  habit  which  is
forced  upon  them.  The  horse  goes  on  drawing  his  cart
quite  contentedly,  without  having  to  be  urged  on:  the
motion  is  the  continued  effect  of  those  strokes  of  the  whip
which  urged  him  on  at  first:  by  the  law  of  inertia  they
have  become  perpetuated  as  habit.  All  this  is  really
more  than  a  mere  parable:  it  is  the  underlying  identity  of
the  will  at  very  different  degrees  of  its  objectivation,  in
virtue  of  which  the  same  law  of  motion  takes  such
different  forms.


Vive  muchos  afios  is  the  ordinary  greeting  in  Spain,
and  all  over  the  earth  it  is  quite  customary  to  wish  people
ft  long  life.  It  is  presumably  not  a  knowledge  of  life
which  directs  such  a  wish;  it  is  rather  knowledge  of  what
man  is  in  his  inmost  nature,  the  will  to  live.

The  wish  which  every  one  has  that  he  may  be  remem-
bered after  his  death — a  wish  which  rises  to  the  longing
for  posthumous  glory  in  the  case  of  those  whose  aims  are
high — seems  to  me  to  spring  from  this  clinging  to  life.
When  the  time  comes  which  cuts  a  man  off  from  every
possibility  of  real  existence,  he  strives  after  a  life  which  is
still  attainable,  even  though  it  be  a  shadowy  and  ideal
one.


The  deep  grief  we  feel  at  the  loss  of  a  friend  arises
from  the  feeling  that  in  every  individual  there  is  some-
thing which  no  words  can  express,  something  which  is
peculiarly  his  own  and  therefore  irreparable.  Omne
individuum  ineffabile.


"We  may  come  to  look  upon  the  death  of  our  enemies
and  adversaries,  even  long  after  it  has  occurred,  with
just  as  much  regret  as   we   feel   for   that   of   our   friends,


262  PSYCHOLOGICAL  OBSERVATIONS.

viz,,  when  we  miss   them  as   witnesses   of  our  brilliant
success.


That  the  sudden  announcement  of  a  very  happy  event
may  easily  prove  fatal  rests  upon  the  fact  that  happiness
and  misery  depend  merely  on  the  proportion  which  our
claims  bear  to  what  we  get.  Accordingly,  the  good  things
we  possess,  or  are  certain  of  getting,  are  not  felt  to  be
such;  because  all  pleasure  is  in  fact  of  a  negative  nature
and  effects  the  relief  of  pain,  while  pain  or  evil  is  what  is
really  positive;  it  is  the  object  of  immediate  sensation.
With  the  possession  or  certain  expectation  of  good  things
our  demand  rises,  and  increases  our  capacity  for  further
possessions  and  larger  expectations.  But  if  we  are  de-
pressed by  continual  misfortune,  and  our  claims  reduced
to  a  minimum,  the  sudden  advent  of  happiness  finds  no
capacity  for  enjoying  it.  Neutralized  by  an  absence  of
pre-existing  claims,  its  effects  are  apparently  positive,
and  so  its  whole  force  is  brought  into  play;  hence  it  may
possibly  break  our  feelings,  i.  e.  be  fatal  to  them.  And
so,  as  is  well  known,  one  must  be  careful  in  announcing
great  happiness.  First,  one  must  get  the  person  to  hope
for  it,  then  open  up  the  prospect  of  it,  then  communicate
part  of  it,  and  at  last  make  it  fully  known.  Every  portion
of  the  good  news  loses  its  efficacy,  because  it  is  anticipated
by  a  demand,  and  room  is  left  for  an  increase  in  it.  In
view  of  all  this,  it  may  be  said  that  our  stomach  for  good
fortune  is  bottomless,  but  the  entrance  to  it  is  narrow.
These  remarks  are  not  applicable  to  great  misfortunes  in
the  same  way.  They  are  more  seldom  fatal,  because  hope
always  sets  itself  against  them.  That  an  analogous  part  is
not  played  by  fear  in  the  case  of  happiness  results  from
the  fact  that  we  are  instinctively  more  inclined  to  hope
than  to  fear;  just  as  our  eyes  turn  themselves  toward  light
rather  than  darkness.


Hope  is  the  result  of  confusing  the  desire  that  some-
thing should  take  place  with  the  probability  that  it  will.
Perhaps  no  man  is  free  from  this  folly  of  the  heart,  which
deranges  the  intellect's  correct  appreciation  of  probability
to  such  an  extent  that,  if  the  chances  are   a   thousand   to


PSYCHOLOGICAL  OBSERVATIONS.  263

oue  against  it,  yet  the  event  is  thought  a  likely  one.
Still  in  spite  of  this,  a  sudden  misfortune  is  like  a  death-
stroke,  while  a  hope  that  is  always  disappointed  and  still
never  dies,  is  like  death  by  prolonged  torture.

He  who  has  lost  all  hope  has  also  lost  all  fear;  this  is
the  meaning  of  the  expression  "  desperate/'  It  is
natural  to  a  man  to  believe  what  he  wishes  to  be  true,  and
to  believe  it  because  he  wishes  it.  If  this  characteristic
of  our  nature,  at  once  beneficial  and  assuaging,  is  rooted
out  by  many  hard  blows  of  fate,  and  a  man  comes,
conversely,  to  a  condition  in  which  he  believes  a  thing
must  happen  because  he  does  not  wish  it,  and  what  he
wishes  to  happen  can  never  be,  just  because  he  wishes  it,
this  is  in  reality  the  state  described  as  "desperation."


That  we  are  so  often  deceived  in  others  is  not  because
our  judgment  is  at  fault,  but  because  in  general,  as  Bacon
says,  "  Iniellectus  luminis  sioci  non  est,  seel  recipit  infu-
sionem  a  voluntate  et  affectibus: "  that  is  to  say,  trifles
unconsciously  bias  us  for  or  against  a  person  from  the
"ery  beginning.  It  may  also  be  explained  by  our  not
abiding  by  the  qualities  which  we  really  discover;  we  go
on  to  conclude  the  presence  of  others  which  we  think
inseparable  from  them,  or  the  absence  of  those  which  we
consider  incompatible.  For  instance,  when  we  perceive
generosity,  we  infer  justice;  from  piety,  we  infer  honesty;
from  lying,  deception;  from  deception,  stealing,  etc;  a
procedure  which  opens  the  door  to  many  false  views,
partly  because  human  nature  is  so  strange,  partly  because
our  stand-point  is  so  one-sided.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that
character  always  forms  a  consistent  and  connected  whole;
but  the  roots  of  all  its  qualities  lie  too  deep  to  allow  of
our  concluding  from  particular  data  in  a  given  case
whether  certain  qualities  can  or   cannot  exist  together.


We  often  happen  to  say  things  that  may  in  some  way
or  other  be  prejudicial  to  us;  but  we  keep  silent  about
things  that  might  make  us  look  ridiculous;  because  in  this
case  effect  follows  very  quickly  on  cause.


264:  PSYCHOLOGICAL  OBSERVATIONS.

The  pain  of  an  unfulfilled  wish  is  small  in  comparison
with  that  of  repentance;  for  the  one  stands  in  the  pres<
ence  of  the  vast  open  future,  while  the  other  has  thr
irrevocable  past  closed  behind  it.


Geduld,  patientia,  patience,  especially  the  Spanish
sufrimiento,  is  strongly  connected  with  the  notion  of
suffering.  It  is  therefore  a  passive  state,  just  as  the
opposite  is  an  active  state  of  the  mind,  with  which,  when
great,  patience  is  incompatible.  It  is  the  innate  virtue
of  phlegmatic,  indolent,  and  spiritless  people,  as  also  of
women.  But  that  it  is  nevertheless  so  very  useful  and
necessary  is  a  sign  that  the  world  is  very  badly  consti-
tuted.


Money  is  human  happiness  in  the  abstract:  he,  then,
who  is  no  longer  capable  of  enjoying  human  happiness  in
the  concrete,  devotes  his  heart  entirely  to  money.


Obstinacy  is  the  result  of  the  will  forcing  itself  into  the
place  of  the  intellect.


If  you  want  to  find  out  your  real  opinion  of  any  one,
observe  the  impression  made  upon  you  by  the  first  sight
of  a  letter  from  him.


The  course  of  our  individual  life  and  the  events  in  it,
as  far  as  their  true  meaning  and  connection  is  concerned,
may  be  compared  to  a  piece  of  rough  mosaic.  So  long  as
you  stand  close  in  front  of  it,  you  cannot  get  a  right  view
of  the  objects  presented,  nor  perceive  their  significance  or
beauty.  Both  come  in  sight  only  when  you  stand  a  little
way  off.  And  in  the  same  way  you  often  understand  the
true  connection  of  important  events  in  your  life  not  while
they  are  going  on  nor  soon  after  they  are  past,  but  only
a  considerable  time  afterward.

Is  this  so,  because  we  require  the  magnifying  effect  of
imagination?  or  because  we  can  get  a  general  view   onlj


PSYCHOLOGICAL  OBSERVATIONS.  205

from  a  distance?  or  because  the  school  of  experience
makes  our  judgment  ripe?  Perhaps  all  of  these  together:
but  it  is  certain  that  we  often  view  in  the  right  light  th«
actions  of  others,  and  occasionally  even  our  own,  only
after  the  lapse  of  years.  And  as  it  is  in  one's  own  life,  so
it  is  in  historv.


Happy  circumstances  in  life  are  like  certain  groups
of  trees.  Seen  from  a  distance  they  look  very  well:  but
go  up  to  them  and  among  them,  and  the  beauty  vanishes;
you  don't  know  where  it  can  be;  it  is  only  trees  you  see.
And  so  it  is  that  we  often  envy  the  lot  of  others.


The  doctor  sees  all  the  weakness  of  mankind,  the
lawyer  all  the  wickedness,  the  theologian  all  the
stupidity.

A  person  of  phlegmatic  disposition  who  is  a  block  head,
would  with  a  sanguine  nature,  be  a  fool.


Now  and  then  one  learns  something,  but  one  forgett
the  whole  day  long.

Moreover  our  memory  is  like  a  sieve,  the  holes  of  which
in  time  get  larger  and  larger;  the  older  we  get,  the
quicker  anything  intrusted  to  it  slips  from  the  memory,
whereas,  what  was  fixed  fast  in  it  in  early  days  is  there
still.  The  memory  of  an  old  man  gets  clearer  and  clearer,
the  further  it  goes  back,  and  less  clear  the  nearer  it
approaches  the  present  time;  so  that  his  memory,  like  his
eyes,  becomes  long-sighted.


In  the  process  of  learning  you  may  be  apprehensive
about  bewildering  and  confusing  the  memory,  but  not
about  overloading  it,  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word.
The  faculty  for  remembering  is  not  diminished  in  pro-
portion to  what  one  has  learned,  just  as  little  as  the  num-
ber of  molds  in  which  youcastsand,  lessens  its  capacity  for
being  cast  in  new  molds.  In  this  sense  the  memory  is
bottomless.     And  yet  the  greater  and    more  various  any


266  PSYCHO  LOGICAL  OBSERVATIONS.

one's  knowledge,  the  longer  he  takes  to  find  out  anything
that  may  suddenly  be  asked  him;  because  he  is  like  a
shopkeeper  who  has  to  get  the  article  wanted  from  a  large
and  multifarious  store;  or,  more  strictly  speaking,  because
out  of  many  possible  trains  of  thought  he  has  to  recall
exactly  that  one  which,  as  a  result  of  previous  training,
leads  to  the  matter  in  question.  For  the  memory  is  not
0,  repository  of  things  you  wish  to  preserve,  but  a  mere
dexterity  of  the  intellectual  powers;  hence  the  mind
always  contains  its  sum  of  knowledge  only  potentially,
never  actually.

It  sometimes  happens  that  my  memory  will  not  re-
produce some  word  in  a  foreign  language,  or  a  name,  or
some  artistic  expression,  although  I  know  it  very  well.
After  I  have  bothered  myself  in  vain  about  it  for  a  longer
or  a  shorter  time,  I  give  up  thinking  about  it  altogether.
An  hour  or  two  afterward,  in  rare  cases  even  later  still,
sometimes  only  after  four  or  five  weeks,  the  word  I  was
trying  to  recall  occurs  to  me  while  I  am  thinking  of  some-
thing else,  as  suddenly  as  if  some  one  had  whispered  it  to
me.  After  noticing  this  phenomenon  with  wonder  for
very  many  years,  I  have  come  to  think  that  the  probable
explanation  of  it  is  as  follows.  After  the  troublesome
and  unsuccessful  search,  my  will  retains  its  craving  to
know  the  word,  and  so  sets  a  watch  for  it  in  the  intellect.
Later  on,  in  the  course  and  play  of  thought,  some  word
by  chance  occurs  having  the  same  initial  letters  or  some
other  resemblance  to  the  word  which  is  sought;  then  the
sentinel  springs  forward  and  supplies  what  is  wanting  to
make  up  the  word,  seizes  it,  and  suddenly  brings  it  up  in
triumph,  without  my  knowing  where  and  how  he  got  it;
so  it  seems  as  if  some  one  had  whispered  it  to  me.  It  is
the  same  process  as  that  adopted  by  a  teacher  toward  a
child  who  cannot  repeat  a  word:  the  teacher  just  suggests
the  first  letter  of  the  word,  or  even  the  second  too;  then
the  child  remembers  it.  In  default  of  this  process,  you
can  end  by  going  methodically  through  all  the  letters  of
the  alphabet.


In  the  ordinary  man,  injustice  rouses  a  passionate  desire
for  vengeance;  and  it  has  often  been  said  that  vengeance
is  sweet.     How  many  sacrifices   have    been   made  just   to


PSYCHOLOGICAL  OBSERVATIONS.  267

enjoy  the  feeling  of  vengeance,  without  any  intention  of
causing  an  amount  of  injury  equivalent  to  what  one  has
suffered.  The  bitter  death  of  the  centaur  Nessus  was
sweetened  by  the  certainty  that  he  had  used  his  last
moments  to  work  out  an  extremely  clever  vengeance.
Walter  Scott  expresses  the  same  human  inclination  in
language  as  true  as  it  is  strong:  i(  Vengeance  is  the
sweetest  morsel  to  the  mouth  that  ever  was  cooked  in  hell!*
I  shall  now  attempt  a  psychological  explanation  of  it.

Suffering  which  falls  to  our  lot  in  the  course  of  nature,
or  by  chance,  or  fate,  does  not,  ceteris  paribus,  seem  so
painful  as  suffering   which    is    inflicted    on    us    by    the
arbitrary  will    of   another.     This  is  because  we  look  upon
nature  and    chance   as   the   fundamental    masters  of  the
world;  we  see  that  the  blow  we  received  from  them  might
just  as  well    have  fallen    on    another.     In    the    case    of
suffering  which   springs  from   this  source,  we   bewail   the
common  lot  of  humanity  rather  ohan  our  own  misfortune.
But  that  it  is  the  arbitrary  will  of  another   which   inflicts
the  suffering,  is  a  peculiarly  bitter  addition  to  the  pain  or
injury  it  causes,  viz.,  the  consciousness  that  some  one  else
is  superior  to  us,  whether  by  force  or  cunning,  while   we
lie   helpless.     If   amends   are   possible,  amends   heal    the
injury;  but  that  bitter   addition,   "and    it   was  you   who
did  that   to   me,"  which  is  often    more  painful   than   the
injury  itself,  is   only   to    be    neutralized    by    vengeance.
By    inflicting   injury    on    the   one    who   has    injured    us,
whether  we  do  it  by    force   or   cunning,  is   to   show    our
superiority  to  him,  and  to  annul  the  proof  of  his  superiority
to   us.      That  gives   our   hearts   the   satisfaction   toward
which  it  yearns.     So  where  there  is  a  great  deal  of  pride
or  vanity,  there  also  will  there  be  a  great   desire   of   ven-
geance.    But  as  the  fulfillment  of  every  wish  brings  with
it  more  or  less  of  a  sense  of  disappointment,  so  it  is   with
vengeance.     The  delight  we  hope  to  get  from  it  is  mostly
embittered a by  compassion.     Vengeance  taken   will  often
tear  the  heart  and  torment  the  conscience:  the  motive  to
it  is  no  longer  active,  and  what  remains  is  the  evidence  of
our  malice.


268  THE  CHRISTIAN  SYSTEM.

THE  CHRISTIAN  SYSTEM.

When  the  Church  says  that,  in  the  dogmas  of  religion,
reason  is  totally  incompetent  and  blind,  and  its  use  to
*>e  reprehended,  it  is  in  reality  attesting  the  fact  that  these
logmas  are  allegorical  in  their  nature,  and  are  not  to  be
judged  by  the  standard  which  reason,  taking  all  things
sensu  proprio*  can  alone  apply.  Now  the  absurdities  of  a
dogma  are  just  the  mark  and  sign  of  what  is  allegorical
anu  mythical  in  it.  In  the  case  under  consideration,
however,  the  absurdities  spring  from  the  fact  that  two
such  heterogeneous  doctrines  as  those  of  the  Old  and  New
Testaments  had  to  be  combined,  The  great  allegory  was
of  gradual  growth.  Suggested  by  external  and  adventi-
tious circumstances,  it  was  developed  by  the  interpretation
put  upon  them,  an  interpretation  in  quiet  touch  writh
certain  deep-lying  truths  only  half  realized.  The  allegory
was  finally  completed  by  Augustine,  who  penetrated
deepest  into  its  meaning,  and  so  was  able  to  conceive  it  as
a  systematic  whole  and  supply  its  defects.  Hence  the
Augustinian  doctrine,  confirmed  by  Luther,  is  the  com-
plete form  of  Christianity;  and  the  Protestants  of  to-day,
who  take  Revelation  sensu  proprio  and  confine  it  to  a
single  individual,  are  in  error  in  looking  upon  the  first
beginnings  of  Christianity  as  its  most  perfect  expression.
But  the  bad  thing  about  all  religions  is  that,  instead  of
being  able  to  confess  their  allegorical  nature,  they  have  to
conceal  it;  accordingly,  they  parade  their  doctrines  in  all
seriousness  as  true  sensu  proprio,  and  as  absurdities  from
an  essential  part  of  these  doctrines,  you  have  the  great
mischief  of  a  continual  fraud*  And,  what  is  worst,  the
iay  arrives  when  they  are  no  longer  true  sensu  proprio,
md  then  there  is  an  end  of  them;  so  that,  in  that  respect,
it  would  be  better  to  admit  their  allegorical  nature  at
once.  But  the  difficulty  is  to  teach  the  multitude  that
something  can  be  both  true  and  untrue  at  the  same  time.
And  as  all  religions  are  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  of  this
nature,  we  must  recognize  the  fact  that  mankind  cannot
get  on  without  a  certain  amount  of  absurdity,  that  absurd-
ity is  au  element  in  its  existence,  and  illusion  indispen-
sable; as  indeed  other  aspects  of  life  testify.

I  have  said  that  the  combination  of  the   Old  Testament
with  the  New  gives  rise   to   absurdities.     Among  the   8X-


THE  CHRISTIAN  SYSTEM.  269

amples  which  illustrate  what  I  mean,  I  may  cite  the
Christian  doctrine  of  Predestination  and  Grace,  as  for-
mulated by  Augustiue  and  adopted  from  him  by  Luther;
iccordiug  to  which  one  man  is  endowed  with  grace  and
mother  is  not.  Grace,  then  comes  to  be  a  privilege
received  at  birth  and  brought  ready  into  the  world;  a
Drivilege,  too,  in  a  matter  second  to  none  in  importance.
What  is  obnoxious  and  absurd  in  this  doctrine  may  be
traced  to  the  idea  contained  in  the  Old  Testament,  that
man  is  the  creation  of  an  external  will,  which  called  him
into  existence  out  of  nothing.  It  is  quite  true  that
genuine  moral  excellence  is  really  innate;  but  the  meaning
of  the  Christian  doctrine  is  expressed  in  another  and  more
rational  way  by  the  theory  of  metempsychosis,  common
to  Brahmans  and  Buddhists.  According  to  this  theory,
the  qualities  which  distinguish  one  man  from  another  are
received  at  birth,  are  brought,  that  is  to  say,  from  another
world  and  a  former  life;  these  qualities  are  not  an  external
gift  of  grace,  but  are  the  fruits  of  the  acts  committed  in
that  other  world.  But  Augustine's  dogma  of  Predestina-
tion is  connected  with  another  dogma,  namely,  that  the
mass  of  humanity  is  corrupt  and  doomed  to  eternal
damnation,  that  very  few  will  be  found  righteous  and
attain  salvation,  and  that  only  in  consequence  of  the  gift
of  grace,  and  because  they  are  predestined  to  be  saved;
while  the  remainder  will  be  overwhelmed  by  the  perdition
they  have  deserved,  viz.,  eternal  torment  in  hell.  Taken
in  its  ordinary  meaning,  the  dogma  is  revolting,  for  it
comes  to  this;  it  condemns  a  man,  who  may  be,  perhaps,
scarcely  twenty  years  of  age,  to  expiate  his  errors,  or  even
his  unbelief,  in  everlasting  torment;  nay,  more,  it  makes
»hia  almost  universal  damnation  the  natural  effect  of
original  sin,  and  therefore  the  necessary  consequence  of
;he  Fall.  This  is  a  result  which  must  have  been  foreseen
Dy  him  who  made  mankind,  and  who,  in  the  first  place,
made  them  not  better  than  they  are,  and  secondly,  set  a
trap  for  them  into  which  he  must  have  known  they  would
fall;  for  he  made  the  whole  world,  and  nothing  is  hidden
from  him.  According  to  this  doctrine,  then,  God  created
out  of  nothing  a  weak  race  prone  to  sin,  in  order  to  give
them  over  to  endless  torment.  And,  as  a  last  character-
istic, we  are  told  that  this  God,  who  prescribes  forbear-
ance and  forgiveness  of  every  fault,  exercises  none  himself,


370  THE  CHRISTIAN  SYSTEM.

but  does  the  exact  opposite;  for  a  punishment  which
comes  at  the  end  of  all  things,  when  the  world  is  over  and
done  with,  cannot  have  for  its  object  either  to  improve  or
deter,  and  is  therefore  pure  vengeance.  So  that,  on  this
view,  the  whole  race  is  actually  destined  to  eternal  torture
and  damnation,  and  created  expressly  for  this  end,  the
only  exception  being  those  few  persons  who  are  rescued
by  election  of  grace,  from  what  motive  one  does  not
know.

Putting  these  aside,  it  looks  as  if  the  Blessed  Lord  had
created  the  world  for  the  benefit  of  the  devil!  it  would
have  been  so  much  better  not  have  made  it  at  all.  So
much,  then,  for  a  dogma  taken  sensu  proprio.  But  look
at  it  sensu  allegorico,  and  the  whole  matter  becomes
capable  of  a  satisfactory  interpretation.  What  is  absurd
and  revolting  in  this  dogma  is,  in  the  main,  as  I  said,  the
simple  outcome  of  Jewish  theism,  with  its  "  creation  out
of  nothing,"  and  the  really  foolish  and  paradoxical  denial
of  the  doctrine  of  metempsychosis  which  is  involved  in
that  idea,  a  doctrine  which  is  natural,  to  a  certain  extent
self-evident,  and,  with  the  exception  of  the  Jews,  accepted
by  nearly  the  whole  human  race  at  all  times.  To  remove
the  enormous  evil  arising  from  Augustine's  dogma,  and  to
modify  its  revolting  nature,  Pope  Gregory  I.,  in  the  sixth
century,  very  prudently  matured  the  doctrine  of  Purga-
tory, the  essence  of  which  already  existed  in  Origen  (cf.
Bayle's  article  on  Origen,  note  B.).  The  doctrine  was
regularly  incorporated  into  the  faith  of  the  church,  so
that  the  original  view  was  much  modified,  and  a  certain
substitute  provided  for  the  doctrine  of  metempsychosis;
for  both  the  one  and  the  other  admit  a  process  of  purifi-
cation. To  the  same  end,  the  doctrine  of  "the  Restora-
tion of  all  things "  (<x7i:oxaraT6rd6.is)  was  established,
according  to  which,  in  the  last  act  of  the  Human  Comedy,
the  sinners  one  and  all  will  be  reinstated  in  integrum.
It  is  only  Protestants,  with  their  obstinate  belief  in  the
Bible,  who  cannot  be  induced  to  give  up  eternal  punish-
ment in  hell.  If  one  were  spiteful,  one  might  say,
14  much  good  may  it  do  them/'  but  it  is  consoling  to  think
./hat  they  really  do  not  believe  the  doctrine;  they  leave  it
'^one,  thinking  in  their  hearts,  "It  can't  be  so  bad  as  all
*hat."

The   rigid   and   systematic   character   of  his  mind    led


THE  CHRISTIAN  SYSTEM.  271

Augustine,  in  his  austere  dogmatism  and  his  resolute
definition  of  doctrines  only  just  indicated  in  the  Bible
and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  resting  on  very  vague  grounds,
to  give  hard  outlines  to  these  doctrines  and  to  put  a  harsh
construction  on  Christianity:  the  result  of  which  is  that
his  views  offend  us,  and  just  as  in  his  day  Pelagianism
arose  to  combat  them,  so  now  in  our  day  Rationalism  doea
the  same.  Take,  for  example,  the  case  as  he  states  it
generally  in  the  "  De  Civitate  Dei."  Bk.  xii.  ch.  21.  It
comes  to  this:  God  creates  a  being  out  of  nothing,  forbids
him  some  things,  and  enjoins  others  upon  him;  and
because  these  commands  are  not  obeyed,  lie  tortures  him
to  all  eternity  with  every  conceivable  anguish;  and  for
this  purpose,  binds  soul  and  body  inseparably  together,  so
that,  instead  of  the  torment  destroying  this  being  by
splitting  him  up  into  his  elements,  and  so  setting  him
free,  he  may  live  to  eternal  pain.  This  poor  creature,
formed  out  of  nothing!  At  least,  he  has  a  claim  on  his
original  nothing:  he  should  be  assured,  as  a  matter  of
right,  of  this  last  retreat,  which,  in  any  case,  cannot  be  a
very  evil  one:  it  is  what  he  has  inherited.  I,  at  any  rate,
cannot  help  sympathizing  with  him.  1/  you  add  to  this
Augustine's  remaining  doctrines,  that  all  this  does  not
depend  on  the  man's  own  sins  and  omissions,  but  was
already  predestined  to  happen,  one  really  is  at  a  loss  what
to  think.  Our  highly  educated  Rationalists  say,  to  be
sure,  "  It's  all  false,  it's  a  mere  bugbear;  we're  in  a  state
of  constant  progress,  step  by  step  raising  ourselves  to  ever
greater  perfection."  Ah!  what  a  pity  we  didn't  begin
sooner;  we  should  already  be  there.

In  the  Christian  system  the  devil  is  a  personage  of  the
greatest  importance.  God  is  described  as  absolutely  good,
wise  and  powerful;  and  unless  he  were  counterbalanced
by  the  devil,  it  would  be  impossible  to  see  where  the  in-
numerable and  measureless  evils,  which  predominate  in
the  world,  come  from,  if  there  were  no  devil  to  account
for  them.  And  since  the  Rationalists  have  done  away
with  the  devil,  the  damage  inflicted  on  the  other  side  has
gone  on  growing,  and  is  becoming  more  and  more
palpable:  as  might  have  been  foreseen,  and  was  foreseen,
by  the  orthodox.  The  fact  is,  you  cannot  take  away  one
pillar  from  a  building  without  endangering  the  rest  of  it.


272  THE  CHRISTIAN  SYSTEM.

And  this  confirms  the  view,  which  has  been  established  on
other  grounds,  that  Jehovah  is  a  transformation  of
Ormuzd,  and  Satan  of  the  Ahriman  who  must  be  taken  in
connection  with  him.  Ormnzd  himself  is  a  transforma-
tion of  Indra.

Christianity  has  this  peculiar  disadvantage,  that,  un-
like other  religions,  it  is  not  a  pure  system*  of  doctrine:
'ts  chief  and  essential  feature  is  that  it  is  a  history,  a
series  of  events,  a  collection  of  facts,  a  statement  of  the
actions  and  sufferings  of  individuals:  it  is  this  history
which  constitutes  dogma,  and  belief  in  it  is  salvation.
Other  religions,  Buddhism,  for  instance,  have,  it  is  true,
historicalappendages,  the  life,  namely  of  their  founders:
this,  however,  is  not  part  and  parcel  of  the  dogma,  but  is
taken  along  with  it.  For  example,  the  Lalitavistara  may
be  compared  with  the  Gospel  so  far  it  contains  the  life  of
Sakya-muni,  the  Buddha  of  the  present  period  of  the
world's  history:  but  this  is  something  which  is  quite
separate  and  different  from  the  dogma,  from  the  system
itself:  and  for  this  reason;  the  lives  of  former  Buddhas
were  quite  other,  and  those  of  the  future  will  be  quite
other,  than  the  life  of  the  Buddha  of  to-day.  The  dogma
is  by  no  means  one  with  the  career  of  its  founder;  it  does
not  rest  on  individual  persons  or  events;  it  is  something
universal  and  equally  valid  at  all  times.  The  Lalitavistara
is  not,  then,  a  gospel  in  the  Christian  sense  of  the  word;
it  is  not  the  joyful  message  of  an  act  of  redemption;  it  is
the  career  of  him  who  has  shown  how  each  one  may  redeem
himself.  The  historical  constitution  of  Christianity
makes  the  Chinese  laugh  at  missionaries  as  story-tellers.

I  may  mention  here  another  fundamental  error  of
Christianity,  an  error  which  cannot  be  explained  away,
and  the  mischievous  consequences  of  which  are  obvious
every  day:  I  mean  the  unnatural  distinction  Christianity
makes  between  man  and  the  animal  world  to  which  he
really  belongs.  It  sets  up  man  as  all-important,  and  looks
upon  animals  as  merely  things.  Brahmanism,  and
Buddhism,  on  the  other  hand,  true  to  the  facts,  recognize
in  a  positive  way  that  man  is  related  generally  to  the
whole  of  nature,  and  specially  and  principally  to  animal
nature;  and  in  their  systems  man  is  always  represented,  by
the  theory   of   metempsychosis  and   otherwise,  as   closely


THE  CHRISTIAN  SYSTEM.  273

connected  with  the  animal  world.  The  important  part
played  by  animals  all  through  Buddhism  and  Brahmanism,
compared  with  the  total  disregard  of  them  in  Judaism  and
Christianity,  puts  an  end  to  any  question  as  to  which
system  is  nearer  perfection,  however  much  we  in  Europe
may  nave  become  accustomed  to  the  absurdity  of  the
claim.  Christianity  contains,  in  fact,  a  great  and
essential  imperfection  in  limiting  its  precepts  to  man,  and
in  refusing  rights  to  the  entire  animal  world.  As  religion
fails  to  protect  animals  against  the  rough,  unfeeling  anc7
often  more  than  bestial  multitude,  the  duty  falls  to  the
police;  and  as  the  police  are  unequal  to  the  task,  societies
for  the  protection  of  animals  are  now  formed  all  over  Europe
and  America.  In  the  whole  of  uncircumcised  Asia,  such  a
procedure  would  be  the  most  superfluous  thing  in  the
world,  because  animals  are  there  sufficiently  protected  by
religion,  which  even  makes  them  objects  of  charity.
How  such  charitable  feelings  bear  fruit  may  be  seen,  to
take  an  example,  in  the  great  hospital  for  animals  at
Surat,  whither  Christians,  Mohammedans  and  Jews  can
send  their  sick  beasts,  which,  if  cured,  are  very  rightlj
not  restored  to  their  owners.  In  the  same  way,  when  a
Brahman  or  Buddhist  has  a  slice  of  good  luck  a  happy
issue  in  any  affair,  instead  of  mumbling  a  Te  Deum,  he
goes  to  the  market  place  and  buys  birds  and  opens  their
cages  at  the  city  gate;  a  thing  which  may  be  frequently
seen  in  Astrachan,  where  the  adherents  of  every  religion
meet  together:  and  so  on  in  a  hundred  similar  ways.
On  the  other  hand,  look  at  the  revolting  ruffianism  with
which  our  Christian  public  treats  its  animals;  killing  them
for  no  object  at  all,  and  laughing  over  it,  or  mutilating
or  torturing  them:  even  its  horses,  who  form  its  most
direct  means  of  livelihood,  are  strained  to  the  utmost  in
their  old  age,  and  the  last  strength  worked  out  of  their
poor  bones  until  they  succumb  at  last  under  the  whip
One  might  say  with  truth,  Maukind  are  the  devils  or
the  earth,  and  the  animals  the  souls  they  torment.  But
what  can  you  expect  from  the  masses,  when  there  are  men  of
education,  zoologists  even,  who,  instead  of  admitting  what
is  so  familiar  to  them,  the  essential  identity  of  man  and
animal,  are  bigoted  and  stupid  enough  to  offer  a  zealous
opposition  to  their  honest  and  rational  colleagues,  when
they  class  man  under  the  proper  head   as   an   animal,  or


274  TEK  CHRISTIAN  SYSTEM.

demonstrate  the  resemblance  between  him  and  the
chimpanzee  or  ourang-outang.  It  is  a  revolting  thing
that  a  writer  who  is  so  pious  and  Christian  in  his  senti-
ments as  Jung  Stilling  should  use  a  simile  like  this,  in  his
"Scenen  aus  dem  Geisterreieh."  (Bk.  II.  sc.  i.,  p.  15.)
"Suddenly  the  skeleton  shriveled  up  into  an  indescribably
hideous  and  dwarf-like  form,  just  as  when  you  bring  a
large  spider  into  the  focus  of  a  burning  glass,  and  watch
the  purulent  blood  hiss  and  bubble  in  the  heat.'v  This
man  of  God  then  was  guilty  of  such  infamy!  or  looked  on
quietly  when  another  was  committing  it!  in  either  case  it
comes  to  the  same  thing  here.  So  little  harm  did  he
think  of  it  that  he  tells  us  of  it  in  passing,  and  without  a
trace  of  emotion.  Such  are  the  effects  of  the  first  chapter
of  Genesis,  and.  in  fact,  of  the  whole  of  the  Jewish  con-
ception of  nature.  The  standard  recognized  by  the
Hindus  and  Buddhists  is  the  Mahavakya  (the  great  word)
— "  tat-twam-asi,"  (this  is  thyself),  which  may  always  be
spoken  of  every  animal,  to  keep  us  in  mind  of  the  identity
of  his  inmost  being  with  ours.  Perfection  of  morality,
iudeed!     Xonsense.

The  fundamental  characteristics  of  the  Jewish  religion
are  realism  and  optimism,  views  of  the  world  which  are
closely  allied;  they  form,  in  fact,  the  conditions  of  theism.
For  theism  looks  upon  the  material  world  as  absolutely
real,  and  regards  life  as  a  pleasant  gift  bestowed  upon  us.
On  the  other  hand,  the  fundamental  characteristics  of  the
Brahman  and  Buddhist  religions  are  idealism  and
pessimism,  which  look  upon  the  existence  of  the  world  as
in  the  nature  of  a  dream,  and  life  as  the  result  of  our
sins.  In  the  doctrines  of  the  Zendavesta.  from  which,  as
is  well  known,  Judaism  sprang,  the  pessimistic,  element  is
represented  by  Ahriman.  In  Judaism,  Ahriman  has
as  Satan  only  a  subordinate  position;  but.  like  Ahriman,
he  is  the  lord  of  snakes,  scorpions,  and  vermin.  But  the
Jewish  system  forthwith  employs  Satan  to  correct  its
fundamental  error  of  optimism,  and  in  the  Fall  introduces
the  element  of  pessimism,  a  doctrine  demanded  by  the
most  obvious  facts  of  the  world.  There  is  no  truer  idea
in  Judaism  than  this,  although  it  transfers  to  the  course
of  existence  what  must  be  represented  as  its  foundation
and  antecedent.


THE  CHRISTIAN  SYSTEM.  275

The  New  Testament,  on  the  other  hand,  must  be  in
gome  way  traceable  to  an  Indian  source:  its  ethical  system,
its  ascetic  view  of  morality,  its  pessimism,  and  its  Avatar,
are  all  thoroughly  Indian.  It  is  its  morality  which  places
it  in  a  position  of  such  emphatic  and  essential  antagon-
ism to  the  Old  Testament,  so  that  the  story  of  the  Fall  is
the  only  possible  point  of  connection  between  the  two.
For  when  the  Indian  doctrine  was  imported  into  the  land
af  promise,  two  very  different  things  had  to  be  combined:
on  the  one  hand  the  consciousness  of  the  corruption  and
misery  of  the  world,  its  need  of  deliverance  and  salvation
through  an  Avatar,  together  with  a  morality  based  on
self-denial  and  repentance;  on  the  other  hand  the  Jewish
doctrine  of  Monotheism,  with  its  corollary  that  "all  things
are  very  good"  (itavra  uaXa  Mav.)  And  the  task
succeeded  as  far  as  it  could,  as  far,  that  is,  as  it  was
possible  to  combine  two  such  heterogeneous  and  antago-
nistic creeds.

As  ivy  clings  for  the  support  and  stay  it  wants  to  a
rough-hewn  post,  everywhere  conforming  to  its  irregulari-
ties and  showing  their  outline,  but  at  the  same  time
covering  them  with  life  and  grace,  and  changing  the
former  aspect  into  one  that  is  pleasing  to  the  eye;  so  the
Christian  faith,  sprung  from  the  wisdom  of  India,  over-
spreads the  old  trunk  of  rude  Judaism,  a  tree  of  alien
growth;  the  original  form  must  in  part  remain,  but  it
suffers  a  complete  change  and  becomes  full  of  life  and
truth,  so  tnat  it  appears  to  be  the  same  tree,  but  is  really
another.

Judaism  had  represented  the  Creator  as  separated  from
the  world,  which  he  produced  out  of  nothing.  Chris-
tianity identifies  this  Creator  with  the  Saviour,  and
through  him,  with  humanity:  he  stands  as  their  represen-
tative; they  are  redeemed  in  him,  just  as  they  fell  in
Adam,  and  have  lain  ever  since  in  the  bonds  of  iniquity,
corruption,  suffering  and  death.  Such  is  the  view  taken
by  Christianity  in  common  with  Buddhism:  the  world
can  no  longer  be  looked  at  in  the  light  of  Jewish  optimism,
which  found  "all  things  very  good:"  nay,  in  the  Chris-
tian scheme,  the  devil  is  named  as  its  Prince  or  Ruler,
(5  apxoovir  rov  Kodjuov  rovrov.  John  12,  33).  The  world  w
no  longer  an  end,  but  a  means;  and  the  realm  of  ever-
blasting  joy  lies  beyond  it  and  the  grave.     Resignation  in


276  THE  CHRISTIAN  SYSTEM.

this  world  and  direction  of  all  our  hopes  to  a  better  form
the  spirit  of  Christianity.  The  way  to  this  end  is  opened
by  the  Atonement,  that  is,  the  Redemption  from  this
world  and  its  ways.  And  in  the  moral  system,  instead  of
the  law  of  vengeance,  there  is  the  command  to  love  your
snemy;  instead  of  the  promise  of  innumerable  posterity,
he  assurance  of  eternal  life;  instead  of  visiting  the  sins
of  the  fathers  upon  the  children  to  the  third  and  fourth
generations,  the  Holy  Spirit  which  over-shadows  all.  •

We  see,  then,  that  the  doctrines  of  the  Old  Testament
are  rectified  and  their  meaning  changed  by  those  of  the
New,  so  that,  in  the  most  important  and  essential  matters,
*n  agreement  is  brought  about  between  them  and  the  old
religions  of  India.  Everything  which  is  true  in  Chris-
tianity may  also  be  found  in  Brahmanism  and  Buddhism.
But  in  Hinduism  and  Buddhism  you  will  look  in  vain  for
any  parallel  to  the  Jewish  doctrines  of  "a  nothing  quick-
ened into  life,"  or  of  "  a  world  made  in  time,"  which,
cannot  be  humble  enough  in  its  thanks  and  praises  to
Jehovah  for  an  ephemeral  existence  full  of  misery,  anguish
and  need.

Whoever  seriously  thinks  that  superhuman  beings  have
ever  given  our  race  information  as  to  the  aim  of  its
existence  and  that  of  the  world,  is  still  in  his  childhood.
There  is  no  other  revelation  than  the  thoughts  of  the
wise,  even  though  these  thoughts,  liable  to  error  as  is  the
lot  of  everything  human,  are  often  clothed  in  strange
allegories  and  myths  under  the  name  of  religion.  So  far,
then,  it  is  a  matter  of  indifference  whether  a  man  lives
and  dies  in  reliance  on  his  own  or  another's  thoughts;  for
it  is  never  more  than  human  thought,  human  opinion,
which  he  trusts.  Still,  instead  of  trusting  what  their  own
minds  tell  them,  men  have  as  a  rule  a  weakness  for  trust-
ing others  who  pretend  to  supernatural  sources  of  knowl-
edge. And  in  view  of  the  enormous  intellectual
inequality  between  man  and  man,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  the
thoughts  of  one  mind  might  appear  as  in  some  sense  a
revelation  to  another.


A  BRIEF  DIALOG  UE.  277

THE  FAILURE  OF  PHILOSOPHY  :


A   BRIEF   DIALOGUE.

A.  Philosophy  has  hitherto  been  a  failure.  It  could
not,  indeed,  have  been  otherwise;  because,  instead  of
confining  himself  to  the  better  understanding  of  the  world
as  given  in  experience,  the  philosopher  has  aspired  to  pass
at  one  bound  beyond  it,  in  the  hope  of  discovering  the
last  foundation  of  all  existence  and  the  eternal  relations
of  things.  Now  these  are  matters  which  our  intellect  is
quite  incapable  of  grasping.  Its  power  of  comprehension
never  reaches  beyond  what  philosophers  call  "finite
things,"  or,  as  they  sometimes  say,  "phenomena;"  in
short,  just  the  fleeting  shadows  of  this  world,  and  the
interests  of  the  individual,  the  furtherance  of  his  aims
and  the  maintenance  of  his  person.  And  since  our
intellect  is  thus  immanent,  our  philosophy  should  be
immanent  too,  and  not  soar  to  supramundane  things,  but
be  content  with  gaining  a  thorough  grasp  of  the  world  of
experience.  It  surely  provides  matter  enough  for  such  a
study.

B.  If  that  is  so,  intellect  is  a  miserable  present  for
Nature  to  give  us.  According  to  your  view,  the  mind
serves  only  to  grasp  the  relations  that  constitute  our
wretched  existence  as  individuals — relations  which  cease
with  the  brief  span  of  our  temporal  life;  and  is  utterly
unsuited  to  face  those  problems  which  are  alone  worthy
to  interest  a  thinking  being — what  our  existence  really  is,
and  what  the  world  means  as  a  whole;  in  short,  how  we
are  to  solve  the  riddle  of  this  dream  of  life.  If  all  this  is
so,  and  our  mind  could  never  grasp  these  things  even
though  they  were  explained  to  it,  then  I  cannot  see  that
it  is  worth  my  while  to  educate  my  mind,  or  to  pay  an)
attention  to  it  at  all;  it  is  a  thing  unworthy  of  any
respect.

A.  My  dear  sir,  if  we  wrangle  with  Nature,  we  are
usually  in  the  wrong.  For  Nature  does  nothing  that
is  useless  or  in  vain — nihil  facit  frustra  nee  snpervacan-
eum.  We  are  only  temporal,  finite,  fleeting  beings
creatures  of  a  dream:  and  our  existence  passes  away  like
a  shadow.     What  do  we  want  with  an  intellect  to  grasp


278  TEE  FAIL  URE  OF  PH1L0S0PEY.

things  that  are  infinite,  eternal,  absolute?  And  how
should  such  an  intellect  ever  leave  the  consideration  of
these  high  matters  to  apply  itself  again  to  the  small  facts
of  onr  ephemeral  life — the  facts  that  are  the  only  realities
for  us  and  our  proper  concern?  How  could  it  ever  be  of
any  use  for  them  again?  If  nature  had  bestowed  this
intellect  upon  us,  the  gift  would  not  only  have  been  an
immense  mistake  and  quite  in  vain;  it  would  even  have
conflicted  with  the  very  aims  that  nature  has  designed  for
us.     For  what  good  do  we  do,  as  Shakespeare  says,

"  We  fools  of  nature,
So  "horridly  to  shake  our  disposition
With  thoughts  beyond  the  reaches  of  our  souls."*

If  we  had  this  perfect,  this  all  embracing,  metaphysical
insight,  should  we  be  capable  of  any  physical  insight
at  all,  or  of  going  about  our  proper  business?  Kay,  it
might  plunge  us  forever  into  a  state  of  chill  horror,  like
that  of  one  who  has  seen  a  ghost.

B.  But  surely  in  all  this  you  are  making  a  notorious
petitio  principii.  In  saying  that  we  are  merely  temporal,
fleeting,  finite  beings,  you  beg  the  whole  question.  We
are  also  infinite,  eternal,  and  the  original  principle  of
nature  itself.  Is  it  not  then  well  worth  our  while  to  go
on  trying  if  we  cannot  fathom  nature  after  all — ob  nicht
Natur  zuletzt  sick  dock  ergrunde?

A.  Yes;  but  according  to  your  own  philosophy  we  are
Infinite  and  eternal,  only  in  a  certain  sense.  We  are  in-
finite and  eternal  not  as  phenomena,  but  as  the  original
principle  of  nature;  not  as  individuals,  but  as  the  inmost
essence  of  the  world;  not  because  we  are  subjects  of
knowledge,  but  merely  as  manifestations  of  the  will  to
live.  The  qualities  of  which  you  speak  are  qualities  that
have  to  do  with  intelligence,  not  will.  As  intelligent
beings  we  are  individual  and  finite.  Our  intellect,  then,
is  also  of  this  character.  The  aim  of  our  life,  if  I  may
use  a  metaphorical  expression,  is  a  practical,  not  a
theoretical  one;  our  actions,  not  our  knowledge,  appertain
to  eternity.  The  use  of  the  intellect  is  to  guide  oui
notions,  and  at  the  same  time  to  ho'd  up  the  mirror  to  our
will;  and  this  is,  in  effect,  what  it  does.     If  the  intellect


*  "  Hamlet,"  L,  Sc.  4.


THE  METAPHYSICS  OF  FINE  ART.  279

Aad  more  to  do,  it  would  very  probably  become  unfit  even
:or  this.  Think  how  a  small  superfluity  of  intellect  is  a
bar  to  the  career  of  the  man  endowed  with  it.  Take  the
case  of  genius:  while  it  may  be  an  inward  blessing  to  its
possessor,  it  may  also  make  him  very  unhappy  in  his
;elations  with  the  world.*

B.  Good,  that  you  reminded  me  of  genius.  To  some
jxtent  it  upsets  the  facts  you  are  trying  to  vindicate.
A  genius  is  a  man  whose  theoretical  side  enormously  out-
weighs his  practical.  Even  though  he  cannot  grasp
eternal  relations,  he  can  see  a  little  deeper  into  the  things
of  this  world;  attamen  est  qiiodam  prodire  tenus.  It  is
quite  true  that  this  does  render  the  intellect  of  genius  less
fit  to  grasp  the  finite  things  of  earth;  just  as  a  telescope
is  a  good  thing,  but  not  in  a  theater.  Here  we  seem  to
have  reached  a  point  where  we  agree,  and  we  need  not
pursue  the  subject  further.


THE  METAPHYSICS  OF  FINE  ART.

The  real  problem  in  the  philosophy  of  art  may  be
very  simply  stated  thus:  How  is  it  possible  to  take
pleasure  in  something  that  does  not  come  into  any  relation
with  the  will?

Let  me  put  this  more  fully.  It  is  commonly  felt  that
pleasure  and  enjoyment  in  a  thing  can  arise  only  when  it
comes  into  some  relation  with  our  will,  or,  as  we  prefer
to  say,  when  it  serves  some  end  which  we  have  in  view.
If  this  were  so,  it  would  seem  to  be  a  contradiction  to
talk  of  pleasure  which  did  not  involve  bringing  the  will
into  play.  And  yet  it  is  quite  obvious  that  we  derive
pleasure  and  enjoyment  from  the  beautiful  as  such,  quite
apart  from  any  connection  it  may  have  with  our  personal
aims,  or,  in  other  words,  with  our  will.

This  problem  I  have  solved  in  the  following  way:  by
the  beautiful  we  mean  the  essential  and  original  forms
of  animate  and  inanimate  nature — in    Platonic    language,

*  Translator's  Note. — This  is  a  favorite  remark  of  Schopenhauer's.
Some  account  of  his  interesting  theory  of  Genius  touched  upon  at
;be  conclusion  of  this  dialogue  may  be  found  in  the  concluding
->ection  of  this  volume  emitted:   "  The  Art  o*  Literature."


2»0  THE  METAPHYSICS  OF  FINE  ART.

the  Ideas;  and  they  can  be  apprehended  only  by  theii
essential  correlate,  a  knowing  subject  free  from  \rl!!j
in  other  words,  a  pure  intelligence  without  purpose  or
ends  in  view.  Hence  in  the  act  of  aesthetic  perception  ****
will  has  absolutely  no  place  in  consciousness.  But  i^  ;s
the  will  alone  which  is  the  fount  of  all  our  sorrows  2*:t
sufferings,  and  if  it  thus  vanishes  from  consciousness,  the
whole  possibility  of  suffering  is  taken  away.  This  I*  :s
that  explains  the  feeling  of  pleasure  which  accompanies
the  perception  of  the  beautiful.

If  it  should  be  objected  that  to  take  away  the  poseib'i:<"y
of  suffering  is  also  to  take  away  the  possibility  of  enjoy-
ment, it  should  be  remembered  that,  as  1  have  often  'ex-
plained, happiness  and  satisfaction  are  negative,  in
their  nature;  in  other  words,  they  are  merely  freedom
from  suffering;  while  pain  is  the  positive  element  of  ex-
istence. So  that,  when  will  vanishes  from  consciousness,
there  yet  remains  over  the  state  of  enjoyment:  that  is  to
say,  the  state  in  which  there  is  a  complete  absence,  not
onlv  of  pain,  but  in  this  case,  even  of  the  very  possibility
of  it.

To  be  freed  from  one's  self  is  what  is  meant  by  becoming
a  pure  intelligence.  It  consists  in  forgetfulness  of  one's
own  aims  and  complete  absorption  in  the  object  of  con-
templation; so  that  all  we  are  conscious  of  is  this  ono
object.  And  since  this  is  a  state  of  mind  unattainable  bj
most  men,  they  are,  as  a  rule,  unfitted  for  an  objective
attitude  toward  the  world;  and  it  is  just  this  that  con-
stitutes the  artistic  faculty.

To  the  will  as  it  exists  in  the  individual  is  superadded
an  intellectual  faculty,  which  enables  the  will  to  become
conscious  of  itself  and  of  the  objects  about  it.  This
intellectual  faculty  came  into  being  in  order  to  perform
the  service  of  the  will.  Now,  let  us  suppose  that  the  will
sets  the  intellect  at  liberty  for  awhile  and  grants  it  a  full
release  from  its  service,  so  that  the  intellect  may  for  the
moment  dismiss  its  concern  for  the  will;  in  other  words,
abandon  the  personal  service  which  forms  its  only  natural
task,  and,  therefore,  its  regular  occupation.  If,  at  the
same  time  that  it  is  thus  released,  the  intellect  does  not
cease  to  be  active  and  energetic,  and  use  every  endeavor  to
arrive  at  a  clear  apprehension  of  the  world,  it  becomes
completely  objective;  that  is  to  say,  it  becomes  a  faithful
minor  of  the  rJ3j.11.gs  about  it.


TEE  METAPHYSICS  OF  FINE  ART  281

It  is  only  in  this  way,  with  a  pure  intelligence  at
subject,  that  the  object,  pure  and  simple,  can  come  into
existence.  For  this  postulated  relation  between  subject
and  object  to  arise  at  all,  it  is  necessary  that  the  intel-
lectual faculty  should  not  only  be  withdrawn  from  its
original  service  and  be  left  altogether  to  itself,  but  also
that,  when  released,  it  should  nevertheless  preserve  its
whole  energy  of  activity;  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the
stimulus  of  this  activity,  the  impulse  of  the  will,  is  now
absent.

Therein  lies  the  difficulty,  and  this  is  just  why  tnj
condition  of  mind  necessary  in  artistic  creation  is  so  rare;
because  all  our  thoughts  and  endeavors,  our  powers  of
sight  and  hearing,  are  always  naturally  exerted,  directly
or  indirectly,  in  the  service  of  our  numerous  personal
aims,  great  and  small.  It  is  the  will  that  drives  the
intellect  to  the  fulfillment  of  its  function,  and  the  in-
tellect flags  at  once  if  the  spur  is  withdrawn.  Rendered
active  in  this  way,  the  intellect  is  perfectly  sufficient  for
the  needs  of  practical  life,  nay,  even  for  the  kind  of
knowledge  required  in  professional  business.  For  there
the  aim  is  to  understand  only  the  relations  of  things,  not
the  inner  reality  peculiar  to  them;  and  this  kind  of
knowledge  proceeds  by  applying  such  principles  of  reason-
ing as  govern  the  relation  in  which  things  may  stand  to  one
another.

But  though  in  the  conception  of  a  work  of  art  the
intellect  is  all  in  all,  in  the  execution  of  it,  where  the
aim  is  to  communicate  and  represent  what  has  been  con-
ceived, the  will  may,  nay,  must  become  active  again;  just
because  there  is  an  aim  to  be  carried  out.  Accordingly,
in  this  sphere,  the  principles  of  reasoning  which  govern
the  relations  of  things  again  come  into  play.  It  is  in
conformity  with  these  principles  that  the  means  used  by
art  are  so  contrived  as  to  produce  artistic  effects.  Time
we  find  the  painter  concerned  with  the  accuracy  of  liu
drawing  and  the  manipulation  of  his  colors,  and  the  poet
looking  first  to  the  arrangement  of  his  subject  and  then  to
a  right  use  of  expression  and  the  laws  of  metre.

In  the  selection  of  a  theme,  both  poetry  pnd  the  plastic
arts  take  some  one  individual    person    or   tiling  and   c*.
deavor    to  present  it  a?  a    separate    entity,  with    all    its
peculiarities,  even  down  to  the  minutest,  exhibited   with


&%  THE  METAPHYSICS  OF  FINE  ART.

the  most  accurate  precision.  Science,  on  the  other  hanu,
works  by  the  treatment  of  abstract  ideas,  every  one  of
them  representing  innumerable  individuals;  and  it  pro-
ceeds to  define  and  mark  out  the  characteristics  of  these
ideas,  so  as  to  fix  them  once  for  all.  A  comparison
between  these  two  methods  might  lead  one  to  suppose
that  art  is  an  insignificant,  petty,  nay,  almost  childish
pursuit.  But  the  nature  of  art  is  such  that  with  it  one
case  holds  good  for  a  thousand;  for  by  a  careful  anc]
letailed  preservation  of  a  single  individual,  person  or  thing,
it  aims  at  revealing  the  idea  of  the  genus  to  which  that
person  or  thing  belongs.  Thus  some  one  event  or  scen§
in  the  life  of  a  man,  described  with  complete  truth— i
described,  that  is  to  say,  so  as  to  exhibit  precisely  all  the
individuals  which  go  to  make  it  what  it  is — gives  us  a
clear  and  profound  insight  into  the  idea  of  humanity
itself,  as  seen  from  this  particular  point  of  view.  But,  in
spite  of  this  difference  of  method  between  science  and  art,
there  is  some  similarity  in  their  treatment  of  single  facts.
For  just  as  the  botanist  picks  a  single  flower  from  the
boundless  realm  of  the  vegetable  world,  and  then  takes  it
to  pieces  in  order  to  demonstrate,  from  the  single  specimen,
the  nature  of  the  plant  itself;  so  the  poet  chooses  out  of
the  endless  turmoil  of  human  life  as  it  hurries  incessantly
on  its  way,  some  one  scene,  nay,  often  only  some  one
mood,  some  one  sensation,  so  that  he  may  show  us  from  it
what  is  the  life  and  character  of  man.

And  thus  it  is  that  the  greatest  minds,  Shakespeare  and
Goethe,  Raphael  and  Rembrandt,  do  not  think  it  un-
worthy of  them  to  bring  some  quite  ordinary  person  before
us — not  even  one  that  is  anything  beyond  the  common—
to  delineate  him  with  the  greatest  accuracy,  in  the  en-
deavor to  show  him  to  us  in  the  most  minute  particularity.
For  it  is  only  when  they  are  put  before  us  in  this  way
that  we  can  apprehend  individual  and  particular  facts  of
life;  and  that  is  why  I  have  defined  poetry  as  the  art  of
rousing  the  imagination  by  means  of  words.

If  the  reader  wishes  for  a  direct  example  of  the  advan-
tage  which  intuitive  knowledge — the  primary  and  funda-
mental kind — has  over  abstract  thought,  as  showing  that
art  reveals  to  \cs  more  than  we  can  gain  from  all  th<
sciences,  let  him  look  at  a  beautiful  human  face,  full  c'
expressive  emotion;  and  that  too  whether  in  nature  itself


THE  METAPHYSICS  OF  FINE  ART.  283

or  as  presented  to  us  by  the  mediation  of  art.  How  much
deeper  is  the  insight  gained  into  the  essential  character
of  man,  nay,  into  nature  in  general,  by  this  sight  than  by
all  the  words  and  abstract  expressions  which  may  be  used
to  describe  it.  When  a  beautiful  face  beams  with
laughter,  it  is  as  though  a  fine  landscape  were  suddenly
illuminated  by  a  ray  of  light  darting  from  the  clouds.
Therefore  rulete,  puellcs,  rtdete!

Let  me  here  state  the  general  reason  why  the  idea,  in
the  Platonic  meaning  of  the  word,  may  be  more  easily
apprehended  from  a  picture  than  from  reality;  in  other
language,  why  a  picture  makes  a  nearer  approach  to  the
idea.  A  work  of  art  is  some  objective  reality  as  it  appears
after  it  has  passed  through  a  subject.  From  this  point
of  view,  it  may  be  said  to  bear  the  same  relation  to  the
mind  as  animal  food,  which  is  vegetable  food  already
assimilated,  hears  to  the  body.

But  there  is  another  and  deeper  reason  for  the  fact  in
question.  The  product  of  plastic  and  pictorial  art  does
not  present  us,  as  reality  does,  with  something  that  exists
once  only  and  then  is  gone  forever — the  connection,  I
mean,  between  this  particular  matter  and  this  particular
form.  It  is  this  connection  which  is  the  essence  of  any
concrete  individuality,  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word.
This  kind  of  art  shows  us  the  form  alone;  and  this,  if  it
were  given  in  its  whole  entirety,  would  be  the  idea.  The
picture,  therefore  leads  us  at  once  from  the  individual  to
the  mere  form;  and  this  separation  of  the  form  from  the
matter  brings  the  form  very  much  nearer  the  idea.  Now
every  artistic  representation,  whether  painting  or  statue,
is  just  such  a  separation;  and  hence  this  separation,  this
disjunction  of  the  form  from  the  matter  is  part  of  the
character  of  a  work  of  aesthetic  art,  because  it  is  just  the
aim  of  such  art  to  bring  us  to  the  knowledge  of  the  idea.

It  is,  therefore*,  essential  to  a  work  of  art  that  it  should
give  the  form  alone  without  the  matter;  and,  further,  that
it  should  do  so  without  any  possibility  of  mistake  on  the
part  of  the  spectator.  This  is  really  the  reason  why  wax  fig-
ures produce  no  aesthetic  impression,  and  therefore  are  not,
in  the  aesthetic  sense,  works  of  art  at  all;  although  if  they
were  well  made,  they  produce  an  illusion  a  hundred  times
greater  than  the  best  picture  or  statue  could  effect;  so  that
if   deceptive   imitation  of  reality  were  the  object  of  art,


284  TEE  METAPHYSICS  OF  FINE  ART.

they  would  have  to  take  the  first  place.  For  a  wax  figure
of  a  man  appears  to  give  not  only  the  mere  form  but  with
it  the  matter  as  well,  so  that  it  produces  the  illusion  that
the  man  himself  is  standing  before  you.  The  true  work  of
art  should  lead  us  from  the  individual  fact,  in  other  words,
that  which  exists  once  only,  and  then  is  gone  forever,  to
,he  mere  form  or  the  idea — in  other  wrords,  that  which
always  exists  an  infinite  number  of  times  in  an  infinite
number  of  ways.  Instead  of  doing  this,  the  wax  figure
appears  to  present  us  with  the  individual  himself — in  other
words,  with  that  which  exists  once  only,  and  then  never
again;  and  yet,  at  the  same  time,  it  fails  to  represent  the
life  which  gives  such  a  fleeting  existence  its  value.  This
is  why  a  wax  figure  is  repulsive;  it  is  stiff  and  stark,  and
reminds  us  of  a  corpse.

It  might  be  thought  that  it  is  sculpture  alone  which
gives  form  without  matter;  and  that  painting  gives  matter
as  well  as  form,  by  making  color  serve  to  imitate  matter
and  its  composition.  But  this  objection  would  imply  that
form  is  to  be  taken  in  a  purely  geometrical  sense;  and  that
is  not  what  is  here  meant.  Form  must  be  taken  in  the
philosophical  sense  of  the  word,  as  the  opposite  of  matter;
and  therefore  it  includes  color,  surface,  texture;  in  short,
quality,  in  whatever  it  may  consist.  It  is  quite  true  that
sculpture  alone  gives  form  in  the  purely  geometrical  sense,
exhibiting  it  on  a  matter  which  the  eye  can  see  to  be
foreign  to  the  form,  namely,  marble;  and  in  this  way  the
form  comes  to  stand  by  itself  so  as  to  strike  the  eye  at
once.

But  painting  does  not  give  matter  at  all,  and  it  gives
only  the  mere  appearance  of  the  form,  not  in  the  geomet-
rical, but  in  the  philosophical,  sense  just  described.
Painting,  I  say,  does  not  give  even  the  form  itself,  but
only  the  mere  appearance  of  it — that  is  to  say,  merely  its
effect  on  one  of  our  senses,  the  sense  of  sight;  and  that,
too,  only  in  so  far  as  a  particular  act  of  vision  is  concerned.
Thi6  is  why  a  picture  in  oils  does  not  really  produce  the
illusion  that  the  thing  represented  is  actually  before  us,
both  in  form  and  matter.  The  imitative  trnth  of  a  picture
is  always  subordinated  to  certain  admitted  conditions  of
this  method  of  representation.  Thus,  by  the  unavoidable
suppression  of  the  parallax  of  our  two  eyes,  a  pict?7.rp
always  makes  things  appear   in   the  way  in  which  a  ox\^


THE  MFTAPBYSICS  OF  FINE  AKT.  285

eyed  person  would  Gee  them.  Therefore  painting,  equally
with  sculpture,  gives  the  form  alone;  for  it  presents
nothing  but  the  effect  of  the  form — an  effect  confined  to
one  of  the  senses  only,  namely,  that  of  sight.

In  connection  with  this  subject  it  is  to  be  observed  that
copper-plates  and  monochromes  answer  to  a  more  noble
and  elevated  taste  than  chromographs  and  water-colors;
while  me  latter  are  preferred  by  persons  of  little  culture.
This  is  obviously  due  to  the  fact  that  pictures  in  black
and  white  give  the  form  alone,  the  form,  as  it  were,  in
the  abstract;  and  the  apprehension  of  this  is,  as  we  know,
intellectual,  in  other  words,  a  matter  of  the  intuitive  un-
derstanding. Color,  on  the  other  hand,  is  merely  an  affair
of  sense,  nay  more,  of  a  particular  arrangement  in  the  organ
of  sight  which  depends  upon  the  activity  of  the  retina.
In  respect  of  the  taste  to  which  they  appeal,  colored  prints
may  be  likened  to  rhymed,  and  copper-plates  to  blank,
verse. *  The  union  of  beauty  and  grace  in  the  human
form  is  the  clearest  manifestation  of  the  will  on  the  top-
most stage  of  its  objectivation,  and  for  that  very  reason
'the  highest  achievement  of  the  plastic  and  pictorial  arts.
But  still,  everything  that  is  natural  is  beautiful  If  there
are  some  animals  of  which  we  find  a  difficulty  in  believing
this  to  be  true,  the  reason  of  it  is  that  we  are  unable  to
look  at  them  in  a  purely  objective  light,  so  as  to  appre-
hend their  idea.  We  are  prevented  from  doing  so  by  some
unavoidable  association  of  thought,  chiefly  the  result  of
some  similarity  which  forces  itself  upon  our  notice;  as,  for
instance,  the  similarity  of  the  ape  with  man;  so  that  in-
stead of  apprehending  the  idea  of  an  ape,  what  we  see  is  the
caricature  of  a  man.  In  the  same  way  a  toad  appears  to
produce  an  effect  upon  us  similar  to  that  of  dirt  and  slime,
and  yet  this  is  not  enough  to  explain  the  unbounded  aver-
sion, nay,  the  feeling  of  dread  and  horror,  which  comes
over  some  people  at  the  sight  of  this  animal,  as  over  others
when  they  see  a  spider.  The  feeling  appears  to  be  deeper
than  any  mere  association  can  explain,  and  to  be  traceable
to  some  mysterious  fact  of  a  metaphysical  nature.

The  inorganic  world,  so  far  as  it  does  not  consist  of
mere  water,  produces  a  very  sad,  nay,  an  oppressive  effect
upon  the  feelings,  whenever  it  is  presented  to  us  quite  by

*  Cf.  Welt  als  und  Vorstellung,  Vol  II.,  p. 488.


286  TEE  METAPHYSICS  OF  FIXE  ART

itself.  Examples  of  what  I  mean  are  afforded  by  districts
which  offer  to  the  eye  nothing  but  a  mas3  of  bare  crags;
that  long  valley  of  rocks,  for  instance,  without  a  trace  of
vegetation,  near  Toulon,  on  the  way  to  Marseilles.  The
Bame  effect  is  produced  on  a  large  scale,  and  in  a  much
more  striking"degree,  by  the  African  desert.  The  melan-
choly impression  which  this  kind  of  scenery  makes  is
mainly  clue  to  the  fact  that  masses  of  inorganic  mattei
obey  one  law  only,  the  law  of  gravity;  and  consequently
everything  is  disposed  in  accordance  with  it.

Contrarily,  the  sight  of  vegetation  produces  a  feeling  of
direct  pleasure,  and  that  too  in  a  high  degree;  and  the
pleasure  is  greater  in  proportion  as  the  vegetation  is  rich,
various,  luxuriant,  and  left  to  itself.  The  more  immediate
reason  of  this  is  that,  in  the  case  of  vegetation,  the  law  of
gravity  appears  to  be  overcome,  as  the  vegetable  world
tends  to  move  in  a  direction  the  exact  contrary  of  that
taken  by  gravity.  This  is,  indeed,  the  direct  way  in
which  the  phenomenon  of  life  announces  its  presence,  as  a
new  and  higher  order  of  things.  It  is  an  order  to  which
we  ourselves  belong;  it  is  something  akin  to  us  and  the*
element  of  our  being.  And  so  at  the  sight  of  it,  our  heart
is  moved.  That  straight  upward  direction  is  the  source  of
our  pleasurable  feeling.  This  is  why  a  fine  group  of  trees
looks  so  much  better  if  a  few  tall  tapering  pines  shoot  out
from  the  middle  of  it.  On  the  other  hand,  a  tree  that  has
been  cut  down  has  lost  all  its  effect  upon  us:  and  one  that
grows  obliquely  has  not  so  much  as  one  that  stands  straight
np.

A  tree  which  bends  over  the  earth  with  its  branches
obedient  to  the  law  of  gravity,  makes  us  melancholy;  and
and  we  call  it  the  weeping  willow.

Water  neutralizes  in  a  great  measure  the  oppressive
effect  of  its  inorganic  composition  by  its  exceeding  mobil-
ity, which  gives  it  an  appearance  of  life,  and  also  by  its
constant  interplay  of  light  and  shade.  Besides,  water  is
absolutely  indispensable  for  the  existence  of  life.

But  above  and  beyond  this,  the  pleasurable  feeling
which  the  sight  of  vegetable  nature  gives  us,  comes  from
that  look  of  rest,  peace  and  satisfaction  which  it  wears;
while  the  animal  world  is  mostly  presented  to  us  in  a
state  of  unrest,  pain,  even  of  struggle.  This  explains  why
it  is  so  easy  for  the   sight  of   vegetation  to   put  us  into  a


TSE  METAPHYSICS  OF  FIJSTE  ATtTB.  287

state  where  we  become  a  pure  intelligence,  freed  from
ourselves.

It  is  a  very  astonishing  thing  that  vegetation,  even
of  the  commonest  and  humblest  kind,  is  no  sooner  with-
drawn from  the  capricious  influence  of  man  than  it
straightway  groups  itself  picturesquely  and  strikes  the  eye
as  beautiful.  This  is  true  of  every  little  spot  of  earth  that
has  been  left  wild  and  uncultivated,  even  though  thistles,
thorns  and  the  commonest  flowers  of  the  field  were  all  it
bore.  Where  the  ground  is  tilled — in  cornfields,  for
instance,  and  kitchen-garoens,  the  aesthetic  element  in  the
vegetable  world  sinks  to  a  minimum.

It  has  long  been  observed  that  everything  constructed
for  the  use  of  man,  whether  it  is  a  building  or  only  an
utensil,  must,  if  it  is  to  be  beautiful,  preserve  a  certain
similarity  with  the  works  of  Nature.  But  a  mistake  has
been  made  in  thinking  that  the  similarity  must  directly
strike  the  eye  and  have  to  do  with  the  shape  the  thing
takes;  as,  for  instance,  that  pillars  should  represent  trees
or  human  limbs;  that  receptacles  should  be  shaped  like
mussels  or  snail-shells,  or  the  calyx  of  a  flower,  and  that
vegetable  or  animal  forms  should  be  met  with  everywhere
in  Art.

The  similarity  should  be  indirect;  that  is  to  say,  it  should
fie  not  in  the  shape  itself,  but  in  its  character.  One  shape
may  differ  from  another  in  actual  appearance  and  yet  be  the
same  in  character.  Accordingly,  buildings  and  utensils
should  not  be  imitated  from  Nature,  but  should  be  con-
structed in  the  spirit  of  Nature.  This  will  show  itself  in  a
perfect  adaptation  of  means  to  ends,  so  that  the  thing  itself
and  every  part  of  it  may  directly  proclaim  what  its  purpose
is.  This  will  be  effected  when  that  purpose  is  attained  in  the
snortest  way  and  in  the  simplest  manner.  It  is  just  this
striking  conformity  to  a  certain  end  that  stamps  the
products  of  Nature.

In  Nature  the  will  works  from  within  outward,  after
completely  dominating  its  material.  But  in  Art  it  works
from  without,  by  a  process  of  intuition;  it  may  be,  by  set-
ting up  the  abstract  idea  of  the  purpose  which  the  object
of  art  is  to  serve;  it  then  attains  its  end  and  delivers  itself
of  its  meaning  by  impressing  it  upon  some  alien  material;
that  is  to  say,  some  material  originally  devoted  to  another
form  of    will.     Yet  for  all   that,  the  character  I  have  de-


288         THE  METAPHYSICS  OF  FINE  ARTS.

scribed  as  belonging  to  a  product  of  Nature  may  be  pre-
served. This  is  shown  by  the  ancient  style  of  architecture,
where  every  part  or  member  is  precisely  suited  to  the  pur-
pose it  is  immediately  meant  to  serve — a  purpose  thus
naively  brought  into  view,  and  where  there  is  a  total  absence
of  anything  that  does  not  serve  some  purpose.

To  this  is  opposed  that  Gothic  style,  which  owes  its  mys-
terious appearance  just  to  the  multitude  of  aimless  orna-
ments and  accessories  it  displays,  where  we  are  obliged  to
Ascribe  to  them  some  purpose  which  we  cannot  discern;
and  again,  that  quite  degenerate  style  of  architecture
which  affects  originality  by  playing,  in  all  sorts  of  unneces-
sary and  roundabout  ways,  with  the  means  used  for  pro-
ducing artistic  effect,  dallying  capriciously  with  them,  and
at  the  same  time  misunderstanding  their  aim.

The  same  remark  holds  good  of  ancient  vessels  and  uten-
sils, the  beauty  of  which  is  clue  to  the  fact  that  they  so
naively  express  their  nature,  and  the  purpose  they  were
meant  to  serve,  and  so  of  all  other  receptacles  made  by  the
ancients.  You  feel  in  looking  at  them  that  if  Nature  had
produced  vases,  amphorae,  lamps,  tables,  stools,  helmets,
shields,  armor  and  so  on,  they  would  be  ma: a  in  that
style.

x\s  regards  the  birth  of  a  work  of  art  in  a  man's  mind,
if  he  is  only  in  a  susceptible  mood,  almost  any  object  that
comes  within  his  range  of  perception  will  begin  to  speak
to  him,  in  other  words,  will  generate  in  him  some  lively,
penetrating,  original  thought.  So  it  is  that  a  trivial  event
may  become  the  seed  of  a  great  and  glorious  work.  Jacon
Bdhme  is  said  to  have  been  enlightened  upon  some  deep
point  of  natural  science  by  the  sudden  sight  of  a  tin  can.*

In  the  end  it  all  depends  upon  the  power  a  man  has  in
himself;  and  just  as  no  food  or  medicine  will  bestow  os
take  the  place  of  vital  energy,  so  no  book  or  study  can  give
a  man  a  mind  of  his  own.


THE  ART  OF  LITERATURE


THE  ART  OF  LITERATURE.


ON  AUTHORSHIP.

There  are,  first  of  all,  two  kinds  of  authors:  those  who
write  for  the  subject's  sake,  and  those  who  write  for  writ-
ing's sake.  While  the  one  have  had  thoughts  or  experi-
ences which  seem  to  them  worth  communicating,  the  others
want  money,  and  so  they  write  for  money.  Their  thinking
is  part  of  the  business  of  writing.  They  may  be  recog-
nized by  the  way  in  which  they  spin  out  their  thoughts  to
the  greatest  possible  length;  then,  too,  by  the  very  nature
of  their  thoughts,  which  are  only  half-true,  perverse,
forced,  vacillating;  again,  by  the  aversion  they  generally
show  to  saying  anything  straight  out,  so  that  they  may
seem  other  than  they  are.  Hence  their  writing  is  deficient
m  clearness  and  definiteuess,  and  it  is  not  long  before  they
betray  that  their  only  object  in  writing  at  all  is  to  cover
paper.  This  sometimes  happens  with  the  best  authors:
now  and  then,  for  example,  with  Lessing  in  his  "  Drama-
turgic," and  even  in  many  of  Jean  Paul's  romances.  As
soon  as  the  reader  perceives  this,  let  him  throw  the  book
away;  for  time  is  precious.  The  truth  is  that  when  an
author  begins  to  write  for  the  sake  of  covering  paper  he  is
cheating  the  reader;  because  he  writes  under  the  pretext
that  he  has  something  to  say.

Writing  for  money  and  reservation  of  copyright  are,  at
bottom,  the  ruin  of  literature.  No  one  writes  anything
that  is  worth  writing,  unless  he  writes  entirely  for  the  sake
of  his  subject.  What  an  inestimable  boon  it  would  be,  if
in  every  branch  of  literature  there  were  only  a  few  books,
but  those  excellent!  This  can  never  happen,  as  long  as
money  is  to  be  made  by  writing.  It  seems  as  though  the
money  lay  under  a  curse;  for  every  author  degenerates  as
soon  as  he  begins  to  put  pen  to  paper  in  any  way  for  the
Bake  of  gain.     The  best  works  of  the  greatest  men  all  come


292  THE  ART  OF  LITERA TURK

from  the  time  when  they  had  to  write  for  nothing  or  for
very  little.  And  here,  too,  that  Spanish  proverb  holds
good,  which  declares  that  honor  and  money  are  not  to  be
found  in  the  same  purse — honray  proveclw  no  caben  en  un
saco.  The  reason  why  literature  is  in  such  a  bad  plight
nowadays  is  simply  and  solely  that  people  write  books  to
make  money.  A  man  who  is  in  want  sits  down  and  writes
a  book,  and  the  public  is  stupid  enough  to  buy  it.  The
secondary  effect  of  this  is  the  ruin  of  language.

A  great  many  bad  writers  make  their  whole  living  bv
that  foolish  mania  of  the  public  for  reading  nothing  but
what  has  just  been  prixited — journalists,  I  mean.  Truly,
a  most  appropriate  name  In  plain  language  it  is  jour-
neymen, day-laborers!

Again,  it  may  be  said  chat  there  are  three  kinds  of
authors.  First  come  those  who  write  without  thinking.
They  write  from  a  full  memory,  from  reminiscences;  it
may  be,  even  straight  out  of  other  people's  books.  This
class  is  the  most  numerous.  Then  come  those  who  do
their  thinking  whilst  they  are  writing.  They  think  in
order  to  write;  and  there  is  no  lack  of  them.  Last  of  all
come  those  authors  who  think  before  they  begin  to  write.
They  are  rare.

Authors  of  the  second  class,  who  put  off  their  thinking
until  they  come  to  write,  are  like  a  sportsman  who  goes
forth  at  random  and  is  not  likely  to  bring  very  much
home.  On  the  other  hand,  when  an  author  of  the  third
or  rare  class  writes,  it  is  like  a  battue.  Here  the  game  has
been  previously  captured  and  shut  up  within  a  very  small
space,  from  which  it  is  afterward  let  out,  so  many  at  a
time^  into  another  space,  also  confined.  The  game  can-
not possibly  escape  the  sportsman;  he  has  nothing  to  do
but  aim  and  fire — in  other  words,  write  down  his  thoughts.
This  is  a  kind  of  sport  from  which  a  man  has  something
to  show.

But  even  though  the  number  of  those  who  really  thin!
seriously  before  they  begin  to  write  is  small,  extremely  few
of  them  think  about  the  subject  itself:  the  remainder
think  only  about  the  books  that  have  been  written  on  the
subject,  and  what  has  been  said  by  others.  In  order  to
think  at  all,  such  writers  need  the  more  direct  and  power-
ful stimulus  of  having  other  people's  thoughts  before
them.     These    become    their    immediate  theme,  and    the


ON  A  UTHORSHIP.  2Qfi

result  is  that  they  are  always  under  their  influence,  and  so
never,  in  any  real  sense  of  the  word,  original.  But  the
former  are  roused  to  thought  by  the  subject  itself,  to
which  their  thinking  is  thus  immediately  directed.  This
is  the  only  class  that  produces  writers  of  abiding  fame.

It  must,  of  course,  be  understood  that  I  am  speaking
here  of  writers  who  treat  of  great  subjects;  not  of  writers
on  the  art  of  making  brandy.

Unless  an  author  takes  the  material  on  which  he  writer
out  of  his  own  head,  that  is  to  say,  from  his  own  observa-
tion, he  is  not  worth  reading.  Book-manufacturers,
compilers,  the  common  run  of  history-writers,  and  many
others  of  the  same  class,  take  their  material  immediately
out  of  books;  and  the  material  goes  straight  to  their  finger-
tips without  even  paying  freight  or  undergoing  examina-
tion as  it  passes  througn  their  heads,  to  say  nothing  of
elaboration  or  revision.  How  very  learned  many  a  man
would,  be  if  he  knew  every  tiling  that  was  in  his  own  books!
The  consequence  of  this  is  that  these  writers  talk  in  such
a  loose  and  vague  manner,  that  the  reader  puzzles  his
brains  in  vain  to  understand  what  it  is  of  which  they  are
really  thinking.  They  are  thinking  of  nothing.  It  may
now  and  then  be  the  case  that  the  book  from  which  they
copy  has  been  composed  exactly  in  the  same  way;  so  that
writing  of  this  sort  is  like  a  plaster  cast  of  a  cast;  and  in
the  end,  the  bare  outline  of  the  face,  and  that,  too,  hardly
recognizable,  is  all  that  is  left  of  your  Antinous.  Let
compilations  be  read  as  seldom  as  possible.  It  is  difficult
to  avoid  them  altogether,  since  compilations  also  include
those  text-books  which  contain  in  a  small  space  the  ac-
cumulated knowledge  of  centuries.

There  is  no  greater  mistake  than  to  suppose  that  the
last  work  is  always  the  more  correct;  that  what  is  written
later  on  is  in  every  case  an  improvement  on  what  was
written  before;  and  that  change  always  means  progress.
Real  thinkers,  men  of  right  judgment,  people  who  are  in-
earnest  with  their  subject — these  are  all  exceptions  only.
Vermin  is  the  rule  everywhere  in  the  world:  it  is  always
on  the  alert,  taking  the  mature  opinions  of  the  thinkers,
and  industriously  seeking  to  improve  upon  them  (save
the  mark!)  in  its  own  peculiar  way.

If  the  reader  wishes  to  study  any  subject,  let  him  beware
of  rushing  to  the  newest  books  upon  it,  and  confining  his


294  THE  ART  OF  LITERA  TURE.

attention  to  them  alone,  under  the  notion  that  science  is
always  advancing,  and  that  the  old  books  have  been  drawn
upon  in  the  writing  of  the  new.  They  have  been  drawn
upon,  it  is  true;  but  how?  The  writer  of  the  new  book
often  does  not  understand  the  old  books  thoroughly,  and
yet  he  is  unwilling  to  take  their  exact  words;  so  he  bungles
them,  and  says  in  his  own  bad  way  that  which  has  been
said  very  much  better  and  more  clearly  by  the  old  writers,
who  wrote  from  their  own  lively  knowledge  of  the  subject.
The  new  writer  frequently  omits  the  best  things  they  say,
their  most  striking  illustrations,  their  happiest  remarks;
because  he  does  not  see  their  value  or  feel  how  pregnant
they  are.  The  only  thing  that  appeals  to  him  is  what  is
shallow  and  insipid.

It  often  happens  that  an  old  and  excellent  book  is  ousted
by  new  and  bad  ones,  which,  written  for  'money,  appear
with  an  air  of  great  pretension  and  much  puffing  on  the
part  of  friends.  In  science  a  man  tries  to  make  his  mark
by  bringing  out  something  fresh.  This  often  means  noth-
ing more  than  that  he  attacks  some  received  theory  which
is  quite  correct,  in  order  to  make  room  for  his  own  false
notions.  Sometimes  the  effort  is  successful  for  a  time;  and
then  a  return  is  made  to  the  old  and  true  theory.  These
innovators  are  serious  about  nothing  but  their  own  precious
self;  it  is  this  that  they  want  to  put  forward,  and  the  quick
way  of  doing  so,  as  they  think,  is  to  start  a  paradox.
Their  sterile  heads  take  naturally  to  the  path  of  negation;
so  they  begin  to  deny  truths  that  have  long  been  admitted
— the  vital  power,  for  example,  the  sympathetic  nervous
system,  generatio  eqinvoca,  Bichat's  distinction  between  the
working  of  the  passions  and  the  working  of  intelligence;  or
else  they  want  us  to  return  to  crass  atomism,  and  the  like.
Hence  it  frequently  happens  that  "  the  course  of  science  is
retrogressive."

To  this  class  of  writers  belong  those  translators  who  not
only  translate  their  author  but  also  correct  and  revise  him;
a  proceeding  which  always  seems  to  me  impertinent.  To
such  writers  I  say:  Write  books  yourself  which  are  worth
translating,  and  leave  other  people's  works  as  they  are!

The  reader  should  study,  if  he  can,  the  real  authors,  the
men  who  have  founded  and  discovered  things;  or,  at  any
rate,  those  who  are  recognized  as  the  great  masters  in  every
branch  of   knowledge.     Let    him    buy  second-hand  books


ON  A  VTEORSHIP.  295

rnther  than  read  their  contents  in  new  ones.  To  be  sure,
it  is  easy  to  add  to  any  new  discovery — invsntis  aliquid
adder e  facile  est;  and,  therefore,  the  student,  after  well
mastering  the  rudiments  of  his  subject,  will  have  to  make
himself  acquainted  with  the  more  recent  additions  to  the
knowledge  of  it.  And,  in  general,  the  following  rule  may
be  laid  down  here  as  elsewhere;  if  a  thing  is  new,  it  is
seldom  good;  because  if  it  is  good,  it  is  only  for  a  short
time  new.

What  the  address  is  to  a  letter,  the  title  should  be  to  a
book;  in  other  words,  its  main  object  should  be  to  bring
the  book  to  those  among  the  public  who  will  take  an  inter-
est in  its  contents.  It  should,  therefore,  be  expressive;
and  since  by  its  very  nature  it  must  be  short,  it  should  be
concise,  laconic,  pregnant,  and  if  possible  give  the  con-
tents in  one  word.  A  prolix  title  is  bad;  and  so  is  one
"ihat  says  nothing,  or  is  obscure  and  ambiguous,  or  even,  it
may  be,  false  and  misleading;  this  last  may  possibly  in-
volve the  book  in  the  same  fate  as  overtakes  a  wrongly  ad-
dressed letter.  The  worst  titles  of  all  are  those  which
have  been  stolen,  those,  I  mean,  which  have  al-
ready been  borne  by  other  books;  for  they  are  in  the
first  place  a  plagiarism,  and  secondly  the  most  convincing
proof  of  a  total  lack  of  originality  in  the  author.  A  man
who  has  not  enough  originality  to  invent  a  new  title  for
his  book,  will  be  still  less  able  to  give  it  new  contents.
Akin  to  these  stolen  titles  are  those  which  have  been  imi-
tated, that  is  to  say,  stolen  to  the  extent  of  one  half;  for
instance,  long  after  I  had  produced  my  treatise  "  On  Will
in  Nature,"  Orested  wrote  a  book  entitled  "  On  Mind  in
Nature."

A  book  can  never  be  anything  more  than  the  impress  of
its  author's  thoughts;  and  the  value  of  these  will  lie  either
"  in  the  matter  about  which  he  has  thought,"  or  in  the
form  which  his  thoughts  take,  in  other  words,  "  what  it  is
that  he  has  thought  about  it."

The  matter  of  books  is  most  various;  and  various  also
are  the  several  excellences  attaching  to  books  on  the  score
of  their  matter.  By  matter  I  mean  everything  that  comes
within  the  domain  of  actual  experience;  that  is  to  say,  the
facts  of  history  and  the  facts  of  nature,  taken  in  and  by
themselves  and  in  their  widest  sense.  Here  it  is  the  thing
treated  of  which  gives  its  peculiar  character  to  the  bookj


296  THE  ART  OF  LITERA TUBS.

bo  that  a  book  can  be  important,  whoever  it  was  that  wrote
it.

But  in  regard  to  the  form,  the  peculiar  character  of  a
a  book  depends  upon  the  person  who  wrote  it.  It  may
treat  of  matters  which  are  accessible  to  every  one  and  well
known;  but  it  is  the  way  in  which  they  are  treated,  what
it  is  that  is  thought  about  them,  that  gives  the  book  its
value;  and  this  comes  from  its  author.  If,  then,  from
this  point  of  view  a  book  is  excellent  and  beyond  compar
sou,  so  is  its  author,  It  follows  that  if  a  writer  is  wortn
reading  his  merit  rises  just  in  proportion  as  he  owes  little
to  his  matter;  therefore,  the  better  known  and  the  more
hackneyed  this  is,  the  greater  he  will  be.  The  three  great
tragedians  of  Greece,  for  example,  all  worked  at  the  same
subject-matter.

So  when  a  book  is  celebrated,  care  should  be  taken  to
note  whether  it  is  so  on  account  of  its  matter  or  its  form;
and  a  distinction  should  be  made  accordingly.

Books  of  great  importance  on  account  of  their  matter
may  proceed  from  very  ordinary  and  shallow  people,  by
the  fact  that  they  alone  have  had  access  to  this  matter;
books,  for  instance,  which  describe  journeys  in  distant
lands,  rare  natural  phenomena,  or  experiments;  or  histor-
ical occurrences  of  which  the  writers  were  witnesses,  or  in
connection  with  which  they  have  spent  much  time  and
trouble  in  the  research  and  special  study  of  original  docu-
ments.

On  the  other  hand  where  the  matter  is  accessible  to
every  one  or  very  well  known,  everything  will  depend  upon
the  form;  and  what  it  is  that  is  thought  about  the  matter
will  give  the  book  all  the  value  it  possesses.  Here  only  a
really  distinguished  man  will  be  able  to  produce  anything
worth  reading;  for  the  others  will  think  nothing  but  what
anyone  else  can  think.  They  will  just  produce  an  impress
of  their,  own  minds;  but  this  is  a  print  of  which  every  one
possesses  the  original.

However,  the  public  is  very  much  more  concerned  to
have  matter  than  form;  and  for  this  very  reason  it  is
deficient  in  any  high  degree  of  culture.  The  public  shows
its  preference  in  this  respect  in  the  most  laughable  way
when  it  comes  to  deal  with  poetry;  for  there  it  devotes
much,  trouble  to  the  task  of  tracing  out  the  actual  events
or  personal  circumstances  in  the  life  of  the  poet  which


ON  A  UTBOIISHIP  29?

Served  as  the  occasion  of  his  various  works;  nay,  these
events  and  circumstances  come  in  the  end  to  be  of  greater
importance  than  the  works  themselves;  and  rather  than
read  Goethe  himself,  people  prefer  to  read  what  has  been
written  about  him,  and  to  study  the  legend  of  Faust  more
industriously  than  the  drama  of  that  name.  And  when
Burger  declared  that  "  people  would  write  learned  dis-
quisitions on  the  question,  who  Leonora  really  was,"  we
find  this  literally  fulfilled  in  Goethe's  case;  for  we  now
possess  a  great  many  learned  disquisitions  on  Faust  and
the  legend  attaching  to  him.  Study  of  this  kind  is,  and
remains,  devoted  to  the  material  of  the  drama  alone.  To
give  such  preference  to  the  matter  over  the  form,  is  as
though  a  man  were  to  take  a  fine  Etruscan  vase,  not  to
admire  its  shape  or  coloring,  but  to  make  a  chemical
analysis  of  the  clay  and  paint  of  which  it  is  composed.

The  attempt  to  produce  an  effect  by  means  of  the
material  employed — an  attempt  which  panders  to  this  evil
tendency  of  the  public — is  most  to  be  condemned  in
branches  of  literature  where  any  merit  there  may  be  lies
expressly  in  the  form;  I  mean,  in  poetical  work.  For  all
that,  it  is  not  rare  to  find  bad  dramatists  trying  to  fill  the
house  by  means  of  the  matter  about  which  they  write.
For  example,  authors  of  this  kind  do  not  shrink  from  put-
ting on  the  stage  any  man  who  is  in  any  way  celebrated,
no  matter  whether  his  life  may  have  been  entirely  devoid
of  dramatic  incident;  and  sometimes,  even,  they  do  not
wait  until  the  persons  immediately  connected  with  him  are
dead.

The  distinction  between  matter  and  form  to  which  I  am
here  alluding,  also  holds  good  of  conversation.  The  chief
qualities  which  enable  a  man  to  converse  well  are  intelli-
gence, discernment,  wit  and  vivacity:  these  supply  the
form  of  conversation.  But  it  is  not  long  before  attention
has  to  be  paid  to  the  matter  of  which  he  speaks;  in  other
words,  the  subjects  about  which  it  is  possible  to  converse
with  him — his  knowledge.  If  this  is  very  small,  his  conver-
sation will  not  be  worth  anything,  unless  he  possesses  the
above  named  formal  qualities  in  a  very  exceptional  degree:
for  he  will  have  nothing  to  talk  about  but  those  facts  of
life  and  nature  which  everybody  knows.  It  will  be  just
the  opposite,  however,  if  a  man  is  deficient  in  these  formal
qualities,,   but  has  an  amount   of  knowledge  which  lends


£98  THE  A  RT  OF  LITER  A  TUTiE.

value  to  what  he  says.  This  value  will  then  depend
entirely  upon  the  matter  of  his  conversation;  for,  as
the  Spanish  proverb  has  it,  mas  sate  el  necio  en  su  casa,
que  el  sabio  en  la  ageno — a  fool  knows  more  of  his  own  busi-
ness than  a  wise  man  of  others'.


ON  STYLE.


Style  is  the  physiognomy  of  the  mind,  and  a  safer
index  to  character  than  the  face.  To  imitate  another
man's  style  is  like  wearing  a  mask,  which,  be  i't  never  so
fine,  is  not  long  in  arousing  disgust  and  abhorrence,  be-
cause it  is  lifeless;  so  that  even  the  ugliest  living  face  is  bet-
ter. Hence  those  who  write  in  Latin  and  copy  the  man-
ner of  ancient  authors,  may  be  said  to  speak  through  a
mask;  the  reader,  it  is  true,  hears  what  they  say,  but  he
cannot  observe  their  physiognomy  too:  he  cannot  see  their
style.  With  the  Latin  works  of  writers  who  think  for
themselves,  the  case  is  different,  and  their  style  is  visible;
writers,  I  mean,  who  have  not  condescended  to  any  sort  of
imitation,  such  as  Scotus  Erigena,  Petrarch,  Bacon,  Des-
cartes, Spinoza,  and  many  others.  And  affectation  in
style  is  like  making  grimaces.  Further,  the  language  in
which  a  man  writes  is  the  physiognomy  of  the  nation  to
which  he  belongs;  and  here  there  are  many  hard  and  fast
differences,  beginning  from  the  language  of  the  Greeks,
down  to  that  of  the  Caribbean  islanders.

To  form  a  provisional  estimate  of  the  value  of  a  writer's
productions,  it  is  not  directly  necessary  to  know  the  subject
on  which  he  has  thought,  or  what  it  is  that  he  has  said
about  it;  that  would  im-piy  a  perusal  of  all  his  works.  It
will  be  enough,  in  the  main,  to  know  how  he  has  thought.
This,  which  means  the  essential  temper  or  general  quality
of  his  mind,  may  be  precisely  determined  by  his  style.  A
man's  style  shows  the 'formal  nature  of  all  his  thoughts —
the  formal  nature  which  can  never  change,  be  the  subject
or  the  character  of  his  thoughts  what  it  may:  it  is,  as  it
were,  the  dough  out  of  which  all  the  contents  of  his  mind
are  kneaded.  When  Eulenspiege1  was  asked  how  long  it
would  take  to  walk  to  the  next  village,  he  gave  the  seem-
ingly incongruous  answer:  W^alk.     He  wanted  to  find  out  by


ON  STYLE.  299

the  man's  pace  the  distance  lie  would  cover  in  a  given  time.
In  the  same  way,  when  I  have  read  a  few  pages  of  an
author,  I  know  fairly  well  how  far  lie  can  bring  me.

Every  mediocre  writer  tries  to  mask  his  own  natural
style,  because  in  his  heart  ho  knows  the  truth  of  what  I
am  saying.  He  is  thus  forced,  at  the  outset,  to  give  up
dny  attempt  at  being  frank  or  naive — a  privilege  which  is
thereby  reserved  for  superior  minds,  conscious  of  their  own
worth,  and  therefore  sure  of  themselves.  What  I  mean  is
that  these  everyday  writers  are  absolutely  unable  to  resolve
upon  writing  just  as  they  think;  because  they  have  a
notion  that,  were  they  to  do  so,  their  work  might  possibly
h>ok  very  childish  and  simple.  For  all  that,  it  would  not
be  without  its  value.  If  they  would  only  go  honestly  to
work,  and  say,  quite  simply,  the  things  they  have  really
thought,  and  just  as  they  have  thought  them,  these  writers
would  be  readable,  and,  within  their  own  proper  sphere,
ever,  instructive.

But  instead  of  that,  they  try  to  make  the  reader  believe
that  their  thoughts  have  gone  much  further  and  deeper
than  is  really  the  case.  They  say  what  they  have  to  say
in  long  sentences  that  wind  about  in  a  forced  and  unnatural
way:  they  coin  new  words  and  write  prolix  periods  which
go  round  and  round  the  thought  and  wrap  it  up  in  a  sort
of  disguise.  They  tremble  between  the  two  separate
aims  of  communicating  what  they  want  to  say  and  of  con-
cealing it.  Their  object  is  to  dress  it  up  so  that  it  may  look
learned  or  deep,  in  order  to  give  people  the  impression
that  there  is  very  much  more  in  it  than  for  the  moment-
meets  the  eye.  They  either  jot  down  their  thoughts  bit
by  bit,  in  short,  ambiguous,  and  paradoxical  sentences,
which  apparently  mean  much  more  than  they  say,  of  this
kind  of  writing  Schelling's  treatises  on  natural  philosophy
are  a  splendid  instance;  or  else  they  hold  forth  with  a
deluge  of  words  and  the  most  intolerable  diffusiveness,  as
though  no  end  of  fuss  were  necessary  to  make  the  reader
understand  the  deep  meaning  of  their  sentences,  whereas
it  is  some  quite  simple  if  not  actually  trivial  idea — exam-
ples of  which  may  be  found  in  plenty  in  the  popular  works
of  Fichte,  and  the  philosophical  manuals  of  a  hundred  other
miserable  dunces  not  worth  mentioning;  or,  again,  they
try  to  write  in  some  particular  style  which  they  have  been
pleased  tq  take  up  and  think  very  grand,  a  style,  for  exam-


300  1EE  ART  OF  LITERATURE.

pie,  par  excellence  profound  and  scientific,  where  the
reader  is  tormented  to  death  by  the  narcotic  effect  of  long-
spun periods  without  a  single  idea  in  them — such  as  are
furnished  in  a  special  measure  by  those  most  impudent  of
all  mortals,  the  Hegelians;  *  or  it  may  be  that  it  is  an  in-
tellectual style  they  have  striven  after,  where  it  seems  as
though  their  object  were  to  go  crazy  altogether;  and  so  on
in  many  other  cases.  All  these  endeavors  to  put  off  the
nascetur  ridiculus  mus — to  avoid  showing  the  fumy  little
creature  that  is  born  after  such  mighty  throes — often  make
it  difficult  to  know  what  it  is  that  they  really  mean.  And
then,  too,  they  write  down  words,  nay,  evm  whole  sen-
tences, without  attaching  any  meaning  to  them  themselves
but  in  the  hope  that  some  one  else  will  get  sense  out  of
them.

And  what  is  at  the  bottom  of  all  this?  Nothing  but
the  untiring  effort  to  sell  words  for  thoughts;  a  mode  of
merchandise  that  is  always  trying  to  make  fresh  openings  for
itself,  and  by  means  of  odd  expressions,  turns  of  phrase,
and  combinations  of  every  sort,  whether  new  or  used  in  a
new  sense,  to  produce  the  appearance  of  intellect  in  order
to  make  up  for  the  very  painfully  felt  lack  of  it.

It  is  amusing  to  see  how  writers  with  this  object  in  view
will  attempt  first  one  mannerism  and  then  another,  as
though  they  were  putting  on  the  mask  of  intellect!  This
mask  may  possibly  deceive  the  inexperienced  for  awhile,
until  it  is  seen  to  be  a  dead  thing,  with  no  life  in  it  at  all:
it  is  then  laughed  at  and  exchanged  for  another.  Such  an
author  will  at  one  moment  write  in  a  dithyrambic  vein,  as
though  he  were  tipsy;  at  another,  nay,  on  the  very  next
page,  he  will  be  pompous,  severe,  profoundly  learned  and
prolix,  stumbling  on  in  the  most  cumbrous  way  and  chop-
mg  up  everything  very  small;  like  the  late  Christian  Wolf,
only  in  a  modern  dress.  Longest  of  all  lasts  the  mask  of
unintelligibility;  but  this  is  only  in  Germany,  whither  it
was  introduced  by  Fichte,  perfected  by  Schelling,  and
carried  to  its  highest  pitch  in  Hegel — always  with  the
best  results.

And  yet  nothing  is  easier  than  to  write  so  that  no  one
Dan  understand;  just  as,  contrarily,  nothing  is   more  diffi-

*  In  tbeir  Hegel  gazette,  commonly  known  as  Jalirbucher  del
wissensckaftliclien  Literatur.


ON  STYLE.  30!

cult  than  to  express  deep  things  in  such  a  way  that  every
one  must  necessarily  grasp  them.  All  the  arts  and  tricks
I  have  been  mentioning  are  rendered  superfluous  if  the  au-
thor really  has  any  brains;  for  that  allows  him  to  show
himself  as  he  is,  and  confirms  to  all  time  Horace's  maxim
that  good  sense  is  the  source  and  origin  of  good  style:

"  Scribendi  recte  sapere  est  et  principium  et  fons."

But  those  authors  I  have  named. are  like  certain  workers
in  metal,  who  try  a  hundred  different  compounds  to  take
the  place  of  gold — the  only  metal  which  can  never  have
any  substitute.  Rather  than  do  that,  there  is  nothing
against  which  a  writer  should  be  more  upon  his  guard  than
.he  manifest  endeavor  to  exhibit  more  intellect  than  he
really  has;  because  this  makes  the  reader  suspect  that  he
possesses  very  little;  since  it  is  always  the  case  that  if  a
man  affects  anything,  whatever  it  may  be,  it  is  just  there
that  he  is  deficient.

That  is  why  it  is  praise  to  an  author  to  say  that  he  is
naive:  it  means  that  he  need  not  shrink  from  showing
himself  as  he  is.  Generally  speaking,  to  be  naive  is  to  be
attractive;  while  lack  of  naturalness  is  everywhere  repulsive.
As  a  matter  of  fact  we  find  that  every  really  great  writer
tries  to  express  his  thoughts  as  purely,  clearly,  definitely
and  shortly  as  possible.  Simplicity  has  always  been  held
to  be  a  mark  of  truth:  it  is  also  a  mark  of  genius.  Style
receives  its  beauty  from  the  thought  it  expresses;  but  with
sham  thinkers  the  thoughts  are  supposed  to  be  fine  because
of  the  style.  Style  is  nothing  but  the  mere  silhouette  of
thought;  and  an  obscure  or  bad  style  means  a  dull  or  con-
fused brain.

The  first  rule,  then,  for  a  good  style  is  that  the  author
should  have  something  to  say;  nay,  this  is  in  itself  almost
all  that  is  necessary.  Ah,  how  much  it  means!  The
neglect  of  this  rule  is  a  fundamental  trait  in  the  philoso-
phical writing,  and,  in  fact,  in  all  the  reflective
literature  of  my  country,  more  especially  since  Fichte.
These  writers  all  let  it  be  seen  that  they  want  to  appear  as
though  they  had  something  to  say;  whereas  they  have
nothing  to  say.  Writing  of  this  kind  was  brought  in  by
the  pseudo-philosophers  at  the  universities,  and  now  it  is
current  everywhere,  even  among  the  first  literary  notabili-


&02  THE  ART  OF  LITERATURE.

ties  of  the  age.  It  is  the  mother  of  that  strained  and
vague  style,  where  there  seem  to  be  two  or  even  more
meanings  in  the  sentence;  also  of  that  prolix  and  cumbrous
manner  of  expression,  called  le  stile  empese;  again,  of  that
mere  waste  of  words  which  consists  in  pouring  them  out
like  a  flood;  finally,  of  that  trick  of  concealing  the  direst
poverty  of  thought  under  a  farrago  of  never  ending  chatter,,
which  clacks  away  like  a  windmill  and  quite  stupefies  one
— stuff  which  a  man  may  read  for  hours  together  without
getting  hold  of  a  single  clearly  expressed  and  definite  idea.  *
However,  people  are  easy-going,  and  they  have  fcrmed  the
habit  of  reading  page  upon  page  of  all  sorts  of  such  verbi-
age, without  having  any  particular  idea  of  what  the  author
really  means.  They  fancy  it  is  all  as  it  should  be,  and  fa:,
to  discover  that  he  is  writing  simply  for  writing's  sake.

On  the  other  hand,  a  good  author,  fertile  in  ideas,  soon
wins  his  reader's  confidence  that,  when  he  writes,  he  has
really  and  truly  something  to  say;  and  this  gives  the
intelligent  reader  patience  to  follow  him  with  attention.
Such  an  author,  just  because  he  really  has  something  to
say,  will  never  fail  to  express  himself  in  the  simplest  and
most  straightforward  manner:  because  his  object  is  to
awake  the  very  same  thought  in  the  reader  that  he  has  in
himself,  and  no  other.  So  he  will  be  able  to  affirm  with
Boileau  that  his  thoughts  are  everywhere  open  to  the  light
of  day,  and  that  his  verse  always  says  something,  whether
it  says  it  well  or  ill:

"  Ma  pensee  au  grand  jour  partout  s'offre  et  s'expose,
Et  inon  vers,  bien  ou  inal,  dit  toujours  quelque  chose."

while  of  the  writers  previously  described  it  maybe  asserted,
in  the  words  of  the  same  poet,  that  they  talk  much  and
never  say  anything  at  all — qui  parlant  beaucoup  ne  disent
jamais  rien.

Another  characteristic  of  such  writers  is  that  they  always
avoid  a  positive  assertion  wherever  they  can  possibly  do  so,
in  order  to  leave  a  loophole  for  escape  in  case  of  need.
Hence  they  never  fail  to  choose  the  more  abstract  way  of
expressing  themselves;  whereas  intelligent  people  use  the
more  concrete;  because  the  latter  brings  things  more  within

*  Select  examples  of  the  art  of  writing  in  this  style  are  to  be  found
almost  passim  in  the  Jahrbiicher,  published  in  Halle,  afterward
called  the  Deutschen  Jahrbiicher.


ON  STYLE.  303

<he  range  of  actual  demonstration,  which  is  the  source  of
ill  evidence.

There  are  many  examples  proving  this  preference  for
abstract  expression;  and  a  particularly  ridiculous  one  is
afforded  by  the  use  of  the  verb  ".to  condition "  in  the
sense  of  to  cause  or  to  produce.  People  say  "  to  condition
something"  instead  of  to  cause  it,  because  being  abstract
and  indefinite  it  says  less;  it  affirms  that  A  cannot  happen
without  B,  instead  of  that  A  is  caused  by  B.  A  back
door  is  always  left  open;  and  this  suits  people  whose  secret
knowledge  of  their  own  incapacity  inspires  them  with  a
perpetual  terror  of  all  positive  assertion;  while  with  other
people  it  is  merely  the  effect  of  that  tendency  by  which
everything  that  is  stupid  in  literature  or  bad  in  life  is
immediately  imitated — a  fact  proved  in  either  case  by  the
rapid  way  in  which  it  spreads.  The  Englishman  uses  his
own  judgment  in  what  he  writes  as  well  as  in  what  he  does;
but  there  is  no  nation  of  which  this  eulogy  is  less  true  than
of  the  Germans.  The  consequence  of  this  state  of  things
is  that  the  word  cause  has  of  late  almost  disappeared  from
the  language  of  literature,  and  people  talk  only  of  condi-
tion. The  fact  is  worth  mentioning  because  it  is  so  charac-
teristically ridiculous.

The  very  fact  that  these  commonplace  authors  are  never
more  than  half-conscious  when  they  write,  would  be  enough
to  account  for  their  dullness  of  mind  and  the  tedious  things
they  produce.  I  say  they  are  only  half-conscious,  because
they  really  do  not  themselves  understand  the  meaning  of
the  words  they  use;  they  take  words  ready-made  and  commit
them  to  memory.  Hence  when  they  write,  it  is  not  so
much  words  as  whole  phrases  that  they  put  together —
phrases  banales.  This  is  the  explanation  of  that  palpable
lack  of  clearly-expressed  thought  in  what  they  say.  The
fact  is  that  they  do  not  possess  the  die  to  give  this  stamp
to  their  writing;  clear  thought  of  their  own  is  just  what
they  have  not  got.  And  what  do  we  not  find  in  its  place?
— a  vague,  enigmatical  intermixture  of  words,  current
phrases,  hackneyed  terms,  and  fashionable  expressions.
The  result  is  that  the  foggy  stuff  they  write  is  like  a  page
printed  with  very  old  type.

On  the  other  hand,  an  intelligent  author  really  speaks
to  us  when  he  writes,  and  that  is  why  he  is  able  to  rouse
our  interest  and  commune  with  us.     It  is  the  intelligent


304  THE  AR  T  OF  LITERA  TURK

author  alone  who  puts  individual  words  together  with  a
full  consciousness  of  their  meaning,  and  chooses  them
with  deliberate  desigu.  Consequently,  his  discourse  stands
to  that  of  the  writer  described  above,  much  as  a  picture
that  has  been  really  painted  to  one  that  has  been  produced
by  the  use  of  a  stencil.  In  the  one  case,  every  word,  every
touch  of  the  brush,  has  a  special  purpose;  in  the  other,
all  is  done  mechanically.  The  same  distinction  may  be
observed  in  music.  For  just  as  Lichtenberg  says  that
Garrick's  soul  seemed  to  be  in  every  muscle  in  his  body,  so
it  is  the  omnipresence  of  intellect  that  always  and  every-
where characterizes  the  work  of  genius.

I  have  alluded  to  the  tediousness  which  marks  the  works
of  these  writers;  and  in  this  connection  it  is  to  be  observed
generally,  that  tediousness  is  of  two  kinds:  objective  and
subjective.  A  work  is  objectively  tedious  when  it  contains
the  defect  in  question;  that  is  to  say,  when  its  author  has
no  perfectly  clear  thought  or  knowledge  to  communicate.
For  if  a  man  has  any  clear  thought  or  knowledge  his  aim
will  be  to  communicate  it,  and  he  will  direct  his  energies
to  this  end;  so  that  the  ideas  he  furnishes  are  everywhere
clearly  expressed.  The  result  is  that  he  is  neither  diffuse,
nor  unmeaning,  nor  confused,  and  consequently  not  tedious.
In  such  a  case,  even  though  the  author  is  at  bottom  in
error,  the  error  is  at  any  rate  clearly  worked  out  and  well
thought  over,  so  that  it  is  at  least  formally  correct;  and
thus  some  value  always  attaches  to  the  work.  But  for
the  same  reason  a  work  that  is  objectively  tedious  is  at  all
times  devoid  of  any  value  whatever.

The  other  kind  of  tediousness  is  only  relative:  a  reader
may  find  a  work  dull  because  he  has  no  interest  in  the
question  treated  of  in  it,  and  this  means  that  his  intellect"
is  restricted.  The  best  work  may,  therefore,  be  tedious
subjectively,  tedious,  I  mean  to  Ibis  or  that  particular
person:  just  as,  contrarily,  the  worst  work  may  be  sub-
jectively engrossing  to  this  or  that  particular  person  who
has  an  interest  in  the  question  treated  of,  or  in  the  writer
of  the  book.

It  would  generally  serve  writers  in  good  stead  if  they
would  see  that,  while  a  man  should,  if  possible,  think  like
a  great  genius,  he  should  talk  the  same  language  as
every  one  else.  Authors  should  use  common  words  to  say
uncommon  things.     But  they  do  just  the   opposite.     We


ON  STYLE.  305

find  them  trying  to  wrap  up  trivial  ideas  in  grand  words,
ami  to  clothe  their  very  ordinary  thoughts  in  the  most  ex-
traordinary phrases,  the  most  far-fetched,  unnatural,  and
out-of-the-way  expressions.  Their  sentences  perpetually
■talk  about  on  stilts.  Tiny  take  so  much  pleasure  in  bom-
bast, and  write  in  such  a  high-flown,  bloated,  affected,
hyperbolical  and  acrobatic  style  that  their  prototype  is
Ancient  Pistol,  whom  his  friend  Falstaff  once  impatiently
told  to  say  what  he  had  to  say,  "  like  a  man  of  this  world."*

There  is  no  expression  in  any  other  language  exactly
answering  to  the  French  sale  empese;  but  the  thing  itself
exists  all  the  more  often.  When  associated  with  affec-
tation, it  is  in  literature  what  assumption  of  dignity,  grand
airs  and  primness  are  in  society;  and  equally  intolerable.
Dullness  of  mind  is  fond  of  donning  this  dress;  just  as  in
ordinary  life  it  is  stupid  people  who  like  being  demure
and  formal.

An  author  who  writes  in  the  prim  style  resembles  a  man
who  dresses  himself  up  in  order  to  avoid  being  confounded
?r  put  on  the  same  level  with  the  mob — a  risk  never  run
by  the  gentleman,  even  in  his  worst  clothes.  The  plebeian
may  be  known  by  a  certain  showiness  of  attire,  and  a  wish
to  have  everything  spick  and  span;  and  in  the  same  way,
the  commonplace  person  is  betrayed  by  his  style.

Nevertheless,  an  author  follows  a  false  aim  if  he  tries  to
write  exactly  as  he  speaks.  There  is  no  style  of  writing
but  should  have  a  certain  trace  of  kinship  with  the
epigraphic  or  monumental  style,  which  is,  indeed,  the
ancestor  of  all  styles.  For  an  author  to  write  as  he  speaks
is  just  as  reprehensible  as  the  opposite  fault,  to  speak
as  he  wrrites;  for  this  gives  a  pedantic  effect  to  what  he
says,  and  at  the  same  time  makes  him  hardly  intelligible.

An  obscure  and  vague  manner  of  expression  is  always
and  everywhere  a  very  bad  sign.  In  ninety-nine  cases  out
of  a  hundred  it  comes  from  vagueness  of  thought;  and
this  again  almost  always  means  that  there  is  something
radically  wrong  and  incongruous  about  the  thought  itself —
in  a  word,  that  it  is  incorrect.  When  a  right  thought
springs  up  in  the  mind,  it  strives  after  expression  and  is
not  long  in  reaching  it;  for  clear  thought  easily  finds
words  to  fit  it.     If  a  man  is  capable  of  thinking  anything

*  "King  Henry  IV.,  "  Part  II,  Act  v.  Sc.  3.


306  THE  ART  OF  LITERA  TURE.

at  all,  he  is  also  always  able  to  express  it  in  clear,  in
telligible,  and  unambiguous  terms.  Those  writers  who
construct  difficult,  obscure,  involved,  and  equivocal  sen-
tences, most  certainly  do  not  know  aright  what  it  is  that
they  want  to  say:  they  have  only  a  dull  consciousness  of  it,
which  is  still  in  the  stage  of  struggle  to  shape  itself  as
thought.  Often,  indeed,  their  desire  is  to  conceal  from
themselves  and  others  that  they  really  have  nothing  at  all
to  say.  They  wish  to  appear  to  know  what  they  do  not
know,  to  think  what  they  do  not  think,  to  say  wiiat  they
do  not  say.  If  a  man  has  some  real  communication  to
make,  which  will  he  choose— an  indistinct  or  a  clear  way
of  expressing  himself?  Even  Quintilian  remarks  that
things  which  are  said  by  a  highly  educated  man  are  often
easier  to  understand  and  much  clearer:  and  that  the  less
educated  a  man  is,  the  more  obscurely  he  will  write —
*'  jrterumque  accidit  id  faciliora  suit  ad  intelhgendum  et
luctdwra  m-ulto  quce  a  doctissimo  quoque  dicuntur  ....
Ent  ergo  etiam  obscurior  quo  quisque  deter wr."

An  author  should  avoid  enigmatical  phrases:  he  should
know  whether  he  wants  to  say  a  thing  or  does  not  want  to
say  it.  It  is  this  indecision  cf  style  that  makes  so  many
writers  insipid.  The  only  case  that  offers  an  exception  to
this  rule  arises  when  it  is  necessary  to  make  a  remark  that
is  in  some  way  improper.

As  exaggeration  generally  produces  an  effect  the  opposite
of  that  aimed  at,  so  words,  it  is  true,  serve  to  make  thought
intelligible — but  only  up  to  a  certain  point.  If  words  are
heaped  up  beyond  it,  the  thought  becomes  more  and  more
obscure  again.  To  find  where  the  point  lies  is  the  problem
of  style,  and  the  business  of  the  critical  faculty;  for  a  word
too  much  always  defeats  its  purpose.  This  is  what
Voltaire  means  when  he  says  that  "  the  adjective  is  the
enemy  of  the  substantive."  But,  as  we  have  seen,  many
people  try  to  conceal  their  poverty  of  thought  under  a
flood  of  verbiage.    .

Accordingly,  let  all  redundancy  be  avoided,  all  string-
ing together  of  remarks  which  have  no  meaning  and  are
not  worth  perusal.  A  writer  must  make  a  sparing  use  of
the  reader's  time,  patience  and  attention;  so  as  to  lead  him
to  believe  that  his  author  writes  what  is  worth  careful
study,  and  will  reward  the  time  spent  upon  it.  It  is
always  better  to  omit  something  good    than  to  add  that


ON  STYLE.  30?

which  is  not  worth  saying  at  all.  This  is  the  right  appli-
cation of  Hesiod's  maxim,  nXiov  %jui<5v  itavro^ — the  half  is
more  than  the  whole.  Le  secret  pour  etre  ennuyeux,  c'est
de  tout  dire.  Therefore,  if  possible,  the  quintessence  only!
mere  leading  thoughts!  nothing  that  the  reader  would
think  for  himself.  To  use  many  words  to  communicate
few  thoughts  is  everywhere  the  unmistakable  sign  of  medi-
ocrity. To  gather  much  thought  into  few  words  stamps
the  man  of  genius.

Truth  is  most  beautiful  undraped;  and  the  impression  it
makes  is  deep  in  proportion  as  its  expression  has  been
simple.  This  is  so,  partly  because  it  then  takes  unob-
structed possession  of  the  hearer's  whole  soul,  and  leaves  him
uo  by-thought  to  distract  him:  partly,  also,  because  he
peels  that  here  he  is  not  being  corrupted  or  cheated  by  the
aits  of  rhetoric,  but  that  all  the  effect  of  what  is  said  comes
from  the  thing  itself.  For  instance,  what  declamation  on
the  vanity  of  human  existence  could  ever  be  more  telling
than  the  words  of  Job? — "  Man  that  is  born  of  a  woman
hath  but  a  short  time  to  live  and  is  full  of  misery.  He
cometh  up,  and  is  cut  down,  like  a  flower;  he  fleeth  as  it
were  a  shadow,  and  never  continueth  in  one  stay."

For  the  same  reason  Goethe's  naive  poetry  is  incompar-
ably greater  than  Schiller's  rhetoric.  It  is  this,  again,  that
makes  many  popular  songs  so  affecting.  As  in  architecture
an  excess  of  decoration  is  to  be  avoided,  so  in  the  art  of
literature  a  writer  must  guard  against  all  rhetorical  finery,
all  useless  amplification,  and  all  superfluity  of  expression
in  general:  in  a  word,  he  must  strive  after  chastity  of
style.  Every  word  that  can  be  spared  is  hurtful  if  it
remains.  The  law  of  simplicity  and  naivety  holds  good  of
all  fine  art;  for  it  is  quite  possible  to  be  at  once  simnle  and
sublime.

True  brevity  of  expression  consists  in  everywhere  saying
only  what  is  worth  saying,  and  in  avoiding  tedious  detail
about  things  which  every  one  can  supply  for  himself.  This
involves  correct  discrimination  between  what  is  necessary
and  what  is  superfluous.  A  writer  should  never  be  brief
at  the  expense  of  being  clear,  to  say  nothing  of  being
grammatical.  It  shows  lamentable  want  of  judgment  to
weaken  the  expression  of  a  thought  or  to  stunt  the  mean-

*  "Works  and  Days,"  40.


308  THE  ART  OF  L1TBRA TURK.

nig  of  a  period  for  the  sake  of  using  a  few  words  less.
But  this  is  the  precise  endeavor  of  that  false  brevity  now-
adays so  much  in  vogue,  which  proceeds  by  leaving  out
useful  words  and  even  by  sacrificing  grammar  and  logic.
It  is  not  only  that  such  writers  spare  a  word  by  making  a
single  verb  or  adjective  do  duty  for  several  different  periods,
so  that  the  reader,  as  it  were,  has  to  grope  his  way  through
them  in  the  dark;  they  also  practice,  in  many  other  re-
spects, an  unseemly  economy  of  speech,  in  the  effort  to
effect  what  they  foolishly  take  to  be  brevity  of  expression
and  conciseness  of  style.  By  omitting  something  that
might  have  thrown  a  light  over  the  whole  sentence,  they
turn  it  into  a  conundrum,  which  the  reader  tries  to  solve
by  going  over  it  again  and  again.*

It  is  wealth  and  weight  of  thought,  and  nothing  else,
that  gives  brevity  to  style,  and  makes  it  concise  and  preg-
nant. If  a  writer's  ideas  are  important,  luminous,  and
generally  worth  communicating,  they  will  necessarily  fur-
nish matter  and  substance  enough  to  fill  out  the  periods
which  give  them  expression,  and  make  these  in  all  their
parts  both  grammatically  and  verbally  complete;  and  so
much  will  this  be  the  case  that  no  one  will  ever  find  them
hollow,  empty  or  feeble.  The  diction  will  everywhere  be
brief  and  pregnant,  and  allow  the  thought  to  find  intelligi-
ble and  easy  expression,  and  even  unfold  and  move  about
with  grace.

Therefore  instead  of  contracting  his  words  and  forms  of
speech,  let  a  writer  enlarge  his  thoughts.  If  a  man  has
been  thinned  by  illness  and  finds  his  clothes  too  big,  it  is
not  by  cutting  them  down,  but  by  recovering  his  usual
bodily  condition,  that  he  ought  to  make  them  fit  him  again.

Let  me  here  mention  an  error  of  style  very  prevalent
uowadays,  and,  in  the  degraded  state  of  literature  and  the
neglect  of   ancient  languages,  always  on  the  increase;  I

*  Translator 's  Note.  In  the  original,  Schopenhauer  here  enters
upon  a  lengthy  exauiinaton  of  certain  common  errors  in  the  writing
and  speaking  of  German.  His  remarks  are  addressed  to  his  own
countrymen,  and  would  lose  all  point,  even  if  they  were  intelligible,
in  an  English  translation.  But  lor  those  who  practice  their  German
by  conversing  or  corresponding  with  Germans,  let  me  recommend
what  he  there  says  as  a  useful  corrective  to  a  slipshod  style,  such  as
can  easily  be  contracted  if  it  is  assumed  that  the  natives  of  a  country
always  know  their  own  language  perfectly.


ON  STYLE.  309

mean  subjectivity.  A  writer  commits  this  error  when  he
tii inks  it  enough  if  he  himself  knows  what  he  means  and
wants  to  say,  and  takes  no  thought  for  the  reader,  who  is
left  to  get  at  the  bottom  of  it  as  best  he  can.  This  is  as
though  the  author  were  holding  a  monologue,  whereas  it
might  to  be  a  dialogue;  and  a  dialogue,  too,  in  which  he
must  express  himself  all  the  more  clearly  inasmuch  as  he
cannot  hear  the  questions  of  his  interlocutor.

Style  should  for  this  very  reason  never  be  subjective,
but  objective;  and  it  will  not  be  objective  unless  the  words
are  so  set  down  that  they  directly  force  the  reader  to  think
precisely  the  same  thing  as  the  author  thought  when  he
wrote  them.  Nor  will  this  result  be  obtained  unless  the
author  has  always  been  careful  to  remember  that  thought
so  far  follows  the  law  of  gravity  that  it  travels  from  head
to  paper  much  more  easily  than  from  paper  to  head;  so
that  he  must  assist  the  latter  passage  by  every  means  in  his
power.  If  he  does  this,  a  writer's  words  will  have  a  purely
objective  effect,  like  that  of  a  finished  picture  in  oils",
while  the  subjective  style  is  not  much  more  certain  in  its
working  than  spots  on  the  wall,  which  look  like  figures
only  to  one  whose  tantasy  has  been  accidentally  aroused
by  them;  other  people  see  nothing  but  spots  and  blurs.
The  difference  in  question  applies  to  literary  method  as  a
a  whole;  but  it  is  often  established  also  in  particular  in-
stances. For  example,  in  a  recently  published  work  I
found  the  following  sentence:  "I  have  not  written  in
order  to  increase  the  number  of  existing  books."  This
means  just  the  opposite  of  what  the  writer  wanted  to  say,
and  is  nonsense  as  well.

He  who  writes  carelessly  confesses  thereby  at  the  very
outset  that  he  does  not  attach  much  importance  to  his  own
thoughts.  For  it  is  only  where  a  man  is  convinced  of  the
truth  and  importance  of  his  thoughts,  that  he  feels  the  en-
thusiasm necessary  for  an  untiring  and  assiduous  effort  to
find  the  clearest,  finest,  and  strongest  expression  for  them,
just  as  for  sacred  relics  or  priceless  works  of  art  there  are
provided  silvern  or  golden  receptacles.  It  was  this  feeling
that  led  ancient  authors,  whose  thoughts,  expressed  in
their  own  words,  have  lived  thousands  of  years,  and  there-
fore bear  the  honored  title  of  classics,  always  to  write  with
care.     Plato,  indeed,  is  said  to  have  written  the  introduc-


310  THE  ART  OF  LITEUA  1  UUE.

tion  to  his  "Republic"  seven  times  over  indifferent  ways.*
As  neglect  of  dress  betrays  want  of  respect  for  the  com-
pany a  man  meets,  so  a  hasty,  careless,  bad  style  shows
an  outrageous  lack  of  regard  for  the  reader,  who  then
rightly  punishes  it  by  refusing  to  read  the  book.  It  is  es-
pecially amusing  to  see  reviewers  criticising  the  works  of
others  iu  their  own  most  careless  style — the  style  of  a  hire-
ling. It  is  as  though  a  judge  were  to  come  into  court  in
dressing-gown  and  slippers!  If  I  see  a  man  badly  and
dirtily  dressed,  I  feel  some  hesitation,  at  first,  in  entering
into  conversation  with  him:  and  when,  on  taking  up  a
book,  I  am  struck  at  once  by  the  negligence  of  its  style,  I
put  it  away.

Good  writing  should  be  governed  by  the  rule  that  a  man
can  think  only  one  thing  clearly  at  a  time;  and  therefore,
that  he  should  not  be  expected  to  think  two  or  even  more
things  in  one  and  the  same  moment.  But  this  is  what  is
lone  when  a  writer  breaks  up  his  principal  sentence  into
little  pieces,  for  the  purpose  of  pushing  into  the  gaps
thus  made  two  or  three  other  thoughts  by  way  of  parenthe-
sis; thereby  unnecessarily  and  wantonly  confusing  the
reader.  And  here  it  is  again  my  own  countrymen  who  are
chiefly  in  fault.  That  German  lends  itself  to  this  way  of
writing,  makes  the  thing  possible,  but  does  not  justify  it.
No  prose  reads  more  easily  or  pleasantly  than  French,  be-
cause, as  a  rule,  it  is  free  from  the  error  in  question.  The
Frenchman  strings  his  thoughts  together,  as  far  as  lie  can,
in  the  most  logical  and  natural  order,  and  so  lays  them  be-
fore his  reader  one  after  the  other  for  convenient  delibera-
tion, so  that  every  one  of  them  may  receive  undivided
attention.  The  German,  on  the  other  band,  weaves  them  to-
gether into  a  sentence  which  he  twists  and  crosses,  and  crosses
and  twists  again;  because  he  wants  to  say  six  things  all  at
once,  instead  of  advancing  them  one  by  one.  His  aim  should
be  to  attract  and  hold  the  reader's  attention;  but,  above  and
beyond  neglect  of  this  aim,  he  demands  from  the  reader
that  he  shall  set  the  above  mentioned  rule  at  defiance,  and
think  three  or  four  different  thoughts  at  one  and  the  same
time;  or  since  that  is  impossible,   that  his  thoughts  shall

*  Translator's  Note. — It.  is  a  fact  worth  mentioning  that  the  first
twelve  words  of  the  "  Republic"  are  placed  in  the  exact  order  which
would  be  natural  in  English.


ON  STYLE.  311

succeed  each  other  as  quickly  as  the  vibrations  of  a  cord.
Iu  this  way  an  author  lays  the  foundation  of  his  stile  em-
pese,  which  is  then  carried  to  perfection  by  the  use  of
high-flown,  pompous  expressions  to  communicate  the
simplest  things,  and  other  artifices  of  the  same  kind.

In  those  long  sentences  rich  in  involved  parentheses,
like  a  box  of  boxes  one  within  another,  and  padded  out
like  roast  geese  stuffed  w7ith  apples,  it  is  really  the  memory
*ihat  is  chiefly  taxed;  while  it  is  the  understanding  and  the
judgment  which  should  be  called  into  play,  instead  of  hav-
ing their  activity  thereby  actually  hindered  and  weakened.*
This  kind  of  sentence  furnishes  the  reader  with  mere  half-
phrases,  which  he  is  then  called  upon  to  collect  carefully
and  store  up  in  his  memory,  as  though  they  were  the
pieces  of  a  torn  letter,  afterward  to  be  completed  and  made
sense  of  by  the  other  halves  to  which  they  respectively
belong.  He  is  expected  to  go  on  reading  for  a  little  with-
out exercising  any  thought,  nay,  exerting  only  his  mem-
ory, in  the  hope  that,  when  lie  comes  to  the  end  of  the
sentence,  he  may  see  its  meaning  and  so  receive  something
to  think  about;  and  he  is  thus  given  a  great  deal  to  learn
-by  heart  before  obtaining  anything  to  understand.  This
is  manifestly  wrong  and  an  abuse  of  the  reader's
patience.

The  ordinary  writer  has  an  unmistakable  preference  for
this  style,  because  it  causes  the  reader  to  spend  time  and
trouble  in  understanding  that  which  he  would  have  under-
stood in  a  moment  without  it;  and  this  makes  it  look  as
though  the  writer  had  more  depth  and  intelligence  than
the  reader.  This  is,  indeed,  one  of  those  artifices  referred
to  above,  by  means  of  which  mediocre  authors  uncon-
sciously, and  as  it  were  by  instinct,  strive  to  conceal  their
poverty  of  thought  and  give  an  appearance  of  the
opposite.  Their  ingenuity  in  this  respect  is  really
astounding.

It  is  manifestly  against  all  sound  reason  to  put  one
thought  obliquely  on  top  of  another,  as  though  both  to-
gether formed  a  wooden  cross.     But  this  is  what  is  done

*  Iranslator's  Note. — This  sentence  in  the  original  is  obviously
meant  to  illustrate  the  fault  of  which  it  speaks.  It  does  so  by  the
use  of  a  construction  very  common  in  German,  but  happily  unknown
in  English  ;  where,  however,  the  fault  itself  exists  none  the  less,
though  in  a  different  form.


312  TEE  ART  OF  LITER  A  TUtlE.

where  a  writer  interrupts  what  he  has  begun  to  say,  for  the
purpose  of  inserting  some  quite  alien  matter;  thus  deposit-
ing with  the  reader  a  meaningless  half-sentence,  and
bidding  him  keep  it  until  the  completion  comes.  It  is
much  as  though  a  man  were  to  treat  his  guests  by  handing
them  an  empty  plate,  in  the  hope  of  something  appearing
upon  it.  And  commas  used  for  a  similar  purpose  belong
to  the  same  family  as  notes  at  the  foot  of  the  page  and
parentheses  in  the  middle  of  the  text;  nay,  all  three  differ
only  in  degree.  If  Demosthenes  and  Cicero  occasionally
inserted  words  by  way  of  parenthesis,  they  would  have
done  better  to  have  refrained.

But  this  style  of  writing  becomes  the  height  of  absurdity
when  the  parentheses  are  not  even  fitted  into  the  frame  of
the  sentence,  but  wedged  in  so  as  directly  to  shatter  it.  If,
for  instance,  it  is  an  impertinent  thing  to  interrupt  an-
other person  when  he  is  speaking,  it  is  no  less  impertinent
to  interrupt  one's  self.  But  all  bad,  careless,  and  hasty
authors,  who  scribble  with  the  bread  actually  before  their
eyes,  use  this  style  of  writing  six  times  on  a  page,  and  re-
joice in  it.  It  consists  in — it  is  advisable  to  give  rule  and
example  together,  wherever  it  is  possible — breaking  up  one
phrase  in  order  to  glue  in  another.  Nor  is  it  merely  out
of  laziness  that  they  write  thus.  They  do  it  out  of  stupid-
ity; they  think  there  is  a  charming  Ugerete  about  it;  that
it  gives  life  to  what  they  say.  No  doubt  there  are  a
few  rare  cases  where  such  a  form  of  sentence  may  be
pardonable.

Few  write  in  the  way  in  which  an  architect  builds;  who,
before  he  sets  to  work,  sketches  out  his  plan,  and  thinks  it
over  down  to  its  smallest  details.  Nay,  most  people  write
only  as  though  they  were  playing  dominoes;  and  as  in  this
game  the  pieces  are  arranged  half  by  design,  half  by
chance,  so  it  is  with  the  sequence  and  connection  of  then-
sentences.  They  only  just  have  an  idea  of  what  the
general  shape  of  their  work  will  be,  and  of  the  aim  they  set
before  themselves.  Many  are  ignorant  even  of  this,  and
write  as  the  coral-insects  build;  period  joins  to  period,  and
Lord  knows  what  the  author  means.

Life  now  a  days  goes  at  a  gallop;  and  the  way  in  which
this  affects  literature  is  to  make  it  extremely  superficial
and  slovenly,


ON  THE  STUDY  OF  LATIN.  313


ON  THE  STUDY  OF  LATIN.

The  abolition  of  Latin  as  the  universal  language  of
learned  men,  together  with  the  rise  of  that  provincialism
which  attaches  to  national  literatures,  has  been  a  real  mis-
fortune for  the  cause  of  knowledge  in  Europe.  For  it
was  chiefly  through  the  medium  of  the  Latin  language
that  a  learned  public  existed  in  Europe  at  all — a  public  tc
which  every  book  as  it  came  out  directly  appealed.  The
number  of  minds  in  the  whole  of  Europe  that  are  capable
of  thinking  and  judging  is  small,  as  it  is;  but  when  the
audience  is  broken  up  and  severed  by  differences  of  lan-
guage, the  good  these  minds  can  do  is  very  much  weakened.
This  is  a  great  disadvantage;  but  a  second  and  worse  one
will  follow,  namely,  that  the  ancient  languages  will  cease
to  be  taught  at  all.  The  neglect  of  them  is  rapidly  gain-
ing ground  both  in  France  and  Germany.

If  it  should  really  come  to  this,  then  farewell,  humanity!
farewell,  noble  taste  and  high  thinking!  The  age  of  bar-
barism will  return,  in  spite  of  railways,  telegraphs  and
balloons.  We  shall  thus  in  the  end  lose  one  more  advan-
tage possessed  by  all  our  ancestors.  For  Latin  is  not  only
a  key  to  the  knowledge  of  Roman  antiquity;  it  also  directly
opens  up  to  us  the  Middle  Age  in  every  country  in  Europe
and  modern  times  as  well,  down  to  about  the  year  1750.
Erigena,  for  example,  in  the  ninth  century,  John  of  Salis-
bury in  the  twelfth,  Raimond  Lullyin  the  thirteenth,  with
a  hundred  others,  speak  straight  to  us  in  the  very  language
that  they  naturally  adopted  in  thinking  of  learned  matters.
They  thus  come  quite  close  to  us  even  at  this  distance  of
time:  we  are  in  direct  contact  with  them,  and  really  corns
to  know  them.  How  would  it  have  been  if  every  one  of
them  spoke  in  the  language  that  was  peculiar  go  his  time
and  country?  We  should  not  understand  even  the  half  of
what  they  said.  A  real  intellectual  contact  with  them
would  be  impossible.  We  should  see  them  like  shadows
on  the  farthest  horizon,  or,  maybe,  through  the  translator's
telescope.

It  was  with  an  eye  to  the  advantage  of  writing  in  Latin
that  Bacon,  as  he  himself  expressly  states,  proceeded  to
translate  his  "  Essays  "  into  that  language,  under  the  title


314  TEE  ART  OF  LITER  A  TURE.

"  Sermones  fideles;  "  at  which  work  Hobbes  assisted  him.*
Here  let  me  observe,  by  way  of  parenthesis,  that  when
patriotism  tries  to  urge  its  claims  in  the  domain  of  knowl-
edge, it  commits  an  offense  which  should  not  be  tolerated.
For  in  those  purely  human  questions  which  interest  al!
men  alike,  where  truth,  insight,  beauty,  should  be  of  sole
account,  what  can  be  more  impertinent  than  to  let  prefer-
ence for  the  nation  to  which  a  man's  precious  self  happens
to  belong,  affect  the  balance  of  judgment,  and  thus  supply
a  reason  for  doing  violence  to  truth  and  being  unjusi  tc
the  great  minds  of  a  foreign  country  in  order  to  make
much  of  the  smaller  minds  of  one's  own!  Still,  there
are  writers  in  every  nation  in  Em-ope  who  afford  examples
of  this  vulgar  feeling.  It  is  this  which  led  Yriaite  to
caricature  them  in  the  thirty-third  of  his  charming
"  Literary  Fables."  f

In  learning  a  language,  the  chief  difficulty  consists  in
making  acquaintance  with  every  idea  which  it  expresses,
even  though  it  should  use  words  for  which  there  is  no
exact  equivalent  in  the  mother  tongue;  and  this  often
happens.  In  learning  a  new  language  a  man  has,  as  it
were,  to  mark  out  in  his  mind  the  boundaries  of  quite  new
spheres  of  ideas,  with  the  result  that  splices  of  ideas  arise
where  none  were  before.  Thus  he  not  only  learns  words,
lie  gains  ideas  too.

This  is  nowhere  so  much  the  case  as  in  learning  ancient

*  Cf.  Thomas  Hobbes  vita:  "Carolopoli  apud  Eleutherium  Angli-
cam,  1681,  p.  22.

f  Translator's  Note. — Tomas  de  Yriarte  (1750-91.)  a  Spanish  poet,
and  keeper  of  archives  in  the  war  office  at  Madrid.  His  two  best-known
works  are  a  didactic  poem,  entitled  "  La  Musica  "  and  the  "  Fables"
here  quoted,  which  satirise  the  peculiar  foibles  of  literary  men.
They  bave  been  translated  into  many  languages;  into  English  by
Kockcliffe  (3d  edition,  1866).  The  fable  in  question  describes  how,  at
a  picnic  of  the  animals, a  discussion  arose  as  to  which  of  them  carried
off  the  palm  for  superiority  of  talent.  The  praises  of  the  ant,  the
dog,  the  bee,  and  the  parrot  were  sung  in  turn;  but  at  last  the
ostrich  stood  up  and  declared  for  the  dromedary.  Whereupon  the
dromedary  stood  up  and  declared  for  the  ostrich.  No  one  could  dis-
cover the  reason  for  this  mutual  compliment.  Was  it  because  both
were  such  uncouth  beasts,  or  had  such  long  necks,  or  were  neither
of  them  particularly  cle»er  or  beautiful?  or  was  it  because  each  had
a  hump?  "  No  !  "  said  the  fox,"  you  are  all  wrong.  Don't  you  see
they  are  both  foreigners  ? "  Cannot  the  same  be  said  of  many
aien  of  learning?


ON  THE  STUDY  OF  LATIN.  315

languages,  for  the  differences  they  present  in  their  mode  of
expression  as  compared  with  modern  languages  is  greater
than  can  be  found  among  modern  languages  as  compared
with  one  another.  This  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  in  trans-
lating into  Latin,  recourse  must  be  had  to  quite  other  turns
of  phrase  than  are  in  use  in  the  original.  The  thought
that  is  to  be  translated  has  to  be  melted  down  and  recast;
in  other  words,  it  must  be  analyzed  and  then  recomposed.
It  is  just  this  process  which  makes  the  study  of  the  ancient
languages  contribute  so  much  to  the  education  of  the
mind.

It  follows  from  this  that  a  man's  thought  varies  according
to  the  language  in  which  he  speaks.  His  ideas  undergo  a
fresh  modification,  a  different  shading,  as  it  were,  in  the
study  of  every  new  language.  Hence  an  acquaintance  with
many  languages  is  not  only  of  much  indirect  advantage,
but  it  is  also  a  direct  means  of  mental  culture,  in  that  it
corrects  and  matures  ideas  by  giving  prominence  to  their
many-Bided  nature  and  their  different  varieties  of  meaning,
as  also  that  it  increases  dexterity  of  thought;  for  in  the
process  of  learning  many  languages  ideas  become  more  and
more  independent  of  words.  The  ancient  languages  effect
this  to  an  incomparably  greater  degree  thai:  the  modern,  in
virtue  of  the  difference  to  which  I  have  alluded.

From  what  I  have  said,  it  is  obvious  that  to  imitate  the
style  of  the  ancients  in  their  own  language,  which  is  so
very  much  superior  to  ours  in  point  of  grammatical  perfec-
tion, is  the  best  way  of  preparing  for  a  skillful  and
finished  expression  of  thought  in  the  mother-tongue.  Nay,
if  a  man  wants  to  be  a  great  writer,  he  must  not  omit  to  do
this;  just  as,  in  the  case  of  sculpture  or  painting,  the
student  must  educate  himself  by  copying  the  great  master-
pieces of  the  past,  before  proceeding  to  original  work.  It
is  only  by  learning  to  write  Latin  that  a  man  comes  to
treat  diction  as  an  art.  The  material  in  this  art  is  language,
which  must  therefore  be  handled  with  the  greatest  care  and
delicacy.

The  result  of  such  study  is  that  a  writer  will  pay  keen
attention  to  the  meaning  and  value  of  words,  their  order
and  connection,  their  grammatical  forms.  He  will  learn
how  to  weigh  them  with  precision,  and  so  become  an  ex-
pert in  the  use  of  that  precious  instrument  which  is  meant
not  only  to  express  valuable  thought,  but  to  preserve  it  as


316  THE  ART  OF  LITERATURE.

well.  Further,  he  will  learn  to  feel  respect  for  the
language  in  which  he  writes,  and  thus  be  saved  from  any
attempt  to  remodel  it  by  arbitrary  and  capricious  treat-
ment. Without  this  schooling,  a  man's  writing  may  easily
degenerate  into  mere  chatter.

To  be  entirely  ignorant  of  the  Latin  language  is  like
being  in  a  fine  country  on  a  misty  day.  The  horizon  is
extremely  limited.  Nothing  can  be  seen  clearly  except
that  which  is  quite  close;  a  few  steps  beyond,  everything  is
buried  in  obscurity.  But  the  Latinist  has  a  wide  view,
embracing  modern  times,  the  Middle  Age  and  Antiquity;
and  his  mental  horizon  is  still  further  enlarged  if  he  studies
Greek  or  even  Sanscrit.

If  a  man  knows  no  Latin,  he  belongs  to  the  vulgar,
eveu  though  he  be  a  great  virtuoso  on  the  electrical
machine  and  have  the  base  of  hydrofluoric  acid  in  his
crucible.

There  is  no  better  recreation  for  the  mind  than  the  study
of  the  ancient  classics.  Take  any  one  of  them  into  your
hand,  be  it  only  for  half  an  hour,  and  you  will  feel  your-
self refreshed,  relieved,  purified,  ennobled,  strengthened;
just  as  though  you  had  quenched  your  thirst  at  some  pure
spring.  Is  this  the  etfect  of  the  old  language  and  its  per-
feet  expression,  or  is  it  the  greatness  of  the  minds  whose
works  remain  unharmed  and  unweakened  by  the  lapse  of
a  thousand  years?  Perhaps  both  together.  But  this  I
know.  If  the  threatened  calamity  should  ever  come,  and
the  ancient  languages  cease  to  be  taught,  a  new  literature
will  arise,  of  such  barbarous,  shallow  and  worthless  stuff
as  never  was  seen  before.


ON  MEN  OF  LEARNING.

When  one  sees  the  number  and  variety  of  institutions
which  exist  for  the  purposes  of  education,  and  the  vast
throng  of  scholars  and  masters,  one  might  fancy  the  human
race  to  be  very  much  concerned  about  truth  and  wisdom.
But  here,  too,  appearances  are  deceptive.  The  masters
teach  in  order  to  gain  money,  and  strive,  not  after  wisdom,
but  the  outward  show  and  reputation  of  it  ;  and  the  schol-
ars learn,  not  for  the  sake  of  knowledge  and  insight,  but


ON  MEN  OF  LEARNING.  317

to  be  able  to  chatter  and  give  themselves  airs.  Every
thirty  years  a  new  race  comes  into  the  world — a  youngster
that  knows  nothing  about  anything,  and  after  summarily
devouring  in  all  haste  the  results  of  human  knowledge  as
they  have  been  accumulated  for  thousands  of  years,  aspires
to  be  thought  cleverer  than  the  whole  of  the  past.  For  this
purpose  he  goes  to  the  university,  and  takes  to  reading
books — new  books,  as  being  of  his  own  age  and  standing.
Everything  he  reads  must  be  briefly  put,  must  be  new!
lie  is  new  himself.  Then  he  falls  to  and  criticises.  And
here  I  am  not  taking  the  slightest  account  of  studies  pur-
sued for  the  sole  object  of  making  a  living.

Students,  and  learned  persons  of  all  sorts  and  every  age,
aim  as  a  rule  at  acquiring  information  rather  than  insight.
They  pique  themselves  upon  knowing  about  everything —
stones,  plants,  battles,  experiments,  and  all  the  books  in
existence.  It  never  occurs  to  them  that  information  is
only  a  means  of  insight,  and  in  itself  of  little  or  no  value;
that  it  is  his  way  of  thinking  that  makes  a  man  a  philoso-
pher. When  I  hear  of  these  portents  of  learning  and  their
imposing  erudition,  1  sometimes  say  to  myself:  Ah,  how
little  they  must  have  had  to  think  about,  to  have  been
able  to  read  so  much!  And  when  I  actually  find  it  re-
ported of  the  elder  Pliny  that  he  was  continually  reading
or  being  read  to  at  table,  on  a  journey,  or  in  his  bath,  the
question  forces  itself  upon  my  mind,  whether  the  man  was
so  very  lacking  in  thought  of  his  own  that  he  had  to  have
alien  thought  incessantly  instilled  into  him;  as  though  he
were  a  consumptive  patient  taking  jellies  to  keep  himseL
alive.  And  neither  his  undiscerning  credulity  nor  his  in-
expressibly repulsive  and  barely  intelligible  style — which
seems  like  that  of  a  man  taking  notes,  and  very  econom-
ical of  paper — is  of  a  kind  to  give  me  a  high  opinion  of  his
power  of  independent  thought.

We  have  seen  that  much  reading  and  learning  is  prej-
udicial to  thinking  for  one's  self;  and,  in  the  same  way,
through  much  writing  and  teaching,  a  man  loses  the  habit
of  being  quite  clear,  and  therefore  thorough  in  regard  to
the  things  he  knows  and  understands;  simply  because  he
has  left  himself  no  time  to  acquire  clearness  or  thorough-
ness. And  so,  when  clear  knowledge  fails  him  in  his
utterances,  he  is  forced  to  fill  out  the  gaps  with  words  and
phrases.     It  is  this,   and   not  the  dryness  of  the  subject-


318  THE  ART  OF  LITER  A  TURE.

matter,  that  makes  most  books  such  tedious  reading.
There  is  a  saving  that  a  good  cook  can  make  a  palatable
dish  even  out  of  an  old  shoe;  and  a  good  writer  can  make
the  dryest  things  interesting.

With  by  far  the  largest  number  of  learned  men,  knowl-
edge is  a  means,  not  an  end.  That  is  why  they  will  never
achieve  any  great  work;  because,  to  do  that,  he  who  pur-
sues knowledge  must  pursue  it  as  an  end,  and  treat  every-
thing else,  even  existence  itself,  as  only  a  means.  For
everything  which  a  man  fails  to  pursue  for  its  own  sake  is
but  half  pursued;  and  true  excellence,  no  matter  in  what
sphere,  can  be  attained  only  where  the  work  has  been  pro-
duced for  its  own  sake  alone,  and  not  as  a  means  to
further  ends.

And  so,  too,  no  one  will  ever  succeed  in  doing  anything
really  great  and  original  in  the  way  of  thought,  who  does
not  seek  to  acquire  knowledge  for  himself,  and,  making
this  the  immediate  object  of  his  studies,  decline  to  trouble
himself  about  the  knowledge  of  others.  But  the  average
man  of  learning  studies  for  the  purpose  of  being  able  to
teach  and  write.  His  head  is  like  a  stomach  and  intestines
which  let  the  food  pass  through  them  undigested.  That  is
just  why  his  teaching  and  writing  is  of  so  little  use.  For
it  is  not  upon  undigested  refuse  that  people  can  be  nour-
ished, but  solely  upon  the  milk  which  secretes  from  the
very  blood  itself.

The  wig  is  the  appropriate  symbol  of  the  man  of  learn-
ing, pure  and  simple.  It  adorns  the  head  with  a  copious
quantity  of  false  hair,  in  lack  of  one's  own:  just  as  erudi-
tion means  endowing  it  with  a  great  mass  of  alien  thought.
This,  to  be  sure,  does  not  clothe  the  head  so  well  and
naturally,  nor  is  it  so  generally  useful,  nor  so  suited  for  all
purposes,  nor  so  firmly  rooted;  nor  when  alien  thought  is
used  up,  can  it  be  immediately  replaced  by  more  from  the
same  source,  as  is  the  case  with  that  which  springs  from
soil  of  one's  own.  So  we  find  Sterne,  in  his  "  Tristram
Shandy,"  boldly  asserting  that  "  an  ounce  of  a  man's  own
wit  is  worth  a  ton  of  other  people's."

And  in  fact  the  most  profound  erudition  is  no  more  akin
to  genius  than  a  collection  of  dried  plants  is  like  Nature,
with  its  constant  flow  of  new  life,  ever  fresh,  ever  young,
ever  changing.  There  are  no  two  things  more  opposed
than  the  childish  naivety  of  an  ancient  author  and  the
learning  of  his  commentator


ON  MEN  OF  LEARNING.  319

Dilettanti,  dilettanti!  This  is  the  slighting  way  in
which  those  who  pursue  any  branch  of  art  or  learning  for
the  love  and  enjoyment  of  the  thing— per  il  loro  diletto
are  spoken  of  by  those  who  have  taken  it  up  for  the  sake
of  gain,  attracted  solely  by  the  prospect  of  money.  This
contempt  of  theirs  conies  from  the  base  belief  that  no  man
will  seriously  devote  himself  to  a  subject,  unless  he  is
spurred  on  to  it  by  want,  hunger,  or  else  some  form  of
greed.  The  public  is  of  the  same  way  of  thinking;  ana
hence  its  general  respect  for  professionals,  and  its  distrust
of  dilettanti.  But  the  truth  is  that  the  dilettante  treats
his  subject  as  an  end,  whereas  the  professional,  pure  and
simple,  treats  it  merely  as  a  means.  He  alone  will  be
really  in  earnest  about  a  matter,  who  has  a  direct  interest
therein,  takes  to  it  because  he  likes  it,  and  pursues  it  con
amove.  It  is  these,  and  not  hirelings,  that  have  always
done  the  greatest  work.

In  the  republic  of  letters  it  is  as  in  other  republics;
favor  is  shown  to  the  plain  man — he  who  goes  on  his  way
in  silence  and  does  not  set  up  to  be  cleverer  than  others.
But  the  abnormal  man  is  looked  upon  as  threatening
danger;  people  band  together  against  him,  and  have,  oh!
such  a  majority  on  their  side.

The  condition  of  this  republic  is  much  like  that  of  a
small  state  in  America,  where  every  man  is  intent  only
upon  his  own  advantage,  and  seeks  reputation  and  power
for  himself,  quite  heedless  of  the  general  weal,  which  then
goes  to  ruin.  So  it  is  in  the  republic  of  letters;  it  is  him-
self, and  himself  alone,  that  a  man  puts  forward,  because
he  wants  to  gain  fame.  The  only  thing  in  which  all  agree
is  in  trying  to  keep  down  a  really  eminent  man,  if  he
should  chance  to  show  himself,  as  one  who  would  be  a
common  peril.  From  this  it  is  easy  to  see  how  it  fares
with  knowledge  as  a  whole.

Between  professors  and  independent  men  of  learning
there  has  alwrays  been  from  of  old  a  certain  antagonism,
which  may  perhaps  be  likened  to  that  existing  between
dogs  and  wolves.  In  virtue  of  their  position,  professorsen-
joy  great  facilities  for  becoming  known  to  their  contempo-
raries. Contrarily,  independent  men  of  learning  enjoy,  by
their  position,  great  facilities  for  becoming  known  to  pos-
terity; to  which  it  is  necessary  that,  among  other  and
much  rarer  gifts,  a  man  should  have  a  certain  leisure  and


B20  THE  ART  OF  LITER  A  TTJRE.

freedom.  As  mankind  takes  a  long  time  in  finding  out  on
whom  to  bestow  its  attention,  they  may  both  work  to-
gether side  by  side.

He  who  holds  a  professorship  may  be  said  to  receive  his
food  in  the  stall;  and  this  is  the  best  way  with  ruminant  ani-
mals. But  he  who  finds  his  food  for  himself  at  the  hands
of  nature  is  better  off  in  the  open  field.

Of  human  knowledge  as  a  whole  and  in  every  branch  of
it,  by  far  the  largest  part  exists  nowhere  but  on  paper
— I  mean,  in  books,  that  paper  memory  of  mankind.
Only  a  small  part  of  it  is  at  any  given  period  really  active
in  the  minds  of  particular  persons.  This  is  due  in  the
main,  to  the  brevity  and  uncertainty  of  life  ;  but  it  also
comes  from  the  fact  that  men  are  lazy  and  bent  on  pleas-
ure. Every  generation  attains,  in  its  hasty  passage
through  existence,  just  so  much  of  human  knowledge  as  it
needs,  and  then  soon  disappears.  Most  men  of  learning
are  very  superficial.  Then  follows  a  new  generation,  full
of  hope,  but  ignorant,  and  with  everything  to  learn  from
the  beginning.  It  seizes,  in  its  turn,  just  so  much  as  it
can  grasp,  or  find  useful  on  its  brief  journey,  and  then  too
goes  its  way.  How  badly  it  would  fare  with  human
knowledge  if  it  were  not  for  the  art  of  writing  and  print-
ing! This  it  is  that  makes  libraries  the  only  sure  and
lasting  memory  of  the  human  race,  for  its  individual  mem-
bers have  all  of  them  but  a  very  limited  and  imperfect  one.
Hence  most  men  of  learning  are  as  loth  to  have  their
knowledge  examined  as  merchants  to  lay  bare  their
books.

Human  knowledge  extends   on  all  sides  farther  than  the
eye   can    reach;  and   of    that   which    would    be    generally
worth   knowing,  no  one  man   can  possess  even  the  thous
andth  part.

All  branches  of  learning  have  thus  been  so  much  en-
larged that  lie  who  would  "  do  something  "  has  to  pursue
no  more  than  one  subject  and  disregard  all  others.  In  his
own  subject  he  will  then,  it  is  true,  be  superior  to  the  vul-
gar; but  in  all  else  he  will  belong  to  it.  If  we  add  to  this
that  neglect  of  the  ancient  languages,  which  is  now-a-days
on  the  increase  and  is  doing  away  with  all  general  educa-
tion in  the  humanities — for  a  mere  smattering  of  Latin  and
Greek  is  of  no  use — we  shall  come  to  have  men  of  learning
who  outside  their  own  subject  display  an  ignorance  truly
bovine.


ON  THINKING  FOR  ONE'S  SELF.  321

An  exclusive  specialist  of  this  kind  stands  on  a  par  with
a  workman  in  a  factory,  whose  whole  life  is  spent  in
making  one  particular  kind  of  screw,  or  catch,  or  handle,
for  some  particular  instrument  or  machine,  in  which,  in-
deed, he  attains  incredible  dexterity.  The  specialist  may
also  be  likened  to  a  man  who  lives  in  his  own  house  and
never  leaves  it.  There  he  is  perfectly  familiar  with  every-
thing, every  little  step,  corner,  or  board;  much  as  Quasi-
modo in  Victor  Hugo's  "  Notre  Dame"  knows  the  cathe-
dral; but  outside  it,  all  is  strange  and  unknown.

For  true  culture  in  the  humanities  it  is  absolutely
necessary  that  a  man  should  be  many-sided  and  take  large
views;  and  for  a  man  of  learning  in  the  higher  sense  of
the  word,  an  extensive  acquaintance  with  history  is  need-
ful. He,  however,  who  wishes  to  be  a  complete  philoso-
pher, must  gather  into  his  head  the  remotest  ends  of
human  knowledge:  for  where  else  could  they  ever  come
together?

It  is  precisely  minds  of  the  first  order  that  will  never  be
specialists.  For  their  very  nature  is  to  make  the  whole  of
existence  their  problem;  and  this  is  a  subject  upon  which
they  will  every  one  of  them  in  some  form  provide  man-
kind with  a  new  revelation.  For  he  alone  can  deserve  the
name  of  genius  who  takes  the  All,  the  Essential,  the
Universal,  for  the  theme  of  his  achievements;  not  he  who
spends  his  life  in  explaining  some  special  relation  of
things  one  to  another.


ON  THINKING  FOR  ONE'S  SELF.

A  library  may  be  very  large;  but  if  it  is  in  disorder,  it
is  not  so  useful  as  one  that  is  small  but  well  arranged.  In
the  same  way,  a  man  may  have  a  great  mass  of  knowledge,
but  if  he  has  not  worked  it  up  by  thinking  it  over  for  him-
self, it  has  much  less  value  than  a  far  smaller  amount  which
he  has  thoroughly  pondered.  For  it  is  only  when  a  man
looks  at  his  knowledge  from  all  sides,  and  combines  the
things  he  knows  by  comparing  truth  with  truth,  that  he
obtains  a  complete  hold  over  it  and  gets  it  into  his  power.
A  man  cannot  turn  over  anything  in  his  mind  unless  he
knows  it;    he  should    therefore,  learn  something;   but  it  is


322  THE  ART  OF  LITER  A  TURE.

only  when  he  has  turned  it  over  that  hf  can  be  said  to
know  it-
Reading  and  learning  are  things  that  any  one  can  do  of
his  own  free  will;  but  not  so  thinking.  Thinking  must
be  kindled,  like  a  fire  by  a  draught;  it  must  be  sustained
by  some  interest  in  the  matter  in  hand.  This  interest  may
be  of  purely  objective  kind,  or  merely  subjective.  The
latter  comes  into  play  only  in  things  that  concern  us  per-
sonally. Objective  interest  is  confined  to  heads  that  think
by  nature;  to  whom  thinking  is  as  natural  as  breathing;
and  they  are  very  rare.  This  is  why  most  men  of  learning
show  so  little  of  it.

It  is  incredible  what  a  different  effect  is  produced  upon
the  mind  by  thinking  for  one's  self,  as  compared  with  read-
ing. It  carries  on  and  intensifies  that  original  difference  in
the  nature  of  two  minds  which  leads  the  one  to  think  and
the  other  to  read.  What  I  mean  is  that  reading  forces
alien  thoughts  upon  the  mind — thoughts  which  are  as
foreign  to  the  drift  and  temper  in  which  it  may  be  for  the
moment,  as  the  seal  is  to  the  wax  on  which  it  stamps  its
imprint.  The  mind  is  thus  entirely  under  compulsion
from  without;  it  is  driven  to  think  this  or  that,  though  for
the  moment  it  may  not  have  the  slightest  impulse  or
inclination  to  do  so.

But  when  a  man  thinks  for  himself,  he  follows  the
impulse  of  his  own  mind,  which  is  determined  for  him  at
the  time,  either  by  his  environment  or  some  particular  recol-
lection. The  visible  world  of  a  man's  surroundings  does
not,  as  reading  does,  impress  a  single  definite  thought  upon
his  mind,  but  merely  gives  the  matter  and  occasion  which
lead  him  to  think  what  is  appropriate  to  his  nature  and
present  temper.  So  it  is,  that  much  reading  deprives  the
mind  of  all  elasticity;  it  is  like  keeping  a  spring  continually
under  pressure.  The  safest  way  of  having  no  thoughts  of
one's  own  is  to  take  up  a  bock  every  moment  one  has  noth-
ing else  to  do.  It  is  this  practice  which  explains  why  erudi-
tion makes  most  men  more  stupid  and  silly  than  they  are  by
nature,  and  prevents  their  writings  obtaining  any  measure
of  success.      They  remain,  in  Pope's  words:

"  Forever  reading,  never  to  be  read!  "  *

Men  of  learning  are  those  who  have  done  their  reading

*  "  Dunciad,"iiL  194.


ON  THINKING  FOR  ONE'S  SELF.  323

tn  the  pages  of  a  book.  Thinkers  and  men  of  genius  are
those  who  have  gone  straight  to  the  book  of  nature;  it  is
they  who  have  enlightened  the  world  and  carried  humanity
further  on  its  way.

If  a  man's  thoughts  are  to  have  truth  and  life  in  them,
they  must,  after  all  be  his  own  fundamental  thoughts,
for  these  are  the  only  ones  that  he  can  fully  and  wholly
understand.  To  read  another's  thoughts  is  like  taking
the  leavings  of  a  meal  to  which  we  have  not  been  invited,
or  putting  on  the  clothes  which  some  unknown  visitor  has
laid  aside.

The  thought  we  read  is  related  to  the  thought  which
springs  up  in  ourselves,  as  the  fossil-impress  of  some  pre-
historic plant  to  a  plant  as  it  buds  forth  in  springtime.

Reading  is  nothing  more  than  a  substitute  for  thought
of  one's  own.  It  means  putting  the  mind  into  leading-
strings.  The  multitude  of  books  serves  only  to  show  how
many  false  paths  there  are,  and  how  widely  astray  a  man
may  wander  if  he  follows  any  of  them.  But  he  who  is
guided  by  his  genius,  he  who  thinks  for  himself,  who  thinks
spontaneously  and  exactly,  possesses  the  only  compass  by
which  he  can  steer  aright.  A  man  should  read  only  when
his  own  thoughts  stagnate  at  their  source,  which  will
happen  often  enough  even  with  the  best  of  minds.  On  the
other  hand,  to  take  up  a  book  for  the  purpose  of  scaring
away  one's  own  original  thoughts  is  sin  against  the  Holy
Spirit.  It  is  like  running  away  from  nature  to  look  at  a
museum  of  dried  plants  or  gaze  at  a  landscape  in  copper-
plate.

A  man  may  have  discovered  some  portion  of  truth  oi
wisdom,  after  spending  a  great  deal  of  time  and  trouble  in
thinking  it  over  for  himself  and  adding  thought  to  thought;
and  it  may  sometimes  happen  that  he  could  have  found  it
all  ready  to  hand  in  a  book  and  spared  himself  the  trouble.
But  even  so,  it  is  a  hundred  times  more  valuable  if  he  has
acquired  it  by  thinking  it  out  for  himself.  For  it  is  only
when  we  gain  our  knowledge  in  this  way  that  it  enters  as
an  integral  part,  a  living  member  into  the  whole  system  of
our  thought;  that  it  stands  in  complete  and  firm  relation
with  what  we  know;  that  it  is  understood  with  all  that
underlies  it  and  follows  from  it;  that  it  wears  the  color,
the  precise  shade,  the  distinguishing  mark  of  our  own  way
of  thinking;  that  it  comes  exactly  at  the  right  time,  just


324  THE  A  R  T  OF  LIT  ERA  TURK

as  we  felt  the  necessity  for  ;t;  that  it  stands  fast  ana  -can-
not be  forgotten.  This  is  the  perfect  application,  nay,  the
interpretation,  of  Goethe's  advice  to  earn  our  inheritance
for  ourselves  so  that  we  may  really  possess  it:

"  Was  du  ererbt  vondeinen  Vatern  Last,
Erwirb  es,  um  es  zu  besitzen."*

The  man  who  thinks  for  himself,  forms  his  own  opin-
ions and  learns  the  authorities  for  them  only  later  on,  when
they  serve  but  to  strengthen  his  belief  in  them  and  in
himself.  But  the  book-philosopher  starts  from  the  authori-
ties, He  reads  other  people's  books,  collects  their  opin-
ions, and  so  forms  a  whole  for  himself,  which  resembles  an
automaton  made  up  of  anything,  but  flesh  and  blood.
Contrarily,  he  who  thinks  for  himself  creates  a  work  like
a  living  man  as  made  by  Nature.  For  the  work  comes
into  being  as  a  man  does;  the  thinking  mind  is  impreg-
nated from  without  and  it  then  forms  and  bears  its  child!

Truth  that  has  been  merely  learned  is  like  an  artificial
limb,  a  false  tooth,  a  waxen  nose;  at  best,  like  a  nose  made
out  of  another's  flesh;  it  adheres  to  us  only  because  it  is
put  on.  But  truth  acquired  by  thinking  of  our  own  is  like
a  natural  limb;  it  alone  really  belongs  to  us.  This  is  the
fundamental  difference  between  the  thinker  and  the  mere
man  of  learning.  The  intellectual  attainments  of  a  man
who  thinks  for  himself  resemble  a  fine  painting,  where  the
light  and  shade  are  correct,  the  tone  sustained,  the  color
perfectly  harmonized;  it  is  true  to  life.  On  the  other
hand,  the  intellectual  attainments  of  the  mere  man  of  learn-
ing are  like  a  large  palette,  full  of  all  sorts  of  colors,  which
at  most  are  systematically  arranged,  but  devoid  o_
harmony,  connection  and  meauing.

Reading  is  thinking  with  some  one  else's  head  instead  of
one's  own.  To  think  with  one's  own  head  is  always  to  aim
at  developing  a  coherent  whole  —a  system,  even  though  it
be  not  a  strictly  complete  one;  and  nothing  hinders  this
so  much  as  too  strong  a  current  of  others'  thoughts,  such
as  comes  of  continual  reading.  These  thoughts,  springing
every  one  of  them  from  different  minds,  belonging  to  dif-
ferent systems,  and  tinged  with  different  colors,  never  of
themselves     flow    together    into    an    intellectual    whole;

*"Faust,"l.  339.


ON  THINKING  FOR  ONE'S  SELF.  325

they  never  form  a  unity  of  knowledge,  or  insight,  or  con-
viction; but,  rather,  fill  the  head  with  a  Babylonian  con-
fusion of  tongues.  The  mind  that  is  over-loaded  with
alien  thought  is  thus  deprived  of  all  clear  insight,  and  so
well-nigh  disorganized.  This  is  a  state  of  things  observ-
able in  many  men  of  learning;  and  it  makes  them  inferior
in  sound  sense,  correct  judgment  and  practical  tact,  to
many  illiterate  persons  who,  after  obtaining  a  little  knowl-
edge from  without  by  means  of  experience,  intercourse
with  others,  and  a  small  amount  of  reading,  have  always
subordinated  it  to,  and  embodied  it  with,  their  own
thought.

The  really  scientific  thinker  does  the  same  thing  as
these  illiterate  persons,  but  on  a  larger  scale.  Although
he  has  need  of  much  knowledge,  and  so  must  read  a  great
deal,  his  mind  is  nevertheless  strong  enough  to  master  it
all,  to  assimilate  and  incorporate  it  with  the  system  of  his
thoughts,  and  so  to  make  it  fit  in  with  the  organic  unity  of
his  insight,  which,  though  vast,  is  always  growing.  And
in  the  process,  his  own  thought,  like  the  bass  in  an  organ,
always  dominates  everything,  and  is  never  drowned  by
other  tones,  as  happens  with  minds  which  are  full  of  mere
antiquarian  lore;  where  shreds  of  music,  as  it  were,  in
every  key,  mingle  confusedly,  and  no  fundamental  noU
is  heard  at  all.

Those  who  have  spent  their  lives  in  reading,  and  taken
their  wisdom  from  books,  are  like  people  who  have  ob-
tained precise  information  about  a  country  from  the
descriptions  of  many  travelers.  Such  people  can  tell  a
great  deal  about  it;  but,  after  all,  they  have  no  connected,
clear,  and  profound  knowledge  of  its  real  condition.  But
those  who  have  spent  their  lives  in  thinking  resemble  the
travelers  themselves;  they  alone  really  know  what  they
are  talking  about;  they  are  acquainted  with  the  actual
state  of  affairs,  and  are  quite  at  home  in  the  subject.

The  thinker  stands  in  the  tame  relation  to  the  ordinary
book-philosopher  as  an  eyewitness  does  to  the  historian;
he  speaks  from  direct  knowledge  of  his  own.  That  is  why
all  those  who  think  for  themselves  come,  at  bottom,  to
much  the  same  conclusion.  The  differences  they  present
are  due  to  their  different  points  of  view;  and  when  these
do  not  affect  the  matter,  they  all  speak  alike.  The\
merely  express  the  result  of  their  own  objective  perception


326  THE  ART  OF  LITERATURE.

of  things.  There  are  many  passages  in  my  works  which  I
have  given  to  the  public  only  after  some  hesitation,  be-
cause of  their  paradoxical  nature;  and  afterward  I  have
experienced  a  pleasant  surprise  in  finding  the  same  opinion
recorded  in  the  works  of  great  men  who  lived  long  ago.

The  book-philosopher  merely  reports  what  one  person
has  said  and  another  meant,  or  the  objections  raised  by  a
third,  and  so  on.  He  compares  different  opinions,  ponders,
criticises,  and  tries  to  get  at  the  truth  of  the  matter;  here-
in on  a  par  with  the  critical  historian.  For  instance,  he
will  set  out  to  inquire  whether  Leibnitz  was  not  for  some
time  a  follower  of  Spinoza,  and  questions  of  a  like  nature.
The  curious  student  of  such  matters  may  find  conspicuous
examples  of  what  I  mean  in  Herbart's  "Analytical  Eluci-
dation of  Morality  and  Natural  Right,"  and  in  the  same
author's  "Letters  on  Freedom."  Surprise  may  be  felt  that  a
man  of  the  kind  should  put  himself  to  so  much  trouble;
for,  on  the  face  of  it,  if  he  would  only  examine  the  matter
for  himself,  he  would  speedily  attain  his  object  by  the  ex-
ercise of  a  little  thought.  But  there  is  a  small  difficulty
in  the  way.  It  does  not  depend  upon  his  own  will.  A
man  can  always  sit  down  and  read,  but  not — think.  It  is
with  thoughts  as  with  men:  they  cannot  always  be  sum-
moned at  pleasure;  we  must  wait  for  them  to  come.
Thought  about  a  subject  must  appear  of  itself,  by  a  happy
and  harmonious  combination  of  external  stimulus  with
mental  temper  and  attention;  and  it  is  just  that  which
never  seems  to  come  to  these  people.

This  truth  may  be  illustrated  by  what  happens  in  the
case  of  matters  affecting  our  own  personal  interest.  When
it  is  necessary  to  come  to  some  resolution  in  a  matter  of
that  kind,  we  cannot  well  sit  down  at  any  given  moment
and  think  over  the  merits  of  the  case  and  make  up  our
mind;  for,  if  we  try  to  do  so,  we  often  find  ourselves  un-
able, at  that  particular  moment,  to  keep  our  mind  fixed
upon  the  subject;  it  wanders  off  to  other  things.  Aversion
to  the  matter  in  question  is  sometimes  to  blame  for  this.
In  such  a  case  we  should  not  use  force,  but  wait  for  the
proper  frame  of  mind  to  come  of  itself.  It  often  comes
unexpectedly  and  returns  again  and  again;  and  the  variety
of  temper  in  which  we  approach  it  at  different  moments
puts  the  matter  always  in  a  fresh  light.  It  is  this  long
process  which  is  understood  by  the  term"  a  ripe  resolution/


ON  THINKING  FOR  ONE'S  SELF.  327

For  the  work  of  coming  to  a  resolution  must  be  distrib-
uted; and  in  the  process  much  that  is  overlooked  at
one  moment  occurs  to  us  at  another;  and  the  repugnance
vanishes  when  we  find,  as  we  usually  do,  on  a  closer  in-
spection, that  things  are  not  so  bad  as  they  seemed.

This  rule  applies  to  the  life  of  the  intellect  as  well  as  to
matters  of  practice.  A  man  must  wait  for  the  right  mo-
ment. Not  even  the  greatest  mind  is  capable  of  thinking
for  itself  at  all  times.  Hence  a  great  mind  does  well  to
spend  its  leisure  in  reading,  which,  as  I  have  said,  is  a  sub-
stitute for  thought:  it  brings  stuff  to  the  mind  by  letting
another  person  do  the  thinking;  although  that  is  always
done  in  a  manner  not  our  own.  Therefore,  a  man  should
not  read  too  much,  in  order  that  his  mind  may  not  become
accustomed  to  the  substitute  and  thereby  forget  the  reality;
that  it  may  not  form  the  habit  of  walking  in  well-worn
paths;  nor  by  following  an  alien  course  of  thought  grow  a
stranger  to  its  own.  Least  of  all  should  a  man  quite  with-
draw his  gaze  from  trie  real  world  for  the  mere  sake  of
reading;  as  the  impulse  and  the  temper  which  prompt  to
thought  of  one's  own  come  far  oftener  from  the  world  of
reality  than  from  the  world  of  books.  The  real  life  that  a
man  sees  before  him  is  the  natural  subject  of  thought;  and
in  its  strength  as  the  primary  element  of  existence,  it  can
more  easily  thananythingelse  rouse  and  influence  the  think-
ing mind.

After  these  considerations,  it  will  not  be  matter  for  sur-
prise that  a  man  who  thinks  for  himself  can  easily  be  dis-
tinguished from  the  book-philosopher  by  the  very  way  in
which  he  talks,  by  his  marked  earnestness,  and  the  origi-
nality, directness,  and  personal  conviction  that  stamp  all
his  thoughts  and  expressions.  The  book-philosopher,  on
the  other  hand,  lets  it  be  seen  that  everything  he  has  is  sec-
ond-hand; that  his  ideas  are  like  the  lumber  and  trash  of
old  furniture-shop,  collected  together  from  all  quarters.
Mentally,  he  is  dull  and  pointless — a  copy  of  a  copy.  His
literary  style  is  made  up  of  conventional,  nay,  vulgar
phrases,  and  terms  that  happen  to  be  current;  in  this  re-
spect much  like  a  small  state  where  all  the  money  that
circulates  is  foreign,  because  it  has  no  coinage  of  its  own.

Mere  experience  can  as  little  as  reading  supply  the  place
of  thought.  It  stands  to  thinking  in  the  same  relation  in
which  eating  stands  to  digestion  and  assimilation.      When


328  1  HE  ART  OF  LITERATURE

experience  boasts  that  to  its  discoveries  alone  is  due  tht
advancement  of  the  human  race,  it  is  as  though  the  mouth
were  to  claim  the  whole  credit  of  maintaining  the  body  in
health.

The  works  of  all  truly  capable  minds  are  distinguished
by  a  character  of  decision  and  definiteness,  which  means
that  they  are  clear  and  free  from  obscurity.  A  truly  cap-
able mind  always 'knows  definitely  and  clearly  what  it  is
that  it  wants  to  express,  whether  its  medium  is  prose,
verse,  or  music.  Other  minds  are  not  decisive  and  not-
definite;  and  by  this  they  may  be  known  for  what  they
are.

The  characteristic  sign  of  a  mind  of  the  highest  order  ii
that  it  always  judges  at  first  hand.  Everything  it  ad*
vances  is  the  result  of  thinking  for  itself;  and  this  is  every*
where  evident  by  the  way  in  which  it  gives  its  thoughts
utterance.  Such  a  mind  is  like  a  prince.  In  the  realm  of
intellect  its  authority  is  imperial,  whereas  the  authority  of
minds  of  a  lower  order  is  delegated  only;  as  may  be  seen
in  their  style,  which  has  no  independent  stamp  of  its  own.

Every  one  who  really  thinks  for  himself  is  so  far  like  a
monarch.  His  position  is  undelegated  and  supreme.  H'S
judgments,  like  royal  decrees,  spring  from  his  own  sover-
eign power  and  proceed  directly  from  himself.  He  ac-
knowledges authority  as  little  as  a  monarch  admits  a  com-
mand; he  subscribes  to  nothing  but  what  he  has  himself
authorized.  The  multitude  of  common  minds,  laboring
under  all  sorts  of  current  opinions,  authorities,  prejudices,
is  like  the  people,  which  silently  obeys  the  law  and  accepts
orders  from  above.

Those  who  are  so  zealous  and  eager  to  settle  debated
questions  by  citing  authorities,  are  really  glad  when  they
are  able  to  put  the  understanding  and  the  insight  of  others
into  the  field  in  place  of  their  own,  which  are  wanting.
Their  number  is  legion.  For,  as  Seneca  says,  there  is  no
man  but  prefers  belief  to  the  exercise  of  judgment — unus-
quisque  mavult  credere  quam  judicare.  In  their  contro-
versies such  people  make  a  promiscuous  use  of  the  weapon
of  authority,  and  strike  out  at  one  another  with  it.  If  any
one  chances  to  become  involved  in  such  a  contest,  he  will
do  well  not  to  try  reason  and  argument  as  a  mode  of  de-
fense; for  against  a  weapon  of  that  kind  these  people  are
.like  Siegfrieds,  with  a  skin  of  horn,  and  dipped  in  the  flood


ON  THINKING  FOR  OXES  SELF.  329

of  incapacity  fcr  thinking  and  judging.  They  will  meet
Ins  attack  by  bringing  up  their  authorities  as  a  way  of
abashing  him — argumentum  ad  verecundia?n,  and  then  cry
out  that  they  have  won  the  battle.

In  the  real  world,  be  it  never  so  fair,  favorable  and  pleas-
ant, we  always  live  subject  to  the  law  of  gravity,  which  we
have  to  be  constantly  overcoming.  But  in  the  world  of
intellect  we  are  disembodied  spirits,  held  in  bondage  to  no
such  law,  and  free  from  penury  and  distress.  Thus  it  is
that  there  exists  no  happiness  on  earth  like  that  which,  at
the  auspicious  moment,  a  fine  and  fruitful  mind  finds  in
itself.

The  presence  of  a  thought  is  like  the  presence  of  a
woman  we  love.  We  fancy  we  shall  never  forget  the
thought  nor  become  indifferent  to  the  dear  one.  But  out
of  sight,  out  of  mind!  The  finest  thought  runs  the  risk
of  being  irrevocably  forgotten  if  we  do  not  write  it  down,
and  the  darling  of  being  deserted  if  we  do  not  marry  her.

There  are  plenty  of  thoughts  which  are  valuable  to  the
man  who  thinks  them;  but  oidy  few  of  them  which  have
enough  strength  to  produce  repercussive  or  reflex  action —
I  mean,  to  win  the  reader's  sympathy  after  they  have  been
put  on  paper.

But  still  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  a  true  value
attaches  only  to  what  a  man  has  thought  in  the  first  in-
stance for  his  own  case.  Thinkers  may  be  classed  according
as  they  think  chiefly  for  their  own  case  or  for  that  of  others.
The  former  are  the  genuine  independent  thinkers;  they
really  think  and  are  really  independent;  they  are  the  true
philosophers;  they  alone  are  in  earnest.  The  pleasure  and
the  happiness  of  their  existence  consist  in  thinking.  The
others  are  the  sophists;  they  want  to  seem  that  which  they
are  not,  and  seek  their  happiness  in  what  they  hope  to  get
from  the  world.  They  are  in  earnest  about  nothing  else.
To  which  of  these  two  classes  a  man  belongs  may  be  seen
by  his  whole  style  and  manner.  Lichtenberg  is  an  example
for  the  former  class;  Herder,  there  can  be  no  doubt,  be-
longs to  the  second.

When  one  considers  how  vast  and  how  close  to  us  is  the
problem  of  existence — this  equivocal,  tortured,  fleeting,
dream-like  existence  of  ours — so  vast  and  so  close  that  a
man  no  sooner  discovers  it  than  it  overshadows  and  obscures
all  other  problems  and  aims;  and  when  one  sees  how  all


330  THE  ART  OF  LI  TEN  A  TURE.

men,  with  few  and  rare  exceptions,  have  no  clear  conscious
ness  of  the  problem,  nay,  seem  to  be  quite  unaware  of  its
presence,  but  busy  themselves  with  everything  rather  than
with  this,  and  live  on,  taking  no  thought  but  for  the  pass-
ing day  and  the  hardly  longer  span  of  their  own  personal
future,  either  expressly  discarding  the  problem  or  else
over-ready  to  come  to  terms  with  it  by  adopting  some  sys-
tem of  popular  metaphysics  and  letcing  it  satisfy  them;
when,  I  say,  one  takes  all  this  to  heart,  one  may  come  to  the
opinion  that  man  may  be  said  to  be  a  thinking  being  only
in  a  very  remote  sense,  and  henceforth  feel  no  special  sur-
prise at  any  trait  of  human  thoughtlessnes  or  folly;  but
know,  rather,  that  the  normal  man's  intellectual  range  of
vision  does  indeed  extend  beyond  that  of  the  brute,  whose
whole  existence  is,  as  it  were,  a  continual  present,  with  no
consciousness  of  the  past  or  the  future,  but  not  such  an
immeasurable  distance  as  is  generally  supposed.

This  is,  in  fact,  corroborated  by  the  way  in  which  most
men  converse;  where  their  thoughts  are  found  to  be
chopped  up  fine,  like  chaff,  so  that  for  them  to  spin  out  a
discourse  of  any  length  is  impossible.

If  this  world  were  peopled  by  really  thinking  beings,  it
could  never  be  that  the  noise  of  every  kind  would  be
allowed  such  generous  limits,  as  in  the  case  with  the  most
horrible  and  at  the  same  time  aimless  form  of  it.*  Jf  na-
ture had  meant  man  to  think,  she  would  not  have  given
him  ears:  or,  at  any  rate,  she  would  have  furnished  them
with  air-tight  flaps,  such  as  are  the  enviable  possession  of  the
bat.  But,  in  truth,  man  is  a  poor  animal  like  the  rest,  and
his  powers  are  meant  only  to  maintain  him  in  the  struggle
for  existence;  so  he  must  needs  keep  his  ears  always  open,
to  announce  of  themselves,  by  night  as  by  day,  the  ap-
proach of  the  pursuer.


ON  SOME  FOxvMS  OF  LITERATURE.

In  the  drama  which  is  the  most  perfect  reflection  oi
Human  existence,  there  are  three  stages  in  the  presentation
of  the  subject,  with  a  corresponding  variety  in  the  design
and  scope  of  the  piece.

*  Translator's  note. — Schopenhauer  refers  to  the  cracking  of
•thins.     Seethe  essay  "  On  Noise"  in  "  Studies  in  Pessimism."


ON  SOME  FORMS  OF  LITER  A  TV  HE.  33 1

At  the  first,  which  is  also  the  most  common  stage,  the
4rama  is  never  anything  more  than  merely  interesting.
The  persons  gain  our  attention  by  following  their  own  aims
which  resemble  ours;  the  action  advances  by  means  of  in-
trigue and  the  play  of  character  and  incident;  while  wit
and  raillery  season  the  whole.  .

At  the  second  stage,  the  drama  becomes  sentimental.
Sympathy  is  roused  with  the  hero,  and,  indirectly,  with
ourselves.  The  action  takes  a  pathetic  turn;  but  the  end  is
peaceful  and  satisfactory.

The  climax  is  reached  with  the  third  stage,  which  is  the
most  difficult.  There  the  drama  aims  at  being  tragic.  We
are  brought  face  to  face  with  great  suffering  and  the  storm
and  stress  of  existence;  and  the  outcome  of  it  is  to  show
the  vanity  of  all  human  effort.  Deeply  moved,  we  are
either  directly  prompted  to  disengage  our  will  from  the
struggle  of  life,  or  else  a  chord  is  struck  in  us  which  echoes
a  similar  feeling.

The  beginning,  it  is  said,  is  always  difficult.  In  the
drama  it  is  just  the  contrary;  for  there  the  difficulty  always
lies  in  the  end.  This  is  proved  by  countless  plays  which
promise  very  well  for  the  first  act  or  two,  and  then  become
muddled,  stick  or  falter — notoriously  so  in  the  fourth  act —
and  finally  conclude  in  a  way  that  is  either  forced  or
unsatisfactory  or  else  long  foreseen  by  every  one.  Some-
times, too,  the  end  is  positively  revolting,  as  in  Les-
sing's  "  Emilia  Galotti,"  which  sends  the  spectators  home
in  a  temper.

This  difficulty  in  regard  to  the  end  of  a  play  arises
partly  because  it  is  everywhere  easier  to  get  things  into  a
tangle  than  to  get  them  out  again;  partly  also  because  at
the  beginning  we  give  the  author  carte  blanche  to  do  as  he
likes,  but,  at  the  end,  make  certain  definite  demands  upon
him.  Thus  we  ask  for  a  conclusion  that  shall  be  either
quite  happy  or  else  quite  tragic;  whereas  human  affairs  do
not  easily  take  so  decided  a  turn;  and  then  we  expect  that
it  shall  be  natural,  fit  and  proper,  unlabored,  and  at  the
same  time  foreseen  by  no  one.

These  remarks  are  also  applicable  to  an  epic  and  to  a
novel;  but  the  more  compact  nature  of  the  drama  makee
the  difficulty  plainer  by  increasing  it.

E  nihilo  nihil  fit.     That  nothing  can  come  from  nothio£


332  THE  ART  OF  LITERATURE.

is  a  maxim  true  in  fine  art  as  elsewhere.  In  composing  an
historical  picture,  a  good  artist  will  use  living  men  as  a
model,  and  take  the  ground  work  of  the  faces  from  life;  and
then  proceed  to  idealize  them  in  point  of  beauty  or  ex-
pression. A  similar  method,  I  fancy,  is  adopted  by  good
novelists.  In  drawing  a  character  they  take  the  general
outline  of  it  from  some  real  person  of  their  acquaint-
ance, and  then  idealize  and  complete  it  to  suit  their
purpose.

A  novel  will  be  of  a  high  and  noble  order,  the  more  it
represents  of  inner,  and  the  less  it  represents  of  outer,  life;
and  the  ratio  between  the  two  will  supply  a  means  of  judg-
ing any  novel,  of  whatever  kind,  from"  Tristram  Shandy"
down  to  the  crudest  and  most  sensational  tale  of  knight  or
robber.  "Tristram  Shandy"  has,  indeed,  as  good  as  no  action
at  all;  and  there  is  not  much  in  "  La  Nouvelle  Ileloise  "  and
"  Wilhelm  Meister."  Even  "  Don  Quixote  "  has  relatively
little;  and  what  there  is,  is  very  unimportant,  and  intro-
duced merely  for  the  sake  of  fun.  And  these  four  are  the
best  of  all  existing  novels.

Consider,  further,  the  wonderful  romances  of  Jean  Paul,
and  how  much  inner  life  is  shown  on  the  narrowest  basis
of  actual  event.  Even  in  Walter  Scott's  novels  there  is  a
great  preponderance  of  inner  over  outer  life,  and  incident
is  never  brought  in  except  for  the  purpose  of  giving  play
to  thought  and  emotion;  whereas,  in  bad  novels,  incident
is  there  on  its  own  account.  Skill  consists  in  setting  the
inner  life  in  motion  with  the  smallest  possible  array  of  cir-
cumstances, for  it  is  this  inner  life  that  realh  excites  our
interest.

The  business  of  the  novelist  is  not  to  relate  great  events,
but  to  make  small  ones  interesting.

History,  which  I  like  to  think  of  as  the  contrary  of
poetry  (i6ropov/ievov — itETtoirjuivov),  is  for  time  what  geogra*
phy  is  for  space;  and  it  is  no  more  to  be  called  a  science,
in  any  strict  sense  of  the  word,  than  is  geography,  because
it  does  not  deal  with  universal  truths,  but  only  with  par-
ticular  details.*     History    has   always   been    the   favorite

*  Translator  s  Note.  —  This  line  of  argument  is  not  likely  to  be
popular  nowadays,  but  if  the  reader  is  interested  by  it,  he  will  find
it  more  fully  stated  in  "  Die  WeJt  "Is  Wille  und  Vorstellung,"  VoL
II.,  c.  38.


OK  SOME  FORMS  OF  LITERATUHE.  333

study  of  those  who  wish  to  learn  something,  without  hav-
ing to  face  the  effort  demanded  by  any  branch  of  real  knowl-
edge, which  taxes  the  intelligence.  In  our  time  history  is
a  favorite  pursuit;  as  witness  the  numerous  books  upon
the  subject  which  appear  every  year.

If  the  reader  cannot  help  thinking,  with  me,  that  history
is  merely  the  constant  recurrence  of  similar  things,  just  as
in  a  kaleidoscope  the  same  bits  of  glass  are  presented,  but
in  different  combinations,  he  will  not  be  able  to  share  all
this  lively  interest;  nor,  however,  will  he  censure  it.  But
there  is  a  ridiculous  and  absurd  claim,  made  by  many  peo-
ple, to  regard  history  as  ^  part  of  philosophy,  nay,  as  phi-
losophy itself;  they  imagine  that  history  can  take  its  place.

The  preference  shown  for  history  by  the  greater  public
in  all  ages  may  be  illustrated  by  the  kind  of  conversation
which  is  so  much  in  vogue  everywhere  in  society.  It  gen-
erally consists  in  one  person  relating  something  and  then
another  person  relating  something  else;  so  that  in  this  way
every  one  is  sure  of  receiving  attention.  Both  here  and  in
the  case  of  history  it  is  plain  that  the  mind  is  occupied
with  particular  details.  But  as  in  science,  so  also  in  every
worthy  conversation,  the  mind  rises  to  the  consideration
of  some  general  truth.

This  objection  does  not,  howewr,  deprive  history  of  its
vilr.e.  Human  life  is  short  am.  Meeting,  and  many  mil-
lions of  individuals  share  in  it.  who  are  swallowed  by  that
monster  of  oblivion  which  is  waiting  for  them  with  ever-
open  jaws.  It  is  thus  a  very  thankworthy  task  to  try  to
rescue  something — the  memory  of  interesting  and  impor-
tant events,  of  the  leading  features  and  personages  of  some
epoch — from  the  general  shipwreck  of  the  world.

From  another  point  of  view,  we  might  look  upon  history
as  the  sequel  to  zoology;  for  while  with  all  other  animals
it  is  enough  to  observe  the  species,  with  man  individuals,
and  therefore  individual  events,  have  to  be  studied;  be-
cause every  man  possesses  a  character  of  an  individual.
And  since  individuals  and  events  are  without  number  or
end,  an  essential  imperfection  attaches  to  history.  In  the
study  of  it,  all  that  a  man  learns  never  contributes  to
lessen  that  which  he  has  still  to  learn.  With  any  real
science,  a  perfection  of  knowledge  is,  at  any  rate,  conceiv-
able.

When  we  gain   access  to  the   histories  of   China   and  of


334  THE  ART  OF  LITERATURE.

India,  the  endlessness  of  the  subject-matter  will  reveal  to
us  the  defects  in  the  study,  and  force  our  historians  to  see
that  the  object  of  science  is  to  recognize  the  many  in  the
one,  to  perceive  the  rules  in  any  given  example,  and  to
apply  to  the  life  of  nations  a  knowledge  of  mankind;  not
to  go  on  counting  up  facts  ad  infinitum.

There  are  two  kinds  of  history;  the  history  of  politics
and  the  history  of  literature  and  art.  The  one  is  the  his-
tory of  the  will;  the  other,  that  of  the  intellect.  The  first
is  a  tale  of  woe,  even  of  terror:  it  is  a  record  of  agony,
struggle,  fraud,  and  horrible  murder  en  masse.  The
second  is  everywhere  pleasing  and  serene,  like  the  intellect
when  left  to  itself,  even  though  its  path  be  one  of  error.
Its  chief  branch  is  the  history  of  philosophy.  This  is,  in
fact,  its  fundamental  base,  and  the  notes  of  it  are  heard
even  in  the  other  kind  of  history.  These  deep  tones  guide
the  formation  of  opinion,  and  opinion  rules  the  world.
Hence  philosophy,  rightly  understood,  is  a  material  force
of  the  most  powerful  kind,  though  very  slow  in  its  work-
ing. The  philosophy  of  a  period  is  thus  the  fundamental
base  of  its  history.

The  newspaper  is  the  second-hand  in  the  clock  of  his-
tory; and  it  is  not  only  made  of  baser  metal  than  those
which  point  to  the  minute  and  the  hour,  but  it  seldom
goes  right.

The  so-called  leading  article  is  the  chorus  to  the  drama
of  passing  events.

Exaggeration  of  every  kind  is  as  essential  to  journalism
as  it  is  to  the  dramatic  art;  for  the  object  of  journalism  is
to  make  events  go  as  far  as  possible.  Thus  it  is  that  all
journalists  are,  in  the  very  nature  of  their  calling,  alarm-
ists; and  this  is  their  way  of  giving  interest  to  what  they
write.  Herein  they  are  like  little  dogs;  if  anything  stirs,
they  immediately  set  up  a  shrill  bark.

Therefore,  let  us  carefully  regulate  the  attention  to  be
paid  to  this  trumpet  of  danger,  so  that  it  may  not  disturb
our  digestion.  Let  us  recognize  that  a  newspaper  is  at
best  but  a  magnifying-glass,  and  very  often  merely  a
shadow  on  the  wall.

The  pen  is  to  thought  what  the  stick  is  to  walking;  but
you  walk   most  easily  when  you  have  no  stick,  and  .you


ON  SOME  FORMS  OF  LITERATURE.  335

think  with  the  greatest  perfection  when  you  have  no  pen
in  your  hand.  It  is  only  when  a  man  begins  to  be  old  that
he  likes  to  use  a  stick  and  is  glad  to  take  up  his  pen.

When  an  hypothesis  has  once  come  to  birth  in  the  mind,
or  gained  a  footing  there,  it  leads  a  life  so  far  comparable
with  the  life  of  an  organism,  as  that  it  assimilates  matter
from  the  outer  world  only  when  it  is  like  in  kind  witli  it
and  beneficial;  and  when,  contrariiy,  such  matter  is  not
like  in  kind  but  hurtful,  the  hypothesis,  equally  with  the
organism,  throws  it  off,  or,  if  forced  to  take  it,  gets  rid  of
it  again  entire.

To  gain  immortality  an  author  must  possess  so  many
excellences  that,  while  it  will  not  be  easy  to  find  any  one
to  understand  and  appreciate  them  all,  there  will  be  men
in  every  age  who  are  able  to  recognize  and  value  some  of
them.  In  this  way  the  credit  of  his  book  will  be  main-
tained throughout  the  long  course  of  centuries,  in  spite  of
the  fact  that  human  interests  are  always  changing.

An  author  like  this,  who  has  a  claim  to  the  continuance
of  his  life  even  with  posterity,  can  only  be  a  man  who,
over  the  wide  earth,  will  seek  his  like  in  vain,  and  offer  a
palpable  contrast  with  every  one  else  in  virtue  of  his  un-
mistakable distinction.  Nay  more:  were  he,  like  the  wan-
dering Jew,  to  live  through  several  generations,  he  would
still  remain  in  the  same  superior  position.  If  this  were
not  so,  it  would  be  difficult  to  see  why  his  thoughts  should
not  perish  like  those  of  other  men.

Metaphors  and  similes  are  of  great  value,  in  so  far  as
Miey  explain  an  unknown  relation  by  a  known  one.  Even
Hie  more  detailed  smile  which  grows  into  a  parable  or  an
allegory,  is  nothing  more  than  the  exhibition  of  some  re-
lation in  its  simplest,  most  visible  and  palpable  fovm.
The  growth  of  ideas  rests,  at  bottom,  upon  similes;  be-
cause ideas  arise  by  a  process  of  combining  the  similarities
and  neglecting  the  differences  between  things.  Further,
intelligence,  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word,  ultimately
consists  in  a  seizing  of  relations;  and  a  clear  and  pure
grasp  of  relations  is  all  the  more  often  attained  when  the
comparison  is  made  between  cases  that  lie  wide  apart  from
one  another,  and  between  things  of  quite  different  nature.
As  long  as  a  relation  is  known  to  me  as  existing  only  in  a


336  THE  ART  OF  LITERATURE.

single  case,  I  have  none  but  an  individual  idea  of  it — in
other  words,  only  an  intuitive  or  perceptive  knowledge  of
it;  but  as  soon  as  I  see  the  same  relation  in  two  different
cases,  I  have  a  general  idea  of  its  whole  nature,  and  this  i£
a  deeper  and  more  perfect  knowledge.

Since,  then,  similes  and  metaphors  are  such  a  powerful
engine  of  knowledge,  it  is  a  sign  of  great  intelligence  in  a
writer  if  bis  similes  are  unusual  and,  at  tbe  same  time,  tc
the  point.  Aristotle  also  observes  tbat  by  far  the  most
important  thing  to  a  writer  is  to  have  this  power  of  meta-
phor; for  it  is  a  gift  which  cannot  be  acquired,  and  it  is  a
mark  of  genius.*

As  regards  reading,  to  require  that  a  man  shall  retain
everything  he  has  ever  read,  is  like  asking  him  to  carry
about  with  him  all  he  has  ever  eaten.  The  one  kind  of
food  has  given  him  bodily,  and  the  other  mental  nourish-
ment; and  it  is  through  these  two  means  that  he  has  grown
to  be  what  he  is.  The  body  assimilates  only  that  which  is
like  it;  and  so  a  man  retains  in  his  mind  only  that  which
interests  him,  in  other  words,  that  which  suits  his  system
of  thought  or  his  purposes  in  life.  Every  one  has  pur-
poses, no  doubt;  but  very  few  have  anything  like  a  system
of  thought.  Few  people  take  an  objective  interest  in  any-
thing, and  so  their  reading  does  them  no  good;  they  retain
nothing.

If  a  man  wants  to  read  good  books,  he  must  make
a  point  of  avoiding  bad  ones;  for  life  is  short,  and  time
and  energy  limited.

Repetitio  est  mater  studiorum.  Any  book  that  is  at
all  important  ought  to  be  at  once  read  through  twice;
partly  because,  on  a  second  reading,  the  connection  of  the
different  portions  of  the  book  will  be  better  understood,
and  the  beginning  comprehended  only  when  the  end  is
known;  and  partly  because  we  are  not  in  the  same
temper  and  disposition  on  both  readings.  On  the  second
perusal  we  get  a  new  view  of  every  passage  and  a  different
impression  of  the  whole  book,  which  then  appears  in
another  light.

It  would  be  a  good  thing  to  buy  books  if  one  could  also
buy  the  time  in  which  to  read  them;  but  generally  the  pur-

*"  Poetics,"  c.  22.


vitf  CRITICISM.  33?

chase  of  a  book  is  mistaken  for  the  acquisition  of  its  con-
tents.

A  man's  works  are  the  quintessence  of  his  mind,
and  even  though  he  may  possess  very  great  capacity  the)'
will  always  be  incomparably  more  valuable  than  his  con-
versation. Nay,  in  all  essential  matters  his  works  will  not
only  make  up  for  the  lack  of  personal  intercourse  with
him.  but  they  will  far  surpass  it  in  solid  advantages.  The
writings  even  of  a  man  of  moderate  genius  may  be  edify-
ing, worth  reading  and  instructive,  because  they  are  his
quintessence — the  result  and  fruit  of  all  his  thought  and
study;  while  conversation  with  him  may  be  unsatis-
factory.

So  it  is  that  we  can  read  books  by  men  in  whose  company
we  find  nothing  to  please,  and  that  a  high  degree  of  cul-
ture leads  us  to  seek  entertainment  almost  wholly  from
books  and  not  from  men.


ON  CRITICISM.

The  following  brief  remarks  on  the  critical  faculty  are
chiefly  intended  to  show  that,  for  the  most  part,  there  is
no  such  thing.  It  is  a  vara  avis;  almost  as  rare,  indeed,
as  the  phoenix,  which  appears  ordy  once  in  five  hundred
years.

When  we  speak  of  taste — an  expression  not  chosen
with  any  regard  for  it — we  mean  the  discovery,  or,  it  may
be  only  the  recognition,  of  what  is  right  aesthetically,
apart  from  the  guidance  of  any  rule;  and  this,  either
because  no  rule  has  as  yet  been  extended  to  the  matter  in
question,  or  else  because,  if  existing,  it  is  unknown  to  the
artist,  or  the  critic,  as  the  case  may  be.  Instead  of  taste,
we  might  use  the  expression  aesthetic  sense,  if  this  were  not
tautological.

The  perceptive  critical  taste  is,  so  to  speak,  the  female
analogue  to  the  male  quality  of  productive  talent  or  genius.
Not  capable  of  begetting  great  work  itself,  it  consists  in  a
capacity  of  reception,  that  is  to  say,  of  recognizing  as  such
what  is  right,  fit,  beautiful,  or  the  reverse;  in  other  words,
of  discriminating  the  good  from  the  bad,  of  discovering
and  appreciating  the  one  and  condemning  the  other.

In  appreciating  a  genius,  criticism  should  not  deal  with


338  THE  ART  OF  LITERATURE.

the  errors  in  his  productions  or  with  the  poorer  of  his
works,  and  then  proceed  to  rate  him  low;  it  should  attend
outy  to  the  qualities  in  which  he  most  excels.  For  in  the
sphere  of  intellect,  as  in  other  spheres,  weakness  and  per-
rersity  cleave  so  firmly  to  human  nature  that  even  the
;iiost  brilliant  mind  is  not  wholly  and  at  all  times  free  from
fthem.  Hence  the  great  errors  to  be  found  even  in  the
vorks  of  the  greatest  men;  or  as  Horace  puts  it,  quandoque
''tonus  dormitat  Homerus.

That  which  distinguishes  genius,  and  should  be  the
fetandard  for  judging  it,  is  the  height  to  which  it  is  able  to
eoar  when  it  is  in  the  proper  mood  and  finds  a  fitting
occasion — a  height  always  out  of  the  reach  of  ordinary
talent.  And,  in  like  manner,  it  is  a  very  dangerous  thing
to  compare  two  great  men  of  the  same  class;  for  instance,
two  great  poets,  or  musicians,  or  philosophers,  or  artists;
because  injustice  to  the  one  or  the  other,  at  least  for  the
moment,  can  hardly  be  avoided.  For  in  making  a  com-
parison of  the  kind  the  critic  looks  to  some  particular
merit  of  the  one  and  at  once  discovers  that  it  is  absent  in
the  other,  who  is  thereby  disparaged.  And  then  if  the
process  is  reversed,  and  the  critic  begins  with  the  latter
and  discovers  his  peculiar  merit,  which  is  quite  of  a  differ-
ent order  from  that  presented  by  the  former,  with  whom
it  may  be  looked  for  in  vain,  the  result  is  that  both  of  them
suffer  undue  depreciation.

There  are  critics  who  severally  think  that  it  rests  with
each  one  of  them  what  shall  be  accounted  good,  and  what
bad.  They  all  mistake  their  own  toy-trumpets  for  the
trombones  of  fame.

A  drug  does  not  effect  its  purpose  if  the  dose  is  too  large;
and  it  is  the  same  with  censure  and  adverse  criticism  when
it  exceeds  the  measure  of  justice.

The  disastrous  thing  for  intellectual  merit  is  that  it
must  wa/t  for  those  to  praise  the  good  who  have  them-
selves produced  nothing  but  what  is  bad;  nay,  it  is  a
primary  misfortune  that  it  has  to  receive  its  crown  at  the
hands  of  the  critical  power  of  mankind — a  quality  of
which  most  men  possess  only  the  weak  and  impotent  sem-
blance, so  that  the  reality  may  be  numbered  among  the
rarest  gifts  of  nature.  Hence  La  Bruveie's  remark  is,  un-
happily, as  true  as  it  is  neat.  "Apres  V esprit  de  discerne-
vrent"  he  says,  "  ce  qn'il  y  a  au  monde  de  plus  rare,  ce  sont


ON  CRITICISM.  339

le»  diamanset  les  perles."  The  spirit  of  discernment!  the
critical  faculty!  it  is  these  that  are  lacking.  Men  do  not
know  how  to  distinguish  the  genuine  from  the  false,  the
corn  from  the  chaff,  gold  from  copper;  or  to  perceive  the
wide  gulf  that  separates  a  genius  from  an  ordinary  man.
Thus  we  have  that  bad  state  of  tilings  described  in  an  old-
fashioned  verse,  which  gives  it  as  the  lot  of  the  great  ones
nere  on  earth  to  be  recognized  only  when  they  are  gone:

"Es  ist  nuui  das  Gescbick  der  Grossen  bier  auf  Erden,
Erst  vvann  sie  nicht  melir  sind.  von  uns  erkannt  zu  werden."

When  any  genuine  and  excellent  work  makes  its  ap-
pearance, the  chief  difficulty  in  its  way  is  the  amount  of
bad  work  it  finds  already  in  possession  of  the  field,  and
accepted  as  though  it  were  good.  And  then  if,  after  a
long  time,  the  new-comer  really  succeeds,  by  a  hard
struggle,  in  vindicating  his  place  for  himself  and  winning
reputation,  he  will  soon  encounter  fresh  difficulty  from
some  affected,  dull,  awkward  imitator,  whom  people  drag
in,  with  the  object  of  calmly  setting  him  up  on  the  altar
beside  the  genius,  not  seeing  the  difference  and  really
thinking  that  here  they  have  to  do  with  another  great  man.
This  is  what  Yriarte  means  by  the  first  lines  of  his  28th
Fable,  where  he  declares  that  the  ignorant  rabble  always
sets  equal  value  on  the  good  and  the  bad:

"  Sienipre  acost  umbra  bacer  el  vulgo  necio
De  lo  bueno  y  lo  nialo  igual  aprecio."

So  even  Shakespeare's  dramas  had,  immediately  after  his
death,  to  give  place  to  those  of  Ben  Jonson,  Massinger,
Beaumont  and  Fletcher,  and  to  yield  the  supremacy  for  a
hundred  years.  So  Kant's  serious  philosophy  was  crowded
out  by  the  nonsense  of  Fichte,  Schelling,  Jacobi,  Hegel.
And  even  in  a  sphere  accessible  to  all,  we  have  seen  un-
worthy imitators  quickly  diverting  public  attention  from
the  incomparable  Walter  Scott.  For,  say  what  you  will,
the  public  has  no  sense  for  excellence,  and  therefore  no
notion  how  very  rare  it  is  to  find  men  really  capable  of
doing  anything  great  in  poetry,  philosophy,  or  art,  or  that
their  works  are  alone  worthy  of  exclusive  attention.  The
dabblers.,  whether  in   verse   or   in   any  other  high  sphere,


340  THE  A  RT  OF  LITER  A  TURfi.

should  be  every  day  unsparingly  reminded  that  neither
gods,  nor  men,  nor  booksellers  have  pardoned  their  me-
diocrity:

"  Mediocri bus  esse  poetis
Non  homines,  non  Di,  non  concessere  coluinnae."  *

Are  they  not  the  weeds  that  prevent  the  corn  coming  up,
so  that  they  may  cover  all  the  ground  themselves?  And
then  there  happens  that  which  has  been  well  and  freshly
described  by  the  lamented  Feuchterslebeii,f  who  died  so
young:  how  people  cry  out  in  their  haste  that  nothing  is
being  done,  while  all  the  wrhile  great  work  is  quietly
growing  to  maturity;  and  then,  when  it  appears,  it  is  not
seen  or  heard  in  the  clamor,  but  goes  its  way  silently,  in
modest  grief:

"  1st  docli" — rufun  sie  vermessen —
"  Nichts  im  Werke,  nicbts  getban!  "

Und  das  Grosse,  reift  indessen

Still  lieran.

"  Es  erscbeint  nun:  nieinand  sieht  es,
Nieinand  bort  es  im  Gesclirei.
Mit  bescheid'ner  Trauer  zieht  es
Still  vorbei."

This  lamentable  dearth  of  the  critical  faculty  is  not  less
obvious  in  the  case  of  science,  as  is  shown  by  the  tenacious
life  of  false  and  disproved  theories.  If  they  are  once  aC'
cepted,  they  may  go  on  bidding  defiance  to  truth  for  fifty
or  even  a  hundred  years  and  more,  as  stable  as  an  iron  pier
in  the  midst  of  the  waves.  The  Ptolemaic  system  was
still  held  a  century  after  Copernicus  had  promulgated  his
theory.  Bacon,  Descartes  and  Locke  made  their  way  ex-
tremely slowly  and  only  after  a  long  time;  as  the  reader
may  see  by  D'Alembert's  celebrated  Preface  to  the  "  En-
cyclopaedia." Newton  was  not  more  successful;  and  this
is  sufficiently  proved  by  the  bitterness  and  contempt  with

*  Horace,  "Ars  Poetica,"  372.

f  Translator's  Note  Ernst  Freiberr  von  Feucbtersleben  (1806-49),
an  Austrian  pbysician,  pbilosopber.  and  poet,  and  a  specialist
in  medical  psycbology.  Tbe  best  known  of  bis  songs  is  tbat
beginning  "  Es  ist  bestimmt  in  Gottes  Rath,"  to  wbicb  Mendelssobn
composed  one  of  bis  finest  melodic


ON  CRITICISM.  341

which  Leibnitz  attacked  his  tbeory  of  gravitation  in  tbe
controversy  with  Clarke.*  Although  Newton  lived  for
almost  forty  years  after  tbe  appearance  of  the  "  Principia,"
his  teaching  was,  when  he  died,  only  to  some  extent  ac-
cepted in  his  own  country,  while  outside  England  he
counted  scarcely  twenty  adherents;  if  we  may  believe  tbe
introductory  note  to  Voltaire's  exposition  of  his  theory.
It  was,  indeed,  chiefly  owing  to  this  treatise  of  Voltaire's
that  the  system  became  known  in  France  nearly  twenty
years  after  Newton's  death.  Until  then  a  firm,  resolute,
and  patriotic  stand  was  made  by  the  Cartesian  "  Vortices;"
while  only  forty  years  previously,  this  same  Cartesian  phi-
losophy had  been  forbidden  in  the  French  schools;  and
now  in  turn  d'Agnesseau,  the  chancellor,  refused  Voltaire
the  "  Imprimatur"  for  his  treatise  on  the  Newtonian  doc-
trine. On  the  other  hand,  in  our  day  Newton's  absurd
theory  of  color  still  completely  holds  the  field,  forty  }~ea"S
after  the  publication  of  Goethe's.  Hume,  too,  was  disre-
garded up  to  his  fiftieth  year,  though  he  began  very  early
and  wrote  in  a  thoroughly  popular  style.  And  Kant,  in
spite  of  having  written  and  talked  all  his  life  long,  did  not
become  a  famous  man  until  he  was  sixty.

Artists  and  poets  have,  to  be  sure,  more  chance  than
thinkers,  because  their  public  is  at  least  a  hundred  times  as
large.  Still,  what  was  thought  of  Beethoven  and  Mozart
during  their  lives?  what  of  Dante?  what  even  of  Shake-
speare? If  the  latter's  contemporaries  had  in  any  way  recog-
nized his  worth,  at  least  one  good  and  accredited  portrait
of  him  would  have  come  down  to  us  from  an  age  when  the
art  of  painting  flourished;  whereas  we  possess  only  some
very  doubtful  pictures,  a  bad  copperplate,  and  a  still
worse  bust  on  his  tomb.*  And  in  like  manner,  if  he  had
been  duly  honored,  specimens  of  his  handwriting  would
have  been  preserved  to  us  by  the  hundred,  instead  of  being
confined,  as  is  the  case,  to  the  signatures  to  a  few  legal
documents.  The  Portuguese  are  still  proud  of  their  only
poet  Camoens.  He  lived,  however,  on  alms  coliected  every
evening  in    the   street  by  a  black    slave    whom    he    had

*See  especially  §§  35,  113,  118,  120,  122,  128.

*A.  Wivell.  "  An  Inquiry  into  the  History,  Authenticity,  and
Characteristics  of  Shakespeare's  Portraits;"  with  21  engravings
London,  1836.


342  THE  ART  OF  LITERATURE.

brought  with  him  from  the  Indies.  In  time,  no  doubt,
justice  will  be  done  to  every  one;  tempo  e  galanf  uomoj
but  it  as  late  and  slow  in  arriving  as  in  a  court  of  law,  and
the  secret  condition  of  it  is  that  the  recipient  shall  be  no
J.onger  alive.  The  precept  of  Jesus  the  son  of  Sirach  is
faithfully  followed:  "Judge  none  blessed  before  his
death.''*  He,  then,  who  has  produced  immortal  works,
must  find  comfort  by  applying  to  them  the  words  of
the  Indian  myth,  that  the  minutes  of  life  among  the  im-
mortals seem  like  years  of  earthly  existence;  and  so,  too,
that  years  upon  earth  are  only  as  the  minutes  of  the  im-
mortals.

This  lack  of  critical  insight  is  also  shown  by  the  fact
that,  while  in  every  century  the  excellent  work  of  earlier
time  is  held  in  honor,  that  of  its  own  is  misunderstood,
and  the  attention  which  is  its  due  is  given  to  bad  work,
such  as  every  decade  carries  with  it  only  to  be  the  sport  of
the  next.  That  men  are  slow  to  recognize  genuine  merit
when  it  appears  in  their  own  age,  also  proves  that  they  do
not  understand  or  enjoy  or  really  value  the  long-acknowl-
edged works  of  genius,  which  they  honor  only  on  the  score
of  authority.  The  crucial  test  is  the  fact  that  bad  work —
Fichte's  philosophy,  for  example — if  it  wins  any  reputation,
also  maintains  it  for  one  or  two  generations;  and  only  when
its  public  is  very  large  does  its  fall  follow  sooner.

Now,  just  as  the  sun  cannot  shed  its  light  but  to  the  eye
that  sees  it,  nor  music  sound  but  to  the  hearing  ear,  so  the
value  of  all  masterly  work  in  art  and  science  is  conditioned
by  the  kinship  and  capacity  of  the  mind  to  which  it  speaks.
It  is  only  such  a  mind  as  this  that  possesses  the  magic  word
to  stir  and  call  forth  the  spirits  that  lie  hidden  in  great
work.  To  the  ordinary  mind  a  masterpiece  is  a  sealed
cabinet  of  mystery,  an  unfamiliar  musical  instrument  from
which  the  player,  however  much  he  may  flatter  himself,
can  draw  none  but  confused  tones.  How  different  a  paint-
ing looks  when  seen  in  a  good  light,  instead  of  in  some
dark  corner!  Just  in  the  same  way,  the  impression  made
by  a  masterpiece  varies  with  the  capacity  of  the  mind  to
understand  it.

A  fine  work,  then,  requires  a  mind  sensitive  to  its  beauty,
a  thoughtful  work,  a  mind  that  can  really  think,  if  it  is  to

*  Ecclesiasticus,  xi.  28.


ON  CRITICISM.  343

exist  and  live  at  all.  But  alas!  it  may  happen  only  too
often  that  he  who  gives  a  fine  work  to  the  world  afterward
feels  like  a  maker  of  fireworks,  "who  displays  with  enthu-
siasm the  wonders  that  have  taken  him  so  much  time  and
trouble  to  prepare,  and  then  learns  that  he  has  come  to  the
wrong  place,  and  that  the  fancied  spectators  were  one  and
all  inmates  of  an  asylum  for  the  blind.  Still,  even  that  is
better  than  if  his  public  had  consisted  entirely  of  men  whc»
made  fireworks  themselves;  as  in  this  case,  if  his  display
had  been  extraordinarily  good,  it  might  possibly  have  cost
him  his  head.

The  source  of  all  pleasure  and  delight  is  the  feeling  of
kinship.  Even  with  the  sense  of  beauty  it  is  unquestion-
ably our  own  species  in  the  animal  world,  and  then  again
our  own  race,  that  appears  to  us  the  fairest.  So  too  in
intercourse  with  others,  every  man  shows  a  decided  prefer-
ence for  those  who  resemble  him:  and  a  blockhead  will
find  the  society  of  another  blockhead  incomparably  more
pleasant  than  that  of  any  number  of  great  minds  puf,
together.  Every  man  must  necessarily  take  his  chief
pleasure  in  his  own  work,  because  it  is  the  mirror  of  his
own  mind,  the  echo  of  his  own  thought;  and  next  in  order
will  come  the  work  of  people  like  him;  that  is  to  say,  a
dull,  shallow  and  perverse  man,  a  dealer  in  mere  words,
will  give  his  sincere  and  hearty  applause  only  to  that  which
is  dull,  shallow,  perverse  or  merely  verbose.  On  the  other
hand,  he  will  allow  merit  to  the  work  of  great  minds  only
on  the  score  of  authority,  in  other  words  because  he  is
ashamed  to  speak  his  opinion;  for  in  reality  they  give  him
no  pleasure  at  all.  They  do  not  appeal  to  him;  nay,  they
repel  him;  and  he  will  not  confess  this  even  to  himself.
The  works  of  genius  cannot  be  fully  enjoyed  except  by
those  who  are  themselves  of  the  privileged  order.  The
first  recognition  of  them,  however,  when  they  exist  without
authority  to  support  them,  demands  considerable  superiority
of  mind.

When  the  reader  takes  all  this  into  consideration,  he
should  be  surprised,  not  that  great  work  is  so  late  in  win-
ning reputation  but  that  it  wins  it  at  all.  And  as  a  matter
of  fact,  fame  comes  only  by  a  slow  and  complex  process.
The  stupid  person  is  by  degrees  forced,  and  as  it  were
tamed,  into  recognizing  the  superiority  of  one  who  standb
immediately  above  him:  this  one  in   his  turn   bows  before


344  THE  ART  OF  LlThRATURW.

some  one  else;  and  so  it  goes  on  until  the  weight  of  the
votes  gradually  prevail  over  their  number ;  and  this  is  just
the  condition  of  all  genuine,  in  other  words,  deserved
fame.  But  until  then,  the  greatest  genius,  even  after  he  has
passed  his  time  of  trial,  stands  like  a  king  amid  a  crowd  of
his  own  subjects,  who  do  not  know  him  by  sight  and
therefore  will  not  do  his  behests;  unless,  indeed,  his  chief
ministers  of  state  are  in  his  train.  For  no  subordinate
official  can  be  the  direct  recipient  of  the  royal  commands,
as  he  knows  only  the  signature  of  his  immediate  superior;
and  this  is  repeated  all  the  way  up  into  the  highest  ranks,
where  the  under-secretary  attests  the  minister's  signature,
and  the  minister  that  of  the  king.  There  are  analogous
stages  to  be  passed  before  a  genius  can  attain  widespread
fame.  This  is  why  his  reputation  most  easily  comes  to  a
standstill  at  the  very  outset;  because  the  highest  authori-
ties, of  whom  there  can  be  but  few,  are  most  frequently  not
to  be  found ;  but  the  further  down  he  goes  in  the  scale  the
more  numerous  are  those  who  take  the  word  from  above,
so  that  his  fame  is  no  more  arrested.

We  must  console  ourselves  for  this  state  of  things  by  re-
flecting that  it  is  really  fortunate  that  the  greater  number
of  men  do  not  form  a  judgment  on  their  own  responsibility
but  merely  take  it  on  authority.  For  what  sort  of  criti-
cism should  we  have  on  Plato  and  Kant,  Homer,  Shake-
speare and  Goethe,  if  every  man  were  to  form  his  opinion
by  what  he  really  has  and  enjoys  of  these  writers,  instead
of  being  forced  by  authority  to  speak  of  them  in  a  fit  and
proper  way,  however  little  he  may  really  feel  what  he  says.
Unless  something  of  this  kind  took  place,  it  would  be  im-
possible for  true  merit,  in  any  high  sphere,  to  attain  fame
at  all.  At  the  same  time  it  is  also  fortunate  that  every
man  has  just  so  much  critical  power  of  his  own  as  is  nec-
essary for  recognizing  the  superiority  of  those  who  are
placed  immediately  over  him,  and  for  following  their  lead.
This  means  that  the  many  come  in  the  end  to  submit  to
the  authority  of  the  few;  and  there  results  that  hierarchy
of  critical  judgments  on  which  is  based  the  possibility  of  a
steady,  and  eventually  wide-reaching  fame.

The  lowest  class  in  the  community  is  quite  impervious
to  the  merits  of  a  great  genius ;  and  for  these  people  there
is  nothing  left  but  the  monument  raised  to  him,  which,  by
the  impression  it  produces  on  their  senses,  awakes  in  them


ON  CRITICISM.  345

Literary  journals  should  be  a  dam  against  the  uncon-
scionable scribbling  of  the  age,  and  the  ever-increasing
deluge  of  bad  and  useless  books.  Their  judgments  should
be  uncorrupted,  just  and  rigorous;  and  every  piece  of  bad
work  done  by  an  incapable  person;  every  device  by  which
the  empty  head  tries  to  come  to  the  assistance  of  the  empty
purse,  that  is  to  say,  about  nine-tenths  of  all  existing
books,  should  be  mercilessly  scourged.  Literary  journals
would  then  perform  their  duty,  which  is  to  keep  down  the
craving  for  writing  and  put  a  check  upon  the  deception  of
the  public,  instead  of  furthering  these  evils  by  a
miserable  toleration,  which  plays  into  the  hands  of  author
and  publisher,  and  robs  the  reader  of  his  time  and  his
money.

If  there  was  such  a  paper  as  I  mean,  every  bad  writer,
every  brainless  compiler,  every  plagiarist  from  others'
books,  every  hollow  and  incapable  place-hunter,  every
sham-philosopher,  every  vain  and  languishing  poetaster,
would  shudder  at  the  prospect  of  the  pillory  in  which  his
bad  work  would  ineviiably  have  to  stand  soon  after  publi-
cation. This  would  paralyze  his  twitching  fingers,  to  the
true  welfare  of  literature,  in  which  what  is  bad  is  not  only
useless  but  positively  pernicious.  Now,  most  books  are
bad  and  ought  to  have  remained  unwritten.  Consequently
praise  should  be  as  rare  as  is  now  the  case  with  blame,
which  is  withheld  under  the  influence  of  personal  consider-
ations, coupled  with  the  maxim  " accpdas  socins,  laude*
lander  is  ut  absens."

It  is  quite  wrong  to  try  to  introduce  into  literature  the
same  toleration  as  must  necessarily  prevail  in  society
toward  those  stupid,  brainless  people  who  everywhere
swarm  in  it.  In.  literature  such  people  are  impudent  in-
trailers;  and  to  disparage  the  bad  is  here  duty  toward  the
good;  for  he  who  thinks  nothing  bad  will  think  nothing
good  either.  Politeness,  which  has  its  source  in  social
relations,  is  in  literature  an  alien,  and  often  injurious,
element;  because  it  exacts  that  bad  work  shall  be  called
good.  In  this  way  the  very  aim  of  science  and  art  is
directly  frustrated.

This  ideal  journal  could,  to  be  sure,  be  written  only  by
people  who  joined  incorruptible  honesty  with  rare  knowl-
edge and  still  rarer  power  of  judgment;  so  that  perhaps
there  could,  at  the  very  most,  be  one;  and  even  hardly  one,


346  THE  A  12  T  OF  LITER  A  TUHB.

iu  the  whole  country;  but  there  it,  would  stand,  like  a  just
Areopagus,  every  member  of  which  would  have  to  be
elected  by  all  the  others.  Under  the  system  that  prevails
at  present  literary  journals  are  carried  on  by  a  clique,  and
secretly  perhaps  also  by  booksellers  for  the  good  of  the
trade;  and  they  are  often  nothing  but  coalitions  of  bad
heads  to  prevent  the  good  ones  succeeding.  As  Goethe
once  remarked  to  me,  nowhere  is  there  so  much  dishonesty
as  in  literature.

But,  above  all,  anonymity,  that  shield  of  all  literary
rascality,  would  have  to  disappear  It  was  introduced
under  the  pratext  of  protecting  the  honest  critic,  who
warned  the  public,  against  the  resentment  of  the  author
and  his  friends.  But  where  there  is  one  case  of  this  sort,
there  will  be  a  hundred  where  it  merely  serves  to  take  all
responsibi'ity  from  the  man  who  cannot  stand  by  what  he
has  said,  or  possibly  to  conceal  the  shame  of  one  who  has
been  cowardly  and  base  enough  to  recommend  a  book  to
Uie  public  for  the  purpose  of  putting  money  into  his  own
pocket.  Often  enough  it  is  only  a  cloak  for  covering  the
obscurity,  incompetence  and  insignificance  of  the  critic.
It  is  incredible  what  impudence  these  fellows  will  show,
and  what  literary  trickery  they  will  venture  to  commit,  as
soon  as  they  know  they  are  safe  under  the  shadow  of
anonymity.  Let  me  recommend  a  general  anticriticism,  a
universal  medicine  or  panacea,  to  put  a  stop  to  all  anony-
mous reviewing,  whether  it  praises  the  bad  or  blames  the
good:  Rascal  !  your  name!  For  a  man  to  wrap  himself  up
and  draw  his  hat  over  his  fac.  ,  and  then  fall  upon  people
who  are  walking  about  without  any  disguise — this  is  not
the  part  of  a  gentleman,  it  is  the  part  of  a  scoundrel  and  a
knave.

An  anonymous  review  has  no  more  authority  than  an
anonymous  letter:  and  one  should  be  received  with  the
tame  mistrust  as  the  other.  Or  shall  we  take  the  name  of
the  man  who  consents  to  preside  over  what  is,  in  the
strict  sense  of  the  word,  une  societe  anonyme  as  a  guarantee
for  the  veracity  of  his  colleagues.

Even  Rousseau,  in  the  preface  to  theXouvelle  s<  Heloise"
declares  tout  lionnete  liomme  doit  avouer  le:  Hvres  qu'il
publie;  which  in  plain  language  means  that  every  honorable
man  ought  to  sign  his  articles,  and  that  no  one  is  honorable
who  does  not  do  so.     How  much  truer  this  is  of  polemical


ON  REP  VTA  TION.  347

writing,  which  is  the  general  character  of  reviews!  Riemer
was  quite  right  in  the  opinion  he  gives  in  his  "  Reminis-
scences  of  Goethe:"  *  "  An  overt  enemy/'  he  says,  "  an  en-
emy who  meets  you  face  to  face,  is  an  honorable  man,  who
will  treat  you  fairly,  and  with  whom  you  can  come  to  terms
and  be  reconciled:  but  an  enemy  who  conceals  himself  "  is  a
base,  cowardly  scoundrel,  "  who  has  not  courage  enough  to
nvow  his  own  judgment:  it  is  not  his  opinion  that  he  cares
about,  but  only  the  secret  pleasure  of  wreaking  his  auger
without  being  found  out  or  punished."  This  will  also  have
been  Goethe's  opinion,  as  he  was  generally  the  source  fronr
which  Riemer  drew  his  observations.  And,  indeed,
Rousseau's  maxim  applies  to  every  line  that  is  printed.
Would  a  man  in  a  mask  ever  be  allowed  to  harangue  i
mob,  or  speak  in  any  assembly:  and  that,  too,  when  hi.
was  going  to  attack  others  and  overwhelm  them  with
abuse?

Anonymity  is  the  refuge  for  all  literary  and  journalistic
rascality.  It  is  a  practice  which  must  be  completely
stopped.  Every  article,  even  in  a  newspaper,  should  be
accompanied  by  the  name1  of  its  author;  and  the  editor
should  be  made  strictly  responsible  for  the  accuracy  of  the
signature.  The  freedom  of  the  press  should  be  thus  far
restricted;  so  that  what  a  man  publicly  proclaims  through
the  far  sounding  trumpet  of  the  newspaper,  he  should  be
answerable  for,  at  any  rate  with  his  honor,  if  he  has  any;
and  if  he  has  none,  let  his  name  neutralize  the  effect  of
his  words.  And  since  even  the  most  insignificant  person
is  known  in  his  own  circle,  the  result  of  such  a  measure
would  be  to  put  an  end  to  two-thirds  of  the  newspaper  lies,
and  to  restrain  the  audacity  of  many  a  poisonous  tongue.


ON  REPUTATION.

Writers  may  be  classified  as  meteors,  planets  and  fixed
stars.  A  meteor  makes  a  striking  effect  for  a  moment.
Ton  look  up  and  cry  There!  and  it  is  gone  forever.
Planets  and  wandering  stars  last  a  much  longer  time.
They  often  outshine  the  fixed  stars  and  are  confounded
with  them  by  the  inexperienced ;  but  this  is  only  because  they

*  Preface,  p.  xxi^L.


348  THE  ART  OF  LITER  A  TURK

are  near.  It  is  not  long  before  they  too  must  yield  their
place;  nay,  the  light  they  give  is  reflected  only,  and  the
sphere  of  their  influence  is  confined  to  their  own  orbit — ■
their  contemporaries.  Their  path  is  one  of  change  and
movement,  and  with  the  circuit,  of  a  few  years  their  tale  is
told.  Fixed  stars  are  the  only  ones  that  are  constant;
their  position  in  the  firmament  is  secure;  they  shine  with  a
light  of  their  own;  their  effect  to-day  is  the  same  as  it  was
yesterday,  because,  having  no  parallax,  their  appearance
does  not  alter  with  a  difference  in  our  standpoint.  They
belong  not  to  one  system,  one  nation  only,  but  to  the  uni-
verse. And  just  because  they  are  so  very  far  away,  it  is
usually  many  years  before  their  light  is  visible  to  the  in-
habitants of  this  earth.

We  have  seen  in  the  previous  chapter  that  where  a  man's
merits  are  of  a  high  order,  it  is  difficult  for  him  to  wiii  rep-
utation, because  the  public  is  uncritical  and  lacks  dis-
cernment. But  another  and  no  less  serious  hindrance  to
fame  comes  from  the  envy  it  has  to  encounter.  For  even
in  the  lowest  kind  of  work,  envy  balks  even  the  beginnings
of  a  reputation,  and  never  ceases  to  cleave  to  it  up  to  the
last.  How  great  a  part  is  played  by  envy  in  the  wicked
ways  of  the  world!  Ariosto  is  right  in  saying  that  the
dark  side  of  our  mortal  life  predominates,  so  full  it  is  of
this  evil:

"questa  assai  piu  oscura  che  serena
Vita  mortal,  tutta  d'invidia  piena.n

v^or  envy  is  the  moving  spirit  of  that  secret  and  informal,
though  flourishing,  alliance  everywhere  made  by  medioc-
rity against  individual  eminence,  no  matter  of  what  kind.
In  his  own  sphere  of  work  no  one  will  allow  another  to  be
distinguished:  he  is  an  intruder  who  cannot  be  tolerated.
Si  quelqu'un  excelle  parmi  nous,  qu'il  aille  exceller  ailleurs!
(this  is  the  universal  password  of  the  second-rate.  In  addi-
tion, Uien,  to  the  rarity  of  true  merit  and  the  difficulty  it
has  in  being  understood  and  recognized,  there  is  the  envy  of
thousands  to  be  reckoned  with,  all  of  them  bent  on  surpress-
ing,  nay,  on  smothering  it  altogether.  No  one  is  take:,
for  what  he  is,  but  for  what  others  make  of  him;  and  this
is  the  handle  used  by  mediocrity  to  keep  down  distinction,
by  not  letting  it  come  up  as  long  as  that  can  possibly  bf
prevented.


OK  REP  UTA  TION.  349

There  are  two  ways  of  behaving  in  regard  to  merit:
either  to  have  fame  of  one's  own,  or  to  refuse  any  to  others.
The  latter  method  is  more  convenient,  and  so  it  is  gener-
ally adopted.  As  envy  is  a  mere  sign  of  of  deficiency,  so
to  envy  merit  argues  the  lack  of  it.  My  excellent  Baltha-
zar Gracian  has  given  a  very  fine  account  of  this  relation
between  envy  and  merit  in  a  lengthy  fable,  which  may  be
found  in  his  "  Discreto  "under  the  heading  "  Hombrede  os-
tentation/' He  describes  all  the  birds  as  meeting  together
and  conspiring  against  the  peacock,  because  of  his  magnifi-
cent feathers:  "If,"  said  the  magpie,  "we  could  only  man-
age to  put  a  stop  to  the  cursed  parading  of  his  tail,  there
would  soon  be  an  end  of  his  beauty;  for  what  is  not  seen
is  as  good  as  what  does  not  exist."

This  explains  how  modesty  came  to  be  a  virtue.  It  was
invented  only  as  a  protection  against  envy.  That  there
have  always  been  rascals  to  urge  this  virtue,  and  to  rejoice
heartily  over  the  bashful ness  of  a  man  of  merit,  has  been
shown  at  length  in  my  chief  work.*  In  Lichtenberg's
"Miscellaneous  Writings,"  I  find  this  sentence  quoted:
"Modesty  should  be  the  virtue  of  those  who  possess  nc
other."  Goethe  has  a  well-known  saying,  which  offend;
many  people:  "  It  is  only  knaves  who  are  modest!  " — JVm
die  Lumpen  sind  bescheiden!  but  it  has  its  prototype  in
Cervantes,  who  includes  in  his  "Journey  up  Parnassus,'''
certain  rules  of  conduct  for  poets,  and  among  them  the
following:  "  Every  one  whose  verse  shows  him  to  be  a  poet
should  have  a  high  opinion  of  himself,  relying  on  the
proverb  that  he  is  a  knave  who  thinks  himself  one."  And
Shakespeare,  in  mauy  of  his  Sonnets,  which  gave  him  the
only  opportunity  he  had  of  speaking  of  himself,  declares,
with  a  confidence  equal  to  his  ingenuousness,  that  what  he
writes  is  immortal. f

*  "Welt  als  Wille,"  Vol.  IT.  c.  37.

f  Collier,  one  of  his  critical  editors,  in  his  "  Introduction  to  the
Sonnets,"  remarks  upon  this  point :  "In  many  of  them  are  be  found
most  remarkable  indications  of  self-confidence  and  of  assurance  in
the  immortality  of  his  verses,  and  in  this  respect  the  author's  opinion
was  constant  and  uniform.  He  never  scruples  to  express  it  .  .  .
and  perhaps  there  is  no  writer  of  ancient  or  modern  times  who,  for
the  quantity  of  such  writings  left  behind  him,  has  so  frequently  or
oso  strongly  declared  that  what  he  had  produced  in  this  department
of  poetry  'the  world  would  not  willingly  let  die.'  "


350  THE  ART  OF  LITERATURE.

A  method  of  underrating  good  work  often  used  by  env}
— in  reality,  however,  only  the  obverse  side  of  it — consists
in  the  dishonorable  and  unscrupulous  laudation  of  the  bad;
for  no  sooner  does  bad  work  gain  currency  than  it  draws
attention  from  the  good.  But  however  effective  this
method  may  be  for  awhile,  especially  if  it  is  applied  on  a
large  scale,  the  day  of  reckoning  comes  at  last,  and  the
fleeting  credit  given  to  bad  work  is  paid  off  by  the  lasting
discredit  which  overtakes  those  who  abjectly  praised  it.
Hence  these  critics  prefer  to  remain  anonymous.

A  like  fate  threatens,  though  more  remotely,  those  who
depreciate  and  censure  good  work:  and  consequently  many
are  too  prudent  to  attempt  it.  But  there  is  another  way;
and  when  a  man  of  eminent  merit  appears,  the  first  effect
he  produces  is  often  only  to  pique  all  his  rivals,  just  as  the
peacock's  tail  offended  the  birds.  This  reduces  them  to  a
deep  silence;  and  their  silence  is  so  unanimous  that  it
Mavors  of  preconception.  Their  tongues  are  all  paralyzed,
tt  is  the  silentium  livoris  described  by  Seneca.  This  ma-
licious silence,  which  is  technically  known  as  ignoring,  may
for  a  long  time  interfere  with  the  growth  of  reputation;  if,
as  happens  in  the  higher  walks  of  learning,  where  a  man's
immediate  audience  is  wholly  composed  of  rival  workers
and  professed  students,  who  then  form  the  channel  of  his
fame,  the  greater  public  is  obliged  to  use  its  suffrage  with-
out  being  able  to  examine  the  matter  for  itself.  And  if,  in
the  end,  that  malicious  silence  is  broken  in  upon  by  the
voice  of  praise,  it  will  be  but  seldom  that  this  happens
entirely  apart  from  some  ulterior  aim,  pursued  by  those
who  thus  manipulate  justice.  For,  as  Goethe  says  in  the
fl  West-ostlicher  Divan,"  a  man  can  get  no  recognition,
either  from  many  persons  or  from  only  one,  unless  it  is  to
publish  abroad  the  critic's  own  discernment:

"  Derm  es  ist  kein  Anerkennen,
Weder  Vieler,  nocli  des  Einen,
Wenn  es  niclit  am  Tagoe  frdert,
Wo  man  selbst  was  moclite  scheinen."

The  credit  you  allow  to   another  man  engaged  in   work
similar  to  your  own  op  akin  to  it,  must  at  bottom  be  with-
drawn from  yourself;  and  you  can  praise   him  only  at  the
expense  of  your  own  claims.
Accordingly,  mankind   is  in  itself  not  at  all  inclined  to


ON  REP  TIT  A  TION.  351

award  praise  and  reputation;  it  is  more  disposed  to  blame
and  find  fault,  whereby  it  indirectly  praises  itself.  If,
notwithstanding  this,  praise  is  won  from  mankind,  some
extraneous  motive  must  prevail.  I  am  not  here  referring
to  the  disgraceful  way  in  which  mutual  friends  will  puff
one  another  into  a  reputation;  outside  of  that,  an  effectual
motive  is  supplied  by  the  feeling  that  next  to  the  merit  of
doing  something  one's  self,  conies  that  of  correctly  appre-
ciating and  recognizing  what  others  have  done.  This  ac-
cords with  the  three-fold  division  of  heads  drawn  up  by
Hesiod,*  and  afterward  by  Machiavelli. f  "There  are,"  says
the  latter/'  in  the  capacities  of  mankind,  three  varieties:
one  man  will  understand  a  thing  by  himself;  another  so
far  as  it  is  explained  to  him;  a  third,  neither  of  himself
nor  when  it  is  put  clearly  before  him."  He,  then,  who
abandons  hope  of  making  good  his  claim*  to  the  first  class,
will  be  glad  to  seize  the  opportunity  of  taking  a  place  in
the  second.  It  is  almost  wholly  owing  to  this  state  oi
things  that  merit  may  always  rest  assured  of  ultimately
meeting  with  recognition,

To  this  also  is  due  the  fact  that  when  the  value  of  a
work  has  once  been  recognized  and  may  no  longer  be  con-
cealed or  denied,  all  men  vie  in  praising  and  honoring  it;
simply  because  they  are  conscious  of  thereby  doing  them-
selves an  honor.  They  act  in  the  spirit  of  Xenophon's
remark:  "he  must  be  a  wise  man  who  knows  what  is  wise."
So  when  they  see  that  the  prize  of  original  merit  is  forever
out  of  their  reach,  they  hasten  to  possess  themselves  of
that  which  ccmes  second  best — the  correct  appreciation  of
it.  Here  it  happens  as  with  an  army  which  has  been
forced  to  yield;  when,  just  as  previously  every  man  wanted
to  be  foremost  in  the  fight,  so  now  every  man  tries  to  be
foremost  in  running  away.  They  all  hurry  forward  to
offer  their  applause  to  one  who  is  now  recognized  to  be
worthy  of  praise,  in  virtue  of  a  recognition,  as  a  rule  un-
conscious, of  that  law  of  homogeneity  which  I  mentioned
in  the  last  chapter;  so  that  it  may  seem  as  though  their
way  of  thinking  and  looking  at  things  were  homogeneous
with  that  of  the  celebrated  man,  and  that  they  may  at
least  save  the  honor  of  their  literary  taste,  since  nothing
else  is  left  them.

*  "  Works  and  Days,  293".  \  "The  Prince,  ch.  22."


352  1HE  ART  OF  LITERA TURE.

From  this  it  is  plain  that,  whereas  it  is  very  difficult  to
win  fame,  it  is  not  hard  to  keep  it  when  once  attained;
and  also  that  a  reputation  which  comes  quickly  does  not
last  very  long;  for  here  too,  quod  cito  fit,  cito  peril.  It  is
obvious  that  if  the  ordinary,  average  man  can  easily
recognize,  and  the  rival  workers  willingly  acknowledge,
the  value  of  any  performance,  it  will  not  stand  very  much
above  the  capacity  of  either  of  them  to  achieve  it  for  them-
selves. Tantum  quisque  laudat,  quantum  se  posse  spend
imitari — a  man  will  praise  a  thing  only  so  far  as  he  hopes
to  be  able  to  imitate  it  himself.  Further,  it  is  a
suspicious  sign  if  a  reputation  comes  quickly;  for  an
application  of  the  laws  of  homogeneity  will  show  that  such
a  reputation  is  nothing  but  the  direct  applause  of  the  multi-
tude. What  this  means  may  le  seen  by  a  remark  once  made
by  Phocion,  when  he  was  interrupted  in  a  speech  by  the
loud  cheers  of  the  mob.  Turning  to  his  friends  who  were
standing  close  by,  he  asked:  "  Have  I  made  a  mistake  and
said  something  stupid?"*

Contrarily,  a  reputation  that  is  to  last  a  long  time  must
be  slow  in  maturing,  and  the  centuries  of  its  duration  have
generally  to  be  bought  at  the  cost  of  contemporary  praise.
For  that  which  is  to  keep  its  position  so  long,  must  be  of  a
perfection  difficult  to  attain;  and  even  to  recognize  this
perfection  requires  men  who  are  not  always  to  be  found,
and  never  in  numbers  sufficiently  great  to  make  themselves
heard;  whereas  envy  is  always  on  the  watch  and  doing  its
best  to  smother  their  voice.  But  with  moderate  talent,
which  soon  meets  with  recognition,  there  is  the  danger
that  those  whopossessit  will  outlive  both  it  and  themselves;
so  that  a  youth  of  fame  may  be  followed  by  an  old  age  of
obscurity.  In  the  case  of  great  merit,  on  the  other  hand,
a  man  may  remain  unknown  for  many  years,  but  make  up
for  it  later  on  by  attaining  a  brilliant  reputation.  And  if
it  should  be  that  this  comes  only  after  he  is  no  more,  well!
he  is  to  be  reckoned  among  those  of  whom  Jean  Paul  says
that  extreme  unction  is  their  baptism.  He  may  console
himself  by  thinking  of  the  saints,  who  also  are  canonized
only  after  they  are  dead.

Thus  what  Mahlmanirf  has  said  so  well  in  "  Herod es  "


*  Plutarch;  "Apothegms."

f  Translator's  Note. — Aue-ust  Mahlmann  (1771-1826),   journalist


ON  R  KP  VTA  Tioy.  353

nolds  good:  in  this  world  truly  great  work  never  pleases  at
once,  and  the  god  set  up  by  the  multitude  keeps  his  place
on  the  altar  but  a  short  time:

"  Ich  denke.  das  wahre  Grosse  in  der  Welt
Is:  immer  nur  Das  was  nicht  gleicb  gefallt
Und  we::  lei  Pobel  nun  Gtatte  weiht
Bersteht  aaf  dem  Altar  nur  kurze  Zeit."

worth  mention  that  this  rule  is  most  directly  con-
firmed in  the  case  of  pictures,,  where,  as  connoisseurs  well
know,  the  gi  sates!  masterpieces  are  not  the  first  to  attract
attention.  If  they  make  a  deep  impression,  it  is  not  after
one.  but    only   after   repealed.  >us;  but  then  they

excite  more  and  more  admiration  every  time  they  are
seen.

Moreover,  the  chances  that  any  given  work  will  be
quickly  and  rightly  appreciated,  depend  upon  two  condi-
tions: firstly,  the  character  of  the  work,  whether  high  01
low.  in  other  words,  easy  or  difficult  to  understand;  and.
secondly,  the  kind  of  public  it  attracts,  whether  large  or
small.  This  latter  condition  is,  no  doubt,  in  most  instances
a  corollary  of  the  former:  but  it  also  partly  depends  upon
:er  the  work  in  question  admits,  like  books  and
musical  compositions,  of  being  reproduced  in  great  num-
bers. By  the  coir;  ::ion  of  these  two  conditions,
achievements  which  serve  no  materially  useful  end — and
these  alone  are  under  consideration  here — will  vary  in  re-
gard to  the  chances  they  have  of  meeting  with  timely  recog-
nition and  due  appreciation;  and  the  order  of  precedence,
beginning  with  those  who  have  the  greatest  chance,  will
be  somewhat  as  follows:  acrobats,  circus-riders,  ballet-
dancers,  jugglers,  actors,  singers,  musicians,  composers,
a  (both  the  last  on  account  of  the  multiplication  of
their  works),   architects,  painters,  sculptors,  philosophers.

The  last  place  of  all  is  unquestionably  taken  by  philoso-
phers, because  their  works  are  meant  not  for  entertainment
but  for  instruction,  and  because  they  presume  some  knowl-
edge on  the  part  of  the  reader,  and  require  him  to  make
an  effort  of  his  own  to  understand  them.  This  makes
their  public  ex  small  and  causes  their  fame  to  be

poet  and  story-writer.     His  ''Herodes  vor  Bethlehem,"  is  a  parod;
")f  Kotzebue's  •"Hussiten  vor  Naumburg,"


354  THE  A  RT  OF  LTTEEA  TURE.

more  remarkable  for  its  length  than  for  its  breadth.  And,
in  general,  it  may  be  said  that  the  possibility  of  a  man's
fame  lasting  a  long  time,  stands  in  almost  inverse  ratio
with  the  chance  that  it  will  be  early  in  making  its  appear-
ance; so  that,  as  regards  length  of  fame,  the  above  order
of  precedence  may  be  reversed.  But,  then,  the  poet  and
the  composer  will  come  in  the  end  to  stand  on  the  same
level  as  the  philosopher;  since,  when  once  a  work  is  com-
mitted to  writing,  it  is  possible  to  preserve  it  to  all  time.
However,  the  first  place  still  belongs  by  right  to  the  philoso-
pher, because  of  the  much  greater  scarcity  of  good  work
in  this  sphere,  and  the  high  importance  of  it;  and  also  be-
cause of  the  possibility  it  offers  of  an  almost  perfect  trans-
lation into  any  language.  Sometimes,  indeed  it  happens
that  a  philosopher's  fame  outlives  even  his  works  them-
selves; as  has  happened  with  T hales,  Empedocles,  Hera-
clitus,  Democitus,  Parmenides,  Epicurus,  and  many  others.

My  remarks  are,  as  I  have  said,  confined  to  achievements
that  are  not  of  any  material  use.  Work  that  serves  some
practical  end,  or  ministers  directly  to  some  pleasure  of  the
senses;  will  never  have  any  difficulty  in  being  duly  appre-
ciated. No  first-rate  pastry-cook  could  long  remain  ob-
scure in  any  town,  to  say  nothing  of  having  to  appeal  to
posterity.

Under  fame  of  rapid  growth  is  also  to  be  reckoned  fame
of  a  false  and  artificial  kind;  where,  for  instance,  a  book
is  worked  into  a  reputation  by  means  of  unjust  praise,  the
help  of  friends,  corrupt  criticism,  prompting  from  above
and  collusion  from  below.  All  this  tells  upon  the  multi-
tude, which  is  rightly  presumed  to  have  no  power  of  judg-
ing for  itself.  This  sort  of  fame  is  like  a  swimming-
oladder;  by  its  aid  a  heavy  body  may  keep  afloat.  It
bears  up  for  a  certain  time,  long  or  short  according  as  the
bladder  is  well  sewed  up  and  blown;  but  still  the  air  comes
out  gradually,  and  the  body  sinks.  This  is  the  inevitable
fate  of  ail  works  which  are  famous  by  reason  of  something
outside  of  themselves.  False  praise  dies  away;  collusion
comes  to  an  end;  critics  declare  the  reputation  ungrounded;
it  vanishes,  and  is  replaced  by  so  much  the  greater  con-
tempt. Oontrarily,  a  genuine  work,  which,  having  the
source  of  its  fame  in  itself,  can  kindle  admiration  afresh  in
every  age,  resembles  a  body  of  low  specific  gravity,  which


ON  BKPUTAIIOX  355

always  keeps  up  of   its  own   accord,  and  so   goes   floating
down  the  stream  of  time.*

Men  of  great  genius,  whether  their  work  be  in  poetry,
philosophy  or  art,  stand  in  all  ages  like  isolated  heroes,
keeping  up  single-handed  a  desperate  struggle  against  the
onslaught  of  an  army  of  opponents.  Is  not  this  character
istic  of  the  miserable  nature  of  mankind?  The  dullness,
grossness,  perversity,  silliness  and  brutality  of  by  far  the
greater  part  of  the  race,  are  always  an  obstacle  to  the
efforts  of  the  genius,  whatever  be  the  method  of  his  art;
they  so  form  that  hostile  army  to  which  at  last  he  has  to
succumb.  Let  the  isolated  champion  achieve  what  he  may:
it  is  slow  to  be  acknowledged;  it  is  late  in  being  appreci-
ated, and  then  only  on  the  score  of  authority;  it  may  easily
fail  into  neglect  again,  at  any  rate  for  awhile.  Ever
afresh  it  finds  itself  opposed  by  false,  shallow,  and  insipid
ideas,  which  are  better  suited  to  that  large  majority,  and
so  generally  hold  the  field.  Though  the  critic  may  step
forth  and  say,  like  Hamlet  when  he  held  up  the  two
portraits  to  his  wretched  mother,  -'-'Have  you  eyes?  Have
you  eyes?  v  alas!  they  have  none.  When  1  watch  the  be-
haviour of  a  crowd  of  people  in  the  presence  of  some  great
master's  work,  and  mark  the  manner  of  their  applause,
they  often  remind  me  of  trained  monkeys  in  a  showT.  The
monkeys'  gestures  are,  no  doubt,  much  like  those  of  men;
but  nowr  and  again  they  betray  that  the  real  inward  spirit
of  those  gestures  is  not  in  them.  Their  irrational  nature
peeps  out.

It  is  often  said  of  a  man  that  "  he  is  in  advance  of  his
age;"  and  it  follows  from  the  above  remarks  that  this  must
be  taken  to  mean  that  he  is  in  advance  of  humanity  in
general.  Just  because  of  this  fact,  a  genius  makes  no
direct  appeal  except  to  those  who  are  themselves  consid-
erably above  the  average  in  capacity;  and  these  are  toe
rare  to  allow  of  their  ever  forming  a  numerous  body  at  any
one  period.     If   he   is   in  this   respect  not  particularly  fa-

":"  Translator's  note. — At  this  point  Schopenhauer  interrupts  thi
I'lread  of  his  discourse  to  speak  at  length  upon  an  example  of  false
fame.  Those  who  are  at  all  acquainted  with  the  philosopher's  views
will  not  be  surprised  to  find  that  the  writer  thus  held  up  to  scorn  is
Hegel;  and  readers  of  the  other  volumes  in  this  series  will,  with  the
translator,  have  had  by  now  quite  enough  of  the  subject.  The  pas
sage  is  therefore  omitted-


356  THE  ART  OF  LITERATURE.

vored  by  fortune,  be  will  be  misunderstood  by  bis  own
age;  in  other  words,  he  will  remain  unaccepted  until  time
gradually  brings  together  the  voices  of  those  few  persons
who  are  capable  of  judging  a  work  of  such  high  character.
Then  posterity  will  say:  "  This  man  was  in  advance  of  his
age,"  instead  of  "in  advance  of  humanity;"  because  hu-
manity will  be  glad  to  lay  the  burden  of  its  own  faults
upon  a  single  epoch.

Hence  it  a  man  has  been  superior  to  his  own  age,  he
would  also  have  been  superior  to  any  other;  provided  that,
in  that  age,  by  some  rare  and  happy  chance,  a  few  just
men,  capable  of  judging  in  the  sphere  of  his  achievements,
had  been  born  at  the  same  time  with  him;  just  as  when,
according  to  a  beautiful  Indian  myth,  Vishnu  becomes
incarnate  as  a  hero,  so,  too,  Brahma  at  the  same  time  ap-
pears as  the  singer  of  bis  deeds;  and  hence  Valmiki,  Vyasa
and  Kalidasa  are  incarnations  of  Brahma.

In  this  sense,  then,  it  may  be  said  that  every
immortal  work  puts  its  age  to  the  proof,  whether  or
no  it  will  be  able  to  recognize  the  merit  of  it.  As  a  rule,
the  men  of  any  age  stand  such  a  test  no  better  than  neigh-
bors of  Philemon  and  Baucis,  who  expelled  the  deities  they
failed  to  recognize.  Accordingly,  the  right  standard  for
judging  the  intellectual  worth  of  any  generation  is  sup-
plied, not  by  the  great  minds  that  make  their  appearance
in  it — for  their  capacities  are  the  work  of  Nature,  and  the
possibility  of  cultivating  them  a  matter  of  chance  circum-
stance— but  by  the  way  in  which  contemporaries  receive
their  works;  whether,  I  mean,  they  give  their  applause
soon  and  with  a  will,  or  late  and  in  niggardly  fashion,  or
leave  it  to  be  bestowed  altogether  by  posterity.

This  last  fate  will  be  specially  reserved  for  worKs  of  a
high  character.  For  the  happy  chance  mentioned  above
will  be  all  the  more  certain  not  to  come,  in  proportion  as
there  are  few  to  appreciate  the  kind  of  work  done  by  great
minds.  Herein  lies  the  immeasurable  advantage  possessed
by  poe^ls  in  respect  of  reputation;  because  their  work  is  ac-
cessible to  almost  every  one.  If  it  had  been  possible  for  Sir
Walter  Scott  to  be  read  and  criticised  by  only  some
hundred  persons,  perhaps  in  his  lifetime  any  common
scribbler  would  have  been  preferred  to  him;  and  afterward,
when  he  had  taken  his  proper  place,  it  would  also  have
Deen  said  in  his  honor  that  he  was  "  in  advance  of  his  age."


ON  REPUTATION.  357

Bat  if  envy,  dishonesty  and  the  pursuit  of  personal  aims
are  added  to  the  incapacity  of  those  hundred  persons  who,
in  the  name  of  their  generation,  are  called  upon  to  pass
judgment  on  a  work,  then  indeed  it  meets  with  the  same
sad  fate  as  attends  a  suitor  who  pleads  before  a  tribunal  of
judges  one  and  all  corrupt.

In  corroboration  of  this,  we  find,  that  the  history  of
literature  generally  shows  all  those  who  made  knowledge
and  insight  their  goal  to  have  remained  unrecognized  and
neglected,  while  those  who  paraded  with  the  vain  show  of
it  received  the  admiration  of  their  contemporaries,  together
with  the  emoluments.

The  effectiveness  of  an  author  turns  chiefly  upon  his  get-
ting the  reputation  that  lie  should  be  read.  But  by  prac-
ticing various  arts,  by  the  operation  of  chance,  and  by
certain  natural  affinities,  this  reputation  is  quickly  won  by
a  hundred  worthless  people;  while  a  worthy  writer  may
come  by  it  very  slowly  and  tardily.  The  former  possess
friends  to  help  them;  for  the  rabble  is  always  a  numerous
body  which  holds  well  together.  The  latter  has  nothing
but  enemies;  because  intellectual  superiority  is  everywhere
and  under  all  circumstances  the  most  hateful  thing  in  the
world,  and  especially  to  bunglers  in  the  same  line  of  work,
who  want  to  pass  for  something  themselves.*    •

This  being  so,  it  is  a  prime  condition  for  doing  any
great  work — any  work  which  is  to  outlive  its  own  age,  that
a  man  pay  no  heed  to  his  contemporaries,  their  views  and
opinions,  and  the  praise  or  blame  which  they  bestow.
This  condition  is,  however,  fulfilled  of  itself  when  a  man
really  does  anything  great,  and  it  is  fortunate  that  it  is  so.
For  if,  in  producing  such  a  work,  he  were  to  look  to  the
general  opinion  or  the  judgment  of  his  colleagues,  they
would  lead  him  astray  at  every  step.  Hence,  if  a  man
wants  to  go  down  to  posterity,  he  must  withdraw  from  the
influence  of  his  own  age.  This  will,  of  course  generally
mean  that  he  must  also  renounce  any  influence  upon  it,  and
be  ready  to  buy  centuries  of  fame  by  foregoing  the  ap-
plause of  his  contemporaries.

For  when  any  new  and  wide-reaching   truth  comes  into

*  If  the  professors  of  philosophy  should  chance  to  think  that  I
am  here  hinting  at  them  and  the  tactics  they  have  for  more  than
thirty  years  pursued  toward  my  works,  they  have  hit  the  nail  upon
the  head.


358  THE  ART  OF  LITERATURE.

the  world — and  if  it  is  new,  it  must  be  paradoxical — an
obstinate  stand  will  be  made  against  it  as  long  as  possible;
nay,  people  will  continue  to  deny  it  even  after  they  slacken
their  opposition  and  are  almost  convinced  of  its  truth.
Meanwhile  it  goes  on  quietly  working  its  way,  and,  like  an
acid,  undermining  everything  around  it.  From  time  to
time  a  crash  is  heard;  the  old  error  comes  tottering  to  the
ground,  and  suddenly  the  new  fabric  of  thought  stands
revealed,  as  though  it  were  a  monument  just  uncovered.
Every  one  recognizes  and  admires  it.  To  be  sure,  this  all
comes  to  pass  for  the  most  part  very  slowly.  As  a  rule,
people  discover  a  man  to  be  worth  listening  to  only  after
he  is  gone;  their  "  hear,  hear!"  resounds  when  the  orator
has  left  the  platform.

Works  of  the  ordinary  type  meet  with  a  better  fate.
Arising  as  they  do  in  the  course  of,  and  in  connection
with,  the  general  advance  in  contemporary  culture,  they
are  in  close  alliance  with  the  spirit  of  their  age — in  other
words,  just  those  opinions  which  happen  to  be  prevalent  at
the  time.  They  aim  at  suiting  the  needs  of  the  moment.
If  they  have  any  merit,  it  is  soon  recognized;  and  they  gain
currency  as  books  which  reflect  the  latest  ideas.  Justice,
nay,  more  than  justice,  is  done  to  them.  They  afford
little  scope  for  envy;  since,  as  was  said  above,  a  man  will
praise  a  thing  only  so  far  as  he  hopes  to  be  able  to  imitate
it  himself.

But  those  rare  works  which  are  destined  to  become  the
property  of  all  mankind  and  to  live  for  centuries,  are,  at
their  origin,  too  far  in  advance  of  the  point  at  which
culture  happens  to  stand,  and  on  that  very  account  foreign
to  it  and  the  spirit  of  their  own  time.  They  neither
belong  to  it  nor  are  they  in  any  connection  with  it,  and
hence  they  excite  no  interest  in  those  who  are  dominated
by  it.  They  belong  to  another,  a  higher  stage  of  culture,
and  a  time  that  is  still  far  off.  Their  course  is  related  to
that  of  ordinary  works  as  the  orbit  of  Uranus  to  the  orbit
of  Mercury.  For  the  moment  they  get  no  justice  done  to
them.  People  are  at  a  loss  how  to  treat  them:  so  they
leave  them  alone,  and  go  their  own  snails"  pace  for  them-
selves.    Does  the  worm  see  the  eagle  as  it  soars  aloft?

Of  the  number  of  books  written  in  any  language,  about
one  in  100,000  forms  a  part  of  its  real  and  permanent  lit-
erature.    What  a  fate  this  one  book  has  to  et^«»*G  before  it


ON  REP  VTA  TION.  359

outstrips, those  100,000  and  gains  its  due  place  of  honor!
Such  a  book  is  the  work  of  an  extraordinary  and  eminent
mind,  and  therefore  it  is  specifically  different  from  the
others;  a  fact  which  sooner  or  later  becomes  manifest.

Let  no  one  fancy  that  things  will  ever  improve  in  this
respect.  No!  the  miserable  constitution  of  humanity
never  changes,  though  it  may,  to  be  sure,  take  somewhat
varying  forms  with  every  generation.  A  distinguished
mind  seldom  has  its  full  effect  in  the  lifetime  of  its  posses-
sor; because,  at  bottom,  it  is  completely  and  properly  un-
derstood only  by  minds  already  akin  to  it.

As  it  is  a  rare -thing  for  even  one  man  out  of  many  mil-
lions to  tread  the  path  that  leads  to  immortality,  he  must
of  necessity  be  very  lonely.  The  journey  to  posterity  lies
through  a  horribly  dreary  region,  like  the  Lybian  desert
of  which,  as  is  well  known,  no  one  has  any  idea  who  has
not  seen  it  himself.  Meanwhile  let  me  before  all  things
recommend  the  traveler  to  take  light  baggage  with  him;
otherwise  he  will  have  to  throw  away  too  much  oix  the
road.  Let  him  never  forget  the  words  of  Balthazar  Gracian;
lo  bueno,  si  breve,  dos  vezes  bueno — good  work  is  doubly
good  if  it  is  short.  This  advice  is  specially  applicable  to
my  own  countrymen.

Compared  with  the  short  span  of  time  they  live,  men  of
great  intellect  are  like  huge  buildings,  standing  on  a  small
plot  of  ground.  The  size  of  the  building  cannot  be  seen
by  anyone  just  in  front  of  it;  nor,  for  an  analogous  reason,
can  the  greatness  of  a  genius  be  estimated  while  he  lives.
But  when  a  century  has  passed,  the  world  recognizes  it  and
wishes  him  back  again.

If  the  perishable  son  of  time  has  produced  an  imperish-
ble  work,  how  short  his  own  life  seems  compared  with  that
of  his  child!  He  is  like  Semele  or  Maia — a  mortal  mother
who  gave  birth  to  an  immortal  son;  or,  contrarily,  like
Achilles  in  regard  to  Thetis.  What  a  contrast  there  is
between  what  is  fleeting  and  what  is  permanent!  The
short  span  of  man's  life,  his  necessitous,  afflicted,  unstable
existence,  will  seldom  allow  of  his  seeing  even  the  begin-
ning of  his  immortal  child's  brilliant  career:  nor  will  the
father  himself  be  taken  for  that  which  he  really  is.  It
may  be  said,  indeed,  that  a  man  whose  fame  comes  after
him  is  the  reverse  of  a  nobleman,  who  is  preceded  by  it.

However,  the  only  difference  that  it  ultimately  makes  to  a


360  THE  ART  OF  LITER  A  TUR  E.

man  to  receive  his  fame  at  the  hands  of  contemporaries
rather  than  from  posterity  is  that  in  the  former  case  his
admirers  are  separated  from  him  by  space,  and  in  the  latter
by  time.  For  even  in  the  case  of  contemporary  fame,  a
man  does  not.  hs  a  rule,  see  his  admirers  actually  before
him.  Reverence  cannot  endure  close  proximity;  it  almost
always  dwells  at  some  distance  from  its  object;  and  in  the
presence  of  the  person  revered  it  melts  like  butter  in  the
sun.  Accordingly,  if  c.  man  is  celebrated  with  his  con-
temporaries, nine- ten  the  of  those  among  whom  he  lives
will  let  their  esteem  be  guided  by  his  rank  and  fortune;
and  the  remaining  tenth  may  perhaps  have -a  dull  conscious-
ness of  his  high  qualities,  because  they  have  heard  about
him  from  remote  quarters.  There  is  a  fine  Latin  letter  of
Petrarch's  on  this  incompatibility  between  reverence  and
the  presence  ol  the  person,  and  between  fame  and  life.  It
comes  second  in  his  '*  Epistolae  familiares"*  and  it  is
addressed  to  Thomas  Messanensis.  He  there  observes,
among  other  things,  that  the  learned  men  of  his  age  all
made  it  a  rule  to  think  little  of  a  man's  writings  if  they
had  even  once  seen  him.

Since  distance,  then,  is  essential  if  a  famous  man  is  to  be
recognized  and  revered,  it  does  not  matter  whether  it  is
distance  of  space  or  of  time  It  is  true  that  he  may  some-
times hear  of  his  tame  in  the  one  case,  but  never  in  the
other;  but  still,  genuine  and  great  merit  may  make  up  for
this  by  confidently  anticipating  its  posthumous  fame.
Nay,  he  who  produces  some  really  great  thought  is  con-
scious of  his  connection  with  coining  generations  at  the
very  moment  he  conceives  it;  so  that  he  feels  the  extension
of  his  existence  through  centuries  and  thus  lives  with  pos-
terity as  well  as  for  it.  And  when,  after  enjoying  a  great
man's  work,  we  are  seized  with  admiration  for  him,  anu
wish  him  back,  so  that  we  might  see  and  speak  with  him,
and  have  him  in  our  possession,  this  desire  of  ours  is  not  un-
requited, for  he,  too,  has  had  his  longing  for  that  posterity
which  will  grant  the  recognition,  honor,  gratitude  and  love
denied  by  envious  contemporaries.

If  intellectual  works  of  the  highest  order  are  not  allowed
their  due  until  they  come  before  the  tribunal  of  posterity,
a  contrary  fate  is  prepared  for  certain  brilliant  errors  which

*  In  the  Venetian  edition  of  1492.


ON  REPUTATION.  361

proceed  from  men  of  talent,  and  appear  with  an  air  of
being  well  grounded.  These  errors  are  defended  with  so
much  acumen  and  learning  that  they  actually  become
famous  with  their  own  age,  and  maintain  their  position  at
least  during  their  author's  lifetime.  Of  this  sort  are  many
false  theories  and  wrong  criticisms;  also  poems  and  works
of  art,  which  exhibit  some  false  taste  or  mannerism  favored
by  contemporary  prejudice.  They  gain  reputation  and
currency  simply  because  no  one  is  yet  forthcoming  who
knows  how  to  refute  them  or  otherwise  prove  their  falsity;
and  when  he  appears,  as  he  usually  does,  in  the  next  gener-
ation, the  glory  of  these  works  is  brought  to  an  end.  Post-
humous judges,  be  their  decision  favorable  to  the  appel-
lant or  not,  form  the  proper  court  for  quashing  the  verdict
of  contemporaries.  That  is  why  it  is  so  difficult  and  so
rare  to  be  victorious  alike  in  both  tribunals.

The  unfailing  tendency  of  time  to  correct  knowledge  and
judgment  should  always  be  kept  in  view  as  a  means  of
allaying  anxiety,  whenever  any  grievous  error  appears,
whether  in  art,  or  science,  or  practical  life,  and  gains
ground;  or  when  some  false  and  thoroughly  perverse  policy
or  movement  is  undertaken  and  receives  applause  at  the
hands  of  men.  No  one  should  be  angry,  or,  still  less,
despondent;  but  simply  imagine  that  the  world  has  already
abandoned  the  error  in  question,  and  now  only  requires
time  and  experience  to  recognize  of  its  own  accord  that
which  a  clear  vision  detected  at  the  first  glance.

When  the  facts  themselves  are  eloquent  of  a  truth,  there
is  no  need  to  rush  to  its  aid  with  words:  for  time  will  give
it  a  thousand  tongues.  How  long  it  may  be  before  they
speak,  will  of  course  depend  upon  the  difficulty  of  the  sub-
ject and  the  plausibility  of  the  error;  but  come  they  will,
and  often  it  would  be  of  no  avail  to  try  to  anticipate  them.
In  the  worst  cases  it  will  happen  with  theories  as  it  hap-
pens with  affairs  in  practical  life;  where  sham  and  deception
emboldened  by  success,  advance  to  greater  and  greater
lengths,  until  discovery  is  made  almost  inevitable.  It  is
just  so  with  theories;  through  the  blind  confidence  of  the
blockheads  who  broach  them,  their  absurdity  reaches  such
a  pitch  that  at  last  it  is  obvious  even  to  the  dullest  eye.  We
may  thus  say  to  such  people:  "  the  wilder  your  statements
the  better/'

There  is  also  some  comfort  to  be  found  in  reflecting  upon


362  THE  ART  OF  LITERATURE.

all  the  whims  and  crotchets  which  had  their  day  and  have
now  utterly  vanished.  In  style,  in  grammar,  in  spelling,
there  are  false  notions  of  this  sort  which  last  only  three  or
four  years.  But  when  the  errors  are  on  a  large  scale,  while
we  lament  the  brevity  of  human  life,  we  shall,  in  any  case
do  well  to  lag  behind  our  own  age  when  we  see  it  on  a
downward  path.  For  there  are  two  ways  of  not  keeping  on
a  level  with  the  times.  A  man  may  be  below  it;  or  he  may
De  above  it.


ON    GENIUS.


No  difference  of  rank,  position,  or  birth,  is  so  great
as  the  gulf  that  separates  the  countless  millions  who  use
their  head  only  in  the  service  of  their  belly,  in  other  words
look  upon  it  as  an  instrument  of  the  will,  and  those  very  few
and  rare  persons  who  have  the  courage  to  say:  No  it  is
too  good  for  that;  my  head  shall  be  active  only  in  its  own
service;  it  shall  try  to  comprehend  the  wondrous  and  varied
spectacle  of  this  world,  and  then  reproduce  it  in  some  form
whether  as  art  or  as  literature,  that  may  answer  to  my
character  as  an  individual.  These  are  the  truly  noble,  the
real  noblesse  of  the  world.  The  others  are  serfs  and  go
with  the  soil — glebce  adscripti.  Of  course,  I  am  here  re-
ferring to  those  who  have  not  only  the  courage,  but  also
the  call,  and  therefore  the  right,  to  order  the  head  to  quit
the  service  of  the  will;  with  a  result  that  proves  the  sacri-
fice to  have  been  worth  the  making.  In  the  case  of  those
to  whom  all  this  can  only  partially  apply,  the  gulf  is  not  so
wide;  but  even  though  their  talent  be  smull,  so  long  as  it
is  real,  there  will  always  be  a  sharp  Hue  of  demarcation
between  them  and  the  millions.*


*  The  correct  scale  for  adjusting  the  hierarchy  of  intelligences  is
furnished  by  the  degree  in  which  the  mind  takes  merely  individual
or  approaches  universal  views  of  things.  The  brute  recognizes  only
the  individual  as  such  ;  its  comprehension  does  not  extend  beyond  thi
limits  of  the  individual.  But  man  reduces  the  individual  to  the  gen-
eral; herein  lies  the  exercise  of  his  reason;  and  the  higher  his  intelli-
gence reaches,  the  nearer  do  his  general  ideas  approach  the  point  at
which  they  become  universal.  If  his  grasp  of  the  universal  is  so
deep  as  to  be  intuitive,  and  to  apply  not  only  to  general  ideas,  but  to
tin  individual    object   by    itself,  ther;    there   arises   a  knowledge  cf


ON  GENIUS.  363

The  works  of  fine  art,  poetry  and  philosophy  produced
oy  a  nation  are  the  outcome  of  the  superfluous  intellect  ex-
isting in  it.

For  him  who  can  understand  aright — cum  grano  sails—
the  relation  between  the  genius  and  the  normal  man  may,
perhaps,  be  best  expressed  as  follows:  A  genius  has  a  double
intellect,  one  for  himself  and  the  service  of  his  will;  the
other  for  the  Avorld,  of  which  he  becomes  the  mirror,  in
■virtue  of  his  purely  objective  attitude  toward  it.  The
work  of  art  or  poetry  or  philosophy  produced  by  the  genius
is  simply  the  result,  or  quintessence,  of  this  contem-
plative attitude,  elaborated  according  to  certain  technical
rules.

The  normal  man,  on  the  other  hand,  has  only  a  single
intellect,  which  may  be  called  subjective  by  contrast  with
the  objective  intellect  of  genius.  However  acute  this  sub-
jective intellect  may  be — and  it  exists  in  very  various
degrees  of  perfection — it  is  never  on  the  same  level  with
the  double  intellect  of  genius;  just  as  the  open  chest  notes
of  the  human  voice,  however  high,  are  essentially  different
from  the  falsetto  notes.  These,  like  the  two  upper  octaves
of  the  flute- and  the  harmonics  of  the  violin,  are  produced
by  the  column  of  air  dividing  itself  into  two  vibrating
halves,  with  a  node  between  them:  while  the  open  chest
notes  of  the  human  voice  and  the  lower  octave  of  the  flute
are  produced  by  the  undivided  column  of  air  vibrating  as  a
whole.  This  illustration  may  help  the  reader  to  under-
stand that  specific  peculiarity  of  genius  which  is  unmis-
takably stamped  on  the  works,  and  even  on  the  physiog-
nomy, of  him  who  is  gifted  with  it.  At  the  same  time  it
is  obvious  that  a  double  intellect  like  this  must,  as  a  rule,
obstruct  the  service  of  the  will;  and  this  explains  the  poor
capacity  often  shown  by  genius  in  the  conduct  of  life.
And  what  specially  characterizes  genius  is  that  it  has  none

tLe  Ideas  in  the  sense  used  by  Plato.  This  knowledge  is  of  an
aesthetic  character,  when  it  is  self-active,  it  rises  to  genius,  and
reaches  the  highest  degree  of  intensity  when  it  becomes  philosophic;
foi'  then  the  whole  of  life  and  existence  as  it  passes  away,  the  world
and  all  it  contains,  are  grasped  in  their  true  nature  by  an  act  of  in-
tuition, and  appear  in  a  form  which  forces  itself  upon  consciousness
as  an  object  of  meditation.  Here  reflection  attains  its  highest  point.
Between  it  and  the  merely  animal  perception  there  are  countless
stages,  which  differ  according  to  the  approach  made  to  a  universal
view  of  things.


364  THE  ART  OF  LITERATURE.

of  that  sobriety  of  temper  which  is  always  to  be  found  in
the  ordinary  simple  intellect,  be  it  acute  or  dull.

The  brain  may  be  likened  to  a  parasite  which  is  nour-
ished as  a  part  of  the  human  frame  without  contributing
directly  to  its  inner  economy;  it  is  securely  housed  in  the
topmost  story,  and  there  leads  a  self-sufficient  and  inde-
pendent life.  In  the  same  way  it  may  be  said  that  a  man
endowed  with  great  mental  gifts  leads,  apart  from  the  indi-
vidual life  common  to  all,  a  second  life,  purely  of  the
intellect.  He  devotes  himself  to  the  constant  increase,
rectification  and  extension,  not  of  mere  learning,  but  of
real  systematic  knowledge  and  insight;  and  remains  un-
touched by  the  fate  that  overtakes  him  personally,  so  long
as  it  does  not  disturb  him  in  his  work.  It  is  thus  a  life
which  raises  a  man  and  sets  him  above  fate  and  its  changes.
Always  thinking,  learning,  experimenting,  practicing  his
knowledge,  the  man  soon  comes  to  look  upon  this  second
life  as  the  chief  mode  Of  existence,  and  his  merely  personal
life  as  something  subordinate,  serving  only  to  advance
ends  higher  than  itself.

An  example  of  this  independent,  separate  existence  is
furnished  by  Goethe.  During  the  war  in  the  Champagne,
and  amid  all  the  bustle  of  the  camp,  he  made  observations
for  his  theory  of  color;  and  as  soon  as  the  numberless
calamities  of  that  war  allowed  of  his  retiring  for  a  short
time  to  the  fortress  of  Luxembourg,  he  took  up  the  manu-
script of  his  "  Farbenlehre."  This  is  an  example  which  we,
the  salt  of  the  earth,  should  endeavor  to  follow,  by  never  let-
ting anything  disturb  us  in  the  pursuit  of  our  intellectual
life,  however  much  the  storm  of  the  world  may  invade  and
agitate  our  personal  environment;  always  remembering  that
we  are  the  sons,  not  of  the  bondwoman,  but  of  the  free.
As  our  emblem  and  coat  of  arms,  I  propose  a  tree  mightily
shaken  by  the  wind,  but  still  bearing  its  ruddy  fruit  oa
every  branch;  with  the  motto  Bum  convellor  mUescuntt
or  Conquassata  sed  ferax.

That  purely  intellectual  life  of  the  individual  has  its
counterpart  in  humanity  as  a  whole.  For  there,  too,  the
real  life  is  the  life  of  the  will,  both  in  the  empirical  and  in
the  transcendental  meaning  of  the  word.  The  purely  in-
tellectual life  of  humanity  lies  in  its  effort  to  increase
knowledge  by  means  of  the  sciences,  and  its  desire  to  per-
fect the  arts.     Both  science  and  art  thus  advance  slowly


ON  GENIUS.  .  3C5

from  one  generation  to  another,  and  grow  with  the  cen-
turies, every  race  as  it  hurries  by  furnishing  its  contribu-
tion. This  intellectual  life,  like  some  gift  from  heaven,
hovers  over  the  stir  and  movement  of  the  world;  or  it  is,
as  it  were,  a  sweet-scented  air  developed  out  of  the  ferment
itself — the  real  life  of  mankind,  dominated  by  will;  and
side  by  side  with  the  history  of  nations,  the  history  of  phi-
losophy, science  and  art  takes  its  innocent  and  bloodless
way.

The  difference  between  the  genius  and  the  ordinary  man
is,  no  dcubt,  a  quantitative  one,  in  so  far  as  it  is  a  diffei-
ence  of  degree;  but  I  am  tempted  to  regard  it  also  as  qual-
itative, in  view  of  the  fact  that  ordinary  minds,  notwith-
standing individual  variation,  have  a  certain  tendency  to
think  alike.  Thus  on  similar  occasions  their  thoughts  at
once  all  take  a  similar  direction,  and  run  on  the  same  lines;
and  this  explains  why  their  judgments  constantly  agree —
not,  however,  because  they  are  based  on  truth.  To  such
lengths  does  this  go  that  certain  fundamental  views  obtain
among  mankind  at  all  times,  and  are  always  being  re-
peated and  brought  forward  anew,  while  the  great  minds
of  all  ages  are  in  open  or  secret  opposition  to  them.

A  genius  is  a  man  in  whose  mind  the  world  is  presented
as  an  object  is  presented  in  a  mirror,  but  with  a  degree
more  of  clearness  and  a  greater  distinction  of  outline  than
is  attained  by  ordinary  people.  It  is  from  him  that  human-
ity may  look  for  most  instruction;  for  the  deepest  insight
into  the  most  important  matters  is  to  be  acquired,  not  by
an  observant  attention  to  detail,  but  by  a  close  study  of
things  as  a  whole.  And  if  his  mind  reaches  maturity,  the
instruction  he  gives  will  be  conveyed  now  in  one  form,
now  in  another.  Thus  genius  may  be  defined  as  an  emi-
nently clear  consciousness  of  things  in  general,  and  there-
fore, also  of  that  which  is  opposed  to  them,  namely,  one's
own  self.

The  world  looks  up  to  a  man  thus  endowed,  and  expects
to  learn  something  about  life  and  its  real  nature.  But  sev-
eral highly  favorable  circumstances  must  combine  to  pro-
duce genius,  and  this  is  a  very  rare  event.  It  happens  only
now  and  then,  let  us  say  once  in  a  century,  that  a  man  is
born  whose  intellect  so  perceptibly  surpasses  the  norma'
measure  as  to  amount  to  that  second  faculty  which  seems
to  be  accidental,  as  it  is  out  of  all  relation  to  the  will.     He


366  THE  ART  OF  LITERATURE.

may  remaiu  a  long  time  without  being  recognized  or  ap*
predated,  stupidity  preventing  the  one  and  envy  the  other.
But  should  this  once  come  to  pass,  mankind  will  crowd
round  him  and  his  works,  in  the  hope  that  he  may  be  able
to  enlighten  some  of  the  darkness  of  their  existence  or  in-
form them  about  it.  His  message  is,  to  some  extent,  a
revelation,  and  he  himself  a  higher  being,  even  though  he
may  be  but  little  above  the  ordinary  standard.

Like  the  ordinary  man,  the  genius  is  what  he  is  chiefly
for  himself.  This  is  essential  to  his  nature,  a  fact  which
can  neither  be  avoided  nor  altered.  What  he  may  be  for
others  remains  a  matter  of  chance  and  secondary  impor-
tance. In  no  case  can  people  receive  from  his  mind  more
than  a  reflection,  and  then  only  when  he  joins  with  them
in  the  attempt  to  get  his  thought  into  their  heads;  where,
however,  it  is  never  anything  but  an  exotic  plant,  stunted
and  frail.

In  order  to  have  original,  uncommon,  and  perhaps  eveu
immortal  thoughts,  it  is  enough  to  estrange  one's  self  sc
fully  from  the  world  of  things  for  a  few  moments,  that  the
most  ordinary  objects  and  events  appear  quite  new  and  un-
familiar. In  this  way  their  true  nature  is  disclosed.  What
is  here  demanded  cannot,  perhaps,  be  said  to  be  difficult:
it  is  not  in  our  power  at  all,  but  is  just  the  province  of
genius.

By  itself,  genius  can  produce  original  thoughts  just  as
little  as  a  woman  by  herself  can  bear  children.  Outward
circumstances  must  come  to  fructify  genius,  and  be,  as  it
were,  a  father  to  its  progeny.

The  mind  of  genius  is  among  other  minds  what  the  car-
buncle is  among  precious  stones:  it  sends  forth  light  of  its
own,  while  the  others  reflect  only  that  which  they  have
received.  The  relation  of  the  genius  to  the  ordinary  mind
may  also  be  described  as  that  of  an  idio- electrical  body
to  one  which  merely  is  a  conductor  of  electricity.

The  mere  man  of  learning,  who  spends  his  life  in  teach-
ing what  he  has  learned,  is  not  strictly  to  be  called  a  man
of  genius;  just  as  idio-electrical  bodies  are  not  conductors.
Nay,  genius  stands  to  mere  learning  as  the  words  to  the
music  in  a  song.  A  man  of  learning  is  a  man  who  has
learned  a  great  deal;  a  man  of  genius,  one  from  whom  we
learn  something  which  the   genius    has  learned   from    no


ON  GENIUS.  361}

body.  Great  minds,  of  wnich  there  is  scarcely  one  in  a
hundred  millions,  are  thus  the  lighthouses  of  humanity;
and  without  them  mankind  would  lose  itself  in  the  bound-
less sea  of  monstrous  error  and  bewilderment.

And  so  the  simple  man  of  learning;  in  the  strict  sense  of
the  word — the  ordinary  professor,  for  instance — looks
upon  the  genius  much  as  we  look  upon  a  hare,  which  is
good  to  eat  after  it  has  been  killed  and  dressed  up.  So
Vong  as  it  is  alive,  it  is  only  good  to  shoot  at.

He  who  wishes  to  experience  gratitude  from  his  contem-
poraries, must  adjust  his  pace  to  theirs.  But  great  things  are
never  produced  in  this  way.  And  he  who  wants  to  do
great  things  must  direct  his  gaze  to  posterity,  and  in  firm
confidence  elaborate  his  work  for  coming  generations.
No  doubt,  the  result  may  be  that  he  will  quite  remain  quite
unknown  to  his  contemporaries,  and  comparable  to  a  man
who,  compelled  to  spend  his  life  upon"  a  lonely  island,  with
great  effort  sets  up  a  monument  there,  to  transmit  to  fu-
ture seafarers  the  knowledge  of  his  existence.  If  he  thinks
it  a  hard  fate,  let  him  console  himself  with  the  reflection
that  the  ordinary  man  who  lives  for  practical  aims  only,
often  suffers  a  like  fate,  without  having  any  compensation
to  hope  for;  inasmuch  as  he  may, under  favorable  conditions,
spend  a  life  of  material  production,  earning,  buying,  build-
ing fertilizing,  laying  out,  founding,  establishing,  beautify-
ing, with  daily  effort  and  unflagging  zeal,  and  all  the  timo
think  that  he  is  working  for  himself;  and  yet  in  the  end
"It  is  his  descendants  who  reap  the  benefit  of  it  all,  and
sometimes  not  even  his  descendants.  It  is  the  same  with
the  man  of  genius;  he,  too  hopes  for  his  reward  and  for
honor  at  least;  and  at  last  finds  that  he  has  worked  for
posterity  alone.  Both,  to  be  sure,  have  inherited  a  great
deal  from  their  ancestors.

The  compensation  I  have  mentioned  as  the  privilege  of
genius  lies,  not  in  what  it  is  to  others,  but  in  what  it  is  to
itself.  What  man  has  in  any  real  sense  lived  more  than  he
whose  moments  of  thought  make  their  echoes  heard
through  the  tumult  of  centuries?  Perhaps,  after  all,  it
would  be  the  best  thing  for  a  genius  to  attain  undisturbed
possession  of  himself,  by  spending  his  life  in  enjoying  the
pleasure  of  his  own  thoughts,  his  own  works,  and  bjf
admitting  the  world  only  as  the  heir  of  his  ample  existence.


B68  WE  ART  OF  LITERATURE.

Then  the  world  would  find  the  mark  of  his  existence  only
after  his  death,  like  the  marks  in  the  Ichnolith.*

Nor  is  it  only  in  the  activity  of  his  highest  powers  that
the  genius  surpasses  ordinary  people.  A  man  who  is
unusually  well-knit,  supple  and  agile,  will  perform  all  his
movements  with  exceptional  ease,  even  with  comfort,
because  he  takes  a  direct  pleasure  in  an  activity  for  which
he  is  particularly  well-equipped,  and  therefore  often  exer-
cises it  without  any  object.  Further,  if  he  is  an  acrobat
or  a  dancer,  not  only  does  he  take  leaps  which  other  people
cannot  execute,  but  he  also  betrays  rare  elasticity  and
agility  in  those  easier  steps  which  others  can  also  perform,
and  even  in  ordinary  walking.  In  the  same  way  a  man  of
superior  mind  will  not  only  produce  thoughts  and  works
which  could  never  have  come  from  another;  it  will  not  be
here  alone  that  he  will  show  his  greatness;  but  as  knowl-
3dge  and  thought  form  a  mode  of  activity  natural  and  easy
to  him,  he  will  also  delight  himself  in  them  at  all  times,
and  so  apprehend  small  matters  which  are  within  the
range  of  other  minds,  more  easily,  quickly  and  correctly
than  they.  Thus  he  will  take  a  direct  and  lively  pleasure
in  every  increase  of  knowledge,  every  problem  solved,
every  witty  thought,  whether  of  his  own  or  another's;  and
so  his  mind  will  have  no  further  aim  than  to  be  constantly
active.  This  will  be  an  inexhaustible  spring  of  delight;
and  boredom,  that  specter  which  haunts  the  ordinary  man,
can  never  come  near  him.

Then,  too,  the  masterpieces  of  past  and  contemporary
men  of  genius  exist  in  their  fullness  for  him  alone.  If  a
great  product  of  genius  is  recommended  to  the  ordinary,
simple  mind,  it  will  take  as  much  pleasure  in  it  as  the
victim  of  gout  receives  in  being  invited  to  a  ball.  The
one  goes  for  the  sake  of  formality,  and  the  other  reads  the
book  so  as  not  to  be  in  arrear.  For  La  Bruyere  was  quite
right  when  he  said:  "All  the  wit  in  the  world  is  lost  upon
him  who  has  none."  The  whole  range  of  thought  of  a
man  of  talent,  or  of  a  genius,  compared  with  the  thoughts
of  the  common  man,  is,  even  when  directed  to  objects
essentially  the   same,  like  a  brilliant  oil-painting,   full  of

*  Translator's  Note. — For  an  illustration  of  this  feeling  in  poetry  t
Schopenhauer  refers  the  reader  to  Byron's  "  Prophecy  of  Dante;*
introd.  to  C.  4.


ON  GENIUS.  369

life,  compared  with  a  mere  outline  or  a  weak  sketch  in
water-color.

All  this  is  part  of  the  reward  of  genius,  and  compensates
him  for  a  lonely  existence  in  a  world  with  which  he  has
nothing  in  common  and  no  sympathies.  But  since  size  is
relative,  it  comes  to  the  same  thing  whether  I  say,  Caius
was  a  great  man,  or  Caius  has  to  live  among  wretchedly
small  people;  for  Brobdingnag  and  Lilliput  vary  only  in
the  point  from  which  they  start.  However  great,  then,
however  admirable  and  instructive,  a  long  posterity  may
think  the  author  of  immortal  works,  during  his  lifetime  lie
will  appear  to  his  contemporaries  small,  wretched,  and
insipid  in  proportion.  This  is  what  I  mean  by  saying  that
as  there  are  three  hundred  degrees  from  the  base  of  a  tower
to  the  summit,  so  there  are  exactly  three  hundred  from  the
summit  to  the  base.  Great  minds  thus  owe  little  ones
some  indulgence;  for  it  is  only  in  virtue  of  these  little
minds  that  they  themselves  are  great.

Let  us,  then,  not  be  surprised  if  we  find  men  of  genius
generally  unsociable  and  repellent.  It  is  not  their  waut  of
sociability  that  is  to  blame.  Their  path  through  the
world  is  like  that  of  a  man  who  goes  for  a  walk  on  a  bright
summer  morning.  He  gazes  with  delight  on  the  beauty
and  freshness  of  nature,  but  he  has  to  rely  wholly  on  that
for  entertainment;  for  he  can  find  no  society  but  the  peas-
ants as  they  bend  over  the  earth  and  cultivate  the  soil.  It
is  often  the  case  that  a  great  mind  prefers  soliloquy  to  the
dialogue  he  may  have  in  this  world.  If  he  condescends  to
it  now  and  then,  the  hollowness  of  it  may  possibly  drive
him  back  to  his  soliloquy;  for  in  forgetfulness  of  his  inter-
locutor, or  caring  little  whether  he  understands  or  not,  he
talks  to  him  as  a  child  talks  to  a  doll.

Modesty  in  a  great  mind  would,  no  doubt,  "be  pleasing  to
the  world;  but,  unluckily,  it  is  a  contradictio  in  adjecto.  It
would  compel  a  genius  to  give  the  thoughts  and  opinions,
nay,  even  the  method  and  style,  of  the  million  preference
over  his  own;  to  set  a  higher  value  upon  them;  and,  wide
apart  as  they  are,  to  bring  his  views  into  harmony  with
theirs,  or  even  suppress  them  altogether,  so  as  to  let  the
others  hold  the  field.  In  that  case,  however,  he  would
either  produce  nothing  at  all,  or  else  his  achievements
would  be  just  upon  a  level  with  theirs.  Great,  genuine
and    extraordinary   work    can    be    done   only  in   so   far


3 70  TIT  ft  ART  OF  L TTERA 7  (IRE.

as  its  author  disregards  the  method,  the  thoughts,  the
opinions  of  his  contemporaries,  itnd  quietly  works  on,  in
*pite  of  their  criticism,  on  his  side  despising  what  they
praise.  No  one  becomes  great  without  arrogance  of  this
sort.  Should  his  life  and  work  fall  upon  a  time  which
cannot  recognize  and  appreciate  him,  he  is  at  any  rate  true
to  himself;  like  some  noble  traveler  forced  to  pass  the  nigh;
in  a  miserable  inn;  when  morning  comes,  he  contentedly
goes  his  way.

A  poet  or  philosopher  should  have  no  fault  to  find  with
his  age  if  it  only  permits  him  to  do  his  work  undisturbed
in  his  own  corner;  nor  with  his  fate  if  the  corner  granted
him  allows  of  his  following  his  vocation  without  having  to
think  about  other  people.

For  the  brain  to  be  a  mere  laborer  in  the  service  of  the
belly,  is  indeed  the  common  lot  of  almost  all  those  who  do
not  live  on  the  work  of  their  hands;  and  they  are  far  from
being  discontented  with  their  lot.  But  it  strikes  despair
into  a  man  of  great  mind,  whose  brain-power  goes  beyond
the  measure  necessary  for  the  service  of  the  will;  and  he
prefers,  if  need  be,  to  live  in  the  narrowest  circumstances,
so  long  as  they  afford  him  the  free  use  of  his  time  for  the
development  and  application  of  his  faculties;  in  other
words,  if  they  give  him  che  leisure  which  is  invaluable  to
him.  It  is  otherwise  with  ordinary  people;  for  them  leisure
has  no  value  in  itself,  nor  is  it,  indeed,  without  its  dangers,
as  these  people  seem  to  know.  The  technical  work  of  our
time,  which  is  done  to  an  unprecedented  perfection,  has,
by  increasing  and  multiplying  objects  of  luxury,  given  the
favorites  of  fortune  a  choice  between  more  leisure  and  cul-
ture upon  one  side,  and  additional  luxury  and  good  living,
but  with  increased  activity,  upon  the  other;  and,  true  to
their  character,  they  choose  the  latter,  and  prefer  cham-
pagne to  freedom.  And  they  are  consistent  in  their
choice;  for,  to  them,  every  exertion  of  the  mind  which
does  not  serve  the  aims  of  the  will  is  folly.  Intellectual
effort  foi  its  own  sake,  they  call  eccentricity.  Therefore,
persistence  in  the  aims  of  the  will  and  the  belly  will  be
concentricity;  and,  to  be  sure,  the  will  is  the  center,  the
kernel  of  the  world.

But  in  general  it  is  very  seldom  that  any  such  alterna-
tive is  presented.  For  as  with  money,  most  men  have  no
superfluity,  but  only  just  enough  for  their  needs,  so  with


OS  GENIUS.  3ti

intelligence;  they  possess  just  what  will  suffice  for  the
service  of  the  will,  that  is,  for  the  carrying  on  of  theii
business.  Having  made  their  fortune,  they  are  content  to
gape  or  to  indulge  in  sensual  pleasures  or  childish  amuse-
ments, cards  or  dice;  or  they  will  talk  in  the  dullest  way,
or  dress  up  and  make  obeisance  to  one  another.  And  ho\r
few  are  those  who  have  even  a  little  superfluity  of  intellect
u al  power!  Like  the  others  they  too  make  themselves  a
pleasure;  but  it  is  a  pleasure  of  the  intellect.  Either  they
will  pursue  some  liberal  study  which  brings  them  in  noth-
ing, or  they  will  practice  some  art;  and,  in  general,
they  will  be  capable  of  taking  an  objective  interest  in
things,  so  that  it  will  be  possible  to  converse  with  them.
But  with  the  others  it  is  better  not  to  enter  into  any  rela-
tions at  all;  for,  except  when  they  tell  the  results  of  their
own  experience  or  give  an  account  of  their  special  vocation,
or  at  any  rate  impart  what  they  have  learned  from  some-
one else,  their  conversation  will  not  be  worth  listening  to;
and  if  anything  is  said  to  them,  they  will  rarely  grasp  01
understand  it  aright,  and  it  will  in  most  cases  be  opposed
to  their  own  opinions.  Balthazar  Gracian  describes  them
very  strikingly  as  men  who  are  not  men — Itombres  cite  non
Jo  son.  And  Giordano  Bruno  says  the  same  thing:  "  What
it  difference  there  is  in  having  to  do  with  men  compared
with  those  who  are  only  made  in  their  image  and  like-
ness! *  And  how  wonderfully  this  passage  agrees  with  that-
remark  in  the  Kurral:  The  common  people  look  like  mer,-
but  I  have  never  seen  anything  quite  like  them."  If  the
reader  will  consider  the  extent  to  which  these  ideas  agree
in  thought  and  even  in  expression,  and  the  wide  difference
between  them  in  point  of  date  and  nationality,  he  cannot
doubt  but  that  they  are  at  one  with  the  facts  of  life.  It
was  certainly  not  under  the  influence  of  those  passages
that,  about  twenty  years  ago,  I  tried  to  get  a  snuff-bcT
made  the  lid  of  which  should  have  two  fine  chestnuts  rep-
resented upon  it,  if  possible  in  mosaic;  together  with  a
leaf  which  was  to  show  that  they  were  horse-chestnuts.
This  symbol  was  meant  to  keep  the  thought  constantly  be-
fore my  mind.  If  any  one  wishes  for  entertainment,  such
as  will  prevent  him  feeling  solitary  even  when  he  is  alone,
let  me  recommend  the  company  of  dogs,  whose  moral  and

*  Opera:  ed.  Warner,  I.  224.


372  THE  ART  GF  LITERATURE?.

intellectual  qualities  may  almost  always  afford  delight  and
gratification.

Still,  we  should  always  be  careful  to  avoid  being  unjust.
I  am  often  surprised  by  the  cleverness,  and  now  and  again
by  the  stupidity,  of  my  dog;  and  I  have  similar  experi-
ences with  mankind.  Countless  times,  in  indignation  at
their  incapacity,  their  total  lack  of  discernment,  their
bestiality,  I  have  been  forced  to  echo  the  old  complaint
that  folly  is  the  mother  and  Khe  nurse  of  the  human
race:

"  Huniani  generis  mater  nutrixque  profecto
Stultitia  est."

But  at  other  times  I  have  been  astounded  that  from  such  a
race  there  could  have  gone  forth  so  many  arts  and  sciences,
abounding  in  so  much  use  and  beauty,  even  though  it  has
always  been  the  few  that  produce  tliem.  Yet  these  arts
and  sciences  have  struck  root,  established  and  perfected
themselves;  and  the  race  has  with  persistent  fidelity  pre-
served Homer,  Plato,  Horace  and  others  for  thousands  of
years,  by  copying  and  treasuring  their  writings,  thus  sav-
ing them  from  oblivion,  in  spite  of  all  the  evils  and
atrocities  that  have  happened  in  the  world.  Thus  the
race  has  proved  that  it  appreciates  the  value  of  these  things,
arid  at  the  same  time  it  can  form  a  correct  view  of  special
achievements  or  estimate  signs  of  judgment  and  intelli-
gence. When  this  takes  place  among  those  who  belong
to  the  great  multitude,  it  is  by  a  kind  of  inspiration.
Sometimes  a  correct  opinion  will  be  formed  by  the  multi-
tude itself;  but  this  is  only  when  the  chorus  of  praise  has
grown  full  and  complete.  It  is  then  like  the  sound  of  un-
trained voices;  where  there  are  enough  of  them,  it  is
always  harmonious.

Those  who  emerge  from  the  multitude,  those  who  are
called  men  of  genius,  are  merely  the  lucida  intervalla  of
the  whole  human  race.  They  achieve  that  which  others
could  not  possibly  achieve.  Their  originality  is  so  great
that  not  only  is  their  divergence  from  others  obvious,  but
their  individuality  is  expressed  with  such  force,  that  all
the  men  of  genius  who  have  ever  existed  show,  every  one  of
them,  peculiarities  of  character  and  mind;  so  that  the
gift  of  his  works  is  one  which  he  alone  of  all  men  could
ever   have   presented   to  the  world.     This  is  what  maken


ON  GENIUS.  373

that  simile  of  Ariosto's  so  true  and  so  justly  celebrated:
Naiura  lofece  e  poi  ruppe  lo  stampo.  After  Nature  stamps
41  man  of  genius,  she  breaks  the  die.

But  there  is  always  a  limit  to  human  capacity;  and  no
one  can  be  a  great  genius  without  having  some  decidedly
weak  side,  it  may  even  be  some  intellectual  narrowness.
fn  other  words,  there  will  be  some  faculty  in  which  he  is
now  and  then  inferior  to  men  of  moderate  endowments.
It  will  be  a  faculty  which,  if  strong,  might  have  been  an
obstacle  to  the  exercise  of  the  qualities  in  which  he  excels.
What  this  weak  point  is,  it  will  always  be  hard  to  define
with  any  accuracy  even  in  a  given  case.  It  may  be  better
expressed  indirectly;  thus  Plato's  weak  point  is  exactly
that  in  which  Aristotle  is  strong,  and  vice  versa;  ar^d  so,
too,  Kant  is  deficient  just  where  Goethe  is  great.

Now,  mankind  is  fond  of  venerating  something;  but  its
veneration  is  generally  directed  to  the  wrong  object,  and  it
remains  so  directed  until  posterity  comes  to  set  it  right.
But  the  educated  public  is  no  sooner  set  right  in  this,  than
the  honor  which  is  due  to  genius  degenerates;  just  as  the
honor  which  the  faithful  pay  to  their  saints  easily  passeo
into  a  frivolous  worship  of  relics.  Thousands  of  Christians
adore  the  relics  of  a  saint  whose  life  and  doctrine  are  un-
known to  them;  and  the  religion  of  thousands  of  Buddhists
lies  more  in  veneration  of  the  Holy  Tooth  or  some  such
object,  or  the  vessel  that  contains  it,  or  the  Holy  Bowl,
or  the  fossil  foosteps,  or  the  Holy  Tree  which  Buddha
planted,  than  in  the  thorough  knowledge  and  faithful
practice  of  his  high  teaching.  Petrarch's  house  in  Arqua;
Tasso's  supposed  prison  in  Ferrara;  Shakespeare's  house  in
Stratford,  with  his  chair;  Goethe's  house  in  Weimar,  with
its  furniture;  Kant's  old  hat;  the  autographs  of  great
men;  these  things  are  gaped  at  with  interest  and  awe  by
many  who  have  never  read  their  works.  They  cannot  do
anything  more  than  just  gape.

The  intelligent  among  them  are  moved  by  the  wish  to
see  the  objects  which  the  great  man  habitually  had  before
his  eyes;  and  by  a  strange  illusion,  these  produce  the  mis-
taken notion  that  with  the  objects  they  are  bringing  back
the  man  himself,  or  that  something  of  him  must  cling  to
them.  Akin  to  such  people  are  those  who  earnestly  strive
to  acquaint  themselves  with  the  subject  matter  of  a  poet's
works,  or  to  unravel  the  personal  circumstances  and  events


3T4  THE  A  Rl  OF  LITER  A  TUUE

in  his  life  which  have  suggested  particular  passages.  This
is  as  though  the  audience  in  a  theater  were  to  admire  a  fine
scene,  and  then  rush  upon  the  stage  to  look  at  the  scaffold-
ing that  supports  it.  There  are  in  our  day  enough  instances
of  these  critical  investigators,  and  they  prove  the  truth  of
the  saying  that  mankind  is  interested,  not  in  the  form  of  a
work,  that  is,  in  its  manner  of  treatment,  but  in  its  actual
matter.  All  it  cares  for  is  the  theme.  To  read  a  philoso-
pher's biography,,  instead  of  studying  his  thoughts,  is  like
neglecting  a  picture  and  attending  only  to  the  style  of  its
frame,  debating  whether  it  is  carved  well  or  ill,  and  how
much  it  cost  to  gild  it.

This  is  all  very  well.  However,  there  is  another  class  cf
persons  whose  interest  is  also  directed  to  material  and  per-
sonal considerations,  but  they  go  much  further  and  carry
it  to  a  point  where  it  becomes  absolutely  futile.  Because
a  great  man  has  opened  up  to  them  the  treasures  of  his  in-
most being,  and.  by  a  supreme  effort  of  his  faculties,  pro-
duced works  which  not  only  redound  to  their  elevation  and
enlightenment,  but  will  also  benefit  their  posterity  to  the
tenth  and  twentieth  generation;  because  he  has  presented
mankind  with  a  matchless  gift,  these  varlets  think  them-
selves justified  in  sitting  in  judgment  upon  his  personal
morality,  and  trying  if  they  cannot  discover  here  or  there
some  spot  in  him  which  will  soothe  the  pain  they  feel  at  the
sight  of  so  great  a  mind,  compared  with  the  overwhelming
feeling  of  their  own  nothingness.

This  is  the  real  source  of  all  those  prolix  discussions,
carried  on  in  countless  books  and  reviews,  on  the  moral  as-
pect of  Goethe's  life  and  whether  he  ought  not  to  have
married  one  or  other  of  the  girls  with  whom  he  fell  in  love
in  his  young  days;  whether,  again,  instead  of  honestly  de-
voting himself  to  the  service  of  his  master,  he  should  not
have  been  a  man  of  the  people,  a  German  patriot,  worthy
of  a  seat  in  the  Paulskirche,  and  so  on.  Such  crying  in-
gratitude and  malicious  detraction  prove  that  these  self-
constituted  judges  are  as  great  knaves  morally  as  they  are
intellectually,  which  is  saying  a  great  deal.

A  man  of  talent  will  strive  for  money  and  reputation;
but  the  spring  that  moves  genius  to  the  production  of  its
works  is  not  so  easy  to  name.  Wealth  is  seldom  its  re-
ward. Xor  is  it  reputation  or  glory;  only  a  Frenchman
could  mean  that.     Glory  if   «uch  an   uncertain  thing,  and,


ON  GENIUS.  375

if  you  look  at  it  closely,  of  so  little  value.  Besides  it  never
corresponds  to  the  effort  you  have  made:

"  Responsura  tuo  nunquam  est  par  fauna  labori."

Nor,  again,  is  it  exactly  the  pleasure  it  gives  yon;  for  this
is  almost  outweighed  by  the  greatness  of  the  effort.  It  is
rather  a  peculiar  kind  of  instinct,  which  drives  the  man  of
genius  to  give  permanent  form  to  what  he  sees  and  feeis,
without  being  conscious  of  any  further  motive.  It  works,
in  the  main,  by  a  necessity  similar  to  that  which  makes  a
tree  bear  its  fruit;  and  no  external  condition  is  needed  but
the  ground  upon  which  it  is  to  thrive.

On  a  closer  examination,  it  seems  as  though,  in  the  case
of  a  genius,  the  will  to  live,  which  is  the  spirit  of  the  hu-
man species,  were  conscious  of  having  by  some  rare  chance,
and  for  a  brief  period,  attained  a  greater  clearness  of  vi-
sion, and  were  now  trying  to  secure  it,  or  at  least  the  out-
come of  it,  for  the  whole  species,  to  which  the  individual
genius  in  his  inmost  being  belongs;  so  that  the  light  which
he  sheds  about  him  may  pierce  the  darkness  and  dullness  of
ordinary  human  consciousness  and  there  produce  some
good  effect.

Arising  in  some  such  way,  this  instinct  drives  the  genius
to  carry  his  work  to  completion,  without  thinking  of  re-
ward or  applause  or  sympathy;  to  leave  all  care  for  his
own  personal  welfare;  to  make  his  life  one  of  industrious
solitude^  and  to  strain  his  faculties  to  the  utmost.  He
thus  comes  to  think  more  about  posterity  than  about  con-
temporaries; because,  while  the  latter  can  only  lead  him
astray,  posterity  forms  the  majority  of  the  species,  and
time  will  gradually  bring  the  discerning  few  who  can  ap-
preciate him.  Meanwhile  it  is  with  him  as  with  the  artist
described  by  Goethe;  he  has  no  princely  patron  to  prize  his
talents,  no  friend  to  rejoice  with  him:

"Ein  Furst  der  die  Talente  schatzt,
Ein  Freund  der  sicli  mit  mir  ergotzt,
Die  haben  leider  mir  gefehlt."

His  work  is,  as  it  were,  a  sacred  object  and  the  true  fruit
of  his  life,  and  his  aim  in  storing  it  away  for  a  more  dis-
cerning posterity  will  be  to  make  it  the  property  of  man-
kind. An  aim  like  this  far  surpasses  all  others,  and  for  it
lie  wears  the  crown  of  thorns  which  is  one  day  to  bloom


376  THE  ART  OF  LITERA  TUBE.

into  a  wreath  of  laurel.  All  his  powers  are  concentrated
in  the  effort  to  complete  and  secure  his  work;  just  as  the
insect,  in  the  last  stage  of  its  development,  uses  its  whole
strength  on  behalf  of  a  brood  it  will  never  live  to  see;  it
puts  its  eggB  in  some  place  of  safety,  where,  as  it  well
knows,  the  young  will  one  day  find  life  and  nourishment
and  then  dies  in  confidence.


STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM


NOTE.

"Jhe  essays  here  presented  form  a  further  selection  from
Schopenhauer's  "Parerga,"  brought  together  under  a  title
which  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  original,  and  does  not
claim  to  apply  to  every  chapter  in  the  volume.  The  first
essay  is,  in  the  main,  a  rendering  of  the  philosophers  re-
marks under  the  heading  of  "  Nachtrage  zur  Lehre  vom
Leiden  der  Welt,"  together  with  certain  parts  of  another
seGtion  entitled  "  Nachtrage  zur  Lehre  von  der  Bejahung
n nd  Verneinung  des  Willens  ziun  Leben."  Such  omissions
as  I  have  made  are  directed  chiefly  by  the  desire  to  avoid
repeating  arguments  already  familiar  to  the  readers  of  the
other  volumes  in  this  series.  The  "  Dialogue  on  Immor-
tality "  sums  up  views  expressed  at  length  in  the  philoso-
pher's chief  work,  and  treated  again  in  the  "  Parerga."  The
psychological  observations  in  this  and  the  previous  volume
practically  exhaust  the  chapter  of  the  original  which  bears
this  title.

The  essay  on  ' '  Women  "  must  not  be  taken  in  jest.  It  ex-
presses Schopenhauer's  serious  convictions;  and,  as  a  pene-
trating observer  of  the  faults  of  humanity,  he  may  be
allowed  a  hearing  on  a  question  which  is  just  now  receiving
a  good  deal  of  attention  among  us.

T.  B.  S.


STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM,


ON  THE  SUFFERINGS  OF  THE  WORLD.

Unless  suffering  is  the  direct  and  immediate  object  of
life,  our  existence  must  entirely  fail  of  its  aim.  It  is  ab-
surd to  look  upon  the  enormous  amount  of  pain  that
abounds  everywhere  in  the  world,  and  originates  in  needs
and  necessities  inseparable  from  life  itself,  as  serving  no
purpose  at  all  and  the  result  of  mere  chance.  Each  sepa-
ate  misfortune,  as  it  comes,  seems,  no  doubt,  to  be  some-
thing exceptional;  but  misfortune  in  general  is  the  rule.

I  know  of  no  greater  absurdity  than  that  propounded  by
most  systems  of  philosophy  in  declaring  evil  to  be  negative
in  its  character.  Evil  is  just  what  is  positive;  it  makes
its  own  existence  felt.  Leibnitz  is  particularly  concerned
to  defend  this  absurdity;  and  he  seeks  to  strengthen  his
position  by  using  a  palpable  and  paltry  sophism.*  It  is
the  good  which  is  negative:  in  other  words,  happiness  and
satisfaction  always  imply  some  desire  fulfilled,  some  state
of  pain  brought  to  an  end.

This  explains  the  fact  that  we  generally  find  pleasure  to
be  not  nearly  so  pleasant  as  we  expected,  and  pain  very
much  more  painful.

The  pleasure  in  this  world,  it  has  been  said,  outweighs
the  pain;  or,  at  any  rate,  there  is  an  even  balance  between
the  two.     If  the  reader  wishes  to  see  shortly  whether  this

Translator's  Note  cf  Y/teod;  §153  Leibnitz  argued  that  evil  is  a  neg-
ative quality — i.e.,  the  absence  of  good:  and  that  its  active  and  seem-
ingly positive  character  is  an  incidental  and  not  an  essential  part  of
its  nature.  Cold,  he  said,  is  only  the  absence  of  the  power  of  heat,
*nd  the  active  power  of  expansion  in  freezing  water  is  an  incidental
and  not  an  essential  part  of  the  nature  of  cold.  The  fact  is,  that  the
power  of  expansion  in  freezing  water  is  really  an  increase  of  repul-
sion among  its  molecules;  and  Schopenhauer  is  quite  right  in  calling
the  whole  argument  a  sophism.


3£2  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

statement  is  true,  let  him  compare  the  respective  feelings
of  two  animals,  one  of  which  is  engaged  in  eating  the
other.

The  best  consolation  in  misfortune  or  affliction  of  any
kind  will  be  thought  of  other  people  who  are  in  a  still
worse  plight  than  yourself;  and  this  is  a  form  of  consola-
tion open  to  every  one.  But  what  an  awful  fate  this
means  for  mankind  as  a  whole!

We  are  like  lambs  in  a  field,  disporting  themselves  under
the  eye  of  the  butcher,  who  chooses  out  first  one  and  then
another  for  his  prey.  So  it  is  that  in  our  good  days  we  are
all  unconscious  of  the  evil  fate  may  have  presently  in  store
for  us — sickness,  poverty,  mutilation,  loss  of  sight  or
reason.

No  little  part  of  the  torment  of  existence  lies  in  this,
that  Time  is  continually  pressing  upon  us,  never  letting  us
take  breath,  but  always  coming  after  us,  like  a  taskmaster
witli  a  whip.  If  at  any  moment  Time  stays  his  hand,  it  is
only  when  we  are  delivered  over  to  the  misery  of  boredom.

But  misfortune  has  its  uses;  for,  as  our  bodily  frame
would  burst  asunder  if  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  were
removed,  so,  if  the  lives  of  men  were  relieved  of  all  need,
hardship  and  adversity;  if  everything  they  took  in  hand
were  successful,  they  would  be  so  swollen  with  arrogance
that,  though  they  might  not  burst,  they  would  present  the
spectacle  of  unbridled  folly — nay,  they  would  go  mad.  And
I  may  say,  further,  that  a  certain  amount  of  care  or  pain
or  trouble  is  necessary  for  every  man  at  all  times.  A  ship
without  ballast  is  unstable  and  will  not  go  straight.

Certain  it  is  that  work,  worry,  labor  and  trouble,  form
the  lot  of  almost  all  men  their  whole  life  long.  But  if  all
wishes  were  fulfilled  as  soon  as  they  arose,  how  would  men
occupy  their  lives?  what  would  they  do  with  their  time?
If  the  world  were  a  paradise  of  luxury  and  ease,  a  land
flowing  with  milk  and  hone},  where  every  Jack  obtained
his  Jill  at  once  and  without  any  difficulty,  men  would
either  die  of  boredom  or  hang  themselves;  or  there  would
be  wars,  massacres,  and  murders;  so  that  in  the  end  man-
kind would  inflict  more  suffering  on  itself  than  it  has  now
to  accept  at  the  hands  of  Nature.

In  early  youth,  as  we  contemplate  our  coming  life,  we
are  like  children  in  a  theater  before  the  curtain  is  raised,
sitting  there  in  high   spirits  and  eagerly  waiting  for  the


ON  THE  SUFFERINGS  OF  THE  WORLD.  333

play  to  begin.  It  is  a  blessing  that  we  do  not  know  what
is  really  going  to  happen.  Could  we  foresee  it,  there  are
times  when  children  might  seem  like  innocent  prisoners,
condemned  not  to  death,  but  to  life,  and  as  yet  all  uncon-
scious of  what  their  sentence  means.  Nevertheless,  every
man  desires  to  reach  old  age;  in  other  words,  a  state
of  life  of  which  it  may  be  said:  "  It  is  bad  to-day,  and
it  will  be  worse  to-morrow  and  so  on  till  the  worst  of
all."

If  you  try  to  imagine,  as  nearly  as  you  can,  what  an
amount  of  misery,  pain  and  suffering  of  every  kind  the  sun
shines  upon  in  its  course,  you  will  admit  that  it  would  be
much  better  if  on  the  earth  as  little  as  on  the  moon  the
sun  were  able  to  call  forth  the  phenomena  of  life;  and
if,  here  as  there  the  surface  were  still  in  a  crystalline
state.

Again,  you  may  look  upon  life  as  an  unprofitable  epi-
sode, disturbing  the  blessed  calm  of  non-existence.  And,
in  any  case,  even  though  things  have  gone  with  you  toler-
ably well,  the  longer  you  live  the  more  clearly  you  will
feel  that,  on  the  whole,  life  is  a  disappointment,  nay,  a
cheat.

If  two  men  who  were  friends  in  their  youth  meet  again
when  they  are  old,  after  being  separated  for  a  lifetime,
the  chief  feeling  they  will  have  at  the  sight  of  each  other
will  be  one  of  complete  disappointment  at  life  as  a  whole;
because  their  thoughts  will  be  carried  back  to  that  earlier
time  when  life  seemed  so  fair  as  it  lay  spread  out  before
them  in  the  rosy  light  of  dawn,  promised  so  much — and
then  performed  so  little.  This  feeling  will  so  completely
predominate  over  every  other  that  they  will  not  even  con-
sider it  necessary  to  give  it  words;  but  on  either  side  it  will,
be  silently  assumed,  and  form  the  ground-work  of  all  they
have  to  talk  about.

He  who  lives  to  see  two  or  three  generations  is  like  a  man
who  sits  some  time  in  the  conjurer  s  booth  at  a  fair,  and
witnesses  the  performance  twice  or  thrice  in  succession.
The  tricks  were  meant  to  be  seen  only  once;  and  when  they
are  no  longer  a  novelty  and  cease  to  deceive,  their  effect  is
gone.

While  no  man  is  much  to  be  envied  for  his  lot,  there  are-
countless  numbers  whose  fate  is  to  be  deplored.

Life  is  a  task  to  be  done.  It  is  a  fine  thing  to  say  de~
fuActus  est;  it  means  that  the  man  has  done  his  task.


384  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

If  children  were  brought  into  the  world  by  an  act  of
pure  reason  alone,  would  the  human  race  continue  to  exist?
Would  not  a  man  rather  have  so  much  sympathy  with  the
coming  generation  as  to  spare  it  the  burden  of  existence?
or  at  any  rate  not  take  it  upon  himself  to  impose  that  bur-
den upon  it  in  cold  blood.

I  shall  be  told,  I  suppose,  that  my  philosophy  is  com-
fortless— because  I  speak  the  truth;  and  people  prefer  to
be  assured  that  everything  the  Lord  has  made  is  good.
Go  to  the  priests,  then,  and  leave  philosophers  in  peace.
At  any  rate,  do  not  ask  us  to  accommodate  our  doctrines
to  the  lessons  you  have  been  taught.  That  is  what  those
rascals  of  sham  philosophers  will  do  for  you.  Ask  them
for  any  doctrine  you  please,  and  you  will  get  it.  Your
University  professors  are  bound  to  preach  optimism;  and
it  is  an  easy  and  agreeable  task  to  upset  their  theories.

I  have  reminded  the  reader  that  every  state  of  welfare,
every  feeling  of  satisfaction,  is  negative  in  its  character;
that  is  to  say,  it  consists  in  freedom  from  pain,  which  is
the  positive  element  of  existence.  It  follows,  therefore,
that  the  happiness  of  any  given  life  is  to  be  measured,  not
by  its  joys  and  pleasures,  but  by  the  extent  to  which  it  has
been  free  from  suffering — from  positive  evil.  If  this  is  the
true  standpoint,  the  lower  animals  appear  to  enjoy  a  hap-
pier destiny  than  man.  Let  us  examine  the  matter  a  lit-
tle more  closely.

However  varied  the  forms  that  human  happiness  and
misery  may  take,  leading  a  man  to  seek  the  one  and
shun  the  other,  the  material  basis  of  it  all  is  bodily
pleasure  or  bodily  pain.  This  basis  is  very  restricted:
it  is  simply  health,  food,  protection  from  wet  and  cold;
the  satisfaction  of  the  sexual  instinct;  or  else  the  ab-
sence of  these  things.  Consequently,  as  far  as  real  phys-
ical pleasure  is  concerned,  the  man  is  not  better  off  than
the  brute,  except  in  so  far  as  the  higher  possibilities  of  his
nervous  system  make  him  more  sensitive  to  every  kind  of
pleasure,  but  also,  it  must  be  remembered,  to  every  kind
of  pain.  But  then  compared  with  the  brute,  how  much
stronger  are  the  passions  aroused  in  him!  what  an  immeas-
urable difference  there  is  in  the  depth  and  vehemence  of
his  emotions! — and  yet,  in  the  one  case,  as  in  the  other,  all
to  produce  the  same  result  in  the  end:  namely,  health,
food,  clothing:,  and  so  on,


ON  THE  SUFFERINGS  OF  THE  WORLD.  385

The  chief  source  of  all  this  passion  is  that  thought  for
tfhat  is  absent  and  future,  which,  with  man,  exercises  sueh
a  powerful  influence  upon  all  he  does.  It  is  this  that  is
the  real  origin  of  his  cares,  his  hopes,  his  fears — emotions
which  affect  him  more  deeply  than  could  ever  be  the  case
with  those  present  joys  and  sufferings  to  which  the  brute
is  confined.  In  his  powers  of  reflection,  memory  and  fore-
sight, man  possesses,  as  it  were,  a  machine  for  condensing
and  storing  up  his  pleasures  and  his  sorrows.  But  the
brute  has  nothing  of  the  kind;  whenever  it  is  in  pain,  it  is
as  though  it  were  suffering  for  the  first  time,  even  though
the  same  thing  should  have  previously  happened  to  it  times
out  of  number.  It  has  no  power  of  summing  up  its  feel-
ings. Hence  its  careless  and  placid  temper,  how  much  it
is  to  be  envied.  But  in  man  reflection  comes  in,  with  all
the  emotions  to  which  it  gives  rise;  and  taking  up  the
same  elements  of  pleasure  and  pain  which  are  common  to
him  and  the  brute,  it  develops  his  susceptibility  to  happi-
ness and  misery  to  such  a  degree  that,  at  one  moment  the
man  is  brought  in  an  instant  to  a  state  of  delight  that  may
even  prove  fatal,  at  another  to  the  depths  of  despair  and
suicide.

If  we  carry  our  analysis  a  step  farther,  we  shall  find  that,
in  order  to  increase  his  pleasures,  man  has  intentionally
added  to  the  number  and  pressure  of  his  needs,  which  in
their  original  state  were  not  much  more  difficult  to  satisfy
than  those  of  the  brute.  Hence  luxury  in  all  its  forms;
delicate  food,  the  use  of  tobacco  and  opium,  spirituous
liquors,  fine  clothes  and  the  thousand  and  one  things  that
he  considers  necessary  to  his  existence.

And  above  and  beyond  all  this,  there  is  a  separate  and
peculiar  source  of  pleasure,  and  consequently  of  pain,
which  man  has  established  for  himself,  also  as  the  result  of
using  his  powers  of  reflection;  and  this  occupies  him  out
of  all  proportion  to  its  value,  nay,  almost  more  than  all
his  other  interests  put  together— I  mean  ambition  and  the
feeling  of  honor  and  shame;  in  plain  words,  what  he
thinks  about  the  opinion  other  people  have  of  him.  Tak-
ing a  thousand  forms,  often  very  strange  ones,  this  becomes
the  goal  of  almost  all  the  efforts  he  makes  that  are  net
rooted  in  physical  pleasure  or  pain.  It  is  true  that  besides
the  sources  of  pleasure  which  he  has  in  common  with  the
brute,  man  has  the  nleasures  of  the  mind  as  well.     These


386  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

admit  of  many  gradations,  from  the  most  innocent  trifling
or  the  merest  talk  up  to  the  highest  intellectual  achieve-
ments; but  there  is  the  accompanying  boredom  to  be  set
against  them  on  the  side  of  suffering.  Boredom  is  a  form
of  suffering  unknown  to  brutes,  at  any  rate  in  their  natural
state;  it  is  only  the  very  cleverest  of  them  who  show  faint
traces  of  it  when  they  are  domesticated;  whereas  in  the
:;ase  of  man  it  has  become  a  downright  scourge.  The
crowd  of  miserable  wretches  whose  one  aim  in  life  is  to  till
their  purses  but  never  to  put  anything  into  their  heads,
offers  a  singular  instance  of  this  torment  of  boredom.  Their
wealth  becomes  a  punishment  by  deliveiing  them  up  to  the
misery  of  having  nothing  to  do;  for,  to  escape  it,  they  will
rush  about  in  all  directions,  traveling  here,  there  and
everywhere.  No  sooner  do  they  arrive  in  a  place  than  they
are  anxious  to  know  what  amusements  it  affords:  just  as
though  they  were  beggars  asking  where  they  could  receive
a  dole!  Of  a  truth,  need  and  boredom  are  the  two  poles  of
human  life.  Finally,  I  may  mention  that  as  regards  the
sexual  relation,  man  is  committed  to  a  peculiar  arrange-
ment which  drives  him  obstinately  to  choose  one  person.
This  feeling  grows,  now  and  then,  into  a  more  or  less  pas-
sionate love,  *  which  is  the  source  of  little  pleasure  and
much  suffering.

It  is,  however,  a  wonderful  thing  that  the  mere  addition
of  thought  should  serve  to  raise  such  a  vast  and  lofty
structure  of  human  happiness  and  misery,  resting,  too,  on
the  same  narrow  basis  of  joy  and  sorrow  as  man  holds  in
common  with  the  brute,  and  exposing  him  to  such  violent
emotions,  to  so  many  storms  of  passion,  so  much  convul-
sion of  feeling,  that  what  he  has  suffered  stands  written
and  may  be  read  in  the  lines  on  his  face.  And  yet,  when
all  is  told,  he  has  been  struggling  ultimately  for  the  very
same  things  as  the  brute  has  attained,  and  with  an  incom-
parably smaller  expenditure  of  passion  and  pain.

But  all  this  contributes  to  increase  the  measure  of  suf-
fering in  human  life  out  of  all  proportion  to  its  pleasures;
and  the  pains  of  life  are  made  much  worse  for  man  by  the
fact  that  death  is  something  very  real  to  him.  The  brute
flies  from  death  instinctively  without  really  knowing  what

*  I  have  treated  this  subject  at  length  in  a  special  chapter  of  the
second  volume  of  my  cliief  work


ON  THE  SUFFERINGS  OF  THE  WORLD.  3S?

it  is,  and  therefore  without  ever  contemplating  it  in  the
way  natural  to  a  man,  who  has  this  prospect  always  before
his  eyes.  So  that  even  if  only  a  few  brutes  die  a  natural
death,  and  most  of  them  live  only  just  long  enough  to
transmit  their  species,  and  then,  if  not  earlier,  become  the
prey  of  some  other  animal — while  man,  on  the  other  hand,
manages  to  make  so-called  natural  death  the  rule,  to
which,  however,  there  are  a  good  many  exceptions — the
advantage  is  on  the  side  of  the  brute,  for  the  reason  stated
above.  But  the  fact  is  that  man  attains  the  natural  term
of  years  just  as  seldom  as  the  brute;  because  the  unnatural
way  in  which  he  lives,  and  the  strain  of  work  and  emotion,
lead  to  a  degeneration  of  the  race;  and  so  his  goal  is  not
often  reached.

The  brute  is  much  more  content  with  mere  existence
than  man;  the  plant  is  wholly  so;  and  man  finds  satisfac-
tion in  it  just  in  proportion  as  he  is  dull  and  obtuse.  Ac-
cordingly, the  life  of  the  brute  carries  less  of  sorrow  with
it,  but  also  le3s  of  joy,  when  compared  with  the  life  of  man;
and  while  this  may  be  traced,  on  the  one  side,  to  freedom
from  tiie  torment  of  care  and  anxiety,  it  is  also  due  to  the
fact  that  hope,  in  any  real  sense,  is  unknown  to  the  brute.
It  is  thus  deprived  of  any  share  in  that  which  gives  us  the
most  and  the  best  of  our  joys  and  pleasures,  the  mental
anticipation  of  a  happy  future,  and  the  inspiriting  play  of
fantasy,  both  of  which  we  owe  to  our  power  of  imagina-
tion. If  the  brute  is  free  from  care,  it  is  also,  in  this
sense,  without  hope;  in  either  case  because  its  conscious-
ness is  limited  to  the  present  moment,  to  what  it  can
'actually  see  before  it.  The  brute  is  an  embodiment  of
present  impulses,  and  hence  what  elements  of  fear  and
hope  exist  in  its  nature—  an^  fhey  do  not  go  very  far —
arise  only  in  relation  to  objects  that  lie  before  it  and  with-
in reach  of  those  impulses:  whereas  a  man's  range  of
vision  embraces  the  whole  of  his  life,  and  extends  far  into
the  past  and  the  future.

Following  upon  this,  there  is  one  respect  in  which  brutes
show  real  wisdom  when  compared  with  us — I  mean,  their
quiet,  placid  enjoyment  of  the  present  moment.  The
tranquillity  of  mind  which  this  seems  to  give  them  often
puts  us  to  shame  for  the  many  times  we  allow  our  thoughts
and  our  cares  to  njake  us  restless  and  discontented.  And,
in  fact,  those  pleasures  of  hope  and  anticipation  which  I


388  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

have  been  mentioning  are  not  to  be  had  for  nothing.  Tne
delight  which  a  man  has  in  hoping  for  and  looking  for-
ward to  some  special  satisfaction  is  a  part  of  the  real  pleas-
nre  attaching  to  it  enjoyed  in  advance.  This  is  after-
ward deducted;  for  the  more  we  look  forward  to  anything,
the  less  satisfaction  we  find  in  it  when  it  comes.  But  the
brute's  enjoyment  is  not  anticipated  and  therefore  suffers
no  deduction;  so  that  the  actual  pleasure  of  the  moment
comes  to  it  whole  and  unimpaired.  In  the  same  way,  too,
evil  presses  upon  the  brute  only  with  its  own  intrinsic
weight:  whereas  with  us  the  fear  of  its  coming  often
makes  its  burden  ten  times  more  grievous.

It  is  just  this  characteristic  way  in  which  the  brute  gives
itself  up  entirely  to  the  present  moment  that  contributes
so  much  to  the  delight  we  take  in  our  domestic  pets.
They  are  the  present  moment  personified,  and  in  some  re-
spects they  make  us  feel  the  value  of  every  hour  that  is
free  from  trouble  and  annoyance,  which  we,  with  our
thoughts  and  preoccupations,  mostly  disregard.  But  man,
that  selfish  and  heartless  creature,  misuses  this  quality  of
the  brute  to  be  more  content  than  we  are  with  mere  exist-
ence, and  often  works  it  to  such  an  extent  that  he  allows
the  brute  absolutely  nothing  more  than  mere,  bare  life.
The  bird  which  was  made  so  that  it  might  rove  over  half
the  world,  he  shuts  up  into  the  space  of  a  cubic  foot,  there
to  die  a  slow  death  in  longing  and  crying  for  freedom;  for
in  a  cage  it  does  not  sing  for  the  pleasure  of  it.  And  when
I  see  how  man  misuses  the  dog,  his  best  friend;  how  he
ties  up  this  intelligent  animal  with  a  chain,  I  feel  the
deepest  sympathy  with  the  brute  and  burning  indignation"
against  its  master.

We  shall  see  later  that  by  taking  a  very  high  standpoint
it  is  possible  to  justify  the  sufferings  of  mankind.  But
this  justification  cannot  apply  to  animals,  whose  sufferings,
while  in  a  great  measure  brought  about  by  men,  are  often
considerable  even  apart  from  their  agency.*  And  so  we
are  forced  to  ask,  Why  and  for  what  purpose  does  all  this
torment  and  agony  exist?  There  is  nothing  here  to  give
the  will  pause;  it  is  not  free  to  deny  itself  and  so  obtain
redemption.  There  is  only  one  consideration  that  may
serve  to  explain  the  sufferings  of  animals.     It  is  this:    that

*  Cf.  "Welt  als  Wille  und  Vorstellung,"  vol.  ii.  p   404.


ON  THE  SUFFERINGS  OF  THE  WORLD.  380

the  will  to  live,  which  underlies  the  whole  world  of  phe
nomena,  must  in  their  case  satisfy  its  cravings  by  feeding
upon  itself.  This  it  does  by  forming  a  gradation  of  phe-
nomena, every  one  of  which  exists  at  the  expense  of  another
I  have  shown,  however,  that  the  capacity  for  suffering  i\
less  in  animals  than  in  man.  Any  further  explanation
that  may  be  given  of  their  fate  will  be  in  the  nature  ol
hypothesis,  if  not  actually  mythical  in  its  character;  and
I  may  leave  the  reader  to  speculate  upon  the  matter  for
himself.

Brahma  is  said  to  have  produced  the  world  by  a  kind  of
fall  or  mistake;  and  in  order  to  atone  for  his  folly,  he  is
bound  to  remain  in  it  himself  until  he  works  out  his  re-
demption. As  an  account  of  the  origin  of  things,  that  is
admirable!  According  to  the  doctrines  of  Buddhism,  the
world  came  into  being  as  the  result  of  some  inexplicable
disturbance  in  the  heavenly  calm  of  Nirvana,  that  blessed
state  obtained  by  expiation,  which  had  endured  so  long  a
time — the  change  taking  place  by  a  kind  of  fatality.  This
explanation  must  be  understood  as  having  at  bottom  some
moral  bearing;  although  it  is  illustrated  by  an  exactly  paral-
lel theory  in  the  domain  of  physical  science,  which  places
the  origin  of  the  sun  in  a  primitive  streak  of  mist,  formed
one  knows  not  how.  Subsequently,  by  a  series  of  moral
errors,  the  world  became  gradually  worse  and  worse — true
of  the  physical  orders  as  well — until  it  assumed  the  dismal
aspect  it  wears  to-day.  Excellent!  The  Greeks  looked
upon  the  world  and  the  gods  as  the  work  of  an  inscrutable
necessity.  A  passable  explanation:  we  may  be  content
with  it  until  we  can  get  a  better.  Again,  Ormuzd  and
Ahriman  are  rival  powers,  continually  at  war.  That  is
not  bad.  But  that  a  God  like  Jehovah  should  have  created
this  world  of  misery  and  woe,  out  of  pure  caprice,  and  be-
cause he  enjoyed  doing  it,  and  should  then  have  clapped
his  hands  in  praise  of  his  own  work,  and  declared  every-
thing to  be  very  good — that  will  not  do  at  all!  In  its  ex-
planation of  the  origin  of  the  world,  Judaism  is  inferior  to
any  other  form  of  religious  doctrine  professed  by  a  civi-
lized nation;  and  it  is  quite  in  keeping  with  this  that  it  is
the  only  one  which  presents  no  trace  whatever  of  any  be-
lief in  the  immortality  of  the  soul.*

i        *  See  "  Parertra."    vol.  i.  pp.  136  et  seq.


390  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

Even  though  Leibnitz'  contention,  that  this  is  the  best
of  all  possible  worlds,  were  correct,  that  would  not  justify
God  in  having  created  it.  For  he  is  the  Creator  not  of  the
world  only,  but  of  possibility  itself;  and,  therefore,  he
ought  to  have  so  ordered  possibility  as  that  it  would  Admit
of  something  better.

There  are  two  things  which  make  it  impossible  to  believe
that  this  world  is  the  successful  work  of  an  all- wise,  all-
good,  and,  at  the  same  time,  all-powerful  being;  firstly,  the
misery  which  abounds  in  it  everywhere;  and  secondly  the
obvious  imperfection  of  its  highest  product,  man,  who  is  a
burlesque  of  what  he  should  be.  These  things  cannot  be
reconciled  with  any  such  belief.  On  the  contrary,  they  are
just  the  facts  which  support  what  I  have  been  saying;  they
are  our  authority  for  viewing  the  world  as  the  outcome  of
our  own  misdeeds,  and  therefore,  as  something  that  haci
better  not  have  been.  While,  under  the  former  hypothesis,
they  amount  to  a  bitter  accusation  against  the  Creator,  and
supply  material  for  sarcasm;  under  the  latter  they  form  an
indictment  against  our  own  nature,  our  own  will,  and
teach  us  a  lesson  of  humility.  They  lead  us  to  see  that,
like  the  children  of  a  libertine,  we  come  into  the  world
with  the  burden  of  sin  upon  us;  and  that  it  is  only  through
having  continually  to  atone  for  this  sin  that  our  existence
is  so  miserable,  and  that  its  end  is  death.

There  is  nothing  more  certain  than  the  general  truth
that  it  is  the  grievous  sin  of  the  world  which  has  produced
the  grievous  suffering  of  the  world.  I  am  not  referring
here  to  the  physical  connection  between  these  two  things
lying  in  the  realm  of  experience;  my  meaning  is  meta-
physical. Accordingly,  the  sole  tiling  that  reconciles  me
to  the  Oid  Testament  is  the  story  of  the  fall.  In  my  eyes,
it  is  the  only  metaphysical  truth  in  that  book,  even  though
it  appears  in  the  form  of  an  allegory.  There  seems  to  me
no  better  explanation  of  our  existence  than  that  it  is  the
result  of  some  false  step,  some  sin  of  which  we  are  paying
the  penalty.  I  cannot  refrain  from  recommending  the
thoughtful  reader  a  popular,  but,  at  the  same  time,  pro-
found treatise  on  this  subject  by  Claudius*  which  exhibits

*  Translator's  Note. — Matthias  Claudius  (1740-1815),  a  popular
poet,  and  friend  of  Klopstock,  Herder  and  Lessing.  He  edited  the
"  Wandsbecker  Bote,"  in  the  fourth  part  of  which,  appeared  the
treatise  mentioned  above.  He  generally  wrote  under  the  pseudonym
of  "  Asmus,"  and  Schopenhauer  often  refers  to  him  by  this  name.


ON  THE  SUFFERINGS  OF  THE  WORLD.  391

the  essentially  pessimistic  spirit  of  Christianity,  It  is
entitled;  "Cursed  is  the  ground  for  thy  sake."

Between  the  ethics  of  the  Greeks  and  the  ethics  of  the
Hindoos,  there  is  a  glaring  contrast.  In  the  one  case  (with
the  exception,  it  must  be  confessed,  of  Plato),  the  object
of  ethics  is  to  enable  a  man  to  lead  a  happy  life;  in  the
other,  it  is  to  free  and  redeem  him  from  life  altogether — as
is  directly  stated  in  the  very  first  words  of  the  "  Sankhya
Karika."

Allied  with  this  is  the  contrast  between  the  Greek  and
the  Christian  idea  of  death.  It  is  strikingly  presented  in
a  visible  form  on  a  fine  antique  sarcophagus  in  the  gallery
at  Florence,  which  exhibits,  in  relief,  the  whole  series  of
ceremonies  attending  a  wedding  in  ancient  times,  from  the
formal  offer  to  the  evening  when  Hymen's  torch  lights  the
happy  couple  home.  Compare  with  that  the  Christian
coffin,  draped  in  a  mournful  black  and  surmounted  with  a
crucifix!  How  much  significance  there  is  in  these  two
ways  of  finding  comfort  in  death.  They  are  opposed  to
each  other,  but  each  is  right.  The  one  points  to  the
affirmation  of  the  will  to  live,  which  remains  sure  of  life
for  all  time,  however  rapidly  its  forms  may  change.  The
other,  in  the  symbol  of  suffering  and  death,  points  to  the
denial  of  the  will  to  live,  to  redemption  from  this  world,
the  domain  of  death  and  devil.  And  in  the  question
between  the  affirmation  and  the  denial  of  the  will  to  live,
Christianity  is  in  the  last  resort  right.

The  contrast  which  the  New  Testament  presents  when
compared  with  the  Old,  according  to  the  ecclesiastical  view
of  the  matter,  is  just  that  existing  between  my  ethical
system  and  the  moral  philosophy  of  Europe.  The  Old
Testament  represents  man  as  under  the  dominion  of  law,
m  which,  however,  there  is  no  redemption.  The  New
Testament  declares  law  to  have  failed,  frees  man  from  its
dominion,*  and  in  its  stead  preaches  the  kingdom  of  grace,
to  be  won  by  faith,  love  of  neighbor  and  entire  sacrifice  of
self.  This  is  the  path  of  redemption  from  the  evil  of  the
world.  The  spirit  of  the  New  Testament  is  undoubtedly
asceticism,  however  your  protestants  and  rationalists  may
twist  it  to  suit  their  purpose.  Asceticism  is  the  denial  of
the  will  to  live;  and  the  transition  from  the  Old  Testament

*  Cf.  Romans  vii:  Galatians  ii.  iii,


392  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

to  the  New,  from  the  dominion  of  law  to  that  of  faith,  from
justification  by  works  to  redemption  through  the  mediator,
from  the  domain  of  sin  and  death  to  eternal  life  in  Christ,
means,  when  taken  in  its  real  sense,  the  transition  from
the  merely  moral  virtues  to  the  denial  of  the  will  to  live.

'  My  philosophy  shows  the  metaphysical  foundation  of  justice
and  the  love  of  mankind,  aud  points  to  the  goal  to  which
these  virtues  necessarily  lead,  if  they  are  practiced  in  per-
fection. At  the  same  time  it  is  candid  in  confessing  that
a  man  must  turn  his  back  upon  the  world,  and   that  the

I  denial  of  the  will  to  live  is  the  way  of  redemption.     It  is

/  therefore  really  at  one  with  the  spirit  of  the  New  Testament,
while  all  other  systems  are  couched  in  the  spirit  of  the
Old;  that  is  to  say,  theoretically  as  well  as  practically,
their  result  is  Judaism—  mere  despotic  theism.  In  this
sense,  then,  my  doctrine  might  be  called  the  only  true
Christian   philosophy — however    paradoxical    a   statement

'  this  may  seem  to  people  who  take  superficial  views  instead
of  penetrating  to  the  heart  of  the  matter.

If  you  want  a  safe  compass  to  guide  you  through  life,
and  to  banish  all  doubt  as  to  the  right  way  of  looking  at
it,  you  cannot  do  better  than  accustom   yourself  to  regard

:  this  world  as  a  penitentiary,  a  sort  of  penal  colony  or
£pya6Tr/pior,  as  the  earliest  philosophers  called  it.*  Among
the  Christian  Fathers,  Origen,  with  praiseworthy  courage,
took  this  view,f  which  is  further  justified  by  certain  ob-
jective theories  of  life.  I  refer,  not  to  my  own  philosophy
alone,  but  to  the  wisdom  of  all  ages,  as  expressed  in  Brah-
manism  and  Buddhism,  and  in  the  sayings  of  Greek  philo-
sophers like  Empedocles  and  Pythagoras;  as  also  by  Cicero,
in  his  remark  that  the  wise  men  of  old  used  to  teach  that
we  come  into  this  world  to  pay  the  penalty  of  crime  com-
mitted in  another  state  of  existence — a  doctrine  which
formed  part  of  the  initiation  into  the  mysteries.  \  And
Vaniui — whom  his  contemporaries  burned,  finding  that  an
easier  task  than  to  confute  him — puts  the  same  thing  in  a
very  forcible  way.  "  Man,"  he  says,  "  is  so  full  of  every
kind  of  misery  that,  were  it  not  repugnant  to  the  Christian
religion,  I  should  venture  to  affirm  that  if  evil  spirits  exist

*  Cf.  Clem.  Alex.  Strom.  L.  iii.,  c.  3,  p.  399.
f  Augustine  de  civitate  Dei.,  L.  xi.  c.  23.
t  Cf .  "  Fragmenta  de  pliilosopliia."


ON  THE  SUFFERINGS  OF  THE  WOULD.  393

at  all,  they  have,  passed  into  human  form  and  are  now
atoning  for  their  crimes."*  And  true  Christianity — using
the  word  in  its  right  sense — also  regards  our  existence  as
the  consequence  of  sin  and  error.

If  you  accustom  yourself  to  this  view  of  life  you  will
regulate  your  expectations  accordingly,  and  cease  to  look
upon  all  its  disagreeable  incidents,  great  and  small,  its  suf-
ferings, its  worries,  its  misery,  as  anything  unusual  or  ir-
regular ;  nay,  you  will  find  that  everything  is  as  it  should
be,  in  a  world  where  each  of  us  pays  the  penalty  of  exist-
ence in  his  own  peculiar  way.  Among  the  evils  of  a  penal
colony  is  the  society  of  those  who  form  it;  and  if  the  reader
is  worthy  of  better  company,  he  will  need  no  words  from
me  to  remind  him  of  what  he  has  to  put  up  with  at  pres-
ent. If  he  has  a  soul  above  the  common,  or  if  he  is  a  man
of  genius,  he  will  occasionally  feel  like  some  noble  prisoner
of  state,  condemned  to  work  in  the  galleys  with  common
criminals;  and  he  will  follow  his  example  and  try  to  isolate
himself.

In  general,  however,  it  should  be  said  that  this  view  of
life  will  enable  us  to  contemplate  the  so-called  imperfections
of  the  great  majority  of  men,  their  moral  and  intellectual
deficiencies,  and  the  resulting  base  type  of  countenance,
without  any  surprise,  to  say  nothing  of  indignation;  for  we
shall  never  cease  to  reflect  where  we  are,  and  that  the  men
about  us  are  beings  conceived  and  born  in  sin,  and  living
to  atone  for  it.  That  is  what  Christianity  means  in  speak-
ing of  the  sinful  nature  of  men.

il  Pardon's  the  word  to  all."  f  Whatever  folly  men  com-
mit, be  their  shortcomings  or  their  vices  what  they  may,  let
us  exercise  forbearance;  remembering  that  when  these  faults
appear  in  others,  it  is  our  follies  and  vices  that  we  behold.
They  are  the  shortcomings  of  humanity,  to  which  we  be-
long; whose  faults,  one  and  all,  we  share;  yes,  even
those  very  faults  at  which  we  now  wax  so  indignant,
merely  because  they  have  not  yet  appeared  in  ourselves.
They  are  faults  that  do  not  lie  on  the  surface.  But  they
exist  down  there  in  the  depths  of  our  nature;  and  should
anything  call  them  forth,  they  will  come  and  show  them-

*  "  De  adtnirandis  naturae  arcanis;  "  dial  L.  p.  35.
f  "  Cymbeline,"  Act  v.  Sc.  5.


394  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

selves,  just  as  we  now  see  them  in  others.  One  man,  it  is
true,  may  have  faults  that  are  absent  in  his  fellow;  and  it
is  undeniable  that  the  sum  total  of  bad  qualities  is  in  some
cases  very  large;  for  the  difference  of  individuality  between
man  and  man  passes  all  measure.

In  fact,  the  conviction  that  the  world  and  man  is
something  that  had  better  not  lrave  been,  is  of  a  kind
to  fill  us  with  indulgence  toward  one  another.
Nay,  from  this  point  of  view,  we  might  well  consider  the
proper  form  of  address  to  be,  not  "  Monsieur,  Sir,  mein
Herr,"  but  "my  fellow-sufferer,"  Son  malorum ,  compagnon
demiseres!  This  may  perhaps  sound  strange,  but  it  is  in
keeping  with  the  facts;  it  puts  others  in  a  right  light;  and
it  reminds  us  of  that  which  is  after  all  the  most  necessary
thing  in  life — the  tolerance,  patience,  regard  and  love  of
neighbor,  of  which  every  one  stands  in  need,  and  which,
therefore,  every  man  owes  to  his  fellow.


THE  VANITY  OF  EXISTENCE.

This  vanity  finds  expression  in  the  whole  way  in  which
things  exist:  in  the  infinite  nature  of  Time  and  Space,  ae
opposed  to  the  finite  nature  of  the  individual  in  both;  in
the  ever-passing  present  moment  as  the  only  mode  of  actual
existence;  in  the  interdependence  and  relativity  of  all
things;  in  continual  becoming  without  ever  being;  in
constant  wishing  and  never  being  satisfied;  in  the  long
battle  which  forms  the  history  of  life,  where  every  effort  is
checked  by  difficulties,  and  stopped  until  they  are  overcome.
Time  is  that  in  which  all  things  pass  away;  it  is  merely
the  form  under  which  the  will  to  live — the  thing  in  itself
and  therefore  imperishable — has  revealed  to  it  that  its
efforts  are  in  vain;  it  is  that  agent  by  which  at  every
moment  all  things  in  our  hands  become  as  nothing,  and
lose  any  real  value  they  possess.

That  which  has  been  exists  no  more;  it  exists  as  little  as
that  which  has  never  been.  But  of  everything  that  exists
you  must  say,  in  the  next  moment,  that  it  has  been.
Hence  something  of  great  importance  now  past  is  inferior
to  something  of  little  importance  now  present,  in  that  the
latter  is  a  reality,  and  related  to  the  former  as  something
to  nothing.


THE  VANITY  OF  EXISTENCE.  395

A  man  finds  himself,  to  his  great  astonishment,  suddenly
existing,  after  thousands  and  thousands  of  years  of  non-
existence: he  lives  for  a  little  while;  and  then,  again,
conies  an  equally  long  period  when  he  must  exist  no  more.
The  heart  rebels  against  this,  and  feels  that  it  cannot  be
true.  The  crudest  intellect  cannot  speculate  on  such  a
subject  without  having  a  presentiment  that  Time  is  some-
thing ideal  in  its  nature.  This  ideality  of  Time  and  Space
is  the  key  to  every  true  system  of  metaphysics;  because  it
provides  for  quite  another  order  of  things  than  is  to  be  met
with  in  the  domain  of  nature.  This  is  why  Kant  is  so
great.

Of  every  event  in  our  life  we  can  say  only  for  one
moment  that  it  is;  forever  after,  that  it  was.  Every  even-
ing we  are  poorer  by  a  day.  It  might,  perhaps,  make  us
mad  to  see  how  rapidly  our  short  span  of  time  ebbs  away,
if  it  were  not  that  in  the  furthest  depths  of  our  being  we
are  secretly  conscious  of  our  share  in  the  inexhaustible
spring  of  eternity,  so  that  we  can  always  hope  to  find  lifa
in  it  again.

Considerations  of  the  kind  touched  on  above  might,
indeed,  lead  us  to  embrace  the  belief  that  the  greatest
wisdom  is  to  make  the  enjoyment  of  the  present  the
supreme  object  of  life;  because  that  is  the  only  reality,  all
else  being  merely  the  play  of  thought.  On  the  other  hand,
such  a  course  might  just  as  well  be  called  the  greatest  folly,
for  that  which  in  the  next  moment  exists  no  more,  and
vanishes  utterly,  like  a  dream,  can  never  be  worth  a  serious
effort.

The  whole  foundation  on  which  our  existence  rests  is  the
present — the  ever-fleeting  present.  It  lies,  then,  in  the
very  nature  of  our  existence  to  take  the  form  of  constant
motion,  and  to  offer  no  possibility  of  our  ever  attaining  the
rest  for  which  we  are  always  striving.  We  are  like  a  man
running  downhill,  who  cannot  keep  on  his  legs  unless  he
runs  on,  and  will  inevitably  fall  if  he  stops;  or,  again,  like
a  pole  balanced  on  the  tip  of  one's  finger:  or  like  a  planet,
which  would  fall  into  its  sun  the  moment  it  ceased  to
hurry  forward  on  its  way.  Unrest  is  the  mark  of
existence.

In  a  world  where  all  is  unstable,  and  nought  can  endure,
but  is  swept  onward  at  once  in  the  hurrying  whirlpool  of
change.;  where  a  man,  if  he  is  to  keep  erect  at  all,  must


396  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

always  be  advancing  and  moving,  like  an  acrobat  on  a  rope
— in  such  a  world,  happiness  is  inconceivable.  How  can
it  dwell  where,  as  Plato  says,  "continual  Becoming  and
never  Being  "is  the  sole  form  of  existence?  In  the  first
place,  a  man  never  is  happy,  but  spends  his  whole  life  in
striving  after  something  which  he  thinks  will  make  him
so;  he  seldom  attains  his  goal,  and  when  he  does,  it  is  only
to  be  disappointed;  he  is  mostly  shipwrecked  in  the  end,
and  comes  into  harbor  with  masts  and  rigging  gone.  And
then,  it  is  all  one  whether  he  has  been  happy  or  miserable;
for  his  life  was  never  anything  more  than  a  present  mo-
ment always  vanishing;  and  now  it  is  over.

At  the  same  time  it  is  a  wonderful  thing  that,  in  the
world  of  human  beings  as  in  that  of  animals  in  general,
this  manifold  restless  motion  is  produced  and  kept  up  by
the  agency  of  two  simple  impulses — hunger  and  the  sex-
ual instinct;  aided  a  little,  perhaps,  by  the  influence  of
boredom,  but  by  nothing  else;  and  that,  in  the  theater  of
life,  these  suffice  to  form  the  primum  mobile  of  how  com-
plicated a  machinery,  setting  in  motion  how  strange  and
varied  a  scene!

On  looking  a  little  closer,  we  find  that  inorganic  matter
presents  a  constant  conflict  between  chemical  forces,  which
eventually  works  dissolution;  and  on  the  other  hand,  that
organic  life  is  impossible  without  continual  change  of
matter,  and  cannot  exist  if  it  does  not  receive  perpetual
help  from  without.  This  is  the  realm  of  finality;  and  its
opposite  would  be  an  infinite  existence,  exposed  to  no  at-
tack from  without,  and  needing  nothing  to  support  it;
ocbi  Go6dvra)S  ov,  the  realm  of  eternal  peace;  ovrs  yiyvojievor
ovt£  dnoXXvfiEvov,  some  timeless  changeless  state,  one  and
undi  versified;  the  negative  knowledge  of  which  forms  the
dominant  note  of  the  Platonic  philosophy.  It  is  to  some
such  state  as  this  that  the  denial  of  the  will  to  live  opens
up  the  way.

The  scenes  of  our  life  are  like  pictures  done  in  rough
mosaic.  Looked  at  close,  they  produce  no  effect.  There
is  nothing  beautiful  to  be  found  in  them,  unless  you  stand
some  distance  off.  So,  to  gain  anything  we  have  longed
for  is  only  to  discover  how  vain  and  empty  it  is;  and  even
though  we  are  always  living  in  expectation  of  better
things,  at  the  same  time  we  often  repent  and  long  to  have
the  past  back  again       V7e  look  upon  the  present  as  some


THE  VANITY  OF  EXISTENCE.  397

thing  to  be  put  up  with  while  it  lasts,  and  serving  only  as
the  way  toward  our  goal.  Hence  most  people,  if  they
glance  back  when  they  come  to  the  end  of  life,  will  find
that  all  along  they  have  been  living  ad  interim:  they  will
be  surprised  to  find  that  the  very  tiling  they  disregarded
and  let  slip  by  unenjoyed,  was  just  the  life  in  the  expecta-
tion of  which  they  passed  all  their  time.  Of  how  many  a
man  may  it  not  be  said  that  hope  made  a  fool  of  him  until
he  danced  into  the  arms  of  death!

Then  again,  Low  insatiable  a  creature  is  man.  Every
satisfaction  he  attains  lays  the  seeds  of  some  new  desire,
so  that  there  is  no  end  to  the  wishes  of  each  individual
will.  And  why  is  this?  The  real  reason  is  simply  that,
taken  in  itself,  Will  is  the  lord  of  all  worlds;  everything
belongs  to  it,  and  therefore  no  one  single  thing  can  ever
give  it  satisfaction,  but  only  the  whole,  which  is  endless.
For  all  that,  it  must  rouse  our  sympathy  co  think  how  very
little  the  Will,  this  lord  of  the  world,  really  gets  when  it
takes  the  form  of  an  individual;  usually  only  just  enough
to  keep  the  body  together.  This  is  why  man  is  so  very
miserable.

Life  presents  itself  chiefly  as  a  task — the  task,  I  mean,
of  subsisting  at  all,  ganger  sa  vie.  If  this  is  accomplished,
life  is  a  burden,  and  then  there  comes  the  second  task  of
doing  something  with  that  which  has  been  won — of  ward-
ing off  boredom,  which,  like  a  bird  of  prey,  hovers  over
us,  ready  to  fall  wherever  it  sees  a  life  secure  from  need.
The  first  task  is  to  win  something;  the  second,  to  banish
the  feeling  that  it  has  been  won;  otherwise  it  is  a -burden.

Human  life  must  be  some  kind  of  mistake.  The  truth
of  this  will  be  sufficiently  obvious  if  we  only  remember  that
man  is  a  compound  of  needs  and  necessities  hard  to  satisfy;
and  that  even  when  they  are  satisfied,  all  he  obtains  is  a
state  of  painlessness,  where  nothing  remains  to  him  but
abandonment  to  boredom.  This  is  direct  proof  that  exist-
ence has  no  real  value  in  itself;  for  what  is  boredom  but
the  feeling  of  the  emptiness  of  life?  If  life — the  craving
for  which  is  the  very  essence  of  our  being — were  possessed
of  any  positive  intrinsic  value,  there  would  be  no  such
thing  as  boredom  at  all:  mere  existence  would  satisfy  us  in
itself,  and  we  should  want  for  nothing.  But  as  it  is,  we
take  no  delight  in  existence  except  when  we  are  struggling
for  something;  and    then  distance   and    difficulties   to   be


398  STUDIES  12?  PESSIMISM.

overcome  make  our  goal  look  as  though  it  would  satisfy  us
— an  illusion  which  vanishes  when  we  reach  it;  or  else
when  we  are  occupied  with  some  purely  intellectual  interest
— where  in  reality  we  have  stepped  forth  from  life  to  look
upon  it  from  the  outside,  much  after  the  manner  of  spec-
tators at  a  play.  And  even  sensual  pleasure  itself  means
nothing  but  a  struggle  and  aspiration,  ceasing  the  moment
its  aim  is  attained.  Whenever  we  are  not  occupied  in  one
of  these  ways,  but  cast  upon  existence  itself,  its  vain  and
worthless  nature  is  brought  home  to  us;  and  this  is  what
we  mean  by  boredom.  The  hankering  after  what  is  strange
and  uncommon — an  innate  and  ineradicable  tendency  of
human  nature — shows  how  glad  we  are  at  any  interruption
of  that  natural  course  of  affairs  which  is  so  very  tedious.

That  this  most  perfect  manifestation  of  the  will  to  live,
the  human  organism,  with  the  cunning  and  complex  work-
ing of  its  machinery,  must  fall  to  dust  and  yield  up  itself
and  all  its  strivings  to  extinction — this  is  the  naive  way  in
which  Nature,  who  is  always  so  true  and  sincere  in  what
she  says,  proclaims  the  whole  struggle  of  this  will  as  in  its
very  essence  barren  and  unprofitable.  Were  it  of  any  value
in  itself,  anything  unconditioned  and  absolute,  it  could
not  thus  end  in  mere  nothing.

If  we  turn  from  contemplating  the  world  as  a  whole,
and,  in  particular,  the  generations  of  men  as  they  live  their
little  hour  of  mock-existence  and  then  are  swept  away  in
rapid  succession;  if  we  turn  from  this,  and  look  at  life  in
its  small  details,  as  presented,  say,  in  a  comedy,  how  ridic-
ulous it  all  seems!  It  is  like  a  drop  of  water  seen  through
a  microscope,  a  single  drop  teeming  with  infusoria  or  a
speck  of  cheese  full  of  mites  invisible  to  the  naked  eye.
How  we  laugh  as  they  bustle  about  so  eagerly,  and  struggle
with  one  another  in  so  tiny  a  space!  And  whether  here,
or  in  the  little  span  of  human  life,  this  terrible  activity
produces  a  comic  effect.

It  is  only  in  the  microscope  that  our  life  looks  so  big.
It  is  an  indivisible  point,  drawn  out  and  magnified  by  the
powerful  lenses  of  Time  and  Space.


ON  SUICIDE.  393

OX  SUICIDE.

As  fak  as  I  know,  none  but  the  votaries  of  monotheistic,
that  is  to  say,  Jewish  religions,  look  upon  suicide  as  a
crime.  This  is  all  the  more  striking,  inasmuch  as  neither
in  the  Old  nor  ill  the  New  Testament  is  there  to  be  found
any  prohibition  or  positive  disapproval  of  it;  so  that  reli-
gious teachers  are  forced  to  base  their  condemnation  of  sui-
cide on  philosophical  grounds  of  their  own  invention.
These  are  so  very  bad  that  writers  of  this  kind  endeavor  to
make  up  for  the  weakness  of  their  arguments  by  the  strong
terms  in  which  they  express  their  abhorrence  of  the  prac-
tice; in  other  words,  they  declaim  against  it.  They  tell
us  that  suicide  is  the  greatest  piece  of  cowardice;  that  only
a  madman  could  be  guilty  of  it;  and  other  insipidities  of
the  same  kind;  or  else  they  make  the  nonsensical  remark
that  suicide  is  wrong;  when  it  is  quite  obvious  that  there
is  nothing  in  the  world  to  which  every  man  has  a  more  un-
assailable title  than  to  his  own  life  and  person.

Suicide,  as  I  have  said,  is  actually  accounted  a  crime*
and  a  crime  which,  especially  under  the  vulgar  bigotry
that  prevails  in  England,  is  followed  by  an  ignominious
burial  and  the  seizure  of  the  man's  property;  and  for  that
reason,  in  a  case  ot  suicide,  the  jury  almost  always  bring  in
a  verdict  of  insanity.  Now  let  the  reader's  own  moral
feelings  decide  as  to  whether  or  not  suicide  is  a  criminal
act  Think  of  the  impression  that  would  be  made  upon
you  by  the  news  that  some  one  you  know  had  committed
the  crime,  say,  of  murder  or  theft,  or  been  guilty  of  some
act  of  cruelty  or  deception;  and  compare  it  with  your  feel-
ings when  you  hear  that  he  has  met  a  voluntary  death.
While  in  the  one  case  a  lively  sense  of  indignation  and  ex-
treme resentment  will  be  aroused,  and  you  will  call  loudlv
for  punishment  or  revenge,  in  the  other  you  will  be  moved
:o  grief  and  sympathy;  and  mingled  with  your  thoughts
will  be  admiration  for  his  courage,  rather  than  the  moral
disanproval  which  follows  upon  a  wicked  action.  Who  has
not  had  acquaintances,  friends,  relations,  who  of  their  own
free  will  have  left  this  world;  and  are  these  to  be  thought
of  with  horror  as  criminals?  Most  emphatically,  No!  1
am  rather  of  opinion  that  the  clergy  should  be  challenged
to  explain  what  right  they  have  to  go  into  the  pulpit,  or
take  up  their  pens,  and  stamp  as  a  crime  an  action  which


400  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

many  men  whom  we  hold  in  affection  and  honor  have
committed:  and  to  refuse  an  honorable  burial  to  those
who  relinquish  this  world  voluntarily.  They  have  no
Biblical  authority  to  boast  of,  as  justifying  their  condem-
nation of  suicide;  nay,  not  even  any  philosophical  argu-
ments that  will  hold  water;  and  it  must  be  understood
that  it  is  arguments  we  want,  and  that  we  will  not  be  put
off  with  mere  phrases  or  words  of  abuse.  If  the  criminal
law  forbids  suicide,  that  is  not  an  argument  valid  in  the
Church;  and  besides,  the  prohibition  is  ridiculous;  for
what  penalty  can  frighten  a  man  who  is  not  afraid  of  death
itself?  If  the  law  punishes  people  for  trying  to  commit
suicide,  it  is  punishing  the  want  of  skill  that  makes  the
attempt  a  failure.

The  ancients,  moreover,  were  very  far  from  regarding
the  matter  in  that  light.  Pliny  says:  "  Life  is  not  so  desir-
able a  thing  as  to  be  protracted  at  any  cost.  Whoever  you
are,  you  are  sure  to  die,  even  though  your  life  has  been  full
of  abomination  and  crime.  The  chief  of  all  remedies  for
%  troubled  mind  is  the  feeling  that  among  the  blessings
which  Mature  gives  to  man,  there  is  none  greater  than  an
opportune  death;  and  the  best  of  it  is  that  every  one
can  avail  himself  of  it."*  And  elsewhere  the  same  writer
declares:  "  Not  even  to  God  are  all  things  possible;  for
he  could  not  compass  his  own  death,  if  he  willed  to  die,
and  yet  in  all  the  miseries  of  our  earthly  life,  this  is  the
best  of  his  gifts  to  man."f  Nay,  in  Messilia  and  on  the
isle  of  Ceos,  the  man  who  could  give  valid  reasons  for  re-
linquishing his  life,  was  handed  the  cup  of  hemlock  by  the
magistrate;  and  that,  too,  in  public. J  And  in  ancient
times,  how  many  heroes  and  wise  men  died  a  voluntary
death.  Aristotle, §  it  is  true,  declared  suicide  to  be  an
offense  against  the  state,  although  not  against  the  person;
but  in  Stobams'  exposition  of  the  Peripatetic  philosophy
there  is  the  following  remark:  "The  good  man  should
flee   life  when  his   misfortunes  become  too  great;  the  bad

*  Hist.  Nat.  Lib.  xxviii.,  1.
f  Loc.  cit.  Lib.  ii    c.  7.

\  Valerius  Maximus;  hist.  Lib.  ii.,  c.  6,§  7  et  8.  Heraelides  Pon
ticus;  fragmenta  de  rebus  publicus,  ix.  Aeliani  variae  historic,  lii
36.     Scrabo;  Lib.  x,  c.  5,  6.

§  Eih.  Niehom.,  v.  15.


ON  SUICIDE.  401

man,  also,  when  he  is  too  prosperous.  And  similarly:  So
he  will  marry  and  beget  children  and  take  part  in  the
affairs  of  the  state,  and  generally,  practice  virtue  and
continue  to  live;  and  then,  again,  if  need  be,  at  any  time  ne-
cessity compels  him,  he  will  depart  to  his  place  of  refuge  in
the  tomb/'*  And  we  find  that  the  Stoics  actually  praised
suicide  as  a  noble  and  heroic  action,  as  hundreds  of  pas-
sages show;  above  all  in  the  works  of  Seneca,  who  expresses
the  strongest  approval  of  it.  As  is  well  known,  the  Hindoos
look  upon  suicide  as  a  religious  act,  especially  when  it
takes  the  form  of  self-immolation  by  widows;  but  also
when  it  consists  in  casting  one's  self  under  the  wheels  of  the
chariot  of  the  god  at  Juggernaut,  or  being  eaten  by  croco-
diles in  the  Ganges,  or  being  drowned  in  the  holy  tanks  in
the  temples,  and  so  on.  The  same  thing  occurs  on  the
stage — that  mirror  of  life.  For  example,  in  "  L/orphelin
de  la  Chine, "f  a  celebrated  Chinese  play,  almost  all  the
noble  characters  end  by  suicide;  without  the  slightest  hint
anywhere,  or  any  impression  being  produced  on  the  specta-
tor, that  they  are  committing  a  crime.  And  in  our  own
theater  it  is  much  the  same — Palmira,  for  instance,  in
"Mahomet,"  or  Mortimer  in  "Maria  Stuart,'*  Othello,
Countess  Terzky.J  Is  Hamlet's  monologue  the  meditation
of  a  criminal?  He  merely  declares  that  if  we  had  any  cer-
tainty of  being  annihilated  by  it,  death  would  be  infinitely
preferable  to  the  world  as  it  is.     But  there  lies  the  rub!

The  reasons  advanced  against  suicide  by  the  clergy  of
monotheistic,  that  is  to  say,  Jewish  religions,  and  by  those
philosophers  who  adapt  themselves  hitherto,  are  w7eak
sophisms  which  can  easily  be  refuted.§  The  most  thorough-
going refutation  of  them  is  given  by  Hume  in  his  "  Essay
on  Suicide."  This  did  not  appear  until  after  his  death,
when  it  was  immediately  suppressed,  owing  to  the  scandal-
ous bigotry  and  outrageous  ecclesiastical  tyranny  that  pre-
vailed in  England;  and  hence  only  a  very  few  copies  of  it

*  Stobaeus.    Ed.  Eth.  ii.,  c.  7,  pp.  286,  312,

f  Traduit  par  St.  Julien,  1834.

%  Translator's  Note — Palmira:  a  female  slave  in  Goethe's  play  of
••  Mahomet  "  Mortimer:  a  would-be  lover  and  rescuer  of  Mary  in
Schiller's  "  Maria  Stuart."  Countess  Terzky  a  leading  character
in  Schiller's  "  Wallenstein's  Tod."

§  See  my  treatise  on  the  "Foundation  of  Morals,"  §  5.


402  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

were  sold  under  cover  of  secrecy  and  at  a  high  price.  This
and  another  treatise  by  that  great  man  have  come  to  us
from  Basle,  and  we  may  be  thankful  for  the  reprint.*  It
is  a  great  disgrace  to  the  English  nation  that  a  purely
philosophical  treatise,  which,  proceeding  from  one  of  the
first  thinkers  and  writers  in  England,  aimed  at  refuting
the  current  arguments  against  suicide  by  the  light  of  cold
reason,  should  be  forced  to  sneak  about  in  that  country,  as
though  it  were  some  rascally  production,  until  at  last  it
found  refuge  on  the  continent.  At  the  same  time  it  shows
what  a  good  conscience  the  Church  has  in  such  matters.

In  my  chief  work  I  have  explained  the  only  valid  reason
existing  against  suicide  on  the  score  of  morality.  It  is
this:  that  suicide  thwarts  the  attainment  of  the  highest
moral  aim  by  the  fact  that,  for  a  real  release  from  this
world  of  misery,  it  substitutes  one  that  is  merely  apparent.]
But  from  a  mistake  to  a  crime  is  a  far  cry;  and  it  is  as  a
crime  that  the  clergy  of  Christendom  wish  us  to  regard
suicide.

The  inmost  kernel  of  Christianity  is  the  truth  that  suf-
fering— the  Cross — is  the  real  end  and  object  of  life.  Hence
Christianity  condemns  suicide  as  thwarting  this  end;
while  the  ancient  world,  taking  a  lower  point  of  view,  held
it  in  approval,  nay,  in  honor,  but  if  that  is  to  be  accounted
a  valid  reason  against  suicide,  it  involves  the  recognition
of  asceticism;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  valid  only  from  a  much
higherethical  standpoint  than  hasever  been  adopted  by  moral
philosophers  in  Europe.  If  we  abandon  that  high  stand-
point,there  is  no  tenable  reason  left,on  the  score  of  morality,
for  condemning   suicide.     The  extraordinary  energy  and

*  "  Essays  on  Suicide"  and  the  "  Immortality  of  the  Soul,"  by  the
late  David  Hume,  Basle,  1799,  sold  by  James  Decker.

f  Translator's  Note. — Schopenhauer  refers  to  "  Die  Welt  als  Wille
und  Vorstellung,"  vol.  i.,  £  69,  where  the  reader  may  find  the  same
argument  stated  at  somewhat  greater  length.  According  to  Schopen-
hauer, moral  freedom — the  highest  ethical  aim — is  to  be  obtained  only
by  a  denial  of  the  will  to  live.  Far  from  being  a  denial,  suicide  is  an
emphatic  assertion  of  this  will.  For  it  is  in  fleeing  from  the  pleas-
ures, not  from  the  sufferings  of  life,  that  this  denial  consists.  When  a
man  destroys  his  existence  as  an  individual,  by  is  not  by  any  means
destroying  his  will  to  live.  On  the  contrary,  he  would  like  to  live  if
he  could  do  so  with  satisfaction  to  himself;  if  he  could  assert  his  will
against  the  power  oi  circumstance;  but  circumstance  is  too  strong  foi
him.


ON  SUICIDE.  403

zeal  with  which  the  clergy  of  monotheistic  religions  attack
suicide  is  not  supported  either  by  any  passages  in  the
Bible  or  by  any  considerations  of  weight;  so  that  it  looks
as  though  they  must  have  some  secret  reason  for  their  con-
tention. May  it  not  be  this — that  the  voluntary  surrender
of  life  is  a  bad  compliment  for  him  who  said  that  "  all
things  were  very  good  ?  "  If  this  is  so,  it  offers  another
instance  of  the  crass  optimism  of  these  religions,  denounc-
ing suicide  to  escape  being  denounced  by  it.

It  will  generally  be  found  that,  as  soon  as  the  terrors  of
life  reach  the  point  at  which  they  outweigh  the  terrors  of
death,  a  man  will  put  an  end  to  his  life.  But  the  terrors
of  death  offer  considerable  resistance;  they  stand  like  a
sentinel  at  the  gate  leading  out  of  this  world.  Perhaps
there  is  no  man  alive  who  would  not  have  already  put  an
end  to  his  life,  if  this  end  had  been  of  a  purely  negative
character,  a  sudden  stoppage  of  existence.  There  is  some-
thing positive  about  ic;  it  is  the  destruction  of  the  body;
and  a  man  shrinks  from  that  because  his  body  is  the  mani-
festation of  the  will  to  live.

However,  the  struggle  with  that  sentinel  is,  as  a  rule,
not  so  hard  as  it  may  seem  from  a  long  way  off,  mainly  in
consequence  of  the  antagonism  between  the  ills  of  the  body
and  the  ills  of  the  mind.  If  we  are  in  great  bodily  pain,
or  the  pain  lasts  a  long  time,  we  become  indifferent  to
other  troubles;  all  we  think  about  is  to  get  well.  In  the
same  way  great  mental  suffering  makes  us  insensible  to
bodily  pain;  we  despise  it;  nay,  if  it  should  outweigh  the
other,  it  distracts  our  thoughts,  and  we  welcome  it  as  a
pause  in  mental  suffering.  It  is  this  feeling  that  makes
suicide  easy;  for  the  bodily  pain  that  accompanies  it
loses  all  significance  in  the  eyes  of  one  who  is  tortured  bv
an  excess  of  mental  suffering.  This  is  especially  evident
in  the  case  of  those  who  are  driven  to  suicide  by  some
purely  morbid  and  exaggerated  ill-humor.  No  special  ef-
fort to  overcome  their  feelings  is  necessary,  nor  do  such
people  require  to  be  worked  up  in  order  to  take  the  step;
but  as  soon  as  the  keeper  into  whose  charge  they  are  given
leaves  them  for  a  couple  of  minutes,  they  quickly  bring
their  life  to  an  end.

When,  in  some  dreadful  and  ghastly  dream,  we  reach
the  moment  of  greatest  horror,  it  awakes  us;  thereby
banishing    all    the    hideous    shapes   that   were    born    of


404  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

the  night.  And  life  is  a  dream:  when  the  moment  of
greatest  horror  compels  us  to  break  it  off,  the  same  thing
happens.

Suicide  may  also  be  regarded  as  an  experiment — a  ques-
tion which  man  puts  to  Nature,  trying  to  force  her  to  an
answer.  The  question  is  this:  What  change  will  death
produce  in  a  man's  existence  and  in  his  insight  into  the
nature  of  things?  It  is  a  clumsy  experiment  to  make;  for
it  involves  the  destruction  of  the  very  consciousness  which
puts  the  question  and  awaits  the  answer.


IMMORTALITY:*  A  DIALOGUE.
Thrasymachos — Philalethes.

Thrasymachos. — Tell  me  now,  in  one  word,  what
shall  1  be  after  my  death?  And  mind  you  be  clear  and
precise.

Philalethes. — All  and  nothing.

Thrasymachus. — I  thought  so!  I  gave  you  a  problem
and  you  solve  it  by  a  contradiction.  That's  a  very  stale
trick.

Philalethes.  Yes,  but  you  raise  transcendental  ques-
tions, and  you  expect  me  to  answer  them  in  language  that
is  only  made  for  immanent  knowledge.  It's  no  wonder
that  a  contradiction  ensues.

Thrasymachos. — What  do  you  mean  by  transcendental
questions  and  immanent  knowledge?  I've  heard  these  ex-
pressions before,  of  course;  they  are  not  new  to  me.  The
professor  was  fond  of  using  them,  but  only  as  predicates  of
the  Deity,  and  he  never  talked  of  anything  else;  which  was
all  quite  right  and  proper.     He  argued   thus!  if  the  Deity

*  Translator's  Note. — The  word  immortality — "  Unsterblichkeit  "
— does  not  occur  in  the  original;  nor  would  it,  in  its  usual  application
find  a  place  in  Schopenhauer's  vocabulary.  The  word  he  uses  is
"  Unzerstorbarkeit  " — indestructibility.  But  I  have  preferred  immor-
tality, because  that  word  is  commonly  associated  with  the  subject
touched  upon  in  this  little  debate.  If  any  critic  doubts  the  wisdom
of  this  preference,  let  me  ask  him  to  try  his  hand  at  a  short,  concise,
and,  at  the  same  time,  popularly  intelligible  rendering:  of  the  Ger-
man original,  which  runs  thus:  "  Zur  Lehre  von  der  Unzerstorbar-
keit unseres  wahren  Wesens  durch  den  Tod:  kleine  dialogische
Schlussbelustiguug/'


1MM0U1ALITY,  405

was  in  the  world  itself,  lie  was  immanent;  if  he  was  some-
where outside  it,  he  was  transcendent.  Nothing  could  be
clearer  and  more  obvious.  You  knew  where  you  were.
But  this  Kantian  rigmarole  won't  do  any  more:  it's  anti-
quated and  no  longer  applicable  to  modern  ideas.  Why,
we've  had  a  whole  row  of  eminent  men  in  the  metropolis  of
German  learning

Philalethes  (aside). — German  humbug,  he  means.

Thrasymachos. — The  mighty  Schleiermacher,  for  in=
stance,  and  that  gigantic  intellect,  Hegel;  and  at  this  time
of  day  we've  abandoned  that  nonsense.  I  should  rather
say  we're  so  far  beyond  it  that  we  can't  put  up  with  it  any
more.  What's  the  use  of  it  then?  What  does  it  all
mean?

Philalethes. — Transcendental  knowledge  is  knowledge
which  passes  beyond  the  bounds  of  possible  experience,  ami
strives  to  determine  the  nature  of  things  as  they  are  in
themselves.  Immanent  knowledge,  on  the  other  hand,  is
knowledge  which  confines  itseit'  entirely  within  those
bounds;  so  that  it  cannot  apply  to  anything  but  actual
phenomena.  As  iar  as  you  are  an  individual,  death  will
be  the  end  of  you.  But  your  individuality  is  not  your  true
and  inmost  being:  it  is  only  the  outward  manifestation  of
it.  It  is  not  the  thing  in-itself,  but  only  the  phenomenon
presented  in  the  form  of  time;  and  therefore  with  a  begin-
ning and  an  end.  But  your  real  being  knows  neither  time
nor  beginning  nor  end,  nor  yet  the  limits  of  any  given  in-
dividual. It  is  everywhere  present  in  every  individual,  and
no  individual  can  exist  apart  from  it.  So  when  death  comes,
on  the  one  hand  you  are  annihilated  as  an  individual;  on  the
other,  you  are  and  remain  everything.  That  is  what  I
meant  when  I  said  that  after  your  death  you  would  be  all
and  nothing.  It  is  difficult  to  find  a  more  precise  answer
to  your  question  and  at  the  same  time  be  brief.  The
answer  is  contradictory,  I  admit;  but  itis  so  simply  because
your  life  is  in  time,  and  the  immortal  part  of  you  in  eter-
nity. You  may  put  the  matter  thus:  Your  immortal  part
is  something  that  does  not  last  in  time  and  yet  is  inde-
structible; but  there  you  have  another  contradiction.  You
see  what  happened  by  trying  to  bring  the  transcendental
within  the  limits  of  immanent  knowledge.  It  is  in  some
sort  doing  violence  to  the  latter  by  misusing  it  for  ends  it
was  never  meant  to  serve.


406  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

Thrasymachos. — Look  here,  I  shaVt  give  twopence
for  your  immortality  unless  Fin  to  remain  an  individual.

Philalethes. — Well,  perhaps  I  may  be  able  to  satisfy
you  on  this  point.  Suppose  I  guarantee  that  after  death
you  shall  remain  an  individual,  but  only  on  condition  that
you  first  spend  three  months  of  complete  unconsciousness.

Thrasymachos. — I  shall  have  no  objection  to  that.

Philalethes. — But  remember,  if  people  are  completely
unconscious,  they  take  no  account  of  time.  So,  when  you
are  dead,  it's  all  the  same  to  you  whether  three  months
pass  in  the  world  of  unconsciousness,  or  ten  thousand  years.
In  one  case  as  in  the  other,  it  is  simply  a  matter  of  believ-
ing what  is  told  you  when  you  awake.  So  far,  then  you
can  afford  to  be  indifferent  whether  it  is  three  months  or
ten  thousand  years  that  pass  before  you  recover  your  indi-
viduality.

Thrasymachos. — Yes,  if  it  comes  to  that,  I  suppose
you're  right.

Philalethes. — And  if  by  chance,  after  those  ten  thou-
sand years  have  gone  by,  no  one  ever  thinks  of  awaking
you,  I  fancy  it  would  be  no  great  misfortune.  You  would
have  become  quite  accustomed  to  non-existence  after  so
long  a  spell  of  it — following  upon  such  a  very  few  years  of
life.  At  any  rate  you  may  be  sure  you  would  be  perfectly
ignorant  of  the  whole  thing.  Further,  if  you  knew  that
the  mysterious  power  which  keeps  you  in  your  present
state  of  life  had  never  once  ceased  in  those  ten  thousand
years  to  bring  forth  other  phenomena  like  yourself,  and  to
endow  them  with  life,  it  would  fully  console  you.

Thrasymachos. — Indeed!  So  you  think  you're  quietly
going  to  do  me  out  of  my  individuality  with  all  this  fine
talk.  But  I'm  up  to  your  tricks.  I  tell  you  I  won't  exist
unless  I  can  have  my  individuality.  I'm  not  going  to  put
off  with  "  mysterious  powers,"  and  what  you  call  ".  pheno-
mena." I  can't  do  without  my  individuality,  and  I  won't
give  it  up.

Phtlalethes. — You  mean,  I  suppose,  that  your  indivi-
duality is  such  a  delightful  thing — so  splendid,  so  perfect,
and  beyond  compare — that  you  can't  imagine  anything
better.  Aren't  you  ready  to  exchange  your  present  state
for  one  which,  if  we  can  judge  by  what  is  told  us,  may
possibly  be  superior  and  more  endurable?

Thrasymachos. — Don't  vou  see  that  my  individuality


IMMORTALITY.  40?

be  it  what  it  may,  is  my  very  self?  To  me  it  is  the  mo6t
important  thing  in  the  world,

"  For  God  is  God  and  I  am  I."

I  want  to  exist,  7,  /.  That's  the  main  thing.  I  don't
care  about  an  existence  which  has  to  be  proved  to  be  mine,
before  I  can  believe  it.

Pihlalethes. — Think  what  you're  doing!  When  you
say  /,  /,  I  want  to  exist,  it  is  not  you  alone  that  says  this.
Everything  says  it,  absolutely  everything  that  has  the
faintest  trace  of  consciousness.  It  follows  then,  that  thi*
desire  of  yours  is  just  the  part  of  you  that  is  not  individ*
ual — the  part  that  is  common  to  all  things  without  dis-
tinction. It  is  the  cry,  not  of  the  individual,  but  of
existence  itself;  it  is  the  intrinsic  element  in  everything
that  exists,  nay,  it  is  the  cause  of  anything  existing  at  all.
This  desire  craves  for  and  so  is  satisfied  with  nothing  less
than  existence  in  general — not  any  definite  individual  ex*
istence.  No!  that  is  not  its  aim.  It  seems  to  be  so  only
because  this  desire — this  will — attains  consciousness  only
in  the  individual,  and  therefore  looks  as  though  it  were
concerned  with  nothing  but  the  individual.  There  lies  the
illusion,  an  illusion  it  is  true,  in  which  the  individual  is
held  fast:  but,  if  he  reflects,  he  can  break  the  fetters  and
set  himself  free.  It  is  only  indirectly,  I  say,  that  the  in-
dividual has  this  violent  craving  for  existence.  It  is  the
will  to  live  which  is  the  real  and  direct  aspirant — alike
and  identical  in  all  things.  Since  then,  existence  is  the
free  work,  nay,  the  mere  reflection  of  the  will,  where  ex-
istence is,  there  too,  must  be  will:  and  for  the  moment,
the  will  finds  its  satisfaction  in  existence  itself;  so  far,  I
mean,  as  that  which  never  rests,  but  presses  forward
eternally,  can  ever  find  any  satisfaction  at  all.  The  will  is
careless  of  the  individual:  the  individual  is  not  its  business;
although,  as  I  have  said,  this  seems  to  be  the  case,  because
the  individual  has  no  direct  consciousness  of  will  except  in
himself.  The  effect  of  this  is  to  make  the  individual  care-
ful to  maintain  his  own  existence;  and  if  this  were  not  so,
there  would  be  no  surety  for  the  preservation  of  the  species.
From  all  this  it  is  clear  that  individuality  is  not  a  form  o*
perfection,  but  rather  of  limitation:  and  sc  to  be  freer*
from  it  is  not  loss  but  gain.     Trouble  vourself  no   mor-


408  STUDIES  JN  PESSIMISM.

about  the  matter.  Once  thoroughly  recognize  what  yon
are,  what  your  existence  really  is,  namely,  the  universal
will  to  live  and  the  whole  question  will  seem  to  you  childish
and  most  ridiculous!

Thrasymachos. — You're  childish  yourself  and  most
ridiculous,  like  all  philosophers!  and  if  a  man  of  my  age
lets  himself  in  for  a  quarter-of-an-hour's  talk  with  such
fools,  it  is  only  because  it  amuses  me  and  passes  the  time.
I've  more  important  business  to  attend  to,  so  good-by.


FURTHER  PSYCHOLOGICAL  OBSERVATIONS.

There  is  an  unconscious  propriety  iu  the  way  in  which,
in  all  European  languages,  the  word  person  is  commonly
used  to  denote  a  human  being.  The  real  meaning  of  per-
sona is  a  mask,  such  as  actors  were  accustomed  to  wear  on
the  ancient  stage;  and  it  is  quite  true  that  no  one  shows
himself  as  he  is,  but  wears  his  mask  and  plays  his  part.
Indeed,  the  whole  of  our  social  arrangements  may  be
likened  to  a  perpetual  comedy;  and  this  is  why  a  man  who
is  worth  anything  finds  society  so  insipid,  while  a  block-
head is  quite  at  home  in  it.


Reason  deserves  to  be  called  a  prophet;  for  in  showing  us
the  consequence  and  effect  of  our  actions  in  the  present,
does  it  not  tell  us  what  the  future  will  be?  This  is  pre-
cisely why  reason  is  such  an  excellent  power  of  restraint  in
moments  when  we  are  possessed  by  some  base  passion,  some
fit  of  anger,- some  covetous  desire,  that  will  lead  us  to  do
things  whereof  we  must  presently  repent.


Hatred  comes  from  the  heart;  contempt  from  the  head:
and  neither  feeling  is  quite  within  our  control.  For  we
cannot  alter  our  heart;  its  bias  is  determined  by  motives;
and  our  head  deals  with  objective  facts  and  applies  to
them  rules  which  are  immutable.  Any  given  individual  is
',he  union  of  a  particular  heart  with  a  particular  head.

Hatred  and  contempt  are  diametrically  opposed  and
mutually  exclusive.  There  are  even  not  a  few  cases  where
hatred  of  a  person  is  rooted  in  nothing  but  forced  esteem


FURTHER  PSYCHOLOGICAL  OBSERVATIONS.     409

for  his  qualities.  And  besides,  if  a  man  sets  out  to  hate
k\\  the  miserable  creatures  he  meets,  he  will  not  have  much
energy  left  for  anything  else;  whereas  he  can  despise  them,
one  and  all,  with  the  greatest  ease.  True,  genuine  contempt
is  just  the  reverse  of  true,  genuine  pride;  it  keeps  quite
quiet  and  gives  no  sign  of  its  existence.  For  if  a  mail
shows  that  he  despises  you,  he  signifies  at  least  this  much
regard  for  you,  that  he  wants  to  let  you  know  how  little
he  appreciates  you;  and  his  wish  is  dictated  by  hatred,
which  cannot  exist  with  real  contempt.  On  the  contrary,
if  it  is  genuine,  it  is  simply  the  conviction  that  the  object
of  it  is  a  man  of  no  value  at  all.  Contempt  is  not  incom-
patible with  indulgent  and  kindly  treatment,  and  for  the
sake  of  one's  own  peace  and  safety,  this  should  not  be
omitted;  it  will  prevent  irritation;  and  there  is  no  one  who
cannot  do  harm  if  he  is  roused  to  it.  But  if  this  pure,
cold,  sincere  contempt  ever  shows  itself,  it  will  be  met
with  the  most  truculent  hatred;  for  the  despised  person  is
not  in  a  position  to  fight  contempt  with  its  own  weapons.


Melancholy  is  a  very  differe7it  thing  from  bad  humor,
and  of  the  two,  it  is  not  nearly  so  far  removed  from  a  gay
and  happy  temperament.  Melancholy  attracts,  while  bad
humor  repels.

Hypochondria  is  a  species  of  torment  which  not  only
makes  us  unreasonably  cross  with  the  things  of  the  present;
not  only  fills  us  with  groundless  anxiety  on  the  score  of
future  misfortunes  entirely  of  our  own  manufacture;  but
also  leads  to  unmerited  self-reproach  for  what  we  have  done
in  the  past.

Hypochondria  shows  itself  in  a  perpetual  hunting  after
things  that  vex  and  annoy,  and  then  brooding  over  them.
The  cause  of  it  is  an  inward  morbid  discontent,  often  co-
existing with  a  naturally  restless  temperament.  In  their
extreme  form,  this  discontent  and  this  unrest  lead  to.
suicide.


Any  incident,  however  trivial,  that  rouses  disagreeable
emotion,  leaves  an  after-effect  in  our  mind,  which,  for  the
time  it  lasts,  prevents  our  taking  a  clear  objective  view  of
the  things  about  us,  and  tinges  all  our  thoughts:  just  as  a


£10  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

small  object  held  close  to   the  eye  limits   and   distorts  our
field  of  vision.


What  makes  people  hard-hearted  is  this,  that  each  man
has,  or  fancies  he  has,  as  much  as  he  can  bear  in  his  own
troubles.  Hence  if  a  man  suddenly  finds  himself  in  an
unusually  happy  position,  it  will  in  most  cases  result  in  his
being  sympathetic  and  kind.  But  if  he  has  never  been  in
any  other  than  a  happy  position,  or  this  becomes  his  per-
manent state,  the  effect  of  it  is  often  just  the  contrary:  it
so  far  removes  him  from  suffering  that  lie  is  incapable  of
feeling  any  more  sympathy  with  it.  So  it  is  that  the  poor
often  show  themselves  more  ready  to  help  than  the  rich.


At  times  it  seems  as  though  we  both  wanted  and  did  not
want  the  same  thing,  and  felt  at  once  glad  and  sorry  about
it.  For  instance,  if  on  some  fixed  date  we  are  going  to  be
put  to  a  decisive  test  about  anything  in  which  it  would  be
a  great  advantage  to  us  to  come  off  victorious,  we  shall  be
anxious  for  it  to  take  place  at  once,  and  at  the  same  time
we  shall  tremble  at  the  thought  of  its  approach.  And  if,
in  the  meantime,  we  hear  that,  for  once  in  a  way,  the  date
has  been  postponed,  we  snail  experience  a  feeling  both  of
pleasure  and  of  annoyance;  for  the  news  is  disappointing,
but  nevertheless  it  affords  us  momentary  relief.  It  is  juat
the  same  thing  if  vve  are  expecting  some  important  letter
carrying  a  definite  decision,  and  it  fails  to  arrive.

In  such  cases  there  are  really  two  different  motives  at
work  in  us;  the  stronger  but  more  distant  of  the  two  being
the  desire  to  stand  the  test  and  to  have  the  decision  given
in  our  favor;  and  the  weaker,  which  touches  us  more
nearly,  the  wish  to  be  left  for  the  present  in  peace  and
quiet,  and  accordingly  in  further  enjoyment  of  the
•advantage  which  at  any  rate  attaches  to  a  state  of  hopeful
uncertainty,  compared  with  the  possibility  that  the  issue
may  be  unfavorable.


In  my  head  there  is  a  permanent  opposition  party;  and
whenever  I  take  any  step  or  come  to  any  decision — though
I    may  have   given    the   matter    mature   consideration — it


FURTHER  PSYCHOLOGICAL  OBSERVATIONS.     411

afterward  attacks  what  I  have  done,  without,  however,
being  each  time  necessarily  in  the  right.  This  is,  I  sup-
pose, only  a  form  of  rectification  on  the  part  of  the  spirit
of  scrutiny;  bat  it  often  reproaches  me  when  I  do  not
deserve  it.  The  same  thing,  no  doubt,  happens  to  many
others  as  well;  for  where  is  the  man  who  can  help  thinking
that,  after  all,  it  were  better  not  to  have  done  something
he  did  with  every  hope  of  success:

"Quid  tam  dextro  pedeconcipis  ut  te
Conatus  non  poeniteat  votique  peracti?"


Why  is  it  that  common  is  an  expression  of  contempt?  anu
that  uncommon,  extraordinary,  distinguished,  denote
approbation?  Why  is  everything  that  is  common  con-
temptible?

Common  in  its  original  meaning  denotes  that  which  is
peculiar  to  all  men,  i.  e.,  shared  equally  by  the  whole
species,  and  therefore  an  inherent  part  of  its  nature.
Accordingly,  if  an  individual  possesses  no  qualities  beyond
those  which  attach  to  mankind  in  general,  he  is  a  common
man.  Ordinary  is  a  much  milder  word,  and  refers  rather
to  intellectual  character;  whereas  common  has  more  of  a
moral  application.

What  value  can  a  creature  have  that  is  not  a  whit  different
from  millions  of  its  kind?  Millions,  do  I  say?  nay,  an
infinitude  of  creatures  which,  century  after  century,  in
never-ending  flow,  nature  sends  bubbling  up  from  her  in-
exhaustible springs;  as  generous  with  them  as  the  smith
with  the  useless  sparks  that  fly  around  his  anvil.

It  is  obviously  quite  right  that  a  creature  which  has  no
qualities  except  those  of  the  species,  should  have  to  confine
its  claim  to  an  existence  entirely  within  the  limits  of  the
species,  and  live  a  life  conditioned  by  those  limits.

In  various  passages  of  my  works.*  I  have  argued  that
while  a  lower  animal  possesses  nothing  more  than  the
generic  character  of  its  species,  man  is  the  only  being
which  can  lay  claim  to  possess  an  individual  character.
But  in  most  men  this  individual  character  comes  to  very
little  in  reality;  and  they  may  be  almost  all  ranged  under

*  "  Grundprobleme  der  Ethik,"  p.  48;  "  Welt  als  Will*  ^nd  Vor
etellung."  vol.  i.  p.  338.


41 2  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

certain  classes:  ce  sont  des  especes.  Their  thoughts  and
desires,  like  their  faces,  are  those  of  the  species,  or  at  any
rate,  those  of  the  class  to  which  they  belong:  and  accord-
ingly, they  are  of  a  trivial,  every-day,  common  character,
and  exist  by  the  thousand.  You  can  usually  tell  before-
hand what  they  are  likely  to  do  and  say.  They  have  no
special  stamp  or  mark  to  distinguish  them;  they  are  like
manufactured  goods,  all  of  a  piece.

If,  then,  their  nature  is  merged  in  that  of  the  species,
how  shall  their  existence  go  beyond  it?  The  curse  of  vul-
garity puts  men  on  a  par  with  the  lower  animals,  by  allow-
ing them  none  but  a  generic  nature,  a  generic  form  of
existence.

Anything  that  is  high  or  great  or  noble  must  then,  as  a
matter  of  course,  ami  by  its  very  nature,  stand  alone  in  a
world  where  no  betcer  expression  can  be  found  to  denote
what  is  base  and  contemptible  than  that  which  I  have
mentioned  as  in  general  use,  namely,  common.


Will,  as  the  thing-in-itself,  is  the  foundation  of  all
being;  it  is  part  and  parcel  of  every  creature,  and  the  per-
manent element  in  everything.  Will,  then,  is  that  which
we  possess  in  common  with  all  men,  nay,  with  all  animals,
and  even  with  lower  forms  of  existence;  and  in  so  far  we
are  akin  to  everything — so  far,  that  is,  as  everything  is
filled  to  overflowing  with  will.  On  the  other  hand,  that
which  places  one  being  over  another,  and  sets  differences
between  man  and  man,  is  intellect  and  knowledge;  there-
fore in  every  manifestation  of  self  we  should,  as  far  as
possible,  give  play  to  the  intellect  alone;  for,  as  we  have
seen,  the  will  is  the  common  part  of  us.  Every  violent
exhibition  of  will  is  common  and  vulgar;  in  other  words,  it
reduces  us  to  the  level  of  the  species,  and  makes  us  a  mere
type  and  example  of  it;  in  that  it  is  just  the  character  of
the  species  that  we  are  showing.  So  every  fit  of  anger  is
something  common — every  unrestrained  display  of  joy,  or
of  hate,  or  fear — in  short,  every  form  of  emotion;  in  other
words,  every  movement  of  the  will,  if  it  is  so  strong  as
decidedly  to  outweigh  the  intellectual  element  in  conscious
noss,  and  to  make  the  man  appear  as  a  being  that  wills
rather  than  knows.

In  giving   way  to   emotion   of   this   violent   kind,  the


FURTHER  PSYCHOLOGICAL  OBSERVATIONS.     413

greatest  genius  puts  himself  on  a  level  with  the  commonest
son  of  earth.  Contrarily,  if  a  man  desires  to  be  absolutely-
uncommon,  in  other  words,  great,  he  should  never  allow
his  consciousness  to  be  taken  possession  of  and  dominated
by  the  movement  of  his  will,  however  much  he  may  be
solicited  thereto.  For  example,  he  must  be  able  to  observe
that  other  people  are  badly  disposed  toward  him,  without
feeling  any  hatred  toward  them  himself;  nay,  there  is  no
surer  sign  of  a  great  mind  than  that  it  refuses  to  notice
annoying  and  insulting  expressions,  but  straightway
ascribes  them,  as  it  ascribes  countless  other  mistakes,  to
the  defective  knowledge  of  the  speaker,  and  so  merely
observes  without  feeling  them.  This  is  the  meaning  of
that  remark  of  Graciau,  that  nothing  is  more  unworthy  of
a  man  than  to  let  it  be  seen  that  he  is  one — el  mayor  des-
doro  de  un  hombre  es  dar  mueatras  de  que  es  Jiombre.

And  even  in  the  drama,  which  is  the  peculiar  province
of  the  passions  and  emotions,  it  is  easy  for  them  to  appear
common  and  vulgar.  And  this  is  specially  observable  in
the  works  of  the  French  tragic  writers,  who  set  no  other
aim  before  themselves  but  the  delineation  of  the  passions;
and  by  indulging  at  one  moment  in  a  vaporous  kind  of
pathos  which  makes  them  ridiculous,  at  another  in  epigram-
matic witticisms,  endeavor  to  conceal  the  vulgarity  of  their
subject.  I  remember  seeing  the  celebrated  Mademoiselle
Rachel  as  Maria  Stuart;  and  when  she  burst  out  in  fury
against  Elizabeth — though  she  did  it  very  well — I  could
not  help  thinking  of  a  washerwoman.  She  played  the
final  parting  in  such  a  way  as  to  deprive  it  of  all  true
tragic  feeling,  of  which,  indeed,  the  French  have  no  notion
at  all.  The  same  part  was  incomparably  better  played  by
the  Italian  Ristori;  and,  in  fact,  the  Italian  nature,  though
in  many  respects  very  different  from  the  German,  shares
its  appreciation  for  what  is  deep,  serious,  and  tiue  in  Art;
herein  opposed  to  the  French,  which  everywhere  betrays
that  it  possesses  none  of  this  feeling  whatever.

The  noble,  in  other  words,  the  uncommon,  element  in
the  drama — nay,  what  is  sublime  in  it — is  not  reached
until  the  intellect  is  set  to  work,  as  opposed  to  the  will;
until  it  takes  a  free  flight  over  all  those  passionate  move-
ments of  that  will,  and  makes  them  the  subject  of  its  con-
templation. Shakespeare,  in  particular,  shows  that  this
is  his  general   method,  more  especially  in  Hamlet.     And


414  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

only  when  intellect  rises  to  the  point  where  the  vanity  of
all  effort  is  manifest,  and  the  will  proceeds  to  an  act  of
self-annulment,  is  the  drama  tragic  in  the  true  sense  of  the
word:  it  is  then  that  it  reaches  its  highest  aim  in  becom-
ing really  sublime.


Every  man  takes  the  limits  of  his  own  field  of  vision  for
ihe  limits  of  the  world.  This  is  an  error  of  the  intellect
as  inevitable  as  that  error  of  the  eye  which  lets  us  fancy
that  on  the  horizon  heaven  and  earth  meet.  This  explains
many  things,  and  among  them  the  fact  that  every  one
measures  us  with  his  own  standard — generally  about  as
long  as  a  tailor's  tape,  and  we  have  to  put  up  with  it:  as
also  that  no  one  will  allow  us  to  be  taller  than  himself — a
supposition  which  is  once  for  all  taken  for  granted.


There  is  no  doubt  that  many  a  man  owes  his  good
fortune  in  life  solely  to  the  circumstance  that  he  has  a
pleasant  way  of  smiling,  and  so  wins  the  heart  in  his
favor.

However,  the  heart  woirid  do  better  to  be  careful,  and  to
remember  what  Hamlet  put  down  in  his  tablets — "  that
one  may  smile,  and  smile,  and  be  a  villain."


Everything  that  is  really  fundamental  in  a  man,  and
therefore  genuine,  works,  as  such,  unconsciously;  in  this
respect  like  the  power  of  nature.  That  which  has  passed
through  the  domain  of  consciousness  is  thereby  trans-
formed into  an  idea  or  picture;  and  so  if  it  comes  to  be
uttered,  it  is  only  an  idea  or  picture  which  passes  from  one
person  to  another.

Accordingly,  any  quality  of  mind  or  character  that  is
genuine  and  lasting,  is  originally  unconscious;  and  it  is
only  when  unconsciously  brought  into  play  that  it  makes  a
profound  impression.  If  any  like  quality  is  consciously
exercised,  it  means  that  it  has  been  worked  up;  it  becomes
intentional,  and  therefore  a  matter  of  affectation,  in  other
words,  of  deception.

If  a  man  does  a  thing  unconsciously,  it  costs  him  no
trouble;   but  if  he  tries  to  do  it  by  taking  trouble,  he  fails.


FURTHER  PSYCHOLOGICAL  OBSERVATIONS.     415

This  applies  to  the  origin  of  those  fundamental  ideas
which  form  the  pith  and  marrow  of  all  genuine  work.
Only  that  which  is  innate  is  genuine  and  will  hold  water;
and  every  man  who  wants  to  achieve  something,  whether
in  practical  life,  in  literature,  or  in  art,  must  "  follow  the
rules  without  knowing  them."


Men  of  very  great  capacity  will,  as  a  rule,  find  the  com-
pany of  very  stupid  people  preferable  to  that  of  the  com-
mon run;  for  the  same  reason  that  the  tyrant  and  the  mob,
the  grandfather  and  the  grandchildren,  are  natural  allies.


That  line  of  Ovid's,

"Pronaque  cum  spectent  animalia  cetera  terrain,"

can  be  applied  in  its  true  physical  sense  to  the  lower
animals  alone;  but  in  a  metaphorical  and  spiritual  sense  it
is,  alas!  true  of  nearly  all  men  as  well.  All  their  plans
and  projects  are  merged  in  the  desire  of  physical  enjoy-
ment, physical  well-being.  They  may,  indeed,  have  per-
sonal interests,  often  embracing  a  very  varied  sphere;  but
still  these  latter  receive  their  importance  entirely  from  the
relation  in  which  they  stand  to  the  former.  This  is  not
only  proved  by  their  manner  of  life  and  the  things  they
say,  but  it  even  shows  itself  in  the  way  they  look,  the
expression  of  their  physiognomy,  their  gait  and  gesticula-
tions. Everything  about  them  cries  out:  in  terramprona!
It  is  not  to  them,  it  is  only  to  the  nobler  and  more  highly
endowed  natures — men  who  really  think  and  look  about
them  in  the  world,  and  form  exceptional  specimens  of  hu-
manity— that  the  next  lines  are  applicable:

"Os  houiini  sublime  dedit  coelumque  tueri
Jussit  et  erectos  ad  sidera  tollere  voltus."


No  one  knows  what  capacities  for  doing  and  suffering
he  has  in  himself,  until  something  comes  to  rouse  them  to
activity:  just  as  in  a  pond  of  still  water,  lying  there  like  a
mirror,  there  is  no  sign  of  the  roar  and  thunder  with  which
it  can  leap  from  the  precipice,  and  yet  remain  what  it  is;


416  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

or  again,  rise  high  in  the  air  as  a  fountain.  When  water
is  as  cold  as  ice,  you  can  have  no  idea  of  the  latent  warmth
contained  in  it.


Why  is  it  that  in  spite  of  all  the  mirrors  in  the  world,
no  one  really  knows  what,  he  looks  like?

A  man  may  call  to  mind  the  face  of  his  friend,  but  not
his  own.  Here,  then,  is  an  initial  difficulty  in  the  way  of
applying  the  maxim,  "  Know  thyself."

This  is  partly,  no  doubt,  to  be  explained  by  the  fact
that  it  is  physically  impossible  for  a  man  to  see  himself  in
the  glass  except  with  face  turned  straight  toward  it  and
perfectly  motionless;  where  the  expression  of  the  eye,
which  counts  for  so  much,  and  really  gives  its  whole  char-
acter to  the  face,  is  to  a  great  extent  lost.  But  co-existing
with  this  physical  impossibility,  there  seems  to  me  to  be  an
ethical  impossibility  of  an  analogous  nature,  and  produc-
ing the  same  effect.  A  man  cannot  look  upon  his  own  re-
flection as  though  the  person  presented  there  were  a
stranger  to  him;  and  yet  this  is  necessary  if  he  is  to  take
an  objective  view.  In  the  last  resort,  an  objective  view
means  a  deep-rooted  feeling  on  the  part  of  the  individual,
as  a  moral  being,  that  that  which  he  is  contemplating  is
not  himself;  *  and  unless  he  can  take  this  point  of  view,
he  will  not  see  things  in  a  really  true  light,  which  is  possi-
ble only  if  he  is  alive  to  their  actual  detects,  exactly  as
they  are.  Instead  of  that,  when  a  man  sees  himself  in  the
glass,  something  out  of  his  own  egoistic  nature  whispers  to
him  to  take  care  to  remember  that  it  is  no  stranger,
but  himself,  that  he  is  looking  at;  and  this  operates  as  a
nolime  taiigere,  and  prevents  him  taking  an  objective  view.
It  seems,  indeed,  as  if,  without  the  leaven  of  a  grain  of
malice,  such  a  view  were  impossible.


According  as  a  man's  mental  energy  is  exerted  or  re-
laxed, will  life  appear  to  him  either  so  short,  and  petty,
and  fleeting,  that  nothing  can  possibly  happen  over  which
it  is  worth  his  while  to  spend  emotion;  that  nothing  really

*  Cf.  "Grundprobleme  derEthik."  p.  275.


FURTHER  PSYCHOLOGICAL  OBSERVATIONS.     41?

matters,  whether  it  is  pleasure  or  riches,  or  even  fame,  and
that  in  whatever  way  a  man  ma}'  have  failed,  he  cannot
have  lost  much — or.  on  the  other  hand,  life  will  seem  so
long,  so  important,  so  all  in  all,  so  momentous  and  so  full
of  difficulty  that  we  have  to  plunge  into  it  with  our  whole
soul  if  we  are  to  obtain  a  share  of  its  goods,  make  sure  of
its  prizes,  and  cany  out  our  plans.  This  latter  is  the  im-
manent and  common  view  of  life;  it  is  what  Gracian
means  when  he  speaks  of  the  serious  way  of  looking  at
things — tomar  muy  de  veras  el  vivir.  The  former  is  the
transcendental  view,  which  is  well  expressed  in  Ovid's
non  est  tanti — it  is  not  worth  so  much  trouble;  still
better,  however,  by  Plato's  remark  that  nothing  in  human
affairs  is  worth  any  great  anxiety — ovrs  n  tgjv  dvhftoaTtivscv
aiiov  k6rl  /isydXr?*;  (37tovdr/<i.  This  condition  of  mind  is  due  to
the  intellect  having  got  the  upper  hand  in  the  domain  of  con-
sciousness, where,  freed  from  the  mere  service  of  the  will,  it
looks  upon  the  phenomena  of  life  objectively,  and  so  can-
not fail  to  gain  a  clear  insight  into  its  vain  and  futile  char-
acter. But  in  the  other  condition  of  mind,  will  predom-
inates; and  the  intellect  exists  only  to  light  it  on  its  way
to  the  attainment  of  its  desires.

A  man  is  great  or  small  according  as  he  leans  to  the  one
or  the  other  of  these  views  of  life.


People  of  very  brilliant  ability  think  little  of  admitting
their  errors  and  weaknesses,  or  of  letting  others  see  them.
They  look  upon  them  as  something  for  which  they  have
duly  paid;  and  instead  of  fancying  that  these  weaknesses
are  a  disgrace  to  them,  they  consider  they  are  doing  them
an  honor.  This  is  especially  the  case  when  the  errors  are
of  the  kind  that  hang  together  with  their  qualities — con-
ditioner sine  quibus  non — or  as  George  Sand  said,  les  defauts
de  ses  vert  us.


Contrarily,  these  are  people  of  good  character  and  irre-
proachable intellectual  capacity,  who,  far  from  admitting
the  few  little  weaknesses  they  have,  conceal  them  with
care,  and  show  themselves  very  sensitive  to  any  suggestion
of  their  existence;  and  this,  just  because  their  whole  merit
consists  in  being  free  from  error  and  infirmity.     If  these


418  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

people  are  found  to  have  done  any  tiling  wrong,  their  repu<
tation  immediately  suffers.


With  people  of  only  moderate  ability,  mcdesty  is  mere
honesty;  but  with  those  who  possess  great  talent,  it  is  hy-
pocrisy. Hence  it  is  just  as  becoming  in  the  latter  to
make  no  secret  of  the  respect  they  bear  themselves  and  no
disguise  of  the  fact  that  they  are  conscious  of  unusual
power,  us  it  is  in  the  former  to  be  modest.  Valerius
Maximus  gives  some  very  neat  examples  of  this  in  his
chapter  on  self-confidence,  defiducia  sui.


Not  to  go  to  the  theater  is  like  making  one's  toilet  with-
out a  mirror.  But  it  is  still  worse  to  take  a  decision  with-
out consulting  a  friend.  For  a  man  may  have  the
most  excellent  judgment  in  all  other  matters,  and  yet  go
wrong  in  those  which  concern  himself;  because  here  the
will  comes  in  and  deranges  the  intellect  at  once.  There-
fore let  a  man  take  counsel  of  a  friend.  A  doctor  can
cure  every  one  but  himself;  if  he  falls  ill,  he  sends  for  a
colleague.


In  all  that  we  do,  we  wish,  more  or  less,  to  come  to  the
end;  we  are  impatient  to  finish  and  glad  to  be  done.  But
the  last  scene  of  all,  the  general  end,  is  something  that,  as
a  rule,  we  wish  as  far  off  as  may  be.


Every  parting  gives  a  foretaste  of  death;  every  coming
together  again  a  foretaste  of  the  resurrection.  This  is
svhy  even  people  who  were  indifferent  to  each  other,  rejoice
30  much  if  they  come  together  again  after  twenty  or  thirty
years'  separation.


Intellects  differ  from  one  another  in  a  very  real  and
fundamental  way;  but  no  comparison  can  well  be  made  by
merely  general  observations.  It  is  necessary  to  come  olose,
and  to  go  into  details;  for  the  difference  that  exists  cannot
be  seen  from  afar*,   and  it  is  not  easy  to  judge  by  outward


F  UR TITER  PSYCHOLOGICAL  GBSER  VA  TIOAS.     4  ]  9

appearances,  as  in  the  several  cases  cf  education,  leisure
and  occupation.  But  even  judging  by  these  alone,  it  must
be  admitted  that  many  a  man  has  a  degree  of  existence  at
least  ten  times  as  high  as  another — in  other  words,  exists
ten  times  as  much.


I  am  not  speaking  here  of  savages  whose  life  is  often
only  one  degree  above  that  of  the  apes  in  their  woods.
Consider,  for  instance,  a  porter  in  Naples  or  Venice  (in
the  north  of  Europe  solicitude  for  the  winter  months
makes  people  more  thoughtful  and  therefore  reflective);
look  at  the  life  he  leads,  from  its  beginning  to  its  end —
driven  by  poverty;  living  on  his  physical  strength;  meeting
the  needs  of  every  day,  nav,  of  every  hour,  by  hard  work,
great  effort,  constant  tumult,  want  in  all  its  forms,  no  care
for  the  morrow;  his  only  comfort,  rest  after  exhaustion;
continuous  quarreling;  not  a  moment  free  for  reflection;
such  sensual  delights  as  a  mild  climate  and  only  just  suf-
ficient food  will  permit  of;  and  then,  finally,  as  the
metaphysical  element,  the  crass  superstition  of  his  church;
the  whole  forming  a  manner  of  life  with  only  a  low  degree
of  consciousness,  where  a  man  hustles,  or  rather  is  hustled,
through  his  existence.  This  restless  and  confused  dream
forms  the  life  of  how  many  millions!

Such  men  think  only  just  so  much  as  is  necessary  to
carry  out  their  will  for  the  moment.  They  never  reflect
upon  their  life  as  a  connected  whole,  let  alone,  then,  upon
existence  in  general;  to  a  certain  extent  they  may  be  said
to  exist  without  really  knowing  it.  The  existence  of  the
mobsman  or  the  slave  who  lives  on  in  this  unthinking  way,
stands  very  much  nearer  than  ours  to  that  of  the  brute,
which  is  confined  entirely  to  the  present  moment;  but,  for
that  very  reason,  it  has  also  less  of  pain  in  it  than  ours.
Nay,  since  all  pleasure  is  in  its  nature  negative,  that  is  to
say,  consists  in  freedom  from  some  form  of  misery  or  need,
the  constant  and  rapid  interchange  between  setting  about
something  and  getting  it  done,  which  is  the  permanent  ac-
companiment of  the  work  they  do,  and  then  again  the
augmented  form  which  this  takes  when  they  go  from  work
to  rest  and  the  satisfaction  of  their  needs — all  this  gives
them  a  constant  source  of  enjoyment;  and  the  fact  that  it
is  much   commoner  to  see  happy  faces  among    the  pool


420  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

than  among  the  rich,  is  a  sure  proof  that  it  is  used  to
good  advantage.

Passing  from  this  kind  of  man,  consider,  next,  the
eober,  sensible  merchant,  who  leads  a  life  of  speculation,
thinks  long  over  his  plans  and  carries  them  out  with  great
care,  founds  a  house,  and  provides  for  his  wife,  his  children
and  descendants;  takes  his  share,  too,  in  the  life  of  the
community.  It  is  obvious  that  a  man  like  this  has  a  much
higher  degree  of  consciousness  than  the  former,  and  so  his
existence  has  a  higher  degree  of  reality.

Then  look  at  the  man  of  learning,  who  investigates,  it
may  be,  the  history  of  the  past.  He  will  have  reached  the
point  at  which  a  man  becomes  conscious  of  existence  as  a
whole,  sees  beyond  the  period  of  his  own  life,  beyond  his
own  personal  interests,  thinking  over  the  whole  course  of
the  world's  history.

Then,  finally,  look  at  the  poet  or  the  philosopher,  in
whom  reflection  has  reached  such  a  height,  that,  instead
of  being  drawn  on  to  investigate  any  one  particular  phe-
nomenon of  existence,  he  stands  in  amazement  before
existence  itself,  this  great  sphinx,  and  makes  it  his  prob-
lem. In  him  consciousness  has  reached  the  degree  of
clearness  at  which  it  embraces  the  world  itself:  his  intellect
has  completely  abandoned  its  function  as  the  servant  of  his
will,  and  now  holds  the  world  before  him;  and  the  world
calls  upon  him  much  more  to  examine  and  consider  it,
than  to  play  a  part  in  it  himself.  If,  then,  the  degree  of
consciousness  is  the  degree  of  reality,  such  a  man  will  be
sure  to  exist  most  of  all,  and  there  will  be  sense  and  signi-
ficance in  so  describing  him.

Between  the  two  extremes  here  sketched,  and  the  inter-
vening stages,  every  one  will  be  able  to  find  the  place  at
which  he  himself  stands.


We  know  that  man  is  in  general  superior  to  all  other
animals,  and  this  is  also  the  case  in  his  capacity  for  being
trained.  Mohammedans  are  trained  to  pray  with  their
faces  turned  toward  Mecca,  five  times  a  day;  and  they
never  fail  to  do  it.  Christians  are  trained  to  cross  them-
selves on  certain  occasions,  to  bow,  and  so  on.  Indeed,  it
may  be  said  that  religion  is  the  chef  d'oeuvre  of  the  art  of
training,   because  it  trains  people  in   the   way  they  shall


fURTHER  PSYCHOLOGICAL  OBSERVATIONS.      421

think-  and,  as  is  well  known,  yon  cannot  begin  the  process
too  early.  There  is  no  absurdity  so  palpable  bnt  that  ift
may  be  firmly  planted  in  the  human  head  if  you  only  begin
to  inculcate  it  before  the  age  of  five,  by  constantly  repeat-
ing it  with  an  air  of  great  solemnity.  For  as  in  the  case  of
animals,  so  in  that  of  men,  training  is  successful  only
when  you  begin  in  early  youth.

Noblemen  and  gentlemen  are  trained  to  hold  nothing
sacred  but  their  word  of  honor — to  maintain  a  zealous,
rigid,  and  unshaken  belief  in  the  ridiculous  code  of  chiv-
alry; and  if  they  are  called  upon  to  do  so,  to  seal  their
belief  by  dying  for  it,  and  seriously  to  regard  a  king  as  a
being  of  a  higher  order.

Again,  our  expressions  of  politeness,  the  compliments
we  make,  in  particular,  the  respectful  attentions  we  pay  to
ladies,  are  a  matter  of  training;  as  also  our  esteem  for  good
birth,  rank,  titles,  and  so  on.  Of  the  same  character  is
the  resentment  we  feel  at  any  insult  diiected  against  us;
and  the  measure  of  this  resentment  may  be  exactly  deter-
mined by  the  nature  of  the  insult.  An  Englishman,  for
instance,  thinks  it  a  deadly  insult  to  be  told  that  he  is  no
gentleman,  or,  still  worse,  that  he  is  a  liar;  a  Frenchman
has  the  same  feeling  if  you  call  him  a  coward,  and  a  Ger-
man if  you  say  he  is  stupid.

There  are  many  persons  who  are  trained  to  be  strictly
honorable  in  regard  to  one  particular  matter,  while  they
have  little  honor  to  boast  of  in  anything  else.  Many  a
man,  for  instance,  will  not  steal  your  money;  but  he  will
lay  hands  on  everything  of  yours  that  he  can  enjoy  without
having  to  pay  for  it.  A  man  of  business  will  often  deceive
you  without  the  slightest  scruple,  but  he  will  absolutely  re-
fuse to  commit  a  theft.


Imagination  is  strong  in  a  man  when  that  particular
'unction  of  the  brain  which  enables  him  to  observe  is
loused  to  activity  without  any  necessary  excitement  of  the
senses.  Accordingly,  we  find  that  imagination  is  active
just  in  proportion  as  our  senses  are  not  excited  by  external
objects.  A  long  period  of  solitude,  whether  in  prison  or
in  a  sick  room;  a^iiet,  twilight,  darkness — these  are  the
things  that  promote  its  activity;  and  under  their  influence
!t  comes  into  play  of  itself.     On   the  other   hand,  when  3


i%%  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

great  deal  of  material  is  presented  to  our  faculties  of  obser-
vation, as  happens  on  a  journey,  or  in  the  hurly-burly  of
the  world,  or,  again,  in  broad  daylight,  the  imagination  is
idle,  and,  even  though  call  may  be  made  upon  it,  refuses
to  become  active,  as  though  it  understood  that  that  was  not
its  proper  time.

However,  if  the  imagination  is  to  yield  any  real  product,
it  must  have  received  a  great  deal  of  material  from  the
external  world.  This  is  the  only  way  in  which  its  store-
house can  be  filled.  The  fantasy  is  nourished  much  in
the  same  way  as  the  body,  which  is  least  capable  of  any
work  and  enjoys  doing  nothing,  just  in  the  very  moment
when  it  receives  its  food,  which  it  has  to  digest.  And  yet
it  is  to  this  very  food  that  it  owes  the  power  which  it  after-
ward puts  forth  at  the  right  time.


Opinion  is  like  a  pendulum  and  obeys  the  same  law.  If
it  goes  past  the  center  of  gravity  ou  one  side,  it  must  go  a
like  distance  on  the  other;  and  it  is  only  after  a  certain
time  that  it  finds  the  true  point  at  which  it  can  remain  at
rest.


By  a  process  of  contraction,  distance  in  space  makes
things  look  small,  and  therefore  free  from  defect.  This  is
why  a  landscape  looks  so  much  better  in  a  contracting
mirror  or  in  a  camera  obscura,  than  it  is  in  reality.  The
same  effect  is  produced  by  distance  in  time.  •  The  scenes
and  events  of  long  ago  and  the  persons  who  took  part  in
them,  wear  a  charming  aspect  to  the  eye  of  memory,  which
sees  only  the  outlines  and  takes  no  note  of  disagreeable
details.  The  present  enjoys  no  such  advantage,  and  so  it
always  seems  defective.

And  again  as  regards  space,  small  objects  close  to  us  look
big.  and  if  they  are  very  close,  we  may  be  able  to  see  noth-
ing else,  but  when  we  go  a  little  way  off,  they  become
minute  and  invisible.  It  is  the  same  again,  as  regards
time.  The  little  incidents  and  accidents  of  every  day  fill
us  with  emotion,  anxiety,  annoyance,  passion  as  long  as
they  are  close  to  us,  when  they  appear  so  big,  so  important,
so  serious;  but  as  soon  as  they  are  borne  down  the  restless
stream  of   time    they  lose  what  significance  they   had;  we


FURTHER  PSYCHOLOGICAL  OBSERVATIONS.     423

think  do  more  of  them  and  soon  forget  them  altogether,
They  were  big  only  because  they  were  near.


Joy  and  sorrow  are  not  ideas  of  the  mind,  but  affections
of  the  will,  and  so  they  do  not  lie  in  the  domain  of  mem-
ory. We  cannot  recall  our  joys  and  sorrows;  by  which  1
Jtnean  that  we  cannot  renew  them.  We  can  recall  only  tho
Jrjeas  that  accompanied  them;  and,  in  particular,  the  things
we  were  led  to  say;  and  these  form  a  gauge  of  our  feelings
at  the  time.  Hence  our  memory  of  joys  and  sorrows  is
always  imperfect,  and  they  become  a  matter  of  indifference
to  us  as  soon  as  they  are  over.  This  explains  the  vanity
of  the  attempt,  which  we  sometimes  make,  to  revive  the
pleasures  and  the  pains  of  the  past.  Pleasure  and  pain  are
essentially  an  affair  of  the  will,  and  the  will,  as  such,  is
not  possessed  of  memory,  which  is  a  function  of  the  intel-
lect; and  this  in  its  turn  gives  out  and  takes  in  nothing
but  thoughts  and  ideas,  which  are  not  here  in  question.

It  is  a  curious  fact  that  in  bad  days  we  can  very  vividly
recall  the  good  time  that  is  now  no  more;  but  that  in  good
days,  we  have  only  a  very  cold  and  imperfect  memory  of
the  bad.


We  have  a  much  better  memory  for  actual  objects  or  pic-
tures than  for  mere  ideas.  Hence  a  good  imagination
makes  it  easier  to  learn  languages;  for  by  its  aid,  the  new
word  is  at  once  united  with  the  actual  object  to  which  it
refers;  whereas,  if  there  is  no  imagination,  it  is  simply  put
on  a  parallel  with  the  equivalent  word  in  the  mother
tongue.

Mnemonics  should  not  only  mean  the  art  of  keeping
something  indirectly  in  the  memory  by  the  use  of  some
direct  pun  or  witticism;  it  should,  rather,  be  applied  to  a
systematic  theory  of  memory,  and  explain  its  se\eral  at-
tributes by  reference  both  to  its  real  nature,  and  to  the
relation  in  which  these  attributes  stand  to  one  another.


There  are  moments  in  life  when  our  senses  obtain  a
nigher  and  rarer  degree  of  clearness,  apart  from  any  par-
ticular occasion  for  it  in  the  nature   of  our  surroundings;


424  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

and  explicable,  rather,  on  physiological  grounds  alone,  as
the  result  of  some  enhanced  state  of  susceptibility,  working
from  within  outward.  Such  moments  remain  iudelibly
impressed  upon  the  memory  and  preserve  themselves  in
their  individuality  entire.  We  can  assign  no  reason  for  it,
nor  explain  why  this  among  so  many  thousand  moments
like  it  should  be  specially  remembered.  It  seems  as  much
a  mattet  of  chance  as  when  single  specimens  of  a  whole
race  tt  animals  now  extiuct  are  discovered  in  the  layers  of
a  rock;  or  when,  on  opening  a  book,  we  light  upon  an  in-
sect accidentally  crushed  within  the  leaves.  Memories  of
that  kind  are  always  sweet  and  pleasant.


It  occasionally  happens  that,  for  no  particular  reason,
long-forgotten  scenes  suddenly  start  up  in  the  memory.
This  may  in  many  cases  be  due  to  the  action  of  some  hardly
perceptible  odor,  which  accompanied  those  scenes  and  now
recurs  exactly  the  same  as  before.  For  it  is  well  known
that  the  sense  of  smell  is  specially  effective  in  awaking
memories,  and  that  in  general  it  does  not  require  much  to
rouse  a  train  of  ideas.  And  I  may  say,  in  passing,  that  the
sense  of  sight  is  connected  with  the  understanding,*  the
sense  of  hearing  with  the  reason,  f  and,  as  we  see  in  the
present  case,  the  sense  of  smell  with  the  memory.  Touch
and  taste  are  more  material  and  dependent  upon  contact.
They  have  no  ideal  side.


It  must  also  be  reckoned  among  the  peculiar  attributes
of  memory  that  a  slight  state  of  intoxication  often  so
greatly  enhances  the  recollection  of  past  times  and  scenes,
that  all  the  circumstances  connected  with  them  come  back
aiuch  more  clearly  than  would  be  possible  in  a  state  of
sobriety;  but  that,  on  the  other  hand,  the  recollection  of
what  one  said  or  did  while  the  intoxication  lasted,  is  more
than  usually  imperfect;  nay,  that  if  one  has  been  absolutely
tipsy,  it  is  gone  altogether.  We  may  say,  then,  that  while
intoxication  enhances  the  memory  for  what  is  past,  it
allows  it  to  remember  little  of  the  present.

*  "  Vierfache  Wurzel,"  §  21.
\  "  Parerm*-"  vol.  ii.,  $  811.


FURTHER  PSYCHOLOGICAL  OBSERVATIONS.     425

Men  need  some  kind  of  external  activity,  because  they
Are  inactive  within.  Contrarily,  if  they  are  active  within,
they  do  not  care  to  be  dragged  out  of  themselves;  it  dis-
turbs and  impedes  their  thoughts  in  a  way  that  is  often
most  ruinous  to  them.


I  am  not  surprised  that  some  people  are  bored  when  they
find  themselves  alone;  for  they  cannot  laugh  if  they  are
quite  by  themselves.  The  very  idea  of  it  seems  folly  to
them.

Are  we,  then  to  look  upon  laughter  as  merely  a  signal
for  others — a  mere  sign,  like  a  word?  What  makes  it
impossible  for  people  to  laugh  when  they  are  alone  is  noth-
ing but  want  of  imagination,  dullness  of  mind  generally —
avai6hr]6ia  Hal  {3padvrr?s  ipvxrjS,  as  Theophrastus  has  it.*
The  lower  animals  never  laugh,  either  alone  or  in
company.  Mvson,  the  misanthropist,  was  once  sur-
prised by  one  of  these  people  as  he  was  laughing  to  himsell
"  Why  do  you  laugh?"  he  asked;  "  there  is  no  one  with
you."     That  is  just  why  I  am  laughing,"  said  Myson.


Natural  gesticulation,  such  as  commonly  accompanies
any  lively  talk,  is  a  language  of  its  own,  more  widespread,
even,  than  the  language  of  words — so  far,  I  mean,  as  it  is
independent  of  words  and  alike  in  all  nations.  It  is  true
that  nations  make  use  of  it  in  proportion  as  they  are  viva-
cious, and  that  in  particular  cases,  among  the  Italians,  for,
instance,  it  is  supplemented  by  certain  peculiar  gestures
which  are  merely  conventional,  and  therefore  possessed  of
nothing  more  than  a  local  value.

In  the  universal  use  made  of  it,  gesticulation  has  some
analogy  with  logic  and  grammar,  in  that  it  has  to  do  with  the
form,  rather  than  with  the  matter,  of  conversation;  but
on  the  other  hand  it  is  distinguishable  from  them  by  the
fact  that  it  has  more  of  a  moral  than  of  an  intellectual
bearing;  in  other  words,  it  reflects  the  movements  of  the
will.  As  an  accompauiment  of  conversation  it  is  like  the
bass  of  a  melody;  and  if,  as  in  music,  it  keeps  true  to  the
progress  of  the  treble,  it  serves  to  heighten  the  effect.

*  "  Characters,"  c.  27-


426  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

In  a  conversation,  the  gesture  depends  upon  the  form  in
which  the  subject-matter  is  conveyed;  and  it  is  interest-
ing to  observe  that,  whatever  that  subject-matter  may  be,
with  a  recurrence  of  the  form,  the  very  same  gesture  is  re-
peated. So  if  I  happen  to  see — from  my  window,  say — ■
two  persons  carrying  on  a  lively  conversation,  without  my
being  able  to  catch  a  word,  I  can,  nevertheless,  understand
the  general  nature  of  it  perfectly  well;  I  mean,  the  kind  of
thing  that  is  being  said  and  the  form  it  takes.  There  is
no  mistake  about  it.  The  speaker  is  arguing  about  some-
thing, advancing  his  reasons,  then  limiting  their  applica-
tion, then  driving  them  home  and  drawing  the  conclusion
in  triumph;  or  he  is  recounting  his  experiences,  proving
perhaps,  beyond  the  shadow  of  a  doubt,  how  much  he  lias
been  injured,  but  bringing  the  clearest  and  most  damning
evidence  to  show  that  his  opponents  were  foolish  and  ob-
stinate people  who  would  not  be  convinced  or  else  he  is
telling  of  the  splendid  plan  he  laid,  and  how  he  carried  it  to
a  successful  issue,  or  perhaps  failed  because  the  luck  was
against  him;  or,  it  may  be,  he  is  saying  that  he  was  com-
pletely at  a  loss  to  know  what  to  do,  or  that  he  was  quick
in  seeing  through  some  trap  set  for  him,  and  that  by  in-
sisting on  his  rights  or  by  applying  a  little  force,  he  suc-
ceeded in  frustrating  and  punishing  his  enemies;  and  so
on  in  hundreds  of  cases  of  a  similar  kind.

Strictly  speaking,  however,  what  I  get  from  gesticula-
tion alone  is  an  abstract  notion  of  the  essential  drift  of
what  is  being  said,  and  that,  too,  whether  I  judge  from  a
moral  or  an  intellectual  point  of  view.  It  is  the  quintes-
sence, the  true  substance  of  the  conversation,  and  this  re-
mains identical,  no  matter  what  may  have  given  rise  to  the
conversation,  or  what  it  may  be  about;  the  relation  between
the  two  being  that  of  a  general  idea  or  class-name  to  the
individuals  which  it  covers.

As  I  have  said,  the  most  interesting  and  amusing  part
of  the  matter  is  the  complete  identity  and  solidarity  of
the  gestures  used  to  denote  the  same  set  of  circumstances,
even  though  by  people  of  every  different  temperament;  so
that  the  gestures  become  exactly  like  words  of  a  language,
alike  for  every  one,  and  subject  only  to  such  small  modi-
fications as  depend  upon  variety  of  accent  and  education.
And  yet  there  can  be  no  doubt  but  tliat  these  standing
gestures  which  everv  one  uses  are  the  result  of  no  conveu-


0$  EDUCATION.  42?

tion  or  collusion.  They  Hie  original  and  i?mate — a  true
language  of  nature;  consolidated,  it  maybe,  by  imitation
and  the  influence  of  custom.

It  is  well  known  that  it  is  part  of  an  actor's  duty  to  make
a  careful  study  of  gesture;  and  the  same  thing  is  true,  to  a
somewhat  smaller  degree,  of  a  public  speaker.  This  study
must  consist  chiefly  in  watching  others  and  imitating  their
movements,  for  there  are  no  abstract  rules  fairly  applicable
to  the  matter,  with  the  exception  of  some  very  genera)
leading  principles,  such  as — to  take  an  example — that  tho
gesture  must  not  follow  the  word,  but  rather  come  imme-
diately before  it,  by  way  of  announcing  its  approach  and
attracting  the  hearer's  attention.

Englishmen  entertain  a  peculiar  contempt  for  gesticula-
tion, and  look  upon  it  as  something  vulgar  and  undignified.
This  seems  to  me  a  silly  prejudice  on  their  part,  and  the
outcome  of  their  general  prudery.  For  here  we  have  a
language  which  nature  has  given  to  every  one,  and  which
every  one  understands;  and  to  do  away  with  and  forbid  it
for  no  better  reason  than  that  it  is  opposed  to  that  much-
lauded  thing,  gentlemanly  feeling,  is  a  very  questionable
proceeding.


ON  EDUCATION.

The  human  intellect  is  said  to  be  so  constituted  that
general  ideas  arise  by  abstraction  from  particular  observa-
tions, and  therefore  come  after  them  in  point  of  time.  If
this  is  what  actually  occurs,  as  happens  in  the  case  of  a
man  who  has  to  depend  solely  upon  his  own  experience  for
what  he  learns — who  has  no  teacher  and  no  book — such  a
man  knows  quite  well  which  of  his  particular  observations
belong  to  and  are  represented  by  each  of  his  general  ideas.
He  has  a  perfect  acquaintance  with  both  sides  of  his  ex-
perience, and  accordingly,  he  treats  everything  that  comes
in  his  way  from  a  right  standpoint.  This  might  be  called
the  natural  method  of  education.

Gontrarily,  the  artificial  method  is  to  hear  what  other
people  say,  to  learn  and  to  read,  and  so  to  get  your  head
crammed  full  of  general  ideas  before  you  have  any  sort  of
extended  acquaintance  with  the  world  as  it  is,  and  as  you  may


428  SI  UDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

see  it  for  yourself.  You  will  be  told  that  the  particular
observations  which  go  to  make  these  general  ideas  will
come  to  you  later  on  in  the  course  of  experience;  but  until
that  time  arrives,  you  apply  your  general  ideas  wrongly,
you  judge  men  and  things  from  a  wrong  standpoint;  you
see  them  in  a  wrong  light,  and  treat  them  in  a
wrong  way.  So  it  is  that  education  perverts  the
mind.

This  explains  why  it  so  frequently  happens  that,  after  a
long  course  of  learning  and  reading,  we  enter  upon  the
world  in  our  youth,  partly  with  an  artless  ignorance  of
things,  partly  with  wrong  notions  about  them;  so  that  our
demeanor  savors  at  one  moment  of  a  nervous  anxiety,  at
another  of  a  mistaken  confidence.  The  reason  of  this  is
simply  that  our  head  is  full  of  general  ideas  which  we  are
now  trying  to  turn  to  some  use,  but  which  we  hardly  ever
apply  rightly.  This  is  the  result  of  acting  in  direct  oppo-
sition to  the  natural  development  of  the  mind  by  obtaining
general  ideas  first,  and  particular  observations  last:  it  is
putting  the  cart  before  the  horse.  Instead  of  developing
the  child's  own  faculties  of  discernment,  and  teaching  it  to
judge  and  think  for  itself,  the  teacher  uses  all  his  energies
to  stuff  its  head  full  of  the  ready-made  thoughts  of  other
people.  The  mistaken  views  of  life,  which  spring  from  a
false  application  of  general  ideas,  have  afterward  to  be  cor-
rected by  long  years  of  experience;  and  it  is  seldom  that
they  are  wholly  corrected.  This  is  why  so  few  men  of
learning  are  possessed  of  common-sense,  such  as  is
often  to  be  met  with  in  people  who  have  had  no  instruction
at  all.

To  acquire  a  knowledge  of  the  world  might  be  defined  as
the  aim  of  all  education;  and  it  follows  from  what  I  have
said  that  special  stress  should  be  laid  upon  beginning  to
acquire  this  knowledgeat  the  right  end.  As  I  have  shown,
this  means,  in  the  main,  that  the  particular  observation  of
a  thing  shall  precede  the  general  idea  of  it;  further,  that
narrow  and  circumscribed  ideas  shall  come  before  ideas  of
a  wide  range.  It  means,  therefore,  that  the  whole  system
of  education  shall  follow  in  the  steps  that  must  have  been
taken  by  the  ideas  themselves  in  the  course  of  their  for-
mation. But  whenever  any  of  these  steps  are  skipped  or  left
out,  the  instruction  is  defective,  and  the  ideas  obtained  are
false;  and,  finally,   a  distorted  view   of  the    world    arises.


ON  EDUCATION^.  429

peculiar  to  the  individual  himself — a  view  such  as  almost
every  oue  entertains  for  some  time,  and  most  men  for  as
long  as  they  live.  No  one  can  look  into  his  own  mind
without  seeing  that  it  was  only  after  reaching  a  very-
mature  age,  and  in  some  cases  when  he  least  expected  it,
that  he  came  to  a  right  understanding  or  a  clear  view  of
many  matters  in  his  life  that,  after  all,  were  not  very  diffi-
cult or  complicated.  Up  till  then,  they  were  points  in  his
knowledge  of  the  world  which  were  still  obscure,  due  to
his  having  skipped  some  particular  lesson  in  those  early
days  of  his  education,  whatever  it  may  have  been  like —
whether  artificial  and  conventional  or  of  that  natural
kind    which    is    based  upon  individual  experience.

It  follows  that  an  attempt  should  be  made  to  find  out
the  strictly  natural  course  of  knowledge,  so  that  education
may  proceed  methodically  by  keeping  to  it,  and  that
children  may  become  acquainted  with  the  ways  of  the
world,  without  getting  wrong  ideas  into  their  heads,  which
very  often  cannot  be  got  out  again.  If  this  plan  were
adopted,  special  care  would  have  to  be  taken  to  prevent
children  from  using  words  without  clearly  understanding
their  meaning  and  application.  The  fatal  tendency  to  be
satisfied  with  words  instead  of  trying  to  understand  things
— to  learn  phrases  by  heart,  so  that  they  may  prove  a
refuge  in  time  of  need,  exists,  as  a  rule,  even  in  children;
and  the  tendency  lasts  on  into  manhood,  making  the  know-
edge  of  many  learned  persons  to  consist  in  mere  verbiage.

However,  the  main  endeavor  must  always  be  to  let  par-
ticular observations  precede  general  ideas,  and  not  vice
versa,  as  is  usually  and  unfortunately  the  case;  as  though
a  child  should  come  feet  foremost  into  the  world,  or  a
verse  be  begun  by  writing  down  the  rhyme!  The  ordinary
method  is  to  imprint  ideas  and  opinions,  in  the  strict  sense
of  the  word,  prejudices,  on  the  mind  of  the  child,  before  it
has  had  any  but  a  very  few  particular  observations.  It
is  thus  that  he  afterward  comes  to  view  the  world  and
gather  experience  through  the  medium  of  those  ready-
made  ideas,  rather  than  to  let  his  ideas  be  formed  for  him
out  of  his  own  experience  of  life,  as  they  ought  to  be.

A  man  sees  a  great  many  things  when  he  looks  at  the
world  for  himself,  and  he  sees  them  from  many  sides;
but  this  method  of  learning  is  not  nearly  so  short
or  so  quick  as  the  method  which  employs  abstract  ideas


430  81  UDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

and  makes  hasty  generalizations  about  everything.
Experience,  therefore,  will  be  a  long  time  in  correcting
preconceived  ideas,  or  perhaps  never  bring  its  task  to  an
end:  for  wherever  a  man  finds  that  the  aspect  of  things
seems  to  contradict  the  general  ideas  he  has  formed,  he
will  begin  by  rejecting  the  evidence  it  offers  as  partial  and
one-sided;  nay,  he  will  shut  his  eyes  to  it  altogether  and
deny  that  it  stands  in  any  contradiction  at  all  with  his
preconceived  notions,  in  order  that  he  may  thus  preserve
them  uninjured.  So  it  is  that  many  a  man  carries  about  a
burden  of  wrong  notions  all  his  life  long — crotchets,  whims,
fancies,  prejudices,  which  at  last  become  fixed  ideas.
The  fact  is  that  he  has  never  tried  to  form  his  fundamental
ideas  for  himself  out  of  his  own  experience  of  life,  his  own
way  of  looking  at  the  world,  because  he  has  taken  over  his
ideas  ready-made  from  other  people;  and  this  it  is  that
makes  him — as  it  makes  how  many  others! — so  shallow
and  superficial.

Instead  of  that  method  of  instruction,  care  should  be
taken  to  educate  children  on  the  natural  lines.  No  idea
should  ever  be  established  in  a  child's  mind  otherwise  than
by  what  the  child  can  see  for  itself,  or  at  any  rate  it  should
be  verified  by  the  same  means;  and  the  result  of  this  would
be  that  the  child's  ideas,  if  few,  would  be  well-grounded
and  accurate.  It  would  learn  how  'co  measure  things  by
its  own  standard  rather  than  by  another's;  and  so  it  would
escape  a  thousand  strange  fancies  and  prejudices,  and  not
need  to  have  them  eradicated  by  the  lessons  it  will  subse-
quently be  taught  in  the  school  of  life.  The  child  would,
in  this  way,  have  its  mind  once  for  all  habituated  to
clear  views  and  thorough-going  knowledge;  it  would  use
its  own  judgment  and  take  an  unbiased  estimate  of  things.

And,  in  general,  children  should  not  form  their  notions
of  what  life  is  like  from  the  copy  before  they  have  learned
it  from  the  original,  to  whatever  aspect  of  it  their  attention
may  be  directed.  Instead,  therefore,  of  hastening  to  place
books,  and  books  alone,  in  their  hands,  let  them  be  made
acquainted,  step  by  step,  with  things — with  the  actual  cir-
cumstances of  human  life.  And  above  all  let  care  be
taken  to  bring  them  to  a  clear  and  objective  view  of  the
world  as  it  is,  to  educate  them  always  to  derive  their  ideas
directly  from  real  life,  and  to  shape  them  in  corfc./^ity
with   it— not  to  fetch  thera  fro?p    other    sources,  such  as


ON  EDUCATION  431

books,  fairy  tales,  or  what  people  say — than  to  apply  them
ready-made  to  real  life.  For  this  will  mean  that  their
heads  are  full  of  wrong  notions,  and  that  they  will  either
see  things  in  a  false  light  or  try  in  vain  to  remodel  the
world  to  suit  their  views,  and  so  enter  upon  false  paths;
and  that,  too,  whether  they  are  only  constructing  theories
of  life  or  engaged  in  the  actual  business  of  it.  It  is  in-
credible how  much  harm  is  done  when  the  seeds  of  wrong
notions  are  laid  in  the  mind  in  those  early  years,  later  on
to  bear  a  crop  of  prejudice;  for  the  subsequent  lessons
which  are  learned  from  real  life  in  the  world  have  to  be
devoted  mainly  to  their  extirpation.  "To  unlearn  the  evil"
was  the  answer  which,  according  to  Diogenes  Laertius,*
Antisthenes  gave,  when  he  was  asked  what  branch  of
knowledge  was  most  necessary;  and  we  can  see  what  he
meant.

No  child  under  the  age  of  fifteen  should  receive  instruc-
tion in  subjects  which  may  possibly  be  the  vehicle  of  seri-
ous error,  such  as  philosophy,  religion,  or  any  other  branch
of  knowledge  where  it  is  necessary  to  take  large  views;  be-
cause wrong  notions  imbibed  early  can  seldom  be  rooted
out,  and  of  all  the  intellectual  faculties,  judgment  is  the  last
to  arrive  at  maturity.  The  child  should  give  its  attention
either  to  subjects  where  no  error  is  possible  at  all,  such  as
mathematics,  or  to  those  in  which  there  is  no  particular
danger  in  making  a  mistake,  such  as  languages,  natural
science,  history,  and  so  on.  And  in  general,  the  branches
of  knowledge  which  are  to  be  studied  at  any  period  of  life
should  be  such  as  the  mind  is  equal  to  at  that  period  and
can  perfectly  understand.  Childhood  and  youth  form  the
time  for  collecting  materials,  for  getting  a  special  and
thorough  knowledge  of  individual  and  particular  things,
In  those  years  it  is  too  early  to  form  views  on  a  large
scale;  and  ultimate  explanations  must  be  put  off  to  a  later
date.  The  faculty  of  judgment,  which  cannot  come  into
play  without  mature  experience,  should  be  left  to  itself;
and  care  should  be  taken  not  to  anticipate  its  action  by
inculcating  prejudice,  which  will  paralyze  it  forever.

On  the  other  hand,  the  memory  should  be  specially  taxed
in  youth,  since  it  is  then  that  it  is  strongest  and  most  te-
nacious.    But  in  choosing  the  things  that  should  be  com*

*  vi.  7.


432  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

initted  to  memory  the  utmost  care  and  forethought  must
be  exercised;  as  lessons  well  learned  in  youth  are  never  foi-
gotten.  This  precnus  soil  must  therefore  be  cultivated  so
as  to  bear  as  much  fruit  as  possible.  If  you  think  how
deeply  rooted  in  your  memory  are  those  persons  whom  you
knew  in  the  first  twelve  years  Ox  your  life,  how  indelible  the
impression  made  upon  you  by  the  events  of  those  years,
how  clear  your  recollection  of  most  of  the  things  that
happened  to  you  then,  most  of  what  was  told  or  taught  you,
it  will  seem  a  natural  thing  to  take  the  susceptibility  and
tenacity  of  the  mind  at  that  period  as  the  groundwork  of
education.  This  may  be  done  by  a  strict  observance  of
method,  and  a  systematic  regulation  of  the  impressions
which  the  mind  is  to  receive.

But  the  years  of  youth  alloted  to  man  are,  short,  and
memory  is,  in  general,  bound  within  narrow  limits;  still  more
so,  the  memory  of  any  one  individual.  Since  this  is  the
case,  it  is  all-important  to  till  the  memory  with  what  is
essential  and  material  in  any  branch  of  knowledge,  to  the
exclusion  of  everything  else.  This  decision  as  to  what  is
essential  and  material  should  rest  with  the  master-minds  in
every  department  of  thought;  their  choice  should  be  made
after  the  most  mature  deliberation,  and  the  outcome  of  it
fixed  and  determined.  Such  a  choice  would  have  to  pro-
ceed by  sifting  the  things  which  it  is  necessary  and  impor-
tant for  a  man  to  know  in  general,  and  then,  necessary  and
important  for  him  to  know  in  any  particular  business  or
calling.  Knowledge  of  the  first  kind  would  have  to  be
classified,  after  an  encyclopedic  fashion,  in  graduated
courses,  adapted  to  the  degree  of  general  culture  which  a
man  may  be  expected  to  have  in  the  circumstances  in
which  he  is  placed;  beginning  with  a  course  limited  to  the
necessary  requirements  of  primary  education,  and  extend-
ing upward  to  the  subjects  treated  of  in  all  the  branches
of  philosophical  thought.  The  regulation  of  the  second
kind  of  knowledge  would  be  left  to  those  who  had  shown
genuine  mastery  in  the  several  departments  into  which  it
is  divided;  and  the  whole  system  would  provide  an  elabo-
ate  rule  or  canon  for  intellectual  education,  which  would,
of  course,  have  to  be  revised  every  ten  years.  Some  such
arrangement  as  this  would  employ  the  youthful  power  of
the  memory  to  best  advantage,  and  supply  excellent  work-
ing material  to  the  faculty  of  judgment,  when  it  made  its
appearance  later  on.


ON  ED  UCA  TION.  433

A  man's  knowledge  may  be  said  to  be  mature,  in  othei
words,  it  has  readied  the  most  complete  state  of  perfection
to  which  he,  as  an  individual,  is  capable  of  bunging  it,
when  an  extict  correspondence  is  established  between  the
whole  of  his  abstract  ideas  and  the  things  he  has  actually
perceived  for  himself.  This  will  mean  that  each  of  his
abstract  ideas  rests,  directly  or  indirectly,  upon  a  basis  of
observation,  which  alone  endows  it  with  any  real  value;
and  also  that  he  is  able  to  place  every  observation  he  makes
under  the  right  abstract  idea  which  belongs  to  it.  Matur-
ity is  the  work  of  experience  alone;  and  therefore  it  re-
quires time.  The  knowledge  we  derive  from  our  own  ob-
servation is  usually  distinct  from  that  which  we  acquire
through  the  medium  of  abstract  ideas;  the  one  coming  to
us  in  the  natural  way,  the  other  by  what  people  tell  us,
and  the  course  of  instruction  we  receive,  whether  it  is
good  or  bad.  The  result  is,  that  in  youth  there  is  generally
very  little  agreement  or  correspondence  between  our
abstract  ideas,  which  are  merely  phrases  fixed  in  the  mind,
and  that  real  knowledge  which  we  have  obtained  by  our
own  observation.  It  is  only  later  on  that  a  gradual  ap-
proach takes  place  between  these  two  kinds  of  knowledge,
accompanied  by  a  mutual  correction  of  error;  and  knowl-
edge is  not  mature  until  this  coalition  is  accomplished.
This  maturity  or  perfection  of  knowledge  is  something
quite  independent  of  another  kind  of  perfection,  which
may  be  of  a  high  or  a  low  order — the  perfection,  I  mean,
to  which  a  man  may  bring  his  own  individual  faculties;
which  is  measured,  not  by  any  correspondence  between  the
two  kinds  of  knowledge,  but  by  the  degree  of  intensity
which  each  kind  attains.

For  the  practical  man  the  most  needful  thing  is  to  ac-
quire an  accurate  and  profound  knowledge  of  the  ways  of
the  world.  But  this,  though  the  most  needful,  is  also  the
most  wearisome  of  all  studies,  as  a  man  may  reach  a  great
age  without  coming  to  the  end  of  his  task;  whereas,  in  the
domain  of  the  sciences,  he  masters  the  more  important
facts  when  he  is  still  young.  In  acquiring  that  knowledge
of  the  world,  it  is  while  he  is  a  novice,  namely,  in  boyhood
and  in  youth,  that  the  first  and  hardest  lessons  are  put  be-
fore him;  but  it  often  happens  that  even  in  later  yeara
there  is  still  a  great  deal  to  be  learned.

The  study  is  difficult  enough  in  itself;  but  the  difficulty


434  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

is  doubled  by  novels,  which  represent  a  state  of  things  in
life  and  the  world,  such  as,  in  fact,  does  not  exist.  Youth
is  credulous,  and  accepts  these  views  of  life,  which  then
become  part  and  parcel  of  the  mind;  so  that,  instead  of  a
merely  negative  condition  of  ignorance,  you  have  positive
error — a  whole  tissue  of  false  notions  to  start  with;  and  at
a  later  date  these  actually  spoil  the  schooling  of  experience,
and  put  a  wrong  construction  on  the  lessons  it  teaches.  If,
before  this,  the  youth  had  no  light  at  all  to  guide  him,  he
is  now  misled  by  a  will-o-the-wisp;  still  more  often  is  this
the  case  with  a  girl.  They  have  both  had  a  false  view  of
things  foisted  on  to  them  by  reading  novels;  and  expecta-
tions have  been  aroused  which  can  never  be  fulfilled.  This
generally  exercises  a  baneful  influence  on  their  whole  life.
In  this  respect  those  whose  youth  has  allowed  them  no
time  or  opportunity  for  reading  novels — those  who  work
with  their  hands  and  the  like — are  in  a  position  of  decided
advantage  There  are  a  few  novels  to  which  this  reproach
cannot  be  addressed — nay,  which  have  an  effect  the  con-
trary of  bad.  First  and  foremost,  to  give  an  example,  "Gil
Bias,"  and  the  other  works  of  Le  Sage  (or  rather  their
Spanish  originals);  further,  "The  Vicar  of  Wakefield,"aud,
to  some  extent.  Sir  Walter  Scott's  novels.  "Don  Quixote"
may  be  regarded  as  a  satirical  exhibition  of  the  error  to
which  I  am  referring.


ON   WOMEN.


Schillek's  poem  in  honor  of  women,  "Wiirde  der
Frauen,"  is  the  result  of  much  careful  thought,  and  it
appeals  to  the  reader  by  its  antithetic  style  and  its  use  of
contrast;  but  as  an  expression  of  the  true  praise  which
should  be  accorded  to  them,  it  is,  I  think,  inferior  to  these
few  words  of  Jouy's:  "  Without  women,  the  beginning  of
our  life  would  be  helpless;  the  middle,  devoid  of  pleasure;
and  the  end,  of  consolation."  The  same  thing  is  more
feelingly  expressed  by  Byron  in  "  Sardanapalus:  "

"  The  very  first
Of  human  life  must  spring  from  woman's  breast,
Your  first  small  words  are  taught  you  from  her  lips»
Your  first  tears  quench'd  by  her,  and  your  last  sighs


02f  WOMEN.  435

Too  often  breathed  oat  in  a  woman's  hearing,
When  men  have  shrunk  from  the  ignoble  care
Of  watching  the  last  hour  of  him  who  led  them."

'(Act  I.  Scene  2.)

These  two  passages  indicate  the  right  standpoint  foi  the
appreciation  of  women.

You  need  only  look  at  the  way  in  which  she  is  formed,
to  see  that  woman  is  not  meant  to  undergo  great  labor,
whether  of  the  mind  or  of  the  body.  She  pays  the  debt  of
life  not  by  what  she  does,  but  by  what  she  suffers;  by  the
pains  of  child-bearing  and  care  for  the  child,  and  by  sub-
mission to  her  husband,  to  whom  she  should  be  a  patient
and  cheering  companion.  The  keenest  sorrows  and  joys
are  not  for  her,  nor  is  she  called  upon  to  display  a  great
deal  of  strength.  The  current  of  her  life  should  be  more
gentle,  peaceful  and  trivial  than  man's,  without  being
essentially  happier  or  unhappier.

Women  are  directly  fitted  for  acting  as  the  nurses  and
teachers  of  our  early  childhood  by  the  fact  that  they  are
themselves  childish,  frivolous  and  short-sighted;  in  a  word,
they  are  big  children  all  their  life  long — a  kind  of  inter-
mediate stage  between  the  child  and  the  full-grown  man,
who  is  man  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word.  See  how  a
girl  will  fondle  a  child  for  days  together,  dance  with  it  and
sing  to  it;  and  then  think  what  a  man,  with  the  best  will
in  the  world,  could  do  if  he  were  put  in  her  place.

With  young  girls  nature  seems  to  have  had  in  view  what,
in  the  language  of  the  drama,  is  called  a  striking  effect;
as  for  a  few  years  she  dowers  them  with  a  wealth  of  beauty
and  is  lavish  in  her  gift  of  charm,  at  the  expense  of  all
the  rest  of  their  life;  so  that  during  those  years  they  may
capture  the  fantasy  of  some  man  to  such  a  degree,  that  he
is  hurried  away  into  undertaking  the  honorable  care  of
them,  in  some  form  or  other,  as  long  as  they  live — a  step
for  which  there  would  not  appear  to  be  any  sufficient  war-
ranty if  reason  only  directed  his  thoughts.  Accordingly,
Nature  has  equipped  woman,  as  she  does  all  her  creatures,
with  the  weapons  and  implements  requisite  for  the  safe-
guarding of  her  existence,  and  for  just  as  long  as  it  is
necessary  for  her  to  have  them.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  Nature
proceeds  with  her  usual  economy;  for  just  as  the  female
ant,  after  fecundation,  loses  her  wings,  which  are  then
superfluous,  nay,  actually  a  danger  to  the  business  of  breed-


436  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

nig;  so,  after  giving  birth- to  one  or  two  children,  a  woman
generally  loses  her  beauty;  probably,  indeed,  for  similar
reasons.

A.nd  so  we  find  that  young  girls,  in  their  hearts,  look
upon  domestic  affairs  or  work  of  any  kind  as  of  secondary
importance,  if  not  actually  as  a  mere  jest.  The  only
business  that  really  claims  their  earnest  attention  is  love,
making  conquests,  and  everything  connected  with  this —
dress,  dancing,  and  so  on.

The  nobler  and  more  perfect  a  thing  is,  the  later  and
slower  it  is  in  arriving  at  maturity.  A  man  reaches  the
maturity  of  his  reasoning  powers  and  mental  faculties
hardly  before  the  age  of  twenty-eight;  a  woman,  at  eight-
een. And  then,  too,  in  the  case  of  woman,  it  is  only  reason
of  a  sort — very  niggard  in  its  dimensions.  That  is  why
women  remain  children  their  whole  life  long;  never  seeing
anything  but  what  is  quite  close  to  them,  cleaving  to  the
present  moment,  taking  appearance  for  reality,  and  pre-
ferring trifles  to  matters  of  the  first  importance.  For  it  is
by  virtue  of  his  reasoning  faculty  that  man  does  not  live  in
the  present  only,  like  the  brute,  but  looks  about  him  and
considers  the  past  and  the  future;  and  this  is  the  origin  of
prudence,  as  well  as  of  that  care  and  anxiety  which  so
many  people  exhibit.  Both  the  advantages  and  the  dis-
advantages which  this  involves,  are  shared  in  by  the
woman  to  a  smaller  extent  because  of  her  weaker  power  of
reasoning.  She  may,  in  fact,  be  described  as  intellectu-
ally shortsighted,  because,  while  she  has  an  intuitive
understanding  of  what  lies  quite  close  to  her,  her  field  of
vision  is  narrow  and  does  not  reach  to  what  is  remote:  so
that  things  which  are  absent,  or  past,  or  to  come,  have
much  less  effect  upon  women  than  upon  men.  This  is
the  reason  why  women  are  more  often  inclined  to  be  extrava-
gant, and  sometimes  carry  their  inclination  to  a  length  that
borders  upon  madness.  In  their  hearts  women  think  that
it  is  men's  business  to  earn  money  and  theirs  to  spend  it —
if  possible  during  their  husband's  life,  but,  at  any  rate,
after  his  death.  The  very  fact  that  their  husband  hands
them  over  his  earnings  for  purposes  of  housekeeping,
strengthens  them  in  this  belief.

However  many  disadvantages  all  this  may  involve,
there  is  at  least  this  to  be  said  in  its  favor;  that  the
woman  lives  more  in  the  present  than  the  man.and  that,  if


ON  WOMEN.  437

the  present  is  at  all  tolerable,  she  enjoys  it  more  eagerly.
This  is  the  source  of  that  cheerfulness  which  is  peculiar  to
woman,  fitting  her  to  amnse  man  in  his  hours  of  recrea-
tion, and,  in  case  of  need,  to  console  him  when  he  is
borne  down  by  the  weight  of  his  cares.

It  is  by  no  means  a  bad  plan  to  consult  women  in  mat-
ters of  difficulty,  as  the  Germans  used  to  do  in  ancient
times;  for  their  way  of  looking  at  things  is  quite  different
from  ours,  chiefly  in  the  fact  that  they  like  to  take  the
shortest  way  to  their  goal,  and,  in  general,  manage  to  fix
their  eyes  upon  what  lies  before  them;  while  we,  as  a  rule,
see  far  beyond  it,  just  because  it  is  in  front  of  our  noses.
In  cases  like  this,  we  need  to  be  brougnt  back  to  the  right
standpoint,  so  as  to  recover  the  near  and  simple  view.

Then,  again,  women  are  decidedly  more  sober  in  theii
judgment  than  we  are,  so  that  they  do  not  see  more  in
things  than  is  really  there;  while,  if  our  passions  are
aroused,  we  are  apt  to  see  things  in  an  exaggerated  way,  or
imagine  what  does  not  exist.

The  weakness  of  their  reasoning  faculty  also  explains
why  it  is  that  women  show  more  sympathy  for  the  unfor-
tunate than  men  do,  and  so  treat  them  with  more  kindness
and  interest;  and  why  it  is  that,  on  the  contrary,  they  are
inferior  to  men  in  point  of  justice,  and  less  honorable  and
conscientious.  For  it  is  just  because  their  reasoning  power
is  weak  that  present  circumstances  have  such  a  hold  over
them,  and  those  concrete  things  which  lie  directly  before
their  eyes  exercise  a  power  which  is  seldom  counteracted  to
any  extent  by  abstract  principles  of  thought,  by  fixed  rules
of  conduct,  firm  resolutions,  or,  in  general,  by  consideration
for  the  past  and  the  future,  or  regard  for  what  is  absent
and  remote.  Accordingly,  they  possess  the  first  and  main
elements  that  go  to  make  a  virtuous  character,  but  they
are  deficient  in  those  secondary  qualities  which  are  often  a
necessary  instrument  in  the  formation  of  it.  *

Hence  it  will  be  found  that  the  fundamental  fault  of  the
female  character  is  that  it  has  no  sense  of  justice.
This  is  mainly  due  to  the  fact,  already  mentioned,  that
women    are    defective    in     the    powers   of   reasoning   and

*  In  this  respect  they  may  be  compared  to  an  animal  organism
•which  contains  a  liver  but  no  gall-bladder.  Here  let  me  refer  to
^hat  I  have  said  in  my  treatise  on  "  The  Foundation  of  Morals,"  §  17.


438  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

deliberation;  but  it  is  also  traceable  to  the  position  which
Nature  has  assigned  to  them  as  the  weaker  sex.  They  are
dependent,  not  upon  strength,  but  upon  craft;  and  hence
their  instinctive  capacity  for  cunning,  and  their  ineradi-
cable tendency  to  say  what  is  not  true.  For  as  lions  are
provided  with  claws  and  teeth,  and  elephants  and  boars
with  tusks,  bulls  with  horns,  and  the  cuttle  fish  with  its
cloud  of  inky  fluid,  so  Nature  has  equipped  woman,  for
her  defense  and  protection,  with  the  arts  of  dissimulation;
and  all  the  power  which  Nature  has  conferred  upon  man
in  the  shape  of  physical  strength  and  reason,  has  been
bestowed  upon  women  in  this  form.  Hence  dissimulation
is  innate  in  woman,  and  almost  as  much  a  quality  of  the
stupid  as  of  the  clever.  It  is  as  natural  for  them  to  make
use  of  it  on  every  occasion  as  it  is  for  those  animals  to
employ  their  means  of  defense  when  they  are  attacked;
they  have  a  feeling  that  in  doing  so  they  are  only  within
their  rights.  Therefore  a  woman  who  is  perfectly  truthful
and  not  given  to  dissimulation  is  perhaps  an  impossibility,
and  for  this  very  reason  they  are  so  quick  at  seeing  through
dissimulation  in  others  that  it  is  not  a  wise  thing  to
attempt  it  with  them.  But  this  fundamental  defect
which  I  have  stated,  with  all  that  it  entails,  gives  rise  to
falsity,  faithlessness,  treachery,  ingratitude,  and  so  on.
Perjury  in  a  court  of  justice  is  more  often  committed  by
women  than  by  men.  It  may,  indeed,  be  generally  ques-
tioned whether  women  ought  to  be  sworn  at  all.  From,
time  to  time  one  finds  repeated  cases  everywhere  of  ladies,
who  want  for  nothing,  taking  things  from  shop-counters,
when  no  one  is  looking,  and  making  off  with  them.

Nature  has  appointed  that  the  propagation  of  the  species
shall  be  the  business  of  men  who  are  young,  strong  and
handsome;  so  that  the  race  may  not  degenerate.  This  is
the  firm  will  and  purpose  of  Nature  in  regard  to  the  species,
and  it  finds  its  expression  in  the  passions  of  women.
There  is  no  law  that  is  older  or  more  powerful  than  this.
Woe,  then,  to  the  man  who  sets  up  claims  and  interest*
that  will  conflict  with  it;  whatever  he  may  say  and  do,
they  will  be  unmercifully  crushed  at  the  first  serious  en-
counter. For  Mie  innate  rule  that  governs  women's  con-
duct, though  it  is  secret  and  unformulated,  nay,  uncon-
•Viioiis  m  its  working,  is  this:  "  We  are  justified  in  deceiv
og  those  who  think  they  have  acquired  rights  over  ths


ON  WOMEN.  439

species  by  paying  little  attention  to  the  individual,  that  is,
to  us.  The  constitution  and,  therefore,  the  welfare  of  the
species  have  been  placed  in  our  hands  and  committed  to
our  care,  through  the  control  we  obtain  over  the  next  gen-
eration, which  proceeds  from  us;  let  us  discharge  our
duties  conscientiously."  But  women  have  no  abstract
knowledge  of  this  leading  principle;  they  are  conscious  of
it  only  as  a  concrete  fact;  and  they  have  no  other  method
of  giving  expression  to  it  than  the  way  >n  which  they  act
when  the  opportunity  arrives.  And  then  their  conscience
does  not  trouble  them  so  much  as  we  fancy;  for  in  the
darkest  recesses  of  their  heart,  they  are  aware  that  in  com-
mitting a  breach  of  their  duty  toward  the  individual,  they
have  all  the  better  fulfilled  their  duty  towards  the  species,
which  is  infinitely  greater.*

And  since  women  exist  in  the  main  solely  for  the  propa-
gation of  the  species,  and  are  not  destined  for  anything
else,  they  live,  as  a  rule,  more  for  the  species  than  for  tin?
individual,  and  in  their  hearts  take  the  affairs  of  tiie
species  more  seriously  than  those  of  the  individual.  This
gives  their  whole  life  and  being  a  certain  levity;  the  gen-
eral bent  of  their  character  is  in  a  direction  fundamentally
different  from  that  of  man;  and  it  is  this  which  produces
that  discord  in  married  life  which  is  so  frequent,  and  almost
the  normal  state.

The  natural  feeling  between  men  is  mere  indifference,
but  between  women  it  is  actual  enmity.  The  reason  of
this  is  that  trade-jealousy — odium  figulinum — which,  in
the  case  of  men,  does  not  go  beyond  the  confines  of  their
own  particular  pursuit;  but,  with  women,  embraces  the
whole  sex;  since  they  have  only  one  kind  of  business.
Even  when  they  meet  in  the  street,  women  look  at  one  an-
other like  Guelphs  and  Ghibellines.  And  it  is  a  patent
fact  that  when  two  women  make  first  acquaintance  with
each  other,  they  behave  with  more  constraint  and  dissimu-
lation than  two  men  would  show  in  a  like  case;  and  hence
it  is  that  an  exchange  of  compliments  between  two  women
is  a  much  more  ridiculous  proceeding  than  between  two
men.     Further,  while  a  man  will,  as  a  general  rule,  always

*  A  more  detailed  discussion  of  the  matter  in  question  may  be
found  in  my  chief  work.  "  Die  Welt  als  Wille  und  Vorstellung,  "
vol.  ii..,  ch.  44-


440  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

preserve  a  certain  amount  of  consideration  and  humanity
in  speaking  to  others,  even  to  those  who  are  in  a  very
inferior  position,  it  is  intolerable  to  see  how  proudly  and
disdainfully  a  fine  lady  will  generally  behave  toward  one
who  is  in  a  lower  social  rank  (I  do  not  mean  a  woman  who
is  in  her  service),  whenever  she  speaks  to  her.  The  reason
of  this  may  be  that,  with  women,  differences  of  rank  are
much  more  precarious  than  with  us;  because,  while  a  hun-
dred considerations  carry  weight  in  our  case,  in  theirs  there
is  only  one,  namely,  with  which  man  they  have  found
favor;  as  also  that  they  stand  in  much  nearer  relations
with  one  another  than  men  do,  in  consequence  of  the  one-
sided nature  of  their  calling.  This  makes  them  endeavor
to  lay  stress  upon  differences  of  rank.

It  is  only  the  man  whose  intellect  is  clouded  by  his
sexual  impulses  that  could  give  the  name  of  the  fair  sex  to
that  undersized,  narrow-shouldered,  broad-hipped,  and
short-legged  race,  for  the  whole  beauty  of  the  sex  is  bound
up  with  this  impulse.  Instead  of  calling  them  beautiful,
there  would  be  more  warrant  for  describing  women  as  the
unsesthetic  sex.  Neither  for  music,  nor  for  poetry,  nor  for
fine  art,  have  they  really  and  truly  any  sense  or  suscepti-
bility; it  is  a  mere  mockery  if  they  make  a  pretense  of  it
in  order  to  assist  their  endeavor  to  please.  Hence,  as  a
result  of  this,  they  are  incapable  of  taking  a  purely  objective
interest  in  everything;  and  the  reason  of  it  seems  to  me  to
be  as  follows.  A  man  tries  to  acquire  direct  mastery  over
things,  either  by  understanding  them,  or  by  forcing  them
to  do  his  will.  But  a  woman  is  always  and  everywhere
reduced  to  obtaining  this  mastery  indirectly,  namely
through  a  man;  and  whatever  direct  mastery  she  may  have
is  entirely  confined  to  him.  And  so  it  lies  in  woman's
nature  to  look  upon  everything  only  as  a  means  for  con-
quering man;  and  if  she  takes  an  interest  in  anything  else,
it  is  simulated — a  mere  roundabout  way  of  gaining  her
ends  by  coquetry,  and  feigning  what  she  does  not  feel.
Hence  even  Rousseau  declared:  "  Women  have,  in  general,
no  love  of  any  art;  they  have  no  proper  knowledge  of  any;
and  they  have  no  genius."*

No  one  who  sees  at  all  below  the  surface  can  have  failed
to  remark   the   same  thing.     You  n«eed   only  observe  the

*  Lettre  «  d'Alembert.     Note  xx.


ON  WOMEN.  441

kind  of  attention  women  bestow  upon  a  concert,  an  opera,
or  a  play — the  childish  simplicity,  for  example,  with  which
they  keep  on  chattering  during  the  finest  passages  in  the
greatest  masterpieces.  If  it  is  true  that  the  Greeks
excluded  women  from  their  theaters,  they  were  quite  right
in  what  they  did;  at  any  rate  you  would  have  been  able  to
hear  what  was  said  upon  the  stage.  In  our  day,  besides,
or  in  lieu  of  saying,  "  Let  a  woman  keep  silence  in  the
church,"  it  would  be  much  to  the  point  to  say,  "  Let  a
woman  keep  silence  in  the  theater."  This  might,  perhaps,
be  put  up  in  big  letters  on  the  curtain.

And  you  cannot  expect  anything  else  of  women  if  you
consider  that  the  most  distinguished  intellects  among  the
whole  sex  have  never  managed  to  produce  a  single  achieve-
ment in  the  fine  arts  that  is  really  great,  genuine,  and
original,  oj  given  to  the  world  any  work  of  permanent
value  in  any  sphere.  This  is  most  strikingly  shown  in
regard  to  painting,  where  mastery  of  technique  is  at  least
as  much  within  their  power  as  within  ours — and  hence
they  ai<?  diligent  in  cultivating  it;  but  still,  they
have  not  a  single  great  painting  to  boast  of,  just  because
they  are  deficient  in  that  objectivity  of  mind  which  is  so
directly  indispensable  in  painting.  They  never  get  beyond
a  subjective  point  of  view.  It  is  quite  in  keeping  with
this  that  ordinary  women  have  no  real  susceptibility  for  art
at  all;  for  nature  proceeds  in  strict  sequence — non  facit
salhim.  And  Huarte*in  his  "  Examen  de  ingenios  para
las  scienzias "--a  book  which  has  been  famous  for  three
hundred  years  -denies  women  the  possession  of  all  the
higher  faculties.  The  case  is  not  altered  by  particular  and
partial  exceptions;  taken  as  a  whole,  women  are,  and
remain,  thorough-going  Philistines,  and  quite  incurable.
Henee,  with  that  absurd  arrangement  which  allows  them
to  share  the  rank  and  title  of  their  husbands,  they  are  a
constant  stimulus  to  his  ignoble  ambitions.  And,  further,
it  is  just  because  they  are  Philistines  that  modern  society,
where  they  take  the  lead  and  set  the  tone,  is  in  such  a  bad
way.  Napoleon's  saying — that  "  women  have  no  rank  " — ■
should  be  adopted  as  the  right  standpoint  in  determining

*  Translator's  Note. — Juan  Huarte  (1520?-1590)  practiced  as  a
physician  at  Madrid.  The  work  cited  by  Schopenhauer  is  well  known,
^Dd  lias  been  translated  into  many  languages.


442  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMfSM.

their  position  in  society;  and  as  regards  their  other  qualities^
Chamfort*  makes  the  very  true  remark:  "  They  are  made
to  trade  with  our  own  weaknesses  and  our  follies,  but  not
with  our  reason.  The  sympathies  that  exist  between  them
and  men  are  skin-deep  only,  and  do  not  touch  the  mind
or  the  feelings  or  the  character."

They  form  the  sexus  sequior — the  second  sex,  inferior  in
every  respect  to  the  first;  their  infirmities  should  be
treated  with  consideration;  but  to  show  them  great  rever-
ence is  extremely  ridiculous,  and  lowers  us  in  their  eyes.
When  nature  made  two  divisions  of  the  human  race,  she
did  not  draw  the  line  exactly  through  the  middle.  These
divisions  are  polar  and  opposed  to  each  other,  it  is  true;
but  the  difference  between  them  is  not  qualitative  merely,
it  is  also  quantitative.

This  is  just  the  view  which  the  ancients  took  of  woman,
and  the  view  which  people  in  the  East  take  now;  and  their
judgment  as  to  her  proper  position  is  much  more  correct
than  ours,  with  our  old  French  notions  of  gallantry  and
our  preposterous  system  of  reverence — that  highest  product
of  Teutonico-Christian  stupidity.  These  notions  have
served  only  to  make  women  more  arrogant  and  overbearing:
*o  that  one  is  occasionally  reminded  of  the  holy  apes  in
Benares,  who  in  the  consciousness  of  their  sanctity
and  inviolable  position,  think  they  can  do  exactly  as  they
please.

But  in  the  West,  the  wcmen,  and  especially  the  "  lady,"
finds  herself  in  a  false  position;  for  woman,  rightly  called
by  the  ancients  sexus  sequior  is  by  no  means  fit  to  be  the
object  of  our  honor  and  veneration,  or  to  hold  her  head
higher  than  man  and  be  on  equal  terms  with  him.  The
consequences  of  this  false  position  are  sufficiently  obvious.
Accordingly,  it  would  be  a  very  desirable  thing  if  this
Number  Two  of  the  human  race  were  in  Europe  also  rele-
gated to  her  natural  place,  and  an  end  put  to  that  lady-
nuisance,  which  not  only  moves  all  Asia  to  laughter,  but
would  have  been  ridiculed  by  Greece  and  Rome  as  well.  It
is  impossible  to  calculate  the  good  effects  which  such  a
change  would  bring  about  in  our  social,  civil  and  political
arrangements.  There  would  be  no  necessity  for  the  Salic
law:  it  would  be  a  superfluous  truism.   In  Europe  the  "  lady"

*  Translator's  Note. — S^e  "  Counsels  and  Maxims/'  p.  12,  note.


ON  WOMEN.  443

strictly  so-called,  is  a  being  who  should  not  exist  all  all;
she  should  be  either  a  housewife  or  a  girl  who  hopes  to
become  one;  and  she  should  be  brought  up,  not  to  be  arro-
gant, but  to 'be  thrifty  and  submissive.  It  is  just  because
there  are  such  people  as  "  ladies  "  in  Europe  that  the  women
of  the  lower  classes,  that  is  to  say,  the  great  majority  of
the  sex,  are  much  more  unhappy  than  they  aie  in  the  East.
And  even  Lord  Byron  says:  "  Thought  of  the  state  of
women  under  the  ancient  Greeks — convenient  enough.
Present  state,  a  remnant  of  the  barbarism  of  the  chivalric
and  the  feudal  ages — artificial  and  unnatural.  They  ought
to  mind  home — and  be  well  fed  and  clothed — but  not
mixed  in  society.  Well  educated,  too,  in  religion — but  to
read  neither  poetry  nor  politics — nothing  but  books  of
piety  and  cookery.  Music — drawing — dancing — also  a
little  gardening  and  plowing  now  and  then.  I  have  seen
them  mending  the  roads  in  Epirus  with  good  success.
Why  not,  as  well  as  hay-making  and  milking?"

The  laws  of  marriage  prevailing  in  Europe  consider  the
woman  as  the  equivalent  of  the  man — start,  that  is  to  say,
from  a  wrong  position.  In  our  part  of  the  world  where
monogamy  is  the  rule,  to  marry  means  to  have  one's  rights
and  double  one's  duties.  Now,  when  the  laws  gave  women
equal  rights  with  man,  they  ought  to  have  also  endowed
her  with  a  masculine  intellect.  But  the  fact  is,  that  just
in  proportion  as  the  honors  and  privileges  which  the  laws
accord  to  women,  exceed  the  amount  which  Nature  gives,
is  there  a  diminution  in  the  number  of  women  who  really
participate  in  these  privileges;  and  all  the  remainder  are
deprived  of  their  natural  rights  by  just  so  much  as  is  given
to  the  others  over  and  above  their  share.  For  the  institu-
tion of  monogamy,  and  the  laws  of  marriage  which  it  en-
tails, bestow  upon  the  woman  an  unnatural  position  of
privilege,  by  considering  her  throughout  as  the  full  equiv-
alent of  the  man,  which  is  by  no  means  the  case;  and  see-
ing this,  men  who  are  shrewd  and  prudent  very  often
scruple  to  make  so  great  a  sacrifice  and  to  acquiesce  in  so
unfair  an  arrangement.

Consequently,  while  among  polygamous  nations  every
woman  is  provided  for,  where  monogamy  prevails  the  num-
ber of  married  women  is  limited;  and  there  remains  over  a
large  number  of  women  without  stay  or  support,  who,  in
the  upper  classes,  vegetate  as  useless  old  maids  and  in  the


444  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

lower  succumb  to  bard  work  for  whicb  tbey  are  not  suited;
or  else  hecome  ftlles  dejoie,  whose  life  is  as  destitute  of  joy
as  it  is  of  honor.  But  under  the  circumstances  they  be-
er me  a  necessity;  and  their  position  is  openly  recognized
t,s  serving  the  special  end  of  warding  off  temptation  from
those  women  favored  by  fate,  who  have  found,  or  may
hope  to  find,  husbands.  In  London  alone  there  are
eighty  thousand  prostitutes.  What  are  they  but  the  women,
who,  under  the  institution  of  monogamy,  have  come  off
worst?  Theirs  is  a  direful  fate:  they  are  human  sacrifices
offered  up  on  the  altar  of  monogamy.  The  women  whose
wretched  position  is  here  described  are  the  inevitable  set-
off to  the  European  lady  with  her  arrogance  and  preten-
sion. Polygamy  is  therefore  a  real  benefit  to  the  female
sex  if  it  is  taken  as  a  whole.  And,  from  another  point  of
view,  there  is  no  true  reason  why  a  man  whose  wife  suffers
from  chronic  illness,  or  remains  barren,  or  has  gradually
become  too  old  for  him,  should  not  take  a  second:  The
motives  which  induce  so  many  people  to  become  converts
to  Mormonism  *  appear  to  be  just'' those  which  militate
against  the  unnatural  institution  of  monogamy.

Moreover,  the  bestowal  of  unnatural  rights  upon  women
has  imposed  upon  them  unnatural  duties,  and,  neverthe-
less, a  breach  of  these  duties  makes  them  unhappy.  Let
me  explain.  A  man  may  often  think  that  his  social  or
financial  position  will  suffer  if  he  marries,  unless  he  makes
csome  brilliant  alliance.  His  desire  will  then  be  to  win  a
woman  of  his  own  choice  under  conditions  other  than  those
of  marriage,  such  as  will  secure  her  position  and  that  of
the  children.  However  fair,  reasonable,  fit  and  proper
these  conditions  may  be,  and  the  woman  consents  by  fore-
going that  undue  amount  of  privilege  which  marriage
alone  can  bestow,  she  to  some  extent  loses  her  honor,  be-
cause marriage  is  the  basis  of  civic  society;  and  she  will
lead  an  unhappy  life,  since  human  nature  is  so  constituted
that  we  pay  an  attention  to  the  opinion  of  other  people
which  is  out  of  all  proportionate  to  its  value.  On  the  other
hand,  if  she  does  not  consent,  she  runs  the  risk  either  of
having  to  be  given  in  marriage  to  a  man  whom  she  does
not  like,  or  of  being  landed  high  and  dry  as  an  old  maid;

*  Translator's  Note. — The  Mormons  have  recently  given  up
polygamy,  and  received  the  American  franchise  in  its  stead.


ON  WOMEN.  445

for  the  period  during  which  she  has  a  chance  of  being  set-
tled for  life  is  very  short.  And  in  view  of  this  aspect  of
the  institution  of  monogamy,  Thomasius,  profoundly
learned  treatise,  "  de  Concubinatu,"  is  well  worth  reading;
for  it  shows  that,  among  all  nations  and  in  all  ages,  down
to  the  Lutheran  Reformation,  concubinage  was  permitted;
nay,  that  it  was  an  institution  which  was  to  a  certain
extent  actually  recognized  by  law,  and  attended  with  no
dishonor.  It  was  only  the  Lutheran  Reformation  that
degraded  it  from  this  position.  It  was  seen  to  be  a  further
justification  for  the  marriage  of  the  clergy;  and  then,  after
that  the  Catholic  Church  did  not  dare  to  remain  behind-
hand in  the  matter.

There  is  no  use  arguing  about  polygamy;  it  must  be  taken
as  de  facto  existing  everywhere,  and  the  only  question  is  as
to  how  it  shall  be  regulated.  Where  are  there,  then,
any  real  monogamists?  We  all  live,  at  any  rate,  for  a  time,
and  most  of  us,  always,  in  polygamy.  And  so,  since  every
man  needs  many  women,. there  is  nothing  fairer  than  to
allow  him,  nay,  to  make  it  incumbent  upon  him,  to  pro-
vide for  many  women.  This  will  reduce  woman  to  her
true  and  natural  position  as  a  subordinate  being;  and  the
lady — that  monster  of  European  civilization  andTeutonico-
Christian  stupidity — will  disappear  from  the  world,  leaving
only  women,  but  no  more  unhappy  women,  of  whom
Europe  is  now  full.

In  India  no  woman  is  ever  independent,  but  in  accord-
ance with  the  law  of  Manu,*  she  stands  under  the  control
of  her  father,  her  husband,  her  brother  or  her  son.  It  is,
to  be  sure,  a  revolting  thing  that  a  widow  should  immolate
herself  upon  her  husband's  funeral  pvre;  but  it  is  also
revolting  that  she  should  spend  her  husband  s  money  with
her  paramours — the  money  for  which  he  toiled  his  whole
life  long,  in  the  consoling  belief  that  he  was  providing  for
his  children.  Happy  are  those  who  have  kept  the  middle
course — medium  tenuere  beati.

The  first  love  of  a  mother  for  her  child  is,  with  the
lower  animals  as  with  men,  of  a  purely  instinctive  character,
and  so  it  ceases  when  the  child  is  no  longer  in  a  physically
helpless  condition.  After  that,  the  first  love  should  give
way  to   one  that  is  based  on  habit   and  reason;  but    this

*  Ch.  V..  v.  148.


446  STUDIES  IJY  PESSIMISM.

often  fails  to  make  its  appearance,  especially  where  the
mother  did  not  love  the  father.  The  love  of  a  father  for
his  child  is  of  a  different  order,  and  more  likely  to  last;
because  it  has  its  foundation  in  the  fact  that  in  the  child
he  recognizes  his  own  inner  self;  that  is  to  say,  his  love  for
it  is  metaphysical  in  its  origin.

In  almost  all  nations,  whether  of  the  ancient  or  the
modern  world,  even  among  the  Hottentots,  *  property  is
inherited  by  the  male  descendants  alone;  it  is  only  in
Europe  that  a  departure  has  taken  place,  but  not  among
the  nobility,  however.  That  the  property  which  has  cost
men  long  years  of  toil  and  effort,  and  been  won  with  so
much  difficulty,  should  afterward  come  into  the  hands  of
women,  who  then,  in  their  lack  of  reason,  squander  it  in  a
short  time,  or  otherwise  fool  it  away,  is  a  grievance  and  a
wrong,  as  serious  as  it  is  common,  which  should  be  pre«
vented  by  limiting  the  right  of  women  to  inherit.  In  my
opinion,  the  best  arrangement  would  be  that  by  which
women,  whether  widows  or  daughters,  should  never  receive
anything  beyond  the  interest  for  life  on  property  secured
by  mortgage,  and  in  no  case  the  property  itself,  or  the
capital,  except  where  all  male  descendants  fail.  The
people  who  make  money  are  men,  not  women;  and  it  fol-
lows from  this  that  women  are  neither  justified  in  having
unconditional  possession  of  it,  nor  fit  persons  to  be  en-
trusted with  its  admiration.^When  wealth,  in  any  true  sense
of  the  word,  that  is  to  say,  funds,  houses  or  land,  is  to  go
to  them  as  an  inheritance,  they  should  never  be  allowed  the
free  disposition  of  it.  In  their  case  a  guardian  should
always  be  appointed;  and  hence  they  should  never  be  given
the  free  control  of  their  own  children,  wherever  it  can  be
avoided.  The  vanity  of  women,  even  though  it  should
not  prove  to  be  greater  than  that  of  men,  has  this  much
danger  in  it,  that  it  takes  an  entirely  material  direction.
They  are  vain,  I  mean,  of  their  personal  beauty,  and  then
of  finery,  show  and  magnificence.  That  is  just  why  they
are  so  much  in  their  element  in  society.  It  is  this,  too
which  makes  them  so  inclined  to  be  extravagant,  all  the
more  as  their  reasoning  power  is  low.    Accordingly  we  find

*  Leroy,  "  Lettres  pkilosophiques  sur  1'irtelligence  et  la  perfecti-
bilite  des  ankuaux,  avec  quelqu.es  lettres  sur  l'houiuie,"  p.  298,  Paris,
1802.


ON  NOISE.  44?

an  ancient  writer  describing  women  as  in  general  of  an  ex-
travagant nature — Fvvr)  to  6vroXov  t6Ti  danavr/pov  q>v6et.*
But  with  men  vanity  often  takes  the  direction  of  non-
material  advantages,  such  as  intellect,  learning,  courage.

In  the  Politics  f  Aristotle  explains  the  great  disadvan-
tage which  accrued  to  the  Spartans  from  the  fact  that  they
conceded  too  much  to  their  women,  by  giving  them  the
right  of  inheritance  and  dower,  and  a  great  amount  of  in-
dependence; and  he  shows  how  much  this  contributed  to
Sparta's  fall.  May  it  not  be  the  case  in  France  that  the
influence  of  women,  which  went  on  increasing  steadilj
from  the  time  of  Louis  XIII.,  was  to  blame  for  that  grad*
ual  corruption  of  the  court  and  the  government,  which
brought  about  the  revolution  of  1789,  of  which  all  subse
quent  disturbances  have  been  the  fruit?  However  tha*
may  be,  the  false  position  which  women  occupy,  demon-
strated as  it  is,  in  the  most  glaring  way,  by  the  institution
of  the  lady,  is  a  fundamental  defect  in  our  social  scheme^
and  this  defect,  proceeding  from  the  very  heart  of  it,  must
spread  its  baneful  influence  in  all  directions.

That  woman  is  by  nature  meant  to  obey  may  be  seen  by
the  fact  that  every  woman  who  is  placed  in  the  unnatural
position  of  complete  independence,  immediately  attaches
herself  to  some  man,  by  whom  she  allows  herself  to  be
guided  and  ruled.  It  is  because  she  needs  a  lord  and
master.  If  she  is  young,  it  will  be  a  lover;  if  she  is  old,  a
priest.


ON   NOISE.


Kant  wrote  a  treatise  on  "The  Vital  Powers."  I  should
prefer  to  write  a  dirge  for  them.  The  superabundant  dis-
play  of  vitality,  which  takes  the  form  of  knocking,  ham-
mering, and  tumbling  things  about,  has  proved  a  daily
torment  to  me  all  my  life  long.  There  are  people,  it  is
true — nay,  a  great  many  people — who  smile  at  such  things,
because  they  are  not  sensitive  to  noise;  but  they  are  just
the  very  people  who  are  also  not  sensitive  to  argument,  or
thought,  or  poetry,  or  art,  in  a  word,  to  any  kind  of  intel-

*  Brunck's  "  Gnomici  poetae  graeci,"v.  115.
\  Bk.  L,  ch  9.


448  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

lectual  influence.  The  reason  of  it  is  that  the  tissue  of
their  brains  is  of  a  very  rough  and  coarse  quality.  On  i\\e
other  hand,  noise  is  a  torture  to  intellectual  people.  In
the  biographies  of  almost  all  great  writers,  or  wherever
slse  their  personal  utterances  are  recorded,  I  find  complaints
about  it;  in  the  case  of  Kant,  for  instance,  Goethe,  Lich-
tenberg,  Jean  Paul;  and  if  it  should  happen  that  any
writer  has  omitted  to  express  himself  on  the  matter,  it  is
only  for  want  of  an  opportunity.

This  aversion  to  noise  I  should  explain  as  follows:  If
you  cut  up  a  large  diamond  into  little  bits,  it  will  entirely
lose  the  value  it  had  as  a  whole;  and  an  army  divided  up
into  small  bodies  of  soldiers,  loses  all  its  strength.  So  a  great
intellect  sinks  to  the  level  of  an  ordinary  one,  as  soon  as
it  is  interrupted  and  disturbed,  its  attention  distracted  and
drawn  oft'  from  the  matter  in  hand;  for  its  superiority  de-
pends upon  its  power  of  concentration — of  bringing  all  its
strength  to  bear  upon  one  theme,  in  the  same  way  as  a
concave  mirror  collects  into  one  point  all  the  rays  of  light
that  strike  upon  it.  Noisy  interruption  is  a  hindrance  to
this  concentration.  That  is  why  distinguished  minds  have
always  shown  such  an  extreme  dislike  to  disturbance  in
any  form,  as  something  that  breaks  in  upon  and  distracts
their  thoughts.  Above  all  have  they  been  averse  to  that
violent  interruption  that  comes  from  noise.  Ordinary
people  are  not  much  put  out  by  anything  of  the  sort.  The
most  sensible  and  intelligent  of  all  the  nations  in  Europe
lays  down  the  rule,  "Never  interrupt!"  asihe  eleventh  com-
mandment. Noise  is  the  most  impertinent  of  all  forms  of
interruption.  It  is  not  only  an  interruption,  but  also  a
disruption  of  thought.  Of  course,  where  there  is  nothing
to  interrupt,  noise  will  not  be  so  particularly  painful.
Occasionally  it  happens  that  some  slight  but  constant
noise  continues  to  bother,  and  distract  me  for  a  time  be-
fore I  become  distinctly  conscious  of  it.  All  I  feel  is  a
steady  increase  in  the. labor  of  thinking — just  as  though  I
were  trying  to  walk  with  a  weight  on  my  foot.  At  last  I
find  out  what  it  is.

Let  me  now,  however,  pass  from  genus  to  species.     The
most  inexcusable  and  disgraceful  of  all  noises  is  the  crack
ing  of  whips — a  truly  infernal  thing  when  it  is  done  in  the
narrow    resounding    streets   of  a  town.     I  denounce   it  as
making  a  peaceful  life   impossible:    it  puts  an  end  to  all


ON  NOISE.  449

quiet  xhought.  That  this  cracking  of  whips  should  be
allowed  at  all  seems  to  me  to  show  in  the  clearest  *way  how
benseless  and  thoughtless  is  the  nature  of  mankind.  No
one  with  anything  like  an  idea  in  his  head  can  avoid  a  feel-
ing of  actual  pain  at  this  sudden,  sharp  crack,  which  par-
alyzes the  brain,  rends  the  thread  of  reflection,  and  mur-
ders thought.  Every  time  this  noise  is  made,  it  must
disturb  a  hundred  people  who  are  applying  their  minds  to
business  of  some  sort,  no  matter  how  trivial  it  may  be;
while  on  the  thinker  its  effect  is  woeful  and  disastrous,
cutting  his  thoughts  asunder,  much  as  the  executioner's
axe  severs  the  head  from  the  body.  No  sound,  be  it  ever
so  shrill,  cuts  so  sharply  into  the  brain  as  this  cursed
cracking  of  whips;  you  feel  the  sting  of  the  lash  right
inside  your  head;  and  it  affects  the  brain  in  the  same  way
as  touch  affects  a  sensitive  plant,  and  for  the  same  length
of  time.

With  all  due  respect  for  the  most  holy  doctrine  of
utility,  I  really  cannot  see  why  a  fellow  who  is  taking
away  a  wagon-load  of  gravel  or  dung  should  thereby  obtain
the  right  to  kill  in  the  bud  the  thoughts  which  may  happen
to  be  springing  up  in  ten  thousand  heads — the  number  he
will  disturb  one  after  another  in  half  an  hour's  drive
through  the  town.  Hammering,  the  barking  of  dogs,  and
the  crying  of  children  are  horrible  to  hear;  but  your  only
genuine  assassin  of  thought  is  the  crack  of  a  whip;  it  ex-
ists for  the  purpose  of  destroying  every  pleasant  moment
of  quiet  thought  that  any  one  may  now  and  then  enjoy.
If  the  driver  had  no  other  way  of  urging  on  his  horse  than
by  making  this  most  abominable  of  all  noises,  it  would  be  ex-
cusable; but  quite  the  contrary  is  the  case.  This  cursed
cracking  of  whips  is  not  only  unnecessary,  but  even  use-
less. Its  aim  is  to  produce  an  effect  upon  the  intelligence
of  the  horse;  but  through  the  constant  abuse  of  it,  the
animal  becomes  habituated  to  the  sound,  which  falls  upon
blunted  feelings  and  produces  no  effect  at  all.  The  horse
does  not  go  any  the  faster  for  it.  You  have  a  remarkable
example  of  this  in  the  ceaseless  cracking  of  his  whip  on  the
part  of  a  cab-driver,  while  he  is  proceeding  at  a  slow  pace
on  the  look-out  for  a  fare.  If  he  were  to  give  his  horse  the
slightest  touch  with  the  whip,  it  would  have  much  more
effect.  Supposing,  however,  that  it  were  absolutely  neces-
sary to  crack  *"he  whin  in  order  to  keep  the  horse  constantly


450  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM,

in  mind  of  its  presence,  it  would  be  enough  to  make  the
hundredth  part  of  the  noise.  For  it  is  a  well-known  fact
that,  in  regard  to  sight  and  hearing,  animals  are  sensitive
to  even  the  faintest  indications;  they  are  alive  to  things
that  we  can  scarcely  perceive.  The  most  surprising
instances  of  this  are  furnished  by  trained  dogs  and  canary-
birds.

It  is  obvious,  therefore,  that  here  we  have  to  do  with  an
act  of  pure  wantonness;  nay,  with  an  impudent  defiance
offered  to  those  members  of  the  community  who  work  with
their  heads  by  those  who  work  with  their  hands.  That
such  infamy  should  be  tolerated  in  a  town  is  a  piece  of
barbarity  and  iniquity,  all  the  more  as  it  could  easily  be
remedied  by  a  police-notice  to  the  effect  that  every  lash
shall  have  a  knot  at  the  end  of  it.  There  can  be  no  harm
in  drawing  the  attention  of  the  mob  to  the  fact  that  the
classes  above  them  work  with  their  heads,  for  any  kind  e(!
head  work  is  mortal  anguish  to  the  man  in  the  street.  A
fellow  who  rides  through  the  narrow  alleys  of  a  populous
town  with  unemployed  post-horses  or  cart-horses,  and  keeps
on  cracking  a  whip  several  yards  long  with  all  his  might,
deserves  there  and  then  to  stand  down  and  receive  five
really  good  blows  with  a  stick.  All  the  philanthropists  in
the  world,  and  all  the  legislators,  meeting  to  advocate  and
decree  the  total  abolition  of  corporal  punishment,  will
never  persuade  me  to  the  contrary.  There  is  something
even  more  disgraceful  than  what  I  have  just  mentioned.
Often  enough  you  may  see  a  carter  walking  along  the  street
quite  alone,  without  any  horses,  and  still  cracking  away
incessantly;  so  accustomed  has  the  wretch  become  to  it  in
consequence  of  the  unwarrantable  toleration  of  this  prac-
tice. A  man's  body  and  the  needs  of  his  body  are  now
3  very  where  treated  with  a  tender  indulgence.  Is  the  think-
ing mind  then,  to  be  the  only  thing  that  is  never  to  ob-
tain the  slightest  measure  of  consideration  or  protection,
to  say  nothing  of  respect?  Carters,  porters,  messengers—
these  are  the  beasts  of  burden  among  mankind;  by  all
means  let  them  be  treated  justly,  fairly,  indulgently,  and
with  forethought;  but  they  must  not  be  permitted  to  stand
in  the  way  of  the  higher  endeavors  of  humanity  by  wan-
tonly making  a  noise.  How  many  great  and  splendid
thoughts,  I  should  like  to  know,  have  been  lost  to  the
world  by  the  crack  of  a  whip?     If  I  had  the  upper  hand,


OIh  NOISE.  461

I  should  soon  produce  in  the  heads  of  these  people  an  in-
dissoluble association  of  ideas  between  cracking  a  whip  and
getting  a   whipping.

Let  us  hope  that  the  more  intelligent  and  refined  among
the  nations  will  make  a  beginning  in  this  matter,  and  then
that  the  Germans  may  take  example  by  it  and  follow  suit.*
Meanwhile,  I  may  quote  what  Thomas  Hood  says  of  them:  f
i(  For  a  musical  nation,  they  are  the  most  noisy  I  ever  met
with".  That  they  are  so  is  due  to  the  fact,  not  that  they
are  more  fond  of  making  a  noise  than  other  people — they
would  deny  it  if  you  asked  them — but  that  their  senses  are
obtuse;  consequently,  when  they  hear  a  noise,  it  does  not
affect  them  much.  It  does  not  disturb  them  in  reading  or
thinking,  simply  because  they  do  not  think;  they  only
smoke,  which  is  their  substitute  for  thought.  The  gen-
eral toleration  of  unnecessary  noise — the  slamming  of
doors,  for  instance,  a  very  unmannerly  and  ill-bred  thing —
is  direct  evidence  that  the  prevailing  habit  of  mind  is  dull-
ness and  lack  of  thought.  In  Germany  it  seems  as  though
care  were  taken  that  no  one  should  ever  think  for  mere
noise — to  mention  one  form  of  it,  the  way  in  which  drum-
ming  goes  on  for  no  purpose  at  all.

Finally,  as  regards  the  literature  of  the  subject  treated
of  in  this  chapter,  I  have  only  one  work  to  recommend,  but
it  is  a  good  one.  I  refer  to  a  poetical  epistle  in  terzo  rimo  by
the  famous  painter  Bronzino:  entitled  "  De  Romori,  a  Messer
Luca  Martini."  It  gives  a  detailed  description  of  the  torture
to  which  people  are  put  by  the  various  noises  of  a  small
Italian  town.  Written  in  a  tragi  comic  style,  it  is  very
amusing.  The  epistle  may  be  found  in  "  Opere  burlesche
del  Berni,  Aretino  et  altri,"  Vol.  II.  p.  258;  apparently
published  in  Utrecht  in  1771.

*  According  to  a  notice  issued  by  the  Society  for  the  Protection  of
Animals  in  Munich  the  superfluous  whipping  and  the  cracking  of
whips  were,  in  December,  1858,  positively  forbidden  in  Nureinburg

\  In  ':  Up  the  Rliine."


452  STUDIES  IK  PESSIMISM.

A  FEW  PARABLES.

In  A  field  of  ripening  corn  I  came  to  a  place  which  had
been  trampled  down  by  some  ruthless  foot;  and  as  I  glanced
among  the  countless  stalks,  every  one  of  them  alike,  stand-
ing there  so  erect  and  bearing  the  full  weight  of  the  ear,  [
saw  a  multitude  of  different  flowers,  red  and  blue  and
violet.  How  pretty  they  looked  as  they  grew  there  so
naturally  with  their  little  foliage!  But,  thought  I,  they
are  quite  useless;  they  bear  no  fruit;  they  are  mere  weeds,
suffered  to  remain  only  because  there  is  no  getting  rid  of
them.  And  yet,  but  for  these  flowers,  there  would  be
nothing  to  charm  the  eye  in  that  wilderness  of  stalks.  They
are  emblematic  of  poetry  and  art,  which,  in  civic  life — so
severe,  but  still  useful  and  not  without  its  fruit — play  the
same  part  as  flowers  in  the  corn.


There  are  some  really  beautiful  landscapes  in  the  world,
but  the  human  figures  in  them  are  poor,  and  you  had  noi
better  look  at  them.


The  fly  should  be  used  as  the  symbol  of  impertinence
and  audacity;  for  while  all  other  animals  shun  man  more
than  anything  else,  and  run  away  even  before  he  come*
near  them,  the  fly  lights  upon  his  very  nose.


Two  Chinamen  traveling  in  Europe  went  to  the  theater
for  the  first  time.  One  of  them  did  nothing  but  study  the
machinery,  and  he  succeeded  in  finding  out  how  it  was
worked.  The  other  tried  to  get  at  the  meaning  of  the
piece  in  spite  of  his  ignorance  of  the  language.  Here  you
have  the  astronomer  and  the  philosopher.


Wisdom  which  is  only  theoretical  and  never  put  into
practice,  is  like  a  double  rose;  its  color  and  its  perfume  are
delightful,  but  it  withers  away  and  leaves  no  seed.

No  rose  without  a  thorn.  Yes,  but  many  a  thorn  witk-
cut  a  rose,


A  FEW  PARABLES.  453

A  widespreading  apple  tree  stood  in  full  bloom,  and
behind  it  a  straight  fir  raised  its  dark  find  tapering  head.
"  Look  at  the  thousands  of  gay  blossoms  which  cover  me
everywhere/'  said  the  apple  tree;  "  what  have  you  to  show
in  comparison?  Dark  green  needles!"  "  That  is  true,"
replied  the  fir,  ''but  when  winter  comes,  you  will  be  bared
of  your  glory;  and  I  shall  be  as  I  am  now."


Once,  as  I  was  botanizing  under  an  oak,  I  found  among
a  number  of  other  plants  of  similar  height  one  that  was
dark  in  color,  with  tightly  closed  leaves  and  a  stalk  that
was  very  straight  and  stiff.  When  I  touched  it,  it  said  to
me  in  firm  tones:  "  Let  me  alone;  I  am  not  for  your  col-
lection, like  these  plants  to  which  Nature  has  given  only  a
single  year  of  life.     I  am  a  little  oak."

So  it  is  with  a  man  whose  influence  is  to  last  for  hun-
dreds of  years.  As  a  child,  as  a  youth,  often  even  as  a  full-
grown  man,  nay,  his  whole  life  long,  he  goes  about  among
his  fellows,  looking  like  them  and  seemingly  as  unimpor-
tant. But  let  him  alone;  he  will  not  die.  Time  will
come  and  bring  those  who  know  how  to  value  him.


The  man  who  goes  up  in  a  balloon  does  not  feel  as
though  he  were  ascending;  he  only  sees  the  earth  sinking
deeper  and  deeper  under  him.

This  is  a  mystery  which  only  those  will  understand  who
feel  the  truth  of  it.


Your  estimation  of  a  man's  size  will  be  affected  by  the
distance  at  which  you  stand  from  him,  but  in  two  entirely
opposite  ways  according  as  it  is  his  physical  or  his  mental
stature  that  you  are  considering.  The  one  will  seem
smaller,  the  farther  off  you  move;  the  other,  greater0


Nature  covers  all  her  works  with  a  varnish  of  beauty,
like  the  tender  bloom  that  is  breathed,  as  it  were,  on  the
surface  of  a  peach  or  plum.  Painters  and  poets  lay  them-
selves out  to  take  off  this  varnish,  to  store  it  up,  and  give
it  us  to  be  enjoyed  at  our  leisure.  We  drink  deep  of  this
beauty  long   before   we   enter  upon  life  itself;  and  when


454  STUDIES  IN  PESSIMISM.

afterward  we  come  to  see  the  works  of  nature  for  our-
selves, the  varnish  is  gone:  the  artists  have  used  it  up  and
we  have  enjoyed  it  in  advance.  Thus  it  is  that  the  world
so  often  appears  harsh  and  devoid  of  charm,  nay,  actually
repulsive.  It  were  better  to  leave  us  to  discover  the  var-
nish for  ourselves.  This  would  mean  that  we  should  not
enjoy  it  all  at  once  and  in  large  quantities;  we  should  have
no  finished  pictures,  no  perfect  poems;  but  we  shoulc
look  at  all  things  in  the  genial  and  pleasing  light  in  which
even  now  a  child  of  nature  sometimes  sees  them — someone
who  has  not  anticipated  his  aesthetic  pleasures  by  the  help
of  art,  or  taken  the  charms  of  life  too  early.


The  cathedral  in  Mayence  is  so  shut  in  by  the  houses
that  are  built  round  about  it,  that  there  is  no  one  spot  from
which  you  can  see  it  as  a  whole.  This  is  symbolic  of
everything  great  or  beautiful  in  the  world.  It  ought  to
gxisr.  for  its  own  sake  alone,  but  before  very  long  it  is  mis-
used to  serve  alien  ends.  People  come  from  all  directions
wanting  to  find  in  it  support  and  maintenance  for  them-
selves; they  stand  in  the  way  and  spoil  its  effect.  To  be
sure,  there  is  nothing  surprising  in  this,  for  in  a  world  of
need  and  imperfection  everything  is  seized  upon  which
can  be  used  to  satisfy  want.  Nothing  is  exempt  from  this
service,  no,  not  even  those  very  things  which  arise  only
when  need  and  want  are  for  a  moment  lost  sight  of — the
beautiful  and  the  true,  sought  for  their  own  sakes.

This  is  especially  illustrated  and  corroborated  in  the
case  of  institutions — whether  great  or  small,  wealthy  or
poor,  founded,  no  matter  in  what  century  or  in  what  land,
to  maintain  and  advance  human  knowledge,  and  generally
to  afford  help  to  those  intellectual  efforts  which  ennoble
the  race.  Wherever  these  institutions  may  be,  it  is  not
long  before  people  sneak  up  to  them  under  the  pretense  oi
wishing  to  further  those  special  ends,  while  they  are  ready
>ed  on  by  the  desire  to  secure  the  emoluments  which  have
been  left  for  their  furtherance,  and  thus  to  satisfy  certain
coarse  and  brutal  instincts  of  their  own.  Thus  it  is  that
we  come  to  have  so  many  charlatans  in  every  branch  of
knowledge.  The  charlatan  takes  very  different  shapes  ac-
cording to  circumstances;  but  at  bottom  he  is  a  man  who
cares  nothing  about  knowledge  for  his  own  sake,  and  only


A  FEW  PARABLES,  455

strives  to  gain  the  semblance  of  it  that  he  may  use  it  for  hia
own  personal  ends,  which  are  always  selfish  and  material.

Every  hero  is  a  Samson.  The  strong  man  succumbs  tc
the  intrigues  of  the  weak  and  the  many;  and  if  in  the  °nd  ho
loses  all  patience  he  crushes  both  them  and  himself.  Or
he  is  like  Gulliver  at  Lilliput,  overwhelmed  by  an  enormous
number  of  little  men.


A  mother  gave  her  children  ^Esop's  fables  to  read,  in
the  hope  of  educating  and  improving  their  minds;  but
they  very  soon  brought  the  book  back,  and  the  eldest,  wise
beyond  his  years,  delivered  himself  as  follows:  "  This
is  no  book  for  us;  it's  much  too  childish  and  stupid.  You
can't  make  us  believe  that  foxes  and  wolves  and  ravens  are
able  to  talk;  we've  got  beyond  stories  of  that  kind!"

In  these  young  hopefuls  you  have  the  enlightened  Ra-
tionalists of  the  future.


A  number  of  porcupines  huddled  together  fof  warmth
on  a  cold  day  in  winter;  but,  as  they  began  to  prick  oih
another  with  their  quills,  they  were  obliged  to  disperse.
However  the  cold  drove  them  together  again,  when  just  the
same  thing  happened.  At  last,  after  many  turns  of  hud-
dling and  dispersing,  they  discovered  that  they  would  be
best  off  by  remaining  at  a  little  distance  from  one  another.
In  the  same  way  the  need  of  society  drives  the  human  por-
cupines together,  only  to  be  mutually  repelled  by  the
many  prickly  and  disagreeable  qualities  of  their  nature.
The  moderate  distance  which  they  at  last  discover  to  he
the  only  tolerable  condition  of  intercourse,  in  the  code  of
politeness  and  fine  manners;  and  those  who  transgress  it  are
roughly  told — in  the  English  phrase — "  to  keep  their  dis
tance."  By  this  arrangement  the  mutual  need  of  warmth
is  only. very  moderately  satisfied;  but  then  people  do  not
get  pricked.  A  man  who  has  some  heat  in  himself  prefers
to  remain  outside,  where  he  will  neither  prick  other  people
nor  get  pricked  himself.

THE   END.


1^       **iW*


^       ^


vQq.


V


p^


^


'


LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS


0  027  276  383  5


HI


■


^M


■


■■    H    ;  !,;  II


■  I


ii


v


■  ■


;i:,it


■


&


1     ''    ■

ii!,1,1


I


■


i :  'ii


I


in
