The Project Gutenberg eBook of Mission from Cape Coast Castle to Ashantee



This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and

most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions

whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms

of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online

at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,

you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located

before using this eBook.


Title: Mission from Cape Coast Castle to Ashantee

        with a statistical account of that kingdom, and geographical notices of other parts of the interior of Africa


Author: T. Edward Bowdich


Contributor: William Elford Leach




Release date: December 1, 2025 [eBook #77375]


Language: English


Original publication: London: John Murray, 1819


Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/77375


Credits: Galo Flordelis (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/Smithsonian Libraries)


* START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MISSION FROM CAPE COAST CASTLE TO ASHANTEE *

                               * * * * *

                                MISSION

                                   TO

                               ASHANTEE.

                               * * * * *


[Illustration: A Map _shewing the_ _DISCOVERIES & IMPROVEMENTS_ _in the_

Geography _of_ WESTERN AFRICA _resulting from the_ _MISSION to ASHANTEE_

_by_ _T. E. Bowdich_ _Conductor_ 1817


_REPORTED COURSES_ of the NIGER to the NILE, GAMBAROO to CAUDEE,

OOGOOAWAI to the CONGO.


_London published as the Act directs by John Murray Albemarle Street

4th. Jany. 1819._


_J. Walker Sculpt._]


                                MISSION

                         FROM CAPE COAST CASTLE

                                   TO

                              =ASHANTEE,=

                                 WITH A

                  STATISTICAL ACCOUNT OF THAT KINGDOM,

                                  AND

                  GEOGRAPHICAL NOTICES OF OTHER PARTS

                                 OF THE

                          INTERIOR OF AFRICA.


                               * * * * *

                       BY T. EDWARD BOWDICH, ESQ.

                               CONDUCTOR.

                               * * * * *


“Quod si præ metu et formidine pedem referemus, ista omnia nobis adversa

                             futura sunt.”


                                LONDON:

                               * * * * *

                     JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE-STREET.

                                 1819.


              * * * * *

  London: printed by W. Bulmer and Co.

     Cleveland-Row, St. James’s.


                             INTRODUCTION.


                               * * * * *


A curiosity throughout Europe, proportionate to the ignorance of the

Interior of Africa, exacts the publication of the proceedings and

researches of every Exploratory Mission, from its Conductor, as a duty

to the Public: “mandat fieri sibi talia.”


The Public, in acknowledgment of the performance of the duty, reflecting

that it constrains literary efforts which the Author otherwise might

never have presumed to expose, should sympathise in his diffidence and

anxiety, and receive and review them as a task imposed, and not as a

spontaneous essay.


If this indulgence is due even to gentlemen who have had the most

enviable opportunities of qualifying themselves at the expense of a

liberal Government, it is surely secure to one who never enjoyed those

advantages; but, being suddenly called to the immediate conduct of a

Mission, originated by a public Board of very contracted means, when

estranged from all facilities, had no resource to aid his realization of

the scientific desiderata, beyond the acquirements common to most

private gentlemen.


The vessel in which I am making my passage to England having been

chartered to trade in the River Gaboon, which is immediately on the

Line, I diverted a tedious delay of seven weeks in so unhealthy a

situation, by visiting Naängo, a town about fifty miles from the mouth

of the River, where I collected Geographical Accounts of the Interior,

from several intelligent traders, and numerous slaves from different

countries. I have added this compilation, (as it may borrow some

interest from the adjacency of the Congo,) with a few notices of the

customs and productions of this ruder part of Africa.


                               CONTENTS.


                               * * * * *


                                PART I.


  CHAP. I.—The Objects and Departure of the Mission.               3


  CHAP. II—The Route and Reception of the Mission.                14


  CHAP. III.—Proceedings and Incidents until the Third            42

  Dispatch to Cape Coast Castle.


  CHAP. IV.—Proceedings and Incidents until the Signing of       101

  the Preliminaries to a General Treaty.


  CHAP. V.—Proceedings and Incidents until the Ratification      118

  of a General Treaty.


  CHAP. VI.—Proceedings and Incidents until the completion of    131

  the Mission and its return to Cape Coast Castle.


                               PART II.


  CHAP. I.—Geography.                                            161


  CHAP. II.—History.                                             228


  CHAP. III.—Constitution and Laws.                              252


  CHAP. IV.—Superstitions.                                       261


  CHAP. V.—Customs.                                              274


  CHAP. VI.—Architecture, Arts, and Manufactures.                304


  CHAP. VII.—Climate, Population, Revenue, City, Market, &c.     315


  CHAP. VIII.—Trade.                                             330


  CHAP. IX.—Language.                                            344


  CHAP. X.—Music.                                                361


  CHAP. XI.—Materia Medica and Diseases.                         370


  CHAP. XII.—Mr. Hutchison’s Diary.                              381


  CHAP. XIII.—Sketch of Gaboon, and its Interior.                422


  CHAP. XIV.—Suggestions for future Missions to the Interior     453

  of Africa.


                               APPENDIX.


  NO. I.—Extract from Meredith’s Account of the Gold Coast.      463


  NO. II.—Translations of an Arabic MS. Descriptive of Mr.       478

  Park’s Death.


  NO. III.—Arabic Routes.                                        482


  NO. IV. Dr. Leach’s Notice of Reptiles, Insects, &c.           493


  NO. V.—Thermometer Account.                                    497


  NO. VI.—Vocabularies.                                          504


                   DIRECTIONS FOR PLACING THE PLATES.


         Map                                    _to front the Title._


   1.    A Captain in his War-dress                   _to face p._ 32


         Arabic Circular                                          128


         Map from Dapper                                          211


   2.    The first Day of the Yam Custom                          275


   3.    The oldest House in Coomassie                            307


   4.    Quarters of the Chief of the Embassy                   _ib._


   5.    Odumata’s sleeping room                                  307


   6.    Inner square of Apokoo’s house                         _ib._


   7. }

      }  Piazzas of the palace                                    308

   8. }


   9.    Part of Adoom Street                                   _ib._


  10.    Exterior of the King’s bed room                        _ib._


         Ichnographical Sketch of Coomassie                       323


         Ashantee Music                                           365


         Empoöngwa Music                                          449


                               * * * * *


                                ERRATA.


  Map.—Affix the name Leeasa to the river flowing from the Niger by

  Boussa.


  Page 9.—After Frederick James, Esq. add, Member of Council, and

  Governor of Accra.


  Page 72.—For dated, read _dictated_.


                               GLOSSARY.


  Croom. A town or village.


  Caboceer. A chief or magistrate.


  Pynin. An elder or counsellor.


  Palaver. A dispute, debate, argument, or suit.


  Book or Note. A certificate of a monthly pension of the African

  Committee, paid in trade to the Fantee Kings and Chiefs in the

  neighbourhood of the British settlements, in consideration of their

  attachment, influence, and services; which Books or Notes were claimed

  by the King of Ashantee, as his by right of conquest.


  Stool. Throne, seat in council, inheritance.


  Custom. A festival, carnival, public ceremony, funeral rite.


  Panyar. To seize or kidnap.


  A Benda. Two ounces four ackies, or £9. currency.


  A Periguin. Two ounces eight ackies, or £10. currency.


  An Ackie. Five shillings currency.


  A Tokoo. Ten pence.


  A Dash. A present.


  Fetish. A charm, amulet, deity. Any supernatural power or influence.

  Any thing sacred.


                               * * * * *

                          MISSION TO ASHANTEE.

                                PART I.

                               * * * * *


                          MISSION TO ASHANTEE.

                               * * * * *


                               CHAPTER I.


                               * * * * *


              _The Objects, and Departure of the Mission._


Bosman and Barbot mention the Ashantees as first heard of by Europeans

about the year 1700; the latter calls it Assiantee or Inta, and writes,

that it is west of Mandingo, and joins Akim on the east; he asserts its

pre-eminence in wealth and power. Issert, a physician in the Danish

service, who meditated a visit to Ashantee, writes, “this mighty king

has a piece of gold, as a charm, more than four men can carry; and

innumerable slaves are constantly at work for him in the mountains, each

of whom must collect or produce two ounces of gold per diem. The Akims

formerly dug much gold, but they are now forbidden by the King of

Ashantee, to whom they are tributary, as well as the Aquamboos,

previously a very formidable nation.” Mr. Dalzel heard of the Ashantees

at Dahomey, as very powerful, but imagined them, the Intas, and the

Tapahs, to be one and the same nation. Mr. Lucas, when in Mesurata, was

informed that Assentai was the capital of the powerful kingdom of

Tonouwah. In Mr. Murray’s enlarged edition of Dr. Leyden’s discoveries

in Africa, we find, “the northern border of Akim extends to Tonouwah,

denominated also Inta, Assientè, or Assentai, from its capital city of

that name, which stands about eighteen days journey from the Gold

Coast.”


In 1807 an Ashantee army reached the Coast for the first time. I would

refer the reader to the extract in the Appendix, from Mr. Meredith’s

account of the Gold Coast, as the particulars are introductory as well

as interesting; and also serve to correct the misstatement in the work

last quoted, that in 1808 the King of Ashantee destroyed the English

fort of Annamaboe; originating, probably, from the storm of the Dutch

fort at Cormantine, at that time.


The Ashantees invaded Fantee again in 1811, and the third time in 1816.

These invasions inflicted the greatest miseries on the Fantees. Few were

slain in battle, for they rarely dared to encounter the invaders; but

the butcheries in cold blood were incredible, and thousands were dragged

into the interior to be sacrificed to the superstitions of the

conquerors. Famines, unmitigated by labour, succeeded the wide waste of

the Fantee territory, the wretched remnant of the population abandoning

itself to despair; and the prolonged blockade of Cape Coast Castle in

the last invasion, engendered so much distress and hazard, that the

Government having averted imminent danger by advancing a large sum of

gold on account of the Fantees, earnestly desired the Committee to

authorise and enable them to venture an Embassy, to deprecate these

repeated calamities, to conciliate so powerful a monarch, and to

propitiate an extension of commerce. By the store ship which arrived in

1817, the African Committee forwarded liberal and suitable presents, and

associated scientific with the political objects of the Mission, in

their instructions, which I submit in explanation.


“In order to enable you to redeem the promise to the King of Ashantee

(and as we are sanguine in our hopes of the good that may result from

it), we send you sundry articles as presents for him, to which you may

add such others from the public stores as you may deem desirable,

provided they will not materially increase the expense. The Committee

are extremely anxious (and in this respect the wishes of all classes of

people in this country go with them) that no exertions should be spared

to become better acquainted with the Interior of Africa; and we consider

the existing state of things to be most favourable for undertaking an

exploratory Mission into the dominions of the King of Ashantee. If,

therefore, nothing shall have transpired in the interim of this dispatch

being received by you, to make the measure objectionable, we wish you to

obtain permission from the King to send an Embassy to his capital: if

granted, you will select three Gentlemen (one of them from the medical

department[1]) for that service; and let them be accompanied by a

respectable escort, you giving them the fullest instructions for their

government. In particular, it will be necessary for them to observe, and

report upon, the nature of the country; its soil and products; the

names, and distances, and the latitude and longitude of the principal

places; and its most remarkable natural objects: the appearance,

distinguishing characters, and manners of the natives; their religion,

laws, customs, and forms of government, as far as they can be

ascertained; and by whom each place is governed. When at Ashantee, they

should endeavour to obtain the fullest information of the countries

beyond, in each direction; particularly whether any high mountains,

lakes, or large rivers are known; and the width, depth, course, and

direction of the latter; and whether the water, as well of the lakes as

the rivers, is salt or fresh: and how far, and under what circumstances,

white men may travel with safety, especially in a northerly direction.

They should collect the most accurate information possible of the

extent, population, and resources of the Ashantee dominions, and should

report fully their opinion of the inhabitants, and of the progress they

may have made in the arts of civilized life. They should be directed

also, to procure and bring away (with the consent of the chiefs) any

specimens of vegetable and mineral productions they may be able: and to

ascertain where and how the natives collect the gold, and the extent to

which the trade in that article, and in ivory, might be carried on. It

would, we conceive, be a most important advantage, if the King of

Ashantee, and some of his chiefs, could be prevailed upon to send one or

more of their children to the Cape, to be educated at the expense of the

Committee (to be attended by their own servants, if required), under the

guarantee of the Governor and Council for their personal safety, and

that they should be sent back when required.


“Another great object would be, to prevail upon the King to form, and

keep open, a path not less than six feet wide, from his capital, as far

as his territories extend towards Cape Coast, you engaging on the part

of the Committee, to continue it from that point to Cape Coast, which we

presume may be done at a very small expense, by means of monthly

allowances to the chiefs of such villages as be in that line; upon

condition that they shall not allow the path to be overgrown with

underwood, or otherwise obstructed.


“It may perhaps be found, that high mountains, or a large river, may be

not many days journey beyond Ashantee; in which case, if the Gentlemen

composing the Embassy feel themselves secure in the attempt, they may

probably be disposed to proceed so far. In such event, we authorize you

to pay their drafts for any moderate sums which they may find it

necessary to expend, as well as for the general objects of the Mission.


“Besides the escort of which we have spoken, we think it necessary, or

at least extremely important, that the Embassy should be accompanied by

natives of character and consequence, conversant with the Ashantee

language, in whom you have perfect confidence, selected, one from each

of the towns of Cape Coast, Accra, and Apollonia, to whom you may make

reasonable allowances for their time and trouble.


“We have said that you should obtain the permission of the King of

Ashantee to send the Embassy: we have doubts of the expediency of

requiring hostages; but, we presume you will concur with us in thinking,

it will be necessary, before it leaves Cape Coast, that a man of

consequence should be specially sent down by the King, to serve as a

guide and protector; and who, on his journey to Cape Coast, may arrange

with the messenger whom you may send to the King, respecting the places

at which the Embassy may stop to refresh, and give directions to open

the paths that may be overgrown.


“The Gentlemen whom you may select, will of course be well advised by

you not to interfere with any customs of the natives, however absurd; or

in any way to give them offence. And they cannot too strongly impress

upon the minds of the King and people of Ashantee, that the only objects

his Britannic Majesty has in view, are, to extend the trade with that

country; to prevent all interruption to their free communication with

the waterside; and to instruct their children in reading, writing, &c.

from which, as may be easily pointed out, the greatest advantages must

arise to the Ashantees.


“From what has been said, you, Gentlemen, will perceive, that in

selecting the Embassy, it is important that one of the persons composing

it should be able to determine the latitude and longitude of places, and

that both shall be seasoned to the climate; of ability, physical and

mental; of cool tempers, and moderate habits; and possessed of fortitude

and perseverance; and that in the selection of their escort also, regard

be had to the qualifications of the parties in those respects. Among

them there should be a bricklayer, carpenter, blacksmith, gunsmith, and

cooper, with proper tools; if these persons can be spared for the

purpose. We wish also they should take with them a number of

_certificates regarding Major Peddie_, and his companions, to be

circulated as distinctly as possible in the Interior; for though the

period may be past when they might have been useful to those travellers,

it is yet possible that they may be of use in making generally known the

object of Government in sending white men to explore that country.”


The suggestion of hostages was wholly impracticable, for there was not

even time for a communication with the King. A variety of circumstances

conspired to urge the immediate dispatch of the Mission; our interests,

to say the least, imperiously demanded its early interference; and had

we waited for a formal permission from the King to relieve the

difficulties of the enterprise, the rainy season would have been too far

advanced, and the critical moment have escaped us. The Governor thought

it more advisable to dispatch the Mission without an escort, and two

native soldiers only were added to the bearers of the baggage. The

perusal of the Governor’s instructions will be satisfactory to the

reader:


                                   _Cape Coast Castle, April 19th_, 1817


    FREDERICK JAMES, ESQ. Member of Council, and Governor of Accra.


   SIR,


IN accepting your voluntary offer of conducting the Embassy to the King

of Ashantee, I have every reason to believe, that from your long

experience in this country, and your knowledge of the manners and habits

of the natives, it will terminate in a manner highly creditable to

yourself, and eventually prove of the greatest importance to the

commercial interest of Great Britain, which is the more immediate object

of the Mission; however, as many subjects of scientific research may be

associated with it, they are particularly recommended to your attention.

For this purpose Mr. Bowdich will accompany you; and I have no doubt he

will be found perfectly qualified to make the necessary observations, in

which you will afford him every facility and assistance. He is provided

with instruments for determining the latitude and longitude of places.

Mr. Hutchison, writer, and Mr. Tedlie, assistant surgeon, will also be

attached to the expedition.


The Ashantees, who are appointed your guides, have been selected by the

Ashantee Captain who is now here. They will, I hope, aid and assist you

in every thing that lays in their power.


In addition to the Committee’s instructions, a copy of which you have

herewith, you will attend to the following:


On the subject of your journey, I have nothing to observe further, than,

that I hope you will take every opportunity of travelling when there

will be the least exposure to the sun, as the officers who accompany you

have been but a short time in the country, and every precaution will be

necessary for the preservation of their health.


As soon as may be convenient after your arrival at the Ashantee capital,

you will of course see the King, and deliver him the various presents in

the name of the African Company, to be received by him as pledges of the

harmony and friendship which is ever to subsist between them; and also

of his good will towards the natives residing under the protection of

their different forts. You will not fail to impress upon his mind, the

great power, wealth, and consequence of the British nation, and how much

it is the interest of himself and his subjects, to promote and

perpetuate their present free intercourse with the water side. In the

course of your interview many circumstances will doubtless occur, which

will suggest various other matters proper to be mentioned to the King,

all which I shall leave entirely to your own discretion.


You will acquaint the King, that in order to secure a correct

communication between him and myself, I request his permission to allow

an officer to reside constantly at Commassey, who will defray all his

own expenses, and for whom you will build a house without loss of time.

A carpenter, bricklayer, and cooper are sent with you, and you will

leave them with Mr. Hutchison, who will remain as Resident. On your

departure you will give him full instructions in writing for his future

government, a copy of which you will deliver me upon your return.


You will keep an exact diary of every circumstance possessing the least

interest, a copy of which you will transmit me by every opportunity.


In the course of your stay in the Ashantee country, you will embrace

every occasion of becoming acquainted with the politics of that nation,

of ascertaining its extent and boundaries, the power of the King over

the lives and property of his subjects, the probable force he could

bring into the field, the number of his allies, the sources and amount

of his revenues. Whether he is tributary to any other power, and what

nations in his neighbourhood are tributary to him? The amount of

tribute, and in what articles paid? The rule of succession to the

throne? What are the punishments for crimes of all descriptions? Who are

the persons of most consequence next to the King? The names of their

offices, and the extent of their power: by whom, or how paid? What are

the most prominent features in the character, manners, and habits of the

people, &c. &c. &c.?


Are any human sacrifices made? Upon what occasions, and to what extent?

How are prisoners of war now disposed of?


Of what nation are the Moors that frequent the Ashantee country, and for

what purpose do they go there?


Ascertain the current medium of exchange, whether gold, or cowries; also

the usual prices at which the Ashantees sell the goods they purchase

from the Europeans on the sea coast; and the extent of their commercial

relations with the Interior.


You will enquire whether any European travellers have ever been seen or

heard of in any of the countries to the northward; and what became of

them? Whether any thing be known of the river Niger, or Joliba, as it is

called by the natives? This information you will probably obtain from

the Moors.


Ascertain the position of the Doncoe country, and the city of Kong; also

the mountains of that name. Refer to Park’s Travels, and acquire as much

information as possible of the regions lying between Ashantee and the

last places he visited. In short, leave nothing undone that may add to

our present imperfect geographical knowledge of the Interior.


You will receive herewith copies of certificates relative to Major

Pedde’s expedition, which you will distribute amongst any persons you

find travelling into the Interior from Ashantee.


It would be of the first importance to have a road cut directly down to

Cape Coast; and this you will urge to the King in the strongest manner.

Your observations will, of course, enable you to point out the proper

directions.


I inclose a sketch of a treaty, and it would be highly desirable if you

could procure its ratification by the King. He might perhaps make some

objection at first, but may be persuaded at length, by your address, and

reasoning. If he wished any trifling alteration made, you might use your

discretion in this respect.


You will acquaint the King, it is my wish that in future he receive his

company’s pay at this Castle, and not at Accra, as formerly. Should he

say any thing of an increase to his present allowance, you may give him

hopes that it will be granted to a reasonable extent, provided the

objects of this Mission be fulfilled, and after twelve months experience

shall have proved the sincerity of his friendship to the British

Government, and to the natives resident under its protection at the

various forts on the Coast.


From the jealous disposition of the natives of Africa, it is highly

probable, that in the prosecution of your enquiries, you will be subject

to many unfavourable suspicions. These you will take all possible care

to remove, by the most candid explanations on every point that may be

required.


You will particularly explain to the King, the ill treatment the people

of Cape Coast have experienced from those of Elmina, which has added

very much to the distresses they have for some time suffered from the

extreme scarcity of provisions; and there is reason to believe, that

this unjust persecution has been induced, from their presuming on their

connection with the Ashantees. Being perfectly aware that it has been

done without the concurrence of the King; I have no doubt but he will,

by a proper representation of the affair from you, exert his influence,

and prevent what is at present to be apprehended, and what the Elminas

are endeavouring to provoke—a war between the two people.


In all cases not provided for in these Instructions, you have of course

a discretionary power, which I am convinced you will make use of with

deliberation and prudence, and with becoming zeal for the service upon

which you are employed.


Wishing you a prosperous journey and a safe return,


                              I am, Sir, your most obedient Servant,


                                                        JOHN HOPE SMITH.


[Footnote 1: We recommend his being well supplied with dressings, &c.

for wounds, and bruises, so that he may be able to assist any natives

whom he may meet with requiring his aid: services of this sort give

Negroes an exalted idea of white men, and are always gratefully

remembered.]


                              CHAPTER II.


                               * * * * *


               _The Route, and Reception of the Mission._


The Mission left Cape Coast Castle on the morning of the 22d of April,

with the intention of quitting the water side at Moree, three miles and

a half to the eastward; but on reaching it, we were told that the path

thence to Payntree’s croom, always bad, was then impassable from the

rains; and that we must proceed to Annamaboe before we struck into the

bush for the Interior.


The reluctance of the carriers, who had been pressed into the service by

the authorities of the town, became thus early almost insuperable; the

consideration of pay and subsistence, and the reflection, that the

dearth inflicted by the invasions the Mission was to deprecate, allowed

them but a bare existence at home, were entirely lost in their aversion

to the undertaking, which was equally influenced by jealousy and

indolence: eleven deserted the first day; and the slender authority of

the King and caboceers of Annamaboe, delayed the procuring of others to

replace them until the next evening. One party was then started,

attended by a soldier and a messenger, as they persisted in laying down

their loads, even in the town; and many of the Annamaboes who had been

procured, after lifting their packages, which were of moderate weight,

walked off again, with the most insolent indifference. The devices by

which these people displayed their ill will were peculiarly their own,

and none could be more ingeniously tormenting. At four o’clock on

Thursday morning we started the remainder of the packages, and followed

them at half past six. Proceeding about two miles in a N.N.W. direction,

we descended a steep hill, a quarter of a mile in length, and entered a

beautiful valley, profusely covered with pines, aloes, and lilies; and

richly varied with palm, banana, plantain, and guava trees: the view was

refreshed by gentle risings crowned with cotton trees of a stupendous

size. I never saw soil so rich, or vegetation so luxuriant.


The first croom we reached was Quama’s, about three miles and a half

from Annamaboe; it presented but a few hovels; and we passed through

three others, Simquoi, Taphoo, and Nasmam, just as wretched and

insignificant, before we reached Booka, romantically situated amidst the

luxuriant foliage of a high hill, terminating the valley. Abra is about

three miles eastward of this croom: it has been entirely deserted since

the last invasion, the Ashantee army under Appia Nanu having made it

their head quarters. It formerly exceeded Annamaboe, but the little that

now remains is in ruin, the inhabitants having retired to the small

crooms of their caboceer, or Captain Quaggheree.


Passing through Tachradi, which scarcely existed but in name, we

ascended a gentle rising, with a small croom, called Acroofroom, on the

left hand. The astonishment of its miserable inhabitants engaging our

attention, the extensive area of the summit burst upon us with the more

effect. It was environed by small groves; and clumps of cotton trees

rose so happily in frequent spots, as to afford all the scenery of a

romantic little park; the broken rays of the sun stealing through the

small trees in the distance, to make the deep shade of the foreground

more imposing. The path then became more hilly, and the landscape fuller

of wood: our descents and risings frequently through long vistas, so

richly gilded with the sun on the summits, that, impressed with the

description of Issert, we naturally yielded to the expectation, in

ascending each eminence, that it would afford us the delightful prospect

of an open country; but we were disappointed, and passing through

Dunnasee and Assoquah, both small crooms, the latter situated on a long

level, about three miles and a half from Acroofroom, we shortly after

arrived at Payntree’s.


On the higher hills the soil was generally gravel, with large stones; on

the lesser, white flint and whinstone abounded: the levels presented few

stones, and the earth was black, strong, and rich, producing grass from

four to ten feet high. The country was very thinly inhabited, and more

sparingly cultivated, the cassada frequent, but producing little from

the want of cultivation.


I made Payntree’s croom barely fifteen miles from Annamaboe; judging

from time, it was guessed to be eighteen or twenty; but the impediments

which the path almost incessantly presented to a hammock, the

inequalities of the ground, and many delays which insensibly consumed

the time, conspired to make such a calculation of distance very

fallacious. The plan I adopted throughout, though laborious, entitled me

to more confidence; and the observations confirmed the pretension. Mr.

Tedlie, who was always just ahead of myself, took the angles of the path

by his compass, which I pencilled as he uttered them, with their several

lengths, allowing four yards and a half for every six paces. It is

allowed too by the natives to be an easy four hours walk. Several hours

elapsed before all the carriers came up; most of those who had been

started by us the preceding day, slept in the bush, and one more had

deserted.


The prevailing courses and their proportions were N.¼; N.bW.⅛; N.N.W.⅛;

N.N.E.⅛; the rest of the distance being made up of small lengths, in

every point of the compass, from S.W. to S.E.; the variation 17¾° W. The

latitude of Payntree, by two altitudes of the sun, was 5° 20′ 30″ N.;

the longitude, by the course and distance, as afterwards corrected, 1°

47′ W.


We received the compliments of Payntree and several caboceers, under a

large tree, and were then conducted to a neat and comfortable dwelling,

which had been prepared for us: a small square area afforded a shed for

cooking in on one side, and a sleeping room in each of the others, open

in front, but well thatched, and very clean: from this we passed to our

sitting room, the floor of which was elevated about two feet from the

ground.


The croom was prettily situated on a level, encircled by very fine

trees, and consisted of a very broad and well cleaned street of small

huts, framed of bamboo, and neatly thatched. Just beyond the north end

of the croom, there was a stream running to the N.N.E and more than a

mile of marshy ground was distinguished by the deeper shade and

luxuriance of the foliage. We observed a great number of small birds,

which were even more beautiful from their delicate symmetry, than their

brilliant plumage; they were generally green, with black wings, and

their nests hanging from the trees.


The Ashantee captain, who expected to continue there some months, on the

king’s business, sent us a sheep, pleading the scarcity, and his being a

stranger, as apologies for so small a present. Old Payntree was

attentive and obliging; he dashed us some fowls, yams, and palm wine. We

remained there the next day, to allow our people to procure four days

subsistence, as they would not be able to meet with provision on the

path during that period.


I walked with Mr. Tedlie along a very neat path well fenced, and divided

by _stiles_, to a corn plantation of at least twenty acres, and well

cultivated. Payntree’s farm house was situated here, and afforded

superior conveniences; a fowl house, a pigeon house, and a large granary

raised on a strong stage. As we returned we paid him a visit, and were

refreshed with some excellent palm wine: his dwelling was a square of

four apartments, which were entered from an outer one, where a number of

drums were kept; the angles were occupied by the slaves, and his own

room, which had a small inner chamber, was decked with muskets,

blunderbusses, cartouch belts fantastically ornamented, and various

insignia. The order, cleanliness, and comfort, surprised us; the sun had

just set, and a cheerful fire on a clean hearth supported the evening

meal. The old man was seated in his state chair, diverting himself with

his children and younger wives, the elder one was looking on from the

opposite apartment with happy indifference; it was the first scene of

domestic comfort I had witnessed among the natives. There was a small

plantation or garden neatly fenced in, near the house, for the supply of

the family.


On Saturday the 26th we left Payntree’s croom, and proceeded through two

romantic little valleys, with a few huts in each: the variety of trees

increased with the number, and ornamented the hills with almost every

tint and character of foliage: the path was frequently covered with

water. Just before we reached Cottacoomacasa, a most beautiful landscape

opened, the fore-ground darkly shaded with large cotton trees, and the

distance composed of several picturesque little hills; their fanciful

outlines, and the beautiful variety of fresh and sombre tint of the

small groves which encircled them, forcibly reminded me of the

celebrated ride by Grongar hill, from Carmarthen to Llandilo.


Cottacoomacasa is about six miles and a quarter from Payntree’s croom,

and consisted but of a few miserable huts and sheds, which scarcely

afforded shelter, and were close and filthy. I took the angles of a

cotton tree near us, and the height proved to be 139 feet; generally

speaking, those we had passed were, to appearance, much higher. The

bearers had all settled themselves here, and not contented with a long

rest, refused for some time to proceed until the next day; several were

intoxicated with the rum from some ankers they had designedly broken. We

started again however about half past three, and almost immediately

entered a large forest impervious to the sun; the risings were frequent

but gentle; the path, crooked and overgrown, presented such constant

obstacles to a hammock, that Mr. Hutchison, Mr. Tedlie, and myself, were

glad to dismount, and found it was much more comfortable as well as more

expeditious to walk; the only inconvenience was the troops of large

black ants, which were too thick to be avoided, and stung us sadly. We

passed two little streams running E.N.E. About six miles from

Cottacoomacasa we found all the baggage, the people making their fires,

and settling themselves for the night; it was almost dark; Quamina, our

Ashantee guide, had gone on without us, and Mr. James we knew must be

far behind; we therefore determined to halt for the night, and our

hammocks were slung to the trees. The distance marched this day was

twelve miles. The longitude of Cottacoomacasa was one mile E. of that of

Payntree by account, that of our resting place 1° 46′ 30″ W. and the

lat. 5° 28′ N.


The next morning we continued our march through the same dark solitude,

and passing three small streams running E. we reached Mansue soon after

ten o’clock. We had scarcely seated ourselves under a tattered shed,

which could not defend us from the burning sun, when we were encircled

by the cooking fires of the party, and nothing but violence could remove

them to a proper distance.


Mansue had been the great Fantee market for slaves from the Interior,

and its former consequence was evident from the extent of its site, over

which a few sheds only were now scattered.


We proceeded again at one o’clock, and passing through a small river,

Assooneara, running eastward, we came to a second, called Okee, running

in the same direction to the Amissa, which falls into the sea between

Annamaboe and Tantum. We passed five or six swamps, one nearly half a

mile long; in these the soil was a dark clay, but otherwise gravelly. We

halted in the woods at a spot where our guide Quamina was busied in

cutting down the underwood to accommodate himself and his women; the

bearers, resolute in their perverseness, had gone on with our provisions

and clothes. The ground of our resting place was very damp, and swarmed

with reptiles and insects; we had great difficulty in keeping up our

fires, which we were the more anxious to do after a visit from a

panther: an animal which, the natives say, resembles a small pig, and

inhabits the trees, continued a shrill screeching through the night; and

occasionally a wild hog bounced by, snorting through the forest, as if

closely pursued. This day’s distance was eight miles, and the course

N.¼N. b. E.⅙. Lat. and long. by account 5° 34′ N. and 1° 48′ W.

Thermometer in shade 6 A.M. 74.


We started the next morning at seven o’clock, and after three miles and

a half crossed a small river called Gaia, and sometimes Aniabirrim, from

a croom of that name being formerly in its neighbourhood; it was ten

yards wide and two feet deep, and ran to the E. just across the path,

but afterwards N.N.E. to the Amissa. Here Mr. Hutchison waited for Mr.

James to come up, whilst Mr. Tedlie and myself walked on to overtake the

people. The doom and iron-wood trees were frequent; the path was a

labyrinth of the most capricious windings, the roots of the cotton trees

obstructing it continually, and our progress was generally by stepping

and jumping up and down, rather than walking; the stems or caudices of

these trees projected from the trunks like flying buttresses, their

height frequently 20 feet. Immense trunks of fallen trees presented

constant barriers to our progress, and increased our fatigues from the

labour of scaling them: we were also frequently obliged to wait the

cutting away of the underwood before we could proceed, even on foot. The

large trees were covered with parasites and convolvuli, and the climbing

plants, like small cables, ascending the trunks to some height, abruptly

shot downwards, crossed to the opposite trees, and threaded each other

in such a perplexity of twists and turnings, that it soon became

impossible to trace them in the general entanglement. We passed through

two small streams running S. and several swamps, richly covered with

palm trees. Parrots and crown birds were numerous. At the end of ten

miles we came to a small river called Quatoa, four yards wide, also

running eastward to the Amissa; and immediately after to a few sheds

bearing the same name, where we found the last party of the bearers all

lying down, and a soldier ineffectually endeavouring to rouse them: we

started them with difficulty. A mile and a half thence we met with the

Okee again, running over its rocky bed in a transparent stream, which

reflected the richest foliage; its course S.W.½W., the breadth nine

yards, and we stepped across it from rock to rock. We soon afterwards

walked through the Antoonso, a smaller river running W.S.W., which

probably crossed the path to the eastward in one of the small streams

near Cottacoomacasa, as every report confirmed its also running to the

Amissa; it was very near Fousou, where we had scarcely arrived, before

the Fantees, such was their perverseness, insisted upon going on, the

Cape Coast messengers either had no influence or would not exert it; we

soon stopped them with the assistance of Quamina, our Ashantee guide,

Mr. James not coming up until late in the evening. Fousou was formerly a

large town, but had been destroyed by the Ashantee invasion of 1807; it

presented but a few sheds, in one of which we observed the Ashantee

traders to deposit yams and plantains to subsist them on their return;

so severe was the scarcity in the Fantee country: we could purchase

nothing, and were admitted to the best hovel with reluctance. This day’s

distance was 14 miles. The courses N.½, N.N.W.¼, N.bW.⅛. The latitude of

Fousou by observation, was 5° 43′ 20″ N. and the longitude by account 1°

52′ W.


The next morning, the 29th of April, we marched seven miles to

Ancomassa, a name given to half a dozen sheds; the path was still of the

same rugged nature, and the gloom unvaried. A strong fragrance was

emitted from the decaying plants and trees of the mimosa kind, whilst

others in the same incipient state of putrefaction were very offensive.

We passed through two small rivers, Bettensin and Soubin, six yards

wide, and shallow; they both ran eastward to the Owa, of which I could

not learn more than that it emptied itself into the Boosempra.


We proceeded at four o’clock, and had not gone two miles on our gloomy

route before it became dark. The path was level, but very swampy, and

generally covered with water. The fire-flies spangled the herbage in

every direction, and from the strength of their light, alternately

excited the apprehension of wild beasts, and the hope that we approached

the resting place our guide, whom we never saw after starting, had told

us of in the morning. The greatest fear of the people was of the spirits

of the woods, (whom Mr. Park’s interpreter, Johnson, propitiated by a

sacrifice between Jing and Gangaddi) and the discordant yells in which

they rivalled each other to keep up their courage, mingled with the

howls and screeches from the forest, imposed a degree of horror on this

dismal scene, which associated it with the imaginations of Dante. Three

or four times we suddenly emerged from the most awful gloom into

extensive areas, on which the stars shed a brilliancy of light gradually

softened into the deep shade which encompassed them; they were the sites

of large and populous crooms destroyed in the Ashantee invasions. About

nine o’clock we discovered a few miserable sheds, which the noise of the

bearers, who had long arrived, convinced us to be Accomfodey. We had

passed two small rivers, the Aprinisee and Annuia, both running to the

Boosempra. This day’s distance was 11 miles, and the courses N.⅓,

N.bW.⅕. The lat. and long. by account 5° 49′ N. and 1° 55′ W.

Thermometer 11 a.m. 80.


We marched early the next morning. The scenery of the forest, excepting

on the banks of the small rivers, was very naked of foliage, and only

presented a harsh and ragged confusion of stems and branches intricately

blended. We passed a small river soon after leaving Accomfodey, bearing

the same name and running eastward; and shortly after another, six yards

wide and two feet deep (the Berrakoo), running N.E. to the Boosempra.

The path was sometimes trackless, and appeared to have been little used

since the invasion of 1807; several human skulls were scattered through

this dark solitude, the relics of the butchery. We halted about two

o’clock by Mr. James’s direction, and passed the night in the forest.

This day’s distance was eight miles, the prevailing courses N.¼, N.bW.⅛,

N.N.W.⅛, N.bE.⅛. The latitude and longitude by account 5° 53′ N. 1° 55′

W. Thermometer 2 p.m. 88½, 7 p.m. 82½.


The next morning we passed some sheds, on the sites of the crooms

Dansamsou and Meakirring. At the end of five miles and a quarter, the

herbage to the right disclosed the cheerful reflections of the sun from

the water; and we descended through a small vista of the forest, to the

banks of the Boosempra or Chamah river. Nothing could be more beautiful

than its scenery: the bank on the south side was steep, and admitted but

a narrow path; that on the north sloping; on which a small Fetish house,

under the shade of a cachou tree, fixed the eye; whence it wandered over

a rich variety of tint and foliage, in which light and shade were most

happily blended: the small rocks stole through the herbage of the banks,

and now and then ruffled the water: the doom trees towering in the

shrubbery, waved to the most gentle air a rich foliage of dark green,

mocking the finest touch of the pencil; the tamarind and smaller mimosas

heightening its effect by their livelier tint, and the more piquant

delicacy of their leaf: the cotton trees overtopped the whole,

enwreathed in convolvuli, and several elegant little trees, unknown to

me, rose in the background, intermixed with palms, and made the coup

d’oeil enchanting. The bright rays of the sun were sobered by the rich

reflections of the water; and there was a mild beauty in the landscape,

uncongenial to barbarism, which imposed the expectation of elegance and

refinement. I attempted a sketch, but it was far beyond my rude pencil;

the expression of the scene could only have been traced in the profile

of every tree; and it seemed to defy any touches, but those of a Claude

or a Wilson, to depict the life of its beauty. I took two angles from a

base on the south side, which gave the width of the river, forty three

yards; the depth was 7 feet, and the course N.W.½W. with a very strong

current. A small river called Nimeä, ran into it, close to our right as

we landed: we crossed in the hollow trunk of a tree, thirty feet long,

the ends plastered up with sticks and swish.


Mansue was said to have been the last town of the Fantee territory; but

we had no opportunity for comparison until we passed the river, the

country thitherto presenting all the gloom of depopulation, and the

forest fast recovering the sites of the large towns destroyed in the

Ashantee invasions. The inhabitants of the few wretched hovels, remotely

scattered, seemed as if they had fled to them as outcasts from society;

they were lost even to curiosity, and manners were brutal and sullen.[2]

We could purchase nothing for our subsistence.


The scene brightened from our crossing the Boosempra; the path improved,

and Prasoo, the first town, only three quarters of a mile from the

river, presented a wide and clean street of tolerably regular houses;

the inhabitants clean and cheerful, left their various occupations to

gratify their curiosity, and saluted us in a friendly and respectful

manner: indeed the Assins may be considered, collectively, a more

mannerly and orderly people than the Ashantees. Kickiwherree, one mile

and a half distant, was a larger town, not so regular, but presenting

the same neat appearance, improved by the white-washing of many of the

houses. We halted here under the ganian[3] tree, used, generally

speaking, for recreation only, palavers being talked in the open fronts

of the houses. We were conducted to a comfortable dwelling, affording us

four very clean rooms, about 12 feet by 7, in which there were shelves

containing many articles of superior domestic comfort; a curtain or

skreen of bamboo let down in the open front, and the floors raised about

a foot and half from the ground, were washed daily with an earth of the

neighbourhood, which coloured them Etruscan red. The iron stone

abounded. Kickiwherree was 7 miles from the previous resting place, and

the prevailing courses N.¼ N.b.W.⅐. The latitude by observation was 5°

56′ 40″ N; the longitude by account 1° 57′ W. Thermometer 8 a.m. 77; 1

p.m. 91.


My observations had not been so frequent as I wished; the nature of the

country, and the season of the year were both very unfavourable to them.

I worked the double altitudes, invariably by Dr. Pemberton’s rule in

Keith’s trigonometry, which requires no assumed latitude, and is in all

cases accurate.


Mr. James having determined to rest the next day at Kickiwherree, we did

not proceed until Saturday the 3rd of May. We passed through a small

river close to the town, called the Ading, six yards wide and two feet

deep; and soon after a second, the Animiasoo, nine yards wide, and three

feet deep, both running to the Boosempra; close to the latter was a

large croom of the same name, the seat of Cheboo’s government. Pagga and

Atobiasee were also large crooms near each other, and within four miles

of Kickiwherree. At Atobiasee was a small river called Prensa, five

yards wide, and two feet deep, which ran E.S.E. to the Boosempra: two

miles thence we came to Becquama, a very old croom, with a river nine

yards wide, called Prapong, running E. by S. to the Boosempra; and at

the end of nine miles we halted at Asharaman, a small croom on an

eminence, where the Assins under Apootey and Cheboo, first engaged the

Ashantees in 1807. There was a small plot of corn near this croom, the

first we had seen since we left Payntree, though every croom was

surrounded by a tract of cultivated land, or plantation of plantains.

The path continued through forest. Distance 8 miles. Courses N.¼.

Latitude by observation, 5° 59′ 20″. Longitude by course and distance 1°

57′ 40″ W. Thermometer 6 a.m. 76, p.m. 89.


The next day we passed through Ansa, a large croom, where Amoo had

governed; north-west of which, at a little distance, was Aboiboo, the

residence of his enemy Apootey. A small river near Ansa, called

Parakoomee, eleven yards wide, and three feet deep, ran south to a

larger, called Ofim or Foom, which rises six days northward of

Coomassie, and falls into the Boosempra some miles westward of our

crossing. The path was very swampy, and we did not reach Akrofroom until

three o’clock: this was by far the largest croom we had seen. The heavy

rains during the night floated us in our lodgings, and, as Quamina

reported, rendered the path to Moisee impassable for the next day;

consequently we did not proceed until Tuesday the 6th. Distance 12

miles. Courses N.⅕, N.N.W.¼. Latitude by observation, 6° 5′ 40″. Long: C

and D 2° 2′. W. The path still through forest, presented frequent

acclivities, and the iron stone, and a soft grey rock abounded; the soil

was sometimes gravelly, but generally of a red coloured clay used in the

native pottery. We passed the Parakoomee again twice, and at the end of

11 miles halted at Moisee,


  “Cingebant silvæ; quem collibus undique curvis,”


the last Assin town, at the foot of three high hills covered with wood,

bearing W.N.W., N., and N.N.E.; the barriers of the Ashantee kingdom.

Course N.⅕, N.W.b.N.⅐, N.b.E.⅛. Latitude by observation 6° 8′ 50″ N.

Longitude C and D 2° 4′ 20″ W. The thermometer was broken on the 4th.


We passed the northern boundary the next morning; the ascent was a mile

and a half in length, and very rocky; a small river called the Bohmen

ran S.W. to the Jim, which falls into the Ofim: the water of the Bohmen

is said to instil eloquence, and numerous Ashantees repair annually to

drink of it: it flowed in a very clear stream, over a bed of gravel, and

was three feet deep, and eight yards broad. The expectation of an open

country was again disappointed; I bore several eminent points, in the

hope of being able to do so again at some distance, and of thus, with

the intermediate course, checking the distance computed by paces; but

the forest soon shut them out entirely. The first Ashantee croom was

Quesha; and we soon after passed through Fohmannee, which had been a

very considerable town. We stopped there awhile at the request of a

venerable old man, who regaled us with some palm wine and fruit: his

manners were very pleasing, and made it more painful to us to hear that

his life was forfeited to some superstitious observances, and that he

only waited the result of a petition to the king to commiserate his

infirmities so far as to allow him to be executed at his own croom, and

to be spared the fatigue of a journey to the capital: he conversed

cheerfully with us, congratulated himself on seeing white men before he

died, and spread his cloth over the log with an emotion of dignity

rather than shame: his head arrived at Coomassie the day after we had.

On ascending the hill, the soil became a dark brown clay, and very

productive. We passed the first large plantation of corn we had seen

since we left Payntree, and halted at Doompassee. Distance 6 miles.

Courses N.⅓, N.N.W.⅕, N.W.⅙. Latitude by observation, 6° 11′ 30″.


Doompassee had been a very large croom, but the caboceer having

intrigued with one of Sai Cudjoe’s wives, who had permission to visit

her family in this place, the greater part of it was destroyed in

consequence, and the caboceer decapitated: the woman possessing

irresistible art in practising upon the numerous admirers of her beauty,

the king spared her life, and employed her thenceforth to inveigle those

distant caboceers, whose lives or properties were desirable to him. It

was the most industrious town on the path; cloths, beads, and pottery

were manufacturing in all directions, and the blacksmiths’ forges were

always at work. The intelligence of the beginning of the King’s fetish

week, and Mr. James’s attack of fever, delayed us at Doompassee, and a

messenger was dispatched in the interim to announce our approach. During

our stay, I observed an eclipse of Jupiter’s first satellite, which gave

the longitude 2° 6′ W.


We did not leave Doompassee until the 14th of May; after two miles,

passing a small stream running N.W. we ascended a high hill, on which a

large croom, called Tiabosoo, was situated. I looked into a pit here six

feet deep; the first stratum was vegetable mould, the second gravel, the

third, a kind of potter’s clay, and the remaining of brittle stone of a

reddish brown, resembling that they call cabouc in the East Indies. The

next croom was Sanquanta, where the path took an easterly direction, and

about seven miles from Doompassee we passed Datiasoo, where large

quantities of pottery were manufacturing, exclusively: it was not more

than a mile distant from Dadawasee, where we found a messenger from the

king, expressing his regret that we had come up in the rainy season, as

he had heard it was a very unhealthy one for white men, and appointing

us to enter the capital on the Monday following; he sent us a present of

a sheep, forty yams, and two ounces of gold for our table; he had also

given six ackies to our messenger, who returned at the same time. The

path had been cleared by the king’s order, the plantations became more

frequent and extensive, and numerous paths branching off from that we

travelled, shewed that the country was thickly inhabited, and the

intercourse of the various parts direct and necessary for an interchange

of manufacture and produce: the crooms hitherto had appeared insulated.

The Acassey or blue dye plant grew profusely. Distance seven miles.

Courses N.¼, N.bW.⅐, N.N.W.⅐, N.N.E.⅙. Latitude by observation 6° 16′

20″ N. long: C and D 2° 7′ 30″ W.


The next day, leaving Dadawasee, close to which was another large croom

called Modjawee, we descended a very steep hill, and passed the Dankaran

or Mankaran, a small river, in the rainy season eleven yards wide and

four feet deep, running to the Birrim: not far from this river was

Sahnfoo, and a short distance from that croom, a smaller river called

Yansee, running N.N.W. We then passed through Korraman, near which was

the small river Dansabow, running westward, and three other large

crooms, Aquinasee (having a neatly fenced burial ground,) Amafou, and

Agabimah; crossing another small river called Soubirree, near the

latter, we reached Assiminia, distant eight miles from Dadawasee. The

path was frequently eight feet wide, and kept as neatly as that of a

garden in the environs of the crooms, which now disclosed themselves

very prettily at some distance. Courses N.⅕, N.bE.⅙, N.N.E.⅙. Latitude

by observation 6° 22′, longitude C and D 2° 7′ 50″ W.


There was a violent tornado in the night, during almost the whole of

which the rain continued in torrents, increasing the small streams near

the town from ancle to three feet deep. Almost all the inhabitants were

employed in weaving the staple manufacture of Assiminia, which was

formerly of much greater extent. Mr. James rested here the whole of the

next day, and on Saturday we proceeded through Boposoo (on a very high

hill), Agemum, Yoko, and Abountum; near which we crossed the Biaqua,

running west to the Jim, and about seven yards wide and two feet deep;

between this and Sarrasou, where we halted, were two large crooms,

Pootooaga and Fiasou.


The path was continually well cleared: each croom presented one wide

central street, with the ganian or cachou trees at the extremities. The

soil ceased to be sandy, and became a reddish earth: we observed some

quartz, but silex prevailed. Distance 11 miles. Courses N.¼, N.N.E.⅕.

Lat. by observation, 6° 30′ 20″. Long. C. and D. 2° 6′ 30″.


The river Dah runs close to Sarrasou, rising at Sekooree near Dwabin,

and falling into the Ofim at Measee in the Warsaw path; it is generally

about sixteen yards wide, and four feet deep. There was an ingenious

fishing weir in this river; two rows of very strong wicker work were

fixed across it, supported against the rapidity of the stream by large

stakes, driven into the ground obliquely on each side of them, and

connected above and below by the trunks of two large trees. The funnel-

shaped baskets, thickly inserted at the bottom, were of split cane, and

about twelve feet long. There are large plantations of corn around

Sarrasou, which is a great nursery for pigs. We left it on Monday

morning, the 19th, and passing through a small croom, Oyoko, stopped at

another, Agogoo, about four miles distant, to dress ourselves in full

uniform. The soil from Sarrasou was a rich black mould, and there were

continued plantations of corn, yams, ground nuts, terraboys, and

encruma: the yams and ground nuts were planted with much regularity in

triangular beds, with small drains around each, and carefully cleared

from weeds.


Two miles from Agogoo, we crossed the marsh which insulates Coomassie;

the breadth at that part forty yards, and the depth three feet. Being

within a mile of the capital, our approach was announced to the king,

who desired us by his messengers to rest at a little croom, called

Patiasoo, until he had finished washing, when captains would be deputed

to conduct us to his presence. Distance 6½ miles. Courses N.⅙, N.N.W.⅙.


We entered Coomassie at two o’clock, passing under a fetish, or

sacrifice of a dead sheep, wrapped up in red silk, and suspended between

two lofty poles. Upwards of 5000 people, the greater part warriors, met

us with awful bursts of martial music, discordant only in its mixture;

for horns, drums, rattles, and gong-gongs were all exerted with a zeal

bordering on phrenzy, to subdue us by the first impression. The smoke

which encircled us from the incessant discharges of musquetry, confined

our glimpses to the foreground; and we were halted whilst the captains

performed their Pyrrhic dance, in the centre of a circle formed by their

warriors; where a confusion of flags, English, Dutch, and Danish, were

waved and flourished in all directions; the bearers plunging and

springing from side to side, with a passion of enthusiasm only equalled

by the captains, who followed them, discharging their shining

blunderbusses so close, that the flags now and then were in a blaze; and

emerging from the smoke with all the gesture and distortion of maniacs.

Their followers kept up the firing around us in the rear. The dress of

the captains (see drawing, No. I.) was a war cap, with gilded rams horns

projecting in front, the sides extended beyond all proportion by immense

plumes of eagles feathers, and fastened under the chin with bands of

cowries. Their vest was of red cloth, covered with fetishes and

saphies[4] in gold and silver; and embroidered cases of almost every

colour, which flapped against their bodies as they moved, intermixed

with small brass bells, the horns and tails of animals, shells, and

knives; long leopards tails hung down their backs, over a small bow

covered with fetishes. They wore loose cotton trowsers, with immense

boots of a dull red leather, coming half way up the thigh, and fastened

by small chains to their cartouch or waist belt; these were also

ornamented with bells, horses tails, strings of amulets, and innumerable

shreds of leather; a small quiver of poisoned arrows hung from their

right wrist, and they held a long iron chain between their teeth, with a

scrap of Moorish writing affixed to the end of it. A small spear was in

their left hands, covered with red cloth and silk tassels; their black

countenances heightened the effect of this attire, and completed a

figure scarcely human.


[Illustration: _Drawn by T. E. Bowdich Esqr._


_No. 1._


CAPTAIN in his WAR DRESS.]


This exhibition continued about half an hour, when we were allowed to

proceed, encircled by the warriors, whose numbers, with the crowds of

people, made our movement as gradual as if it had taken place in

Cheapside; the several streets branching off to the right, presented

long vistas crammed with people, and those on the left hand being on an

acclivity, innumerable rows of heads rose one above another: the large

open porches of the houses, like the fronts of stages in small theatres,

were filled with the better sort of females and children, all impatient

to behold white men for the first time; their exclamations were drowned

in the firing and music, but their gestures were in character with the

scene. When we reached the palace, about half a mile from the place

where we entered, we were again halted, and an open file was made,

through which the bearers were passed, to deposit the presents and

baggage in the house assigned to us. Here we were gratified by observing

several of the caboceers pass by with their trains, the novel splendour

of which astonished us. The bands, principally composed of horns and

flutes, trained to play in concert, seemed to soothe our hearing into

its natural tone again by their wild melodies; whilst the immense

umbrellas, made to sink and rise from the jerkings of the bearers, and

the large fans waving around, refreshed us with small currents of air,

under a burning sun, clouds of dust, and a density of atmosphere almost

suffocating. We were then squeezed, at the same funeral pace, up a long

street, to an open-fronted house, where we were desired by a royal

messenger to wait a further invitation from the king. Here our attention

was forced from the astonishment of the crowd to a most inhuman

spectacle, which was paraded before us for some minutes; it was a man

whom they were tormenting previous to sacrifice; his hands were pinioned

behind him, a knife was passed through his cheeks, to which his lips

were noosed like the figure of 8; one ear was cut off and carried before

him, the other hung to his head by a small bit of skin; there were

several gashes in his back, and a knife was thrust under each shoulder

blade; he was led with a cord passed through his nose, by men disfigured

with immense caps of shaggy black skins, and drums beat before him; the

feeling this horrid barbarity excited must be imagined. We were soon

released by permission to proceed to the king, and passed through a very

broad street, about a quarter of a mile long, to the market place.


Our observations en passant had taught us to conceive a spectacle far

exceeding our original expectations; but they had not prepared us for

the extent and display of the scene which here burst upon us: an area of

nearly a mile in circumference was crowded with magnificence and

novelty. The king, his tributaries, and captains, were resplendent in

the distance, surrounded by attendants of every description, fronted by

a mass of warriors which seemed to make our approach impervious. The sun

was reflected, with a glare scarcely more supportable than the heat,

from the massy gold ornaments, which glistened in every direction. More

than a hundred bands burst at once on our arrival, with the peculiar

airs of their several chiefs; the horns flourished their defiances, with

the beating of innumerable drums and metal instruments, and then yielded

for a while to the soft breathings of their long flutes, which were

truly harmonious; and a pleasing instrument, like a bagpipe without the

drone, was happily blended. At least a hundred large umbrellas, or

canopies, which could shelter thirty persons, were sprung up and down by

the bearers with brilliant effect, being made of scarlet, yellow, and

the most shewy cloths and silks, and crowned on the top with crescents,

pelicans, elephants, barrels, and arms and swords of gold; they were of

various shapes, but mostly dome; and the valances (in some of which

small looking glasses were inserted) fantastically scalloped and

fringed; from the fronts of some, the proboscis and small teeth of

elephants projected, and a few were roofed with leopard skins, and

crowned with various animals naturally stuffed. The state hammocks, like

long cradles, were raised in the rear, the poles on the heads of the

bearers; the cushions and pillows were covered with crimson taffeta, and

the richest cloths hung over the sides. Innumerable small umbrellas, of

various coloured stripes, were crowded in the intervals, whilst several

large trees heightened the glare, by contrasting the sober colouring of

nature.


  “Discolor unde auri per ramos aura refulsit.”


The king’s messengers, with gold breast plates, made way for us, and we

commenced our round, preceded by the canes and the English flag. We

stopped to take the hand of every caboceer, which, as their houshold

suites occupied several spaces in advance, delayed us long enough to

distinguish some of the ornaments in the general blaze of splendour and

ostentation.


The caboceers, as did their superior captains and attendants, wore

Ashantee cloths, of extravagant price from the costly foreign silks

which had been unravelled to weave them in all the varieties of colour,

as well as pattern; they were of an incredible size and weight, and

thrown over the shoulder exactly like the Roman toga; a small silk

fillet generally encircled their temples, and massy gold necklaces,

intricately wrought; suspended Moorish charms, dearly purchased, and

enclosed in small square cases of gold, silver, and curious embroidery.

Some wore necklaces reaching to the navel entirely of aggry beads; a

band of gold and beads encircled the knee, from which several strings of

the same depended; small circles of gold like guineas, rings, and casts

of animals, were strung round their ancles; their sandals were of green,

red, and delicate white leather; manillas, and rude lumps of rock gold,

hung from their left wrists, which were so heavily laden as to be

supported on the head of one of their handsomest boys. Gold and silver

pipes, and canes dazzled the eye in every direction. Wolves and rams

heads as large as life, cast in gold, were suspended from their gold

handled swords, which were held around them in great numbers; the blades

were shaped like round bills, and rusted in blood; the sheaths were of

leopard skin, or the shell of a fish like shagreen. The large drums

supported on the head of one man, and beaten by two others, were braced

around with the thigh bones of their enemies, and ornamented with their

skulls. The kettle drums resting on the ground, were scraped with wet

fingers, and covered with leopard skin. The wrists of the drummers were

hung with bells and curiously shaped pieces of iron, which gingled

loudly as they were beating. The smaller drums were suspended from the

neck by scarves of red cloth; the horns (the teeth of young elephants)

were ornamented at the mouth-piece with gold, and the jaw bones of human

victims. The war caps of eagles feathers nodded in the rear, and large

fans, of the wing feathers of the ostrich, played around the

dignitaries; immediately behind their chairs (which were of a black

wood, almost covered by inlays of ivory and gold embossment) stood their

handsomest youths, with corslets of leopard’s skin covered with gold

cockle shells, and stuck full of small knives, sheathed in gold and

silver, and the handles of blue agate; cartouch boxes of elephant’s hide

hung below, ornamented in the same manner; a large gold handled sword

was fixed behind the left shoulder, and silk scarves and horses tails

(generally white) streamed from the arms and waist cloth: their long

Danish muskets had broad rims of gold at small distances, and the stocks

were ornamented with shells. Finely grown girls stood behind the chairs

of some, with silver basins. Their stools (of the most laborious carved

work, and generally with two large bells attached to them) were

conspicuously placed on the heads of favourites; and crowds of small

boys were seated around, flourishing elephants tails curiously mounted.

The warriors sat on the ground close to these, and so thickly as not to

admit of our passing without treading on their feet, to which they were

perfectly indifferent; their caps were of the skin of the pangolin and

leopard, the tails hanging down behind; their cartouch belts (composed

of small gourds which hold the charges, and covered with leopard or

pig’s skin) were embossed with red shells, and small brass bells thickly

hung to them; on their hips and shoulders was a cluster of knives; iron

chains and collars dignified the most daring, who were prouder of them

than of gold; their muskets had rests affixed of leopard’s skin, and the

locks a covering of the same; the sides of their faces were curiously

painted in long white streaks, and their arms also striped, having the

appearance of armour.


We were suddenly surprised by the sight of Moors, who afforded the first

general diversity of dress; there were seventeen superiors, arrayed in

large cloaks of white satin, richly trimmed with spangled embroidery,

their shirts and trowsers were of silk, and a very large turban of white

muslin was studded with a border of different coloured stones: their

attendants wore red caps and turbans, and long white shirts, which hung

over their trowsers; those of the inferiors were of dark blue cloth:

they slowly raised their eyes from the ground as we passed, and with a

most malignant scowl.


The prolonged flourishes of the horns, a deafening tumult of drums, and

the fuller concert of the intervals, announced that we were approaching

the king: we were already passing the principal officers of his

houshold; the chamberlain, the gold horn blower, the captain of the

messengers, the captain for royal executions, the captain of the market,

the keeper of the royal burial ground, and the master of the bands, sat

surrounded by a retinue and splendor which bespoke the dignity and

importance of their offices. The cook had a number of small services

covered with leopard’s skin held behind him, and a large quantity of

massy silver plate was displayed before him, punch bowls, waiters,

coffee pots, tankards, and a very large vessel with heavy handles and

clawed feet, which seemed to have been made to hold incense; I observed

a Portuguese inscription on one piece, and they seemed generally of that

manufacture. The executioner, a man of an immense size, wore a massy

gold hatchet on his breast; and the execution stool was held before him,

clotted in blood, and partly covered with a cawl of fat. The king’s four

linguists were encircled by a splendor inferior to none, and their

peculiar insignia, gold canes, were elevated in all directions, tied in

bundles like fasces. The keeper of the treasury, added to his own

magnificence by the ostentatious display of his service; the blow pan,

boxes, scales and weights, were of solid gold.


A delay of some minutes whilst we severally approached to receive the

king’s hand, afforded us a thorough view of him; his deportment first

excited my attention; native dignity in princes we are pleased to call

barbarous was a curious spectacle: his manners were majestic, yet

courteous; and he did not allow his surprise to beguile him for a moment

of the composure of the monarch; he appeared to be about thirty-eight

years of age, inclined to corpulence, and of a benevolent countenance;

he wore a fillet of aggry beads round his temples, a necklace of gold

cockspur shells strung by their largest ends, and over his right

shoulder a red silk cord, suspending three saphies cased in gold; his

bracelets were the richest mixtures of beads and gold, and his fingers

covered with rings; his cloth was of a dark green silk; a pointed diadem

was elegantly painted in white on his forehead; also a pattern

resembling an epaulette on each shoulder, and an ornament like a full

blown rose, one leaf rising above another until it covered his whole

breast; his knee-bands were of aggry beads, and his ancle strings of

gold ornaments of the most delicate workmanship, small drums, sankos,

stools, swords, guns, and birds, clustered together; his sandals, of a

soft white leather, were embossed across the instep band with small gold

and silver cases of saphies; he was seated in a low chair, richly

ornamented with gold; he wore a pair of gold castanets on his finger and

thumb, which he clapped to enforce silence. The belts of the guards

behind his chair, were cased in gold, and covered with small jaw bones

of the same metal; the elephants tails, waving like a small cloud before

him, were spangled with gold, and large plumes of feathers were

flourished amid them. His eunuch presided over these attendants, wearing

only one massy piece of gold about his neck: the royal stool, entirely

cased in gold, was displayed under a splendid umbrella, with drums,

sankos, horns, and various musical instruments, cased in gold, about the

thickness of cartridge paper: large circles of gold hung by scarlet

cloth from the swords of state, the sheaths as well as the handles of

which were also cased; hatchets of the same were intermixed with them:

the breasts of the Ocrahs, and various attendants, were adorned with

large stars, stools, crescents, and gossamer wings of solid gold.


We pursued our course through this blazing circle, which afforded to the

last a variety exceeding description and memory; so many splendid

novelties diverting the fatigue, heat, and pressure we were labouring

under; we were almost exhausted, however, by the time we reached the

end; when, instead of being conducted to our residence, we were desired

to seat ourselves under a tree at some distance, to receive the

compliments of the whole in our turn.


The swell of their bands gradually strengthened on our ears, the peals

of the warlike instruments bursting upon the short, but sweet responses

of the flutes; the gaudy canopies seemed to dance in the distant view,

and floated broadly as they were springing up and down in the

foreground; flags and banners waved in the interval, and the chiefs were

eminent in their crimson hammocks, amidst crowds of musquetry. They

dismounted as they arrived within thirty yards of us; their principal

captains preceded them with the gold handled swords, a body of soldiers

followed with their arms reversed, then their bands and gold canes,

pipes, and elephants tails. The chief, with a small body guard under his

umbrella, was generally supported around the waist by the hands of his

favourite slave, whilst captains holla’d, close in his ear, his warlike

deeds and (strong) names, which were reiterated with the voices of

Stentors by those before and behind; the larger party of warriors

brought up the rear. Old captains of secondary rank were carried on the

shoulders of a strong slave; but a more interesting sight was presented

in the minors, or young caboceers, many not more than five or six years

of age, who overweighed by ornaments, were carried in the same manner,

(under their canopies), encircled by all the pomp and parade of their

predecessors. Amongst others, the grandson of Cheboo was pointed out,

whom the king had generously placed on the stool of his perfidious

enemy. A band of Fetish men, or priests, wheeled round and round as they

passed with surprising velocity. Manner was as various as ornament; some

danced by with irresistible buffoonery, some with a gesture and carriage

of defiance; one distinguished caboceer performed the war dance before

us for some minutes, with a large spear, which grazed us at every bound

he made; but the greater number passed us with order and dignity, some

slipping one sandal, some both, some turning round after having taken

each of us by the hand; the attendants of others knelt before them,

throwing dust upon their heads; and the Moors, apparently, vouchsafed us

a blessing. The king’s messengers who were posted near us, with their

long hair hanging in twists like a thrum mop, used little ceremony in

hurrying by this transient procession; yet it was nearly 8 o’clock

before the king approached.


It was a beautiful star light night, and the torches which preceded him

displayed the splendor of his regalia with a chastened lustre, and made

the human trophies of the soldiers more awfully imposing. The skulls of

three Banda caboceers, who had been his most obstinate enemies, adorned

the largest drum: the vessels in which the boys dipped their torches

were of gold. He stopped to enquire our names a second time, and to wish

us good night; his address was mild and deliberate: he was followed by

his aunts, sisters, and others of his family, with rows of fine gold

chains around their necks. Numerous chiefs succeeded; and it was long

before we were at liberty to retire. We agreed in estimating the number

of warriors at 30,000.


We were conducted to a range of spacious, but ruinous buildings, which

had belonged to the son of one of the former kings, and who had recently

destroyed himself at a very advanced age, unable to endure the severity

of disgrace: their forlorn and dreary aspect bespoke the fortune of

their master, and they required much repair to defend us from the wind

and rain, which frequently ushered in the nights.


[Footnote 2: Every account I received afterwards, confirmed the boundary

of the Fantee and Assin territories to be between Mansue and Fousou;

also that Ancomassa, Accomfodey, Dansamsou, Meakirring, &c. &c. had all

been large Assin crooms, destroyed with many others in their

neighbourhood, in the Ashantee invasion of 1807.]


[Footnote 3: This is the same tree as the banian or India fig.]


[Footnote 4: Scraps of Moorish writing, as charms against evil.]


                              CHAPTER III.


                               * * * * *


   _Proceedings and Incidents until the Third Dispatch to Cape Coast

                                Castle._


                                            _Coomassie, May 22nd_, 1817.


            TO THE GOVERNOR AND COUNCIL, CAPE COAST CASTLE.


   GENTLEMEN,


THE important objects of the Mission, and the safety and prosperity of

the Settlements, have this day demanded our public dissent from our

superior officer, Mr. James; to prove the act tutelary to these objects,

can be our only justification.


The Mission has engrossed our thoughts and exertions from the moment we

were honoured by the appointments; we have felt that the credit of the

Committee, the character of the service, and the good of our country

were associated in the enterprise; and that we were personally

responsible for these important objects, to the extent of our industry,

fortitude, and ability. Our reflections naturally associated obstacles

commensurate with the importance of the objects affected; and to

overcome the former in a manner auspicious to the latter, we conceived

to be the duty expected from us, as composing a Mission originated to

remove a portion of the formidable barriers to the interior of Africa.

We anticipated prejudice, intrigue, and difficulty, as inevitable; as

obstacles to invigorate and not to sicken our exertions.


At Dadasey, on Wednesday the 14th instant, we received a present from

the King, of two ounces of gold, a sheep, and thirty yams, with a second

appointment to enter his capital the succeeding Monday. When within a

short distance, the messenger who announced us, returned, to desire us

to wait at a croom until the King had washed. We were permitted to enter

soon after two o’clock, and the King received us with the most

encouraging courtesy, and the most flattering distinction. We paid our

respects in turn, (passing along a surprising extent of line) to the

principal caboceers, many of remote, and several of Moorish territories;

and all of these encircled by retinues astonishing to us from their

numbers, order, and decorations. We were then requested to remove to a

distant tree to receive their salutes; which procession, though simply

transient, continued until past eight o’clock. It was indescribably

imposing from the variety, magnificence, and etiquette: its faint

outline in Mr. Bowdich’s report, will impart our impression of the power

and influence of the monarch we are sent to conciliate. The King as he

passed, repeated his former condescensions.


The next morning (Tuesday) the King sent to us to come and speak our

palaver in the market place, that all the people might hear it: we found

him encircled by the most splendid insignia, and surrounded by his

caboceers: we were received graciously. Mr. James, through his linguist,

declared to the King’s, (who are alone allowed to speak to him in

public) that the objects of the Mission were friendship and commerce;

impressed the consequence of our nation, and the good feelings of the

Committee and Governor towards the King, as would be testified by our

presents; he submitted the wish of a Residency, and of a direct path.

The King enquired if we were to settle the Commenda palaver; the reply

was, no! He rejoined, “that he wished the Governor of Cape Coast to

settle all palavers for him with the people of the forts, and that he

had thought we came to make all things right, and so to make friends

with the Ashantees.” The King had previously observed, as literally

rendered, that “the forts belonged to him,” meaning (as the context, and

the whole of his sentiments and conduct have confirmed) nothing

humiliating to our dignity and independence; but simply, that the

advantages derived by the Fantee nations from the forts, should now be

his. He desired the officer to be pointed out to him who was to be the

Resident; and then enquired if that was all our palaver, he was told

yes: he said he would give us his answer the next day.


Soon after we returned to our house, the King’s linguist delivered this

message. “The King knows very well the King of England has sent him

presents; if you wish to be friends with him you must bring these

presents to his own house, and shew them to him and his friends, and not

give them before all the people.” This, in our judgment was a policy, to

prevent any favourable bias of the body of caboceers and people

anticipating the King’s and his councils satisfaction of our motives and

professions.


We attended: all the curiosity the packages excited could not incline

the King to regard them, until he had desired distinctly to understand

who had sent them, the King of England, or the Governor. He was told,

the Company to whom the forts belonged under the King; the interpreter

seemed to render it the King individually; it was more intelligible, and

the agreeable impression it made was striking. The presents were

displayed. Nothing could surpass the King’s surprise and pleasure, but

his warm yet dignified avowal of his obligations. “Englishmen,” said he,

admiring the workmanship of the different articles, “know how to do

every thing proper,” turning to his favourites with a smile as

auspicious to our interests, as mortal to the intrigues of our rival.

Much of the glass was broken; Mr. James expressed his regret, and

offered to procure more; the King replied, “the path we had come was bad

and overgrown, that we had many people to look after;” and waved our

excuses with superior courtesy. He desired the linguists to say, “this

shewed him that the English were a great people, that they wished to be

friends with him, to be as one with the Ashantees; that this made him

much pleasure to see, (and to repeat again and again,) that he thanked

the King of England, the Governor at Cape Coast, and the officers who

brought the presents much, very much.” He made very liberal presents of

liquor to our people, and delivered the distinct presents to his four

principal caboceers in our sight.


We learned from Quashie, the Accra linguist, the favourable reports he

had collected through his intimacy with some of the principal men. All

the caboceers, he said, had thought we had come for bad, to spy the

country; the King thought so too a little, but much fetish was made, and

all shewed that we meant well, and now the King thought so; the mulatto

sent by General Daendels, directly after Mr. Hydecoper, and who arrived

just before us, had sent to the King for a pass to go back, and the King

told him, that he would give him this message, “that the King had

thought to do good to the Dutch, but now he sees their white mens faces,

he should do good to the English.” This mulatto man (who is not in the

service, but a free man of Elmina town) visited us afterwards, and his

complaints and sentiments confirmed these reports in our favour.


On Wednesday morning the King’s sisters (one the caboceer of the largest

Ashantee town near the frontier) paid us a visit of ceremony, and

retired to receive our’s in return; their manners were courteous and

dignified, and they were handed with a surprising politeness by the

captains in attendance.


Mr. James being indisposed, we went by invitation to see the chief

captain’s horse, when the King sent to us to say, he was walking that

way, and requested us to get our chairs and wait, that he might bid us

good morning. Directly he saw us he ordered the procession to alter its

course, and stopped to take us by the hand. The procession consisted of

about 2000 men, and was marked by all the suit and parade of royalty.

The caboceers that day in attendance appeared as warriors, being

divested of the rich silks of the preceding day; the executioner, the

master of the bands, and the cook, were in the train, with suits which

shewed the importance of their offices; the latter was preceded by a

massy service of plate. Mr. Bowdich’s report will be more particular.


The king sent his messenger this morning to repeat, that he thanked the

King of England and the Governor very much for yesterday.


The King was much pleased when Quashie, the Accra linguist (who is our

only intelligible medium,) attempted to describe the use of the sextant;

consequently, when Mr. Bowdich saw the King’s chief captain this

morning, he offered to shew it to the King, with the camera obscura and

telescope; the captain said it would please the King, and reported, that

the King was much pleased with us, that he liked to be friends with the

English, that he wished to make pleasure with us, and would send for us

by and by to do so. We have been particular in these lesser

circumstances, as they are the evidence of the King’s good feelings, and

of the fair prospect of the consummation of the Mission, superior to all

the prejudice and intrigue opposed to it.


We were sent for to the King’s house; he was only attended by his privy

counsellors; he expressed much delight at the camera obscura and

instruments. He said, “the Englishmen knew more than Dutchmen or

Danes—that black men knew nothing.” He then ordered our people to be

dismissed, said he would look at the telescope in a larger place, that

now he wished to talk with us. He again acknowledged the gratification

of Tuesday, and desired Mr. James to explain to him two notes which he

produced, written by the Governor in Chief at the request of Amooney,

King of Annamaboe, and Adokoo, Chief of the Braffoes, making over to

Saï, King of Ashantee, four ackies per month of their company’s pay, as

a pledge of their allegiance and the termination of hostilities. The

impression seemed instantly to have rooted itself in the King’s mind,

that this was the Governor’s individual act, or that he had instanced

it; his countenance changed, his counsellors became enraged, they were

all impatience, we all anxiety. “Tell the white men,” said the King,

“what they did yesterday made me much pleasure; I was glad we were to be

friends; but to day I see they come to put shame upon my face; this

breaks my heart too much. The English know, with my own powder, with my

own shot, I drove the Fantees under their forts, I spread my sword over

them, they were all killed, and their books from the fort are mine. I

can do as much for the English as the Fantees, they know this well, they

know I have only to send a captain to get all the heads of the Fantees.

These white men cheat me, they think to make ’Shantee fool; they pretend

to make friends with me, and they join with the Fantees to cheat me, to

put shame upon my face; this makes the blood come from my heart.” This

was reported by his linguist with a passion of gesture and utterance

scarcely inferior to the King’s; the irritation spread throughout the

circle, and swelled even to uproar.


Thus much was inevitable; it was one of our anticipated difficulties; it

was not a defeat, but a check; and here originates our charge against

Mr. James, whom we declare to have been deficient in presence of mind,

and not to have exerted those assurances and arguments which, with a

considerate zeal, might at least have tended to ameliorate the unjust

impression of the King, if not to have eradicated it. Mr. James said,

“the Governor of Cape Coast had done it, that he knew nothing about it,

that he was sent only to make the compliments to the King, that if the

King liked to send a messenger with him, _he was going back and would

tell the Governor all that the King said_.” This was all that was

advanced. Was this enough for such a Mission to effect? the King

repeated, “that he had expected we had _come_ to settle all palavers,

and to _stay_ and make friends with him; but we came to make a fool of

him.” The King asked him to tell him how much had been paid on these

notes since his demand—that he knew white men had large books which told

this. Mr. James said he had seen, but he could not recollect. Nothing

could exceed the King’s indignation. “White men,” he exclaimed, “know

how many months pass, how many years they live, and they know this, but

they wont tell me; could not the other white men tell me.” Mr. James

said, “we never looked in the books.”


We were not so indiscreet as to expect or wish Mr. James to commit

himself by _promising the satisfaction_ of the King’s wishes; but

dwelling on the expense and importance of the Mission, on the

expectations it had excited, and feeling the reason of the King’s

argument, that its object should be to settle all palavers if we wished

to be good friends, we conceived we but anticipated the feeling of the

Council and of the Committee, in our anxiety for Mr. James to offer to

communicate with the Governor by letter, and to wait his reply, with a

confidence that his good feeling towards the King, his instructions from

England, and his own disposition, would lead him to do every thing that

was right to please him.


Mr. James’s embarrassment had not only hurried him to extricate himself

as an individual at the expense of his own dignity and intellect, but,

which was worse, he had thrown the whole onus of this invidious

transaction on the shoulders of the Governor in chief, against whom the

King’s prejudice would be fatal to all, and whose interest in his honour

was most flattering to the King, most auspicious to us, and the hopes of

the Mission; not only the future prosperity, but the present security of

the Settlements hung upon this, and the dagger was at this moment

suspended from a cobweb. Mr. Bowdich urged this in the ear of Mr. James,

urged the danger of leaving the King thus provoked, the fatal sacrifice

of every object of the Mission, the discredit of the service, the

disgrace of ourselves; Mr. James replied, “he knew the Governor’s

private sentiments best.” The Moors of authority seized the moment, and

zealously fanned the flame which encircled us; for the King looking in

vain for those testimonies of British feeling which presence of mind

would have imposed, exclaimed, as he turned his ear from the Moors, “I

know the English come to spy the country; they come to cheat me; they

want war, they want war.” Mr. James said “No! we want trade.” The King

impatiently continued, “They join the Fantees to put shame upon my face;

I will send a captain to-morrow to take these books, and bring me the

heads of all the Fantees under the forts; the white men know I can do

this, I have only to speak to my captains. The Dutch Governor does not

cheat me; he does not shame me before the Fantees; he sends me the whole

4 oz. a month. The Danes do not shame me, and the English 4 ackies a

month is nothing to me; I can send a captain for all; they wish war.” He

drew his beard into his mouth, bit it, and rushing abruptly from his

seat exclaimed, “Shantee foo! Shantee foo! ah! ah!” then shaking his

finger at us with the most angry aspect, would have burst from us with

the exclamation, “If a black man had brought me this message, I would

have had his head cut off before me.” Mr. James was silent.


Gentlemen! imagine this awful moment, think what a fatal wound menaced

the British interests; the most memorable exertion of the Committee, the

pledge to the Government of their energies, of the zeal and capabilities

of their officers, this important and expensive Mission falling to the

ground, the sacrifice to supineness; the Settlements endangered instead

of benefited, ourselves disgraced as officers and men, our key to the

Interior shivered in the lock, and the territories of a great and

comparatively tractable prince shut against us for ever. Could we be

expected to look with indifference on these sacrifices, to risk nothing

to avert them; to be auxiliary to the triumph of the intrigues and

duplicity of our rival, which you know to have been exerted even to our

destruction? Not a moment was to be lost; Mr. Bowdich stood before the

King, and begged to be heard; his attention was arrested, the clamours

of the council gradually abated: there was no interpreter but the one

Mr. James brought from his own fort, and no alternative but to charge

him promptly in the Governor’s name, before reflection could associate

the wishes of his master, to speak truly. Mr. Bowdich continued standing

before the King, and declared, “that the Governor wished to gain his

friendship more than he could think that we were sent, not only to

compliment him, but to write what he had to say to the Governor, and to

wait to tell his answer to the King, and to do all he ordered; to settle

all palavers, and to make Ashantees and English as one before we went

back. That the Governor of Accra was sick, and in pain, and naturally

wished to go back soon, but that himself, and the other two officers

would stay with the King, until they made him sure that the Governor was

a good friend to him. That we would rather get anger, and lose every

thing ourselves, than let the King think the Governor sent us to put

shame on him; that we would trust our lives to the King, until we had

received the Governor’s letter, to make him think so; and to tell us to

do all that was right, to make the Ashantees and English as one; and

this would shew the King we did not come to spy the country, but to do

good.” Mr. Bowdich then assured Mr. James that no outrage on his dignity

was meditated; that we should continue to treat him as our superior

officer, but that we felt the present act imperative, as our duty to the

Service and our Country.


Conviction flashed across the countenance of the interpreter, and he

must have done Mr. Bowdich’s speech justice, for the cheerful aspect of

the morning was resumed in every countenance. The applause was general;

the King (who had again seated himself) held out his hand to Mr.

Bowdich, and said, “he spoke well; what he spoke was good; he liked his

palaver much.” The King’s chief linguist came forward and repeated his

commendations with the most profound bows; every look was favourable;

every where there was a hand extended. The King then instructed his

linguist to report to Mr. Bowdich, personally, his arguments respecting

the books. “That he had subdued the Fantees at the expense of much

powder and shot; and that, in consequence, all their notes were his:

that he had only to send a Captain to bring all their heads, that he did

not want to do no good, and keep the books; he would do more for the

forts than the Fantees could; that the Dutch Governor did not cheat him,

but gave the four oz. a month. That he wished to be friends with the

English; but that the 4 ackies a month put shame upon his face.” To this

Mr. Bowdich replied, that he could only say he knew the Governor would

do what was right; that he could not say more until he heard from him;

but that he would write every word the King said; and he was sure the

King would see that the Governor would do what was right. We shook hands

and retired.


All the Fantees being detained by the King, Mr. Bowdich and Mr.

Hutchison went in the evening to the chief captain to request a

messenger from the King to Cape Coast; about two hours afterwards he

reported the King’s reply almost literally as follows: “The King wishes

you good night; this is his palaver and yours, you must not speak it to

any one else, the white men come to cheat him. The King recollects the

face of the white man who spoke to him to day, he likes him much, he

wishes he would talk the palaver; the King likes the other white men who

stood up with him very much; he thinks the Governor of Accra wishes to

put all the wrong on the Governor at Cape Coast, and not to tell any

thing. The King thinks that not right, and he sees you do not like that.

You must not speak this palaver again; ’tis the King’s palaver, and

yours; the King’s captain will speak right to the King what you say, and

you shall have a messenger.”


We again affirm positively, that Mr. James made no offer to communicate

with the Governor, but spoke only of his return, which we know he was

meditating at the expense of the treaty, and every object of the

Mission.


Referring to our detail previous to the serious business of to day, you

will find every circumstance to have been encouraging, and in our

opinion, auspicious to the consummation of the Mission. Yet at that

moment, unclouded as it was, we know Mr. James, by his own confession,

to have written to head quarters with a gloom which existed only in his

own imagination; this letter did not go from the detention of the Fantee

bearers. We believe firmly, that had there been no interference on our

part at the critical moment, Mr. James would have returned forthwith to

Cape Coast, without effecting one object of the Mission, and that the

future good of the Settlements would not only have been sacrificed, but

their present security endangered.[5]


Mr. James may write that Mr. Bowdich rose with great warmth: this we

deny, and affirm that he displayed no more than a temperate zeal,

considerate in its declarations, and respectful even in its dissent from

Mr. James. The attention of the King was arrested by the novelty of a

white man addressing him in the oratorical manner of his own country,

but it was not until the linguist had conveyed the arguments, that the

King held out his hand and the applause was general. Mere observations

whispered in the ear of the linguists had lost all effect, and would not

have answered the crisis.


Mr. James has talked, and perhaps written much of the King’s suspicion,

but we must contend that much of this is misnamed, and is no more than

that deliberate policy which is a pledge of the durability of the

confidence it precedes. Certainly there has been suspicion, but not more

than must have been expected, not more than was commensurate with the

important novelty which challenged it. It has been confessed here, that

our political rival has exerted all his address to vitiate our objects

in the eyes of the King, to convince him our ostensible views were

pretences; our real ones dangerous and unjust; that we sought

sovereignty, not commerce. The Moorish chiefs and dignitaries by whom

the King is surrounded, whose influence is powerful, not only from their

rank but their repute, naturally urged these arguments against

unbelievers and competitors in trade, and their extensive intercourse

has unfortunately possessed them of facts to the point of our ambition.

Let these considerations be weighed, let our account of the King’s

general deportment be again referred to; let us impress, that he has

never once adverted to our destruction of his troops before Annamaboe,

or of the critical situation of the fort; that he has evinced a

disposition to a sound understanding, by veiling every irritating

retrospect, by acknowledging every conciliatory circumstance.


We do not presume to enter our opinions into the important question of

the King’s demand of the whole of these two notes; we have advanced

nothing but our assurance that the Governor will do what is right, and

we have pledged our lives to convince the King of this; the importance

of the Mission would have claimed a more valuable pledge.


Whilst we impress the surprising power and influence of the King, we

must do him the justice to acknowledge the convincing manner in which he

urged the injuries and forbearance which preceded the Fantee war; his

willingness to do every thing for the forts, and the conduct of the

Dutch Governor in giving him the whole of the four ounces, were

impressively and ingeniously associated.


To wear away suspicion, Mr. Bowdich has ceased his enquiries and

observations for a time. The resources for intelligence of the Interior

are infinite. Timbuctoo has been visited by most of the sojourners, and

a mass of valuable information may be gathered with caution.[6] The

eclipses of Jupiter’s satellites will be regularly observed by Mr.

Bowdich, and the mean longitude reported; the want of a good watch

imposes considerable trouble.


We have reflected on what we have done, and if we are so unfortunate as

to be visited by your and the Committee’s displeasure, we shall console

ourselves in our reluctant change of pursuit, by the satisfaction of our

own minds of the honourable zeal of our motives.


We most respectfully solicit our recall, as we cannot implicate our

character and our responsibility with Mr. James’s judgment and

perseverance in prosecuting the Mission, of the consummation of which we

cannot agree to despond. We could not reconcile ourselves to the

sacrifice of one of its important objects to our personal apprehensions

(supported as we are by authority and circumstances) whilst the

recollection of the illustrious energies of an enterprising traveller,

forlorn and destitute, appeals to our spirit, and impresses the

expectations of our country. We are, &c.


                                         (Signed)


                                                      T. EDWARD BOWDICH.


                                                      W. HUTCHISON.


                                                      HENRY TEDLIE.


                               * * * * *


                                              _Coomassie, May 24_, 1817.


            TO THE GOVERNOR AND COUNCIL, CAPE COAST CASTLE.


   GENTLEMEN,


THE act our former letter has avowed, and we would presume (after the

most deliberate reflection) to add justified, has made it our duty to

communicate (independently of Mr. James) the circumstances of the

interval we may await your pleasure.


If this duty had not been imposed on us by the act in question, the

imminent fatality engendered in the debate of to day, and quickened by

the ardor of the captains, would have demanded from our private as well

as our public feelings, the most energetic representations (as auxiliary

to those of Mr. James,) in impressing the calamities and the sacrifices

which menace the Settlements and the Mission, to secure your serious

deliberation, as the only preventive we can look to with confidence.


Yesterday we were conducted some way without the town to an assembly of

the Moorish caboceers and dignitaries, who exert every device against

us. A chapter was read from the Koran, and we were ordered to swear by

that book that we had no rogues palaver, and that we had put no poison

in the King’s liquor. We severally refused to swear on the Koran, but

offered to do so on our own prayer books. The King’s linguist mediated,

and asked us if we would only strike that book three times, and then

declare as much, because the Moors said, that book would kill us if we

lied. We did this, and were about two hours afterwards ordered to sit

without our house and receive the following present from the King:


One bullock, 2 pigs, 8 oz. of gold, for Mr. James.


One sheep, 2 oz. 4 ackies of gold, for each of us.


To each of the numerous Fantee messengers, 10 ackies of gold.


To our cooks, a large assortment of pots and country vessels, 100 large

billets of wood, 100 yams, 100 bunches of plantains, four of sugar cane,

four (24 gallon) pots of palm oil, three jars of palm wine.


To the soldiers, 10 ackies of gold.


To the Accra linguist, 10 ackies of gold.


On Saturday we were summoned to the King, and waited as usual a

considerable time in one of the outer courts of the palace, which is an

immense building of a variety of oblong courts and regular squares, the

former with arcades along the one side, some of round arches

symmetrically turned, having a skeleton of bamboo; the entablatures

exuberantly adorned with bold fan and trellis work of Egyptian

character. They have a suit of rooms over them, with small windows of

wooden lattice, of intricate but regular carved work, and some have

frames cased with thin gold. The squares have a large apartment on each

side, open in front, with two supporting pillars, which break the view

and give it all the appearance of the proscenium or front of the stage

of the older Italian theatres. They are lofty and regular, and the

cornices of a very bold cane work in alto relievo. A drop curtain of

curiously plaited cane is suspended in front, and in each we observed

chairs and stools embossed with gold, and beds of silk, with scattered

regalia. The most ornamented part of the palace is the residence of the

women. We have passed through it once; the fronts of the apartments were

closed (except two open door ways) by pannels of curious open carving,

conveying a striking resemblance at first sight to an early Gothic

screen; one was entirely closed and had two curious doors of a low arch,

and strengthened or battened with wood-work, carved in high relief and

painted red. Doors chancing to open as we passed, surprised us with a

glimpse of large apartments in corners we could not have thought of, the

most secret appeared the most adorned. In our daily course through the

palace there is always a delay of some minutes, before the door of each

of the several distinct squares is unlocked; within the inmost square is

the council chamber.


To day, after the delay of nearly an hour (which seems an indispensible

ceremony) in the outer court, (where different dignitaries were passing

to and fro with their insignia and retinues,) we were conducted to a

large yard, where the King, encircled by a varied profusion of insignia,

even more sumptuous than that we had seen before, sat at the end of two

long files of counsellors, caboceers, and captains; they were seated

under their umbrellas, composed of scarlet and yellow cloth, silks,

shawls, cottons, and every glaring variety, with carved and golden

pelicans, panthers, baboons, barrels, crescents, &c. on the top; the

shape generally a dome. Distinct and pompous retinues were placed

around, with gold canes, spangled elephants tails to brush off the

flies, gold headed swords, and embossed muskets, and many splendid

novelties too numerous but for a particular report, which will not be

neglected. Each had the dignitaries of his own province or establishment

to his right and left; and it was truly “Concilium in Concilio.” When we

recollected the insignificant, though neat appearance of the few

Ashantee towns we had passed through on the southern frontier, and even

the extent and superior character of the capital, this magnificence

seemed the effect of enchantment.


We have intruded this sketch to impress the power and resources of the

monarch we are to conciliate, and to anticipate in some degree the delay

of Mr. Bowdich’s report, the transcription of which must yield to the

present momentous communication.


The King having decided a cause then in course, by which one of his

captains was condemned to death for cowardice, ordered the question of

the Annamaboe and Braffoe notes to be resumed. The several Fantee

messengers were heard, the King of Annamaboe’s, Amooney’s, and

Payntree’s (the interior caboceer) having joined us in the path. They

appeared all equivocation and embarrassment, as Quashie’s

interpretations confirmed; they were incompetent to answer the King’s

linguists, and unable to use the few uninterrupted intervals which were

allowed them to any purpose: it seems they would not acknowledge what

the full amount of these notes was. Mr. James was asked, he said “white

men’s heads were not like black men’s, and he could not recollect; but

he thought 4 oz. and 2 oz.” He did not offer to learn from the Governor.

Several impassioned harangues were made by the King’s linguists and

counsellors: the King said, “he had 4 oz. from Elmina, and 2 oz. from

English Accra; was it not putting shame upon him to send him 4 ackies

from Cape Coast?” The Cape Coast messenger (Quashie Tom had absented

himself) spoke again with great trepidation; the King could not conceal

his emotions; his counsellors became clamorous; in an instant there was

a flourish of all the horns; all the captains rose and seized their gold

headed swords from their attendants; the head general snatched Mr.

Tedlie’s from his scabbard; numerous canopies crowded one upon the other

in the background, as if some considerable personages had arrived; there

was nothing but commotion, wrath, and impatience. The captains, old and

young, rushed before the King, and exclaimed, as Quashie reported, (who

seems to have been afraid to tell us all, and was restrained by Quamina)

“King, this shames you too much; you must let us go to night and kill

all the Fantees, and burn all the towns under the forts.” They then

presented themselves successively with their bands of music and

retinues, and bowing before the King, received his foot upon their

heads; each then directed his sword to the King (who held up the two

first fingers of his right hand) and swore by the King’s head, that they

would go with the army that night, and bring him the books, and the

heads of all the Fantees. Each captain made the oath impressive in his

own peculiar manner; some seriously, some by ridicule, at our expense,

and that of the Fantees, pointing at our heads and ears, and

endeavouring to intimidate us by the most insolent action and gesture as

they held out their swords. The old general (Apokoo) who swore the last,

after he had done so in the most expressive manner, threw Mr. Tedlie’s

sword to him, over the heads of the people with contemptuous defiance.

The number was so great, that we thought this awful ceremony would never

finish.


The King left the council a short time. In the interval, Quamina Bwa

(our guide) told Accra Quashie to beg Mr. James to speak to the King

when he came back, and try and appease him. Mr. James did so, but

without the zeal, presence of mind, or argument the crisis demanded; it

was not adequate even to ameliorate the King’s impression of the

Governor and the English; it was no more than he said at first. The King

took not the least notice of it, but declared angrily, that “if he did

not see white men’s faces he would cut off the heads of every Fantee

messenger on the spot.” Some sheep and gold were then brought forward

and presented to the Captains, and the King rose abruptly from his

chair. In this anxious moment we reflected that the mulatto of General

Daendels had a long audience of the King just before we were received;

no resource was to be left untried, that was manly and appropriate. Mr.

Bowdich stepped before the King, and declared through the linguist,

“that he wished to speak what he knew would make the King think that the

Governor would do him right, and was his good friend.” The King said he

would hear him speak in the house; we retired amidst the insults and

menaces of the assembly.


About two hours after, we were summoned, and, as is the etiquette, kept

some time in waiting; in this interval, Mr. James said that our

situation being very critical, it was a pity any difference should be

observed, and that he thought it much better to be reconciled. Mr.

Bowdich replied, that he could not think it possible our sentiments to

be delivered to the King could differ at such a moment; that if they did

we should assimilate ours to his as much as possible; but feeling the

necessity for the greatest energy, for every address and argument for

the conviction of the King, we must, for the public good, continue our

assumption of the privilege of strengthening his declarations by our own

until our recall, that we should be tender of his dignity, but that it

being a difference on a point of public duty, we could not compound it,

but would take the consequences. We were received; the King’s aspect was

stern; he prefaced that “he did not wish to make war with the English;

but that the 4 ackies a month shamed him too much; that the captains

said to him, King! they cheat you, they put shame on you; we will go to

night and bring you the heads of all the Fantees; that he was forced to

say to them, I beg your pardon, but as I see the white men’s faces, I

beg you to stay till to-morrow, when they can write to the Governor, and

they will tell me themselves what he says; then if he does not send me

Amooney’s and the Braffoes books, you shall go and kill all; that he had

been obliged afterwards to dash them sheep and gold to make them stay

until the white men got the Governor’s letter.” Mr. James assured the

King “that the King of England and the Governor wished to be friends

with him, to do all that was right; and he thought in his own mind that

the Governor would give up the books.” The King took no notice, and

continued serious: the moment called for the most energetic appeal to

his reason, for every imposing argument and circumstance. There was a

long pause; Mr. Bowdich rose, and charged Mr. James’s linguist to

interpret truly. We took the precaution of making notes of this speech,

feeling we should be particular where we pledge our honour, and

volunteer our affidavit; it was as follows.


“We swore yesterday as the King wished, to day we wish to swear as we

should before our own King.” The King held up the two first fingers of

his right hand as he did to the captains. “We swear” (presenting our

swords and kissing the hilt, as the most imposing form that occurred to

us) “by our God, and by our King, and we know the Governor of Accra will

do the same, that we mean no bad to the King, that the King of England

and the Company ordered the Governor to send us to make the Ashantees

and English as one, that we are sure the Governor will do the King

right, and that when we write him all the King says, we will write also

that we think the King’s palaver good. We were sent to make the English

and Ashantees as one, because our’s is the greatest white, your’s the

greatest black nation, and when two great nations are friends, it makes

good. I came out in the ship that was sent to tell the Governor this,

and when he heard it, he said it gave him very much pleasure. The King

of England and the Company thought the Governor should send to the King,

to send some of his great men to Cape Coast, that we might be safe; but

the Governor said, no! there was no occasion, and wrote to the King and

the Company that he could trust all his officers in Ashantee, because

the King’s honour made them safe, so we came without sending, because we

knew the King was our true friend.


“The Governor wished always to do the King right, but the Fantees never

would tell him what was right, so he wrote to the King of England to

send him some presents, that he might send his own officers to the King,

and hear properly from the King’s own mouth what was right, because the

Fantees never would tell him what was true, or what the King said. When

the Governor reads what we shall write him, then he will know the truth

for the first time. We shall stay to make the Ashantees and English one,

and we pledge our lives to the King, that we speak a proper palaver, and

when we speak true before God and the King we cannot fear.”


There were repeated and general applauses as each sentence was

interpreted; the King smiled, and desired his linguist to say to Mr.

Bowdich as Quashie interpreted, “The King likes you, you speak a proper

good palaver, you speak like a man, the King wishes to be a friend to

white men; he thinks white men next to God.” Here the King raised his

hands to heaven, and then covering his face, Quashie continued to

interpret. “The King thanks God and his own fetish, that they have sent

him white men to talk proper like this to him, and when you three white

men go back to Cape Coast, and the Governor has bad put into his head,

and think you did wrong, then if you want any thing to eat, send a

messenger to him and he will send you plenty, for the King thinks you do

right to God and him, and to your King, and to the Governor, and that

you will get much honour when you go back; so the King thanks you, and

says you speak well.” The King then asked Mr. James if he would swear on

his sword like us, as we said; Mr. James did so. The King made an

observation which it seems we cannot convey to you in its full force, or

nearer than, that he liked the three white men because they always stood

up to speak, and pushed forward to get what they wanted. Many auxiliary

observations were afterwards offered casually by each of us, to confirm

his change of sentiment. The Fantee linguists attempted to intimidate

the linguist Quashie of Accra, but ineffectually; this man is invaluable

from his influence and intelligence, he is our only safe medium, and

interprets to the King anxiously and impressively.


The King appeared much pleased, and made us a long speech. “The King

says the Fantees are all rogues, the Governor knows that very well; the

King thinks they always put bad palaver in the Governor’s head, he

always tells his captains so; he is sure you come to do him right. The

King wishes all good for the English; he swears by God and by the

fetish, that if the English could know how the Fantees serve him, and

all the bad they do, they would say his palaver was good. The King

speaks true.” He then gave us an outline of the Fantee war, which must

have convinced even the most prejudiced, of his injuries and

forbearance, and their injustice and cruelty.


The King says, “if the English trust to him, he will take more care of

the forts than the Fantees can, he will do them great good, he does not

want to do nothing. He will send the English his trade; he will send

them good gold like what he wears himself, (shewing his armlets,) not

bad gold like he knows the Fantees make, his people don’t know how to do

that, the Fantees do it in their own houses before they give it to white

men. If at any time the English in the forts are in want of any thing to

eat, and send to him, he will send them every thing. To morrow is

Sunday, but the next day is Monday, then he will give you a proper

messenger.”


We cannot do justice to the King’s sentiments either in detail or in

expression; they were incredibly liberal, and would have ennobled the

most civilized monarch; they seemed to break the spell which has shut

the Interior. He begged us to drink with him, and Mr. James agreed in

the toast of “May the Ashantees and English always be one;” it pleased

him, and he begged us to touch his glass with ours. He then turned

suddenly to the Fantee messengers (who were trembling in the rear) and

said, “you made me very angry with you, and I am very angry with you,

but never mind, come and drink some of my liquor.”


Our critical situation demands the delivery of our sentiments on the

subject of these notes; we do so with diffidence and respect. The

services of the Braffoes, who hold the one, are merely nominal, their

enmity nugatory from their political situation; the issuing of a fresh

note to Amooney will be but a small addition to the expenditure, and

even the expense of renewing them both cannot be weighed with the

prevention of another Fantee war, of the destruction of a whole people,

and the ruin of our Settlements in their defence, with the defeat of the

intrigue and devices of our rival, and the acquisition of the confidence

of a powerful and liberal monarch, whose influence may perfect the views

of the British Government on the Interior. We hail the circumstances as

auspicious, even in the present serious moment.


Mr. James confesses that he desponds of consummating the objects of the

Mission; we do not; we would be responsible for all of them, but we

diffidently await your decision. We must claim this momentary calm of

the King to ourselves, because it only affords us the credit, or rather

the justification of having done our duty, which we are resolute in

repeating Mr. James has not. What has been said through Mr. Bowdich is

here reported faithfully; we have not committed the Governor or

ourselves.


Gentlemen, our situation is critical; if your answer determines the King

on war, we are his prisoners; if, as we cannot doubt, the valour of our

countrymen again retards his progress by defences as memorable as that

of Annamaboe, we may be the victims of an irritated soldiery, though we

feel it would be with the reluctance of a generous prince, who is not

independent, but, unfortunately, controlled by a military despotism,

which deposed his brother and invested him.


But, Gentlemen, if in your better knowledge and reflection, you cannot

consistently with your honour and your trust, meet the King’s demand,

the history of our country has fortified our minds with the illustrious

example of a Vansittart, and his colleagues, who were situated as we

are, when the dawn of British intercourse in India was scarcely more

advanced than its dawn in Africa now; and their last request to their

Council is our present conclusion to you—“Do not put our lives in

competition with the honour and interests of our country.”


                                            We are, &c. &c.


                                           (Signed)   T. EDWARD BOWDICH.


                                                      W. HUTCHISON.


                                                      HENRY TEDLIE.


                                            _Coomassie, May 28th_, 1817.


                      TO THE GOVERNOR AND COUNCIL.


   GENTLEMEN,


ON Sunday the King visited us at our quarters, and expressed much

gratification with the trifles we presented him individually, and our

solicitude in explaining some plates of botanical and natural history,

which he sends for frequently.


On Monday we had a public audience before the Captains, (whose ill-will

has been acknowledged,) when two messengers were ordered to accompany

one of ours to Cape Coast, with the letters to the Governor, and were

impressively sworn; they received their instructions in a speech from

the linguist of nearly two hours; it seemed to be intended to conciliate

the Captains at the same time.


In the afternoon the King sent for us again, and said he wished to

dictate a letter to the Governor. Mr. James wrote the sense of the

King’s expressions, but was obliged to leave off from indisposition. The

King would not trust it out of his hands. Yesterday evening it was

concluded, when the King proposed to make his mark, and insisted on

repeating it in the direction. We have taken the pains to preserve this

curious letter verbatim, which from its length, and our constant

interruption, we are compelled to reserve with many curious particulars

for the General Report.


We are anxiously waiting a summons to hand our dispatches to the

messenger. Nine days are allowed for the journey to Cape Coast, and nine

for the return. The whole time has been gradually extended, by intreaty

of the Fantee messengers, from eighteen to thirty days.


Mr. Hutchison is ill with a bilious attack, and several of the people

with a fever and dysentery. The heat is very powerful here, but Mr.

Bowdich and Mr. Tedlie continue in excellent health.


We would recommend the sending up a common green silk umbrella, and a

Company’s dirk, as presents to the King’s favourite nephew.


Our confinement to the house is rather irksome; we are not allowed to

walk in the town without Captains accompanying us.


12 o’clock. The King sent to say Mr. Bowdich must come to the palace,

and mount the chief captain’s horse, and shew him how Englishmen ride.

Mr. Bowdich went, and by the King’s desire gallopped up and down the

opposite hill. The King expressed great anxiety when the horse was made

to play his tricks; and when Mr. Bowdich persevered, and made him gallop

back and alighted, the King sent him word that “he rode like a proper

man, that he stayed on the horse well, and made him do proper.”


4 o’clock. The King sent for us at two, to make some additions to the

letter, and to seal it in his presence. A long prayer was uttered by a

Moor after the sealing of the letter, and we were called back to be

again impressed with the example and justice of the Dutch as regards the

books. Mr. Hutchison’s illness prevented his attendance to day. The

messengers are to go to night.


May 29th, 3 p.m. The messengers and the Fantee bearers, have been

delayed in consequence of the death of a person of rank, and their

assistance in the custom. I am now assured that they will leave

Coomassie at 4 o’clock.


In reply to the request we urged to Mr. James, that he would dismiss our

hammock men, as they had been of so little service to us in coming up,

and were a considerable expense; he impressed that it would be contrary

to your instructions.


Only one message from the King to day, and that a private one to Mr.

Bowdich, with permission for him to ride: he went all round the town,

which he considers to be about three miles in circumference: the King

afterwards sent him word, that to-morrow he must ride on a cloth only,

as he had heard the English did.


                                        We are, &c. &c.


                                               (Signed)   T. E. BOWDICH.


                                                          H. TEDLIE.


P.S. Mr. James had a severe relapse of fever last night, and was very

ill this morning; at 10 o’clock a.m. he had the cold bath, and some

febrifuge medicine. Mr. Hutchison is rather better, the soldiers also,

but the hammock men continue much the same.


                               * * * * *


SAÏ TOOTOO QUAMINA, _King of Ashantee and its Dependencies, to_ JOHN

HOPE SMITH, _Esquire, Governor in Chief of the British Settlements on

the Gold Coast of Africa._


THE King sends his compliments to the Governor, he thanks the King of

England and him very much for the presents sent to him, he thinks them

very handsome. The King’s sisters and all his friends have seen them,

and think them very handsome, and thank him. The King thanks his God and

his fetish that he made the Governor send the white men’s faces for him

to see, like he does now; he likes the English very much, and the

Governor all the same as his brother.


The King of England has made war against all the other white people a

long time, and killed all the people all about, and taken all the towns,

French, Dutch, and Danish, all the towns, all about. The King of

Ashantee has made war against all the people of the water side, and all

the black men all about, and taken all their towns.


When the King of England takes a French town, he says, “come, all this

is mine, bring all your books, and give me all your pay,” and if they

don’t do it, does the Governor think the King of England likes it?[7] So

the King has beat the Fantees now two times, and taken all their towns,

and they send and say to him, you are a great King, we want to serve

you; but he says, Hah! you want to serve me, then bring all your books,

what you get from the forts, and then they send him four ackies, this

vexes him too much.


The first time he made war against the Fantees, two great men in Assin

quarrelled, so half the people came to Ashantee, half went to Fantee.

The King said, what is the reason of this, so he sent his gold swords

and canes to know why they did so, and the Fantees killed his messengers

and took all their gold.[8] After they fought with the Elminas and

Accras, the Fantees sent word to the King they would serve him; the King

sent word to the Assins, if it is true that the Fantees want to serve

me, let me hear; after that they sent to say yes! they tired of

fighting, and wanted to serve him, he said, well, give me some gold,

what you get from the books, and then you shall hear what palaver I have

got in my head, and we can be friends; then he sent some messengers, and

after they waited more than two years, the Fantees sent word back, no!

we don’t want to serve the King, but only to make the path open and get

good trade: this vexed the King too much.


Then the Fantees sent to a strong man, Cudjoe Coomah, and said, “come,

let us put our heads together against the King;” after that, when the

King heard this, he sent one, not a great man, but his own slave, and

said, well you will do, go kill all the people, all the Aquapims, and

Akims, and all; and so he killed all, and after he killed all he came

and told him.


When he sent against Akim, the people in Akim sent word, that they told

their head men not to vex the King, but they would not mind them, so he

killed the head people, and the others begged his pardon.


When the King went to fight with the Fantees they sent this saucy

word—we will kill you and your people, and stand on you; then they did

not kill one Ashantee captain, but the King killed all the Fantee

captains and people. They do not stand on him.


That time, after the King fought, all the Fantees sent word, well we

will serve you, but you must not send more harm to hurt us, we don’t

want to fight more, but to make good friends with you. Then the King

said, what caboceer lives at Cape Coast and Annamaboe, what books they

get from the forts, let them send all, and then we can be friends. And

the King sent word too, if my messengers go to Cape Coast fort, and if

they bring pots of gold, and casks of goods, then I can’t take that,

_but I must have the books_.


After that the King sent word to the Governor of Cape Coast and the

Governor of Annamaboe, well! you know I have killed all the Fantees, and

I must have Adocoo’s and Amooney’s books, and I can make friends with

you, good brother and good heart; but now they send four ackies, that is

what makes the King’s heart break out when he looks on the book and

thinks of four ackies, and his captains swear that the Fantees are

rogues and want to cheat him. When the white men see the Fantees do

this, and the English officers bring him this four ackies, it makes him

get up very angry, but he has no palaver with white men.


All Fantee is his, all the black mans country is his; he hears that

white men bring all the things that come here; he wonders they do not

fight with the Fantees, for he knows they cheat them. Now he sees white

men, and he thanks God and his fetish for it.


When the English made Apollonia fort he fought with the Aowins, the

masters of that country, and killed them; then he said to the caboceer,

I have killed all your people, your book is mine; the caboceer said,

true! so long as you take my town, the book belongs to you.


He went to Dankara and fought, and killed the people, then he said; give

me the book you get from Elmina, so they did, and now Elmina belongs to

him.[9]


The English fort at Accra gave a book to an Akim caboceer, called

Aboigin Adjumawcon. The King killed him and took the book. The Dutch

fort gave a book to another Akim caboceer, Curry Curry Apam. The Danish

fort gave a book to another Akim caboceer, Arrawa Akim; the King killed

all and took their books.


This King, Saï, is young on the stool, but he keeps always in his head

what old men say, for it is good, and his great men and linguists tell

it him every morning. The King of England makes three great men, and

sends one to Cape Coast, one to Annamaboe, and one to Accra; Cape Coast

is the same as England. The King gets two ounces from Accra every moon,

and the English wish to give him only four ackies for the big fort at

Cape Coast, and the same for Annamboe; do white men think this proper?


When the King killed the Dankara caboceer and got two ounces from

Elmina, the Dutch Governor said, this is a proper King, we shall not

play with him, and made the book four ounces. The King has killed all

the people, and all the forts are his; he sent his captains to see white

men, now he sees them, and thanks God and his fetish. If the path was

good when the captains went, the King would have gone under the forts

and seen all the white men. The Ashantees take good gold to Cape Coast,

but the Fantees mix it; he sent some of his captains like slaves to see,

and they saw it; ten handkerchiefs are cut to eight, water is put to

rum, and charcoal to powder, even for the King; they cheat him, but he

thinks the white men give all those things proper to the Fantees.


The King knows the King of England is his good friend, for he has sent

him handsome dashes; he knows his officers are his good friends, for

they come to see him. The King wishes the Governor to send to Elmina to

see what is paid him there, and to write the King of England how much,

as the English say their nation passes the Dutch; he will see by the

books given him by both forts. If the King of England does not like

that, he may send him himself what he pleases, and then Saï can take it.


He thanks the King and Governor for sending four white men to see him.

The old King wished to see some of them, but the Fantees stop it. He is

but a young man and sees them, and so again he thanks God and his

fetish.


Dictated in the presence of,


    T. EDWARD BOWDICH,


    WILLIAM HUTCHISON,


    HENRY TEDLIE.


                               * * * * *


May 30. Apokoo sent us a present of 30 ackies of gold and some fruits.


June 1. The King sent to desire Mr. Tedlie to bring his instruments and

medicines, and explain their uses to him; he was shrewdly inquisitive,

and presented Mr. Tedlie with 6 ackies of gold in approbation of his

intelligence.


June 4. The King paid us a visit at our quarters, and expressed himself

highly gratified with some botanical engravings: he said white men tried

to know so much they would spoil their heads by and by. We were allowed

to take a walk in the town to day, in charge of two captains. We had

scarcely passed the palace when two men were decapitated for cowardice:

three others had been executed during the night.


June 5. Bakkee, to whom our house formerly belonged, had been sent the

second in command of the army with which Appia Danqua invaded Fantee the

second time, in pursuit of the Akim and Aquapim revolters. Wearied of

the procrastination and labours of the campaign, he inconsiderately

observed to a public messenger, that, as the King had declared when he

invaded Fantee in person, that he would have the head of every Fantee

caboceer, and yet returned with a part only; so he could not be expected

to forego the enjoyment of the riches and luxuries of his home, until

every revolter was killed. On his return to the capital without leave,

he was charged with this, and not denying it, was stripped of all his

property, and hung himself. Aboidwee our present house master was raised

to Bakkee’s stool, or seat in council, to which 1700 retainers are

attached.


June 9. The King sent us two sheep and a large quantity of fruit; his

nephew also sent us a sheep.


June 11. We were invited to attend the King’s levee, on the Adaï custom,

and were presented with a flask of rum and a fat sheep. This walk was a

great relief, for the longest court in our quarters was not more than 14

feet.


June 12. The King sent us a large Hio sheep to look at; it measured 4½

feet from the head to the insertion of the tail, which was two feet

long, its height was three feet, and it was covered with coarse shaggy

hair.


June 13. The King sent for us late at night; he assured us he wished to

think well of the English; and that if Cape Coast was not so far off, he

should send messengers daily to wish the Governor good morning, but the

Crambos (Moors) and his great men thought we came to do bad, and spy the

country; so he sent for us when it was dark, that they might not know

it. He had only two persons with him. Mr. James was too ill to attend.


17. The King sent a present to our quarters of


     2 ounces of gold to the officers.


    20 ackies to our people.


    10 ackies to our linguists.


     1 hog, 1 sheep, and a profusion of plantains and oranges.


This was his reproof of a disgraceful attempt to borrow money of him for

our subsistence; of which Mr. Hutchison, Mr. Tedlie, and myself, had

publicly disclaimed our knowledge and sanction. Nothing could be more

injurious to our dignity.


18th. Mr. Tedlie having ventured to walk a few yards without the town,

was arrested by a captain, with about 100 followers, who detained him in

his house whilst a message was sent to the King, who desiring Mr. Tedlie

to be brought before him, enquired if he had his small box (compass) in

his pocket, and finding he had not, affected to reprove the captain

severely, for supposing either of us could wish to run away, whilst the

King was our friend. After this we seldom went out.


21st. Bundahenna, one of the King’s uncles, begged him for permission to

go and make custom for some relatives whom he had lost in the last

Fantee war, as he feared their spirits were beginning to trouble him.

The King subscribed four ounces of gold, two ankers of rum, one barrel

of powder, and four human victims for sacrifice, towards this custom. We

received a present of 11 ackies of gold from Quatchie Quofies household.


26th. We received a present from a captain called Oöossa Cudjo, of 10

ackies of gold, and another from Jessinting, of the same quantity, a

sheep and some plantains.


28th. The King sent us a large quantity of plantains and oranges.

Apokoo, one of the four greatest men in the kingdom, hearing his

mother’s sister was dead, killed a slave before his house, and proceeded

to her croom to sacrifice many more, and celebrate her funeral custom;

but, when he found, on opening her boxes, that the old woman from her

dislike of him, had thrown almost all her rock gold into the river, and

that he should only inherit a number of hungry slaves, he sacrificed but

one more victim, and made but a very mean custom.


29th. Attended the King’s levee, and were presented with a flask of rum,

and a fat sheep. The King sent us word that he would be glad to let us

walk out, but there were many bad people who would kill us if they

could. We were gratified by an invitation to visit Odumata, one of the

four aristocrats; he begged us to drink palm wine with him, and ordered

a large jar of it to be sent to our servants. He told us he was the

first captain who fought with the English at Annamaboe; and that if the

books were not sent, he would be the first to do so again; he asked us

if we would take him to England to see our King, and engage to bring him

back again; for, having sold an immense number of captives as slaves, he

expected some of them might recognise him, and call out to the King of

England to stop him, because he had sent them out of their own country.


July 2. A girl was beheaded for insolence to one of the King’s sons, and

a man for transgressing the law by picking up gold which he had dropped

in the public market place, where all that falls is allowed to

accumulate until the soil is washed on state emergencies.


3rd. This morning one of the King’s sons (about 10 years of age) shot

himself: his funeral custom was celebrated in the afternoon, and a smart

fire of musquetry was kept up until sun-set, amidst dancing, singing,

and revelry; two men and one girl were sacrificed, and their trunks and

heads were left in the market place till dark. The mother of this child,

a favourite wife of the King’s, having added crime to a continued

perversity of conduct, had been put to death; the boy was banished the

King’s presence from that time. This morning he had stolen into the

palace for the first time, and the King desiring him to be removed,

observing that he had, doubtless, as bad a head towards him as his

mother had shewn; he replied, that if he could not be allowed to come

and look at his father, he had better die; half an hour afterwards he

destroyed himself privately, by directing a blunderbuss into his mouth,

and discharging it with his foot. The keeper of the royal cemetry was

this day imprisoned. His wife was soon after charged by the council with

making fetish to turn the King’s head; she replied that it meant no more

than to make the King think better of her husband; but they insisted

that she invoked the Fetish to make the King mad, and she was executed.


5th. A loud shout from our people announced the return of the messengers

from Cape Coast Castle, after an absence of thirty-eight days.


[Footnote 5: “The government of the country is a military despotism, and

I have this day received private information, that it is already

settled, that if the refusal of the notes occasions a war, and any one

is hurt or killed by the forts, our lives will be the forfeit.” Mr.

James’s Dispatch.]


[Footnote 6: “In the present suspicious state of the King’s mind

respecting us, I fear it would be impolitic to make the enquiries you

ordered in your instructions. I think it will be more prudent to leave

them to time. Mr. H. if he remains, will be able, from time to time, to

obtain such information as they can give, without creating that

suspicion which would certainly arise from any questions put at the

present moment. I have kept Mr. H’s hammock men, as it is yet uncertain

whether he will remain.” Mr. James’s Dispatch.]


[Footnote 7: This is an extraordinary impression, that all the towns in

Europe are supported like those under the forts, holding notes from

their governments for annual stipends.]


[Footnote 8: Here the King’s linguist ceased, and by his desire

requested us to repeat all the King had said, he was much pleased with

our accuracy, and begged us to take some refreshment, (spirits and palm

wine were introduced in silver bowls) fearing he had kept us too long

without eating, and, would continue the letter to-morrow. He locked up

what had been written, and heard it read again the next day, before his

linguists continued.]


[Footnote 9: The King always spoke of the acts of all his ancestors as

his own.]


                              CHAPTER III.


                               * * * * *


   _Proceedings and Incidents until the Third Dispatch to Cape Coast

                                Castle._


                                     _Cape Coast Castle, June 21_, 1817.


   SIR,


MR. JAMES being ordered to return here as soon as possible, will deliver

you his instructions, and you will immediately on receipt of this

letter, take upon yourself the management of the Mission. I have every

reliance on your prudence and discretion, and still firmly hope that the

termination of the Embassy will be attended with success, and that the

sanguine expectations which we have entertained as to the result of it,

will not be disappointed.


The King has received a very erroneous impression of the affair of the

Fantee notes, which I regret to hear was the cause of a serious

disturbance: I am glad however to find that by your prompt mode of

conduct, you were in some measure able to repress the unfavourable bias

it seems to have occasioned, and I have no doubt that an explanation of

the circumstance will effectually remove any remaining prejudice. This

transaction was entirely between the Ashantee messengers and Fantees,

negociated, and determined on by them at Abrah, and afterwards ratified

here by their mutual consent. Hearing that messengers from the King were

at Abrah, I invited them down, wishing through their medium to

communicate with him concerning the conveyance of the presents I had

received from the Committee. After some delay they arrived, and on their

first interview made known their errand to the Fantees, and the manner

it had been arranged, applying at the same time for two notes to be made

out in favour of Zey, at four ackies each, which were to be deducted

from the notes of Amooney and Aduecoe; not being perfectly satisfied

from the representation of these people as to the justness of the claim,

I delayed complying until it was stated to be a pledge of good faith and

allegiance on the part of the Fantees, and a confirmation of the final

adjustment of all differences between the two parties, and as such they

were given them. The nature of the claim having been fully and

satisfactorily explained, I have no hesitation in complying with the

wishes of the King; and this I do the more readily, knowing that by the

extension of his authority, good order and subjection will be better

preserved.


This will, I hope, evince to the King my friendly intention towards him;

and you will impress upon his mind, that it is my earnest desire to

cultivate his friendship, the establishment of which will be mutually

beneficial; and in order that the union between us may be more closely

cemented, I am particularly desirous that Mr. Hutchison be permitted to

reside at Ashantee, which will be the means of preventing any

interruption to the good understanding which, before you leave, will, I

hope, be firmly settled.


I have no objection to you returning by way of Warsaw, but your

undertaking the journey on foot, I am apprehensive, you will find too

fatiguing. The hammock-men are engaged for the trip, therefore the only

additional expense will be their subsistence; I however leave it to you

to dismiss them or not.


The Accra linguist being so very useful, and the only man who will

interpret faithfully, you will retain him until you return.


I have sent you, by the King’s messenger, 40 oz. of gold to defray your

expenses; should any loan have been granted by the King, you will of

course repay him.


I send you a piece of muslin and 10 danes for presents to the Moors,

whose friendship it will be highly necessary to conciliate. I have also

at your request, sent a dirk and umbrella, intended for the King’s chief

captain and his favourite nephew.


Quamina, the Ashantee captain at Abrah, has refused to allow any letters

to pass that place which may be given in charge to Ashantee traders, on

the plea that by so doing he would incur the displeasure of the King;

who, he says, expects that especial messengers will be engaged here to

proceed with all letters to the capital. Not long ago a trader who had

received a letter, was detained by him at Abrah, and the letter

returned. The expense of employing messengers here on every occasion

would be material, which is quite unnecessary, as opportunities almost

daily occur for forwarding letters by the different traders going from

hence. I therefore hope your representation of this affair to the King,

will induce him to countermand his orders to Quamina, if any such have

been given him.


                                           I am, Sir,


                                      your most obedient Servant,


                                                        JOHN HOPE SMITH.


_To Thomas Edward Bowdich, Esq._


JOHN HOPE SMITH, _Esquire, Governor in Chief of the British Forts and

Settlements on the Gold Coast of Africa, to_ SAÏ TOOTOO QUAMINA, _King

of Ashantee._


   SIR,


I HAVE received your letter of the 26th ult. and am happy to find that

you are sincerely desirous of cultivating the friendship of the British

nation. Both inclination and duty urge me to reciprocate the sentiments

expressed by you, and I shall be anxious at all times to promote the

harmony and good understanding which, I hope, will now be established

between us respectively, and which cannot fail to be mutually

advantageous.


I regret to find there has been so much trouble about the Fantee notes,

and I am sorry you did not apply to me in the first instance, as the

affair should have been settled immediately to your satisfaction; but I

knew not of it, except from the Fantees having begged me to take four

ackies per month from each note, which they said they had agreed for

with your messengers at Abrah.


I observe by the many instances quoted in your letter, that the notes of

conquered countries have been transferred to your ancestors, therefore

it shall be the same on the present occasion. Herewith I send you two

notes, one for two oz. per month, formerly held by Amooney, also one

from the caboceer at Abrah for two oz, the latter was only 12 ackies per

month, and I have added 1 oz. 4 to it. These, and the notes you hold

from Accra, will make your Company’s pay six oz. per month, which shall

be regularly paid at the Castle.


I hope my ready compliance with your wishes will convince you of the

good will of the British nation, but I have every reason to believe that

attempts have been made to prejudice you against it, however your own

good understanding will readily suggest to you that the only motive is

jealousy in trade.


The conduct of the English you will always find very different; they

enter into fair competition with the other European residents here, but

they never, by clandestine means or false assertions, endeavour to

injure their character with the natives of this country.


I have learned with regret that the people of Elmina are using their

influence to induce you to make a palaver with the Commendas. They are a

mere handful of people, extremely poor and not worth your notice;

besides they are under my protection, therefore I hope you will not

think further of the affair, and I shall consider your compliance in

this instance, as the greatest possible proof of the sincerity of your

intentions towards the English.


I wish you health and happiness, and I hope you will reign many years,

enjoying the love of your subjects, and the respect of all the Europeans

resident in this country.


                                       I am, Sir,


                                           your faithful friend,


                                               (Signed)    J. H. SMITH.


_Cape Coast Castle, 20th June_, 1817.


P.S. The abolition of the slave trade was an act of the King and the

Parliament in England, in which the government in this country had no

concern.


                                              _Coomassie, July 9_, 1817.


        TO JOHN HOPE SMITH, ESQ. GOVERNOR IN CHIEF, &c. &c. &c.


   SIR,


THE messengers returned on Saturday the 5th instant.


To be confirmed by your approbation, in the opinion that my zeal for the

public good had not exceeded my duty, is a most flattering satisfaction.

The appointment you have conferred on me, is an acknowledgment so far

transcending my conduct, that it must stimulate every ability to exert

itself for the success of the Mission, to justify such an honourable

distinction.


The box containing the letters was opened in the King’s presence, but

being engaged in a custom on the death of a son, he deferred the reading

of your letter, retaining it with the notes. His acknowledgments of your

justice were associated with the declaration, that, although you had

sent him the notes, still, if I could not fortify him with the prices of

the various articles to be received in payment, you would have it in

your power (though he did not suspect you) to reduce the intrinsic of

the whole, to that of the moiety rejected. The proposition of the same

prices as those attached to the Accra note, was annihilated by the

argument, that Accra was a small fort, and not like Cape Coast or

_Elmina_. So much stress was laid on the instance of the latter, that I

felt called upon to declare, as the only striking conviction, that you

did not wish, in the payment of these notes, to treat the King like a

trader, and therefore would not allow the Elmina Governor to act more

liberally in prices than yourself: the conviction was entire and

instantaneous.


The next audience did not take place until Monday, Mr. James being

present. I did justice to the utmost of my ability to your impressive

letter; the effect was honourable to you, and encouraging to myself; the

King ordered me to take his hand, in his sensibility to the strong

appeal of the several paragraphs, and again at the conclusion, as a

pledge of his cordial satisfaction of the whole; his linguist followed

his example, (as did the whole council) when he laid his fore-finger on

his head and breast, as the invocation to Heaven for the vouchsafement

of your several good wishes, as I concluded with them. I was reluctantly

compelled to yield a minor object to a custom consecrated by their

constitution. The laws of the three first Kings (who were brothers, and

cotemporary leaders of the colony, whose conquests established the

Empire) are sacred; and it was a law of Saï Cudjo, the younger brother,

and the grandfather of the present King, which granted to particular

captains the honourable patent of receiving the pay of small forts,

distinctly, each being responsible for his separate duties to his

settlement. If this law were not inviolable, the King pleads, that it

would be an invidious act, and unjust to the merits of the Captain of

English Accra, (Asquah Amanquah) to remove the payment of the Accra note

to Cape Coast; but as the other appointments originate in him, he will

respect your wish, by constituting one captain to receive both the Abra

and Annamaboe notes at Cape Coast. He enquired if it was your wish that

no Ashantee trader should go to Accra? I replied no! you were only

desirous to induce as many as possible to come to Cape Coast.


The Cape Coast linguists, and our guide, Quamina Bwa, confirmed your

report of the conduct of Quamina Bootaqua, the captain now at Payntree,

in the negociation of the notes; it excited the greatest surprise and

indignation; his interception of letters was disclaimed, and will be

done away with. I submitted to the King, on retiring, that in my next

audience, I should be desirous of declaring the purport of the official

instructions transferred to me (which had not been yet avowed) with

other credentials, explanatory and impressive of the good wishes and

intentions of the Government, the Committee, and yourself. I was

favoured with my first separate audience at 8 o’clock this morning. I

first impressed from the dispatches of the Committee, every motive and

sentiment that was convicting or imposing; urging your waving the

hostages and escort, as the demonstration of your confidence in the

King’s honour and friendship; and insinuating that the establishment of

a school at Cape Coast, was solely in anticipation of the King’s

committing some of his children to your care for education, as the

foundation of the pre-eminence of Europeans. I then passed to your

instructions, rendering them in a manner as persuasive and auspicious as

possible; associating in favour of the Residency, the commanding motive

of facilitating political interests, with the imposing one of securing

justice to the Ashantee traders. Lastly, I introduced the Treaty, as a

pledge from the King to give force to your application to the Government

at home, for the increase of his pay; for, as he continued to dwell on

the grant of 4 ounces from Elmina, I availed myself of this liberty of

my instructions, to divert the impression, and to propitiate his

ratification of the Treaty. I considered the pretence of your being

obliged to address the British Government on the subject, as

preservative of the opportunity of judging of the sincerity of his

professions, and of the duration of the union.


I think I may pledge myself for three great pillars of our commercial

intercourse, by the accomplishment of the Residency, the Education, and

the Treaty.


I reconcile myself to fresh difficulties by the reflection that they are

inseparable from all great political views; and that without them, I

should be deprived of the satisfaction of proving myself, in a small

degree, worthy this confidence and distinction, by patience and

perseverance. A letter accompanies this, written in the King’s presence,

on the subject of the Commenda palaver, which wears so decided an

aspect, that whilst I pledge all my energy and address, and look with

hope to the aid of your suggestions, I must candidly confess, I do not

think it can be compounded in any thing like a reasonable way. I

appealed to the King’s magnanimity, and depicted the poverty of the

Commendas, but every appeal and every argument was ineffectual; their

aggravated offences admit of no amelioration of the King’s feelings. I

depreciated the plea of General Daendels’ repeated messages, by

submitting that they were addressed to the Town, and not to the Fort,

and I succeeded in retiring him from the negociation, as an interference

inconsistent with your dignity, and the present good understanding.


I did not discourage the King’s great anxiety for clothes of the English

costume, considering that his example would be more auspicious than any

thing else, to the introduction of these manufactures. I have

distributed the muslins, &c. as politically as possible, including with

the Moors of repute, the aristocracy, or four captains controuling the

King, his four linguists, his brother and successor, our housemaster,

and some other captains of superior influence. I made a point of

conciliating a Moor of influence, about to return through Sallagha or

Sarem (the capital of the Inta country, and the grand emporium of the

merchandize of the interior) to Houssa, feeling the policy of

communicating every favourable impression to the neighbouring kingdoms.

In my second interview I obtained permission from the King to dismiss

the remaining Fantees. It was one of the first considerations, for the

sake of our dignity, to avoid the humiliating circumstances and

impressions, which have ensued from the want of foresight, and the

consequent inability to meet the demands of our people. Their conduct

since has been so mutinous and insulting, with the exception of six,

that to preserve the impression of the firmness of an English officer, I

secured one who encouraged the others, by persisting in some insulting

indecencies, in contempt of my remonstrances, and ordered him to be

punished.


The others (with the above exception) having refused in a body,

aggravating their disobedience with the grossest insolence, to go with a

cane to Payntree, and bring the biscuit which had been deserted there; I

have disclaimed them, and left them to act for themselves, only securing

them the King’s permission to depart.


I shall request the King to furnish me with his own people, on the

conclusion of the business of the Embassy. Such an arrangement favours

œconomy, and impresses the confidence I affect.


The frequent presents had enabled me to present the Fantees with large

supplies of plantains and hogs; and on paying them their arrears, which

I did the same evening I received your gold, I gave them a bullock which

fell to my share in a division with Mr. James.


You will see by the balance of the annexed account, that (preserving our

dignity) every expense should be avoided that can be; and I assure you,

that in making the present arrangement for bearers for our baggage only,

I do not disregard your solicitude for our health. I shall order one

Cape Coast messenger to attend Mr. James, and also the bearers left

behind, being sufficiently recovered.


The statistical and scientific desiderata so impressively recommended to

my attention, are daily realising beyond my expectations. Mr. Tedlie has

had a severe attack of fever and dysentery, but is convalescent: Mr.

Hutchison and myself are in perfect health.


                                 I am, with respect, Sir,


                                        Your most obedient Servant,


                                                          T. E. BOWDICH.


SAÏ TOOTOO QUAMINA, _King of Ashantee and its Dependencies, to_ JOHN

HOPE SMITH, _Esquire, Governor in Chief of the British Settlements on

the Gold Coast of Africa._


THE Commenda palaver now rests with you and the King of Ashantee only,

the Dutch Governor has no more to do with it, so the King recals the

captain sent to him, and sends a proper messenger to treat with you

individually.


The conduct and messages of the Commendas have been so irritating and

insolent to the King, that nothing but believing you to be his good

friend, could induce him to treat at all with them, or do any thing but

kill them; but for your sake, he will settle the palaver, and you must

help him properly.


The King wants to begin the union without any palaver remaining, and as

this Commenda palaver is the only one, it must be settled, and if you do

this, he will take care the Elminas shall not do wrong to the Fantees,

but he will help you in all your palavers.


The Elminas are always sending him messages about the insulting conduct

and expressions of the Commendas towards him, and this is very vexatious

to him, so he wishes to put an end to it with your help.


Adoo Bradie, his favorite nephew, the son of the former King Saï

Quamina, is sent with a proper captain, Quantree, to help you settle the

palaver.


Two thousand ounces is the demand.


The origin of the palaver is, that after the King returned from his own

campaign against the Fantees, the Commendas went to the Elminas and

said, “well, you help’d the King, and now he is gone back we will fight

for it.”


Again, when a war was about to take place between the Cape Coast people

and the Elminas, the Commendas went to the latter and said, well, we

will help you if you will give us plenty of powder to fight for you:

they did so, and immediately the Commendas used it to seize 98 Elminas,

and sold them as slaves—this the King thinks you will say is very bad.


The Cape Coast people and the Fantees having joined against the Elminas,

they sent to tell the King, stating, when he demanded the reason, that

it was because they had not resisted him when he came down against the

Fantees; adding, that the Commendas, who were their natural allies

before, had now joined their enemies, and begging the King to revenge

this act of perfidy. The King much angered, immediately sent a captain

for the purpose of their destruction (Yaquokroko,) but the Dutch

governor sent to him, and then sent to the King to beg him to stop,

because the English and Dutch being one, it would put shame on his face.


Col. Torrane by giving up Cheeboo, induced the King to consider the Cape

Coast people as his friends, and they took fetish accordingly, but their

joining the Fantees afterwards to fight against Elmina for assisting the

King, has made him distrust them always since.


He considers his favourite nephew as the adopted son of Col. Torrane, to

whom he gave him, and the Colonel gave him English clothes, so he is all

the same as a Cape Coast Boy.


Col. Torrane being dead, he considers his nephew to stand in the same

relation to you, and that he is therefore the proper messenger to send

to you about this palaver.


You must write in your great book, that the King is your good friend,

that he likes you too much, that he thanks God very much, so that every

future Governor may read that in the Cape Coast Books.


                       The mark X of Saï Tootoo, King of Ashantee,


                                                      Per T. E. BOWDICH.


Present.


   WM. HUTCHISON.


   HENRY TEDLIE.


_Coomassie, July 9th_, 1817.


                                           _Coomassie, July 12th_, 1817.


          JOHN HOPE SMITH, ESQUIRE, GOVERNOR IN CHIEF, &c. &c.


   SIR,


I AM just returned from reading your letter to the King, and extracts

from that to myself, before the assembly of the captains: the effect was

satisfactory; and Quamina Bootaqua is ordered up to answer for his

conduct. The King enquired if the pay now due on the two notes would be

liquidated on application; I replied, immediately; he is anxious for it,

on account of the approaching yam custom.


                                              I am, &c.


                                           (Signed)   T. EDWARD BOWDICH.


                               * * * * *


I will not continue to copy the rude diary before submitted, it is only

a register of dull or disgusting circumstances, illnesses, human

sacrifices, and ceremonious visits. I would not anticipate the better

arrangement of my reports, or break the thread of the correspondence on

the political difficulties opposed to the Mission. I will abridge some

passages of my diary, merely to give an idea of the nature of our

conversations, and the biography of the leading men. Mr. Hutchison has

sent me copious extracts from his diary, as Resident, his leisure and

tranquillity having afforded him better opportunities of social

intercourse and domestic observation, than I had, or could afford time

to cultivate, without neglecting my reports. I shall adjoin these

extracts, expecting they will contribute to the rational entertainment

of the public, and to the credit of an active and intelligent officer.


A captain called Asofoo, sent us a present of seven ackies of gold, and

we also received twelve from Amanquateä, and three from our house

master. On the 9th of July the King sent us ten ackies of gold, and

repeated his satisfaction of the result of the late correspondence, and

daily presents of meat and fruits from various quarters, evinced the

better opinion of his chiefs.


I paid my first private visit to Baba the chief Moor, and took some

pens, paper, ink, and pencils with me as a present; the paper and

pencils were much esteemed, but he preferred his reed and vegetable ink.

He received me courteously, and was contemplating a curiously intricate

figure like a horoscope; the ms. was filled with them; he laid his

finger on it, and said, if you have any hard palaver, this can make me

settle it for you when no other person can; or if you have any dear

friend in England you wish to see, tell me the name, and this shall

bring him to you. I thanked him, observing, that when Englishmen knew

their palaver was right, they always left it to God, and that England

was too good a place for me to wish any one I regarded to leave it. His

disciples and pupils were writing on wooden boards, like those Mr. Park

describes. When a charm was applied for, one of the oldest wrote the

body of it, and gave it to Baba, who added a sort of cabalistical mark,

and gave it a mysterious fold; the credulous native snatched it eagerly

as it was held out to him, paid the gold, and hurried away to enclose it

in the richest case he could afford. I had a long conversation with

Baba, and he begged me to visit him frequently; he was much gratified

with the specimens of African Arabic at the end of Mr. Jackson’s work,

and read them fluently. I visited him the next day, when he sent hastily

for a Moor, who he told me was very learned, and just come from

Timbuctoo. This man expressing no surprise when he first saw me, Baba

explained it, by telling me, spontaneously, that this Moor had seen

three white men before, at Boussa. I eagerly enquired the particulars of

the novelty, and they were again repeated to Baba, and were thus

interpreted: “that some years ago, a vessel with masts, suddenly

appeared on the Quolla or Niger near Boussa, with three white men, and

some black. The natives encouraged by these strange men, took off

provisions for sale, were well paid and received presents besides: it

seems the vessel had anchored. The next day, perceiving the vessel going

on, the natives hurried after her, (the Moor protested from their

anxiety to save her from some sunken rocks, with which the Quolla

abounds) but the white men mistaking, and thinking they pursued for a

bad purpose, deterred them. The vessel soon after struck, the men jumped

into the water and tried to swim, but could not, for the current, and

were drowned. He thought some of their clothes were now at Wauwaw, but

he did not believe there were any books or papers.” This spontaneous

narrative, so artlessly told, made a powerful impression on my mind. I

saw the man frequently afterwards, his manners were very mild, and he

never asked me for the most trifling present. He drew me a chart before

he went away, and I dispatched some certificates for Major Peddie by

him, endorsed with Baba’s recommendations. I heard exactly the same

thing afterwards from another Moor, but he had not been an eye witness.

I begged Mr. Hutchison, when I left Coomassie, to note any other report

on the subject of Mr. Park’s death, and he afterwards sent me the ms. a

translation of which is in the appendix. I continued to call on Baba

three or four times a week; these visits afforded much information, for

at each I found strange Moors just arrived from different parts of the

interior, sojourning with him. They always affected to deplore the

ignorance of the Ashantees, and presumed it must be as irksome to me as

to them. Baba telling one that I could speak different languages, he

said that he would try me, and addressed me in several, all very uncouth

to my ear, and their names even unintelligible, except one, which he

called Hindee or Hindoo; neither had I heard of any of the great cities

he enumerated, until at last he pronounced Room (Rome) and said, if I

did not know that I was not a Christian. I never saw the Shereef Brahima

(to whom I was introduced about this time by a Jennë Moor) at Baba’s,

they did not appear to be on terms; I think the latter was envious of

the greater learning and intelligence of the former, who had been to

Mecca and Medina. One day I requested Baba to draw me a map of the

world, he did so, encircling one large continent with a sea, bounded by

a girdle of rocks. Old Odumata’s notion of geography was as strange; for

he mentioned one day, that when on the coast above Apollonia, he had an

idea of walking to England, for he was told he should reach Santonee

(Portugal) in 30 days, and that after that, the path was very good. He

greatly enjoyed our singeing the hair of a foppish attendant of his,

with a burning glass; the man’s amazement was inconceivable, Mr.

Hutchison was at some distance, and not suspected.


We were now permitted to walk four or five miles beyond the city, and

felt quite at home. We seldom went out in the morning, lest an occasion

for an audience should occur. Apokoo and several other daily visitors

diverted us with their anecdotes, and in the afternoon we made our round

of calls. Apokoo was always facetious, and looked with much anxiety for

our entry, as his greatest recreation; he was very desirous of learning

tennis and sparring, and daily made some essays, so comical, that

neither we nor his attendants could contain ourselves. Apokoo became

very communicative of Ashantee politics, and asked innumerable questions

about England; particularly, why the King of England did not send one of

his own sons to the King of Ashantee, with the presents, and why so

great a King sent such a small force to Africa. The Spanish campaign was

gone through, again and again, and never tired him. He gave us an

excellent dinner, as did Odumata repeatedly. Both were extravagantly

enraptured with the miniature of an English female, and called all their

wives to look at it.


Having been advised by a note from the Governor, of the arrival of an

Ashantee boy and girl at Cape Coast Castle, sent by the King without any

explanation, I desired an audience on the subject, and forwarded the

following letter, which also communicates the baseness of one of the

King’s messengers, just returned from the Coast, and other inauspicious

circumstances.


                               * * * * *


                                            _Coomassie, 10th Aug._ 1817.


          JOHN HOPE SMITH, ESQ. GOVERNOR IN CHIEF, &c. &c. &c.


   SIR,


THE King has explained to me that he sent the boy and girl you mention

to have arrived at Cape Coast, to become the property of the Committee

or Government, conceiving it to be obligatory on him, in justification

of his possession of the notes, to allow an Ashantee family to rear

itself under the Governor’s protection, for the service of the

Settlement, and as an acknowledgment of the duties he owes it. He begs

me to observe that he put the same plates of gold around their necks

which distinguish the royal attendants.


I had reason to believe, from a coolness and some invidious comparisons

on the part of the King, that the messenger lately arrived, Ocranameah,

who was so particularly recommended to your favour, had been unjust in

his report of the treatment he had experienced. I did not hesitate to

avow my impression to the King, having solicited an audience for the

purpose. The King confessed he had felt his private feelings hurt ever

since the return of that messenger, having received his assurance, that

you would scarcely admit him to your presence; that he received no

present or compliment from you, and was wholly neglected during his stay

at head quarters. I instantly pledged my honour to the King that

Ocranameah (who was present) was guilty of falsehood and ingratitude,

adding, that I was not prepared to confront him with the particulars of

the presents he received from you and the officers; though I was

positive, from private letters, as well as my own conviction, that you

had not slighted the opportunity of evincing your private friendship for

the King; and as I might possibly identify some trifle, I wished the

King to allow a search to be made. On the messenger’s box being sent for

and opened, two engravings appeared, to the surprise of the King, and

which I recognised; but as the messenger still persists in _your_ entire

neglect of him, and of his not having received any present or compliment

worth mentioning, I must trouble you for the particulars of his

treatment at Cape Coast Castle, for the entire conviction of the King.

The King expressed his suspicion (founded on reports) that many

Ashantees imposed on your generosity, by introducing themselves as

attached to him in various capacities; and hoped that you would only

listen in future to such as he recommended to your notice by letter,

which his three messengers above had been; the second (Ocranameah) the

more particularly, and that recollection had made him so sensible of the

neglect. You will regret, with myself, that this inauspicious

circumstance has been unavoidable.


The recent intelligence respecting the Buntooko war, has imposed serious

anxiety, in the place of the King’s former confidence. The revolt of

that people, as may be expected in all revolts from arbitrary controul,

has gradually induced the secessions of some other tributaries; and the

King feels called upon by these unexpected difficulties, to conduct the

war in person; not with his former expectation of witnessing their rapid

subjugation, but from his present conviction of the necessity for every

stimulus and energy. His precaution has dictated some popular acts,

ameliorating the condition of the lower order of his subjects. The

confidential ministers have been instructed to hint to me, that it would

be indiscreet in the King to expose even his temporary reverses in an

arduous war, by the residence of a British officer; and that he would

most probably defer that part of the mutual wish, until the contest was

terminated. I used the same medium to impress upon the King, that such a

feeling towards the delegate of a friendly power was misplaced; that you

had expedited his ex-parte views in the confidence of his consummation

of the reciprocal objects of the Mission, without which (as they had

been instituted for his benefit and aggrandisement) I could not think of

returning; since a protraction would be construed into a slight of the

friendly overtures of the British Government, which (from its dignity

and pre-eminence in Europe) could not be vouchsafed whenever they might

be solicited.


I anxiously await your communications on the Commenda palaver, to

further my exertions for the full accomplishment of the Mission. The

King and his Council labour under so much anxiety and business at the

present moment, that though we pay and receive visits of ceremony, it is

almost impossible to effect an audience, but on the receipt of

dispatches.


                                               I am, &c. &c.


                                                      T. EDWARD BOWDICH.


The most entertaining _delassement_ of our conversations with the

chiefs, was, to introduce the liberty of English females; whom we

represented, not only to possess the advantage of enjoying the sole

affection of a husband, but the more enviable privilege of choosing that

husband for herself. The effect was truly comic, the women sidled up to

wipe the dust from our shoes with their cloths, and at the end of every

sentence brushed off an insect, or picked a burr from our trowsers; the

husbands suppressing their dislike in a laugh, would put their hands

before our mouths, declaring they did not want to hear that palaver any

more, abruptly change the subject to war, and order the women to the

harem.


One of the King’s linguists was a very old man, called Quancum; he spoke

but seldom, yet the greatest deference was paid to his opinion; the King

appeared to consult him more than any other. I was so much interested by

this man’s deportment, that I enquired his history. He had been the

linguist of two former Kings, who paid frequent, and large sums of gold,

as damages for his intrigues; neither had age corrected his fault, until

very lately, though the present King used the most friendly

remonstrances; and urged, that from his paying large sums so frequently

for him on this account, his subjects thought, that he countenanced the

depravity. Quancum confessed to the King, that his ardour for women was

perpetuated by the sensual devices of one of his wives. Soon afterwards,

he was detected in an intrigue with the wife of a captain of great

consequence, and the King refused to interfere. The captain declaring

that the punishment of Quancum, and not gold, was his object, the King

permitted him to be despoiled of all his property, even to his bed. The

favourite wife was amongst the spoil, and the injured captain being much

smitten with her, assured her of an indulgence and preference, even

greater than that she had enjoyed with Quancum; she replied, she must

always hate him, and intreated to be sold. After much importunity the

captain agreed to do so, provided she would put him in possession of all

the presents Quancum had lavished on her; she produced them,

stipulating, that her son might retain a small sum of gold, which

Quancum had lately presented to him; this was agreed to, and she was

immediately sold to a distant caboceer; but her son followed her, and

buying her with his little property, presented her again to his father.

On this, the King gave Quancum a house, and some furniture, and takes

care to continue small supplies of gold daily, adequate to his and this

woman’s comfort; having exacted a solemn oath from him, that he would

devote himself to this one wife, and never try to recover any of the

others.


Mr. Tedlie’s interesting interview with the King, when he desired his

attendance to exhibit and explain his surgical instruments, and

medicines, is best described in his own words.


“The King sent for me this morning, saying he wished to see the

medicines, books, and instruments. I went immediately, and explained

through Quashie, the Accra linguist, the proper use and advantage of

each instrument: he was very particular in his enquiries, and asked if I

had performed the operations I described; I assured him that I had, and

as a proof, exhibited a piece of bone that I had taken out of an Indian

black man’s head in Ceylon, who had been wounded, and who lived. The

King held up his hand as a mark of approbation, and all his attendants

were astonished. I applied the instruments first on myself, then on the

linguists, afterwards on the King’s two captains, and lastly on the

King: nothing could exceed the King’s approbation. He then desired me to

shew him the medicines; he enquired the virtues and doses of each, what

time in the day they should be taken, and whether it was proper to eat

or drink after taking them? I told him: he asked if I would sell them? I

said no. I brought these medicines for the officers; I could not sell

them, but I would give him as much as I could, keeping in view that some

of the four officers might be sick; he said that I was right, but he

could not help coveting the greater part of the medicines; he viewed

them all over five or six times, and asked me to give him some of them.

I did give him as much innocent medicine as I could with propriety

afford; he thanked me “very much.” I then shewed him the botanical

books; he was astonished, held up his hand and exclaimed hah! at every

brilliant or high coloured plant which he saw. All his attendants were

closely arranged around: the two captains laid hold of a volume each,

and were admiring the flowers; when either of them ejaculated an

admiration, the King would seize it, and ask me what that tree was?

After I had told him the use of them, I said all these trees grow in

England; and the reason the English write all these in a book is, that

they may know which is a good tree, and which is bad. He expressed the

greatest astonishment at the flax (linum), oak “that we build our ships

with,” poppy “that makes a man sleep,” and the sensitive plant (mimosa),

which he pointed out and described himself. During this time he

whispered to one of his attendants, who went out, and returned in a

short time with a bit of cloth containing 9 ackies of gold; the King

presented it to me; I accepted it, and returned thanks. He then asked me

if I would come and see him at any time he sent for me; I assured him I

would do every thing to please him, consistent with my duty. He shook

hands with me and went into his house. He returned in a short time,

leading his sister by the hand, in a manner that would shame many beaux

in Europe, saying, “this is the white doctor I told you of; go, and take

his hand; you are sick, tell him your complaint, and he will do you

good:” the lady complied with his request. He then said “give me that

gold I gave you, the cloth is not clean; I want to put it in a clean

cloth for you.” He then put it in a piece of rich silk, and after he

returned the gold he said “I like you; I like all the English very much;

they are a proper people, and I wish to drink health with you.” He

retired to his own apartment, and returned with a flask of gin, and two

servants with a silver vase and water and glasses; he helped himself and

me, made a bow and said “Saï wishes you good health.” I returned the

bow, saying, I wish good health to the King, and hope he never will

require any of my medicine: when this was explained to him he held out

his glass to me, we touched and drank. He then took my hand, saying, “If

I send my sister to you will you talk with her?” I assured him I would

talk with and advise all the King’s friends whenever he wished. After I

gave all the medicine I could conveniently part with, he sent for a

small Dutch liqueur case; he desired 10 or 12 of his attendants, and his

eunuch, to keep in their heads what I said; and requested me to repeat

again the use and dose of each medicine I gave him, with the proper time

and method of using it. I did so. He placed his hand on his head saying

“Saï recollects what the white doctor says;” then placing the medicines

in the case himself said “that good for my head, that good for my belly,

that good for my stomach,” &c. One of the King’s sisters sent a message

that she wanted to come and see the white gentlemen; and shortly

afterwards arrived with her stool and retinue, being head caboceer of a

large town. After exchanging compliments, she complained that her left

hand pained her very much. I examined it, but must confess I could not

see any thing the matter with it; however I rubbed a little liniment on

her hand, which seemed to gratify her; she asked if I would come and see

her in the evening? I answered yes. Quamina, our Ashantee guide, came to

conduct me: he said I must dress, put on my sword and hat, as this woman

was a caboceer, and the King’s sister; he would carry my umbrella. When

I arrived I found the princess lying on a mat in one of the inner

apartments of the house she occupied; she ordered a stool for me; I

rubbed some more liniment on her hand; she wished me to stop and drink

palm wine; this I declined, alledging the English did not like palm wine

in the evening, because it is sour.”


                               CHAPTER V.


                               * * * * *


 _Proceedings and Incidents until the Signing of the Preliminaries to a

                            General Treaty._


[The Governor’s reply to my communication on the subject of the Commenda

              palaver, reached me on the 27th of August.]


                                   _Cape Coast Castle, August 11_, 1817.


                          T. E. BOWDICH, ESQ.


   SIR,


I ENTERTAINED a confident hope that no further mention would have been

made by the King concerning the Commendas, after the receipt of my

letter, and I am sorry that he should allow so insignificant a set of

people to protract in the least the settlement of our union. As it is my

particular wish to remove this impediment, I have used every endeavour

to bring the affair to a conclusion, and trust the King will not suffer

it to be invincible. The Commendas are also naturally anxious for its

termination, but their poverty is so great, that they have it not in

their power to comply with his demand. They have acknowledged their

fealty to the King, and have agreed to pay the sum of 120 oz. of gold,

of which, messengers are sent by his nephew to enquire whether he will

accept. This, with the sum they have been unavoidably obliged to promise

the principal persons deputed to negociate this business, will increase

the sum to at least 150 oz. The many proofs the King has had of my

friendly intentions towards him, and the consideration of the benefits

that will accrue to him from his alliance with the English, will, I

hope, induce him to concede to the terms offered by the Commendas. A

refusal must be considered as an avowal of his determined resolution not

to conciliate the affair, and as the indigent circumstances of these

people, make it utterly impossible for them to pay a larger sum, you

will, should he persist in exacting more, procure his permission to

leave the country, and return with the other officers as soon as you

can. To sacrifice the Mission, after the heavy expences which have been

incurred, and when we are induced to believe that every other object is

propitiated to our utmost expectations, should be avoided if possible;

but if he insists on a larger sum being levied from the Commendas than

has been offered, there remains no other alternative. The dignity of the

flag must be the superior consideration to all others.


The King has no need to doubt in the least the sincerity of the Cape

Coast people, they are his friends, and have every inclination to

continue so; and I am convinced his nephew will, on his return, confirm

this report to him.


I will make known to the Committee his request for a crown and clothes,

and I have no doubt but it will be complied with.


                                           I am, Sir,


                                      your most obedient Servant,


                                                        JOHN HOPE SMITH.


                                             _Coomassie, Aug. 29_, 1817.


          JOHN HOPE SMITH, ESQ. GOVERNOR IN CHIEF, &c. &c. &c.


   SIR,


I HAVE the satisfaction to enclose a copy of the Preliminaries to the

general Treaty, as signed this day by the King in Council, adjusting the

Commenda palaver, agreeably to your letter of the 11th, which did not

reach me till the 27th instant.


I proceed to acquaint you with the transactions of the interval.


The charge of a political Embassy, in a part of the world where respect

and security are founded upon the opinion imposed by our conduct,

exacted a spirit and dignity, which might have been abated in

insinuating a Mission through the country for scientific purposes, but

the inviolability of which was inseparable from the improvement and

safety of neighbouring settlements. Since my last dispatch, I have been

obligated to resist various encroachments, of which I shall mention two

or three to justify my treatment of them.


The death of Quamina Bwa, our Ashantee guide, in the early part of the

last week, creating an idle, but popular superstition that he had been

killed by the fetish for bringing white men to take the country; I was

applied to in the King’s name, to ameliorate this impression, by

contributing an ounce of gold towards the custom to be made by the King

for his repose. I refused on two grounds; first, that Quamina Bwa had

himself unjustly incensed the people against us, by panyaring[10] their

provisions in the King’s name, for our subsistence, and defrauding them

of the gold we gave him for the payment: secondly, that the rites of

customs were unnatural to our religion, which bound us, at least, not to

encourage them. Fifteen persons had been sacrificed the week before (in

a custom for the mother of a captain) with aggravated barbarity.


Several of the principal men having applied to me to send to Cape Coast

for silks, to be paid for on receipt at Coomassie (a very dangerous and

impolitic indulgence), I impressed, indignantly, that I was not sent as

a trader to make bargains with them, but as an officer to talk the

palavers with the King.


These circumstances, and a personal chastisement of some insults from

inferior captains, which was provoked after much patience, influenced ex

parte representations, which, though they may not have sickened the

King’s regard, induced hauteur and neglect. In proceeding to the King’s

house on public occasions, which I never did without the flag, canes,

and soldiers, we had been expected to make way for the greater retinues

of superior captains, who would rudely have enforced it; and after

soliciting audiences for two days, I was kept in waiting above an hour

in the outer courts of the palace. On the last occasion of the latter

treatment, knowing that it was affected, I returned to our quarters

until I received the King’s invitation; representing to him, that as an

officer dignified by an authority to make a treaty with him in the name

of the British Government, I could not submit to disrespectful treatment

at the Palace, nor allow the English flag to give place to any but

himself; that, if it merely affected myself as an individual, my esteem

for the King would induce me to compromise these points of etiquette

with his captains; but, according to the custom of England, I dared not;

for if I did, my sword would be taken from me on my return to Cape Coast

Castle. It produced the desired effect; the gong gong proclaimed in

every street that all captains must make way for the flag; and at the

monthly levee of the captains (the Adaï custom) the King’s linguists

were deputed to us first, with the customary present of a sheep and rum;

and presented us the first to pay our compliments to the King, being

followed by Amanquateä, Quatchie Quophi, Apokoo, and Odumata; the four

captains composing the Privy Council, or Aristocracy, which checks the

King. The first (whose power approximates to that of the Mayor of the

Palace under the early French dynasty) sent his linguist and gold swords

to compliment us on the ground. I determined to take advantage of this

impression, and of the comparative facility of intercourse, and demanded

an audience to discuss the treaty, a copy of which I enclose, and hope

my additions will be satisfactory. I have the King’s assurance that it

shall be formally executed in eight days; when all his tributaries will

be present for the yam custom, and when I hope to make the King of

Dwabin and its dependencies a party, whose power is equal to the King of

Ashantee’s.


To resume—the audience was granted; and I read the treaty before the

King and his Council, submitting it article by article, to their

consideration. It was debated the whole of that and the succeeding day.

I considered that if I could get the treaty discussed and executed in

this favourable interval, removing the Commenda palaver from the

situation of an obstacle, and reserving it as the first proof of the

King’s disposition to coincide with you in what was reasonable and just,

I might, on the receipt of dispatches, gain the better terms for that

people.


On Saturday the 22d instant, I was summoned to declare the articles of

the treaty before the assembly of captains, who were seated with their

attendants and warriors in the large yard of the palace, with all the

imposing pomp and military parade, which had before been collected to

subdue us, in the scene of the declaration of war. The King’s sisters,

with the females of his family, were seated, with their numerous

attendants, on an elevated floor behind. The deputies from the Fantee

towns in the interior, were placed within hearing, and the crowd was

almost impervious: the most ghastly trophies were mixed with this blaze

of ostentation. We were seated near the King immediately opposite to his

linguists.


In reading the treaty, I paused after every article, leaving it to be

formally repeated to the King through his linguists, and then sat down

whilst it was discussed by the assembly. It is not necessary to repeat

the various debates; and I will only notice that Amanquateä, through his

linguist, proposed the renewal of the Slave Trade as a sine qua non;[11]

this, however, as I had all along declared it to be impossible, was at

length over-ruled, but with considerable difficulty. It was also

proposed to attach a fine to the infraction of the treaty; but this I

resisted as derogatory to the dignity of the contracting parties; and

urged, that as the King and his dignitaries would consider his oath as

sacred, as you and the Government would mine, I considered no

_infraction_ of the treaty could take place; though it might possibly be

_offended_ by the conduct of his subjects, or of individuals under

British protection, which was provided for, and must be visited

accordingly by the authorities pledged to the treaty.


I had declared from the first, that it would be expected that the King

should swear in the form of his country to the fulfilment and

preservation of the treaty, and that his oath should be attested by his

principal captains, from my anxiety to fortify to the utmost, a measure

not only valuable to commerce but to humanity, in averting the renewal

of a war, recorded by indelible marks of carnage and devastation.


At the moment I expected the King to execute the treaty, a fresh design

was disclosed, in a long speech from the chief linguist, setting forth

the wrongs the King had just received from the people of Amissa, who had

scourged his messengers, and couched their insulting defiance in the

foulest language; yet, he said, the King did not want to invade the

Fantee country for the sake of one town, and therefore I must stay and

assist him to settle that palaver; he would then readily swear to the

treaty. I replied at length, declaring particularly that I could not,

and would not recognize the Amissa palaver; that the King vitiated the

compliments he had been pleased to pay me, in expecting me to be such a

fool as to involve you in the palaver of a people, over whom you neither

possessed nor desired authority; and that if I had not a right to think

better of the King, I should view such a proposal as evasive of the

treaty, and final to the hope of a thorough understanding.


The chief linguist rejoined, that I had declared in announcing the

treaty, that it was the wish of the British Government to put an end to

war, and for the King to have no occasion to trouble the Fantees;

whereas, if the people of Amissa were not persuaded to retract, the King

must send a captain to destroy them, which could be done at a word, and

this perhaps would make another war. I urged that the Fantee towns under

the British forts must be considered distinctly, and that those, and

those only, were viewed by the Government and the treaty; yet, for the

cause of humanity, I would request you, for the King, to advise the

people of Amissa better, through some medium, which I hoped might do

good, but if disregarded, you could not even repeat it: that was all I

could promise, and if that was not enough, our negociations were at an

end. No! that was not enough, I must stay and see the palaver settled.


We immediately rose, and I declared as impressively as I could, that as

the officer of the King of England, your orders only could be obeyed by

me, that I dared not remain or allow myself to be stopped, even if I

should be killed on the path, for my life was not my palaver, but the

King of England’s. As I bowed to retire, the linguist exclaimed, that

the King promised to see me again in an hour.


I used the interval for reflection, and resolved to act upon the

conclusion, that nothing but an undaunted resolution could check these

encroachments, which were to be attributed to the Government rather than

to the King.


The hour having fully expired, I sent a cane to Adoocee, the chief

linguist, to desire the audience; he sent me word that the King was

asleep, and no one dared to awake him. I then went to Odumata (who

resides within the palace) and repeated to him, that I was determined to

go, if the King did not keep his word and see me; he said I could not; I

rejoined, I would, and left him. I then went to Adoocee’s house,

declared the same, and received the same reply. I left a cane in waiting

at the palace, with orders to quit and return to me at 4 o’clock, (which

allowed altogether four hours instead of one) if he was not dispatched

with a message in the interval. No notice was taken; there was no

alternative to my making good what I had said. The views of the Mission

were at risk, but they would have been too dearly purchased by such

concessions, and I was sanguine, rather than apprehensive of the success

of the measure I adopted; without spirit and fortitude nothing was to be

done.


I ordered all the baggage out, planted the flag, and giving the

soldiers’ muskets to the officers, converted them and the artificers

into bearers, as well as our own servants, for I saw the previous

dismissal of my own people was considered a hold on me. I ordered the

linguists to declare to the party publickly, that I would flog any man

who attempted to leave the town in debt; I paid all they confessed, by

advances on their pay to the amount of 10 ackies: this gave the greatest

publicity to our movements.


The King’s uncle, Bundaenha, and another superior captain came in form

to entreat me to stay, whilst they affected to address the King. I saw

through this, and that I might presume on it; holding the watch in my

hand, I promised to wait half an hour, and no longer. They returned

within the time to conduct me to the King, but after being kept

unusually long in waiting, the answer to my remonstrance through the

linguists, was, that the King was very busy hearing a great palaver; I

saw they lingered still in their hope of my submission. I sent the two

canes to tell the King that mine was a great palaver, and ought to be

heard, not only from its importance, but because he had passed his word

that it should; that after a King disregarded his promise, it was

useless to wait any longer. Returning to our quarters, I ordered the

people to load the baggage.


At the moment of starting, a royal messenger ran up, to say the King was

waiting to see me. I dismissed him with the message, that I could not

stop, unless a person of consequence was sent to promise for the King.

The King’s uncle came, and assured me the King would receive me himself

at the entrance of the palace. We went, and were instantly ushered into

the presence of the King and his captains, who were debating by torch

light: the clamour and deportment of this assembly might have been

subduing, had it been novel. The uproar having abated, the King

demanded, through his linguist, why I had determined to leave so

suddenly, and whether he had not behaved well to me, adding to much

declamation, that he knew the King of England and the Governor wished to

please him, and would not countenance the act. I replied, that “I had

not only gone the full length of my instructions to please the King, but

exceeded them; and all that I had to fear was, that you would not

approve my remaining a moment after he had trifled with me. The King’s

behaviour to me, as an individual, I should always be proud to speak of,

but his respect of the Embassy was a very superior consideration. Every

thing he wished had been done, and now he tried to impose a palaver on

me, with which you had no more to do than with the Buntooko war. The

King had promised me to settle the point of the treaty, I waited the

discussion patiently, he pledged his word to see me that evening, he had

avoided it; I had said I would wait no longer if he did not keep his

word; no English officer dared to break his word, if he did, he lost his

sword.” Much declamation ensued, but the King’s conviction silenced the

assembly, and realized the triumph I expected. He said, what I told him

was true, that he was very sorry, but he had too much to think about; he

liked the Law (the Treaty) very well, but begged me to wait a little

longer till all his captains came. I received his promise to see me the

following day. The next morning the head linguist came in form to

acquaint me that some palavers had arrived in the night, which had made

it necessary for the King to go to Berramang (a croom about five miles

to the N.E. on the road to Sallagha, the capital of the Inta country)

but he had orders to furnish us with the King’s hammock-men, if we were

inclined to follow him the next day. We did so, and I enclose an extract

from my diary, with the circumstances of the day, as they do not affect

the point in question: on taking leave in the evening, the King promised

that I should hear from him the next day.


Apokoo, who had been left in charge of the town, visited me in form by

the King’s orders, with the criers and insignia, to assure me there

should be no more impediments to the treaty, and that the King would

return the next day. The evening was productive of another disturbance,

from my resistance of an indignity. The Cape Coast messenger arriving,

informed me that the dispatches and letters were retained by Adoo

Bradie’s messenger, who accompanied him. I sent the canes to Apokoo’s to

demand them, but ineffectually; I then went myself, and insisted on the

delivery; he said it could not be allowed until the King returned to the

capital. I protested so strongly against the act, that he sent for the

chief linguist (Adoocee) and after a palaver, they promised to send me

the letters on my return to the house: I left the canes in waiting. The

time allowed having expired without the receipt, I went again to

Apokoo’s, who referred me to Adoocee. I went to him, and he said he

dared not interfere in the business. The Cape Coast messengers refusing

to do so, we proceeded instantly to Adoo Bradie’s house, and finding the

messenger, demanded the letters, and obtained them. I had scarcely read

them, before Adoocee came with some captains, and about 100 persons,

(being then 9 o’clock) to demand my delivery of your letter to his

charge, until the King’s return. I indignantly refused, asserting my

authority, and criminating such a request as injurious to the rights of

the meanest subject of the King of England, and an insuperable affront

to you. He tried threats and entreaties alternately; the former I

treated with contempt, the latter I regretted I dared not yield to. The

palaver was prolonged till 10 o’clock at night. I determined not to lose

ground. The King did not arrive until the evening of the next day, I

sent three canes with my compliments on his return, and received his

with an appointment of an audience the next (this) morning.


We were sent for early, the affair of the letters was opposed to me. I

repeated my declarations to Adoocee, and added, that I should not think

of leaving a Resident, if such were the forms of the Ashantee Court. The

Ashantee messengers declared that you had ordered your letters to be

delivered to the King. I said that was impossible. The King was very

gentle, but such was the suspicion of the assembly, that they requested

me to swear on my sword, that I had not altered any part of your letter;

I did so, prefacing the act as such a suspicion merited. I then read

your letter, abating nothing of its spirit and firmness, and laying

stress upon your disposition to benefit the King, and the proofs you had

given. I concluded my illustrations with the declaration, that you did

not settle the King’s palaver from fear, but from friendship, as it

remained with him to prove. I submitted the preliminaries in form, for

rejection or acceptance. After an ardent debate among the captains, they

were executed and attested, and I lose no time in forwarding the copy. I

left a duplicate with the King, as I shall of the treaty.


The King intends to dispatch a messenger directly to empower Adoo Bradie

to receive the gold, and hopes you will recommend the people of Commenda

to restore any of the slaves in their possession belonging to Elmina,

although that is not his palaver.


The King desired me to communicate his best thanks for your handsome

treatment of his nephew, whose reports have been very flattering.


I urged my intercessions for Quamina Bootaqua, until the King vouchsafed

me his assurance that he would pardon him.


I have the satisfaction to inform you, that I have been able, privately,

so far to conciliate the Moors, as to have witnessed their forwardance

of the certificates[12] to the Interior, with their own letters of

recommendation indorsed.


I advocated the merits of the Castle linguist, De Graff, as you desired,

and successfully. I flatter myself this will anticipate the arrival of

the King’s, and the Cape Coast messengers.


                             I am, &c. &c.


                                                          T. E. BOWDICH.


_Preliminaries of a General Treaty, to be made and entered into by_

THOMAS EDWARD BOWDICH, _Esquire, for the Governor and Council of Cape

Coast Castle, and on the part of the British Government, with_ SAÏ

TOOTOO QUAMINA, _King of Ashantee and its Dependencies._


1st. The King accepts the offer of the people of Commenda, through the

Governor in Chief; namely, one hundred and twenty ounces of gold for

himself, and the customary fees to his embassadors, as a settlement in

full of all demands.


2nd. The people of Commenda shall acknowledge their fealty to the King,

and be entitled to all the benefits of his protection.


3d. The King shall authorize some responsible captain to receive the

gold, from the hands of the deputies of the people of Commenda, at Cape

Coast Castle.


4th. It is hereby agreed, that every palaver is now settled preparatory

to the General Treaty, which shall be executed forthwith.


 Signed and sealed this twenty-ninth day of August, in the year of our

             Lord one thousand eight hundred and seventeen.


                               The mark of SAÏ TOOTOO QUAMINA. X (L. S.)


                                                  T. E. BOWDICH. (L. S.)


In the presence of


  WILLIAM HUTCHISON.


  HENRY TEDLIE.


  ADOOCEE, Chief Linguist.


  APOKOO, Keeper of the Treasury.


  QUAMINA QUATCHIE,  }

                     } Linguists to the Mission.

  QUASHEE APAINTREE, }


_Extract from Diary._—Monday, 25th August, we started soon after seven

o’clock, and proceeding in a N.E. direction, crossed the marsh close to

the town, where it was about two feet deep and one hundred and fifty

yards broad. We travelled the path to Sallagha, through a beautiful

country, abounding in neat crooms (of which we passed through seven),

the sites spacious, and environed by extensive plantations. The path was

wide and so nearly direct, that the eye was always in advance through

beautiful vistas varied by gentle risings. The iron stone still

prevailed.


The King received us in the market place, and enquiring anxiously if we

had breakfasted, ordered refreshment. After some conversation we were

conducted to a house prepared for our reception, where a relish was

served (sufficient for an army) of soups, stews, plantains, yams, rice,

&c. (all excellently cooked) wine, spirits, oranges, and every fruit.

The messengers, soldiers, and servants were distinctly provided for.

Declining the offer of beds, we walked out in the town, and conversed

and played drafts with the Moors, who were reclining under trees; the

King joined us with cheerful affability, and seemed to have forgotten

his cares. About two o’clock dinner was announced. We had been taught to

prepare for a surprise, but it was exceeded. We were conducted to the

eastern side of the croom, to a door of green reeds, which excluded the

crowd, and admitted us through a short avenue to the King’s garden, an

area equal to one of the large squares in London. The breezes were

strong and constant. In the centre, four large umbrellas of new scarlet

cloth were fixed, under which was the King’s dining table (heigthened

for the occasion) and covered in the most imposing manner; his massy

plate was well disposed, and silver forks, knives, and spoons (Colonel

Torrane’s) were plentifully laid. The large silver waiter supported a

roasting pig in the centre; the other dishes on the table were roasted

ducks, fowls, stews, pease pudding, &c. &c. On the ground on one side of

the table were various soups, and every sort of vegetable; and elevated

parallel with the other side, were oranges, pines, and other fruits;

sugar-candy, Port and Madeira wine, spirits and Dutch cordials, with

glasses. Before we sat down the King met us, and said, that as we had

come out to see him, we must receive the following present from his

hands, 2 oz. 4 ackies of gold, one sheep and one large hog to the

officers, 10 ackies to the linguists, and 5 ackies to our servants.


We never saw a dinner more handsomely served, and never ate a better. On

our expressing our relish, the King sent for his cooks, and gave them

ten ackies. The King and a few of his captains sat at a distance, but he

visited us constantly, and seemed quite proud of the scene; he conversed

freely, and expressed much satisfaction at our toasts, “The King of

Ashantee, the King of England, the Governor, the King’s Captains, a

perpetual union (with a speech, which is the sine qua non) and the

handsome women of England and Ashantee.” After dinner the King made many

enquiries about England, and retired, as we did, that our servants might

clear the table, which he insisted on. When he returned, some of the

wine and Dutch cordials remaining, he gave them to our servants to take

with them, and ordered the table cloth to be thrown to them and all the

napkins. A cold pig, cold fowls (with six that had not been dressed)

were dispatched to Coomassie for our supper. We took leave about five

o’clock, the King accompanying us to the end of the croom, where he took

our hands, and wished us good night. We reached the capital again at

six, much gratified by our excursion and treatment.


Mr. Tedlie had brought Quamina Bwa (our guide) into a very advanced

state of convalescence; but he so eagerly betook himself from low diet

to palm oil soups, and stews of blood, that he soon relapsed, and a

gathering formed on his liver, aggravated not a little by the various

fetish draughts he swallowed. Seeing there was no other chance, Mr.

Tedlie, who is a very skilful operator, would have scarified the liver;

but although I had great reason to rely confidently on his judgment and

ability, I thought our situation too critical to run such a risk. A

Fantee boy having fractured his leg, and his dissolution appearing

inevitable, the parents, in great distress, applied to the surgeon of an

English outfort, who amputated the limb, and after much wearying

attendance, to the surprise of every one, restored the boy to health.

The family then brought him into the fort, and laying him down in the

hall, addressed the surgeon (who was in charge of the fort) thus; “As

Master cut off poor boy’s leg, and so spoil poor boy for work, we come

to ask Master how much he think to give poor boy to keep him.”


Quamina Bwa was fetished until the last moment, and died amidst the

howls of a legion of old hags, plastering the walls, door posts, and

every thing about him, with chopped egg and different messes. I forget

how many sheep he had sacrificed to the fetish by the advice of these

harpies. The King sent him a sheep and a periguin of gold, when he heard

he was ill. This man had settled the palaver with Mr. White, after the

blockade of Cape Coast, in 1815, the third invasion of the Ashantees,

and was universally odious, for his cruel extortions; these being

reported to the King, he was disgraced; and being very extravagant,

became much involved. Being at Payntree, he prevailed on Quamina

Bushmaquaw to allow him to conduct us, to retrieve his finances a

little. Excepting Adoocee, the King’s chief linguist, he was the most

plausible villain I ever met with.


The head of an Akim caboceer arrived in Coomassie about this time. The

King and the Ashantee government had proposed that every croom of Akim

should pay 20 periguins of gold as an atonement for their late revolt.

Ten periguins were advanced immediately by each, and the other moiety

was excused until after the harvest; but Aboidedroo caboceer of Manasoo

resolutely refused to pay a tokoo. The King’s messengers, however,

appealed to his people with so much address, that they rose upon their

caboceer, killed him, and sent his head to the King, with the 20

periguins required.


[Footnote 10: Seizing.]


[Footnote 11: Presents from two Spanish slave ships were received

through the Mulatto Brue on the 16th instant; they were general, but I

can only particularise the following:


  To the King, 3 pieces of cloth, 1 umbrella, and a hat.


  To the chief linguist, 1 piece, do.  2 flashes liquor.


  To the 4th do. (Otee) 1 do.          2 ditto, do.


  To Odumata, 2 do.                    2 ditto, do.


  To Quamina Bwa, agent for the purchase of the slaves, 2 pieces of

  cloth, 1 umbrella, and 1 Dane gun.


]


[Footnote 12: For a copy of these certificates vide the opposite

engraving.]


                              CHAPTER VI.


                               * * * * *


_Proceedings and Incidents until the Ratification of a General Treaty._


The report of an Ashantee having been flogged to death in Cape Coast

Castle, which was aggravated every hour to our prejudice, was explained

by the following letter:


                                   _Cape Coast Castle, August 17_, 1817.


                          T. E. BOWDICH, ESQ.


   SIR,


THE day before yesterday an Ashantee man was guilty of a most daring

insult to the fort. On passing the gate, he was desired by the sentinel

to take his cloth off his shoulders, but instead of complying, he turned

round and struck him. The offender was instantly secured, and I ordered

him to be put in irons. Last night about nine o’clock, the captain of

the guard came to me to say, that the sentry on duty had reported the

Ashantee to have hung himself. The place in which he was with others

confined, was immediately opened, and he was found in a room adjoining

to that in which the prisoners sleep, with his under cloth attached to a

beam not more than three feet high, and very tightly drawn round his

throat, part of his body was lying on the ground, and it must have been

by the most determined resolution that he succeeded in strangling

himself. The surgeon was present, but his efforts to recover him were

ineffectual. This is the second offence of a similar nature that has

occurred; the first person, I most assuredly should have punished, had

he not ran past the sentry and made his escape.


The King’s displeasure will no doubt be excited when he hears of such

acts of insolence, and I hope he will issue such orders to his people,

as will make them more circumspect in future.


                                            I am, Sir,


                                        your most obedient Servant,


                                                            J. H. SMITH.


                               * * * * *


                                         _Coomassie, 31st August_, 1817.


          JOHN HOPE SMITH, ESQ. GOVERNOR IN CHIEF, &c. &c. &c.


   SIR,


I RECEIVED your letter last evening respecting the suicide of the

Ashantee. I procured an audience this morning, and have just returned

from the palace, where I had the honour to address you a letter, in the

name of the King, on this, and other subjects.


The messenger sent up by Adoo Bradie, was the brother of the deceased,

and declared before the King upon oath, that he had been killed by the

officers. The master (our landlord) proposed a fine to the captains

assembled, but after the audience was gone through, the King retired to

council, which is the form, and returning, dictated the sentiments I had

the honour to communicate to you, and rebuked our house-master severely

for his proposition. Of course I impressed the insult to the fort, as

the superior consideration of your letter.


The insolence of the lower orders here became insufferable, they

proceeded even to pelting us with stones; after every effort on our part

to conciliate them by the exhibition of the telescope and other

novelties. As may be expected in a military government, they are beyond

the King’s control, out of the field. He declared however, that he would

behead any man I would point out to him, and begged me to punish them as

I thought proper: a summary chastisement of two inferior captains

repressed this spirit.


All the captains of consequence have become friendly and respectful;

Apokoo was deputed in form yesterday, in the name of the whole, to thank

me for my conduct in negociating with the King.


The Treaty will be brought forward to be executed in six days, before

the annual assembly of Kings, caboceers, and captains. All the Kings

tributaries and allies being compelled to attend him at the yam custom.


The King intends your linguist De Graff, to take fetish with his five

linguists, to be just to both the powers to be pledged to the treaty,

and is convinced of his probity.


                                I am, with respect, Sir,


                                       your most obedient Servant,


                                                      T. EDWARD BOWDICH.


                               * * * * *


                                            _Coomassie, 31st Aug._ 1817.


    SAÏ TOOTOO QUAMINA, _King of Ashantee, &c. to_ JOHN HOPE SMITH,

               _Esquire, Governor in Chief, &c. &c. &c._


   SIR,


THE King assures you, that, anticipating the permanent union of the

English and Ashantees, so far from allowing the death of one man to

retard it, he should take no notice if a thousand were flogged to death

by you, as reported here, well knowing the insolent disposition of the

lower order of Ashantees, which is as vexatious to him as to you. He is

satisfied however, that this man came to his death by his own hands.


The King wishes you to adjust the palaver between the Commendas and

Elminas, as soon as convenient to you; that all the people who serve him

may be united, relying entirely on your justice.


The King will thank you very much if you will make the people of Cape

Coast, Elmina, and Commenda “_all one together_.”


The little palaver between these people, is the only one remaining; and

therefore, though it is not his, he wishes you to settle it.


The King hereby, and by his messenger, empowers his nephew Adoo Bradie,

and the Captain Quantree, to receive the gold from the deputies of

Commenda in your presence.


You must settle the compliments and fees, which the Commendas send to

the King’s linguists and captains.


The King hopes you will advise the people of Amissa, through some

medium, to retract their insolent message to the King, that the whole of

the Fantee territory may be quiet.


The King has condescended personally to solicit Mr. Bowdich to protract

his stay fifteen days, and obliged all his captains to the same

condescension, so that you will consider it the King’s act from the wish

to send him down with an honourable escort, and other marks of his

favour.


The King wishes you health and happiness.


                                   The mark X of Saï Tootoo Quamina, &c.


    In the presence of


      WM. HUTCHISON.


      HENRY TEDLIE.


A few only of the many curious observations of our Ashantee friends

recur to me. One captain told us he had heard that the English were so

constantly in palavers, one with another, that their houses, which he

understood to be made of wood, the same as their ships, were always

fixed on wheels; so that when a man had quarrelled with his neighbour,

he moved to another part of the bush. Another insisted that monkies

(whom the Moors said sprung from the Israelites, who disobeyed Moses)

could talk as well as men; but they were not such fools; for if they

did, they knew men would make them work.—This is better than Pliny’s

account of monkies playing chess.


The King walked abroad in great state one day, an irresistible

caricature; he had on an old fashioned court suit of General Daendels’

of brown velveteen, richly embroidered with silver thistles, with an

English epaulette sewn on each shoulder, the coat coming close round the

knees, from which the flaps of the waistcoat were not very distant, a

cocked hat bound with gold lace, in shape just like that of a

coachman’s, white shoes, the long silver headed cane we presented to

him, mounted with a crown, as a walking staff, and a small dirk round

his waist.


The King presented one of our servants with six ackies of gold, for

making trowsers for his child, and mending him a pair of drawers, which

he thought it extravagant to put on under trowsers or small clothes, and

therefore wore them alone.


I fixed a rude leaping bar in the outer yard of our house, and trained

the horse to it, preparatory to getting him over the trunks of trees on

the path: this brought even greater levees than the camera obscura, or

the telescope. Sometimes a gazer would start from the eye piece of the

latter, to lay hold of the figure at the end, as he expected; and they

all insisted on both being taken to pieces in their presence, that they

might see what was inside. At length, being inexplicable, it was

pronounced fetish. A captain had told the King, that with the telescope

we saw, when at Doompassie, all that he was doing at Coomassie: and

happening, in a sudden and heavy rain, to gallop from Asafoo to our

house, with Mr. Tedlie on the horse behind me, holding the umbrella, it

was immediately reported to the King as our plan of travelling to Cape

Coast.


Our Accra linguist pointed out a man to me named Tando, whom he

recollected to have visited the Coast some years, in great pomp, never

going the shortest distance, but in his taffeta hammock, covered with a

gorgeous umbrella, and surrounded by flatterers, who even wiped the

ground before he trod on it. This man had now scarcely a cloth to cover

him. He had been retired from his embassy to Akim, in consequence of a

dispute with Attah, then the king of that country; for though Attah was

adjudged to be in fault, after the palaver was talked at Coomassie, the

Ashantee government thought it politic to displace Tando, though he had

become disagreeable to the other, only for his vigilance and fidelity.

After a long interval of the most luxurious life the capital could

afford, he was instructed to proceed to Elmina, to talk a palaver for

the King; but thinking it would be a coup d’éclat much more important

and agreeable, if he could settle the Warsaw palaver as well, he visited

the country on his return, and persuaded them to conciliate the King,

and avert their ruin, by carrying a considerable sum of gold to

Coomassie, and agreeing to pay twenty-four slaves for every Ashantee

subject killed or injured by one of Warsaw. Deputies returned with this

man for this purpose; but the King dismissed them contemptuously; and to

the disappointment and surprise of Tando, declared that no man must dare

to do good out of his own head, or perhaps he would find he did bad, as

Tando had done, in spoiling a palaver which he and his great men meant

to sleep a long time. Tando was immediately stripped of all his property

for his presumption, and from a noble became a beggar.


The Moors now became friendly, and sent us some very good coffee, and

choice pieces of meat.


                               * * * * *


                                           _Coomassie, Sept. 8th_, 1817.


          JOHN HOPE SMITH, ESQUIRE, GOVERNOR IN CHIEF, &c. &c.


   SIR,


I HAVE the satisfaction to inform you, that the treaty was signed and

sworn to yesterday, by the King of Ashantee, and this day, by the King

of Dwabin. The whole of the caboceers, captains, and tributaries having

arrived, the treaty was finally discussed on Saturday, and two of the

four members of the Aristocracy, with the two oldest captains (Ashantee

and Nabbra) were deputed to swear for that assembly, with the King,

whose oaths (being very rare) are solemnized by the presence of his

wives.


The King sent a handsome procession of flags, guns, and music, to

conduct us to the palace on the occasion; and meeting us in the outer

square, preceded us to the inmost, where about 300 females were seated,

in all the magnificence which a profusion of gold and silk could

furnish. The splendour of this coup d’oeil made our surprise almost

equal to theirs. We were seated with the King and the deputies, under

the large umbrellas in the centre, and I was desired to declare the

objects of the Embassy and the Treaty, to an old linguist, peculiar to

the women. The King displayed the presents to them; the flags were all

sewn together, and wrapped around him as a cloth.


I was afterwards desired to stand before the King, and swear on my sword

that I had declared the truth: I did so, with the other officers. The

next form dictated was, that I should seat myself, and receive the oaths

of the deputies, and lastly, of the King himself, for his brother the

King of England. They advanced in turn, extending their gold swords

close to my face, as they declared their oaths. I rose to receive the

King’s, all the women holding up two fingers, as their mark of

approbation when he received the sword, and one of his counsellors

kneeling beside him with a large stone on his head. The King swore very

deliberately, that his words might be fully impressed on me, invoking

God and the fetish to kill him; first, if he did not keep the law, if we

had sworn true; and secondly, if he did not revenge the Ashantees to the

full, if we had bad in our heads, and did not come for the purpose I

avowed. The assurances, and the menaces of the oaths of the captains

were equally forcible. The King sent an anker of rum to our people to

drink on the occasion, and paid each captain the customary fee, of a

periguin of gold on his oath.


The King having communicated my wish, by a formal message, to Boïtinnee

Quama, the King of Dwabin, who holds his temporary court on the north

side of the town, I seconded it, by sending the canes to request an

audience; at which I had again formally to declare the objects of the

Embassy and the Treaty, which, after a great deal of form and enquiry,

received his signature, with the attestations of his chief linguists,

Quama Saphoo, and Kobara Saphoo, who are his principal counsellors. His

court was equally crowded with the King of Ashantees, who sits on his

right hand when he visits Dwabin; a reciprocal etiquette.


By an addition to the 4th article of the treaty, I reconciled the point

of the Amissa palaver; and the securing you the opportunity of

mediation, (without attaching any thing like responsibility) I

considered to be not only a precaution due to humanity, but a prudent

and legitimate measure for the extension of our influence.


The value of this treaty is enhanced by the reflection, that the

justice, dignity, and spirit, of the British Government have been

preserved inviolate; and that it has been the result of the impression,

and not of the abatement of these characteristics.


We are flattered by your acknowledgment of our offer to accompany the

King to the Buntooko war, and feel the force of your reason in the

present view of the invasion of that country. The lake proving to be

southward instead of northward, and close to the Accra path, I did not

think it prudent to aggravate suspicion, for so secondary and well

defined an object, whilst every day exacted some exertion (beyond

vigilance) to wear away the difficulties opposed to the more important

views of the Mission.


I expect the King will permit me to take leave on Saturday next. To-

morrow Apokoo gives us a dinner in public.


                             I am, with respect, Sir,


                                        your most obedient Servant,


                                                          T. E. BOWDICH.


                               * * * * *


_Treaty made and entered into by_ THOMAS EDWARD BOWDICH, _Esquire, in

the name of the Governor and Council at Cape Coast Castle on the Gold

Coast of Africa, and on behalf of the British Government, with_ SAÏ

TOOTOO QUAMINA, _King of Ashantee and its Dependencies, and_ BOÏTINNEE

QUAMA, _King of Dwabin and its Dependencies._


1st. There shall be perpetual peace and harmony between the British

subjects in this country, and the subjects of the Kings of Ashantee and

Dwabin.


2nd. The same shall exist between the subjects of the Kings of Ashantee

and Dwabin, and all nations of Africa residing under the protection of

the Company’s Forts and Settlements on the Gold Coast, and, it is hereby

agreed, that there are no palavers now existing, and that neither party

has any claim upon the other.


3rd. The King of Ashantee guarantees the security of the people of Cape

Coast, from the hostilities threatened by the people of Elmina.


4th. In order to avert the horrors of war, it is agreed, that in any

case of aggression on the part of the natives under British protection,

the Kings shall complain thereof to the Governor in Chief to obtain

redress, and that they will in no instance resort to hostilities, even

against the other towns of the Fantee territory, without endeavouring as

much as possible to effect an amicable arrangement, affording the

Governor the opportunity of propitiating it, as far as he may with

discretion.


5th. The King of Ashantee agrees to permit a British officer to reside

constantly at his capital, for the purpose of instituting and preserving

a regular communication with the Governor in Chief at Cape Coast Castle.


6th. The Kings of Ashantee and Dwabin pledge themselves to countenance,

promote, and encourage the trade of their subjects with Cape Coast

Castle and its dependencies to the extent of their power.


7th. The Governors of the respective Forts shall at all times afford

every protection in their power to the persons and property of the

people of Ashantee and Dwabin, who may resort to the water side.


8th. The Governor in Chief reserves to himself the right of punishing

any subject of Ashantee or Dwabin guilty of secondary offences, but in

case of any crime of magnitude, he will send the offender to the Kings,

to be dealt with according to the laws of his country.


9th. The Kings agree to commit their children to the care of the

Governor in Chief, for education, at Cape Coast Castle, in the full

confidence of the good intentions of the British government, and of the

benefits to be derived therefrom.


10th. The Kings promise to direct diligent inquiries to be made

respecting the officers attached to the Mission of Major John Peddie,

and Captain Thomas Campbell; and to influence and oblige the

neighbouring kingdoms and their tributaries, to befriend them as the

subjects of the British government.


Signed and sealed at Coomassie, this seventh day of September, in the

year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and seventeen.


                                The mark of SAÏ TOOTOO QUAMINA X (L. S.)


                                The mark of BOÏTINNEE QUAMA X    (L. S.)


                                THOMAS EDWARD BOWDICH.           (L. S.)


   In the presence of


WILLIAM HUTCHISON, Resident.


HENRY TEDLIE, Assistant Surgeon.


 The mark of APOKOO X }

                      }

 ODUMATA X            } Deputed from the General Assembly of caboceers

                      } and captains to swear with the King.

 NABBRA X             }

                      }

 ASHANTEE X           }


 KABRA SAPHOO X   }

                  } Linguists to the King of Dwabin.

 QUAMINA SAPHOO X }


 QUASHEE APAINTREE X Accra Linguist.


 QUASHEE TOM X      }

                    } Cape Coast Linguists.

 QUAMINA QUATCHEE X }


                               * * * * *


[Illustration: This _is to make known that Major John Peddie, Capt.

Thos. Campbell, and Surgeon Willm. Cowdry, have been employed by the

British Government to proceed from Senegal into the interior of Africa,

to trace the course of the River Niger; and to obtain such information

respecting the Countries through which they pass, as may be useful in

the extension and improvement of Commerce which is the object of the

British Government in sending those persons to Africa; and that any

Person who may happen to meet with those Gentlemen, and shall be the

Bearer of a Letter to the Governor of CAPE COAST CASTLE on the Gold

Coast, from either of them, shall receive five Ounces of Gold, and be

liberally rewarded for any Service or Act of kindness which it may

appear by such Letter may have been rendered to either of them._


_Witness my hand at Coomasie the Capital of the Kingdom of Ashantee the

30th. day of July 1817_


_Wm. Hutchinson Resident_


_T. E. Bowdich Conductor of the Mission from Cape Coast Castle_]


We were present at the trial of Appia Nanu, who had accompanied his

brother Appia Danqua in the last invasion of Fantee, and was ordered by

the King, on his death, to take the command of the army, and prosecute

the campaign. In the irritation of the moment, he exclaimed, before the

royal messengers, that though the King did not prevent him from

succeeding to the stool, and the honours of his brother, he kept back

all the rock gold which belonged to the inheritance, and desired to wear

him out in the pursuit of the revolters, to prevent his claim and

enjoyment of the property of his family. From this time he was very

inactive, and became suspected of cowardice; however, having succeeded

in getting the head of one of the revolters, he returned to Coomassie;

where he was coolly received, but not accused until the 8th of July. The

witnesses were the messengers the King had sent to him, who had been

concealed in a distant part of the frontier ever since, that Appia Nanu,

believing the general report of their death, might be the more

confounded when they burst upon him at the moment of his denial of the

charge. He was deprived of his stool and the whole of his property, but

permitted to retire with three wives and ten slaves; the King hearing

the next day that he still loitered in the capital, exclaimed, that no

proper man would bear so much shame before all the people, rather than

leave his home, and ordered only one wife to be left to him, whereupon

Appia Nanu hung himself. The King considers, that none but the basest

spirits can endure life after severe disgrace.


The Moors celebrated the feast of Ramadan in this month: there was

nothing curious in this ceremony. Men and women were dressed in their

richest suits, and seated on large skins before their houses, for they

occupy one street exclusively. They rose occasionally in small troops,

made short circuits in different directions, saluted each other, and

then sat down again. In the evening, the superiors exchanged visits at

their houses; the one visited always accompanied the other some distance

along the street on his way, where they exchanged blessings, and parted.

The slaves who carried their small umbrella’s over their heads, seemed

thoroughly jaded by this incessant parading.


The King regretted in one of his visits about this time, that they were

not more frequent; he said, our conversation entertained him more than

any thing else, because it told him of so many things black men never

heard of, but when he wished to see us on that account, his great men

checked him, and said, it did not become him as a great King to want us,

but that he should only send his compliments, see us, and make us wait a

long time when he sent for us to the palace.


                              CHAPTER VII.


                               * * * * *


 _Proceedings and Incidents until the completion of the Mission and its

                     return to Cape Coast Castle._


On the 11th of September I received the Governor’s reply to my letter of

the 10th of August.


                                   _Cape Coast Castle, August 25_, 1817.


                          T. E. BOWDICH, ESQ.


   SIR,


I HAVE received your letter of the 10th instant. The boy and girl shall

be disposed of under the protection of the Government here, agreeable to

the King’s wishes.


The messenger (Ocranameah) has grossly misrepresented to the King, the

reception he met with at Cape Coast; he was treated with the greatest

civility during his stay, and on leaving, expressed himself gratified by

the attention which had been shewn him.


For the King’s satisfaction, I have subjoined a list of the articles I

made him a present of;[13] the three first which I gave him, on taking

leave, will, when produced, convince him how much he has been deceived,

and prove to him, that his recommendation of the messenger was not

unattended to.


The Buntooko war, I consider a mere pretext for getting rid of the

Resident; it cannot be the true motive: to oppose however, any

disinclination to the measure, either on the part of the King or his

principal men, would be entirely useless; the aversion to it has no

doubt originated in the latter, with whom, under the present order of

things, the Resident would be very unpopular; consequently unsafe. The

eager desire which the King has manifested for enquiring into every

trivial occurrence, is another cause of its being objectionable. The

residence of a British officer would afford him the opportunity, not

only of doing this, but of making demands which he might otherwise not

have thought of. These and other circumstances, which were entirely

unforeseen, have materially altered my opinion in regard to the

Residency, which is certainly not so desirable as I before considered

it. You will therefore, on your return, bring Mr. Hutchison with you.


I am not aware of any Ashantees having introduced themselves here, but

such as were duly authorised by the King; you will however inform him,

that none will be attended to unless they bear his cane.


As Mr. Hutchison is to return, it will be a most important point that

you bring down two of the King’s sons for education, and I am very

solicitous that you should accomplish this object if possible.


The Commenda palaver being terminated, there will be nothing to detain

you longer at Ashantee. Your returning by way of Warsaw will be

desirable, and I hope the King will not object to your so doing.


                                           I am, Sir,


                                      your most obedient Servant,


                                                        JOHN HOPE SMITH.


                                            _Coomassie, Sept. 16_, 1817.


          JOHN HOPE SMITH, ESQ. GOVERNOR IN CHIEF, &c. &c. &c.


   SIR,


I DID not receive your letter of the 25th of August, until the 11th

instant, four days after I had advised you of the execution of the

treaty. I considered it my duty to acquaint you of every variation in

the prospects of the Embassy, although, even when communicating the

discouraging circumstances of my letter of the 10th ult. I could not

abate my hopes, or allow doubt to sicken my exertions. I valued on the

reflection, that I had not been heard before the King in vindication of

the Residency; the motives of which I knew to have been grossly

misrepresented by our natural enemies the Moors, to whose arts the

suspicion of the natives have been suitably auxiliary. My confidence was

justified by the favourable impression the King and the Government

manifested, when the subject was publicly advocated; since which I have

never heard of an objection to it: it has indeed, become a favourite

measure with the superior captains, who, as far as may be judged from

the respect and deference with which they have treated us from that

time, seem not only to have been conciliated, but won by the recent

circumstances of the negotiation. The terms of the treaty, by exceeding

your expectations, will compensate for the accumulation of difficulties

which have been opposed to us. We are taught to believe that no law has

ever been enacted in this kingdom with equal solemnity, or an oath, so

serious, been before submitted to by the King, or imposed on the

captains. Had the treaty disappointed, instead of exceeded our

expectations, I must have viewed it as inviolable, and submitted myself

to your candour; which I would now, and justify myself by answering the

reasonable apprehensions which have recently affected your opinion of

the Residency, rather than by the plea that the treaty was executed

before I received them.


If I had been convinced that it was dislike, and not suspicion, which

actuated the opposition to the Residency, I should not only have

considered it imprudent, but derogatory, to have persevered in the view;

but, sensible that it was the latter, (from the evidence of the King’s

deportment, and the knowledge of the intrigue and calumny excited

against us,) I felt the greater anxiety for its accomplishment; since,

to have yielded to suspicion, without every labour to eradicate it,

would have been to have excluded ourselves from the kingdom hereafter.


If the King had been actuated, individually, by the desire of detecting

the frauds of his messengers, I should have viewed the measure as

pernicious; but the Government itself having anxiously recommended it,

for the sake of their own interest, (Fort pay, and purchases from the

treasury being always divided amongst the superior captains) I

considered it harmless; and not solely from the power of its advocates,

but also from the impotence of the royal messengers in state affairs,

being generally attendants on the King, and therefore jealously watched

by the other parts of the Government. This desire has only been

addressed to me in two instances, both of which I think justified it:

first, respecting the fort pay; it having been since proved, and

confessed, that, out of 62 oz. paid at Christiansburg Castle in 1816 and

17, the Ashantee Government has been defrauded of 23 oz. by the

messenger: and secondly, respecting the goods purchased by Ocranameah,

where the fraud could not escape notice. Such peculations have probably,

in the first case, given rise to doubts of our honour; and in the

latter, have certainly proved a prejudice to the trade. On the occasion

of Ocranameah’s baseness, I myself requested the King to allow me to

address you for the particulars of his treatment; and if you consider

the mischievous influence of the report, the fatality of the impression

that the King’s Embassy had been subjected to contempt, whilst we had

been treated with generosity and respect, you will admit that the

disproof was imperious on me: he has been disgraced, and owes his safety

to my intercession. Nothing but the most decisive conduct can arrest

villainy here. The reports of Adoo Bradie have been highly flattering.

The King will certainly have a better opportunity of making demands from

the residence of a British officer; neither can I lessen the probability

further than by my opinion, which though only indulgent of the people in

general, is certainly favourable of the honour of the King, and the

superior captains. The advantages and prospects of our preserving our

footing by a Residency, have been too fully suggested by your

experience, to require my dwelling on them.


I will proceed to acquaint you of the circumstances subsequent to my

receipt of your letter, one of which had nearly been serious. After the

settlement of the Commenda palaver, the King requested me to wait 10

days, which were afterwards extended to 15, as you were advised in his

letter of the 31st ult. This time expired on Saturday last, but the King

said then that we must not go until Monday. Accordingly, on that day, I

delivered Mr. Hutchison written instructions (a copy of which I enclose)

and sent several messages to the King to remind him of his promise. We

were not sent for until six o’clock in the evening, when the King said

he could not let me go then, nor before he had time to send me away

properly. This I considered to be the mere affectation of state; I

pleaded that your orders were binding, and that it was insulting to you,

as well as dangerous to me, to prevent my respect of them, now every

thing like business was settled. The King said he would only ask me to

stop until Wednesday. I replied, that if he would give me his hand, and

promise that I should go then, I would wait. No! he could not, but he

would promise me for the Monday following. I saw that yielding to this

would subject me to an indefinite delay. I told the King that I should

be obliged to go, though unwillingly, without his approbation, and that

not only my duty but his promise justified me. I had only to ask him if

he still wished me to leave Mr. Hutchison? All the reply I could get

was, that I might break the Law if I thought proper. I told them the Law

would never be broken by an English officer, but still, if they were

sorry that they had sworn to the Law, I would send for it and tear it in

pieces before them; we did not make laws from fear. No! they liked the

Law, and could not break it, but I might if I chose. I repeated my

willingness to stay till Wednesday; the promise could only be given for

the Monday: the King and the council retired abruptly. I followed them,

told them I was obliged to be determined, and begged the King to shew

his respect for you, and the friendship he had condescended to profess

for myself, by considering your orders; this was construed as

indecision; and Monday, or when the King has time, was the reply. I

thanked him formally for all his kindnesses, told him I must go, and

retired. It was necessary, at least, to make the attempt, although it

was then eight o’clock. I left all the luggage in the charge of Mr.

Hutchison, except two portmanteaus, the sextant, and the box containing

my papers. We had scarcely proceeded fifty yards before the gong-gongs

and drums were beat all around us, and we were attacked by a crowd of

swords and muskets, headed by our house master Aboïdwee, who in the

first rush seized the luggage and the flag. I felt myself compelled to

attempt to regain the flag; and the value of my papers, and the impolicy

of being intimidated by the outrage, were also considerations. I begged

the officers not to draw their swords till the last moment, and taking

the muskets, the butt ends of which cleared our way to the luggage, we

fastened on it, with the soldiers, artisans, and our servants, who

supported us vigorously. The Ashantees did not attempt to fire, but

attacked us only with their heavy swords and large stones. We kept our

ground nearly a quarter of an hour, though our belts and caps were torn

away, and we frequently fell. At this time, Mr. Tedlie (who had regained

his sword, which had been torn from his side) was stunned by a blow on

the head, and as all were much bruised, and some of the people cut, I

contented myself with the recovery of the flag, the sextant, and the

papers, and we retired slowly to the house, not expecting they would

follow us; but they did so, with a fury which led me to believe they

intended our destruction. We posted ourselves in the door-way, and I

immediately dispatched the canes by a back way to the King, to tell him

we had not yet drawn our swords, but we must do so unless he rescued us

immediately. The tumult did not allow expostulation, we had no

alternative but to defend ourselves, which the narrow passage favoured.

The captain, Aboïdwee, who was quite mad with fury and liquor, made a

cut at me as I held him from me, which would have been fatal but for the

presence of mind of one of the soldiers, through which it only grazed my

face. We were soon rescued by the presence of Adoocee, the chief

linguist, and Yokokroko, the King’s chamberlain, with their retinues.

Nothing could exceed their servility, they offered to swear the King was

not privy to the outrage, ordered Aboïdwee before them, and threatened

him with the loss of his head. I told them I knew the King’s controul,

and was not to be treated as a fool; he had forcibly detained us as

prisoners, and must take the consequences; I should say no more. They

continued their professions and entreaties upwards of an hour, and did

all they could by their menaces to Aboïdwee, and their deference to the

evidence of our people, to convince me of their discountenance of the

outrage. I divided the people into watches for the night.


By day light the next morning all our luggage was returned, I refused to

receive it. Yokokroko and Adoo Quamina then sent to say they waited

below until we had done breakfast; a long palaver succeeded, of the same

tenour as that of the preceding night. About 11 o’clock, the linguists,

Adoocee, Otee, and Quancum; Yokokroko, and a crowd of captains came from

the King with a present of 20 ackies, two flasks of liquor, and a large

hog. I asked them if they came to put more shame on my face, by bribing

me to settle the great palaver they had made the night before with the

King of England. They flattered and menaced by turns to make me take it,

and urged, that to refuse the King’s present was to declare war. I

persisted in refusing every thing short of an interview with the King.

The Cape Coast messengers, impelled by their apprehensions and their

avarice, had the temerity to declare at this moment, that you had sent

them as a check upon me, and that they knew I was not doing as you

wished in talking so to the King, and that you would make a palaver with

me for not waiting the King’s pleasure. It was necessary to annihilate

the impression of such language immediately. I deprived them of their

canes, and threatened to put them in irons. The King not long after sent

his eunuch and followers to conduct us to the palace, where he had

assembled the superior captains. We went in plain clothes, alleging that

we dared not wear our uniforms as prisoners. The King said, I must not

say that; he was my good friend, and would do me right; he did not think

I would have tried to go without his leave, and never meant his people

to fight with us, he would give me the heads of all those who led them

on, and beg me himself for the rest, as I begged him for Quamina

Bootaqua; he never begged any body before; he did not send the gold, as

I thought, he sent it to pay for any thing the people had spoiled, and

meant to do us right all the same; it would break his heart if the King

of England heard he had used his officers ill, and if I liked him, I

must settle the palaver easy.


Of course I would not hear of any heads being cut off, though they all

pressed it repeatedly, and doubtless would not have regarded sacrificing

a few inferior captains to varnish their allegation; yet, I must

declare, it is my firm opinion, and it is supported by the evidence of

our private friends, that the King and his principal men merely intended

Aboïdwee to stop us, by placing his numbers before us and pleading the

King’s orders, not dreaming of any outrage, or that the impetuosity of

this man, irritated by the loss of his retainer at Cape Coast,[14] would

hurry him to order his soldiers to assault us: he has not an atom of

influence; but the King selected him as a near relative of his own, to

succeed to Bakkee’s stool, to which 1700 men are attached: the King

repeatedly offered me his head. To resume, the King requested us to

drink with him, and then to shake hands, begged us to resume our

uniforms, and ordered his own people to attend us at our house. I

renewed the subject of our departure. The King said this was a bad week,

and he did not like us to go in it, he would thank me very much to stay

till Monday, and then he could get a proper present ready. Sunday too

was the Adaï custom, and then I must put Mr. Hutchison’s hand in

Adoocee’s, and Adoocee place it in his, and he would promise to take

proper care of him before all the captains. Odumata and Adoocee came

forward to give me their hands, as a pledge of their responsibility. I

said I could receive no one’s hand but the King’s on such an occasion,

but I ordered Quashie Apaintree to do so, and it was sworn to. The King

then said Adoocee had told him the Cape Coast messengers had tried to

put shame on my face—he was very angry with them—they ought to know God

made white man’s head better than black man’s, and they must come before

him, and put my foot on their heads. I told him, I could not let any one

do so, but I sent for their canes, and entrusted them to them again,

with a suitable reprimand. The King then begged me to receive his

present, which I did, giving the people the hog and liquor, they had

received another on the Friday before, which the King sent me, with 39

yams.


I have observed that the Government’s anxiety for the force of the

Treaty, and for the Residency, has heightened in proportion to the

indifference I have affected. I consider the affair of yesterday to have

perfected the impression of our spirit. I certainly would not think of

leaving any but an officer of the most considerate conduct as a

Resident, and, I believe, Mr. Hutchison, by tempering his spirit with

judgment, may safely realize the objects of the situation; if, however,

on my return, you consider I have left him in a precarious situation, I

volunteer my services to replace him, and deliberately to retire the

Residency.


It occurs to me, the Amissa palaver may possibly be the design of this

interval, if it should, you may rely on my remaining resolute on the

subject.


                                                  I am, &c.


                                         (Signed)     T. EDWARD BOWDICH.


                                                _Coomassie, Sept._ 1817.


          _To_ WILLIAM HUTCHISON, _Esquire, British Resident._


   SIR,


I AM directed by the Governor in Chief to leave you written instructions

for your future government.


The conviction of the honour and justice of our public negotiations,

having procured us a footing in opposition to the arts which have been

practised upon the suspicion of the natives, your conduct is looked to,

with confidence, to support it, by originating an opinion of our moral

character, equally auspicious to the benevolent views of the British

Government. The simplicity of our religion, tolerating the calumny of

the Moors, that we are destitute of any, you will have the satisfaction

of perfecting the confutation, by a regular retirement to its duties,

and by the practice of that benevolence and forbearance, equally

congenial to the policy prescribed to us.


It would be premature, as well as dangerous, to direct any other than

the tacit reproof of your own conduct and sentiments, to the cruelties

consecrated by the superstitions of the Ashantees; you must be content

to avoid the countenance of them by your presence, by adhering to the

plea of the repugnance of your religion. This conduct, associated with a

humanity always inclining you to induce mercy, whenever the offence, or

prudence, may admit of an interference, will propitiate your own wishes,

and the expectations of the Government.


The friendship and respect which the King, and the superior captains

have manifested, will not only be preserved, but strengthened, by a

dignified deportment, and a considerate use of the private intercourse

these feelings have established; and you will cultivate the frequent

opportunities of instilling into their minds, that education originated

the pre-eminence of Europeans; and that peace is most auspicious to the

greatness of a Nation, directing all its powers to commerce and the

arts, and thereby founding its superior comfort, prosperity, and

embellishment. The power and resources of your own country should be

quoted to illustrate this truth; and you will impress that it is the

experience of it, which has imposed the benevolent anxiety of the

British Government, to improve the condition of the people of Africa,

through the legitimate medium of commerce. This impression you will

extend, deliberately, to the visitors from other kingdoms, particularly

to those from the Sarem and Mallowa countries.


In encouraging the trade with the Coast, your measures must disprove any

view but that of a fair competition; and your vigilance of the British

interests must be distinct from any thing like jealousy, suspicion, or

intermeddling: you will act as the advocate of the views of Europe, but

not allow any interference to be imposed on you, without the sanction of

the Governor in Chief, whose letters will be, exclusively, attended to,

and to whom you will candidly communicate any circumstance or

reflection, affecting our new connection.


You will repress, rather than encourage the disposition of the King and

the Council, to detect imposition through your assistance, by confining

your justifications, as much as possible, to public transactions; for

although the Government is gratified by it, it may tend to make the

Residency unpopular.


I enclose you a copy of the Treaty, and particularly direct your

attention to the 4th article, which authorizes you to submit to every

thing like a mediation, separable from responsibility, to the discussion

of the Governor in Chief, for the sake of peace and humanity; but you

will do this, invariably, with diffidence; without betraying any

sanguine expectations.


You will be more sensible to insult than injury; and the most politic

conduct will be, to declare that the British Government exacts from all

its officers, on pain of disgrace, a firm repulse of the former; and

that they dare not admit the influence of their private feelings, as in

the latter case.


I leave you in possession of the esteem of the King, and the friendship

of the superior Captains, and with every thing favourable to the objects

of the Residency; but, should any caprice in the Government make you

invidious to any thing like a party, or diminish their respect, you will

immediately address the Governor in Chief, who will order your presence

at Head Quarters. Another important consideration will be your health;

also the character of the captain who may be left in charge of the

capital, should the King go himself to the Buntooko war. Your personal

safety is out of the question at present, but should the least doubt

arise in your own mind hereafter, you must consult the Governor’s

solicitude, rather than your own spirit.


You see the necessity of keeping in with the Moors; the flattering their

intelligence is most conducive to this, and also elicits valuable

information.


I shall afford you a perusal of the dispatch of the Committee, and the

instructions of the Governor in Chief, to perfect the present.


I have directed Mr. Tedlie to leave you a supply of medicines, and you

will take charge of the Resident’s flag.


                                            I am, Sir,


                                        your most obedient Servant,


                                         (Signed)     T. EDWARD BOWDICH.


Baba had a great number of Arabic manuscripts; I have preserved a leaf

finely illuminated. Apokoo astonished us by offering to lend us some

books to read; he shewed us two French volumes on geography, a Dutch

bible, a volume of the Spectator, and a Dissuasion from Popery, 1620. It

was gratifying to recollect that this chief, now become so much attached

to us, was the man mentioned in our early dispatches as snatching Mr.

Tedlie’s sword from him, on the declaration of war, to make his oath

against us the more inveterate. Telling the King one day that Mr.

Hutchison’s and Mr. Tedlie’s countries, Scotland and Ireland, were

formerly distinct from mine, he begged directly to hear specimens of the

different languages, and was reluctantly persuaded that it was the

policy of England to get rid of all national distinctions between her

subjects. Apokoo was very fond of scribbling, and with a smile

frequently begged to know what he had written. They could not comprehend

how any hieroglyphic that was not a picture, could express an object. My

name, said the King, is not like me. He was rather uneasy at my

sketching; the Moors, he hinted, had insinuated that I could place a

spell on the buildings I drew. I told him, without drawings, the people

in England could not be convinced that I had visited him; he appeared

satisfied, and begged to be drawn handsome.


There are only four direct descendants now living of the noble families

which accompanied the emigration of Saï Tootoo, the founder of the

Ashantee monarchy; none of them are wealthy, and Assaphi, who is one, is

a beggar, wandering in the bush, having been disgraced from the highest

favour, for the following fraud. An old linguist of the former King’s

(Saï Quamina) having died at a distant croom, the King, according to

custom, sent Assaphi with four periguins of gold, and a quantity of

expensive cloths and mats to bury him; Assaphi kept the gold, and

substituted inferior cloths of his own. The wife urged the great and

zealous services of her husband to Saï Quamina, and her indignation at

such a mean acknowledgment as the King had sent. Assaphi returned,

reported her gratitude, and that every thing had been handsomely done,

to the credit of the King. The wife privately dug up the cloths buried

with the corpse, and suspecting the fraud, secretly conveyed them to the

King, with a full account. The King sent for Assaphi and again enquiring

the particulars, with seeming indifference, suddenly required him to

swear to the truth, which he advanced to do, when the King said no! you

must not swear, and the woman was immediately discovered to him with all

the cloths. He then confessed the particulars, was stripped of every

thing, and is now the more despised for not killing himself; and the

King could not put him to death, as the direct descendant of one of Saï

Tootoo’s peers. Part of the King’s reproach to him was curious: “my

brother’s linguist did him great good, so when he and my brother, who

now live with God, make God recollect all, and tell him the shame you

put on him for me, in so burying him, God will kill me.”


A man and a woman were beheaded on the 17th of this month, for an

intrigue: the woman was very handsome, and the wife of a captain: on

their being suspected, both were ordered to drink doom, which choking

them, they were immediately executed. The King’s sister sent for Mr.

Tedlie to go and see her, he enquired into her complaint and recommended

some medicine, which she very thankfully agreed to take; he prepared

some for her, and went to give her the proper directions; upon which,

she handed the cup to her husband, who beginning to swallow it very

fast, Mr. Tedlie stopped him, and said he had only prepared sufficient

for one person; the lady replied, “let him drink this to day, and I can

have more to-morrow;” he told her that he had very little medicine, and

could not afford to give it to people that were in good health: she did

not appear pleased with this reasoning. A man of Assiminia, who had

received medicine and advice from Mr. Tedlie on our march up, sent him a

third present about this time, of fruit, vegetables, and wild deer, with

the account that he was quite well.


Apokoo enquired very anxiously, why the King of England had not sent one

of his sons with the presents to the King of Ashantee. He said he had

himself conquered five nations, during the present and the preceding

reign, and he named twenty one nations which now paid tribute to

Ashantee; but he added, there were three countries which would not; two

eastward, and one to the north-west; each of those eastward had defeated

the Ashantees; the one north-westward, on the King sending for tribute,

desired that he would come and take it, and afterwards entirely

destroyed an Ashantee army.


                               * * * * *


                                            _Akrofroom, Sept. 26_, 1817.


          JOHN HOPE SMITH, ESQ. GOVERNOR IN CHIEF, &c. &c. &c.


   SIR,


THE King only availed himself of our detention to introduce us to fresh

ceremonies, and to augment the testimonies of his friendship. The Amissa

palaver was not attempted, and nothing like design has disclosed itself.


On the Monday there was a general assembly of the caboceers and

captains, the King of Dwabin being present, with his linguists, also

several Dagwumba caboceers, and the Moorish dignitaries. The King

announced the execution of the Treaty by himself and the deputies, and

impressed, in a long speech through his linguists, that he would visit

the least offence against it with the greatest severity. I was then

requested to read it for the last time, and the King’s duplicate was

executed in a similar manner.


In the evening, the King gave us our last audience before all his

superior captains: a letter was dictated, which I shall present to you

on my arrival; and Adoocee, the chief linguist, was formally deputed to

receive Mr. Hutchison’s hand from me, and to place it in the King’s, who

received it with a solemn avowal of his responsibility for the charge.

The linguist then presented from the King,


To the Government, four boys for education.


To the British Museum, six specimens of the goldsmith’s work. (I had

interested the King, by my account of this national repository.)


To the Governor in Chief, one boy, one girl, to be brought up in his

service.


To Mr. Bowdich, one boy, one girl, and 2 oz. 6 ac. of gold.


  Mr. Tedlie, one boy, and 1 oz.     4 ac. of gold.


  Accra linguist, one cloth,         10 ditto.


  Cape Coast linguists, two cloths,  10 ditto.


  De Graaff’s messenger,             10 ditto.


  The officers servants,             10 ditto.


  The soldiers,                      10 ditto.


I afterwards received a Sarem cloth and some trifles as a further dash

from Apokoo; one sheep, &c. &c. from Baba the chief of the Moors; and 15

ackies of gold from the King’s linguists, with their acknowledgments of

my firmness during the negotiation.


The King having a palaver at present with the Warsaws, objected so

strongly to our returning through their territory, that after one or two

attempts to over-rule his apprehensions, I found it would be imprudent

to persevere in the wish, although the disappointment was great; the

King assured me the Warsaw path was two days longer, and that he will

not spare any labour on that of Assin directly after the war. I had

permission to go some miles on the Warsaw path, to convince myself of

its neglected condition.


The King’s favorite son (a child about five years old) whom he had

dressed in our uniform for the occasion, was so alarmed at the idea of

being given over to us, that the King’s feelings obliged him to promise

me that he would send the children after me; he is too jealous of the

advantages to allow those of his great men to participate, until his own

family are first distinguished by them.


The King supplied me with bearers, and pressed me to take six hammock

men in case of sickness; he would not hear of pay for any, and persisted

in appointing one of his captains to take care of us. He yielded the

point of an escort reluctantly, which I had combated from the

consideration of the expense of a present to such a number. The King

requested me on taking leave, to wait a short time until his captains

had distributed the powder to salute as on our departure, and it being

then dark, to proceed no further than a small croom just beyond the

marsh, where the people should join us in the morning. The King and his

captains were seated by torch light with all their insignia, without the

palace, and we quitted the capital, preceded by the King’s banners,

discharges of musketry, and every flattering distinction that could be

thought of.


The King has provided one of the best houses for Mr. Hutchison, very

superior to any we could have raised at so short a notice, and has

anticipated every thing to make him comfortable, and respected; nothing

could be more considerate or kind, than his speech to him on my taking

leave.


A messenger of the King of Dwabin’s accompanies me for a suit of our

uniform for the King’s wear, which I could not refuse.


                                              I am, &c. &c.


                                         (Signed)     T. EDWARD BOWDICH.


                                        _Coomassie, September 22_, 1817.


    SAÏ TOOTOO QUAMINA, _King of Ashantee, &c. to_ JOHN HOPE SMITH,

               _Esquire, Governor in Chief, &c. &c. &c._


   SIR,


WE are from this time forth good friends, and I shall send all the trade

I can to Cape Coast Castle, and I hope that you will by and by have

confidence in my word.


I beg you will send my best compliments to the King of England, and

accept them yourself, in proof of my satisfaction of the purposes of the

Embassy, and its happy termination.


You will call all the Fantee caboceers before you, and impress the

importance of the Treaty, and exact their respect of it, as I have from

all my great men and caboceers.


I hope you will always act towards me as a friend, and I shall always be

ready to protect and support the British interests.


I wish you health and happiness, and all my captains send their best

compliments to you.


                                     I am, Sir,


                                           your sincere friend,


                                       The mark X of Saï Tootoo Quamina.


   Present,


W. HUTCHISON.


HENRY TEDLIE.


I will thank you to impress on the King of England that I have sworn not

to renew the war with the Fantees, out of respect to him, and I shall

consider them as his people. I hope therefore he will, in turn, consider

if he cannot renew the Slave Trade, which will be good for me.


I hope the King of England will now let all foreign vessels come to the

coast to trade, and you must say that the path is now clear to do as

much English trade as your supplies will allow.


                               * * * * *


         The following letter was sent after me, to Doompassie.


                                       _Coomassie, 23d September_, 1817.


          JOHN HOPE SMITH, ESQ. GOVERNOR IN CHIEF, &c. &c. &c.


   SIR,


THE King of Ashantee desires me to request you will write to all the

Governors of English forts, on the African coast, to order the caboceers

of each town, to send a proper person to Cape Coast, and that you will

add one messenger yourself; that they may all proceed to Coomassie to

take the King’s fetish in his presence, that none may plead ignorance of

the Treaty concluded between his Majesty and the British nation.


The King wishes me to express, that he is fully satisfied with the

objects of the Mission, and that the Treaty may be read by me to all the

Fantee deputies you may send for that purpose.


                                                 I am, &c. &c.


                                              (Signed)     W. HUTCHISON.


                               * * * * *


My last private letters from Cape Coast Castle had imposed the most

painful anxiety; the two lives naturally beyond all others the dearest

to me, were imminently endangered by the seasoning illness of the

country; one yielded to it before I could arrive, yet, under all the

impatience of my affliction, I must confess, when I took the King’s hand

for the last time, when I reflected on the benevolence, the solicitude,

and the generosity I had experienced whilst my life was in his hands,

affected by the most untoward and irritating political circumstances, by

the aggravated suspicions of his chiefs, and by the poisonous jealousy

of the Moors, there was a painful gratification in the retrospect, which

blended the wish to linger another hour in listening to acknowledgments

of esteem and obligation, more affecting than flattering, and enhanced

by the consoling reflection, that they were the natural emotions of one

of those monarchs we are pleased to call barbarians. Night was coming

on, but as I had so positively declared before the King and his council,

on the former occasion, that nothing should deter me from keeping my

word in quitting Coomassie on this day, it would not do to delay even

until the morning. A strict observance of your word, is every thing in

the eye of a Negro. The King said, he would not beg me to stay, as I had

declared I dared not; he would only ask me to go no further than Ogogoo,

that night, and his people should join me early in the morning. Our exit

was a brilliant scene, from the reflection of the glittering ornaments

of the King and his captains by the torches; they were seated in a deep

and long line, without the palace, accompanied by their retinues; all

their bands burst forth together, as we saluted the King in passing, and

we were enveloped in the smoke of the musketry. The darkness of the

forest was an instantaneous and awful contrast, and the howlings and

screeches of the wild beasts, startled us as we groped our way, as if we

had never heard them before. The torches provided for our protection

against them were extinguished in crossing the marsh, which had swollen

to between four and five feet deep, and the descent to it from Coomassie

was rocky and abrupt. The linguists and soldiers lost themselves in the

forest, and did not arrive at Ogogoo until long after Mr. Tedlie and

myself. The inhabitants were asleep, but they rose cheerfully, cleared

the best house for us, and made fires. The next morning I received the

dash of gold from the King’s linguists, in a Mallowa bag, with a long

compliment; the conclusion of which was, that I must always be ready to

use the same spirit and address, in talking a palaver for the King of

Ashantee, as I had shewn in talking that of my own King. This testimony

of their good feeling and esteem, which they could not avow whilst we

were political antagonists, was grateful.


Marching through Sarrasoo, where we were liberally refreshed with palm

wine, we halted in the evening at Assiminia. We were received with great

hospitality by the principal man, who provided us with excellent

lodging, to his own inconvenience, and presented us with some fowls. The

path was almost a continued bog, for the rainy season had set in

violently. The next day we marched through Dadasey to Doompassie, and

occupied our former comfortable dwelling. One party spent the night in

the woods. Thursday morning, the 6th, we had a short but most fatiguing

march over the mountains dividing the frontiers, to Moisee, the first

Assin town. The difficulty of procuring provisions until the people

returned from the plantations, detained us in Moisee until four o’clock

in the evening. As the stage from Doompassie had been short, (although

fatiguing) I determined to proceed to Akrofroom, as we should gain a day

by it. The Ashantees remonstrated, knowing the swollen state of the

several small rivers, and the aggravated difficulties of the path from

the heavy rain; but I was so apprehensive of being detained, by their

pleading their superstitious observance of good and bad days for

travelling, that I was afraid of seeming to yield to them, lest it might

encourage the disposition. I recommended them to go back, and started

without them, but they were soon at my heels, declaring, they should

lose their heads if they quitted us. Mr. Tedlie, myself, a soldier, and

the Ashantee next in authority under the captain, outwalked the rest of

the party, and found ourselves out of their hearing when it grew dark.

We lost some time in trying to make torches to keep off the beasts, and

to direct us in the right track, for we were walking through a continued

bog, and had long before lost our shoes. A violent tornado ushered in

the night, we could not hear each other holla, and were soon separated;

luckily I found I had one person left with me (the Ashantee) who, after

I had groped him out, tying his cloth tight round his middle, gave me

the other end, and thus plunged along, pulling me after him, through

bogs and rivers, exactly like an owl tied to a duck in a pond. The

thunder, the darkness, and the howlings of the wild beasts were awful,

but the loud and continuing crash of a large tree, which fell very near

us during the storm, was even more so to my ear. The Ashantee had

dragged me along, or rather through, in this manner until I judged it to

be midnight, when, quite exhausted, with the remnants of my clothes

scarcely hanging together, I let go his cloth, and falling on the

ground, was asleep before I could call out to him. I was awoke by this

faithful guide, who had felt me out, and seated me on the trunk of a

tree, with my head resting on his shoulder; he gave me to understand I

must die if I sat there, and we pursued the duck and owl method once

more. In an hour we forded the last river, which had swollen

considerably above my chin, and spread to a great width. This last

labour I considered final, and my drowsiness became so fascinating, that

it seemed to beguile me of every painful thought and apprehension, and

the yielding to it was an exquisite, though momentary pleasure. I

presume I must have slept above an hour, lifted by this humane man from

the bank of the river to a drier corner of the forest, more impervious

to the torrents of rain; when, being awoke, I was surprised to see him

with a companion and a torch; he took me on his back, and in about three

quarters of an hour we reached Akrofroom. This man knew I carried about

me several ounces of gold, for the subsistence of the people, not

trusting to our luggage, which we could not reckon on in such a season

and journey. Exhausted and insensible, my life was in his hands, and

infested as the forest was with wild beasts, he might after such a

night, without suspicion, have reported me as destroyed by them; this

had occurred to me, and was an uneasy feeling as long as my torpor left

me any. It was about two o’clock in the morning, and the inhabitants of

Akrofroom were almost all asleep, for it was too rude a night for Negro

revelry; however, I was directly carried to a dry and clean apartment,

furnished with a brass pan full of water to wash in, some fruits and

palm wine, an excellent bed of mats and cushions, and an abundance of

country cloths to wrap around me, for I was all but naked. After I had

washed, I rolled myself up in the cloths, one after the other, until I

became a gigantic size, and by a profuse perspiration escaped any other

ill than a slight fever. A soldier came up about mid-day, and gave me

some hopes of seeing Mr. Tedlie again, who arrived soon afterwards,

having left his companions in a bog, waiting until he sent them

assistance from the town. Our gratification was mutual, for the only

trace he had had of me was by no means an encouraging one; my servant

meeting an Ashantee in the forest with fragments of my clothes, which he

persisted he had not taken from any person, but picked up on his way.

Mr. Tedlie (whose feet were cut and bruised much more than mine, and

whose wretched plight made him envy the African toga I had assumed)

after we had separated, and the storm had drowned our mutual hollaings,

the howlings of the wild beasts meeting his ears on all sides, had just

determined to roost in a tree for the night, when an Ashantee appeared

with a torch, and conducted him out of the track to the remains of a

shed, where four or five of the people had before strayed and settled

themselves. Another party arrived at Akrofroom about four o’clock, and

the last, with the Cape Coast linguist and the corporal, not until sun

set; they had lost the track altogether, and spent the whole day, as

well as the previous night, in the woods. We made an excellent duck

soup, our grace to which was, “what a luxury to poor Mungo Park;” the

name recalled sufferings which made us laugh at our own as mere

adventures.


On Saturday the 8th we marched to Asharamang. Here we found great

difficulties in getting provisions until the Ashantees came up, for

Quamina Bwa’s knavery had been ascribed to us; and here, panyaring all

we required, he had not given the inhabitants a tokoo of the gold. At

length we were well supplied and comfortably lodged. The next day we

marched through Kickiwherree to Prasoo, where we occupied a good house,

and an Ashantee captain proceeding on an embassy, dashed us a supply of

fowls and yams. We crossed the Boosempra early the next morning, and

thence began to leave the rains behind us. Persevering in making but one

journey of the distances which occupied us two and three days going up,

we pressed forward, passing by our former bivouacs in the woods,

scarcely distinguishable, until we reached the site of Accomfodey, for

only one hut now remained; the wretched inhabitants having deserted it

in terror of the Ashantees. The solitary Fantee who occupied it, had the

address to assure me, that I should find much better lodging at

Ancomassa, where we recollected to have left some comfortable huts going

up, and we resolved to try another stage, and were recompensed by

finding scarcely a wreck of the place, and some tattered sheds only

instead of the sound roof we had quitted. We proceeded early the next

morning, passed Foosou, which was entirely deserted, and marched until

we found ourselves at sun set on the banks of the Aniabirrim. The people

were all behind, and the Ashantees coming up about an hour afterwards,

informed us they had settled themselves for the night about two hours

walk distant. Unfortunately we had no flint, and after fasting all day,

we had the mortification of losing our supper merely for want of a fire;

the wood was all so wet that friction had no effect on it, we could find

no shelter, and a heavy rain set in as it grew dark; fatigue luckily

beguiled us of cold and hunger, and of our apprehensions of a visit from

the beasts, who were howling about the banks of their watering place. I

wrapped myself up in the Inta cloth Apokoo had given me, and wet as the

ground was, I never slept better. Hence the forest visibly declined in

height towards the coast. We pressed on by day light, found some

excellent guavas to allay our hunger, and reaching Mansue, made a good

soup of our fowls, peppers growing luxuriantly all around us. We waited

until we heard of the people behind us, and then proceeded; about five

in the evening I reached Cottacoomacasa, with the Dwabin messenger only.

The place was deserted, and a body of Ashantee traders had occupied the

remaining shed. I would not disturb them, but waiting until sun set for

Mr. Tedlie, I left him a supply of guavas, and proceeded to Payntree.

There was a charm in the name of that place, being but one journey from

the sea, superior to the recollection of the former night’s adventure.

It was a brilliant night, and the dark gloom and hollow echos of the

long vistas of the forest, formed a fine contrast to the extensive areas

(sites of large Fantee crooms destroyed by the Ashantees) into which we

frequently emerged. The wild music and cheerful revelry of the

inhabitants of Payntree stole upon my ear, and raised the tone of my

spirits in proportion as the sounds strengthened.


A loud and continued shout warned me that I was announced; torches and

music instantly encircled me, and I was conducted to old Payntree’s

residence, who had built himself a new house somewhat in the Ashantee

fashion. An excellent bed was prepared for me of an accumulation of mats

and country cloths, and a famous supper of soups, stews, fruit, and palm

wine. Quamina Bootaqua paid his respects, and old Payntree, Amooney King

of Annamaboe, and two or three other caboceers, unknown to me, made a

long adulatory speech, complimenting my ability, bewailing my hardships,

and magnifying their obligations. I was requested to seat myself on old

Payntree’s state stool, whilst they stood around me, and he begged me to

listen to an air composed by his band on the occasion of the embassy,

and its successful termination; “all would now be well, and Fantee

revive and flourish.” I sat up till midnight, vainly expecting Mr.

Tedlie and the soldiers; they awoke me by their arrival before sun rise;

they had passed the night in a sound hut, on the path, which from the

want of a torch had escaped my notice.


Hearing, as I expected, that there was a path from Payntree to Cape

Coast Castle, avoiding Annamaboe (whence the Mission had departed), I

determined to explore it, and Payntree furnished me with a guide. The

country was beautifully diversified with hill and dale, but the soil was

generally lighter and more gravelly than that between Annamaboe and

Payntree. We passed through several groves of guava trees, and all the

other tropical fruits abounded. Occasionally there were small

plantations of Guinea corn, where a few wretched Fantees still lurked in

the ruins of the crooms the Ashantees had destroyed. We passed through

eleven which had been considerable, and now presented but a few mud

houses scattered over extensive sites. Their names were Assequah,

Daöoramong, Amparoo, Taächoo, Coorikirraboo, Perridjoo, Abikarrampa,

Aquoitee, Miensa, and Amosima. The only water was near Amparoo; it was a

large pond nearly two miles in circumference, and sixty yards broad,

impregnated with vegetable matter. After travelling 15 miles, we climbed

some very steep and rocky hills, apparently of iron stone, and descended

into a flat country, continuing until a small rising about two miles

from Cape Coast Castle, (which I judged to be 20 miles from Payntree by

this interior path) opened the sea to our view; as delightful to our

sight, as land would have been after a prolonged and perilous voyage.

The shouts and greetings of the natives were a grateful introduction to

the more congenial congratulations of our countrymen.


[Footnote 13: One piece of silk. 10 handkerchiefs of Dane. 1 umbrella. 4

gallons of rum. 20 lbs. of pork. 1 basket of rice. Biscuit. 1 sheep.]


[Footnote 14: The man who hung himself.]


                               * * * * *

                          MISSION TO ASHANTEE.

                                PART II.

                               * * * * *


                               CHAPTER I.


                               * * * * *


                              _Geography._


The impression of the Natives that we came “to spy the country” was

sedulously strengthened by the Moors, who were actuated by alarm,

jealousy, and a spirit of intolerance unmitigated by a previous

intercourse with Europeans. I felt compelled, therefore, to suppress all

curiosity for a considerable time, lest the anxiety to detect us in

geographical enquiries, to make their calumny more imposing, might have

been gratified. Latterly, when better feelings had been induced through

patience and candour, as the Moorish charts and MSS. evidence, the

inaptitude rather than the reluctance of the natives, made the shortness

of our stay unaccommodating. I shall pass over a mass of memoranda

recorded on individual report, and only select such, wherein Moors and

natives, unknown to each other, have agreed; describing their travels in

their own way, without my questions anticipating or directing them.

These routes and observations were further confirmed by the evidence of

children, recently arrived as slaves from the various countries, whose

artless replies decided my credence. It may be remarked, that the

children of the African Negroes, early accustomed to travel with their

parents for their convenience or their assistance, and unoccupied by the

difficulties of incipient education, observe nature more attentively

than European children of the same age would; for they have nothing else

to think of, or to divert the fatigue of these reiterated trading

journies: their evidence, therefore, was a genuine and acceptable check

on the Moorish and Negro adults.


The difficulty of adjusting geography by investigation only, is not

diminished by the numerous small states, scarcely less frequent than

those of modern Italy, which we find to compose this part of Western

Africa.


Any thing like observations of the Sun’s place, during a journey, seemed

to be so uncommon to the Natives, and so secondary to the Moors, from

their confused accounts of the occasional changes, that, after expending

much time to no purpose, I was obliged to content myself with placing

the different kingdoms in the same direction as their several paths bore

from Coomassie, taking every precaution to be convinced that the paths

did not cross each other; and afterwards adjusting the positions by the

various auxiliary evidence which occurred in the general course of my

enquiries. I allow 15 miles for each days journey (which, from

observation and report, I have reason to think is the average) and two

thirds of the sum to be made good on the horizontal distance, as we

found this to be nearly the case in our journey from Annamaboe to

Coomassie; the distance travelled being 146 miles, Annamaboe laying in

5° 4′ N., and 1° 43′ W., and the latitude of Coomassie being 6° 34′ 50″

N.; and the longitude 2° 11′ W. by the mean of the observations of the

eclipses of Jupiter’s 1st and 2nd satellites.


I procured the numerals of the various countries whenever I could, to

assist future enquirers.


There are nine great paths leading from Coomassie, the Dwabin, Akim,

Assin, Warsaw, Sauee, Gaman, Soko, Daboia, and Sallagha.


Dwabin is not more than three quarters of a day’s journey eastward from

Coomassie, by the route No. 1.; in which I have retained only the larger

towns, omitting the villages; as I shall invariably. The river Dah is

crossed close to the westward of Dwabin, and said to be as wide as we

found it at Sarrasoo. Two journies beyond Dwabin is a small dependent

district called Mohoo. Several names, such as Meäsee, Marmpon,

Akrofroom, &c. will be found common to different states, as Larissa,

Argos, and Thebes were in antient Greece.


There is an eastern branch of the Akim path, entered immediately on

leaving Coomassie, to a country called Quaöo, northward of Akim, (of

which it seems formerly to have been a district) and adjoining the

Volta. Diabbee is its principal town, and the second Wantomoo, 8

journies from Coomassie by route No. 2. The latter is situated at the

foot of a mountain whence the Boosempra issues, with two smaller rivers,

the Soobirree and Sesee, running to the Kirradee. This district is

entered the 3d day from Coomassie.


There are two routes to Accra through Akim, the capital of which is

Bannasoo, 5 journies, and the northern frontier town Feëa, 3 journies

from Coomassie. The easternmost route to Accra is 15 journies; the other

is made 17 journies to pass near the lake Boosmaquee. This lake, 3

journies from Coomassie, was described as four miles long, and nearly

three broad; upwards of thirty small crooms were reckoned situated

around it, supported by fishing: the water was said to be unpleasant to

drink, and to give a reddish hue to the hair of the people who washed in

it. Fish were forwarded thence daily for the King’s table, by relays of

men. It was called the white mans fetish, there being a popular

superstition, nourished by the Moors, that Europeans were to join it

with the sea, to introduce vessels for the subjugation of the country.

Close to the lake is a mountain called Quashee Boposoo, sometimes seen

clearly from Coomassie, abounding in large black stones, described as

basaltes. By this route (No. 3.) to Accra, the Akim country is entered

the 4th day, the Boosempra is crossed on the 6th, by a tree laid over

it, and the Birrim, by a line and raft on the 12th; it is much wider

than the Boosempra is where we crossed it, and runs to that river,

falling into it just above our crossing. The Aquapim, a clear and

mountainous country, is entered on the 16th day. By the eastern route,

No. 4, the Akim country is entered the 4th day; a large hill called

Abirrawantoo is passed the 9th; thence the Birrim springs, crossing the

path twice before it runs to the Boosempra. Three days westward from

this mountain, is a second, called Papow, in which the Aïnshue or the

Winnebah river rises. A river called Dinshue rises also in this

neighbourhood, running to the Saccomo, which falls into the sea 8 miles

west of Accra. Isert, who visited Aquapim, called the capital Kommang,

but Akropong is so now. The distance from Coomassie to Accra may be

estimated at 230 miles, which bears about the same proportion to the

horizontal distance, as the path we travelled through Assin from

Annamaboe. Dr. Leyden was much imposed on in the extravagant account he

has given of the extent, power, and commerce of Akim,[15] which is

placed in the map accompanying his work, eastward of Dahomey, instead of

westward of the Volta. Dr. Isert was a Danish gentleman, who had the

good fortune to cure the former King of Ashantee’s sister of a lingering

disorder, after she had exhausted all the skill of the fetish women, and

came to Christiansburg Castle in despair. He afterwards expressed his

wish to visit the Ashantee kingdom; and being encouraged, he set out in

June 1786, and staying some days in Aquapim, was just about to enter

Akim, when he was recalled by the Governor. A dangerous illness,

heightened by his disappointment, soon afterwards disgusted him with the

country, and he left it for the West Indies. As Dr. Isert’s letters are

only known in German and Dutch,[16] and he was an industrious and

scientific observer, an extract from his description of the Aquapim

country will be acceptable. I am indebted for a Latin translation of

this and other passages, adduced on different subjects, to Dr. Reynhaut

of Elmina Castle.


“I began my journey early in the morning of the 17th of June, and after

walking two hours I arrived at a little village, picturesquely situated,

named Aschiama. Two hours behind this lies a chain of mountains, which

are composed of granitous stones; flints are but rarely found. The whole

prospect shews itself here in a very different manner to that observed

in sandy countries; the rocks are covered with lofty trees, which are

encompassed with small forests almost impervious. The soil, no longer

sandy, becomes argillaceous, and excellent for vegetation. Behind these

forests I arrived at a Negro village called Abodee, eight leagues from

Christiansburg: the inhabitants of this place are very tenacious of

native ceremony and etiquette. Thence I passed by an irregular path

through the following villages, Fiasso, Fientema, Futu, Mampon, Odaky,

Manno, and Manseng. An hour afterwards I reached a village named

Kommong, the residence of H.R.H. the Duke of Aquapim. Here the country

is charming, though forests are still to be found. Mountains, rocks, and

vallies vary each other in the most striking order; fresh water, so

rarely obtained in maritime countries, is found here of an excellent

quality. Near this village a stream constantly rushes from the summit of

a rock, and affords a fresh and crystalline water. Trees of a very large

circumference are also found; I calculated one of the biggest to be 45

feet round and 15 in diameter. These trees are not the same as those of

which Adanson speaks in his description of Senegal, (Adansonia digitata)

but are of a peculiar species; they much resemble a round tower, as they

do not bear either flowers or fruits. Here I found the Ammonium Grana

Paradisi, the Ammonium Zerumber, and a new genus in a perpendicular tree

ornamented by flowers, which resembled tulips, (Novum Genus Tetandriæ)

and of great elegance: also a new species of aloe, of which the

inhabitants make thread; a new species of citron with indented leaves,

and a multitude of unknown trees and shrubs. In the thickest forests

grows a species of Spanish cane, very straight and well proportioned,

and often attaining six feet in height; it is to be wished that it could

be made use of, treating it as the Chinese do, for if, when dry, an

equal degree of tenacity could be induced, it would prove superior in

quality. I observed, on the boughs of the trees, the Senna plant (which

is parasitic, and consists entirely of a flower), it was almost the

shape of a pine when open, and the inside is of a very deep red; the

Negroes use it in the syphilitic disorder, when first attacked. I took

it for the Aphuteia Hydrora of Thunberg, but on examination it differs

much, as it belongs to Icosandria. Palm trees are here very rare, except

the oliferous (Elois Guineensis) and the viniferous (an Phœnix) which

are cultivated in great numbers; also the true cocoa nut trees (Cocas

nucifera) and the false (an Borassus.) In a word, nature entirely

changes her form as soon as you reach the summit of the chain of

mountains, and I do not believe one twentieth part of the plants found

here are the same as those on the Coast. With regard to natural history,

I was less happy in making discoveries. The elephant, so abundantly

inhabiting the environs of Fidah, (Whydah) and other wild beasts, are

here very rare, which may be attributed to the scarcity of grass, the

growth of which is prevented by the almost impenetrable forests. Several

sorts of birds are here seen, principally paroquets, of which I knew six

species, Psittacus, Erythæus and Pullarius (Linn.) the others seem to be

new, and I also saw a great number of insects of new species. The

mineral kingdom would perhaps be richer if they had mines here. The

rocks are solely composed of rough stones like granite and grens, and

their species; dry quartz and slate stones are often found; on the other

hand I could not discover calcareous earth. The soil is varied, but

consists in general of a rich aluminous earth, traced in different

colours, and of a rich black earth with which sand is never mixed. The

atmosphere seemed more salubrious than on the sea coast, though

physicians generally deny this quality to exist near the forests which

grow in warm climates. I believe the elevated situation of the country

contributes much to it. The Europeans who inhabit the Coast in forts,

would do well to establish an hospital and a garden here. The Arum

Esculentum, the Banana (Musa sapientum) the Ananas (Bromelia Ananas) the

Carica Papaia and Citron all abound here.”


The Assin path is that described in the route from Annamaboe to

Coomassie, it branches off at Foosoo to Ensabra, two journies from

Winnebah, through Anissoo, Asoidroo (the head quarters of the King of

Ashantee in the invasion of 1807) and Atoäperrim, which means “to fire a

gun.” The principal town of Assin is Ansa, through which we passed,

Akrofroom, apparently larger, is called the second. A range of stony

hills is the boundary of Assin and Akim.


The path to Elmina, through the Warsaw country, makes so considerable an

angle to the westward, that the Ashantees invariably declared it

occupied more time to travel than the Assin; it is allowed to be ten

journies at Elmina, by route No. 5. The Dah is crossed the first day at

its town Adahsoo, and in the evening Becquoi (one of the five large

towns built by the Ashantees) is reached. The Dankara country is entered

the third day, the Tufel the fourth, the Warsaw the sixth, the Boosempra

is crossed the tenth day, the Ofim, which skirts this path to the

westward (having received the Dah at Meeäsee) falling into it. The

capital of the Dankara country is four journies westward of Coomassie,

and the frontier is entered the second by route No. 6: it is the most

productive of gold, but has been extravagantly over-rated in Bosman’s

report of its population. The river Seënnee, or, as the Portuguese have

called it, Ancobra, from its serpentine course, has been thought to rise

just beyond the north eastern frontier, but it will presently appear to

be a branch of the Tando of the Ashantees. In the Dutch copies of the

old Portuguese charts, Dankara is placed eastward of Ashantee. The

Warsaw country will be noticed more particularly, in considering the

maritime geography from Cape Coast Castle to the river Assinee.


The Warsaw path has two grand branches, one to Apollonia and one to

Aöwin, each thirteen journies; the former is in the small kingdom of

Amanăheä. The Aöwin country extends from Apollonia to the river Assinee,

five journies in length and three in breadth; it is governed by seven or

eight caboceers, like those of Warsaw, independent of each other: it can

furnish about 5000 soldiers. The numerals of Amanăheä and Aöwin will

appear in an essay on the Fantee language. Both countries are at the

mercy of the Ashantees, who extort gold from them frequently, though

they have not yet fixed the tributes.


Sauëe lies eight journies W.N.W. from Coomassie, and Moinsan fifteen. I

could not procure the routes, but Wom and Sannasee are two of the

largest towns which are passed through.


Buntookoo, the capital of the kingdom of Gaman, is 11 journies N.N.W. of

Coomassie by route No. 7. The river Ofim is crossed the second day, the

Tando the fifth, thence the country becomes open. Yammee, the frontier

town of Gaman, is reached the eighth day. The name of the King of Gaman

is Adinkara; the capital, though not so large, is allowed to be better

built than Coomassie, and the Moorish influence has been longer

established. It is incomparably the richest country in gold, and small

pits were described to me, like those Mr. Park saw at Shrondo. The

numerals are,


  One      Tah.


  Two      Noo.


  Three    Sah.


  Four     Nah.


  Five     Taw.


  Six      Torata.


  Seven    Toorifeenoo.


  Eight    Toorifeessa.


  Nine     Toorifeena.


  Ten      Noonoo.


The four principal Gaman towns, are Sarem, which some call the capital,

Bandakeeä, Bundoo, and Nasseä, five journies from Kong, and seven from

Buntookoo.


A powerful kingdom called Bahooree, which has hitherto successfully

resisted the Ashantees, was described to be westward, and expected to

afford refuge to the King of Gaman on the approaching invasion.


I had heard it reported that the Tando formed the Assinee river, about

35 miles westward of Cape Apollonia, but a very intelligent Ashantee

satisfied me this was a mistake, arising probably from Seënee being the

native name of the Ancobra, which is formed by one branch of the Tando;

a second running westward. The Tando is not near so large as the

Boosempra, and therefore very unlikely to form so large a river as the

Assinee; the western branch may possibly run into it. Mr. Meredith,

writing from report without sufficiently checking it, has made the Tando

and the Chamah or Boosempra the same; yet, p. 225, he adds, “the Volta

is more probably a branch of the Tando, a large river reported as

running to the eastward, and which the Ashantees are obliged to cross in

coming to the Coast;” he did not reflect that he thus laid down a river

running out of the sea. The Tando, we have seen, is five days northward

of Coomassie, it rises in some rocky hills called Toofeeä, near the

large town Aënkroo, between the Banda and Inta paths.


Soko (formerly a province of Gaman) is 11 journies from Coomassie; and

Banda, four beyond, and a little to the eastward; see route No. 8. The

first day, Tafoo is reached, a large aboriginal Inta town, for, as will

be seen in the historical report, the Ashantees emigrated, and subjected

several Inta districts now forming the northern part of their dominions,

and trenched considerably on that declining kingdom, now entirely at

their mercy. If Mr. Dalzel had reflected, it would have occurred to him,

that the Taffoe, Tafoe, or Tafu of Snelgrave (placed so absurdly in his

map, 60 miles west of the mouth of the Volta) and the In-ta[17] he heard

of at Dahomey, and confounded with Ashantee, were the same: for the In

in In-ta is scarcely audible, and only a slight nasal sound barely

amounting to n, as N-ta; foo is merely an adjunct equal to people or men

in our language, affixed in the present infancy of African language to

all names of countries, as if we always said the Scotchmen or Irishmen,

instead of the Scotch and Irish. The Ofim is crossed one day beyond

Tafoo at its croom Ofeesoo, the Tando four journies beyond at Tandosoo.

Takima is reached the eighth day, whence the Fantees are reported, by

tradition, to have emigrated, and there is yet but little difference in

the languages.


Sixteen journies N.N.E. of Coomassie is Boopee (which I have placed

accordingly in 8° 42′ N. and 1° 19′ W.) the frontier town of Inta,

hitherto confounded with Ashantee, than which it is more populous and

more civilized. The Moorish influence has been long established there,

and almost all its caboceers affect to profess that faith. The river

Adirri, which we shall presently identify with the Volta, is crossed

four hours southward of Boopee, and is described as about 120 yards

broad; it rises eight journies N.W. of Boopee, in a large mountain

called Kondoongooree, one of the mountains of Kong, which were

distinctly and invariably reported not to be a chain, but frequently and

individually scattered, from Kong eastward. Seven journies from

Coomassie, on the Inta route, is the smaller kingdom Coranza (probably

the Corisseno of the old maps) the people of which are of the same

origin as the Ashantees by tradition, but, as the King himself assured

me, of much more genius and aptitude. Three journies from Boopee is

Daboia, the second town of Inta. The first journey is to Minsiroo, where

lions are numerous; the second to Moronko, the inhabitants of which are

so fearful of being carried off as slaves by the Ashantee traders (who

travel in great numbers) that they have no doors to their houses, but

ascending by a ladder, which they immediately draw up, they enter

through the thatch. Close to Moronko is a river, about as large as the

Boosempra, called Adiffofoo. Pahmee, three journies south eastward of

Daboia, and Yabo which I cannot place so precisely, are the alternate

residences of the King of Inta. There is a constant commercial

intercourse between Inta and Dahomey, the frontiers being five journies

apart. The numerals of Inta are


  One      Koko.


  Two      Anyoe.


  Three    Assa.


  Four     Anna.


  Five     Annoo.


  Six      Assee.


  Seven    Assoonno.


  Eight    Adoobrooa.


  Nine     Digrakoono.


  Ten      Koodoo.


Sallagha, the grand market of the Inta kingdom, is 17 journies north-

eastward from Coomassie, by route No. 10. The first is to Marmpon, one

of the five large towns built by the Ashantees, and possessing palatine

privileges; the second, through five smaller towns to Aphwaguiassie, the

largest market in the Ashantee kingdom; the 9th day the rivers Kirradee

and Oboosoom are crossed, each about 60 yards wide, and flowing so near

together, as to appear one in the rainy season; a high mountain,

Aduarreekennee, is just beyond them, the boundary of Ashantee and

Booroom. The tenth day the river Sennee is forded, which afterwards

enlarges considerably, and runs into the Volta; it rises five journies

from Coomassie (by route No. 11) between the Boopee and Sallagha paths.

The Booroom country is quite open, and the Ashantees give the river the

figurative name of Birrinsoo, which means that its distance is so

deceiving, that you will cry before you reach it. The capital of Booroom

is Guia, a considerable town, noticed in the route to Odentee, a fetish

sanctuary of great repute, and said to be splendidly furnished. The

Ashantee language is spoken very commonly in Booroom, but the vernacular

numerals are


  One      Ekoo.


  Two      Enoo.


  Three    Essa.


  Four     Enna.


  Five     Annoo.


  Six      Esseä.


  Seven    Assoono.


  Eight    Aquiay.


  Nine     Akonno.


  Ten      Edoo.


The tenth day the Adirri or Volta is crossed, more than a mile wide, but

much interrupted by rocks, and described to be full of hippopotami

(which they call sea elephants,) and alligators. This river divides

Booroom from Inta, Sallagha being one day’s long march from it.

Calculating the 17 journies to Sallagha at 15 miles each, the course as

N.E. by E. and supposing two thirds to be made good on the horizontal

distance, according to our own experience, which gives 170 B. equal to

147 G. miles, Sallagha will lie in latitude 7° 56′ N., and longitude 9″

W. As a check upon this position, it will be necessary to follow the

Adirri or Volta as far as the natives navigate it from Adda, where it is

called the Flou (as the falls of the Senegal.) Isert’s report may be

interesting as an introduction.


“The people of Adda think it derogatory to cultivate land, and live by

fishing, and making salt, which they sell to the people of the Interior.

The Volta has no breakers, and therefore may be presumed to be deep.”

This is an extraordinary mistake; Dalzel says there are high breakers.

Colonel Starrenberg (of Engineers) at Elmina Castle, who went about 60

miles up the Volta, accompanied by a Danish officer and flag, and met

with no impediment so far, but turned back reluctantly in three or four

fathoms of water, observed to me, that he thought the channel between

the breakers about a mile wide. Dalzel mentions an American brig making

good her passage over the bar, on which there is about two fathoms

water; and a Danish schooner has done so since. “An arm goes from the

mouth to Quitta.” This must be the river running from Lagos into the

Volta, near the mouth, as will be shewn in considering the errors in the

maritime geography. “Six English miles from the mouth, it forms a lake

60 miles long and 48 broad, whence an arm extends to Pottriba, 3 miles

eastward of Quitta: in this lake are more than a hundred islands.”

Colonel Starrenberg thought the river widened about 9 British miles from

the mouth, but the number of small islands prevented even ocular

demonstration. So large a lake would certainly have been spoken of by

the natives to Europeans ere this; those whom I have questioned, have

gone up the river to the extreme navigable point, and crossed it in many

parts; and they all declare that at Ascharee, 2 days from Adda, it is

not two miles wide. I never could find either an Ashantee, or a

waterside native, who knew of the arm running to Pottriba, a name they

had not heard of; neither could Col. Starrenberg learn any thing of it;

no branch appeared as far as he went. Isert probably alluded, from

report, to the river Assuafroo, which runs from eastward into the Volta,

7 journies from Adda, as will appear in the natives account. “From May

to December the water is good to drink, being then higher than the sea;

in the other months it is not so, but produces more fish. The river

overflows in July, and August, and the neighbourhood of its banks is

excellent for the cultivation of rice.” Rice is abundantly cultivated in

the Inta kingdom. “Three miles from the sea is an island, called Bird

Island, full of pelicans of peculiar kinds. There is a fish in this

river called hardrass, which, when smoked, is exactly like European

salmon. There are also hippopotami and crocodiles: quantities of oysters

adhere to the mangroves, but when the river is fresh they are good for

nothing. There are a great number of singing birds, and a nightingale

equal to the Polish, which sings in May and December.” Col. Starrenberg

heard a nightingale, but saw only one hippopotamus. There is a kind of

cedar tree, (Avicenniæ nov. spec.) which shoots up many branches from

the ground, about as thick as a pipe, and bare of leaves: this tree is

so very salt in its nature, that in the morning a great quantity of

liquid salt is found on the leaves, chrystallizing in the course of the

day.[18] Amalfee is on an island, 48 miles from the mouth, the

inhabitants of which, and those on the banks of the river, of Agrafee,

Wefee, Tophirree, and Bettoo, call themselves river inhabitants. The

former are the brokers of slaves for the Creppee country, and receive a

vast number from one of its provinces called Acottim, 3 journies

eastward.”


Mr. Meredith could scarcely have enquired about the Creppee or Aquamboe

countries, to have placed them west of the Volta. The natives who carry

salt up the Volta, pull the 1st day, by Agrafee, Foomee, and Tefferee to

Amanfee, on the banks; the 2nd to Dofo on an island; the 3rd, by

Ascharee, on the western bank, to Adomë; the 4th by Assafoo to the

Aquamboe country; the 5th to Sowa; the 6th to Pessee; the 7th by

Appasoo, to Deyatoompon, where a large river flows into the Volta from

the eastward; to Doodee the 8th; to Tombo the 9th; to Akorosoo the 10th;

to Odentee the 11th. Here the river becomes too rocky to proceed

conveniently, and hence to Sallagha by land is 4 journies, through the

large towns Oboëkee, Akuntong, Enkungquakroo, and Apapassee, famous for

making cotton cloth. There is a small state northward, between Aquamboe

and Inta, called Anoöchoo, subject to Ashantee, bordering on which is

Guasoo, the southern district or province of Inta. The Creppee country

borders on Aquamboe eastward, and is independent.


I am not in possession of Colonel Starrenberg’s bearings, but the course

of the river may be pretty well ascertained from fixing the points of

Odentee, Quaöo, and Ascharee. Odentee is 6 journies southward of east

(by route No. 12) from Pattooda, in the Booroom country, and mentioned

in the route to Sallagha. Quaöo, the country where the Boosempra rises,

has already been mentioned as entered 8 journies from Coomassie.

Ascharee, 2 days and a half pull up the river, is reached in 1 day’s

walk from Ningo. The course of the Volta is consequently about W.N.W. to

Quaöo, N.E. by N. to Odentee, and N.W. by Sallagha, which course it

appears to continue to Boopee, if not to its source in the Kondoongooree

mountain. The 10 days pull from Adda to Odentee, and the 4 journies by

land thence to Sallagha, agree very well with the distance and position

of that place, as before calculated by the 17 days route from Coomassie.

The houses of Sallagha and other towns of Inta were mentioned as

peculiar from being round. Leo Africanus observed houses built in the

form of bells at Timbuctoo.


Seven days from Sallagha, N.E. according to the Moors, through the Inta

town of Zongoo, is Yahndi, the capital of Dagwumba, which I have placed,

calculating the course at N.E. by E., and allowing 18 miles for each

journey, as the country is said to be open, in 55′ E. and 8° 38′ N.: the

position is assisted by the common account of its being 8 journies from

Daboia, by route No. 13, and that two obscure, but direct paths to

Daboia and Yahndi, from Coomassie, occupy the first 19 days, and the

latter (described as laying between Daboia and Sallagha) 23 days. Sir

William Young, in his Report of the Geography and History of Northern

Africa, writes, “the Slatees of Old Calebar are said to carry on their

trade to Degombah _northward_,” which also supports my placing it more

to the eastward than it appears in Major Rennel’s map. Yngwa, a district

and large town of Dagwumba, is said to lie 8 days north-westward of

Yahndi, through Sakoigoo; its distance from Daboia, by report 6

journies, places it about N.N.W. Two journies from Daboia, towards

Yngwa, is the river Adiffofoo, about 60 yards wide, running eastward, 2

journies from which is Kooboro, a large Dagwumba town.


North-eastward of Yahndi is Tonomah, of which I do not recollect more

than the name, though I think it is a town and district of Dagwumba. The

kingdom of Tonowah, of which Assentai has been described as the capital

by the Shereef Imhammed,[19] must have been derived from this name,

being otherwise unknown. Three journies north-eastward of Yahndi is

Sokoquo or Ensoko, also a considerable town.


Yahndi is described to be beyond comparison larger than Coomassie, the

houses much better built and ornamented. The Ashantees who had visited

it, told me, they frequently lost themselves in the streets. The King,

Inăna Tanquăree, has been converted by the Moors, who have settled there

in great numbers. Mr. Lucas called it the Mahomedan kingdom of Degomba,

and it was represented to him as peculiarly wealthy and civilized. The

markets of Yahndi are described as animated scenes of commerce,

constantly crowded with merchants from almost all the countries of the

interior. Horses and cattle abound, and immense flocks are possessed

even by the poorer class. The numerals of Dagwumba and Yngwa differing,

I submit both.


          _Yngwa._    _Dagwumba._


  One      Lakoo        Yahndo


  Two      Ayee         Ayee


  Three    Attah        Attah


  Four     Anāhee       Nasee


  Five     Leerennoo    Ennoon


  Six      Ayoboo       Yohbee


  Seven    Ayapaï       Poiee


  Eight    Annee        Nehenoo


  Nine     Awai         Whyee


  Ten      Peä          Edoo.


Yahndi is named after the numeral one, from its pre-eminence. Sarem is

the name of a region, including Gaman, Inta, and Dagwumba, so called

from the open nature of those countries.


One day from Sallagha, towards Yahndi, and scarcely one journey westward

from the latter, is the river Laka, described to be as large and as

rapid as the Adirri or Volta, which it joins below Odentee, and may

therefore be safely concluded to be the Assuafroo; for the names of

rivers are very mutable in Africa, each country through which they pass

naturalising them to its own language, and thus increasing the

perplexities of a geography founded on investigation. I could not

procure any authorized account of the northward course of this river,

the best opportunities had escaped me when I heard of it.


Five journies N.E. from Yahndi is the smaller kingdom of Gamba, the

birth place of Baba the chief Moor at Coomassie, and the boundary of the

Ashantee authority, though its influence, through the much respected

medium of Dagwumba, would extend to the Niger. Seven journies northward

of Yngwa is the kingdom of Fobee: the river Koontoorooa is crossed four

days from it, being about half a mile broad, it has an eastern and

western branch, the former running to the Karhala, one day farther,

considerably wider, and the course south-eastward. One journey from the

river is a large mountain called Sarraka, the same distance from Fobee,

the capital of the kingdom. Lakoo, Lamma, Karhala, and Koomada are the

next largest towns. Five journies northward is an independent kingdom

called Chouoocha. The position of Fobee is checked by Goorooma, being 15

journies from it, (a kingdom to be noticed presently in the direct

northern route from Yahndi to Houssa,) and Kawerree only nine, doubtless

Cayree, a kingdom in the route of the Moors from Coomassie to Jinnie.

The numerals of Fobee are


  One      Koroom.


  Two      Nalay.


  Three    Poompevarra.


  Four     Leetaynalee.


  Five     Kakwassee.


  Six      Mannassa.


  Seven    Noottoosoo.


  Eight    Borafay.


  Nine     Pirrifay.


  Ten      Nanooa.


Five journies from Yngwa is Mosee, a more warlike but less visited

kingdom; it consists of many states, but the superior monarch is named

Billa, and the capital Kookoopella. I place this N.W., because, although

its traders pass through Yngwa, they do not cross the Karhala, or indeed

any river but what they can walk through. The numerals are


  One      Yimbo.


  Two      Ayeeboo.


  Three    Ataboo.


  Four     Annasee.


  Five     Annoo.


  Six      Ayobee.


  Seven    Owhi.


  Eight    Ennee.


  Nine     Aïhopoi.


  Ten      Peega.


A few days northward of Fobee, through Chamday and Kobafoo, is Calanna,

described as a very large city, rivalling Yahndi as a market, and

situated at the foot of a mountain abounding in iron stone, which they

manufacture for rude purposes in much the same manner as Mr. Park

witnessed at Jeningalla. Calanna is probably the Calanshee of Imhammed,

who told Mr. Lucas that it was a dependency of Tounouwah or Assentai,

situated mid-way between it and the coast, 18 journies from each. The

numerals are


  One      Kodoom.


  Two      Naboolla.


  Three    Naweedazoo.


  Four     Nabonaza.


  Five     Nabonoa.


  Six      Lodoo.


  Seven    Logwa.


  Eight    Littaïzoo.


  Nine     Nako.


  Ten      Yewoo.


Kumsallahoo I have not attempted to lay down, having no other guide for

placing it than the report that it is one moon’s journey from Dagwumba,

that its traders pass through Mosee, and cross only one river, the

Fachinga, and that not large. The numerals are


  One      Yumbo.


  Two      Yeeboo.


  Three    Tabo.


  Four     Nasee.


  Five     Annoo.


  Six      Yobo.


  Seven    Poihee.


  Eight    Nehee.


  Nine     Wahee.


  Ten      Pega.


We will now return to Coomassie and proceed northwards to Jinnie, or as

it was generally pronounced, Jennë. This route to Tombuctoo (or

Timbooctoo) is much less frequented by the Moors than that from

Dagwumba, through Houssa. They alledge that the people northward, are

neither so commercial, so civilized, or so wealthy as those north-

eastward. The first 12 journies are to Buntookoo, seven journies whence

is a river called by the natives Coombo, and by the Moors, Zamma; it is

described as half a mile broad, and running westward. I could not find

any Ashantee who had travelled beyond this river, which is the northern

limit of their authority. Five journies eastward of north from the

river, is Kong, the King of which is named Asequoo. A large mountain

called Toolileseena is near the capital, and a small river, Woora, four

journies from it. The kingdom is said to be by no means so wealthy or

powerful as that of Ashantee; the market is supplied from Houssa, the

country is populous, horses numerous, and elephants killed daily. The

people fight with spears, and bows and arrows. Seven journies from Kong

several mountains are passed, called Koonkoori. Mr. Park says, that

“Kong signifies mountain in the Mandingo language, which language is in

use from the frontier of Bambarra to the western sea.” The language of

Kong seems to be a corruption of the Bambarra or Mandingo: the numerals

are


  One      Kiddee.


  Two      Filla.


  Three    Sowa.


  Four     Nanoo.


  Five     Looroa.


  Six      Wora.


  Seven    Ooranfilla.


  Eight    Leeaygee.


  Nine     Konunto.


  Ten      Tah.


The Ashantees calling all the slaves whom they brought down to the water

side Dunkos, it had been, for many years, naturally concluded that there

was a large country of that name in their neighbourhood. Isert writes,

“the Dunkoers are a people behind Ashantee.” On enquiry, however, I

found to my surprise, that there is no country of that name, but that it

is merely an epithet, synonymous with the barbarian of the Greeks and

Romans, which they apply to all the people of the interior but

themselves, and implies an ignorant fellow. I first suspected this from

observing some Dunkos were cut in the face, and some not, and I

presently discovered their vernacular languages were various, and

unintelligible to each other. Generally speaking, the bush or country

people of Dagwumba have three light cuts on each cheek bone, and three

below, with one horizontal under the eye; those of Yahndi, three deep

continued cuts; the people of Mosee, three very deep and long, and one

under the eye; those of Bornoo are frequently cut in the forehead; of

Marrowa all over the body in fine, small, and intricate patterns. In

Fobee, Kumsallahoo, and Calanna, the lower orders have a hole bored

through the cartilage of the nose. These cuts are made during infancy,

to insinuate fetish liquids to invigorate and preserve the child.


Nine journies northward of Kong is Kaybee, the King of which, named

Mamooroo, killed the former monarch Dabbira. The country was said to be

very populous, the capital behind a mountain called Beseeree, the soil

chalky, and asses as numerous as horses. Three journies from the

frontier of Kaybee, over a large mountain called Seboopoo, and across a

large river, is Kayree, through which country it is very dangerous to

pass, the people laying in ambush in small parties to rob or kidnap

travellers, and subsisting by rapine. Five journies thence is Garoo

(probably Gago[20]) a very powerful kingdom, the King, Batoomo, lives at

Netaquolla. Twenty journies beyond is the kingdom of Doowarra, the

people of which are indifferent warriors, but superior agriculturists,

and plant extensively; the soil is red earth. A smaller kingdom called

Filladoo or Firrasoo, is in the neighbourhood. Five journies north of

Doowarra is the Niger, and on an island, about a mile from the southern

bank, is Jennë. The route from Kong to Jennë is the only one which has

not been checked by Negro evidence, but I had reason to think well of

the Moor who furnished it, who never contradicted himself, though

repeatedly cross questioned during the four months I was at Coomassie.

The places reported to Mr. Park on this route, it is true, are none of

them mentioned, but, probably, the people who were insuperably adverse

to his proceeding, were the least likely to satisfy his curiosity but by

imposing on him.[21] Mr. Park in his route from Sego to Bædoo, has a

town called Doowassoo, only four journies from Sego; but I was assured

repeatedly that Doowarra is a powerful kingdom. In the first Mission,

Mr. Park reported the kingdom of Gotto to be so close to the Niger, that

its chief, Moösee, embarked on it to attack Jinnie, and Major Rennell

has placed it accordingly: but, in the second, he writes, “one month’s

travel south of Bædoo,” (which he makes 30 journies southward of Sego)

“through the kingdom of Gotto, will bring the traveller to the country

of the Christians, who have their houses on the banks of the Ba Sea

Feena.” He says the Ba Nimma rises in the Kong mountains south of

Marraboo, but does not mention the kingdom of Kong in his route, which

is about one moon’s travel from the sea, as he has described Bædoo to

be. Now it is very unlikely, if Bædoo had been but 20 journies from

Coomassie, that we should not have heard of it; and it is next to

impossible, that if any kingdom called Gotto laid still nearer, (which

it must have done, to have been passed through from Bædoo to the sea)

that it should have been unknown. Indeed, if the kingdom of Bambarra

extended 28 days south of Sego, as appears by the route given to Mr.

Park, the Ashantees would not have spoken of it from mere report, but

would probably have become acquainted with it, either through war,

commerce, or negotiation. It is a little extraordinary that the kingdom

of Ashantee, reported as eminently powerful to Mr. Lucas even so far

distant as Mesurata, and which must be well known in the neighbourhood

of Jennë, from the number of Moors who visit it from that city, should

not even have been noticed to Mr. Park in this southern route from Silla

or Sego to the sea. Mr. Park writes of the Moors not being able to

subject Jinbala; I believe they insinuate themselves as residents every

where, but I could not hear of their having established themselves by

force, or of their composing even the greater part of a population any

where.[22]


Having reached the Niger it is time to observe, that it is only known to

the Moors by the name of Quolla, pronounced rather as Quorra by the

Negroes, who, from whatever countries they came, all spoke of this as

the largest river they knew; and it was the grand feature in all the

routes (whether from Houssa, Bornoo, or the intermediate countries) to

Ashantee. Mr. Horneman wrote that the Niger, in some parts of Houssa,

was called _Gaora_, which must sound very like Quorra. The Niger, after

leaving the lake Dibbir, was invariably described as dividing in two

large streams; the Quolla, the greater, pursuing its course south-

eastward until it joined the Bahr Abiad, and the other branch running

northward of east near Timbuctoo, and dividing again soon afterwards;

the smaller stream running northwards by Yahoodee, a place of great

trade,[23] and the larger turning directly eastward, and increasing

considerably, running to the lake Caudi or Cadi under the name of

Gambaroo.[24] The Moors call the branch running by Timbuctoo the

Jolliba, I presume figuratively, as a great water, for I was assured by

a native of Jennë, who had frequently visited Timbuctoo, that this

branch was called Zah-mer by the Negroes.[25]


The variety of the concurrent evidence respecting the Gambaroo,

certainly made an impression on my mind almost amounting to conviction.

De Lisle, in his map of Africa for the use of Louis XV, (the accuracy of

which in one point where our latest charts are in error, the Lagos

river, will be shewn towards the close of this Report) makes a branch

from the Niger running near Timbuctoo; and what is even more to the

point, writes “Gambarou ou Niger.” It was not till sometime after my

return from Ashantee, that I unexpectedly discovered this solitary

European record of such a name, and it will at least be allowed that so

respectable a character as De Lisle, would neither have laid down the

branch from the Niger (for it is as likely to be so in the absence of

explanation, as a river running into it) without some authority, nor

have invented the name Gambarou: and it will also be allowed, that he

must have heard of it as being a very large river, to have confounded it

with the Niger. De Lisle has preserved most of the names reported to me,

more closely than any other geographer.[26] In the judicious compendium

of Mr. Murray, I observe the following note. “It is but justice to

D’Anville to say, that in his map of central Africa, inserted in the

26th volume of the Academie des Inscriptions, he has represented a river

passing close to Timbuctoo, running S.W., and falling into the Niger.

This delineation has not been copied by others, but it is not the less

probable that that excellent geographer may have had positive

information on which to found it.” Now, I may presume, this is only

recorded in delineation, and not noticed by D’Anville in the text, or,

his authority would have appeared. I shall be indulged in such a

conjecture, when it is recollected I am writing where I cannot satisfy

myself, in a place destitute of literary facilities. If it is only to be

found in the delineation, it is of course, as likely to be a branch

running N.E. from the Niger, as a river running S.W. into it. Mr. Park

has described the Niger as dividing into two large branches after

leaving Dibbie, and their re-union has been admitted by considerate

investigators, to be a very improbable addition to that report.[27] Sidi

Hamet assigns no course to the great river which he described as about

an hour’s ride with a camel south of Timbuctoo, and distinguished from

the Niger, or, as he called it, Zolilib, by saying the latter was two

hours ride. Adams placed La-mar-Zarah, about three quarters of a mile

wide, two miles south of the town, without hesitation, but he only

_conceived_ that the course was S.W.[28] Leo, ambiguous as the context

may be, certainly writes that there is a _branch_ of the Niger passing

Timbuctoo, “Vicino a un ramo del Niger.” Mr. Beaufoy’s Moor says that

below Ghinea is the sea into which the river of Tombuctoo disembogues

itself; on which Major Rennell observes, “by the word sea, it is well

known the Arabs mean to express a lake also:” this river of Timbuctoo

is, doubtless, the branch of the Niger forming the Gambaroo, and the sea

below Ghinea, the lake Caude. In the Description de l’Afrique, traduite

du Flamand, D’O. Dapper, à Amsterdam, 1686, I find “Ce Royaume de Tombut

ou Tongbutu environ à quatre lieuës _d’un bras_ du Niger.” The account,

to be submitted presently, that this branch of the Niger passing

Timbuctoo is not crossed until the third day going from Timbuctoo to

Houssa, is not an argument against its identity with the Zarah of Adams,

or the river of Sidi Hamet, only two or three miles from the city;

because, giving a northerly course to the branch, and Houssa laying

north eastward 20 journies from Timbuctoo, as will be shewn presently,

the direction of the path would not require the river to be crossed

immediately, but, evidently, not till the second or third day.


De Barros, who considered the Senegal to be the Niger, wrote, that it

received various names,[29] and was called by the Caragoles

(Serawoollies) Collë; on which Mr. Murray reasonably observes, “this

name seems readily convertible into Joli-ba, the latter syllable being

merely an adjunct, meaning a river:” this I was also given to

understand. Now, if the name Joliba had not been reported on the

authority of Mr. Park, I might submit that Collë is more readily

convertible into Quolla, which approximating even more closely to Kulla,

seems to identify the Collë and Kulla under the common name of

Quolla.[30] Mr. Park in his memoir to Lord Camden, writes, “the river of

Dar Kulla, mentioned by Mr. Browne, is generally supposed to be the

Niger, or at least to have a communication with that river.” The name

and course of the Quolla suggested this to me before I observed the

above remark, which I did not until my return.[31] Other arguments will

presently appear for the identity of the Kulla and the Niger.[32]


The Gambaroo seems to me to identify the Gir of Ptolemy,[33] carried by

him into the centre of Africa, and which would appear as large as the

Niger by the expression, “maximi sunt Gir et Nigir.” The river of

Bornoo, hitherto assumed, is not adequate to the impression Ptolemy

conveys, and the names “Gir et Nigir,” seem to indicate a connection.

The Niger may be considered to terminate when the smaller stream is lost

in the Nile.


Concerning the source of the Niger, there was a difference of opinion

amongst the Moors, and not the least notion amongst the Negroes. Some

said that it rose in Bambooch, meaning, as I presume, Bambouk, and

others in Jabowa, where they described another large river to rise also,

running westward. Jabowa was said to be 40 journies from Sego, and

Bambooch 43.


From Jabowa the Niger was described to run to Fouta Gollabi, and in six

days thence to Fouta Towra; the Moors must certainly have meant Foota

Galla, and Footatora, for their pronunciation was more imperfect than

their knowledge of the native names westward, whither they rarely

travelled. I induced a Moor on each side the question, and of different

countries, to draw in my quarters, unknown to each other, what they

called a chart of the Quolla, for the sake of preserving the several

names in their own writing. They were only inferior to one Moor, from

whom I never had an opportunity of inducing a chart. Both parties met,

apparently, at Hasoo, as will be seen by submitting the names.[34]


               _Bambooch._                                     _Jabowa._


  _Journies._


      10       to Gadima, probably Gadoo, little more than 6

               journies from the capital of Bambook, according

               to Major Rennell.


      20       to Hasoo                                         Hasoowa.


       4       to Jaoora                                        Jaoona.


       2       to Jamoo                                         Gamsoö.


       5       to Mallaïa                                       Mallaïu.


       2       to Shégo                                         Sego.


Sego was correctly described according to Mr. Park, and the death of the

monarch he first knew spontaneously mentioned, with his warlike

disposition, and great power. Mr. Park observes that he found the

language of Bambarra a sort of corrupted Mandingo; this confirms the

numerals repeated to me as the Bambarra:


         _Bambarra._    _Mandingo._


  One      Killi          Killin.


  Two      Foolla         Foola.


  Three    Sabba          Sabba.


  Four     Nani           Nani.


  Five     Looroo         Looloo.


  Six      Wora           Woro.


  Seven    Worroola       Oronglo.


  Eight    Sagi           Sie.


  Nine     Konunto        Konunto.


  Ten      Ta             Tang.


From Sego to Sansanding was called one journey, from Sansanding to Jennë

three. Jennë was described as on an island of the Niger, the town

considerable, and fortified, and with large houses to pray in. I did not

understand that it was subject to Timbuctoo; it certainly has a distinct

monarch, who was called Malaï Smaera, and the head Moor, Malaï Bacharoo.

From Jennë through Dibbir, at the entrance of which is Sanina, to

Kabarra or Kabra, the port of Timbuctoo (half a day’s walk from it) is a

voyage of 20 days. By land, it was only 12 journies, through Mashena

(Masina) Farrimabbie, Jimballa (the Jinbala of Mr. Park, which they

persisted was not on an island of the Niger, but on the northern bank of

it) Taäkim, Assoofoo, Zeddaï, Douraï (probably the Downie in Major

Rennell’s map) Matarooch, and Makkasoorfoo, probably the Soorka’s, whom

Mr. Park mentioned as inhabiting the northern bank of the river between

Jinnie and Timbuctoo: he also writes that it is 12 journies by land from

Jinnie to Timbuctoo. The horizontal distance from Jennë to Jimballa, on

Major Rennell’s map is about 100 B. miles, and thence to Timbuctoo 90

more. Now 12 journies at 18 miles, give but a horizontal distance of 144

B. miles, wherefore, I should think the northern bank of the lake

Dibbir, is not so high as it has been hitherto drawn, and the path so

distant as not to be deflected by any curve of the lake. Timbuctoo was

described as a large city, but inferior to Houssa, and not comparable

with Bornoo. The Moorish influence was said to be powerful, but not

superior. A small river goes nearly round the town, overflowing in the

rains, and obliging the people of the suburbs to move to an eminence in

the centre of the town, where the King lives. This is, probably, the

smaller river described by Sidi Hamet as close to the town. Leo says,

when the Niger rises, the waters flow through certain canals to the

city. There were very few muskets to be seen; the King, a Moorish Negro

called Billabahada, had a few double barrelled guns, which were only

fired at customs, and gunpowder was almost as valuable as gold. The two

latter circumstances, besides the name of the river, were all that I

recognised in their reports confirming the description given by Adams,

which I conceive to be as inadequate as those collected by Mr. Jackson

are extravagant.[35] The three last Kings before Billa, were Osamana,

Dawoolloo, and Abass. Mr. Jackson says there was a King Woollo reigning

in 1800, and a Moor who had come from Timbuctoo to Coomassie ten years

ago, did not know King Woollo (Adams’s King) was dead, as he was

reigning at the time he left Timbuctoo. Abass probably had a short reign

like Saï Apokoo the second. This Moor also said that Woollo’s favourite

wife (called by Adams, Fatima) was named Fatooma Allizato. The editor of

Adams shews that the name of Fatima, affords in itself no proof that its

possessor was Moorish, or even a Mohammedan woman. I think it is

probably derived from a numeral, for it answers to five in the numerals

of Garangi (a country described to be northwards of Jennë) which are


  One      Kerriminna.


  Two      Ferriminna.


  Three    Sowaninna.


  Four     Firrima.


  Five     Fahtima.


  Six      Tata.


  Seven    Mannima.


  Eight    Pirima.


  Nine     Missirĭma.


  Ten      Guahee.


Numerals are frequently added to names in Ashantee.


Perhaps the old ms. which I purchased with difficulty from a Jennë Moor,

will recompense the translator by a fuller account, but I fear religion

only is the subject. It contains thirteen pages, with some marginal

notes in a different hand. I should have observed, that, generally

speaking, I found the Moors very cautious in their accounts, declining

to speak unless they were positive, and frequently referring doubtful

points to others whom they knew to be better acquainted with them. I did

not succeed in procuring the numerals of Timbuctoo, but the language is

different from that of Houssa, as the words opposed to those recollected

by Adams will shew:


          _Timbuctoo._    _Houssa._


  Man       Jungo          Motoo.


  Woman     Jumpsa         Motee.


  Camel     So             Rakoomee.


  Dog       Killab         Karree.


  Cow       Fallee         Saneä.


  House     Dah            Garree.


  Water     Boca           Looa.


  Tree      Carna          Leeseeä.


  Gold      Or             Jennarreä.


  A Moor    Seckar         Bibay.


From Timbuctoo[36] to Houssa is 20 journies; the three first through a

woody country, and over the branch of the Niger to Azibbie, the frontier

town. Houssa was said to be the largest city north or south of the

Quolla, except Bornoo; the Moorish influence to have been established

there beyond memory, and the King’s name Serragkee. Cabi is not the name

of the kingdom, but of a large dependent town and district on the Niger.

Mallowa, or Marrowa, as the Negroes pronounce it, (for they seemed

invariably to substitute _r_ for the _l_ of the Moors, as Quorra for

Quolla)[37] is the next extensive in its limits to Bornoo. It is, no

doubt, the kingdom of Mellè, misplaced by Leo, and reported to Cadamosto

in 1455, as 30 journies beyond Timbuctoo. Major Rennell observes, “we

should naturally look for it on the eastward of Timbuctoo,” and it has

only been placed south eastward, and south of the Niger, because Edrisi

has a city called Malel thereabouts, though he calls the name of the

kingdom of which it is the capital Lamlam, which Hartman would reconcile

by supposing it to be a transposition of Malel, certainly a forced

conjecture.[38] A large town called Mahalaba is the nearest I have found

to Malel, to be noticed on the route from Dagwumba to the Niger.[39] In

speaking of all fortified cities, the negroes of Mallowa invariably

prefixed Berinnë or Brinnë to the name, as an indication that they were

so; this was always the case in mentioning Houssa, Cabi, Cassina,

Katinna, &c. &c. I shall place the numerals of Cassina, as written by

Mr. Lucas after the Shereef Imhammed, to the right of those of Houssa or

Mallowa, from their close affinity, perhaps identity; for this language

is spoken far eastward, and the Shereef, as we shall presently see, was

rather inaccurate in his recollection of the numerals of Bornoo.


  One      Daia        Deiyah.


  Two      Beeyoo      Beeyou.


  Three    Okoo        Okoo.


  Four     Odoo        Foodoo.


  Five     Beä         Beat.


  Six      Seddah      Sheedah.


  Seven    Becquay     Bookai.


  Eight    Tacquass    Takoos.


  Nine     Tarra       Tarrah.


  Ten      Gwoma       Goumah.


Two large lakes were described close to the northward of Houssa, one

called Balahar Soudan, and the other Girrigi Marragasee. Calculating the

20 journies from Timbuctoo at 18 miles each, supposing two-thirds to be

made good on the horizontal distance (equal to 212 g. miles) and the

course N.E., I have placed Houssa, 18° 59′ N. and 3° 59′ E. This agrees

pretty well with the account of its being 17 journies from the Niger, or

Quolla, which give 306 B. miles, and the horizontal distance 176 g.

miles. Houssa has hitherto been laid down about 2 journies N. of the

Niger. I have an impression that the city of Houssa will be found to lay

about E.N.E. of Timbuctoo, of course nearer the Gambaroo, which runs

through its dominions, and thus account for the reports of its being

situated upon the Niger. Leo certainly meant Mallowa and the Gambaroo,

when he wrote, “Melli regio quæ extendit se ad flumen quoddam quod ex

Nilo (i.e. Nigro) effluit trecenta millia passuum,” adding, “regnum

opulentissimum, maximè artificum et mercatorum copia, frequentia templa,

sacerdotes et populus qui Nigritas omnes civilitate antecedunt;” which

they certainly appear to do: see a few of their articles for the British

Museum. May not the Maurali of Ptolemy be the Melli of Leo, and the

modern Mallowa or Marrowa? his large adjunct to the Niger to the south

indicates the two rivers. Major Rennell seems to have expected the

present discovery, when he writes (commenting on Mr. Park’s report that

Houssa was 30 journies by land from Tombuctoo, and 45 by water)

“Possibly it may be that Houssa is situated on a different river from

that which passes by Tombuctoo (the Joliba,) but which may be an adjunct

of it, and may run into it in the quarter of Tombuctoo.” In Dapper’s

translation of the Description De l’Afrique du Flamand, 1686, I find

“Cette contreé (Melli) s’etend environ cent lieuës _le long d’un bras_

du Niger.”


Tarrabaleese, 50 journies westward of north, was much spoken of from the

number of its market places. This must be Tripoli, the Arabic corruption

of which is Trabŏlis. The Moors gave me a route to Tunis or Toonis, but

I cannot recognise any name in Major Rennell’s map, (which I could not

procure until my return,) unless Sabbai be Sebba, and Mookanassa

Mourzouk, in Fezzan. There is also another route eastward which I cannot

trace. See Appendix.


From Kabarra the Quolla, continuing its course southward of east, passed

by Uzzalin, Googara,[40] Koolmanna, Gauw, Tokogirri, (perhaps the Tokrur

of Edrisi and Gatterer) Askeä, Zabirmë, and Cabi to Yaoora, which I

imagine to be the Youri of Major Rennell’s map.[41] De Lisle places a

kingdom, Yaouree, south of the Niger. It is a very celebrated ferry,

occurring in a variety of routes from the north of the Quolla to

Ashantee, spoken of always as westward of Cassina, and with little

variation as 25 journies from Timbuctoo. Now as the Moors called it one

day’s journey from Sego to Sansanding, and Mr. Park made it scarcely

more, I will assume this as the rule to calculate the distance from

Timbuctoo to Yaooree, and afterwards consider its place according to the

routes from Dagwumba, through it, to Cassina. Twenty five journies from

Timbuctoo would place Yaoora about 70 miles above the Berrisa in Major

Rennell’s map, but this makes the horizontal distance from Yaoora to

Dagwumba about 850 B. miles, and therefore too great for 42 journies,

the greatest number allowed in the routes from Dagwumba to Yaoora.


I would not presume to investigate after Major Rennell, it would be

absurd in me to expect to throw any new interest into the discussion,

but by making clear the accounts I collected; to do which I must decline

the course of the Niger from Cabi (Mr. Horneman writes it flows

southward from Haoussa) even to a junction with the Bahr Kulla. For,

placing Yaoora in 13° 30′ N. and 8° 30′ E. in conformity with its

distance from Timbuctoo and a declining course to the Kulla, the

horizontal distance to Yahndi, the capital of Dagwumba, will be 600 B.

miles: now 42 journies, the greatest number allowed by the travellers,

at 20 miles each, (rejecting one third, as heretofore, lost in the

windings of the path) give the horizontal distance at 560 B. miles. This

is certainly an additional argument to the similarity of the names

Quolla and Kulla, for the identity of these rivers; but not so strong a

one as that the routes both of Moors and Negroes, allow but 40 journies

from Dagwumba to the point of crossing the Niger for Houssa. The course

to this point was described by the Moors as a little to the eastward of

north: now 40 journies on a N.N.E. course, by the former rule, places

this ferry 15° 1′ N. and 3° 33′ E. agreeing very well with our previous

position of Houssa, and proving that the course of the Niger must

decline considerably, for more than two extra journies would otherwise

be required for the north eastward route from Dagwumba to Yaoora. Major

Rennell only writes that the course of the Niger is _probably_ to

Wangara. Mr. Ledyard, in his comparatively minute description of that

country, (which I shall notice in the route to Bornoo) says nothing of

its bordering on the Niger. Major Rennell, in the construction of the

geography of Mr. Horneman’s report, writes, “M. D’Anville also had an

idea, and so describes it in his map of Africa, 1749 (possibly from

actual information,) that the Niger declined to the south beyond Gana,

so that the termination of it in the lake Semegonda was 3½ degrees of

latitude to the south of Gana.” There is a kingdom called Kulla as well

as a river, and there is also a kingdom Quollaraba: raba being probably

no more than an adjunct equal to the prefix dar, and signifying a

kingdom. Mr. Dupuis, in his notes on Adams, says of an intelligent

Negro, “his account was chiefly curious from his description of a nation

which he called Gallo or _Quallo_, which conveyed to me an idea of a

people, more advanced in the arts, and wealthier than any that I had

previously heard of: within three days journey of the capital was a

large lake or river which communicated with the Wed Nile.” The commended

arguments of the Quarterly Review, (which I have never had the advantage

of reading,) must be in a great degree auxiliary, in arguing, to support

the Congo hypothesis, a course of the Niger equally declined with that

which I have followed for the identity of the Quolla and Kulla. The

junction of the Quolla with the Bahr Abiad, or Nil, as the Moors called

it, cannot be more descriptively expressed, according to every account I

received, than in the words of Mr. Horneman. “Some days past I spoke to

a man who had seen Mr. Brown in Darfoor, he gave me some information

respecting the countries he travelled through, and told me that the

communication of the Niger with the Nile was not to be doubted, but that

this communication before the rainy season was very little.”[42]


We will pursue the course of the Quolla from Yaoora (where I should

judge from description it must be about 3 miles wide) before we apply

the routes northward of it.[43] One journey eastward of Yaoora,

(sometimes called Yawooree by the Negroes,) it passed Nooffie, doubtless

the Nyffe of Mr. Horneman and others, and which De Lisle has written

Nouffy: 3 journies thence it passed Boussa, which Amadi Fatouma

reported, as it was to me also (see Diary) as the place of Mr. Park’s

death, but I could hear nothing of the rock and door. Boussa is not in

Major Rennell’s map, but I observed Bousa in the map of De Lisle before

alluded to; it is probably the Berrisa of Edrisi. Twelve journies thence

it passed Atagara, but, previously, Hoomee, and Rakkah.[44] Southward of

the latter, they described an inland country called Koofee, possibly

Kosie, a country I shall presently introduce, as visited by a mulatto,

behind Lagos. Thirty journies from Atagara, it flowed through the

kingdom of Quollaraba,[45] which thus falls precisely where Major

Rennell has laid down the kingdom of Kulla. Six journies thence it

passed Mafeegoodoo, and 13 journies beyond, the lake Cadee or Caudee.

This I should consider to be the Cauga of Edrisi, which Major Rennell

has identified with the Fittri of Mr. Brown, for into this the second

large branch of the Niger, or the river Gambaroo, is said to run; but it

is considerably too much to the southward for the Cauga in Major

Rennell’s map, being, according to the accounts of the Moors, only 3

journies northward of the Quolla: yet Edrisi writes “besides a river of

the name of Nile or Neel _passes by_ Kauga.” What inclines me to think

the Cauga may be more distant from Bornoo the capital, though not from

the frontier of that kingdom, (15 journies being the number reported to

me as well as to Mr. Brown) is, that the Negroes of that city were not

so well acquainted with this lake as the Moors. My sketch in the map, of

course, represents the sketches and descriptions of the natives. They

described the Cadee or Caudee as an immense water, like a small sea,

frequently overflowing the neighbouring country, and sometimes so

convulsed as to throw up large quantities of fish and other contents;

meaning, in short, a volcanic lake. The Moors called it also the Bahr el

Noä, having a tradition that the waters of the deluge retired to, and

were absorbed in it. A very high mountain was spoken of, at an equal

distance between the Caudee and the Quolla.[46] Twelve journies from

Caudee, the Quolla received the river Sharee from northward, which, I

imagine, if not the Misselad, may be a river deriving its name from the

Abu Shareb of Major Rennell’s map. The Quolla was said to pass to the

southward of Bagarrimee, (the Baghermee of Mr. Brown.) Kalafarradoo, (I

cannot find any name nearer to this than the Courourfa of De Lisle, and

Kororfa, said in Mr. Beaufoy’s MSS. to be W. of Begarmee). Foör (Darfur,

according to Mr. Brown, means the kingdom of Foör) and lastly to skirt

Waddaï, the Waddey of Mr. Horneman, who wrote that it was east of

Begharmee, and west of Darfoor; but, as it was reported to me east of

Darfoor, by every person, and as Mr. Brown did not hear of it to adjust

its position, I have placed it so.[47]


The junction with the Nile having taken place, as Mr. Horneman before

reported, south of Darfoor, they continued the course to a large country

called Soonar,[48] indisputably the kingdom of Sennaar. Hence to

Massar,[49] or Egypt, they did not always agree themselves in the

various names, nor can I recognise any on the map, unless their Shewa

Abenhassa be Bennassa, Minsoor, Misur, Gammeacha, Gammazie; Sooess,

Sohaig; Kaheea, Kahoul; Zaragoo, Nayazoogoo; and their Lamabalara, in

the country of Egypt, the Bahr be la ma of Mr. Horneman; of the latter

there can be no doubt.[50]


My friend, the Shereef Brahima had, as well as some others, been to

Mecca and Medina. I place great reliance on this man’s information

(invariably confirmed by the Negroes) from his caution and diffidence,

and my experience of his character; for he was ultimately a valuable

friend to the Mission: he was the only Moor who dared to refuse to be

present at human sacrifices. The MS. No. 2. is his writing, and

professedly the route from Dagwumba through Bornoo to Massar,[51] it

consists of six pages well written. This would have been a valuable man

to have engaged to travel through the interior, for he was capable of

making circumstantial minutes, and I think he might have been engaged to

do so by a moderate Fort pay. The Moors talk much of the King of

Santambool,[52] as a powerful monarch and formidable to the Christians.


It will excite surprise that I heard nothing of Wangara,[53] as was the

case with Mr. Brown, not even after I had, contrary to my general

custom, submitted the name: but I heard very much spontaneously of

Oongooroo. Mr. Horneman called Wangara, Ungura, and De Lisle, Ouangara,

we shall find it in the route from Yaoora to Bornoo or Barranoo. Bornoo

was described to me about north-east from Yaoora, which agrees very well

with Major Rennell’s position, established beyond all contradiction

short of an observation, but, the horizontal distance, (lowering the

place of Yaoora as I have done) thence to Bornoo would be upwards of

1000 B. miles, whereas they described it to be but 51 journies, which

allowing 20 miles to each, as the country was said to be much more

favourable to travelling, and the path more direct than that we came,

would give but an horizontal distance of 680 B. miles. Mr. Horneman

heard that Bornu was but 15 journies from Kassina; I was told 33 if

walked, 19 if rode. Major Rennell has made the distance about 30

journies, considering the 15 journies applicable to the western

boundaries of the empire, and not to the capital.


We will now return to Yahndi and proceed northwards to Houssa. Nineteen

journies from Yahndi is Matchaquawdie, six beyond is Goorooma, 10 thence

Dolooë, subject to Goorooma, and only five journies from the Quolla,

described as about two miles wide there. When Amadi Fatouma mentioned

that he passed Gourouma, I should suppose he meant this kingdom of

Goorooma, Dolooë, as subject to it, being probably included under that

name. I must impress, however, that this northern route from Dagwumba to

the Niger, being, with that from Kong to Jennë, the only ones

unauthenticated, otherwise than by cross examination, I do not report

them with the same confidence, which I do the others. Two journies from

the northern bank of the Quolla is Gamhadi, to which three large towns

belong, Dogondaghi, Toodonkassalee, and Toompasseä, and numerous

dependent crooms. There were three routes from Gamhadi, the first

northward to Houssa 15 journies, passing the large river Gambaroo the

ninth, between which and Houssa is a district called Zessa. The second

route is to Katinnee, a city and state of the Mallowa kingdom, one month

from the Quolla. On this route the Gambaroo is crossed the tenth day,

and Sowhoondë, Souoola, (perhaps Sala) Quattaraquassee, Doorooma, Soroo,

Zabbakou, Dinka, Doochingamza, and Dammisamia were mentioned as large

towns on the route. The third route was through the Fillanee country,

(doubtless the Fullan[54] of Ben Ali) which had been frequently at war

with Mallowa, to the kingdom of Kallaghee, 14 journies from the Quolla,

the Gambaroo being passed the tenth. The numerals of Kallaghee are


  One      Gadee.


  Two      Sillil.


  Three    Quan.


  Four     Foolloo.


  Five     Vydee.


  Six      Zoodoo.


  Seven    Etkassa.


  Eight    Shiddowka.


  Nine     Woollaä.


  Ten      Woma.


A country called Barrabadi was described eastward of Mallowa, between it

and Bornoo; its numerals corresponded with those of Bornoo.


We will now return again to Dagwumba, and follow the route thence, over

the Quolla, through Yaoora to Bornoo. Gamba we have already described as

five journies north eastward of Yahndi, thence two journies, over a high

mountain called Yerim, and across a river running southwards (which the

Moors called Mory, but which it would seem is the continuation of the

Karhala) is Gooroosie, four journies thence Zoogoo, probably the Zeggo

of Major Rennell’s map; 10 farther the kingdom of Barragoo. De Lisle has

placed his kingdom of Bourgou thereabouts. North-westward of Barragoo is

Koomba, the Kombah of Major Rennell’s map. The position of this kingdom

is pretty well ascertained, because those who came from it, described

Goorooma as its northern neighbour, and Barragoo to be the first kingdom

passed through in their journies to the coast below Whydah. Eight

journies from Barragoo is Toombeä, three beyond is Goodoobirree. A river

running to the Quolla (as it was said, but more probably from it) called

Leeäsa, flows close to the eastward of this path, and is crossed, going

from Goodoobirree southwards, to a large kingdom called Yariba by the

Moors, but Yarba more generally by the natives. Major Rennell has drawn

a river communicating with the Niger close to Youri, so has De Lisle.

This river Leeäsa is the only one I heard of, answering in the least

degree to that of Sidi Hamet, but Wassana was a name unknown. Aquallie

is the frontier town of Yariba, one journey from Goodoobirree, and one

from Bootee, second only to the capital, Katanga, four journies beyond

it. Yariba was described to be about 24 journies, through Hio, (its

immediate neighbour) from Arătakassee or Alătakassee, which we shall

hereafter recognise in Ardra: this determines its position pretty

well.[55] Dahomey was said to be tributary to Yariba, as well as to Hio,

which I have an impression is also tributary to Hio. From Hio to Dahomey

is seven journies. The military are despotic in Hio, they always

intercept the new King on his way to the palace, and demand his naming

some neighbouring country for their invasion and plunder, before they

confirm him. The King before the present, had named Dahomey, but after

three years neglect of the fulfilment, he ordered the army against a

northern neighbour. The army went, wasted and pillaged the country, but

when within a day’s march of the capital on their return, they sent

deputies to enjoin his abdication, as inevitable to a falsehood to them;

he was obstinate; they arrived and cut off his head. The numerals of Hio

are


  One      Innee.


  Two      Eygee.


  Three    Etta.


  Four     Ernee.


  Five     Aroon.


  Six      Effa.


  Seven    Eggay.


  Eight    Eggo.


  Nine     Essun.


  Ten      Eywaw.


The Hio man, who gave me the above numerals, spoke of the Apaccas as a

more powerful northern neighbour, but I never heard of them from any

other person.


Yariba must certainly be the Yarba of Imhammed, though he described it

as 18 or 20 journies from Gonjah towards the N.W., for he is likely to

have been incorrect in this, because we have proved him to be so, in

stating, that Ashantee was the capital of Tonouwah, which appears to be

a district or town of Dagwumba, the people of which kingdom are by no

means warlike as he represented them, nor have they any notion of taming

the elephant: he reported that Calanshee was a dependency of Ashantee,

whereas no Ashantee knows the name; that Gonjah was 46 journies from the

coast, when it is but 30. Major Rennell reasonably conceived the Yarba

of Imhammed to be the Yarra of De Lisle, at the back of Sierra Leone,

but as this country is not preserved in his own map, I presume it cannot

be of much consequence, politically or commercially, whereas Yariba,

indisputably eastward of Kong, is always announced to enquirers, both by

Moors and Negroes, as a very powerful, and much frequented kingdom.

Another argument is, that all the Moors I saw at Coomassie, were almost

ignorant of the countries westward, only speaking of those their

enquiries for the source of the Quolla had made known to them: indeed, I

did not see one who had travelled westward, or south westward of

Bambarra, but our Accra linguist told me that he had recognised a Moor

at the Rio Pongos, whom he had seen in Coomassie (when sent there on the

eve of the second Ashantee invasion) who told him that he had been two

months travelling from Kong, and crossed a very large river. Imhammed’s

Affow (if not Taffoo, or the Inta country) I conceive to be Afflou, a

town and district of the Krepee or Kerrapay country, and a short walk

from the sea by Quitta, westward of Yarba, as he says, but more than

eight journies. The Kerrapay country, which is extensive and

independent, will be described, in proceeding from Cape Coast Castle,

along the coast, eastward.


[Illustration: _London published as the Act directs by John Murray

Albemarle Street 4th. Jany. 1819._


_J. Walker Sculpt._]


To return to the route from Yahndi to Yaoora, three journies from

Goodoobirree towards the Quolla through Gillimakafoo, Garagaroogee, and

Paänghee, is the large city of Kaiama, and four beyond it, through

Mahalaba, (the nearest name to the Malel of Edrisi,) Marramoo, and

across the small river Wooroo, (running to the Quolla) is the city of

Wauwaw,[56] three journies from the Quolla. Ten journies from the

northern bank, through Yaoora, and skirting the eastern limits of

Zamfara, is Goobirree, so called by the Moors, and Goobur by the

Negroes.[57] Mr. Beaufoy learned that Gubur was to the south of Wangara,

and De Lisle writes it Goubour. Thence to Kassina, having crossed the

large river Gambaroo, is eight journies. Eighteen journies, calculated

at 18 miles each on a N.E. course, from the altered position of Yaoora,

would place Kassina in 15° 43′ N. and 10° 43′ E., instead of 16° N. and

11° 45′ E. Mr. Lucas learned that Kassina was five journies from the

Niger, or about 100 miles from that water, which it is likely to be from

the upper branch or the Gambaroo, which river skirting Kanoo, and

Oongooroo, (or Wangara,) before it descends to the lake Cadee, (though I

could not prove satisfactorily that it did so,) would account for

Edrisi’s placing Kano, and Wangara, on the Niger.[58] From Kassina to

Dawoorra is six journies: this must be the Daura of Mr. Horneman, though

in the drawing of the Marrabut it is placed north of Kano. From Dawoorra

to Kanoo is four journies. D’Anville placed it 90 miles to the N.E. of

Kassina, and in the drawing just alluded to, it is placed inland

northward of the Niger. The only authority for supporting Edrisi’s

position of it, is what Mr. Matra was told at Marocco. The Moor who

informed Mr. Beaufoy that boats went with the stream to Ghineä, (the

Gano or Kano of Major Rennell) placed Jinnie between it and Houssa, so

gross an inaccuracy as to justify our doubting him on the other point.

The Ginea of Leo more probably meant Jennë, and he seems to write of

that navigation as a distinct one from that to Melli eastward.[59] From

Kanoo, through the large towns Madagee and Adagia, to Oongooroo is nine

journies, but seven on a joma or camel, “Est iter octo dierum versus

orientem” (Edrisi.) From Oongooroo to Barranoo is 15 journies on foot

according to the Moors, nine on horseback according to the Negroes, by

route No. 12. Bornoo or Barranoo was spoken of as the first empire in

Africa,[60] the King’s name, according to the Moors, was Baba Alloo, but

the Negroes called him Massinnama.[61] Kassina, and the intermediate

countries on the route, were subject to him with many others. One

district belonging to Bornoo was named Panaroo, and the vassal King or

governor of it, Yandee Kooma. A small river, called Gaboöa[62] by the

Negroes, ran southwards near Bornoo, and six journies eastward from it,

close to Aweeac, a large one Zerrookoo Keroboobee. Mr. Horneman writes,

the Wad el Gazel is not a river, but a large and fertile valley. The

Negroes of Bornoo were well acquainted with Baghermee. Imhammed’s

recollection of the numerals of Bornoo must have been very imperfect,

for I have written them at least half a dozen times, both from Moorish

and Negro inhabitants, and my spelling agreed with that of another

person present. They are


                   _Imhammed’s._


  One      Leskar    Lakkah.


  Two      Ahndee    Endee.


  Three    Yaskar    Nieskoo.


  Four     Deegah    Dekoo.


  Five     Oöogoo    Okoo.


  Six      Araskoo   Araskoo.


  Seven    Tooloor   Naskoo.


  Eight    Woskoo    Tallóre.


  Nine     Likkar    L’ilkar.


  Ten      Meeägoo   Meikoo.


Ben Ali said the language of the common people of Bornoo had a strong

resemblance to that of the neighbouring Negroes. Mr. Lucas writes that

no less than 30 languages are spoken in these dominions. The following

are the numerals of Maïha, one month to the north-eastward, subject to

Bornoo, and the King’s name Smaï Doonama.


  One      Lagen.


  Two      Indë.


  Three    Eäska.


  Four     Daäger.


  Five     Ohoo.


  Six      Araska.


  Seven    Tooloor.


  Eight    Weska.


  Nine     Likar.


  Ten      Inagoon.


The Negroes called Kanem, Kandem; were well acquainted with Doomboo, and

spoke much of the kingdom of Asben.


We will now return to Cape Coast Castle, and seek the best descriptive

authorities, in aid of the observations which have been made by the

Commissioners and others, for the maritime geography from the river

Assinee to Lagos.


The latitude and longitude of Cape Coast (called by the natives Igwa,

and in the Affettoo district) according to Messrs. Ludlam and Dawes, the

Government Commissioners who surveyed the coast in 1810, is 5° 6′ N. and

1° 51′ W. Elmina, the native name of which is Addĭna, is about seven

miles to windward of Cape Coast. Twelve miles from Elmina is Commenda,

an English fort, the town is called by the natives Akatayki, the Dutch

fort was destroyed in the American war. Nine miles thence is Chama, or

Assĕma, at the mouth of the Boosempra. Six hours pull up the river, is

an island, where Attobra, one of the Warsaw caboceers, who supplies the

Dutch with canoes, is building a large house to retire to; four hours

above which is his croom. Colonel Starrenberg was pulled three days up

the river in a canoe; his progress was much impeded by rocks, and at

length arrested by a large cataract, which, being considered a powerful

fetish by the natives, the canoe-men dared not to approach. Nine miles

from Chama, where the Dutch have a fort called Sebastian, is Succondee,

the first town in the Ahanta country. The English fort was destroyed by

the French in the American war, but there is a settlement house. The

Dutch fort is called Orange. Four miles from Succondee is Taccorary, and

a Dutch fort. Nine miles beyond is Boutrie where the Dutch have a fort,

formerly belonging to the Brandenburgh Company. Three miles from Boutrie

is Dix-Cove, or Nfooma, and in the interval Boossooä, the capital of

Ahanta, which is divided into three districts, Amanfoo, Adoom, and Poho.

The first is about one journey (through Geämma) behind Boossooa, and one

from the river Ancobra, the caboceer is of the next consequence to the

King, whose power and means are extremely limited. The two latter

districts are not more than half a journey behind Taccorary. The small

river running into the sea at Boutrie, rises in the Adoom district,

which is said to abound in gold, but the pits have not been worked for

many years, from their fear of the Warsaws. Amanfee also abounds in very

fine gold, which is generally found in quartz, and is ground upon stones

arranged under large sheds for the purpose. In a respectable periodical

publication of the last year, I observe, the King of Ashantee called

King of Ahanta, Inta, or Ashantee; this is one of the many proofs of the

indiscriminate ideas of that monarch before the Mission. Eighteen miles

from Dix-Cove passing Achooma and Accoda, (where the Dutch have a fort,

and which is close to Cape Three Points) are the ruins of Hollandia,

formerly belonging to the Brandenburgh Company, and called Fort Royal

Fredericksburg. Sixteen miles farther is Axim, where the Dutch fort

Anthony, their Vice Presidency, is situated. The people of Axim speak a

dialect of the Ahanta. About two miles westward is the mouth of the

Ancobra, so called by the Portuguese from its windings, the native name

is Seënna. Col. Starrenberg, who went up the river as far as the ruins

of Elisa Carthago, the extreme navigable point, for any but a very small

canoe, says, he cannot form any accurate idea of the distance, but

supposes it was about 20 Dutch miles and the course N.E. Meredith says

50 English: he was very careless and incorrect in writing, “the French

built a fort on the right bank of this river, and at about 50 miles from

its mouth; where they had a great gold trade, that soon excited the

jealousy of the Dutch, who expelled them. The Dutch however did not long

enjoy this acquisition, for the chief got embroiled with the natives,

and betook himself to the desperate remedy of blowing up the fort.”

Elisa Carthago was built by the Dutch governor Ruighaven, who died, as

appears by his tomb stone at Elmina, before 1700. The French never had

any but a small factory, almost at the mouth of the river, and the Dutch

officer in charge of Elisa Carthago had enjoyed a good trade many years

before the cupidity of the natives reduced him to the act of despair,

related by Bosman, and still recorded by the natives, who narrated it to

Col. Starrenberg. The following is from the Latin translation of Dr.

Reynhaut: “The chief of Elisa Carthago being at variance with the

natives, who invested the fort, and finding he could not resist them any

longer” (for as the story goes, he had been reduced to fire pieces of

rock gold from the want of bullets) “feigned to treat with them, and

invited them for that purpose into the hall of the fort, under which he

had placed several barrels of gunpowder, and a small boy with a match,

ordering him to apply it directly he stamped his foot on the floor of

the hall above. This he did, after reproaching the natives with their

cupidity, and they were all blown up together. One of the servants of

the fort had just before contrived to effect his escape with most of the

papers.” In navigating from the mouth of the Ancobra or Seënna to Elisa

Carthago, the following towns, on the banks, are passed, Boasso, Tarbo,

Marmeresse, Ejujan, Tetchbrouw, Gura, Barnesoe, Uromanio, Afamkan, and

Aduwa. Gura is a small state, the people of which speak the same

language as those of Axim. From Aduwa there are three grand roads, one

to the Aowin country, one to the Dankara, and one to Asankarie, a

considerable town in Warsaw. From Aduwa to Dankara numerous small crooms

are passed through, and the first large one of the latter country is

Kenkoomabaraso, only three journies from Coomassie. The people of

Dankara come to Axim to trade. From Aduwa to Aowin the first

considerable town is Taqua. The Warsaw country is governed by four

caboceers, independent of each other, of whose relation and power, the

best idea I can give, is by comparing it with that of the tyrants Geron

and Theron, who ruled at the same time in Sicily. Intiffa, the richest

caboceer, and whose power extends the farthest, resides at Abbradie, one

short journey from Elmina. Cudjo Miensa (Miensa is the numeral three) is

his principal counsellor, and will succeed him. Nerbehin was formerly

the residence of Quashee Jacon, another independent caboceer, but of

Intiffa’s family; he was driven from thence by Esson Cudjo, who now

rules there: he fled to Samcow (situated about one day’s journey on the

frontier of Warsaw, behind Succondee) of which Musoe, a slave of his,

has raised himself to be the caboceer, and now protects his master until

Esson Cudjoe’s death. Attobra, another independent caboceer, lives at

Dabroādie, on the Boosempra. The greatest breadth of the Warsaw country

is supposed to be 60 B. miles, and the greatest length 100 or 120. About

28 miles from the Ancobra, begins the kingdom of Amanaheä, in which the

English fort Apollonia is situated: it extends about 100 miles along the

coast, but not more than 20 in-land. The various numerals of the coast

will be submitted in an essay on the Fantee language.


Barely four miles eastward of Cape Coast is Moree, and the Dutch fort

Nassau. Six miles from Moree is Annamaboe, the most complete

fortification in the country; five miles thence Cormantine, the first

fort possessed by the English, and built by them about the middle of the

seventeenth century. It was taken afterwards by the Dutch, and being

stormed, was almost destroyed by the Ashantee army, before it attacked

Annamaboe: the position is very commanding. Tantumquerry, a small

English fort, is about 18 miles from Cormantine, (crossing the small

river Amissa, an hour’s walk in-land from which is Mankasim, the capital

of the Braffoe district of Fantee) the natives call the town Tuam. Eight

miles from Tantum is the town of Apam, where is a Dutch fort and a small

river. Eight miles from Apam is Simpah or Winnebah. The people of Simpah

are Fantees, but their language is called Affoottoo. They are in the

district of Agoona. About nine miles from Simpah is the Dutch fort

Berracoe, the natives call the town Seniah. Attah of Akim laid a

contribution on this fort in March 1811. About 27 miles from Berracoe is

Accra, or Inkran, once subject to Aquamboo, which people, according to

Isert, formerly drove them to Popo. Meredith fully describes Accra and

the environs, but he does not mention that according to the natives the

Portuguese settled here first, (Isert writes in 1452) and exercising the

greatest cruelties and enormities, were extirpated by the Accras (their

town was then situated a little behind the present), who executed the

governor and his countrymen, on a spot whence they still take the earth

to rub a new born child, in commemoration of the event. Accra, according

to the observations of the Commissioners, is in 5° 20′ N. and 10′ W. Mr.

Meredith, after quoting this observation, placed it in his outline of

the coast in 58′ E. Between two and three miles from the English fort,

is Christiansburg Castle, the Danish head-quarters.


We will follow[63] Isert in his route from Accra to the Volta, as he

travelled it several times. “Two miles from Christiansburg is Labbodee,

where there was formerly a fort: this is the residence of the grand

fetish, and the Bishop. Two miles to Pessin, two to Temmen, where the

Dutch had a small fort, abandoned in 1781, two (leaving Nimboe a little

in the bush) to Ponee, a deserted Dutch fort, now a Dutch factory; two

miles thence (crossing a brakke streek or low land, up to the shoulders

in the rains, and 300 fathoms broad, sometimes called Ponee river) are

great and small Pram Pram, where the English have a small fort or

fortified factory. Two long miles thence is Friedensbourg fort at Ningo,

the people of which speak a different language called Adampee, (the name

given to their country,) a mixture of Ashantee, Kerrapee, and Accra; it

is a republic.” Behind Adampee is the Crobo mountain, the people of

which, though but a few hundreds, have hitherto baffled the Ashantees,

by leaving their croom at the bottom of the mountain, which is of great

height, rugged, accessible but by one narrow path, and with springs of

water on the top, whence they roll down upon their enemies, the large

stones and fragments of rock which abound. “From Adampee I went in one

day to Addah, 12 miles. Two and a half from Ningo is a croom called Laï,

the inhabitants of which have removed, some to Addah, some to Ningo: the

English had a factory here, long gone to ruin. One mile west of the

Volta, there was formerly a croom called Foutchi.” Reckoning four

English miles to one Danish or Dutch, Addah would be 96 miles from

Christiansburg, but Meredith makes it but 67, therefore we will take the

medium and call it 87. From the Volta to Cape St. Paul’s is five leagues

by sea, according to Dalzel, and 15 miles by land, according to Norris’s

map of Dahomey and its environs. Quitta, about 12 miles from it

(according to Norris) by the observation made in H.M.S. Argo in 1802, is

in 5° 45′ N. and 1° 29′ 30″ E. by chronometer. Accra lies, according to

the Commissioners, in 10′ W. Taking the medium between Isert and

Meredith, Christiansburg Castle, about three miles eastward of the

English fort, is 87 from Addah, but as that place is six miles from the

mouth of the Volta, we will call it 81: allowing one mile for the

breadth of the river and 18 miles for the difference of longitude

between it and Quitta, (according to Norris,) the distance from English

Accra to Quitta will be 103 B. miles, which being equal to 89

geographical miles, place Quitta in 1° 19′ E. instead of 1° 29′ 30″ as

by the observation of the Argo, and that supposing the whole distance to

be made good horizontally, which is impossible. Wherefore I should think

Isert, who had travelled it, was more likely to be correct in making the

distance from Christiansburg to Addah 96 miles, than Meredith in calling

it 67.


Norris’s observation, placing Cape St. Paul’s in 5° 52′ N., I conceive

to be incorrect, as that of the Argo must be preferred, which places

Quitta in 5° 42′ N., instead of 6° 2′ N., as in Norris’s map. This

should not have escaped Mr. Dalzel’s notice in the “New Sailing

Directions,” where both observations are cited in the same page, without

any remark on the inconsistency, for Quitta and not St. Paul’s, is thus

made the Cape or western limit of the Bight, the eastern side of which

is called the Bight of Benin, I regret, amongst other disadvantages,

that of not having the opportunity to consult the chart of Mr. Demayne

(the master of H.M.S. Amelia) which is said to be more accurate than any

other.[64]


Quitta is included in an independent state of Kerrapay, called Agwoona,

which extends thence along the coast to the Volta; the towns from that

river to Quitta are Attoko, Terrobee, Footee, Agwoona, Whiëe, and

Tegbay. Agwoona lays half a mile from the shore, and about 15 miles from

the Volta. The inhabitants of all the other towns are obliged by the law

to bury their dead in Agwoona, the capital; the caboceer of which is

supreme over the others, but not absolute. Between Quitta and Popo, lay

the Kerrapay towns Egbiffeemee, to which several of the Quittas have

retired, Edjenowah, Oöogloobooë, and Afflou or Afflahoo, a little way

from the beach. These towns are governed by caboceers, independent of

each other, as well as of Agwoona; and in the last a mixture of Adampë

and Kerrapay is spoken, accounted for by the emigration of a large body

of the former people. Another independent state of Kerrapay is

Tettaytokoo, 2 journies behind Popo; the King is said to be despotic,

and the capital composed of circular houses. There is also another

smaller interior state, governed by a caboceer called Quaminagah. Tadoo,

however, is allowed to be the largest kingdom of Kerrapay, 6 journies

behind Popo, (which the Fantees call Inshan, but the natives Taun or

Taum) described as a large town; and the Accra language is spoken there

as well as the Kerrapay, in consequence of the temporary emigration of

the former people in 1680. The Kerrapay numerals are


  One      Eddee.


  Two      Effee.


  Three    Eltong.


  Four     Ennay.


  Five     Altong.


  Six      Adday.


  Seven    Adrinnee.


  Eight    Ennee.


  Nine     Indee.


  Ten      Owoo.


The Negroes of this country are of a much more daring and desperate

character than their neighbours, and were always the most severely

treated in the slave ships. Mr. Meredith, who writes it Crepee, placed

it west of the Volta.


Whydah, according to an observation of the Argo, is 6° 14′ N. 2° 31′ E.

I do not recollect Dalzel to have mentioned that Anotto is produced in

the neighbourhood of Whydah. I am not certain whether it is by the Bixa

orellana; but the shrub at Whydah may be classed under Polyandria

Monogynia. Lambe made it 200 miles from Whydah beach to Abomey; Norris

112, Dalzel 96. By Mr. Norris’s own account of his journey, not more

than 20 hours were occupied in travelling, which at 4 miles an hour, the

greatest pace which I think the hammock men can average, would make the

distance 80 miles. An officer in this service went to Dahomey, without

hurrying, in 3 days; and considers a dispatch would reach it in 2: he

thinks it can scarcely be 70 miles; but calling it 80 as above, and

supposing 54, two thirds, to be the horizontal distance made good, equal

to almost 47 G. miles, Abomey would lay in 7° 12′ N. Yet Mr. Dalzel

writes it lays in about 7° 59′ N.: Whydah being in about 6° 25′ in the

map affixed to his history; this requires 108 B. miles to be made good

on the horizontal distance, whereas he calls that of the whole journey

but 96, and Mr. Norris, who drew the map, 112. The public were certainly

indebted to Mr. Dalzel for the History of Dahomey, but it was his duty,

as an intelligent and considerate man, to correct such an error as this;

and if the author of the preface had reflected, he would not have

written, “The map, is that of Mr. Norris, with a few additions, which

for the places on the coast, and the position of Abomey, is near enough

to the truth.” Mr. Dalzel should have corrected a greater error in this

map, the course of the Lagos river, for altering which I shall presently

quote his own authority in addition to others.


An officer in this service, who resided at Lagos three years, and is the

only European resident who has survived of those who have made the

attempt, enables me to correct the following errors. The Pelican bank is

much smaller than it appears on the charts; the Doo island (which lays

N.W. and not N. of Lagos town) where the natives go to make fetish, is

not more than one mile in circumference; and there is no river of that

name. The beach over which the Portuguese and French (who never cross

the bar, where there are 3 fathoms water) transport their goods to the

canoes, is not more than 100 yards wide, instead of one mile. In

Norris’s map prefixed to Dalzel’s History, the Lagos river is made to

cross the path to Dahomey near Torë. In the Sailing Directions for the

Coast of Africa, to which Mr. Dalzel was the chief contributor, and who

revised the work, we find, “River Lagos is the mouth not only of the

river of that name, which runs to the _eastward from Ardrah_,” &c. and

the river Mr. Norris crossed near Torë, which he calls pretty deep and

rapid, but with a bridge over it, is by the account of other gentlemen,

officers in this service, who have been to Dahomey, no more than a

marsh. The gentleman before mentioned to have resided three years in

Lagos, informs me the grand branch of that river flows from the

northward of the island, where the pretended river Doo is placed, he

found it so wide on entering it, that being in the middle, where there

are 10 fathoms water, he could scarcely see the land on either side. The

current is impetuous, and floating islands, and large masses of alluvial

matter come down with such force, in the rainy season, as to trip

vessels from their anchors in the English road. De Lisle makes the Lagos

river flowing from the N., and the French are allowed to be much better

acquainted with this part of the coast. That called the West river in

Norris’s map, is only a creek; and what he calls the Lagos river, and

draws running close to Bădaggry, Ardrah, and passing Torë, is the

Western river. Bădaggry is not more than 5 or 7 miles from the beach,

instead of 15, and the tide only ebbs and flows so far. Ardrah is from

25 to 30 miles from the beach, instead of 18; and the river is crossed

at about one-third of the distance from the sea: this is what we call

Porto Novo, for there is not more than beachmen’s huts on the shore

opposite the anchorage. The natives call Ardrah Aratakassee, or

Allatakassee, and the country Essaäm, or the great. The river continues

its course not more than 100 yards from the sea, at Whydah, and proceeds

equally close (indeed frequently the ridge between them is covered with

water) until passing Quitta, it falls into the Volta near the mouth.


The above mentioned gentleman proves the informant of Adams’s editor

incorrect, in stating that the Houssa traders were constantly to be met

with at Lagos, previous to the abolition of the slave trade, for it has

always been the policy of Kosie, a kingdom on the eastern bank of the

river, and about 60 miles inland from the mouth, to prevent all

intercourse between the traders of the interior, and those of Lagos, to

secure to themselves the exorbitant profits they made as the brokers or

medium. The Europeans who traded at Lagos, once meditated forcing a

passage up the river in armed boats, and a vessel of 18 guns was got

over the bar, and anchored close to Lagos town; but the project was

abandoned as too perilous. Sometime afterwards the King of Kosie desired

a European might visit him, to gratify his curiosity, and that of his

people; but no one being willing, a mulatto, named Peter Brown, was

dressed up and sent. This man, being now at Cape Coast, I have

questioned. Several armed men were sent to conduct him, and relays of

canoe men sufficient to continue brisk pulling; which they did from the

evening till the next day, before he left the river to proceed by land;

it was still very wide, and more than 4 fathoms deep; considerably, for

aught he knew, for the bamboo poles of that length, with which the

natives push the canoe forward, when they get close enough to the banks

to do so, would not touch the bottom in the middle. Relays of hammock

men then carried him at a brisk pace until evening, when he reached

Kosie, which he described as a town of great extent, and the buildings

to resemble those in the drawings of Coomassie. The King gave orders

that the crowd should not intrude themselves into his house, treated him

very handsomely, and dismissed him after three days. He only heard the

people of Kosie speak of two great nations, the Hios, and the Awissees.


The gentleman before mentioned has an impression, from all the enquiries

he recollects to have made, of the slaves of the interior, that the

merchants convey them by water the greater part of the way; and their

reports were strengthened by his having an opportunity of seeing canoes

brought from Kosie to Lagos, and purchased from the slave merchants of

the interior. They were very superior in size and convenience to those

of the coast, were covered in, with a distinct apartment for the trader

and his wives, and would hold a hundred slaves. I never heard any slaves

speak of being brought any part of the way by water, but I have not seen

any who were brought to Kosie or Lagos.


The Karhala is the only large river likely to communicate with, or to

form that of Lagos; possibly the Karhala might run to the large lake in

Hio, which Snelgrave says (from the information of the Portuguese

mulatto he found at Abomey) “is the fountain of several large rivers

which empty themselves into the Bay of Guinea.” The Lagos river may flow

from this lake, but this is mere conjecture. The gentleman to whom I am

indebted, places the Mahees north of Dahomey, instead of north-west as

in Norris’s map, which is allowed to be far from discriminate in the

interior parts, in the preface to Dalzel’s History, and this is also

more probable, because about nine years ago, the King of Hio entirely

conquered the Mahees, and upwards of 20,000 of them were brought for

sale to Lagos.


The Joös, inconsiderately reported to Adams’s editor as being, with the

Anagoos and Mahees, the principal nations on the journey to the Niger,

and nearer to the coast, avoiding Dahomey, are probably the Jaboos, who

are about 40 miles westward of Kosie, and not behind Cradoo, as in

Norris’s map. They are celebrated for the cloths of their name, of which

the Portuguese have shipped such large quantities. The Anagoos, or

Nagoos, are the north westward neighbours of Dahomey.


The extent of Fantee is corrected from the conjectural enlargement of it

by Mr. Meredith, and, with that of Ashantee, Akim, Assin, Warsaw,

Ahanta, &c. &c. is sufficiently distinct in the present map. A more

enlarged, and particular map of Fantee, &c. would not be interesting to

the public, but as it might be desirable to geographers, I shall keep it

in view as a duty, and, at some future time, endeavor to add to the

observations of latitude and longitude which have been already made on

the coast.


I may not conclude without acknowledging the guidance, and assistance,

which Major Rennell’s previous investigations have afforded me; without

impressing, that had not some sketches of the interior been collected by

the industry of the emissaries of the African Association, and

afterwards connected and formed into a general outline, blended with the

feeble lights of the ancients, my enquiries would neither have been

excited or directed; and this present small contribution to our slender

knowledge would have perished an embryo. When I reflect on the creative

researches of the genius of D’Anville, and the acumen and erudition of

Major Rennell, it is my greatest anxiety to make my deference in

investigation, as manifest as the public duty which exacted the

involuntary presumption; and I cannot conclude more appropriately, than

by addressing the latter in the expressive lines of Virgil:


  “Nec calamis solum æquiparas sed voce magistrum


   Fortunate—tu nunc eris alter ab illo.


   Nos tamen hæc quocunque modo tibi nostra vicissim


   Dicemus.”


[Footnote 15: “On the west of Aquamboe lies the powerful state of Akim,

sometimes denominated Akam, Achem, and Accany, which occupies almost all

the interior of the Gold Coast, and is supposed by the natives to extend

to Barbary. The Accanese are represented as carrying on an extensive

commerce with the interior kingdoms of Africa, particularly Tonouwah,

Gago, and Meczara, by which Mourzouk the capital of Fezzan seems to be

intended.”]


[Footnote 16: “Reize van Koppenhagen naar Guinea, &c. Door den Heer

Isert. Amsteldam, 1797. Naar het Hoog Duitsch.”]


[Footnote 17: This induced me to think that In-ta and Ta-pah, as well as

Assiantee might mean the same place, as we find of Mahee, Yahon,

&c.—Dalzel.]


[Footnote 18: “In the province of St. Jago, in Chili, there is a plant

of this class and order (Didynamiæ gymnosperma) supposed to be a species

of wild basil (Ocimum salinum), resembling the common basil so much as

to be hardly distinguished from it, except that the flower stem is round

and jointed, and its scent and taste not like the basil, but rather like

the sea flag, or some marine plant. It is an annual, shooting forth in

the spring, and continuing till the commencement of winter: every

morning it is covered with hard and shining saline globules, resembling

dew, which the countrymen shake off the leaves to serve them as common

salt, and in some respects is thought to be of a superior quality. Every

plant produces daily about half an ounce of this salt; but Molina, a

scientific naturalist, to whom we are indebted for this information,

says, that it is extremely difficult to account for this phenomenon, as

the situation where he found these plants was in the most fertile part

of the kingdom, and at a distance from the sea of more than seventy

miles. When we see some plants secrete flint, separate and distinct from

their fibres, as well as combined with their organic structure; and when

we also know that plants secrete alkali, in every situation, I cannot

perceive why Molina should consider the contiguity of the sea to be

essential to the production of a neutral salt in the Ocimum salinum.”

Linnæan System, London, 1816, vol. ii. p. 303.


Riley, whose narrative has recently appeared, saw in the desert, “A

dwarf thorn bush from two to five feet high with succulent leaves

strongly impregnated with salt.”]


[Footnote 19: In the Dutch copies of the old Portuguese charts, Xabunda

(perhaps Banda) is placed as the capital of Ashantee, and two or three

large Portuguese towns, one St. Lawrence, with several convents and

crosses between it and the Coast.]


[Footnote 20: Gago oppidum amplissimum nullis quoque cingitur muris,

distat a Tumbuto meridiem versus quadringentes fere passuum millibus,

inclinatusque fere ad Euroaustrum. Leo Af.]


[Footnote 21: “To what degree the natives of Silla would have

contradicted each other in their accounts of Tombuctoo, Park’s short

stay there could not have allowed him time to ascertain, even if his

knowledge of their language had enabled him to understand their accounts

as well as he did those of the slatees on the Gambia.


“Several instances of the contradictory testimony of the Negroes occur

in Park’s travels, Jennië, for instance, is stated in his first Mission

to be situated on the Niger, but on his second journey he renounces that

opinion, on the apparently good authority of an old Somonie (canoe man)

who had been seven times at Tombuctoo.” Adams’s Editor.]


[Footnote 22: Mr. Hutchison writes, that from Inta to Jennë is said to

be 41 journies. This Gentleman, the Resident at Coomassie, merely

accompanied the Mission to act in that capacity in case the object could

be accomplished, and was not instructed to report: the officer

conducting the Mission being responsible to the extent of his industry,

and the opportunities, for the various desiderata, excepting the

Botanical and Medical, which were expected from the Surgeon, Mr. Tedlie.

Mr. Hutchison’s time was much employed in making duplicates and copies

of the frequent and voluminous dispatches to head quarters. The Moors

disliking even a second European to be present at their geographical

communications, Mr. Hutchison, through his obliging disposition, which

accommodated itself to every thing auxiliary to the pursuits of the

Mission, rendered me a great service, and quieted the uneasiness of the

Moors by keeping watch, and diverting the various Ashantee visitors who

would have intruded, with great patience and address. There was no time

even for a communication of the data I had collected before the Mission

left Coomassie, for we may be said to have lived in public the latter

part of the four months, and Mr. Hutchison’s genius inclining more to

the cultivation of the Ashantee and Arabic languages, which I had no

doubt would yield to his great industry, I did not intrude less

congenial pursuits on his attention, (the desiderata having been amply

realized,) but merely requested he would let me know what any

intelligent Moor, arriving after my departure, might say of the

Interior, and, if possible, procure a chart from him, especially if he

was not a native of Houssa or Bornoo, which two of the Moors who had

drawn for me were. After I had finished my Geographical Report, Mr.

Hutchison sent, with some other interesting particulars, added as notes

with his initials, a chart drawn by a Jennë Moor just arrived,

confirming all I had collected in the most satisfactory manner. The

names of the countries from the source of the Niger to Egypt were

written in Arabic, with Mr. Hutchison’s expression of the pronunciation

in English opposite. I particularly recollect that his ear differed

somewhat from mine, which accounts for the trifling differences in our

spelling. I shewed Mr. Hutchison my charts as curiosities, but he took

no minutes of the names, uninteresting from his never having had an

opportunity of reading Major Rennell’s Dissertations, which would alone

make them so to any one. He gives a better proof of this, than my own

impression, by the following extract from his letter to me, accompanying

the chart: “The Bornoo you used to talk about, you will find the same as

the lake Chaudi, or Al Bahare Noohoo, or else you know a country I I do

not recollect hearing of;” but, in the postscript, he writes, “On

looking over my memoranda, I find Bornoo is the principal monarchy the

Arabs alone stand in awe of, and one of the four kingdoms best known on

the Quolla.” Mr. Hutchison _unconsciously_ confirming what I had

learned, is even more satisfactory than if I had left him any basis for

his enquiries; indeed, his own object, the acquirement of the language,

was too important to be interrupted unnecessarily. Before I attach any

quotation from this Gentleman’s letters, I must acknowledge the

assistance I had previously derived from his spirited zeal as an

officer, as well as that which has since resulted from his interest in

intellectual pursuits.]


[Footnote 23: The Moors particularly mentioned buying their writing

paper there. One told me that the Joliba ran to a river called Hotaiba

after it passed Yahoodee, which river ran towards Toonis. Several talked

of vessels coming to Yahoodee, navigated by white men, but whence I

could not learn, and Brahima had never visited it, though such reports

were familiar to him.]


[Footnote 24: The rivers Arauca and Capanaparo in Cumana form

bifurcations similar to those of the Niger. The Arauca divides itself

into two rivers, the northern one, the Arauquito, runs through the lake

Cabullarito into the Orinoco, and the southern retaining the name of

Arauca, also flows to the Orinoco. The Capanaparo falls into the Orinoco

in two streams, the northern retaining the original name, and the

southern acquiring that of Mina. See Humboldt’s map of the eastern part

of the province of Verina.]


[Footnote 25: See note, p. 189.]


[Footnote 26: “No one who compares the maps of De Lisle and D’Anville

with the materials then published, can doubt the excellent means of

information with which they must have been supplied both by government,

and by private individuals.” Murray.


We find a remarkable instance of De Lisle’s accuracy in Major Rennell’s

construction of the geography of Mr. Horneman’s expedition. “Mr.

Horneman was informed that there are 101 inhabited places in Fezzan.” It

is remarkable that this is precisely the number stated in M. Delisle’s

map of Africa, drawn in 1707; and, according to Mr. Beaufoy’s informant,

there are nearly 100.


I have since found an older authority for the name _Gambaroo_, and which

also shews that the name _Quolla_ and its connection with the Gambaroo,

have not been wholly unknown hitherto. It is in the L’Afrique de Marmol,

livre viii. chap. 3. “C’est une chose estrange que ce fleuve venant de

si loin, car Ptolomée le fait venir du lac _Quélonide_, et de celui de

Nuba, il n’entraine pas tant d’eaux par ce costé-là, et la marée ne

monte pas si avant, _que par l’autre bras que l’on appelle Gamber_.” One

may almost fancy Quolla and Quellonide to have been derived from the

Chalonides of Ptolemy.]


[Footnote 27: “The fact of a large lake like the Dibbie, discharging its

waters by two streams flowing from distant parts of the lake, and re-

uniting after a separate course of a hundred miles in length, has always

appeared to us extremely apocryphal, at least we believe that the

geography of the world does not afford a parallel case.” Adams’s

Editor.]


[Footnote 28: “According to these statements of the Moorish traders,

Adams would seem to have mistaken the course of the stream at Tombuctoo.

In fact, I do not recollect that he told me at Mogadore that it flowed

in a westerly direction: but, I think, I am correct in saying, that he

discovered some uncertainty in speaking upon this subject, (and almost

upon this subject alone) observing, in answer to my inquiries, that he

had not taken very particular notice, and that the river was steady,

without any appearance of a strong current.” Dupuis on Adams.


Adams’s name, La-mar-Zarah (for of course he did not attach _La_ mar to

indicate water, but pronounced La-mar-Zarah, as an integral name) seems

accounted for by his confounding or connecting the Arabic name of the

river, _Lahamar_, with the Negro name _Yça_ (for we find these names in

Marmol, tom. 3. liv. 8.) making _Lahamar-yça_, La-mar-Zarah.]


[Footnote 29: Les Sénégurs le nomment Sénédec, les Jalofes Dengueh, les

Turcorons qui sont plus au-dedans du pays Maye, les Saragoles qui sont

plus haut Colle, et en un contrée plus vers l’orient Zimbale: au royaume

de Tombut on le nomme Yça. Marmol, tom. 3, livre 8. The name Zimbale

must be derived from Jimballa, by which country the river passes; it

occurs in the route from Shégo to Timbuctoo. P. 194.]


[Footnote 30: Kulla, in the Mallowa, if not in the Kassina language,

means _child_; perhaps, allegory being the character of African

language, the southern river may be called Quolla or Kulla, from being a

_branch_ only of the great river which forms it and the Gambaroo.]


[Footnote 31: See the account of the large interior river known at

Gaboon, under the name of _Wole_ or _Wolela_.]


[Footnote 32: “There is one thing that disagrees with Mr. Park’s

account, they call the Niger Quolla at Jennë, Sansanding, &c. &c. and

describe the Jolliba as falling into the Quolla east of Timbuctoo.” W.

H.


The Moors invariably reported to me that it ran from it. Mr. H. might

perhaps have misunderstood the Jennë Moor, whose single authority cannot

be opposed to the concurrence of several.]


[Footnote 33: Illorum verò qui per interiorem Æthiopiam fluant, quique

fontes et ostia in continente habent maximi sunt Gir et Nigir. (Lib. 2.

E. 1. De maximis _fluminibus_.)]


[Footnote 34: The Jennë Moor does not appear to have been so

particularly acquainted with the source of the Niger. He has drawn two

hills, from one of which springs a large river he could not name,

running westward, the other is the source of the Quolla, and Mr.

Hutchison has written its name Bieteerilmiloo. Between this source and

Mala, the King of which he describes as a great monarch, he mentions no

towns or kingdoms. This Mala is the Malay of the Moorish charts I

procured, between the source and which five places or countries were

written. Mr. Hutchison writes the course thus, without time or distance,

Mala, Bambarra, Shego, Sansanding, Jena, Mashina, Dahleä (a small croom

on the lake Dibber,) Kabarra: he adds, cannibals are close to the

Joliba, and 30 journies from Timbuctoo, they eat their prisoners: the

dead of their own people are put in the Joliba, in wooden coffins.]


[Footnote 35: The following sentence in the description of Leo, conveys

an idea of the decline or decay of the city. “Cujus domus omnes in

tuguriola cretacea stramineis tectis _sunt mutatæ_.” Yet immediately

after we receive the contrary impression on reading “Visitur tamen

elegantissimum quoddam templum cujus murus ex lapidibus atque calce vivo

est fabricatus: deinde et palacium quoddam regium quodam Granato viro

artificissimo conditum. Frequentissimæ hic sunt artificum mercatorum

præcipuè autem telæ atque gossypii textorum officinæ; huc mercatores

Barbari pannum ex Europa adferunt.” In the Description de l’Afrique en

Flamand, published about a century and a half afterwards, the author

seems to be aware of the advanced decline or decay of Timbuctoo. “Les

maisons étoient autrefois fort sumptueuses, mais elles ne sont

maintenant que de bois enduites de terre grasse et couvertes de

paille.”]


[Footnote 36: “All the country from where the Joliba discharges itself

into the Quolla is subject to the Sultan Malisimiel. What makes the

Sultan of Timbuctoo so much talked of, is his being near the water side;

but his master, the Sultan of Malisimiel considers him merely as a

deputy or governor. The four greatest monarchs known on the banks of the

Quolla, are Baharnoo, Santambool, Malisimiel, and Malla.” W. H. Malla is

Mallowa.]


[Footnote 37: “The Chaymas substitute _r_ for _l_, a substitution that

arises from a defect of pronunciation, common in every zone. The

substitution of _r_ for _l_ characterizes, for example, the Bashmouric

dialect of the Coptic language. It is thus that the Caribbees of the

Oroonoko have been transformed into Galibi, in French Guiana, by

confounding _r_ with _l_, and softening the _c_. The Tamanach has made

choraro (solalo) of the Spanish word soldado.” Humboldt’s personal

narrative, book iii. chap. 9.]


[Footnote 38: The position of Mellè is further confirmed in Dapper “Le

Roi de _Tombut_ prend le nom d’Empereur de _Melli_.” This title seems to

have been transferred to the King of Houssa from the decline of

Timbuctoo, to which the aggrandisement of the former city is to be

attributed.]


[Footnote 39: The King residing in Houssa is the King of Malla; he has

seven tributary Kings. W. H.]


[Footnote 40: I did not hear of the Gotoijegee, Carmasse, or Gourmon of

Amadi Fatouma; it is clear that he was not very correct in names. I

never once heard Silla called Sellee, Dibbie, Sibbie, or Kabra,

Rakbarra.]


[Footnote 41: The Jennë Moor notices between Kabarra and Cabi, Gauw (a

great kingdom) Quoülla, Askeä, Zabirma. Ptolemy has a city called Geua

on the Gir.]


[Footnote 42: The Jennë Moor told Mr. Hutchison, “the Quolla was the

largest river in the world, and about 5 miles wide, having a very rocky

channel, the banks on both sides very high, and rugged: in many parts

canoes often take a day to cross, from the dangerous whirlpools, and

sudden squalls; at other places the stream runs with great rapidity. The

houses in its environs are either terraced or shingled, as thatch cannot

resist the frequent high winds.”]


[Footnote 43: The Jennë Moor has placed Gangë as an island in the Quolla

just below Bousa. This must be the Gongoo of Imhammed, and Ben Ali,

south of Cassina. Mr. Lucas writes “the width of the Niger is such, that

even at the island of Gongoo, where the ferrymen reside, the sound of

the loudest voice from the northern shore is scarcely heard.”]


[Footnote 44: The Jennë Moor traces the course from Yaoora, thus:

Boussa, Gangë, Wawa, Noofa, Quollaliffa, Atagara; the only difference

being the position of the latter place, possibly an error of mine, as

the name Atagara was not noticed in the charts I made the Moors draw,

but only in the more particular enumerations of the countries the Quolla

passed; the names of which I minuted from their utterance, and

afterwards attached their remarks as interpreted to me.]


[Footnote 45: The Jennë Moor calls this Quolla liffa. Mr. Hutchison, who

has a servant, a native of it, describes it as a very powerful kingdom,

as the Shereef Brahima described it to me, and as was the impression of

Mr. Dupuis. Mr. H. adds, on Negro and Moorish authority, “it is to the

King of Quallowliffa that the country in which Canna, Dall, and Yum Yum,

where cannibals are, is subject.” Mr. Horneman mentions Yem Yems

cannibals south of Kano 10 days; and the account is further confirmed in

my subsequent geographical sketch of the interior of Gaboon. Mr.

Horneman’s information that the Niger flowed towards the Egyptian Nile

through the land of the Heathens, which Mr. Park quoted as an argument

for the Congo hypothesis, doubtless referred to these cannibals.]


[Footnote 46: “At times the water of this lake is hot, and it boils and

bubbles with a great noise, often overflowing the surrounding country.

The bones of fish thrown up by the volcano are so numerous, that the

Arabs mix them in the swish of their houses. There are a great many

islets in the lake, which is so extensive, that they cannot see the end.

Between it and the Quolla rises a very high hill, from the top of which

is an extensive view; it is a day’s journey from the water on either

side. The Arabs eat black rice, corn, and sweet beans, called Tummer.”

W. H.]


[Footnote 47: The Jennë Moor has also placed it E. of Foor. Mr.

Hutchison writes the course, after him, from Atagara, thus:

“Maffagoodoo, Sharee, Lake Chadee, Phorr (beginning of Arabs) “Wadie.”

Mr. Horneman writes “A great part of the people of Wadey, together with

their King, are Arabs.”]


[Footnote 48: Mr. Hutchison has written it Sooänar.]


[Footnote 49: “Cairo is still called, in the figurative language of the

East, Misr, without an equal; Misr, the mistress of the world.”

Quarterly Review. Mr. Hutchison writes, that the Moors told him it was

so called after Misraim, who settled there.]


[Footnote 50: The following, in the left hand column, are the places or

countries as written by Mr. Hutchison, after the Jennë Moor, agreeing

with those the Moors reported to me.


  Shuewa                                     Shewa Abenassa.


  Swiss                                      Sooess.


  Zall                                       Zaloo.


  Machazoogee                                Machawazoo.


  Tabarbass, cultivation, volcano from

  the Quolla two days, two days to the top,  Tabarrabass.


  Askanderee                                 Askandaraia or Sakunderree.


The latter place is Alexandria. The Moors called the Mediterranean Sea

to me by two names, Baharlë Malee, and Sabbaha Bahoori. Mr. Hutchison

writes it Baramela or Bahermale, and adds, “Seven rivers from Africa

turn their course to it, but only two reach the shores, of which the

Nile is one. The rush of the waters of the Nile when they meet the sea,

is so great, that the waves are driven into the air with great force,

and retire like waves against a rock. The Red Sea, they say, assumes

various colours at different periods from seven streams pouring their

course into it, salt water and fresh, red, blue, yellow, &c.”]


[Footnote 51: “Half of the inhabitants of Massar are white, and half

black; they have a Fort and Governor.” W. H.]


[Footnote 52: Stambool is the Arabic pronunciation of the familiar or

vulgar name of Constantinople, the etymology of which is ιϛαμαι πολιν.]


[Footnote 53: Mr. Hutchison writes, “Wangara is the name of a region

comprehending Mosee Kong, and other neighbouring countries south of the

Niger (if not some to the north of it) but Oongooroo is the name of the

country laying between Cassina and Bornoo.)” Mr. Park has _Wangeera_ in

the route from Sego to the coast of Guinea.]


[Footnote 54: “The dress of the people of Fullan (a country to the west

of Kassina) resembles the cloth of which the plaids of the Scotch

Highlanders are made.” Ben Ali.]


[Footnote 55: Mr. Hutchison sends me this route, as given him by the

Jennë Moor, thus, (supposing me not to have heard of Yariba) “from

Goodaberry, over Lasa small water to Quolla, at Boussa; few hours walk

to Yaraba; 28 days from Dahomey:” he adds, “recollect that the King of

Dahomey is tributary to the King of Yaraba, who is the same in that

quarter, as the King of Ashantee is here.”]


[Footnote 56: The Jennë Moor gave this route thus: Wawa to Kiama, a

great kingdom, 3 days; close to the eastward a desert; 1 day

Garagroogee; 1 day Wala; 1 day Goodaberry.]


[Footnote 57: “Guber est à cent lieuës de Gago vers l’Orient, et en est

separé par un desert inhabitable à quatorze ou quinze lieuës du Niger.

Cette contrée est entre de hautes montagnes, et toute pleine de

villages; celui où le Prince tient sa Cour a quelque mille maisons.”

Dapper.]


[Footnote 58: I shall adjoin an outline of the great river in one of the

maps of Dapper’s Description de l’Afrique, traduit du Flamand, because

the book is very scarce, and I do not remember to have seen the Niger,

the Gir, or the Congo so laid down in any other.]


[Footnote 59: The removal of Cano from the banks of the Niger agreeable

with every report I received, is supported by Dapper. “A cent soixante

et dix lieuës d’Agadez et à deux cent du Niger on trouve ce royaume

(Guber), au milieu du quel est la ville de Cano fermée de murailles de

bois et de pierre, et qui a des maisons bâties de même.”]


[Footnote 60: “The Mahometans of Senaar number Bornoo amongst the four

most powerful monarchies of the world; the other three are Turkey,

Persia, and Abyssinia: the sovereign of Bornoo is more powerful than the

Emperor of Morocco.” Lucas.]


[Footnote 61: Ce royame, qu’on croit avoir été la demeure des

Garamantes, est une vaste Province au levant de Gangara, qui s’étend

vers l’Orient l’espace de cent soixante dix lieuës et est éloignée du

Niger de cinquante.]


[Footnote 62: Mr. Hutchison heard of another river near Bornoo called

Koomoodoo gaiguina: he could not hear of the Wad el Gazel.]


[Footnote 63: I observe, in a modern publication, Dr. Isert’s described

as a second visit to Africa, under the auspices of the Danish

government, encouraged by his reports to attempt colonization in

Aquapim, and that he died from anxiety and exertion. This was not the

case, it was his first and only visit, the Danes never attempted

colonization, and he embarked for the West Indies as I have before

stated. Having read the above, however, I wrote to Dr. Reynhaut, who

translated some passages from the Dutch into Latin for me, and the

following is an extract from his letter in reply. “Quod attinet Iserti

in Africam reditum, ibique ejus obitum, ficta hæc est fama. Verum est

juxta Quitam post victoriam in Augnaeos populos reportatam, Danos arcem

condidisse, cui nomen insigniverunt Prinzenstein; sed nullæ culturæ

incubuerunt, nec colonias struxerunt, nec minus falsum est umquam

Isertum in Africæ littoræ inferiora regis jussu rediisse, colonias

extruendi gratia, nam præter opus Botanicum quod Floræ Guinensis titulo

occurrit, nullum aliud de illo scriptum existit.”]


[Footnote 64: Since I have been at sea I have drawn the maritime part of

my map again, and laid down the Forts and other points according to the

observations quoted in Norrie, (4th edition, 1816,) which agree so very

nearly with those of the Commissioners in the two instances cited, that

I conclude he has been allowed to copy the whole series from their

papers, which I believe have never been published. Even in Dr. Mackay’s

valuable publication, Cape Coast Castle is laid 1° 23′ too much to the

eastward. I presume too that the observations made by H.M.S. Amelia, are

part of those quoted by Norrie, although the Argo’s observations of the

longitude of Quitta and Whydah are not confirmed. I observe a small

error which makes 1′ 28″ N. and 7′ 24″ E. the difference between

Kormantine and Annamaboe, the former is only 5 miles eastward of the

latter.]


                              CHAPTER II.


                               * * * * *


                               _History._


To speak of the death of a former king, the Ashantees imagine to affect

the life of the present equally with enquiring who would be his

successor; and superstition and policy strengthening this impression, it

is made capital by the law, to converse either of the one or the other.

The inability of the natives to compute time, and the comparatively

recent establishment of the Moors, may be pleaded as additional

apologies for the imperfect history I have collected.


According to a common tradition, which I never heard contradicted but

once, the Ashantees emigrated from a country nearer the water side, and

subjecting the western Intas, and two lesser powers, founded the present

kingdom. These people being comparatively advanced in several arts, the

Ashantees necessarily adopted a portion of their language with the

various novelties; which probably created the limited radical difference

between their language and that of the Fantees; for I could not find,

after taking the greatest pains, more than 200 words unknown to the

latter. The weights of the Inta country, in particular, were adopted

with their names, by the conquerors, without the least alteration.


The tradition, scanty in itself, is very cautiously adverted to, the

government politically undermining every monument which perpetuates

their intrusion, or records the distinct origins of their subjects: but,

from the little I could collect, it appeared to have been an emigration

of numerous enterprising or discontented families, to whom the parent

state afterwards became subject. I am inclined to think, (the account of

their coming from a country nearer the sea being too general for

conjecture to revolt from,) that they emigrated from the eastward of

south, where the territory admitted to be Ashantee proper is remote,

compared with its extent southward, or westward of south, and the former

consequence of Doompassie, and the towns eastward of it, support this:

yet, the very few natives who pretended to any opinion on the subject,

had an impression, that their ancestors emigrated from the neighbourhood

of a small river, Ainshue, behind Winnebah: a croom called Coomadie is

to be found there, but there is nothing else to countenance the report.


The Ashantee, Fantee, Warsaw, Akim, Assin, and Aquapim languages are

indisputably dialects of the same root; their identity is even more

striking than that of the dialects of the ancient Greek: now the Fantees

and Warsaws both cherish a tradition, which exists also in many Ahanta

families, that they were pressed from the interior to the water side by

the successful ambition of a remote power; whence it may be concluded,

that the Ashantee emigration we are now considering, was posterior to a

more important movement of the whole people, corresponding with that of

their neighbours. I will not dilate upon this secondary subject by

referring to internal evidence, there is nothing to recompense either

the investigation or the perusal.


One curious evidence however may be added of the former identity of the

Ashantee, Warsaw, Fantee, Akim, Assin, Aquamboe, and part of the Ahanta

nations; which is a tradition that the whole of these people were

originally comprehended in twelve tribes or families; the Aquonna,

Abrootoo, Abbradi, Essonna, Annŏna, Yoko, Intchwa, Abadie, Appiadie,

Tchweedam, Agoona, and Doomina; in which they class themselves still,

without any regard to national distinction. For instance, Ashantees,

Warsaws, Akims, Ahantas, or men of any of the nations before mentioned

will severally declare, that they belong to the Annŏna family; other

individuals of the different countries, that they are of the Tchweedam

family; and when this is announced on meeting, they salute each other as

brothers. The King of Ashantee is of the Annŏna family, so was our Accra

and one of the Fantee linguists; Amanquateä is of the Essonna family.

The Aquonna, Essonna, Intchwa, and Tchweedam, are the four patriarchal

families, and preside over the intermediate ones, which are considered

as the younger branches. I have taken some pains to acquire the

etymology of these words, but with imperfect success; it requires much

labour and patience, both to make a native comprehend, and to be

comprehended by him. Quonna is a buffalo, an animal forbade to be eaten

by that family. Abrootoo signifies a corn stalk, and Abbradi a plantain.

Annŏna is a parrot, but it is also said to be a characteristic of

forbearance and patience. Esso is a bush cat, forbidden food to that

family. Yoko is the red earth used to paint the lower parts of the

houses in the interior. Intchwa is a dog, much relished by native

epicures, and therefore a serious privation. Appiadie signifies a

servant race. Etchwee is a panther, frequently eaten in the interior,

and therefore not unnecessarily forbidden. Agoona signifies a place

where palm oil is collected. These are all the etymologies in which the

natives agree. Regarding these families as primæval institutions, I

leave the subject to the conjectures of others, merely submitting, that

the four patriarchal families, the Buffalo, the Bush Cat, the Panther,

and the Dog, appear to record the first race of men living on hunting;

the Dog family, probably, first training that animal to assist in the

chase. The introduction of planting and agriculture, seems marked in the

age of their immediate descendents, the Corn stalk and Plantain

branches. The origin and improvement of architecture in the Red earth;

and of commerce, probably, in the Palm oil: indeed, the natives have

included the Portuguese, the first foreign traders they knew, in that

family, alleging, that their long and more intimate intercourse with the

blacks, has made the present race a mixture of the African and

Portuguese. The Servant race reminds us of the curse of Canaan. This

resembles a Jewish institution, but the people of Accra alone practise

circumcision, and they speak a language, as will be shewn, radically

distinct, yet not to be assimilated to the Intā, to which nation they

are referred by the Fantees, merely because it is the nearest which

practises circumcision. Accra is a European corruption of the word

Inkran, which means an ant, and they say the name was either given or

assumed on account of their numbers; this must have been before their

wars with the Aquamboes.


When Adokoo, chief of the Braffoes, a Fantee nation, consulted the

venerable fetish men of the sanctuary, near Sooprooroo, on the Ashantee

war, they answered, that nothing could be more offensive to the fetish,

than the Fantees preventing the peaceable intercourse of their inland

neighbours with the water side, because they were formerly all one

family.


The conduct of the later emigration of the Ashantees is ascribed to Saï

Tootoo, who, assisted by other leading men of the party, and encouraged

by superstitious omens, founded Coomassie, and was presented with the

stool, or made King, from his superior qualifications. This account is

supported by the mixed nature of the government, founded on equality and

obligation, and the existence of a law, exempting the direct descendants

of any of Saï Tootoo’s peers and assistants, (in whom the Aristocracy

originated) from capital punishment.


The Dwabin monarchy is said to have been founded at the same time by

Boitinnë, who was of the same family as Saï Tootoo, being the sons of

sisters. Boitinnë and his party, took possession of Dwabin, the largest

of the aboriginal towns, (leaving Saï Tootoo to build Coomassie) whence

it seems his followers were the more powerful; indeed I have heard it

confessed by a few Ashantees, that Dwabin had formerly the pre-eminence,

though they have always been firm allies in war, and equal sharers in

spoil and conquest. This common interest, preserved uninterrupted more

than a century, by two rising powers, close to each other, with the view

of a more rapid aggrandisement, and their firm discretion in making many

serious disagreements subservient to the policy, is one of the few

circumstances worth considering in a history composed of wars and

successions. I do not think there is such an instance in our heptarchy,

nor do I recollect any other in history, but that of Chalcis and

Eretria.


Bakkee, who died, as I have related,[65] about a year ago, was the son

of Saï Apokoo, the second king, and an infant at the breast at the time

of his father’s death; he was a very old man when he incurred the

present King’s displeasure, which supports the report of the Moors, that

the kingdom has been founded about 110 years. Bosman and Barbot mention

the Ashantees, as just heard of by Europeans, about the year 1700, which

confirms this account. The anxiety of the Ashantee government for daily

records, immediately on the establishment of the Moors, who were only

visitors until the present reign, acknowledges the perplexities and

deficiencies of their early history too candidly, to leave any

encouragement to the researches of strangers. Records beyond half a

century are not to be found in the archives either of Cape Coast, or

Christiansburg Castles, so that the chronology can only be founded on

that of the Moors, and circumstances.


The Ashantee government concentred the mass of its original force, and

making the chiefs resident in Coomassie and the few large towns they

built in its neighbourhood, with titular dignities, conciliated those

whom they subdued by continuing them in their governments, and checked

them by exacting their frequent attendance at festivals, politically

instituted. Military command seems to have been the sole prerogative of

Saï Tootoo; his judicial and legislative power being controlled by the

chiefs or aristocracy much more than at present, who, as in the Teutonic

governments, directed the common business of the state, only consulting

a general assembly on extraordinary occasions.


Saï Tootoo defeated the Akims and Assins, subjected the Tufel country,

and subdued many small states in the neighbourhood. He also conquered

Dankara, the King of which, Intim Dakarey, was so considerable a trader

in slaves, that the Dutch Governor General paid him a monthly note from

his own purse, and assisted him with two or three small cannons, and a

few Europeans, on the eve of the Ashantee invasion: the former are now

placed as trophies in Coomassie, at the top of the street in which the

Mission was quartered. Booroom was subjugated soon after.


Saï Tootoo did not live to see all the streets of Coomassie completed,

for war being declared against Atoä, a district between Akim and Assin,

he invaded that country. The chief of the Atoas, unable to face such a

power, dexterously insinuated his small force through the forest, until

he reached the rear of the Ashantee army, which the King was following

leisurely with a guard of a few hundred men, all of whom were destroyed

by the Atoäs, who shot the King in his hammock. This happening near a

place called Cormantee, (razed to the ground in vengeance,) and on a

Saturday, the most solemn oath of the Ashantees, is “by Saturday and

Cormantee;” (“Mĭminda Cormantee;”) and no enterprise has since been

undertaken on that day of the week.


1720. Saï Apokoo, brother of Saï Tootoo, was next placed on the stool.

Had there been no brother, the sister’s son would have been the heir;

this extraordinary rule of succession, excluding all children but those

of a sister, is founded on the argument, that if the wives of the sons

are faithless, the blood of the family is entirely lost in the

offspring, but should the daughters deceive their husbands, it is still

preserved.


Saï Apokoo finished the building of Coomassie, and exchanged compliments

with the King of Dahomey, since which there has been no intercourse; the

latter, probably, as a despotic monarch, did not wish to give his people

any opportunity of contemplating the greater freedom of the Ashantee

government.


Saï is the family name of the present race of Kings, some of their

relatives bearing it as well. Innăna is also the cognomen of the Kings

of Dagwumba.


Apokoo invading the kingdom of Gaman, Abo, the King, fled to Kong,

whither the Ashantee army pursued him. The King of Kong politically

compelled Abo to meet his enemies on the frontier, least they might

disturb a neutral kingdom. Abo being defeated, purchased a peace by

presenting large sums of gold to the various chiefs, and consenting to

an annual tribute. Apokoo next subjected Takima, whence the Fantees are

said to have emigrated, and forced a second emigration of the people to

Gomawa, at the back of Winnebah. He dispossessed the Akims of the

English, Dutch, and Danish Accra notes.[66] The mortifying destruction

of European records, confines me to the report of the more intelligent

natives on the subject of these notes, who declare, that the people of

Accra being deprived of them by the fraud of the Akims, when they were

assisted by them against the Aquamboes, the Akims were in their turn

obliged to yield them to their conquerors the Ashantees.


Tribute being demanded from the neighbouring kingdom of Dagwumba, a war

ensued, and its troops were defeated. The King of Dagwumba, convinced

that his former reliance on a superior population was vain, from the

military genius of the Ashantees, and the commercial disposition of his

own people, dispirited from their want of fire arms,[67] prudently

invited a peace, before a more decisive defeat left him no dignity, and

his enemies no moderation for treating. As it was, they still respected

his resources, and were content to secure him as a tributary, rather

than exhaust their forces in his subjugation, in the infancy of their

kingdom. A triumph in policy was in the view of the King of Dagwumba,

equivalent to the small diminution of personal dignity; and at the

expense of an inconsiderable tribute, he established a commercial

intercourse, which, his markets being regularly supplied from the

interior, was both an advantage and a security to him, from the great

convenience to his warlike neighbours, whose superstition assenting to

his great reputation for making saphies, and for augury, would not only

augment his revenue, but insure him superior respect as a tributary.

Intā had previously become tributary.


I should have mentioned, that every subject state was placed under the

immediate care of some Ashantee chief, generally resident in the

capital, who seldom visited it but to receive the tribute from the

native ruler, for whose conduct he was in a reasonable degree

responsible. Thus Quatchi Quofie has now the care of Dankara, Odumata of

Soota, Apokoo of Aquamboe, Oöosa Quantabisa of Daboia, &c. &c. Their

policy, in short, not only in this particular, but in many others, seems

to have been closely similar to that of the Persians, as described by

Herodotus.


Boitinnë, the founder of Dwabin, died in this reign.


1741. Saï Apokoo was succeeded by his brother Saï Aquissi. I could not

learn any particular exploits of his, excepting that he preserved the

subjection of the states previously reduced. The King of Akim, in his

time, (the last who had the power of governing without consulting the

pynins or elders) desiring to go to war with his neighbours, was obliged

to obtain permission from the Ashantee government, which he did by the

promise of sending them half the spoil; but, gaining little or nothing,

he did not do so. He soon afterwards heard of Aquissi’s intention, to

demand his head; and knowing that King’s word was irrevocable, he

summoned his ministers, and desired to sacrifice his life for the quiet

of his people: his ministers insisted on sharing his fate; and a barrel

of powder being brought for each to sit on, they drank a large quantity

of rum, and blew themselves up with the fire from their pipes. Dr. Isert

also heard of this in Akim.


1753. Aquissi was succeeded by Saï Cudjo. The Aristocracy was retrenched

and conciliated by this monarch, who raised his favourite captains to

the vacant stools,[68] uniting three or four in one, and swearing that

their lives should be equally sacred, (see p. 4,) to anticipate any

doubts of his fidelity to the constitution.


Saï Cudjo defeating the Warsaws and Assins more decisively than his

predecessors, first compelled them to acknowledge their fealty to

Ashantee. He also subjected Aquamboe, and Aquapim, quelled several

revolts of other countries, and was esteemed a very great captain. The

grandfather of Amanquateä Atooa, conquered Sawee, killing the king

Boomancumma; and Bakkee, soon afterwards, subjugated Moinseä. In this

reign Quama, king of Dwabin, died.


1785. Saï Quamina succeeded his grandfather Saï Cudjo, at a very early

age. The Akims revolted soon after his accession, under Ofoosoo, their

most active ruler for many years: he engaged several smaller states in

alliance, and defeated the Ashantees repeatedly; at length the treachery

of his followers procured Quatchi Quofie, the Ashantee general, his

head; with which he returned to Coomassie, the country having again

submitted. The fame of Ofoosoo made Quatchi Quofie so vain of this

achievement, that he had a figure of him made, with which his umbrella

is still crowned, and before which he dances with every insulting

gesture and vaunt, when he arrives on the ground at the various

ceremonies. The present king has frequently been heard to say, that it

was a great pity this old man did not know better, for the Akim

caboceers generally attended his summons with alacrity and good will;

but the sight of the insulted effigy of their favourite leader,

disgusted them, and excited their revolt. These brave people have risen

from their dependence at least eight times.


The government finding a pretext to invade Banda, the King Odrasee

vigorously opposed the Ashantee army; but at length, seeing he must

inevitably fall into their hands, to prevent his head being found, which

circumstance he knew would sorely disquiet the enemy,[69] and solace his

own people, ordered, just before he killed himself, a woman to be

sacrificed, and the abdomen being ripped, his head to be sewn up within

it, and her body afterwards to be buried in the heap of the slain. It

was discovered by bribes, and is now on one of the King’s great drums.

Soota was also subjugated in this reign, occupying the army under

Odumata ten years, during which period he was not allowed to see

Coomassie. Odumata afterwards subdued Coranza, the larger part of his

army being Gaman auxiliaries.


Saï Quamina raised Apokoo to the stool of Assimadoo, to whom he had been

a servant, in exclusion of the family.


The Danish Governor-General, meditating the punishment of the Popos,

applied to Saï Quamina for 5000 Ashantee auxiliaries; the request was

granted, but while the troops were on their march down, the Governor

died, and his successor prudently paid 250 ounces of gold, (alleged to

have been advanced by the King for their subsistence on their march to

Christiansburg Castle) rather than involve himself in the expenses and

troubles of such an alliance.


1798. Saï Quamina had remained twelve months on a visit at Dwabin, deaf

to the remonstrances of various deputations urging his return, and

infatuated beyond recovery by the arts of his mistress, Gyawa, the

daughter of the King; when it was formally announced to him, that if he

was not present at the approaching Yam custom, he would be deprived of

the stool. It is said, that this woman refused to accompany him to

Coomassie, either dreading the resentment of his mother, a woman of

violent passions, and great ambition, or, which is more probable,

influenced by her father to mingle this repugnance with her

blandishments, to accelerate the ruin of Saï Quamina, which he was not

without hopes might lead to his own aggrandisement. The form of the

dethronement is interesting. Appia Danqua, whose power seems to have

been equal to that of mayor of the palace, repaired to the King’s mother

with the chief captains, and deliberately recounting the offences of her

son, commanded her to remonstrate with him, as the daughter of their old

king, and the parent to whom he owed his elevation. The mother, who no

doubt had assisted in the private council, affecting to bewail her own

misfortune and her son’s disgrace, confessed, with seeming reluctance,

that her remonstrances had already been despised, that the king had even

attempted her life, and begged them to raise her second son, Saï Apokoo,

to the stool the elder had forfeited. This was complied with, and they

sent Saï Quamina a few of his women and slaves, desiring him to retire

into the bush and build himself a croom, and on his death, which

happened soon after, as it was said, from the poignancy of his feelings,

they made the greatest custom for him which had ever been known. The

sable Cleopatra died soon after him. It was whispered, that those he had

formerly injured incessantly insulting him in his retirement, even to

abusing his wives before his face, he had a private interview with the

present King, communicated several schemes of conquests, invoked him to

distrust, and, if possible, to punish those who had forsaken him, and

implored death; which was inflicted (as the blood of the royal family

could not be shed, and as he could not be privately drowned in the

sacred river) by fixing his feet on the ground, bending his body

backwards with a prop in the small of his back, and suspending several

large teeth of ivory from a noose around his neck, which, hanging from

the prop, strangled him.


1799. Saï Apokoo did not live more than a few weeks after being elevated

to the stool, and was succeeded by his brother Saï Tootoo Quamina, the

present King, who must then have been about seventeen years of age. On

this occasion, the general assembly of the captains, jealous of the

aristocracy, and desirous of making a favourable impression on the young

King, insisted that the remaining members of it, should propitiate the

reign, by publicly disclaiming their exemption from capital punishment.


The invasion of the Fantee kingdom in 1807 was the first important

military act of the present reign, the circumstances and origin of

which, being pretty accurately described by Mr. Meredith, in the extract

in the Appendix, I need not repeat. Whilst the invasion was meditating,

Baba, now the chief of the Moors, presented himself to solicit an asylum

in Coomassie, having been driven from Gamba by the rapacity of the King,

his near relative; and professing solely to desire the recovery of a

large property with held from him, to make the King of Ashantee the heir

to it. The King promised he would oblige the King of Gamba to do him

justice, on his return from the Fantee war, if Baba and his companions

were fortunate in their prayers and charms for his success. The King of

Gamba did not think proper to resist the demand afterwards made through

the Ashantee government.


1807. Coonadua, the King’s mother, was left regent during his absence;

this woman was a second Messalina, and many young captains who refused

to intrigue with her, from fear or disgust, have been ultimately the

victims of her artifice and vengeance.


Yaboquorra, the King of Dwabin, died in this interval, and was succeeded

by his grandson, Boitinnë Quama, now about twenty years of age.


1811. Attah, caboceer or King of Akim, had followed the King to the

first Fantee war, and behaved well. Apokoo being sent on an expedition

against the Fantees of Winnebah and Berracoo, Attah received orders to

join him with his contingency; instead of which, he sent a message to

Apokoo, before he passed the Boosempra river, refusing to join him, and

advising him not to attempt to pass through his country. Apokoo reported

this immediately to the King, who, as is usual, sent to Attah to enquire

if he had said so. He confessed that he had, without hesitation, adding,

that the King treated him like a slave, in incessantly summoning him to

attend his wars, and besides, that he never could forget that Saï Cudjo

had cut off his grandfather’s head, and that he would fight with Apokoo

whenever he came. Soon afterwards, Quamina Guma, (the father of Becqua,

captain of Danish Accra,) and one of the King’s sons, returning to

Coomassie with a large quantity of gold collected to make custom for the

King’s mother, Attah intercepted, robbed, and murdered them and their

party, with the exception of one, whom he desired to tell the King that

this act would convince him he was in earnest, and determined to go to

war with him. Apokoo was immediately ordered to proceed against Attah,

who had engaged Quaw Saffătchee as a party in the revolt, who was weary

of the same laborious vassalage. When Apokoo entered the Akim country,

Attah was for attacking him immediately, and at sun rise, but Quaw

impressing his doubts of their succeeding against the superior warfare

of the Ashantees, begged him to stop until three o’clock, when the

Ashantees generally ate and slept, and when they might be better able to

retreat if worsted, as the enemy never pursued in the dusk. The attack

was a surprise, but the fight continued obstinate and undecided until

night, when Apokoo found he had lost so many men, that he immediately

dispatched a messenger to summon the Accras to his aid, as vassals to

the King. His messenger reached Accra the next day, and that people

joined him on the following, on which the enemy retreated precipitately;

Attah to windward, and Quaw to Adda. Apokoo followed the latter, who

having escaped him after a tedious watchfulness, Apokoo, believing the

Danish governor, Mr. Flindt, to have connived, made him his prisoner,

and kept him with the army, which soon afterwards encamped in Aquapim,

five months, during which time he was treated with kindness and respect,

but his ransom amounted to nearly £400. Apokoo was soon after ordered

back to Coomassie. He told me he brought the bell of Adda fort as a

trophy.


Appia Danqua had been sent, at the same time with Apokoo, with 6000 men

against the Fantee states which were disposed to the revolters. He

defeated them at Apam, and took Baffoo the Annamaboe caboceer prisoner,

but whilst his army was before Tantum, intelligence of the approach of

Attah, who had retreated from Apokoo, but whose name was as redoubtable

as his disposition was rapacious, subdued his firmness, and under the

plea of prudence, hurried him back to the interior.


[Sidenote: 1814.]


The path was afterwards shut for two years, through the vigilance, and

from the terror of Cudjo Cooma, who had been elected to the stool of

Akim, six months after the death of Attah, whose immediate successor

(Quawko Ashantee) tyrannized so cruelly during that period, that he was

commanded by the people to kill himself, and could only obtain the

indulgence of a week’s respite, which he spent in singing and dancing,

in fact in making his own custom Quaw Saffătchee had also leagued with

the Fantees who attacked the Accra town, but were repulsed. The King

suddenly determined to open the path to receive the arrears of pay due

from the Forts, and sent Amanqua Abiniowa with an army of 20,000 men,

charging him to offer no violence nor commit hostility, unless provoked

by attack, but to receive the submission of the Akims and Aquapims, and

merely to exact a fine to seal it. Appia Danqua was sent at the same

time with a smaller army to the back of Winnebah and Tantum, to

intercept the revolters if they fled to windward. Abiniowa proceeded to

Aguiasso, one day’s march from Aquapim, unmolested, when one of his

foraging parties was attacked by Cudjo Cooma and seven men killed. A

general engagement took place the next morning, and after six hours

fighting the Ashantees were victorious, and sent a jaw-bone and a slave

to each of the Accra towns. Amanqua then marched to Accra to receive the

King’s pay, and remained nearly twelve months in its neighbourhood. He

then returned to Aquapim, where, after some time, he received a message

from the King, with a large quantity of gold, advising him that he must

not see his face again unless he brought the heads of Cudjo and Quaw.

Amanqua did not immediately communicate this message to his captains,

but ordered them to deposit their equipage and property in Accra, and

then, making a large custom for three days, to propitiate the

enterprise, he took fetish with all his captains that they would never

return to Coomassie without the heads.


1816. Appia Danqua had died in Assin in the interim, and was succeeded

by his brother Appia Nanu, under whom Bakkee was the second in command.

The King hearing nothing of his progress, and his indolence being

reported to him, sent orders to Amanqua to join him, which he did at

Essecooma, reproaching him for his cowardice. Soon after this, the

skirmish at the salt pond near Cape Coast took place, the detachment was

principally of Assins, and commanded by Quasheemanqua. Yokokroko soon

afterwards joined the combined army, (which had marched to Abra,) with a

few hundred men destined to attack Commenda.


Not long after the palaver was settled at Cape Coast, and the army again

divided, Cudjo Cooma was killed by a party of Appia Nanu’s at Insoom or

Incoom near Essecooma; upon which, Appia, instead of marching to join

Amanqua as had been concerted, returned to Coomassie, where he was

coldly received, but not accused until the 12th of July last (see

Diary). Adoo Danqua, the brother of Quaw Saffătchee, came to the Accras

and concerted the delivering of him up, as he had tired him out with his

wanderings. The Ashantees agreed to prevail on the King to give him the

stool if he did. A few Accras and a few Ashantees accompanied him, and

when he came near where his brother was hid, one day’s journey from

Accra, he placed an ambush, and sitting down, expostulated with him, and

recommended him to kill himself; but Quaw would not, alleging that he

should eventually wear out the King’s patience in pursuing him; on this

Adoo rose, and a shot was immediately fired at Quaw, who was brought

down and rose again four times, exclaiming that his brother was his

murderer, who reflected the reproach on his own obstinacy. The body was

brought to Accra, and his head sent to Coomassie, and it is now a trophy

at Bantama or the back town. Amanqua then returned to Coomassie, and

arrived about six months before the Mission.


The Aowins, to anticipate the ambitious views of the Ashantee

government, lately sent an embassy with offers of service and tribute,

but the amount of the latter has not yet been decided.


The King had sent to demand the royal stool of Buntooko or Gaman which

was thickly plated and embossed with gold; it was given up by Adinkara,

the King, from fear; his sister, a woman of masculine spirit and talent,

and the soul of the government, being absent. On her return, she

reproached her brother severely, and ordered a solid gold stool to be

made to replace it. That being also demanded, as the right of the

superior, with a large gold ornament in the shape of an elephant, dug

out from some ruins, the sister, receiving the ambassadors, replied,

that the King should not have either, and added, impressing it with more

force than delicacy, that her brother and she must change sexes, for she

was most proper for a King, and would fight to the last rather than be

so constantly despoiled. The King of Ashantee sent word that she was fit

to be a king’s sister, and a strong woman, and he would give her twelve

months to prepare for war. Several embassies have been sent however to

negotiate; two during our stay, the latter, it was said, with an offer

of 400 Bendas, (£3200.) but the aristocracy were obstinate, and urged to

the King, that his other tributaries would laugh at him, if he did not

get the King of Gaman’s head. The small pox was raging in Buntooko.


It is clear, that the King of Ashantee contemplates the reduction of the

King of Dwabin from an independent ally to a tributary. We witnessed one

circumstance to the point. A messenger being sent to require gold of

Dwabin, the King of which is a very weak young man, a captain of the

royal family replied, that there was no war on foot to require gold, and

as it could only be for the individual benefit of Ashantee, the

government must be reminded that Dwabin had formerly exacted gold, and

was not now to be subjected to imposition, because the right had been

yielded from respect to the sister kingdom. This being reported to the

King, he suppressed his anger, and sent a gold headed sword, with other

marks of dignity and favour to this man, who, to his surprise, refused

them, alleging, that the honours he already possessed at home became him

better. The King still temporised. Some months after, at the full

assembly convened for the proclamation of the treaty with the British

Government, the mother of the King of Dwabin, who acts as regent, and

over whom Saï is known to have much influence, suddenly, and no doubt at

his instance, accused this captain of plotting to deprive her son of the

stool. The accusation was supported by others, who prayed the King to

judge the palaver. The King of Dwabin sat with the greatest

indifference. The accused made an animated appeal to the assembly, and

Saï affected to support him vehemently, and ordered the linguists to

give him chalk, or acquit him. The man thanking him very earnestly,

Adoosee was desired to tell him, that his ill-will to the King of

Ashantee had been reported in a very aggravated manner; but as it was no

longer believed, he was only required to take fetish, that he liked the

King, and would do him all the good he could; this done, the man

received several marks of favour and bounty.


Saï Tootoo is considered to take better care of the treasury than any of

his predecessors: he cautiously extends his prerogative, and takes every

opportunity of increasing the number of secondary captains, by

dignifying the young men brought up about his person, and still

retaining them in his immediate service.


Saï Acotoo, the King’s brother, and the heir to the stool, appeared to

me very inferior in ability; but the Ashantees say otherwise.


The King’s private character is amiable; the children of his brothers

share the fondness and indulgence which endear him to his own, and his

few moments of recreation are the liveliest of theirs. The circumstances

connected with the various instances which we witnessed of his

generosity to others, justify me in ascribing it to the benevolence of

his disposition. His admiration of ingenious rather than splendid

novelty, has frequently imposed the appearance of a covetousness,

scarcely culpable from his reverence for invention, and the amazement

its extent excited. To present him with the trifles which attracted his

notice when he visited us, offended him, he told us we must only answer

his questions, and let him examine them; to make dashes on the occasion

of a private visit, was to vitiate the motive of the condescension,

which could not be repeated unless we paid more respect to his dignity

and friendship. The King is certainly capricious, and his liberality of

mind is stained by prejudices against individuals which he confesses to

be unaccountable; and to several of the principal actors in his

brother’s deposition, (which, desirous to extend his prerogative, he

would tacitly censure,) he has been unjustly severe. His humanity is

frequently superior to his superstition and policy, he offended Quatchi

Quofie, one of the four, by limiting the human sacrifices at his

mother’s funeral, and resisted all the importunities, founded on

precedent, for the allowance of a greater number. He dismissed us twice

with apologies for not proceeding to business, confessing, the first

time, that he had been unusually irritated just after he sent for us,

and had not recovered his calmness; the latter, that some agreeable news

had induced him to drink more than fitted him to hear great palavers

like ours. In his judicial administration, a lie always aggravated the

punishment, and truth generally extenuated, and sometimes atoned of

itself for the offence: he invariably anticipated the temerity of

perjury, where convicting evidence was to be opposed to the accused. The

King’s manners are a happy mixture of dignity and affability, they

engage rather than encourage, and his general deportment is conciliating

though repressive. He speaks well, and more logically than most of his

council, who are diffuse, but his superior talent is marked in the

shrewd questions by which he fathoms a design or a narrative. He excels

in courtesy, is wisely inquisitive, and candid in his comparisons: war,

legislature, and mechanism, were his favourite topics in our private

conversations. The great, but natural fault of the King is his ambition;

I do not think it has ever proved superior to the pledge of his honour,

but it certainly has, and that frequently, to his sense of justice,

which is repressed rather than impaired by it. This sketch of his

character being narrowed to my own knowledge, will be assisted by the

following history of Agay, the second linguist.


Agay, when a boy, carried salt from Aquoomo to Coomassie for sale; he

was afterwards taken into the service of Aquootoo, caboceer of that

place, against whom the government had instituted a palaver, but

wrongfully. Agay accompanied the caboceer when he was sent for to

Coomassie for judgment. After the King’s messengers had spoken,

misrepresenting the case in preference to confessing the King to be in

the wrong, and the caboceer was confused, this boy suddenly rose, and

said, to use the words of the narrators, “King, you have people to wash

you, to feed you, to serve you, but you have no people to speak the

truth to you, and tell you when God does not like your palaver.” The

assembly cried out unanimously, that the boy might be hurried away and

his head taken off; but the King said, “No! let him finish;” and Agay is

said to have spoken three hours, and to have disclosed and argued the

palaver to the King’s conviction, and his master’s acquittal. He was

retained to attend the King, but treated with no particular distinction.

A serious palaver occurring between two principal men, it was debated

before the council, who were at a loss to decide, but inclined to the

man whom the King doubted; judgment was suspended. In the interim the

King sent Agay, privately, to the house of each, to hear their palavers

in turn, tête-à-tête; he did so, and when the King asked him who he

thought was right, he confirmed his impression. “Now,” said the King, “I

know you have a good head.” Agay was then made a Linguist, and presented

with a house, wives, slaves, and gold. Sometime afterwards, the King

confessing a prejudice against a wealthy captain, his linguists, always

inclined to support him, said, “If you wish to take his stool from him,

we will make the palaver;” but Agay sprung up, exclaiming, “No, King!

that is not good; that man never did you any wrong, you know all the

gold of your subjects is your’s at their death, but if you get all now,

strangers will go away and say, only the King has gold, and that will

not be good, but let them say the King has gold, all his captains have

gold, and all his people have gold, then your country will look

handsome, and the bush people fear you.” For this the King made him

second linguist, and much increased his property. When Amanqua had the

command of the army against Cudjo Cooma, the King asked him which

linguist he would take, he replied, Adoosee or Otee; the King said, no!

I will give you this boy, he has the best head for hard palavers.

Amanqua urged that he was too young, the King told him he was a fool to

say so. He then made Amanqua take fetish with him to report the merits

of Agay faithfully, who distinguished himself so much, that he is always

employed in difficult foreign palavers.


The manners of the higher orders of captains, always dignified, are

courteous and hospitable in private, though haughty and abrupt in

public. I believe them to be jealous rather than tenacious of their

honour, and their sophistry is as ingenious as their maxims are

prepossessing. They consider that war alone affords an exertion or

display of ability, and they esteem the ambition of their King as his

greatest virtue. They have no idea of the aggrandisement of a state by

civil policy alone. They are candid in acknowledging their defeats, and

just to the prowess of their enemies, but they possess little humanity,

and are very avaricious and oppressive. They listen to superstition with

the most childish credulity, but they only cultivate it for the

preservation of life and the indulgence of passion; beyond this, the

Moors could never advance their enquiries; they are neither curious nor

anxious about a future state, pretending to it from rank and achievement

rather than domestic virtue; and believing, if the latter were outraged,

the solemnities and sacrifices of their funeral customs would purchase

their repose. Indeed, licensed as they are by the zealous conflicts of

rival superstitions, (Moorish and Pagan,) their lives are moderate and

benevolent to what might be expected, and merit more than our excuses.


The lower order of people are ungrateful, insolent, and licentious. The

King repeatedly said, he believed them to be the worst people existing,

except the Fantees, and not comparable with many of their inland

neighbours. Perhaps we should agree with Voltaire, “Je crois qu’il faut

plutôt juger d’une puissante nation par ceux qui sont à la tête, que par

la populace.”[70]


[Footnote 65: See Diary.]


[Footnote 66: See the explanatory list of words and the early dispatches

in the First Part.]


[Footnote 67: Fire arms are unknown to such of the nations on the south

of the Niger as the Shereef has visited; and the reason which he assigns

for it is, that the Kings in the neighbourhood of the coast, persuaded

that if these powerful instruments of war should reach the possession of

the populous inland states, their own independence would be lost, have

strictly prohibited, and by the wisdom of their measures, have

effectually prevented this dangerous merchandise from passing beyond the

limits of their dominions. Lucas.]


[Footnote 68: “To succeed to the stool,” does not mean to the seat in

the council, but is the common expression for succeeding to a property

even in private life. The same stool, or seat descends through many

generations.]


[Footnote 69: On the death of the late King of Amanaheä, two competitors

for the stool appeared, one called Suikee or Suiquah; the other’s name I

am ignorant of. Both collected their slaves and adherents, and fought.

Suikee was obliged to fly, and hide himself in the bush; but the people

being dissatisfied with the conqueror, Suikee re-appeared against the

town. When his rival was reduced beyond all hope, he threw all his gold,

which filled several jars, into the lake; and then collecting his wives

and the different branches of his family, went with them into a remote

part of the bush, and cut all their throats, with the exception of one

son, whom he reserved to assist him in burying the bodies. He then made

this son swear on his fetish, to kill and bury him, and never to

discover where the bodies were laid: the son fulfilled the oath, and

returned to Apollonia, but I am not certain what became of him. After

Suikee had seated himself firmly on the stool, he by some means

discovered where the bodies were concealed; he caused them to be dug up,

and taken to Apollonia town; he then ranged them in a sitting posture,

in a row along the beach, with stakes to extend their arms, and support

their heads: this horrid spectacle was exhibited until even their bones

had perished. One of Suikee’s first acts after his accession, was to

consecrate his hiding place in the bush, making it death, or a heavy

fine, for any one to swear by Suikee’s bush, and not to keep the oath.]


[Footnote 70: The principal districts of Fantee, are, the Affettoo, the

Braffoo, and the Essecoomah; Cape Coast is in the former. The Dey of

Affettoo (a title probably introduced by the Portuguese) was formerly

supreme in Fantee, so far as summoning the other kings and caboceers at

pleasure, prescribing their political conduct, and being appealed to and

sentencing in all cases of life and death, wherever or by whomsoever the

crime may have been committed; witchcraft excepted. Upwards of a century

ago the small pox almost depopulated Affettoo, then the largest town and

capital of all Fantee, (it is about 10 miles inland from Cape Coast,)

and all the immediate heirs to the stool being cut off, the supremacy

was transferred to Mankasim. The present Dey, however, preserves a

spiritual authority over the other kings and caboceers, and is esteemed

as the superior fetish man; when they desire rain, for instance, they

apply to him to procure it, and they look to him solely for their

chronology, which he preserves by knotting strings. Mankasim then became

the capital and largest town of Fantee, but it was almost destroyed by

the Ashantees in their first invasion of 1807. Any Fantee caboceer who

did not attend the summons of the King of Mankasim, was suspended by

him, and afterwards displaced by the diet. Adoo, the last King of the

Braffoos, despoiling all his subjects of their most valuable property,

and countenancing the individuals of his family in the same assumption

and violation, without any regard to persons; they were all seized, on

his death, by a simultaneous rising of the people, and sold off the

coast as slaves, to get rid of the race. Adookoo, one of the leading

men, was then called to the care of the stool, with the title of

caboceer only, it being still considered as an interregnum, but he

exercised the same supremacy and privileges which the King had done, and

was acknowledged by the whole country. During his retreat and wanderings

in the bush, after several defeats by the Ashantees, the Fantee towns

have assumed many political and judicial rights before centered in

Mankasim; but Adookoo is now expected to summon them all, and re-

establish the ancient order of things, which they deem too sacred to

think of resisting. It was not the Braffoos, or the whole people of that

district, who had the privilege of living abroad at the public expense,

and who took whatever they pleased of the property of others, as Mr.

Meredith has stated; but the state officers of that district called

Brofoos, who acquired that name from the hide in which the tobacco is

rolled, being formed into a seat peculiar to them, never using a wooden

stool. They were the executors, and not the organs of the law, and

always sat to the right and left of Adookoo, but had no voice. The

number was twelve, and the dignity immemorially hereditary in as many

families. These men were allowed to take whatever they pleased at home

and abroad, but since Adookoo’s misfortunes, and inability to support

them, they have been content to beg for their tithes in the large towns,

and only exercise their rapacity in the small crooms of their own

district.]


                              CHAPTER III.


                               * * * * *


                        _Constitution and Laws._


The King, the Aristocracy, now reduced to four, and the Assembly of

Captains,[71] are the three estates of the Ashantee government.


The constitution requires or admits an interference of the Aristocracy

in all _foreign_ politics, extending even to a veto on the King’s

decision; but they watch rather than share the _domestic_

administration, generally influencing it by their opinion, but never

appearing to control it from authority; and their opinions on civil

questions, are submitted with a deference, directly in contrast to their

bold declarations on subjects of war or tribute, which amount to

injunction.


The Ashantees advocated this constitution by the argument, that the

interference of the Aristocracy in all foreign politics, makes the

nation more formidable to its enemies, who feel they cannot provoke with

impunity, where there are so many guardians of the military glory; who,

by insisting on a war, become responsible in a great degree for the

issue, and pledge an energy and exertion, in comparison with which, such

as could be excited by a despotic monarch, must be deemed disinterested.

They added, that an almost independent administration of the King, was

better calculated for the domestic government, because the decrees of a

monarch have naturally more force with the people, (over whom his power

is unlimited) and, further, that a civil power in the Aristocracy could

not be reconciled to the Assembly of Captains, to whom the former estate

was already sufficiently invidious for the health of the constitution.


In exercising his judicial authority, the King always retired in private

with the Aristocracy to hear their opinions, to encourage their candor

without diminishing his majesty in the eye of the people; and in using

his legislative prerogative, he was said always to give them a private

opportunity of defending the old law, rather than of objecting to the

new; though, from the same state policy, the latter was announced to the

Aristocracy as well as to the Assembly of Captains, before the people,

as the sudden and arbitrary pleasure of the King.


The general Assembly of the Caboceers and Captains, is summoned merely

to give publicity to the will of the King and Aristocracy, and to

provide for its observance; unless on state emergencies, or

unprecedented occasions, such as the Treaty with the British Government.

The following anecdote, related to me by many Ashantees, will illustrate

the freedom of their constitution.


A son of the King’s quarrelling with a son of Amanquateä’s, (one of the

four) told him, that in comparison with himself, he was the son of a

slave; this being reported to Amanquateä, he sent a party of his

soldiers, who pulled down the house of the King’s son and seized his

person. The King hearing of it sent to Amanquateä, and learning the

particulars, interceded for his son, and redeemed his head for 20

periguins of gold.


The most original feature of their law, that of succession, has been

mentioned in the History, with the argument on which it is founded: it

is universally binding; the course is, the brother, the sister’s son,

the son, the chief vassal or slave to the stool. In the Fantee country,

the principal slave succeeds to the exclusion of the son, who only

inherits his mother’s property, frequently considerable, and inherited

from her family independently of her husband: the daughters share a

small part of the fetish or ornamental gold, which is much alloyed with

silver.


The sisters of the King may marry or intrigue with whom they please,

provided he be an eminently strong or personable man; that the heirs of

the stool may be, at least, personably superior to the generality of

their countrymen.


The King is heir to the gold of every subject, from the highest to the

lowest; the fetish gold and the cloths are generally presented by him to

the successor to the stool, from which the slaves and other property of

the deceased are inseparable. The King contributes to the funeral custom

to validate his claim, and usually bestows ten periguins of the dust

gold on the successor, (if of a rich man,) who is in all cases liable

for the debts of the deceased, though the amount is generally made good

to him sooner or later, if he has influence with those about the King,

or recommends himself to his notice personally. This law is sometimes

anticipated, by a father presenting his children with large sums of gold

just before his death. Boiteëm, the father of Otee, one of the King’s

linguists, is known to have done so, but the son discovers his wealth

very deliberately.


The gold buried with members of the royal family, and afterwards

deposited with their bones in the fetish house at Bantama, is sacred;

and cannot be used, but to redeem the capital from the hands of an

enemy, or in extreme national distress; and even then, the King must

avoid the sight of it, if he would avoid the fatal vengeance of the

fetish or deity.


If a slave seeks refuge from an ally or tributary, he is restored; if

from an unconnected power, he is received as a free subject.


The tributary state which distinguishes itself in suppressing the revolt

of another, is rewarded by privileges at the expense of the offending

power: thus if a subject of the former kills a subject of the latter,

the price of a slave only can be recovered, instead of the fine

otherwise attached to the death of a freeman; and the damages for other

injuries are reduced in proportion.


If the subjects of any tributary do not like the decision of their

ruler, according to the laws of their own country, they may appeal to

the King, and claim decision by the law of Ashantee. The commission

allowed to the collectors of tribute or fine, is two periguins out of

ten.


The direct descendants of the noble families who assisted the enterprise

of Saï Tootoo, the founder of the kingdom, are not subject to capital

punishment, but can only be despoiled. There are now but four remaining,

Ananqui, Assafee, (see Diary,) and two others, all beggars.


We were present at the promulgation of the following law: “All persons

sent on the King’s business shall no longer seize provisions in any

country, whether tributary or otherwise, in his name; but requiring

food, shall offer a fair price for the first they meet with, if this is

refused, they shall then demand one meal, and one meal only, in the

King’s name, and proceed. This extends to all messengers sent by the

head captains, whose servants, as well as the King’s, have been long in

the habit of extorting goods from traders, and tobacco and provisions in

the market place, in the names of their masters, which they shall do no

longer without incurring the same penalty which is attached to the

former part of this law, 110 penguins.” The form of making this law,

was, the linguists with their insignia advanced and announced it to each

of the four members of the Aristocracy, then to the whole assembly;

afterwards Cudjo Appăni, the chief crier, proclaimed it to the people,

who shouted their thanks; his fee from the King was ten ackies, from the

people twenty. This attachment of the penalty to the law (the chief

merit of Zaleucus) manifests some advancement in polity, in securing the

accused against arbitrary judgment.[72]


The caboceers of Soota, Marmpon, Becqua, and Kokofoo, the four large

towns built by the Ashantees at the same time with Coomassie, have

several palatine privileges; they have an independent treasury, though

subject to the demands of the government and a judicial power, with the

reserve of an appeal to the King. They celebrate their own yam custom

after they have attended that at Coomassie, at which all dependents and

tributaries must be present, and which seems to have been instituted

like the Panathenæa of Theseus, to unite such various nations by a

common festival. These four caboceers, only, are allowed, with the King,

to stud their sandals with gold.


The blood of the son of a King, or of any of the royal family cannot be

shed; but when guilty of a crime of magnitude, they are drowned in the

river Dah, by a particular captain, named Cudjo Samfani.


If a man swears on the King’s head, that another must kill him, which is

understood to be invoking the King’s death if he does not, the other man

must do so, or forfeit the whole of his property, and generally his

life. This very frequently occurs, for the blacks in their ardor for

revenge, do not regard sacrificing their own lives to bring a palaver on

their murderer, which their families are sure to do.


To be convicted of cowardice is death.


A subject may clear any part of the bush for building a croom, or making

a plantation, without paying any thing to the King as lord of the soil;

but he must pay a small sum to the possessor of the nearest croom or

plantation, through which his path runs.


The government has no power to direct the traders to any particular

market, though it interdicts the commerce with any power which may have

offended it.


All the King’s linguists take fetish to be true to each other, and to

report faithfully.


If any subject picks up gold dropped in the market place, it is death,

being collected only by order of the government on emergencies; see

Revenue.


Theft of the King’s property, or intrigue with the female attendants of

the royal family, or habitual incontinence, is punished by emasculation;

but crim. con. with the wife of a man who has been so punished, is

death: being considered an aggravated contempt of law.


Interest of money is 33⅓ per cent. for every forty days, which is

accompanied after the first period by a dash of liquor. When the

patience of the creditor is exhausted, he seizes the debtor, or even any

of his family, as slaves, and they can only be redeemed by the payment.

This barbarous law was nearly the same in Athens.[73]


In almost all charges of treason, the life of the accuser is at risk as

well as that of the accused, and is forfeited on the acquittal of the

latter. I understood this, from the best authorities, to be

indispensible as a check on the palavers; envy, spleen, or covetousness

would otherwise accumulate.


The accuser is never discovered or confronted to the accused, nor the

evidence revealed, until the latter has fully replied to the charge, as

outlined by the King’s linguists.


Palavers are frequently allowed to sleep even for years, as in the

Fantee country, to make the damages sued for, the heavier: for instance,

if a man stole a hen twelve months before, the value of the broods and

eggs it would have produced, on a fair average, in the interval, would

be shrewdly calculated, and sued for.[74] State palavers are also

allowed to sleep for years, but that is to impose the confidence on the

accused that the principal witnesses are dead, and the impression is

artfully assisted by the policy of the council. The witnesses against

Appia Nanu, who had reported his haughty message to the King, had not

been seen for nearly twelve months before they burst before him on the

day of his trial, having been sent into the bush on the most distant

frontier.


No man is punished for killing his own slave, but he is for the murder

of his wife or child.[75] If he kills the slave of another, he must pay

the value. If a great man kills his equal in rank, he is generally

allowed to die by his own hands: the death of an inferior is generally

compensated by a fine to the family, equal to seven slaves.[76]


If a person brings a frivolous palaver against another, he must give an

entertainment to the family and friends of the acquitted.


If an aggry bead is broken in a scuffle, seven slaves are to be paid to

the owner.


Trifling thefts are generally punished by the exposure of the party in

various parts of the town, whilst the act is published; but more serious

thefts cannot be visited on the guilty by any but his family, who are

bound to compensate the accuser, and punish their relative or not as

they think fit; they may even put him or her to death, if the injury is

serious, or the crime repeated or habitual.


If a man cohabits with a woman without the house, or in the bush, they

are both the slaves of the first person who discovers them; but

redeemable by their families.


It is forbidden, as it was by Lycurgus, to praise the beauty of another

man’s wife, being intrigue by implication.


A captain generally gives a periguin to the family on taking a wife, a

poor man two ackies: the damages for intrigue in the former case are ten

periguins; in the latter, one ackie and a half, and a pot of palm wine.


If a woman involves herself in a palaver, she involves her family, but

not her husband.


None but a captain can sell his wife, and he, only, if her family are

unable to redeem her by the repayment of the marriage fee.


The property of the wife is distinct, and independent of the husband,

though the King is the heir to it.


None but a captain can put his wife to death for infidelity, and even

then he is expected to accept a liberal offer of gold from the family,

for her redemption. To intrigue with a wife of the King’s is death.


If the family of a woman are able and willing, on her report of her

dislike to her husband, or his ill-treatment of her, to tender him the

marriage fee, he must accept it, and the woman returns to her family,

but may not marry again.


If a husband is not heard of by his wife for three years, she may marry

again, and if the first husband returns, the claim of the second is the

better; but all the children of the after marriage are considered the

property of the first husband, and may be pawned by him.


Those accused of witchcraft, or having a devil, are tortured to death.


The good treatment of slaves is in some degree provided for, by the

liberty they have of dashing or transferring themselves to any freeman;

whom they enjoin to make them his property by invoking his death if he

does not; an imperative appeal.


[Footnote 71: It has been shewn in the history, that the Aristocracy was

originally formed of the peers and associates of Saï Tootoo the founder

of the monarchy, who owed his elevation not to his superior rank, but to

his superior endowments and address. The Aristocracy has been gradually

retrenched since Saï Cudjo pointed out the way.]


[Footnote 72: By the laws of Ahanta, which are peculiar, if any subject

or sojourner is in urgent want of provisions, he may seize the first he

meets with, paying the owner the prices which have been fixed by the

caboceers: this is similar to the law of Lycurgus. At the Contoom or

annual Harvest Custom, the Ahantas revise their laws, as Solon enjoined

the Athenians to do, annulling some and adding others.]


[Footnote 73: In Ahanta, all old debts must be paid within six weeks

from the commencement of the Contoom or Harvest Custom. The creditor can

panyar or seize not only the family, but the townsmen of the debtor.]


[Footnote 74: The Ahanta laws do not allow of these protracted palavers,

and only award the intrinsic value of the articles stolen or destroyed.

If a man robs a plantation of a yam, he must pay the owner a tokoo of

gold, and take two more. In Fantee the pettiest theft frequently entails

slavery.]


[Footnote 75: In the kingdom of Amanaheä or Apollonia, the tenth child

is always buried alive.]


[Footnote 76: A person accidentally killing another in Ahanta, pays 5

oz. of gold to the family, and defrays the burial customs. In the case

of murder, it is 20 oz. of gold and a slave; or, he and his family

become the slaves of the family of the deceased. If a man dashes himself

to the fetish on the head of another, the other must redeem him. If a

man kills himself on the head of another, the other must kill himself

also, or pay 20 oz. to the family: in Fantee the sum is indefinitely

great: this is frequently resorted to, when there is no other prospect

of revenge.


Adumissa, an extraordinarily beautiful red skinned woman of Cape Coast,

possessed numerous admirers, but rejected them all. One of them, in

despair, shot himself on her head close to her house. The family

demanding satisfaction; to save her relations from a ruinous palaver,

she resolved to shoot herself in expiation. She accordingly assembled

her friends and relatives from various parts of the country, and

sitting, richly dressed, killed herself in their presence with golden

bullets. After the body had been exposed in state, it was buried with a

profusion of cloths and gold. The beautiful Adumissa is still eulogised,

and her favourite patterned cloth bears her name amongst the natives.]


                              CHAPTER IV.


                               * * * * *


                            _Superstitions._


The Negro tradition of the book and the calabash, cited by St. Pierre,

is familiar to every native of these parts, and seems the source of

their religious opinions. Impressed that the blind avarice of their

forefathers inclined all the favour of the supreme God to white men,

they believe themselves to have been committed to the mediating care of

subordinate deities, necessarily as inferior to the primary, as they are

to Europeans.


As the Ashantee manner of relating this tradition differs a little from

that of the Fantee, I will repeat it, on the authority of Odumata and

other principal men. In the beginning of the world, God created three

white and three black men, with the same number of women; he resolved,

that they might not afterwards complain, to give them their choice of

good and evil. A large box or calabash was set on the ground, with a

piece of paper, sealed up, on one side of it. God gave the black men the

first choice, who took the box, expecting it contained every thing, but,

on opening it, there appeared only a piece of gold, a piece of iron, and

several other metals, of which they did not know the use. The white men

opening the paper, it told them every thing. God left the blacks in the

bush, but conducted the whites to the water side, (for this happened in

Africa) communicated with them every night, and taught them to build a

small ship which carried them to another country, whence they returned

after a long period, with various merchandise to barter with the blacks,

who might have been the superior people.


With this imaginary alienation from the God of the universe, not a shade

of despondency is associated; they consider that it diminishes their

comforts and their endowments on earth, but that futurity is a dull and

torpid state to the majority of mankind.


Their fetishes or subordinate deities, are supposed to inhabit

particular rivers, woods, and mountains, as the imaginary deities of the

Celts. They are venerated in proportion as their predictions (always

equivocal) chance to be realized. The present favourite fetish of

Ashantee is that of the river Tando. Cobee, a river in Dankara, and

Odentee on the Adirree, are two of the others.


The kings, caboceers, and the higher class, are believed to dwell with

the superior Deity after death, enjoying an eternal renewal of the state

and luxury they possessed on earth. It is with this impression, that

they kill a certain number of both sexes at the funeral customs, to

accompany the deceased, to announce his distinction, and to administer

to his pleasures.


The spirits of the inferior classes are believed to inhabit the houses

of the fetish, in a state of torpid indolence, which recompenses them

for the drudgery of their lives, and which is truly congenial to the

feelings of the Negro. Those of superior wisdom and experience, are said

to be endued with foresight after death, and to be appointed to observe

the lives, and advise the good of those mortals who acknowledge the

fetish; their state corresponding, in short, with that of the first race

of men after death, as described by Hesiod. Those whose enormities

nullify the mediation of the funeral custom, or, whom neglect or

circumstances might have deprived of it, are doomed, in the imagination

of others, to haunt the gloom of the forest, stealing occasionally to

their former abodes in rare but lingering visits. Those who have

neglected the custom, or funeral rites of their family, are thought to

be accursed and troubled by their spirits.


There are two orders of fetishmen. The first class dwell with the

fetish,[77] who has a small round house, built generally at a distance

from the town. They question the oracle respecting the future fortune of

a state or an individual, convey its advice, and enjoin the attention of

the _audible_ spirits of those, any member of their family would

question respecting property or domestic circumstances:


  “Auditur tumulo et vox reddita fertur ad aures.” Æn. vi.


The inferior class pursue their various occupations in society, assist

in customs and superstitious ceremonies, and are applied to as fortune

tellers or conjurors are in Europe; especially in cases of theft; when,

from a secret system of espionage, and a reluctance, frequently

amounting to a refusal to discover the culprit, or to do more than

replace the property whence it was taken, they are generally successful.

The magical ceremony consists in knotting, confusing, and dividing

behind the back, several strings and shreds of leather. They are also

frequently applied to by slippery wives, to work charms to keep their

husbands in ignorance of a projected intrigue, which they affect to do.


The primary dignity is hereditary in families, as the priesthood was in

Egypt, celibacy not being enjoined; their property is also hereditary,

and they possess other immunities. The latter order is frequently

augmented by those, who declare that the fetish has suddenly seized, or

come upon them, and who, after inflicting great severities on

themselves, in the manner of the convulsionists, are ultimately

acknowledged. The fetish women, generally preferred for medical aid, as

they possess a thorough knowledge of barks and herbs, deleterious and

sanative, closely resemble the second class of Druidesses as described,

I think by Mela: they seem licensed prostitutes, before and after

marriage.


The present state of these people referring them to a comparison with

the nations of ancient Europe,[78] the close resemblance of many points

of their superstition to relative particulars recorded of Greece and

Gaul, recalls the following reflection of an eminent writer. “The truth

is, there is hardly any thing more surprising in the history of mankind,

than the similitude, or rather identity, of the opinions, institutions,

and manners of all these orders of ancient priests, though they lived

under such different climates, and at so great a distance from one

another, without intercourse or communication. This amounts to a

demonstration, that all these opinions and institutions flowed

originally from one fountain.”


Half the offerings to the fetish, are pretended to be thrown into the

river, the other half belongs to the priests. The King’s offering is

generally ten ounces, and three or four slaves: that of a poor subject

about four ackies. Children are frequently vowed to the service of the

fetish before their birth. A slave flying to the temple, may dash or

devote himself to the fetish; but, by paying a fee of two ounces of gold

and four sheep, any person shuts the door of the fetish house against

all his run away slaves.[79]


Every family has a variety of domestic fetishes, furnished by the

priests, and answering to the Penates of the Romans; some are wooden

figures, others of arbitrary shapes and materials; they receive

offerings and libations at the yam custom, but are not brought out of

the house.[80]


In Ashantee there is not a common fetish day, as on the coast.[81]

Different families solemnize different days of the week, by wearing

white cloths, abstaining from palm wine and labour, as they do the day

of the week on which they were born, which is in fact their second

fetish day. The King’s family keep Tuesday as their fetish day.

Odumata’s, Friday. Saturday was the King’s birth day, when, as well as

on his fetish day, he always sat on a stool placed before his chair as a

foot stool would be. Some families never eat beef, others abstain from

pork. Fowls and beef are the fetish of the King’s family, and

consequently never eaten by it.


The Ashantees have their Fasti and Nefasti, or lucky and unlucky days,

as the Romans had.[82] The former consecrated by some good fortune, the

latter condemned from some national calamity, as Saturday, for instance,

from the defeat and death of Saï Tootoo. They are also otherwise marked

than by the week; for I was told, that our month of September contained

fewer bad days than any other, and was besides deemed auspicious to

travelling:


  Ipsa dies alios alio dedit ordine Luna


  Felices operum · · · ·


  · · · · nona fugæ melior. Geor. I.


I have known Ashantees thirty days coming with dispatches from Cape

Coast Castle to Coomassie, in August; and in September, to have arrived

in twelve.


If the successor to a stool, or any rich inheritance is a child, they

grind aggry beads into a powder, and rub him with it daily, after

washing, believing that it hastens his growth and maturity. When any one

denies a theft, an aggry bead is placed in a small vessel, with some

water, the person holding it puts his right foot against the right foot

of the accused, who invokes the power of the bead to kill him if he is

guilty, and then takes it into his mouth with a little of the water, the

rest being thrown on the ground, and crossed as he repeats the

invocation: their superstition is generally superior to their

resolution. I shall be expected to notice these aggry beads.


The natives invariably declare that the aggry beads are found in the

Dankara, Akim, Warsaw, Ahanta, and Fantee countries, the greater number

in the former, being the richer in gold; they say they are directed to

dig for them by a spiral vapour issuing from the ground, and that they

rarely lay near the surface; the finder is said to be sure of a series

of good fortune. The plain aggry beads are blue, yellow, green, or a

dull red, the variegated consist of every colour and shade. The Fantees

prefer the plain yellow bead, the Amanaheäns the blue and yellow, for

which they will give double the weight in gold; those of inferior beauty

frequently fetch a large price, from having been worn by some royal or

eminent character. Dr. Leyden, who writes, “the aigris is a stone of a

greenish blue colour, supposed to be a species of jasper, small

perforated pieces of which, valued at their weight in gold, are used for

money,” (which I never heard of,) rather describes the popo bead; though

that is semi-transparent, (of a bright blue,) resembling carnelian,

(which is frequently found in these countries) and said to be obtained

in the same manner as the aggry bead. Isert writes, “they are a sort of

coral, with inlaid work: the art of making beads is entirely lost, or

was never known in these parts: it is not improbable, that in the golden

age of Egypt, she had communication with the Gold Coast; indeed, it has

been thought, and perhaps not without some reason, that the Gold Coast

is the Ophir of Solomon.”


The variegated strata of the aggry beads are so firmly united, and so

imperceptibly blended, that the perfection seems superior to art: some

resemble mosaic work, the surfaces of others are covered with flowers

and regular patterns, so very minute, and the shades so delicately

softened one into the other, and into the ground of the bead, that

nothing but the finest touch of the pencil could equal them. The

agatized parts disclose flowers and patterns, deep in the body of the

bead, and thin shafts, of opaque colours, running from the centre to the

surface. The natives pretend that imitations are made in the country,

which they call boiled beads, alleging that they are broken aggry beads

ground into powder, and boiled together, and that they know them because

they are heavier; but this I find to be mere conjecture among

themselves, unsupported by any thing like observation or discovery. The

natives believe that by burying the aggry beads in sand they not only

grow but breed.[83]


To return to the superstitions of the Ashantees: when they drink, they

spill a little of the liquor on the ground as an offering to the fetish;

and on rising from their chairs or stools, their attendants instantly

lay them on their sides, to prevent the devil (whom they represent to be

white) from slipping into their master’s places.


But the most surprising superstition of the Ashantees, is their

confidence in the fetishes or saphies they purchase so extravagantly

from the Moors, believing firmly that they make them invulnerable and

invincible in war, paralyse the hand of the enemy, shiver their weapons,

divert the course of balls, render both sexes prolific, and avert all

evils but sickness, (which they can only assuage,) and natural death.

The King gave to the King of Dagwumba, for the fetish or war coat of

Apokoo, the value of thirty slaves; for Odumata’s, twenty; for Adoo

Quamina’s, thirteen; for Akimpon’s, twelve; for Akimponteä’s, nine; and

for those of greater captains in proportion. The generals being always

in the rear of the army are pretty sure to escape, a circumstance much

in favour of the Moors. The drawing of Adoo Quamina will convey the best

idea of this dress, which has been described before, in our entrée; it

is so weighty that old Odumata could scarcely move in his. Jannequin,

who visited Mandingo in 1637, describes exactly the same sort of dress

as worn by the chiefs of that country, and adds, “their bodies are so

encumbered with these defences, that they are often unable to mount on

horseback without assistance.” For a small fetish of about six lines,

sewn in a case of red cloth, which the King presented to our Accra

linguist, Baba charged and received six ackies. The man valued the gift

highly; he had expended two pieces of cloth and a quantity of rum in

fetish, at Accra, before he joined the Mission; but for which, he told

me, he was convinced the Ashantees would have managed to poison him:

yet, he was one of the most sensible natives I ever conversed with. A

sheet of paper would support an inferior Moor in Coomassie for a month.

Several of the Ashantee captains offered seriously to let us fire at

them; in short, their confidence in these fetishes is almost as

incredible, as the despondency and panic imposed on their southern and

western enemies by the recollection of them: they impel the Ashantees,

fearless and headlong, to the most daring enterprises, they dispirit

their adversaries, almost to the neglect of an interposition of fortune

in their favour. The Ashantees believe that the constant prayers of the

Moors, who have persuaded them that they converse with the Deity,

invigorate themselves, and gradually waste the spirit and strength of

their enemies. This faith is not less impulsive than that which achieved

the Arabian conquests.


Neither the Ashantees or their neighbours have any tradition of a

deluge, nor does Catcott, the only writer I recollect to have read on

its universality, report any Negro tradition, though he submits that of

the American tribes, with those of the other nations of the world. The

Moors told me, that the waters of the deluge retired to, and were

absorbed in the lake Caudi or Caughi, which they also called Bahar

Noohoo, or the sea of Noah.


Amongst other observations, I recollect the Moors to have said, that

Moses spoke like God, that Abraham was the friend of God, that Jesus was

a spirit of God, but that Mahomet was the best beloved of God. They

added, that there were four books written by the inspiration of God, at

different times. Moses wrote Tauratoo; David, Zaboura; Jesus, Lingheel;

and Mahomet, Al Koran. Lightning, they said, was occasioned by God

waving his hand to direct the courses of his angels. One Moor was a

great etymologist; he told me, that Mahomet rushing between two armies,

who were fighting, exclaimed to one party, “Toorek! Toorek!” (leave off!

leave off!) and that those people were thenceforward called Turks. I

questioned them concerning the origin of nations; they told me, that

Japhet was the most active in covering the nakedness of his father,

which Ham discovered, and thence the subjection of black men the

descendants of Ham, to Europeans the descendants of Japhet. Shem, from

whom they were themselves descended, they said, was neither so good or

so bad as his brothers, and therefore his children enjoyed a medium of

endowment and favour. They augured from the sacrifice of sheep, with

which the King supplied them abundantly, and, excepting those who had

made a pilgrimage to Mecca, (of which they told us wonderful tales) did

not hesitate mingling the superstitions of the natives with their own,

either for their profit or safety. They were tolerably expert in slight

of hand tricks.


[Footnote 77: At Nanampong (Nanan means a grand-father) near Mankasim,

in the Braffoo country, there is a deep dell, inhabited by a number of

aged fetish men, whom the Fantees believe to be immortal, and to have

lived there beyond all memory, in close converse with the fetish, and

ignorant of the world but by intuition. The spirits of the aged and wise

are believed to dwell amongst them, and their prophecies and advice are

revered as emanations from the fetish. Adookoo, the chief of the

Braffoos, used sometimes to consult them in person, but generally

through his head fetishman, and the Fantees now attribute the successes

of the Ashantees, and their own defeats and misfortunes, to the

disregard of what the oracle enjoined; for, whilst it was obeyed, they

say the country always prospered; and, indeed, from the instances which

have been reported to me, the responses appear to have directed a just

and prudent policy, highly conducive to the welfare of Fantee. This dell

is so impervious, and yet so capacious, that many hundred Fantees were

secreted there, during the Ashantee invasions, which these priests had

predicted. The house or temple of the principal fetish of the Ahanta

country, called Checquoo, is at Apremmadoo, about four miles up the

Takaradee river: upwards of fifty superior priests are resident there.]


[Footnote 78: “And here I cannot but remark, that those accounts, when

compared, shew how little manners and minds improve in Africa, and how

long, and how much society has been there at a stand:—Jobson saw, in

1620, exactly what Park saw in 1798.” Sir W. Young.]


[Footnote 79: A slave dashing or devoting himself to Checquoo, the great

fetish of Ahanta, is never redeemed; the impression of the superior

power of that fetish being so awful, that the proprietor of the slave,

would believe the death of all his family inevitable, were he to redeem

him from the sanctuary.]


[Footnote 80: The different states of the water side revere different

animals as fetish: the hyæna is esteemed so at Accra, the alligator at

Dix Cove and Annamaboe, and vultures universally; and with more apparent

reason, as they consume all the offal of the neighbourhood, and thus

contribute to its health and cleanliness. A black man killing a hyæna at

Accra, would incur a serious penalty. A European is obliged to pay a

case of neat rum and one piece of white baft, in which the head of the

animal is wrapped, and afterwards buried by the natives. Almost every

resident on the coast, can speak to the imitative powers of the hyæna,

which Pliny has been ridiculed for reporting. In a fresh water pond at

Dix Cove, there is an alligator, about twelve feet long, which always

appears on the bank, at the call of the fetish men, who then throw it a

white fowl. In a modern natural history, I read, “in this part of the

world (Africa) also, as well as at Siam, the crocodile makes an object

of savage pomp, near the palaces of their monarchs. Philips informs us,

that at Sabi, on the slave coast, there are two pools of water near the

royal palace, where crocodiles are bred as we breed carp in our ponds in

Europe.” I never heard of any royal palaces, or of Sabi (probably

Assaboo) on the Slave Coast; the alligator of Dix Cove may possibly be

alluded to.]


[Footnote 81: Tuesday is the common fetish day on the coast, when they

neither fish or work in their plantations.]


[Footnote 82:


  Ille et nefasto te posuit die. Hor. 12, 13.


Romani pariter quosdam atros et nefastos habuere, eo quod in iis clades

acceperant; · · ·]


[Footnote 83: The coloring matter of the blue beads has been proved, by

experiment, to be iron; that of the yellow, without doubt, is lead and

antimony, with a trifling quantity of copper, though not essential to

the production of the color. The generality of these beads appear to be

produced from clays colored in thin layers, afterwards twisted together

into a spiral form, and then cut across: also from different colored

clays raked together without blending. How the flowers and delicate

patterns, in the body and on the surface of the rarer beads, have been

produced, cannot be so well explained. Besides the suite deposited in

the British Museum, I had the pleasure of presenting one of the most

interesting kind to Baron Humboldt; and I have also sent one to Sir

Richard Hoare, as it seemed to correspond so closely with the bead which

he found in one of the barrows, and describes, as follows, in his

History of Wiltshire. The notion of the rare virtues of the Glain

Neidyr, as well as of the continued good fortune of the finder, accords

exactly with the African superstitions. “A large glass bead, of the same

imperfect petrefaction as the pully beads, and resembling also, in

matter, the little figures that are found with the mummies in Egypt, and

are to be seen in the British Museum. This very curious bead has two

circular lines of opaque sky blue and white, which seem to represent a

serpent entwined round a centre, which is perforated. This was certainly

one of the Glain Neidyr of the Britons, derived from glain, which is

pure and holy, and neidyr a snake. Under the word glain, Mr. Owen, in

his Welsh Dictionary, has given the following article: “The Glain

neidyr, transparent stones, or adder stones, were worn by the different

orders of the bards, each having its appropriate color. There is no

certainty that they were worn from superstition originally; perhaps that

was the circumstance which gave rise to it. Whatever might have been the

cause, the _notion of their rare virtues was universal_ in all places

where the Bardic religion was taught. It may still be questioned whether

they are the production of nature or art.” The beads which are the

present object of my attention, are thus noticed by Bishop Gibson in his

improved edition of Camden’s Britannia. “In most parts of Wales, and

throughout all Scotland, and in Cornwall, we find it a common opinion of

the vulgar, that about Midsummer eve (although in the time they do not

all agree,) it is usual for snakes to meet in companies; and that by

joining heads together, and hissing, a kind of bubble is formed like a

ring, about the head of one of them, which the rest, by continual

hissing blow on till it comes off at the tail; and then it immediately

hardens, and resembles a glass ring, _which whoever finds (as some old

women and children are persuaded) shall prosper in all their

undertakings_. The rings which they suppose to be thus generated are

called Gleinu Nadroedh, i.e. Gemmæ Anguinum, whereof I have seen at

several places about twenty or thirty. They are small glass annulets,

commonly about half as wide as our finger rings, but much thicker; of a

green color, usually, though some of them are blue, and others curiously

waved with blue, red, and white. I have also seen two or three earthen

rings of this kind, but glazed with blue, and adorned with transverse

streaks in furrows on the outside. There seems to be some connection

between the Glein Neidyr of the Britons, and the Ovum Anguinum mentioned

by Pliny,[a] as being held in veneration by the Druids of Gaul, and to

the formation of which he gives nearly the same origin. They were

probably worn as an insigne, or mark of distinction, and suspended

around the neck, as the perforation is not sufficiently large to admit

the finger.”


The bead engraved in Tumulus No. 9, resembles closely a coarse sort of

bead, still manufactured in Syria, brought over by Dr. Meryon. The glass

globes dug up in Lincolnshire, and presented by Sir Joseph Banks to the

British Museum, are very like a distinct sort of aggry bead, dug by the

natives even more rarely than the others, but not larger than a moderate

sized apple: they are more opaque than the other beads, and the ground

or body is generally black, speckled confusedly with red, white, and

yellow.


_Aggry_ is the generic, not the abstract name; ‘_awynnee_’ is _bead_,

but aggry is an exotic word no native can explain. When first I heard of

similar beads having been lately dug in India, I associated for an

instant the expectation that it might have been in the neighbourhood of

Agra, and thus have thrown some light on the name; but it appears they

were found in Malabar. I am indebted for the following account of this

interesting discovery to a gentleman lately returned from India. “The

bead you sent me is more like those I saw in India, than any I have seen

before; but it is thicker and shorter; neither does the material of

which it is formed exactly agree with those in India, which appear to be

of a red glass, very like red carnelian (such, however, are frequent

among the Aggry beads) with white lines of enamel, inlaid, as it were,

in the body of the bead. I gave these to a friend in India, who promised

to send them to the Asiatic Society in Calcutta. The circles of stone in

which these beads have been found, abound most in Malabar, in the

neighbourhood of Calicut; but I have seen them in other parts of India,

and I am of opinion that they might be traced throughout the whole of

the southern peninsula. They are formed of large masses of rough stones,

placed round in irregular circles, some of very large extent, some of

smaller: they appear so much like natural rocks, that most persons would

pass them unobserved. Several of these circles about three years since

were excavated, in the vicinity of Calicut, and in the centre of each of

them we found, at the depth of about five feet, a large earthen jar of

the same shape as those found in Wiltshire, as near as we could judge,

for it was broken to pieces: it was about four or five feet deep, its

mouth in general closed with a square piece of granite: the beads were

found at the bottom of these jars with some pieces of iron, apparently

parts of swords and spears. There was an iron javelin found in one of

these places, tolerably perfect: it was about five feet long, with a

large iron knob at one end of it. In the centre of one of the circles we

came to a flight of seven steps, which led to a cave excavated in the

rock; it measured 11 feet in diameter, and 7 feet in its highest part;

the entrance to it was a square opening of about 18 inches, which was

closed up by an immense block of granite. We found in this place a great

number of earthen pots of very curious shape; in one of these there were

the remains of bones, which appeared to have been but imperfectly

calcined; in several of the larger jars there were the husks of rice,

which dropped into dust immediately they were opened. We found here also

an iron tripod, and a very curious stone, somewhat similar to what the

Indians now use for grinding their curry powder on. The large stones

forming the circles were set upright and capped with still larger ones.

They are not of granite, but of the stone of the country in which they

are situated; they are of different sizes; I have seen some of them 10

or 12 feet high, and the large stone on the top from 10 to 12 feet in

diameter, or perhaps more. Coimbatore is a district situated between the

Coromandel and Malabar coasts; it is bounded on the east by the river

Cavery, on the banks of which the tumuli are in general situated. In

some, a few silver coins have been found, of a square figure, with

characters on them, which none of the most learned Bramins have been as

yet able to make out; it is in these also that remains of very large

swords, &c. have been found. The Roman coins to the number of upwards of

90 were all of gold, and Nero’s; each of them had a cut or slit in it.

They were not found in one of these barrows, but were discovered in a

garden by one of the natives when digging: they were in a small copper

pot. Pandu Kuri literally means Pandu’s caves or holes. Pandu is a very

celebrated personage in the Hindoo Mythology, and a great warrior; it is

common in India to ascribe to him all great works of antiquity; this

term therefore only shews that those places are very ancient, and that

the present inhabitants are quite ignorant of their origin.”]


[Footnote a: Præterea est ovorum genus in magna Galliarum fama, omissum

Græcis. Angues innumeri æstate convoluti, salivis faucium, corporumque

spumis artifici complexu glomerantur, anguinum appellantur. Druidæ

sibilis id dicunt in sublime jactari, sagoque oportere intercipi ne

tellurem attingat. Profugere raptorem equo. Serpentes enim insequi donec

arceant amnis alicujus interventu. Experimentum ejus esse si contra

aquas fluitet vel auro cinctum Insigne Druidis. Ad victorias litium ac

regum aditus maxime laudat. Plinii Hist. Natural. L. 29. c. 3.]


                               CHAPTER V.


                               * * * * *


                               _Customs._


The Yam Custom is annual, just at the maturity of that vegetable, which

is planted in December, and not eaten until the conclusion of the

custom, the early part of September. All the caboceers and captains, and

the majority of the tributaries, are enjoined to attend, none being

excused, but such as the Kings of Inta, and Dagwumba, (who send

deputations of their principal caboceers,) and those who have been

dispatched elsewhere on public business. If a chief or caboceer has

offended, or if his fidelity be suspected, he is seldom accused or

punished until the Yam Custom, which they attend frequently unconscious,

and always uncertain of what may be laid to their charge. The Yam Custom

is like the Saturnalia; neither theft, intrigue, or assault are

punishable during the continuance, but the grossest liberty prevails,

and each sex abandons itself to its passions.


On Friday the 5th of September, the number, splendor, and variety of

arrivals, thronging from the different paths, was as astonishing as

entertaining; but there was an alloy in the gratification, for the

principal caboceers sacrificed a slave at each quarter of the town, on

their entré.


In the afternoon of Saturday, the King received all the caboceers and

captains in the large area, where the Dankara canons are placed. The

scene was marked with all the splendor of our own entré, and many

additional novelties. The crush in the distance was awful and

distressing. All the heads of the kings and caboceers whose kingdoms had

been conquered, from Saï Tootoo to the present reign, with those of the

chiefs who had been executed for subsequent revolts, were displayed by

two parties of executioners, each upwards of a hundred, who passed in an

impassioned dance, some with the most irresistible grimace, some with

the most frightful gesture: they clashed their knives on the skulls, in

which sprigs of thyme were inserted, to keep the spirits from troubling

the King. I never felt so grateful for being born in a civilized

country. Firing and drinking palm wine were the only divertissemens to

the ceremony of the caboceers presenting themselves to the King; they

were announced, and passed all round the circle saluting every umbrella:

their bands preceded; we reckoned above forty drums in that of the King

of Dwabin. The effect of the splendor, the tumult, and the musquetry,

was afterwards heightened by torch light. We left the ground at 10

o’clock; the umbrellas were crowded even in the distant streets, the

town was covered like a large fair, the broken sounds of distant horns

and drums filled up the momentary pauses of the firing which encircled

us: the uproar continued until four in the morning, just before which

the King retired. I have attempted a drawing, (No. 2.) it is by no means

adequate, yet more so than description could be.


[Illustration: _Drawn by T. E. Bowdich Esqr._


_Engraved by R. Havell & Son._


THE FIRST DAY OF THE YAM CUSTOM.


_Published Decr. 2, 1818, by John Murray, Albemarle Street._]


On the left side of the drawing is a group of captains dancing and

firing, as described in our entré. Immediately above the encircling

soldiery, is a young caboceer under his umbrella, borne on the shoulders

of his chief slave; he salutes as he passes along, and is preceded and

surrounded by boys (with elephants tails, feathers, &c.) and his

captains, who, lifting their swords in the air, halloo out the deeds of

his fore-fathers; his stool is borne close to him, ornamented with a

large brass bell. Above is the fanciful standard of a chief, who is

preceded and followed by numerous attendants; he is supported round the

waist by a confidential slave, and one wrist is so heavily laden with

gold, that it is supported on the head of a small boy; with the other

hand he is saluting a seated caboceer, sawing the air by a motion from

the wrist. His umbrella is sprung up and down to increase the breeze,

and large grass fans are also playing; his handsomest slave girl

follows, bearing on her head a small red leather trunk, full of gold

ornaments, and rich cloths; behind are soldiers and drummers, who throw

their white-washed drums in the air, and catch them again, with much

agility and grimace, as they walk along. Boys are in the front, bearing

elephants tails, fly flappers, &c. and his captains with uplifted

swords, are hastening forward the musicians and soldiers. Amongst the

latter is the stool, so stained with blood that it is thought decent to

cover it with red silk. Behind the musicians is Odumata, coming round to

join the procession in his state hammock lined with red taffeta, and

smoking under his umbrella, at the top of which is a stuffed leopard. In

the area below is an unfortunate victim, tortured in the manner

described in the entré, and two of the King’s messengers clearing the

way for him. The King’s four linguists are seen next; two, Otee and

Quancum, are seated in conversation under an umbrella; the chief,

Adoosey, is swearing a royal messenger, (to fetch an absent caboceer,)

by putting a gold handled sword between his teeth, whilst Agay delivers

the charge, and exhorts him to be resolute. The criers, all deformed and

with monkey skin caps, are seated in the front. Under the next umbrella

is the royal stool, thickly cased in gold. Gold pipes, fans of ostrich

wing feathers, captains seated with gold swords, wolves heads and snakes

as large as life of the same metal, depending from the handles, girls

bearing silver bowls, body guards, &c. &c. are mingled together till we

come to the King, seated in a chair of ebony and gold, and dressed much

in the same way as described at the first interview. He is holding up

his two fingers to receive the oath of the captain to the right, who,

pointing to a distant country, vows to conquer it. On the right and left

of the state umbrella are the flags of Great Britain, Holland, and

Denmark. A group of painted figures are dancing up to the King, in the

most extravagant attitudes, beating time with their long knives on the

skulls stuck full of thyme. On the right of the King is the eunuch, who

superintends the group of small boys, the children of the nobility,

waving elephants tails, (spangled with gold,) feathers, &c.: behind him

is the above mentioned captain and other chiefs dressed as in the left

end of the drawing. Musicians, seated and standing, are playing on

instruments cased or plated with gold. The officers of the Mission are

next seen, their linguists in front, their soldiers, servants, and flag

behind, at the back of whom is placed the King’s state hammock, under

its own umbrella. Adjoining the officers is old Quatchie Quofie and his

followers; at the top of his umbrella is stuck a small black wooden

image, with a bunch of rusty hair on the head, intending to represent

the famous Akim caboceer who was killed by him; vain of the action, he

is seen according to his usual custom, dancing before and deriding his

fallen enemy, whilst his captains bawl out the deed, and halloo their

acclamations. The manner of drinking palm wine is exhibited in the next

group, a boy kneels beneath with a second bowl to catch the droppings,

(it being a great luxury to suffer the liquor to run over the beard,)

whilst the horns flourish, and the captains halloo the strong names. The

Moors are easily distinguished by their caps, and preposterous turbans.

One is blessing a Dagwumba caboceer, who is passing on horseback, (the

animal covered with fetishes and bells,) escorted by his men in tunics,

bearing lances, and his musicians with rude violins, distinct from the

sanko. The back of the whole assembly is lined with royal soldiers, and

the commoner ones are ranged in front, with here and there a captain and

a group of musicians, who, some with an old cocked hat, some with a

soldier’s jacket, &c. &c. afford a ludicrous appearance. This

description will be rendered more illustrative of the drawing, by

referring to that of our entré.


The next morning the King ordered a large quantity of rum to be poured

into brass pans, in various parts of the town; the crowd pressing

around, and drinking like hogs; freemen and slaves, women and children,

striking, kicking, and trampling each other under foot, pushed head

foremost into the pans, and spilling much more than they drank. In less

than an hour, excepting the principal men, not a sober person was to be

seen, parties of four reeling and rolling under the weight of another,

whom they affected to be carrying home; strings of women covered with

red paint, hand in hand, falling down like rows of cards; the commonest

mechanics and slaves furiously declaiming on state palavers; the most

discordant music, the most obscene songs, children of both sexes

prostrate in insensibility. All wore their handsomest cloths, which they

trailed after them to a great length, in a drunken emulation of

extravagance and dirtiness.[84]


Towards evening the populace grew sober again, the strange caboceers

displayed their equipages in every direction, and at five o’clock there

was a procession from the palace to the south end of the town and back;

the King and the dignitaries were carried in their hammocks, and passed

through a continued blaze of musketry: the crush was dreadful. The next

day (Monday) was occupied in state palavers, and on Tuesday the diet

broke up, and most of the caboceers took leave.


About a hundred persons, mostly culprits reserved, are generally

sacrificed, in different quarters of the town, at this custom. Several

slaves were also sacrificed at Bantama, over the large brass pan, their

blood mingling with the various vegetable and animal matter within,

(fresh and putrefied,) to complete the charm, and produce invincible

fetish. All the chiefs kill several slaves, that their blood may flow

into the hole from whence the new yam is taken. Those who cannot afford

to kill slaves, take the head of one already sacrificed and place it on

the hole.[85]


The royal gold ornaments are melted down every Yam Custom, and fashioned

into new patterns, as novel as possible. This is a piece of state policy

very imposing on the populace, and the tributary chiefs who pay but an

annual visit.


About ten days after the custom, the whole of the royal houshold eat new

yam for the first time, in the market place, the King attending. The

next day he and the captains set off for Sarrasoo before sun rise, to

perform their annual ablutions in the river Dah. Almost all the

inhabitants follow him, and the capital appears deserted; the succeeding

day the King washes in the marsh at the south-east end of the town, the

captains lining the streets leading to it on both sides. He is attended

by his suite, but he laves the water with his own hands over himself,

his chairs, stools, gold and silver plate, and the various articles of

furniture used especially by him. Several brass pans are covered with

white cloth, with various fetish under them. About twenty sheep are

dipped, (one sheep and one goat only are sacrificed at the time,) to be

killed in the palace in the afternoon, that their blood may be poured on

the stools and door posts. All the doors, windows, and arcades of the

palace, are plentifully besmeared with a mixture of eggs, and palm oil;

as also the stools of the different tribes and families. After the

ceremony of washing is over, the principal captains precede the King to

the palace, where, contrary to usual custom, none but those of the first

rank are allowed to enter, to see the procession pass. The King’s fetish

men walk first, with attendants holding basins of sacred water, which

they sprinkle plentifully over the chiefs with branches,[86] the more

superstitious running to have a little poured on their heads, and even

on their tongues. The King and his attendants all wear white cloths on

this occasion. Three white lambs are led before him, intended for

sacrifice at his bed chamber. All his wives follow, with a guard of

archers.


Another national custom is the Adaï, by the number of which the

Ashantees appear to reckon their year, which began, I could not

understand why, on the first of October. The common people pretend, or

believe, that the time for repeating the Adaï, is marked by the falling

of a fruit like a gourd, from a tree called Brebretim, and which

generally takes place in about twenty days from its first appearance,

all the birds and beasts in the neighbourhood crying out simultaneously.

They further pretend, that from the fruit of this tree spring various

kinds of vegetables. This account of the tree, known in Warsaw as well,

is peculiar to Ashantee. The customs are alternately called the great

and little Adaï, the former taking place always on a Sunday, the latter

on a Wednesday; and it appeared to me, from calculation, that there were

six weeks between each great Adaï, and six between each little one, so

that the custom was generally held every twenty-one days.


The large drum which stands at the entrance of the palace, adorned with

skulls and thigh bones, is struck with great force at sun set the

preceding day, as a signal; the whole of the establishment of the palace

shout, and their shout is echoed by the people throughout the town.

Music and firing generally beguile the night. The next morning the King

goes to the fetish house, (Himma,) opposite the palace, and offers

several sheep; the blood of this sacrifice is poured on the gold stool,

to which extraordinary virtues are ascribed, being considered the

palladium of the kingdom: the deposition of Saï Quamina was protracted

from his having it in his possession at Dwabin. The caboceers and

captains, many coming from towns two or three days distant, begin to

march to the large yard of the palace about sun rise, to secure their

places. We generally attended between nine and ten, when the King had

just seated himself. The first ceremony was penetrating to the King,

through the various state officers and attendants, to wish him good

morning, at which he slightly inclined his head. The chiefs as they

advanced to do so, were supported and followed by a few favourite

attendants, who flourished their swords in the air, the gold handles

upwards, and the band of each began to play as he left his seat. Young

caboceers of five and six years of age, stalked by with interesting

vanity. After this the King left his chair, which was turned upside

down, and retired a few minutes into the palace. All the horns

flourished as he made his exit and entrée; swords, feathers, elephants

tails, were waved rapidly, and the drums beaten with deafening effect.

After he was seated, the linguists, preceded by their gold canes and

insignia, presented a sheep, a flask of rum, (drank on the ground,) and

ten ackies of gold to each superior captain, and somewhat less to the

others. Another flourish proclaimed the dispensation of the King’s

bounty. Five or six men then rose; and chaunted his deeds and titles for

about ten minutes. I regret exceedingly that this chaunt was not noted,

it was so harmonious. I observed them put something between their teeth

before they began. The same tedious form of saluting the King was now

repeated to return thanks. Any new law was afterwards promulgated, which

occurred but twice during our stay, and the levee broke up on the King’s

leaving his chair. Not unfrequently the whole took place during heavy

rain. It was computed that the King dashed or presented forty pereguins

of gold (£400.) every Adaï custom.[87]


The decease of a person is announced by a discharge of musketry,

proportionate to his rank, or the wealth of his family. In an instant

you see a crowd of slaves burst from the house, and run towards the

bush, flattering themselves that the hindmost, or those surprised in the

house, will furnish the human victims for sacrifice, if they can but

secrete themselves until the custom is over. The body is then handsomely

drest in silk and gold, and laid out on the bed, the richest cloths

beside it.[88] One or two slaves are then sacrificed at the door of the

house. I shall describe the custom for Quatchie Quofie’s mother, which

we witnessed August the 2d.; it was by no means a great one, but it will

give the most correct idea of these splendid, but barbarous ceremonies.

The King, Quatchie Quofie, and Odumata each sacrificed a young girl

directly the deceased had breathed her last, that she might not want for

attendants until the greater sacrifice was made. The retainers,

adherents, and friends of the family then sent contributions of gold,

powder, rum, and cloth, to be expended at the custom; the King, as heir,

exceeding every quota but that of the nearest relative, who succeeded to

the stool and slaves. The King also sent a sum of gold, and some rich

cloths to be buried with the deceased, in the basket or coffin. I could

not learn the various sums of gold dust with sufficient accuracy to note

them, but the following were the quantities of powder presented on the

occasion:


  Quatchie Quofie                20 oz. (of gold) kegs.


  King                            4


  King’s brother                  2


  Amanquateä                      2


  Odumata                         2


  Apokoo                          1


  Otee                            1


  Yapensoo                        1


  Amanqua Abiniowa (the nephew)   2


  (Name illegible)                1


  Adoosey                         1


  Jessinting                      1


  Saphoo                          1


  Ooshoo                          1


  Inferior retainers              4

                                 --

                                 44 nearly 12 barrels.


The inferior retainers of Quatchie Quofie gave four ackies of gold, and

eight fathoms of cloth each. I was told these contributions were

unusually small, from the command of the King that the greatest economy

should be observed in every expenditure of powder, on account of the

approaching war.


We walked to Assafoo about twelve o’clock; the vultures were hovering

around two headless trunks, scarcely cold. Several troops of women, from

fifty to a hundred in each, were dancing by in movements resembling

skaiting, lauding and bewailing the deceased in the most dismal, yet not

discordant strains; audible, from the vast number, at a considerable

distance. Other troops carried the rich cloths and silks of the deceased

on their heads, in shining brass pans, twisted and stuffed into crosses,

cones, globes, and a fanciful variety of shapes only to be imagined, and

imposing at a small distance the appearance of rude deities. The faces,

arms, and breasts of these women were profusely daubed with red earth,

in horrid emulation of those who had succeeded in besmearing themselves

with the blood of the victims. The crowd was overbearing; horns, drums,

and muskets, yells, groans, and screeches invaded our hearing with as

many horrors as were crowded on our sight. Now and then a victim was

hurried by, generally dragged or run along at full speed; the uncouth

dress, and the exulting countenances of those who surrounded him,

likening them to as many fiends. I observed apathy, more frequently than

despair or emotion, in the looks of the victims. The chiefs and captains

were arriving in all directions, announced by the firing of muskets, and

the peculiar flourishes of their horns, many of which were by this time

familiar to us; they were then habited plainly as warriors, and were

soon lost to our sight in the crowd. As old Odumata passed in his

hammock, he bade us observe him well when he passed again: this prepared

us in a small degree. Presently the King’s arrival in the market place

was announced, the crowd rolled towards it impetuously, but the soldiery

hacked on all sides indiscriminately, and formed a passage for the

procession. Quatchie Quofie hurried by, plunging from side to side like

a Bacchanal, drunk with the adulation of his bellowing supporters; his

attitudes were responsive to the horror and barbarism of the exultations

which inspired them. The victims, with large knives driven through their

cheeks, eyed him with indifference; he them with a savage joy, bordering

on phrenzy: insults were aggravated on the one, flattery lavished on the

other. Our disgust was beguiled for an instant by surprise. The chiefs

who had just before passed us in their swarthy cloths, and the dark

gloomy habits of war, now followed Quatchie Quofie, glistening in all

the splendor of their fetish dresses; (see drawing, No. I.) the

sprightly variety of their movements ill accorded with the ceremony. Old

Odumata’s vest was covered with fetish, cased invariably in gold or

silver. A variety of extraordinary ornament and novel insignia, courted

and reflected the sun in every direction. It was like a splendid

pantomime after a Gothic tragedy.


We followed to the market place. The King, and the chiefs not

immediately connected with Quatchie Quofie, were seated under their

canopies, with the usual insignia and retinue, and lined about the half

of a circle, apparently half a mile in circumference; the soldiery

completed it, their respective chiefs situated amongst them. Thirteen

victims, surrounded by their executioners, whose black shaggy caps and

vests gave them the appearance of bears rather than men, were pressed

together by the crowd to the left of the King. The troops of women,

before described, paraded without the circle, vociferating the dirge.

Rum and palm wine were flowing copiously, horns and drums were exerted

even to frenzy. In an instant there was a burst of musketry near the

King, and it spread and continued incessantly, around the circle, for

upwards of an hour. The soldiers kept their stations, but the chiefs,

after firing, bounded once round the area with the gesture and

extravagance of madmen; their panting followers enveloping them in

flags, occasionally firing in all the attitudes of a scaramouch, and

incessantly bellowing the strong names of their exulting chief, whose

musket they snatched from his hands directly he had fired. An old hag,

described as the head fetish woman of the family, screamed and plunged

about in the midst of the fire as if in the greatest agonies. The

greater the chief the heavier the charge of powder he is allowed to

fire; the heaviest charge recollected, was that fired by the King on the

death of his sister, 18 ackies, or an ounce avoirdupoise. Their

blunderbusses and long guns were almost all braced closely with the

cordage of the country; they were generally supported by their

attendants whilst they fired, several did not appear to recover it for

nearly a minute; Odumata’s old frame seemed shaken almost to

dissolution. Many made a point of collecting near us, just within the

circle, and firing as close as possible to startle us; the frequent

bursting of their muskets made this rather alarming as well as

disagreeable. The firing abated, they drank freely from the bowls of

palm wine, religiously pouring a small quantity on the ground before

they raised them to their lips.[89]


The principal females of the family, many of them very handsome, and of

elegant figures, came forward to dance; dressed, generally, in yellow

silk, with a silver knife hung by a chain round their necks; one with a

gold, another with a silver horn; a few were dressed as fetish women; an

umbrella was held over the grand daughter as she danced. The Ashantees

dance incomparably better than the people of the water side, indeed

elegantly; the sexes do not dance separately, as in Fantee, but the man

encircles the woman with a piece of silk which he generally flirts in

his right hand, supports her round the waist, receives her elbows in the

palms of his hands, and a variety of figures approximating, with the

time and movement, very closely to the waltz.


A dash of sheep and rum was exchanged between the King and Quatchie

Quofie, and the drums announced the sacrifice of the victims. All the

chiefs first visited them in turn; I was not near enough to distinguish

wherefore. The executioners wrangled and struggled for the office, and

the indifference with which the first poor creature looked on, in the

torture he was from the knife passed through his cheeks, was remarkable:

the nearest executioner snatched the sword from the others, the right

hand of the victim was then lopped off, he was thrown down, and his head

was sawed rather than cut off; it was cruelly prolonged, I will not say

wilfully. Twelve more were dragged forward, but we forced our way

through the crowd, and retired to our quarters. Other sacrifices,

principally female, were made in the bush where the body was buried. It

is usual to “wet the grave” with the blood of a freeman of

respectability. All the retainers of the family being present, and the

heads of all the victims deposited in the bottom of the grave, several

are unsuspectingly called on in a hurry to assist in placing the coffin

or basket, and just as it rests on the heads or skulls, a slave from

behind stuns one of these freemen by a violent blow, followed by a deep

gash in the back part of the neck, and he is rolled in on the top of the

body, and the grave instantly filled up. A sort of carnival, varied by

firing, drinking, singing, and dancing, was kept up in Assafoo for

several days; the chiefs generally visiting it every evening, or sending

their linguists with a dash of palm wine or rum to Quatchie Quofie; and

I was given to understand, that, but for the approaching war and the

necessary economy of powder, there would have been eight great customs

instead of one, for this woman, one weekly, the King himself firing at

the last. The last day, all the females in any way connected with the

family (who are not allowed to eat for three days after the death,

though they may drink as much palm wine as they please,) paraded round

the town, singing a compliment and thanks to all those who had assisted

in making the custom.


On the death of a King, all the Customs which have been made for the

subjects who have died during his reign, must be simultaneously repeated

by the families, (the human sacrifices as well as the carousals and

pageantry) to amplify that for the monarch, which is also solemnised,

independently, but at the same time, in every excess of extravagance and

barbarity. The brothers, sons, and nephews of the King, affecting

temporary insanity, burst forth with their muskets, and fire

promiscously amongst the crowd; even a man of rank, if they meet him, is

their victim, nor is their murder of him or any other, on such an

occasion, visited or prevented; the scene can scarcely be imagined. Few

persons of rank dare to stir from their houses for the first two or

three days, but religiously drive forth all their vassals and slaves, as

the most acceptable composition of their own absence. The King’s Ocras,

who will be mentioned presently, are all murdered on his tomb, to the

number of a hundred or more, and women in abundance. I was assured by

several, that the custom for Saï Quamina, was repeated weekly for three

months, and that two hundred slaves were sacrificed, and 25 barrels of

powder fired, each time. But the custom for the King’s mother, the

regent of the kingdom during the invasion of Fantee, is most celebrated.

The King of himself devoted 3000 victims, (upwards of 2000 of whom were

Fantee prisoners) and 25 barrels of powder.[90] Dwabin, Kokoofoo,

Becqua, Soota, and Marmpong, furnished 100 victims, and 20 barrels of

powder, each, and most of the smaller towns 10 victims, and two barrels

of powder, each. The Kings, and Kings only, are buried in the cemetery

at Bantama, and the sacred gold buried with them; (see Laws;) their

bones are afterwards deposited in a building there, opposite to which is

the largest brass pan I ever saw, (for sacrifices,) being about five

feet in diameter, with four small lions on the edge. Here human

sacrifices are frequent and ordinary, to water the graves of the Kings.

The bodies of chiefs are frequently carried about with the army, to keep

them for interment at home, and eminent revolters or enemies also, to be

exposed in the capital. Boiteäm, (the father of Otee the fourth

linguist,) who accompanied the army of Abiniowa in his political

capacity, dying at Akrofroom in Aquapim, during the campaign, his body

was kept with the army two months before it arrived at Coomassie. I

could not get any information on their treatment of the corpse, beyond

their invariable reply that they smoked it well over a slow fire.


The laws of Ashantee allow the King 3333 wives, which number is

carefully kept up, to enable him to present women to those who

distinguish themselves, but never exceeded, being in their eyes a

mystical one. Many of these reside in a secluded part of the King’s

croom, or country residence, at Barramang; a greater number in a croom,

at the back of the palace, immediately in the marsh; and the remainder

in two streets of the capital. Many, probably, the King has never seen.

The streets as well as the croom, are inhabited by them exclusively, and

never approached but by the King’s messengers, or their female

relatives, who only communicate with them at the entrances, which are

closed at each end with bamboo doors, where there is always a guard. If

the King _consaws_ or marries an infant at the breast, which is not

unfrequent, she is thenceforth confined to the house, and rigorously

secluded from the sight of any but the female part of her family. The

King has seldom more than six wives resident with him in the palace. On

the occasion of signing the treaty, as explained in the public letter,

about 300 were assembled, and none but the King’s Chamberlain, and the

deputies of the parts of the government, were allowed to be present:

they were addressed through their own linguist, a very decrepid old man;

many of them were very handsome, and their figures exquisite. When they

go out, which is seldom, they are encircled and preceded by troops of

small boys with thongs or whips of elephants hide, who lash every one

severely who does not quit their path for another, or jump into the bush

with his hands before his eyes; and sometimes the offenders are heavily

fined besides. The scrambling their approach occasioned, in the more

public parts of the city, was very diverting; captains, caboceers,

slaves, and children tumbling one over another. I was told what it cost

the King daily to support them, but it has escaped me; they are said to

live as daintily as himself. None but the chief eunuch, an immense

creature, is allowed to bear a message to the King when in the seraglio

of the palace.


It has been mentioned before, that the King’s sisters are not only

countenanced in intrigue, with any handsome subject, but they are

allowed to choose any eminently so, (however inferior otherwise,) as a

husband; who is presently advised by the King of his good fortune; thus

they consider they provide for a personal superiority in their monarchs.

But if the royal bride dies before the husband, unless his rank be

originally elevated, he is expected to kill himself on the occasion, and

also if the only male child dies: if he hesitates, he is peremptorily

reminded that as either are his superiors, to whom he is to be

considered as a slave, so he must attend them wherever they go; and when

a male child is born, the father does it homage and acknowledges his

vassalage in the most abject manner.


The Ocra’s are distinguished by a large circle of gold suspended from

the neck; many of them are favourite slaves, many, commoners who have

distinguished themselves, and who are glad to stake their lives on the

King’s, to be kept free from palavers and supported by his bounty, which

they are entirely; some few are relatives and men of rank. All of the

two former classes, excepting only the two or three individuals known to

have been entrusted with the King’s state secrets, are sacrificed on his

tomb. The royal messengers, and others of the suite have been described

in the processions; they are sometimes fed in the palace, but they have

a free seat at the table of every subject.


The King has a troop of small boys, who carry the fetish bows and

arrows, and are licensed plunderers; they are so sly and nimble, that it

is very diverting to watch them in the market place, which they infest

every morning. Whatever they can carry off is fair game, and cannot be

required or recovered; but the loser, if he can catch them before they

arrive at the palace, may beat them as severely as he pleases, short of

mortal injury; however, they bear it as obdurately as young Spartans.

Sometimes one party trips up a person with a load of provisions, whilst

another scrambles them up: the anxious alarm of the market people,

sitting with sticks in their hands, and the comic archness of these boys

threading the crowd in all directions, is indescribable. Some of the

earliest European travellers in Abyssinia met with a similar troop of

royal plunderers, and I believe suffered from them; our property was

always respected by them, but they used to entertain themselves with

mimicking our common expressions and our actions, which they did

inimitably: whilst sketching, they buzzed about me like musquitoes. The

Ashantees are without exception the most surprising mimics I have ever

heard. I have known a captain, called Adoo Quamina, repeat a sentence

after I had finished it, of at least a dozen words, which he knew

nothing about, and had not heard before. The King has a sort of buffoon,

whose movements were as irresistibly comic as those of Grimaldi.


The King appeared to have nearly a hundred negroes of different colors,

through the shades of red and pink to white; they were collected for

state, but were generally disgusting objects, diseased and emaciated;

they always seemed as if going to shed their skins, and their eyes

blinked in the light, as if it was not their element.


About twenty pots of white soup, and twenty pots of black (made with

palm nuts) are cooked daily at the palace, (besides those for the

consumption of the household,) for visitors of consequence, and a

periguin of gold is given daily to Yokokroko, the chamberlain, for palm

wine. This would have appeared too large a sum, had I not witnessed the

vast consumption and waste of it; for the vigour of an Ashantee being

estimated by the measure of the draught he can drink off; nearly half is

generally spilt over his beard, which it is his greatest pride and

luxury to draw through his fingers when wet. The King was very proud of

the superior length of his beard. A large quantity of palm wine is

dashed to the retinues of all the captains attending in the course of

the day; much is expended in the almost daily ceremony of drinking it in

state in the market place; and our party was always well provided for in

the course of the evening. The palm wine at the palace was seldom good,

but a zest was excited by the exquisite polish of the plate in which it

was served. Apokoo, Odumata, and others, sent us some daily that was

excellent.


It is to be observed that the King’s weights are one third heavier than

the current weights of the country; and all the gold expended in

provision being weighed out in the former, and laid out in the latter,

the difference enriches the chamberlain, cook, and chief domestic

officers of the palace, as it is thought derogatory to a King avowedly

to pay his subjects for their services. In the same manner the linguists

derive the greater part of their incomes, (their influence being

occasionally purchased,) for all the dashes or presents of gold the King

makes in the year, are weighed out by the royal weights, and re-weighed

by them in the current ones. The law allows a debtor to recover of a

reluctant or tardy creditor, in the King’s weights, besides the

interest, (noticed in the laws,) if he is esteemed enough by Apokoo the

treasurer, to be trusted with them; or rather, if he can afford to bribe

him, or engages to share the profit with him.


After a subject is executed for crime, the body and head are carried out

of town by some of the King’s slaves, appointed for that purpose, and

thrown where the wild beasts may devour them; but if the deceased be of

any consequence, some of his friends conceal themselves near where they

know the body will be carried, and purchase it, and the right of burial,

of these domestics, generally for eight ackies. There are a number of

fine large sheep, decorated with bells and other ornaments, about the

palace. If any person gets into an ordinary palaver, and wishes the

King’s interference in his favor, he goes to the captain who has the

charge of these sheep, pays him 20 ackies for one, and sends or takes it

to the King, as a dash, who commits it again to the care of the captain.


When the King sends an ambassador, he enriches the splendor of his suite

and attire as much as possible; sometimes provides it entirely; but it

is all surrendered on the return, (except the additional wives) and

forms a sort of public state wardrobe. The King’s system of espionage is

much spoken of (for its address and infallibility) by Apokoo and others,

who abet it. A shrewd but mean boy is attached to, or follows the

embassy, (sometimes with a trader,) in the commonest capacity and

meanest attire; and he is instructed to collect every report as he

passes, and to watch the motions of the embassy as closely as possible.

As the extortions of these deputies are always loudly and publicly

complained of by the injured inhabitants of the dependent or tributary

crooms they pass through, (perhaps being aware they will reach the

King’s ears,) the particulars are easily acquired. The messengers who

were sent with our first dispatches to Cape Coast, excusing the length

of the time, (forty days) by alleging that it was found necessary to

collect a session of the Fantee caboceers at Paintree; the King replied,

“You tell me a lie; you fined a captain there four ounces for breaking

an Ashantee law, and you waited to procure and expend the gold, not

intending it should be known.” The men instantly confessed, and were put

in irons; one was the brother of Yokokroko, who paid six ounces for his

release, after several days.


When the King spits, the boys with the elephants tails sedulously wipe

it up, or cover it with sand; when he sneezes, every person present

touches, or lays the two first fingers across the forehead and breast,

as the Moors did when they pronounced a blessing, and the Ashantees,

invariably, to propitiate one. These troops of boys who carry the

elephants tails, are the sons of men of rank and confidence; for

whenever the King dignifies a deserving subject, with what may be termed

nobility, he exchanges some of his own sons or nephews, (from eight to

fourteen years of age,) for those of the individual, who maintains them,

and for whom they perform the same offices, as his own and others do for

the King. Thus the present King (the short reign of his brother Saï

Apokoo being unanticipated) carried an elephants tail before Apokoo,

whose kindness and indulgence to the child secured the preference of the

monarch.


It is a frequent practice of the King’s, to consign sums of gold to the

care of rising captains, without requiring them from them for two or

three years, at the end of which time he expects the captain not only to

restore the principal, but to prove that he has acquired sufficient of

his own, from the use of it, to support the greater dignity the King

would confer on him. If he has not, his talent is thought too mean for

further elevation. Should he have no good traders amongst his

dependents, (for if he has there is no difficulty) usury and worse

resources are countenanced, and thought more creditable than a failure,

ascribed to want of talent rather than to a regard of principle.


The fees to the King’s household on a captain being raised to a stool,

are generally eight ounces. I saw two instances of the King paying them

himself; the individuals, very suddenly elevated for extraordinary

courage, being too poor to do so. They were immediately dispatched to

collect tributes, the per centage on which, (see Laws,) and the

douceurs, which may be judged of by the amount provided for them in the

settlement of the Commenda palaver, would possess them of a good sum to

begin with.


The interference of Amanquateä, Quatchie Quofie, Odumata, and Apokoo, is

purchased at a most extravagant rate by offenders, whether foreigners or

subjects; it is irresistible with the King; Apokoo is generally

preferred; minor influence is purchased in proportion. No subject can

sit in public with a cushion on his stool, unless it has been presented

to him by the King, or one of the four, who, as well as all the other

superior captains, receive a periguin of gold for every oath the King

exacts of them.


During the minority, or the earlier part of the reign of a monarch, the

linguists and oldest counsellors visit him betimes every morning, and

repeat, in turn, all the great deeds of his ancestors. The greatest

deference seemed to be paid to aged experience or wisdom.


Apokoo is the keeper of the royal treasury, and has the care of all the

tributes, which are deposited, separately, in a large apartment of the

palace, of which he only has the key. Numerous and various as the sums

are, he disposes of them by a local association which is said to be

infallible with him, for the Moorish secretary, (who resided some time

at Hio,) only records the greater political events. Apokoo holds a sort

of exchequer court at his own house daily, (when he is attended by two

of the King’s linguists, and various state insignia,) to decide all

cases affecting tribute or revenue, and the appeal to the King is seldom

resorted to. He generally reclined on his lofty bed, (of accumulated

cushions, and covered with a large rich cloth or piece of silk,) with

two or three of his handsomest wives near him, whilst the pleadings were

going forward. He was always much gratified when I attended, and rose to

seat me beside him. I observed that all calculations were made,

explained, and recorded, by cowries. In one instance, after being

convinced by a variety of evidence that a public debtor was unable to

pay gold, he commuted sixteen ounces of gold, for twenty men slaves.

Several captains, who were his followers, attended this court daily with

large suites, and it was not only a crowded, but frequently a splendid

scene. Before the footoorh or treasury bag is unlocked by the weigher,

though it be by the King’s order, Apokoo must strike it with his hand in

sanction.


In all public trials, the charges are preferred, in outline, against the

criminal by the King’s linguists, and he is always heard fully, and

obliged to commit or exculpate himself on every point, and to take the

various primary oaths, before the witnesses are confronted with him; of

whom he is kept as ignorant as possible until the moment of their

appearance. The oaths, sometimes four or five, are progressive,

generally beginning by the King’s foot, or some arbitrary form, and are,

apparently, not considered awful or decisive; such perjuries being

commutable by fine. But when the oath, “by the King’s father,” is

administered, every one looks serious, and if, “by Cormantee and

Saturday” (see History) is resorted to, there is a gloomy silence; but

this is seldom ventured, if the witnesses, (hurried in with a sort of

stage effect between that and the former oaths,) confound or perplex the

accused.


There are various ways of taking fetish; the two I observed, were,

licking a white fowl twice or thrice, and drinking a nauseous vegetable

juice without coughing: it was administered by the linguists out of a

brass pan in a folded leaf of the plant. If the accused is cleared, he

comes forward, and is marked with white chalk by the linguists, after

which he bows to, and thanks all the great men in the council. Taking

doom is the infallible test, when they consider the case to be too

doubtful for human decision. The bark of that tree is put into a large

calabash with water, so as to make a strong infusion; it is stirred up

whilst the suspected parties sip in turn. It operates, instantaneously

and convulsively, as a most violent emetic and purge; those who sip

first may recover, and the dregs are frequently left designedly for the

obnoxious.[91]


The criers, upwards of a hundred, who always attend the linguists, are

all deformed or maimed, to make them more conspicuous; they wear a

monkey skin cap, with a gold plate in front, and the tail hanging down

behind. Their common exclamations are, Tehoo! Tehing! Odiddee! Be

silent! Be quiet! Pray hear! and these are so incessantly uttered, that

they are themselves the only interruption. Several less interesting

peculiarities are represented in the drawings of the Yam Custom, and

associated with other subjects.


A general is appointed to the command of an army by receiving a gold

handled sword of the King’s from his hand, (who strikes him gently with

it three times on the head,) swearing to return it encrusted with the

blood of his conquered enemies. One of the King’s linguists always

accompanies an army of any consequence, to whom all the politics of the

war are entrusted, and whose talent and intelligence in negotiating, are

expected to mature the fruits of the military genius of the general, and

to reimburse the expense of the war by heavy fines and contributions.

The Ashantees are as superior in discipline as in courage to the people

of the water side, though their discipline is limited to the following

precautions. They never pursue when it is near sun set; the general is

always in the rear; the secondary captains lead the soldiers on, whilst

those in command, with a few chosen individuals, urge them forward from

the rear with their heavy swords, and cut any man down who retreats

until the case is desperate. The first object of the Ashantee in close

fight, is, to fire and spring upon the throat of his enemy; to advance

every time he fires he feels to be imperative, if his commander thinks

it possible, who would, otherwise, if he escaped death in the action,

inflict it on him directly it was over. It is one of the sentences of

the most popular song in Coomassie, “if I fight I die, if I run away I

die, better I go on and die.” They are as the antient Spaniards have

been described, “prodiga gens animæ et properare facillima mortem.” The

general has his umbrella spread in the rear, and, besides his guard, has

several extra muskets ready loaded for those soldiers who may be driven

to him in case of reverse. His band plays all the time, and in his

assumed contempt for the enemy, it is the etiquette for him to divert

himself at some game, whilst the heads of the slain of any rank in the

hostile army are sent to him to put his foot on. When the result of an

important action is expected, even with an anxiety by no means sanguine,

and the messengers are known to be near the capital, the King is always

seated in public, with his golden worra board before him, playing with

some dignitary; and thus receives the news, to impress the people with

confidence by his affected indifference to victory or defeat, when

superstition had revealed and fated inevitable success ultimately.


All the superior captains have peculiar flourishes or strains for their

horns, adapted to short sentences, which are always recognised, and will

be repeated on enquiry by any Ashantee you may meet walking in the

streets, though the horns are not only out of sight, but at a distance

to be scarcely audible. These flourishes are of a strong and distinct

character. The King’s horns uttered, “I pass all Kings in the world.”

Apokoo’s, “Ashantees, do you do right now?” Gimma’s, “Whilst I live no

harm can come.” Bundahenna’s, “I am a great King’s son.” Amanqua’s, “No

one dares trouble me.” This will be further noticed in the chapter on

Music. These peculiar flourishes are more particularly for their

government in action, for all the soldiery, indeed I might say all the

women and children, being familiar with every flourish, the positions of

the various chiefs are judged of when they cannot be seen; whether they

are advancing, falling back, or attempting to flank the enemy by

penetrating the woods, is known, and the movements of all the others

become co-operative, as much as possible. The King’s horns go to the

market place every night, as near to midnight as they can judge, and

flourish a very peculiar strain, which was rendered to me, “King Saï

thanks all his captains and all his people for to-day.”


Several of the hearts of the enemy are cut out by the fetish men who

follow the army, and the blood and small pieces being mixed, (with much

ceremony and incantation,) with various consecrated herbs, all those who

have never killed an enemy before eat a portion, for it is believed that

if they did not, their vigor and courage would be secretly wasted by the

haunting spirit of the deceased. It was said that the King and all the

dignitaries partook of the heart of any celebrated enemy; this was only

whispered; that they wore the smaller joints, bones, and the teeth of

the slain monarchs was evident as well as boasted. One man was pointed

out to me, as always eating the heart of the enemy he killed with his

own hand. The number of an army is ascertained or preserved in cowries

or coin by Apokoo. When a successful general returns, he waits about two

days at a short distance from the capital, to receive the King’s

compliments, and to collect all the splendor possible for his entrée, to

encourage the army and infatuate the people. The most famous generals

are distinguished by the addition of warlike names, more terrific than

glorious, as they designate their manner of destroying their prisoners.

Apokoo was called Aboäwassa, because he was in the habit of cutting off

their arms. Appia, Sheäboo, as he beats their heads in pieces with a

stone. Amanqua, Abiniowa, as he cuts off their legs.


The army is prohibited during the active parts of a campaign, from all

food but meal, which each man carries in a small bag at his side, and

mixes in his hands with the first water he comes to; this, they allege,

is to prevent cooking fires from betraying their position, or

anticipating a surprise. In the intervals, (for this meal is seldom

eaten more than once a day,) they chew the boossee or gooroo nut. This

meal is very nourishing and soon satisfies; we tried it on our march

down. Ashantee spies have been stationed three and four days in the high

trees overlooking Cape Coast Castle, with no other supply than this meal

and a little water, before the army has shewn itself. There is always a

distinct body of recruits with the army, to dispatch those with their

knives whom the musket has only wounded, and they are all expected to

return well armed from despoiling the enemy, or they are not esteemed of

promise, and dismissed to some servile occupation. I could not find that

they had any idea of fortifications, though undoubtedly common to the

large cities on the Niger.


It is the invariable policy of Ashantee to make the contingency of the

power last subdued, the revolters recently quelled, or the allies last

accepted, the van of their army throughout the campaign, and very

frequently there are no Ashantees but captains with the army; but it is

composed entirely of tributaries and allies. Thus Odumata subdued Banda

with an army of Gamans. In the Ashantee body of the army, which is

always that of reserve, the youngest or last made captain marches and

engages first, and the others follow seriatim, until Odumata precedes

Quatchie Quofie, Amanqua follows him, and Apokoo precedes the King. Were

the country generally open, I have no doubt, necessity and their

military genius would have suggested greater arrangement and compactness

in their movement, which is nevertheless very orderly. Two divisions of

an army are rarely allowed to go the same path, lest, being in want of

supplies, the neighbourhood should prove inadequate. Aboidwee, our house

master, (see correspondence on the Ashantee suicide) who has 1700

retainers, always precedes the King’s or Apokoo’s division, (which will

exclusively occupy the Banda path in the invasion of Gaman) to raise a

bamboo house for the King’s reception when he comes up.


Infants are frequently married to infants, for the connection of

families; and infants are as frequently wedded by adults and elderly

men. The ceremony is to send the smaller piece of cloth, worn around the

middle, to the infant, and a handsome dash of gold to the mother, as her

care then ceases to be a duty, but becomes a service performed to the

husband, who also sends frequent presents for the support of the child.

Apokoo told me it was a good plan for a man to adopt who wished to get

gold, for as the circumstance was seldom generally known, the most

innocent freedom when the girl became ten or eleven years old, grounded

a palaver against the individual, though he might consider he was but

fondling a child, and be wholly ignorant of her marriage. I afterwards

understood from several others, that this view was the leading

motive.[92]


It frequently happens, when the family of the wife is too powerful for

the husband to venture to put her to death for intrigue, that he takes

off her nose as a stigma and punishment, and makes her the wife of one

of his slaves. A wife who betrays a secret is sure to lose her upper

lip, and, if discovered listening to a private conversation of her

husband’s, an ear. Women so maimed are to be met with in all parts of

the town. Prostitutes are numerous and countenanced. No Ashantee forces

his daughter to become the wife of the man he wishes, but he instantly

disclaims her support and protection on her refusal, and would persecute

the mother if she afforded it; thus abandoned, they have no resource but

prostitution. During the menses, the women of the capital retire to the

plantations or crooms in the bush.[93]


In visiting, the chief always gives his principal slaves a few sips of

the liquor offered to him, not for security, for it is more frequently

after than before he has drank, but as a mark of his favour. He will

frequently give his daughter in marriage to a confidential slave, but

where there are a few thus distinguished and indulged, (apparently as a

political check upon a heterogeneous populace,) there are thousands

barely existing.


Their principal games are Worra[94] (see drawing, No. 10.) which I could

not understand, and Drafts, which both Moors and Negroes play well and

constantly. Their method resembles the Polish, they take and move

backwards and forwards, and a king has the bishop’s move in chess. They

have another game, for which a board is perforated like a cribbage

board, but in numerous oblique lines, traversing each other in all

directions, and each composed of three holes for pegs; the players begin

at the same instant, with an equal number of pegs, and he who inserts or

completes a line first, in spite of the baulks of his adversary, takes a

peg from him, until the stock of either is exhausted.


[Footnote 84: The description of the siege of Pondicherry in Voltaire

occurred to me; it will assist the imagination of the reader: “De grands

magasins de liqueurs fortes y entretenaient l’ivrognerie et tous les

maux dont elle est le germe. C’est une situation qu’il faut avoir vue.

Les travaux, les gardes de la tranchée étaient faits par des hommes

ivres · · · · · · · · De-là les scènes les plus honteuses et les plus

destructives de la subordination et de la discipline. On a vu des

officiers se colleter avec des soldats et mille autres actions infâmes,

dont le détail, renfermé dans les bornes de la vérité la plus exacte,

paraîtrait une exagération monstreuse.”]


[Footnote 85: In Ahanta, at the Contoom or Harvest custom, each family

erects its rude altar, composed of four sticks driven in the ground, and

twigs laid across the top; the whole is then covered with fresh pulled

leaves. A hog, a sheep, a goat, or a fowl is killed, according to the

means of the family, and the most delicate parts laid on the altar, a

mixture is made of eggs, palm oil, palm wine, the blood of the animal

slain, and other ingredients, and also dedicated to the fetish, in small

pots placed on the altar. In a few days these altars become so offensive

as to render it disagreeable to pass them, but they are never removed.]


[Footnote 86:


  “Idem ter socios purâ circumtulit undâ,


   Spargens rore levi et ramo felicis olivæ.” Æn. VI.


]


[Footnote 87: The Ahanta’s divide time into periods of three weeks. The

first week is called Adaï, and is termed the good week, in which much

work is done; and traders visit the markets more frequently in this week

than at any other time, supposing all they do in it must prosper. The

second week is Ajamfoe, or the bad week, in which no work or trade is

done, the natives believing every thing undertaken in it must fail. The

third week is Adim, or the little good week, in which they both work and

trade, but not as much as in the Adaï.]


[Footnote 88:


  · · · Tum membra toro defleta reponunt,


  Purpureasque super vestes, velamina nota,


  Conjiciunt;


                                          Æn. VI.


In Fantee they dress the body richly, and usually prop it erect in a

chair, exposing it until it is dangerous to do so any longer: they bury

it in their house, with as many gold ornaments as they can afford to

dedicate. The men called the town drummers are only allowed to die

standing, and when expiring are snatched up, and supported in that

posture. In Ahanta they frequently exhibit the body chalked all over.]


[Footnote 89:


  “Hic duo rite mero libans carchesia Baccho


  “Fundit humi.


                                             Æn. V.


  “Οἶνον δ’ἐκ δεπάων χαμάδις χέον, οὐδέ τις ἔτλη


  “Πρὶν πιέειν, πρὶν λεῖψαι ὑπερμενέϊ Κρονίωνι.”


                                             Ομηρ. η.


The Ashantees do so not only on solemn occasions, but invariably; and it

would seem that the Greeks did, from the following words of Hecuba to

Hector,


  “Ἀλλὰ μέν’, ὄφρα κέ τοι μελιηδέα οἶνον ἐνείκω,


   Ὡς σπείσῃς Διῒ πατρὶ καὶ ἄλλοις ἀθανάτοισι


   Πρῶτον· ἔπειτα δέ κ’αὐτὸς ὀνήσεαι, αἴ κε πίῃσθα·”


                                             Ομηρ, ζ.

]


[Footnote 90: Suetonius tells us that Augustus sacrificed 300 of the

principal citizens of Perusia, to the manes of his uncle Julius. We read

in Prevost, that 64080 persons were sacrificed, with aggravated

barbarity, in the dedication of a temple in Mexico.]


[Footnote 91: In the Warsaw country there is said to be a more dreadful

poison called Sabë: if it is thrown upon the skin, it is absorbed by the

pores, and has nearly the same instantaneous mortal effect as when given

internally.]


[Footnote 92: On the Coast, the bride’s character is very notoriously

published, for part of the husband’s present to her family being a flask

of rum, and that not sent until the next day; whether it is brimful, or

somewhat wanting, indicates her virginity, or early frailty.]


[Footnote 93: The women of Ahanta, on the same occasion, are prohibited

from entering any inhabited place; and if they attempt to go into a

house, are heavily fined or punished. If the family is respectable, they

generally erect a temporary shed to shelter her; the poorer class are

forced to endure the inclemencies of the weather without any retreat.]


[Footnote 94: This game is said to be played in Syria also.]


                              CHAPTER VI.


                               * * * * *


                _Architecture, Arts, and Manufactures._


The construction of the ornamental architecture of Coomassie reminded me

forcibly of the ingenious essay of Sir James Hall, (in the Edinburgh

Philosophical Transactions,) tracing the Gothic order to an

architectural imitation of wicker work. The drawings will serve to shew

the various and uncommon character of their architectural ornaments,

adopted from those of interior countries, and, confessedly, in no degree

originating with themselves.


In building a house, a mould was made for receiving the swish or clay,

by two rows of stakes and wattle work, placed at a distance equal to the

intended thickness of the wall; as two mud walls were raised at

convenient distances, to receive the plum pudding stone which formed the

walls of the vitrified fortresses in Scotland. The interval was then

filled up with a gravelly clay, mixed with water, with which the outward

surface of the frame or stake work was also thickly plastered, so as to

impose the appearance of an entire thick mud wall. The houses had all

gable ends, and three thick poles were joined to each; one from the

highest point, forming the ridge of the roof, and one on each side, from

the base of the triangular part of the gable; these supported a frame

work of bamboo, over which an interwoven thatch of palm leaves was laid,

and tied with the runners of trees, first to the large poles running

from gable to gable, and afterwards, (within,) to the interlacing of the

bamboo frame work, which was painted black and polished, so as to look

much better than any rude cieling would, of which they have no idea; a

small part appears in the houses in the drawing of Adoom-street (No. 9.)

The pillars, which assist to support the roof, and form the proscenium

or open front, (which none but captains are allowed to have to their

houses) were thick poles, afterwards squared with a plastering of swish.

The steps and raised floor of these rooms were clay and stone, with a

thick layer of red earth, which abounds in the neighbourhood, and these

were washed and painted daily, with an infusion of the same earth in

water; it has all the appearance of red ochre, and from the abundance of

iron ore in the neighbourhood, I do not doubt it is.


The walls still soft, they formed moulds or frame works of the patterns

in delicate slips of cane, connected by grass. The two first slips (one

end of each being inserted in the soft wall) projected the relief,

commonly mezzo: the interstices were then filled up with the plaster,

and assumed the appearance depicted. The poles or pillars were sometimes

encircled by twists of cane, intersecting each other, which, being

filled up with thin plaster, resembled the lozenge and cable ornaments

of the Anglo-Norman order; the quatre-foil was very common, and by no

means rude, from the symmetrical bend of the cane which formed it. I saw

a few pillars, (after they had been squared with the plaster) with

numerous slips of cane pressed perpendicularly on to the wet surface,

which being covered again with a very thin coat of plaster, closely

resembled fluting. When they formed a large arch, they inserted one end

of a thick piece of cane in the wet clay of the floor or base, and

bending the other over, inserted it in the same manner; the entablature

was filled up with wattle work plastered over. Arcades and piazzas were

common. A white wash, very frequently renewed, was made from a clay in

the neighbourhood. Of course the plastering is very frail, and in the

relief frequently discloses the edges of the cane, giving however a

piquant effect, auxiliary to the ornament. The doors were an entire

piece of cotton wood, cut with great labour out of the stems or

buttresses of that tree; battens variously cut and painted were

afterwards nailed across. (See drawing, No. 5.) So disproportionate was

the price of labour to that of provision, that I gave but two tokoos for

a slab of cotton wood, five feet by three. The locks they use are from

Houssa, and quite original; one will be sent to the British Museum.

Where they raised a first floor, the under room was divided into two by

an intersecting wall, to support the rafters for the upper room, which

were generally covered with a frame work thickly plastered over with red

ochre. I saw but one attempt at flooring with plank, it was cotton wood

shaped entirely with an adze, and looked like a ship’s deck. The windows

were open wood work, carved in fanciful figures and intricate patterns,

and painted red; the frames were frequently cased in gold, about as

thick as cartridge paper.


What surprised me most, and is not the least of the many circumstances

deciding their great superiority over the generality of Negroes, was the

discovery that every house had its cloacæ, besides the common ones for

the lower orders without the town. They were generally situated under a

small arch way in the most retired angle of the building, but not

unfrequently up stairs, within a separate room like a small closet, (see

drawing No. 3.) where the large hollow pillar also assists to support

the upper story: the holes are of a small circumference, but dug to a

surprising depth, and boiling water is daily poured down, which

effectually prevents the least offence. The rubbish and offal of each

house was burnt every morning at the back of the street, and they were

as nice and cleanly in their dwellings as in their persons.


[Illustration: ODUMATA’S SLEEPING ROOM.


_No. 5._]


[Illustration: _Drawn by T. E. Bowdich Esqr._


_No. 6._


INNER SQUARE of APOOKOOS HOUSE.


_Published Decr. 2, 1818, by John Murray, Albemarle Street._]


[Illustration: THE OLDEST HOUSE in COOMASSEE.


_No. 3._]


[Illustration: _Drawn by T. E. Bowdich Esqr._


_No. 4._


PART of the QUARTERS of the MISSION.


_Published Decr. 2, 1818, by John Murray, Albemarle Street._]


Drawing No. 3, is one of the oldest houses in Coomassie, inherited by

the unfortunate Bakkee, and part of the quarters of the Mission. Its

comparative rudeness is evident.


No. 4, is a more modern part of the same house, being one side of a

small area about 15 feet square, allotted to the chief officer of the

Embassy. These areas are all distinct, and a house consists of an

indefinite number of them, some 36 feet square, with several long

courts. In paying a visit to a principal man, the state was to detain us

some minutes at the door of each area, as he generally received us in

the innermost. The figure is one of the King’s body guards, which have

been described before. The figures are introduced to shew the proportion

of the buildings, and to give some idea of the costume.


No. 5, is the exterior of a bed room of Odumata’s, which is one side of

an oblong area in a very retired angle of his house, about 25 feet by 8.

The cloth suspended to the left of the door on the top of the steps,

hides the bloody stools which are in the recess. The small gallery in

front of the upper room is only wide enough for one person to walk in.

The recess and small room below accommodate confidential slaves. The bed

room was very small, about 8 feet square, but being hung round with a

variety of gold and silver ornaments, had a very rich appearance. The

bed is generally about 5 feet high, and composed entirely of large silk-

cotton pillows piled one above another. The King of Gaman, we were

assured, had steps of solid gold to ascend to his bed. A man wearing a

crier’s cap, is playing the sanko.


No. 6, is a perspective view of the entrance area to Apokoo’s house; the

fourth side is an open fronted building like those on the right and left

for attendants to wait in, and for the hearing of palavers. The opposite

closed side is a bed room. The figure is playing the bentwa (see Music.)


[Illustration: PART of a PIAZZA in the PALACE.


_No. 7._]


[Illustration: _Drawn by T. E. Bowdich Esqr._


_No. 8._


PART of a PIAZZA in the PALACE.


_Published Decr. 2, 1818, by John Murray, Albemarle Street._]


[Illustration: _Drawn by T. E. Bowdich Esqr._


_No. 9._


PART of ADOOM STREET.


_Published Decr. 2, 1818, by John Murray, Albemarle Street._]


[Illustration: _Drawn by T. E. Bowdich Esqr._


_No. 10._


THE KINGS SLEEPING ROOM.


_Published Decr. 2, 1818, by John Murray, Albemarle Street._]


No. 7, is a part of a piazza, which lines the interior of the wall

secluding the palace from the street. The piazza is 200 yards long, and

inhabited by captains and other attendants on the King; above is a small

gallery. Piles of skulls, and drums ornamented with them, are frequent

in this piazza. The figure is a common soldier of Ashantee, his belt

ornamented with red shells, and stuck full of knives.


No. 8, is the upper end of the piazza, which is more ornamented, and

appropriated to the superior captains, who have each a suite of rooms,

marked by the small doors under the piazza. A woman is dancing whilst a

man plays the flute and rattle.


No. 9, is a view of part of Adoom-street: each open front denotes the

residence of a captain, being used for talking palavers, receiving

strangers, observing or superintending customs, and evening recreation.

The dwelling is entered by the small door at the side, which generally

leads through a narrow passage or court to a large area like No. 6, and

thence by various intricate ways to smaller and more retired areas like

No. 4 and No. 5. A fetish woman has just quitted the centre house; she

has on a white cloth, and various pieces of rich silk are hanging round

her girdle, her breasts are confined with a scarf, a fillet encircles

her head, in each hand she waves a horse’s tail, and she continues

yelling and swinging round and round until she is quite stupified. A

weaver and loom are on her right, and a market woman under her shed on

the left.


No. 10, is the exterior of the King’s bed room, being one side of an

inner area, about 30 feet square. The stunted silk-cotton and the

manchineal tree are fetish or sacred, as are the white and red rags at

the top of the pole, and the small brass cups supported by the forked

sticks. The colored bags hanging over the round doors (the chequering of

which is in relief,) contain Moorish charms. The carving of the left

hand window is cased in silver, of the right hand, in gold. The two men

are playing at Worra. The King made frequent enquiries about the

architecture of England, of which we gave him some idea by drawings. He

was very fond of referring to a project ascribed to Saï Cudjo, and which

he declared he would carry into effect directly the Gaman war was over.

This was to build a house for his own immediate residence, roofed with

brass pans, beaten into flat surfaces, and laid over an ivory frame work

appearing within. The windows and the doors to be cased in gold, and the

door posts and pillars of ivory. Whether the Moors originated or

encouraged this extravagance by the descriptions in their tales, for

some of the stories of the Arabian Nights were commonly in their mouths,

or whether it was the scheme of his own disposition, prone to

magnificence and novelty, the King dwelt ardently on the intention, and

by their frequent conversations on the subject, his chiefs appeared

scarcely less anxious for the execution than himself. He meditated great

improvements and embellishments in his capital, on his return from the

war, when it was intended that every captain should be presented with an

extraordinary sum out of the public treasury, for adorning or enlarging

his house. The ruined streets between Asafoo and Bantama were to be

rebuilt, and the six or seven small crooms between Coomassie and

Baramang, (the King’s country residence,) were to be pulled down, and

the inhabitants to occupy a wide street to extend from the city to that

croom. This was the darling design of the King; he had already made a

sound, broad, and almost direct road, and numerous labourers were

continuing to bring it as near as possible to a straight line.


The Ashantee loom is precisely on the same principle as the English; it

is worked by strings held between the toes; the web is never more than

four inches broad. A weaver is represented in the drawing, No. 3, and a

small loom complete is amongst the articles for the British Museum. They

use a spindle, and not a distaff, for spinning, holding it in one hand,

and twisting the thread, (which has a weight at the end,) with the

finger and thumb of the other. The fineness, variety, brilliance, and

size of their cloths would astonish, could a more costly one be

exhibited; in the absence of which, that for the Museum will doubtless

be admired for the two first qualities, and for having precisely the

same appearance on both sides. I shall notice in the Chapter on Trade,

that the richest silks are unravelled to weave into them. The white

cloths, which are principally manufactured in Inta and Dagwumba, they

paint for mourning with a mixture of blood and a red dye wood. The

patterns are various, and not inelegant, and painted with so much

regularity, with a fowl’s feather, that they have all the appearance of

a coarse print at a distance. I have seen a man paint as fast as I could

write. There will be a very fair specimen in the British Museum, the

price of painting which was one ackie.


They have two dye woods, a red and a yellow, specimens of which I

brought down; they make a green by mixing the latter with their blue

dye, in which they excel; it is made from a plant called acassie,

certainly not the indigo, which grows plentifully on the Coast. The

acassie rises to the height of about two feet, and according to the

natives, bears a red flower, but the leaf is not small, fleshy, or soft,

nor is it pale or silvery coloured underneath; it is a thin acuminate

leaf about five inches long, and three broad, of a dark green.[95] I

regret to add, our best specimens of this plant perished in the

disasters of our march, and no drawing was made of it, as it bore no

flower in that season; it grows abundantly in the woods, and produces a

fast and beautiful colour without requiring a mordant. They gather a

quantity of the leaves, bruise them in a wooden mortar, and spread them

out on a mat to dry, this mass is kept for use, a proportion of it is

put into a pot of water and remains six days previous to immersing the

thread, which is left in six days, drying it once every day in the sun,

it is then a deep lasting blue colour. When a light blue is wished for,

the thread is only allowed to remain in the dye pot three days.


They excel in pottery, as the pipes for the Museum will shew; they are

rested on the ground when smoked; the clay is very fine, polished (after

baking) by friction, and the grooves of the patterns filled up with

chalk. They have also a black pottery which admits of a high polish.


The people of Dagwumba surpass the Ashantees in goldsmith’s work, though

the latter may be esteemed proficients in the art. The small articles

for the Museum, a gold stool, sanko, bell, jaw bone, and drum, are not

such neat specimens as I could wish; the man who made them having too

much costly work on hand for the King, to pay our trifles his wonted

attention; unfortunately too, he was committed to prison before they

were quite finished; however, they will give an idea. I weighed out

nineteen ackies and a half of gold dust for making these articles, one

third of an ackie was lost in melting, and five was the charge of the

goldsmith. We lost a beautiful silver pipe in the bustle. Bees wax for

making the model of the article wanted, is spun out on a smooth block of

wood, by the side of a fire, on which stands a pot of water; a flat

stick is dipped into this, with which the wax is made of a proper

softness; it takes about a quarter of an hour to make enough for a ring.

When the model is finished, it is enclosed in a composition of wet clay

and charcoal, (which being closely pressed around it forms a mould,)

dried in the sun, and having a small cup of the same materials attached

to it, (to contain the gold for fusion,) communicating with the model by

a small perforation. When the whole model is finished, and the gold

carefully enclosed in the cup, it is put in a charcoal fire with the cup

undermost. When the gold is supposed to be fused, the cup is turned

uppermost, that it may run into the place of the melted wax; when cool

the clay is broken, and if the article is not perfect it goes through

the whole process again. To give the gold its proper colour, they put a

layer of finely ground red ochre, (which they call Inchuma,) all over

it, and immerge it in boiling water mixed with the same substance and a

little salt; after it has boiled half an hour, it is taken out and

thoroughly cleansed from any clay that may adhere to it. Their bellows

are imitations of ours, but the sheep skin they use being tied to the

wood with leather thongs, the wind escapes through the crevices,

therefore when much gold is on the fire they are obliged to use two or

three pair at the same time. Their anvils are generally a large stone,

or a piece of iron placed on the ground. Their stoves are built of swish

(about three or four feet high) in a circular form, and are open about

one fifth of the circumference; a hole is made through the closed part

level with the ground, for the nozzle of the bellows. Their weights are

very neat brass casts of almost every animal, fruit, or vegetable known

in the country. The King’s scales, blow pan, boxes, and weights, and

even the tongs which hold the cinder to light his pipe, were neatly made

of the purest gold that could be manufactured.


Their blacksmith’s work is performed with the same sort of forge as the

above, but they have no idea of making iron from ore, as their interior

neighbours do. Their swords are generally perforated in patterns like

fish trowels; frequently they make two blades springing parallel from

one handle, which evince very fine workmanship. The needles and

castanets will only give some idea of their progress. The iron stone is

of a dark red colour, spotted with gray, and intermixed with what had

all the appearance of lava, they cut bullets out of it for the army,

when lead is scarce. I have brought some arrows of native iron. They

have no idea of making a lock like the people of Houssa and Marrowa.


They tan or dress leather in Ashantee, but they do this, and dye it, in

a very superior manner in Houssa and Dagwumba; see the sandals and

cushion in the British Museum, the former varied and apparently

stitched; doubting that there could be such stitching, I undid a part,

and discovered that they perforated the surface, and then stuck in the

fine shreds of leather. The curious will observe, that the patterns of

the stool cushion are all produced by paring the surface. They make

their soldiers belts and pouches out of elephant or pig skin, ornamented

with red shells. (See drawing, No. 7.)


Of their carpenter’s work the stool is a fair specimen, being carved out

of a solid piece of a wood called zesso, white, soft, and bearing a high

polish; it is first soaked in water. They sell such a stool for about

three shillings, in Accra or Fantee it would fetch twenty. The umbrella

is even more curious, the bird is cut almost equal to turning, and the

whole is so supple that it may be turned inside out. This, only a

child’s umbrella, is a model of the large canopies I have described in

the procession; I gave a piece of cloth value twenty shillings for it.

The sanko or guitar is also neatly made, and the chasteness and Etruscan

character of the carving is very surprising. The surface of the wood is

first charred in the fire, and then carved deep enough to disclose the

original white in the stripes or lines of the patterns.


Numbers of workmen are employed in breaking, rounding, and boring the

snail shells, as big as a turkey’s egg generally, and sometimes as large

as a conch. They are first broken into numerous pieces, then chipped

round, the size of a sleeve button, and afterwards bored with a bow and

iron style fixed in a piece of wood. Lastly they are strung, and

extended in rows on a log of wood, and rubbed with a soft and bluish

gray stone and water, until they become perfectly round.


Their pine apple thread is very strong, and is made from the fineness of

a hair to the thickness of whip cord, it bleaches to a beautiful

whiteness, and would answer for sewing any strong material, but, when

muslin is stitched with it, it is liable to be cut from the harshness.

The women frequently join their cloths, and ornament their handkerchiefs

with a zigzag pattern, worked with unravelled silks of different

colours. The fetish case is a specimen of their needle work, in the

manner of chain stitch.


[Footnote 95: It is a shrub with opposite leaves, no stipules, and

having a certain degree of resemblance to _Marsdenia suave-olens_ (the

indigo of Sumatra) but as the leaves are toothed in the acassie, it

probably does not belong even to the same natural order.]


                              CHAPTER VII.


                               * * * * *


           _Climate, Population, Revenue, City, Market, &c._


The climate will be best judged of by the account of the thermometer

(from May to February) in the Appendix. During the first two months, May

and June, it rained about one third of the time, throughout July and

August it rained nearly half, and abrupt tornadoes were frequent in the

evening, just after sun set, ushered in by a strong wind from the south-

west. The heaviest rains were from the latter end of September to the

beginning of November, they fell even in more impetuous torrents than

are witnessed on the coast.[96] The influence of the harmattan was

described as very powerful. Generally speaking, from the elevation of

Ashantee, (unfortunately we had no barometer,) it was much cooler in

Coomassie than at Cape Coast; indeed, from four to six in the morning,

there was a severity of cold unknown on the coast.


I can only calculate the population of the kingdom of Ashantee, small in

itself, from its military force, of which the following is the most

moderate of the estimates I received.


  Coomassie district (extending to the northern frontier)         60,000


  Dwabin ditto                                                    35,000


  Marmpon ditto                                                   15,000


  Soota ditto                                                     15,000


  Kokoofoo ditto                                                  15,000


  Becqua ditto                                                    12,000


  Adiabin ditto (between Coomassie and the lake)                  12,000


  Aphwagwiasee ditto                                              10,000


  Daniasee ditto (southwards of Coomassie)                         8,000


  Koontarasie ditto (on the lake)                                  8,000


  Gamasie ditto                                                    8,000


  Amafoo ditto                                                     6,000

                                                                 -------

                                                                 204,000


This appears an extravagant force, until we recollect that it is

probably one fifth of the whole population.[97] The Romans when they

were a nation of warriors, which these people are, raised a military

force equally great in proportion to their population. Barbot heard of

the Ashantees losing 50,000 men in two actions, an exaggeration which,

nevertheless, serves to argue great military resources. Since the

Ashantee invasions, their disposable force has been estimated by old

residents in public reports, as upwards of 150,000. From the above

particular statement, the population may be estimated at one million,

which I believe is little more than half the population of Scotland, the

area of which must be more than double that of Ashantee, which certainly

does not contain more than 14,000 square miles. Amanquateä, Quatchie

Quofie, Odumata, and Apokoo’s forces alone amounted to 25,000. The

contingencies at command from tributaries, (21 in number) are too

indefinite to attempt to detail. Neither Inta or Dagwumba furnish any,

the Ashantees pretending to despise their troops too much to use them.

The following, which are known to be pretty correct, have generally been

the first called into action:


  Coranza        10,000


  Assin           8,000


  Takima          6,000


  Dankara         5,000


  Warsaw          7,000


  Booroom        12,000


  Sawee           4,000


  Akim            4,000, before their later destructive revolts 16,000


  Aquapim, &c.    1,000


Though polygamy is tolerated to such an excess amongst the higher

orders, I do not think, from observation, that the proportion of women

to men is two to one. Most of the lower order of freemen have but one

wife, and very few of the slaves (the greater proportion of the military

force) any. The following calculation is the only one I can think of,

and it supports my impression after five months residence.


  204,000 Men able to bear arms, about one-fifth of the

          whole population                                     1,000,000


  101,000 Or one-fourth, children under ten years of age as

          found in Great Britain.


   50,000 Boys above that age not capable of bearing arms.


    7,000 Or one in about 28 incapacitated by old age or

          accidents, as found in Great Britain.

  -------

  362,000                                             Males      362,000

                                                                 -------

                                                    Females      638,000


The men are very well made, but not so muscular as the Fantees; their

countenances are frequently aquiline. The women also are generally

handsomer than those of Fantee, but it is only amongst the higher orders

that beauty is to be found, and amongst them, free from all labour or

hardship, I have not only seen the finest figures, (which the ease of

their costume and habits may account for,) but, in many instances,

regular Grecian features, with brilliant eyes set rather obliquely in

the head. Beauty in a Negress must be genuine, since complexion

prejudices instead of imposes, and the European adjudges it to the

features only, which appeared in this class to be Indian rather than

African; nor is it surprising, when we recollect that they are selected

from, or are the daughters of the handsomest slaves or captives; or are

expressly chosen by their interior neighbours, to compose part of their

tribute to the King of Ashantee, who retains but a small proportion.


Both men and women are particularly cleanly in their persons, the latter

washing themselves, and the former being washed by them daily on rising,

from head to foot, with warm water and Portuguese soap, using afterwards

the vegetable grease or butter, which is a fine cosmetic. Their cloths,

which are beetled, are always scrupulously clean. The lowest orders are

generally dirty. Occasionally, small delicate patterns in green or white

paint are traced on their cheeks and temples. The Moorish negresses

darken the edges of their eye lids with lead reduced to a fine powder.

The ore was brought from Mallowa and is very rich. The powder is

moistened a little, and kept in small boxes, like bodkin cases with a

bulb at the end, and prettily covered with cow’s hair, within which is a

metal stylus to apply the powder, as the women of India do antimony for

this purpose. Top-cloths are generally worn, and not by the higher order

only as in Fantee. They are commonly of a coarse silk bought at

Dagwumba. They wear little or no antiffoo, a sort of cushion projecting

from just below the small of the back in the Fantee women, by the size

of which, frequently preposterous, and at all times unsightly, their

rank, or the number of their children is known. The bosoms of girls of

thirteen and fourteen are frequently models, but the young women

sedulously destroy this beauty for what is considered a greater, wearing

a broad band tight across their breasts, until ceasing to be globular

they project conically. Their heads are shaved in fanciful elaborate

patterns, having as intricate an appearance as a rich carpet.


The food of the higher orders is principally soup of dried fish, fowls,

beef, or mutton, (according to the fetish,) and ground nuts stewed in

blood. The poorer class make their soups of dried deer, monkeys flesh,

and frequently of the pelts of skins. Yams, plantains, and foofoos, (see

the kouskous of Mr. Park) are commonly eaten, and they do not make

cankey of their corn, (a coarser sort of kouskous not cleared from the

husk) as the Fantees do, but they roast it on the stalk, and when young

the flavour closely resembles that of green peas. Besides palm wine they

drink Pittō, made from dried corn, which I think must have been the beer

Lieutenant Martyn relished so much, for it is quite as pleasant as a

brisk small ale. They are forbidden eggs by the fetish, and cannot be

persuaded to taste milk, which is only drank by the Moors. Their stews

and white soups are excellent, and my companions reported their black

soups (made with palm oil) to be equally so.


I cannot pretend to calculate the variable revenue of Ashantee, nor

indeed to report its optional sources; I noted a few particulars.


1. The dust gold of all deceased and disgraced subjects. Boiteäm, the

father of Otee, left five jars (said to hold about four gallons each)

and two flasks. On Appia Nanu’s disgrace three jars were seized.


2. A tax in gold upon all slaves purchased for the coast.[98] Customs

paid in gold by all traders returning from the coast, levied near Ansa

in Assin.


3. A tax on the elephant hunters.


4. The small pits in Soko, which with the washings were reported to

yield, sometimes 2,000 ounces per month, at others not more than 700.


5. The daily washings throughout Dankara, and the hills dividing Akim

and Assin; very rich in gold.


6. A tax on every chief increasing the number of his gold ornaments.

Apokoo paid 20 periguins to the King on melting 100.


7. The soil of the market place (see Laws) has been washed but twice

during the present reign. I was told it produced about 800 ounces of

gold each time. During our stay a heavy rain washed down a large

quantity, which was replaced and carefully covered with the soil, by the

Captain in charge of the market place. It was very easily seen after

rain.


The tributes of the various nations they had subdued, were in some

instances fixed, but more frequently indefinite, being proportioned to

the exigencies of the year; indeed from various conversations with

Apokoo and others, and my own observations during state palavers, it

appeared that the necessities and the designs of the Ashantee government

were the superior considerations, and the rule in levying tribute every

where. I made the following memoranda.


Inta and Dagwumba never pay in gold, which though plentiful from

commerce, is not found there, cowries being the circulating medium.

Their capitals and all their large towns send the following tribute

annually, and the smaller in proportion.


  500 Slaves.


  200 Cows.


  400 Sheep.


  400 Cotton cloths.


  200 Ditto and silk.


Takima a smaller proportion of the same kind.


Coranza is generally excused, from fidelity, and a long series of

military services.


  Sawee                                200 periguins annually.


  Moinseän                              50 bendas ditto.


  Gaman had paid, (besides all large

  pieces of rock gold,)                100 periguins ditto.


Akim, Assin, Warsaw, Aowin, &c. &c. were taxed indefinitely by crooms.


Coomassie is built upon the side of a large rocky hill of iron stone. It

is insulated by a marsh close to the town northwards, and but a narrow

stream; half a mile distant from it N.W., and 60 yards broad; close to

it N.E., E., S.E., and S., and about 100, 20, 70, and 50 yards broad at

these points. In many parts depth after heavy rains was five feet, and

commonly two. The marsh contains many springs, and supplies the town

with water, but the exhalation covers the city with a thick fog morning

and evening, and engenders dysentery, with which the natives of the

coast who accompanied us were almost immediately attacked, as well as

the officers. It is a little extraordinary that we never saw a musquito

in Ashantee. I could find none but birds eye views of the city, which

were uninteresting, presenting nothing but the thatch of the houses; it

was encircled by a beautiful forest, which required more time than I

could spare, and a more expressive pencil to pourtray. Coomassie is an

oblong of nearly four miles in circumference, not including the suburbs

of Assafoo nor Bantama, (the back town,) half a mile distant, and

formerly connected by streets with the city, as is evident from the

numerous ruins of houses on the path. The slaughter of constant warfare,

and the extinction or removal of several ill affected chiefs with their

adherents, account for this even in a rising state. The ruins in the

interval to Bantama were indeed accounted for by Amanquateä (who holds

his court there, as Quatchie Quofie does at Assafoo) informing us, that

almost all the Ashantees killed before Annamaboe (about 2000 by the most

moderate computation) belonged to him, as it was his division which

marched along the beach from Cormantine, exposed to the cannon of the

fort. Four of the principal streets are half a mile long, and from 50 to

100 yards wide. I observed them building one, and a line was stretched

on each side to make it regular. The streets were all named, and a

superior captain in charge of each; ours for instance, was Aperremsoo,

big gun or cannon street, because those taken when Dankara was

conquered, were placed on a mound at the top of it, near Adoo Quamina’s

house. The area in which we had our first audience was called Daëbrim,

the great market, in distinction to a lower street called Gwaba, or the

small market. The street above where we lived was called Osamarandiduüm,

meaning literally, “with 1000 muskets you could not fight those who live

there.” One street was named after Odumata, and there was another near

it, whose title I forget, but it was equal to prison street. The palace

was situated in a long and wide street running through the middle of the

town, from which it was shut out by a high wall, terminating at each end

at the marsh, where it was discontinued, that being a sufficient

boundary. It included Odumata’s and the King’s brothers residences, and

two or three small streets, (besides the several areas and piazzas,) for

the King’s relief and recreation when the superstitions of the country

confine him to the palace. I reckoned twenty seven streets in all, which

I have laid down in a ground plan of the town. The small grove at the

back of the large market place was called Sammonpomë or the spirit-

house, because the trunks of all the human victims were thrown into it.

The bloody tracks, daily renewed, shewed the various directions they had

been dragged from, and the number of vultures on the trees indicated the

extent of the recent sacrifice; the stench was insupportable, and the

visits of panthers nightly. Several trees were individually scattered

about the town for the recreation of the inhabitants of those quarters,

and small circular elevations of two steps, the lower about 20 feet in

circumference, like the bases of the old market crosses in England, were

raised in the middle of several streets, on which the King’s chair was

placed when he went to drink palm wine there, his attendants encircling

him.


[Illustration: _Ichnographical Sketch of_ COOMASSIE, _with the principal

Streets and the Situations of remarkable Houses._


  1. Entrance from Fantee and Assin.


  2. Agwabu or the small market.


  3. King’s eldest Sister’s house.


  4. —— Goldsmith’s ditto.


  5. Appia Nanu’s ditto.


  6. Otee’s (3d Linguist) ditto.


  7. Odumata’s (1 of the 4) ditto.


  8. King’s youngest Sister’s ditto.


  9. Adoom Street.


  9.* Baba’s house and the Crambos (Moors) Street.


  10.* Aboogaywa or place of execution.


  10. Palace.


  11. King’s wives Croom.


  12. Marsh.


  13. Entrance from Dwabin.


  14. ——— Barramang.


  15. King of Dwabin’s temporary Court.


  16. King’s Blacksmith’s Croom.


  _a._ Himma or the King’s fetish temple.


  _b._ Apokoo’s (1 of the 4) house.


  _c._ Adoocee’s (chief linguist.)


  _d._ Apirremsoo Street.


  _e[Symbol]._ Aboidwee’s house, the quarters of the Embassy.


  _f._ Adoo Quamina’s (chief Captain) house.


  _g._ Osarramandiduum Street.


  _h._ King’s Umbrella maker’s Croom.


  _i._ Entrance to the high street of Bantama.


  _k._ Croom.


  _l._ Ditto.


  _m._ Ditto.


  _n._ Long irregular suburb, and road to Dankara.


  _o._ Sammonpome or the Spirit Grove.


  _p._ Adooebrim, the large market place.


  _p*._ Small Market.


  _q._ High Street of Assafoo. Course of the procession of the Embassy

  on its entré.


  _r._ Halted to witness the war dance.


  _s._ Halted to pass the baggage and presents.


  _t._ Halted to witness the human sacrifice.


  _u._ Presented to the King and Chiefs.


  _w._ Seated to see them march home.


_T. E. Bowdich_, 1817.]


The Ashantees persisted that the population of Coomassie, when

collected, was upwards of 100,000. I think it likely to be much greater

than that of Sego, (which Mr. Park reported as 30,000,) from the

extended masses of crowd I observed on festivals, when the plantations

of the environs are almost wholly deserted. I compared them in my

recollection with the crowds I have seen collected in the secondary

cities of England, on similar occasions of public curiosity; the only

criterion, as I had not time to finish reckoning the number of houses. I

say when collected, because the higher class could not support their

numerous followers, or the lower their large families, in the city, and

therefore employed them in plantations, (in which small crooms were

situated,) generally within two or three miles of the capital, where

their labours not only feed themselves, but supply the wants of the

chief, his family, and more immediate suite. The middling orders station

their slaves for the same purpose, and also to collect fruits and

vegetables for sale, and when their children become numerous, a part are

generally sent to be supported by these slaves in the bush. Perhaps the

average resident population of Coomassie is not more than from 12 to

15,000.


The markets were held daily from about eight o’clock in the morning

until sun set. The larger contains about sixty stalls or sheds, (a small

square frame covered with cotton cloth with a pole from the centre,

stuck into the ground, see drawing, No. 9.) besides throngs of inferior

venders, seated in all directions. Amongst the articles for sale, were

beef, (to us about 8_d._ per lb.) and mutton, cut in small pieces for

soup, wild hog, deer, and monkey’s flesh, fowls, pelts of skins; yams,

plantains, corn, sugar-cane, rice, encruma, (a mucilaginous vegetable,

richer than asparagus, which it resembles,) peppers, vegetable butter;

oranges, papaws, pine apples, (not equal to those on the coast,)

bananas; salt and dried fish from the coast; large snails smoke dried,

and stuck in rows on small sticks in the form of herring bone; eggs for

fetish; pittō, palm wine, rum; pipes, beads, looking-glasses, sandals,

silk, cotton cloth, powder, small pillows, white and blue cotton thread,

calabashes, &c. &c. See Chapter on Trade.


The following are the comparative prices of the markets of Coomassie and

Yahndi, the capital of Dagwumba:


                   _Coomassie._           _Yahndi._


  A fat bullock      £.6   0  0          £.1  0  0


  A sheep              0  15  0            0  4  0


  A fowl               0   1  8            0  0  5


  A horse             24   0  0            8  0  0


  Yams                 0   0  8 for two    0  0  8 for ten.


The surprising exorbitance of the former is to be accounted for by the

abundance of gold, yet labour and manufacture was moderately purchased.

In Mallowa, provision is dearer than in Dagwumba, but the articles of

trade much cheaper; they manufacture very little cloth, the Moorish

traders supplying it so abundantly. The cattle we saw in Ashantee were

as large as the English, unlike those on the coast, which resemble the

Jersey. The sheep are hairy in Ashantee, but woolly in Dagwumba, an open

country, where they manufacture a coarse blanket. The horses in Dagwumba

are generally small, some were described to be 15 hands high, but these

were never parted with, and the Ashantees did not desire them, for I

never saw but one who rode fearlessly. The horses I saw were like half

bred galloways, their legs lathy, with a wiry hair about the fetlock,

only requiring to be pulled. Their heads were large; dun and mouse

colours were said to be common; they were never shod, and their hoofs

consequently in the eye of the European, though not in nature,

disproportionate; they were fed on guinea grass, occasionally mixed with

salt, and sal-ammoniac was frequently dissolved in the water. The

saddles were Moorish, of red leather, and cumbersome; the bridles of

twisted black leather thongs, and brass links, with a whip at the end;

the bit severe, with a large ring hanging from the middle, and slipped

over the under jaw instead of a curb chain; the stirrups were like large

blow pans, and hung very short. Some of the Moors rode on bullocks, with

a ring through the nose.


The extent and order of the Ashantee plantations surprised us, yet I do

not think they were adequate to the population; in a military government

they were not likely to be so. Their neatness and method have been

already noticed in our route up. They use no implement but the hoe. They

have two crops of corn a year, plant their yams at Christmas, and dig

them early in September. The latter plantations had much the appearance

of a hop garden well fenced in, and regularly planted in lines, with a

broad walk around, and a hut at each wicker gate, where a slave and his

family resided to protect the plantation.


All the fruits mentioned as sold in the market grew in spontaneous

abundance, as did the sugar cane: the oranges were of a large size and

exquisite flavour. I believe this fruit has hitherto been considered

indigenous to India only. We saw no cocoa nut trees, nor was that fruit

in the market. Mr. Park’s route was through a very different

country.[99] In the marshy ground, a large species of fern is very

abundant, there are four varieties of it; in shady places that have been

cultivated, various tribes of urtica; and the leontodon grows abundantly

to the north of Coomassie. The miraculous berry, which gives acids the

flavour of sweets, making limes taste like honey, is common.[100] The

castor oil, (ricinus communis) rises to a large tree, I have only seen

it as a bush about three feet high on the coast; and the wild fig is

abundant, though neither of them are used by the natives. The cotton

plant is very plentiful, but little cultivated. The only use to which

they apply the silk cotton, is to the stuffing of cushions and

pillows.[101] Mr. Park observed the tobacco-plant, which grows

luxuriantly in Inta and Dagwumba, and is called toah. The visitors from

those countries recognised it in a botanical work. They first dry the

leaves in the sun, then, having rubbed them well between their hands,

mix them with water into oval masses, as will be seen; it is further

noticed in the Trade Report.


Lions are numerous on the northern frontiers of Inta, elephants (assoon,

F. A. soorer, B.[102]) are remarkably numerous in Kong, but they are

also found in Ashantee, with wild hogs (yambo, F. A.) hyænas (patacoo,

F. A. boofooree, B.,) cows (anantwee, F. A. B.,) sheep (ygwan, F. A.

tsan, B.,) goats (apunkie, F. A. terrie, B.,) deer (wonsan, F. A. B.,)

antelopes (ettwan, F. A. B.,) dogs (boddum, etcha, F. tweä, A. opooree,

B.,) approximating to the Danish, cats (agramwaw, F. A. B.,) extremely

sharp visaged and long necked, Gennet cats (essoor, F. A. B.,) pangolins

(appra, F. A. aypra, B.,) alligators (dankim, F. A. B.,) &c. &c. &c. The

rhinoceros (năree) is found in Boroom, and the hippopotamus (shonsa, A.

tchoosooree, B.) in the Odirree river.


The Ashantees say, that an animal called sissah or sissirree, will

attack every other however superior in size. The Fantees who had never

seen it, had imbibed a tremendous idea of it, from the stories in their

own country. I doubt its being so formidable to all other animals, for

the skin I saw was not more than three feet long, and the legs short, it

resembled that of a boar, but the natives said it was between a pig and

a goat. I enquired of the people of Inta and Dagwumba if they had ever

heard of a unicorn; one replied, yes! in the white man’s country. It is

extraordinary that the gnoo, (antelope gnu,) which is found behind the

Cape of Good Hope, is known in Inta by the same name.[103] Where the

beds were not an accumulation of cushions, the skin of the gnoo was

nailed to a large wooden frame, raised on legs about a foot from the

ground, and stretched as we would sacking. It was a revered custom that

no virgin of either sex should sleep on this kind of bed. Another

animal, called otrum, was described by the inhabitants of the eastern

frontier as having one very long horn on one side of the head and a

short one on the other; it is much larger than the gnoo. We met with a

spotted animal of the cat kind (gahin, F. A. B.,) very common, and

allied to the leopard or panther, but whether referable to either of

those species, or to be considered as distinct, we could not determine,

owing to the very vague and unsatisfactory character by which

naturalists have attempted to distinguish them, the kind and number of

the rows of spots; which we have observed in individuals of the same

decided species, to present almost an infinity of variation.


The vulture (pittay, F. A. epraykee, B.,) which I have before mentioned

to be venerated by the natives, for the same reason which the Egyptians

venerated the Vulturus Percnopterus, is the Vulturus Monachus, figured

by Le Vaillant. Green pigeons (assam) are found, and crows with a white

ring round their necks, probably the corvus scapularis figured by Le

Vaillant. There were several small birds of beautiful plumage, which

sung melodiously; two in particular, the one like a blackbird, and the

other of the same colour as the English thrush, but larger. Also a

variety of parrots beautifully spangled with different colours. M.

Cuvier was misinformed when he wrote (Regne animal, tom. i. p. 108)

“Macaque est le nom générique des singes à la côte de Guinée.” The name

is unknown there as well as in the interior. Dokoo is the generic name.

The Simia Diana (effoor, F. A. B.,) which has the most beautiful skin of

any monkey, is found in Ashantee as well as in Warsaw. All the natives

agree that they do not know of any monkies which dare to attack men, but

the akonëson, which they describe as small, and always seen in troops.


Snakes (aboïtinnee, F. A. ewaw, B.,) green, and of all colours;

scorpions, lizards, &c. &c. were found as on the coast, with a curious

variety of beetles, and the most beautiful butterflies. A few specimens

preserved in spirits will be sent to the British Museum,[104] as the

best apology for my ignorance rather than neglect of natural history.


[Footnote 96: At Cape Coast in 1815 there was scarcely any rain fell in

its season, from May to August. In 1816, the rains were heavy, but no

fogs succeeded. In 1817, there was but little rain, but a protracted

succession of slight fogs. The climate has been observed, by old

residents, to alter as unaccountably within these few years as that of

Europe.]


[Footnote 97: “My friend Mr. Morton Pitt, M.P. has proved, by the

enumeration of the inhabitants of a country parish in Dorsetshire, that

the men of an age capable of bearing arms are one fourth of the whole

community. Mr. Horneman, if I understand him rightly, states the number

of actual warriors to be 1500; so that we ought, perhaps, to multiply

that number by 5, to get nearer to the total amount of the population.”

_Major Rennell_.]


[Footnote 98: Issert mentions this being levied in Akim and other

tributary states.]


[Footnote 99: “It is observable, however, that although many species of

the edible roots which grow in the West India islands, are found in

Africa, yet I never saw, in any part of my journey, either the sugar

cane, the coffee, or the cocoa tree; nor could I learn, on inquiry, that

they were known to the natives. The pine apple, and the thousand other

delicious fruits, which the industry of civilized man (improving the

bounties of nature,) has brought to such great perfection in the

tropical climates of America, are here equally unknown. I observed,

indeed, a few orange and banana trees, near the mouth of the Gambia; but

whether they were indigenous, or were formerly planted there by some of

the white traders, I could not positively learn. I suspect that they

were originally introduced by the Portuguese.” Park’s First Mission.]


[Footnote 100: The curious fruit mentioned in the introduction, and to

which I have given the name of oxyglycus, I find was known to Des

Marchais, who describes it as a little red fruit, which, being chewed,

gives a sweet taste to the most sour or bitter things. Dalzel’s

Dahomey.]


[Footnote 101: Cotton of the cotton tree (or _silk_ cotton) _Bombax

Pentandrium_ _Lin._ This cotton is not made into thread, but is used

for making pillows and beds. It is also, from its catching fire so

easily, commonly put into tinder boxes, and employed in the preparation

of fire works. Ainslie’s Materia Medica of Hindostan.]


[Footnote 102: F. A. affixed to assoon, denote that to be the native

name in the Fantee and Ashantee languages, as B. represents Boroom.]


[Footnote 103: C’est probablement lui qui a donné lieu à leur

_catoblepas_. Voyez Pline, lib. 8, c. 32, et Ælien, lib. 7, c. 5,

Cuvier. The gnoo is almost always _looking down_.]


[Footnote 104: See Dr. Leach’s notice in the Appendix.]


                             CHAPTER VIII.


                               * * * * *


                                _Trade._


The currency of Ashantee is gold dust, that of Inta, Dagwumba, Gaman,

and Kong, cowries. Mr. Lucas writes, “to the merchants of Fezzan who

travel to the southern states of the Negroes, the purchase of gold,

which the dominions of several, and especially those of Degombah,

abundantly afford, is always the first object of commercial

acquisition.” I could not learn that any gold was dug or collected in

Dagwumba, though considerable quantities are imported, from its

extensive commerce. Sixteen ackies make an ounce or newemeën, 36 a

benda, 40 a periguin: eight tokoos (a small berry) are reckoned to the

ackie, but it will not weigh more than seven: there are eight distinct

names for quantities of gold dust from one to eight ackies. Five strings

or 200 cowries are equal to a tokoo, as at Accra. The clearest manner of

shewing the articles, prices, and profits of the Ashantee, Inta, and

Dagwumba markets, will be by a table with remarks; substituting, for the

greater convenience, English monies calculated at the currency of gold

here, which is £4. the oz.


  [Q.: Quantity.; P.: Profit.; P. pC.: Profit. per Cent.;

   Pce.: Piece.; Gll.: Gallon.; Brl.: Barrel.; fth.: fathom.;

   hdk.: hdkchf.; chg.: charge.]


  +------------------------------+------------------+------------------+

  |                _Cape Coast._ |  _Coomassie._    |   Sallagha and   |

  |                              |                  |     Yahndi.      |

  +---------------+--+--+--+-----+--+--+--+-----+---+--+--+--+-----+---+

  |  Articles.    |£ |s.|d.| Q.  |£.|s.|d.| Q.  |P. |£.|s.|d.| Q.  |P. |

  |               |  |  |  |     |  |  |  |     |pC.|  |  |  |     |   |

  +---------------+--+--+--+-----+--+--+--+-----+---+--+--+--+-----+---+

  |(_a_) Silk,    |4 |  |  | per |  |5 |  |  1  |175|  |  |  |     |   |

  |India          |  |  |  |Pce. |  |  |  |span.|   |  |  |  |     |   |

  |               |  |  |  |     |  |  |  |     |   |  |  |  |     |   |

  | —— Fezzan     |  |  |  |     |2 |  |  |  1  |100|1 |  |  |  1  |   |

  |               |  |  |  |     |  |  |  |fth. |   |  |  |  |fth. |   |

  |               |  |  |  |     |  |  |  |     |   |  |  |  |     |   |

  |(_b_)          |1 |10|  |     |  |2 |6 |  1  |400|  |  |  |     |   |

  |Sarstracunda   |  |  |  |     |  |  |  |span.|   |  |  |  |     |   |

  |               |  |  |  |     |  |  |  |     |   |  |  |  |     |   |

  |(_c_) Glasgow  |1 |10|  |     |  |5 |  |  1  |75 |  |  |  |     |   |

  |Dane           |  |  |  |     |  |  |  |hdk. |   |  |  |  |     |   |

  |               |  |  |  |     |  |  |  |     |   |  |  |  |     |   |

  |(_d_) Romal    |1 |  |  |     |1 |5 |  |pce. |20 |  |  |  |     |   |

  |               |  |  |  |     |  |  |  |     |   |  |  |  |     |   |

  |(_e_) Guinea   |  |10|  |     |  |15|  |     |33 |  |  |  |     |   |

  |Stuff          |  |  |  |     |  |  |  |     |   |  |  |  |     |   |

  |               |  |  |  |     |  |  |  |     |   |  |  |  |     |   |

  |(_f_) Silesia  |  |10|  |     |  |15|  |     |33 |  |  |  |     |   |

  |               |  |  |  |     |  |  |  |     |   |  |  |  |     |   |

  |Dagwumba       |  |  |  |     |  |5 |  | sq. |100|  |2 |6 | sq. |   |

  |white Cotton   |  |  |  |     |  |  |  |yard.|   |  |  |  |yard.|   |

  |               |  |  |  |     |  |  |  |     |   |  |  |  |     |   |

  |Rum            |  |10|  |Gll. |  |  |7½|dram.|400|  |  |  |     |   |

  |               |  |  |  |     |  |  |  |     |   |  |  |  |     |   |

  |(_g_) Tobacco, |6 |  |  |Roll.|10|  |  |roll.|75 |  |  |  |     |   |

  |Portuguese     |  |  |  |     |  |  |  |     |   |  |  |  |     |   |

  |               |  |  |  |     |  |  |  |     |   |  |  |  |     |   |

  |               |  |  |  |     |  |  |7½|span.|   |  |  |  |     |   |

  |               |  |  |  |     |  |  |  |     |   |  |  |  |     |   |

  | —— Inta       |  |  |  |     |  |2 |6 | lb. |150|  |  |  | lb. |   |

  |               |  |  |  |     |  |  |  |     |   |  |  |  |     |   |

  |(_h_) Gunpowder|4 |  |  |  ¼  |  |  |7½|  1  |400|  |  |  |     |   |

  |               |  |  |  |Brl. |  |  |  |chg. |   |  |  |  |     |   |

  |               |  |  |  |     |  |  |  |     |   |  |  |  |     |   |

  |Iron           |1 |  |  |Bar. |1 |15|  |bar. |75 |3 |  |  |bar. |200|

  |               |  |  |  |     |  |  |  |     |   |  |  |  |     |   |

  |Lead           |  |10|  |     |  |  |7½|  ½  |75 |  |  |  |     |   |

  |               |  |  |  |     |  |  |  |inch.|   |  |  |  |     |   |

  |               |  |  |  |     |  |  |  |     |   |  |  |  |     |   |

  |Flints         |  |5 |  | 100 |  |  |¼ |each.|600|  |  |  |     |   |

  |               |  |  |  |     |  |  |  |     |   |  |  |  |     |   |

  |(_i_) Spanish  |  |5 |  | ea. |  |5 |  |     |   |  |  |  |     |   |

  |Dollar         |  |  |  |     |  |  |  |     |   |  |  |  |     |   |

  |               |  |  |  |     |  |  |  |     |   |  |  |  |     |   |

  |(_k_) Sandals  |  |  |  |     |  |10|  |pair.|100|  |5 |  |pair.|   |

  |               |  |  |  |     |  |  |  |     |   |  |  |  |     |   |

  |Cushions       |  |  |  |     |1 |  |  | ea. |100|  |10|  | ea. |   |

  |               |  |  |  |     |  |  |  |     |   |  |  |  |     |   |

  |Marrowa Locks  |  |  |  |     |  |5 |  |     |100|  |2 |6 |     |   |

  +---------------+--+--+--+-----+--+--+--+-----+---+--+--+--+-----+---+


(_a_) The red taffetas (11 yards in each piece) are unravelled by the

Ashantees, and wove into the cloths of their own manufacture: they

unravel a few of the fancy silks, but these are generally bought for

wear, though they prefer those from Fezzan for that purpose, because the

colours are more shewy. Coarse thick scarves are also brought from the

interior, equal in substance to a double wove ribbon. One ackie a span

was the price in the public market, where it was retailed in these small

quantities, for the convenience of the weavers, who did not require, or

could not afford to purchase more: the price of a piece was uncertain,

as the person who could purchase so much, generally sent a trusty

servant to the foreign market, and seldom bought of the traders but when

they were necessitated to sell at little more than prime cost. The

richest silks, I saw, were worn by the Moors, who had bought them at

Yahndi and Houssa.[105] Reckoning nine inches to a span, there are eight

spans in a fathom, which is the Ashantee measure; but the fathom of Inta

and Dagwumba, contains only six spans. Even if the Ashantee traders give

twenty shillings a fathom, in barter of boossee, salt, rum, iron, &c.;

it is considerably cheaper to them than ours, considering that they get

100 per cent. on it at Coomassie. Mr. Lucas mentions “silk wrought and

unwrought amongst the articles exported from Fezzan to Kassina. Apokoo

and several others related to me, that Saï Cudjo bought a piece of silk

at Yahndi, so very fine, that although it could be compressed between

two hands, it was nevertheless larger than any cloth I had seen the

present King wear, and his appeared monstrous. Apokoo added, that six

slaves were paid for it, which would have produced £160. at the water

side.


(_b_) This is a highly glazed British cotton of bright red stripes with

a bar of white: it is bought solely for the red stripe, (as there is no

red dye nearer than Marrowa) which they weave into their own cloths,

throwing away the white. There are 280 inches in a piece. A cloth of

Ashantee manufacture will be sent to the British Museum, and, I expect,

the size, fineness, and variety will surprise.


(_c_) This is also a highly glazed British cotton of more colours, and

in handkerchiefs; ten of which are in a 30_s._ piece.


(_d_) This is an unglazed India cotton, not much in demand, and yielding

the least profit. The Manchester cotton called Tom Coffee is preferred.


(_e_) This is India cotton unglazed, for all of which there is, in

proportion, but a small demand. The Ashantees invariably prefer cloths

of the Dagwumba, or their own manufacture, and we rarely saw any others

worn in Coomassie.


(_f_) These are white cottons, six yards in a piece, but narrow, they

are bought for fetish cloths; but the next article, the white cotton

cloth of Dagwumba, is preferred, a piece of which, painted, will be sent

to the British Museum.


(_g_) These are the wholesale and retail prices at Coomassie, the

average length of a roll is 42 fathoms.


(_h_) Powder is retailed for customs or festivals: those who purchase it

for war, or can afford a ¼ barrel, send to the water side for it. A ¼

barrel contains 25 lbs. and the Ashantee charge weighs 16 ackies, equal

to ¾ of an ounce avoirdupoise.


(_i_) This was owing to their brisk intercourse with the Spanish and

Portuguese slave ships, a dollar generally fetches two ackies or 10_s._

Mr. Park writes, from £1. 5_s._ to £2. 10_s._ at Sansanding.


(_k_) Sandals and a cushion will be sent to the British Museum. In

Marrowa they decoct a good red dye from a tree called mossarātee.


The reason green ells are purchased by the Warsaws only, is, that they

must be the wedding garment of the females of that country: if they are

fast colours, and will not change to a blue with lime-juice, they will

not look at them.


Most of the slaves in Coomassie, were sent as part of the annual tribute

of Inta, Dagwumba, and their neighbours, to Ashantee; very many were

kidnapped, and for the few who were bought, I was assured by several

respectable Ashantees, 2000 cowries, or 1 basket of Boossee was the

greatest price given; so full were the markets of the interior. I have

brought some pods of the Boossee; it is astringent, and the natives chew

it to excite a flow of saliva, and allay the sensation of hunger.

The[106] Boossee must be the Gooroo nut, which Mr. Lucas describes as

one of the articles of trade between Fezzan, Kassina, Bornoo, and the

states south of the Niger. He writes, “Gooroo nuts, which are brought

from the Negro states on the south of the Niger, and which are

principally valued for the pleasant bitter that they communicate to any

liquor in which they are infused,” and again “a species of nut—which is

much valued in the kingdoms to the north of the Niger, and which is

called Gooroo. It grows on a large and broad leafed tree, that bears a

pod of about 18 inches in length, in which are inclosed a number of nuts

that varies from 7 to 9. Their colour is a yellowish green; their size

is that of a chesnut, which they also resemble, in being covered by a

husk of a similar thickness, and their taste, which is described as a

pleasant bitter, is so grateful to those who are accustomed to its use,

and so important as a corrective to the unpalatable or unwholesome

waters of Fezzan, and of the other kingdoms that border on the vast

Zahara, as to be deemed of importance to the happiness of life. They

are purchased at the rate of 12_s._ for 100 pods.”


Sal ammonia is found abundantly in Dagwumba: in the Ashantee market, a

lump the size of a duck’s egg, was sold for 2_s._: they grind it to mix

with their snuff, (of which they take large quantities,) as it gives it

a pungency agreeable to them. They also dissolve it in the water they

give to their cattle, and sometimes drink it themselves for pains in the

bowels. The Tamool practitioners in the East Indies suppose it to be a

useful remedy in certain female obstructions, and morbid uterine

enlargements. Mr. Lucas writes, “No commercial value appears to be

annexed to the fleeces which the numerous flocks of the Negro kingdoms

afford; for the cotton manufacture, which, the Shereef says, is

established among the tribes to the south of the Niger, seems to be the

only species of weaving that is known among them.” In Dagwumba, however,

they manufacture a coarse kind of blanket from sheep’s wool. There is a

white grease, which has long been called Ashantee grease by the natives

on the coast, who supposed it to be produced in that country. They use

it daily to anoint their skins, which otherwise become coarse and

unhealthy. The Ashantees purchase it from the interior, and make a great

profit by it: it is a vegetable butter, decocted from a tree, called

Timkeëä: it is doubtless the Shea butter of Mr. Park.[107] Mr. Lucas

mentions, “small Turkey and plain Mesurata carpets,” among the articles

exported from Fezzan to Kassina: a small carpet fetches 2 oz. of gold at

Coomassie. The Ashantees procure most of their ivory from Kong, where

they give 8 ackies, or 40_s._ in barter, for a very large tooth.


“The preference of the Ashantees for the Dagwumba and Inta markets, for

silk and cloth, results not merely from their having been so long

accustomed to them, but because they admit of a barter trade. The

Boossee or Gooroo nut, salt, (which is easily procured, and affords an

extravagant profit,) and small quantities of the European commodities,

rum, and iron,[108] yield them those articles of comfort and luxury,

which they can only purchase with gold and ivory from the settlements on

the coast. Gold they are all desirous of hoarding; even those less

covetous than is generally their nature, that they may be prepared for

the purchase of guns and powder to a large extent, on any sudden war,

and thus ingratiate themselves with the king and the government. Were

the Ashantees a commercial people, they might be the brokers between the

interior and Europeans, or, purchasing supplies more adequate to the

demands of their neighbours for European commodities, which would be

bought with avidity, realize large properties. But they have no idea of

buying more of the various articles than will supply themselves; and

leave a small residue to barter for the cloth, silk, and tobacco in the

Inta and Dagwumba markets. They are as little commercial as the Romans

were in their infancy, and their government would repress rather than

countenance the inclination, (believing no state can be aggrandized but

by conquest,) lest their genius for war might be enervated by it, and

lest, either from the merchants increasing to a body too formidable for

their wishes to be resisted, or too artful from their experience to be

detected, they might sacrifice the national honour and ambition to their

avarice, and furnishing Inta, Dagwumba, or any of their more powerful

neighbours (who have yielded to circumstances rather than force) with

guns and powder (which are never allowed to be exported from

Ashantee,[109]) break the spell of their conquests, and undermine their

power. The chiefs are fed bountifully by the labours of their slaves,

and sharing large sums of the revenue, (the fines their oppression has

imposed on other governments,) with incalculable fees for corruption or

interference, refine upon the splendor of equipage even to satiety, and

still possess a large surplus of income daily accumulating. Were they to

encourage commerce, pomp, the idol of which they are most jealous, would

soon cease to be their prerogative, because it would be attainable by

others; the traders growing wealthy, would vie with them; and for their

own security, stimulated by reflections they have now too little at risk

to originate, they would unite to repress the arbitrary power of the

Aristocracy; and even if they did not, inevitably (as the chiefs

conceive) divert the people’s genius for war.


It will occur that even to furnish the necessities or luxuries of the

Ashantees alone, in cloth, silk, &c. would, considering the extent of

the kingdom, considerably augment the returns of our commerce in this

part of the world; and therefore it would be well to wean them,

gradually, from the markets of the interior, by inducing their

cultivation of cotton, which grows abundantly, is of a superior quality,

and which, offered in quantities, in addition to the ivory, would lessen

the balance of trade now in our favor, and by enabling them, in some

degree to purchase with produce instead of gold dust, remove the present

comparative disadvantage in trading with Europeans entirely. This

occurred to me, and I explained the view not only to the king, but to

the more enterprising and reflecting natives: but they had no idea of a

quantity, and immediately concluded cotton to be so desirable to us,

that 40 or 50 lbs. would be received in barter for twenty times its

value; and they required one tokoo and a half per lb. for it, (say one

shilling,) even in gold, and on the spot. When I urged that they must

clear the ground, form plantations, and superintend the labours of their

slaves; they replied, that the Boossee or Gooroo nut grew spontaneously,

and required no labour, that salt was brought to their frontier by

poorer nations, and sold for little without the trouble of fetching it;

and these articles, with the value, their prevention of all intercourse

but their own with the water side nations, attached to a little rum and

iron in the interior, furnished them with silks and cotton cloths at a

much easier rate, pattern and quality.


A serious disadvantage opposed to the English trade, is that the

Ashantees will purchase no tobacco but the Portuguese, and that eagerly

even at 2 oz. of gold the roll. Of this, (the Portuguese and Spanish

slave ships regularly calling at Elmina,) the Dutch Governor-General is

enabled to obtain frequent supplies, in exchange for canoes, two of

which, though they cost him comparatively nothing, fetch 32 rolls of

tobacco; and the General has sometimes received 80 oz. of gold a day

from the Ashantees for tobacco only. If they cannot have this tobacco,

they will content themselves with that grown in the interior, of which I

have brought a sample. A preference for the Dutch has long been natural

to the Ashantees, from an earlier though limited intercourse with them,

and from the natural impression, that the English settling amongst their

enemies, the Fantees, have encouraged and assisted their provocations

and resistance. With this bias in his favor, though the Dutch market,

destitute of supplies, had not been visited for many years, the talent

of General Daendels, “callidum quicquid placuit,” would no doubt have

again raised it to a level with the English, cæteris paribus; and his

unlimited importation of powder and guns in the first place, with the

still more valuable supplies of Portuguese tobacco he receives at

present, as superior advantages, have, of course, possessed the Dutch

market of superior inducements.


It is to be lamented, the indifference of the Dutch and Danes to their

settlements here, being evident from their neglect and reduction of

them, that the British government did not take advantage of the

disregard, and add them to their own. Elmina is a much finer position

for head quarters than Cape Coast; the Dutch fort at Succondee, the best

point for the Warsaw trade, and where we have but a house, is strong,

admirably situated, and might be put in good condition for £1000. in

addition to which, Axim, near the mouth of the Ancobra, would be the

only fort to windward worth keeping; and the Danish head quarters,

Christiansburg Castle at Accra, with their fort at Adda, (to secure the

navigation of the Volta,) would have answered every purpose and view to

leeward. One system could then have been acted upon towards the natives,

the commerce, confined to the English, would have grown from wholesome

regulations, which no other settlers could counteract by selfishness,

jealousy, or by facilitating the illegitimate trade we would crush; and

the benevolent views of the British government for the improvement and

civilization of the natives, would not be defeated by those, who,

holding their private interest superior to views in which their own

government has evinced no interest, militate against them by fostering

suspicions to bar our progress in the interior, and by indulging those

habits and customs of the natives, which it must be our first step to

correct and divert.


In addition to the obstacles which the inconsistent and selfish conduct

of the different European powers towards the natives presents to

intercourse and civilization, the continuance of the slave trade under

the Spanish flag, is one more serious: no one can imagine the stubborn

impediment it was to our negotiations at Ashantee, where the native

emissaries from these slave ships arrived not long after us. It not only

injures the British commerce here, almost to annihilation, but, slaving

being the natural trade of the natives, because it is the most indolent

and the most lucrative, the opposition, which is insinuated and believed

to proceed from the English alone, conveys a disagreeable impression of

us to the interior, as inauspicious to our intercourse and progress, as

the even partial continuance of such a trade is to legitimate commerce

and civilization. One thousand slaves left Ashantee for two Spanish

schooners or Americans under that flag, to our knowledge, during our

residence there, doubtless the whole number was much greater; since our

return it must have been very considerable, for the slave trade was

never more brisk than it is at this moment under the cloak of the

Spanish flag, and great risk has been incurred, in consequence, of

offending our new friend and formidable neighbour the King of Ashantee,

from the firm resistance of his strong intreaties to the Governor in

Chief, to allow the return of a powerful mulatto slave trader to Cape

Coast town, whence he had been expelled under the present government, as

the most daring promoter of that commerce. It is a great pity, in the

infancy of our intercourse with this great interior power, that there

should have been occasion either for the request or refusal; which there

would not have been had the slave trade been abolished, instead of

crippled, at the expense, probably, of our own interests and views in

the interior, and, which is worse, of the happiness and improvement of

the natives. For it is certainly our duty, because it is the most

acceptable and the only efficient acknowledgment we can make of the

superior blessings and endowments by which we are so indulgently

distinguished from these nations, to extend the influence and the

participation, both by enterprise and policy, even if our commerce may

not be benefitted; and if we gain no other recompense than the

satisfaction of our own minds in the ameliorated condition of others,

and the opportunity we have made to ourselves of exemplifying our own

gratitude.[110] Whilst one slave ship is allowed to visit this coast,

the great convenience and the great profits of the trade will recur, and

be perpetuated amongst the Ashantees; they will linger in the hope of

its entire renewal, and view the English invidiously, as the enemies to

what they conceive to be their only natural commerce; this is another

advantage to the Dutch, added to the inherent bias in their favour; and,

from the reception and facilities which slave ships meet with at Elmina,

our odium is aggravated instead of being participated. “Delenda est

Carthago.”


Let us suppose this irreconcilable obstacle to be annihilated, as no

doubt it will be, and resume our reflections on a commercial intercourse

with the interior. The people of Inta and Dagwumba, being commercial

rather than warlike, the object, deliberately to be obtained, is an

intercourse with them, which would in fact be an intercourse with the

interior as far as Timbuctoo and Houssa northwards, and Cassina, if not

to Bornoo, eastwards. The wealth, civilization, and commerce of

Dagwumba, Mr. Lucas has before reported. Now, in effecting such an

intercourse through the Ashantees, who are indisputably the greatest and

the rising power of western Africa, and who, having acquired their

present extent of influence and command in little more than a century,

may be expected to aggrandize their empire considerably; in seeking this

connection through them, there are these adverse circumstances, their

policy, their jealousy, and their inaptitude to commerce. It has been

suggested to the King, and urged with all the address of General

Daendels, to open a path to the interior through his kingdom, and to

receive a duty or tax on all the merchandize transported, which would

afford him a certain and considerable addition to his revenue; but even

this appeal to the avarice of the Ashantee government has had no

influence. It would be dangerous as well as impolitic to offend the King

of Ashantee at any time, with the present garrisons of the forts,

madness; and though his influence through that of Dagwumba, which is at

his command, would extend to the Niger, yet, I think our anxiety to

explore so far should be suppressed for two or three years, until he is

satisfied that commerce and not ambition is the impulse. But in the

interim, it would be desirable gradually to approach Inta and Dagwumba,

by establishing a settlement up the Volta, which has been shewn to run

close to Sallagha, the grand emporium of Inta, and is navigable within

four days of it; and possibly might be made so even nearer. The Danes

would no doubt relinquish their claim to the navigation of the Volta,

for it is a doubtful one. Dalzel writes, “the Danes claim the exclusive

navigation of the Volta, which is disputed by the English, who have a

settlement near it, called Loy.” The great prices the Ashantees get for

rum, iron, &c. from the people of Inta and Dagwumba, and the avidity

with which they purchase their small supplies, leave no doubt of the

eagerness with which they would resort to our market; and the silks they

obtain from Fezzan being dearer than our own, I should think we could

induce a preference. Our Manchester cloth and cotton manufactures would

be novel and useful to them, as those I saw wore vests and tunics. But

here I must observe, that whenever our commerce with the interior may be

established, the returns of it, in my opinion, will fall short of the

general idea and expectation.


The King of Ashantee viewing our settlements on the Volta, would, I have

no doubt, be reconciled by our undertaking to sell neither guns or

powder to any but his own people; a measure due to humanity as well as

policy, for the preponderance of one great nation is auspicious to the

civilization as well as the tranquillity of Africa; but for that, the

slaughter of the human species would be incalculable; there would be a

constant warfare between the numerous states, naturally querulous, and

our passage to the interior would be impossible, not only on that

account, but because there would be no powerful monarch to recommend or

protect us. If the King of Ashantee were not satisfied with our new

settlement confining the trade of guns and powder to himself, he would

certainly be repressed by the alarming reflection, that it was at our

discretion, (depending on his behaviour,) to supply Inta and Dagwumba

with both, and thus to undermine his empire; for it is well known, and

has been confessed, that the greater population of these countries,

could they but procure fire-arms, would give them a superiority over the

Ashantees, to which their greater civilization seems to entitle them.

Our force and establishments should be respectable; not to arrogate or

to intrude, but to protect the legitimate commercial views, sanctioned

and invited by the voice of less arbitrary powers, and also to make

their first impression of the English imposing and preservative.

Residencies should be established at these courts, and young men of

talent, temper, and discrimination be found to fill them, collecting the

geographical and statistical desiderata, and forwarding them to be

investigated and digested into one report at head quarters, before they

were transmitted to England. One or two intelligent Moors might also be

engaged to trade by different routes, and minute the directions,

distances, and descriptions of the several places; thus paving the way,

and lessening the difficulties of a future Mission to the Niger. If the

working of gold mines were also an object, the vicinity of the Ancobra

affords a rich field; and a small district might either be purchased of

the natives, or they might receive a dividend of the proceeds, which

would produce them much more than their present inadequate researches,

suppressed by their more powerful neighbours the Warsaws.


The benevolent and politic views of the British Government, would thus,

by making use of what we have or might easily get, be more probably, if

not more speedily realized, than by the perilous, desultory, and limited

enterprises of two or three individuals.


[Footnote 105: Since my return to England I have seen some silk brought

from Aleppo, and manufactured there, precisely resembling these, which

were frequently enriched by gold threads interwoven.]


[Footnote 106: Sterculia acuminata _Palis de Beauvais Flore d’Oware_, 1.

_p._ 41, _tab._ 24.]


[Footnote 107: See Sketch of Gaboon.]


[Footnote 108: Though iron is manufactured in Dagwumba, that from Europe

is preferred for finer purposes. The former is an imperfect steel

containing a mechanical mixture of unreduced ore.]


[Footnote 109: “Fire arms are unknown to such of the nations on the

south of the Niger as the Shereef has visited; and the reason which he

assigns for it is, that the kings in the neighbourhood of the coast,

persuaded that if these powerful instruments of war should reach the

possession of the populous inland states, their own independence would

be lost, have strictly prohibited, and by the wisdom of their measures

have effectually prevented this dangerous merchandize from passing

beyond the limits of their dominions.” Lucas.]


[Footnote 110: The dissuasion from barbarities of which millions are now

the victims, as the descriptions of the customs of Ashantee and the

interior have shewn, and the interests of science, render this duty more

imperious. It has been well observed, “apologies for our present

ignorance of every thing that regards geography, &c. might be pleaded by

mercantile speculators, but can have little weight with those who have

the interests of science at heart, or the national honour and fame,

which are intimately connected with those interests. It was not with a

view to any immediate commercial advantages, that this liberal

encouragement for the discovery of the north-west passage was held out,

but with the same expanded objects that sent Cook in search of a

southern continent.”


Voltaire’s remark on India is now only applicable to Africa, “Plusieurs

y ont fait des fortunes immenses, peu se sont appliqués à connoître ce

pays.” I would even recommend indulging the wish of the King of Dahomey

to renew and perpetuate his connection with the English, not indeed by

resuming the fort, that would be a useless expense, as there is no trade

but in ivory, but by establishing a Residency at his capital, the most

frugal method of collecting the various accounts of the interior of that

neighbourhood for geographical investigators, besides supplying the

naturalist. Geographical discoveries in Africa have long been ardently

emulated between England and France, and they have stimulated a generous

rivalry of investigation between the men of science of both countries.

An Englishman first penetrating to the Niger, and determining its course

at the moment a learned investigator of the other kingdom had concluded

it to be a contrary one, was one of those rational and illustrious

triumphs which adorn the historical pages of a nation much more than

those of war; for the gratification and the benefit is shared by both,

and such successes cease to be invidious when the interests of science

are thus mutually at heart. The following immortal tribute from a

classic of a rival nation, should stimulate us to challenge as

illustrious a record of intellectual research,


  · · · · “monumentum ære perennius,


  Regalique situ pyramidum altius;”


by a correspondent pursuit of intelligence in Africa.


“Un Anglais, détruit tout ce vain amas d’erreurs dont sont remplies nos

histoires des Indes, et confirme ce que le petit nombre d’hommes

instruits en a pensé.” Voltaire.]


                              CHAPTER IX.


                               * * * * *


                              _Language._


The hypothesis I have met with, I think in Parsons’s Remains of Japhet,

that the confusion of languages at Babel was a visitation on the family

of Ham only, which spread itself over Africa, is certainly supported

(considering the radical affinities which have been traced between the

Arabic the Russ and the Greek, the Persian and the German, the Qquichua,

or language of the Incas, and the Sanscrit, and many others[111]) by the

variety of languages in Africa which cannot be assimilated in the least

degree to each other, and which would, I think, resist the laborious

ingenuity of the philologist.


I have heard about half a dozen words in the Fantee, which might be said

to be not unlike the same nouns in the Welsh language; and this is the

only affinity which has been imagined. Two words only in the Accra

language have struck me as assimilating to those of any other, the

conjunction “_kay_” (_and_), which with a broader sound would answer the

corresponding Greek conjunction και; and _fai_ (_to do_,) pronounced as

the perfect participle of the same verb in French, and which is spelled

_fai_ in the old songs of Richard the first, and the troubadour Faydit.

The Fantee word _umpa_ (_true, indeed_,) may be imagined to resemble the

Greek εμπας, which has the same meaning; but it is a solitary instance.


From Apollonia or Amănăheä to the Volta, about 300 miles, six languages

are spoken: the Amanaheä, Ahanta, Fantee, Affoottoo, Accra, and the

Adampë. The numerals of which will appear, collaterally with others

hitherto unknown, at the end of this chapter.


The Ashantee, in comparison with the Fantee, Warsaw, &c. &c. from its

refinement of idiom, oratory being so much more cultivated, may be

considered as the Attic amongst the dialects of the Greek, but it owes

its superior euphony, striking to any ear, to the characteristics of the

Ionic, an abundance of vowel sounds, and a rejection of aspirates:


          _Fantee._     _Ashantee._


  Key      Sāfie         Saphwooa.


  Lock     Karradacoo    Karradoo.


  Night    Adayfwa       Adagio.


  Day      Aweeabil      Aweeabillee.


  Gun      Etoorh        Oteuh.


Vocabularies of these languages would not be interesting to the public,

especially as no affinity can be traced; and I know not how to acquit

myself of every thing like indifference to the curiosity at home,

(without the dulness of the subject proving more irksome than a

disappointment,) unless I endeavour to give an idea of the philosophy of

the languages,[112] and submit their progress, collaterally with that of

the arts and manners. The genius of the Accra language differing the

most essentially from that of the Ashantee or Fantee, examples from both

will be instanced for illustration. I have principally consulted two

gentlemen, natives of the country, but educated in Europe: the one

resident between forty and fifty years; the other, who has a respectable

knowledge of the grammar of the English and French languages, returned

from England about ten years back, and both are as fluent as the Negroes

in the Fantee and Accra, the latter being their vernacular tongue.


Impressed with the ingenious hypothesis of the learned author of the

Diversions of Purley, my first care has been to investigate the

particles of the Fantee and Accra, considering the languages of

uncivilised people, to be least advanced or removed from the primeval

simplicity, to which Mr. Horne Tooke’s system refers. I found, however,

both the Accra and Fantee languages more complete than I expected in

conjunctions, and seldom using verbs instead of them, which I presumed

they might do. Yet I have no doubt, their half dozen of conjunctions, if

examined etymologically by a person thoroughly conversant in the

languages, might be traced, and shewn to be the contracted imperatives

of the most recurrent verbs, as Mr. Tooke has proved those of our own

language to be. Neither the Accra or Fantee have conjunctions answering

to each of ours; the distinction between many is neither comprehensible

or necessary to them. I will submit their conjunctions, with those

investigated in the first volume of the Diversions of Purley.


  _Fantee._                        _Accra._


  Onee           and               Kay


              {  if

  Sey         {                    Kedgee

              {  unless


              {  still

  Emphee      {                    Shee

              {  but


              {  because           Nooyĕwon

  Interah     {

              {  since             Nunnë


              {  notwithstanding

  Namoo       {                    Nemoolay

              {  though


              {  otherwise

  Anna        {                    Noollay

              {  or


There are no adverbs in either language. There are but two in our own

which may not be expressed by a verb or an adnoun, _still_ and _since_;

and these they express by the conjunctions _but_ and _because_. “I

intreated, but (still) he would not,” “because (since) it is so,” as the

Latins frequently used prepositions for the Greek adverbs. Indeed

_since_ is expressible by a verb, being derived according to Mr. Tooke

from the Saxon _sithan_, seeing that. They express the adverb _much_ by

the adjective _many_; _ago_ by a verb, “_it passes_ ten years;” _almost_

by the verb _it wants_, “_it wants_ to rain;” and _when_ by a noun,

“_the time_ I was there,” coincident with Jones’s derivation of

ὁτε.[113] _Nooyĕwon_, (_because_) in Accra, is literally, “_for the sake

of_.” _Intērah_, the corresponding word in Fantee, “on the head of,”

(_tirree_ is head) thus, they would say, “I do this on your head,” or

because you told me. Lest, which is considered by Mr. Horne Tooke to be

the past participle of the Saxon verb leyan, to dismiss, is not to be

found either in the Accra or Fantee: in the former they would say,

“_Menkaw hauh ebbēbărădi_,” “do not go there, you fall down;” and in the

latter, “_Kaiheah djai nee oheäbwayshee_,” “do not go there, and (or

for) you fall down.” The use of the noun for the adverb is frequent in

Demosthenes, (“εϛι δικαιος εχειν,” “he justly deserves”) and can only be

accounted for in a prose writer, who does not need poetical licenses, as

an archaism, disused generally, through invention or refinement. The

term adverb is not a just indication of the origin of that part of

speech, for, although they are derived from verbs as well as nouns, yet,

in our own language, as well as in the Greek, following Mr. Horne Tooke,

the greater number are derived from nouns: and those (of which there are

some in the Greek) which may be indifferently derived from a noun, or a

verb, may be referred to the former; because, many of the adnouns from

which adverbs are derived in the Greek, have been pointed out as

disused; and therefore the verbs from which adverbs are exclusively

derived, are likely to be derived themselves from obsolete adnouns,

which cannot be recalled; for it has been philosophically advanced, that

originally there could have been but one sort of words, that is, nouns,

or the names of the objects of our sensations and ideas.[114]


I consider the absence of adverbs, participles, and prepositions,

certainly the least indispensible parts of speech, and favouring

copiousness rather than energy, to be a proof of the almost genuine, or

primeval simplicity of the Accra and Fantee languages, which have not

advanced or altered, even in the small degree of their arts or manners;

for these have only been ameliorated by commercial intercourse with

strangers, who not understanding their language could not have suggested

improvements, and from whose languages, they being equally

unintelligible, amendments could not have been copied. We find

Portuguese nouns, and nouns only, adopted in the Fantee; and that, of

necessity, as Saxon nouns were adopted in the Welsh or Celtic, because

they had no words to designate novelties they had never before seen or

heard of; and, therefore, they called them as those did who introduced

them. These primitive languages being, nevertheless, thoroughly adequate

to oratory as well as the commoner purposes of speech, is a strong proof

that language was revealed, as Johnson, Blair, Warburton, and others

have maintained, and that it was not the fruit of human invention or

industry, as Lucretius, Horace, and most of the antients imagined.


Neither the Accra or Fantee distinguish genders, the name of the person,

or the context, is the only explication; they have not even a third

person feminine, but one pronoun serves for _he, she, it_.


The Accra has a definite and indefinite article, but both are affixed to

the noun, as “_minna nooleh_,” I saw the man; “_minna nookoo_,” I saw a

man. The indefinite article “_koo_” is the contraction of numeral one,

“_ekoo_,” so that I saw a man, is literally “I saw man one.” _An_ is

simply another form of the numeral one, still used in North Britain

under the form ane; and in the French, the numeral and the article

corresponding to one, are the same. The Fantee, like the Greek, has no

indefinite article, or according to Mr. Harris’s expression, on which

Mr. Horne Tooke is so pleasant, “supplies it by a negation of the

definite,” which is “_noo_,” affixed, as “_mehoon nimpanoo_,” I saw the

man.[115]


In the Accra, the plural is formed by inflection, epenthesis, paragoge,

and apocope: these changes are almost peculiar in every noun; the more

frequent inflections are, ai, ay, and ee.


            _Singular._    _Plural._


  A woman     yeo           yeay.


  A box       adikka        adikkai.


  A stone     teh           tai.


  Ground      shepong       shepongee.


  A hyæna     krang         krangee.


  A father    tchay         tchaymë.


  A liar      amallalo      amallaloi.


  A gun       toon          tween.


  A vessel    lelen         ledgenë.


  A man       noon          nhal.


  A house     tchoon        tchuë.


In the Fantee the plural number is distinguished by the prefix _en_,

though generally, if they can, (in a glance whilst speaking) discover

the number of objects, they use a numeral with the noun singular; or, if

they cannot be so precise in the instant, they substitute _many_ to mark

an indefinite number. The Chinese also, are said to drop their plural

adjunct “_min_,” when there is another word of plurality attached to the

noun.


Neither language has prepositions, and of course peraphrasis is

generally resorted to: conjunctions are sometimes substituted, as _and_

for _with_; occasionally verbs, as “the King _to give_ his captain,” for

_to his captain_; and, sometimes, they are presumed from the tone or the

context. Mr. Horne Tooke, who values prepositions very much, has traced

all but five, of our own language, to nouns and verbs; and of these

five, three have since been traced to nouns and a numeral; so that _out_

and _off_, only, are unaccounted for. Jones, in his Greek Grammar,

writes, “the roots of prepositions are nouns and verbs,” and,

accordingly, he derives απο from the Hebrew, _ab_, a stem, περι from the

Arabic _pera_, eminence, υπερ from the Hebrew _aber_, sky, or the

Persian _ober_, a cloud: the inseparable prepositions had been traced to

nouns and verbs long before.


Degrees of comparison are not expressed by adjectives or adverbs, in

either language: but, for he is richer than he, the Accras would say,

“_eh phay leh ne_;” the Fantees, “_aw tchen adee_,” he _passes him_ (in)

things: neither language has an adjective answering to rich or wealthy,

but “_ne_,” and “_adee_,” in both, correspond exactly in meaning and use

with the _res_ of the Latins: the superlative would be expressed by “_he

passes all_.” The antient idiom of comparison, antecedent to the general

use of inflections or adverbs, was probably similar, judging from the

following, and many other sentences in the Greek, “Παῥ ἑαυτὸν μηδένα

ἐπιτὴδειον ἡγεῖτο, he thought no body fitter than himself;” “πλείονος

δοξης παρὰ Μωσῆν ἠξίωται, Heb. xiii. he was counted of more glory, or

more glorious than Moses.” Here παρα, so frequently expressing

comparison, being derived from the verb περαω, _to pass_, is identical

with the Accra and Fantee expression.


I observed before that the Accra and Fantee have no adjective answering

to rich, they are also deficient in many others, which they supply by a

second substantive in the same manner. This idiom is found in the Greek,

“Το σωμα της ταπεινωσεως ἠμων, our humiliated body, the body of our

humiliation; Αιρεσεις απωλειας. destructive heresies, &c. &c.” and it

is said to be both a Hebrew and Celtic idiom; primeval languages, and

the latter, I presume, as rude as those we are investigating.


In the Accra, the personal pronouns are


  I             me


  thou          boh


  he, she, it   lheh


  we            whah


  you           nnheay


  they          amăy


_Me_ is generally reduplicate before verbs, as “_me me yay_” I eat.

_Boh_ before verbs generally suffers aphæresis as “_oh yay_,” thou

eatest, but sometimes not, as “_boh fai_,” thou doest: this is also the

case with _lheh_ as “_heh yay, lheh fai_.” _Me_ is added, as _met_ in

Latin, to make these pronouns compound. In Fantee the personal pronouns

are


  I             me


  thou          awaw


  he, she, it   narra


  we            yarra


  you           awoo


  they          warra;


the latter is used as a possessive pronoun also; _woodde_ is affixed to

make them compound; they are irregularly contracted before verbs.

Considering these barbarous languages of primitive simplicity, and

recollecting the original and philosophical deduction of pronouns from

verbs, by the Greek professor of Glasgow, as εγω or εγων (which is the

more ancient) from λεγων, ipse from επω, I particularly enquired for

verbs resembling their pronouns; but, after a long and diligent

recollection, neither of my authorities could furnish me with any to the

point. It is curious to observe, that the _me_ represents the pronoun I,

in both these rude languages,[116] as it does, though not in the

nominative case, in most other primitive languages, and in the modern

ones derived from them: it would seem to be the natural and involuntary

expression for that pronoun.


There is only an active voice in the Accra or Fantee; the passive is

expressed by a circumlocution, as he loves, or they love me, for I am

loved, &c.[117] It appears erroneous to consider the infinitive mood as

the root of the verb, when it has a separable or distinguishing

termination, and _mong_ is as distinctly the verbalizing adjunct in the

Accra language, as _ere_ or _are_ in the Latin, ειν in Greek, or an in

the Anglo-Saxon. If we consider the imperative as the divested

fundamental form of the verb, it is still difficult in these languages

to get at the root, for the use of the infinitive for the imperative,

occasional in the Greek, is, in the Accra, so general, that for some

time I thought it unexceptionable, and that it had not the two moods.


The Accra has the neuter verb _to be_ in the present, perfect, and

future tenses, but in the perfect, it is irregular.


  I am   I have been   I shall be


  meyeh      metay       mahyeh


The Fantee only has it in the present, “_oh yea_, he is.” It is

remarkable that even the linguists of our forts, who speak English

fluently, never understand or use our neuter verb _to be_, but

substitute _live_ for it, and that, whether they speak of animate or

inanimate things; a servant would say, “your keys live in your pocket.”


The imperative mood has a present tense complete in each language.


They express the potential mood by adding auxiliary verbs, such as our

can, may, &c., have been shewn to be derived from.


The termination of the infinitive in the Accra is generally _mong_,

which is rejected in conjugating. In the Fantee it is not distinguished

from the first person present, or root. The use of the infinitive mood,

even in Accra, is very circumscribed, for it is not found even in the

most natural case when two verbs come together, as I want to eat, for

which they say, “_metōn meyay_,” I want I eat. The infinitive is

generally used for the imperative in the Accra, but, otherwise, it only

occurs in an idiom almost peculiar to that language, for instance, for

are you walking now, they say,


  “_Neo_mong oh _neo_ neh,”


  “To walk are you walking now.”


For I am straightening it,


  “_Jadjumong_ me _jadjio_ leh.”


  “To straighten I am straightening it.”


Verbs are invariably used thus, interrogatively, and, generally, in

replies. I said almost peculiar, because I think this pleonasm is

identified in the Greek idiom, “Ουχι μενον σοι εμενε. Remaining, did it

not remain to thee.”


The Accra has the present, imperfect, perfect, and future tenses: the

imperfect and future being distinguished by the prefixes _bleh_ and

_ah_, the one before, the other after the pronoun.


  “me yāyne.   bleh me yayne.   me yăy.    m’ahye.”


  I eat it.   I was eating it.  I eat.   I will eat.


But the imperfect tense is never used, unless a sentence precedes it, as


  “Bennay heh bă bleh me yay.”


  “When he came I was eating.”


Otherwise, they use the perfect for the imperfect, never replying to a

question even, in the latter. The perfect is only distinguished from the

present by being pronounced short. These explicative particles, _bleh_

and _ah_, would, no doubt, be found to be remnants of verbs of

appropriate signification, as the _ai_ of the French future is derived

from _avoir_, were any philologist sufficiently acquainted with the

languages to investigate them. _Ne_, signifying it or thing, is adjoined

to many verbs, frequently in the present tense only, like the

explicative particle _en_ conjugated with “_aller_.”


The Fantee has a present, perfect, and pluperfect: as “me dedee,” I eat,

“me adee,” I have eaten, “me waya dedee,” I had eat. It has no future,

yet the time is marked precisely, by adding _soon_, _to-morrow_, &c. to

the present.


Neither language has participles; for, I see him coming, the Accras

would say, according to their idiom,


  “Minnā eh ba’lheh.”


  “I see his coming.”


_Ba_ being a noun, with the definite article _lheh_ affixed. The Fantees

would say,


  “Mehoon deh orraba.”


  “I see that he comes.”


Many verbs in the Accra language are conjugated like reflectives, though

they are not so in their nature, as


  “Me  nakoo  me  fai  lheh


   I    not   I   did   it, for I did not do it.


In the Accra, _ko_, the contraction of _nakoo_, (not,) is added to verbs

as a negative, as “_meyayko_,” I did not eat; yet, in some instances,

they have distinct verbs to express the negative of the action, as

“_mahttay_,” I will go, “_meyang_,” I will not go.


The Fantee prefixes _neën_, not, as “_me dedee_,” I eat, “_me neën

dedee_,” I do not eat; and they have also, apparently, distinct negative

verbs, as “_me becko_,” I go, “_me’nkoko_,” I do not go.


The Accra resembles the Greek in the nice distinctions of some of its

verbs and nouns.


  Gnăghmong         To salute in the morning.


  Cotaghmong        To roll up.


  Balbaghtoomong    To draw towards


  Tehtemong         To gather up


  Kakow             The tooth ache (_nanyong_ a tooth)


  Kodjomong         To talk a palaver


  Song              To work as a smith  }

                                        } neechoomong to work

  Ghnāmong                    mechanic  }


  Ninnamong         To separate weeds from earth


The Accra and Fantee interjections are generally parts of sentences, as,

Mr. Horne Tooke has shewn most of our own to be: “_minnannako_,” what do

I see now, “_me ä whoo!_” I die, “_màdja!_” oh my father, equally

responsive to grief, joy, or surprise; and used as involuntarily, and as

frequently as the two syllables _boh_, _hah_, which answer to our _oh_,

and _ah_, and which, of course, cannot be called words. An Ashantee

striking his foot against a stone, or any thing in his way, exclaims

“the thing is mad.”


I was surprised to find little, or no inversion in the Accra or Fantee

prose[118]; the substantive precedes the adjective, but there is

scarcely any other trace of it: yet, it is one of their poetical

licenses, as may be instanced in the following line of a Fantee song;


          “Abirrikirri croom ogah odum.”


          Foreign town fire put in,


for “the foreign town is set on fire.” In addition to this inversion, so

many peculiar additives, (generally vowels,) and inflexions are allowed,

as well as the figures Synæresis, Diæresis, Metathesis, and Anastrophe,

in their poetry, and in their poetry only, (making it unintelligible

even to those who can converse fluently with them) that both languages

may be said to have a Prosody. From the following song, I imagined the

Fantees (for the Accra’s are said to possess none but fetish hymns in

their own language) to have some idea of rhyme, considering the

inversion of the first line as forced, and expressly accommodated to the

metre,


  Abirrikirri croom ogah odum,


  Ocoontinkiï bonoo fum,


  Cooroompun,


  Coom agwun,


but I have not met with any other instance.


The Ashantees generally use much and vehement gesture, and speak in

recitative: their action is exuberant, but graceful; and from the

infancy of the language,[119] nouns and verbs are constantly repeated,

for force, and distinction, as _one one_, for, _one by one_, or, _each_;

_one tokoo one tokoo_, for, _one tokoo a-piece_. They frequently are

obliged to vary the tone, in pronouncing a word which has more than one

meaning, as the Chinese do. They have no expression short of you are a

liar, and the king was surprised, when I told him we made a great

difference between a mistake and a lie; he said the truth was not spoken

in either case, and, therefore, it was the same thing; they did not

consider the motive but only the fact.


Like the American languages, those of this part of Africa, are full of

figures, hyperbolical and picturesque.[120] One of the kings of the

interior, whose territories the Ashantees had long talked of invading,

sent forty pots of palm oil to Coomassie, with the message, that, “he

feared they could not find their way, so he sent the oil to light them.”

The Accras instead of good night, say “_wooäu d’tcherrimong_,” sleep

till the lighting of the world: one of their imprecations against their

enemies, is, “may their hiding place be our flute,” that is, “our

plaything:” when they speak of a man imposing on them, they say, “he

turned the backs of our heads into our mouths.” Having occasion, whilst

at Coomassie, to protest against the conduct of an individual, the king

replied, through Adoosee, “The horse comes from the bush, and is a fool,

but the man who rides him knows sense, and by and by makes him do what

he wishes; you, by yourself, made the horse, who was a fool, do better

the other day, therefore, three of you ought to teach a man, who is not

born a fool, and does not come from the bush, to do what you know to be

right by and by, though I see he does wrong now.” Other instances will

appear in their songs.


I shall transfer the imperfect Vocabularies which I formed, and the

incidental observations, to the Appendix; as they may not be indulged

with so much attention by the generality of readers, as the

investigation of the structure.


[Footnote 111: The eastern and western branch of this polar race, the

Eskimoes and the Tschougazes, notwithstanding the enormous distance of

800 leagues which separates them, are united by the most intimate

analogy of languages. This analogy extends, as has been recently proved

in the most evident manner, even to the inhabitants of the north-east of

Asia; for the idiom of the Tschouktshes at the mouth of the Anadin has

the same roots, as the language of the Eskimoes who inhabit the coast of

America opposite to Europe. The Tschouktsches are the Eskimoes of Asia.

Humbolt, P. N. v. 3, p. 291.]


[Footnote 112: “I am aware that languages are much more strongly

characterised by their structure and grammatical forms, than by the

analogy of their sounds and of their roots; and that their analogy of

sounds is sometimes so disfigured in the different dialects of the same

tongue, as not to be distinguishable; for the tribes into which a nation

is divided, often designate the same objects by words altogether

heterogeneous. Hence it follows, that we are easily mistaken, if,

neglecting the study of the inflexions, and consulting only the roots,

for instance the words which designate the moon, sky, water, and earth,

we decide on the absolute difference of two idioms from the simple want

of resemblance in sounds.” Humboldt’s Personal Narrative, vol. iii. p.

251.


I am gratified to find, since my return to England, and consequent

perusal of the Congo publication, that my investigations of these

languages have happened to be consonant with the instructions of Mr.

Marsden in his letter to Captain Tuckey, as appears from the following

extract. “Where a longer residence admits of freer intercourse, and a

means of acquiring a more perfect knowledge of the language, it will be

desirable, besides attempting to fill up the larger vocabulary, that

pains should be taken to examine its grammatical structure, and to

ascertain, for instance, how the nominative and subjunctive words in a

sentence are placed with respect to the verb; how the adjective with

regard to the substantive; how plurals and degrees of comparison are

formed; whether there is any kind of inflexion or variation of syllables

of the same word, according to its position in the sentence and

connection with other words; whether the pronouns personal vary

according to the rank or sex of the person addressing or person

addressed; and whether they are incorporated with the verb; and to

observe any other peculiarities of idiom, that the language may present;

noting the degree of softness, harshness, indistinctness, intonation,

guttural sounds, and the prevalence or deficiency of any particular

letters of the alphabet, as we should term them, such as R and F. The

extent of country over which a language is understood to prevail should

also be a subject of investigation; and, by what others it is bounded on

every side. Also, whether there may not be a correct language of

communication between nations, whose proper languages are distinct.” I

think the very frequent use of _q_ is one distinguishing character of

African languages: the _r_ and _f_ are very frequent, the latter

especially; the former as a liquid is frequently substituted for _l_, as

I have illustrated in the Chapter on Geography. Their pronunciation of

_z_ approximates to that of the _aspro z_ of the Italians. I hope to

have leisure and opportunity hereafter for paying this subject more

attention. I have not yet had time to make sufficient progress in German

to read Vater’s Mithridatis, which will no doubt assist my

observations.]


[Footnote 113: “From the Hebrew עתה, ote, _time_, has flowed ὁτε,

_when_; which τ, π, οπ, being prefixed, becomes τοτε, ποτε, ὁποτε.”]


[Footnote 114: “Every verb consists of a pronoun, expressing an agent,

and of a noun, or the substitute of a noun, expressing an object. Thus,

οινος and εγω joined and abbreviated is οινοω; and this term would be

sufficient to express _I drink wine_, though originally it meant only

_wine I_; association supplying to the speaker and the person addressed

the intermediate notion _of drinking_.” Jones.]


[Footnote 115: The word _caboceer_ (_chief_,) which I have used in the

correspondence, history, and other parts of this work, as the only title

familiar to Europeans, (being always substituted, even by native

interpreters for the vernacular,) was of course introduced by the

Portuguese, and consequently unknown in the interior. It is applied to a

chief who has the charge or government of a town, (_croom_.) Such

however are indiscriminately called _ōhen_ or _king_, in Fantee.

Throughout Ashantee the monarch only is called _ōhennie_ or _king_, and

the chiefs who have the care or government of the towns of his

dominions, _sāf ĕhen_. _Sāfie_ or _saphwooa_, means _key_, and the last

syllable of the compound, _hen_, is evidently an abbreviation of

_ōhennie_. _Safie_, a _charm_, is without doubt identical in a

figurative sense with _sāfee_, _key_; and should, on consideration, be

spelt as such, and not _saphie_ as I have generally written it hitherto.

A Moor is called _Crambo_ by the Negroes of the interior, which bears

the same interpretation as _Pongheme_, a Spaniard, in the Tamanack, i.e.

_a man clothed_.]


[Footnote 116: It is also found in the Empoönga, and other African

languages.]


[Footnote 117: “The distinction of active and passive is not essential

to verbs. In the infancy of language, it was in all probability not

known; in Hebrew, the difference but imperfectly exists, and in the

early periods of it, possibly did not exist at all. In Arabic, the only

distinction which obtains, arises from the vowel points, a late

invention compared with the antiquity of that language. And in our own

tongue the names of active and passive would have remained unknown, if

they had not been learnt in Latin.” Jones.]


[Footnote 118: “He (the savage) would not express himself according to

our English order of construction, Give me fruit, but according to the

Latin order, Fruit give me, Fructum da mihi, for this plain reason, that

his attention was wholly directed towards fruit, the desired object.

This was the exciting idea; the object which moved him to speak, and of

course would be the first named. Such an arrangement is precisely

putting into words the gesture which nature taught the savage to make,

before he was acquainted with words; and therefore it may be depended

upon as certain, that he would fall most readily into this arrangement.

· · · · · · We might therefore conclude, à priori, that this would be

the order in which things were most commonly arranged at the beginning

of language, and accordingly we find, in fact, that in this order words

are arranged in most of the antient tongues; as in the Greek and the

Latin; and it is also said, in the Russian, the Sclavonic, the Gaelic,

and several of the American tongues.” Blair.


The arrangement of words in the Chayma is such as is found in every

language of both continents, which has preserved a certain air of youth.

The object is placed before the verb, the verb before the personal

pronoun. The object on which the attention should be principally fixed,

precedes all the modifications of that object.


The American would say; “liberty complete love we;” instead of we love

complete liberty; “Thee with happy am I”—instead of I am happy with

thee. Humboldt’s Personal Narrative, vol. 3, p. 261.]


[Footnote 119: “In the infancy of language, while words were yet scanty,

the most natural way, whereby a writer or speaker might give an

additional force to his discourse, was to _repeat_ such terms as he

wished to render _emphatic_. The more ancient any language is, the more

numerous appear the traces of such repetitions; and next to the Hebrew,

they form a remarkable feature in the Greek tongue. This μαω μαω, I

desire desire, blended into one word, become μιμαω, and mean, I greatly

desire. βαω βαω, I walk walk, βιβαω, I stride, &c. &c. &c. See Jones.]


[Footnote 120: “The messenger concluded this insulting notification by

presenting the king with a pair of iron sandals, at the same time

adding, that until such time as Daisy had worn out these sandals in his

flight, he should never be secure from the arrows of Bambarra.” Park’s

1st Mission.]


                               CHAPTER X.


                               * * * * *


                                _Music._


The wild music of these people is scarcely to be brought within the

regular rules of harmony,[121] yet their airs have a sweetness and

animation beyond any barbarous compositions I ever heard. Few of their

instruments possess much power, but the combination of several

frequently produces a surprising effect. The flute is made of a long

hollow reed, and has not more than three holes; the tone is low at all

times, and when they play in concert they graduate them with such nicety

as to produce the common chords. Several instances of thirds occur,

especially in one of the annexed airs, played as a funeral dirge; nor is

this extraordinary considering it is the most natural interval; the

addition of fifths, at the same time, is rare. The natives declare they

can converse by means of their flutes, and an old resident at Accra has

assured me he has heard these dialogues, and that every sentence was

explained to him.


On the Sanko (see Drawing No. 5, and Specimen in the Museum) they

display the variety of their musical talents, and the Ashantees are

allowed to surpass all others. It consists of a narrow box, the open top

of which is covered with alligator, or antelope skin; a bridge is raised

on this, over which eight strings are conducted to the end of a long

stick, fastened to the fore part of the box, and thickly notched, and

they raise or depress the strings into these notches as occasion

requires. The upper string assimilates with the tenor C of the piano,

and the lower with the octave above: sometimes they are tuned in

Diatonic succession, but too frequently the intermediate strings are

drawn up at random, producing flats and sharps in every Chromatic

variety, though they are not skilful enough to take advantage of it. I

frequently urged this by trying to convince them they were not playing

the same tune I had heard the day before, but the answer was invariably,

“I pull the same string, it must be the same tune.” The strings are made

from the runners of a tree called Enta, abounding in the forests. All

airs on this instrument are played very quick, and it is barely possible

to make even an experienced player lessen the time, which quick as it

is, is kept in a surprising manner, especially as every tune is loaded

with ornament. They have a method of stopping the strings with the

finger, so as to produce a very soft and pleasing effect, like the Meyer

touch of the harp.


The horns form their loudest sounds, and are made of elephant’s tusks,

they are generally very large, and, being graduated like the flutes,

their flourishes have a martial and grand effect. It has been mentioned

in the Military Customs of the Ashantees, that peculiar sentences are

immediately recognised by the soldiers, and people, in the distinct

flourishes of the horns of the various chiefs: the words of some of

these sentences are almost expressible by the notes of the horns; the

following, uttered by the horns of a captain named Gettoä, occurs to me

as an instance


  “O Saï tĭntĭntoo, ma yūāyĭä pa pa.”


   O Saï great king! I laud thee every where, or exceedingly.


The Bentwa (see Drawing No. 6.) is a stick bent in the form of a bow,

and across it, is fastened a very thin piece of split cane, which is

held between the lips at one end, and struck with a small stick; whilst

at the other it is occasionally stopped, or rather buffed, by a thick

one; on this they play only lively airs, and it owes its various sounds

to the lips.


The Mosees, Mallowas, Bournous, and natives from the more remote parts

of the interior, play on a rude violin: the body is a calabash, the top

is covered with deer skin, and two large holes are cut in it for the

sound to escape; the strings, or rather string, is composed of cow’s

hair, and broad like that of the bow with which they play, which

resembles the bow of a violin. Their grimace equals that of an Italian

Buffo: they generally accompany themselves with the voice, and increase

the humour by a strong nasal sound.


The Oompoochwa is a box, one end of which is left open; two flat bridges

are fastened across the top, and five pieces of thin curved stick,

scraped very smooth, are attached to them, and (their ends being

raised,) are struck with some force by the thumb. I can compare it to

nothing but the Staccado nearly deprived of its tone.


The Ashantees have an instrument like a Bagpipe, but the drone is

scarcely to be heard.


The rest of the instruments can hardly be called musical, and consist of

drums, castanets, gong-gongs, flat sticks, rattles, and even old brass

pans.


The Drums (see Drawing No. 7.) are hollow’d trunks of trees, frequently

carved with much nicety, mostly open at one end, and of many sizes:

those with heads of common skin (that is of any other than Leopard skin)

are beaten with sticks in the form of a crotchet rest; the largest are

borne on the head of a man, and struck by one or more followers; the

smaller are slung round the neck, or stand on the ground; in the latter

case they are mostly played with the inside of the fingers, at which the

natives are very expert: amongst these drums are some with heads of

leopard skin, (looking like vellum,) only sounded by two fingers, which

are scraped along, as the middle finger is on the tamborine, but

producing a much louder noise. The gong-gongs are made of hollow pieces

of iron, and struck with the same metal. The Castanets are also of iron.

The Rattles are hollow gourds, the stalks being left as handles, and

contain shells or pebbles, and are frequently covered with a net work of

beads; the grimaces with which these are played make them much more

entertaining to sight than hearing.


I was fortunate enough to find a rare instance of a native able to play

the radical notes of each tune; he is the best player in the country,

and I was enabled to collect the airs now offered: with some of the

oldest date I have also selected a few of the latest compositions. Their

graces are so numerous, some extempore, some transmitted from father to

son, that the constant repetition only can distinguish the commencement

of the air: sometimes between each beginning they introduce a few

chords, sometimes they leave out a bar, sometimes they only return to

the middle, so entirely is it left to the fancy of the performer. The

observation made on the time of the Sanko may be extended to almost

every other instrument, but it is always perfect, and the children will

move their heads and limbs, whilst on their mother’s backs, in exact

unison with the tune which is playing: the contrasts of piano and forte

are very well managed.


The singing is almost all recitative, and this is the only part of music

in which the women partake; they join in the chorusses, and at the

funeral of a female sing the dirge itself; but the frenzy of the moment

renders it such a mixture of yells and screeches, that it bids defiance

to all notation. The songs of the Canoe men are peculiar to themselves,

and very much resemble the chants used in cathedrals, but as they are

all made for the moment, I have not been able to retain any of them.


To have attempted any thing like arrangement, beyond what the annexed

airs naturally possess, would have altered them, and destroyed the

intention of making them known in their original character. I have not

even dared to insert a flat or a sharp.


No. 1. is the oldest air in the whole collection, and common both to

Ashantees and Warsaws; I could trace it through four generations, but

the answer made to my enquiries will give the best idea of its

antiquity; “it was made when the country was made.” The key appears to

be E minor.


The old and simple air No. 2, is almost spoiled from the quick method of

playing it, but when slow it has a melancholy rarely found in African

music, and it is one of the very few in which the words are adapted to

the tune. I think it is decidedly in the key of C major. The noun

aganka, an orphan, is from the verb agan to leave. Oboïbee is a bird

that sings only at night, for which I know no other name than the

Ashantee. The Warsaw air, No. 3, also in C major, was composed in

consequence of a contest between the two principal caboceers of that

country, Intiffa and Attobra; one extremely thin and the other very fat;

Attobra ran away, and is derided by Intiffa in the following satirical

words:


          Asoom cōōcŏŏrŏŏcōō ŏninny ăgwanny.


Asoom is a dolphin, which, as a beardless creature, is an epithet of the

strongest contempt. The literal translation is,


          The big dolphin runs away from the small man.


No. 5, which I should conjecture to begin in E minor, and to end in D

minor, was occasioned by an English vessel bringing the report of a

battle, in which the French were defeated and their town burned. The

words are allegorical.


      Abirrikirri croom ogah odum;


      French town fire put in;


      Ocoontinkii bonoo fum;


  Great fighting man, wolf take you away;


      Cooroompun coom agwun.


      Cooroompun kills all goats.


Abirrikirri applies indiscriminately to all nations beyond the sea, as

Dunko does to all nations far in the interior. Cooroompun is a very

large insect of the genus mantis (soothsayer) frequently met with here,

and the natives believe that it kills the sheep and goats by

fascination, standing with its eyes fixed on those of the object, and

swinging its head and body from side to side without moving its feet,

until the animal falls in fits and dies.[122] Agwun is a noun of

multitude, comprehending all the goat kind.


A long tale accompanies No. 6. An Ashantee having been surprised in an

intrigue with another man’s wife, becomes the slave of the King, and is

obliged to follow the army in a campaign against the celebrated Attah,

the Akim caboceer mentioned in the history. The Ashantee army having

retired, this man either deserted or could not join his division, and

after concealing himself some time in the forest, was taken by a party

of Attah’s, whom he addresses in the following words:


    Eqqwee odin ahi,


    Panther bush here (belongs to)


      Minăwoo! Minăwoo!


      I die! I die!


    Me’din adoo croom,


    Bush now my croom,


      Minăwoo! Minăwoo!


      I die! I die!


    Babisseäche Minăwoo! Minăwoo!


  For woman’s sake I die! I die!


    Attah m’incomie! Attah m’incomie!


    Attah don’t kill me! Attah don’t kill me!


The man’s life, it was added, was preserved when he urged that he

understood how to make sandals. The key appears to be E minor.


No. 7, in G major, seems to convey the moral, that riches prompt mankind

to wickedness, the word “_makes_” is understood.


No. 9, became a common song in March last in praise of the present

Governor in Chief; who, in consequence of the famine occasioned by the

preceding invasion from the Ashantees, daily distributed corn to the

starving multitude: the words are even more incoherent and figurative

than the others, therefore I have not written them, but the meaning to

be gathered is, “Poor woman and poor child got no gold to buy kanky;

good white man gives you corn.” It will be observed that the air much

resembles No. 11, wherefore I suspect it is an alteration, and not a

composition; although the key seems to be G major, and it is impossible

to attach any key to the latter.


The dirge, No. 12, certainly in the key of C major, has been mentioned

before, but here I must add, that in venturing the intervening and

concluding bass chord, I merely attempt to describe the castanets, gong-

gongs, drums, &c. bursting in after the soft and mellow tones of the

flutes; as if the ear was not to retain a vibration of the sweeter

melody.


No. 13, in D minor, is played by only two flutes, and is one of the

softest airs I have met with.


No. 14, is an Accra fetish hymn, sung by one man and one woman, or more,

at Christmas:


  Afĭnaïē pweë,


  The year’s ends have met,


  Gnōr woorra


  Somebody’s child


  Mŏrbee.


  Take blessing.


“Somebody’s child,” means the child of a person of consequence,

reminding us of Hidalgos, “the son of somebody,” so applied in Spanish.

Its regularity is surprising, and its transition from G major to C major

is very harmonious.


No. 15, in G major, is a specimen of the Kerrapee or Kerrapay music,

which I have made a point of preserving, as it appeared to me superior

even to Ashantee. A young man acknowledges a crime he had attempted to

conceal:


  Kennĕödvay nooblou adomevai,


  Oh pity! the palaver is spoiled,


  Noodooloo adomevai,


  It is found, it is spoiled;


    Ēnnŏblou;


    Think for me;


  Dootŏh mĕ pŏ mĕ blōh,


  Elders, settle it for me,


    Adăn vō,


    I am at a loss,


        Iëe!


        Oh!


The following is a translation of a long Ashantee song, with little or

no air. The men sit together in a line on one side, with their sankos

and other instruments; and the women in a line opposite to them.

Individuals rise and advance, singing in turn.[123]


  _1st Woman._   My husband likes me too much,


                 He is good to me,


                 But I cannot like him,


                 So I must listen to my lover.


  _1st Man._     My wife does not please me,


                 I tire of her now;


                 So I will please myself with another,


                 Who is very handsome.


  _2nd Woman._   My lover tempts me with sweet words,


                 But my husband always does me good,


                 So I must like him well,


                 And I must be true to him.


  _2nd Man._     Girl you pass my wife handsome,


                 But I cannot call you wife;


                 A wife pleases her husband only,


                 But when I leave you, you go to others.


[Illustration: Music score


The oldest ASHANTEE and WARSAW AIR.]


[Illustration: Music score


A very old ASHANTEE AIR.


  Aganka oshoom noofa Oboibee oshoom noofa Aganka oshoomnoofa


  Orphan cries at night · · · cries at night Orphan cries at night


  wekirree wekirree oimiyow wekirree wekirree oimiyow wekirree


  sad thing sad thing I’m sorry sad thing sad thing I’m sorry sad thing

]


[Illustration: Music score


WARSAW AIR.]


[Illustration: Music score


ASHANTEE AIR.]


[Illustration: Music score


FANTEE AIR.]


[Illustration: Music score


AN ASHANTEE AIR.]


[Illustration: Music score


AN ASHANTEE AIR.


  Onoompah yahpah onompah yahpah onoompah yahpah


  (Makes) Person do bad · · · · · · · · · ·


  sicca sicca onoompah yahpah onoompah yahpah


  gold gold (makes) person do bad · · · · · · · ·


  onoompah yahpah Akim sicca onoompah yahpah.


  · · · · · · Akim gold (makes) person do bad.

]


[Illustration: Music score


MODERN FANTEE AIR.]


[Illustration: Music score


MODERN FANTEE AIR.]


[Illustration: Music score


ASHANTEE AIR.]


[Illustration: Music score


ASHANTEE AIR.]


[Illustration: Music score


A FANTEE DIRGE.]


[Illustration: Music score


AN ASHANTEE AIR.]


[Illustration: Music score


AN ACCRA FETISH HYMN.


  Afinaiepwaëe gnorwoorra afinaiepwaëe


  gnorwoorra gnorwoorra


  gnorwoorra afinaiepwaëe gnorwoorra morbee gnorwoorra


  gnorwoorra gnorwoorra morbee gnorwoorra

]


[Illustration: Music score


A KERRAPEE SONG.


  Kenneovay nooblou adomevai Kenneovay nooblou adomevai


  noodooloo adomevai ennoblou Dootoh me po me bloh adanvo Iëe

]


[Illustration: Music score


FANTEE AIR.]


[Illustration: Music score


FANTEE AIR.]


[Illustration: Music score


ASHANTEE AIR.]


[Illustration: Music score


MALLOWA AIR.]


[Illustration: Music score


MOSEE AIR.]


[Footnote 121: “A few melodies in national music have been found

incapable of harmony; such as the two first bars of the second part of

the Irish tune called The Fair Hair’d Child.” Dr. Crotch.]


[Footnote 122: The power of fascination by the eyes, is believed and

dreaded in those parts of Africa as mortal, whether exercised by the

fetish priests against men, or by the cooroompun against animals. The

idea prevailed in Pliny’s time, but it was ascribed to the voice. “In

libro quodam Plinii naturalis historiæ legi esse quasdam in terrâ Africâ

familias hominum voce atque linguâ effascinantium. Qui si impensiùs

fortè laudaverint pulchras arbores, segetes lætiores, infantes

amœniores, egregios equos, pecudes pastu, atque cultu optimas,

emoriantur repentè hæc omnia.” A cooroompun will be found amongst the

specimens for the British Museum.]


[Footnote 123: I never heard this sung without its recalling Horace’s

beautiful little dialogue ode, (9. lib. 3) “Donec gratus eram tibi.”]


                              CHAPTER XI.


                               * * * * *


                     _Materia Medica and Diseases._


The report of the Materia Medica and Botany of Ashantee, was the only

one which I was not required to furnish. It was afforded by Mr. Henry

Tedlie, assistant surgeon, whose subsequent death has mingled a regret

with the recollection of the Embassy, which the recall of my own

sufferings, and the family affliction it entailed on me, could never

have exacted. The intelligence reached me in England, to correct the

pride of success by associating misfortune with it; for the recollection

of Mr. Tedlie’s social virtues, of his enterprise and ability, makes it

a severe one to myself, and to the world. Mr. Tedlie suffered severely

from intermitting dysentery during the Mission, but I had hoped it would

have been eradicated after his return. He had previously attended the

expedition to Candy, and expired at Cape Coast Castle in the 27th year

of his age. Throughout the Mission he indulged the feelings of the

natives, in his professional capacity, with a patience few could have

exerted; whether labouring under sickness himself, or disturbed in the

moments of a scanty rest; he awed and conciliated the people by the

importance of his cures, and thus contributed to the success of the

enterprise.


“During the earlier part of our residence at Coomassie, the season was

tolerably favourable to the gathering of plants, but we were then

allowed to go out but seldom, and never beyond the town. Latterly, when

better impressions succeeded, and our walks were unrestrained by limits

or attendants, the rains not only checked, but generally disappointed my

researches, by presenting the subject flowerless, (or in an unfit state

for preservation,) and consequently not admitting their classification,

as is too evident in the following list of such plants as are used as

medicines by the Ashantees.


1. Cutturasuh. ([124]_Chrysanthellum procumbens_. _Persoon. syn._ 2.

_p._ 471, _Verbesina mutica_ _Willd._) A small plant, a decoction of

which is purgative, before boiling it should be bruised.


2. Adumba, (a species of Ficus.) The bark and fruit are pounded with

Mallaguetta pepper and a small plant called awhinteywhinting, boiled in

fish soup: two doses in the third month of gestation are said to cause

abortion.


3. Koofoobah (_Gloriosa superba_. _Linn._) is bruised with Mallaguetta

pepper (lesser cardamom seeds) and applied to the ancle or foot when

sprained.


4. Tandoorue (_perhaps a_ _Cupania_ _or_ _Trichilia_.) The bark is

pounded and boiled with Mallaguetta pepper; used for pain in the belly,

and acts as a purgative.


5. Bissey. (_Sterculia acuminata_. _Palis. de Beauvois, Flore d’Oware_

1. _p._ 41. _tab._ 24.) The fruit is constantly chewed by the Ashantees,

especially on a journey; it is said to prevent hunger and strengthen the

stomach and bowels; has a slight bitter aromatic astringent taste, and

causes an increase of the saliva while chewed.


6. Attueh. (_Blighia sapida_. _Hort. Kew. ed._ 2. _vol._ 3, _p._ 350.

_Akeesia africana_ _Tussac Flor. des Antilles_ 66.) A decoction of the

bark is said to be anti-venereal. The fruit is eaten.


7. Ricinus Communis _Linn._ Castor oil nut tree, 30 feet high here, and

not a bush as on the coast: not used as medicine by the natives.


8. Apooder. (_Two species of_ _Leucas_, _of which one is hardly

different from_ _L. Martinicensis_ _Hort. Kew. ed._ 2. _vol._ 3, _p._

409, _the other is perhaps new._) A mixture of the bruised leaves with

lime juice is applied to inflammations.


9. Hooghong. (A species of Urtica) is bruised, mixed with chalk, and

drank by pregnant women to correct acidity in the stomach, heartburn,

&c.


10. Accocottocotorawah. (_Heliotropium indicum_. _Linn._) The juice

expressed from this plant is snuffed up the nostrils in cases of severe

head-ach. They also inhale the smoke of it into the nose.


11. Crowera (_Acalypha ciliata_. _Willd. sp. pl._) is bruised with

lesser cardamom seed, and rubbed on the chest and side when pained.


12. Enminim (_a species of_ _Vitis_.) A climbing plant. The juice

expressed from the leaves is dropped into the eyes when affected with

opthalmia or pain.


13. Secoco. (_Leptanthus_?) A small marshy plant. Is pounded with lime

juice and rubbed on the body to cure the crawcraws; a severe and

obstinate species of itch.


14. Ammo.—The juice is applied to cuts and bruises.


15. Petey (_possibly a_ _Piper_.) The leaves are pounded and applied as

a plaister to inflammatory swellings and boils.


16. Abromotome.—The bruised leaves are used to discuss boils.


17. Yangkompro. (_A syngenesious plant related to_ _Cacalia_.) The

pounded leaves are applied to cuts and contusions.


18. Oeduema. (_Musanga cecropioides_ _Br. See Tuckey’s Congo, p._ 453.)

The hairy sheath or stipule of a large palmated leaved tree; it

resembles a skin, is boiled in soup, and used as a powerful emmenagogue.


19. Semeney, (_probably a species of_ _Aneilema_.) The leaves are

pounded and applied as a plaister to favour the discharge of boils and

collections of pus.


20. Wowwah (_perhaps a_ _Sterculia_.) The inner bark of this tree is

scraped fine and mixed with Mallaguetta pepper, and drank for colic and

other pains in the belly.


21. Anafranakoo.—The bruised leaves are applied to discuss boils and

other inflammatory swelling.


22. Kattacaiben (_Leea sambucina_.) A decoction of the leaves is drank

every morning by pregnant women when they experience any uneasiness in

the abdomen. The bark of the tree powdered is rubbed on chronic

swellings.


23. Aserumbdrue (_a species of_ _Piper_ _related to_ _umbellatum_.) The

leaves are used in soup to allay swellings of the belly.


24. Ocisseeree.—The bark of this tree is used to stop the purging in

dysentery and diarrhoea.


25. Gingang. (_Paullinia africana_ _Br. See Tuckeys Congo, p._ 427.) The

bark of this tree is used internally and externally, mixed with

Mallaguetta pepper for pain in the side.


26. Cudeyakoo.—A very small plant. The leaves and stalk pounded are

applied to eruptions on the head. A mixture of it with lime juice is

applied to the yaws.


27. Affeuah (_unknown_) and Nuinnuerafuh (_Hedysari species_.) A mixture

of the bruised leaves of these plants with Mallaguetta pepper, is rubbed

on the body and limbs when swelled or pained: a decoction of them, with

an addition of the plant Comfany (_Alternantheræ, sp._) is used

internally in the same cases.


28. Adummah. (_Paullinia africana_. _The same as No._ 25.) A decoction

of the bark of this tree, reduced to powder with Mallaguetta pepper,

drank once a day, stops the discharge of blood and cures the dysentery.


29. Tointinney (_probably a_ _Menispermum_.) Is chewed with Mallaguetta

pepper as a cure for a cough.


30. Apussey. (_A leguminous plant, probably allied to_ _Robinia_.)


The bark of this tree pounded with Mallaguetta pepper is applied to the

head in cases of head-ach.


31. Thuquamah.—The bark is pounded and drank in Palm wine, with

Mallaguetta pepper, for pain in the belly.


32. Conkknoney, a dark purple coloured Toadstool, the size of a hazel

nut, rubbed with Mallaguetta pepper and lime juice, it purges briskly.

To stop the purging, a mess of boiled Guinea corn meal and lime juice

should be eaten.


33. Suetinney.—(_Brillantaisia owariensis_. _Palis. de Beauvois Flor.

d’Oware_, 2. _p._ 68 _tab._ 100, _fig._ 2.) A decoction of the leaves is

drank for pain in the belly.


34. Soominna, (Tetandria Monogynia,) is bruised with lime juice and used

to abate cough.


35. Thattha (_Scoparia dulcis_. _Linn._)—The expressed juice of this

plant is dropped into the ears when pained.


36. Aquey (_Melia Azedarach_. _Linn._) A decoction of the leaves of this

tree is used with Palm wine as a corroborant.


37. Dammaram (_Mussænda fulgens_. _nov. spec._)


The diseases most common in the Ashantee Country are the Lues, Yaws,

Itch, Ulcers, Scald-heads, and griping pains in the bowels. Other

diseases are occasionally met with, I should suppose in the same

proportion that they occur in civilized countries; but I do not know to

what cause to assign the prevalence and frequency of one of the most

unsightly diseases that can occur in any country: it is an obstinate

species of ulcer, or, Noli me tangere, which destroys the nose and upper

lip; it attacks women chiefly, although men are not exempt from it;

there are more than 100 women in Coomassie who have lost the nose or

upper lip from this cause alone: it commences with a small ulcer in the

alæ nasi, or upper lip, the size of a split pea, excavated, with the

edges ragged and turned inwards, it proceeds by ulcerating under the

skin; the bottom of the ulcer is uneven, covered with a foul slough, of

a very disagreeable smell, and the discharge is thin, watery, and very

irritating: it seldom cicatrices before the alæ nasi and lip are

completely destroyed; when it does cease, the skin is puckered and

uneven, and has a very disagreeable appearance; the only remedy which

the natives use, is an external application of bruised leaves; they seem

to let it take its course, without being very anxious about a cure.


Framboesia, the Yaws, is a very frequent disease with the children of

the poor and slaves: before the eruption takes place they are severely

afflicted with pains in the joints, and along the course of the muscles

of the superior and inferior extremities; in young persons, hard, round

bony excrescences, the size of a walnut, form on each side of the nose

under the eyes. The Natives either are not acquainted with a remedy for

this enlargement of the bones, or if they are, they do not put it in

practice. I administered alterative doses of calomel and antimonial

powder with success, as it stopped the enlargement of the bones and

caused them to be absorbed, and relieved the pain in the arms and legs

particularly; during the exhibition of the alterative pills, a foul

ulcer on the head got well: the natives apply a mixture of the plant

Cudey-akoo, with lime juice, to the eruption, but apparently with very

little benefit.


Psora, the itch, a very severe species of which, called craw craw, is a

frequent disease, and is very contagious; it is most commonly met with

in children, few of the Dunko slaves are without it, from their poor

diet and extreme dirtiness; they do not seem to experience much

uneasiness from it, as they seldom apply any remedy; sometimes they use

a rubefaciant, made of a plant called secoco, bruised and mixed with

lime juice.


Gonorrhœa is of rare occurrence, two cases came under my care, the

patients had never used injections, they drank decoctions of leaves and

bark, but could not tell me the plants they used; one of the

ingredients, was a small plant call Cutturasuh, of a purgative nature.

The disease is allowed to take its course by the natives, as they are

unacquainted with any method to stop it.


Tinea Capitis, the scald head, is a common disease with the poorer sort

of Ashantees and slaves, arising from their neglect of cleanliness; the

applications which they use to cure it have seldom the desired effect.

They apply plaisters of pounded leaves and charcoal, but do not wash the

head. In one case, where a boy was placed under my care, he got well in

eight days, by having his head very well washed with a brush, soap, and

warm water; then a strong infusion of tobacco, applied with a sponge,

and when the head was dry, a composition of resinous and mercurial

ointment was rubbed on it.


Hydrocele occasionally occurs; they attempt to cure it by frictions of

the castor oil nut, burnt and bruised with Mallaguetta pepper, but

without any benefit. I drew off the water from one hydrocele, but, from

our want of stimulants, could not perform any radical cure. Their

applications to Inguinal hernia are equally ineffectual. They never

attempt the reduction of umbilical hernia, although some are very large,

and the disease very frequent.


When a fracture of the leg or arm happens, the part is rubbed with a

soft species of grass and palm oil, and the limb bound up with splints.

“If God does not take the patient he recovers in four months,” as they

say.


I have not seen a single instance of fracture in the Ashantee country.

Gun-shot wounds of the extremities, when the bone is fractured, are

generally fatal, or, where a large blood vessel is wounded, as they are

unacquainted with any method of stopping the hæmorrage; in fact they pay

little attention to their wounded men; if they are not able to travel,

they are abandoned. One of the King’s criers had his thigh dislocated at

the hip joint with an anchylosis of the knee; the limb was considerably

longer than the other, and the accident must have occurred a long time

ago, as he walks very well.


During the time we remained in Coomassie, and from our first entrance

into the Ashantee country, I was every day applied to for advice and

medicines by those who were afflicted with diseases, of which the number

was great, and in the capital more especially, from its very unhealthy

situation, being entirely surrounded by an extensive tract of swampy

ground, and the natives consequently very subject to dysentery and

fever. On first entering the country I was applied to by numbers of

patients, many of them miserable objects, from the effects of the

venereal disease: to as many of those as applied, during our halt in a

town, I gave boxes of pills and strict directions for their use, and

told them if they came to Coomassie during my residence there, I would

do every thing in my power to cure them. Many availed themselves of my

offer, and attended me on my arrival. To those who had ulcers or wounds,

I applied the proper dressings, and left with them lint, adhesive

plaister, and ointment. Most of them as a mark of their gratitude, sent

presents of fowls, fruit, palm oil, wine, &c. to me after I had arrived

in the capital. One man in Assiminia, who was nearly in the last stage

of existence from a complication of disorders, originating from lues

venerea, after I had seen him, sent every week to Coomassie for

medicines, and completely recovered. Another in Sarrasoo who had the

worst looking ulcers of the inferior extremities, that I have ever seen,

did the same, and with the same success. A great many caboceers attended

me every morning with their slaves and children affected with dropsy,

crawcraws, yaws, fever, bowel complaints, &c. and expressed the most

unbounded thanks for the medicine and advice they received.


At the King’s particular request, I attended his own brother, the heir

apparent, who had oedematous feet: by the use of friction, a roller, and

an alterative course of calomel, and diuretics, he soon recovered.


The King’s uncle, heir to the crown after the brother, was severely

tormented with stricture of the urethra; he could only pass urine, drop

by drop; three weeks passing the catheter, enabled him to make it in a

full stream; when he immediately requested some powerfully stimulating

medicine to correct impotency, which it was not in my power to grant.


The captain whose office it is to drown any of the King’s family who

have offended, had an ulcer two inches long in the palate bone; when he

drank, part of the fluid passed out of his nose, and his speech was very

unintelligible; the sides of the opening were scarified, and the

granulations touched every third or fourth day with lunar caustic until

they united; he got well in one month.


The only unfortunate case I attended, was our guide Quamina Bwa; shortly

after we arrived in Coomassie he was attacked with remittent fever; by

the use of febrifuge medicines, the cold bath, bark, &c. he recovered,

and was able to attend his usual duty of waiting on us, when we visited

the king; he went into the country, and I did not see him for six weeks;

at the end of that time, he sent for me, and I found him labouring under

a severe bilious dysentery, and liver complaint. I was unable to prevent

the formation of matter in his liver; it formed a large swelling with

distinct fluctuation, and as he hesitated to have it discharged by

puncturing with a trochar, it burst internally, and he died. I had one

case of cancer of the upper lip, although the disease is said rarely to

occur in that part. This case had all the marks of a true cancer; I

dressed it every day during the whole time I remained in Coomassie, but

the effect flattered and disappointed me by turns.


The most importunate man for medicine, especially of an invigorating

kind, in the whole Ashantee country, was old Apokoo, the treasurer and

chief favourite. He was afflicted with inguinal hernia: I wrote to Cape

Coast for a truss, which I applied, and it gave him immediate relief and

satisfaction. He would take the most nauseous drug with pleasure. I

generally gave him bark and peppermint water, which he regularly either

sent or came for every day, during the two last months of our residence,

and earnestly requested me to leave plenty of medicine with Mr.

Hutchison, the British resident there. Most of the chief men were very

earnest in their solicitations for me to give them stimulating

medicines. I always assured them that it was impossible, that the

English never used any, and that nothing astonished me more than that

they should ask for such things. Their answers were, “they knew that the

English had good heads and knew every thing, and must know that too, but

I did not wish to give them any.”


  _A List of the Diseases which I have seen in the Ashantee country._


  Febris remittens        2 cases


  Hepatitis               1


  Dysenteria mucosa       6


  Colica                  1


  Anasarca                3


  Ascites                 3


  Scrophula               many cases


  Syphilis                many


  Gonorrhœa               2


  Stricture               3


  Cataract                2


  Staphyloma              5


  Ectropium               1


  Bronchocele             many


  Cephalagia              many


  Odontalgia              10


  Ulcers                  8


  Framboesia              many


  Psora                   many


  Hernia inguinal         1


  Umbilical (hernia)      many


  Dracunculus             7


  Tinea capitis           many


  Hydrocele               many


  Cancer                  1


  Elephantiasis           1


  Lepra                   7


[Footnote 124: I am indebted to Mr. Brown’s knowledge for the names and

references in the parentheses.]


                              CHAPTER XII.


                               * * * * *


                        _Mr. Hutchison’s Diary._


September 26. After we left the palace this morning, Apokoo invited me

home to take some refreshment. He entered into a long conversation

concerning the slave trade: he heard, he said, that an English vessel

had arrived at Cape Coast, and had brought out a letter from the King of

England to the Governor-in-Chief, ordering a renewal of the slave trade,

and asked me, if I had received any letter. I said I had not, but if

such a thing had taken place, I thought I should have early accounts. He

enquired what were the objections we had to “buy men?” I told him what I

conceived to be proper; he laughed at our ideas, and enquired if the

king of Dahomey had not sent a “book four moons ago to Cape Coast,

inviting the English to trade again, in his kingdom.” I replied there

was a message sent, but I could not say exactly in what words, as I was

at Dix Cove at the time. “England,” he said, “was too fond of fighting,

her soldiers were the same as dropping a stone in a pond, they go

farther and farther:” at the same time he described an enlarging circle

with his hand, and shook his finger and head significantly at me. He was

anxious for me to write a “proper book” on the slave trade, many slaves,

he told me, had revolted, and joining the Buntokoo standard were to

fight against them; there were too many slaves in the country, (an

opinion I tacitly acquiesced in), and they wanted to get rid of some of

them. There might be a deal of trouble from them; he alone had one

slave, who had 1000 followers at arms, and he might trouble them as

Cudjo Cooma did, who was a slave of his when he revolted, and whose

adherents alone were 10,000, independent of runaways, &c.


In the afternoon the King sent me a ceremonious message, with his

compliments, saying he would be glad if I attended him in his customs,

&c. when he should sit in public. I replied that I would be happy to do

so, as it was the King’s wish, except when human sacrifices were

offered, but then it would be contrary to my inclinations, my religion,

and my instructions.


Shortly after I was told the King was in the market-place drinking palm

wine. I went for the first time and took my seat on his left. The King

made me a present of a pot of wine, as did several of his chiefs. When

he drank, the whole of the music played, while the executioners, holding

their swords with their right hands, covered their noses with their

left, whilst they sung his victories and titles. About half a dozen

small boys stood behind his chair, and finished the whole with a fetish

hymn. The King enquired how many servants I had, and several questions

of the same kind. After sitting about half an hour the assembly broke

up, the King rising first, which is the signal to retire.


Since the mission departed I have not been annoyed by any boys calling

after me. After seeing Messrs. Bowdich and Tedlie through the town, on

their going away, as I returned home the crowds thanked me as I passed,

for staying. I suppose they hardly imagined, when it came to the last,

that I would do so: indeed when I returned to my lodgings I found them

solitary enough; and, in the night time, three men found their way into

the house; one of my servants awakening, shouted out; I struck at one of

them with my sword, but missed him: in the morning it was discovered

that he had succeeded in stealing nearly half a sheep, a quantity of

kankey belonging to the boys, and a table knife. I am not sanguine

enough to imagine I shall be long allowed to take my walks unmolested;

when the novelty of my remaining alone passes away, they will return to

their old insolencies.


Monday 29. Paid Apokoo a visit, and dashed him a razor. Several people

were there talking palavers, and wishing him to interest the King for

them; among others, an old captain complained heavily of Quamina Bwa,

our guide, but since dead, who he said had stolen a slave from him and

sold him during the Fantee war; he had unavailingly applied to the

family, he therefore wished it to be brought before the King.


Apokoo complained of head-ach, and one of his women brought a decoction

of herbs, which she poured into a hollow piece of wood with two tubes,

these were inserted in the nostrils, and the liquor poured in, while the

head was held back, and afterwards spit out by the mouth; I have seen

the same poured into the ear for a like complaint. He wished me to try a

little of it; I of course declined it. He called one of his daughter’s,

and wished me to consaw, or espouse her; I told him she was too young;

he said that was nothing, as he would keep her for me: he added, the

Ashantee custom was, if a great man’s wife with child took another man’s

fancy, he consawed the child in the womb, and if born a girl, when she

grew up she became his wife; if a boy, it was his to serve and attend on

him, and he took care of it. Four ounces of gold it generally cost to

consaw a girl. I said he was a rich man; “true,” he replied, “but it

sometimes costs eight or ten ounces, sometimes only two.” Observing a

bow and arrows standing in the room, I began to amuse myself with

shooting them; he told me these were only for play, but when they went

to fight, they tipped them with iron, and put a deadly poison on it,

which caused almost instant death; the poison is made from vegetables

boiled in a large pot, and the arrows steeped in it. He shewed me the

marks of two arrow wounds which he received in battle. He then began to

consult his fetish, by a quantity of strings, with various ornaments on

one end to denote their good or evil qualities; these were mixed

promiscuously together, and taking them in his right hand, he put them

behind his back, and drew out one with his left; this was repeated about

20 times. A wicker basket was then brought on a small stool covered with

a silk cloth, in it were two lumps like pincushions, made of eggs, palm

oil, &c.: he then turned up the bottom of his stool, and making three

holes in it with something like a cobler’s awl, he drove in three pegs

with a stone, muttering to himself all the time, and waving each string

round his right ear; an egg was then brought in broken at one end, and

placed alternately on the lumps in the basket, and crushed on the stool

where the pegs were put in: this he did every morning before he went

out, to keep him out of bad palavers through the day.


Tuesday 30. This morning Apokoo invited me to take a share of his

umbrella, and attend the King, who went to finish his ablutions. We

walked along through an immense crowd; the streets were lined with the

chiefs and their respective suites. We went down to the place where the

King washes; a low platform was erected where the stools were laid on

their sides. The linguists and officers of the household stood on one

side holding gold rods and canes, the fetishmen formed a crescent to the

north side. The King performed the ceremony of laving the water over

himself, sprinkling the various articles the same as on Saturday, and

the procession concluded as before.


On walking back Apokoo wished to try on one of my gloves, and as usual

put it on the wrong hand; his gold castanets pinched him when the glove

was on, which made him shout out rather lustily, and stop short, I

called out “you stop the King;” “never mind,” said he, and his

attendants pulled to get the glove off. The King sent to know what

occasioned the stoppage, Apokoo held up his hand compressed, exclaiming,

“_Gamphnee_,” (it hurts me,) and stopped till it was got off.


In the afternoon I called on Odumata, who said he was angry that I had

not called before. I told him I came to thank him for allowing a slave

boy he has, to do any thing for me; he said I might have him so as I fed

him, I replied I would do so. He entered into conversation concerning

the power of England over other nations, and the danger of going to sea;

he had lived three years at Apollonia when a young man, and had seen

many Portuguese, but did not like them, “as they were all wenches!” He

seemed pleased that I did not like them either. He wished me to purchase

a horse from him for eight ounces, I said I would give him four.“ “I

must not want one, or I would not offer him so,” was his reply. I said

that I had no place to ride it in, the country being all bush, and the

King did not like me to go very far; he replied, they were soon going to

fight, and, as I should go with them, it would be better for me to have

a horse to ride than to walk. I answered, I should lay hold of some wild

boar and gallop it; this observation struck him with astonishment, and

stroking down his beard, he asked my servant if he thought I could do

so, who replied, if I took it in my head I certainly would. Odumata said

the people would think the devil was come among them. This he told me is

the last day of the year, according to their calculation, but from what

reason I do not know. In the Sarem countries, he told me, they work iron

from the stone, and silver, gold, &c. into trinkets, better than in

Ashantee. I enquired why they did not make iron here, as they have

plenty of ore; his reply was truly African; “why should they do so, when

they had plenty of gold to buy it, and could get it so near.” I told him

of England’s resources from her own manufactories; he said it was not

good for white men to know so much; if black men knew those things they

would all run to England. When I got home I sent him a present of a

razor, he sent two messengers to thank me, such is their fashion; and

for even the smallest article they return thanks the next day. Odumata

enquired why I did not get drunk sometimes, and come to see him then, I

told him, were I to get drunk in Ashantee, I ought to have my sword

broke over my head, that I had indeed got tipsey the evening before I

came away, with my friends, and might perhaps do so when I returned, but

not till then. He gave me some palm wine, and looked amazed at my

swallowing only half a tumbler full, “he would drink three pots before

he went to bed!” (about 15 gallons.)


Wednesday, October 1. The King dictated a letter to the Governor at Cape

Coast, stating, that the King of Cape Coast had broken the law by

insulting an Ashantee man, who swore, by the King of Ashantee’s head,

that if the Cape Coast King did not kill him, he must pay 110 periguins

of gold to the King. This practice, though it savours of madness, is yet

often resorted to for revenge, as it is almost sure to end in the ruin

of the other party. The Cape Coast King had threatened, that the

Governor would put the Ashantee man in the slave hole till he died,

which appeard to irritate the King very much.


The King then enquired if I had any yams at home; I told him I had a few

of his last present; he told me he would send more to the house for me,

which he did, and gave me 5½ ackies gold; then pressed me to take some

gin and water; on his being told that it must be very little, for I was

afraid of an attack of spleen and liver, and eat little and walked much,

he said that was proper.


Thursday 2. Through this and the afternoon of yesterday I felt very

feverish, not being able to get any sleep for the rats at night. I kept

my room all day; the King sent a pot of palm wine in the evening. Adoo

Quamina called.


Friday 3. Whilst writing letters, Apokoo sent his compliments and would

be happy to see me; I went, and he said he was sorry he had not seen me

for some days. I told him I was sick the two former days, and to-day was

writing to my family how I liked Ashantee; he hoped I would give the

King a good name in England. I should tell truth. He enquired if I would

like to see his croom (village.) I replied yes! He was going there this

evening, and if no palaver came, he would send his people for me in the

morning, to carry me. He asked if I was not for one of his daughters,

that he might be called my father. He then enquired why I did not wear

my hair tied, and let my beard grow; he recollected Colonel Torrane and

Mr. White having tails at the siege of Annamaboe, and they looked very

handsome. He requested me to show him the skin of my arm, he gazed on it

with seeming pleasure, begged I would allow him to touch it; on

receiving permission, he rubbed his hand over it, exclaiming “_Papa

Taffia_,” (very handsome) and repeated his invitation to go to the

croom. I took my leave.


As I was going home I met a man white-washed, carrying a vessel covered

over with a white cloth: this I have been often told is Tando fetish,

but can learn nothing more. Music and a great crowd went with it to Adoo

Quamina’s house, at the front of which they put it down, and sacrificed

a child of Cudjoo Cooma’s, the Akim revolter, over it, as an annual

sacrifice of the King’s.


Saturday 4. Apokoo sent his people for me in the morning, who took me to

his croom, about three miles S.W. of Coomassie. The road was in good

order, and newly cut on account of my going; his slaves all turned out

to see me, many of them never having seen a white man before. Apokoo

came to the entrance of the croom, which is small, to meet me, and took

me into the place where he lives himself; it is like all country houses

here, a square lined with palm leaves and thatched with grass; his own

room, raised on the floor, painted with red inchuma or ochre, and at one

end of it, his couch raised on wood with plaited palm leaves, and

covered with large cotton cushions. Near his head hung three strings of

fetish, made of gold, red earth, horn, and bone, in the shape of thigh

bones, horns, jaw bones, &c. &c. One side of the square was fitted up

with a forge and bellows to work gold; another served as a cooking

place, and the fourth for his sons to sleep in. About 11 o’clock he went

to one of the side places to eat, that he might not trouble me in his

room, as he said. Before he began, small pieces of yam were laid on his

fetish; a small table was then set before him, and clean water poured

into a brass pan, with which he washed his right hand, and then eat with

it:—they are careful not to touch victuals with their left hand. A large

pot of yams and another of fish being boiled, he satisfied himself

first; the remainder was then divided into as many lots as there were

persons to partake; when the door was opened, and about twenty sons and

daughters, with their calabashes, received each their mess. He had given

my servant two fowls, some fish and yams, and told him to make any thing

I could eat; I told him to make a soup of the fowls. When I was eating,

Apokoo said he thought I was ashamed, and requested I would let him put

down the screen; I told him I dared not eat much through the day, being

afraid of sickness. He enquired if I wished to go to sleep, for his

couch was at my service. I declined the offer, and he went to sleep

himself. Shortly after, four of his wives came from town with a mess for

him; he was awaked to know if they were to have admittance, as usual: he

ordered them to set down the meat and go away; they pretended to do so,

but sat down under one of the sheds, and began to annoy the slaves, but

their stifled laughter soon awoke Apokoo, who stretched out his neck,

and seeing them, told them in a passion, it was because I was there that

they wished to stop, and that they had better be off; they took the hint

and made their retreat. He got up to shew me his gold ornaments, which

weighed 146 bendas (£1168.) and made his people kindle the forge fire to

melt some rock gold to make a fish; but the mould not being perfect, it

was spoiled. He enquired if ever I had been in a yam plantation; on my

replying in the negative, we went to see one; he asked if I would allow

him to ride in my hammock, I gave him leave; it was better than his

basket, he said, except that he did not like his legs hanging down. He

wished me to dig up a yam; the people brought me a long pointed stick,

which is forced into the earth to loosen the yam, afterwards the fibres

are cut with a knife. After I had dug up ten, he hoped I would accept of

them as a present; yams are set like potatoes in Europe, they are put in

the ground about December, so that they are nine months growing to

maturity. He said he should not go to Coomassie that night, as he had to

decorate his drums with tigers skins, but that he would be in on

Tuesday. If I wished to come out and see him before that time he would

send people for me, and be glad. I said I should come out some other

time, but not so soon. I set off for Coomassie about six o’clock, having

spent a very agreeable day.


About seven o’clock the King sent for me; on my going, he would trouble

me, he said, to read a book he had that day found in a man’s possession.

It proved to be a Danish note to the King for three ounces per month,

dated August 1, 1811; it seemed as if a seal had been affixed to it, but

the impression had disappeared, and it was very much worn. The King said

he never knew of it; that an Ashantee captain had received and kept it,

but he would enquire about it. His majesty wished me to drink something,

I declined it; he hoped I was not sick, I said no, but drinking made my

head ach; he hoped I would sleep sound, paid me many compliments that I

cannot repeat; enquired of my servant if I was a good master, with other

questions of the like nature.


Saturday 11. The King sent for me, and on going to the palace I found

them in full council talking palavers. Adoosee was ordering a messenger

to go to Quamina Bootaqua, to make him proceed to Cape Coast, and inform

the Governor that Payntree had sworn by the King and had broke his oath,

Bootaqua having sent word to the King of it; but they did not mention

any thing to me. After this, Adoosee informed me, that messengers have

gone from Amanfoo, sent by Sam Brue, to complain that the Cape Coast

people had come armed against him to kill him. After hearing a long

statement of grievances, they told me I must write to the Governor about

it; I said I would, at the same time I assured the King that Sam Brue

was a slave trader, and not to be tolerated at Cape Coast, his conduct

was so infamous; they then called on his messenger to know what reason

Sam had to leave Cape Coast; he entered at great length into the

grievances experienced by Brue from the Governor in Chief and officers,

because he owed eight ounces of gold; I was called in to reply, which I

said I could not condescend to do, until I heard from the Governor in

Chief, as they had sent messengers to complain to him. Adoosee charged

four messengers with what they were to tell the Governor, making them

take fetish and other formalities usual only on great occasions, thereby

giving the affair an importance it did not merit. The King, on the

breaking up of the council, said he would send for me shortly after, to

write an account of the affair to the Governor; when I returned home, I

did communicate the whole to the Governor, as the King’s letters are so

hurried.


I heard nothing from the King all day, but at night a Fantee man called

on me, who had been taken by the Ashantees in last year’s war, and whom

I had been trying to liberate by speaking in his behalf to the King, and

concerning four ounces of gold that had been taken. The captain

concerned in it, to get quit of the palaver, had urged one of his wives

to swear the man had lain with her; she accordingly made a formal

complaint; the man was put in irons in the bush and only released

yesterday morning as they thought to catch the King when he had some

palavers pending, which would make him angry; they therefore brought it

before the King yesterday morning, thinking he would order the man’s

head to be cut off; but he told the King that this palaver was brought

against him because I had spoken for him; the woman was called, who

insisted the man had lain with her, the man denied it, and on being

offered fetish he cheerfully took it, and swore by the King to the

contrary. The woman would not do so, and the King ordered the irons to

be taken from the man, and put on the woman, telling her, she had not

looked at the man properly, as it must be some other person.


Tuesday 14. This morning a man was beheaded at the door of the house

where I live, by Aboidwee, the house master: it appears, the man in

question was brother to a caboceer, and presumptive heir to his

property; tired of waiting so long he made fetish incantations, and

other ceremonies peculiar to them, to destroy his brother; this coming

to the brother’s ears, and also, that he had enjoyed one of his wives

five times, he complained to the King and requested he would put the

offender to death to save his own life; the King complied, and ordered

Aboidwee to put the sentence in execution.


Wednesday 15. The Adaï custom. I went as usual with flags, and first

received the usual offering of rum, and ten ackies of gold instead of a

sheep. I called on Baba, the chief of the Moors, in the afternoon, who

said he would teach me Arabic if I would teach him English; I said I

would; but I am afraid he is too old for progress. I called on Odumata

in my way back, who annoyed me as usual to drink palm wine, although it

gives me a head ache. Akotoo, the King’s brother, was there, who said he

had only seen me four times since the mission went away, and wished me

to call on him. The conversation turned on the King’s going to war, and

his anxiety for me to go and see how they killed their enemies, and he

would give me gold to feed me. I was told by a Fantee man, that Sam Brue

had procured 200 guns and a quantity of powder for the King, for slaves

he had sold to the Spaniards now on the coast.


Friday 17. Deputies from the Warsaw states arrived a few days ago, to

settle the differences between them and the Ashantees. It is thought, a

fine to the King and future tribute may compromise the matter. Odumata

informed me, that the slave ship has 600 slaves on board; and that,

through Sam Brue’s exertions; he confirmed the report of the guns and

powder.


Sunday 19. The heaviest rain, thunder, and lightning I ever saw, and has

continued for several days and nights. About 7 o’clock A.M. the King’s

drums announced his going to the market-place, where all his chiefs went

and were drenched with wet till 2 o’clock P.M. when the King sent for

rum and palm wine and dismissed them drunk and dirty. On Monday the

scene was continued till the slaves had got the house covered in.


Tuesday 21. Agay the linguist returned from Assin, where he had been

four months; and brought with him a number of Fantees and their

families, as slaves. During the eruption of the Fantees in 1816, many of

them ran to the Assin country to try and elude the vigilance of the

King, but he heard of it, and sent Agay to demand them, who, after a

long negociation, succeeded. A council was held at Abrassoo on the

Barramang road, and the slaves were sent to Barramang to build a new

croom for the King.


Sunday, November 2. The King has been busy for the last twelve days

making fetish, &c. for the success of the war; the Moors going every

morning to the palace for prayer and sacrifice: to day being Adaï

custom, I went as usual, and received ten ackies of gold and a flask of

rum, the foremost in the assembly, which was numerous.


Friday 7. A serious palaver has arisen between the King and Adoosee the

chief linguist, he having taken a bribe from some person to misrepresent

a palaver to the King; this coming to the King’s ear, he sent in a fury

to Adoosee, who, on being charged with it, thought his life would be the

forfeit, and sent an express to Apokoo to come and intercede for him;

Apokoo being at his croom, it has been several times talked before the

King, but no settlement, has taken place.


Several people have been making application to me to demand them of the

King, as belonging to the forts, having been detained as slaves during

the Fantee war, and when Winnebah fort was destroyed. They are commonly

very old, and of the female sex.


Saturday 8. Adoosee has got his palaver settled by paying twenty ounces

of gold, and six or eight sheep to the King; Adoosee’s friends alleged

that he ought not to pay any thing, because when any palaver comes he

settles it at once; but if he is not there, they have to go to council,

which in fact is true; but notwithstanding his abilities, and that he

takes his seat as usual, the King looks at him with a gloomy eye. The

King has been busy making human sacrifices for the success of the war,

at Bantama, Assafoo, and Aduma, in the evenings; and the Moors make

their offerings of sheep in the palace in the mornings according to the

moslem ritual. Though the zealous Christian may lament that the Gospel

has not taken place of the fetish, yet the friends of humanity will

rejoice that the King favours the Moors, as many lives have been saved

that would otherwise have been destroyed at the present crisis. To day a

bullock was offered up in the chief market-place, previous to the

entrance of the chiefs, caboceers, &c. into the town, to meet in

council, and determine on the method of conducting the war: in the

afternoon, Boitinnë Quama, King of Dwabin, sent his compliments to me to

announce his arrival. Shortly after, the various bands of music declared

the arrival of the tributaries, &c.; the King of Ashantee took his seat

in the market-place, and received their compliments as they passed

before him. About nine o’clock at night Boitinnë, King of Dwabin paid me

a private visit, and brought me a present of two curious Gennet cats.


Sunday 9. At day break the firing of guns, music, &c. announced a custom

for the husband of the King’s sister (the second woman in the kingdom),

he having died in the bush on Friday, about 7 o’clock; the King went to

the market-place to make custom, and sacrificed two men; several others

were killed by various caboceers. In the evening Apokoo and the other

captains who are to exhibit their gold, paraded the streets, firing

musketry, &c.; the crowd was great. At 8 o’clock, his majesty of Dwabin

came with the messengers he sent to Cape Coast to have a suit of

clothes, he said two trunks were at his house and he brought a sword to

shew me, which the Governor had sent.


Friday 14. Before I got up, I was annoyed with a crowd of captains who

began to annoy me for liquor. I ordered them out and desired a boy to

keep the door fast. I sent a dash of wine, rum, sugar, soap, butter, and

perfumery to the king, who was highly pleased. To all the principal

captains, a dash of rum, wine, and sugar, till I had nearly expended my

stock: the whole day was a continual annoyance from visitors, troubling

me for drink, but as I was resolved to give to those only who were

worthy, many of them were disappointed. This week past Apokoo and

several of the captains have been making an exhibition of their riches;

this is generally done once in life, by those who are in favour with the

King, and think themselves free from palavers. It is done by making

their gold into various articles of dress for show. Apokoo, who sent for

me before his uproar began, shewed me his varieties, weighing upwards of

800 bendas of the finest gold; among the articles, was a girdle two

inches broad. Gold chains for the neck, arms, legs, &c. ornaments for

the ancles of all descriptions, consisting of manacles, with keys,

bells, chairs, and padlocks. For his numerous family of wives, children,

and captains, were armlets and various ornaments. A superb war cap of

eagle’s feathers, fetishes, Moorish charms, &c. Moorish caps, silk

dresses, purses, bags, &c. made of monkey skin. Fans, with ivory

handles, made of tiger skin, and decorated with silk. New umbrellas made

in fantastical shapes, gold swords and figures of animals, birds,

beasts, and fishes of the same metal; his drums, and various instruments

of music, were covered with tiger skin, with red belts for hanging them.

Ivory arrows and bows, covered with silk and skins, and many other

weapons of war or fancy, such as the mind in a like situation would

devise. Apokoo was anxious that I should come and see him when out, but

from the noise, I judged that they were too turbulent for me to venture

without a chance of being insulted.


Saturday 15. Again annoyed by the people wishing for drink. Apokoo

called with his retinue to thank me; for the Governor had given his

people a flask of Jamaica rum. He had got three days to play, as he

called it, and was sorry that he had not seen me. I told him I had very

seldom been out, except when there was no noise, as the people were so

unruly in the evening.


Monday 17. In the afternoon Apokoo sent a message, saying he was come to

the door of the house to play and shew me his gold, hoping I would come

out. I went and found a Moorish carpet spread, at one end of which I was

seated under an umbrella, while Apokoo and his wives, children, and

captains danced by turns before me. Some of his young wives were dressed

with great taste, a rich silk cloth with a bag made of fine fur, slung

over the shoulder, studded with gold ornaments: on the left shoulder

they held a pistol, and in the right hand a silver bow and arrow. During

the dance, if Apokoo was pleased with them he took the bow and hung it

on some of the ornaments, when she retired from the dance; this was a

strong mark of approbation, if I may judge from the applause that

followed: to some he gave a little gold. Several times he took from

their necks various ornaments which he placed on my knees and over my

left shoulder; this was the greatest mark of honour he could shew me;

and his band played a tune in praise of England, and of our abilities in

settling differences. Many of the captains sent him presents of gold and

rum. I gave him a large flask of wine, which he said pleased him more

than all the others, as it would shew the people I thought him a good

man.


Thursday 20. The Moorish caboceer of Alphia called to day, requesting I

would allow him to bring his brother and nephew who had arrived, as they

wished to see me: on receiving my permission he sent for them, and as

they immediately made their appearance, they must have been waiting at

the door. I shewed them a compass, sand-glass, quadrant, some

phosphorus, and several other things; at the sight of each they bent

their heads to the ground, exclaiming “Allahoo Akabir!” God is great. I

gave the caboceer a wax candle, piece of a perfumed soap (which he was

going to eat!) a flask of Jamaica rum, and some sugar; things he had

never seen before: he begged to be allowed to touch my hand, and

continued calling out Ah! bielane Wasieh! Ah Nasara! Ah white visier! Ah

Christian. He said he had a sister whom he would make me a present of,

if I would have her. The caboceer of Alphia is brother to the caboceer

of Premehinie, east of Ashantee, in the Sarem region, and subject to Saï

Tootoo; it is 14 days journey to Alphia, one day to Brookoom, where the

head fetish of that country dwells, and one day more to Crumassia and

Sodie, a range of high hills.


I told him I would buy his horse if he would put a reasonable price on

it, and would give him a note to get powder, rum, &c. at the Cape: he

said the Ashantees brought rum to Sarem, but they boiled pepper in water

and sold it to them; he never tasted such good adrue (medicine) as mine.


I have been learning Arabic this last month, principally from the

Shereef Abraham, who comes from Boussa, where Mungo Park was drowned,

and he, as he says, was an eye witness to it; his great sanctity made

the King of Ashantee send for him to pray and make sacrifice for the

success of the war. The other Moors here look on him with an evil eye,

because he will not wear fetishes as they do, and be present at human

sacrifice. This place now presents the singular spectacle of a Christian

and Mahometan agreeing in two particulars, rejecting fetishes, and

absenting themselves from human sacrifices and other abominations: the

rest of the people, of whatever country they may be, when the King’s

horns announce any thing of the kind, strive who will get there first to

enjoy the agonies of the victims. The Shereef told me to-day, that the

reason he came so seldom to see me, was, that the King had heard he was

teaching me the Koran, but he wished him not to do so, he did not wish

me to know how “to call on God;” but, said Abraham, I shall teach you as

much as I can, that when you go to your own country you may give the

Moors a good name, for I told the King you knew Arabic before you saw

me, and we sometimes spake together in that language. He had a beautiful

copy of the Koran which he intended to leave me, but the King had told

him he must have it, that when any trouble came he might hold it up to

God, and beg his mercy and pardon: but he would try and get a small one

for me.


Saturday 22. This morning a slave belonging to the house master swore by

the King’s head that he must kill him to-day. A great uproar ensued,

while they put him in irons, and they got out the family stools and

sacrificed fowls and sheep, pouring the blood on them to propitiate the

wrath of the King from the family. The King was then told of it, who

said as that was his fetish day he could not kill a man that day, but

to-morrow he would behead him.


It appears he had connection with one of his brother’s wives, who,

hearing of it, cautioned him from doing so again, or else he would tell

the King and make him kill him: he was again found with the woman, and

his brother went to the King to complain. Hearing this, and fearing the

torture, he swore by the King that he must shoot him with eight muskets.

The King on being told this, said he would put such small shot into the

muskets as only to wound him, and then he should torture him; hereby

fulfilling his own law, which he considers sacred.


Sunday 23. About 12 o’clock sent for by the King, whom I found scolding

his sister for disobedience in one of her slaves. After sitting some

time talking on indifferent subjects, the King said he should go to

council, about what he was going to say to me. Shortly after he sent one

of his sons to say his father was going to eat and wash, if I would be

kind enough to return home. I heard that messengers from Elmina had

arrived the evening before, and expected to hear of some complaint of

breaking the law, as they style it: although I could not reconcile it

with an observation I had made; a pair of razors I had presented to the

King were invariably sent to me to sharpen, as the King wished to shave

with them, when any favourable affair was to be talked, and that morning

they came as usual.


I was again sent for, and the King announced in a formal manner his

intention of going in person to make war on Adinkara, the King of

Buntookoo, and wished me to announce it to the Governor. I therefore

wrote a letter of the King’s dictating, stating this to the Governor,

and requesting him to give on trust 300 oz. kegs, powder, and 300

muskets, and sending to the Governor in Chief six periguins of gold, and

to the Governor of Annamaboe four periguins, to purchase a cloth for

him, the handsomest they could find, and inviting them to send him a

dash and make the town’s people do the same, for the prosperity of the

war. His Majesty was very lavish in his compliments of the generosity of

the English, and their great riches; he then enquired if I was willing

to go to fight, I replied certainly, if I could obtain the Governor’s

permission, I should like it very much: he thanked me very warmly. I

heard, on my return to the house, that the Dutch General had sent as a

present to the King 60 oz. kegs powder, and the Elmina people 40, which

caused this stir.


Monday 24. Sent for again to write the Governor word that the King sent

down 30 men to be clothed as soldiers, if the Governor could spare

clothes, one of them to be as captain and one a serjeant, with a flag.

His Majesty also wished to have arrow root, Port wine, sugar, candles,

and a few other things for the campaign. I was then told to write a

letter to the Danish Governor in Chief to the same effect, and to ask

him for payment of what was due on his note. I foresaw this would make

an uproar; and on the note being handed to me to know what was due on

it, when I told the King that nothing was on it, he got into the

greatest rage I have yet seen him in, with the captain who receives the

pay. This man had been sent down to Accra about three months ago, to

receive what pay was due, Mr. Bowdich writing to the Danish Governor in

Chief to know, for the King’s satisfaction, what was sent. On his

return, the latter stated that the King’s note was paid up to the

ensuing Christmas. There being a great deficiency between what was

stated in the letter, and what the captain produced, he charged Mr.

Bowdich with mis-stating what was in the letter; Quashie Apaintree, the

linguist, was sworn on the King’s fetish to interpret proper; the

Ashantee still insisted, and to clear himself, said the book was _not_

paid to Christmas. The King and linguists remembered this, and when they

heard that the note was actually paid to the end of the year, every one

tried who would be loudest in their accusations against him. Apokoo, who

is his chief, was loudest against him, he said he had used him

disrespectfully, and never gave him any of the dashes he received;

besides he had given the lie to an English officer, and at the same time

he cheated the King; he therefore left him to the mercy of his Majesty.

The King said he must return him all the gold back he had lent him; and

as for the fort at Accra, he might take the pay when he pleased. A hat,

certainly a bad one, was brought in, and the King asked me if I thought

it worth the price charged for it. I replied I was not a judge, as such

hats were not sent out for us; but if I were, I must positively decline

interfering in the King’s affairs with his servants. By degrees the King

worked himself to such a height of passion, that throwing his cloth

around him, and hastily rising, he ordered the captain’s arrest. The

King’s sons seized on him, and he stood appalled, as the silver cane

fell from his hand. I once thought the King would have committed some

extravagance, none of the chiefs daring to rise; Agay at length arose,

and in his energetic manner requested that his majesty would recollect I

was present. The King ordered his sons to go with the captain to his

house, and bring him all the gold they found; he then withdrew, but I

heard him storming in his apartments. Shortly after, Odumata’s brother

came to say, that the chiefs might thank me, as were it not for my sake,

every one of them would have been turned out of the palace by the

slaves. Agay, who was the only one who followed the King, came to

apologise for the abrupt departure of his Majesty: he hoped I would not

be offended, and requested I would go home and dine, as it was late, and

the King would send for me soon.


Tuesday 25. The King sent for me to write another letter to the

Governor, saying he had sent down three pieces of rock gold as a pawn

for powder; they were the largest I have yet seen, one of them weighing

about 20 ounces. I gave his Majesty a packet of letters to be forwarded

to Cape Coast: he rallied me on the size of it, and said he supposed I

wrote the Governor and Mr. Bowdich every palaver in town.


To-day the stool of Alphia was declared in abeyance; the son of the

caboceer Premehinia having brought a complaint against the caboceer of

Alphia, who is brother to the former; his sable highness came on a

beautiful Arabian, of a very small size; at the sound of drums and horns

he danced and went through various evolutions.


Friday 28. To-day the caboceer of Alphia was deposed, and his brother

the caboceer of Premehinia had the stool attached to his other

possessions. In the afternoon whilst I was out, the Moorish prince, with

a large retinue, called to pay me a visit, I found one of his attendants

sitting at the door with a gold sword, who, on receiving permission,

went and told him I was come home; shortly after he came, and expressed

great wonder at all he saw. He said I had too many silver spoons, and

modestly requested I would give him one or two; his attendant who fanned

him thought so too, as he attempted to steal one, but one of the

servants happening to pass, he threw it under the table. I wished him to

sell me his horse, but he said he was too great a man to walk home, and

the ground hurt his feet.


Sunday 30. The King paid me a long visit, he heard, he said, that my

horse had died, and had come to see me least I should think he forgot

me, but he had so much fetish to make, and so many palavers to settle,

that he had little time. The conversation then turned on the travels of

Englishmen, and the white men drowned in the Quolla (Niger.) I explained

to his Majesty the objects of the expeditions sent from England to the

interior of Africa, and expressed how anxious I was to get Mr. Park’s

books and papers for the King of England; his Majesty promised to aid me

in doing so, and before he went away, desired me to point out to him

what I conceived the proper method.


The King then began to talk about my living with him, and if I liked to

do so; he said I was like a king, and wished his people to treat me with

respect, and every one run to see me when I went out, as they run to see

him. I said that some of his people wished to accuse me of treason for

putting buckles in my shoes at the Adaï custom. The King said that none

dared do so, but those whom he ordered, any other would have their heads

cut off: but I was different, and he knew Englishmen did what was

proper. His majesty took his leave with many expressions of personal

attention, which, whether they were sincere or not, were at least to be

received with politeness.


Monday, December 1. One of the King’s nephews came to see me, but was

terribly afraid to pass the man in irons who swore on the King, least he

should swear that when the King killed him, he must also kill his

nephew, which would cost a deal of gold; for such is the sacredness of

the law, that in that case the King must do it. I had a key of a door

where I could privately let him out, without passing through the courts

of the house, by which he gladly made his escape. This man has been no

small annoyance, as no person of rank will venture to call on me, least

they should be brought into trouble by his swearing on their heads.


Tuesday 2. The King to-day made a present of 10 periguins of gold to the

Moors in town for their services, and they were to divide it themselves.

This created no small altercation among them; those belonging to the

town wished to keep it all, and not give the Shereef Abraham any, who

came from the banks of the Niger; as the King had that morning told him

he wished him to accompany him to the war, he told them it was of no

consequence, as he should not accompany the King unless he was looked on

with the same degree of rank as Baba, as, indeed, he was superior from

his knowledge, and belonging to Mahomet’s family. On this they gave him

three periguins, the same that Baba had: all were then pleased with

their portion except one, called Aboo, who only had 10 ackies; he

consoled himself by making the usual exclamation, “God is great! he

never dies, he never sleeps,” and said he left the palaver in his hands.


Thursday 4. Apokoo paid me a visit to thank me for some medicine I had

given him, being sick after his great custom; he enquired if I heard

that Fantee messengers were come to this place, I said no, but I

expected them soon to take the King’s fetish, as he wished them to do

so, previous to his going to war; he then told me that the King heard

there were some on the path, and could not think what their message was;

I told him they must either be those the Governor was sending up, or

Fantees with the King’s tribute; on his going away, he requested I would

let him out by the door I had the key of, as he also was afraid of the

man in irons swearing on his life, and was glad he could avoid passing

him.


Friday 5. This was the coldest morning I have felt since I came to

Africa, being scarcely able to take breakfast, I was so chilly; the

thermometer stood at 65°.


I was desired to write a letter to General Daendels, telling him the

King had lost his notes for the Dutch forts, and requesting him to give

new ones to Akimpon. The King’s father had conquered the Akim chief, who

held a note for Dutch Accra; he also conquered the King of Adinkara, who

had the Elmina note, both of which were given up to him; he would not

take them both in one note as the General wished, but he must have one

payable at Elmina and one at Accra. When the King weighed out the gold

for his messengers expences, he weighed 10 ackies for me, which I hoped

his Majesty would take back, as I did not wish for them, and requested

he would not think I wished payment for writing a letter for him. My

scruples were laughed at by them all, and the King said “that white men

were very singular, as they gave gold or a good dash to any one who did

any thing for them, yet they would not take any: he wished to do

something like white men, and when any one did any thing for him he gave

them something, and he wished me to take this to shew his good will.”

Odumata, who is the greediest man in Coomassie for gold, whispered, if I

did not like it, I might send it to him when I got home. I did not

exactly understand him, or I would have offered it to him then with

pleasure, to expose his avarice.


The captain who was arrested last week for peculation on Danish Accra,

appeared in his place to day; he had promised Amanquateä and Quatchie

Quophie, the two chief captains, a large present if they would settle

the affair for him, which they did, and he received the letters to

proceed to the fort as usual.


Apokoo having told the King of the inconvenience arising to any chief

coming to me, from the culprit in irons being in the way, he was removed

to a private part of Apokoo’s house, where he could annoy no one, till

the Adaï custom, when he is to be beheaded, as the affair cannot be

settled without.


Sunday 7. Several of the Moorish caboceers came to take leave, as they

were going to-morrow to their own country previous to the war, and were

to meet the King on the road when he went, and consequently would not

see me again for some time; on my enquiring how long the King was to be

absent, they replied, God had told them seven months would finish the

war; they enquired if I should like to see them at Cape Coast, as they

should come and see me, to which I said I should. After drinking coffee,

&c. they took a hurried leave, as one of the King’s people came to tell

me one of his Majesty’s daughters was dead, and shortly after, constant

discharges of musketry announced the custom. The King in the afternoon

came to the market place close to the house, to make custom with his

chiefs. I understood that human sacrifices were to be offered, and

walked out to avoid the uproar.


On my way I paid a visit to Baba, who was performing ablution; he said

he was going to prayer, but would soon have done, I told him I would sit

down till he had finished. Cow hides were spread in rows for the

worshippers, in the front was a large hide for Baba. All having taken

off their sandals and prostrated themselves with their faces to the east

(to Mecca,) the service began by one of them chaunting the usual call to

prayer; the chorus of Allahoo Akaber! (God is great) was well performed

by the others.


There was something solemn and affecting in it, contrasted with the

heavy discharges of musketry and shouts of the populace in the distance,

which proclaimed the bloody sacrifice was begun, while the vultures and

crows wheeled in mazy circles expecting their usual share of the

banquet, and the sun shot his last gleams through the heavy fogs that

encircled the town.


As I went home I passed the headless trunks of two female slaves, laying

neglected and exposed in the market place, that had been sacrificed, one

by the King and one by the deceased’s family. The vultures were

revelling undisturbed amidst the blood.


I happened to-day to throw down a tumbler of wine and water with my

foot, having placed it on the ground, while the Moorish Shereef was with

me; he bent his head to Mecca, pronouncing “God is great!” and told me

it was my good angel who had done so, for who might tell but there was

poison in the cup to destroy me? he said man had always two angels

attending him, one on his right hand as his good angel, and one on his

left as his evil one; whatever good he did was prompted by the former,

and whatever ill by the latter one. I have never found them without a

reason for every thing, or a name, except to the mother of Moses, whom

they say nobody knows on earth; the Shereef gravely enquired if I knew

the name of Aboobaker’s father, I assured him I did not; he told me many

of the Moors could not tell, but as he was of Mahomet’s family he knew

more things, and told me it was _Kahābata_.


I heard from the Sarem Moors that they fight with bows and arrows

steeped in deadly poison, the least scratch of which is instant death.

They gather scorpions tails, snakes heads, and the poisonous parts of

any reptile that affects man; this, with several vegetable substances

which they would not name, are put in a pot, and set over the fire at

sun rise; they boil it all day and must not eat or drink, but stir it

about repeating incantations, and shaking a pair of iron castanets,

without which, the charm would be incomplete. I saw an old hag at this

work on the Bantama road, who would not answer my question as to what

she was doing, but made many wry faces, and squint looks, for me to be

gone and not spoil her work, and while I stood, she stirred, and

muttered, and clattered the castanets with greater fury.


My attention being anxiously turned towards information concerning the

Niger and its course, all enquiries end in making the Nile its

continuation. An old Moor from Jennë told me, unasked, that while he was

at Askanderee (Alexandria) twenty-six years ago he saw a fight at the

mouth of the Nile between ships, and one of them was blown up in the air

with a terrible explosion. This must have been the battle fought by Lord

Nelson, although there is a mistake in the date of seven years; he

surely could not invent such a story. He states also, that returning to

Masser (Grand Cairo) the European armies advanced to that place; the

first army took every thing they wanted and would not pay: but when the

second European and Turkish army got possession of it, they paid for

whatever they wanted. All the Moors were ordered to retire to one

quarter of the city, and not allowed to mix with the soldiers; this

agrees with Sir Robert Wilson’s account of the Egyptian campaign. I

shewed him a seal I have, of Pompey’s pillar, which he said he knew; he

had travelled from Jennë to Masser on a joma (camel) and drew me a map

of the Quolla and Nile from its source to its emptying itself into the

sea at Alexandria. There is one thing that disagrees with Mr. Park’s

account, they call the Niger Quolla at Jennë, Sansanding, &c. and

describe the Jolliba as falling into the Quolla to the east of

Timbuctoo. When I told them of the conjectures that the great river of

Africa emptied itself into a large lake, they laughed at such an idea,

and reasoned so as to put wiser heads to the blush. “God,” say they,

“made all rivers to run to the sea, you say that small rivers go there:

the Quolla is the largest river in the world, and why should it not go

there also? Was it to lose itself in the lake, where could the waters go

to?” They describe the Quolla as about five miles in breadth, and having

a very rocky channel, the banks on both sides very high and rugged; in

many places, canoes often take a day to pass a short distance, from the

dangerous whirlpools, and sudden squalls: at other places, the stream

runs with great rapidity.


They think the Mediterranean sea to be circular, without mixing with the

ocean; seven rivers from Africa turn their course to it, but only two

reach the shores, of which the Nile is one. The rush of the waters of

the Nile, when they meet the sea is so great, that the waves are driven

into the air with great force, and retire like waves against a rock.

They call the Mediterranean sea Bahare Mall. The Red sea, say they,

assumes various colours at different periods, from seven streams pouring

their course into it, red, blue, yellow, &c. Hence they call it Majumaal

Bahare, or the confluence of streams. They are very fond of mystical

numbers, and often quote seven. The lake Caudie they call Bahare Nohoo,

or the water of Noah, from the tradition that the deluge broke out from

thence. They describe it as encompassed with rocks, within which is a

bed of sand, and then the water. This we may allow to be a little

fanciful, as I have seen a map of the earth drawn by Baba, where the

world is supposed to be round, and encompassed with a rocky girdle, the

sea is supposed to flow between this and the earth, which is placed in

the centre. They are not singular in this idea; as all rude nations form

the same notions of the globe: but though we reject, with reason, their

foolish notions of many things, it would be no great sign of wisdom to

refuse every information from them.


Man is a reasoning animal, and enquires into the nature of things in a

rude, as well as in a civilised state; and if he cannot give a just,

will at least give a plausible reason for many things.


The Moors say “That the noise people hear, when they stop their ears

with their hands, is the rolling of the waters of libation in paradise,

where Mahomet purifies all those he saves from hell, before they enter

into the state of the blessed. It is for this reason they perform

ablution before they pray; the fire burning other parts of their bodies,

while their face, hands, feet, &c. remained untouched, hence Mahomet

when he looks for them, knows them from Jews, Christians, &c. They have

also a sentence written on their foreheads, “Hooalie Jahanamoo naataka

raboo baskafaatee Mahomada roosoola lahee sallee allahoo alahe

wasalame.”


Inoculation for the small pox is practised in the Moorish countries;

they take the matter, and puncture the patient in seven places, both on

the arms and legs. The sickness continues but a few days, and rarely any

person dies of it. It is also done in Ashantee. Seven is their mystical

number.


Monday, December 8. To day the King killed a man on account of his

daughter who died yesterday, and to be out of the way, I called on

Odumata, whom I found well charged with palm wine: his usual discourse

of the greatness of the King and the manner of the Ashantees fighting

took up his time: he said that when white men wished to fight, they sent

a book to the other party, telling them they would meet them on such a

day, but the Ashantees took their enemies by surprise, which shortened

their wars. I told him he had repeated the same story about fifty times

in two months, and wished to know if the English did so at Annamaboe,

where fifteen white men killed thousands of Ashantees; this put him on

the fidget, as I knew it would, and he said that it was on him the

English fired first, and he fought them without the King’s leave, who

was angry when he heard that they had returned the fire of the fort; I

told him it was a fine excuse to cover their defeat. He enquired if I

thought they could not have taken the fort? I told him if they could

have done it they would. He said, if the King says we must do any thing,

we must do it. I asked him, if the King told them to pull down the moon,

if they could do it? He then got up from his chair and began to

manoeuvre how he and Apokoo were to have made a breach in Annamaboe

fort, to the no small enjoyment of several of his wives, captains, and

slaves, who were present; they were to have burned the gates, and with

axes to have cut through the walls. He said they had Dutch and Danish

flags, which they had taken from forts; why, I enquired, did they not

show the English trophies? They had none, he said: and the King had told

them, that were he to kill white men from England, he might as well kill

all the cocks in the kingdom; the one told the hour, and when to rise in

the morning; the other brought them good things from England, and

learned them sense; besides, if any of their slaves did ill, they told

them they would sell them to the whites, which made them better. I told

him black men had the eyes of a thief, the paws of a tiger, and the

belly of a hog, for they were never satisfied; he said I was right, for

they were now going to war, and would take whatever they could find; he

thought 30,000 Ashantees would be killed, but that was nothing. He then

locked up his wives because I put evil in their heads, by saying that

Englishmen allowed every one a husband. I then took my leave.


Monday 15. Baba, the chief of the Moors, having told me that a Moor was

going to Jennë, I took the opportunity of writing a letter to two

Europeans who reside there, and, I suppose, belonged to Mungo Park’s

expedition, seven soldiers being unaccounted for, who were in good

health when they were separated from Mr. Park. There are also two white

men at Timbuctoo, who have been there several years. The Moors are

confident that the letter will reach them, which is much to be desired,

as some information may be obtained of that celebrated traveller. Baba

came, and the old Moor with him, to whom I delivered the letter; he

received it from Baba with much ceremony, and to induce him to forward

an answer, I promised him a suitable reward[125]. The whole of the Moors

came in a body with drums, muskets, horns, and all the attendant pomp of

chiefs; they had just taken leave of the King, and came to do the same

to me. Having remained about half an hour, and drank some wine, they set

out for their journey with noisy clamour.


Sunday 21. Apokoo called and told me he was going to morrow, with the

King, to the camp, on the Barramang path, to make fetish, and would

return on Wednesday: he seemed to expect that I would say I would go

also; but as the King had not sent to me, I did not express any wish. A

boy brought some milk covered up, and he lifted the lid to look what it

was, some of it touched his fingers, and he sent for water, herbs, and

different things to purify his fingers; he said he would give me a

present if I would give over drinking milk: I told him if he sent me an

ounce of gold daily, I would not do it; he cursed the milk, and the boy

for bringing it. Thus many of them are so particular, they will not stay

where eggs are, another shuns a fowl, one hates beef, and many mutter a

charm if they meet a pig. The Moorish Shereef discovered a piece of pork

one day in the boy’s room, and made such a noise, that I thought one had

struck him, nor would he cease till I ordered it away.


Monday 22. The King, and almost all the captains, set out early this

morning, with great bustle for the camp, many sent their compliments

previous to going.


Wednesday 24. The King and all the people returned in the evening, and

went to the upper market place; where the King seeing me at the door,

ordered them to pass down the street to the palace, the chiefs all

saluting as they passed. The King, who was the only one that did not

walk, made his people halt, and held out his hand to me, which I took,

and bade him welcome to his capital; he enquired if I was well, and

after he passed, he looked round with a smile and shook his finger at

me: I suppose because I did not follow him to the camp. His Majesty

afterwards sent his compliments, as did several of the chiefs.


Thursday 25. This being Christmas day, I displayed the flag, and paid

every attention to it that I possibly could; many of the chiefs hearing

of it, sent their compliments, expecting a present, but of course were

disappointed.


Friday 24. Baba called, and began an oration about Sam Brue, hinting

that he should like if I could get Brue, the slave trader, back to Cape

Coast. He was my good friend, I was his friend, the Governor was my

friend, Brue was his friend, and a long genealogy fit to puzzle a

Scottish or Welch family herald. I told him no person must interfere in

such affairs. He had that morning received from Brue, powder, guns, and

cloth for slaves he had sent down; he brought me a piece of the cloth to

shew me, it was very coarse with large red figures on it. I told him

when he washed it, he would need to take his staff and put on his

sandals to hunt after the colours; he told me he had found that out; for

he had washed a piece, and he could not tell what colour it was. He then

began a dissertation on the _good_ the slave trade did them, and what

changes he had seen since he came here; he thought God intended to

change the power of white men, and give it to the blacks and Moors. I

told him he was going to make Mahomet a liar, as the Alkoran told them

that the whites were to have sovereign dominion to the end, because of

Noah’s sons’ behaviour to him when drunk; and if God was inclined to

hide his face from white men, because of any ill they did, I did not

think he would transfer it to Africans for any good they had done; he

said I was right, and when they thought wrong the Christians could put

them right. Seeing a Prayer Book on the table, he enquired if that was

“Lingeel,” the name they give the New Testament; I replied it was the

form of worshipping God in English Churches; he wished me to read a

little of it to him, as he had heard that white men prayed to God so—and

muttered in a form, it must be allowed, too often resorted to by lazy

clergymen. They conceive to worship God in any other way than chaunting

or singing is absurd. I have had more than once to sing (if I may

presume to call it so) from the psalms of David, and chaunt the

responses of the service, to convince them that there is something more

than mere muttering in prayer, were it properly performed, besides

describing the organ used in churches to assist the harmony. They have

often asked me about the high priest at Rome, and whether or not we had

any thing shaped out that we called god. I told them the English

abhorred all representations of the Eternal, and that nothing was

adequate to represent him. They are very tenacious on this point, and as

scrupulous as any Protestant may wish, conceiving it an inexcusable

crime to have any thing of the kind. They have many times enquired if we

offer any sacrifice to God. I told them that our Scriptures do not allow

the shedding of blood of any kind; the last great expiation of the

Christians being performed by Jesus when he died on the cross, in

commemoration of which, the offering of bread and wine formed the

sacrifice. Neither did we pour out libations[126] before drinking,

because any thing poured forth before drinking, or victuals set apart

before eating, is an offering to devils.


The Shereef Abraham coming in with one or two more, I enquired about

Solomon’s Al Genii, and whether or not they knew any thing of free

masonry. I had questioned them several times before, and knew none of

them were free masons; they now told me that there was such a sect in

Arabia, and conceived them to be magicians, as they controlled the

spirits of air. They were much astonished to hear that I was one, and

eagerly enquired if I knew about Solomon’s seal, the building of the

temple, and other matters, which universal belief endows free masons

with,—matters, I told them, I might not speak of. They told me they knew

we kept some of our genii on a floating island in the sea; if any ships

came near it, the genii were instructed to laugh at them, and the island

disappeared; with other such stories. One of the boys told them I had a

stuff (phosphorus) which they supposed gave me such power; they wished

to see it, and laughed at first at the idea of any thing in water

producing fire, or that I could confine that element and dare to keep it

in a trunk; I put it to the proof, by burning a piece of cloth, paper,

and mat, and told them if they were not satisfied they might have some

on their skins, but they did not choose it, and called out in wonder,

“Houa Kahina iakul naroo malekaneran,” “he is a magician and eats fire,

he is the King of fire;” be it remembered that this last appellation is

peculiar to the devil. The Shereef after thinking some time, enquired if

that stuff was not made from the bones of genii? I told him bones were

in the composition. He wished to know if we killed genii and took their

bones, I told him blood was never shed in England but for great crimes;

true, he said, but none could see _us_ do so. I told him there was an

eye that never sleeps, at which he bent his head, pronouncing “God is

great.” The Moors then held a conversation in Arabic, by which they

settled that I must be in the secrets of Solomon, and the Shereef

Abraham related one of the Arabian tales, by which Balkes or Bilkis,

Queen of Sheba, is made out to be the child carried away by the dog in

one of the stories of that work. Balkis, according to them, adored the

sun, and Solomon made her turn and worship God; he commanded the genii

to transport her palace from her own country to Jerusalem, and the three

palaces he built for her in Arabia Felix had gold mixed with the mortar

with which they were formed. They wished to know if I could move a

house? I told them, such was the mystery attached to our concerns, that

it was difficult to answer them; any thing not concerned with masonry, I

might answer; this, they said, was what the people in their country

said. Abraham said he was sure the Arabian magicians made use of bones

from genii to make fire and control them. It would be a curious

circumstance to know that phosphorus, and inoculation, existed in Arabia

in the days of its splendour, and continue now; as they are considered

as two of the most eminent among modern European discoveries. After they

were gone, I called on Odumata, whom I found all talk as usual. He said

he knew I wished to take some of the King’s sons to Cape Coast for

education, but the captains had represented to his Majesty, that they

did not wish it. If the King wanted gold, and they had it, they would

give it him; and were always ready when he called them, to receive his

foot on their necks, and swear to do whatever he wished them, or never

to return. The reason he gave, was, that they were afraid of being

discovered when they cheated the King, which they made no secret of

avowing, and having their heads cut off. I told him he did not like a

white man to live here then; yes, he said, they all liked that; but he

was sufficient to settle all palavers between the King and the English,

without any of the King’s people knowing English. He began to boast of

the many wives and children he had, more than Englishmen. I told him

there was a possibility of an Englishman knowing his father; but no

black man could tell his; they were all slaves, and rendered incapable

of inheriting their father’s property; none of his children need to

thank him, he neither could give them any thing while alive, nor leave

them any thing when dead, and many of them kept wives, while their

slaves enjoyed them. He said I spoke very true, but that I could not

show keys with him; he produced two large bunches, and I offered him an

ounce of gold if he would shew me a lock for each key; he evaded this: I

took them in my hand, and found many of them broken, and various

articles of lead and iron to make the bunches large; his people, and

some chiefs that were with him, enjoyed his perplexity, if I might judge

from their chuckling.


Several of the King’s brother’s slaves appeared in pursuit of two of

their fellows, flogging them with whips; one of the culprits bounding

over every obstacle, threw himself at Odumata’s feet, which saved him

from their flogging; the man who had charge of him appeared, and in a

long and animated harangue, with many gestures, stated the trouble he

had had from the runaway, and concluded by swearing, the man must be

given up to him in the morning to go and work. It is customary for

slaves, when they fall under their master’s displeasure, to take shelter

in some other chief’s house, who tries to get them excused.


Saturday 27. The King sent for me, to give me letters which had arrived;

and on my opening them, two small packages of gold tumbled out. The King

asked, if they were for me or him. I enquired if he expected gold from

any one at Cape Coast, he said, no. I told him, it was unlikely gold

would be sent to any one but me. The King, turning to his captains, said

the Governor was a good man, sending me gold whenever I asked for it,

and I eat a great deal of gold. I told him, I never wished a present of

gold from any one; what I got was my pay, as Englishmen did not give

gold to one another. He intended returning his messengers on Tuesday, as

he said, two of them having come up in English uniforms, as the Governor

was to fit out thirty at the King’s request. His Majesty wished me to

taste a bottle of tincture of rhubarb the Governor had sent him; I did

so, lest he should think there was something bad in it. I had then to

taste some tincture of cinnamon he had received some time ago; I

swallowed them with great distaste, as I had felt very unwell the

preceding day, and that morning, and had taken medicine just before the

King sent, and not eaten any breakfast.


In the afternoon Apokoo called; he had heard Adoo Bradie had been on

board a ship, and that 400 flags were hoisted to receive him;[127] that

was the reason, he said, they did nor wish any of the King’s people to

learn to read and write, they became white men, and saw so many fine

things, they never thought of returning to Ashantee. I told him if it

was disagreeable, it would be given over. Every one was pleased, he

said, to think any Ashantee great man was well used at Cape Coast; but

it turned their heads, not being accustomed to it. The King would give

Adoo Bradie fetish when he came back, and if he told the King lies, the

fetish would catch him, and where would be the good? The English would

have all their trouble for nothing.


His Majesty, some years ago, took one of Apokoo’s daughters to wife; she

is now one of the finest women in Coomassie, and must have been a great

beauty. It was discovered by the chief eunuch that she had intrigued

with one of the attendants. It was told the King that one of his wives

had proved false; “let her die instantly,” said he in a rage; the slave

whispered him “it is Apokoo’s child.” He rose in silence, and went to

the harem, and the culprit being sent for, the King turned his head

away, while he folded his cloth around him, and lifting the curtain to

let her pass, he exclaimed “go, you are free! your father was my

father,[128] he is my friend, and for his sake, I forget you; when you

find any man good enough for you, let me know and I will give him gold.”

Her father has not allowed her to marry again.


When any public execution, or sacrifice, is to take place, the ivory

horns of the King proclaim at the palace door, “wow! wow! wow!” “death!

death, death, death!” and, as they cut off their heads, the bands play a

peculiar strain, till the operation is finished.


The greatest human sacrifice that has been made in Coomassie during my

residence, took place on the eve of the Adaï custom early in January. I

had a mysterious intimation of it two days before, from a quarter not to

be named. My servants being ordered out of the way, I was thus

addressed, “Christian, take care and watch over your family; the angel

of death has drawn his sword, and will strike on the neck of many

Ashantees; when the drum is struck, on Adaï eve, it will be the death

signal of many. Shun the King if you can, but fear not.” When the time

came to strike the drum, I was sitting thinking on the horrors of the

approaching night, and was rather startled at a summons to attend the

King. This is the manner he always takes to cut off any captain or

person of rank; they are sent for to talk a palaver, and the moment they

enter, the slaves lay hold of them, and pinion them, and throw them

down; if they are thought desperate characters, a knife is thrust

through their mouth to keep them from swearing the death of any other,

when they are charged with their crime, real or supposed, and put to

death or torture.


Whilst I was with the King, the officers, whose duty it is to attend at

sacrifices, and are in the confidence of the King, came in with their

knives, &c. and a message was sent to one chief to say, that the King

was going to his mother’s house to talk a palaver, and shortly after his

Majesty rose, and proceeded thither, ordering the attendants to conduct

me out by another door.


This sacrifice was in consequence of the King imagining, that if he

washed the bones of his mother and sisters, who died while he was on the

throne, it would propitiate the fetish, and make the war successful.

Their bones, were therefore taken from their coffins, and bathed in rum

and water with great ceremony; after being wiped with silks, they were

rolled in gold dust, and wrapped in strings of rock gold, aggry beads,

and other things of the most costly nature. Those who had done any thing

to displease the King, were then sent for in succession, and immolated

as they entered, “that their blood might water the graves.” The whole of

the night, the King’s executioners traversed the streets, and dragged

every one they found to the palace, where they were put in irons: but

(which is often the case) some one had disclosed the secret, and almost

every one had fled, and the King was disappointed of most of his

distinguished victims. Next morning being Adaï custom, which generally

brought an immense crowd to the city, every place was silent and

forlorn; nothing could be found in the market, and his Majesty proceeded

to the morning sacrifice of sheep, &c. attended only by his confidents,

and the members of his own family. When I appeared at the usual time, he

seemed pleased at my confidence, and remarked that I observed how few

captains were present. He appeared agitated and fatigued, and sat a very

short time.


As soon as it was dark, the human sacrifices were renewed, and, during

the night, the bones of the royal deceased were removed to the sacred

tomb at Bantama, to be deposited along with the remains of those who had

sat on the throne. The procession was splendid, but not numerous, the

chiefs and attendants being dressed in the war costume, with a musket,

and preceded by torches; the sacred stools, and all the ornaments used

on great occasions, were carried with them; the victims, with their

hands tied behind them, and in chains, preceded the bones, whilst at

intervals, the songs of death and victory proved their wish to begin the

war. The procession returned about three P.M. on Monday, when the King

took his seat in the market place with his small band, and “death!

death! death!” was echoed by his horns. He sat with a silver goblet of

palm wine in his hand, and when they cut off any head, imitated a

dancing motion in his chair; a little before dark, he finished his

terrors for that day, by retiring to the palace, and soon after, the

chiefs came from their concealment, and paraded the streets, rejoicing

that they had escaped death, although a few days might put them in the

same fear. I had been attacked by a violent fit of ague in the morning,

from having stood so long in the sun the day before while with the King,

it being unusually hot. I dared not send out my people to procure any

thing, least they should be murdered, and in fact there was nothing in

the market to be had: there was not even a drop of water in the house.

The sacrifice was continued till the next Adaï custom, seventeen days.


[Footnote 125: “Mr. Wm. Hutchison, British Resident at Coomassie, the

capital of Ashantee, hearing there are two Europeans at Jennë, takes the

opportunity of a Moor returning to that place, to write to them. It is

earnestly requested, that some information will be sent to Cape Coast

Castle, whether or not, those, to whom this is addressed, belonged to

the expedition of Captain Mungo Park, or by what means they reached

Jennë. As no certain accounts have reached England of the fate of that

gentleman and his companions, any particulars will be interesting; also,

whether or not the Niger is the river known here by the name of Quolla,

Joliba, or any other appellation unknown in Europe. Also, its course,

and the opinions among the natives as to its termination, with the names

of any towns or countries it may run through. It is also reported that

there are two white men at Timbuctoo: should it be possible to render

any assistance to either, it will be done from Cape Coast Castle on

accounts being received of the certainty of their situation; and the

means which may be found to make the Europeans on the Quolla revisit

their native country: in the mean time, any information will be

anxiously expected, as to the fate of their companions; and whether they

have heard of an English expedition, lately arrived at the Niger. Two

notices in English and Arabic accompany this, offering a reward for

information.


December 9th.]


[Footnote 126: I have observed some of the Moors who have been a long

time in Ashantee pour forth a little of any thing before drinking. It

may be remarked, that all the worshippers of the fetish do this, and

also set apart some of their victuals before they eat.]


[Footnote 127: The signals happened to be drying on board H.M.S. Cherub,

Captain Wills, then lying in the roads of Cape Coast.]


[Footnote 128: It will be remembered, that the present King carried an

elephant’s tail before Apokoo, until he unexpectedly succeeded to the

stool.—See page 295.]


                             CHAPTER XIII.


                               * * * * *


                 _Sketch of Gaboon, and its Interior._


The River Gabon, or Gaboon, as the English pronounce it, is placed by

some, N. 30’, E. 8° 42’, by others, on the equator and E. 9° 23’: the

former longitude is certainly the more correct; judging from three

reckonings of the vessel in which I visited it; unfortunately, I had not

the requisites for an observation. The former latitude also, is,

doubtless, the correct one of Cape Clara; for an observation, taken as

we were beating in by Round Corner, gave 23’ N.; and another, taken

about 35 miles up the river, 15’ N. From Cape Clara (which is not ‘very

high land,’) to Sandy point, being an oblique line, may be about 25

miles, but the direct width of the mouth of the river, cannot be more

than 18. From 22 to 25 miles up the river, lay Parrot and Konig islands,

called by the natives Embenee and Dambee; the former (on which ships

have been hauled to careen) 1¾ miles in circumference and uninhabited,

the latter considerably larger, and having a village on the hill. The

natives mentioned the ruins of a Portuguese fort there. Konig island is

not more than a mile from Rodney’s or Oweëndo point, where there is a

large bight; which, with the one opposite, within Eghirrighee point,

makes the width of the river nearly thirty miles in this part. From

these points it seems to form an inner basin, the greatest width of

which, just above Goombena creek, is about twelve miles, judging from

shots; for the work of the ship being heavy whilst in the river, and the

crew suffering from the climate, (the first mate and carpenter dying,)

no assistance could be spared for a survey. There are several large

creeks in the river, Goöngway is the most so, and Goombena the second.


These names, being, of themselves, as uninteresting as the list of

bearings would be, I shall reserve both the one and the other, with the

outline of the river adjusted to them, for the Portfolio of the African

Association; and also two or three sketches of the different parts of

the river, not worth publishing, but, possibly, useful for the

introduction of more accurate observers.[129]


About forty-five miles from the mouth, the river forms two arms. The one

runs north eastwards, by a point called Ohlombompole by the natives of

Gaboon, and Gongoloba by the Shekans or interior people; the entrance is

about four miles wide. The other, runs apparently S.S.E. by a point

called Quawkaw, and Quanlie by the two nations, and is about two miles

broad. It was an inconsiderate observation of Mr. Maxwell’s, “If the

Niger has a sensible outlet, I have no doubt of its proving the Congo,

knowing all the rivers between Cape Palmas and Cape Lopez to be

inadequate to the purpose.” The Volta may be thought so, but the Lagos

certainly cannot, nor the Danger, or Gaboon; and, surely, the rivers del

Rey, and Formoso are not; which are thus noticed, within a few pages of

Mr. Maxwell’s observation, by the judicious Editor of Mr. Park’s last

mission, “The Rio del Rey and the Formoso, are stated to be of

considerable size, being each of them seven or eight miles broad at the

mouth; and the supposed Delta, estimated by the line of coast, is much

larger than that of the Ganges: consequently, the two streams, if

united, must form a river of prodigious magnitude.”


There being little prospect of the ship completing her cargo (red wood

and ebony) within two months, I determined to divert such a tædium under

an insalubrious climate, by investigating and compiling the interior

geography, as far as I could from the reports of the slaves, and

traders. The most enterprising of the latter, and the greatest

travellers in the interior, living on board the vessel during her

loading, I conversed with them constantly, as they spoke good English;

and I went on shore twice, passing a night the latter time, to Naängo or

George’s Town, two miles up the romantic creek of Abaäga, about forty-

five miles from the mouth of the river. I found the Governor (so his

title was interpreted) a very hospitable and intelligent native, and

speaking good English. He had travelled much in the interior, when

young, was still very inquisitive for particulars, and produced me a

troop of slaves for questioning, which furnished a native of almost

every country I could hear of. I saw two young negroes, the sons of

native rulers, who spoke and wrote French fluently. The one had been

sent to that country for education, and the other in his voyage to

England for the same purpose, was taken and carried to France, and

generously educated and maintained by the owner of the privateer.[130]

Each remained in France upwards of eight years before they were sent

back to Gaboon, and professed to be very anxious to return to it,

depicting the native habits not only as uncongenial, but disgusting to

them. The Congo hypothesis, the primary stimulus to my enquiries, making

geographical particulars the most desirable, I will defer those on other

subjects, and submit the compilation of seven weeks investigation and

inquiry under the above advantageous circumstances.


The native name of the country of Gaboon, is Empoöngwa; it dos not

extend above the branching of the river, or more than forty miles in

length; and is about thirty in breadth, including the river, which they

call Aroöngo. We will pursue the north-eastern arm first. There is a

sand-bank in the middle of the entrance, and three small islands,

Soombëä, Ningahinga, and Ompoöngee, are just beyond it, where the water

becomes fresh. About two miles further, is a larger island called

Cheēndue, inhabited, and the women of which are constantly employed in

fishing for white mullet, being abundant. They dress them with a kind of

chocolate, which I shall notice presently. Several large trees grow out

of the water, one, eminently high, is directly in the middle of the

river; they are called Intinga, or the iron tree. The eastern banks of

this arm are inhabited by the Sheekans, who, with all the nations of the

interior, are called Boolas by the Gaboons, a term synonymous with Dunko

in Ashantee. Adjoining Sheekan are the Jomays, who speak a dialect of

the same language. The Sheekans bury their dead within the house, under

their beds. The Gaboons prohibit these people from visiting the coast,

lest they should deprive them of their profits, as the medium between

the interior and shipping, whether for slaves or manufactures.


The Sheekans, like their neighbours, only reckon from 1 to 5, conjoining

these numerals afterwards, as Mr. Park has shewn the Feloops and the

Jaloffs to do.


  One       Ilwawtoe


  Two       Ibba


  Three     Bittach


  Four      Binnay


  Five      Bittah


  Ten       Ducoom


  Twenty    Eboomebba


  Hundred   Kama


The source of the north-eastern arm is unknown, it probably flows from

the River Danger, called by the natives Moöhnda, which flows very far

from the interior; and, though not so wide, is considerably deeper than

the Aroöngo or Gabon. There is a creek passing Quaw Ben’s town in the

River Gabon, which runs inland, within a short distance of the Moöhnda,

so that traders proceeding so far by it, carry their canoes over the

interval to that river. The Nokos, Apooks, and Komebays, inhabit the

lower space between the Rivers Gaboon and Danger.


Having pulled up the N.E. arm for two days and nights, they land,

leaving the river about one mile broad; and after two journies,

(skirting Sheekan,) reach Samashialee, the capital of the country of

Kaylee, (sometimes called Kalay,) and the residence of the King Ohmbay.

Samashialee, is described as a considerable town, and Asāko, as the

second to it; their houses are all of bamboo. The Kaylees manufacture

iron from the ore, which abounds every where in this part of Africa; but

they are very careful not to let the coast people see them do so, as

knives, spears, mats, and bamboo cloth, are their articles of barter

with them, for brass rods, cottons, and other European commodities. I

procured some of the knives and spear heads, of their own iron. The

bamboo-cloth has the appearance of coarse brown Holland. Their mats are

very fine, and much varied in colors and patterns. It is remarkable,

that the latter do not partake at all of their own wild character, but

are of that chaste, simple outline which would be called elegant by

civilized nations. These people are cannibals, not only eating their

prisoners but their dead, whose bodies are bid for directly the breath

is out of them. A father has frequently been seen to eat his own child.

Fowls abound in their country, but they never eat them, nor will they

goats, which are equally numerous, whilst human flesh is to be had. Salt

fetches an enormous price. The people of Gaboon would be afraid to

venture amongst them, even as traders, but for their musquets, and a

strong body of Sheekans, always engaged to accompany them. Their country

is mountainous and woody. There are people inhabiting a mountain close

to the north-eastward of Kalay, who are said to see best in the night

time, when they travel and work, sleeping most of the day, because the

light hurts their eyes, which are remarkably brilliant. Ivory is

plentiful. The Kaylee seems to be a dialect of the Sheekan.


  One      Woto


  Two      Ibba


  Three    Battach


  Four     Binnay


  Five     Bittan


  Ten      Duëoom


Northward of Kaylee, two journies, is Imbekee, adjoining the Moöhnda or

Danger. One moon distant, in the same direction, passing through the

countries, Beesoo (three journies from Imbeekee) Aösa, and Hetan, are

the larger kingdoms of Badayhee, and Oongoomo; the King of the latter is

Enjukayamoo, and the capital Mattadee, described as a very large town.

The numerals assimilate to those of Kaylee.


  One      Woötta


  Two      Beeba


  Three    Bittach


  Four     Binnay


  Five     Bitten


Travelling (still northward,) through the small states of Oondamee and

Bolaykee, in six journies they reach the extensive countries of Paämway,

and Shaybee, which adjoin each other; and on their northern frontier is

Bayhee, through which kingdom the River Wola or Wole flows; the largest

river they had ever seen or heard of, and running eastward. My friend

the Governor, always impressed on me, that this was the largest river in

the world, and ran, to use his own words, “farther than any one, except

God, knows, farther than Indee; all the great rivers in this country

come from Wole.” The Moöhnda, he had always understood in the long

course of his enquiries, to flow from it; but he could not speak so

positively of that, as of the junction of the Ogooawai and the Wole, as

he had himself been to a considerable distance up the Ogooawai, which,

returning to Gaboon, we shall proceed to. All the nations on this route

were said to be cannibals, the Paämways not so voraciously so as the

others, because they cultivate a breed of large dogs for their eating;

this seems the favourite meat in most parts of Africa.


Those who travel eastward, pull for a day and a half up the right hand

or south-eastern arm of the Gaboon or Aroöngo, which arm is formed by

the junction of several small streams, about sixty miles from its

confluence with the north-eastern arm. Landing about thirty-five miles

up it, two and a half journies are occupied in travelling over an

uninhabited country, described as savannah, and called Woongawoonga; it

is entirely open, and buffaloes are numerous. Here they reach the

Ogooäwai, a rapid river, frequently as wide, and, generally,

considerably deeper than the Gaboon; and which, as we shall presently

see, runs to the Congo, of itself insignificant. One day up the

Ogoöawai, is the small kingdom of Adjoomba, consisting but of four

towns. One journey beyond, on the Ogooäwai, and north-eastward, is

Gaelwa, a kingdom of more importance, its length three journies. The

King’s name is Roiela, and the capital, a considerable town, Inkanjee:

Goondemsie is second to it. Adjoining Gaelwa is Eninga, where the river

widens considerably; this country is larger than Adjoomba, very

populous, and composed of several small governments. The river winds

very much; frequently they save time by carrying their canoes over the

peninsulas; they are also opposed by impetuous currents. Hitherto the

language is the same as the Empoöngwa or Gaboon. Twenty journies from

the frontier of Gaelwa and Eninga, through the small state of Okota, is

the kingdom of Asheera; and ten beyond it, that of Okandee, the greatest

they know. The King’s name is Adoomoo, the capital extensive, and kept

particularly clean: their law forbids any native of Okandee to be sold

as a slave. None of the nations on the Ogooäwai are cannibals. On the

eastern confines of Okandee this river is described to join or flow from

the Wōla. The countries between the Moöhnda and Ogooäwai, are called

Sappalah, Koomakaimalong, and Okaykay, and described as vast extents of

savannah. Deeha was spoken of as a large country in the neighbourhood of

the Wōla. I could not make these interior natives, or the people of

Gaboon, understand what I meant by a Moor; there are none but pagan

negroes throughout. The slaves recently arrived viewed me with affright;

they said none in their country would believe there were white men.


I could hear of no great controlling kingdom, like Ashantee, in these

parts of the interior, nor do I think any such exists eastward of

Yarriba, or other than numerous small states, as far behind Dagwumba and

its neighbours in civilization, as they are behind Europeans. The

name,[131] situation, magnitude, and course of the Wōla, leave little

doubt of its being the Kulla or Quolla; though I am not clear that they

said there was a country of the name of the river, nor did I recognize

the name of any of the countries I had before heard of, as being in its

neighbourhood. With those on the northern banks of this large river they

did not profess to be acquainted, and those on the southern may be

intermediate between the Moöhnda and Ogooawai routes, which diverge from

Empoöngwa, the former northward, the latter north-eastward. Forty

journies from the Empoöngwa frontier to the Bahr Kulla agree very well

with the distance. A strong argument, in addition to the above, for the

Wōla and the Quolla being the same river, (recollecting my description

of the Paämways, and all the nations on the line of the Moöhnda, as

cannibals,) is suggested by the reperusal of the following remarks of

Mr. Horneman, and Mr. Hutchison, already quoted in page 202: “The Yem

Yems, cannibals, are south of Kano, ten days,” which agrees very well

with the lowered course of the Niger, which I have been obliged to lay

down. “It is to the King of Quallowliffa that the country in which

Canna, Dall, and Yum Yum, where cannibals are, is subject.” It is true,

that the character only, and not the names of the nations visited from

Empoöngwa, can be identified with Mr. Hutchison’s Canna, Dall, and Yum

Yum; but the Moorish pronunciation, or writing of negro names,

especially those only known to them by report, is very incorrect and

capricious. To Mr. Horneman, they were called Yem Yems; to Mr.

Hutchison, Yum Yums, and sometimes Jum Jums. The names Bapoonoo,

Okobella, Banginniga, Oonbamba, and Asango, may possibly be identified

hereafter amongst the countries approximating to the Wōla.


We will return to Adjoomba, where the Ogooäwai divides itself; the

smaller arm called Assazee runs to Cape Lopez, which is in the kingdom

of Oroöngoo; the monarch, Ogoöla, from his power surpassing every other

in the neighbourhood of the coast, has acquired the name of Pass-all

with the traders who speak English. Between Oroöngoo and Adjoomba is the

kingdom of Oongobai. The King’s name is Pendanga, and the numerals are,


  One      Rappeek.


  Two      Ramboise.


  Three    Mittasee.


  Four     Binnay.


  Five     Bittan.


  Six      Sambal.


  Seven    Bittooba.


  Eight    Bissamen.


  Nine     Bwoi.


  Ten      Deëoom.


An intelligent native of this country had fled to Gaboon to avoid

execution.


The larger arm of the Ogooäwai, flowing south-eastward, as wide as the

Gaboon, through the country of Tanyan, (the western frontier of which is

five journies from that of Adjoomba,) runs into the Congo, (which is

comparatively small before the confluence,) about ten days pull from the

mouth of that river. A very intelligent man who acts as interpreter or

trade man to the vessels which frequent the river Gaboon, confirming

this account of the slaves and traders, I enquired into the

circumstances to which he owed his knowledge. He is the son of the

principal trader in Gaboon, called Tom Lawson, who speaks English

fluently. Eight years ago, this young man, Wondo, went from Gaboon to

the Congo, in the Nimble, Everett master. After the vessel had traded

some time, as high up in the river as she might safely venture, the

captain sent him and three or four other negroes in a boat with goods,

to go up as much higher as they could. His account was, that they passed

Evehelee and Cormee, when they came to a fall of water upwards of twenty

feet high. A native, who preceded them in his canoe, directed them to

enter a small channel to the east, which, by a considerable sweep,

avoided it, but the natives, he persisted, both pulled their canoes up,

and let them down this fall, by long fibrous roots twisted into cordage,

and affixed to the large trees above; frequently, however, the most

expert were victims to their intrepidity, generally in the descent;

their canoes were made purposely in the shape of a bow. I expressed my

doubts, questioned him with seeming indifference, at many different

times, on this subject, and requested others to do the same; his account

never varied. He was naturally very cautious in what he said, by no

means given to the marvellous in recounting his travels, but a corrector

of that disposition in others. To the last moment he persisted in this

report. Just beyond this fall is the confluence of the Ogooawai and the

Congo, which takes place in Tanyan.[132] From this point he described

the latter as gradually dwindling to its source, (not more than six days

distant, by Encombë and Eveheea,) so that the Congo owed its magnitude

and rapidity entirely to the Ogooawai.[133] He mentioned a chief named

Mangoff, to have been a principal man in the Congo, and he sung his boat

chorus as a specimen of the language, “Malava napa, malava mabootay,

mabootay.” He said, Mangoff lived at Barrima. He spoke of a place called

Ohlobe, but I omitted to minute the particulars.


The master of a Liverpool ship, laying in Gaboon river, having visited

the Congo annually for many years, I availed myself of an opportunity of

conversing with him also. He mentioned Bōma as the principal place of

trade, but he did not consider it more than forty miles up the river; it

was so called after a chief, whose son has now succeeded him. Binda, a

secondary place of trade, he reckoned to be ninety miles from the

entrance of the river, on the north side; but there are so many arms or

branches there, that it is very difficult to distinguish the Congo

itself, which he had always understood to terminate soon

afterwards.[134] The houses he described as wretched, and transportable,

so that a trader buying one for a trifle, could have it moved to any

part of the banks he pleased. Sea horse teeth were to be bought

plentifully, they buried them with their dead, dedicating them as the

Ashantees do gold, and generally sticking one erect on the grave, as a

sort of monument. He spoke very ill of them from his own experience;

they had frequently attempted to poison the water on board his vessel. A

few months back they cut off a Portuguese vessel, destroyed the crew,

and plundered her. I anxiously anticipate the perusal of Captain

Tuckey’s journal.


Tom Lawson, who has as much, if not more influence than his brother the

King, says he would provide an escort headed by his son Wondo, and

guarantee the safety of any exploratory party to the river Ogooawai, and

five days up it; that is as far as Okota. Two hundred pounds laid out in

goods, I think, would defray the expenses, and presents, en passant,

handsomely, and there are many opportunities by which two officers might

be sent from Cape Coast to Gaboon for the purpose, and by way of the

islands, return to it. A man of war might convey them, and call for

them, on her cruise.


Kings are numerous in Gaboon, and scarcely comparable even with the

petty caboceers of Fantee. The greatest trader, or the richest man of

almost every small village assumes the title, and frequently suffers

gross indignities from his subjects, from not having the power to punish

them. The King of Naängo seems of acknowledged superiority, and is

comparatively respectable, both in means and power; he is known to

trading vessels by the name of King George. The brother succeeds before

the son. The legislative and judicial power is vested in the Governor,

controlled by the King, who may order the death of a man; but, if he

assigns no good reason, the offensive party is generally allowed to

retire elsewhere. All children share the property of the father in equal

portions, except the eldest son, who has about half as much again as any

other. If a man kills another, he has a public trial; and, if he cannot

justify the act, which it seems he may in many instances, his own death

is inevitable. If he kills one of his wives, (his rank is designated by

the number,) he pays a fine to her family, who, and not the husband, are

involved in all her palavers. The acknowledged heir to a property may

bring a palaver against his father, or whoever may be possessor of it,

for killing a slave unjustly, or otherwise injuring the property, and

oblige him to make good the injury.


A man may not look at, or converse with his mother-in-law, on pain of a

heavy, perhaps a ruinous fine; this singular law is founded on the

tradition of an incest. It is a common custom to lend their wives to one

another; if a man evades a promise of this kind, the Governor awards

heavy damages to the plaintiff. If an applicant is refused, and is

detected in intrigue, the whole of his property is forfeited to the

husband of the woman, who, if it is not speedily delivered, may kill the

man, and burn his house. I heard of no law so barbarous or disgusting,

as this any where in the interior of the Gold Coast. They assured me

they never made human sacrifices.


A man of consequence never drinks before his inferiors, without hiding

his face from them, believing that at this moment only, his enemies have

the power of imposing a spell on his faculties, in spite of the

guardiance of his fetish. When a man dies, the door of his house is kept

shut seven days. The whiskers of the men, and the side locks both of

them and the women, hang down in narrow braids, sometimes below their

shoulders, the ends commonly tipped with small beads, and the front

locks are generally braided to project like horns. The women wear a

number of thick brass rings (the trade brass rod twisted) round their

legs. A woman of consequence has a succession of them from the ancle to

the knee, which announce her approach when walking, and jingle when she

dances. The female slaves support even the heaviest burdens from a broad

band or string around the temples. Like other negroes, different

families have different fetish, some will not eat a cock, nor others a

hen. I could not discover any distinct ideas of the creation, or of a

future life. They believe implicitly in the superior fetish of

individuals from Sappalah and other countries in the interior.


Tom Lawson’s ‘fetish man,’ a native of Sappalah, has so thoroughly

persuaded his master, by his address and fortuitous circumstances in

war, that no bullet can injure him, strike him where it will, (either

rebounding, or penetrating to be thrown from the stomach at pleasure)

that this old man, who has lived almost the whole of his life in

European vessels, always presses every stranger to become equally

convinced by firing at him. His son bribed this man to endue him with

the same fetish, and eagerly making trial of its virtue, received a

musket ball, which fractured the small bone of his arm. The address of

the fetish man accounted for this, to the entire satisfaction of every

body, by declaring (being the most probable crime he could guess in the

emergency) that it was at that instant revealed to him by the offended

fetish, that this young man once had a stolen intercourse with his wife

at an improper season; it was immediately confessed as a truth, and they

are as obstinate believers as ever.


Naängo consists of one street, wide, regular, and clean. The houses are

very neatly constructed of bamboo, and afford a ground floor of spacious

and lofty apartments. They sleep on bedsteads encircled with musquito

curtains of bamboo cloth. The manners of the superiors are very pleasing

and hospitable, and a European may reside amongst them, not only with

safety, but with comfort and dignity. I do not think the old and new

town contain 500 inhabitants between them. From the sickness which

prevailed on board the vessel, the climate must be very insalubrious.

The density of the atmosphere from exhalation was even more oppressive

than the heat, which was intense before the setting in of the sea-

breeze, and at all times sensibly much greater than I had experienced on

the Gold Coast, or in the interior: there was no thermometer on board.

The Empoöngwa is the softest negro language I have ever heard, being

characterized by the duplication of vowels, separately pronounced. Their

numerals are;


  One      Hemoödee


  Two      Mban


  Three    Ntcharoo


  Four     Nahee


  Five     Nchanee


  Six      Oroöba


  Seven    Ragginnoömoo


  Eight    Ennanakee


  Nine     Enogoöm


  Ten      Hegoöm


They do not possess a single manufacture, depending for all their

comforts and conveniences on the superior ingenuity of their inland

neighbours, and the supplies of shipping. They plant but handfuls of

corn, and rear a few goats and fowls. Cotton grows spontaneously. They

make a good black dye from the mangrove and ebony shavings. They reduce

the red wood to a very soft powder, by breaking a soft species of stone,

and sprinkling the finest particles of it on a flat piece of red wood,

which they rub violently against another flat piece; the mixed powders

are then thrown into water, and that of the wood floating on the surface

is strained and dried. They rub children with this powder for cutaneous

eruptions.


The African Ourang-outan (Pithecus Troglodites) is found here, the one I

saw was two feet and a half high, but said to be growing. I offered a

fair price for it, considering they are not rare there, and would not

give more when I heard of one being already in England. The native name

is Inchego: it had the cry, visage, and action of a very old man, and

was obedient to the voice of its master; its agony on espying the

panther on board was inconceivable.[135] There is a curious variety of

monkeys. The favourite and most extraordinary subject of our

conversations on natural history, (which I introduce merely to excite

enquiry) was the Ingēna, compared with an Ourang-outan, but much

exceeding it in size, being generally five feet high, and four across

the shoulders; its paw was said to be even more disproportionate than

its breadth, and one blow of it to be fatal; it is seen commonly by

those who travel to Kaylee, lurking in the bush to destroy passengers,

and feeding principally on the wild honey, which abounds. Their death is

frequently accelerated by the silliness which characterizes most of

their actions: observing men carry heavy burthens through the forest,

they tear off the largest branches from the trees, and accumulating a

weight (sometimes of elephants teeth,) disproportionate even to their

superior strength, emulously hurry with it from one part of the woods to

another, with little or no cessation, until the fatigue, and the want of

rest and nourishment, exhausts them. Amongst other of their actions,

reported without variation by the men, women, and children of Empoöngwa

and Sheekan, is that of building a house in rude imitation of the

natives, and sleeping outside or on the roof of it; and also of carrying

about their infant dead, closely pressed to them, until they drop away

in putrefaction.[136] The larger birds in the creeks were uncommon, if

not unknown. Pelicans abounded.


Chamelions were plentifully caught, but none lived more than a month on

board the vessel, whether fed with flies, or not at all. The changes of

those I watched seemed confined to the shades between a very dark, dusky

green, and a bright yellow; when placed on any black substance they

became the former, and when any thing light approached them, they

changed to a bright green, which hue, if the substance was yellow, was

interspersed with the most brilliant spots of that colour. I could not

discern that they ever acquired a tinge of blue or red; when at rest in

their cage, their color was dark green, mottled with still darker spots.


In my rambles about the environs of Naängo, I formed some idea of the

general face of vegetation in Empoöngwa. Being the rainy season, of

course it did not possess its usual beauty. The red wood trees abounded,

with many which were new to me. The Mangroves clothed the banks of the

creeks and river, even growing some yards from the banks in the water,

and their lower branches frequently covered with oysters. The palm wine

tree was plentiful. Like most parts of Western Africa, the woods were so

covered beneath with shrubs and plants, that they seemed impenetrable.

Immense runners, twisting together, dropped from the branches like large

cables, generally covered with parasites; sometimes adhering to the

parent stem, they became themselves a tree, and at others, shooting

across to the branches of neighbouring trees, seemed to connect the

forest in a general link. The climbing plants contributed to this

entanglement, for, interlacing their tendrils amongst the trees, they

enwreathed them in the most beautiful flowers, or dropping in festoons,

formed a splendid drapery to the sober green of the canopy: amongst

these the convolvolus cairicus was conspicuous, from its extreme

variety, the flowers being not only of that beautiful lilac, so much

esteemed in England, but of the brightest blue, dark brown, pale yellow,

white, pink, buff with a purple eye, and all the shades which an opening

flower presents from budding to decay.[137] I gathered a few specimens

of the plants as I walked along, which may be acceptable to botanists. I

can only lament that so many circumstances conspired to render my

account of them imperfect; the rainy season, my slight knowledge of

botany, and the absence of all instruments which might have enabled me

to examine the very minute flowers which frequently presented

themselves; but I am convinced many new species might be discovered. I

will submit a few which were remarkable for their different virtues, and

of which drawings or specimens are preserved.


The Cosa Cosa grew upon a tree about ten feet high, the flowers in

clusters, but rarely two fully blown at the same moment, the corolla

white, tube shaped, but cleft to the bottom, tinged at the top with

crimson and yellow; a slightly tinged glutinous petal was fixed within

the corolla, and adhered firmly to it; when separated, I found the two

anthera fastened to it, without filaments, and between them laid the

style, the stigma having a small hook at the back to fasten it between

the two anthera. The juice is used for curing inflammations of the eyes.


The Endaägoo (_Cyperas articulatus_. _Linn._) had the appearance of a

grass, the bulbous root was used as a worm medicine.


The Owallifa was not in blossom, the prickly leaf was applied to

swellings when they wished to reduce them by bleeding; flogging the part

affected, as boys frequently do their chilblains with holly.


The Edjamba (_a species of_ _Urtica_) bears a multitude of minute green

flowers, the leaves wear the appearance of nettles, and when laid on the

skin produce blisters.


The Eninda Aboönee (_Leea sambucina_) is an umbelliferous plant, the

infusion of which is said to correct nausea.


The Oonkoolankolee (_Aneilema bracteolata_. _Br._) bears a very delicate

lilac blossom, with only two petals, which fly back and expose the other

parts of the flower; the least breath of air will disturb them. The

natives wash their children with its infusion, if they are backward in

walking.


The Econda Boomba (_Bidens_, probably a new species, but too imperfect

to be determined) is anti-venereal, as an infusion; the flower resembles

the chamomile.


The Shewawono bears a spike with leaves resembling those of Hedysarum.

The decoction is said to cure rheumatism.


The tobacco grows spontaneously, but I do not consider this so strong a

proof of its being indigenous to Africa, as that it grows in Inta. The

Portuguese have probably introduced it into Gaboon.


The natives here as well as elsewhere have a number of fetish plants;

the most remarkable seems the Ewelly welly, (the Aserumbdrue of

Ashantee, a species of Piper related to Umbellatum) the broad leaf of

which, when rubbed on a fetish man, is said to render him invisible.


The Eroga, a favourite but violent medicine, is no doubt a fungus, for

they describe it as growing on a tree called the Ocamboo, when decaying;

they burn it first, and take as much as would lay on a shilling.


The medicine they most prize is the Neoöndoo; a small quantity was

spared to me reluctantly. Four nuts grow in a pod on a very large tree

of the hardest wood; it is purchased greedily, only growing on the

frontier of Empoöngwa, and is used successfully by those afflicted with

gravel.


In killing elephants they use two poisons, both of which are the milky

juices of the stalks of plants. Inquaw indjoo (a plant belonging to the

natural order _Aroidea_, and referable to the Linnean genus _Arum_)

bears a hard white berry in a spiral cluster. The Ygwan agwan berries

are red, and in perfection at the time that the flowers are budding.

These juices are rubbed on the muskets balls, spears, arrows, and

knives, and the effect on the elephant is described as almost

instantaneous.


They make bird lime from a tree called Epoowa.


Besides the pine apple, the common thread of Africa, they use that of

two other plants, the Ezoönee (_Triumfitta elliptica_, _Nov. Sp._) and

the Naängoo, an _Urtica_, or genus nearly allied to it. The former bears

a yellow flower, too minute for my inspection. The top of the latter is

surmounted by five or six delicate flower stalks; the blossoms were

exceedingly minute, and of a lively green.


The governor of the town brought me two or three very harsh rough

leaves, which he said were from the plant Egoögoo (a species of _ficus_)

not then in blossom; they are used in planing wood, polishing and

cleaning various articles of household furniture, and feel like emery

paper. At the same time he gave me what they are very fond of chewing, a

delicate little mimosa, (_Abrus precatorius_. _Linn._) the taste of

which resembles liquorice.


A beautiful red pod, the blossom of which was out of season, contains

small black seeds, in taste exactly resembling the cardamom. The natives

of this place, and also of the interior, are very fond of them. In

Booroom the plant is called Booroomma, and at Gaboon, Entoöndo.


The Caoutchouc is to be met with here; the natives describe it as the

product of one tree only,[138] the olamboo; their method of collecting

it is curious. After the incision is made in the tree, whence it oozes

like a glutinous milk, they spread it over their arms and breasts with a

knife, (having first shaved themselves, that the hair of the skin may

not be torn up when it is taken off,) in the form of a plaister. It is

either rolled up in balls to play with, or stretched over the heads of

drums; they do not seem to apply it to any other use.


They make their torches from the wood (odjoo) of which they form their

canoes, the resinous parts are broken in small pieces, and tied closely

in very long leaves; the smaller end is fixed to an upright stick placed

in the ground of the apartment; they afford a brilliant light, and the

resin, when burning, emits a grateful odour.


The Odica, from which they make a kind of chocolate, is a very high and

large tree, bearing an acuminate shining leaf. The nuts, which are

white, are contained in a round pod with a bulb at the end, twice as

large as a man’s fist, green without, and yellow within; the parts

surrounding the nuts are squeezed into water, which they sweeten like

honey. The kernels are strung and smoke dried, and then beat in water

into large masses, having the appearance of coarse chocolate, but the

flavour of a rank gross gravy. It might be more palatable otherwise

prepared.


The vegetable butter (which certainly belongs to the natural order

_Sapoteæ_) brought to the Ashantee market, is here well known by the

name of Onoöngoo: it is a large tree, and the nuts are enclosed in a

round red pod, containing from four to six: the flower is also red, from

description. My servant, a native of Booroom, called the tree

Kirrimkoon, and the butter Incoom; the Ashantees call the latter

Sarradee; in Mallowa the tree is called Timkeëä. The nut is first

boiled, and the oil or butter afterwards expressed; in Booroom and

Mallowa it is skimmed from the surface. It tasted quite as good as fresh

butter before any salt is added, and we relished the meat fried in it

exceedingly. Being the rainy season I could neither get a sight of the

flower or the pod of this or the odica, but I procured the nuts and

produce of both. The curious may compare this butter with the specimen

of the Ashantee grease. Before I understood them to be distinct trees, I

concluded the odica and the butter both to be the produce of the cacao-

nut, but the butter answers closely to Mr. Park’s description of the

shea-tolu, though the tree did not resemble the American oak.


The Kolla nut grows on one of those trees which are supposed to sow

their own seed; it is round, and the size of an Orleans plum, having a

very hard shell, the kernel is white, and, after being exposed to the

sun for a few days, becomes even sweeter than a filbert. The natives

frequently soak them in salt water for a few weeks, and relish the rank

flavour they then acquire. They form the principal food of the lower

orders. They have a round orange coloured fruit, called Incheema, the

size varies from that of a small cocoa nut to a large one; the capsule

is very thick, and when cut yields a milky juice; a number of hard, dark

brown seeds, surrounded by a pulp, are found within, the latter only is

eaten, and when gathered fresh from the tree, is of a very delicious

flavour, not unlike that of a green gage. If the fruit is suffered to

fall from the tree, the bruise renders it unwholesome and unpalatable.


Every dark night, Tom Lawson was sure to direct me to look in the

direction of what some foolish Europeans had persuaded him must be a

diamond mountain. It lays about three days eastward of Empoöngwa in

direct distance, but from the fear of the intervening people, he had

been obliged to visit it by a circuitous route, which occupied seven

days; he lost the pieces he procured, in a skirmish on his return; they

illuminated a great circumference. It is considered a powerful fetish,

and described as a very high mountain. I must admit, that when there was

no moon, a pale but distinct light was invariably reflected from a

mountain in that quarter, and from no other.


The red and yellow ochres brought to me, were dug in the neighbourhood

of a savannah three journies south-eastward of Empoöngwa, where they

insisted there were large pits of strata, not only of red and yellow,

but of other colours. They believe, that if a man attempts to carry off

different colours at the same time, he is paralyzed on the spot. Gold

has never been found in this part of Africa.


[Illustration: Music score


EMPOÖNGWA SONG.]


[Illustration: Music score


EMPOÖNGWA SONG.]


[Illustration: Music score


Notes sung by the white Negro from Imbeekee.]


The music of Empoöngwa is, generally, very inferior to that I have

before noticed. The enchambee, their only peculiar instrument, resembles

the mandolino, but has only five strings, made from the root of the palm

tree; the neck consists of five pieces of bamboo, to which the strings

are fastened, and, slipping up and down, are easily, but not securely

tuned; it is played with both hands; the tones are sweet, but have

little power or variety. Long stories are recited to the enchambee in

the moon-light evenings, in a sort of recitative; a favourite one, is an

account of the arts by which the Sun gained the ascendancy over the

Moon, who were first made of coeval power by their common father.


No. 1, (which, I imagine, commences in F major, and ends in G major) is

an Empoöngwa air played on the enchambee. I do not know if the inversion

of words is common in their conversation as well as in their songs. A

native envies a neighbour, named Engaëlla, who has ivory to barter with

a vessel.


  Amorill injanja        Engaëlla;  impoongee  m’adgillinjanja.


  A brass pan he has got Engaëlla;   ivory,    I have got none.


Here again we find _me_ answers to the personal pronoun I.


No. 2, in G major, is a song in which the men sing the air alone, and

the women join in the chorus. It is an old one, and the subject the

first appearance of a white man. One verse will be quite enough to

satisfy others and exculpate myself. At least half a dozen followed it.


       Ma         bengwoo        ma bengwa           baïa.


  A fine strange  thing,    A fine strange thing,  my mother.


          Deboonga sai                 camberwoona  nayennee.


  Like the leaf of the fat tree,[139]  true I say,  so it is.


     Sangwa moochoo,          baïa.


  I make you look to-day,  my mother.


        Baï yamgwan boonoo.


  My mother fears this fetish man.


My patience during a series of dull Empoöngwa songs, was recompensed by

the introduction of a performer, as loathsome as his music was

astonishing. It was a white negro from the interior country of Imbeekee;

his features betrayed his race, his hair was woolly, and of a sandy

colour, with thick eye brows of the same; his eyes small, bright, and of

a dark grey; the light seemed to hurt them, and their constant quivering

and rolling gave his countenance an air of insanity, which was confirmed

by the actions of his head, and limbs, and the distortions of his mouth.

His stature was middling, and his limbs very small; his skin was

dreadfully diseased, and where it was free from sores bore the

appearance of being thrown on, it hung about him so loose and so

shrivelled; his voice was hollow, and his laugh loud, interspersed with

African howls. His harp was formed of wood, except that part emitting

the sound, which was covered with goat skin, perforated at the bottom.

The bow to which the eight strings were fixed, was considerably curved,

and there was no upright; the figure head, which was well carved, was

placed at the top of the body, the strings were twisted round long pegs,

which easily turned when they wanted tuning, and, being made of the

fibrous roots of palm wine tree, were very tough and not apt to slip.

The tone was full, harmonious, and deep. He sat on a low stool, and

supporting his harp on his knee and shoulder, proceeded to tune it with

great nicety; his hands seemed to wander amongst the strings until he

gradually formed a running accompaniment (but with little variety) to

his extraordinary vociferations. At times, one deep and hollow note

burst forth and died away; the sounds of the harp became broken;

presently he looked up, pursuing all the actions of a maniac, taking one

hand from the strings, to wave it up and down, stretching forth one leg

and drawing it up again as if convulsed, lowering the harp on to the

other foot, and tossing it up and down. Whilst the one hand continued

playing, he rung forth a peal which vibrated on the ear long after it

had ceased; he was silent; the running accompaniment served again as a

prelude to a loud recitative, uttered with the greatest volubility, and

ending with one word, with which he ascended and descended, far beyond

the extent of his harp, with the most beautiful precision. Sometimes he

became more collected, and a mournful air succeeded the recitative,

though without the least connection, and he would again burst out with

the whole force of his powerful voice in the notes of the Hallelujah of

Handel. To meet with this chorus in the wilds of Africa, and from such a

being, had an effect I can scarcely describe, and I was lost in

astonishment at the coincidence. There could not be a stronger proof of

the nature of Handel, or the powers of the negro.


I naturally enquired if this man was in his senses, and the reply was,

that he was always rational but when he played, when he invariably used

the same gestures, and evinced the same incoherency. The accompanying

notes were caught whilst he was singing; to do more than set them down

in their respective lengths, was impossible, and every notation must be

far inadequate.


As regards the words, there was such a rhapsody of recitative, of

mournful, impetuous, and exhilarated air, wandering through the life of

man, throughout the animal and vegetable kingdom for its subjects,

without period, without connection, so transient, abrupt, and

allegorical, that the Governor of the town could translate a line but

occasionally, and I was too much possessed by the music, and the

alternate rapture and phrenzy of the performer, to minute the half

which he communicated. I can only submit the fragments of a melancholy

and a descriptive part.


Burst of a man led to execution,


  Yawa yawa wo wo oh


  Yawa waï yawa


  What have I done? what have I done?


Bewailing the loss of his mother,


  Yawa gooba shangawelladi yaisa


  Wo na boo, &c.


  My mother dies; who’ll cry for me now


  When I die? &c.


  Pahmbolee gwoongee yayoo, &c.


  Which path shall I seek my love?


  Hark! I know now,


  I hear her snap the dry sticks,


  To speak, to call to me.


Jiggledy jiggledy, jiggledy, too too tee too, often invaded or broke off

a mournful strain; it was said to be an imitation of the note of a bird,

described as the wood-pecker.


Three Portuguese, one French, and two large Spanish ships, visited the

river for slaves during our stay, and the master of a Liverpool vessel

assured me that he had fallen in with 22 between Gaboon and the Congo.

Their grand rendezvous is Mayumba. The Portuguese of St. Thomas’s and

Prince’s islands send small schooner boats to Gaboon for slaves, which

are kept after they are transported this short distance, until the coast

is clear for shipping them to America. A third large Spanish ship, well

armed, entered the river the night before we quitted it, and hurried our

exit, for one of that character was committing piracy in the

neighbouring rivers. Having suffered from falling into their hands

before, I felicitated myself on the escape. We were afterwards chased

and boarded by a Spanish armed schooner, with three hundred slaves on

board; they only desired provisions.


[Footnote 129: I believe no instructions for entering the River Gabon

are in print, the following were compiled from the log-book of the Lord

Mulgrave, which has been laden in the river the three successive years

she has been chartered as a store-ship by the African Committee, and

beat into it this time. When standing for the river, from the southward,

it is best to give Round Corner a good birth, as a shoal or sand-bank

runs off between that and Sandy point, and also in case of being

becalmed, as the ground is foul and bad for anchoring. A channel goes in

by Sandy point, but it is rarely used but by small vessels. Leave Round

Corner about three leagues, and stand over for Cape Clara until you have

the river well open, then steer for a bluff point about two miles inside

of the Cape, where you will find from eight to ten fathom water. You may

stand in, till you are about two miles from the above point, and then

steer up the river, keeping the north shore aboard, and steering for the

highest land you see, which lies above Quaw Ben’s town. In mid-channel,

you will find nine fathoms, until you bring Sandy point on a line with

Cape Clara bearing S.S.E. You are then in the narrowest part of the

channel, which is not more than two or three miles wide, and your

greatest soundings will be six fathoms. When you are well inside these

bearings you may haul off from the shore at your leisure, and steer for

Parrot Island. When athwart of Quaw Ben’s town, and about five miles off

shore, you will find twelve and thirteen fathoms. In standing up from

Quaw Ben’s, give Prince Glass’s town a good birth, as a shoal runs off

to some distance, your soundings will be from seven to nine fathoms; you

may anchor on any part of the north side, without danger. Between Konig

and Parrot Islands, is very good anchorage in seven fathoms, and a soft,

muddy, bottom; thence to Abraham’s town, you will have from seven to

four fathoms at low water; and small vessels may go a considerable way

up the river, for there are three fathoms at Naängoo or George-Town

creek, about forty-five miles up the river. If you are turning into the

river, when you are within the Cape, stand no further off than into five

fathoms, for as you close the middle ground, the soundings are very

irregular; you may have five fathoms; and, before the next cast, the

ship may be ashore. The widest part of the channel, is not more than

about 5½ miles, until you are nearly athwart of Quaw Ben’s town, when

you may stand over to the south side, as you are then inside the bank.

There is a very good watering-place at Rodney’s point. Ships

unacquainted, may anchor off the Cape and wait for the sea breeze, which

generally sets in before noon.]


[Footnote 130: I am sorry to say those whom their parents have been

persuaded to entrust to English vessels for the same purpose, have

invariably been sold as slaves, in violation of every assurance; an

infamy of which the French have never been guilty in a single instance.]


[Footnote 131: Wōla is probably the Empoöngwa corruption of the original

name Quolla or Kulla, for, presuming that name to be given to it in the

Mallowa or Houssa country,[a] to denote its being a branch or arm of the

great river, dividing into it and the Gambaroo after leaving the lake

Dibbir, (Kulla being _child_ in the Mallowa,) it doubtless retains the

same name in the country known at Gaboon; not only because Mr. Brown

first reported the river Kulla (_Bahr Kulla_) and the kingdom (_Dar

Kulla_) to be situated thereabouts, but because from the following

observation of Mr. Hutchison’s, received since I wrote my geographical

chapter, it appears, that the language of the kingdom which bears the

name of the river, is at least a dialect of the Mallowa language. “I

send you the numerals of Quolla liffa, as given me by the servant boy I

have got lately, who comes from that country, which is near the

cannibals:” see Appendix, Language.]


[Footnote a: The Jennë Moors however called it Quolla, which inclined me

at first to derive its name from _Killi_, the numeral _one_ in the

Bambarra, as if to denote it the first or greatest river; as Yahndi, the

name of the capital of Dagwumba, implies its pre-eminence; _Yahndi_

being _one_ in the language of the country.]


[Footnote 132: “The information received here (at Mavoonda) of the

upward course of the river, was more distinct than any we have yet had;

all the persons we spoke to agreeing that after ten days in a canoe, we

should come to a large sandy island, which makes _two channels, one to

the north west, and the other to the north east; that in the latter

there is a fall, but that canoes are easily got above it_; that twenty

days above the island, the river issues by many small streams from a

great marsh or lake of mud.” Captain Tuckey’s Narrative. In a map,

“Regna Congo et Angola,” in Dapper’s Description de l’Afrique, 1686, a

large arm is laid down, about two hundred and fifty miles up the Zaire,

running to or coming from the north-east. As this book is scarcely

known, there being but one copy in England, it may be interesting to the

reader to see a description of the Congo and its source, according to

the geographical opinions, a century and a half ago, for 1686 is the

date of the translation from the German. Refer first to my copy of a

part of one of the many maps in Dapper’s work, p. 211. Au midi de cette

riviere (Niger) est le Zaire, ou la grande riviere de Congo qui prend sa

source de trois lacs, au sentiment de Pigaser. Le premier se nomme

Zambre d’où procede le Nil, le second Zaire d’où sortent les rivieres de

Lelunde et de Coanze, et le troisiême est un lac formé par le Nil. Mais

le principal est le Zambre qui est comme le centre d’où les fleuves de

nord le Nil, au levant Cuama et Coavo, au midi Zeila et Manice ou

Manhessen, et au couchant la riviere de Zaire, qui par divers bras

arrose toute la partie occidentale de l’Afrique, situé au delà de la

ligne, les royaumes de Congo, d’Angola, de Monomatapa, de Matamam, de

Bagamadiri et d’Agasymba jusqu’au cap de bonne-esperance; pendant que le

Nil, Cuama, Coavo, Zeila, et Manice traversent l’Abyssinie et tous les

pais qui sont entre la mer-Rouge et Cuama. L’embouchure de Zaire est à

cinq degrez quarante minutes de latitude Meridionale. Elle a trois

milles de large et se décharge dans l’ocean avec tant d’impetuosité, que

l’impression qu’elle donne à la marée, dont elle rend le cours ouëst-

nord-ouëst et nord-ouëst au nord se ressent en pleine mer, à douze

milles de la côte. Quand on a perdu la terre de vue, on découvre une eau

noire, de la verdure, des cannes et des roseaux qui ressemblent à de

petites îles, et que la violence de la marée entraine après soi du haut

des ecœuils. De sorte qu’à moins d’un vent d’arrière il est fort

difficile de resister au courant et d’aller jetter l’ancre dans la rade

de Cabo Padron. On ne sauroit remonter ce fleuve plus de vint ou vint

cinq lieues au-dessus de son embouchure, à cause des cascades qui sont

au milieu de son lit et qui s’élancent du haut des rochers avec tant de

bruit qu’on l’entend à deux ou trois lieues de là. Plusieurs ruisseaux

se déchargent ou sortent de ce fleuve et arrosent le pais: ce qui est

fort commode pour les marchands et les habitans qui peuvent aller

commodément d’un village à l’autre sur des canots. Les peuples qui

demeurent le long de ces ruisseaux sont des gens de petite taille.]


[Footnote 133: The following, which Baron Humboldt sketched before me,

(and which is only laid down in Walker’s Map of the World on the

globular projection) is a more extraordinary concatenation of rivers;

considering the opposite courses of the Orinoco and Amazon when

connected by the Casiquaire, which is more curiously situated than the

south eastern branch of the Ogooawai, flowing, through Tanyan, into the

Zaire.


[Illustration]

]


[Footnote 134: “Captain Tuckey could only learn that the paramount

Sovereign was named Blindy N’Congo, and resided at a banza named Congo,

which was six days journey, in the interior from the ‘Tall Trees,’

where, by the account of the negroes, the Portuguese had an

establishment, and where there were soldiers and white women. This place

is no doubt the St. Salvador of the Portuguese. The following is the

description in Dapper: La province de Pembo est la plus considerable de

tout le royaume dont elle contient la ville capitale, et forme comme le

centre. Cette ville porte le nom de banza chez les Ethiopiens, les

Portugais la nomment présentement S. Salvador, et Marmol l’appelloit

Ambas Congo. Elle est presque au milieu de la province, située sur une

roche fort haute, _à 76 lieues de France ou 150 milles de la mer_, au

sud-est de la riviere de Zaire, et ombragée de Palmiers, de Tamarins, de

Bacoves, de Colas, de Limoniers et d’Orangers. Le côtau sur lequel elle

est bâtie est si haut, que de dessus son sommet on porte la vue aussi

loin qu’elle se peut étendre, sans qu’aucune montagne l’arrête. Il n’y a

point de murailles autour de cette ville, si ce n’est d’un côté de

devers le Midi, que le premier roi chrétien donna aux Portugais pour les

mettre à couvert des insultes. Il fit aussi fermer de murailles son

palais et toutes les maisons royales qui sont aux environs, laissant une

place vuide où l’on bâtit ensuite un palais et un cimétiere. La cime de

la montagne est occupé par des maisons baties fort près l’une de

l’autre: les personnes de qualité en possedent la plus grande partie, et

sont des enceintes de bâtimens qui ressemblent à une petite ville. Les

habitations des personnes du commun sont rangées de file, en diverses

rues, elles sont assez grandes, mais les murailles ne sont que de

paille; excepté quelques unes que les Portugais ont faites, dont les

murs sont de brique & le toit de chaume. Le palais du roi est aussi

grand qu’une ville ordinaire; il est fermé de quatre murailles, celle

qui regarde sur le quartier des Portugais est de chaux & de pierre, les

autres ne sont que de paille, mais travaillée fort proprement. Les

murailles des sales & des chambres sont orneés de tapisseries de paille

nattées avec beaucoup d’art. Dans l’enceinte interieure du Palais, il y

a des jardins & des vergers embellis de berceaux & de pavilions fort

beaux pour le pais, quoiqu’au fond ce ne soit pas grande chose. Il y a

dix ou douze Eglises, la Cathedrale, sept chapelles dans la ville &

trois Eglises dans le chateau du Prince. Il y a aussi un couvent de

Jesuites, où trois ou quatre de ces Peres sent tous le jours le

Catechisme au peuple, & des écoles où l’on enseigne le Latin & le

Portugais. Il y a deux fontaines, l’une dans la rue de St. Jaques &

l’autre dans une cour du Palais, qui fournissent abondance d’eau

fraiche, sans qu’on se donne la peine de refaire les aqueducs ou de les

entretenir. Outre cela il y a un bras de la riviere Lelunde, qu’on nomme

Vese, qui sort au pié de la montagne, au Levant de la ville; son eau est

fort bonne, le peuple en va puiser, & elle sert à arroser & rendre

fertiles les campagnes d’alentour. On y a des pourceaux & des chevres;

mais peu de moutons & boeufs; on les renferme la nuit dans des parcs qui

sont dans la ville près des maisons.]


[Footnote 135: This panther or leopard, was sent to the Governor-in-

Chief by the King of Ashantee, and was so perfectly tame as never to be

tied up, but strolled at liberty through the apartments, playing with

the servants and children. It was presented to the Duchess of York, and

died at Exeter ’Change, a short time after it landed, of an inflammation

on the lungs. The extraordinary playfulness and good humour of the

animal, and the preservation of its health and tameness during a four

months voyage, (during the colder part of which he banquetted

sumptuously on dead parrots) made the loss very mortifying.]


[Footnote 136: The description the natives give of this animal agrees

extraordinarily with that of the Quoja Morrou in Dapper.


Les Quojas Morrou, dont on a parlé dans le royaume de Quoja, naissent

dans le royaume d’Angola. Comme cet animal tient beaucoup de l’homme,

bien des gens ont cru qu’il étoit issu d’un homme & d’un singe, mais les

Negres même rejettent cette opinion. Il y a trente ou quarante ans qu’on

apporta en Hollande un de ses animaux, dont on fit present à son Altesse

le Prince Frederic Henri. Il étoit de la grandeur d’un enfant de trois

ans, _mais il avoit bien le double d’épais, étant d’une taille carreé_,

fort vigoureux & agile: _car il levoit des choses fort pesantes & les

portoit d’un lieu en un autre_. Le devant de son corps étoit nud, mais

le dos étoit couvert de poil noir. Sa face avoit quelque chose d’humain,

mais son nez étoit plat & retroussé. Ses oreilles, son sein, et ses

mamelles, ses coudes ses mains, le bas de son ventre & ses parties

naturelles, ses jambes & ses pieds resembloient parfaitement à ceux

d’une femme, parce que c’étoit un animal femelle. _Il se tenoit debout &

marchoit souvent tout droit; il buvoit fort proprement, portant, d’une

main le pot à la bouche et le soutenant de l’autre; il se couchoit de

même, mettoit sa tête sur un chevet, ajustoit la couverture sur son

corps, & à le voir ainsi étendu on l’auroit pris pour un homme_. Aussi

les Negres rapportent-ils des choses prodigieuses de cet animal; ils

assurent qu’il force des femmes & des filles, _& qu’il ose s’en prendre

à des hommes armez_. Et selon toutes les apparences c’est là ce Satyre

si celebre chez les Anciens, dont Pline & les poëtes ont tant parlé par

oui-dire & sur des rapports incertains.]


[Footnote 137: “Les Botanistes remarquent même très fréquemment ces

accidens de couleurs dans les plantes venues en lieux agrestes. Je n’en

citerai qu’un exemple entre mille. Sur les rives sauvages du Volga et du

Samara, Pallas a trouvé l’_Anemone patens_ chargé de périanthes tantôt

bleus, tantôt blancs, tantôt jaunes.”—Mirbel 1ère partie, p. 264.]


[Footnote 138: “India rubber is obtained from the milky juice of

different plants in hot countries. The chief of these are, the Jatropha

elastica and Urceola elastica. The juice is applied in successive

coatings on a mould of clay, and dried by the fire or in the sun, and

when of a sufficient thickness the mould is crushed and the pieces

shaken out.” Nicholson.


“It has been discovered that caoutchouc is not exclusively the produce

of the Heven caoutchouc, but that it is furnished by several other

plants. We know it to be obtained in large quantities from the Jatropha

elastica of South America, and Dr. Roxburgh has given us a description

of an Indian plant (Urceola elastica) which affords a juice that when

thickened has all the properties of the caoutchouc. We moreover know

that the milky exudations of the Jack tree (Artocarpus integrifolia) the

Banyan tree (Ficus Indica) and also that of the Arasum tree (Ficus

religiosa) possess nearly similar qualities.” Ainslie’s Materia Medica

of Hindoostan.]


[Footnote 139: The vegetable butter.]


                              CHAPTER XIV.


                               * * * * *


      _Suggestions for future Missions to the Interior of Africa._


A mission to Dagwumba is of the first importance. See Geography, p. 178.

The commercial genius and opulence of its people, their disinclination

and inaptitude to war, their superior civilization, and the numerous

caravans which frequent this emporium, from the most remote parts of the

interior, make a treaty of intercourse most desirable, both for commerce

and science. But it is more imperiously desirable, or rather this

enterprise becomes a duty, from the recollection, that, from this King’s

proverbial repute for sanctity, if he were persuaded by the deliberate

remonstrance of a British Resident, at least to mitigate, if not

ultimately to abolish human sacrifices, his example would naturally be

followed by the several neighbouring monarchs who make him their oracle.


Mr. Hutchison’s courage, his love of enterprise, and his interest in

intellectual pursuit, to say nothing of a feeling towards myself, which

I cannot but be proud of, would, I am sure, lead him to anticipate my

wishes and strengthen my hopes of success, by having him again as a

companion; and his diary must have proved, though very imperfectly,

compared with a personal acquaintance with him, how well he is qualified

for an appointment, so important to the interests of commerce, science,

and humanity, by his discretion, zeal, and benevolence.[140]


A third officer (and a zealous and able successor to Mr. Tedlie has

presented himself) should accompany this mission, to proceed under the

King of Dagwumba’s guarantee and recommendation, which is omnipotent to

the Niger, to Wauwaw (on the banks of that river where Mr. Park was

buried; for no plea could be less suspicious, than the King of England’s

natural anxiety to send an officer to the Sultan of Wauwaw, to learn the

particulars of Mr. Park’s death, and to enquire for his papers,

especially as a Moorish emissary passing through Yahndi, was instructed

to do so, directly we heard of the circumstance in Ashantee. The officer

alluded to (who is a medical man, well acquainted with natural history,

and an accurate draftsman) should be content with a sight of the Niger,

and remain at Wauwaw collecting and observing, until an exchange of

letters with Cape Coast, through the Resident at Yahndi[141]; when it

would be seen how far it might be prudent, (having replaced him at

Wauwaw) to allow him to proceed to Cassina, Houssa, or Timbuctoo; that

is, if the Sultan of Wauwaw would guarantee his safety, under the same

promise of reward previously held out to the King of Dagwumba.


No moment could be more auspicious than the present for this enterprise

to Dagwumba, since the King of Ashantee’s absence and perplexity in the

Gaman war bars his molestation or hindrance; though I have no

expectation that he would offer either, were he at liberty, or aware of

the occasion: see page 342.


If the trade of Dagwumba be so extensive as was invariably reported to

us (and to Mr. Lucas at Mesurata on the Mediterranean) it might then

become desirable to establish a British market up the Volta; but this is

an after consideration. Geographical circumstances are much more in

favour of a mission to Dagwumba than they were in that to Ashantee,

(besides, that there are no irritating political retrospects to be

debated on arrival,) for the Volta or Adirree is navigable from the sea

to within eight days march of Yahndi; (see page 176;) even if we do not

calculate on the reported junction of the river Laka, which would bring

us close to Yahndi.


The presents should all be ingenious novelties, rather than costly

apparel, for they are not only more acceptable and more imposing, but,

which is very important, much more portable; and would require so few

carriers, as to diminish the expense of conveyance as much as the

expense of purchase. The negroes have more than anticipated our

_portable_ displays of splendour, from the pageantry and descriptions of

the Moors; and we have had the advantage of witnessing what kind of

presents made the most auspicious impression on the King of Dagwumba’s

powerful neighbour, which were certainly all of the class of ingenious

novelty. I should recommend, therefore, a few pieces of tissue and rich

silk, with gold thread interwoven, to shew that our manufactures can be

accommodated to their taste; see note page 331.


Pieces of worked muslin.


One piece of ditto, worked with gold thread.


Scotch damask.


Palampours, with gold and silver leaf.


Manchester cottons, of rich pattern.


Red, blue, and yellow broad cloth.


Raw silk, of various colours; see page 331.


Of the foregoing, only small quantities as presents to the King and

principal Moors, by way of samples of our manufactures.


Two pair of richly cut glass decanters.


A small silver bowl embossed.


A handsome lamp.


A military saddle and bridle, with pistols, &c.


Two musical snuff boxes.


A good bird organ.


Two or three common violins, being the instrument of the country.


Pandean pipes.


Cymbals.


Two bugles.


Kaleidescopes.


An inferior gold repeater for the King.


Two or three common silver watches.


A telescope.


Camera obscura.


Magic lantern.


Microscope.


Pocket compasses.


Boxes of phosphorous matches.


Arabic Bibles, and Arabic literature.


Two or three landscapes, in sympathetic ink.


A port-folio of engravings of English costume and public buildings, with

a set of the drawings of this work.


A copying writing apparatus for the chief Moor.


Wax, seals, pencils, Indian rubber.


Two boxes of water colours.


Drawing and writing paper, and vellum.


Razors, scissors, knives.


A handsome double barrelled gun.


Two boxes of carpenters tools.


A small turning lathe.


A small plough.


A made up turban of gold tissue, with a gilt circle for the head, set

with false stones, for the chief Moor.


A silk union flag.


An air gun.


Candles and perfumed soap.


Bark, and other medicines.


The officers of the mission should be provided with Troughton’s pocket

sextant, Dollond’s 32 feet telescope, the new barometers, &c. &c.


The Danes having deserted their fort (Adda) at the mouth of the Volta,

their government, on being solicited, would surely not only not

obstruct, but favour so important a scientific enterprise, and not

compel us to reach the river over land, as we could do, by marching

through Aquapim and Quaoo. The man of war on the station might convey

the mission to the mouth of the Volta, and one of her boats accompany

the canoes (which should be brought from Cape Coast) a day or two up the

river.


It would be well to be prepared with several impressions of a manifesto

(in Arabic,) explanatory and impressive of the legitimate and benevolent

views of the British government, as an introduction to the King of

Dagwumba, preparatory to our negociation, and also to serve the same

purpose at Wauwaw, and to circulate through the interior. Numerous

impressions of the certificates circulated in behalf of Major Peddie,

should also be circulated, Mr. Ritchie’s name being substituted, and the

reward for an act of kindness acknowledged in a letter from that

gentleman, being made payable (after an authority from Cape Coast) at

either of the British Residencies, Coomassie, Yahndi, or Dahomey; for as

there are many officers to spare at Cape Coast, the expressed wish of

the latter monarch should be immediately gratified, and our intercourse

renewed by a Residency. See note, p. 340.


I think all the objects of the Dagwumba mission could be effected in

four months; when I should feel impatient to visit the river Gaboon, for

the purpose of penetrating to the Ogooawai, and going as far up it as I

might with prudence. See p. 436. The discovery of so large a river in

this situation is very important.


Arrangements could probably be made at Eninga or Okota (p. 429.) for the

guarantee of an after mission to Asheera: also for one from Gaboon to

Kaylee; and, which is most important, for the south-eastern navigation

(from Adjoomba, p. 431) of the branch of the Ogooawai running through

Tanyan into the Congo.


But there is another enterprise which should not be forgotten, the

navigation of the Lagos river to the highest point, (p. 224) and a visit

to Kosie, (p. 225,) a Residency at which court would doubtless lead to a

similar establishment in the powerful and commercial kingdom of Yarriba.

See p. 209.


The Residents at the various courts, who, as I have impressed before,

should be young men of acquirement, patience, and address, should

receive occasional instructions from head quarters, directing their

enquiries and observations to the geographical and scientific

desiderata, more peculiarly belonging to or expected from their

different neighbourhoods, which would be suggested from the closer study

of these subjects by the individual at the head of a department of

discovery at head quarters, and also by the scientific Societies in

England according to their peculiar pursuits.


The Residents should make quarterly reports, accompanied by specimens of

natural history, to be digested into one annual report at head quarters,

(with the various geographical improvements and discoveries, adjusted

and embodied in one large chart) for forwardance to England.


All Residents and Conductors of Missions, should be provided with small

copying apparatuses, so that they might forward their original dispatch,

and one duplicate, to Cape Coast, by two different opportunities, always

retaining the other copy, in case of accident, or until the receipt were

acknowledged.


If it could be afforded, a medical officer should afterwards be added to

the more important Residencies, to attach and relieve the natives.


Botanical and Mineralogical excursions, (taking sextants, telescopes,

and barometers,) into Ahanta, Aowin, Warsaw, Akim, and Aquapim, small

surveys, &c. &c. should be undertaken, ad interim, not only from the

smallness of the expense and the great comparative benefit, (as we know

nothing of these countries beyond their position,) but to qualify the

younger officers (of congenial disposition and acquirement,) for future

missions and residencies.


The young men soliciting appointments in England, should be required to

make themselves acquainted with the grammar of the Arabic language, and

practical astronomy, before they receive their commissions; and one or

two intelligent Moors from the interior, should be invited, by a pay, to

settle at Cape Coast Castle, to perfect these officers in writing and

speaking the language. The Fantee language should also be cultivated, as

it is a dialect of the Ashantee.


The soldiers of the settlements should no longer be enlisted from the

mulattoes and Fantees of the neighbourhood, making the present paltry

force the more inefficient, from local and family attachments,

inseparable from human nature, and preventing their acting cordially, if

at all, on emergencies for the rescue of human victims, or the

punishment of their relatives and townsmen, for insult, or contempt of

the British legislation for the abolition of the slave trade, &c. The

Negroes captured in the illicit Spanish and Portuguese slave ships, of

whom there must be a number unemployed at Sierra Leone, would form the

most desirable military force, even preferable to European, which has

recently been adopted by the Dutch. These rescued Negroes would possess

no attachment, beyond that which the considerate kindness and good

conduct of their officers might induce; the climate would be natural to

them; and they would prove valuable companions, if not intelligent

guides, in future missions to the interior. There should at least be two

hundred and fifty of these soldiers at head quarters, (one company being

trained as artillery by European serjeants) and fifty at each other

settlement, if but two.


The three missions, to Dagwumba, Wauwaw, and Ogooawai, would not cost

above a thousand pounds, judiciously expended in England; which is not

so much as the annual expense of either of the six paltry out-forts

(exclusive of the head quarters, and the vice presidency, which is but 9

miles from Cape Coast, and, since the abolition of the slave trade, an

useless and absurd position;) the mere existence of which, although it

may excite astonishment, and reflect credit on the mercantile ingenuity

and economy of the African Committee, is notoriously a disgraceful

caricature on the British name.


Three respectable establishments, one at Cape Coast Castle, one at

Accra, (a rich and open country,) and one at Succondee, (if we could not

purchase Axim, which commands the navigation of the Ancobra,) with an

allowance of a thousand a year for a progress in the interior,

(beneficial to commerce, science, and humanity,) would be productive of

fame and honour, and probably of wealth, to our nation.


[Footnote 140: This gentleman being already superseded by Mr. Dupuis

(formerly Vice-consul at Mogadore, and now Consul at Coomassie) is of

course at liberty to indulge his disposition for enterprise.]


[Footnote 141: The King of Dagwumba should be promised additional

presents on the receipt at Cape Coast Castle of the first dispatch from

the Niger.]


                               * * * * *

                               APPENDIX.

                               * * * * *


                            APPENDIX. No. I.


                               * * * * *


          _Extract from Meredith’s Account of the Gold Coast._


               _Origin and History of the Ashantee War._


The Assin country lies at the rear of the Fantee, and borders on the

Ashantee country. It was divided into two states: the one governed by

King Cheboo and Quacoe Apoutay; and the other by King Amoo. Apoutay,

although not elevated to the dignity of King, held equal sway with

Cheboo; but they were each subordinate to the King of Ashantee. A man of

opulence died in Amoo’s town; and, as is customary on such occasions,

gold and other valuable articles were deposited with the body in the

grave. On this occasion, one of Cheboo’s people was present, and seeing

what was done, watched an opportunity to rob the grave; which he

effected, and escaped with the treasure. Amoo his neighbour sought

redress of Cheboo and Apoutay, but without success: he then laid the

affair before the King of Ashantee; who summoned all the parties before

him, gave them an impartial hearing, and awarded in favour of Amoo.

Quacoe Apoutay was detained as a hostage until restitution should be

made: but he, in a short time, contrived to make his escape, and, when

at liberty, refused to accede to the award made by the King of Ashantee.

On this Amoo attacked the town in which Cheboo and Apoutay resided, and

routed his opponents: after this, at the instigation of the King of

Ashantee, the parties met to settle the dispute; but Quacoe Apoutay

acting treacherously on the occasion, sent privately to Cheboo for an

armed force to support him: and a battle was the consequence, which

ended in the death of the man who had committed the theft, and the total

defeat of Apoutay and his forces. At this crisis the King of Ashantee,

willing to bring about a peace, again interfered. He sent two gold

manillas, the one to Amoo, the other to his adversary, directing them to

cease all hostilities; to which both parties agreed, and took the

manillas. Amoo obeyed the King; but Quacoe Apoutay attacked Amoo, and

drove him in his turn from his town. Amoo, indignant at the repeated

deceptions of Apoutay, obtained succours, and overthrew his treacherous

opponent. The King of Ashantee still anxious to reconcile his

neighbours, and unwilling to draw his sword, presented two gold swords

and an axe to Amoo, and recommended him to conciliate Quacoe Apoutay,

and terminate their quarrels. Amoo consented to obey the King, but in

the mean time was again attacked by his implacable foe, and totally

defeated, and lost in the contest the golden sword and hatchet. His

opponent committed ravages wherever he came, killing messengers, and

every man who fell into his hands, not sparing even the King of

Ashantee’s messengers! A war with the King of Ashantee followed

hereupon: Quacoe Apoutay and Cheboo dreading his vengeance, fled to the

Fantee country: in consequence of which the King sent a message to

Acoom, the caboceer or mayor of Assecoomah (a small state tributary to

the King of Ashantee,) accompanied by a present of twenty ounces of

gold; stating the necessity of his pursuing his enemies to the Fantee

country, but giving assurance of the King’s pacific disposition towards

the Fantees, and that his only object was to get into his possession

Cheboo and Apoutay: the Fantees would not interfere, nor allow the

Ashantee forces to come into their country. Upon this answer, Appey

Dougah,[142] the King of Ashantee’s general, collected, by command of

his master, a large force, and gave the enemy battle at Buinka in

Fantee; he displayed great gallantry, and defeated the two Kings, in

conjunction with the Fantee forces that had joined them. Next day Cheboo

and Apoutay having rallied their forces, and formed a junction with a

fresh Fantee force, gave Appey Dougah battle; but were totally defeated,

with the loss of many killed and made prisoners: among the latter was

Atia,[143] the caboceer of Abrah, the principal town of Fantee. A large

sum was offered for his ransom, but refused; and he was committed to the

care of Acoom, the caboceer of Assecoomah, in whom the King had great

confidence; but this person betrayed his trust, and liberated the enemy.

Quacoe Apoutay, baffled at all points, sent to the King of Ashantee to

accept his conditions, provided he would discharge his debts on his

return home. To this proposal the King agreed, and, in token of his

friendship, sent various presents to Cheboo and Apoutay; who, instead of

receiving them with gratitude, beheaded the messengers. This wicked and

unprovoked act roused the indignation of the King of Ashantee, and he

vowed eternal war against the aggressors. Acoom (who had been forgiven

by the King for his treachery in suffering Atia to escape,) being in

possession of a large quantity of provisions, was applied to by the King

of Ashantee for a supply, which he with seeming cheerfulness granted:

six times he delivered faithfully those that were contracted for, but,

the seventh time, he betrayed about one thousand men who had been sent

for them, and sold them in March or April, 1806. In consequence of this

conduct Acoom became involved in the war: very shortly afterwards the

King of Ashantee defeated him, and made rapid progress with his army

towards the coast in search of Cheboo and Apoutay. The Fantees opposed

his march, but were defeated in every onset, and the Braffoes were

nearly extirpated by the Ashantees in their march. The Annamaboes,

instigated by the remaining Braffoes, were impudent enough to receive

and protect Cheboo and Apoutay; which proved fatal to them. At this

period the Governor of Cape Coast Castle, being under some apprehension

for the safety of the British settlements, was inclined to send a flag

of truce with a message to the King of Ashantee, who was now (May, 1806)

at Abrah, and only fifteen or twenty miles from the coast. The

Annamaboes (who were consulted on the measure) objected to it, and the

design was consequently suspended. The Governor was anxious to know upon

what terms the King would consider the British, and wished to become a

mediator; but the Annamaboes, who placed a vain dependence on their name

and strength, fully expected that the King and his army would be

conquered; and that if not the whole, the greater part of the army would

fall into their hands; and hence were not disposed to pacific measures,

nor would they permit the Governor’s messenger to proceed inland.

Shortly after this, a division of the Ashantee army made its appearance

at Cormantine, and routing the inhabitants from the town, completely

destroyed it. The captain of this division contrived to get into the

Dutch fort, and having pillaged it of a number of articles, took up his

residence there. It was now time to become acquainted with the King’s

intentions; and for that purpose the Governor of Annamaboe fort sent a

messenger with a flag of truce to the commander of this division,

intimating a wish to be acquainted with the King’s motives for marching

an army to the coast, and proposing himself as a mediator. This message,

we may suppose, was conveyed to the King; and on the following day three

men were observed coming from Cormantine with a white flag displayed,

and (Mr. White) the Governor, expected they were the bearers of some

agreeable and satisfactory intelligence: in this however he was much

disappointed; for the commander of that division of the Ashantee army

being in possession of fort Amsterdam, was elated with his success,

particularly in getting to the sea side; (a circumstance which inspired

him with such joy, that he went to the beach and dipped his sword three

times in the sea, some of which he had conveyed to the King as a proof

of his success:)—whether those circumstances stimulated him to try the

disposition of the English chief, we know not; but the message he sent,

imported a degree of haughtiness by no means agreeable to Mr. White, and

was to this effect: that when the Governor would send him twenty barrels

of gunpowder, and one hundred muskets, he would be told what the King’s

designs were. To comply with this demand would be acknowledging too much

submission, and would doubtless give the King a very indifferent opinion

of the British character. Mr. White behaved politely to the people, gave

them some refreshment, and told them that he regretted that the King, or

their master, did not appear inclined to come to an explanation, or to

conciliate matters: that if the King would point out in what manner the

Annamaboes had offended, he would use his authority to have satisfaction

given: that until he was assured of their having transgressed, or having

injured his Majesty, they were entitled to the protection of the fort,

if they sought for it: and that, finally, if the King’s army should come

with any hostile intentions near the fort, it would be fired upon.


After this two or three of the heavy guns were fired with shot, for the

purpose of giving them an idea of the destructive power of artillery;

and they were preparing to depart, when private information was

received, that the flag of truce would be violated in its return, and

the men murdered. Whereupon Mr. White and Mr. Wilson (a gentleman not in

the service,) escorted them, and left them in safety within a short

distance from their quarters. The Governor now anxiously looked for a

definitive reply from the King, and every assiduity was used to place

things in a defensive position; and the towns-people having heretofore

placed a firm reliance on their strength, became alarmed, and were

solicitous to be assured of the Governor’s protection. Mr. White

informed them, that if the King of Ashantee intended to attack the town,

he would give them all the assistance and protection in his power; at

the same time advised them of the most prudent measures to be employed

for their safety and defence. He instructed them, in the first instance,

to have strong parties on the look-out, and to guard every avenue

leading into the town; and, on the first alarm, or approach of the

enemy, to send the old men, women, and children to the fort, where they

would be received; and as many as the fort would not accommodate, to

come close to the walls, where they would be under the protection of the

guns.


At this crisis Mr. White and the inhabitants of the town were ignorant

as to the strength of the Ashantee forces, and had but an imperfect idea

of the bravery and intrepidity of the men who composed the King’s army.

It was supposed that the Ashantees partook of the dispositions of the

natives on the coast, who in general cannot stand against a regular and

determined fire, and often creep into some concealed hole, when cannon

or musket shot are heard to whiz among them; or, if the Ashantees were

superior, it was little imagined that their courage, or ardour for

conquest, would carry them to the very muzzles of the guns, and

consequently expose them to inevitable destruction.


About a week had elapsed, and no news from the King; which was no

favourable indication of pacific measures. The commander of the division

at Cormantine, and who proved to be the King of Dinkara, sent forward a

party to ascertain the strength of the town of Annamaboe, and succeeded

in gaining possession of a village called Agah, situated upon a point of

land about one mile eastward from Annamaboe; whence every movement of

the Annamaboes on that side could be observed. This was considered an

annoyance, and on the 14th of June a strong body (indeed almost the

whole of the town’s people) marched out for the purpose of dislodging

the Ashantees. The action was clearly seen from the fort. The Annamaboes

were received in the most gallant and spirited manner by nearly a third

of their force, and for some time the contest was doubtful. The

Ashantees fired with more regularity than could be expected, and their

muskets were well directed; whereas the Fantees kept up a confused fire

without taking aim; they however succeeded, and the Ashantees retreated

in excellent order, keeping possession of part of the village which lay

concealed in a valley, and where the Annamaboes did not think proper to

proceed. The Annamaboes were either too confident of their strong

position, or thought too insignificantly of their opponents, to attend

to the advice given them by Mr. White; for while they were amused by

this small party, the King, with the main body, was vigilant in securing

the different passes leading to the town, and was at this time only

three miles to the rear of it.


Early on the 15th those who were on the look-out observed the Ashantee

army in motion: the alarm was given, and every man who was able to carry

a musket, repaired to meet the enemy. As the town was situated at the

rear of the fort, and extended some distance inland, no prospect of the

contending parties could be obtained; smoke was seen to arise from

different parts of the surrounding country, and heavy discharges of

musketry were distinctly heard. Alarm and confusion now prevailed

throughout the town, and the women, children, and old men, made the best

of their way to the fort, the area of which they soon filled, after

which the gates were closed. The volleys of musketry were advancing very

fast, and the Fantees were retreating in great disorder: one or two

great guns were fired over the town with a view to impel terror on the

assailants, but they were too much elated with hopes of conquest, and

too resolute to be affrighted: about eleven o’clock the musket balls

were heard to whistle in every part of the fort, and the Ashantees

entered the town in every direction, pursuing the vanquished to the

beach, where the slaughter was great.


The Annamaboes conceived, that with the aid of their canoes and their

knowledge of swimming, they should be able to escape, but they were

pursued too closely by the Ashantees, whose fury appeared to be

insatiable; men, women, and children were followed by indiscriminate

destruction. During this work of carnage, the Governor was very active

with his small garrison to repel the assailants; a twenty-four pounder,

that pointed along the beach to the westward, several times discharged

grape-shot among them, whereby vast numbers must have fallen: a three-

pounder likewise, which flanked the gate on the east side was frequently

fired with grape, notwithstanding fresh parties came on much quicker

than they could be repelled; and at length they came under the walls for

the purpose of carrying away the women who could not be received into

the fort. About this period the Governor[144] was wounded in two places;

one ball struck his mouth and carried away four of his teeth, another

ball passed through his left arm; and nearly at the same time an officer

and two men were wounded, and one man killed.


Things assumed now a more serious and dangerous aspect than was

apprehended, and gave the garrison a strong assurance of the disposition

of the enemy, who, it was evident, intended to bend his utmost efforts

against the fort. The Ashantees were confident that by gaining

possession of it, a large booty would be obtained. However, the small

number which composed the garrison of Annamaboe at this period,

consisting of Governor White, Messieurs Meredith, Swanzy, Smith, and

Baines; also four free mulattoes and twenty men, including soldiers,

artificers, and servants, were confident of the severity of their

situation. The walls being high, and accurately flanked, and the gates

sound and well barricadoed; the Governor, from the nature of his wounds,

from great debility in consequence of much effusion of blood, being

constrained to retire, and the command of the fort having devolved on

the senior officer, who perceiving that the cannon in one quarter could

not be used with effect, for the enemy fired with such precision as to

cut off every man who was exposed at an embrasure, depended solely on

the musket; and another man having been killed about noon, and two more

wounded:—the garrison was now reduced to the small number of eight,

including officers, who could be depended upon, and the Ashantees were

using every effort to force the western gate; but were twice repulsed

with no small loss. A third time they attempted it, and endeavoured to

apply fire to the gate; but the man who brought the materials for that

purpose, extinguished the fire by falling a corpse upon it. In all their

attempts they were defeated with musketry alone, and notwithstanding

that their efforts to gain an entrance into the fort proved ineffectual,

the contest was continued till six o’clock. After this cessation, and

before total darkness came on, the garrison used all possible energy in

repairing injuries, and preparing for the defensive, in case of

hostilities being renewed in the night.


On the following day a scene replete with the horrors of war exhibited

itself:—heaps of dead and wounded around the walls, and for a mile along

the eastern shore, tossed about by a violent surf:—houses unroofed, and

others on fire:—the sorrowful countenances of the old men, who sought

refuge in the fort; the mournful lamentations of the women, and the

pitiable cries of the children, presented a picture of exquisite feeling

and of the greatest distress! Of the number the town contained, and

which we will calculate to have been at least fifteen thousand souls, we

may suppose that two-thirds of that number perished. The fort afforded

refuge to about two thousand of every description, and about two hundred

escaped to a rock surrounded by the sea, and at pistol-shot from the

beach, where they remained unmolested, and notwitstanding the vigilance

of the Ashantees, we may suppose that two or three thousand effected

their escape. Without going into further enquiry, we may venture to

state that eight thousand Fantees were destroyed; and although they were

attacked by at least three times their number, yet if they were actuated

by one-third of the bravery of their opponents, they would have

committed some execution, and doubtless would have checked that

intrepidity and ardour which were so pre-eminently conspicuous in their

enemy. Their resistance was very feeble; terror seized them at the

commencement of the attack, and it impressed them so forcibly, that the

sea formed but an indifferent barrier to their precipitate flight.


When the fury of the Ashantees against the Fantees was a little

diminished, they turned part of their force against the fort with great

coolness and resolution, advancing with shouts expressive of their

loyalty and courage, to the very muzzles of the guns. At the east side

of the fort, two three pounders, which were well served, destroyed

numbers of them with every discharge of grape: but at the west side, the

cannon which flanked the gate could not be rendered useful, in

consequence of advantages the enemy possessed, and which were not to be

found on the opposite quarter, where the musket alone was to be

dependended upon: and we have the authority of the gentleman who

commanded (after Mr. White was wounded) of stating, that he and another

officer (Mr. Swanzy) fired nearly three hundred rounds of ball-cartridge

in keeping the gate clear, and protecting those who were under the

walls. Mr. Swanzy was so injured with the recoil of his musket, that he

could not use his right arm for some days without much pain, and the

other officer (Mr. Meredith) was nearly in the same state.


What loss the Ashantees sustained cannot be precisely laid down: the

King, prior to his departure from Annamaboe, said, he lost three

thousand men: but in that number he probably included those who were

carried off by disease. His men however suffered very severely; for

their approach was made with such large bodies, that twenty, thirty, or

perhaps more, fell with every discharge of grape-shot; and the musket

not only killed, but very often wounded at the same time, so close were

the enemy.


At this period (the 16th of June,) the fort was in an awkward

state,—completely blockaded on the land-side, and a very imperfect

communication by sea, and only a few weeks provisions for the number it

contained; add to which, the effluvia from the dead bodies, which were

approaching fast to a putrid state, excited very uneasy apprehensions.

These circumstances demanded some extraordinary effort, which the

garrison, from its weakness, could not attempt. Every person, from great

exertion and constant exposure to a vertical sun on the 15th, and from

solicitude and want of rest, was much fatigued. Nevertheless things wore

a more promising appearance; whenever plunder was attempted, which now

and then was the case, it met with resistance. There was not, however,

any desire manifested by the Ashantees to renew hostilities, and every

motion indicated a wish for peace. The garrison too was very desirous of

such an event, but did not wish to be the first to yield, or to offer

any terms without orders from the chief-governor. The King, from his

late successes, had a high opinion of his power and the bravery of his

army. On the other hand the small garrison, notwithstanding its reduced

state, had no mean opinion of itself, and wished to confirm in his

Majesty an idea of the superior skill of Europeans.


The Governor at Cape Coast was apprised of the state of affairs at

Annamaboe, and lost no time in sending assistance. Two ships were

provided for the purpose, which sailed from the Cape on the morning of

the 16th: but, from unavoidable circumstances, the re-inforcement the

ships brought could not be landed before four o’clock in the afternoon.

This re-inforcement consisted of twelve men and four officers; and their

arrival in the fort afforded much satisfaction. This party was landed

under cover of the smoke of some heavy guns, and was not fired at; but

the canoe, on returning, was fired upon and one man wounded. It was the

Governor’s order that a flag of truce should be sent to the King, to

endeavour to bring about an amicable understanding. A white flag was

accordingly lowered over the wall, accompanied with the national

colours; and when the emblem of peace was observed, it is impossible to

express sufficiently the joy that diffused itself among the people: the

multitude which crowded around the flags was inconceivably great, and it

was with difficulty that the King’s officers, who were known by golden

swords and axes, could clear the way leading to his quarters: the air

resounded with acclamations in praise of their King, and expressive of

their satisfaction at the prospects of peace.


And here we cannot forbear remarking, that although the Ashantees are so

remote from polished or civilized nations, they seem not to be

unacquainted with the customs of a civilized people, as they are

connected with the rules of war; for they paid every respect to the flag

of truce: a few indeed of them were making towards the rock on which

were a number of Fantees, but they well understood the signal of recall,

when a musket or two were fired over their heads. The flag of truce

returned about seven o’clock, with three messengers from the King; and

they, in order to justify the King for his proceedings against the

Fantees, entered into a long detail of the origin of the war, which we

have been attempting to describe. The King was pleased that the flag of

truce was sent, and expressed his satisfaction by giving the two

soldiers who were the bearers of it a fat sheep. After a conference that

continued beyond two hours, the messengers departed.


A communication was thus established with the King and his army; but it

was considered prudent to keep the gates closed until a perfect

understanding was effected. It appeared, however, that this could not be

done, without a meeting between the chief Governor and the King. To

accomplish this Mr. Meredith tried to persuade the King to go to Cape

Coast, but in this he was disappointed; he however gained his Majesty’s

consent to send some of his confidential and chief men to wait upon the

Governor, and to hear his sentiments.


It will, we doubt not, be gratifying to the reader, if we here subjoin

the correspondence between Mr. Meredith and Mr. Torrane, the Governor in

Chief, on this occasion.


                                        _Annamaboe Fort, June 17_, 1807.


   SIR,


MR. WHITE directs me to acknowledge the receipt of your letter to the

Governor of Elmina. The state Mr. White is in, being much weakened with

loss of blood and other causes, prevented him paying that attention to

your letters which they demanded, and my duty was such, that I could not

spare a moment to write you fully. I had a conference with three of the

King’s messengers last night, and at this instant there are two men with

his Majesty; when they return, you shall be acquainted with the result.

I have already mentioned to the King that Cheboo would be given up, and

if it was agreeable for him to send his cane, and one or two of his

gold-headed swords, I would engage their security by going to Cape Coast

with them. The message received from the King was of a favourable

tendency; and I trust he will perceive the expediency of putting an end

to this sanguinary war. Be assured we are all so employed on various

duties, it debars me more particularly of giving you a further detail of

our proceedings. But I trust, by a messenger this evening, to relate

fully every circumstance attending this very severe contest. The party

were landed in safety, viz. twelve privates, one corporal, with Messrs.

Bold, Galloway, and Woolbert. Both ships will remain here until to-

morrow. I am well pleased with the attention and assistance afforded us

by Captain Coley.


                                                  I am, &c.


                                                         HENRY MEREDITH.


 _Colonel Torrane, Governor in Chief, &c. &c. &c._

             _Cape Coast Castle._


                               * * * * *


                                        _Annamaboe Fort, June 17_, 1807.


   SIR,


I WROTE you this morning, acknowledging the receipt of your letters,

and, agreeably to my intentions then, I take the liberty of stating more

particularly the occurrences in this garrison on the 15th and subsequent

to it. I beg leave to remind you, that we were prepared for any attack

that might be made upon us, by any body of men unaccustomed to the shock

of artillery; and I believe Mr. White assured you of the confidence he

placed in the officers and men under his command, and every soul was

animated with a desire to do his duty.


[Here follows a description of the battle as before related.]


The re-inforcement you was pleased to send, got on shore without any

opposition about four o’clock P.M.; and I assure you we were very glad

to receive them, as, from the severe duty we had undergone the preceding

day, we were much cut up by fatigue. About six P.M. the flag of truce,

with a corporal and private from the detachment you sent, were conveyed

to the King; and as they proceeded, they were warmly greeted by the

Ashantees. The message the King returned was modest; he said, it was not

his intention to commence hostilities with the fort, nor to distress any

of the whites; his enemies were the Assins and Fantees, and he now

conceived his anger against them pretty well assuaged. This morning

(17th) according to agreement, his messengers came, and said, that the

King wished to see the same person that conveyed the flag of truce, that

they might hear from his own lips what he had to deliver. Accordingly I

sent them with Dutton, a man of quick understanding, to hear more

particularly the sentiments of his Majesty. After remaining some time

hearing the opinion of his counsellors they returned, and after some

preliminary discourse, they informed me that the King had deputed six of

his principal men, with six deputed by the men of power in his train, to

repair to Cape Coast to hear what you have to say, and to negotiate. In

course of their communication the King deplored the number of lives that

were lost in consequence of the fire from the fort.


As the messengers mean to repair to Cape Coast, I will forbear relating

every particular. The King seemed to say that he must have those who

sought protection in the fort: this he only hinted at, and probably the

same may be hinted to you; but in giving them up, we ought to be assured

of their being used kindly. I send a canoe with this, and have agreed

with the messengers, that you will send canoes and a guard for their

protection. Mr. White’s travelling canoe is in good order, therefore be

pleased to send eleven canoe-men for her. This canoe, with three more

from the Cape, will, in my opinion, be fully sufficient to convey the

whole twelve messengers with their guard. The number of persons here are

reducing our provisions very fast, and if not removed soon, some of them

will be most likely starved, or will be the cause of some serious

malady: the sooner we are rid of them the better. But if you can gain

their protection, it will be a humane act. Mr. White, who I am happy to

say is in a fair way, desires his respects.


                                                   I am, &c.


                                             (Signed)    HENRY MEREDITH.


 _Colonel Torrane, Governor in Chief,

             &c. &c. &c._


                               * * * * *


   SIR,


BOTH your letters of yesterday’s date I have received; the latter has

given me particular satisfaction, not only as it affords every prospect

that this war will be terminated, but also as it removes great anxiety

from my mind respecting the state of Mr. White’s wounds. The assurances

you now give me that he is in a fair way of recovery, are highly

gratifying. I dispatch eleven canoe-men for Mr. White’s canoe; and I

also send three other canoes. I trust the King will appoint persons of

sufficient consequence to negotiate with me: I have an earnest wish to

see the King: make this desire known to him; tell him I think it may

essentially lead to the arrangement of affairs of much importance; that

I have greatly to deplore with him this war; that although these events

cannot always be guarded against, they may even ultimately bring future

good consequences; and herein I think much depends on our meeting.

Assure the King, that notwithstanding the steps I have taken to give

protection to the Fantees, I have ever held him in the highest respect,

from the many reports I have heard of him, and that, had I seen any

messenger from him antecedent to his attack on Annamaboe, I am of

opinion we should have avoided the blow in that quarter. The King I

understand to be a man of strong mind: it will naturally suggest itself

to him, that a meeting between us may be of vast importance to the

country. Assure him I have too high a consideration for my own

character, as well as his consequence, to suffer the smallest indignity

to be offered to him; that if he will come to the castle I shall be

proud to shew him every honour, and that I will give every possible

security for his personal safety. I have apartments ready for him, and

officers shall be sent to attend him here. On receipt of this, send your

accustomed messenger to the King, saying, that you have a letter from

me, and that an officer will wait personally on him to explain the

contents. This officer with this letter in his hand, you will send (say

Mr. F. L. Swanzy) as early as you shall receive the King’s reply. I know

not whether you have a good flag for the occasion; I therefore send one.

Mr. F. L. Swanzy will have two flag-bearers, one with a white flag, the

other carrying the union; and he will be very particular in explaining

every part of this letter, and do his utmost to persuade the King to

visit the Cape. He may also add, that a ship can be procured, if he (the

King) prefers coming that way, and that an officer of distinction shall

be sent to accompany him. In a few words, Mr. F. L. Swanzy will do his

utmost to persuade the King to visit the castle. An officer should come

here, with the guard you send to protect the messengers. You must let me

know of what consequence the messengers are, that I may treat them

accordingly, and this it will be advisable to acquaint me of before

their arrival.


                                                  I am, &c.


                                            (Signed)     GEORGE TORRANE.


_To Henry Meredith, Esq._


Although these men proceeded to the Cape, it was found that nothing

important could be transacted without an interview with the King, and

for this purpose Colonel Torrane was obliged to go to Annamaboe, and a

day was fixed for a conference. To give as favourable and as respectable

an opinion as possible of the British, a number of articles as presents

were sent to the King, and as many officers and soldiers as the service

could afford, were assembled to attend the Governor on the day

appointed; but previous to those preparations, and a few days after the

flag of truce was received by the King, Cheboo (one of the men who was

the cause of the war) was secured by the Governor at Cape Coast and sent

to Annamaboe, to be delivered up to the King, in expectation that any

further effusion of blood would be prevented, and that it would be the

means of saving the Fantees from entire destruction. These benevolent

purposes were not realized: the King had proceeded so far in the war,

that he could not recede without displeasing those auxiliaries he had

with him, and who expected a vast deal of plunder; and besides, Apoutay

and Acoom were again in arms, and collecting all the Fantees they could

to oppose the King’s progress. On the day appointed for the interview,

the Governor and his party were put in motion, and although the

procession was not very numerous, it was arranged with taste, and made

no despicable appearance. About twenty of the Company’s artificers,

habited in a neat manner, marched in front; a guard of forty men, and a

band of music followed them; next walked the Governor, followed by ten

officers, two and two, and some gentlemen traders (who were enticed from

the Cape by curiosity), brought up the rear. When the procession had got

a short distance it was met by a principal man, who was sent by the King

to conduct the Governor, and to keep off the multitude, which was

assembling in great numbers, some of whom had never seen a white man.

Notwithstanding the authority of this person, and the exertions of his

attendants, the curiosity of the people was so great that every avenue

was crowded; which, by preventing the circulation of air, augmented the

natural heat of the day, and this inconvenience was farther increased by

the putrid smell from the dead bodies, and the vast swarm of flies. The

Governor was obliged to visit each man of rank, before he could be

received by the King; a ceremony that could not be prudently denied, and

which occupied some time: for those men had their several courts, and

collectively had formed an extensive circle. Every one of them was

seated under a huge umbrella, surrounded by attendants and guards, with

young persons employed in fanning the air and dispersing the flies,

which were numerous and troublesome. One of those men and his attendants

excited some curiosity and attention: his dress and appearance were so

different from those of the others, that it evidently proved he must

have come from countries situated a considerable distance inland. He was

a tall, athletic, and rather corpulent man, of a complexion resembling

an Arab or an Egyptian. His dress was heavy, and by no means adapted to

the climate. He wore a cap that came down below his ears, and being made

of yellow cloth, it did not contribute to diminish his tawny complexion.

He was a follower of the Mohammedan religion, possessed much gravity;

but was communicative, condescending, and agreeable. He had about him a

great number of sentences from the Alkoran, which were carefully incased

in gold and silver, and upon which he set a high value. He was a native

of Kassina, a country that appears to be situated to the south of east

from Tombuctou. He said he had been at Tunis and at Mecca; had seen many

white men and ships, and described the method of travelling over the

great desert. This person commanded a body of men who fought with

arrows, as well as muskets: four of the arrows were found in the fort;

they were short and pointed with barbed iron. He had many persons in his

train who were of the same colour, but varied a little as to dress: they

were all habited in the Turkish manner, but did not wear turbans. After

the ceremony of visiting those persons was over, the Governor was

conducted towards the King, who was surrounded by a number of

attendants, whose appearance bore evident signs of riches and authority:

chains, stools, axes, swords, flutes, message-canes, &c. were either of

solid gold, or richly adorned with that metal: those dazzling

appearances, added to damask, taffety, and other rich dresses, gave a

splendour to the scene highly interesting. When the Governor approached

the King, and when an interchange of compliments had passed, the air

resounded with the noise of musical instruments, such as drums, horns,

and flutes. After some conversation, during which much politeness was

observed in the behaviour of the King, the Governor wished this

ceremonial visit to be returned; which was agreed to, and a convenient

place was found to receive the King and his train. The Governor, his

officers, and attendants, were formed in a half-circle, and seated under

the shade of some trees, and a passage of sufficient breadth was formed

by the soldiers for the King and his attendants to pass through. It was

full two hours before his Majesty was announced, so numerous was his

train. Each man of rank, as he advanced, paid the necessary compliments

agreeably to the custom of his country, and then filed off. It was

previously directed, that the King should be received with arms

presented and the grenadiers march when passing the soldiers. This mark

of distinction and respect appeared to give him much satisfaction: he

halted to observe the orderly behaviour and uniform appearance of the

soldiers; and the martial air that was playing, seemed to produce the

most agreeable sensations on his mind. The writer had an opportunity of

seeing this man. He was of the middle size, well formed, and perfectly

black, with regular features and an open and pleasing countenance. His

manner indicated understanding and was adorned with gracefulness; and in

all respects he exceeded the expectations of every person. His dress was

plain: it consisted of a piece of silk wrapt loosely about him; a wreath

of green silk ornamented his head: his sandals were neatly made, and

curiously studded with gold. He was not distinguished by any gold

ornaments, as his attendants were. One man who was dressed in a

grotesque manner, and who appeared to act the buffoon, was, literally,

loaded with gold.


As this was a visit of ceremony, no business of consequence was

transacted. The King politely enquired after Mr. White, and expressed a

hope that he would soon be well of his wounds. He said he would move

from Annamaboe soon, as his army felt ill effects from the water, and

from the dead bodies. After this visit, every confidence was placed in

the King and his army, and as the gates were now opened, a free

admittance was allowed: various conferences of a favourable nature were

carried on between both parties; but peace with the Fantees was

considered impracticable. Apoutay had escaped the King’s vigilance; and

Acoom was at the head of a strong party, and marching towards Annamaboe

to give the King battle. The King assured the Governor, that after he

had subdued his enemies to leeward, he would return to Annamaboe for the

purpose of making arrangements relative to the future welfare of the

country, and the regulations of trade.


It was agreed, that those residing under British forts, provided they

observed a neutrality, should not be molested, and that every respect

should be paid to the British flag. The Governor likewise procured the

release of those who sought refuge in the fort, although the King

contested his right to them; for this reason, that as he destroyed the

town, he had a claim to every person and to every thing belonging to it.

On report of Acoom being in arms and making preparations to attack the

Ashantees, the King ordered his army to collect and march to meet him.

Two days subsequent to the King’s departure (3d July,) Acoom’s party and

the advanced guard of the Ashantee’s met; a battle was the consequence,

which ended in the defeat of Acoom, who, with his party, would have been

cut off, if a river, that was in their rear, had not favoured their

flight; the fordable parts of which were known to them, but not to the

Ashantees. After this defeat, the King’s enemies dared not shew

themselves in the field in any force; they however supported a kind of

predatory warfare, and were sometimes successful in cutting off small

foraging parties. As the Ashantees proceeded to leeward, desolation

accompanied them; almost every town and village were laid in ruins; but

disease, which got among them at Annamaboe, and which spread rapidly,

carried off vast numbers. This unexpected calamity altered the King’s

intentions: he could not return to Annamaboe without risking the loss of

his whole army; prudence therefore directed him to face towards his

kingdom, leaving at Accra a sufficient force to dispose of prisoners,

and to convey them in safety to Ashantee.


Cheboo and Apoutay, who appeared inseparable friends at the commencement

of this war, and throughout it, fled to Cape Coast with about five

hundred followers, as soon as they perceived the Ashantees approaching

towards Annamaboe, on the 15th of June. The Cape Coast people were

willing to afford them protection and assistance, but when the Governor

heard how things were at Annamaboe, he warned them of the danger, and

advised them to be neutral. When an account arrived at Cape Coast of the

desperate attack made on Annamaboe fort, the Governor came to the

resolution of securing, if possible, both these men, and delivering them

up to the King as the most probable means of not only putting an end to

the war, but of securing the King’s friendship. A party was accordingly

selected for that purpose; but Apoutay, after a warm contest, wherein

some were killed on both sides, effected his escape. Cheboo was not so

fortunate; he was secured and sent to the King, as we have already

mentioned; his followers too made a precipitate flight, leaving behind

them some bulky articles, among which were the whole of Cheboo’s

regalia, which were carefully lodged for the King; and it had the effect

on his disposition that was intended; it gave a favourable opinion of

the British, and assured him of the Governor’s friendship, and at the

same time it abated the desire he encouraged, to be revenged for the

loss his army had sustained on the 15th. For he concerted a design to

attempt the fort by storm, and Wednesday the 17th was the day appointed

for this enterprise. The plan was not badly arranged; and was to be

conducted in the following manner. Six thousand men were to be selected;

half of them destined not only to mount the walls, but to apply a

quantity of gunpowder under them; the explosion from which was expected

to shake the fort very much, and likewise to create such a confusion

within as to cause the garrison to be off its guard; the other half were

to keep up a continued firing. The plan was averted by the prudent

policy of the Chief Governor, not only by his securing Cheboo, but by

his alacrity in demanding a truce, whereby the King’s resentment was

cooled, and his inclinations diverted towards pacific measures.


[Footnote 142: This should be Appia Dunqua; he was the elder brother of

Appia Nanu, an account of whose disgrace is in the Diary.]


[Footnote 143: This should be Atta.]


[Footnote 144: Mr. White, who, after an absence of twenty seven years

from his native country, expired a few hours after he landed in it.]


                           APPENDIX. No. II.


                               * * * * *


    _Translations of a Manuscript descriptive of Mr. Park’s Death._


                       MR. SALAME’S TRANSLATION.


[The words in italics, so distinguished at that Gentleman’s request, not

                        being in the original.]


A literal translation of a Declaration, written in a corrupted Arabic,

from the town of Yaúd in the interior of Africa.


          In the name of God the Merciful and the Munificent.


This Declaration is issued from the town called[145] Yaúd in the Country

of Kossa[146].—We (the writer,) do witness the _following_ case;

(statement.) We never saw, nor heard of the sea (River) called[148]

Koodd; but we sat to hear (understood) the voice (report) of some

persons _saying_, “We saw a ship, equal to her we never saw before; and

the King of Yaúd had sent plenty of every kind of food, with cows and

sheep; _There_ were two men, one woman, two male slaves and two maids in

the ship;[149] _The_ two white men _were_ derived from the race (_sect_)

of Nassrí; (Christ or Christianity.) The King of Yaúd asked them to come

out to him; (to land[150]; and they refused coming out, (landing,) and

they went to the _King of the_ Country of[151] Bassa, who is greater

than the King of Yaúd; And _while_ they _were_ sitting in the ship and

gaining a position (rounding) over the Cape of Koodd, and _were_ in

society with the people of the King of Bassa, the ship reached (struck)

a-head of Mountain which took (destroyed) _her_ away,[152] and the men

and women of Bassa all together, with every kind of arms; (goods); And

the ship could find no way to avoid the mountain; And the man who _was_

in the ship, killed his wife, and threw all his property into the Sea,

(River), and _then_ they threw themselves _also_ from fear[153]:

Afterwards they took one _out of the_ water till the news reached the

town of Kanji,[154] the country of the King of Wawí, and the King of

Wawí heard of it, he buried him in his earth, (grave), and the other we

have not seen[155]; perhaps he is in the bottom of the water.”—And God

knows best. Authentic from the mouth of Sherif Abrahim.—Finis.


                       MR. JACKSON’S TRANSLATION.


[Of this Gentleman’s considerate politeness in anticipating my wishes by

a spontaneous offer to translate this MS., I shall have occasion to

repeat my acknowledgments in the Geographical Appendix.]


              In the name of God the Merciful and Clement.


This Narrative proceeds from the territory in Housa[146] called[145]

Eeauree. _We observed_ an extraordinary event or circumstance[147], _but

we neither saw nor heard of the River which is called[148] Kude_, and as

we were sitting, we heard the voice of children and _we saw a vessel_

the like to which in size we never saw before; and, _we saw_ the King of

Eeauree send cattle and sheep, and a variety of vegetables in great

abundance: and there were two men and one woman, and two slaves, and

_they tied or fastened them in the vessel_.[149]


There were also in the vessel, two white men of the race called

Christians (N’sarrah) and the Sultan of Eeauree called aloud to them to

come out of the vessel,[150] but they would not.


They proceeded to the country of Busa, which is greater than that of the

Sultan of Eeauree, and as they were setting in the vessel, they hung or

were stopped, by the Cape or Head Land of Kude.[151]


And the people of the Sultan of Busa called to them, and poured their

arms into the vessel, and the vessel reached the head-land or cliff, and

became attached or fixed to the head of the mountain, and could not pass

it. Then the men and women of Busa collected themselves hostilely

together, with arms of all descriptions, when the vessel being unable to

clear or pass the Cape, the man in the vessel killed his wife[153] and

threw the whole of her property into the river: they then threw

themselves into the river, fear seizing them (the news of this

occurrence was then conveyed to the Sultan Wawee) until it reached by

water the territory of Kanjee,[154] in the country of the Sultan Wawee,

and we buried it (a male body) in its earth, and one of them, we saw not

at all in the water,[155] and God knows the truth of this report. From

the mouth of the Shereef Ibrahim.—The end.


                               * * * * *


I have sent the original MS. to the African Association, the following

is Mr. Jackson’s transcript of it. I regret that Mr. Salamé did not also

furnish a transcript of this MS.


                         بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم


هذه الوثيقه خرج من بلد حوسا يقال يَور ونحن راينا الامر لم نري ولانسمع في

البحر الذي يقال كوض انما نحن جلسنا نسمع صاخ صبيان لرايت السفينه لم نري

مثله قط فارسل سلطان يَور لرايته مع البقر والكبس مع انواع الطعام كثيرِ

هما رجلان وامراة واحدة والعبدان وعقدان في السفينة رجلان بيضان خرجوا من

نسب نصري ويدعوهو سلطان يور الي ان خرجوا اليه وابوا خروج ومشوا الي بلد

بسا وهوا كبر من سلطان يور وهم يجلسون ويعلكون ملوك علي راس كُوض ويصاخور

اهل سلطان بُسا لرايته وهم ركوب في السفينة بلغ السفينة راس جبل وياخد

الجبل السفينة ورجال بُسا والنساه بسا يجمعون كلهم مع انواع السلاح

والسفينة لم يجد طريق المنع الجبل ورجل الدي في السفينة قتل امراته ورمي

ماله كله في البحر ورموا نفسهما في البحر لخوف ثم ياخدوا بلغ خبر الي سلطان

واوي حتي بلغ ماه به الي بلد كنجي بلد سلطان وَاوَيَ ودفنه في قرابه وواحد

منهما لم نره اقل في قهر الماه والله اعلم صح في فَم شريف اِبراهيم * تمت *


[Footnote 145: Sir William Ouseley (who very obligingly communicated a

hurried translation from Crickhowel, although the original had been but

two hours in his possession) read this Yaur or Yaôur.]


[Footnote 146: Sir Wm. writes Husa or Haousa: the latter is occasionally

the Moorish pronunciation, but Houssa is invariably the negro. I

certainly never once heard that Houssa included Yawoorie, which has a

distinct Sovereign, who is mentioned in the MS.: Perhaps it may be

accounted for, from Yawoorie being one of the seven kingdoms tributary

to Houssa or Mallowa.]


[Footnote 147: Mr. Jackson has preserved this apparent contradiction in

his fidelity to the original, according to his reading. He considers, it

may be reconciled by presuming that the writer only saw the vessel pass

Yawoorie, and did not witness the ultimate catastrophe at Boussa, where

he imagines the river may first receive the name of Kude, as African

rivers frequently have a different name in every country through which

they flow. This interpretation does not make the writer a mere reporter

as in the other translation, but a witness of all that happened at

Yawoorie, although not afterwards. I never understood the river to have

any other name than Quorra or Quolla, from Shego to Foör, yet of this we

ought not to feel positive.]


[Footnote 148: It is very extraordinary that the name of the Quolla

should always be written Kude, Koad, or Koada, and that Mr. Hutchison,

who was learning Arabic of the Moors, in Ashantee, should be taught to

write and pronounce as Quolla, the same Arabic word which every European

proficient reads as above. I cannot help thinking that, from bad

writing, ignorance, or perhaps some occidental difference, the _d_ is

put for the _l_,[a] and that it should be Kule or Koala, especially as

there appears to be a town called Kula on its banks, (see routes in

Appendix) which comes very close to Kulla, Mr. Brown’s river. The

identity of the Quolla and Kulla, seems confirmed by Mr. Dupuis reading

the name of the kingdom, as written by the Moors, Koora, which seems as

if they had written it for once, according to the negro pronunciation,

(Quorra,) for as I have observed (p. 196) that the negroes always

substitute r for the Moorish _l_ (a defect also characterising a dialect

of the Coptic, the Chayma, the Tamanack, &c. &c., and common, as Baron

Humboldt observes, to every zone) Koora becomes Koola, for the same

reason which the Quorra of the negroes was always pronounced Quolla by

the Moors; and Koola, it will be allowed, is very near to Mr. Brown’s

Kulla.]


[Footnote a: I recollect one, but only one instance of the negroes

substituting _d_ for the Moorish _l_, which was in Toppodo for Toppollo,

a town of Bornoo.]


[Footnote 149: Mr. Jackson writes وعقدان في السفينة Uakkadan fee sfeena,

i.e. and tied or bound them in the vessel or ship, adding, that he is at

a loss to imagine how it can have been converted into “two maids in the

ship.”[a] Sir Wm., however, in his hurried notice, rendered it ‘female

slaves.’]


[Footnote a: _Ockdan fi ássafinat_, means either “_Two maids_, or _two

female slaves_, in the ship,” and no otherwise.—A. S.]


[Footnote 150: “Invited (or entertained them) until they left him,” Sir

Wm.]


[Footnote 151: Sir William, in his hurried perusal, read this, “and went

on to the country of Besa, and (the Sultan of) this country is greater

than the Sultan of Yaour: there they settled or halted, above Ras (Cape)

Koumen. The people belonging to the Sultan of Besa saw the boat, and

they went into the boat, and it reached the Mountain Cape, (or

Headland,) and was there stopped.”]


[Footnote 152]


[Footnote 153: “And _the man who was_[a] in the boat slew his woman

(امراة) and threw every article of his property into the river, and then

cast _themselves_ into the river through fear.]


[Footnote a: I translate this in the singular, yet afterwards, there

seems a confusion with the plural.” Sir Wm. This act, which appears very

improbable, and which I never heard of in the oral accounts which I

received whilst in Coomassie, (Diary, p. 91) if it was committed, must

have been by Lieut. Martyn, recollecting the difference of his and Mr.

Park’s dispositions, and Amadi Fatouma’s anecdote of the former wishing

to kill him for preventing him from firing any more at the people of the

King Gotoijege, I should observe here, that Amadi Fatouma’s _Poul_

nation can be no other than the Fillani, (p. 207) the Fullan of Ben Ali,

for though it has been translated Poul, there is no _p_ in the Arabic,

and the Moors in Ashantee always wrote _f_ for the negro _p_, as _fon_

for _pon_. As Col. Maxwell merely observes in his letter, that “Isaaco’s

Arabic Journal was translated into English, by a person resident in

Senegal, who probably had but an ordinary or colloquial knowledge of

Arabic, it is to be regretted that the original was not transmitted with

it, as a more careful perusal of it by Sir William Ouseley or some

Arabic scholar in England, would probably reconcile the two accounts, at

least in the names of places, if not in the circumstances, more than

they can be from the translation remitted.]


[Footnote 154: See note; p. 202.]


[Footnote 155: “And the other did not,——from the violence of the

water.”—Sir Wm.]


                           APPENDIX. No. III.


                               * * * * *


                                ROUTES.


                                   1.


                               To Dwabin.


  Seepa


  Marmpon


  Pakooroo


  Aquooquamong


  Okimdaia


  Weterkroom


  Bunkooroo


  Boomfeea


  Kinnesoo


                                   2.


                               To Quaoo.


  1. Assiempong


  2. Thro’ Amoom R. to Oseemadoo


  3. Obogoo, Frontier Quaoo town.


  4. Adumpong, the Government of the C. Coast Captain


  5. Assebanasoo


  6. Minidasoo, Famous for Palm Oil.


  7. Assoona


  8. Wantomo


                                   3.


                               To Accra.


  1. Odossoo


  3. Kroofoofroom, Two hours from the lake.


  4. Obirribee, The 1st Akim town


  5. Assinee


  6. Over Boosempra to Gawasee


  7. Meeasee


  8. Monasa


  9. Over the Aninnee, (rising in a hill called Quomshoo, 1 day to the

  W.) on a tree


  10. Ashoosoo


  11. Aquapong


  12. Over Birrim to Measa


  13. Asheeaqua


  14. Kookrantoom


  15. Aguiesso


  16. Marmpon and Aboödee, Visited by Issert, who calls it 24 miles from

  Christiansburg Castle.


                                   4.


                               To Accra.


  1. Ashiedumpong


  2. Assaboo


  3. Assuennie


  5. Antarranaï


  6. Ammoonoom


  7. Akropong


  9. Abirriwantoo


  10. Aradntem


  11. Kookrantoom


  13. Aguiesso.


                                   5.


                               To Elmina.


  1. Thro’ the towns Akasee, Kankawasee, Odasoo, Adiabin, Asakkraka,

  Adoonko, Agafrompon, to Adoomasa


  2. Fiasee, Bonechumay, Asanasoo, to Becquoi


  3. Inshuentem, (_between waters_) Abimpingua, to Atobiasee


  4. Thro’ Hoomassie, Assekosoo, Edoomassie, Akoorkerry, Akotokee,

  Yankeren, to Abateä, the frontier town of Dankara


  5. Thro’ Sewooterasee, (_put your head lower_) Aboposoo, the frontier

  Tufel town, to Ensuaguesoo, (_woman’s town_) the capital of Tufel


  6. Morobim


  7. Thro’ Akoontarrem, (the 1st Warsaw town) Amodai, over Bopoquaw, (a

  high hill where there was formerly a large croom, now deserted) &

  Apachamba, to Kaïrakoo


  8. Over Pra to Demamba


  9. Dadiasoo


  10. Asseecooma, Abannasoo, Abrādi, Elmina, or, as the natives call it,

  Addĭna.


                                   6.


                              To Dankara.


  1. Dakoon


  2. Terraboöom, the frontier town of Dankara


  3. Thro’ Mosiasoo to Enquanta


  4. Thro’ Ofoo, Amasoo, to Dankara.


                                   7.


                             To Buntookoo.


  1. Barree [156]or to Passaroo


  2. Beamasoo, or to Dooniantiffee


  3. Ensoota


  4. Quanta


  5. Across Tando, to Odomassee


  6. Suaterree


  7. Birrakoomee


  8. Yammee


  9. Kirribeeö


  10. Kickiwerree


  11. Buntookoo


                                   8.


                               To Banda.


  1. Tafoo


  2. Ofeesoo


  3. Abofoo


  4. Kinkawasoo


  5. Akomada


  6. Tandosoo


  7. Koontoosoo


  8. Takima


  9. Weäkee


  10. Aousa


  11. Soko


  12. Namasa


  13. Coransoo


  14. Bimma


  15. Banda


                                   9.


                               To Boopee.


  1. Esansoo, or Medima


  2. Through Ofim, which rises close to the E. to Bümsoo or Akimakasie


  3. Soodroo


  4. Takimenteä, or Quamang


  5. Akommadeä, or Boomang


  6. Boisoo


  7. Coranza


  8. Boibin


  9. Koonquoontee


  10. Dawdaw


  11. Akrofroom


  12. Oboosmosoo


  13. Moboäsoo


  14. On the path


  15. Over Adirri


  16. Boopee


                                  10.


                              To Sallagha.


  1. Marmpon


  2. Aphwaguiasee


  3. Gammasee a fetish temple


  4. Akrofroom


  5. Intonnasoo (Cloth Town)


  6. Quanasee or Troabirree


  7. Agwoona


  8. Adoogan


  9. Over rivers and mountains to Aguirra, or Poorra


  10. Through Sennee to Amanting


  11. Pattooda


  12. Atoboboo


  13. Weasee


  14. Pannangha


  15. Yadjee


  16. Over Adirri to Sallagha


                                  11.


                          To Source of Sennee.


  1. Agamachasee


  2. Aboiman


  3. Yatirrim


  4. Oweeamasee


  5. Anyanasue


  6. Assekadoomasee


                                  12.


                           To Odentee ferry.


  1. Kokoofoo


  2. Guia


  3. Weeäsee


  4. Bassa


  5. Tarrisoo


  6. Over Sennee, to ferry


                                  13.


                         From Yahndi to Daboia


  1. Through Patinga to Duetuem


  2. Tampeūn


  3. Through Nantong to Kompoongo


  4. Through Boö to Dindinno


  5. Daboia


           Large Towns on the Route from Boornoo to Oongoora.


  Deeagarra


  Digza


  Gellaroo


  Rakah


  Zaghgah


  Ariggum


  Madellarie


  Zogogdo


  Doobba


  Toppollo, or Toppodo


  Garaga


  Gaskaia


  Matchella


  Goozirrinkoorra


  Dumgabalo


  Potuskum, or Kuskum


  Dawaso


  Woodbo


  Gummo


  Zega


   Adagia, Mallagee, and Katanga, lay between Oongoora, and Kassina.


  Towns adjoining, or laying close to the right and left of the above

                                 Route.


  Serrakeelaia


  Dakum


  Lismaroo


  Goobilwa


  Gobookalashee


  Dazakou


  Danga


  Likhalalie


  Looha


The following transcripts of the most intelligible of the MSS. I

brought, according to the different readings, with the Negro

pronunciation as it was familiar to me in Ashantee, will show how

careless or incapable the Moors are of writing the names of Negro

kingdoms accurately according to the expression of the natives. The

original MSS. will be sent to the African Association, to whom I had

hoped to present the interesting itinerary of Shereef Brahima from

Dagwumba to Mecca, but this valuable MS. which it had cost me so much

pains to procure, after being kept three months by one gentleman before

he discovered that he had not time to translate it, was lost or mislaid

by another in the course of doing so, and I have the mortification of

being unable to submit any other than the mere skeleton of it. See

Geography, p. 205.


                              CHART No. I.


          _Course of the Niger or Quolla (by a Houssa Moor.)_


 Negro pro-   Mr. Jackson’s reading       Mr. Dupuis’ reading and

 nunciation.     and transcript.                transcript.


  Gebowa                                  Gebawa         جباو


  Toro        Futa Jelua    فوت جلوا      Foota Joolaba  فُوتَ جلوب

  Jollabi


  Fota Tora   Futa Tura     فوت طورَ      Foota Tooroo   فُوتَ طُورُ


  Hasoo       Kassua        خَصوا         Khassoua       خَصُوا


  Jaoona      Jäun          جَعونْ        Jafoona        جفون


  Gammoe      G¯remua       غموا          Ghemoua        غمُوا


  Mallaia     Maly Faly     مَلَي فَلي    Malia          مَلي


  Shego       Shag¯ru       شاغُ          Shagho         شاغُ


  Sansandin   Sansandia     سَنسَندي      Sansandia      سَنسَندي


  Jennie      Janni         جَان          Jinnie         جَان


  Mashina     Masheena      مَاشِنَ       Mashena        مَاشينَ


  Jimballa    G¯rimbala     غِمْبَلَ      [157]Ghimballa غِمْبَلَ


              (G¯r nearest sound

              to غ.)


  Kabarra     Kabra         كَبرَ         Kabara         كَبَرَ


  Timbuctoo                               Timbuctoo      ثمْبَكْتُ


  Jolliba     Jilab Karihua جلاب كريهوا   Jilleb Kareho  جلاب كريهوا


              (or Garihua.[158])


  Uzzabin     Asabin        احبن          Azbene         ازبن


  Gaw         G¯raheh       غاي           Ghou           غاو


  Kabi        Keb           كب            Kabi           كب


  Yaoora      Eüra          يورَ          Yaoury         يور


                                          Hooman         حمن

                                          (Dhooman)


  Raka        Baka          بَكا          Raka           رَكَا


  Quarraraba  Kurauabee     كرَوبَي       Koorawaba      كْرَوَبَ


  Mafeegoodoo Mafikadoo     مَافِقُدَ     Mafhygodo      مَافْقِغُدُ


  Cadie,      Shad          شد            Shada          شَدَ

  Caudee,

  and Chadi


  Sharee R.   Shar          شر            Sharry         شَرِ


  Foor        Fure          فور           Foor           فُوُرْ


  Weddai      Wadan         وادان         Wadana         وَادَانَ


               (i.e. two rivers.)


  Soonar      Sanar         سَنَارْ       Sanar          سَنَارْ


  Shuar       Sheua         شوَا بنَسر    Shewa ben      شوَا بن حسن

  Benassa     benasser                    Hassan


              Shousuad      شوسواد        Shousooda      شوسواد


                                          Doulamba       دُلَنْبَ


              Kalen or      فالن or كالن  Kalana         كالن

              Falen


  Jefeesgo    Jafag¯r       جَفَغْ        Jafegh         جفغ


  Massar      Mass’r        مصر           Massir         مصر


                               MS. No. I.


                    _Route from Boussa to Yarriba._


  Wauwaw            Wou             واوْ


  Kaiama            Kima            كيما


  Godoobirrie       Khudubar        خدوبار


  Gamba             Khamba          خَمْبَ


  Kroomie Yarriba   Kurmi Yarabia   كُرْم يَرَبي


  Ageasee           Abashee         ابَشي


A more familiar illustration of the difficulty or carelessness of the

Moors in writing Negro names, is the following route to Sallagha, to

which there are many paths, containing several Ashantee towns, which I

have laid down in the map. I rather think, however, the corrupt Arabic

of the interior is not quite understood.


                              MS. No. II.


  Negro pronun-    Mr. Jackson’s reading and transcript.

  ciation.


                    Jemakashee       جماكاشي


  Gammasee          Khemashee or     خماشي

                    Ghemashee


  Akrofroom         Kukerume or      كوقروم or كوكروم

                    Kuferume


                    Ber kaleela (a   برقليلا

                    narrow or close

                    country)


  Soota             U badha Shta  }

                                  }

                                  }  وبعده شتا

                                  }

  And afterwards Shta or an       }

  alluvial country                }


  The people of Sudi in the          وحيل اسود كان في بلد شتا

  territory of Shta


  Marmpon           U badha Mamefm   و بعده مَمفم


  Aduarrie Kennie   D’keen Adjar     دكين ادجار


  Aguira            Ajuee or Ajree   اجري or اجوي


  Antonasoo         Anteenee         عنتيني


                    Akakuee          اككوي


  Patooda (no P     Ketdee           كتدي

  in Arabic)


  Atoboo            Atab             اتاب


  Weasee            Hooashee or      جومشي or حوعشي

                    Weeashu


                    Feneeueekee      فنيويقي


  Perhaps meaning   Bure             بور

  frontier of

  Booroom


  Sallagha          Salag~r          سلغ


I shall submit more translations or transcripts of routes and charts in

Arabic, adding the Negro pronunciation, as the situations of most of the

places were not so clearly confirmed as to enable me to insert them in

my map, and consequently it is important to enable future travellers to

refer to them; such outlines being a great assistance in directing and

checking enquiry (which they frequently originate) and investigation.

The original MSS. will be sent to the African Association, in case a

further examination may be desirable hereafter.


                              MS. No. III.


          _Course of the Niger or Quolla (by a Bornoo Moor.)_


      Negro        Mr. Jackson’s reading    Mr. Dupuis’ reading and

  pronunciation.      and transcript.           transcript.


  Bambooch         Banbug~r    بَنبُغ الدي  Banboogho    بَنْبغ

                   eladi eeakul ياكل


                   el Ham Abn   الحم ابن ادم

                   Adam


                   Banbug~r, who eat the flesh of men.


                   Firmagr~a   فرمَغَ       Fermagha     فرمَغَ


  Hasoo            Hâsu         حاسُ         Hasoo        حَاسُ


  Jaoona           Jahunu       جَاحُنُ      Jahoonoo     جَاحُيُ


  Gamoo            Jamu         جَمُ         Jamoo        جَمُ


  Malay or Mallaia Mali         مَلي         Malabi       مَلبي


  Shego            Shaegru      شَيْغُ       Shagho       شَيْغُ


  Sansandin        Sansandy     سَنسَندِ     Sansadia     سَنسَدَ


  Jennie           Jany         جَنِ         Jinnie       جني


  Mashina          Masina       مَاسَنَ      Massina      مَاسنَ


  Timbuctoo        Tunbûktu     تُنبَقْتُ    Timbuctoo    تمبقْتُ


  Gauw             G¯rau        غَاوْ        Ghaou        غاوْ


  Kolomanni        Kulman       كُلْمَنِ     Koolmani     كُلْمَن


  Zinberme         Dtanberma    ذَنبرْمَ     Danberma     ذَنْبرْمَ


  Cabi             Kabi         كَبِ         Kabi         كَبِ


  Yawoorie or      Eauri        يَاوُرِ      Yaouri       يَاوُرِ

  Yaoora


  Noofee           Nufy         نُفي         Noufee       نفي


  Boussa           Busâa        بوسَا        Boussa       بوسا


  Rakka            Raka         رَاقَا       Rakka        رَاقَا


  Bornoo           B’rn Bernu   برن          Bornou       برن


  Chadee L.        (The lake drawn, but the name not written.)


  Bagarrimee       Bag¯rarm     باغرو        Baghroom     باغرم


  Kalamfarradoo    Kaferk or    كافرد or     Kaferda      كافرد

                   Kaferd       كافرك        Kalferka


  Weddaï           Wadana (two  وَدَان       Wadai        وَدَان

                   rivers)


  Soonar           Surnar       سُرنَرْ      Soonar       سُونَرْ


                   Siua         سيوا         Sewa         سيوا


  Schweess         Suis         سويس         Souisa       سويس


  Zaloo            Jal          جال          Jaloo        جال


  Kataëba          Katab        قَتَب        Kataibi      فَتَيب


  Makidzue         Mek’duh      مقدوح        Mokad        مقدوح


  Mertabass        M’rtabas     مرتباس       Mertabas     مرتباس


  Hoodayba         Mamudeeb     مَموديب      Haoudeba     هوديي


  Taiboos          Teesuse      تيسوس        Tesoos       تيسوس


  Jarooba          Jerub        جروب         Jarouba      جروب


  Tabarrabass      Tidburse or  تدبرس or     Tarbasa      ترباس

                   Tidfurse     تدفرس


  Gedda.           J’da         جدا          Jidda        جدا


  Geddook          J’duk        جدوخ         Jidoukh      جدوخ


  Limbarr’         Linbabahr    لنبَبَحر     Linbahar     لنبحر


  Tarrowm          Term         ترم          Taroom       ترم


  Massar           M’nser       منصر         Minsor       منصر


  Sakunderree or   Skender, a   سكندر مرج    Sakundria,   سْكَنْدَرِ

  Askandarie       swamp lake                Alexandria


          _Route from Timbuctoo to Ferjan (from the same MS.)_


                   Tuan         توان         Toowano      توان


                   M’brûk       مبروك        Mobaruka     مبَرْوك


                   Jeerban      حيربن        Joojebani    اجوجبن


                   Abugiberk    ابوجبرخ      Kheerabi     خيربي


                   Tehekeem     تحكيم        Tahkema      تحكيم


  Bageeacha  }

             }

  Hootailee  }

             }

  Goosaicha  }    not written, but position marked, and thus pronounced.

             }

  Hayloon    }

             }

  Barrahese  }


                   Ferjan       فرجان        Ferjan       فَرْجَانْ


            _From Timbuctoo to Tunis (from the same Chart.)_


  Ziggie           Jak, Jik, or جق           Jagha        جغ

                   Juk


  Arowalla         Arun or Arul عرول or عرون Aaroon       عرون


  Tarrabaleese     Trahesen     ترهيسن       Trabolas     ترهبليس


  Mooquinassa      M’kenas      ممكناس       Mookanassa   مَكْنَاس


  Hass             Has          حَاسْ        Hhas         حَاسْ


  Landoloos        Lindalsu     لَندَلْسُ    Lankalsoo    لَنكَلْسُ


  Toonis           Tunis        تونس         Tunis        تونس


                   Near the sea كباله بحر


Other towns named on this route were


  Hassaladee


  Hassazedeed


  Hassat


  Omattaras


  Dizzaela


  Dazeleel


  Katerbaîlie


  Bahadzai


  Maratooph


  Swamach


                              MS. No. IV.


    _Course of the Niger or Quolla (by a Jennie Moor who had been to

                                Egypt.)_


  Negro         Mr. Jackson’s reading         Mr. Dupuis’ reading and

  pronun-          and transcript.                  transcript.

  ciation.


  Mallaia        Malh         ملح             Mahh            مَاحْ


  Shego          Shak         سك              Shako           سكُ


  Sansandin      Sansandee    سنسدَي          Sansandia       سنسنديَ


  Jennie         Jin          جن              Jinnie          جنِ


  Massina        Masheen      ماشين           Mashina         ماشين


  Tinbuctoo      Tinbut       تنبت            Tinbuctoo       تنبت


  (Here he draws the Jolliba flowing from or into the Quolla by

  Timbuctoo.)


  Gauw           Gru          غو              Ghou            غو


  Quoälla        Kula         كولا            Koualla         كولا


  Askeä          Assaëe       اَساَي          Askea           اسكي


  Zabirma        Zabuaä       زبوعا           Zaberma         زبرما


  Cabi           Keb          كب              Kaby            كبا


  Yaoora         Eeurë        يور             Yeory           يور


  Boussa         B’sa         بسا             Bussu           بسا


  (Here he branches off a southern route to Yarriba with precisely the

  same names as in MS. I, by the Houssa Moor.)


  Noofee         }

                 }

  Quolla-liffa   }

                 }

  Atagara        } not written, but position marked, and thus

                 } pronounced.

  Sharee R.      }

                 }

  Chadee L.      }


  Foor           Foo          فوُ             Sour            صُره


  Weddai         Wadaee       وداي            Wadai           وداي


  Joonar         Jusenaw      جوسناو          Joosnou         جوسناو


  Shewa          Shuee        شوي             Shouy           سوي


  Sooeess        Siuse        سُوسْ           Sweis           سُوسْ


  Zale           Zal          زاَل            Zal             زاَل


  Zaedooma       Zeehwam      زيهوم           Zeedouma        زيدوم


  Lachtamoo      Lahellam     لاحلام          Lakhtamo        لاخطام


  Makagoodoo     Mehed’twa    محذوْع          Mohadzou        محذوْع


  Dalooba        Deeluba      ديلوبا          Djaoba          دجاوبا


  Tarbass        Tubas        توباس           Terbasa         ترباس


  Jaheesoo       Jekeesee     جخيس            Jakhesa         جخيس


  Latooha        Lituh or     ليعوح or ليطوح  Letouh          ليطوح

                 Liauh


  Mabanoos       M’benuse     مبنوس           Mabanouso       مَبَنُوس


  Itkhame        Atekam       اتخام           Etakhamo        اطخدَمُ


  Massar         Missu        مصو             Massir          مصر


  Sooryada       Sueed        سويد            Sourida         سُويد


  Nezoogoo       Teeawa       تياوع           Nezugh          نيزوخح


  Kataramoo      Kateram      كترام           Kateramo        كترام


  Dahloomoo      D’helume     دحلوم           Dhalomo         دحلوم


  Hateboo        Heteeb       حتيب            Hhateba         حتيب


  Haheenie       Heneen       حنين            Hahhene         ححين


  Hajamie        Khejam       خجام            Hajame          حجام


  Tapasooloo     Tefawn       تفعون           Tafsoona        تفصون


  Askandarie                                  Askundria       اسكندري


  Bahar Mela      (Bahar Melhah the           Bahar al Malah

                      salt sea)


                              MS. No. IV.


This was written by an old Moor, a native of the Mallowa country, but

unfortunately just as he had finished (for I made them all write at the

moment in my own apartment, however hurried, rather than allow them to

go home and compose for me) and was beginning to explain what he had

written, a summons from the King obliged me to quit him, and he left

Coomassie before I could procure another visit from him. In the absence

of all explanation, I can only conclude from some few names that are

familiar to me, that it is a route from Berragoo over the Quolla, and

then westward to Bergoo, known to Mr. Brown. I am only induced thus to

preserve a transcript of this ms. from its fortunate co-incidence in

several names with the valuable lost itinerary of my friend Brahima, as

far as can be collected from a mere sketch of a translation, which was

made in anticipation of the perfect one. I shall submit them

collaterally, as they assist to elucidate each other, and agree very

well in the relative positions of places, although the parties never saw

each other, which is some satisfaction under the disappointment.


 _Outline of Brahima’s                    MS. No. IV.

      Itinerary._


 Mr. Dupuis’ reading and   Mr. Jackson’s reading         Other readings.

 transcript.               and transcript.


 Bazao      بَزاوُ (بَراوُ)  Burg¯ru          بُرْغُ            Bouroughoo

 (Barao)


                             Babigry          بَبِغي            Babaghe


 Kaikshi    كَيَقشي          Keekesh          كيقش              Keekash


 Droo       دروو             Serkune          سركون             Serkoon


 Mashooko   مَشوُكوْ


 Banghoo    بَانْغُوا        Banaka           بانعقا


 Toonooma   تُونُومُ         Tuee             توي


 Yajoury    يَجُورِ          Tenbykukmaetunby تنب كوك مَيتُنْب

 (doubtless

 Yawoorie)


                             Kenbua           كنبوا             Kanboo


                             Dendawy          دنداوي            Danadoo


                             Belg¯rua         بلغوا             Balaghou


 Jabdgho    جَبْذْغُ         Jebeng¯rua       جبنغوا            Jabadghoo


 Keemba or  كمْبَا (كصْبَا)  Kamba            كمبه

 Keerba


 Kadarkoo   اَلجركَدَرْكُ    Kedug¯reh R.     كَدوغه            Kadarko

 R.


 Doodirba   ذُذْرْبَا        Dtedterba R.     ذذربا             Dodarba

 R.


                             Uwawfeh          وواوفه


                             Mhaka Kury       محكا كوري

                             (arrival at

                             Kury)


                             Saffer           سفر


                             Aäu Khashah      اعَوو كحاشه


 Shawanka   اشَوَنْكَا       Shawangra        شاوَنْغَ


 Ghoufel    غوفل             Jafu             جافُو             Japhoo


 Simmer     سمر


 Yarkoo     يركو


 Daghm      دغم


 Bannanao   بَنَنَوْا


 Doonkee    دُنْقيْ          Dunka            دُنقَيْ           Doonkot


 Ghodau     غوضا             G¯ru’w           غووَ              Ghouwa


 Salamo     سَلَمْوُا


 Janboodoo  جَانْبُدُوا      Jabendu          جابندوا


 Soosoo     سُسُوْا          Susu             سُوسُوْا


 Kooreree   كُرر             Koos             كوصْ


 Barghoowa  برغَوَا          Berg¯rua         برغوا


 Nak or     نك

 Naka


 Water of   وض

 Wada


 Douga      ضوغا

 (probably

 Donga)


 Mazim      مزم


 Kal        كل


 Makji      مقجي


 Tafkat     تفقت


 Shal L.    شل


 Koad or    كوض

 Koada


  Here the writer signified that he went back to _Kateen_, as appeared

  to the transcriber, but more probably_Kassina_, and thence proceeded

  to


 Kano       كَن


 Bornou     برنو


 Sher R.    شر


 Shadda L.  شاد


 Foor       فر


 Wada       وداء


 Massir     مصر


 Makata     مكة

 (Mecca)


 Madina     مدينه


 Shem       شام

 (Damascus)


 Jerusalem, بيت المقدس

 &c. &c.


[Footnote 156: When _or_ appears between two names, it means that each

town is equally close to the path, and indifferently visited.]


[Footnote 157: Mr. Dupuis renders the Arabic غ g¯h agreeable to

Richardson. Mr. Jackson has insisted on preferring g˘r throughout. Mr.

Dupuis, having sailed for Africa, has not had the advantage of

correcting the press for himself, but every care has been taken.]


[Footnote 158: Sir W. Ouseley remarks, that the letter _k_ is frequently

softened into _g_.]


                           APPENDIX. No. IV.


                               * * * * *


                         REPTILIA. (REPTILES.)


_Gen._ MONITOR, _Cuvier._


  _Sp._ 1. _Pulcher_, _Leach._


    M. Supra niger albo pulcherrime zonatus et maculatus: zonis

    dorsalibus e maculis effectis, ventre albido nigro transversim vage

    lineato, cauda compressa carinata.


    This elegant species was found in Fantee. The whole upper parts of

    the body, the legs and tail, are black, most beautifully banded and

    spotted with white. The bands on the tail are alternately wide and

    narrow; the wider bands are each much and abruptly dilated above

    into a kind of spot, whilst the narrow ones become gradually wider

    in the inverse direction. The legs are spotted above with white; the

    under parts of them, as well as of the belly and throat, are also of

    the same colour with the spots.


_Gen._ CHAMÆLEON, _of authors._


  _Sp._ 1. _Dilepis_, _Leach._


    Ch. Capite supra sub plano utrinque bicarinato: carinis antice

    conniventibus, occipite utrinque squama magna instructo, dorso

    subspinoso-carinato.


    This species may readily be distinguished from all that have been

    hitherto discovered, by the two large scales, affixed one on each

    side to the back part of the head. These scale-like processes, are

    covered by the same scaly integuments which cover the head and body.


_Gen._ ACONTIAS, _Cuvier._


  _Sp._ 1. _Punctatus_, _Leach._


    A. Supra brunneo-fuscus obsolete purpurascens, squamis postice

    macula ventreque fulvescentibus.


    Fantee.


_Gen._ MACROSOMA, _Leach._


    1. _Elegans, Leach._


    Coluber elegans, _Shaw._


    Fantee.


_Gen._ COLUBER, _Cuvier._


    1. _Bicolor_, _Leach._


    C. Supra badio-niger subtus albidus, squamis dorsalibus elongatis

    gradatim angustioribus; apice obtusiusculis.


    Fantee.


    2. _Irroratus_, _Leach._


    C. Badio-fuscus, gula pallida, squamis pulcherrime albido irroratis;

    dorsalibus subelongatis apice rotundatis.


    Fantee.


    3. _Irregularis_, _Leach._


    C. Azureo-virescens, ventre albido, squamis simplicibus

    irregularibus: dorsalibus ovatis: lateralibus superioribus superne

    truncatis; inferis subhexagonis.


    Fantee.


    The above three species of _Coluber_ are decidedly new, as well as

    the _Acontias_; the latter is more particularly interesting, since

    it encreases the species of a very limited genus.


                              ARACHNOÏDA.


_Gen._ SCORPIO, _of authors._


    _Sp._ 1. _Afer_, _Fabr._


_Gen._ MYGALE, _Latreille._


    The only specimen was too mutilated to enable me to make out its

    specific character.


                               MYRIAPODA.


    Of this class you found two species in Fantee; a _Scolopendra_, and

    a gigantic _Julus_; neither of which are in a sufficiently good

    state to enable me to make out whether they be described or not.


                                INSECTA.


_Gen._ TEFFLUS, _Leach_, new genus.


                           Generic character.


    CAPUT. _Mandibulæ_ æquales edentulæ. _Palpi labiales_ et _maxillares

    externi_ articulo ultimo elongato-securiformi.


    THORAX hexagonus antice et postice rectus. _Alæ_ nullæ. _Elytra_

    coalita abdomen tegentia apicem versus utrinque sinuata. _Tibiæ_

    anticæ latere interiore apicem versus emarginatæ calcare elevato

    instructæ. _Tarsi antici_ MARIS articulis duobus primis tenuiter

    dilatatis.


    Habitus et Antennæ Carabi.


   _Sp._ 1. _Meyerlei_.


    Carabus Meyerlei, _Fabr. Syst. Eleut._ i. 169.—_Voet. col._ ii.

    _tab._ 39, _f._ 49.


_Gen._ ODONTOMERUS, _Dahl._


   _Sp._ 1. _Serratus_.


    Buprestis serratus, _Fabr._


    Fantee.


_Gen._ CETONIA, _of authors._


    _Sp._ 1. _Marginata_, _Fabr._


    Fantee.


_Gen._ PHYLLOTOMA, _Wm. MacLeay, MSS._


    _Sp._ 1. _Reflexa_.


    Melolontha reflexa, _Fabr._


    Fantee.


_Gen._ HELOPS, _Fabr._


    _Sp._ 1. _Marginatus_, _Olivier_.


    Fantee.


_Gen._ UPIS? _Fabr._


    _Sp._ 1. Cuprea.


    Tenebrio Cupreus, _Fabr._


    Fantee.


_Gen._ LAMIA, _Fabr._


    _Sp._ 1. Tri-fasciata, _Fabr._


    Fantee. This species is also found at Sierra Leone, and in the Back

    Settlements of the Cape of Good Hope.


_Gen._ PETROGNATHA, _Leach._


                               Character


    _Caput_ thorace paulo latius. _Antennæ_ (_maris_ corpore duplo

    longiores et ultra,) articulo secundo longiore flexuoso. _Labrum_

    lineare transversum nudum utrinque rotundatum. _Mandibulæ_ petrosæ

    (MARIS interne apicem versus obtuse unidentatæ,) infra et externe

    irregulariter carinatas. _Palpi maxillares_ et _labiales_ articulo

    ultimo basi subattenuato, apice externe oblique truncato-acuminato.


    THORAX transversus utrinque 1-spinosus. _Elytra_ humeris 1-spinosis,

    apiceque ad saturam spinoso-subproducto.


    _Sp._ 1. _Gigas_.


    Lamia Gigas, _Fabr._


    Fantee.


_Gen._ CALLICHROMA, _Latreille._


    _Sp._ 1. _Festivum_.


    Cerambyx festivus, _Oliv. Fabr._


    Fantee.


_Gen._ MANTIS.


    _Sp._ 1. _Superstitiosa_, _Fabr_.


    Fantee


    This species, as well as its congeners, is an object of

    superstitious veneration amongst the natives of north-western

    Africa, Syria, and India. It agrees in all points with the original

    specimen of _Superstitiosa_, so named by Fabricius in the Banksian

    Cabinet.


_Gen._ GRYLLUS, _Fabr._


    _Sp._ 1. _Squarrosus_, _Fabr._


    Fantee.


_Gen._ REDUVIUS, _Fabr._


    _Sp._ 1. _Barbicornis_, _Fabr._


    Fantee.


    I have received this species from the Cape of Good Hope.


_Gen._ CANOPUS, _Rodhe._


    _Sp._ 1. _Punctatus_, _Leach._


    Supra olivaceo-ater impresso-punctulatus rubro punctatus, subtus

    ruber segmentis marginibus stigmatibus tibiis tarsisque nigris,

    capite rubro irrorato.


    Gaboon.


                            APPENDIX, No. V.


                               * * * * *


              _Mr._ TEDLIE’S _Account of the Thermometer._


     Date.     |  A.M. |   M.  |  P.M. |           Weather.

               |       |       |       |

  April 28     |6 74   |       |       |

               |       |       |       |

  29           |7½ 75  |       |       |

               |       |       |       |

               |11 80  |       |       |

               |       |       |       |

  30           |       |       |2 88½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7 82½  |

               |       |       |       |

  May 1        |8 77   |       |       |

               |       |       |       |

  2            |8 76½  |       |1 91   |

               |       |       |       |

  3            |6 76   |12 89  |       |

               |       |       |       |

  May 4.       |The Thermometer was broken last night at Asharaman.

               |       |       |       |

  At Coomassie, from the 7th June to the 11th, it varied from 80 to 85,

  between 12 and 2.

               |       |       |       |

  June 15      |       |       |1 82   |

               |       |       |       |

  16           |10 79  |       |       |

               |       |       |       |

  17           |       |12 82  |       |

               |       |       |       |

  18           |9 79   |       |2 84   |

               |       |       |       |

  19           |7½ 73  |       |2½ 78  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |5 78   |

               |       |       |       |

  20           |10 78  |       |1 81   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2½ 82  |

               |       |       |       |

  21           |8 74   |       |2½ 82  |

               |       |       |       |

  22           |8 76   |12 82  |1 74   |Tornado.

               |       |       |       |

  23           |8½ 74  |       |1 81   |Tornado.

               |       |       |       |

  24           |11½ 76 |       |2 73   |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

  25           |9 75   |       |1 76   |

               |       |       |       |

  26           |9 76   |12 76  |2 78   |

               |       |       |       |

  27           |8½ 79  |       |3½ 80  |

               |       |       |       |

  28           |8½ 74  |12 77  |       |

               |       |       |       |

  29           |9½ 74  |       |2 77   |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

  30           |9 77   |       |1 80   |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

  July 1       |9 76   |       |1 80   |

               |       |       |       |

  2            |8 73   |12 78  |       |

               |       |       |       |

  3            |9 78   |       |1 78   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 75   |

               |       |       |       |

  4            |8 72   |12 74  |       |

               |       |       |       |

  5            |8 72   |       |1 78   |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

  6            |6 71   |12 76  |       |

               |       |       |       |

  7            |6 71   |       |2 80   |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 75   |

               |       |       |       |

  8            |6 72   |12 78  |       |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |3 80   |Tornado.

               |       |       |       |

  9            |6 72   |       |       |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |1 79   |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

  10           |7 73   |       |2½ 81  |

               |       |       |       |

  11           |8 73   |       |2 81   |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 72   |

               |       |       |       |

  12           |6 72   |       |2½ 80  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 76   |

               |       |       |       |

  13           |8 77   |       |       |

               |       |       |       |

               |11 73  |       |3 77   |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

  14           |8 71   |       |2 77   |

               |       |       |       |

  15           |8 70   |12 74  |6 72   |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

  16           |7 69   |       |2 78   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7 73   |

               |       |       |       |

  17           |7 69   |       |2½ 79  |

               |       |       |       |

  18           |8 71   |       |3 79   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 76   |

               |       |       |       |

  19           |6 70   |       |       |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2½ 76  |Fair,

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7 74   |

               |       |       |       |

  20           |8 72   |       |2½ 78  |

               |       |       |       |

  21           |7½ 71  |12 75  |2½ 78  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6½ 75  |

               |       |       |       |

  22           |6 70   |       |2 78   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7 73   |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

  23           |6 70   |       |2 78   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 72   |

               |       |       |       |

  24           |8 70   |       |2 74   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 72   |

               |       |       |       |

  25           |8 69   |       |1 74   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 72   |

               |       |       |       |

  26           |7 70   |       |2 75   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 74   |

               |       |       |       |

  27           |7 68   |       |3½ 80½ |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 71   |

               |       |       |       |

  28           |8 70   |       |       |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |3 77   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7½ 73  |

               |       |       |       |

  29           |7 70   |       |2 78   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 73   |

               |       |       |       |

  39           |7 66½  |       |2 78   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7 73   |

               |       |       |       |

  31           |8 70   |12 76  |2 78   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7 73   |

               |       |       |       |

  Aug. 1       |7 70   |       |2 77   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7 73   |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

  2            |7 71   |       |2 73   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 70   |

               |       |       |       |

  3            |7 69½  |12 72  |3 73   |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 70½  |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

  4            |7 70   |       |2 78   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 74   |

               |       |       |       |

  5            |7 71   |       |2 79   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 75   |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

  6            |7 70   |       |       |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 78½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 73   |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

  7            |7 71   |       |2 78   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 76   |

               |       |       |       |

  8            |6 70   |12 73  |2½ 77  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7 73   |

               |       |       |       |

  9            |6 70   |       |2½ 78  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7 75   |

               |       |       |       |

  10           |7 71   |       |2 76   |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7 74   |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

  11           |7 71   |       |2 78   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 73   |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

  12           |7 70½  |       |3 76   |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 73   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 71   |

               |       |       |       |

  13           |7 70   |       |2 77   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 73   |

               |       |       |       |

  14           |7 70   |       |2 74   |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 73   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 71   |

               |       |       |       |

  15           |7 70   |       |2 72   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7 73   |

               |       |       |       |

  16           |7 70   |       |2 75   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7 73   |

               |       |       |       |

  17           |7 70   |       |2 80   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7 74   |

               |       |       |       |

  18           |7 71   |12 77  |2 80½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |3 81   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7 77   |

               |       |       |       |

  19           |7 71   |       |2 75   |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 73   |

               |       |       |       |

  20           |7 68½  |       |       |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 72½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 71   |

               |       |       |       |

  21           |6 69   |       |       |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |1 77   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7 74   |

               |       |       |       |

  22           |6 68   |12 73  |2 77   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7 71   |

               |       |       |       |

  23           |7 68   |       |1 76   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 73   |

               |       |       |       |

  24           |7 69   |       |3 74   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7 71½  |

               |       |       |       |

  25           |6 68   |       |6 74   |

               |       |       |       |

  26           |6 68   |       |3 78½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7 74   |

               |       |       |       |

  27           |7 69   |       |       |Hazy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |1 72   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |3 72   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7 70½  |

               |       |       |       |

  28           |6 69 ½ |       |       |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 74   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 72   |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

  29           |7 70   |       |3 78   |Fair

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 77   |

               |       |       |       |

  30           |7 70   |       |       |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2½ 76  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7 73   |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

  31           |7 70½  |       |3 77   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7 73   |

               |       |       |       |

  Sept. 1      |7 71   |       |       |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |3 80   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7 77   |

               |       |       |       |

  2            |6 71   |       |       |Hazy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 75   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7 74   |Slight showers

               |       |       |       |

  3            |6 71   |12 74  |       |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |1 80   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 74   |

               |       |       |       |

  4            |7 71   |12 77  |7 74   |

               |       |       |       |

  5            |5 71   |       |3 79   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7 76   |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

  6            |6 70   |       |2 74   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7 73   |

               |       |       |       |

  7            |8 71   |       |3 76   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 73   |Slight showers

               |       |       |       |

  8            |7 71   |12 76  |       |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 80   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 73   |

               |       |       |       |

  9            |6 71   |       |2 80   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 74   |

               |       |       |       |

  10           |7 71   |       |       |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |3 80   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7 76   |

               |       |       |       |

  11           |6 72   |       |       |Heavy rain.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 77   |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |10 72  |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

  12           |7 72   |12 78  |3½ 80½ |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |10 76  |

               |       |       |       |

  13           |7 22   |       |2 78   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |3½ 80  |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |9 76   |

               |       |       |       |

  14           |7 72   |       |       |Hazy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2½ 79  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 76   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 75   |

               |       |       |       |

  15           |5 71   |       |3 80   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7 75   |

               |       |       |       |

  16           |7 72   |       |2½ 80  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 75   |

               |       |       |       |

  17           |7 72   |12 78  |2½ 81  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |9 75   |

               |       |       |       |

  18           |7 72   |       |2 77   |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 73   |

               |       |       |       |

  19           |7 71   |       |3 81   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |9 75   |

               |       |       |       |

  20           |7 72   |       |2 79   |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 74   |

               |       |       |       |

  21           |7 72   |       |2½ 81  |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 72   |

               |       |       |       |

  22           |8 71   |       |       |Hazy.

               |       |       |       |

               |12½ 71 |       |2 82½  |


 _Mr._ HUTCHISON’S _Account of the Thermometer, after the Departure of

                              Mr. Tedlie._


     Date.     |  A.M. |   M.  |  P.M. |           Weather.

               |       |       |       |

  Sept. 23     |8 73   |       |       |Thunder, with rain.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 80   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 75   |

               |       |       |       |

  24           |6 72   |       |       |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |12 78  |       |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 82   |Fair, but cloudy

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 75   |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

  25           |6 71½  |       |       |

               |       |       |       |

               |10 76  |       |       |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |12 83  |       |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 75   |Violent tornado

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 71½  |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

  26           |6 70   |       |       |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |12 73  |       |Hazy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 80   |Cloudy

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |4 77   |Wind

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 71   |Heavy rain.

               |       |       |       |

  27           |6 73   |       |       |

               |       |       |       |

               |10 75  |       |       |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |12 80½ |6 75   |

               |       |       |       |

  28           |6 71   |       |2 81½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 74   |

               |       |       |       |

  29           |6 71½  |       |2 82   |

               |       |       |       |

  30           |6 73   |       |       |Cloudy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 80   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7 71½  |

               |       |       |       |

  Oct. 1       |6 72½  |       |2 82   |

               |       |       |       |

               |10 70  |       |8 76   |

               |       |       |       |

  2            |6 70   |       |2 79   |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 78   |Sultry.

               |       |       |       |

  3            |6 71   |       |       |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 82   |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 80   |

               |       |       |       |

  5            |6 72   |       |2 79   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 74   |

               |       |       |       |

  6            |6 72   |       |       |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 79   |Much rain, thunder.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 75   |

               |       |       |       |

  7            |6 72   |       |2 79   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 74   |

               |       |       |       |

  8            |6 71   |12 79  |2 73   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 71   |

               |       |       |       |

  9            |6 71   |       |2 79   |Sultry and cloudy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 78   |

               |       |       |       |

  10           |6 73   |       |       |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |12 78  |       |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 71½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 73½  |Much rain, thunder.

               |       |       |       |

  11           |6 73   |       |       |Heavy fog.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 76½  |Fair, cloudy.

               |       |       |       |

  12           |6 71½  |       |       |Sultry, foggy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 80½  |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 78   |

               |       |       |       |

  13           |6 73   |       |       |Foggy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |12 78  |       |Sultry.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 79   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 77   |Rain, thunder.

               |       |       |       |

  14           |6 74½  |       |       |Rain, foggy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 78½  |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 74   |

               |       |       |       |

  15           |6 72½  |       |       |Rain, foggy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 74   |Hazy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 73   |

               |       |       |       |

  16           |6 72½  |       |       |Foggy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 80½  |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 75   |

               |       |       |       |

  17           |6 73½  |       |       |Rain, foggy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 78   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 74½  |

               |       |       |       |

  18           |6 73   |       |       |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 80   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 75   |Rain and thunder.

               |       |       |       |

  19           |73½    |       |       |

               |       |       |       |

               |71½    |       |       |Much rain.

               |       |       |       |

  20           |6 70½  |       |       |Dense fogs.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 73   |Foggy, with showers.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 74   |

               |       |       |       |

  21           |6 72½  |       |       |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 79   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 78½  |

               |       |       |       |

  22           |6 73   |12 77  |       |Foggy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 82½  |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 75   |

               |       |       |       |

  23           |6 72½  |       |       |Foggy, with thr. showers.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |12 80  |2 83   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 77   |

               |       |       |       |

  24           |6 73   |       |       |Foggy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |12 80  |       |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |3 78½  |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 75   |

               |       |       |       |

  25           |6 74½  |12 82  |       |Foggy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 82   |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 74   |

               |       |       |       |

  26           |6 72½  |       |       |Foggy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 80   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |78     |Rain, thunder.

               |       |       |       |

  27           |6 72   |       |       |Foggy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 80   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 76   |Thunder shrs.

               |       |       |       |

  29           |6 7    |       |       |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 82   |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 75   |

               |       |       |       |

  30           |6 73   |       |       |Foggy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 83   |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 78   |

               |       |       |       |

  31           |6 72½  |       |       |Foggy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 82   |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 76   |

               |       |       |       |

  Nov. 1       |6 72½  |       |       |Foggy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 81   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 80   |Sultry.

               |       |       |       |

  2            |6 73   |       |       |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 81½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 75   |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

  3            |6 73   |       |       |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 82½  |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 78   |

               |       |       |       |

  4            |6 72   |       |2 78   |Rain, foggy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 74½  |Sultry.

               |       |       |       |

  5            |6 72½  |       |2 79½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 78   |

               |       |       |       |

  6            |6 74   |       |2 80½  |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 79   |Rain, sultry.

               |       |       |       |

  7            |6 72½  |       |2 82½  |Fair, thunder

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |3 79   |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 77   |

               |       |       |       |

  8            |6 72   |       |2 78½  |Thunder.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 75   |Hazy.

               |       |       |       |

  10           |6 71   |       |       |Foggy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 82   |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 76   |

               |       |       |       |

  11           |6 72½  |       |       |Foggy.

               |       |       |       |

               |2 81½  |       |       |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 78   |

               |       |       |       |

  12           |6 74½  |       |2 79   |Cloudy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 78   |Sultry.

               |       |       |       |

  13           |6 73   |       |2 83½  |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 75   |

               |       |       |       |

  14           |6 69   |       |2 78½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 75   |

               |       |       |       |

  15           |6 70½  |       |2 82½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 79   |

               |       |       |       |

  16           |6 69   |       |2 82   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 80   |

               |       |       |       |

  17           |6 70½  |       |2 82½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 79   |

               |       |       |       |

  18           |6 72   |       |2 82½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 80   |

               |       |       |       |

  19           |6 72½  |       |2 80½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 78   |

               |       |       |       |

  20           |6 70½  |       |2 81   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 76   |

               |       |       |       |

  21           |6 72½  |       |2 83½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 79   |

               |       |       |       |

  22           |6 72   |       |2 83   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 78   |

               |       |       |       |

  23           |6 75   |       |2 82   |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 78   |Foggy.

               |       |       |       |

  24           |       |       |6 72   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 81   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 76   |

               |       |       |       |

  26           |6 71   |       |2 83   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 75   |

               |       |       |       |

  27           |6 73   |       |       |Slight showers.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 80   |Foggy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 76   |

               |       |       |       |

  28           |6 70   |       |2 80½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 74   |

               |       |       |       |

  29           |6 78   |       |2 82   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 75½  |

               |       |       |       |

  30           |6 78½  |       |2 81   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 76   |

               |       |       |       |

  Dec. 1       |       |       |6 78   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 80½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 74   |

               |       |       |       |

  2            |6 77½  |       |2 80   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 74   |

               |       |       |       |

  3            |6 68½  |       |2 79   |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 74   |Fair.

               |       |       |       |

  4            |6 67   |       |2 81   |Foggy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 77   |

               |       |       |       |

  5            |6 68   |       |2 80½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 77   |

               |       |       |       |

  6            |6 65   |       |2 78   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 76   |

               |       |       |       |

  7            |6 63   |       |2 80   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 77   |

               |       |       |       |

  8            |6 70   |       |2 78½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 76   |

               |       |       |       |

  9            |6 63   |       |2 79   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 76   |

               |       |       |       |

  10           |6 71   |       |2 79   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 75   |

               |       |       |       |

  11           |6 73   |       |2 80½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 74   |

               |       |       |       |

  12           |6 74   |       |2 81   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 75   |

               |       |       |       |

  13           |6 74½  |       |2 79½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 77   |

               |       |       |       |

  14           |6 72   |       |2 79   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 76   |

               |       |       |       |

  15           |6 73¼  |       |2 79   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 76   |

               |       |       |       |

  16           |6 74   |       |2 80½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 74   |

               |       |       |       |

  17           |6 73½  |       |2 80   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 75   |

               |       |       |       |

  18           |       |       |6 71½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 79   |Tornado.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 76   |

               |       |       |       |

  19           |6 68   |       |2 79½  |Foggy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 74   |

               |       |       |       |

  20           |6 64½  |       |2 79   |Foggy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 76   |

               |       |       |       |

  21           |6 75   |       |2 80   |Tornado.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 78   |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

  22           |6 76   |       |2 81   |Foggy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 78   |

               |       |       |       |

  23           |6 76½  |       |2 83½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 80   |

               |       |       |       |

  24           |6 79   |       |2 84   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |4 82   |Thunder.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |7 80   |Tornado.

               |       |       |       |

  25           |6 78   |       |       |Foggy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |2 81   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 78   |Tornado.

               |       |       |       |

  26           |6 69   |       |2 81   |Foggy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |6 80   |Tornado.

               |       |       |       |

  27           |6 70   |       |2 82   |Foggy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 76   |

               |       |       |       |

  28           |6 74   |       |2 82   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 78   |

               |       |       |       |

  29           |6 73   |       |2 80½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 76½  |

               |       |       |       |

  30           |6 74   |       |2 79   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 76   |

               |       |       |       |

  31           |6 72   |       |2 81   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 78   |

               |       |       |       |

  Jan. 1 1818. |6 70½  |       |2 81   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 78   |

               |       |       |       |

  2            |6 72   |       |       |

               |       |       |       |

  3            |6 72   |       |2 85   |Thunder.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 76   |Rain.

               |       |       |       |

  From sickness, the Thermometer was not attended to till the 10th,

  during the interval the weather was excessive cold, and the fogs

  very dense.

               |       |       |       |

  10           |       |       |2 74   |Foggy.

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 68   |

               |       |       |       |

  11           |6 62½  |       |2 76   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 70½  |

               |       |       |       |

  12           |6 60   |       |2 77   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 70   |

               |       |       |       |

  13           |6 61½  |       |2 74½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 68   |

               |       |       |       |

  14           |6 58   |       |2 74   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 66   |

               |       |       |       |

  15           |6 60   |       |2 75½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 70   |

               |       |       |       |

  16           |6 61½  |       |2 76   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 72½  |

               |       |       |       |

  17           |6 62   |       |2 76½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 71   |

               |       |       |       |

  18           |6 60   |       |2 74   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 73   |

               |       |       |       |

  19           |6 62½  |       |2 79   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 75   |

               |       |       |       |

  20           |6 64   |       |2 78½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 76   |

               |       |       |       |

  21           |6 64½  |       |2 79   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 74   |

               |       |       |       |

  22           |6 66   |       |2 80   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 78   |

               |       |       |       |

  23           |6 64   |       |2 82   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 76   |

               |       |       |       |

  24           |6 62   |       |2 82½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 74   |

               |       |       |       |

  25           |6 64   |       |2 84   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 80   |

               |       |       |       |

  26           |6 68   |       |2 83½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 67½  |

               |       |       |       |

  27           |6 68½  |       |2 84   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 80½  |

               |       |       |       |

  28           |6 72   |       |2 84¼  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 78   |

               |       |       |       |

  29           |6 72   |       |2 85   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 80   |

               |       |       |       |

  30           |6 74   |       |2 85   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 80   |

               |       |       |       |

  31           |6 76   |       |2 86   |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 80   |

               |       |       |       |

  Feb. 1       |6 74   |       |2 84½  |

               |       |       |       |

               |       |       |8 79   |

               |       |       |       |

  2            |6 73½  |       |2 86½  |


                           APPENDIX. No. VI.


                               * * * * *


I will now submit the numerals of 31 nations, which, with the exception

of three, the Fantee, the Accra, and the Bornoo, (and those but

imperfectly,) have never been reported before. I will arrange them

according to their geographical approximation, remarking any apparent

affinity which occurs to me, in notes. I shall place the Inta first,

because it is the most remote, inland, which can be assimilated to the

Fantee, Ahanta, Aöwin, and Amanaheä; and may, probably, from that

circumstance, be the root of these languages; as it has been shewn, in

the history, that the nations of the water side have been gradually

pressed down, or have emigrated from the interior, and it is

consequently to be expected that the etymology of the names of these

countries are not to be found in the languages of the people who _now_

inhabit them, but more probably in the languages of their southern

neighbours. Thus,


_Inta_ is likely to be derived from the _Booroom_ word _inta_, _water_,

as it has been noticed as an alluvial country.


_Yngwa_, a northern province of Dagwumba, from the Ashantee _anggwa_,

_fat, rich_, or the Booroom, _yngia_, _a wood_.


_Soko_ from _Soko_, _one_, in the Badaggry (below Dahomy) as _Yahndi_

the capital of Dagwumba was so called from _yahndo_ the numeral _one_,

to indicate its pre-eminence.


_Assin_ from the Ashantee _Assoon_, an elephant. But this expectation is

not further supported in the two or three other probable etymologies

which occur to me, as _Takima_ from the Ashantee _takramma_, tongue.

_Akim_ (formerly the greatest trading country,) from the Booroom

_Akimmie_, cloth; _Booroom_ from _boora_, full, in that language.


It is curious how nearly the _word_ for _God_ in the Malemba,

_M’Poungoo_, approaches the native name, _Empoongwa_, of the country

Europeans call _Gaboon_. _Wonga_ is fear in the Malemba, and _Woonga-

woonga_ is the name of an uninhabited savannah of three days extent,

between Empoöngwa and Adjoomba.


          1. _Inta._    2.          3.           4. _Aöwin._ 5.

                        _Booroom._  _Ashantee._              _Amanaheä._


  One     Koko          Ekoo        Akoon        Aconë       Aconë

  (_a_)


  Two     Anyoe         Enoo        Anoo         Enyow       Enyow

  (_b._)


  Three   Assa          Essa        Mensa        Inza        Insa

  (_c_)


  Four    Anna          Enna        Ennung       Inna        Enna

  (_d_)


  Five    Annoo         Annoo       Ennoom       Noo         Enoo

  (_e_)


  Six     Assee         Esseä       Inseëä       Inzeah      Inseah

  (_f_)


  Seven   Assoonno      Assoono     Inshong      Inzoo       Insoon

  (_g_)


  Eight   Adoobrooa     Aquiay      Woquee       Motteä      Mottuay

  (_h_)


  Nine    Digrakoono    Akonno      Oonkonnong   Ongoona     Ongona


  Ten     Koodoo        Edoo        Edoo         Boloo       Booloo

  (_i_)


          6. _Ahanta_   7. _Fantee_ 8.           9.          10.

                                    _Affootoo_   _Inkran_    _Adampë_

                                                 [159]


  One     Akoon         Akoor       Achoomee     Ekkoo       Kakee


  Two     Ayue          Abeeën      Ennuë        Ennuë


  Three   Assan         Abiasseh    Assah        Ettayh


  Four    Arra          Anan        Annah        Edjuë


  Five    Aoonoo        Ennoom      Ennoo        Ennoomó


  Six     Ayshing       Asseeä      Isshin       Eghpah


  Seven   Assooa        Ashong      Isshennooh   Paghwooh


  Eight   Awotchay      Awotwee     Ettchee      Paghnue


  Nine    Awonna        Akoon       Assan        Nahoon


  Ten     Boonoo        Edoo        Eddoo        Nongmah


          11.           12.         13. _Yngwa_  14. _Hio_   15. _Mosee_

          _Kerrapay_    _Dagwumba_


  One     Eddee         Yahndo      Lakoo        Innee       Yimbo


  Two     Effee         Ayee        Ayee         Eygee       Ayeeboo


  Three   Eltong        Attah       Attah        Etta        Ataboo


  Four    Ennay         Nasee       Anāhee       Ernee       Annasee


  Five    Altong        Ennoon      Leerennoo    Aroon       Annoo


  Six     Adday         Yohbee      Ayoboo       Effa        Ayobee


  Seven   Adrinnee      Poice       Ayapaï       Eggay       Owhi


  Eight   Ennee         Nehenoo     Annee        Eggo        Ennee


  Nine    Indee         Wyhee       Awai         Essun       Aïhopoi


  Ten     Owoo          Edoo        Peä          Eywaw       Peega


          16.           17. _Gaman_ 18. _Kong_   19. _Fobee_ 20.

          _Kumsallahoo_                                      _Callana_


  One     Yumbo         Tah         Kiddee       Koroom      Kodoom


  Two     Yeebo         Noo         Filla        Nalay       Naboolla


  Three   Tabo          Sah         Sowa         Poompevarra Nawedazoo


  Four    Nasee         Nah         Nanoo        Leetaynalee Nabonaza


  Five    Annoo         Taw         Looroa       Kakwassee   Nabonoa


  Six     Yobo          Torata      Wora         Mannassa    Lodoo


  Seven   Poihee        Toorifeenoo Ooranfilla   Noottoosoo  Logwa


  Eight   Nehee         Toorifeessa Leeaygee     Borafay     Littaïzoo


  Nine    Wahee         Toorifeena  Konunto      Pirrifay    Nako


  Ten     Pega          Noonoo      Tah          Nanooa      Yewoo


          21.           22.         23.          24.         25.

          _Bambarra_    _Garangi_   _Mallowa_    _Kallaghee_ _Bornoo_


  One     Killi         Kerriminna  Daia         Gadee       Leskar


  Two     Foolla        Ferriminna  Beeyoo       Silill      Ahndee


  Three   Sabba         Sowaninna   Okoo         Quan        Yaskar


  Four    Nani          Firrima     Odoo         Foolloo     Deegah


  Five    Looroo        Fahtima     Beä          Vydee       Ooögoo


  Six     Wora          Tata        Seddah       Zoodoo      Araskoo


  Seven   Worroola      Mannima     Becquay      Etkassa     Tooloor


  Eight   Sagi          Pirima      Tacquass     Shiddowka   Woskoo


  Nine    Konunto       Missirima   Tarra        Woollaä     Likkar


  Ten     Ta            Gwahee      Gwoma        Woma        Meeägoo


          26. _Maïha_   _Quolla-    _Badaggry_   27.         28.

                        liffa_      by Mr.       _Sheekan_   _Kaylee_

                        by Mr.      Hutchison.

                        Hutchison.


  One     Lagen         Da          Soko         Ilwawtoe    Woto


  Two     Indë          Bue         Auwee        Ibba        Ibba


  Three   Eäska         Okoo        Atong        Bittach     Battach


  Four    Daäger        Hodoo       Inna         Binnay      Binnay


  Five    Ohoo          Bakwee      Ato          Bitta       Bittan


  Six     Araska        Shida       Trukoo


  Seven   Tooloor       Bockwa      Chauto


  Eight   Weska         Sidda       Quouie


  Nine    Lekar         Tarra       Kennee


  Ten     Inagoon       Goman       Owoo         Duëoom      Duëoom


  Twenty                                         Emboomebba


  Hundred                                        Kama


          29.           30.         31.

          _Oongoomo_    _Oongobaï_  _Empoöngwa._

                                    See p.

                                    439 for

                                    character.


  One     Wootta        Rappeek     Hemoödee


  Two     Beeba         Ramboise    Mban


  Three   Bittach       Mittasee    Ntcharoo


  Four    Binnay        Binnay      Nahee


  Five    Bitten        Bittan      Nehanee


  Six                   Sambal      Oroöba


  Seven                 Bittooba    Ragginnoömoo


  Eight                 Bissamen    Ennanahee


  Nine                  Bwoi        Eno go öm


  Ten                   Deëoom      Hegoöm


(_a_) The words for the numeral one assimilate in the specimens 1, 2, 3,

4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9: again, but distinctly, in 14, 12, 15, 16: also in 26,

25, 13: in 21, 18, 20, 19: in 27, 28, 29, (making apparently five

roots), but they remain solitary in 11, 17, 22, 23, 24 30 and 31. The

numeral one in 14 is not unlike the two in 8, 9, 2, 3, and the one in

12, would, with the prefix of y, be precisely the same as the two of 25.

Excepting _Kakee_, _one_, the Inkran numerals seem to have been adopted

as those of Adampë, for the convenience of trade and intercourse, but I

will add a few words, to show that the languages are radically

different:


             _Adampë._     _Inkran._


  House       Aoosoo       Wheay.


  Fire        [160]Odja    Lla.


  Man         Ossa         Noon.


  Woman       Ossĕ         Yeo.


  Victuals    Odë          Neeaynee.


  Father      Attay        Tchay.


  Mother      Awoo         Nneay.


(_b_) The numeral _two_ is the most general word, and may be assimilated

in 2, 3, 8, 9, 4, 5, 1, 6, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. There is little

difference between the numerals _two_ and _five_ in most of these, and

_five_ in 15 and 16, precisely answers to _two_ in 1 and 2.


(_c_) _Three_ may be assimilated in 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, 14, 15,

16, 17. In 12, 13, 14, 16, it approaches to the Congo and Mozambique

_tatoo_ and _atatoo_.


(_d_) I have observed that in most African languages there is less

distinction in the words for four and five, than between any other of

the numerals and that frequently the word for _five_ in one language, is

identical with that for _four_ in another, geographically remote. _Four_

may be assimilated in 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 11, 6, 14, for the two latter

deviate only in the substitution of one liquid for another, which is as

common in the languages of Africa as in those of America. The words for

four in the above suite do not seem of a different root from those in

12, 13, 14, 15, 16, and 21, from which it only varies in 20 by the

prefix of _nabo_. With the difference of a single letter, the same word

for _four_ is found in the Yngwa (13) and the Empoöngwa (31) which are

1000 miles distant. Four in Congo is _m’na_, in Empoöngwa, _nahee_.

_Sanu_, the Kaffer _four_, is approached in 18.


(_e_) Five may be assimilated from 1 to 17, (11 excepted) one liquid

being substituted for another in 14, an _leer_ being prefixed in 13. It

is remarkable too that we again identify this numeral in the Malemba,

Embomma, and Empoöngwa languages, by removing the prefixes _t_, _to_,

and _neh_, from the words _tanoo_, _toanoo_, and _nehanee_. Below five,

the numerals in the Inkran lose all identity with those of the languages

with which it has been hitherto assimilated.


(_f_) _Six_ assimilates from 1 to 9, in 12 to 17 (14 excepted) in 20,

23, 24, in 17 and 22; but remains distinct in all the others. The Sanbal

of Oöngobai (30) approaches the Sambanoo of the Embomma.


(_g_) _Seven_ assimilates in 1 to 9; in 12, 13, 16, but in no others.


(_h_) _Eight_ assimilates in 2, 3, 6, 7; in 11 to 17, (14 excepted) all

of which, with 31, approximate to E’nana, the word for eight in the

Malemba.


(_i_) _Ten_ assimilates in 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 12, in 4, 5, 6, in 17, 19, 25,

26, 29, in 13, 15, and in 14, 20, 22, 23, 24.


                               * * * * *


The following is the skeleton of a _Vocabulary_, of which the enlarged

or perfect copy was blown out of the cabin-window, in a sudden squall,

(with some specimens of music), during my voyage home.


 |_English._| _Ashantee._ |_Fantee_[161].| _Booroom._   |  _Various._

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Above     |wattefee     |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Advice    |matoorh      |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Afraid    |osooroh      |              |efweedammee   |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Afternoon |inumirree    |ingubirh      |ennie         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Again     |impray       |              |meära         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Alike     |oninnisie    |              |minnamata     |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Alive     |nannuwomie   |uannekan      |issaboobwaw   |n’chema

 |          |             |              |              |Malemba

 |          |             |              |              |Inchema a

 |          |             |              |              |fruit in

 |          |             |              |              |Empoöngwa.

 |          |             |              |              |

 |All       |nenarra      |              |inkaken       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Alone     |waunkoo      |              |ohwoorie      |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Angry     |mōbwaf       |moboäf        |moobiaf       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Another   |ebissoo      |              |ekoo          |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Arm       |wabow        |              |serrekoonkoo  |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Ashamed   |wennatoo     |              |woifarrie     |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Asleep    |werda        |wadda         |awdirrie      |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Awake     |waihen       |              |otinnie       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Back      |wakee        |              |atterra       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Bad       |omoo         |              |ohmara        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Bead      |aoonee       |              |aboroo[162]   |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Beard     |aboidwee     |              |annoque       |the same

 |          |             |              |              |as _chin_,

 |          |             |              |              |a frequent

 |          |             |              |              |surname.

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Beat      |whaoonoo     |wabomë        |babeëm        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Bed       |empa         |              |kerray        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Before    |wawquoorasoo |waw_quan_     |oïyo          |ovetide

 |          |             |              |              |_quande_.

 |          |             |              |              |Malemba.

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Beg       |ekkaydie     |_empoikeöw_   |dibbim        |_mpanou_.

 |          |             |              |              |Malemba.

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Behind    |owakee       |              |odioterra     |the noun

 |          |             |              |              |_back_ with

 |          |             |              |              |_o_ & _odia_

 |          |             |              |              |prefixed

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Below     |asnadie      |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Big       |kookrookoo   |              |otchwaw       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Bird      |anima        |              |abooree       |for names of

 |          |             |              |              |animals, see

 |          |             |              |              |p. 328.

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Bite      |whakum       |              |inkadooa      |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Black     |tintoom      |              |oboobie       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Blind     |frafoo       |              |atenna        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Blood     |mugga        |              |moogga        |menga. Mal.

 |          |             |              |              |Emb.

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Boil      |woaroo       |wooworh       |ohfoo         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Bone      |ebiou        |              |ebou          |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Boy       |afra         |              |ayebee        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Burn      |whahim       |              |ohwho         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Buy       |mekoto       |              |meashoor      |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Call      |aferen       |afren         |ateëm         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Carry     |atooron      |              |dumta         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Catch     |makin        |              |mekeeram      |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Change    |wahseesun    |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Cheeks    |wafoon       |              |afeehe        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Child     |ebbah        |              |obee          |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Clean     |wafie        |              |aulay         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Cloth     |ettum        |entama        |_akim_mie     |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Cold      |oiwoo        |              |afoo          |differs

 |          |             |              |              |little from

 |          |             |              |              |_boil_

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Come      |rraba        |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Cry       |oroosoor     |              |orissoo       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Cut       |witwa        |              |wawtung       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Dance     |saw          |              |attcha        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Dark      |oiheesoom    |              |mayoo         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Daughter  |mebăbā       |              |mebee         |_coomba_. Em.

 |          |             |              |              |which is a

 |          |             |              |              |common female

 |          |             |              |              |name in Fantee

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Day[163]  |             |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Dead      |wow          |              |ohoo          |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Deaf      |nasheeasie   |teetĭfoo      |sinteelaboo   |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Deep      |eboonie      |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Devil     |ayen[164]    |              |              |Amoonie a

 |          |             |              |              |proper name

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Dig       |amoonna      |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Door      |aboo         |              |ebunabooná    |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Drink     |noom         |              |noo           |_noa_. Mal.

 |          |             |              |              |_noi_. Em.

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Drop      |wawto        |awtarradi     |otore         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Drown     |eboon        |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Drunk     |wassoo       |wawboo        |hassoo        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Ear       |assoor       |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Eat       |edee         |              |              |_dea_. Mal.

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Egg       |kessua       |kirrifooa     |akaddie       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Empty     |eppun        |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Enough    |ojëay        |              |obahrìe       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Eye       |wunnie       |ennua         |ennyass       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Eyebrow   |wunnĕwee     |entun         |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Face      |wynim        |              |anyasirra     |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Far       |akirh’       |              |aterh’        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Fat       |anggwa       |              |oomfoä        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Father    |aggáh        |              |missee        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Fear      |sooroo       |              |efweedam      |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Feather   |takirrie     |              |eetta         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Feel      |_soom_whay   |              |kirrada       |_seem_bede.

 |          |             |              |              |Mal.

 |          |             |              |              |Kirradee,

 |          |             |              |              |a river of

 |          |             |              |              |Booroom.

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Fetch     |ekkoon       |              |becquaw       |a town in

 |          |             |              |              |Booroom

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Fifty     |edoonoom     |              |              |10. 5.

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Fight     |orrokoo      |              |obuquooa      |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Fill      |eënnama      |              |boorra        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Find      |maoo         |maoon         |maioom        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Finger    |insa         |              |eserrĭbee     |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Fire      |ogiäh        |egah          |ogha          |boogoom. Mosee

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Fish      |enum         |              |eyay          |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Flower    |nadjua       |              |ewooda        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Fly       |watoo        |              |oqueshoo      |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Fool      |woigimmie    |_abooa_       |woigimmie     |booba. Mal.

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Foot      |wannunsa     |              |aīah          |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Forget    |moorafie     |              |sessĕro       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Forgive   |edimămoo     |              |inkawffinsow  |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Fowl      |akoo         |              |karrabee      |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Friend    |ankoo        |              |oonkoosĭba    |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Fruit     |quadiäteä    |impooa        |quadiateä     |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Girl      |bisēä        |              |otchay        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Give      |fummum       |              |tāsămi        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Glad      |yam          |yamma         |amirra        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Go        |kaw          |              |narry         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |God       |yankoompon   |              |oodoobwarrie  |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Gold      |sikkă        |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Good      |oëyay        |              |obwārie       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Green     |boioöma      |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Grow      |owynee       |oeen          |ohodan        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Hair      |hewhee       |              |hemoonie      |Amoonie, a

 |          |             |              |              |proper name.

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Half      |effeh        |              |baggah        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Hand      |mensa        |              |assaddie      |Mensa, a

 |          |             |              |              |proper name.

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Handsome  |oia          |              |obweefay      |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Hang      |osesan       |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Hard      |oiătin       |              |oöqua         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Head      |tirrie       |              |egnoon        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Hear      |matr’        |              |maynoon       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Heart     |akoomo       |              |akirrăbie     |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Heavy     |oiadoor      |              |obodoor       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Here      |hah          |              |oomboh        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Hide      |mōhoo        |              |manghoo       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |High      |essoor       |              |oskasoor      |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Hill      |cooqua       |              |iffoo         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Hit       |aboor        |              |odum          |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Hold      |soom         |              |karrara       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Hole      |watchoo      |              |osarrie       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Horn      |aben         |              |abay          |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Horse     |panquaw      |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Hot       |oiayue       |              |owuegua       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |House     |efee         |odan          |eban          |paseebah,

 |          |             |              |              |Kumsallahoo.

 |          |             |              |              |deeo,

 |          |             |              |              |Dagwumba.

 |          |             |              |              |gidda,

 |          |             |              |              |Mallowa.

 |          |             |              |              |koopella,

 |          |             |              |              |Mosee.

 |          |             |              |              |Kokoopella,

 |          |             |              |              |capital of

 |          |             |              |              |ditto.

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Hundred   |ehha         |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Hungry    |oquandummie  |comagin       |aquandum      |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Husband   |mookoon      |              |mookooddie    |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Idle      |nehuff       |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Iron      |dadee        |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Jump      |oroo         |              |fay           |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Keep      |intamaseea   |ysee          |afeeërra      |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Kick      |chayche      |              |orraychum     |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Kill      |coom         |              |bamoem        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |King      |ohennie      |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Knot      |eppo         |              |ippo          |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Know      |innim        |              |nayoom        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Lame      |opakkie      |              |ebbeä         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Land      |fum          |dadi          |sebooroo      |tenga. Mosee

 |          |             |              |              |kaisa Mallo.

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Last      |naddou       |              |afoorinay     |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Laugh     |sicroo       |sroo          |orroomuss     |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Law       |widdooffoo   |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Lead      |soomwie      |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Learn     |akirren      |              |ekērow        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Leg       |asirrie      |              |inwoonnie     |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Lie (down)|daoo         |              |oyadee        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Lie       |etwapō       |              |afoorenie     |

 |(falsity) |             |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Little    |kakra        |kakrabi       |bahttee       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Long      |ohwar’       |              |ohbissay      |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Look      |fway         |              |kaye          |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Love      |poopa        |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Mad       |same as      |              |              |

 |          |‘fool’       |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Man       |binin        |              |oninnie       |pagga, Kums.

 |          |             |              |              |boodasa, Dag.

 |          |             |              |              |noon, Accra.

 |          |             |              |              |nedda, Mosee.

 |          |             |              |              |moottanee,

 |          |             |              |              |M. moontau,

 |          |             |              |              |Male. muntu,

 |          |             |              |              |Mozam.

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Many      |peenarra     |              |otuä          |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Market    |egwass       |egoom         |ebiass        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Mat       |keraw        |empa          |kerray        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Mend      |pam          |              |bărā          |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Moon      |serrānee     |boossoom      |ofoorie       |wattacha,

 |          |             |              |              |Ku. marraga,

 |          |             |              |              |Dag. oöota

 |          |             |              |              |Mallowa.

 |          |             |              |              |choogoo, Mos.

 |          |             |              |              |

 |More      |mambissoo    |              |samoko        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Mother    |mna          |minna         |minnee        |nneay, Accra.

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Mouth     |wannoom      |ennoom        |annoo         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Much      |dooroo       |              |otchoo        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Nails     |oomboiray    |              |ungwarrie     |‘_unguis_’

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Name      |             |dgin          |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Neck      |ekkone       |              |ekkoona       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Nest      |anĭmaboo     |              |              |anĭma,

 |          |             |              |              |a bird.

 |          |             |              |              |Annămāboo, a

 |          |             |              |              |Fantee town.

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Net       |ebbwau       |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Never     |dabbiada     |              |as _no!_      |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |New       |fofoor       |              |ofroofoo      |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |No        |dabbi        |              |an            |

 |          |             |              |inarticulate  |

 |          |             |              |noise with    |

 |          |             |              |the lips      |

 |          |             |              |closed        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Noise     |deddie       |              |boolāo        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Nose      |ewhin        |              |ewhoonie      |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Oil       |engoo        |              |oomfwaie      |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Old       |quodda       |              |aquŏdā        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Open      |boi          |              |booë          |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Owe       |mintēka      |dinnekow      |indāqua       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Pay       |tchamkou     |              |kamëquow      |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Play      |agoor’       |              |feearee       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Poison    |otoowādoo    |              |otoowādoo     |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Poor      |haynil       |              |ohēä          |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Pot       |quonsun      |              |adinna        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Pregnant  |orrŏhoo      |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Present   |wahoo        |              |okōë          |

 |(gift)    |             |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Pull      |twin         |              |sheeay        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Quarrel   |irriquaw     |orriyow       |batōë         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Quick     |tetimrĭka    |              |serrie        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Quiet     |gyaë         |yafoo         |yaië          |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Rain      |osoorăba     |yankoom       |bwārie        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Rat       |quissie      |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Red       |memmia       |betcheä       |okooquaw      |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Ring      |inkaä        |              |apateä        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |River     |bāk          |              |oboom         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Rob       |odomādi      |              |odoiyā        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Round     |kandinginnŭma|              |koorookooddie |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Run       |gwan         |              |serrie        |as ‘_quick_,’

 |          |             |              |              |B. sirr, run,

 |          |             |              |              |Arabic.

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Salt      |inkkim       |              |imfoorie      |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Sand      |aghweä       |              |issay         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Say       |assie        |ass           |aberrie       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Sea       |eppoo        |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |See       |aweeh        |              |akayh         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Sell      |tum          |              |fah           |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Send      |wahsmum      |              |ocheow        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Shake     |wosoo        |              |ediddie       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Shell     |oorabba      |              |owoora        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Short     |takoteä      |tchaba        |akoteä        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Shut      |toom         |              |toroo         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Sick      |yirrie       |yarrie        |mimmielal     |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Silver    |gwettay      |              |odume         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Sing      |enyoom       |              |ennum         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Sister    |akirrawa     |akirrăba      |moofwa        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Sit       |tinnahoe     |kooaugh       |tchinna       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Sleep     |waughda      |              |oädie         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Smell     |gwooa        |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Smoke     |wishshue     |              |djessie       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Soft      |mirrou       |              |omooqua       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Son       |ebba         |              |ebee          |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Sorry     |oimiyow      |              |boomega       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Speak     |akas         |              |osasin        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Stand     |ginnaoh      |ginnah        |yerrie        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Steal     |wawwoo       |weyweädie     |oëwee         |windega, Kum.

 |          |             |              |              |wintanga,

 |          |             |              |              |Dag. lana,

 |          |             |              |              |Mallowa.

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Strong    |waginna      |ohwidein      |oshoneyöo     |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Sun       |ayowea       |              |oöe           |As an

 |          |             |              |              |exclamation

 |          |             |              |              |of wonder.

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Swear     |shua         |              |              |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Sweet     |oiaday       |oiadow        |obooding      |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Swim      |abhoorh      |              |abboor        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Soil      |afoonna      |              |affung        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Tail      |dooah        |              |odoo          |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Take      |afwa         |              |maytah        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Tell      |abim         |              |aiyow         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Thief     |krumfoe      |aiwee         |ohwie         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Throat    |komen        |              |ekoonnie      |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Throw     |too          |              |ohtoo         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Tie       |tittieh      |kikhieh       |keay          |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |To-morrow |otchinna     |akinna        |otchay        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Tongue    |takramma     |              |dannoo        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Tooth     |essie        |              |engyie        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Touch     |kah          |              |tah           |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Town      |croom        |              |eban          |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Tree      |dooa         |              |assah         |dawgo, Kums.

 |          |             |              |              |dawro, Dagw.

 |          |             |              |              |rahoo, Mosee.

 |          |             |              |              |ittachee,

 |          |             |              |              |Mall. chee,

 |          |             |              |              |Embom.

 |          |             |              |              |

 |True      |umpa         |              |kerram        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Turn      |dahen        |              |darie         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Twenty    |eddooän      |              |edooh         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Wake      |wyen         |              |otinnie       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |[165]Walk |nanchoo      |              |narree        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Warm      |oyahue       |              |obiguh        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Wash      |gwarr        |              |orrohooroo    |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Water     |inshoo       |insoo         |inta          |kome, Kumsal.

 |          |             |              |              |looa,

 |          |             |              |              |Mallowa.

 |          |             |              |              |quom, Mosee.

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Weep      |oroosoo      |oroosoo       |oreesh        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |White     |foofoo       |              |intoofoofoorie|Intiffa, a

 |          |             |              |              |proper name.

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Wife      |ayerh        |              |mekkah        |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Wild      |wadoohem     |wadoohem      |dooafay       |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Wind      |ooframma     |              |affoo         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Wing      |ataban       |              |ittay         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Woman     |bisea        |              |tchee         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Work      |adjooma      |              |orilaloo      |adawwah, Ku.

 |          |             |              |              |matah, Mallow.

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Year      |affrieyay    |              |otee          |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Yes       |yeö          |              |matee         |

 |          |             |              |              |

 |Yesterday |endodra      |ennida        |indeay        |


              * * * * *

  London: Printed by W. Bulmer and Co.

     Cleveland-row, St. James’s.


[Footnote 159: _Inkran_, an _ant_, is the native name of the country

Europeans call _Accra_, which name was probably given by the Portuguese

to their settlement there (the earliest they made according to the

traditions of the natives) to commemorate the voyage of Hanno; Accra

being one of the five cities raised by him between the Soloe Promontory,

or Cape Bojador, and the River Lixus or Ouro.]


[Footnote 160: This word approximates to _ogha_, _ogiah_, and _egah_,

the words for _fire_ in the Booroom, Ashantee, and Fantee: but all the

other Adampë words I have ever heard, cannot be assimilated to those

which denote the same objects in any other African language.]


[Footnote 161: Where there is no word in the Fantee column, it is the

same as the Ashantee.]


[Footnote 162: I have before stated (Superstitions, p. 270.) that

_aggry_ is a generic name, probably exotic, of the derivation of which

the Negroes are wholly ignorant. It is remarkable that the Boorooms call

these beads _sikka koonkoorie_, and never use the common word for _bead_

(aboroo,) when they speak of them: this name imports their value

(_sikka_ being _gold_) and one would fancy something connected with

their locality, _Koonkoorie_ being a range of hills seven days northward

of Kong, (see p. 182.) but I never could obtain the least explanation on

this subject from the natives.]


[Footnote 163: They distinguish different times of the day, thus


  Morning, or before 12.    napa.


  Mid-day, or 12.           aweeabillee    aweeabil    emfass.


  Afternoon, 4.             ingubee                    noobwawss.


  Evening, 6.               adiasa         adjasa      eybeen.


  Night                     noofa                      aniaberra.

]


[Footnote 164: This reminds me that I ought to have noticed, in the

Superstitions of Ashantee, that they believe the devil to be a wandering

evil spirit, occasionally entering into a human being, immediately to be

destroyed for the safety of mankind.]


[Footnote 165: It is curious that in both these radically distinct

languages, the verb _walk_ should assimilate so closely to the noun

_cow_.]


Transcriber's note:


  The changes in the ERRATA regarding the text have been made.


  Inconsistent chapter numbering between Contents and Part I of the text

  has been left as is.


  pg 19, Changed: "place 1° 46′ 30′ W. and" to: "30″"


  pg 22, Changed: "The courses N. ½ N. N. W. ¼ N. b W. ⅛." to: "N.½,

  N.N.W.¼, N.bW.⅛."


  pg 23, Changed: "the courses N. ⅓ N. b W. ⅕." to: "N.⅓, N.bW.⅕."


  pg 36, Changed: "their long Danish mukets" to: "muskets"


  pg 40, Changed: "minors, or young caboceeers" to: "caboceers"


  pg 45, Changed: "and again,) “that he thanked" to: "and again,) that

  he thanked"


  pg 49, Changed: "my captains. “The Dutch" to: "my captains. The Dutch"


  pg 63, Changed: "an ouline of the Fantee war" to: "outline"


  pg 94, Changed: "inauspicious circumstance has been unvoidable" to:

  "unavoidable"


  pg 98, Added ” after: "he will do you good:"


  pg 108, Changed: "I sent a cane to Adooçee" to: "Adocee"


  pg 110, Changed: "promised that I shoul hear from him" to: "should"


  pg 132, Changed: "into every trivial occurrrence" to: "occurrence"


  pg 145, Changed: "have more to-morrow ”" to: "have more to-morrow;”"


  pg 151, Changed: "I had exeprienced whilst" to: "experienced"


  pg 196, footnote 37, Added “ before "The Chaymas"


  pg 204, footnote 47, Changed: "of Arabs) “Wadie." to: "of Arabs)

  Wadie."


  pg 253, Changed: "exercising his judical authority" to: "judicial"


  pg 256, Changed: "accused against arbitary judgment" to: "arbitrary"


  pg 268 (270), footnote 83, Changed: "inlaid, at it were, in the body"

  to: "as it were"


  pg 268 (271), footnote 83, Added ” after "ignorant of their origin."


  pg 279, Changed: "the tribatary chiefs who pay but" to: "tributary"


  pg 288, Changed: "discharge of muketry, proportionate" to: "musketry"


  pg 322, Changed: "with 1000 mukets you could not" to: "muskets"


  pg 333, Changed: "as a corrective to the unplatable" to: "unpalatable"


  pg 345 (346), footnote 112, Changed: "we are asily mistaken" to:

  "easily"


  pg 348, footnote 113, Added “ at the start.


  pg 352, Changed: "corsespond exactly in meaning" to: "correspond"


  pg 419, Changed: "wow!” “death! “death" to: "wow!” “death! death"


  pg 433, footnote 132, Changed: "spoke to agreeing tha after" to:

  "that"


  pg 451, Changed: "and phrenzy of the perfomer" to: "performer"


  pg 469, Changed: "clompletely blockaded on the land-side" to:

  "completely"


  pg 473, Changed: "bring future good conse-sequences" to:

  "consequences"


  pg 479, footnote 149, Changed: "or ship, “adding, that" to: "or ship,

  adding, that"


  pg 479-480, The footnote 152 referred to in the text is missing.


  pg 484, footnote 157, Changed: "had the advanage of correcting" to:

  "advantage"


  pg 487, Changed: "Shagho — شَيْعُ" to: "شَيْغُ"


  pg 487, Changed: "Rakka — رَافَا" to: "رَاقَا"


  pg 491, Changed: "Yajoury (doubtlels Yawoorie)" to: "doubtless"


  pg 492, Changed: "Massir — سصر" to: "مصر"


  Minor changes in punctuation have been done silently.


  Other spelling inconsistencies have been left unchanged.


* END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MISSION FROM CAPE COAST CASTLE TO ASHANTEE *





Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will

be renamed.


Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright

law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,

so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United

States without permission and without paying copyright

royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part

of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project

Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™

concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,

and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following

the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use

of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for

copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very

easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation

of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project

Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may

do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected

by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark

license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE


THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE


PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK


To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free

distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work

(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project

Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full

Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at

www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg

electronic works


1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg

electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to

and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property

(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all

the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or

destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your

possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a

Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound

by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person

or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be

used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who

agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few

things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works

even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See

paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project

Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this

agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg

electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the

Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection

of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual

works in the collection are in the public domain in the United

States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the

United States and you are located in the United States, we do not

claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,

displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as

all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope

that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting

free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg

works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the

Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily

comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the

same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when

you share it without charge with others.


1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern

what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are

in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,

check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this

agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,

distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any

other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no

representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any

country other than the United States.


1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other

immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear

prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work

on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the

phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,

performed, viewed, copied or distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most

    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions

    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms

    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online

    at www.gutenberg.org. If you

    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws

    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.



1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is

derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not

contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the

copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in

the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are

redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project

Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply

either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or

obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg

trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted

with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution

must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any

additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms

will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works

posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the

beginning of this work.


1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg

License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this

work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.


1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this

electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without

prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with

active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project

Gutenberg License.


1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,

compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including

any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access

to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format

other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official

version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website

(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense

to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means

of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain

Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the

full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,

performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works

unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing

access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works

provided that:


    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from

        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method

        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed

        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has

        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project

        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid

        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are

        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty

        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project

        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in

        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg

        Literary Archive Foundation.”



    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies

        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he

        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™

        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all

        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue

        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™

        works.



    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of

        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the

        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of

        receipt of the work.



    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free

        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.




1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project

Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than

are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing

from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of

the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set

forth in Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable

effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread

works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project

Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™

electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may

contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate

or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other

intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or

other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or

cannot be read by your equipment.


1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right

of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project

Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project

Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project

Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all

liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal

fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT

LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE

PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE

TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE

LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR

INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH

DAMAGE.


1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a

defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can

receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a

written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you

received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium

with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you

with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in

lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person

or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second

opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If

the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing

without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth

in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO

OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT

LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied

warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of

damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement

violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the

agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or

limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or

unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the

remaining provisions.


1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the

trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone

providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in

accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the

production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™

electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,

including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of

the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this

or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or

additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any

Defect you cause.


Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg


Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of

electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of

computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It

exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations

from people in all walks of life.


Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the

assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s

goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will

remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project

Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure

and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future

generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary

Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see

Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.


Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit

501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the

state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal

Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification

number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary

Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by

U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.


The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,

Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up

to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website

and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact


Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg

Literary Archive Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread

public support and donations to carry out its mission of

increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be

freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest

array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations

($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt

status with the IRS.


The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating

charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United

States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a

considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up

with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations

where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND

DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state

visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.


While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we

have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition

against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who

approach us with offers to donate.


International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make

any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from

outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.


Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation

methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other

ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To

donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.


Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works


Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project

Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be

freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and

distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of

volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed

editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in

the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not

necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper

edition.


Most people start at our website which has the main PG search

facility: www.gutenberg.org.


This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,

including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary

Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to

subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
